The Occult Sciences
========================================
A. E. Waite (1891) — Waite's compendium of transcendental doctrine — his great survey of magic, alchemy and divination. Source: https://archive.org/details/occultsciencesco00wait. Public domain.

THE   OCCULT   SCIENCES.

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


THE

OCCULT    SCIENCES

A  COMPENDIUM  OF  TRANSCENDENTAL  DOCTRINE
AND  EXPERIMENT

EMIUIACING

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  MAGICAL  PRACTICES ;  OF  SECRET  SCIENCES

IN  CONNECTION  WITH  MAGIC ;  OF  THE  PROFESSORS  OF

MAGICAL  ARTS  ;  AND  OF  MODERN  SPIRITUALISM,

MESMERISM  AND  THEOSOPHY

15Y

AIJ.THUE    EDWARD    WAITE

LONDON
KEGAN   PAUL,   TRENCH,   TRUBNER  &   CO.,  Ltd.

[SUCCESSORS  TO  GE(:)RGE  ElDWAy]

1891

APR2  9  1927   ^


PEEFACE.

^T^HE  subject  of  occultism,  by  which  we  mean  those
sciences,  called  transcendental  and  magical,  a
knowledge  of  which  has  been  transmitted  and  accumu-
lated in  secret,  or  is  contained  in  books  that  have  an
inner  or  secret  meaning,  has  been  very  fully  dealt  with
during  recent  years  by  various  students  of  eminence.
But  the  works  of  these  well-equipped  investigators  are,
in  most  instances,  unsuited  to  an  elementary  reader,  and
they  are  all  somewhat  expensive.  It  has  remained  for
the  results  of  their  studies  to  be  condensed  into  a  port-
able volume,  which  shall  conduct  the  inquirer  into  the
vestibule  of  each  branch  of  "  the  occult  sciences,"  and
place  within  his  reach  the  proper  means  of  prosecuting
his  researches  further  in  any  desired  direction.  It  is
such  an  unpretending  but  useful  task  which  we  have  set
ourselves  to  perform  in  the  present  volume,  which  em-
braces, as  we  would  claim,  in  a  compressed  and  digested
form,  the  whole  scope  of  occult  knowledge,  expressed  in
the  language  of  a  learner.

We  have  sought  as  far  as  possible  to  distinguish
between  theory  and  practice,  between  facts  which  it  is
possible  to  ascertain  and  explanations  over  which  views
may  diverge.     AVe  have  checked  our  individual  judg-

VI  PREFACE.

ments  and  modified  our  individual  opinions  not  only
by  the  best  authorities  in  the  literature  of  the  several
subjects  treated,  but  by  the  collaboration  of  many  living
writers  who  are  specialists  in  distinct  branches  of  esoteric
science.  In  this  respect  the  book  may  be  accepted  as
the  result  of  a  collective  endeavour  rather  than  of  an
unaided  effort,  and  it  will  be  received  with  an  increased
confidence  on  this  ground.

CONTENTS.

iN-TEODrCTIOX

PAGE
1

PART  I.

MAGICAL  PRACTICES.

Magic:  Defixitioxs          .            .,          .            .            .  9

White  Magic  :  The  Evocatiox  of  Axgels  .  .  17
White  Magic  :  The  Evocatiox  of  the  Spirits  of  the

Elemexts         ......  35

Black  Magic  :  The  Evocation  of  Demoxs  .  .  51
Necromaxcy  :    The  Evocatiox  of  the  Souls  of  the

Dead    .......  71

PART  11.

SECRET  SCIENCES  IX  CONNECTION  WITH  MAGIC.

Alchemy      .....

83

The  Elixir  of  Life

95

Crystallomaxcy    ....

103

The  Composition^  of  Taltsmaxs   .

109

Divixatiox             ....

121

The  Divixixg  Rod

151

Astrology              ....

163

Kabbalism              ....

181

Vlll  CONTENTS.

PART  III.

PROFESSORS  OF  MAGICAL  ART.

The  Mystics            .....

PAGE

189

The  Rosiceucians              ....

199

The  Freemasons    .            .            .

213

PART  IV.

MODERN  PHEXOMEXA.

Mesmerism  ......        227

Modern  Spiritualism        .  .  .  .  .        247

Theosophy  .  .  .  .  .  .269

^.  INTRODUCTION.

THE  claims  of  Hermetic  philosophy  to  the  considera-
tion of  serious  thinkers  in  the  nineteenth  century
are  not  to  be  confounded  with  those  merely  of  an
exalted  intellectual  system,  or  of  a  sublime  and  legitimate
aspiration.  These  may,  indeed,  be  urged  in  behalf  of  it
Av-ith  the  force  of  unadulterated  truthfulness,  but  not  as
the  principal  point.  What  the  philosophy  Avhich  is  indis-
criminately called  transcendental.  Hermetic,  Rosicrucian,
mystical,  and  esoteric  or  occult,  submits  in  its  revived
form,  to  the  scrutator  of  life  and  her  problems  as  a  suffic-
ing and  rational  cause  for  its  resuscitation,  and  as  an  ade-
quate ground  for  its  recognition,  is  tersely  this  : — That  it
comprises  an  actual,  positive,  and  realisable  knowledge
concerning  the  worlds  which  we  denominate  invisible,
because  they  transcend  the  im2:)erfect  and  rudimentary
faculties  of  a  partially  developed  humanity,  and  con-
cerniug  the  latent  potentialities  which  constitute,  by  the
fact  of  their  latency,  what  is  termed  the  interior  man.
In  more  strictly  philosophical  language,  the  Hermetic
science  is  a  method  of  transcending  the  phenomenal
world,  and  attaining  to  the  reality  which  is  behind
phenomena.  At  a  time  when  many  leaders  of  thought
have  substantially  abandoned  all  belief  in  the  existence
of  intelligence  outside  of  the  visible  universe,  it  is  almost
superfluous  to  say  that  the  mere  claim  of  the  mystics
has  an  irresistible  magnetic  attraction  for  those  who  are
conscious  that  deep  down  in  the  heart  of  every  man
there  exists  the  hunger  after  the  supernatural.

The  mode  of  transcending  the  phenomenal  world,  as
taught  by  the  mystics,  consists,  and  to  some  extent
exclusively,  of  a  form  of  intellectual  ascension  or  develop-
ment, which  is  equivalent  to  a  conscious  application  of
selective   evolutionary   laws   by   man   himself   to  man.

2  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Those  latent  faculties  which  are  identified  as  Psychic
Force  pass,  under  this  training,  into  objective  life ;  they
become  the  instruments  of  communication  with  the  un-
seen world,  and  the  modes  of  subsistence  which  are
therein.  In  other  words,  the  conscious  evolution  of  the
individual  has  germinated  a  new  sense  by  which  he  is
enabled  to  appreciate  Avhat  is  inappreciable  by  the  grosser
senses.

The  powers  of  the  interior  man,  and  the  possibility  of
communication  with  the  unseen,  are  the  subject  of  his-
torical magic,  which  is  filled  with  thaumaturgic  accounts
of  experiments  with  these  forces,  and  of  the  results  of
this  communication.  Whether  these  alleged  occurrences
are  to  be  accepted  as  substantiated  facts  is  not  the
question  on  which  the  enlightened  mystic  desires  to
insist.  The  evidence  which  supports  them  may  be,  and
is,  important ;  it  may  be,  and  is,  overwhelming ;  but  it  is
not  upon  the  wonders  of  the  Past  only  that  the  Hermetic
claim  is  sought  to  be  established,  or  demands  recognition,
in  the  Present.  Whatever  be  the  evidential  value  for  the
success  of  the  psychic  experiments  conducted  by  the  in-
vestigators of  old,  they  may  at  least  be  said  to  constitute
a  sufficient  ground  for  a  new  series  of  scientific  inquiries
on  the  part  of  those  persons  who  are  devoting  their  in-
telligence and  their  energy  to  the  solution  of  the  grand
mysteries  of  existence.  Otherwise,  the  transcendental
philosophy  would  be  simply  the  revival  of  an  archaic
faith,  and  would  be  wholly  unaclapted  to  the  necessities
of  to-day.  It  should  be  remembered,  however,  when
speaking  of  scientific  inquiry,  that  the  reference  is  not
confined  to  the  professed  scientists  of  the  period,  but
to  all  who  are  capable  of  exact  observation,  and  can
appreciate  the  momentous  character  of  the  issues  in-
volved.

The  standpoint  indeed  is  this  :  the  successful  experi-
ments of  the  past  are  capable  of  repetition  in  the  present,
and  it  is  open  to  those  who  doubt  it  to  be  convinced  by
individual  experience.  In  one  of  his  most  mystical
utterances,  Christ  is  recorded  to  have  said  that  there  are
those  who  are  eunuchs  from  their  mother's  womb,  and  that
there  are  those  who  become  eunuchs  in  the  interests  of

INTRODUCTION.  3

the  Kingdom  of  God  :  so  also  there  are  natural  magicians
and  magicians  who  are  the  product  of  art,  yet,  generally
speaking,  the  magician,  unlike  the  poet,  is  not  born  but
made,  for  the  same  potentialities  abide  in  the  whole  of
humanity,  and  they  can  be  ultimately  developed  in  all.
AVhat  is  wanted,  therefore,  is  not  merely  persons  possessed
of  the  gifts  of  clairvoyance,  or  even  of  lucidity,  of  pro-
phetic foresight,  or  of  the  equalities  called  mediumistic,
but  those  who  by  the  nature  of  their  aspirations,  and
by  the  help  of  a  favourable  environment,  are  able  to
apply  the  arcane  laws  of  evolution  to  their  own  in-
terior selves.  But  there  is  another  and  an  indis-
pensable condition,  namely,  the  power  to  distinguish
between  Hermetic  truth  and  the  shameless  frauds  which
have  encompassed  it  from  time  immemorial.  At  pre-
sent, the  intellectual  world  is  substantially  divided  into
those  who  reject  esoteric  doctrine  and  practice  as  un-
mixedly  fraudulent,  and  those  whose  credulity  identifies
its  worst  impostures  and  most  puerile  perversions  with  its
highest  forms  of  truth.  Transcendentalism  is  concerned
with  the  development  and  application  of  certain  power-
ful forces  resident  in  the  interior  man,  and  as  these  forces
have  been  developed  and  ajDplied  in  various  directions,
from  many  motives,  and  with  a  multiplicity  of  ends  in
view,  historical  mysticism  is  very  diverse  in  its  character,
is  often  puerile,  superstitious,  dangerous,  malevolent,
and  obscene,  and  from  its  very  nature  has  been  always
peculiarly  liable  to  the  counterfeits  of  charlatans.

Certain  sections  of  modern  mystics  have  expressed
somewhat  too  freely  their  indignation  against  the
Christian  churches  for  the  abuses  and  corruptions  which
they  have  generated  during  the  undermining  process  of
the  ages.  Now,  the  history  of  no  doctrine  and  of  no  re-
ligion can  compare  in  its  abuses  and  corruptions  with
that  of  Magic ;  for  every  sjoecies  of  abomination,  of  "  un-
natural love  and  more  unnatural  hate  "  have  been  fostered
under  the  tenebrous  wangs  of  the  goetic  part  of  mysticism.
There,  as  in  other  matters,  the  height  of  aspiration  finds
its  exact  counterpoise  in  the  abysses  of  spiritual  degra-
dation. It  is  the  custom  with  many  to  shield  occultism
from  the  responsibility  of  these  dishonourable  histories

4  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

by  means  of  transliteral  interpretations,  just  as  it  is  the
custom  among  the  more  credulous  section  of  spiritualists
to  cloak  every  phase  of  fraud  among  "mediums"  by
accrediting  the  "  spirit  world  "  with  the  impostures  of
many  of  those  who  pose  as  the  avenues  of  communication
between  the  seen  and  the  unseen.  In  the  current
periodical  literature  of  our  newest  and  most  elaborated
mysticism  may  be  found  attempts  to  erect  Cagliostro,
the  Sicilian  mesmerist,  into  an  adept  of  divine  magic,  on
the  plea  that  a  person  accepting  the  notorious  facts  of  his
life  and  character  as  historical  truth,  would  be  adopting
a  shallow  and  puerile  view.  Even  the  most  obvious  and
direct  contradictions  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  French
mystics  have  been  qualified  and  excused  by  a  separation
of  the  conflicting  statements  into  different  planes  of
thought.  In  the  same  manner,  at  a  number  of  private
stances  where  the  non-professional  avenues  of  communi-
cation refused  all  remuneration,  and  where,  as  a  con-
sequence, the  essential  element  of  fraud  might  be  safely
deemed  wanting,  the  most  incessant  and  clumsy  impos-
ture has  been  explained  by  the  hypothesis  that  the
unbuyable  "avenues"  were  completely  entranced  and
unconscious,  that  they  were  utilised  in  this  manner  by
the  "  holy  spirit  world "  in  order  to  economise  psychic
force,  and  "form-manifestations"  were  being  witnessed.
But  nevertheless  the  transcendental  philosophy  is  the
one  hope  of  an  age  which  is  sick  unto  death  of  its  own
unprofitable  speculations.  It  asks  no  faith ;  it  offers  a
positive  knowledge.  But  it  is  well  that  we  should
recognise  the  existence  and  proximity  of  its  darker  side.
It  is  well  also  for  all  who  approach  the  subject,  and
desire  to  preserve  the  even  balance  of  an  unbiassed  and
well-regulated  mind,  to  discount  much  of  the  gorgeous
claim  put  forward  by  modern  mystics  concerning  the
antique  masters.  Hierophants  who  are  supposed  by
their  admirers  to  have  achieved  all  heights,  ought  surely
to  have  enjoyed  an  immunity  from  the  "  cosmogonical  "
ignorance  of  their  age,  whereas  their  writings  reveal  them
as  by  no  means  advanced  students  of  physical  science.
Those  who  are  believed  to  have  stood  on  the  threshold
of  Deity  might  have  enunciated  theological,  views  of  a

INTRODUCTION,  5

broader  character ;  nevertheless,  we  find  that  in  most
questions  of  religion  they  appear  to  have  adhered  to
the  doctrines  which  were  current  at  their  particular
epochs.  These  facts  suggest  limitations  which  will,
we  fear,  be  conclusive  proof  to  a  large  number  of
thinkers  that  the  achievements  of  adepts  in  the  past
are  of  a  somewhat  imaginary  nature.  However,  a
comparison  of  their  claims  with  the  known  facts  of
modern  psychology  will  establish  the  general  truth  of
their  statements ;  and  the  higher  and  unexplored  possi-
bilities which  to-day  are  indicated  by  psychic  science,
and  which  are  known  to  advanced  experimentalists,  will
be  found,  on  comparison,  to  be  precisely  in  the  direction
of  the  more  exalted  claims  of  the  mystics.  But  in  spite
of  the  attainments  of  some  brilliant  exceptions,  there  is
little  reason  to  suppose  that  the  turha  philosoj)Jiorum,  as  a
whole,  did  much  more  than  extend  our  actual  psychic
experiments — mesmeric,  hypnotic,  and  spiritual — for  a
marked  but  a  measurable  distance  beyond  ourselves,  and
that  the  grand  altitudes  of  occultism,  of  which  we  write
and  dream,  were  the  Promised  Land  of  their  own  aspira-
tions, and  not  attained  in  their  lives.  "^

This  being  the  case,  it  is  better  for  the  present  to  con-
fine our  attention  in  the  main  to  the  repeatable  experi-
ments of  the  mystics.  To  serious  students  it  is  possibly
permissible,  with  excessive  discrimination  and  caution,
to  extend  the  circle  of  investigation  to  some  of  the
branches  of  Black  Magic  (such  as  the  control  of  evil
spirits),  knowledge  and  not  gain  being  the  only  end  in
view.  The  alleged  dangers  in  connection  with  magical
practices  are  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  ends
which  are  to  be  achieved,  and  the  existing  secret  brother-

*  There  is,  however,  an  alternative  view  which  it  is  only  just  to
cite.  It  is  advanced  that  the  hierophants  of  the  past  were  forced  of
necessity  to  speak  the  cosmological  language  of  their  day.  When
transcendental  doctrine  was  rendered  in  the  language  of  the  current
philosophy,  the  mystic  could  not  seem  viuch  above  the  errors  of
the  day.  Otherwise,  his  over-science  would  have  been  additionally
incomprehensible.  On  the  transcendental  plane,  he  })robably  knew
all,  but  in  physical  science  he  may  have  been  limited  by  the  know-
ledge of  the  jieriod.  In  either  case,  the  translation  of  the  secret
wisdom  for  the  public  use  could  only  be  accomjilished  by  writing
down  theologically  as  well  as  philosophically  to  the  public  level.

6  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,

hoods,  more  especially  Masonry,  which  is  founded  on
esoteric  doctrine,  could  be  utilised  by  the  mystics  in
subservience  to  these  ends.

The  common  presumptions  established  by  modern
science  against  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  and  the
existence  of  spiritual  intelligences  outside  the  visible
universe,  are  based  on  a  sharp  distinction  between  the
substances  respectively  denominated  material  and  spiritual,
which  offers  a  singular  instance  of  the  verbal  tyrannies  to
which  we  subject  our  minds.  No  more  abundant  source
of  intellectual  misconception  and  blunder  can  well  be
adduced  than  is  comprised  in  the  two  words  SPIRIT  and
MATTER.  Believers  and  sceptics  alike  have  exhausted
the  methods  of  philosophy  in  their  attempt  to  establish
the  two  conceptions  at  antipodean  poles  of  thought.  It
is  now  universally  admitted  that  we  are  exclusively
limited  to  an  acquaintance  with  the  appearances  of  this
world  which  we  term  material ;  of  matter  in  its  ultimate
nature  we  know  nothing  whatever.  No  scientific  analysis
can  throw  light  upon  its  eternally  inscrutable  problem.
It  is  also  admitted  that,  in  the  intellectual  order,  man
realises  that  he  is  a  conscious  being  by  a  reflex  and  not
a  direct  act,  and  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  ego  is  a  book
permanently  sealed.  Once  more,  we  are  familiar  alone
with  certain  modes  of  manifestation ;  ever  the  reality
escapes  us.  It  is  therefore  impossible  rationally  to  estab-
lish fundamental  distinctions  between  substances  about
which  we  are  fundamentally  ignorant,  and  as,  for  all
practical  purposes,  mind  is  identical  with  the  vague  con-
cept which  we  denominate  spirit,  we  may  enunciate  the
following  axiom  with  complete  truth  : — The  distinction
between  matter  and  spirit  is  philosophically  futile  and  frivo-
lous. A  direct  consequence  follows ;  those  who  affirm
the  existence  of  matter  and  deny  spirit  may  be  uncon-
sciously contradicting  themselves.  Though  identified  in
the  common  darkness  which  involves  them,  it  is  philo-
sophically impossible,  of  course,  to  affirm  their  substantial
identity ;  therefore  reservation  of  judgment  is  the  only
prudent  course.  This  reservation  must  be,  moreover,
extended  in  another  and  important  direction.  See-
ing that  the  phenomena  called  thaumaturgic,  magical

INTRODUCTION.  7

and  spiritual  may  be  simply  uninvestigated  modes  of
manifestation  in  one  force  infinitely  differentiated  in  the
universe,  it  is  unreasonable  to  deny  their  possibility  on
d  piori  grounds,  for  the  possible  modes  of  manifestation
in  an  ultimately  unknown  substance  cannot  be  theoreti-
cally limited.  As  a  fact,  we  are  unconsciously  landed  in
pure  Spinozism,  for  it  is  one  of  the  tenets  of  this  grand
and  singular  thinker  that  matter  and  mind  are  but  two
finite  manifestations  of  one  infinite  substance,  which  may
be  capable  of  an  infinite  number  of  other  finite  manifes-
tations of  which  we  can  and  do  know  nothing.  It  is
outside  the  present  order  of  inquiry,  but  these  considera-
tions lead  us  to  touch  briefly  on  a  still  more  important
subject.  The  existence  of  a  creative  mind  exterior  to
the  visible  universe,  and  standing  in  relation  thereto  as
its  almighty  author  and  architect,  has  been  debated  for
long  ages  without  the  possibility  having  occurred  to
dialecticians  on  either  side  that  the  efficient  cause  of
matter  and  mind  may  be  something  so  totally  transcend-
ing them  both,  and  equally  in  nature  and  substance,
that  it  cannot  be  identified  with  either.  If  the  panthe-
istic identification  of  deity  with  the  titanic  forces  of  the
Cosmos  be  a  narrow  and  inadequate  solution  of  the
mystery  of  God,  the  anthropomorphic  identification  with
mind  is  liable  to  the  same  objection.

If  there  be  any  philosophic  accuracy  in  this  method  of
reasoning,  it  follows  that  by  virtue  of  our  absolute  and
irretrievable  ignorance  concerning  the  fundamentals  of
matter  and  mind,  mere  speculations  on  the  problems  of
life,  on  the  possibility  of  intellectual  subsistence  devoid
of  a  physical  organism — in  other  words,  on  the  existence
<.f  disembodied  humanities,  and  of  hierarchies  of  spiritual
beings  above  or  below  humanity — can  never  ultimate  in
any  solid  knowledge ;  they  will  ever  be  speculations
only,  devoid  of  conviction  and  satisfaction.  It  follows,
also,  that  there  is  no  possible  refuge  from  permanent
agnosticism  except  by  a  formal  act  of  faith  in  some
system  of  alleged  revelation,  or  by  experimental  re-
searches, if  possible,  into  the  nature  and  powers  of  the
mind.  But  faith  is  no  longer  what  it  was  in  the  days
of  St  Paul,    "  the   substance  of  things  hoped  for,   the

8  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

evidence  of  things  not  seen  -, "  it  is  not  a  source  of
scientific  conviction ;  it  is  aspiration  formulated  as
creed ;  and  by  its  nature  it  is  unable  to  provide  a  true
intellectual  certainty.

It  is  at  this  point  that  the  transcendental  philosophy
appears,  and  in  the  name  of  a  thousand  histories,  and  of
ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  traditions  and  legends,
declares  it  is  possible  to  know  by  experimental  research
that  disembodied  humanities  can  and  do  subsist,  that
there  are  hierarchies  of  intelligence  above  and  below
humanity,  that  in  this  life,  and  with  this  environment,
the  potentialities  of  the  interior  man  may  be  so  developed
as  to  put  him  in  communication  with  forms  of  intellec-
tual subsistence  which  transcend  his  normal  mode ;  that
the  positive  knowledge  which  is  the  result  of  such
research  can  be  attained  now  as  it  was  attained  in  the
past,  and  that  a  scientific  solution  of  the  problems  of
life  is  actually  within  the  limits  of  every  earnest  man.

Such  are  the  claims  of  the  Hermetic  philosophy,  and
such  is  the  scientific  basis  of  mysticism.  On  these
claims  the  spiritual  future  of  the  world  may  be  reason-
ably considered  to  depend.  On  this  basis,  if  on  any,
must  the  religion  of  the  future  be  built,  if  by  religion
we  are  to  understand  the  establishment  of  a  vital  and
vivifying  correspondence  between  that  which  is  highest
in  man  and  that  which  is  supreme  in  the  universe.  The
choice  lies  between  agnosticism  and  the  science  of  the
mystics.  If  mysticism  be  a  true  science,  grand  and
illimitable  is  the  prospect  which  awaits  the  psychic  man.
If  it  be  grounded  in  superstition  and  imposture,  even
from  agnosticism  itself  we  may  devise  a  chilly  consola-
tion, for  so  insoluble  is  the  mystery  of  the  universe  that
no  aspiration  can  be  extinguished  as  wholly  impossible
of  fulfilment ;  even  in  the  insoluble  mystery  there  is
room  for  a  forlorn  hope.

PART    I.

DEFINITIONS.

EVERY  brancli  of  the  occult  or  secret  sciences  may-
be included  under  the  word  Magic,  with  the  sole
exception  of  astrology,  which,  important  and
interesting  as  it  is,  can  hardly  be  termed  a  branch  of
arcane  msdom,  as  it  depends  solely  on  abstruse  astro
nomical  calculations,  and  on  the  appreciation  of  the  value
of  those  influences  which  are  supposed  to  be  diff'used  by
the  j^lanets  and  the  starry  heavens  over  the  lives  of
nations  and  individuals.  But  the  doctrines  concerning
the  nature  and  power  of  angels,  ghosts,  and  spirits ;  the
methods  of  evoking  and  controlling  the  shades  of  the  dead,
elementary  spirits,  and  demons  ;  the  composition  of  talis-
mans ;  the  manufacture  of  gold  by  alchemy ;  all  forms  of
di^-ination,  including  clairvoyance  in  the  crystal,  and  all
the  mysterious  calculations  which  make  up  kabbalistic
science,  are  all  parts  of  magic.  It  is  necessary  to  make
this  statement  at  the  outset  to  prevent  misconception,
because  in  an  elementary  hand-book  it  would  be  clearly
a  source  of  confusion  to  include  subjects  so  apparently
distinct  under  a  single  generic  title ;  and  we  have  there-
fore determined  to  make  a  few  introductory  remarks  upon
magic  viewed  as  a  whole,  and  then  to  treat  each  of  its
branches  under  special  titles  which  will  be  readily  intel-
ligiljle  to  those  who  are  seeking  for  the  first  time  an
acquaintance  with  the  mysteries  of  the  esoteric  sciences.
The  popular  significance  attached  to  the  term  magic
diverges  widely  from  the  interpretations  which  are
ofl'ered  by  its  students.     By  the  term  magic,  according

10  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

to  the  common  opinion,  there  is  generally  implied  one
of  two  things — either  that  it  is  the  art  of  producing
effects  by  the  operation  of  causes  which  are  apparently
inadequate  to  their  production,  and  are  therefore  in
apparent  defiance  of  the  known  order  of  nature  ',  or  that
it  is  the  art  of  evoking  spirits,*  and  of  forcing  them  to
perform  the  bidding  of  the  operator.  The  second  alter-
native may  be  practically  resolved  into  the  first,  for  the
invocation  of  invisible  intelligences  is  inseparably  con-
nected in  the  minds  of  the  vulgar  with  a  certain  hocus-
pocus  of  preposterous  rites  and  formulae,  including  the
utterance  of  barbarous  and,  to  them,  meaningless  words,
which  certainly  appear  to  be  inadequate  to  produce
so  stupendous  an  effect  as  a  direct  manifestation  from  a
hidden  side  of  Nature.  Now,  to  establish  communica-
tion with  worlds  which  are  normally  beyond  our  reach
is  undoubtedly  included  in  the  great  claims  of  the
magus ;  and  the  art  of  evoking  spirits,  taken  in  its  true
and  its  highest  sense,  is  the  head  and  crown  of  Magic ;
but  it  is  not  in  fact  a  violation  of  immutable  natural
laws,  and  the  causes  which  are  set  in  operation  by  its
qualified  initiates  are  really  adequate  to  the  effects  which
are  produced,  wonderful  and  incredible  as  they  may
appear.  The  popular  conception  of  Magic,  even  when  it
is  not  identified  with  the  trickeries  of  imposture  and  the
pranks  of  the  mountebank,  is  entirely  absurd  and  gross.
"  Magic,  or,  more  accurately,  Magism,"  says  Christian

*  Four  classes  of  the  intenigences  called  "spirits"  are  recog-
nised by  the  science  of  the  magi.  There  are  the  Angels  who  are
the  oifspring  of  primeval  creation,  made  and  not  begotten  ;  there
are  the  Devils,  or  Demons,  the  angelical  hierarchies  who  fell
from  their  first  estate.  There  are  the  Elementary  Spirits,  who
inhabit  the  four  elements  of  ancient  physical  science,  and  are
divided  into  Sylphs,  Undines,  Gnomes,  and  Salamanders — intelli-
gences who  reproduce  their  species  after  the  manner  of  man-
kind. Finally,  there  are  the  Souls  of  departed  men  and  women
whose  actual  locality  in  the  unseen  world  is  variously  described.
Angels  are  invoked  in  the  higher  branches  of  white  magic,  and
Demons  in  the  operations  of  the  black  art  ;  Elementary  Spirits  are
the  classes  most  easily  commanded,  and  they  are  the  "  familiars  "
of  the  middle  ages.  The  Souls  of  the  Dead  were  conjured
commonly  for  the  revelation  of  mundane  secrets,  occasionally
for  the  disclosure  of  future  events,  but  most  frec[uently  in  the
interests  of  bereaved  affection.

DEFINITIONS.  1 1

in  his  Hidoire  de  la  Magie,  "  if  anyone  would  condescend
to  return  to  its  antique  origin,  could  be  no  longer  con-
founded ^yith  the  superstitions  which  calumniate  its
memory.  Its  name  is  derived  to  us  from  the  Greek
words  Magos,  a  Magician,  and  Mageia,  Magic,  which  are
merely  permutations  of  the  terms  MoG,  Megh,  Magh,
which  in  Pehlvi  and  in  Zend,  both  languages  of  the  eld-
est East,  signify  '  priest,'  '  wise,'  and  '  excellent.'  It  was
thence  also  that,  in  a  period  anterior  to  historic  Greece,
there  originated  the  Chaldsean  name  Maghdim,  which  is
equivalent  to  '  supreme  msdom,'  or  sacred  philosophy.
Thus,  mere  etymology  indicates  that  Magic  was  the
synthesis  of  those  sciences  once  possessed  by  the  Magi
or  philosophers  of  India,  of  Persia,  of  Chaldsea,  and  of
Egypt,  Avho  were  the  priests  of  nature,  the  patriarchs  of
knowledge,  and  the  founders  of  those  vast  civilisations
whose  ruins  still  maintain,  without  tottering,  the  burden
of  sixty  centuries."

Ennemoser,  in  his  "  History  of  Magic  "  (as  translated
by  Howitt),  says  :  "  Among  the  Parsees,  the  Medes,  and
the  Egyptians,  a  higher  knowledge  of  nature  was  under-
stood by  the  term  Magic,  with  which  religion,  and  par-
ticularly astronomy,  were  associated.  The  initiated  and
their  disciples  were  called  Magicians — that  is,  the  Wise
— which  was  also  the  case  among  the  Greeks.  .  .  .  Plato
understood  by  Wisdom  nothing  less  than  a  worship  of
the  Divinity,  and  Apuleius  says  that  Magus  means,  in
the  Persian  language,  a  priest.  .  .  .  India,  Persia,  Chal-
dea,  and  Egypt,  were  the  cradles  of  the  oldest  Magic.
Zoroaster,  Ostanes,  the  Brahmins,  the  Chaldean  sages,
and  the  Egyptian  priests,  were  the  primitive  possessors
of  its  secrets.  The  priestly  and  sacrificial  functions,  the
healing  of  the  sick,  and  the  preservation  of  the  Secret
Wisdom,  were  the  objects  of  their  life.  They  were
either  princes  themselves,  or  surrounded  princes  as
their  counsellors.  Justice,  truth,  and  the  power  of
self-sacrifice,  were  the  great  qualities  with  which  each
one  of  these  must  be  endowed ;  and  the  neglect  of  any
one  of  these  virtues  was  punished  in  the  most  cruel
manner."

A  theosophical  writer  who  is  said  to  belong  to  the  most

12  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

advanced  school,  Dr  Franz  Hartmann,  who  is  said  to  be  a
practical  as  well  as  theoretical  student,  who  also  lays  claim
to  the  successful  performance  of  recondite  alchemical  ex-
periments by  the  application  of  spiritual  forces  to  material
things,  and  who,  therefore,  should  at  any  rate  be  com-
petent to  provide  us  with  a  tolerable  definition  of  his  art,
has  the  following  assertion  at  the  beginning  of  one  of  his
books  : — "  Whatever  misinterpretation  ancient  or  modern
ignorance  may  have  given  to  the  word  Magic,  its  only
true  significance  is  The  Highest  Science,  or  Wisdom,  based
upon  knowledge  and  practical  experience."  This  definition
reads  an  absolute  value  into  a  term  which  it  does  not
historically  possess,  for  though  Magic  be  undoubtedly
derived  from  a  word  which  signifies  Wisdom,  it  is
Wisdom  as  conceived  by  the  Magi  to  which  it  is  alone
equivalent,  and  so  far  as  philosophy  is  concerned,  magian
Wisdom  either  may  or  may  not  be  identical  with  the
absolute  and  eternal  Wisdom.

Magic,  says  Eliphas  Levi,  is  "the  traditional  science
of  the  secrets  of  Nature  which  has  come  down  to  us
from  the  Magi,"  a  definition  devoid  of  nonsense,  and
narrowly  escaping  perfection,  the  limitation  of  the  source
of  esoteric  knowledge  to  the  Persian  hierarchs  being,  we
think,  its  sole  defect.

By  these  definitions  it  is  plain  that  Magic  is  not  merely
the  art  of  invoking  spirits,  and  that  it  is  not  merely  con-
cerned with  establishing  a  communication  with  other  forms
of  intelligent  subsistence  in  the  innumerable  spheres  of
the  transcendental.  If  such  invocation  be  possible,  if  such
communication  can  be  truly  established,  it  is  evidently  by
the  intervention  of  certain  occult  forces  resident  in  the
communicating  individual,  man.  Now,  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose  that  the  same  forces  can  be  applied  in  other
directions,  and  the  synthesis  of  the  methods  and  processes
by  which  these  forces  are  utilized  in  the  several  fields  of
experiment,  combined  with  a  further  synthesis  of  methods
and  processes  l)y  which  the  latent  potentialities  of  a
variety  of  physical  substances  are  developed  into  mani-
fest activity,  constitutes  Magic  in  the  full,  perfect,  and
comprehensive  sense  of  that  much  abused  term.

The  maltreatment  and  odium  of  centuries  has  elimin-

DEFINITIONS.  13

ated  from  the  word  Magic  its  original  and  sublime
significance.  Once,  in  the  dead  language  of  starry
Chaldea,  the  solemn  sanctuary,  the  cradle,  if  not  the
birthplace,  of  the  sciences  called  transcendental,  it  was
the  equivalent  of  supreme  wisdom ;  once  its  professors
were  the  priests,  the  vnse,  the  excellent :  but  the  science
is  confounded  with  the  impostures  which  have  encom-
passed its  history,  and  the  initiates  are  identified  mth
the  rabble  of  rogues  and  charlatans.  So  it  would
almost  seem  as  if  the  term  Magic  had  become  a  word
whose  accepted  meaning  is  a  libel  on  the  science  which
it  signifies,  and  a  slur  on  the  memory  of  its  grand  masters.
Fortunately,  however,  it  is  not  the  only  term  by  which
that  science  is  described  ;  esoteric  msdom,  occult  know-
ledge, the  transcendental  philosophy  and  practice  are
inter-convertible  terms  which  all  signify  Magic,  and  are
used  indiscriminately  throughout  this  volume,  less  to
avoid  tautology  than  to  minimise  the  depreciatory  effect  of
a  now  debased  word  by  connecting  it  vdth  the  equivalents
of  its  first  and  true  significance.

We  have  already  explained  in  the  Introduction  to
this  work  what  we  conceive  to  be  the  objects  of  the  pre-
sent revival  of  mysticism,  and  the  exact  nature  of  its
claims  on  the  consideration  of  the  nineteenth  century.
The  origin  and  destiny  of  Man  are  the  absorbing  and
vital  problems  which,  in  the  present  age,  demand  more
urgently  than  ever  a  complete  and  satisfactory  solution.
Such  a  solution  is  offered,  it  is  claimed,  by  Magic.
Latent  energies,  undeveloped  faculties,  generally  un-
known possibilities,  are  affirmed  by  that  science  to  be
actually  resident  in  man.  By  their  eff'ectual  evolution
it  is  said  that  the  horizon  of  his  energies  and  his  per-
ceptions can  be  so  enlarged  as  to  extend  over  a  new
range  of  existence.  It  is  demonstrated  that  his  physical
envelope  is  not  his  real  self,  that  he  can  transcend  it
without  destroying,  while  he  can  establish  a  direct  con-
nection with  numberless  forms  of  intelligence  who  are
dissevered  from  their  perishable  bodies,  and  with  others
of  every  rank  who  have  never  been  joined  with  flesh.  The
desire  of  the  long  ages  is  promised  a  complete  fulfilment
in  this  sublime  programme  of  an  abandoned  knowledge.

14  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

The  psychological  experiments  of  the  past  masters  of
mysticism  are  alleged  to  have  brought  them  into  com-
munication with  various  classes  of  intelligences,  such  as
angels,  elementary  sjiirits,  demons,  and  the  disembodied
souls  of  men.  The  fundamental  principle  of  this  com-
munication was  in  the  exercise  of  a  certain  occult  force
resident  in  the  Magus  and  strenuously  exerted  for  the
establishment  of  such  a  correspondence  between  two
planes  of  Nature  as  would  effect  his  desired  end.  This
exertion  was  termed  the  evocation,  conjuration,  or  call-
ing of  the  spirit,  but  that  which  in  reality  was  raised
was  the  energy  of  the  inner  man ;  tremendously  developed
and  exalted  by  combined  will  and  aspiration,  this  energy
germinated  by  sheer  force  a  new  intellectual  faculty  of
sensible  psychological  perception,  and  enabled  the  pre-
pared mystic  to  see  into  a  new  world,  and  communicate
with  its  several  populations.  To  assist  and  to  stimulate
this  energy  into  the  most  powerful  possible  operation,
artificial  means  were  almost  invariably  used.  The  ordin-
ary faculties  and  senses  were  worked  upon,  and  fre-
quently the  narrow  line  which  intervenes  between  ex-
altation and  frenzy  was  overstepped  in  the  temerity  of
the  process.  The  appeal  to  the  senses  by  a  gorgeous
and  overwhelming  ritual,  which  has  been  attended  with
grand  success  in  the  hierarchic  religions  of  Chris tianit}^,
was  made  also  by  the  hierarchic  magic  of  the  past.
The  synthesis  of  these  methods  and  processes  was  called
Ceremonial  Magic,  which  in  effect  was  a  tremendous  forc-
ing-house of  the  latent  faculties  of  man's  spiritual  nature.
Undoubtedly  the  end  was  occasionally  accomplished  by
violent  and  unnatural  means,  for  intellectual  exaltation
can  be  achieved  by  laudanum  and  haschisch  as  much  as
by  divine  grace  applied  to  the  soul ;  but  the  ethical
value  of  the  end  cannot  be  impeached  by  the  use  of  dis-
creditable methods,  though  the  operator  may  be  per-
sonally discredited  and  permanently  maimed  thereby.

The  gospel  according  to  the  mystics  has,  it  will  be
seen,  its  darker  side.  As  the  known  forces  of  modern
material  science  can  be  used  to  preserve  or  destroy,  so
can  the  arcane  potencies  developed  by  magic  be  directed
to  a  good  or  an  evil  end.     In  the  suggestive  language  of

DEFINITIONS.  15

the  alchemists,  coals  may  be  turned  into  gold,  but  also
it  is  possible  to  convert  the  precious  metal  into  coal.
We  can  rise  into  communion  with  the  exalted  under-
standing of  the  angels ;  we  can  sink  into  correspondence
with  the  psychic  deformities  of  the  devils ;  we  can  com-
pose the  Universal  Medicine  and  the  arcane  poison  of
the  second  death.

There  is  white  and  there  is  black  magic.  The  lawf  id
application  of  the  arcane  forces  which  are  known  to
esoteric  science  constitutes  A¥hite  Magic ;  the  lawless
and  vicious  application  of  the  same  forces  is  the  Black
or  infernal  Art.

The  seat  of  the  law  abides  in  the  intention  and  will  of
the  operator.  That  which  is  well  meant  must  eventu-
ally Avork  well.  Actions  must  be  appraised  by  their  in-
tention and  not  their  effect  alone,  as  the  significance  of
words  is  extended,  contracted,  or  changed  by  a  reference
to  their  philological  origin.  Black  Magic  has  two  pre-
ponderating elements — the  diabolical,  and  the  supersti-
tious or  absurd.  The  use  of  the  term  diabolical  is  not
to  be  interpreted  in  an  absolutely  theological  sense.

The  contrast  obtained  by  the  epithets  white  and  black
may  be  considered  to  countenance  their  use,  but  such
emblematical  language  has  frequently  been  misapplied.
Then  we  have  red  magic,  which  is  characterized  as
the  cream  of  the  secret  sciences  and  other  fanciful
designations.

As  this  book  is  by  no  means  intended  for  an  advanced
student,  but  is  exclusively  addressed  to  the  postulant  in
the  pronaos  of  the  mystical  temple,  as  its  information  is
therefore  elementary,  although  practical,  the  supreme
altitudes  of  magical  science  (where  the  adept  passes  into
the  saint,  where  communication  with  spiritual  intelli-
gences is  transcended,  and  a  union  is  said  to  be  estab-
lished with  the  fontal  source  of  souls,  with  the  divine,
universal  life)  are  not  described  herein,  and  the  way
of  attainment  in  this  transcendental  branch  is  not
delineated.

Here  it  is  sufficient  to  observe  that  the  mystics  con-
tinually refer  to  the  existence  of  an  absolute  and
universal   science  which  is  not   beyond  possession   by

16  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

finite  man.  This  divine  knowledge  is  intimately  associ-
ated with  a  divine  power  which  may  be  either  developed
in  man,  or  with  which  he  may  be  energised  from  without.
As  it  is  impossible  to  conclusively  determine  that  such
heights  have  ever  been  truly  scaled,  the  modern  mystic
will  be  unwise  to  insist  on  their  existence,  though  he
may  feel  personally  assured  of  the  fact.

For  merely  historical  references  to  Magic  among  the
Arabs,  the  Romans,  the  Chinese,  the  Early  Christians,
the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks,  the  Israelites,  the  Germans,
the  Laplanders,  and  the  Orientals,  the  reader  is  referred
to  Ennemoser's  work,  translated  by  Howitt  and  pub-
lished under  the  title  of  "  The  History  of  Magic."
There  is  also  a  learned  work,  translated  in  1877  from
the  French  of  Lenormant,  and  called  "  Chaldean  Magic,"
in  which  are  translated  some  curious  incantations  in  the
cuneiform  character.  Del  Rio's  Disquisitionum  Magicarum,
a  voulme  of  1100  pages,  published  in  1657,  is  an  early
authority,  and  contains  a  chapter  on  Fascination.  An
antiquarian  work  called  "  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and
Magic  from  the  most  Authentic  Sources,"  was  published
by  Thomas  Wright,  F.S.A.,  in  1851.  Francis  Barrett's
"  The  Magus,"  an  expensively  illustrated  work  printed
in  1801,  is  the  work  of  one  who  styled  himself  a  "  pro-
fessor "  of  occult  science.  In  France  the  writings  of
Elij^has  L6vi — especially  his  Histoire  de  la  Magie,  and
his  Dogme  et  Bituel  de  la  Haute  Magie  —  are  justly
esteemed.

Pererius  in  159S,  Tiedemann  in  1787,  Freytag  in
1710,  Christophorus  in  1711,  have  all  written  tracts  on
the  subject  of  Magic,  which  are  sometimes  met  with.

AVHITE  MAGIC.

THE  EVOCATION  OF  ANGELS.

THE  highest  orders  of  intelligence  known  to  the
Christian  mystics,  and  derived,  like  their  general
concejjtions  of  the  Cosmos  of  matter  and  mind,
from  their  Jewish  initiators,  were  the  messengers  of
Scriptural  tradition,  who  are  called  in  the  Greek  angelos,
and  in  the  Hebrew  malak.  The  ambassadorial  office  has
long  been  eliminated  from  our  conception  of  these  beings,
who,  in  a  condition  of  ecstatic  adoration  and  in  undiver-
sified  permanence  of  beatitude,  seem  to  have  survived
their  raison  d'etre.  According  to  the  Eabbinical  com-
mentary on  Genesis,  written  by  Rabbi  Jacob,  the  angels
have  no  free  will,  "for  they,  being  of  a  pure  under-
standing, and  having  an  inclination  to  good  only,  cannot
be  otherwise  than  good ; "  and  this  is  an  actual  doctrine
of  the  Latin  church.  Practically,  however,  the  angels
of  Catholic  history  and  legend,  in  spite  of  their  consum-
mate perfection,  would  appear  to  rejoice  in  the  plenary
possession  of  that  freedom  which  an  abstract  theology
denies  them.  They  respond  to  invocations,  they  perform
miracles,  they  garner  the  prayers  of  the  faithful,  they
overwatch  human  beings,  and  they  engage  everlastingly
in  a  spiritual  warfare  with  the  emissaries  of  perdition
and  darkness.

This  practical  aspect  of  orthodox  angelology  corre-
sponds to  that  of  western  magic,  both  being  undoubtedly
derived  from  the  ancient  faith  of  Israel,  which  in  turn
was  indebted  for  the  elements  of  its  pneumatic  hypo-
theses to  Egypt,  Babylon,  and  Chaldea,  whence  the
doctrine  of  the  Incommunicable  Name,  with  the  powers
and  virtues  thereof,  was  derived  by  Rabbinical  theoso-
phists.     The  latter  evolved  out  of  its  diverse  combina-

B

18  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

tions  a  complex  hierarchy  of  intelligence,  analogous  to
the  Alexandrian  system  of  successive  emanations,  differ-
entiated by  a  downward  egression  out  of  the  one  and
eternal  substance.

The  Incommunicable  Name  came  to  be  considered  a
fountain  of  arcane  power,  and,  by  an  easy  and  natural
transition,  it  was  at  length  regarded  as  the  source  of  life.
The  letters  which  composed  it  were  deemed  especially
prolific  in  the  creations  of  intelligence,  illumination,  and
harmony.  A  measure  of  their  power  was  extended  to
the  entire  Hebrew  alphabet,  which  was  endowed  with
an  abstruse  mystical  significance.  It  is  necessary  to
explain  this  point  in  order  to  understand  the  angelical
doctrines  of  the  Jemsh  Magi.  Each  of  the  alphabetical
symbols  represented  a  vital  and  creative  principle  resi-
dent in  the  intelligible  world.  Just  as  out  of  the  letters
of  an  ordinary  alphabet  is  evolved  the  vocabulary  of  a
great  language,  so  from  the  arcane  potencies  which  were
signified  by  the  Hebrew  signs,  the  variations  of  an  in-
finite existence  were  divinely  elaborated.  Now,  the  sup-
position of  an  exact  correspondence  between  the  arcane
potencies  in  question  and  the  signs  by  which  they  were  re-
presented, as  well  as  between  the  inexhaustible  vitalities
of  the  Cosmos  and  the  language  developed  from  the  signs,
constituted  the  magical  character  of  the  Jewish  tongue.

In  an  interesting  and  valuable  manuscript,  entitled,
"  The  Cabalistic  Science,  or  the  Art  to  Know  the  Good
Genies,"  there  is  the  following  explanation  of  the
mysteries  which  are  contained  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet.

By  the  sequence  of  symbols  extending  from  Aleph  to
Jod  was  symbolised  the  Angelical  World,  or  the  hierarchy
of  sovereign  intelligences  directly  derived  from  the  first
Eternal  Light,  and  attributed  to  Jod  in  first  and  superior
correspondence.  By  the  sequence  from  Caf  to  Tsad  were
represented  the  several  orders  of  angels  who  inhabit  the
visible,  or  astronomical  and  astrological  worlds,  mystic-
ally attributed  to  Jah,  each  individual  sphere  being
under  the  special  safeguard  of  a  particular  presiding
intelligence.  The  sequence  from  Tsad  to  Thau  is  in
arcane  correspondence  with  the  elementary  world,  which
is  attributed  by  philosophers  to  Jaho  in  the  paramount

WHITE  MAGIC.  19

order.  The  destinies  of  humanity  are  dispensed  in  the
elementary  sphere,  and  its  angelic  intelligences  preside
over  animated  Nature.

Orthodox  Christian  theosophy  enumerates  nine  choirs
of  angelical  beings  which  differ  from  each  other  in  order
and  in  degree  of  glory,  but  are  all  of  the  same  nature.
In  the  mystical  writings  attributed  to  the  apostolic
Areopagite,  an  account  of  these  hierarchies  is  given  in
an  extended  form,  and  it  is  undoubtedly  to  this  trans-
cendentalist  that  theology  is  indebted  for  the  angelical
doctrines  subsequently  developed  by  S.  Thomas.  Now
the  advanced  mystic  who  borroAved  the  name  of
Dionysius  was  indebted  in  turn  to  the  Kabbalists  for
his  pneumatic  hypotheses,  as  "vvill  be  seen  in  the  follow-
ing tabulation  of  the  attributes  of  the  Divine  Names,
and  of  the  intelligences  in  correspondence  with  each  of
the  Hebrew  letters.

I.  The  first  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  is  called
Aleph  ;  it  is  in  correspondence  with  Eheieh,  the  fontal
name  of  God,  which  is  interpreted  as  Divine  Essence.
Its  seat  is  in  the  world  called  Ensoph,  which  signifies
Infinity,  and  its  attribute  is  Keter,  the  Crown.  It  rules
over  the  Angels  called  by  the  Hebrews  Haioth-ha-
Kodesch,  or  The  Living  Creatures  of  Holiness,  who  are
otherwise  named  Seraphim,  and  constitute  the  first  and
supreme  choir.

II.  The  second  letter  is  Beth,  and  the  Divine  name
which  corresponds  to  it  is  Bachour,  or  eledus  juvenis.
It  is  the  sign  of  the  Ophanim,  who  are  the  Angels  of  the
second  order,  and  the  Cherubim  of  exoteric  theology.
By  their  ministry,  Jehovah  unfolded  and  cleared  the
primordial  chaos.  The  attribute  of  Bachour  is  Hocmah,
or  Divine  Wisdom.

III.  The  third  letter  is  Ghimel.  It  corresponds  to
the  name  Gadol,  which  signifies  Grand  or  Great,  and  is
assigned  to  the  Angels  of  the  third  order  whom  the
Hebrews  called  Aralym,  the  mighty  and  strong.  These
are  the  Thrones  of  the  Kabbalists,  and  the  third  choir.
By  their  ministry  Tetragrammaton  Elohim  establishes
and  maintains  the  form  of  the  Fluidic  Matter.  Its
attribute  is  Binah,  or  Intelligence.

20  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,

IV.  The  fourth  letter  is  Daleth.  It  represents  the
name  Dagoul,  which  is  equivalent  to  Insignis,  and  it
corresponds  to  the  Angels  of  the  Hasmalim,  or  Angels
of  the  fourth  order,  who  are  the  Dominions  of  current
theology.  By  their  ministry  were  elaborated  the  di-
verse forms  of  matter,  and  especially  the  human  body.
Hesed  is  the  attribute  of  El,  and  it  signifies  Mercy  and
Goodness.

V.  The  fifth  letter  is  He,  which  typifies  the  name
Nadotjr,  significant  of  the  majesty  of  God,  and  corres-
ponding to  the  fifth  angelical  hierarchy,  which  is  the
choir  of  might  and  power,  and  its  Intelligences  are  called
Powers.  By  their  ministry  the  elements  were  evolved
by  Elohim-Gibor,  whose  numeration  is  Pachad,  which
signifies  Fear  and  Judgment,  and  whose  attribute  is
Geburah,  which  signifies  Strength  and  Power.

VI.  The  sixth  letter  is  Vau,  whence  is  developed  the
name  Vezio,  cum  splendor e  ;  it  stands  for  the  Angels  of
the  sixth  order,  the  Malakim,  or  Virtues,  by  whose
ministry  Eloah-Vaudahat  produces  the  metals  and  other
substances  which  belong  to  the  mineral  kingdom.  His
attribute  is  Tiphereth,  which  signifies  Beauty  and
Splendour.

VII.  The  seventh  letter  is  Zain,  which  originates  the
name  Zakai,  equivalent  to  pur  us,  munclus.  It  corres-
ponds to  the  Angels  of  the  seventh  order,  the  Kabbal-
istic  Children  of  Elohim,  who  are  the  Principalities  of
orthodox  faith.  By  their  ministry  the  vegetable  king-
dom was  produced  by  Tetragrammaton-Sabaoth,  whose
attribute  is  Nezah,  which,  interpreted,  is  Triumph  and
Justice.

VIII.  The  eighth  letter  is  called  Cheth.  It  designates
the  name  Chasid,  which  is  equivalent  to  misericors.  It
corresponds  to  the  Angels  of  the  eighth  choir,  the  Bene-
Elohim,  or  Sons  of  God,  who  are  identical  with  the
archangelical  host.  By  their  ministry  the  animal  creation
was  developed  by  Elohim-Sabaoth,  whose  attribute  is
Hod,  which  is  Praise.

IX.  The  ninth  letter  is  Teth.  It  corresponds  to
Tahor,  or  the  Mundus  purus,  and  to  the  Cherubim  or
ninth  choir  of  Angels,  who  preside  at  the  birth  of  man

WHITE  MAGIC.  21

and  inspire  him  with  the  light  which  is  needed  to  direct
him  to  eternal  life.  By  their  ministry  are  Guardian
Angels  devoted  to  the  whole  of  humanity  by  Shaclay
and  Elhai,  whose  attribute  is  the  Foundation,  or  Jesod.

X.  The  tenth  letter  is  Jod,  which  gives  power  to  the
name  Jah,  which  is  ecpiivalent  to  Deus.  It  designates
the  tenth  numeration  of  the  Hebrews — Adonay-Melech,
or  the  God-King,  whose  attributes  are  the  Kingdom,  the
Temj^le,  and  the  Empire.  Its  influences  extend  to  the
Issim — strong,  happy,  and  blessed  Men,  located  in  the
sphere  of  the  spirit.  By  their  ministry,  intelligence,  in-
dustry, and  the  knowledge  of  divine  things  descend  as
an  influx  to  embodied  humanity.

The  Angelical  World  is  completed  ^\ath  the  tenth
letter,  but  the  rest  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  corresponds
to  individual  princes  of  intelligence,  governors  of  innu-
merable hosts,  and  severally  enacting  an  important  part
in  the  economy  of  the  mystical  universe.  Mettatron  is
in  correspondence  with  Caf,  the  eleventh  letter ;  by  his
ministry,  the  sensible  world  receives  deific  virtues.  He
belongs  to  the  first  Heaven  of  the  Astronomic  World.
There  is  also  the  final  Caf,  which  corresponds  to  the
Intelligences  of  the  second  order,  who  govern  the
Heaven  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  especially  the  zodiacal
signs.  Their  supreme  chief  is  Eaziel.  Lamed,  the
twelfth  letter,  corresponds  to  the  Intelligences  of  the
third  Heaven,  who  preside  in  the  sphere  of  Saturn.
Their  lord  is  Schebtaiel,  whose  attribute  is  the  Hidden
God.  Mem,  which  is  the  thirteenth  letter,  corresponds
to  the  fourth  Heaven,  or  sphere  of  Jupiter.  The  sove-
reign Intelligence  who  governs  this  planet  is  called
Tsaclkiel.  There  is  also  the  final  Mem,  which  is  analo-
gous to  the  fifth  Heaven,  or  sphere  of  Mars,  with  Camael
for  its  supreme  Intelligence.  He  is  the  strength  and  fire
of  God,  and  presides  over  many  princes.  Nun  is  the
fourteenth  letter,  and  corresponds  to  the  sixth  Heaven,
which  is  that  of  the  Sun.  Now,  the  first  sovereign
Intelligence  which  governs  the  grand  luminary  is  the
splendid  and  mighty  Raphael,  the  House  of  God.  Nun
in  its  asj^ject  as  a  final  corresponds  to  the  sphere  of
Venus,    which   is   also   the    seventh   Heaven,   and   has

22  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Haniel  for  its  sovereign  lord,  who  is  the  love,  justice,
and  grace  of  God.  Samech,  the  fifteenth  letter,  corre-
sponds to  the  eighth  Heaven,  which  is  that  of  the  star
Mercury,  and  is  governed  by  Michael.  The  sixteenth
letter  is  Oin,  which  is  analogous  to  the  ninth  Heaven,
the  sphere  of  the  Moon,  governed  by  the  messenger-
intelligence  Gabriel.  The  Astrologic  and  Astronomic
worlds  finish  with  this  letter,  and  the  succeeding  sequence
of  arcane  correspondences  is  concerned  with  the  Ele-
mentary Plane.

Thus  Ph6,  the  seventeenth  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alpha-
bet, has  reference  to  the  first  of  the  mystical  elements,
which  is  held  to  be  Fire,  and  its  sovereign  Intelligence
is  Seraphim.  Ph6  final  corresponds  to  the  Air,  which  is
the  abode  of  the  Sylphs,  whose  lord  is  Cherubim.  Tsad6,
the  eighteenth  letter,  has  reference  to  Water,  which  is
the  abode  of  the  Nymphs.  Now  the  Queen  of  the
Nymphs  is  Tharsis.  Koph  is  the  nineteenth  letter ;  it
is  in  correspondence  with  Earth,  which  is  the  sphere  of
the  Gnomes,  having  Ariel  for  its  presiding  Intelligence.
Eesh,  which  is  the  twentieth  letter,  applies  to  the
Animal  Kingdom,  including  Man ;  Schin  corresponds
to  all  vegetable  substances,  and  Tau,  the  last  symbol
of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  refers  to  the  world  of  minerals."^

Besides  the  celestial  hosts,  which  are  enumerated  in
the  above  tabulation,  the  mystical  calculus  of  the
Hebrews  establishes  the  existence  of  other  angelical
sequences,  as,  for  example,  the  angels  who  encompass
the  Great  White  Throne,  and  whose  names  are  entirely
extracted  from  three  mysterious  verses  in  the  fourteenth
chapter  of  Exodus.  Such  elaborations  of  a  multitude  of
titles,  by  means  of  Kabbalistic  computations,  and  their
endowment  with  corresponding  powers  and  formal  periods
of  influence,  were  prized  by  rabbinical  writers  as  con-
taining the  keys  of  the  government  of  the  universe.

It  is  hardly  on  their  own  merits  that  we  have  included
these  speculations  in  a  practical  handbook,  of  occultism,
although  they  are  almost  venerated  by  a  certain  section

*  In  this  list,  by  some  mischance,  the  rulers  of  the  Air  and  of
the  Earth  have  become  confused  ;  for  Cherubim  is  usually  referred
to  the  latter  element,  and  Ariel  to  the  former.

WHITE  MAGIC.  23

of  modern  mystics.  But  they  are  vitally  important  as
establishing  the  exact  nature  of  Kabbalistic  conceptions
concerning  those  worlds  of  invisible  intelligences,  whose
outer  fringes  are  contiguous  to  our  own  horizon,  of  which
they  had  glimpses  as  we  have,  but  of  which  they  had
little  real  knowledge,  and  could  formulate  no  adequate
hyjjothesis.  The  inadequacy  of  their  speculation  is  em-
barrassing to  believers  in  the  infallibility  of  the  Hebrew
mystics,  but  it  offers  no  obstacle  to  those  who  are  investi-
gating the  actual  scope  of  ancient  knowledge  concerning
the  facts  of  psychology,  and  can  distinguish  the  land-
marks of  true  experimental  progress  amidst  a  wilderness
of  distraught  speculations.

The  rites  to  be  used  in  the  conjuration  of  the  more  ex-
alted intelligences  are  found  in  the  "Key  of  Solomon,"  an
excellent  edition  of  which  has  been  issued  by  Mr.  Mathers.
Intelligences  of  this  nature  are  generically  denominated
angels,  but  they  often  partake  of  the  character  of  supe-
rior elementary  spirits,  and  this  is  undoubtedly  the  case
with  most  of  those  who  are  supposed  to  be  controlled  by
the  imjDrecations  and  threats  of  the  Magus.

An  anonymous  German  work  published  at  Frankfort
in  1686,  and  entitled  Theosophia  Pneumatica,  appears  to
comprise  in  a  comparatively  small  space  the  most  satis-
factory formulae  for  the  invocation  of  the  supreme  angels.
A  translation  in  manuscript,  made  by  Dr  J.  M.  Rieder,
having  recently  come  into  our  hands,  we  have  made  it  the
foundation  of  the  citations  which  follow.  Students  will
perceive  that  it  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  treatise  by
Arbatel  on  "  Magic."  The  classifications  and  names  of
the  angels,  as  they  exist  in  this  curious  work,  are  not
in  corresj^ondence  with  those  which  have  been  already
given,  but  as  it  is  acknowledged  by  the  mystics  that
the  true  names  —  which  is  equivalent  to  saying,  the
real  and  ultimate  natures — of  all  unseen  beings  are  in-
accessible to  human  research,  importance  should  not  be
ascribed  to  any  of  the  variations.  Titular  distinctions  in
matters  of  magical  practice  have  little  but  literary  utility.
Once  in  the  presence  of  an  angel,  it  is  said,  the  soul  has
no  need  of  speech,  much  less  of  the  ordinary  methods  of
social  address.

24  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

The  magical  treatise  in  question  has  the  common  dis-
ability of  all  works  of  its  age  and  class ;  its  aspirations
its  intentions,  and  its  practical  value  as  a  ritual  must  be
sedulously  separated  from  its  crude  philosophical  setting.
AVhatever  the  spiritual  knowledge  attained  by  the
Magus  of  old,  it  was  seemingly  insufficient  to  raise  him
above  the  intellectual  limitations  of  his  time,  and  it  must
ever  be  remembered  that  the  modern  scheme  of  mystical
criticism  which  seeks  to  account  for  such  obvious  philo-
sojDhical  inadequacies  as  exist  in  the  ancient  mystics  by
assuming  that,  in  spite  of  superior  attainments,  they
condescended  for  concealed  reasons  to  countenance
current  opinions,  scientific  or  religious,  is  without  any
actual  warrant  in  known  fact.

In  "  Pneumatic  Magic,"  the  names  of  the  angels  are
classified  under  the  title  of  Olympian,  or  Celestial  spirits,
who  abide  in  the  firmament  and  the  supreme  constella-
tions :  "  it  is  their  function  to  acknowledge  the  Fata  and
to  administer  the  inferior  destinies.  Each  Olympic  spirit
accomplishes  and  teaches  whatsoever  is  portended  by  the
star  in  which  he  is  insphered.  Yet  can  he  do  nothing
of  his  own  power,  nor  without  a  special  command  from
God.

"  There  are  Seven  Stewards  of  Heaven  by  whom  God  is
pleased  to  administrate  the  world.  To  wit : — Ara-
THRON,  Bethor,  Phaleg,  Och,  Hagith,  Ophiel,  Phul.
They  are  thus  called  in  the  Olympian  language,  and
each  of  them  has  a  numerous  army  and  grand  chivalry
of  the  firmament.

Arathron  commands  over  49  visible  regions.

Bethor

i^KJ±±Ll.S.d.<Ail.l\A

Lo    v/  y  \j^

42

3)

^^O^

Phaleg

35

«M'

Och

28

J)

Hagith

21

53

Ophiel

14

33

Phul

7

35

"The  Olympic  Regions  are  in  all  one  hundred  and
ninety-six,  over  which  the  Seven  Stewards  extend  their
policy.  The  mysteries  of  these  regions  and  of  the  firma-
ments are  explained  in  the  sublime  science  of  transcen-

WHITE  MAGIC.  25

dental  astrology,   and  the  means  of  establishing  com-
munication with  the  powers  and  principalities  therein.

"  Arathron  appears  on  a  Saturday  at  the  first  hour,  and
gives  a  true  answer  for  his  regions  and  their  inhabitants.
So  also  ^ith  all  the  others,  each  at  his  own  day  and
hour,  and  each  presiding  over  a  space  of  four  hundred
and  ninety  years.  The  functions  of  Bethor  began  in
the  fiftieth  year  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  were
extended  till  the  year  of  Christ  430.  Phagie  reigned
till  A.D.  920;  Och  till  the  year  1410;  Hagith  will
govern  till  A.D.  1900.  The  others  shall  follow  in  succes-
sion. These  intelligences  are  the  stewards  of  all  the
elements,  energising  the  firmament,  and,  with  their
armies,  depending  from  each  other  in  a  regular  hier-
archy.

"The  names  of  the  minor  Olympian  spirits  are  inter-
preted in  divers  ways,  but  those  alone  are  powerful
which  they  themselves  give,  which  are  adapted  to  the
end  for  which  they  have  been  summoned.  Grenerically,
they  are  called  Astra,  and  their  power  is  seldom  pro-
longed beyond  one  hundred  and  forty  years.

"  The  heavens  and  their  inhabitants  come  voluntarily
to  man  and  often  serve  against  even  the  will  of  man,
but  how  much  more  if  we  implore  their  ministry.  That
evil  and  troublesome  spirits  also  approach  men  is  accom-
plished by  the  cunning  of  the  devil,  at  times  by  con-
juration or  attraction,  and  frequently  as  a  penalty  for
sins ;  therefore,  shall  he  who  would  abide  in  familiarity
with  celestial  intelligences  take  pains  to  avoid  every
serious  sin ;  he  shall  diligently  pray  for  the  protection
of  God  to  vanquish  the  impediments  and  schemes  of
Diabolus,  and  God  will  ordain  that  the  devil  himself
shall  work  to  the  direct  profit  of  the  Theosophist.

"  Subject  to  Divine  Providence,  some  spirits  have
power  over  pestilence  and  famine,  some  are  destroyers
of  cities,  like  those  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  some  are
rulers  over  kingdoms,  some  guardians  of  provinces,  some
of  a  single  person.  The  spirits  are  the  ministers  of  the
word  of  God,  of  the  Church  and  its  members,  or  they
serve  creatures  in  material  things,  sometimes  to  the
salvation   of  soul  and  body,  or,  again,  to  the  ruin   of

26  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

both.     But  nothing,  good  or  bad,  is  done  without  know-
ledge, order,  and  administration."

Arathron  is  the  celestial  spirit  of  Saturn ;  he  can
operate  natural  things  prepared  by  astrological  influences;
he  may  change  everything  into  stone,  whether  animals
or  plants  ;  but  they  will  preserve  their  exterior  appear-
ance. He  changes  treasures  into  coals  and  coals  into
treasures.  He  gives  familiar  spirits  with  definite  power.
He  teaches  alchemy,  magic,  and  natural  philosophy.
He  joins  men  to  gnomes  and  earth  spirits.  He  renders
people  invisible.  He  governs  fertility  and  conception  ;
he  teaches  the  discovery  of  lead,  its  manipulation,  and
its  change  into  gold.  He  teaches  the  art  of  curing  the
smaller  animals  of  their  diseases,  such  as  goats,  poultry,
&c.  He  gives  intelligence  of  prisoners  and  of  sick
people,  despatches  ministering  spirits,  who  serve  after
his  own  manner,  enlarges  the  understanding,  gives  ex-
cellent advice  on  all  elevating  subjects,  and  is  most
exact  in  his  calculations.

He  must  be  invoked  on  a  Saturday,  at  the  first  hour
of  sunset  in  the  increasing  moon.

Bethor  administers  the  influence  of  Jupiter ;  he  who
can  obtain  his  assistance  may  rise  to  the  highest  dignities  ;
he  dispenses  treasures,  subjects  the  spirits  of  the  air  to
the  Magus,  and  gives  a  true  answer.  These  intelligences
carry  all  things,  even  precious  stones,  with  marvellous
medicines,  from  one  place  to  another.  The  spirit  of
Jupiter  gives  other  ministering  spirits  of  the  firmament :
he  can  extend  life  to  seven  hundred  years,  God  willing.
He  has  subject  to  him  forty-two  kings,  thirty-five
princes,  twenty-eight  dukes,  one-and-twenty  counsellors,
fourteen  servants,  seven  messengers,  and  two  thousand
nine  hundred  legions  of  spirits ;  he  instructs  judges  in
the  administration  of  equal  justice  to  the  poor  as  well  as
to  the  rich ;  he  inspires  his  Magus  with  the  love  of
justice,  gives  him  true  vision-haunted  dreams,  and  assists
in  the  attainment  of  venerable  functions  and  dignities.
He  gives  understanding  to  the  old,  even  to  fools  and
idiots,  strengthens  the  weak  memory,  beautifies  men  under
his  influence,  endows  them  Avith  eloquence  before  princes
and  the  great  of  this  world,  and  makes  them  gentle,

WHITE  MAGIC.  27

courteous,  and  noble ;  he  gives  a  number  of  serving
spirits  for  various  purposes ;  and  he  appoints  ministering
spirits  to  teach  the  manufacture  of  gold  from  tin.  This
princely  angel  is  Good  Fortune  ipsa  persona ;  he  dispenses
a  profusion  of  gifts,  especially  of  a  spiritual  kind ;  his
ministers  can  bring  the  object  of  your  desires  even  from
India  and  other  lands  of  the  Orient ;  they  teach  distilla-
tion from  various  herbs  and  roots,  and  the  preparation
all  kinds  of  physics  and  spices.  This  spirit  must  be
adjured  on  Monday  in  Pentecost  at  the  first  hour  of
smirise.

Phales;  is  the  master  of  matters  which  are  ascribed  to
Mars,  but  he  is  also  a  prince  of  peace ;  whosoever  re-
ceives his  signum  is  exalted  to  supreme  dignities.  He
teaches  military  science  and  medicine ;  how  to  judge
and  govern  well,  to  find,  extract,  and  manipulate  iron,
and  how  to  manufacture  gold.

He  must  be  called  on  a  Tuesday  at  the  first  hour  of
sunrise,  between  seven  and  eight  in  the  morning,  and
between  two  and  three  in  the  afternoon,  during  the  in-
creasins;  moon.

Och  is  a  sovereign  over  things  belonging  to  the  sun ;
he  can  extend  life  to  six  hundred  years,  insuring  con-
stant health  and  wisdom ;  he  sends  the  most  excellent
angels,  teaches  a  perfect  medical  science,  can  change
anything  into  the  purest  gold,  gives  a  purse  in  which
gold  grows,  prepares  the  precious  metal  in  the  mountains
during  a  long  period,  by  alchemy  in  a  briefer  space,  and
by  magic  in  a  single  moment.  Whosoever  receives
his  sign  the  kings  of  the  earth  must  venerate  as  a
divine  being.  He  commands  thirty-six  thousand  five
hundred  and  thirty-six  legions  of  spirits ;  he  alone
administers  all  things ;  all  intelligences  serve  him.  He
and  his  subjects  seldom  exalt  anyone  till  they  have
attained  middle  age,  neither  can  they  impart  the  highest
rank,  but  their  advice  is  excellent  in  several  matters,
especially  in  medicine,  including  the  cure  of  wounds
caused  by  the  bite  of  a  snake,  scorpion,  or  spider.

The  spirit  of  Sol  must  be  invoked  on  a  Sunday
morning  at  sunrise.

Hagith  administrates  in  Venereal  concerns.    He  makes

28  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

beautiful  the  being  to  whom  he  gives  his  sign,  and  en-
dows him  with  physical  grace.  He  changes  copper  into
gold  instantaneously,  gives  spirits  full  of  faithful  service,
has  four  thousand  legions  of  angels,  with  kings  occasion-
ally established  over  them — one  over  every  thousand.
He  teaches  the  knowledge  of  herbs,  plants,  roots,  and
spices ;  he  instructs  in  the  arcana  of  health,  skill,  and
beauty ;  he  is  the  most  rapid  of  all  spirits ;  he  gives  good
counsellors,  embroiderers,  sempstresses  in  silk  —  the
latter  all  neat  and  skilful."

He  must  be  invoked  in  the  increasing  moon,  on  a
Friday,  at  the  first  hour  of  sunrise  or  sunset.

Ophiel  administers  mercurial  things.  His  legions
exceed  one  hundred  thousand.  He  grants  ministering
angels  willingly,  teaches  all  arts,  and  to  whomsoever
he  gives  his  sign  he  imparts  the  power  of  instan-
taneously extracting  the  philosophical  stone  out  of
mercury.  From  him  you  may  learn  astrology,  the
learned  professions,  mining,  alchemy,  statuary,  painting,
the  removal  of  mountains  into  the  sea,  the  erection  of
bridges,  the  preparation  of  magic  mirrors  and  other
instruments,  excellence  in  letter  writing,  editing,  and
penmanshij^  ;  also,  elocution,  jurisprudence,  and  inter-
pretation of  Holy  Writ.  He  gives  good  counsel,  right
judgment,  and  skill  in  all  subtle  arts.

He  must  be  adjured  on  a  Wednesday,  at  the  first  hour
of  sunrise,  and  during  the  increasing  moon.

Phul  administers  all  things  belonging  to  the  moon.
He  can  change  all  metals  into  silver,  heal  dropsy,  give
Undines  serving  man  in  visible,  corporeal  shapes,  and  can
lengthen  life  to  three  hundred  years.  You  may  obtain
from  him  an  angel,  who  is  a  physician,  a  philosopher,  an
artist,  and  a  naturalist  or  transcendentalist.  He  gives
physic  for  the  eyes,  and  remedies  against  vertigo,  epilepsy
and  strabism,  or  presbitism.  He  grants  also  a  good  sight
and  reliable  information  on  many  subjects,  including
things  future  which  are  of  a  personal  character.

He  is  called  on  a  Monday,  at  the  first  hour  of  sunrise,
in  the  increasins;  moon.

The  ritual  informs  us  that  each  of  the  Seven  Celestial
Stewards  can  operate  after  a  number  of  methods,  either

WHITE  MAGIC.  29

according  to  the  common  course  of  nature,  or  by  the  more
arcane  exercise  of  will-power,  and  that  each  can  accom-
plish in  a  very  brief  period  what,  without  his  interfer-
ence, would  require  much  time  and  preparation.  Each
of  these  intelligences  must  be  invoked  between  seven
and  eight  in  the  forenoon,  or  between  two  and  three
in  the  afternoon,  on  any  day  of  the  week,  but  solely
in  the  hours  which  he  governs,  the  moon  being  on  the
increase.

An  accjuaintance  with  the  names  and  offices  of  these
spirits  is  by  no  means  sufficient  to  enter  into  a  state  of
correspondence  with  their  exalted  intelligence,  and  many
preparations  for  the  successful  evocation  of  angels  are
described  by  the  authority  I  have  cited,  of  which  some  are
methodically  enumerated  after  the  following  fashion  : —

I.

The  Talmid  (otherwise  the  Magus,  in  his  earlier  grade
of  initiation)  shall  ponder  day  and  night  on  the  method
of  attaining  a  true  knowledge  of  God,  not  only  by  the
AYord  which  has  been  manifested  from  the  beginning  of
the  world,  but  also  from  the  laws  of  the  Cosmos,  and  the
admirable  practical  secrets  which  may  be  learned  from
the  study  of  the  ^dsible  and  invisible  creatures  of  God.

II.

The  Magus  shall  learn  to  know  himself,  to  distinguish
between  his  mortal  and  immortal  parts,  and  the  spheres
to  which  they  severally  belong.

III.

By  his  immortal  nature  he  shall  study  to  love  God,  to
adore  and  to  fear  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  But  he
must  also  in  his  mortal  body  endeavour  to  be  useful  to
his  neighbours,  and  glorify  his  maker.  These  are  the
highest  commandments  of  Magic,  by  which  you  shall
obtain  the  veritable  Pneumatology  through  Divine  Truth
and  Wisdom,  and  you  shall  be  served  by  angelical  crea-
tures not  only  in  secret,  but  publicly,  and  face  to  face.

30  '  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES

IV.

As  every  one  is  destined  from  his  mother's  womb  to
a  certain  commerce  of  life,  the  disciple  should  pause  to
consider  whether  he  is  born  to  Magic,  and  to  what
branch.  By  noting  the  measure  of  success  ia  the  dif-
ferent sections  of  operation,  he  may  soon  ascertain  the
second  point.

V.

An  intending  Magus  shall  be  discreet  and  faithful ;  he
shall  never  reveal  what  he  has  been  told  by  a  spirit.
Daniel  was  commanded  to  set  a  seal  on  several  matters ;
Paul  was  forbidden  to  reveal  what  he  beheld  in  his  ecstasy.
The  importance  of  this  ordination  cannot  be  exaggerated.

VI.

Say  very  frequently  with  David  : — Take  not  thy  Holy
Spirit  of  strength  away  from  me.  Lead  me  not  into
temptation.

VII.

Accustom  yourself  to  the  evocation  of  spirits.  You
cannot  gather  grapes  from  thorns,  nor  figs  from  thistles.
Prove  all  things  and  hold  fast  that  which  is  good.  Avoid
all  that  is  contrary  to  the  mil  of  God.

VIII.

Avoid  all  superstition,  which  consists  in  the  attribu-
tion of  divine  power  to  things  which  are  without  divinity,
and  in  the  acceptation  of  divine  service  without  a  com-
mand from  God.  The  illusions  of  diabolical  magic,
which  arrogates  to  the  prince  of  darkness  the  adoration
due  to  God,  are  included  under  this  name.

IX.

Avoid  the  deceitful  imitations  of  the  devil,  who,  by
the  perversion  of  the  theurgic  powers  concealed  in  the
"Word  of  God,  becomes  a  fraudulent  imitator  of  things
which  belong  to  God.

WHITE  MAGIC.  31

"SATien  these  conditions  have  been  fulfilled,  and  the
operator  proceeds  to  the  practice,  he  should  devote  a
special  prefatory  period  to  profound  contemplation  on
the  serious  and  sacred  business  which  he  has  voluntarily
taken  in  hand,  and  must  labour  to  present  himself  before
his  Supreme  Teacher  with  a  pure  heart,  an  unde filed
mouth,  and  innocent  hands  :  "  he  must  bathe  his  body
and  purge  it  from  all  uncleanness,  wear  newly  washed
garments,  confess  his  sins,  and  abstain  from  "wine,  as  well
as  all  unchastity "  for  the  space  of  three  days.  He
should  also  give  alms  to  the  poor,  and  when  the  eve  of
operation  has  at  length  arrived,  he  must  dine  moderately
at  noon,  and  sup  on  bread  and  water.  Then  on  the
following  day,  he  must  seek  a  retired  and  uncontamin-
ated  spot,  where,  free  from  observation,  he  can  recite
the  prescribed  invocations,  e.g.  :

Prayer.

Holy,  Holy  Father !  Increase  my  faith  and  confirm
me  that  I  may  believe  stedfastly  in  Thy  willingness  to
vouchsafe  me  that  which  I  am  now  asking  through  Jesus
Christ  Thy  Son.     Amen.

And  further : —

Almighty,  Everlasting,  Merciful  God,  who  didst
create  all  things  to  thine  own  honour  and  j^raise,  and  to
the  benefit  of  mankind,  I  pray  Thee  to  send  me  the
spirit  OcH — of  the  race  of  the  suns — in  a  visible  form  to
teach  me  that  which  I  would  ask  him,  namely  to  give
me  a  plain  and  brief  instruction  in  the  preparation  of
the  angelic  water,  for  the  cure  of  all  external  and
internal  diseases  in  seven  days."^  That  he  may  direct
one  of  his  spirits  to  visit  me  all  the  days  of  my  life,
giving  true  answers,  and  instructing  me  in  all  questions

*  Obiter  nota :  the  angelic  water  in  all  seven  metals  in  5  pliilos  :
regenerated  elixir  and  DictaUa  polahilia  mixed  together.  Ut  si
2)himbu7ii  rcgeneraium  est  elixir  i^lusquam  in  iiiassa  respicemus
Saturnam  et  ArcUhron  et  Signa  ejus  et  liquefactum  est  aqua  fixa
reliqua.  And  all  metals  solved,  also  discover  their  nature,  so  that
also  6  and  all  other  metals  can  be  changed  into  gold  in  an  instant
— and  gold  which  is  good,  right,  and  resisting  all  proofs.

32  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCE.

and  in  all  matters  on  which  I  require  information.  Give
me  a  docile  heart  to  understand  and  remember,  also  to
apply  my  knowledge  to  Thy  glory  and  the  benefit  of
man.  0  Lord,  take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me,  con-
firm me  in  divine  joy.  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but
deliver  us  from  evil.

Holy,  Holy  Father,  I  pray  Thee,  do  not  abandon  me
to  the  spirit  of  untruth,  as  Thou  didst  give  him  power
over  Achab,  but  preserve  me  in  thine  own  truth.  In
all  things  Thy  will  be  done.  Through  Jesus  Christ.
Amen.

When  the  spiritual  exaltation  of  the  Magus  has  been
accomplished  by  these  and  other  j^rayers  (varied  of
course  to  suit  the  purpose  intended),  and  by  various
ceremonial  practices,  the  spirit  is,  in  magical  language,
compelled  to  appear.  That  is  to  say,  the  operator  has
passed  into  a  condition  when  it  would  be  as  impossible
for  a  spirit  to  remain  invisible  to  him  as  for  an  ordinary
mortal  to  conceal  himself  from  our  common  sight,
without  an  intervening  shelter,  in  the  blaze  of  a  noon-
day sun.

When  the  angel  has  arrived,  continues  the  Ritual,
briefly  make  known  what  you  wish,  write  down  his
answer ;  do  not  ask  more  than  three  questions  ;  preserve
what  you  learn  in  your  memory,  and  consider  it  as
sacred.  As  soon  as  your  answer  has  been  obtained,
say  to  the  angel : — "  Since  thou  didst  come  peacefully,
thanks  be  to  God  the  Lord,  in  whose  name  thou  art
commissioned,  return  now  in  peace  unto  thy  rank  and
sphere,  and  come  again  when  I  invoke  thee  according
to  the  order  and  functions  which  the  Almighty  has
vouchsafed  thee.     Amen."

Thus  we  see  that  the  magician  of  old  who  had  any
desire  unfulfilled,  by  his  knowledge  of  the  different
spiritual  potencies  and  their  respective  functions,  was
able,  by  evoking  that  one  whose  powers  corresponded  to
his  own  desire,  to  obtain  whatever  he  sought.  Whether
such   evocations  are  now  practised,  and  if  so  to  what

WHITE  MAGIC.  33

extent,  it  is  impossible  here  to  say,  for  probably  the
modern  magician  who  attained  such  knowledge  would
have  attained  it  only  after  such  a  novitiate  as  would
render  him  unable  or  unwilling  to  disclose  the  facts.  In-
deed, it  is  the  general  opinion  of  modern  occultists  that
the  initiated  mystic  never  disclosed  anything  except  to
his  brother  adepts,  and  that  what  has  transpired  in  these
matters  has  been  through  persons  who  failed  in  the
process,  but  had  advanced  as  far  as  a  certain  point.

The  theological  literature  of  angelology  is  exceedingly
extensive,  and  one  of  its  most  important  developments
is  that  of  St  Thomas  of  Aquinas,  who  is  called  the
angelical  doctor.  In  general  literature,  perhaps  the
most  curious  work  is  Hey  wood's  "  Hierarchy  of  the
Blessed  Angels,"  which  is  a  storehouse  of  curious  re-
search. Other  works  are  "  De  apparitionibus  omnis  generis
Spirituum,"  by  the  Jesuit,  Peter  Thyrseus,  date  1600;
"Pneumatalogia;  or,  a  Discourse  of  Angels,  their  Nature
and  Office  or  Ministry,"  anonymous,  1701  ;  but  a
methodical  history  of  angelology  has  not  yet  been
written.

0

WHITE  MAaiC.

THE  EVOCATION  OF  THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.

TO  the  old  magical  doctrine  of  the  Spirits  of  the
Elements  we  owe  some  of  the  most  graceful  and
enchanting  fictions  in  literature.  It  supplied
Pope  with  the  supernatural  machinery  for  his  inimitable
"Rape  of  the  Lock,"  while  an  old  Latin  treatise  of
Paracelsus  suggested  the  groundwork  of  "  Undine,"  one
of  the  most  dainty  and  delicate  of  all  German  fairy
tales.  Oriental  romance  is  also  replete  with  the  oj^era-
tive  wonders  of  these  and  kindred  beings,  for  the  Peris,
Jinn,  and  Afreets  of  Arabian  imaginative  writers  are
substantially  identical  with  Western  conceptions  con-
cerning Elementary  Spirits.

The  possible  existence  of  such  intelligences  has  been
seriously  debated  even  by  the  scientific  writers  of  this
epoch.  In  the  "  Unseen  Universe  "  a  chapter  is  filled
with  speculations  as  to  the  association  of  delicate  cosmical
processes  in  this  visible  universe  with  the  operations  of
unseen  intelligences  residing  within  it.

The  belief  in  the  connection  of  personal  agents  with
the  more  startling  natural  phenomena  is  admitted  to
have  been  extensively  prevalent  during  the  middle  ages,
when  imagination  peopled  the  "  four  elements "  with
intelligences,  normally  unseen,  "  some  of  them  friendly
to  man,  some  of  them  his  deadly  enemies.  They  are
powerful  and  conscious  of  their  power,  but  at  the  same
time  profoundly  and  mournfully  aware  that  they  are
without  a  soul.  Their  life  depends  upon  the  continu-
ance of  some  natural  object,  and  hence  for  them  there  is
no  immortality.  Sometimes,  however,  an  elementary
spirit  procures  a  soul  by  means  of  a  loving  union  with
one  of  the  human  race.     At  other  times,  the  reverse

86  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

happens,  and  the  soul  of  the  mortal  is  lost,  who,  leaving
the  haunts  of  men,  associates  mth  those  soulless,  but
often  amiable  and  affectionate  beings."

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  writers  who,  also  at  this
day,  believe,  or  profess  to  believe,  that  "the  planets  of
our  system  may  be  directed  in  their  '  continual  speaking
changes  '  by  their  several  crowds  of  governing  spirits  " —
that  "  spirits  are  everywhere  the  directors  of  matter  " —
that  "  there  exist  upon  the  earth  reasonable  creatures
other  than  man,  having  like  him  a  body  and  soul,  being
born  and  dying  like  him  " — that  these  are  "  the  forces
of  the  wind,  the  fire,  and  the  flood," — that,  in  fact,  what-
ever superstition  generated  in  the  past,  whatever  im-
agination has  endowed  with  a  habitation  and  a  name,
has  an  invisible  but  certain  existence.  The  doctrine  of
planetary  intelligences  has  been  countenanced  as  hypo-
thetically  admissible  even  by  Mr  W.  S.  Lilly,  who  is
one  of  the  most  cultured  and  thoughtful  of  later
philosophical  writers.

The  idea  of  living  forces  existing  in  the  elements  is
not  merely  of  mediseval,  or  even  of  Gnostic,  origination,
for  this  belief  was  cherished  in  the  earliest  ages  of  the
world's  history.  As  a  proof  of  this  we  may  instance  two
very  ancient  Accadian  or  early  Assyrian  Incantations,
addressed  to  the  Elements  of  Fire  and  of  Water.  The
originals  were  translated  by  Mr  Ernest  Budge,  the
Egyptologist,  and  published  in  "  The  Records  of  the
Past."

The  108th  chapter  of  the  Ancient  Egyptian  "  Eitual
of  the  Dead,"  the  "Per-M-Hru,"  is  called  "the  Chapter
of  Knowing  the  Spirits  of  the  West."  Several  of  the
chapters  which  immediately  follow  are  devoted  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Spirits  of  various  denominations,  the
Spirits  of  the  East,  the  Spirits  of  Tu,  the  Spirits  of  An,  &c.

Thus  we  see  that  the  most  ancient  nations  believed  in
the  existence  of  certain  living  forces  of  Nature,  whose
chiefs  they  named  and  invoked ;  and  we  shall  find  the
same  ideas  prevalent  in  both  the  Scandinavian  and  the
Indian  mythology.

The  discriminating  disciple  of  mysticism,  however,
while  admitting  the  complete  possibility  of  the  existence

WHITE  MAGIC.  37

of  intelligences  both  inferior  and  superior  to  humanity,
"will  do  well  to  remember  that  some  of  the  elaborate
hypotheses  concerning  them  are  devoid  of  scientific
value,  being  structures  equally  clumsy  and  inadequate
which  have  been  based  upon  partial  experiment.

The  most  popular  presentation  of  the  doctrine  of
Elementary  Spirits  is  found  in  a  little  book  entitled  the
"  Comte  de  Gabalis,"  a  work  of  the  Abbe  de  Yillars,  pub-
lished at  the  close  of  the  last  century.  It  possesses  the
merit — which  is  rare  in  a  popular  handbook — of  being
quite  representative  and  accurate  so  far  as  it  goes,  and
albeit  so  doubtful  in  its  character  as  to  have  frequently
passed  for  a  satire,  it  is  an  excellent  tract  for  citation
within  its  individual  lines.

It  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  state — what  is  very
generally  known — that  the  four  official  elements  have
from  time  immemorial  been  supposed  to  swarm  with  a
variety  of,  on  the  whole,  sub-human  intelligences,  who
are  formally  grouped  into  four  broad  species.  The  air
is  inhabited  by  the  amiable  race  of  Sylphs,  the  sea  by
the  delightful  and  beautiful  Undines,  the  earth  by  the
industrious  race  of  swarthy  Gnomes,  and  the  fire  by  the
exalted  and  glorious  nation  of  Salamanders,  who  are
supreme  in  the  elementary  hierarchy.  There  is  a  close
analogy  in  the  natures  of  all  these  intelligences  with  the
more  lofty  constitution  of  certain  angelical  choirs,  for
in  the  "  Compendious  Apology  for  the  Society  called
Rosicrucian,"  written  by  Robert  Fludd,  it  is  stated  that
the  Seraphim,  Virtues,  and  Powers  are  of  a  fiery  char-
acter, the  Cherubim  are  terrestrial,  the  Thrones  and
Archangels  are  aquatic,  while  the  Dominations  and
Principalities  are  aerial.

"  When  you  shall  be  lifted  among  the  children  of  the
philosophers,"  says  the  '  Comte  de  Gabalis,'  "  when  your
eyes  shall  have  been  fortified  with  the  use  of  the  most
sacred  medicine,  you  will  immediately  discover  that  the
elements  are  inhabited  by  singularly  perfect  beings,  of
whose  knowledge  the  sin  of  Adam  hath  deprived  his  most
wretched  posterity.  Yon  immense  space  which  inter-
venes between  earth  and  heaven  hath  far  more  noble  in-
habitants than  birds  or  gnats  ;  those  vast  seas  have  in-

38  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

numerable  other  guests  than  the  whales  and  the  dolphins  ;
the  profundities  of  the  earth  are  not  for  the  moles  alone,
and  the  more  noble  element  of  fire  was  not  created  to
remain  void  and  useless.  The  air  is  full  of  an  innumerable
multitude  of  people  of  human  form,  somewhat  fierce  in
their  aspect,  but  in  reality  tractable,  great  lovers  of
science,  excessively  subtle,  officious  to  the  sages,  and
only  hostile  to  the  foolish  and  ignorant.  Their  wives
and  daughters  are  beauties  of  a  masculine  character,
much  after  the  manner  of  the  Amazons.  The  seas  and
rivers  are  inhabited  as  well  as  the  air,  and  the  beings
who  fill  them  were  denominated  Nymphs  or  Undines  by
the  antique  doctors  of  wisdom.  They  beget  but  few
males,  but  the  women  are  abundant,  they  are  ex-
ceedingly beautiful,  and  the  daughters  of  men  cannot
compare  with  them.  The  earth  is  populated  to  a  short
distance  of  its  centre  with  gnomes,  people  of  a  low
stature,  the  guardians  of  buried  treasure,  of  mines,  and
of  precious  stones.  They  are  ingenious,  amicable  to
humanity,  and  commanded  with  facility.  They  supply
the  Children  of  the  Sages  with  the  money  which  they
need,  and  desire  no  other  wages  for  their  labours  but
the  glory  of  the  service.  The  Gnomides,  their  wives,
are  diminutive  but  exceptionally  pretty,  and  very  quaint
in  attire.  As  to  the  Salamanders,  the  igneous  inhabit-
ants of  the  fiery  region,  they  serve  the  philosophers,  but
are  not  anxious  to  court  their  company,  and  their  wives
and  daughters  are  rarely  visible.  The  wives  of  the
Salamanders  are  more  beautiful  than  any  of  the  rest,  for
their  element  is  purer,  and  you  will  be  more  charmed  with
the  beauty  of  their  minds  than  even  with  their  physical
perfections.  Yet  you  cannot  but  pity  these  hapless
creatures  when  I  tell  you  that  their  souls  are  mortal,
and  that  they  have  no  hopes  of  enjoying  that  Eternal
Being  whom  they  know  and  religiously  adore.  Composed
of  the  purest  parts  of  the  elements  which  they  inhabit,
and  having  no  contrary  qualities,  they  subsist,  it  is  true,
for  many  ages,  yet  what  is  time  in  comparison  with  ever-
lasting ?  They  must  eventually  return  to  the  abyss  of
nothing.  So  much  does  this  thought  afflict  them  that  it
is  frequently  hard  to  console  them.     But  God,  whose

WHITE  MAGIC.  39

mercy  is  infinite,  revealed  to  our  fathers,  the  philo-
sophers, a  remedy  for  this  evil.  They  learned  that  in
the  same  manner  that  man  by  the  alliance  which  he  hath
contracted  "with  God  has  been  made  partaker  of  divinity,
so  may  the  Sylphs,  Gnomes,  Undines,  and  Salamanders,
by  an  alliance  Avith  man  be  made  partakers  of  immortal-
ity, and  of  the  bliss  to  which  we  aspire,  when  one  of  them
is  so  happy  as  to  be  married  to  a  sage,  while  Elementaries
of  the  masculine  kind  can  attain  the  same  glorious  end
by  effecting  a  union  with  the  daughters  of  the  human
race.

"  The  Salamanders  are  composed  of  the  most  subtle
parts  of  the  sphere  of  fire,  conglobated  and  organised  by
the  universal  fire,  so  called  because  it  is  the  principle  of
all  the  motions  of  Nature.  In  the  same  manner,  the
Sylj^hs  are  composed  of  the  j^urest  atoms  of  air.  Nymphs
of  the  most  ethereal  particles  of  water,  and  Gnomes
of  the  most  refined  earth.  The  primeval  Adam  was  in
correspondence  with  these  perfect  creatures,  because
being  composed  of  the  finest  matters  of  the  four  ele-
ments, he  contained  in  himself  the  physical  perfection
of  each  of  these  four  races,  and  was  therefore  their
natural  king.  But  when  sin  had  precipitated  him
among  the  excrements  of  the  four  elements,  this  har-
mony was  shattered,  he  became  gross  and  impure,  and
no  longer  bore  any  proportion  with  these  so  pure  and
subtile  substances."

Though  not  definitely  stated  in  the  "  Comte  de  Gabalis,"
it  is  obvious  that  the  end  of  a  magical  communication
with  Elementary  Spirits  is  to  restore  our  Edenic  corre-
spondence between  man  and  the  harmonial  world  of
spirits,  which  in  effect  would  be  a  restoration  of  the
celestial  condition  of  primordial  humanity.  Now  the
traditions  of  aboriginal  perfection  and  aureoline  splen-
dour may  be  possibly  untrue  for  the  past  but  they  are
certainly  prophetic  for  the  future  ;  they  are  the  ultimate
stage  of  evolution  forecast  at  remote  periods,  and  while
taking  form  as  reminiscences  of  a  vanished  glory,  they
are  also  a  dim  foreshadowing  of  a  glory  which  is  still  to
come.

A  recipe  for  the  transfiguration  of  the  Magus  in  the

40  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

direction  of  Salamandrine  perfection  is  vouchsafed  in
the  "  Comte  de  Gabalis  ; "  it  is  completely  unintelligible
in  its  literal  sense,  while  the  unserious  nature  of  the
entire  work  will  not  reasonably  warrant  the  supposition
that  it  contains  an  arcane  meaning,  though  it  may  be
admitted  that  its  wording  is  suggestive  from  the  mysti-
cal standpoint.  The  recipe  is  as  follows  : — If  you  would
recover  the  empire  over  the  Salamanders,  purify  and
exalt  the  NATURAL  FIRE  that  is  within  you.  Nothing  is
required  for  this  purpose  but  the  concentration  of  the
Fire  of  the  World  by  means  of  concave  mirrors  in  a
globe  of  glass.  In  that  globe  is  formed  a  SoLARY  Powder,
which  being  of  itself  purified  from  the  mixture  of  other
elements,  and  being  prepared  according  to  ^^^,  be-
comes in  a  very  short  time  a  sovereign  process  for  the
exaltation  of  the  Fire  that  is  within  yoUj  and  will  trans-
mute you  into  an  igneous  nature.

It  is  clear  that  a  great  part  of  the  secret  and  mystery
is  in  the  nature  of  the  mirrors  and  in  the  nature  of  the
vessel  of  glass,  and  those  who  devote  themselves  to  the
unravelling  of  this  Gordian  Knot  should  direct  their
especial  attention  to  these  points,  which,  if  allegory  may
be  credibly  assumed,  should  not  be  very  far  to  seek.

We  are  assured  by  the  Abb 6  de  Villars  that  by  the
use  of  this  recipe  the  inhabitants  of  the  Sphere  of  Fire
will  become  our  inferiors,  and  ravished  to  behold  our
mutual  harmony  restored,  they  will  have  the  same  love
and  friendship  for  us  that  they  entertain  for  their  own
kind.

Amidst  the  rich  imagination  of  these  fantastic  reveries,
the  student  will  do  well  to  remember  that  the  experi-
ments of  the  old  magicians  brought  them  into  communica-
tion with  many  classes  of  extra-mundane  intelligence,
and  that  they  elaborated  many  hypotheses  to  account
for  them.

But  it  must  be  further  recollected  that  among  Ele-
mental Spirits  themselves  there  exist  many  classes  and
natures  in  each  category.  For  instance ;  in  the  case  of
the  Fire-Spirits  there  are  those  which  are  friendly,  hostile,
and  neutral  as  regards  men ;  there  are  those  which  are
compounded  of  a  purer  essence,  partaking  of  the  nature

WHITE  MAGIC.  41

of  the  lower  angels  without  being  exactly  of  their  genus ;
there  are  those  which  are  violent  and  cruel,  approximat-
ing to  a  demoniac  nature,  and  whose  tendency  is  to  stir
up  wrath,  hatred,  and  envy.  Then  there  are  those  again
which  are  pure  living  Spirits  of  Flame,  operating  in  all
things  of  a  fiery  natiure,  and  directing  the  currents  of
that  element.  Besides  all  these  there  are  those  which
more  resemble  the  Spirits  of  fairy-lore,  and  which  may,
perhaps,  be  best  described  as  a  species  of  igneous  man-
kind having  a  more  physical  organisation  than  certain  of
the  other  classes.  Yet,  again,  there  are  certain  whose
natures  form  a  link  between  the  Spiritual  AVorld  and  the
Vegetable  Kingdom;  others  again  control  the  fiery  nature
in  the  Mineral  AVorld ;  and  others  are  Volcanic  in
nature  and  operation,  whence  they  were  called  by  certain
of  the  mediaeval  writers  "^tneans."  But  even  these
classes  are  but  few  in  comparison  with  the  enormous
number  of  subdivisions  in  each  Element  alone.  And,
besides  this,  it  must  be  remembered  that  there  are  all
the  millions  upon  millions  of  Elemental  Spirits  of  the
Planets,  of  the  Zodiac,  and  of  the  Fixed  Stars ;  so  that
the  mind  is  bemldered  in  the  endeavour  to  trace  out
fully  all  the  classes  even  under  one  Element.  Then  in
each  Element  there  are  Spirits  partaking  of  all  forms,
mixed  and  simple,  of  the  Animal  Kingdom,  every  form
of  bird,  beast,  tish,  reptile,  and  insect,  sometimes  in  the
simple  form,  but  more  often  compounded  with  each  other
and  with  Man: — e.g.,  a  frequent  form  of  certain  Fire-
Spirits  is  a  compound  of  a  Man,  a  Lion,  and  a  Serpent.
Some  of  the  most  repulsive  of  the  Elemental  forms,  how-
ever, are  the  various  compounds  of  huge  insect  or  crus-
tacean forms  with  either  human  or  animal  heads.  Such
are  veritable  nightmares,  and  Darwin's  "  missing  link "
seems  to  be  easily  discoverable  on  the  Elemental  plane.
The  snakes,  dogs,  and  insects,  seen  by  some  sufferers  from
"  delirium  tremens,'^  are — according  to  a  modern  occultist
— simply  forms  taken  by  some  of  the  lowest  Elementals
who  have  been  attracted  to  the  drink-sodden  atmosphere
of  the  habitual  drunkard,  following  the  same  law  by
which  vultures  and  jackals  are  drawn  to  rotting  and
putrefying  carrion.     Yet,  nevertheless,  it  would  be  just

42  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

as  incorrect  to  call  even  the  lowest  and  worst  of  the
Elementals  "  devils,"  as  to  say  that  a  Scorpion  or  an
Adder  was  really  a  fiend.

Another  and  more  difficult  matter  to  grasp,  regarding
the  Elemental  Spirits,  is  that  they  partake  only  of  the
nature  of  one  Element  respectively,  and  that  in  that
Element  they  can  live,  breathe,  and  move;  but  that
another  Element,  and  especially  one  opposite  in  nature,
is  to  them  a  bar  and  obstacle.

Though  the  evocation  of  Elementary  Spirits  was  an
important  part  of  theurgic  jDractice  during  the  middle
ages,  we  are  unacquainted  with  any  ritual  which  expounds
the  method  of  communicating  with  these  intelligences  in
any  complete  way.  A  considerable  section  of  so-called
angelical  magic  was  in  reality  devoted  to  the  control  of
the  Spirits  of  the  Air,  who  are  the  Sylphs  of  Paracelsian
mythology,  and  it  is  frequently  hard  to  distinguish  be-
tween the  angels  and  the  '  elementaries '  of  old  writers  on
account  of  this  uniform  confusion.  Much  of  the  Black
Magic  of  the  past  was  also  undoubtedly  concerned  with
the  lower  hierarchies  of  Nature  Spirits,  and  just  as  the
"  Comte  de  Gabalis  "  identifies  the  gracious  creations  of
the  classic  Pantheon — its  Astartes,  Dianas,  and  Egerias
with  the  beautiful  tribe  of  Nymphs — so  did  the  devils  of
the  Sabbath,  by  a  variety  of  characters  and  qualities,
approach  the  lowest  of  the  elementals,  and  had  actually
but  little  that  was  in  common  with  the  thunderstruck
angels  of  orthodox  Christian  theology.

A  method  for  the  interrogation  and  government  of
elementary  intelligences  is  given  in  the  initiations  of
Eliphas  Levi;  but  the  source  of  its  extraction  is  un-
named, and  it  is  of  a  very  fragmentary  nature.  It  is,
however,  the  most  available  of  its  kind,  and,  with  a  few
supplementary  recipes,  may  be  sufficient  for  practical
purposes.

To  dominate  the  Elementary  Spirits,  and  become  thus
the  king  of  the  occult  elements,  it  is  necessary,  says  the
last  of  the  French  initiates,  to  experience  the  four  trials
of  antique  initiation ;  and,  as  these  initiations  exist  no
longer,  they  must  be  supplied  by  analogous  processes ;

WHITE  MAGIC.  43

as,  for  instance,  by  exposing  oneself  with  courage  in  a
burning  house,  by  crossing  a  precipice  on  a  plank  or  the
trunk  of  a  tree ;  by  ascending  a  perpendicular  mountain
in  a  storm ;  and  by  vigorously  plunging  through  a  cas-
cade or  dangerous  whirlpool.  He  who  is  afraid  of  the
water  will  never  reign  over  the  Undines  ;  he  who  shrinks
from  the  flames  "\nll  never  command  Salamanders ;  let
him  who  is  subject  to  vertigo  leave  the  Sylphs  in  peace,
and  forbear  from  irritating  the  Gnomes,  for  inferior
spirits  will  obey  no  power  which  has  not  asserted  its
supremacy  in  their  own  individual  element.

When  courage  and  indomitable  energy  have  acquired
this  incontestable  power,  the  Logos  of  will-force  must
be  imposed  on  the  elements  by  particular  consecrations
of  air,  fire,  earth,  and  water,  this  being  the  indispens-
able beginning  of  all  magical  operations.

The  air  is  exorcised  by  the  sufflation  of  the  four
cardinal  points,  the  recitation  of  the  Prayer  of  the
Sylphs  and  the  following  formula : — The  Spirit  of  God
moved  upon  the  water,  and  breathed  into  the  nostrils  of
man  the  breath  of  life.  Be  Michael  my  leader  and  be
Sabtabiel  my  servant,  in  the  name  and  by  the  virtue  of
light.  Be  the  power  of  the  word  in  my  breath,  and  I
will  govern  the  spirits  of  this  creature  of  Air,  and  by
the  will  of  my  soul,  I  will  restrain  the  steeds  of  the  sun,
and  by  the  thought  of  my  mind,  and  by  the  apple  of  my
right  eye.  I  exorcise  thee,  0  creature  of  Air,  by  the
Pentagrammaton,  and  in  the  name  Tetragrammaton,
wherein  are  steadfast  will  and  well  directed  faith.
Amen.     Sela.     So  be  it.

AYater  is  exorcised  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  by
breathing,  and  by  speech,  mixing  consecrated  salt  with
a  little  of  the  ash  which  is  left  in  the  incense  pan.  The
aspergillus  is  made  of  branches  of  vervain,  periwinkle,
sage,  mint,  ash,  and  basil,  tied  by  a  thread  taken  from  a
virgin's  distaff,  with  a  handle  of  hazelwood  which  has
never  borne  fruit,  and  on  which  the  characters  of  the
seven  spirits  must  be  graved  with  the  magic  awl.  The
salt  and  ashes  of  the  incense  must  be  separately  conse-
crated.    The  Prayer  of  the  Undines  should  follow.

Fire  is  exorcised  by  casting  salt,  incense,  white  resin,

44  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

camphor,  and  sulphur  thereio,  and  by  thrice  pronounc-
ing the  three  names  of  the  Genii  of  fire — Michael,
king  of  the  sun  and  of  the  lightning ;  Samael,  king  of
volcanoes ;  and  Anael,  king  of  the  Astral  Light ;  then
by  reciting  the  prayer  of  the  Salamanders.

The  earth  is  exorcised  by  the  sprinkling  of  water,  by
breathing,  and  by  fire,  with  the  perfumes  proper  to  each
day,  and  the  prayer  of  the  Gnomes.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  special  kingdom  of
the  Gnomes  is  at  the  north,  that  of  the  Salamanders  at
the  south,  that  of  the  Sylphs  at  the  east,  and  that  of  the
Undines  at  the  west.  They  influence  the  four  tempera-
ments of  man,  that  is  to  say,  the  Gnomes  influence  the
melancholic,  Salamanders  the  sanguine,  Undines  the
phlegmatic,  and  Sylphs  the  bilious.  Their  signs  are —
the  hieroglyphs  of  the  Bull  for  the  Gnomes,  who  are
commanded  with  the  magic  sword ;  of  the  Lion  for  the
Salamanders,  who  are  commanded  with  the  forked  rod,
or  magic  trident ;  of  the  Eagle  for  the  Sylphs,  who  are
ruled  by  the  holy  pentacles ;  and,  finally,  of  Aquarius
for  the  Undines,  who  are  evoked  by  the  cup  of  libations.
Their  respective  sovereigns  are  Gob  for  the  Gnomes,
Djin  for  the  Salamanders,  Paralda  for  the  Sylphs,  and
Necksa  for  the  Undines.

Like  so  much  of  occult  nomenclature,  these  names  are
of  a  generic  and  arbitrary  kind,  and  appear  to  be  devoid
of  real  importance ;  in  the  present  instance,  they  are
borrowed  from  folk-lore.

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  words  "Elemental"
and  "Elementary  "  are  not  exactly  convertible  terms ;  as
the  latter  is  frequently  used  by  "  theosophists  "  to  denote
the  astral  remains,  or  "shell,"  of  a  deceased  person
who  has  led  a  gross  and  evil  life  on  earth,  and  whose
vanishing  personality  remains  for  some  time  in  the  earth
atmosphere,  seeking  to  annoy  the  living.

When  an  elementary  spirit  torments,  or,  at  any  rate,
troubles,  the  inhabitants  of  this  world,  continues  Eliphas
Levi,  it  must  be  adjured  by  air,  water,  fire,  and  earth,
by  breathing,  sprinkling,  the  burning  of  perfumes,  and
by  tracing  on  the  ground  the  Star  of  Solomon  and  the
sacred  Pentagram.     These  figures  should  be  absolutely

WHITE  MAGIC.  45

correct,  and  drawn  either  "\Anth  the  ash  of  consecrated
fire,  or  with  a  reed  soaked  in  various  colours,  mixed  Avith
pulverised  loadstone.  Then,  holding  the  pentacle  of
Solomon  in  the  hand,  and  taking  up  by  turns  the  sword,
rod,  and  cup,  the  Conjuration  of  the  Four  should  be
repeated.

This  Conjuration  should  be  preceded  and  terminated
"with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  made  after  the  Kabbalistic
manner.  Eaising  the  hand  to  the  forehead,  the  Magus
should  say  :  "  Thine  is,"  then,  bringing  it  to  the  breast,
"the  kingdom;"  transferring  it  to  the  left  shoulder,
"justice;"  finally,  to  the  right  shoulder,  "  and  mercy;"
then,  joining  both  hands,  "  through  the  generating  ages."

To  conquer  and  subjugate  the  elementary  spirits,  we
must  never  be  guilty  of  the  faults  which  are  their  charac-
teristics. Never  will  a  capricious  and  changeable  mind
be  able  to  rule  the  Sylphs.  Never  will  a  soft,  cold,  and
fickle  disposition  be  qualified  to  govern  the  Undines  ;
anger  irritates  the  Salamanders,  and  gross  covetousness
makes  those  whom  it  enslaves  the  sport  and  plaything
of  the  Gnomes.  But  we  must  be  prompt  and  active,
like  the  Sylphs ;  pliant  and  observant  as  the  Undines ;
energetic  and  strong  like  the  Salamanders  ;  laborious  and
patient,  like  the  Gnomes  :  in  a  word,  we  must  overcome
them  in  their  strength  without  ever  being  overcome  by
their  weakness.

Mediaeval  magic  abounds  with  the  histories  of  familiar
spirits  attached  to  the  persons  of  magicians,  and  frequently
performing  their  commands  without  any  apparent  re-
ward, and  "without  exacting  from  their  mortal  master
any  of  the  spiritual  sacrifices  which  are  usually  supposed
to  be  required  from  dealers  with  the  infernal  world.
The  evidential  value  of  these  histories  has  been  weakened
with  time,  but  they  are  absolutely  paralleled  in  the
wonders  of  modern  Spiritualism,  and  there  is  a  mass  of
contemporary  testimony  in  affirmation  of  a  domestic
ministry  of  unseen  intelligences,  who  in  their  characters
and  performances  are  substantially  identical  with  the
familiar  spirits  of  the  past.  The  ritual  for  the  evocation
of  familiars  is  therefore  not  to  be  identified  with  infernal

46  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

magic ;  current  psychology  would  regard  it  as  a  com-
munion Avith  the  souls  of  the  dead,  an  opinion  which  is
wholly  in  conflict  with  the  consensus  of  mystical  author-
ity, and  from  the  standpoint  of  historic  magic,  it  seems
safe  on  the  whole  to  include  it  as  a  part  of  elemental
practice.  The  following  antique  ceremonial  for  the
control  of  familiars  may  be  therefore  recorded  here.

Fix,  in  the  first  place,  upon  a  sj)ot  proper  for  thy
purpose,  which  must  be  either  a  subterranean  vault,
hung  round  with  black,  and  lighted  by  a  magical  torch ;
or  else  in  the  centre  of  some  thick  wood  or  desert,  or
upon  some  extensive,  unfrequented  plain  j  or  amidst  the
ruins  of  ancient  castles,  abbeys,  monasteries,  &c.,  or
amongst  the  rocks  on  the  sea-shore ;  in  some  private
detached  churchyard,  or  any  other  solemn,  melancholy
place,  between  the  hours  of  twelve  and  one  in  the  night,
either  when  the  moon  shines  very  bright,  or  else  when
the  elements  are  disturbed  with  storms  of  thunder,
lightning,  wind,  and  rain;  for  in  these  places,  times,
and  seasons,  it  is  contended  that  spirits  can  with  less
difficulty  manifest  themselves  to  mortal  eyes,  and
continue  visible  with  the  least  pain  in  this  elemental
world.

When  the  proper  time  and  place  are  fixed  on,  a  magic
circle  is  to  be  formed,  within  which  the  master  and  his
associates,  to  the  number  of  three  all  told,  are  carefully
to  retire.  The  dimensions  of  the  circle  are  as  follows.
A  piece  of  ground  is  usually  chosen  nine  feet  square,
at  the  full  extent  of  which  parallel  lines  are  drawn
one  within  another,  having  sundry  crosses  and  tria-
angies  described  between  them,  close  to  which  is  formed
the  first  or  outer  circle ;  then,  about  half  a  foot  within
the  same,  a  second  circle  is  described ;  and  within  that
another  square  correspondent  to  the  first,  the  centre  of
which  is  the  seal  or  spot  where  the  master  and  associates
are  to  be  placed.  The  vacancies  formed  by  the  various
lines  and  angles  of  the  figure  are  filled  up  with  all  the
holy  names  of  God.

The  reasons  assigned  by  magicians  and  others  for  the
institution  and  use  of  circles  is,  that  so  much  ground
being  blessed  and  consecrated  by  such  holy  words  and

\^TIITE  MAGIC.  47

ceremonies  as  they  make  use  of  in  forming  it,  hath  a
secret  force  to  expel  all  evil  spirits  from  the  bounds
thereof;  and,  being  sprinkled  with  pure,  sanctified  water,
the  ground  is  purified  from  all  uncleanness.  Moreover,
the  holy  names  of  God  being  written  over  every  part  of
it,  its  force  becomes  so  powerful  that  no  evil  spirit,  if
such  should  appear,  hath  ability  to  break  through  it,  or
to  get  at  the  magician  and  his  companions,  by  reason  of
the  antipathy  in  nature  they  bear  to  these  sacred  names.
And  the  reason  given  for  the  triangle  is,  that  if  a  spirit
be  not  easily  brought  to  speak  the  truth,  he  may  be  con-
jured by  the  Exorcist  to  enter  the  same,  where,  by  virtue
of  the  names  of  the  Essence  and  Divinity  of  God,  he  can
speak  nothing  but  what  is  true  and  right.  The  circle
therefore  is  the  principal  fort  and  shield  of  the  magician,
from  which  he  is  not,  at  the  peril  of  his  life,  to  depart
till  he  has  completely  dismissed  the  spirit.

The  usual  form  of  consecrating  the  circle  is  as  follows  :
— I,  Avho  am  the  servant  of  the  Highest,  do,  by  the
virtue  of  his  Holy  Name  Immanuel,  sanctify  unto  my-
self the  circumference  of  nine  feet  about  m.e,  >J<  ►i^  >i<
from  the  east,  Glavrab ;  from  the  west,  Garron ;  from
the  north,  Gabon ;  from  the  south,  Berith ;  which
ground  I  take  for  my  projDer  defence  from  all  malignant
spirits,  that  they  may  have  no  power  over  my  soul  or
body,  nor  come  beyond  these  limitations,  but  that,  being
summoned,  each  spirit  may  answer  truly,  without  dar-
ing to  transgress  their  bounds.

The  proper  attire,  or  pontifical,  of  a  magician  is  an
ephocl  made  of  fine  white  linen,  over  that  a  priestly  robe
of  black  bombazine,  reaching  to  the  ground,  with  the
two  seals  of  the  earth,  drawn  correctly  upon  virgin
parchment,  and  affixed  to  the  breast  of  his  outer  vest-
ment. Kound  his  waist  is  tied  a  broad  consecrated
girdle,  with  the  names  Ya,  Ya,  >J<  Aie,  Aiae,  ^J*  Elibra
►f<  Elohim  »J^  Sadai  >J^  Pah  Adonai  >J<  tuo  robore  *J<
cinctus  sura  ►{<.  Upon  his  shoes  must  be  written  Tetra-
grammaton,  with  crosses  round  about ;  upon  his  head  he
must  wear  a  high-crown  hat  of  sable  silk ;  and  in  his
hands  must  be  a  Bible,  printed  or  written  in  pure
Hebrew.    When  all  these  things  are  prepared,  when  the

48  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

circle  is  drawn,  the  ground  consecrated,  and  the  Exorcist
securely  placed  ^\dthin  the  circle,  he  proceeds  to  call  up
or  conjure  the  spirit  by  his  proper  name.

The  forms  of  conjuration  most  commonly  appear  in  the
first  instance  under  a  ferocious  and  frightful  guise,  which
is  evidence  that,  whatever  their  nature,  they  are  not  of  a
kind  to  be  trusted,  but  if  the  intention  of  the  Magus  be
consciously  divested  of  the  desire  to  communicate  with  the
abyss,  an  infernal  spirit  would  not  usually,  on  the  magical
hypothesis,  be  able  to  disguise  himself  as  an  elementary
or  a  mere  familiar.  All  submundane  spirits  are  variable
and  inclined  to  deceit,  but  when  properly  subjected  are
said  to  be  frequent  and  officious ;  they  more  or  less
require  certain  conciliatory  offerings,  such  as  fumiga-
tions, odours,  incense,  and  other  ingredients ;  the  bloody
sacrifices  which  are  occasionally  enjoined  are  rites  of  a
detestable  nature,  and  should  never  be  attempted.  The
Exorcist,  in  all  cases,  must  be  greatly  upon  his  guard,
and  when  he  has  completed  the  exorcism,  and  made  such
inquiries  as  he  wished  to  obtain  from  the  spirit,  he
must  carefully  discharge  him  by  some  form  like  the
following : —

"  Because  thou  hast  diligently  answered  my  demands,
and  been  ready  to  come  at  my  first  call,  I  do  here
license  thee  to  depart  unto  thy  proper  place,  without
injury  or  danger  to  man  or  beast ;  depart,  I  say,  and  be
ever  ready  at  my  call,  being  duly  exorcised  and  conjured
by  sacred  rites  and  magic ;  I  charge  thee  to  withdraw
with  quiet  and  peace ;  and  peace  be  continued  betwixt
me  and  thee,  in  the  name,"  &c.

The  magician  must  remain  within  the  boundary  of
the  circle  until  all  signs  of  the  spirit's  presence  have
passed  away.  Then  he  may  venture  to  Avithdraw,
repeating  the  Lord's  prayer ;  after  which,  concludes  this
ritual,  he  may  take  up  the  various  utensils,  and,  having
destroyed  all  traces  of  the  circle,  may  return  in  safety  to
his  proper  home.  According  to  an  authority  "  The  pre-
valence of  the  black  colour  in  the  requisites  for  the
above  ceremony  shows  that  the  elementals  communicated
with  would  be  of  the  nature  of  the  Earth,  and  of  Saturn  j

WHITE  MAGIC.  49

and  consequently  that  they  might  show  themselves  in-
clined to  be  obnoxious  to  the  Evocator."

As  there  is  no  complete  ritual  for  the  evocation  of  ele-
mentary spirits,  so  there  is  no  formal  treatise  devoted  to
the  doctrine  itself,  "vvith  the  sole  exception  of  the  Comte
de  Gabalis.  The  basis  of  this  belief  is  in  folk-lore,  and
it  is  there  that  the  most  information  will  be  gathered ;
but  Burton's  "  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,"  and  Hey  wood's
"Hierarchy  of  the  Blessed  Angels,"  may  be  both  in-
cidentally consulted.

BLACK  MAGIC.

THE   EVOCATION   OF  DEMONS.

AN  exceedingly  large  proportion  of  mystical  pneu-
matology  was  concerned  with  the  devildom  of
orthodox  Christian  theologians,  and,  the  discreet
reticence  of  modern  mystics  not^vithstanding,  it  is  better
to  face  this  fact.  Much  that  passed  current  in  the  west
as  White  {i.e.  permissible)  Magic  was  only  a  disguised
goeticism,  and  many  of  the  resplendent  angels  invoked
Avith  divine  rites  reveal  their  cloven  hoofs.  It  is  not
too  much  to  say  that  a  large  majority  of  past  psycho-
logical experiments  were  conducted  to  establish  com-
munication with  demons,  and  that  for  unlawful  purposes.
The  popular  conceptions  concerning  the  diabolical
spheres,  which  have  been  all  accredited  by  magic,  may
have  been  gross  exaggerations  of  fact  concerning  rudi-
mentary and  perverse  intelligences,  but  the  wilful
viciousness  of  the  communicants  is  substantially  un-
touched thereby.

It  is  universally  recognised  by  all  the  Christian
mystics  and  magical  hierophants,  that  the  demons  are
fallen  angels  ;  and  they  are  in  substantial  agreement  with
orthodox  theology  as  to  the  nature  and  cause  of  their
fall.  Some  fix  it  before  the  creation  of  the  physical
world,  some  on  the  second  day  of  the  creation.  Their
conceptions  on  the  subject  are  quite  as  inadequate  as
anything  that  is  offered  by  theology.  It  would  be
interesting  to  trace  the  demonological  hypothesis  from
its  extreme  Oriental  origin  to  its  gruesome  mediaeval
elaborations,  to  establish  by  philological  and  historical
facts  the  true  nature  of  the  fontal  conception  of  demons,
and  to  distinguish  between  the  demon  of  Socrates  and
the  fiend  of  the  Black  Sabbath,  but  the  inquiry  is  beyond

52  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

our  scope.  It  is  sufficient  to  state  that  the  word  ''  demon  "
did  not  anciently  imply,  of  necessity,  a  spirit  of  evil
nature,  and  that  the  Doctrine  of  Devils  passed  over
with  the  rest  of  a  doubtful  inheritance  from  the  Jewish
to  the  Christian  systems,  and  the  classification  of  the
angelical  hierarchies  was  counterbalanced  by  a  classifica-
tion of  the  masters  and  hosts  of  the  great  abyss.
Agrippa  affirms  that  the  lost  angels  are  equal  in
number  to  those  who  retained  their  first  estate,  and
that  they  are  also  divided  into  nine  formal  hierarchies.
Wierus,  who  was  his  disciple,  has  furnished  a  tabu-
lated statement  of  the  whole  Satanic  monarchy,  with
the  names  and  the  surnames  of  seventy-two  princes
and  a  myriad  of  smaller  devils.  It  appears  from
this  tabulation  that  the  throne  of  Infernus  has  passed
from  the  possession  of  the  genuine  and  aboriginal  serpent,
Satan,  and  that  Beelzebub  reigns  in  his  place,  the  entire
disposition  being  made  after  the  following  manner  : —

Princes  and  Grand  Dignitaries.
Beelzebub,   supreme  chief  of  the  Infernal  Court  and

Empire,  and  Founder  of  the  Order  of  the  Fly.
Satan,  Leader  of  the  Opposition.
EuRONYMUS,  Prince  of  Death,  Grand  Cross  of  the  Order

of  the  Fly.
Moloch,  Lord  of  the  Land  of  Tears,  Grand  Cross  of  the

Order.
Pluto,  Lord  of  Fire.
Leonard,  Grand  Master  of  the  Sabbath,  Knight  of  the

Fly.
Baalberith,  Master  of  Alliances.
Proserpine,  Arch-she-fiend,  sovereign  princess  of  the

perverse  spirits.

Ministers.
Adramaleck,  Lord  High  Chancellor,  Grand  Cross  of  the

Order  of  the  Fly.
AsTAROTH,  Lord  High  Treasurer.
Nergal,  Chief  of  the  Secret  Police.
Baal,  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  infernal  armies.  Grand

Cross  of  the  Order  of  the  Fly.
Leviathan,  Lord  High  Admiral,  Knight  of  the  Fly.

BLACK  MAGIC.  53

Airibassadors.

Belphegor,  Ambassador  in  France.
Mammon,  Ambassador  in  England.
Belial,  Ambassador  in  Turkey.
RiMMON,  Ambassador  in  Russia.
Thamuz,  Ambassador  in  Spain.
HuTGiN,  Ambassador  in  Italy.
Martinet,  Ambassador  in  Switzerland.

Judge.
Lucifer,  Lord  Chief  Justice.

Alastor,  Commissioner  of  Public  Works.

Royal  Household.

Verdelet,  Master  of  Ceremonies.

Succor-Benoth,  Chief  of  the  Eunuchs.

Chamos,  Grand  Chamberlain,  Knight  of  the  Fly.

Melchom,  Paymaster.

MiSROCH,  Chief  Steward.

Behemoth,

Dagon,

Mullin,  First  Valet-de-Chambre.

Masters  of  the  Revels.

KoBAL,  Stage  Manager.

AsMODEUS,  Superintendent  of  Playhouses.

Nybbas,

Antichrist,  Juggler  and  Necromancer.

In  a  perfectly  phenomenal  work,  a  record  of  personal
experiences  in  all  species  of  deviltry,  written  in  the  first
quarter  of  the  present  century  by  Alexis-Vincent  Charles
Berbiguier  de  Terre-Neuve  du  Thym,  and  quaintly
entitled  "Xes  Farfadets ;  or,  all  Demons  are  not  of  the
Other  World,"  the  author  affirms  that  the  Court  of  Hell
had  human  emissaries  and  representatives  in  a  number
of  great  cities,  and  even  enumerates  persons,  apparently
his  actual  contemporaries,  who  occupied  posts  in  the
viceroy alty  of  eternal  perdition.

Amidst  the  superstition,  the  stupidity,  the  malice,  and

54  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

perversity  of  goetic  experiments,  we  may  recognise  the  ex-
istence of  one  central  truth,  which  is  of  great  importance
in  rational  mysticism,  the  existence  of  a  class  of  intelli-
gences in  the  extra-mundane  spheres,  whose  natures  are
gross,  formless,  and  undeveloped,  or  have  been  developed
along  the  lines  of  that  intense  spiritual  malice  which  is
commonly  identified  with  the  essential  nature  of  devils.
The  hypotheses  and  the  formal  tabulations  of  the  grand-
masters of  mediaeval  demonology  —  of  Agrippa  and
Wierus,  of  Bodin,  Delancre,  and  Delrio — have  little
value  except  from  the  archseological  standpoint,  and  as
otherwise  unheard-of  curiosities  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  have
nothing  in  themselves  to  recommend  them,  and  as  doc-
trinal extensions  of  alleged  facts,  they  cannot  be  con-
sistently resuscitated  along  with  revived  mysticism,
which  is  concerned  with  the  facts  alone,  and  not  with
fantastic  explanations.

It  may  be  concluded  from  the  tenour  of  the  foregoing
remarks  that  the  holy  horror  of  Black  Magic  which  is
entertained  by  the  modern  apostles  of  mysticism  is  in
the  main  well-founded ;  but,  nevertheless,  much  non-
sense has  been  written  on  the  subject  of  the  darker
side  of  the  transcendental  art,  and  many  exaggerated
notions  have  been  propagated  concerning  the  infernal
branch  of  mystic  practice.  Sometimes  these  exaggera-
tions take  the  form  of  distinct,  and,  it  would  seem,  of
wilful  perversions.  Eliphas  L6vi  is  the  prophet  of  modern
mysticism,  one  of  the  most  finished  mystics  of  all  the
Christian  centuries,  though  probably  no  person  who  has
entered  into  "  that  great  magic  chain  which  began  with
Hermes  or  Enoch,  and  will  only  end  with  the  world,"
had  ultimately  not  only  a  less  belief,  but  a  more  profound
disdain  for  all  pneumatic  theorems.  Indeed  he  has
considerably  blackened  the  Black  Art  by  sensational
pseudo  citations  which  do  not  exist  in  the  works  from
which  he  proposes  to  quote. "^

*  It  is  suggested  that  Eliphas  Levi,  as  one  who  was  acquainted
with  the  real  and  awful  dangers  of  black  magic,  was  determined  to
confuse  and  mislead  the  ill-intentioned  dabbler  by  all  possible
methods,  including  false  quotations.

BLACK  MAGIC.  55

The  "  Grimorium  Yerum  "  and  the  "  Grand  Grimoire  "
divide  with  the  "  Grimoire  of  Pope  Honoriiis "  the
doubtful  honour  of  being  the  official  text-books  of
mediaeval  black  magic.  Their  contents  are  reprehen-
sible enough,  and  there  is  no  need  to  intensify  their
motive  by  vitiated  selections,  and  by  interpreting  the
recipes  which  they  contain  in  an  unwarranted  sense.

The  most  noticeable  feature  of  the  Grimoires,  and  of
the  science  which  they  represent,  is  their  utter  futility,
the  immense  expenditure  of  elaborate  liturgic  and  ritual-
istic energy  for  the  smallest  possible  result.  Black  magic
offers  to  its  possessor  absolutely  no  power  with  which  the
permissible  branches  of  Magic  are  unable,  by  their  claim,
to  endow  him,  and  it  is  for  the  most  part  little  more  than
an  ignorant,  stupid,  and  grossly  superstitious  perversion
of  the  "  white  "  art.  Why  should  it  be  necessary  to  call
up  the  devils  of  hell,  to  invoke  every  intelligence  of  the
abyss,  from  Bel  and  the  Dragon  to  Astaroth  and  Lucifer,
merely  to  obtain  possession  of  a  hidden  treasure  1  Now,
the  concealed  money  bags  of  dead  misers  represent  the
utmost  altitude  of  the  ambition  of  average  black  magi-
cians. Why  should  the  wizard  barter  both  body  and
soul,  and  bind  himself,  with  bloody  parchments,  to  the
infernal  hierarchy  simply  to  acquire  the  material  riches
which  the  less  nocuous  sister  art  pretends  to  dispense
generously  through  the  harmless  and  uncovetous  hands
of  Gnomes  and  Nature  Spirits  ?  "^

It  would  appear  that  in  mediaeval  times  the  doctrine
of  Nature  Spirits,  partly  derived  from  the  classical
mythology  of  Kome,  partly  from  the  aboriginal  reli-
gions of  the  Teutons,  and  partly  from  the  Arabian
lore  which  at  an  early  period  penetrated  into  Europe,
became  confused  with  the  orthodox  doctrine  con-
cerning the  lost  angels.  More  correctly,  the  indis-
criminate condemnation  of  all  branches  of  magic  by
victorious  Christianity  resulted  in  the  identification  of
the  elementary  intelligences  with  the  minor  hordes  of
devils,  and  this  grotesque  classification  was  accepted  by

*  A  distinction  should,  however,  be  made  between  the  mere
sorcerer  and  the  veritable  Black  Magician.  Tlic  hitter  was  ambitious
of  far  diderent  possessions  than  the  miser's  money  bags.

56  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

the  black  magicians,  who  expected  to  obtain  their  desires
with  greater  facility  from  the  fiends  than  from  other
classes  of  invisible  beings.  This  opinion  was  completely-
accredited  by  the  theology  of  the  period,  for  the  uni-
versal diffusion  of  devildom,  the  practical  omnipotence
of  Satan,  and  his  extreme  readiness  to  distribute  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth,  with  all  their  pomps  and  vanities,
to  those  who  would  fall  down  and  adore  him,  were
doctrines  untiringly  taught  by  the  Latin  church.

The  orthodox  views  concerning  demonology  have
lapsed  into  deserved  discredit ;  the  system  of  infernal
magic  erected  on  their  foundation  has  sunk  with  them
into  irretrievable  oblivion ;  rudimentary,  retrogressive,
and  malevolent  intelligences  may  indeed  exist  among  the
peoples  of  the  illimitable  world  invisible,  and  with  these
it  may  be  possible  to  communicate,  but  not  on  the  lines,
not  with  the  alleged  results,  and  not  with  the  involved
penalties  of  the  black  rituals.  Were  it  otherwise,  their
reproduction  at  the  present  day,  when  all  classes  of
mystical  experiment  are  obtaining  a  certain  credence,
and  exciting  curiosity  not  unmixed  with  reverence,
would  be  little  short  of  criminal.  But,  unlike  the  beliefs
and  the  practices  connected  with  lawful  magic,  they  be-
long to  an  order  of  ideas  which  has  utterly  passed  away ;
they  are  the  dead  branch  of  the  living  tree  of  occultism,
and  it  is  only  their  archaic  interest,  and  the  high  place
to  which  they  are  entitled  among  the  curiosities  of  effete
superstition,  that  warrant  their  consideration  in  any
comprehensive  statement  of  the  whole  scope  of  esoteric
science.

Many  of  the  practices  taught  in  the  ''  Grimoires ''  are,
however,  comparatively  harmless ;  on  the  other  hand,
many  of  the  experiments  contained  in  legitimate  rituals
border  closely  on  Black  Magic — those  which  are  concerned
with  bloody  sacrifices,  a  survival  of  Judaism  and  of
Hellenic  theurgy,  being  specially  open  to  objection.

The  garbage,  trickery,  and  rubbish  of  the  "Grimoires  "  is
the  most  noticeable  feature  which  concerns  them.  Filthy
physical  processes  for  the  recovery  of  female  purity,  re-
volting recipes  for  procuring  invisibility  by  devouring
the  boiled  bones  of  dead  black  cats,  directions  for  the

BLACK  MAGIC.  57

composition  of  aphrodisiacal  potions,  and  other  refuse
from  the  gutters  of  superstition,  combine  with  grotesque
and  commonly  impossible  formulce  for  the  evocation  of
"the  grand  Lucifuge,"  and  -wTritten  compacts  for  the
sale  of  the  souls  of  men  for  small  premiums  to  the
tenants  of  perdition.

It  is  impossible  to  interpret  the  "  Grimoires  "  in  any
serious  manner ;  diabolical  practices  are  invariably  pre-
faced by  long  and  solemn  prayers  which  insist  on  the
piu'ity  of  the  magician's  intention,  and  on  his  fixed
resolve  to  belong  irrevocably  to  God.  The  most  sacred
rites  of  the  church  are  practised  as  required  prelimi-
naries, and  the  authors  are  apparently  guiltless  of  any
conscious  profanation  in  the  matter.  When  the  supreme
moment  of  evocation  at  length  arrives,  when  the  masses
have  been  said,  when  the  long  fasts  have  finished,  when
the  celebrant  has  divested  himself  of  all  impure  desires,
and  has  preserved  his  body  from  all  sexual  defilement
for  a  prescribed  time,  when  at  length  he  determines
to  invoke  the  devil,  it  is  generally  evident  that  he  intends
to  trick  the  fiends ;  he  possesses  the  words  which  master
them  j  he  can  torture  them  with  his  magic  wand  ;  he  can
bully  them  into  compliance  ^vvith  his  demands  ;  he  treats
them  uniformly  as  fools.  AVhen  he  sells  them  his  soul,  he
deceives  them  by  an  obvious  play  upon  words ;  and  the
devil  departs  contented,  while  his  evoker  chuckles  at  his
hoax,  and  completes  his  grotesque  performance  by  a
determination  to  devote  himself  to  good  deeds,  to  distri-
bute the  buried  treasures  he  has  unearthed  by  the  fiend's
hel^)  among  the  jDoor  of  Christ,  while  his  familiar  is  put
off  with  a  paltry  coin  on  the  first  day  of  the  month.
Such  is  Infernal  Magic  !  Such  is  the  art  or  science  on
which  some  modern  mystics  expend  their  anathemas  !

Should  there  be  anyone  sufficiently  imbecile  to  de-
sire to  revive  this  truly  awful  art,  it  will  be  well  to
remind  him  that  it  can  only  be  put  in  practice  by  a
believer  in  the  Catholic  church.*  The  belief  in  that
system  must  be  at  once  real  atid  strong,  and  it  is  an
absolutely  vital  condition.     "  The  evokers  of  the  devil

*  That  is  to  say,  a  complete  materialist,  believing  only  in  the
evidence  of  the  senses,  could  not  succeed,  and  a  true  Catholic
would  not  try.

58  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

must  before  all  things  belong  to  a  religion  which  believes
in  a  devil  Avho  is  the  rival  of  God  ;  "  and  as  all  ceremonial,
more  especially  from  the  magical  standpoint,  is  ineffectual
apart  from  faith,  those  who  undertake  to  make  use  of
rites  borrowed  from  the  Koman  church,  and  to  invoke
di\dne  names  which  are  the  property  of  that  church,
must  themselves  have  embraced  it,  and  that  in  all  sin-
cerity. When  this  condition  has  been  fulfilled,  which  is
certainly  a  difficult  feat  for  the  mystic  of  modern  times,
the  postulant  in  the  carnal  synagogue  of  black  magic  will
have  to  legislate  as  best  he  may  for  compliance  ^\ath  the
substantially  impossible  directions  which  will  be  presently
cited.

Black  Magic  in  its  esoteric  aspect  is  a  barbarous  per-
version of  legitimate  mystic  science.  The  conditions  of
success  in  infernal  evocations  have  been  defined  by  Levi
as  follows  : — 1.  Invincible  obstinacy.  2.  A  conscience  at
once  hardened  by  crime  and  most  subject  to  remorse  and
terror.  3.  Affected  or  natural  ignorance.  4.  Blind  faith
in  everything  incredible.  5.  A  completely  false  notion  of
God.  Stripped  of  its  grotesque  and  inhuman  ceremonial,
and  considered  simply  in  its  intention  and  result,  the
diabolising  of  the  human  soul  is  at  once  its  condition  and
end.  When  the  frightful  transformation  is  completed,  the
abandoned  oj^erator  receives,  even  by  the  terms  of  his
science,  absolutely  no  return.  Every  practical  power,
as  we  have  before  stated,  which  Black  Magic  can  at  the
utmost  oflfer  to  its  initiates  is  guaranteed  with  tenfold
additional  capacity,  on  ten  times  stronger  authority,  and
in  an  infinitely  simpler  way,  by  the  branch  which  is
denominated  Divine.  "To  be  a  Christian  is  hard,"  said
the  impressed  but  vacillating  pagan,  and  the  heights  of
mystical  sanctity  are  also  laborious  in  the  ascent,  but  the
apex  of  adeptship  is  far  more  easily  attained  by  the
humanity  which  is  called  thereto,  than  is  the  diabolical
condition  which  the  Black  Magic  that  is  behind  Black
Magic  requires  of  its  professors.

The  true  nature  of  the  pseudo-science  of  the  "  Grim-
oires  "  having  been  thus  defined,  we  may  proceed  to  a
brief  consideration  of  their  archaic  curiosities.

BLACK  MAGIC.  59

Abstinence  from  every  species  of  impurity  must  be  ob-
served for  the  space  of  an  entire  quarter  of  the  moon ;  a
pledge  must  be  given  to  the  "  grand  Adonay,"  who  is  the
master  of  alls^^irits,  that  the  number  of  daily  collations  shall
not  exceed  two,  and  that  they  shall  be  prefaced  by  prayer
during  the  whole  of  the  term  prescribed.  The  operator,
moreover,  must  disrobe  as  seldom,  and  sleep  as  little,
as  possible,  but  he  must  meditate  continually  on  his
undertaking,  and  centre  all  his  hopes  in  the  infinite
goodness  of  the  divine  Adonay.  The  "  Grimoires  "  are  so
full  of  deceptions  and  mystifications  that  it  is  frequently
difficult  to  pronounce  with  any  certainty  upon  their  real
meaning,  but  it  would  appear  to  be  God  whom  they  desig-
nate under  his  name  Adonay,  and  not  some  master-fiend
who  is  invested  with  the  title  of  Deity.  The  invocation  of
Lucifer  must  be  distinguished  from  his  worship,  which
we  have  not  found  in  the  rituals  of  black  magic.

According  to  the  "  Grand  Grimoire,"  the  materials
required  for  evocation  are  a  stone  made  of  red  enamel,
and  called  ematille,  which,  it  is  said,  can  be  purchased
from  a  druggist;  a  virgin  kid,  which  must  be  crowned
with  vervain  and  decapitated  on  the  third  day  of
the  moon ;  and  a  forked  branch  of  a  wild  hazel  which
has  never  borne  fruit,  and  which  must  be  cut  on  the
day  of  evocation,  when  the  sun  is  just  rising.  A  piece
of  wood  must  be  fashioned  to  a  size  corresponding
■vvith  one  end  of  the  fork  of  the  genuine  rod,  and  must
be  taken  to  a  locksmith  that  he  may  hoop  the  two  little
branches  with  the  steel  blade  with  which  the  victim
was  slain,  taking  care  that  the  ends  are  slightly  pointed
when  they  are  fitted  to  the  wood.  The  whole  being
executed  after  this  manner,  the  Magus  may  return  home
and  adjust  the  before-mentioned  hoop  with  his  own
hands  to  the  genuine  rod.  Subsequently,  he  must
obtain  a  piece  of  loadstone  to  magnetise  the  two  points,
at  which  time  he  must  pronounce  the  following  words  : —

"  By  the  grand  Adonay,  Eloim,  Ariel,  and  Jehovam,
I  Ijid  thee  be  united  to,  and  I  bid  thee  attract  all  sub-
stances which  I  shall  require  through  the  might  of  sub-
lime Adonay,  Eloim,  Ariel,  and  Jehovam.     I  com-

60  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

mand  thee,  by  the  antagonism  of  fire  and  water,  to
separate  all  substances  as  they  were  separated  on  the
day  of  the  world's  creation.     Amen."

When  these  matters  have  been  accomplished,  the
operator  may  be  convinced  that  in  the  "  Blasting  Eod  "
(Avhich  is  the  name  given  to  the  instrument)  he  is  in
possession  of  a  most  priceless  treasure.

The  place  of  evocation  must  be  a  forlorn  and  isolated
spot,  and  the  time  night.  Thither  he  must  transport  the
rod,  the  skin  of  the  kid,  the  stone  called  ematille,  two
vervain  crowns,  together  with  two  candlesticks  and  as
many  candles  of  virgin  wax,  made  by  a  virgin  girl,  and
duly  blessed.  He  must  take  also  a  new  steel  and  two
new  flints,  with  sufficient  tinder  to  kindle  a  fire,  like-
wise the  half  of  a  bottle  of  brandy,  some  consecrated
incense  and  camphor,  and  four  nails  from  the  cofiin  of  a
dead  child.  The  great  Kabbalistic  circle  must  be  formed
with  strips  of  the  kid's  skin,  made  fast  to  the  ground  by
means  of  the  four  nails.  Then,  with  the  stone  called
ematille,  a  triangle  must  be  traced  ^vithin  the  circle,  be-
ginning at  the  eastern  point.  In  the  centre  of  this
figure  the  operator  must  take  up  his  place ;  he  must
deposit  the  two  candlesticks  and  the  two  vervain  crowns
on  the  right  and  left  of  the  triangle.  The  candles  should
then  be  lighted,  and  a  brazier,  which  must  be  in  front  of
the  operator,  must  be  heaped  up  with  charcoal  of  willow-
wood,  and  kindled  with  the  help  of  a  small  quantity  of
the  brandy  and  a  part  of  the  camphor,  the  rest  being
reserved  for  the  periodical  renewal  of  the  fire  in  propor-
tion to  the  length  of  the  business.

Many  conjurations  are  given  in  the  rituals,  and  these
are  to  be  used  in  succession  till  the  apparition  of  the
spirit  is  obtained.  The  most  powerful,  as  it  is  also
apparently  the  most  senseless,  may  be  cited  as  a  speci-
men of  the  whole.

Grand  Conjuration.

.^Extracted  from  the  veritable  Clavicle.)

"  I  adjure  thee,  0  Spirit  1  by  the  power  of  the  great
Adonay,  to  appear  instanter,  and  by  Eloim,  by  Ariel,  by

BLACK  MAGIC.  61

Jehovam,  by  Agla,  Tagla,  Mathon,  Oarios,  Almouzin,
Arios,  Membrot,  Yarios,  Pythona,  Magots,  Salphae,
Gabots,  Salamandrae,  Tabots,  Gnomus,  Terrae,  Coelis,
Godens,  Aqua,  Gingua,  Janna,  Etitnamus,  Zariatnatmit,
&c.,  A.  .  E.  .  A.  .  J.  .  A.  .  T.  .  M.  .  0. .  A.  .  A.  .  M.  .  Y.  .
P.  .  M.  .  S.  .  C.  .  S.  .  T.  .  G.  .  T.  .  C.  .  G.  .  A.  .  G.  .  J.  .
F.  .  Z.  .  &c."

The  manifestation  of  the  spirit  is  guaranteed  after  a
second  repetition  of  these  sublime  words,  when  the  oper-
ator may  demand  what  he  requires,  and  enforce  it  by  the
terrors  of  the  Blasting  Kod,  which  tortures  all  Infernals
when  it  is  plunged  into  the  consecrated  flame.  The
demon  is  generally  ordered  to  discover  the  nearest
buried  treasure,  which  is  done  on  the  condition  that  the
secret  is  kept  inviolate,  that  the  Magus  is  charitable  to
the  j^oor,  and  that  he  receives  a  gold  or  silver  coin  on
the  first  day  of  every  month.

If  the  operator  was  deterred  by  the  extreme  difficulty
of  complying  with  the  ceremonial  requirements  of  Black
Magic,  but  not  dismayed  by  the  character  of  its  pro-
ceedings, his  masters  in  infernal  knowledge  could  provide
him  with  a  simpler  ritual  at  an  increased  personal  expense.
He  was  free  to  compound  with  perdition  for  a  slightly
less  elaborate  performance,  if  he  would  enter  into  a  com-
pact ^vith  the  fiend  whom  he  chose  to  evoke,  and  dispose
of  his  soul  in  eternity  for  certain  defined  favours,  invari-
ably of  a  paltry  character,  which  hell  would  guarantee
him  in  time.  The  particulars  of  this  process  were  con-
tained in  the  "  Sanctum  Regnum,"  or  the  "True  Method
of  making  Pacts  with  all  Spirits  whatsoever."

Of  the  fiends  who  are  open  to  this  kind  of  negotia-
tion with  humanity,  the  first  is  the  great  Lucifuge'
RoFOCALE,  Prime  Minister  infernal.  He  has  the  power
with  which  Lucifer  has  invested  him  over  all  the  wealth
and  treasures  of  the  world.

The  second  is  the  grand  Satanachia,  General-in-Chief;
he  has  the  power  of  subjecting  all  women  and  girls  to  his
wishes,  and  to  do  ^Wth  them  as  he  wills.

Agaliarept,  another  Commander,  has  the  faculty  of
discovering  the  most  arcane  secrets  in  all  the  courts  and
council  chambers  of  the  world.     He  also  unveils  the  most

62  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

sublime  mysteries.     He  commands  the  Second  Legion  of
Spirits,  and  has  under  him  Buei\  Gusoyen,  and  Botis^  &c.

Fleurety,  Lieutenant-General,  has  the  power  to  per-
form any  labour  during  the  night ;  moreover,  he  can
cause  hailstones  in  any  required  place.  He  controls  a
very  large  army  of  spirits,  and  has  Bathim,  Pursan,  and
Abigar,  &c.,  &c.,  as  his  subordinates.

Sargatanet,  Brigadier-Major,  has  the  power  to  make
any  person  invisible,  to  transport  him  to  any  distant
place,  to  open  all  locks,  to  reveal  whatsoever  is  taking
jjlace  in  private  houses,  to  give  instruction  in  all  the
rogueries  of  the  shepherds.  He  commands  several
brigades  of  spirits,  and  has  Laray,  Valefai\  and  Faraii,
&c.,  for  his  immediate  inferiors.

Nebiros,  Field-Marshal  and  Inspector-General,  has  the
power  to  do  evil  to  whomsoever  he  will.  He  discovers
the  Hand  of  Glory ;  he  reveals  all  the  virtues  of
metals,  minerals,  vegetables,  and  animals  both  pure  and
impure.  He  also  possesses  the  art  of  predicting  things
to  come,  being  one  of  the  greatest  necromancers  in  all  the
infernal  hierarchies  ;  he  goes  to  and  fro  everywhere  and
inspects  all  the  hordes  of  perdition.  His  immediate  sub-
ordinates are  Ayperos,  Nuherus,  and  GlasyalaMas,  &c.,  &c.

"When  you  have  determined  to  make  a  Pact  with
one  of  the  Governing  Intelligences,"  says  the  "  Sanctum
Regnum,"  "  you  must  begin  on  the  previous  evening  by
cutting  with  a  new  and  unused  knife,  a  Rod  of  Wild
Hazel,  which  has  never  borne  fruit,  and  is  rigorously
similar  to  the  Blasting  Rod.  This  must  be  done  pre-
cisely at  the  moment  when  the  sun  appears  upon  our
horizon.  The  same  being  accomplished,  arm  yourself
with  the  stone  called  Ematille,  and  two  blessed  candles.
Then  proceed  to  select  for  the  coming  operation  a  place
where  you  will  be  wholly  undisturbed.  You  may  even
make  the  Pact  in  some  isolated  room,  or  in  some  remains
ot  an  old  and  ruinous  Castle,  for  know  that  the  Spirit
has  power  to  transport  the  Treasure  to  any  required
place.  This  having  been  arranged,  describe  a  Triangle
with  the  Stone  called  Ematille.  Set  the  two  blessed
candles  in  a  parallel  position  on  either  side  of  the  Tri-
angle of  Pacts ;  inscribe  the  holy  name  of  Jesus  below,

BLACK  MAGIC.  63

SO  that  no  spirits  can  injure  you  after  any  manner.  You
may  now  take  up  your  position  in  the  middle  of  the
Triangle,  holding  the  Mysterious  Eod,  together  with
the  Grand  Conjuration  of  the  Spirit,  the  Clavicle,  the
Kecjuisition  you  mean  to  make,  and  the  Discharge  of
the  Spirit."

When  all  these  conditions  have  been  fulfilled,  the
Magus  proceeds  to  the  prayers  and  adjurations,  which
are  closed  with  the  ensuing —

Grand  Conjuration  of  Spirits.

Emperor  Lucifer,  Master  of  all  the  Eevolted  Spirits,
I  entreat  thee  to  favour  me  in  the  adjuration  which  I
address  to  thy  mighty  minister,  Lucifuge'  Eofocale,
being  desirous  to  make  a  Pact  with  him.  I  beg  thee
also,  0  Prince  Beelzebuth,  to  protect  me  in  my  under-
taking !  0  Count  Astarot !  be  propitious  to  me,  and
grant  that  to-night  the  great  Lucifuge'  may  appear  to
me  under  a  human  form,  and  free  from  evil  smell,  and
that  he  may  accord  me,  in  virtue  of  the  Pact  into  which
I  propose  to  enter,  all  the  riches  that  I  need.  Oh !
grand  Lucifuge',  I  pray  thee  to  cjuit  thy  dwelling,
wheresoever  it  may  be,  and  come  hither  to  speak  with
me ;  otherwise  "will  I  compel  thee  by  the  power  of  the
strong  living  God,  of  His  beloved  Son,  and  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  Obey  promptly,  or  thou  shalt  be  eternally
tormented  by  the  power  of  the  potent  words  in  the  Grand
Clavicle  of  Solomon,  wherewith  he  was  accustomed  to
compel  the  rebellious  Spirits  to  accept  his  compact.
Therefore,  straightway  appear,  or  I  Avill  persistently
torture  thee  by  the  virtue  of  these  grand  words  in  the
Clavicle — Aglon  Tetragram,  vaycheon  stimulamaton  ezphares
retragrammaton  olyoram  irion  esytion  existion  aryona  onera
brasym  moym  messias  soter  Emanuel  Sahaoth  Adoiiay  te
adoro,  et  te  invoco.     Amen.

Like  that  of  the  ordinary  evocation,  the  most  general
object  of  a  pact  was  the  possession  of  a  buried  treasure,
or  the  gratification  of  some  unlawful  desire.  The  con-
dition laid  down  by  the  spirit  was  the  j30ssession  of  the
soul  and  body  of  the  operator  at  the  end  of  twenty
years.      The  agreement,  which  was  to  be  signed  with

64  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

the  blood  of  the  operator,  would,  however,  invariably
involve  some  play  upon  words,  which  was  designed  to
impose  upon  the  apparition,  as,  for  instance  : — "  I  pro-
mise the  Grand  Lucifuge  to  recompense  him  in  twenty
years  for  all  the  treasures  with  which  he  may  endow  me,"
Avhich  seemed  generally  to  satisfy  the  fiend  Avithout
imperilling  the  magician  in  any  irrevocable  manner.

In  the  "  Grimorium  Yerum  "  the  infernal  hierarchy
is  described  at  greater  length  than  in  the  "  Grand
Grimoire,"  and  Lucifer,  Beelzebuth,  and  Ashtaroth  are
said  to  reign  respectively,  the  first  over  Europe  and
Asia,  the  second  over  Africa,  and  the  third  over
America,  apparently  with  equal  power.

Most  modern  apologists  for  Black  Magic  would  be  sur-
prised to  find  what  a  ridiculous  concatenation  of  errors
Black  Magic  was  reduced  to  in  the  Middle  Ages ;  but
such  an  apologist  would  aver  that  anciently  it  was  not
so,  and  that  Black  Magic  in  its  true  acceptation  repre-
sents the  prostitution  of  the  Divine  Magic  to  produce
material  and  evil  results  ;  and  that  too  often  the  desire  of
worldly  aggrandisement  and  the  gratification  of  revenge
had  led  aside  the  mediaeval  student  from  the  higher
paths.

The  solemn  and  ceremonial  invocation  of  curses  upon
another  person  undoubtedly  formed  an  important  part
of  ancient  goetic  art.  An  instance  in  the  life  of  Marcus
Crassus  by  Plutarch,  may  be  here  quoted.  It  occurred
when  Crassus  was  leaving  Eome  to  march  against  the
Parthians,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they  were
allies  of  Rome  at  the  time.  "  Ateius,  one  of  the
tribunes,  advanced  to  meet  Crassus.  In  the  first  place,
by  +he  authority  of  his  office,  he  commanded  him  to  stop,
and  protested  against  his  enterprise.  Then  he  ordered
one  of  his  officers  to  seize  him,  but  the  other  tribunes
interposing,  the  officer  let  Crassus  go.  Ateius  now  ran
before  to  the  gate,  and  placed  there  a  censer  with  tire  on
it.  At  the  approach  of  Crassus,  he  sprinkled  incense
upon  it,  offered  libations,  and  uttered  the  most  horrid
imprecations,  invoking  at  the  same  time  certain  dreadful
and  strange  gods.  The  Romans  say,  these  mysterious
and   ancient   imprecations   have   such  power,   that  the

BLACK  IVIAGIC.  65

object  of  them  never  escapes  their  effect ;  nay,  they
add,  that  the  person  who  uses  them  is  sure  to  be  un-
happ3^,  so  that  the}^  are  seldom  used,  and  never  but  upon
a  great  occasion.  Ateius  was  much  blamed  for  his  rash
zeal.  It  was  for  his  country's  sake  that  he  was  an  ad-
versary to  Crassus,  and  yet  it  was  his  country  he  had  laid
under  that  dreadful  curse."  The  evil  issue  of  Crassus'
expedition  is  well  known.  His  army  was  almost  com-
pletely destroyed,  and  both  himself  and  his  son  were
slain  by  the  Parthians.

The  follomng  goetic  invocation  of  Typhon  Seth,  the
Egyptian  Evil  Deity,  is  taken  from  the  Leyden  Papyrus
(No.  65,  col.  XV.).  It  is  Grieco-Egyptian,  and  is  of  value
not  only  as  representing  an  anticpie  ceremonial  for  in-
voking a  curse  upon  a  j^erson,  but  also  as  showing  the
great  importance  attached  to  the  correct  knowledge  of
certain  names.  This  is  corroborated  again  and  again  in
the  Egyptian  "  Eitual  of  the  Dead,"  and  seems  to  prove
that  such  an  idea  is  no  mere  mediaeval  superstition.  It
is  furthermore  especially  to  be  noted  that  the  magical
names  are  not  Egyptian.  Some  have  thought  them  to
have  been  adopted  from  Hebrew  or  Chaldee.

"  I  invoke  thee  who  art  in  the  empty  wind,  terrible,
invisible,  all  potent  God  of  Gods,  bringer  of  destruction
and  bringer  of  desolation,  thou  who  hatest  a  well-estab-
lished race,  seeing  that  thou  hast  been  cast  out  from
Egypt  and  from  her  lands.  Thou  hast  been  named  the
breaker  in  pieces  of  all  things,  and  the  unconquered  one.
I  invoke  thee,  0  Typhon  Seth,  I  perform  thy  magical
rites,  seeing  that  I  invoke  thee  through  thy  verital)le
name,  in  virtue  of  which  thou  canst  not  refuse  to  hear  : —

JOERBETH,  JOPAKERBETH,  JOBOLCHOSETII,  JoPATATHNAX,
JOSORO,    JONEBOUTOSOUALETH,    AkTIOPHI,  ErESCHKIAL,

Nebopuoaleth,  Aberamenthoou,  Lerthexanax.
Ethreluoth,  Nemareba,  AiiMiNA;  come  unto  me  in
thy  complete  form,  and  go  forward,  and  overthrow  such
a  man  or  such  a  woman  by  cold  and  by  heat.  For  he  or
she  hath  wronged  me,  and  by  him  or  Ijy  her  hatli  the
blood  of  Phyoii  (or  of  generation  ?  or  of  Typhon  ?)  been
poured  forth.  Therefore  perform  I  these  rites."  Sucli
arc  the  words  !

£

66  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Regarding  the  importance  attached  to  the  genuine
name  of  the  power  invoked,  see  Porphyry's  Epist.  Ad
Anehonem,  and  the  answer  of  lamblichus  to  Porphyry.
Hebrew  names  were  supposed  to  have  great  effect ;  but
if  translated  into  Greek  or  Latin  they  lost  their  power.

We  may  close  these  examples  with  the  translation  of
a  very  ancient  Accadian  hymn  to  avert  the  attack  of  the
Seven  Evil  Spirits.

"  Seven  are  they,  seven  are  they  !
In  the  channel  of  the  deep,  seven  are  they  !
In  the  radiance  of  heaven  seven  are  they  !
In  the  channel  of  the  deep  in  a  palace  grew  they  up.
Female  they  are  not,  male  they  are  not ;
In  the  midst  of  the  deep  are  their  paths.
Wife  they  have  not,  son  they  have  not.
Order  and  Mercy  know  they  not.
Prayer  and  supplication  hear  they  not.
The  cavern  in  the  mountain  they  enter.
Unto  Hea  they  are  hostile  ;
The  throne-bearers  of  Gods  are  they. '
Disturbing  the  lily  in  the  torrents  are  they  set.
Baleful  are  they,  baleful  are  they  !
Seven  are  they,  seven  are  they,  seven  twice  again  are

they.
Spirit  of  the  Heaven,  remember  it !
Spirit  of  the  Earth,  remember  it !  "

Although  this  is  hardly  an  incantation  of  Black  Magic,
we  may  insert  it  here  as  showing  the  Accadian  ideas  of
the  evil  forces.

The  mystical  doctrine  concerning  spiritual  essences,
and  the  practice  of  ceremonial  magic  to  establish  com-
munication with  invisible  beings,  having  been  adequately
considered,  we  are  entitled  to  proceed  to  certain  general
conclusions.  The  rejection  of  much  of  the  magical
hypothesis  of  the  Spirit  World  is  the  first  course  which
enlightened  reason  seems  to  require  of  the  modern
student.  The  divine  character  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,
for  instance,  will  be  accepted  by  few  persons  at  the  pre-
sent day.     The  supposed  correspondence  of  its  ciphers

BLACK  MAGIC.  67

with  the  divine  creative  forces  which  combined  for  the
production  of  the  innumerable  hierarchies  of  intelli-
gence, as  the  letters  of  an  alphabet  combine  for  the
production  of  an  indefinitely  extensible  language,  is,
however,  an  important  article  in  the  creed  of  the  Kab-
balist ;  as  is  also  the  anagrammatical  extraction  of  the
names  and  offices  of  angels  from  scriptural  verses
arbitrarily  selected.  There  is  little  in  the  mystical
doctrine  concerning  demonology  to  distinguish  it  in
philosophical  importance  from  the  demonology  of  the
Christian  church.  The  hypothesis  of  elementary  spirits
is  extremely  suggestive,  and  is  an  interesting  contribution
to  folk-lore,  but  its  classifications  are  by  no  means
scientific  in  character.  The  eschatological  doctrine
derived  by  magic  from  Je^vish  Kabbalism  is  undoubt-
edly of  value  as  a  hypothesis,  though  there  is  little  to
confirm  it  in  the  discoveries  of  modern  psychology.

But  when  point  after  point  of  the  salient  doctrines  of
magic  is  eliminated  in  this  manner,  the  student  may
reasonably  inquire  whether  the  mystical  basis  and
temple  have  not  both  melted  into  air.  Criticism  which
"  pumps  out  ^vith  a  ruthless  ingenuity,  atom  by  atom,"
must  inevitably  leave  us  "  vacuity."  It  should,  how-
ever, be  remembered  that  the  secret  which  the  mystics
possessed  was  the  opening  of  the  inner  eye  for  percep-
tion into  the  world  called  spiritual.  Prophecies  will
become  void,  tongues  will  cease,  but  love,  it  is  affirmed,
will  not  fail.  In  like  manner,  doctrines  once  of  author-
ity, hypotheses  once  held  adequate,  are  outgrown  in  the
progress  of  the  mind  and  in  the  extension  of  the  intel-
lectual horizon,  but  the  facts  which  they  seem  to  have
been  invented  to  explain  cannot  be  made  obsolete  by
time,  and  truths  which  can  be  verified  by  experiment  are
not  left  behind  in  evolution.  Now,  the  experiments
which  were  the  foundation  of  magical  doctrine  and
magical  hypothesis  are  facts  which  are  not  to  be  evapo-
rated by  the  severity  of  critical  analysis ;  they  are  the
synthesis  of  the  experiments  of  the  ages,  and  they  can  be
verified  by  those  who  desire  it.

The  lucidity  of  the  mystics  exhibited,  what  there  is,
naturally,  good  reason  to  believe,  namely,  the  existence

68  Til  E  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

of  innumerable  hierarchie>s  of  being,  which,  according  to
the  fashion  of  the  time,  were  duly  classified  and  arranged,
as  has  been  already  shown.  In  actual  performance,  the
magician  of  the  past  was  in  advance  of  existing  psycho-
logical experiment ;  but  the  new  mysticism,  while
enlarging  the  circle  of  experiment,  and  seeking  to
surpass  the  Magi  in  the  extent  of  its  practical  research,
endeavours  in  addition  to  make  actual  in  its  disciples  that
ideal  life  which  the  Magi  conceived  :  and  it  should  also,
in  proportion  to  its  progress,  do  its  best  to  establish  the
foundations  of  a  rational  hypothesis  of  the  unseen.

The  ceremonial  part  of  magic,  with  its  direfully
potent  formula  and  its  excess  of  grotesque  ritual
observance,  was  accredited  in  the  past  with  an  absolute
value.  It  will  be  seen  that  an  inherent  virtue  w^as
supposed  to  reside  in  certain  words  and  acts — a  prin-
ciple which  is  at  the  basis  of  all  superstitious  obser-
vance. Now,  the  actual  and  demonstrable  value  of
ceremonial  magic  is  of  two  kinds.  It  produced  an
exaltation  in  the  operator  which  developed  the  latent
faculties  of  his  interior  being ;  and  the  atmospheric  con-
ditions required  for  success  in  all  classes  of  mystical
experiments  were  produced  by  its  perfumes  and  incense.
As  human  imagination  is  ever  open  to  the  same  classes
of  impressions,  and  as  modern  psychology  is  equally
dependent  for  success  on  atmospheric  and  other  condi-
tions. Ceremonial  Magic  should  be  as  potent  in  its  effect
to-day  as  at  any  period  of  antiquity.

The  Hexameron  of  Torquemada ;  the  Tableau  de  Tincon-
stance  des  dSmons,  by  Delancre;  the  Pseiidomonarchia
Dcemonorum  of  Wierus ;  and  the  Disquisitiones  Magicce  of
Delrio,  are  the  most  orthodox  and  exhaustive  sources
of  knowledge  on  demonological  doctrines  and  science.
There  is  a  complete  cycle  of  mediaeval  Latin  literature
devoted  to  the  processes  for  the  exorcism  of  evil  spirits.
As  the  intervention  of  devils  has  ever  been  the  popular
explanation  of  all  extranatural  phenomena,  so  in  all  lan-
guages extranatural  literature  has  been  largely  demono-
logical in  character.  In  English  there  are  innumerable
books,  which  cover  all  branches  of  sorcery  and  witch-

BLACK  MAGIC.  69

craft.  One  of  the  most  notable  is  Scot's  "  Discovery  of
Witchcraft,"  date  1651,  with  which,  in  the  opposed  in-
terest, may  be  compared  Glanvill's  Sadducismus  Trium-
phatus,  belonging  to  the  same  period,  and  Cotton  Mather's
"Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World."  In  1859,  a  "Philo-
sophy of  Witchcraft "  was  attempted  by  J.  Mitchell.
The  "  Letters  on  Demonology "  addressed  to  J.  G.
Lockhart  by  the  author  of  "  Waverley,"  will  not  be  con-
fused with  the  "  Discovery."  There  is  also  a  "  History
of  Witchcraft ; "  and  many  sermons,  treatises,  and  dis-
plays of  corporeal  leagues  between  devils  and  witches,
have  contributed  to  the  right  understanding  and  illu-
mination of  the  general  subject.  Eichard  Baxter's
"  Certainty  of  the  World  of  Spirits  fully  evinced,"  1691,
is  a  representative  work  of  its  kind.  For  the  practical
part,  or  the  method  of  communicating  with  demons,  the
G-riinorium  Verum  and  the  Grand  Grimoire,  are  said  to  be
entirely  sufficient.

NECROMANCY.

THE  EVOCATION  OF  THE  SOULS  OF  THE  DEAD.

WE  have  seen  in  the  section  devoted  to  angelology,
that  after  the  nine  choirs  of  celestial  intelli-
gences in  the  pneumatic  enumeration  of  the
Kabbalists,  there  is  the  order  of  beatified  human  souls,
who  exercise  a  beneficent  and  energising  influence  on
the  incarnate  race  of  man.  Their  chief  is  said  to  be
Moses,  and  by  their  natures  they  are  in  opposition  to
the  souls  of  the  ^^dcked,  who  are  under  the  tyranny  of
Nahema,  the  demon  of  impurity.  Such  a  classification
is,  to  all  appearance,  very  arbitrary  and  inadequate;  the
formal  distinction  between  good  and  bad  is  not  sub-
stantiated by  present  psychological  experiments.  But
this  and  other  doctrinal  teachings  of  the  old  mystics
do  not  belong  to  that  portion  of  esoteric  wisdom
which  it  is  alone  rational  to  revive.  The  student  should
always  carefully  separate  the  ascertainable  facts  of  the
science  from  the  theoretical  structure  which  overlays
them.  The  differentiation  of  the  sovd  of  man  into  a
multiplicity  of  separable  parts  (even  the  time-honoured
and  reasonable  distinction  between  the  soul  and  the
spirit)  must  be  properly  referred  to  the  domain  of  specu-
lation to  which  it  properly  belongs.  As  regards  the
subject  of  this  chapter,  a  central,  fundamental,  and  vital
fact  is  this — that  practical  magic  in  its  investigations  of
extra-mundane  worlds  has  come  into  communication
with  "  those  whom  the  living  call  dead,"  and  that  the
ritual  of  such  communication  has  been  bequeathed  ])y
magicians  to  posterity.

Many  specvdations  concerning  Necromancy  are  reason
able,  many  hy^jotheses  are  probable,  others  are  neither
probable  nor  reasonable.    Yet  some  writers  appear  to  sup-

72  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

pose  that  if  we  accept  the  fact  recorded  by  the  mystics
we  are  bound  to  accept  the  sokition  which  they  otfer.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  unreasonably  urged  that
the  men  who  have  most  investigated  the  psychological
world  have  most  right  to  an  opinion  about  it.  They  have,
indeed,  every  right  to  an  opinion,  and  their  opinions  must
have  a  claim  on  our  respect,  but  we  need  not  consider
them  final.  We  hold  that  in  magic  there  is  no  authority
but  that  of  the  pioneer  who  has  preceded.  Now,  the
pioneer  may  be  a  beacon  in  the  darkness,  but  he  is  not  a
guide  infallible.  The  mystics  have  penetrated  far  beyond
ourselves  into  the  infinite  realms  of  the  soul,  but  they
may  not  have  gauged  the  infinite,  and  thus  we  are  by
no  means  committed  to  any  of  their  absolute  doctrines.*

Generally  speaking,  the  pneumatic  dogmas  of  the
middle  ages  were  based  on  the  lines  of  orthodox  pneu-
matology ;  as  we  have  seen,  they  admitted  the  distinc-
tion between  pure  and  fallen  angels  and  reproduced  their
spiritual  histories  point  by  2)oint.  The  hierarchy  of
elementary  spirits  is  foreign  to  Christian  theology,  and
theology  denounced  them  as  demons ;  the  psychological
history  of  the  human  individual  in  its  past-mortal  condi-
tion is,  on  the  other  hand,  substantially  identical  in  both
systems,  and  the  higher  the  position  of  the  mystic  the
nearer  he  gravitates  in  his  opinions  to  the  accredited
teachings  of  the  great  religion  of  the  day.

Once  more,  an  important  point  in  that  branch  of  tran-
scendental science  which  has  reference  to  the  souls  of
humanity  consists  in  the  possibility  of  establishing  that
the  soul  survives  death  and  preserves  its  intelligence  and
its  individual  being  in  another  order  of  subsistence,  by  the
contrivance  of  an  actual  and  conscious  communication
with  departed  men  and  women.

The  hypotheses  which  have  been  founded  on  this  fact
are  excessively  numerous  and  are  sometimes  suggestive
and  beautiful.  They  all  have  analogies  with  each  other
as  well  as  with  the  Christian  scheme.  When  estimated
at  their  true  worth,  they  will  deserve  and  repay  study,

*  The  counter-view  has  been  well  enunciated  by  an  esteemed
colUiborateur  a,s,  follows: — "The  value  of  psychological  authority
can  only  be  gauged  by  e(|ual  experimental  knowledge."

NECROMANCY.  73

and  are  rich  in  reflected  lights.  One  of  the  explanatory-
hypotheses  derived  from  the  Kabbalah  which  most  recom-
mends itself  to  esoteric  students  at  the  present  day  is
concerned  with  the  existence  of  a  fliiidic  envelope  of  the
sjjirit,  which  corresponds  to  St  Paul's  conception  of  a
spiritual  organism,  and  is  termed  the  astral  body.  An
exceedingly  lucid  exposition  of  this  hypothesis  and  of
the  soul's  eternal  progress  has  been  given  us  by  Eliphas
Levi,  and  it  fairly  represents  the  archaic  doctrine  of  the
Hebraistic  mystics.

In  its  most  extended  scope,  this  hypothesis  affirms  the
existence  of  a  single  substance  diffused  through  all  space,
out  of  which  the  entire  Cosmos,  with  all  its  sentient
populations,  was  originally  developed,  and  into  which  at
the  close  of  the  grand  and  extreme  cycle  it  will  all  ulti-
mately be  resolved.  It  is  the  Great  Telesma  of  Hermes
Trismegistus,  an  ambient  and  all-jjenetrating  substance,
the  first  matter  of  aboriginal  creation,  the  created  Light
of  Genesis.  The  polarisation  of  this  substance  about  a
centre  produces  living  beings,  and  in  man  it  forms  the
Astral  Body,  or  Plastic  Mediator.  The  spirit,  or  per-
manent principle  of  the  individual,  which  the  hypothesis
apparently  distinguishes  from  the  cosmic  substance,  and
refers  to  a  divine  origin,  departs  at  the  moment  of  death
clothed  in  the  astral  form,  which  in  the  case  of  a
virtuous  person  evaporates  like  a  pure  incense,  but
which  enchains  the  vicious  intelligence.

The  ministry  of  mystical  doctrine  to  the  spiritual
aspirations  of  man  has  a  definite  value  of  its  own.  The
ascent  of  the  ladder  of  being,  the  revolutions  and  incarna-
tions of  the  soul,  are  delightful  poetical  conceptions  which
give  nourishment  to  the  loftier  energies  of  imagination.
The  legendary  romances  of  the  soul  deserve  to  be  incor-
porated in  a  volume  devoted  to  the  subject  of  pneumatic
speculations;  they  are  not  confined  to  mysticism ;  they
exist  among  all  peoples  both  savage  and  civilised  ;  they
throw  great  light  upon  comparative  mythology ;  but  it
must  ever  be  remembered  that  ordinary  psychological
theories  are  as  much  in  the  field  of  speculation  as  are
the  North  American  traditions  of  Travels  into  the  Land
of  Souls.

74  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

The  ceremonial  evocation  of  the  departed  is  usually
termed  Necromancy.  This  word,  however,  by  its  deriva-
tion means  the  art  of  discerning  future  events  through
communications  established  with  the  dead  ;  it  is  divina-
tion by  the  tenants  of  the  tomb.  The  science  of  the
mystics  has  enlarged  the  original  significance,  while
popular  superstition  has  perverted  it.  Necromancy  by
the  interpretation  of  the  mystics  is  the  evocation  of  the
souls  of  departed  humanity,  for  whatsoever  end  it  is
undertaken;  as  it  is  understood  by- the  vulgar,  it  is
synonymous  with  "  Black "  Magic,  with  obscene  rites,
and  dark,  abhorrent  practices.  Professed  mystics,  how-
ever, have  occasionally  authorised  the  second  view,  which
is  only  excusable  by  ignorance.  Eliphas  Levi,  after  hav-
ing personally  disturbed  the  eternal  rest  of  Apollonius
by  a  deliberate  ceremonial  evocation,  indiscriminately  de-
nounced the  whole  art  of  Necromancy  as  the  "  blackest
of  the  sciences  of  the  abyss,"  when  endeavouring  to
identify  modern  Spiritism  with  the  infernal  devices  of
sorcery.

As  a  fact,  the  evocation  of  the  souls  of  the  departed
is  one  of  the  most  important  branches  of  practical  mys-
ticism ;  it  is  one  of  the  test  experiments  by  which  the
mystic  gospel  may  be  said  to  stand  or  fall.  If  it  be
possible,  after  following  for  a  certain  prescribed  period  a
certain  method  of  life,  calculated  to  exalt  the  intellectual
faculties,  to  cj^uicken  spiritual  perceptions,  and  to  ger-
minate what  may  be  called  a  new  sense  in  man ;  if  it  be
possible  to  enter  into  actual  and  undeceived  communica-
tion with  beings  who  have  departed  from  this  our  plane
of  subsistence ;  if  we  can  see  them  as  they  were ;  if  we
can,  to  some  extent,  know  them  as  they  are  ;  and  if,  at
the  time,  we  are  in  conscious  possession  of  our  common
senses,  then  the  mystic  gospel  must  be  the  truth  itself.

There  are  important  questions  connected  with  legiti-
mate Necromancy  which  cannot  be  discussed  here.  If
the  pathological  fact  be  admitted,  there  is  the  problem
of  identity  to  deal  with ;  to  establish  the  truth  of  evoca-
tions is  not  to  explain  all  spiritual  mysteries.  In  an
elementary  text-book,  we  conceive  it  is  sufficient  to  indi-
cate by  what  means  the  mystics  pretend  to  place  their

NECROMANCY.  75

disciples  in  communication  with  the  invisible  planes  of
subsistence.  In  the  evocation  of  the  souls  of  the  dead,
one  form  of  procedure  is,  at  any  rate,  comparatively-
simple,  and  a  synthetic  account,  based,  it  is  affirmed,  on
an  ancient  arcane  theory,  has  been  given  by  a  French
writer  in  a  recent  work  on  the  secret  sciences.

"  Prompted  by  a  sentiment  of  profound  tenderness,"
says  P.  Christian,  "it  occasionally  happens  that  a  be-
reaved person  will  dedicate  to  perpetual  mourning
the  room  where  a  beloved  being  has  expired.  Like  a
holy  place,  the  chamber  is  shut  and  sealed,  to  be  re-
visited alone  on  the  anniversaries  of  the  joys  that  are
dead  and  of  the  separation  which  is  final  for  earth.

"The  soul,  notwithstanding,  can  be  occasionally  at-
tracted by  the  worship  of  the  heart ;  though  unseen,  it
assists  at  the  sacrifice  of  loving  tears,  and  if  it  be  the
hour  of  dusk,  if  the  departed  intelligence  be  called  on
by  an  exalted  act  of  faith  and  affection,  made  in  the
name  of  the  Almighty,  the  brilliancy  of  its  immortal
essence  may  break  forth  in  splendour  for  a  moment  in
the  midst  of  that  restful  t"wdlight  wherein  nature  rests
after  the  setting  of  the  sun.

"  The  affection  which  unites  us  from  beyond  the  tomb
to  lamented  individuals  must  be  entirely  pure  in  its
character.  They  are  exclusively  to  be  considered  as  the
transfigured  tenants  of  a  more  elevated  sphere,  who  in
their  new  form  of  subsistence  implore  the  Eternal  and
Almighty  Being  to  make  us  worthy  of  one  day  attaining
to  their  own  beatitude.  The  examination  of  conscience
is  another  and  as  indispensable  condition.  If  we  have
wronged  our  neighbours,  the  injury  must  be  repaired ;
if  we  have  enemies,  we  must  pardon  them  from  the  very
depth  of  our  hearts ;  if  we  have  neglected  the  soul-
exalting  duty  of  adoration  and  prayer  to  God,  we  must
cultivate  regularity  in  worship,  in  accordance  with  the
rites  which  we  have  received  from  our  ancestors ;  pre-
liminaries which  are  the  best  evidence  that  the  evocation
of  the  dead  is  not  sorcery,  and  that  it  is  not  an  unholy
compact  with  the  malicious  spirits  in  the  abysses  of  the
world  invisible.     It  is  by  these  preparations  alone  that

76  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

it  is  possible  to  enter  the  avenues  of  the  unseen  universe
without  danger  to  life  and  reason.

"  The  23lace  chosen  for  the  evocation  is  not  an  unimport-
ant point.  The  most  auspicious  is  undoubtedly  that  room
which  contains  the  last  traces  of  the  lamented  person.
If  it  be  impossible  to  fulfil  this  condition,  we  must  go  in
search  of  some  isolated  rural  retreat  which  corresponds
in  orientation  and  aspect,  as  well  as  measurement,  with
the  mortuary  chamber.

"  The  window  must  be  blocked  with  boards  of  olive-
wood,  hermetically  joined,  so  that  no  exterior  light  may
penetrate.  The  ceiling,  the  four  interior  walls,  and  the
floor,  must  be  draped  with  tapestry  of  emerald-green  silk,
which  the  operator  must  himself  secure  with  copper  nails,
invoking  no  assistance  from  strange  hands,  because,  from
this  moment,  he  alone  may  enter  into  this  spot  set  apart
from  all,  the  arcane  Oratory  of  the  Magus.  The  furniture
which  belonged  to  the  deceased,  his  favourite  possessions
and  trinkets,  the  things  on  which  his  final  glance  may  be
supposed  to  have  rested — all  these  must  be  assiduously
collected  and  arranged  in  the  order  which  they  occupied
at  the  time  of  his  death.  If  none  of  these  souvenirs  can
be  obtained,  a  faithful  likeness  of  the  departed  being
must  at  least  be  procured,  it  must  be  full  length,  and
must  be  depicted  in  the  dress  and  colours  which  he  wore
during  the  last  period  of  his  life.  This  portrait  must  be  set
up  on  the  eastern  wall  by  means  of  copper  fasteners,
must  be  covered  with  a  veil  of  white  silk,  and  must  be
surmounted  with  a  crown  of  those  flowers  which  were
most  loved  by  the  deceased.

"  Before  this  portrait  there  must  be  erected  an  altar  of
white  marble,  supported  by  four  columns  which  must
terminate  in  bulls'  feet.  A  five-pointed  star  must  be
emblazoned  on  the  slab  of  the  altar,  and  must  be  com-
posed of  pure  copper  plates.  The  place  in  the  centre  of
the  star,  between  the  plates,  must  be  large  enough  to
receive  the  pedestal  of  a  cup-shaped  copper  chafing-dish,
containing  dessicated  fragments  of  laurel  wood  and
alder.  By  the  side  of  the  chafing-dish  must  be  placed  a
censer  full  of  incense.  The  skin  of  a  white  and  spotless
ram  must  be  stretched  beneath  the  altar,  and  on  it  must

NECROMANCY.  77

be  emblazoned  another  pentagram  drawn  with  parallel
lines  of  azure  blue,  golden  yellow,  emerald  green,  and
purple  red.

"  A  copper  tripod  must  be  erected  in  the  middle  of  the
Oratory  ;  it  must  be  perfectly  triangular  in  form,  it  must
be  surmounted  by  another  and  similar  chafing-dish,  which
must  likewise  contain  a  quantity  of  dried  olive  wood.

"  A  high  candelabrum  of  copper  must  be  placed  by  the
wall  on  the  southern  side,  and  must  contain  a  single
taper  of  purest  white  wax,  which  must  alone  illuminate
the  mystery  of  evocation.

"  The  white  colour  of  the  altar,  of  the  ram's  skin,  and
of  the  veil,  is  consecrated  to  Gabriel,  the  planetary  arch-
angel of  the  moon,  and  the  Genius  of  mysteries ;  the
green  of  the  copper  and  the  tapestries  is  dedicated  to
the  Genius  of  Venus.

"  The  altar  and  tripod  must  both  be  encompassed  by  a
magnetized  iron  chain,  and  by  three  garlands  composed  of
the  foliage  and  blossoms  of  the  myrtle,  the  olive,  and  the
rose.

"  Finally,  facing  the  portrait,  and  on  the  eastern  side,
there  must  be  a  canopy,  also  draped  wdth  emerald  silk,
and  supported  by  two  triangular  columns  of  olive  wood,
plated  with  the  purest  copper.  On  the  North  and  South
sides,  between  each  of  these  columns  and  the  wall,  the
taj)estry  must  fall  in  long  folds  to  the  ground,  forming  a
kind  of  tabernacle  ;  which  must  be  open  on  the  eastern
side.  At  the  foot  of  each  column  there  must  be  a  sphinx
of  white  marble,  with  a  cavity  in  the  top  of  the  head  to
receive  spices  for  burning.  It  is  beneath  this  canopy
that  the  apparition  will  manifest,  and  it  should  be  re-
membered that  the  Magus  must  turn  to  the  East  for
prayer,  and  to  the  West  for  evocation.

"  Before  entering  this  little  sanctuary,  devoted  to  the
religion  of  remembrance,  the  operator  must  be  clothed  in
a  vestment  of  azure,  fastened  by  clasps  of  copper,  enriched
with  a  single  emerald.  He  must  wear  upon  his  head  a
tiara  surrounded  by  a  floriated  circle  of  twelve  emeralds,
and  a  crown  of  violets.  On  his  breast  must  be  the  talis-
man of  Venus  depending  from  a  ribbon  of  azure  silk.  On
the  annular  finger  of  his  left  hand  must  be  a  copper  ring

78  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

containing  a  turquoise.  His  feet  must  be  covered  with
shoes  of  azure  silk,  and  he  must  be  provided  with  a  fan  of
swan's  feathers  to  dissipate,  if  needful,  the  smoke  of  the
perfumes.

"  The  Oratory  and  all  its  objects  must  be  consecrated
on  a  Friday,  during  the  hours  which  are  set  apart  to  the
Genius  of  Venus.  This  consecration  is  performed  by
burning  violets  and  roses  in  a  fire  of  olive  wood.  A
shaft  must  be  provided  in  the  Oratory  for  the  passage
of  the  smoke,  but  care  must  be  taken  to  prevent  the
admission  of  light  through  this  channel.

"  When  these  preparations  are  finished,  the  operator
must  impose  on  himself  a  retreat  of  one-and-twenty  days,
beginning  on  the  anniversary  of  the  death  of  the  beloved
being.  During  this  period  he  must  refrain  from  confer-
ring on  any  one  the  least  of  those  marks  of  affection  which
he  was  accustomed  to  bestow  on  the  de^Darted  ;  he  must  be
absolutely  chaste,  alike  in  deed  and  thought ;  he  must
take  daily  but  one  repast,  consisting  of  bread,  wine,  roots,
and  fruits.  These  three  conditions  are  indispensable  to
success  in  evocation,  and  their  accomplishment  requires
complete  isolation.

"  Every  day,  shortly  before  midnight,  the  Magus  must
assume  his  consecrated  dress.  On  the  stroke  of  the
mystic  hour,  he  must  enter  the  Oratory,  bearing  alighted
candle  in  his  right  hand,  and  in  the  other  an  hour-glass.
The  candle  must  be  fixed  in  the  candelabra,  and  the  hour-
glass on  the  altar  to  register  the  flight  of  time.  The
operator  must  then  proceed  to  replenish  the  garland  and
the  floral  crown.  Then  he  shall  unveil  the  portrait,  and
erect  and  immovable  in  front  of  the  altar,  being  thus
with  his  face  to  the  East,  he  shall  softly  go  over  in  his
mind  the  cherished  recollections  he  possesses  of  the
beloved  and  dej^arted  being.

"  When  the  upper  reservoir  of  the  hour-glass  is  empty,
the  time  of  contemplation  will  be  over.  By  the  flame  of
the  taper  the  operator  must  then  kindle  the  laurel  wood
and  alder  in  the  chafing-dish  which  stands  on  the
altar ;  then,  taking  a  pinch  of  incense  from  the  censer,  let
him  cast  it  thrice  upon  the  fire,  repeating  the  following
words  : — Glory  be  to  the  Father  of  life  universal  in  the

NECROMANCY.  79

sj^lendour  of  the  infinite  altitude,  and  peace  in  the  twilight
of  the  immeasurable  depths  to  all  Spirits  of  good  "vvill  !

"  Then  he  shall  cover  the  portrait,  and  taking  up  his
candle  in  his  hand,  shall  depart  from  the  Oratory,  walking
backward  at  a  slow  pace  as  far  as  the  threshold.  The
same  ceremony  must  l^e  fulfilled  at  the  same  hour  during
every  day  of  the  retreat,  and  at  each  visit  the  crown
which  is  above  the  portrait,  and  the  garlands  of  the  altar
and  tripod,  must  be  carefully  renewed.  The  withered
leaves  and  flowers  must  be  burnt  each  evenino;  in  a  room
adjoining  the  Oratory.

"  When  the  twenty-first  day  has  arrived,  the  Magus
must  do  his  best  to  have  no  communication  with  any  one,
but  if  this  be  im230ssible,  he  must  not  be  the  first  to  speak,
and  he  must  postpone  all  business  till  the  morrow.  On
the  stroke  of  noon,  he  must  arrange  a  small  circular  table
in  the  Oratory,  and  cover  it  with  a  new  napkin  of  un-
blemished whiteness.  It  must  be  garnished  with  two
copper  chalices,  an  entire  loaf,  and  a  crystal  flagon  of
the  purest  wine.  The  bread  must  be  broken  and  not  cut,
and  the  wine  emptied  in  equal  proportions  into  the  two
cups.  Half  of  this  mystic  communion,  Avhich  must  be
his  sole  nourishment  on  this  supreme  day,  shall  be  offered
by  the  operator  to  the  dead,  and  by  the  light  of  the  one
taper  he  must  eat  his  own  share,  standing  before  the
veiled  portrait.  Then  he  shall  retire  as  before,  walking
backward  as  far  as  the  threshold,  and  leaving  the  ghost's
share  of  the  bread  and  wine  upon  the  table.

"  When  the  solemn  hour  of  the  evening  has  at  length
arrived,  the  Magus  shall  carry  into  the  Oratory  some
well-dried  cypress  wood,  which  he  shall  set  alight  on
the  altar  and  the  tripod.  Three  pinches  of  incense  must
be  cast  on  the  altar  flame  in  honour  of  the  Supreme
Potency  which  manifests  itself  by  Ever  Active  Intelligence
and  by  Absolute  Wisdom.  When  the  wood  of  the  two
chafing  dishes  has  been  reduced  to  embers,  he  must  renew
the  triple  offering  of  incense  on  the  altar,  and  must  cast
some  seven  times  on  the  fire  in  the  tripod ;  at  each
evaporation  of  the  consecrated  perfume  he  must  repeat
the  previous  doxology,  and  then  turning  to  the  East,  he
must  call  upon  God  by  the   prayers   of  that   religion

80  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

which  was  professed  by  the  person  whom  he  desires  to
evoke .

"  When  the  prayers  are  over  he  must  reverse  his  posi-
tion, and  with  his  face  to  the  West,  must  enkindle  the
chafing-dishes  on  the  head  of  each  sphinx,  and  when  the
cypress  is  fully  ablaze  he  must  heap  over  it  well-dried
violets  and  roses.  Then  let  him  extinguish  the  candle
which  illuminates  the  Oratory,  and  falling  on  his  knees
before  the  canopy,  between  the  two  columns,  let  him  ment-
ally address  the  beloved  person  with  a  plenitude  of  faith
and  affection.  Let  him  solemnly  entreat  it  to  appear,
and  renew=^  this  interior  adjuration  seven  times,  under
the  auspices  of  the  seven  providential  Genii,  en-
deavouring during  the  whole  of  the  time  to  exalt  his  soul
above  the  natural  weakness  of  humanity.

"Finally,  the  operator,  with  closed  eyes,  and  with  hands
coverin^his  face,  must  call  the  invoked  person  in  a  loud
but  gentle  voice,  pronouncing  three  times  all  the  names
which  he  bore.

"  Some  moments  after  the  third  appeal,  he  must  extend
his  arms  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes,
he  will  behold  the  beloved  being,  in  a  recognisable
manner,  in  front  of  him.  That  is  to  say,  he  will  perceive
that  ethereal  substance  separated  from  the  perishable
terrestrial  body,  the  fiuiclic  envelope  of  the  soul,  which
Kabbalistic  initiates  have  termed  the  Perispirit.  This
substance  preserves  the  human  form  but  is  emancipated
from  human  infirmities,  and  is  energised  by  the  special
characteristics  whereby  the  imperishable  indi\dduality  of
our  essence  is  manifested.  Evoked  and  evoker  can  then
inter-communicate  intelligibly  by  a  mutual  and  mysterious
thought-transmission.

"  The  departed  soul  will  give  counsel  to  the  operator  ;
it  will  occasionally  reveal  secrets  which  may  be  beneficial
to  those  whom  it  loved  on  earth,  but  it  will  answer  no  ques-
tion which  has  reference  to  the  desires  of  the  flesh  ;  it  will
discover  no  buried  treasures,  nor  will  it  unveil  the  secrets
of  a  third  person ;  it  is  silent  on  the  mysteries  of  the
superior  existence  to  which  it  has  noAv  attained.  In
certain  cases,  it  will,  however,  declare  itself  either  happy
or  in  punishment.  If  it  be  the  latter,  it  will  ask  for  the
prayers  of  the  Magus,  or  for  some  religious  observance,

NECROMANCY.  81

which  he  must  unfailingly  fulfil.     Lastly,  it  will  indicate
the  time  when  the  evocation  may  be  renewed.

"  When  it  has  disappeared,  the  operator  must  turn  to
the  East,  rekindle  the  fire  on  the  altar,  and  make  a  final
offering  of  incense.  Then  he  must  detach  the  crown  and
the  garlands,  take  up  his  candle,  and  retire  with  his  face
to  the  West  till  he  is  out  of  the  Oratory.  His  last  duty
is  to  burn  the  final  remains  of  the  flowers  and  leaves.
Their  ashes,  united  to  those  which  have  been  collected
during  the  time  of  retreat,  must  be  mixed  with  myrtle
seed,  and  secretly  buried  in  a  field  at  a  depth  which  will
secure  it  from  disturbance  by  the  ploughshare."

The  conditions  of  necromantic  evocation,  it  will  be  seen,
are  somewhat  elaborate ;  they  are  devised  for  the  legiti-
mate exaltation  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  and  for  the
direction  of  the  force  of  will ;  but  there  is  nothing  which
endangers  the  reason  or  beclouds  the  brain,  and  they
may  be  fulfilled  by  any  person  who  has  a  little  money
at  command  for  the  purchase  of  the  recjuisite  instru-
ments, and  has  occasionally  the  privilege  of  possessing
his  soul  in  solitude.  The  theurgic  doctrine  has  made
provision  in  the  event  of  a  failure ;  it  recommends  the
renewal  of  the  experiment,  with  additional  precautions,
on  the  next  anniversary,  and  affirms  that  the  third  time
will  never  be  barren  of  result,  unless  the  operator  be
oppressed  by  an  inveterate  vice  which  has  become  to
him  as  a  second  nature.

It  must  be  clear  from  the  above  ceremonial  that  there
is  nothing  repellent  to  the  most  cultivated  spiritual
sense  in  the  rites  of  la"wful  necromancy.  It  is  otherwise,
however,  with  the  evocations  of  the  infernal  art,  with  the
unhallowed  necromantic  practices  of  Black  Magic,  which
violate  the  sanctity  of  the  sepulchre,  and  endeavour  to
establish  a  vicious  communion  with  the  souls  of  evil  men.

The  rituals  of  infernal  evocations  are  the  outcome  of
certain  psychological  doctrines  which  prevailed  during
the  middle  ages,  and  are  to  some  extent  remnants  of  a
very  remote  antiquity.  Persons  who  died  by  their  OAvn
hands,  or  who  perished  by  a  violent  death,  being  sepa-
rated from  their  bodies  in  advance  of  the  natural  time,

F

82  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

were  supposed  to  be  more  or  less  bound  to  the  place
where  the  catastrophe  happened,  till  the  "radical
moisture  "  of  their  corpse  was  entirely  consumed.

Such  earth-bound  souls  were  easily  attracted  and
abused  by  the  sorcerers  and  black  magicians,  and  many
repellent  and  objectionable  recipes  for  their  evocation
are  extant.  The  skeleton  or  corpse  was  fumigated  with
mixtures  of  blood,  milk,  eggs,  and  other  substances,  and
the  deceased  person  was  invoked  with  the  usual  ad-
jurations of  Black  Magic,  and  generally  for  an  evil
purpose.  These  and  other  abuses  led  the  Romans
to  the  classification  of  Necromancy  with  treason,  secret
poisoning,  and  other  crimes.

In  a  Grseco-Egyptian  papyrus  in  the  British  Museum,
there  is  a  curious  necromantic  process  described  for
making  a  magical  ring  to  bind  a  person  in  any  manner
desired.  This  ring,  the  papyrus  goes  on  to  say,  is  to  be
taken  to  the  grave  of  a  person  untimely  dead,  and  to  be
there  buried  four  fingers  deep  in  the  ground,  with  the
words,  "  0  departed  spirit,  whosoever  thou  art,  I  deliver
to  thee  such  an  one,  that  he  may  not  do  such  a  thing.
Then  having  covered  it  up,  depart.  And  you  will  do  it
best  in  the  waning  of  the  moon."

The  bil^liogTaphy  of  Necromancy  is  coextensive  with
the  literature  of  the  supernatural.  For  the  ritual,  it  is  un-
necessary to  go  further  than  the  directions  which  we
have  given.  For  the  practice  of  black  necromancy,  the
student  is  referred  to  the  last  division  of  Ebenezer
Sibly's  "  Occult  Sciences."  In  general  literature,  some
information  may  be  found  in  Howitt's  "History  of  the
Supernatural;"  in  the  "Universal  History  of  Appari-
tions," date  1770;  and  in  Jung  Stilling's  "Theory  of
Pneumatology,"  translated  in  1884.  There  is  also  some
curious  matter  to  be  found  in  Dr  F.  G.  Lee's  "  Glimpses
of  the  Supernatural."  The  recent  publication,  by  the
Authorities  of  the  British  Museum,  of  a  facsimile  of  the
Papyrus  of  Ani  ("The  Book  of  the  Dead"),  a  manu-
script which  scholars  refer  to  a  period  fourteen  centuries
before  Christ,  will  enable  modern  students  to  ascertain
the  nature  of  this  celebrated  work,  which  was  intended
for  the  use  and  the  protection  of  the  dead  in  the  world
beyond  the  grave.

PART    II.

ALCHEMY.

ALCHEMY  is  known,  and  misknown,  to  all  the
world  as  the  supposed  science  of  transmuting
the  metals  which  the  ignorance  of  a  benighted
epoch  denominated  base  into  the  resplendent  perfections
of  gold  and  silver.  Outside  the  circle  of  Hermetic
students,  the  possibility  of  such  a  conversion  is  gener-
ally derided  at  the  present  day,  and  if  any  one,  by  an
accident,  alights  upon  the  evidence  which  exists  for  its
actuality  in  the  entombed  scientific  literature  of  the  far
past,  he  is  embarrassed  by  its  extent  and  solidity,  but
can  hardly  be  shaken  in  his  prejudice.

We  intend  in  the  present  essay  to  define  in  a  positive
manner  the  exact  theory  of  metallic  transmutation
which  was  professed  by  the  alchemists,  to  state  the
ulterior  possibilities  which  may  be  developed  from  that
theory,  and  to  expose  the  connection  which  subsists
between  this  branch  of  Hermetic  art  and  the  branch  that
is  known  as  Magic.  As  we  are  forced  to  embody  in  the
briefest  possible  compass  the  largest  available  amount  of
compressed  information,  we  must  solicit  from  our  readers
a  certain  rational  confidence  in  those  statements  that  a
narrow  space  forbids  us  to  verify.

The  philoso})hical  writings  which,  in  the  fourth  century,
were  produced  under  the  name  of  Hermes  Trismegistus,
were  the  source  of  alchemical  inspiration  during  the  sub-
sequent Christian  centuries.  The  first  distinct  and
undoubted  reference  to  alchemy  is  posterior  to  the  cir-
culation of  these  books,  as  mysterious  in  matter,  and
as  important  in  mystical  history,  as  they  are  doubtful

84  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

and  suspicious  in  their  origin.  The  reference  in  question  is
contained  in  a  manuscript  treatise  by  Zosimus  the  Pomo-
polite,  which  is  preserved  in  the  library  at  the  Louvre.
The  first  of  the  practical  alchemists — Geber,  the  Arabian
physician — is  usually  referred  to  the  eighth  century  of
our  era.  By  his  writings  it  would  appear  that  the  art
was  already  matured,  and  he  appeals  to  the  authority  of
a  line  of  anterior  adepts  and  to  a  literature  of  apparent
antiquity  from  which  he  extensively  drew.  From  the
eighth  to  the  sixteenth  century  the  doctrines  and  prac-
tices of  alchemy  continued  to  be  propagated  in  the  West,
and,  with  Germany  as  its  centre,  it  dififused  a  great  light
of  mysticism  till  the  eve  of  the  French  Revolution.

The  avowed  object  of  physical  alchemy  was  such  an
investigation  of  natural  secrets  as  would  elicit  a  practical
method  for  the  conversion  of  certain  substances,  generally
metallic,  into  gold  and  silver.  This  was  accomplished,
in  the  main,  by  means  of  an  elixir,  which,  in  harmony
with  a  theory  to  which  much  Hermetic  importance  has
been  sometimes  attached,  could  be  applied  to  the  body
of  the  alchemist  after  a  certain  occult  adaptation  as
well  as  to  a  metallic  body,  and  with  a  strictly  analogical
result.  In  the  mineral  kingdom  the  completed  j^ro-
cess  was  termed  transmutation ;  in  its  application  to
humanity  it  was  known  as  'the  conversion  or  trans-
figuration of  the  individual  by  means  of  alchemy.
The  result,  in  the  first  place,  was  gold,  or  if  the  process
was  arrested  at  a  certain  stage,  silver  was  the  product
instead.  In  the  second  case,  a  complete  renewal  of  all
the  vital  forces  and  the  development  of  the  physical
capacities  to  an  exceptionally  advanced  degree,  trans-
ferred the  successful  magus  to  an  advanced  stage  of
evolution,  and  endowed  him  with  powers  and  capacities
which  could  be  put  in  operation  both  in  a  material  and
spiritual  direction.

While  the  uninitiated  students  of  the  Hermetic
mystery  exhausted  their  revenues  and  squandered  their
entire  lives,  ransacking  every  kingdom  of  nature,  and
experimenting  with  every  conceivable  subject  from
ordure  to  egg  shells,  so  as  at  length  to  accomplish  the
extraction  of  the  fundamental  matter  of  the  elixir,  the
adepts,  who  appear  to  have  received  the  secret  by  oral

ALCHEMY.  85

transmission,  pursued  their  experiments  in  accordance
with  an  arcane  theory  which  was  a  precious  inheritance
from  the  past.  The  philosophers  who  were  participants
of  the  theory  could  operate  with  ease,  and  ensure  success.
For  them  it  was  the  work  of  a  child  or  a  woman.  The
student  who  was  outside  the  select  circle  of  the  hiero-
phants  was,  however,  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  the
divine  science  of  the  Hermetists  might  be  communicated
by  one  of  those  inexplicable  flashes  of  unprefaced  intui-
tion which  the  God-encompassed  minds  of  the  philo-
sophers, who  rejected  the  fortuitous  and  believed  in  an
imminent  Providence,  interpreted  as  direct  revelation.
A  perfect  master  of  science  might  also  initiate  a  stranger
after  proper  tests  and  progressive  study.

The  Hermetic  theory  v\^as  at  once  philosophical  and
practical.  Its  philosophical  section  is,  for  the  most  part,
exposed  in  the  literature  of  alchemy ;  its  practical  portion
is  preserved  in  symbolic  language  and  in  pictorial  symbols
which  are  capable  of  such  diverse  interpretations  that
their  true  meaning  seems  invariably  to  escape  the  student.
By  the  terms  of  the  philosophical  theory,  it  is  evident  that
the  adepts  regarded  the  animal  creation  as  so  many  suc-
cessive steps  through  which  Nature  laboriously  ascended
to  the  creation  of  her  most  perfect  achievement,  Man;  and
in  every  stage  of  production,  Man  was  the  end  in  view.
That  which  the  human  individual  was  to  the  rest  of  the
animal  kingdoms,  gold  was  to  the  world  of  minerals,
and  it  was  therefore  affirmed,  in  the  allegorical  language
of  alchemy,  that  Nature  always  intended  to  produce
gold;  the  existence  of  the  inferior  metals  was  due  to
arrested  development  at  various  stages  of  operation.
Less  crudely  put,  through  the  successive  steps  of  the
whole  mineral  kingdom  Nature  worked  up  towards  gold.
The  foundation  of  the  precious  metal  is  thus  to  be  found
in  its  inferiors,  as  there  is  also  a  certain  common  nature
between  man  and  the  animals  which  are  below  him.  It
was  the  oljject  of  alchemy  to  take  up  the  work  of  Nature
where  it  had  been  arrested  by  circumstances,  to  develop
the  latent  perfections  in  lead,  mercury,  and  antimony,
and  in  a  thousand  other  subjects,  and  to  produce  on  the
lines  of  her  observed  operations  the  metallic  perfection
which  was  her  aim.

86  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Possibly  there  is  little  in  this  hypothesis  to  recom-
mend it  to  those  who  are  acquainted  mth  the  facts  of
modern  science,  yet  the  evidence  which  exists  for  the  per-
formance of  transmutations  in  the  past  is  abundant  and
good  of  its  kind.  If  the  composite  character  of  metals  can
be  tolerated  as  a  possibility,  and  the  drift  of  scientific
experiment  is,  we  believe,  in  this  direction,  then  it  is  con-
ceivable that  the  life-long  labours  of  so  many  generations
of  adepts,  may  have  occasionally  resulted  in  discovering
the  constituent  elements  of  gold  and  in  the  actual  com-
position of  the  metal.  That  success,  if  it  were  in  reality
achieved,  was  occasionally  wholly  fortuitous,  is  made
evident  by  the  fact  that  the  operator  was  sometimes
unable  to  repeat  the  experiment  which  had  realised
his  absorbing  ambition.  The  crudity  of  the  explana-
tory hypothesis  does  not  much  undermine  the  evidence ;
there  are  many  undoubted  facts  in  modern  physics
which,  even  at  this  day,  are  very  inadequately  explained.

The  philosophical  theory  of  alchemy,  which  we  have
thus  briefly  exhibited,  deserves  more  extended  considera-
tion ;  and  as  the  belief  in  the  transmutation  of  metals
has  by  no  means  passed  away ;  as  the  study  of  practical
alchemy  is  said  to  be  actually  reviving,  with  the  general
resurrection  of  mysticism ;  as  Figuier  admits  that  the
romantic  conversion  is  possible  and  may  even  be  ultimately
performed  ;  and  as,  so  late  as  the  middle  of  this  century,
Dr  Christopher  Girtanner,  who  has  been  described  as  an
eminent  professor  of  Gottingen,  actually  affirmed  in  the
Annates  cle  Chimia  that  it  was  destined  to  be  generally
known  and  practised,  that  every  chemist  and  artist
would  be  able  to  manufacture  gold,  that  kitchen  utensils
by  the  close  of  the  present  age  would  be  made  of  the
precious  metals  ;  it  seems  desirable  to  provide  the  reader
with  a  comprehensive  account  of  the  principles  which,
on  the  authority  of  the  alchemists  themselves,  were
involved  in  the  art  of  transmutation.  The  substance  of
the  ensuing  pages  is  derived  from  the  masonic  alchemy
of  Baron  Tschoudi,  which  is  based  on  the  authority  of
Paracelsus ;  wherever  it  seems  obscure  or  imperfect,  we
have  endeavoured  to  supplement  it  with  side  lights  from
the  writings  of  other  adepts.

ALCHEMY.  87

The  first  study  of  an  alchemical  philosopher  is  research
into  the  operations  of  Nature,  whose  end  is  God,  as  He
also  is  her  sole  beginning.  Now,  Nature  is  divisible  philo-
sophically into  four  chief  regions,  the  dry,  the  moist,  the
warm,  and  the  cold,  which  are  the  four  elementary  quali-
ties whence  all  that  is  must  be  derived.  Nature  is  differ-
entiated into  male  and  female.  She  is  compared  to
mercury.  She  is  never  visible,  though  she  acts  visibly,
being  a  volatile  essence  which  performs  its  office  in
bodies,  and  is  informed  by  the  universal  spirit.  She
represents  the  divine  breath,  the  central  fire,  which  is
termed  by  the  philosophers  the  sulphur  of  matter,  and
is  identical  ^vith  that  mercury  of  the  sages  which
manifests  itself  by  the  gentle  heat  of  Nature.
^  The  investigators  of  Nature  should  be,  like  herself,
simple,  truthful,  patient,  and  persevering.  What  they
desire  to  perform  should  be  in  accordance  mth  her,
whom  they  should  follow  in  every  point.  In  seeking  to
achieve  something  more  excellent  than  she  has  performed
in  a  particular  subject,  they  should  consider  by  what  it
is  ameliorated,  which  is  invariably  by  its  like;  for
example,  if  you  would  develop  the  intrinsic  virtue  of  a
metal  beyond  the  natural  point,  you  must  grasp  the
metallic  nature  itself,  and  know  how  to  distinguish
between  the  male  and  female  in  Nature.

The  searcher  must  know  how  to  obtain  the  seed  of
metals,  which  is  their  elixir  or  superior  quintessence,
the  most  finished  and  perfect  decoction  and  digestion  of
the  thing  itself.  This  seed,  or  germ,  is  produced  by  the
four  elements  through  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being
and  the  Imagination  of  Nature.

The  true  and  primeval  matter  of  metals  is  of  double
essence,  being  an  aerial  warmth  and  moisture  and  a  dry
heat.  But  the  student  must  beware  how  he  interprets
these  terms  in  their  literal  sense.  There  are  many
circles  within  the  circle  of  alchemical  philosophy.  For
example,  the  air  of  the  philosophers  is  said  to  be  a  water
coagulated  by  fire,  which  produces  a  universal  dissolvent,
and  even  by  the  centre  of  the  earth,  where  the  elements
are  supposed  to  deposit  their  metallic  seed,  the  philo-
sophers appear  to  have  referred  in  an  arcane  manner  to

88  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

a  mysterious  storehouse  of  chaotic  forces.  But  the
allegory  and  the  intentional  confusion  are  by  no  means
at  an  end  here.  The  disciple  of  Hermetic  art  is  required
to  direct  his  attention  to  what  is  termed  by  the  French
adepts  the  point  de  la  nature,  and  this  he  should  not  seek
in  the  vulgar  metals  which  are  absolutely  dead,  while
those  which  are  known  to  the  hierophants  are  absolutely
living  and  possessed  of  a  vital  spirit.  Now,  the  living
gold  of  the  philosophers  is  explained  by  another  author-
ity to  be  that  "fixed  grain"  which  animates  the
mercury  of  the  sages ;  but  as  the  sophic  sulphur,  or  Eed
Magisterium,  is  also  a  vivific  gold,  the  confusion  of
alchemical  nomenclature  is  to  the  uninitiated  of  an
exceedingly  embarrassing  kind.

Metals  were  supposed  to  be  engendered  in  the  bowels
of  the  earth  after  the  following  manner.  When  the
circulation  of  the  philosophical  elements  has  deposited
the  seed,  it  is  returned  towards  the  surface  in  a  sublim-
ated state.  The  seed  of  every  metal  is  originally  one,  iu
which  the  possibility  of  their  conversion  is  founded  j
they  are  differentiated  by  local  influences  acting  within
the  centre.  Before  all  other  study  it  is  affirmed  to  be
absolutely  needful  that  an  amateur  should  understand
the  formation  of  metals  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.
Without  this,  and  the  faithful  imitation  of  Nature,  he
will  never  achieve  anything  successful.  Nature  com-
poses all  metals  of  mercury ;  which,  however,  is  a  living
and  feminine  principle,  and  not  the  substance  which
under  that  name  is  known  to  ordinary  chemistry ;  and
of  sulphur,  which  is  a  living  male.  In  a  matrix  of
saline  water,  these  substances  are  combined  in  a  vapor-
ous condition,  and  a  species  of  vitriol  results,  which  by
the  circulation  of  the  elements  is  again  converted  into
vapour,  is  combined  with  sulphur,  is  transformed  into  a
glutinous  mass,  and  after  other  complicated  processes,
which  it  would  be  perfectly  idle  to  enumerate,  a  metal
is  evolved,  that  is  pure  or  impure  according  to  the  local-
ity of  its  production.

These  explanations,  it  will  be  seen,  offer  no  instruc-
tions for  the  discovery  of  the  all-important  seed.  It  is
evident  throughout  that  the  described  processes  refer  to

ALCHEI^rY.  89

the  laboratory  practices  of  the  adepts,  and  not  to  cosmic
evolution.  Simplified  and  pruned  as  it  is  in  this  brief
presentation,  it  will  a2:)23ear  to  the  ordinary  scientific
reader  as  a  raving  chaos  of  unintelligible  extrava-
gance, out  of  which  it  would  seem  impossible  to  de-
velop any  form  or  harmony,  could  even  a  key  be  pro-
vided to  the  exact  meaning  of  every  figure  of  speech.
When  it  must  be  added  that  the  most  illustrious  adepts
were  accustomed  in  addition  to  allegorical  language,
insoluble  cryptograms,  and  symbols  which  admitted
innumerable  interpretations,  to  fill  their  pages  with  false
recipes,  useless  fictions,  and  numberless  errors,  so  as
still  further  to  disguise  from  the  ignorant  the  truth
which  they  pretended  to  reveal,  it  is  evident  that  the
recovery  of  the  practical  process  for  metallic  transmuta-
tion is  a  hopeles  and  insane  quest ;  for  when  no  reliance
can  be  placed  upon  aoy  statement,  while  everywhere
deception  abounds,  progress  of  any  kind  is  impossible.

That  alchemical  typology  is  nonsense  and  a  hoax  from
beginning  to  end  cannot,  however,  be  affirmed  by  any
person  who  has  accjuaintance  mth  the  facts  of  the  case.
In  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  when  the
spread  of  Hermetic  ideas  and  the  increasing  facilities  of
printing  made  alchemy  a  remunerative  speculation  for
the  bookseller,  a  literature  which  largely  consisted  of
unadulterated  imposture  appears  to  have  sprung  into
existence ;  but  in  anterior  centuries,  there  was  no  such
inducement  to  dishonesty.  The  writings  of  the  alchem-
ists remained  in  the  obscurity  of  manuscript,  and  it  is
absurd  to  suppose  that  a  laborious  terminology  was  in-
vented, and  innumerable  books  were  Avritten,  to  gratify
a  purposeless  passion  for  unprofitable  and  aimless  de-
ception. It  is  more  probable  that  a  conventional  lan-
guage was  devised  to  enable  the  participators  in  a
common  pursuit  to  communicate  ^vithout  difficulty  upon
matters  which  it  was  dangerous  to  refer  to  in  any  o\)(in
and  comprehensible  manner.  At  the  same  time  it  must
be  admitted  that  the  entire  problem  is  almost  inscrutable,
and  it  is  difficult  to  propound  any  theory  that  can  be
tolerated  concerin'ng  it.

It  may  be  stated,  by  way  of  a  conclusion  to  this  por-

90  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

tion  of  the  subject,  that  the  alchemists  were  accustomed
to  distinguish  three  kinds  of  gold — astral  gold,  whose
centre  is  in  the  sun,  and,  like  light,  is  communicated  in
its  rays  to  all  inferior  beings  ;  elementary  gold,  the  most
pure  and  fixed  part  of  the  elements  and  of  all  substances
which  are  composed  of  them,  so  that  all  the  sublunary
beings  of  the  three  kingdoms  of  Nature  contain  in  their
centre  a  precious  grain  of  this  elementary  gold ;  lastly,
there  is  vulgar  gold,  the  most  beautiful  of  known  metals,
and  perfect  and  unchangeable  in  itself.

When  from  the  natural  principles  of  alchemy  the
adepts  proceed  to  an  account  of  the  actual  process,  they
are  less  barbarous  in  their  methods  and  less  contradictory
ill  their  statements.  The  operations  described  have  the
character  of  serious  experiments,  and  might  be  repro-
duced if  the  materials  which  are  required  could  be
obtained.

The  profound  study  of  Hermetic  allegory  has  indicated
to  a  few  minds  an  unexpected  solution  which  is  exceed-
ingly suggestive  and  curious.  We  have  seen  that  the  mys-
tics regarded  the  successive  steps  of  creation  as  all  leading
up  to  man ;  and,  though  the  analogy  may  have  nothing
to  recommend  it,  the  occult  doctrine  of  correspondence
led  them  to  regard  the  evolution  of  minerals  as  proceed-
ing after  a  parallel  method.  More  recently,  we  have
seen  that  every  mundane  substance,  animate  or  other-
wise, possesses  in  the  centre  of  its  nature  a  spark  of
elementary  gold.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that,  on  the
one  hand,  the  gold  of  the  philosophers  is  not  a  metal ;
that,  on  the  other  hand,  man  is  a  being  who  possesses
■within  himself  the  seeds  of  a  perfection  which  he  has
never  realised,  and  that  he  therefore  corresponds  to  those
metals  which  the  Hermetic  theory  supposes  to  be  capable
of  development.  It  has  been  consequently  advanced
that  the  conversion  of  lead  into  gold  was  only  the
assumed  object  of  alchemy,  and  that  it  was  in  reality  in
search  of  a  process  for  developing  the  latent  possibilities
in  the  subject,  Man  ;  that  the  quest  was  pursued  with
success  ;  that  it  led  to  magnificent  results  in  the  physical
and  spiritual  orders,  and  to  an  acquaintance  with  facts

ALCHEMY.  91

and  forces  which  it  was  unwise  indiscriminately  to
divulge,  and  which  resulted  in  the  invention  of  a  typolo-
gical literature  that  was  intelligible  to  the  initiated  alone.
Without  in  any  way  pretending  to  assert  that  this  hypo-
thesis reduces  the  literary  chaos  of  the  philosophers  into
a  regular  order,  it  may  be  affirmed  that  it  materially
ehicidates  their  ^vri tings,  and  that  it  is  wonderful  how
contradictions,  absurdities,  and  difficulties  seem  to  dis-
solve wherever  it  is  applied.

At  the  same  time,  it  is  equally  and  abundantly  evident
that  those  alchemists  with  whose  lives  we  are  in  any
way  acquainted,  were,  in  the  overwhelming  majority  of
cases,  indisputably  physical  chemists  in  search  of  a
physical  secret,  and  ambitious  of  material  wealth.

It  may  be  said  that  as  actions  speak  louder  than
words,  the  new  interpretation,  however  plausible,  is  pro-
bably fallacious,  yet  outside  the  illumination  which  it
casts  on  a  large  section  of  alchemical  literature,  there  are
other  considerations  in  its  favour  which  cannot  be  lightly
set  aside.  There  is,  in  the  first  place,  this  fundamental
and  really  important  fact,  that  those  Hermetic  books  of
Alexandrian  Platonism,  theurgy,  and  Egyptian  tradition,
attributed  to  Trismegistus,  which  were  the  ultimate,
ever  quoted,  and  infallible  authority  of  all  the  western
alchemists,  appear  absolutely  devoid  of  any  assignable
connection  with  metallic  transmutation ;  they  are  devoted
to  transcendental  cosmology  and  a  system  of  spiritual
philosophy.  If  the  alchemists  were  workers  in  metals,
why  did  they  appeal  to  Hermes  ?  It  is  insufficient  to
reply  that  they  were  of  opinion  that  the  Alexandrian
symbolist  was  delineating  the  processes  of  their  metallic
science  in  an  arcane  fashion.  There  is  nothing  to  support
the  assertion,  for  the  Golden  Treatise  of  Hermes  Trisme-
gistus, which  alone  is  concerned  with  physical  transmu-
tation, is  a  composition  of  the  fifteenth  century,  long  after
the  establishment  of  alchemical  doctrines  in  the  West,
long  after  Hermes  had  been  appealed  to  as  an  authority,
and  in  all  probability  a  product  of  the  opinion  in  question,
so  the  fact  remains  that  there  is  nothing  in  early  Hermetic
literature  to  give  colour  to  such  an  interpretation.

In   the   second   place,   it   is   fairly  certain   that  the

92  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

mystics  who  were  confessedly  devoted  to  the  development
of  psychic  potentialities  in  man  made  use  of  the  same
symbols,  of  similar  allegories,  and  of  methods  rigorously
akin  to  those  of  the  alchemists.     Lastly,  the  mystics  as
well  as  the  alchemists  appeal  to  the  authority  of  Hermes.
These,  in   a  brief   compass,  are  the  most  important
facts  of  the  case,  and  in  the  face  of  so  much  conflicting
evidence  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  arrive  at  a  tenable
and  moderate  conclusion  which  shall  bring  both  of  these
views  into  a  harmonious  and  consistent  relationship.    We
must  begin  by  conceding  that  from  facts  which  are  ob-
vious in  the  lives  of  the  alchemists,  and  from  facts  in  the
history  of  chemistry,  these  early  investigators  of  Nature
were  in  search  of  metallic  transmutation,  and  that  in  the
course  of  their  exiDeriments  they  admittedly  made  dis-
coveries  in  physics  which  laid  the  foundations  of   the
existing  science  of  chemistry.     We  must  suppose  that
the  literature  of  alchemy  was  devoted — as  it  claims  to  be
devoted — to  veiled  instruction  in  the  physical  processes
of  mineral  conversion.     In  this  case,  we  are  forced  to
regard  what  may  be  termed  the  spiritual  gleams  that
we  discover  in  Western  Hermetics  as  simply  lights  which
are  diffused  by  a  theory  which  is  too  broad  for  the  prac-
tice.    The  metallic  work  is  the  threshold  of  a  larger
achievement,  and  the  lustre  of  that  more  consummate
opus  permeates  the  material  veils  of  the  metallic  theory
with  oblique   and  confusing  rays.     If  we  turn  to  the
writings  of  the  mystics,  to  Hermes,  Trithemius,  Sweden-
borg,  Vaughan,  Bohme,  and  the  other  innumerable  lights
which  diffuse  their   psychic   splendour  on   the   golden
ladder  of  the  transcendental,  we  shall  find  that  we  have
entered  the  field  of  the  larger  hypothesis,  the  grander
hope,  the  superb,  if  untinished,  achievement.    These  men
wrought  upon  the  subject  Man ;  his  were  the  potencies
which  they  endeavoured,  though  perhaps  imperfectly,  to
develop   and  extend ;   his  transmutation  from  material
to  spiritual  consciousness,  from  lower  to  higher  life,  from
humanity  to  superhumanity,  was  the  conversion  which
these  had  in  view ;  his  regenerated  perfection  was  the
end  towards  which  they  strived.     The  opening  of   his
interior  faculties  till  he  was  enabled  to  form  a  corre-

ALCHEMY.  93

spondence  vnth  superior'  intelligent  subsistences,  and
mioht  in  the  end  be  enabled  to  create  an  intellectual
union  with  the  Summa  totius  Perfedionis,  was  the  divine
dream  of  the  mystics.  This  they  endeavoured,  this  they
aspired,  to  accomplish  by  virtue  of  a  theory  of  develop-
ment which  -Hermes  applied  in  explanation  of  the  ma-
terial cosmos,  which  they  deemed  of  ec|ual  application  to
humanity  as  minutum  munclum,  the  cosmos  within  the
cosmos,  the  small  world  within  the  great  world,  and  in-
tellectually the  centre  of  this ;  by  the  alchemists  it  was
also  appropriated  because  they  believed  that  the  develop-
ment of  a  particle  of  matter  must  proceed  on  the  same
line  and  according  to  the  same  basis  as  that  of  the  grand
totality.  With  such  an  interpretation  we  can  understand
the  appeal  to  Hermes  on  the  part  of  physical  and  spiritual
mystics  alike,  the  identity  of  symbols,  and  the  parallel
in  allegory  between  the  two  schools  of  thought.

At  this  point  we  must  pause  ;  it  would  be  quite  out  of
place  in  an  elementary  treatise  to  attempt  any  delineation
of  mystical  methods  in  the  development  of  the  interior
Sol  and  of  its  complement,  the  interior  Luna.  We  believe
ourselves  to  have  established  the  points  which  we  under-
took at  the  beginning  to  demonstrate.  We  have  shown
that  the  ordinary  notions  concerning  the  Hermetic  mys-
tery and  alchemy  are  inadequate  to  the  scope  of  the  sub-
ject ;  we  have  endeavoured  to  explain  the  conceptions
which  are  at  the  base  of  the  theory  of  transmutation,  to
indicate  the  possibilities  which  the  mystics  beheld  behind
it,  and  to  expose,  as  was  promised,  the  connection  which
subsists  between  this  branch  of  transcendental  experi-
ment and  that  which  is  known  as  magic,  for  magic  from
the  mystical  standpoint  was  the  modification  of  man  by
alchemy,  or  the  spiritual  side  of  magnum  opus.

Books  on  the  subject  of  alchemy  in  the  English  lan-
guage are  rare  and  expensive.  The  following  are  recom-
mended : — "  A  Suggestive  Enquiry  into  the  Hermetic
Mystery;""^  "  Eemarks  on  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists,"

*  Of  all  modern  works  this  is  most  important  to  the  student.
Issued  in  1850,  it  was  suppressed  almost  on  the  day  of  publication,
authoress  and  advisers  considering  that  it  was  too  suggestive  to  be
circulated  with  prudence.

94  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Boston,  1857  ;  "  Lives  of  the  Alchemistical  Philosophers,
with  a  Selection  of  the  most  celebrated  Treatises  on  the
Theory  and  Practice  of  the  Hermetic  Art,"  1815.

There  exist,  also,  English  translations  of  works  by
Geber,  Paracelsus,  Van  Helmont,  Helvetius,  George
Starkey,  Eugenius  Philalethes  (Thomas  Yaughan),  Basil
Valentine,  Roger  Bacon,  Sendivogius,  and  Pseudo-
Hermes.  A  considerable  insight  into  the  life  and  work
of  a  physical  alchemist  in  the  middle  ages  may  be
obtained  in  a  very  pleasant  manner  by  the  perusal  of
"  A  Professor  of  Alchemy,"  which  is  an  account  of  the
history  and  adventures  of  Denis  Zachaire,  the  celebrated
French  alchemist.

THE  ELIXIR  OF  LIFE.

JUST  as  the  aims  of  the  alchemists  have  been  inter-
preted in  a  romantic  spiritual  sense,  so  has  that  other
department  of  thaumaturgic  physics,  intimately  con-
nected with  alchemy — alchemy,  indeed,  under  another
aspect — which  is  concerned  with  the  conversion,  recon-
struction, and  complete  transmutation  of  the  present  body
of  man.  The  entire  transcendentalism  of  the  West  seems
to  have  been  emphatically  based  on  the  lapse  of  humanity
from  a  primordial  condition  of  grace,  strength,  perfection,
beauty,  and  physical  immortality,  and  the  divine  dream
of  its  professors  was  to  re-establish  the  harmony  which
once  existed  between  man  and  his  fontal  source,  so  as  to
retrieve  the  individual  at  any  rate  from  the  miserable
ruin  of  the  race,  and  to  restore  him  to  his  original  con-
dition. This,  indeed,  was  unmistakably  their  patent  and
avowed  object.  A  certain  method  of  life  and  a  certain
medical  regimen  were  the  means  by  which  it  was  deemed
possible  to  secure  this  resplendent  rehabilitation.  To
achieve  immortality  by  a  medicine  which  had  the  quality
of  renovating  wasted  tissues,  of  eliminating  the  germs  of
disease,  and  arresting  the  progress  of  decay,  was  a  grand
upward  step,  a  substantial  realisation  of  the  dream ;  the
possibility  was  universally  admitted,  the  process  was
hoped  for,  longed  for,  toiled  for,  often  died  for;  some
claimed  to  have  accomplished  it,  many  pretended  to
possess  the  secret,  a  few,  ravished  out  of  sober  reason  by
search,  expectation,  and  desire,  genuinely  believed  them-
selves to  have  attained  to  the  grand  way,  the  true  path,
and  may  have  been  encouraged  in  their  sublime  self-decep-
tion by  the  actual  discovery  of  powerful  healing  secrets
which  are  unknown  to  modern  science.  It  is  at  any  rate
moderately  certain  that  the  Elixir  of  Life,  the  Universal
Medicine,  and  the  renewal  of  youth  are  conceptions  which

96  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

were  understood  by  the  mystics  in  a  literal  sense,  and
no  modern  interpretation  must  be  accepted  which,  does
outrage  thereto.  But  it  also  becomes  evident  by  the
study  of  the  great  transcendentalists  that  the  double
aspect  of  alchemy  must  be  extended  to  the  life-elixir ;  it
was  actual,  it  was  physical,  it  was  truly  sought,  there
was  neither  pretence,  nor  allegory,  nor  subterfuge  about
it ;  but  it  included  also  another  side,  a  larger  scope,  a
deeper  search,  a  higher  meaning."^

Eliphas  Levi,  ever  open  to  the  most  adverse  criticism,
but  to  whom  we  must  always  recur  for  quotation,  says  :
"  To  imprison  a  soul  for  ever  in  a  mummified  human
body,  such  would  be  the  horrible  solution  of  pre-
tended immortality  in  the  same  body  and  on  the  same
earth."  That  may  be  true  enough,  but  impossible,  un-
worthy, gross  though  it  may  be,  it  was  still  sought
by  transcendental  science  in  the  West ;  only  the  apostles
of  transcendental  science  would  have  cried  out  against
the  perverted  presentation  of  their  cherished  idea ;
they  would  have  said  that  their  great  elixir  renews
vitality,  that  it  gives  immortality  to  youth  and  not  to  a
mummy.

When  we  turn  from  these  higher  considerations  to
the  renewal  of  physical  youth,  which  the  mystics  desired
to  achieve,  we  are  brought  into  the  presence  of  much  that
appears  barbarous,  absurd,  and  belonging  to  the  awk-
ward, clumsy,  and  stumbling  infancy  of  medical  science.

The  entire  subject  of  the  life-elixir,  the  grand  palin-
genesis, the  universal  medecine,  and  the  perfect  way  of
youth-renewal,  has  been  exhaustively  discussed  in  an
excessively  curious  book  published  at  Paris  in  1716,  and
entitled  :  An  History  of  those  Persons  who  have  lived  more
than  a  century,  and  of  those  who  have  Renewed  their  Youth,

*  The  following  mystical  commentary  has  been  offered  on  this
point.  ' '  The  arcane  understanding  of  the  Elixir  of  Life  is  in  the
alcliemical  Solve  et  Coagula,  when  spirit  is  turned  into  matter,  and
vice  versa.  When  a  man  knows  his  own  spirit,  he  cannot  die,
that  is,  lose  consciousness  in  the  flesh.  He  can  put  off  his  taber-
nacle if  he  will,  and  if  he  have  allowed  it  to  become  feeble.  He
then  disappears.  If  he  has  kept  up  the  physical  correspondence
perfectly,  he  can  pass  to  another  country,  appearing  to  die  in  a
o-iven  place.    But  to  do  so,  he  must  have  friends  with  knowledge."

THE  ELIXIR  OF  LIFE,  97

icitli  the  Secret  of  Rejuvenescence^  drawn  out  by  Arnold
de  ViUenieuve,  by  M.  de  Longiieville-Harcourt.  The
fifteenth  chapter  discusses  the  possibility  of  renewal,
with  the  quaint  illustrations  that  follow.

"To  renew  youth  is  to  enter  once  more  into  that
felicitous  season  which  imparts  to  the  human  frame  the
23leasures  and  strength  of  the  morning.  Here  it  is  to
no  purpose  that  we  should  speak  of  that  problem  so
much  discussed  by  the  Wise,  whether  the  art  can  be
carried  to  such  a  pitch  of  excellence  that  old  age  should
itself  be  made  young.  We  know  that  Paracelsus  has
vaunted  the  metamorphic  resources  of  his  Mercury  of
Life  which  not  merely  rejuvenates  men  but  converts
metals  into  gold  ;  he  who  promised  unto  others  the  years
of  the  sybils,  or  at  least  the  300  winters  of  Nestor,  himself
perished  at  the  age  of  thirty- seven.  Let  us  turn  rather
to  Nature,  so  admirable  in  her  achievements,  and  deem
her  not  capable  alone  of  destroying  what  she  has  pro-
duced at  the  moment  she  has  begotten  them.  Is  it
possible  that  she  will  refuse  unto  man,  for  whom  all
was  created,  what  she  accords  to  the  stags,  the  eagles,
and  the  serpents,  who  do  annually  cast  aside  the  mourn-
ful concomitants  of  senility,  and  do  assume  the  most
brilliant,  the  most  gracious  amenities  of  the  most  joyous
youth  ?  Art,  it  is  true,  has  not  as  yet  arrived  at  that
apex  of  perfection  wherefrom  it  can  renew  our  youth ;
but  that  which  was  unachieved  in  the  past  may  be  ac-
complished in  the  future,  a  prodigy  which  may  be  more
confidently  expected  from  the  f?^  that  in  isolated  cases
it  has  actually  already  taken  place,  as  the  facts  of  history
make  evident.  By  observing  and  following  the  manner
in  which  nature  performs  such  wonders,  we  may  as-
suredly hope  to  execute  this  desirable  transformation,
and  the  first  condition  is  an  amiable  temperament,  such
as  that  which  was  possessed  by  Moses,  of  whom  it  is
written  that  for  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  his  sight
never  failed  him.

"The  stag,  eagle,  and  sparrow-hawk  renew  their
youth.  Aldrovandus  has  written  on  the  rejuvenescence
of  the  eagle.  Among  the  birds  of  the  air,  we  are  told
by  Pliny  that  the  raven  and  the  phoenix  live,  each  of

G

98  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

them,  six  hundred  years.  No  one  denies  that  the  stag  is
renewed  by  feeding  on  vipers  and  serpents,  while  the
apes  of  Caucasus,  whose  diet  is  jiepper,  prove  a  sovereign
remedy  for  the  lion,  who  grows  young  by  devouring  their
flesh.  Those  who  have  written  of  the  elej)hant  maintain
that  his  normal  life  is  extended  through  three  centuries,
while  the  horse,  which  alone  in  creation  participates  in
the  natures  of  man,  of  the  lion,  of  the  ox,  the  sheep,  the
mule,  the  stag,  the  wolf,  the  fox,  the  serpent,  and  the
hare,  from  each  deriving  three  of  its  qualities,  has  oc-
casionally survived  with  undiminished  vigour  the  lapse
of  a  hundred  years.  The  serpent,  who  is  instrumental
in  the  rejuvenescence  of  the  stag,  himself  renews  his
youth  at  the  shedding  of  his  scales,  from  all  which  con-
siderations, it  follows  that  it  is  not  beyond  belief  that  a
like  prodigy  may  be  found  in  the  superior  order  of  the
same  productions  whence  man  has  been  himself  derived,
for  man  is  assuredly  not  in  a  worse  condition  than  the
beasts  whom  he  rules."

From  these  considerations  the  writer  passes  to  an
account  of  those  jjersons,  male  and  female,  who  are
supposed  to  have  renew^ed  their  youth.  Unfortunately,
the  evidence  is  chiefly  confined  to  the  mythic  periods  of
antiquity.  Eson,  the  father  of  Jason,  was  enveloped
by  Medea  in  a  quantity  of  warm  herbs  and  aromatics,
saturated  with  certain  liquids  which  extracted  the  po-
tent juices  of  these  plants  and  recovered  the  youth  of
the  patient.  A  fountain  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus
which  restored  strength  to  the  aged.  The  spring  of
Lucaga  in  America  is  accredited  by  Peter  Chieza  with
the  same  marvellous  j^roperty.  A  similar  fountain  is
located  in  an  island  of  the  Greek  Archipelago,  according
to  Andrseus  Baccius,  and  another  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Argos  w^as  called  the  Fountain  of  Canathus.  Torque-
mada  and  Peter  the  Martyr,  Aulus  Gellius  and  Pliny,
Lovrichius,  and  William  Postel  are  cited  in  support  of
the  actuality  of  renewal,  and  when  the  historic  evidence
has  been  at  length  exhausted,  M.  de  Longueville-
Harcourt  supplies,  what  is  promised  in  his  title,  the
"arcanum"  of  Arnold  de  Villeneuve  for  the  operation
of  the  grand  work  of  renewal.

THE  ELIXIR  OF  LIFE.  99

"  This   marvellous   process   for  the  rehabilitation  of
Nature,"  says  the  author  already  cited,  "is  not  to  be
found  in  the  folio  edition  of  the  illustrious  Arnold  de
Yilleneuve  ;  it  is  preserved  in  an  ancient  Latin  manu-
script, which  came  into  the  hands  of  a  certain  M.  du
Poirier,  chief  physician  of  the  general  hospital  at  Tours,
who  lent  it  to  the  Abbt^  de  Vallemont,  of  Pomaine,"  by
whom  it  was  communicated  to  the  author,  M.  de  Longue-
ville-Harcourt.     The  rejuvenating  process  of  Arnold  de
Yilleneuve  is  supplemented  by  a  recipe  for  the  Universal
Medicine,  which  is  generally  identified  with  the  Elixir,
but  appears  to  be  of  lesser  virtue.     This  special  elabora-
tion is  the  achievement  of  M.  de  Comiers,  who  had  a
doctrine  that  diet  and  sweating  were  certain  remedies
for  everything.      It  was  claimed  to   be  the  -universal
medicine  in  a  liquid  form,  and  was  guaranteed  to  set
free  or  preserve  the  partaker  from  every  disease.     The
dose  was  from  five  to  six  drops  in  wine  or  broth,  accord-
ing to  the  nature  of  the  illness."

According  to  Bernard  Trevisan,  a  distinguished  French
adept,  the  reduction  of  the  "  philoso23hical  stone "  into
mercurial  water  results  in  the  alchemical  elixir  of  life,
which  is  the  Hermetic  aurum  potabile.  Its  potent  virtues
are  equal  to  the  cure  of  every  variety  of  disease  and
it  prolongs  life  beyond  the  ordinary  limits.  When  the
perfect  elixir  has  been  elaborated  to  the  Red,  it  is  said
to  transmute  copper,  lead,  iron,  and  all  metals  into  a
purer  gold  than  that  which  is  found  in  the  mines,  while
the  same  elixir  elaborated  to  the  AVhite  produces  an
excellent  quality  of  wholly  unalloyed  silver.

Several  formal  recipes  for  the  composition  of  the
Universal  Medicine  are  given  in  alchemical  literature.
That  in  Alhertus  Parvus  requires  eight  pounds  of  sugar
of  mercury  as  its  foundation.  Those  who  partake
night  and  morning  of  one  dose  will  find  their  life  pro-
longed, their  health  insured;  while  gout,  sciatica,  vertigo,
and  every  internal  complaint  will  be  entirely  and  speedily
eradicated.

At  the  solemn  moment  of  death,  the  illustrious  Bene-
dictine, Trithemius,  who  is  counted  among  the  greatest
of  the  Christian  and  Catholic  hierophants,  formulated  a

100  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

recipe  which  he  is  said  to  have  affirmed  would  preserve
a  good  stomach,  a  strong  mind,  and  a  tenacious  memory,
together  with  perfect  sight  and  hearing,  for  all  who
made  use  of  it.  As  it  is  concerned  with  available
materials,  it  deserves  to  be  given  in  full : —

Pulvis  Medicinalis  valde  celebratus  Trithemii.

Calami  Aromatici,

Gentianse,

Cinimi,

Sileris  Montani,

p       .'  ^15  gram.  625  millig.  of  each

Ameos,

Sem.  Petroselini,

Spicse  Nardi,

Coralli  Rub,

Unionum  sive  perlarum  \  -.^n  o^a      -it

J.      ^^  >  15b  2fram.  2d0  millio^.

non  perioratorum,        j  ^  ^

Zingiberis  Albi,  \

T^  T  ci    '  V    19  srram.  331  millio;.  of  each.

Jboliorum  iSenae,  (  "  ^

Tartari  Adusti,  j

^\^^^'  \      7  gram.  331  millig.  of  each.

Cubebarum,  j  ^  °

Cariophyllorum,  27  gram.  344  millig.

Fiat  pulvis.

Dose. — 5  gram.  859  millig.,  taken  night  and  morning
in  wine  or  brodium,  during  the  whole  of  the  first  month  ;
during  the  second  month,  in  the  morning  only ;  during
the  third  month,  thrice  in  the  week,  and  so  continue
through  life.

Occasionally  the  miraculous  recipe  was  formulated  in
the  terms  of  the  alchemists.  The  true  method  of  compos-
ing the  divine  medicine  is  thus  imparted  by  Eugenius
Philalethes  : — "  Ten  parts  of  coelestiall  slime ;  separate
the  male  from  the  female,  and  each  afterwards  from  its
own  earth,  physically,  mark  you,  and  with  no  violence.
Conjoin  after  separation  in  due,   harmonic,  vitall  pro-

THE  ELIXIR  OF  LIFE.  101

portion ;  and,  straightway,  the  Soul  descending  from
the  pyroplastic  sphere,  shall  restore,  by  a  mirific  embrace,
its  dead  and  deserted  body.  Proceed  according  to  the
Volcanico  magical  theory,  till  they  are  exalted  into  the
Fifth  Metaphysical  Rota.  This  is  that  world-renowned
medicine,  whereof  so  many  have  scribbled,  which,  not-
withstanding, so  few  have  known."

In  the  "  Doctrine  and  Ritual  of  Transcendental
Magic,"  Eliphas  L(^vi  informs  his  students  that  he  has
come  into  possession  of  Cagliostro's  great  secret  of  re-
juvenescence, but  his  reasons  for  withholding  it  from
publication  will  be  readily  understood.  If  it  be  necessary
to  pose  as  the  protector  of  dangerous  knowledge,  one
should  at  least  do  so  consistently,  but  with  true  French
fickleness,  and  mthout  a  word  of  warning,  much  less  of
explanation  or  defence  of  his  change  of  front,  he  supplies
the  recipe  in  his  next  book,  and  makes  evident  by  its
nature  the  pure  charlatancy  of  his  previous  scruples,
which  are  wholly  in  character  with  the  transcendental
devices  which  abound  in  his  earlier  work.

By  means  of  this  preposterous  regimen,  which  is  too
complicated  to  admit  of  reproduction  in  this  place,  the
impostor,  who  was  not  all  an  impostor,  pretended  to  have
extended  his  life  over  a  period  of  several  centuries ;  and
on  the  authority  of  Levi,  we  learn  that  the  apostles  of  the
marvellous  are  convinced  that  the  great  Copt  is  now
located  in  America,  w^here  he  is  the  suj^reme  and  invisible
pontiff  of  the  grand  chaos  of  the  spirit  rappers.

Aristeus,  the  philosophical  alchemist,  is  supposed  to
have  delivered  to  his  disciples  what  he  terms  the  golden
key  of  the  Grand  Work,  which  will  render  all  metals
diaphanous,  and  man  himself  immortal.  The  process
appears  to  consist  in  the  esoteric  treatment  of  air,  but
whether  of  the  ordinary  atmosphere,  or  of  something  more
concealed  and  recondite,  we  have  no  means  of  judging.
It  is  congealed  and  distilled  till  it  develops  a  divine  sparkle,
and  subsequently  becomes  liquified.  It  is  then  subjected
to  heat,  and  is  reinforced  by  another  atmosphere.  After
these  and  other  treatments,  the  elixir  or  solar  marvel
of  all  the  sages,  should  reward  the  alchemical  worker.

102  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

An  arcanum  may  be  possibly  contained  in  this  truly
philosophical  explanation,  but  the  explanation  is  itself
an  arcanum,  and  an  exceeding  great  and  monumental
mystery.  It  is  the  concentrated  centre  of  the  incompre-
hensible. But  the  principles  thus  bequeathed  to  the
elected  children  of  Aristeus  have  been  the  subject  of
reflection,  we  are  informed,  among  skilful  artists  of  the
magnum  opus.  The  result  of  their  pondering  is  the
luminous  conclusion  that  he  shall  not  truly  work  in  vain
who  composeth  a  medley  with  the  veritable  balm  of
mercury,  which,  treated  after  the  methods  of  alchemical
confection  and  united  with  the  elixir  of  their  master,
will  perform  every  possible  wonder  that  can  be  expected
from  so  suprem^e  an  achievement.

However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  on  the  lines
of  the  Hermetists  no  practical  performance  can  be  so
much  as  attempted  in  the  physical  order,  for  want  of  the
necessary  materials.  No  investigation,  however  assiduous,
can  possibly  elucidate  secrets  that  have  never  been  re-
vealed, and  a  long  and  exhaustive  study  leaves  the  whole
subject  exactly  where  it  Avas  found  by  the  tyro,  in  a  chaos
of  cloud  and  darkness.  It  is  exceedingly  probable  that
some  of  the  minor  recipes  which  will  be  found  in  Hermetic
books  may  contain  medical  secrets  which  are  unknown
to  modern  science,  and  may  be  recovered  by  careful
experiment.  Among  so  vast  a  mass  of  material — mystic
therapeutics,  mystic  chemistry,  mystic  herbalism — there
may  well  be  something  of  value ;  but  it  will  not  be
Eaymond  Lully's  great  Elixir,  nor  the  true  Metallic
Medicine.  These,  if  they  ever  existed,  would  appear  to
be  beyond  recovery.

The  literature  of  the  Universal  Medicine,  as  distinct
from  the  literatin^e  of  alchemy,  is  not  extensive.  The
Avork  which  we  have  already  cited  is  perhaps  the  most
complete  of  its  kind;  but  one  which  is  excessively  curious,
and  should  not  be  overlooked  by  the  curious,  is  Salmon's
Polygraphia^  which  has  much  information  upon  the  Grand
Elixir  of  the  philosophers.  Some  of  our  information
will  be  found  in  Les  AdmiraUes  Secrets  cV Albert  le  Grand;
and  there  are  annotations  on  potable  gold  in  the
"Infernal  Dictionary,"  and  in  Migne's  encyclopaedic
Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes.

CEYSTALLOMANCY.

THOUGH  properly  belonging  to  divination,  an  ele-
mentary branch  of  occultism,  the  Science  of  the
Crystal  is  sufficiently  serious  in  character  and
sufficiently  important  in  result  to  demand  a  separate
treatment.

It  was  found  in  the  past  that  the  fixed  contemplation
of  a  transparent  and  radiating  object  dazzled  and
troubled  the  eyes,  and  ultimately  produced  in  a  number
of  subjects  the  condition  which  we  denominate  hypnotic.

The  artificial  production  of  the  hypnotic  state  was
thus  obtained  in  an  innumerable  variety  of  ways,  but
by  none  more  successfully  than  the  intervention  of  such
substances  as  mirrors,  crystals,  and  precious  stones
like  the  beryl.  The  mirror  was  more  largely  made  use
of  in  ceremonial  evocations  ;  the  crystal,  on  the  other
hand,  was  deemed  the  most  perfect  instrument  for
eliciting  supernatural  revelations  in  visions.  It  was
practised  in  two  manners,  each  of  them  preceded  by  a
formal  consecration,  or  charging  of  the  potent  stone.
Those  who  were  personally  devoid  of  the  faculty  of
clairvoyant  lucidity  could  operate  by  the  intervention  of
a  virgin  girl  or  boy,  born  in  laAvful  wedlock,  the  physical
purity  and  spiritual  innocence,  which  in  children  more
closely  than  in  others  approaches  the  ideal  of  unfallen
humanity,  being  intimately  connected  with  success  in
the  practice  of  all  lawful  magic,  and  the  preponderance
of  intuitive  over  rational  perception  during  the  first
period  of  youth  being  another  and  distinct  advantage.

The  imagination  of  the  subject  was  impressed  by  the
recitation  of  the  charge,  and  perhaps  was  still  further
exalted  by  the  use  of  a  slight  ceremonial.  He  might  be
draped,  for  example,  in  a  mantle  of  violet  silk  and
crowned  with  a  garland  of  lilies.  Incense  wonld  be
burnt  in  his  presences,  or  penetrating  and  delicious  per-

104  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

fumes,  such  as  that  of  syringa  and  magnolia,  might  be
diffused  around ;  his  hands,  feet,  and  forehead  might  be
anointed  with  chrism,  and  an  aromatic  draught  might  be
given  him.  When  these  preparations  were  over,  he  was
placed  in  a  subdued  light  in  front  of  the  magic  crystal
and  his  eyes  were  fixed  upon  its  surface.  Gradually,  to
a  suitable  subject,  a  mist  would  gather  in  the  depths  of
the  globe ;  the  interior  faculties  of  the  mind  would  ex-
pand like  a  flower,  the  exterior  senses  w^ould  be  at  least
partially  suspended,  except  to  the  voice  of  the  operator,
with  whom  he  was  in  magnetic  rapport,  the  crystal
itself  would  vanish  from  the  sight  of  the  entranced  being,
the  mist  w^ould  melt  or  part,  and  he  would  be  ravished
by  the  apparition  of  a  radiant  being,  the  abiding  spirit
of  the  stone,  or  of  some  other  vision  which  he  was
influenced  to  behold  by  the  words  or  the  will  of  the
Magus.

This  form  of  divination  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the
most  innocent,  pleasing,  and  successful  methods  of  minor
magical  practice,  and  it  is  one  which  can  be  reproduced
by  an  operator  at  the  present  day  with  considerable
facility.  The  true  crystal  has  been  accredited  with
magnetic  properties  which  assist  the  development  of  the
interior  sight,  but  it  is  indispensable  for  success  that
they  should  be  of  considerable  size,  and  in  shape  either
a  perfect  sphere  or  an  egg ;  a  good  specimen  is  therefore
expensive,  but  excellent  imitations  in  glass  may  be
easily  procured,  which  are  said  to  be  utilised  by  occult
students  with  genuine  results,  and  can  be  purchased  at
the  cost  of  a  few  shillings.  The  favourite  medium  in  the
past  was  the  pale  water-green  beryl ;  a  clouded  crystal
was  preferred  by  some  operators,  and  every  variety  of
precious  stone  has,  on  occasion,  been  pressed  into  service.

Testimony  to  the  complete  reliability  of  many  recorded
results  obtained  by  the  crystal  is  to  be  found  in  abund-
ance ;  things  taking  place  at  a  distance  having  been
beheld  by  the  seer  in  his  trance  and  afterwards  verified
in  detail.  By  virtue  of  what  law  such  occurrences  are
possible  is  beyond  the  scope  of  our  present  investigation;
we  are  concerned  with  the  facts  alone;  explanations  may
be  ingenious  and  plausible,  and  many  have  indeed  been

CRYSTALLOMANCY.  105

devised,  but  at  the  present  stage  of  psychological  experi-
ment hypothesis  seems  decidedly  premature.

Crystallomaney  in  its  second  and  more  advanced  form
was  practised  wub^ut  the  interv^^ntion  of  a  medium,  when
the  Magus  believed  himself  to  possess  the  required
faculty  of  clairvoyance

In  modern  times,  the  iiiic  f'-r  cl^faining  a  vision  have
been  exceedingly  simjiiiiied.  A  practical  student  of  the
subject  has  reduced  thei-:  lp  the  following  points : —
"  Keep  the  crystal  clean.  J  )on*t  be  too  liberal  in  allow-
ing strangers  to  handle  it,  except  you  are  going  to  look
for  them,  when  they  ought  to  hold  it  in  their  hands
for  a  few  minutes.  Hold  the  crystal  between  fingers
and  thumb,  or  on  a  table,  if  fiat  at  the  end.  If  the
crystal  appears  hazy  or  dull,  it  is  a  true  sign  that  you
will  see  ;  the  crystal  will  subsequently  clear,  and  the
forms  manifest.  If  it  be  required  to  see  events  which
are  taking  place  at  a  distance,  say,  in  Australia,  look
lengthwise  through  the  crystal,  when,  if  you  can  see  at
all,  you  are  likely  to  accomplish  your  object."

But  there  are  rituals  contained  in  old  manuscripts  and
books  of  magic  which  insist  uj)on  a  far  more  elaborate
ceremonial.

"  Those  who  desire  to  establish  communication  with
good  spirits  in  the  crystal,"  says  one  of  these  older
authorities,  "  must  lead  a  religious  life,  and  keep  them-
selves unspotted  from  the  world.  The  operator  must
make  himself  clean  and  pure,  using  frequent  ablutions
and  prayers  for  at  least  three  days  before  he  attempts
the  practice,  and  the  moon  must  be  increasing.  If  he
choose,  he  may  have  one  or  two  wise  and  discreet  per-
sons as  companions  and  assistants,  but  he  and  they
must  equally  conform  to  the  methods  and  rules  of  art.
The  operator  must  be  firm,  strong  in  faith,  great  in  con-
fidence, and  he  must  be  careful  that  no  portion  of  the
ceremordes  be  omitted  if  he  desire  to  achieve  success,  for
on  the  exactitude  with  which  the  entire  ritual  is  per-
formed depends  the  accomplishment  of  his  design.  The  in-
vocant  may  perform  the  practice  at  any  time  of  the  year,
provided  the  two  luminaries  are  in  a  fortunate  aspect,  in
conjunction  Avith  fortunate  planets;  when  the  sun  is  in

106  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

his  greatest  northern  declination  is  said  to  be  the  best
time."

In  order  to  prosecute  his  work,  the  operator  must  have
a  small  room  in  a  retired  part  of  the  house,  such  as  an
attic,  or  a  low  kitchen.  It  must  be  clean  and  neat,  but
with  no  sumptuous  ornaments  to  distract  his  attention.
The  floor  must  be  well  scoured  and  quite  level,  so  as  to
receive  the  lines  of  the  several  circles  and  characters
which  are  to  be  traced  thereon.  The  room  must  be  free
from  intruders,  from  the  hurry  of  business,  and  it  should
be  locked  when  not  in  use.  Every  preparation  belong-
ing to  the  art  must  be  made  during  the  moon's  increase.
The  operator  must  be  provided  with  a  small  table,
covered  with  a  white  linen  cloth ;  a  chair  should  be
placed  in  the  room,  and  the  materials  required  for  a  fire,
which  will  be  necessary  to  enkindle  the  perfume  proper
to  that  planet  which  may  govern  the  hour  of  practice.
A  torch,  two  wax  candles,  placed  in  gilded  or  brass
candlesticks,  highly  polished  and  engraven,  must  be
likewise  provided,  together  with  a  pair  of  compasses,
and  several  minor  accessories,  such  as  twine,  a  knife,  a
pair  of  scissors,  &c.  The  magic  sword  must  be  made  of
pure  steel ;  it  must  be  supplemented  by  a  wand  of
hazel  wood,  of  a  year's  growth  and  a  yard  in  length,
graven  with  appropriate  sacred  characters.  Every  in-
strument, large  or  small,  must  be  entirely  new,  and
must  be  consecrated  previous  to  use.

The  most  important  adjunct  of  the  practice  is  the
crystal,  which  must  be  about  four  inches  in  diameter,  or,
at  least,  the  size  of  a  large  orange.  It  must  be  properly
ground  and  polished,  fo  as  to  be  free  from  specks  or
spots ;  it  should  be  enclosed  in  a  frame  of  ivory,  ebony,
or  boxwood,  also  highly  polished.  Sacred  names  must
be  ^vritten  round  about  it,  in  raised  letters  of  gold ;  the
pedestal  to  which  the  frame  is  fixed  may  be  of  any  suit
able  wood,  properly  polished.  The  crystal,  like  the
other  instruments,  must  be  consecrated  before  being
used,  and  should  be  kept  in  a  new  box  or  drawer,  under
lock  and  key.  The  names  to  be  engraved  on  the  frame  are,
at  the  North,  Tetragrammaton  ;  at  the  East,  Emanuel  ;
at  the  South,  Agla  j  and  at  the  West,  Adonay.    The

CRYSTALLOMANCY.  107

pedestal  which  supports  the  frame  should  bear  the  mystical
name  Saday,  while  on  the  pedestals  of  the  two  candles,
Elohim  and  Elohe,  must  be  respectively  embossed.

In  consecrating  all  the  instruments  and  other  acces-
sories of  the  art,  the  invocant  must  repeat  the  forms*of
consecration  while  imposing  his  hands  upon  the  different
articles,  and  his  face  must  be  turned  to  the  East.

The  consecrations  being  ended,  he  may  then  arrange
the  table  with  the  crystal  thereon,  together  with  a  candle-
stick containing  a  wax  candle  on  each  side  of  the  circle,
which  should  be  seven  feet  in  diameter,  and  must  en-
close a  mystic  square,  whose  angles  at  the  apex  j^oint
must,  in  each  case,  impinge  on  the  circumference.  Both
figures  must  be  appropriately  inscribed  with  sacred
names  and  mystical  characters  and  symbols.  When  the
operator  enters  the  circle  with  his  companions,  if  any,  it
must  be  the  day  and  hour  of  Mercury,  the  moon  increas-
ing, and  the  operations  must  be  prefaced  by  an  earnest
invocation  of  Vassago,  who  is  the  genius  of  the  crystal.

If  the  conjurations  be  often  repeated,  if  the  operator
be  patient  and  constant  in  his  perseverance,  and  not  dis-
heartened or  dismayed  by  reason  of  any  tedium  or  delay,
the  spirit,  it  is  affirmed  by  the  ritual,  will  at  last  appear,
when  he  must  be  bound  with  the  Bond  of  Spirits,  after
which  he  may  be  conversed  with  freely.  "  That  this  is  a
true  experiment,  and  that  the  spirit  hath  been  obliged  to
the  fellowship  and  service  of  a  magic  artist  heretofore,  is
very  certain,"  says  the  same  authority;  "  but  as  all  aerial
spirits  are  very  powerful,  it  will  be  well  for  the  operator
not  to  quit  the  limits  of  the  circle  till  a  few  minutes  after
the  apparition  has  been  formally  licensed  to  depart."

It  seems  clear  that  the  intelligences  which  manifest  to
the  Magus  through  the  graceful  medium  of  the  crystal
are  members  of  an  elementary  hierarchy,  and  it  will  be
discerned  by  the  intelligent  reader  that  the  force  which
controls  them  is  the  will  of  the  operator,  rendered
magnetic  by  the  discipline  of  the  ritual,  and  dilated  as
well  as  directed  by  the  elaborate,  if  grotesque,  cere-
monial. He  will  probably  conclude  that  the  so-called
divine  names,  which  are  frequently  barbarous  perver-
sions  of    dead    tongues,   or    are  .  simply   chaotic,    are

108  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

imj)otent  symbols  in  themselves  till  they  are  vivified
by  the  intelligent  and  measured  desperation  of  the
operator,  and  that  the  whole  modus  operandi  is  calcu-
lated to  work  upon  the  interior  faculties  of  the  man,  and
not  upon  the  fears  of  the  spirit.  If  the  will  and  the
imagination  of  the  operator  be  sufficiently  strong,  and  at
the  same  time  sufficiently  governed  to  dispense  with
ritual  formalities,  an  etiect  may  be  produced  without
them.  Paracelsus,  relying  upon  the  force  of  the  con-
cealed 7nagnes  in  the  arcane  man,  denounces  the  cere-
monial of  magic  with  the  violence  of  the  mediaeval
hierophant.  At  the  same  time,  if  the  rites  be  observed
at  all,  they  must  be  observed  in  toto,  for  the  smallest
deflection  will  react  on  the  will  of  the  operator,  and,  as
Eliphas  L6vi  indicates,  it  Avill  produce  apprehension  and
embarrassment  which  may  stultify  the  whole  process.

Among  the  many  persons  who  in  recent  years  have
conducted  experiments  with  the  crystal,  one  of  the  most
successful  was  the  late  Frederick  Hockley,  who  devoted
his  life  to  the  collection  and  transcription  of  works  on
the  secret  sciences,  and  who  was  also  a  practical  student
of  several  branches  of  magic.  He  was  not  himself  a  seer
in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  and  his  dealings  with
the  spirits  of  the  crystal  were  conducted  by  the  media-
tion of  clairvoyantes.  AVhen  his  extraordinary  library
was  dispersed,  a  long  series  of  communications  obtained
through  the  crystal,  and  extending  to  several  volumes,
written  in  his  own  hand,  was  a  centre  of  interest  to  the
collectors  of  occult  manuscripts.  The  success  which  was
obtained  by  Mr  Hockley  in  this  as  in  other  departments
of  magic  art,  had  considerable  evidential  value,  as  it  was
achieved  by  a  private  gentleman  who  never  posed  as  a
mystic,  who  pursued  his  experiments  in  secret  for  his
personal  satisfaction  only,  who  never  published  the  re-
sults of  his  researches,  and  was  neither  seeking  notoriety
nor  pecuniary  gain.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  TALISMANS.

THE  English  Platonist,  Joseph  Glanvil,  author  of
Saddudsmus  Triumphatus,  a  formidable  discovery  of
witchcraft,  of  a  "  Key  to  the  Grand  Mysteries  in
Relation  to  Sin  and  Evil,"  and  of  other  tracts  and  treatises,
was  an  important  mystic  of  his  period,  but  he  is  now
known  only  by  one  anecdote  and  one  pregnant  sentence.
The  anecdote  is  that  of  the  Scholar  Gipsy,  who  renounced
his  Oxford  studies  to  lead  a  nomadic  life  and  to  discover
an  arcanum  possessed  by  the  Bohemians,  whereby  they
could  strangely  influence  the  will  of  others.  Which  of
us  is  unacquainted  with  the  imperishable  beauty  of
Matthew  Arnold's  elegy  founded  on  this  anecdote  1  As
transcendentalists,  we  should  be  grateful  to  the  sweet
singer  who  has  indirectly  perpetuated  the  memory  of
the  dead  mystic.  But  Glanvil  is  immortalised  also  by  a
sentence  which  Poe  disentombed,  and  has  placed  as  the
central  idea  of  one  of  his  wildest  narratives.  "  And  the
Will  therein  lieth,  which  dieth  not.  Who  knoweth  the
mysteries  of  the  AVill,  with  its  vigour  1  For  God  is
but  a  great  Will  pervading  all  things  by  nature  of  its
intentness.  Man  doth  not  yield  himself  to  the  angels
nor  to  death  utterly,  save  only  through  the  weakness  of
his  feeble  will."  The  anecdote  and  sentence  are  both
taken  from  the  "Vanity  of  Dogmatizing,"  a  title  which
may  be  respectfully  recommended  to  the  attention  of
many  persons  at  the  present  day.  This  single  sentence
is,  in  effect,  the  sum  of  magic,  for  the  seat  of  the  power
of  the  soul  is  said  to  be  in  the  Will  of  the  man,
which  is  the  great  magical  agent,  the  instrument  in  the
development  of  all  interior  faculties,  the  life  of  conscious
act,  and  the  sole  informing  principle  of  mystic  rites  and
ceremonies.

As  the  will  of  a  strong  man  can  influence  a  weaker

110  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,

mind,  as  it  can  bid  the  magnetic  patient  sleep,  and  the
clairvoyant  see,  so  it  was  believed  in  the  past  that  it
could  endue  an  inert  substance  with  an  occult  force
transferred  from  the  inmost  individuality  of  the  operator
by  a  grand  mental  projection ;  and  this  was  Talismanic
Magic.  The  principle  was  debased  by  the  unintelligence
and  superstition  of  the  past;  the  virtue  was  divorced
from  its  connection  with  the  operating  mind,  and  was
referred  to  the  methods,  and  to  the  substance  of  the
talisman,  or  to  the  blind  observation  of  times  and
seasons.  The  life  of  the  belief  departed,  and  the  vivid
realisation  of  the  absolute  power  of  man  over  all  things
animate  and  inanimate  was  replaced  by  a  slavish  venera-
tion of  occult  forces  which  exercised  a  fatal  and  undis-
cerning  tyranny  over  men  and  the  magus.

At  its  best,  talismanic  magic  seems  to  rank  as  one  of  the
curiosities  of  esoteric  science  which  are  chiefly  archaeo-
logical in  interest.  We  may  recognise  the  principle  which
it  involves  as  a  reasonable  part  of  mysticism.  This  prin-
ciple is  concerned  with  the  communication  of  human  mag-
netism to  inert  objects,  which  in  an  inferior  kingdom  of
nature  is  paralleled  by  the  transference  of  a  similar  and
equally  mysterious  virtue  from  the  loadstone  to  iron.
Beyond  this,  and  beyond  the  part  which  is  played  by
the  talisman  in  the  ceremonies  of  evocation,  it  is  a  branch
of  mysticism  which  has  little  to  warrant  its  revival  at
the  present  day.  It  encourages  intellectual  weakness,
and  directs  the  attention  of  the  student  to  the  frivolities
of  transcendental  art.  The  talisman  has  been  tersely
defined  as  an  astrological  character  engraven  upon  a
sympathetic  stone  in  correspondence  with  the  constella-
tion or  star  which  was  represented  by  the  character  in
question.  Its  name  is  derived  from  a  Greek  word  which
signifies  a  symbol,  image,  or  figure.  It  is  a  sign  which
stands  as  the  nominal  equivalent  of  a  force  or  influence.
The  emblem  must  be  engraved  upon  the  substance  of
the  talisman  by  an  operator  who  is  at  any  rate  philo-
sophically acquainted  with,  the  nature  of  the  influence
which  it  signifies,  who  can  concentrate  his  entire  atten-
tion and  his  undivided  will  upon  the  work,  while  his
mental  powers  are  isolated  from  all  sources  of  distraction

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  TALISJNIANS.  Ill

and  all  thoughts  which  are  unconnected  with  the  matter
in  hand.

The  doctrines  and  practice  of  talismanic  magic,  as
it  flourished  amidst  the  Christianity  of  the  AYest,  are
derived  from  the  Kabbalah,  which  in  turn  was  indebted
to  Chaldea,  Egypt,  and  Babylon ;  for  if  the  talisman  be
less  old  than  religion,  it  is  as  old  as  superstition  and  as
wide  in  the  sphere  of  its  influence.

The  seal  of  Solomon  is  the  most  famous  of  all  talis-
mans, and  nothing  was  believed  to  be  impossible  for
those  who  possessed  it,  as  it  had  power  over  all  spirits,
which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  it  represented  a  strong
psychic  force.  The  five-pointed  star  of  the  microcosm,
which  is  the  Star  of  Bethlehem,  the  star  of  the  Magi,
and  the  mystic  sign  of  humanity,  as  the  double  triangle
of  Solomon  was  the  symbol  of  the  universe,  the  macro-
cosm, or  the  great  world — man  being  minutum  mundum
— this  emblem  was  of  equal  repute  and,  in  the  human
sphere,  of  even  greater  power  than  the  seal  of  the  mythic
monarch  of  transcendental  Judaism.  With  the  single
point,  or  horn,  in  the  ascendant,  it  represented  White
Magic ;  reversed,  it  was  the  emblem  of  sorcery,  witch-
craft, and  the  grotescjue  extravagances  of  the  "  Sabbath."

Occasionally,  talismanic  influence  has  been  accredited
with  a  broader  range.  Five  varieties  are  enumerated
by  Elihu  Rich  : — 1.  The  astrological,  having  the  char-
acters of  the  heavenly  signs  or  constellations.  This
branch  was  developed  by  Paracelsus,  who  refers  talis-
manic virtue  to  the  seven  genii  of  the  seven  planets.
2.  The  magical,  engraved  with  symbolical  figures,  and
the  names  of  unknown  angels.  The  mystical  designs
which  are  found  upon  Gnostic  gems  may  be  referred  to
this  branch.  3.  The  mixed,  engraven  with  celestial
signs  and  barbaric  words.  4.  The  sigilla  planetarum,
composed  of  Hebrew  numeral  letters,  or  their  equiva-
lents in  Roman  and  Arabic  ciphers.  5.  Hebrew  names
and  characters.  This  classification  is,  however,  exceed-
ingly arbitrary.  The  majority  of  talismans  are  suffi-
ciently composite  in  design  to  embrace  all  of  these
varieties.  Within  the  historical  period,  they  were  all
formed  under  appropriate  planetary  intluences,  and  to

112  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

this,  if  no  further,  extent,  were  of  distinctly  astronomical
character.  A  more  accurate  distinction,  though  one
originating  in  superstition,  may  be  based  on  the  differ-
ence between  artificial  talismans  composed  by  the  science
of  the  Magus  and  substances  which  were  accredited
with  a  natural  talismanic  virtue,  as  in  the  case  of
precious  stones.

The   virtues   which   were   attached    to  the  talisman
were  usually  of  a  practical  character,  and  an  important
position  was   assigned   them   in   the    mysteries  of   the
healing  art.     As  in  modern  mesmeric  therapeutics,  the
health-giving  power  of  the  physician  is  supposed  to  be
transmitted  to  a  patient  at  a  distance  by  means  of  a
magnetised  water,  or  other  suitable  medium,  so  it  would
appear  that  the  power  of  the  magus  had  entered  into
the  talisman  by  the  penetrating  force  of  mil,  and  could
exercise  a  similar  influence  over  a  sick  person  when  it
had  been  composed  for  a   healing  purpose.      But  the
talisman  would  be  more  potent  than  the  magnetic  water
of   the   unilluminated   mesmerist.     The  science  of  the
Magus  enabled  him  to  combine  with  the  force  of  his  own
will  and  intelligence  the  most  favourable  influences  of  the
whole  sidereal  world.     The  genius  of  the  predominating
planet  of  the  moment — which,  in  other  words,  was  the
specific  influence  and  destiny  which  it  was  astrologically
supposed  to  radiate — entered  into  the  act  of  composi-
tion ;  the  talisman  was  informed  by  his  genial  and  bene-
volent potency,  which  was  superior  to  that  of  the  Magus
(whose  participation  was  practically  forgotten  from  the
moment  that  the  composition  was  over),  and  the  con-
secrated object  became  the  talisman  of  that  planet  under
which  it  was  made  and  consecrated.     The  alleged  value
of   planetary  influences  will   be   appreciated  in  a  sub-
sequent portion  of  this  book;  here  it  is  suificient  to
observe  that  the  belief  in  intervention  on  the  part  of  the
astral  world  largely  assisted  talismanic  healing  by  its
effect  on  imagination,  which  by  its  natural  therapeutics
can  accomplish  what  is  impossible  to  medicine,  and  is
the    chief    agent   in   all   so-called    miraculous   cures  —
magnetic,  magic,  talismanic.

The  Doctrine  of  Talismans  supposes  that  the  influence

THE  COMPOSITION .  OF  TALISMANS.  113

of  the  Seven  Planets  which  were  known  to  the  astronomy
of  the  ancients,  is  never  more  strong  and  conspicuous
than  when  it  acts  through  the  intervention  of  the  Seven
Metals  of  alchemy,  which  are  each  in  correspondence
with  one  of  these  celestial  bodies.  The  metals,  which
are  to  be  severally  referred  to  each  of  the  several  planets,
are  said  to  have  been  ascertained  by  the  sublime  pene-
tration of  the  Kabbalists.  However  this  may  be,  it  is
certain  that,  from  the  magical  standpoint,  gold  was  the
metal  of  the  Sun,  and  of  the  first  day  in  the  week ;  silver
of  the  moon,  and  of  Monday ;  iron  of  Mars,  and  of
Tuesday  ;  quicksilver  of  Mercury,  and  of  Wednesday ;
pewter  of  Jupiter,  and  of  Thursday ;  copper,  or  brass,
of  Venus,  and  of  Friday ;  and  lead  of  Saturn,  and  of
Saturday.

From  Christian's  Histoire  cle  la  Magie,  from  the
curiosities  of  the  "Little  Albert,"  and  similar  autho-
rities, we  may  gather  an  intelligible  notion  of  the  most
important  astral  talismans.  It  should,  however,  be  re-
marked that,  as  in  other  ceremonial  matters,  there  is
little  unanimity  on  this  subject  among  writers  on  magic.
A  variety  of  pentacles  are  attributed  to  each  of  the
planets  in  the  so-called  "Keys  of  Solomon"  which
differ  altogether  from  those  which  are  described  by
Paracelsus,  while,  among  modern  authors,  Eliphas  Levi
has  developed  a  system  of  his  own.

I.  The  Talisman  of  the  Sun  must  be  composed  of  a
pure  and  fine  gold,  fashioned  into  a  circular  plate,  and
well  polished  on  either  side.  A  serpentine  circle,  en-
closed by  a  pentagram  must  be  engraved  on  the  obverse
side  with  a  diamond-pointed  graving  tool.  The  reverse
must  bear  a  human  head  in  the  centre  of  the  six-pointed
star  of  Solomon,  which  shall  itself  be  surrounded  with
the  name  of  the  solar  intelligence  Pi-Rhe,  written  in  the
characters  of  the  Magi.  This  talisman  is  supposed  to
insure  to  its  bearer  the  goodwill  of  influential  persons.
It  is  a  preservative  against  death  by  heart  disease,  syn-
cope, aneurism,  and  epidemic  complaints.  It  must  be
composed  on  a  Sunday  during  the  passage  of  the  moon
through  the  first  ten  degrees  of  Leo,   and  when  that

11

114  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

luminary  is  in  a  favourable  aspect  with  Saturn  and  the
Sun.  The  consecration  consists  in  the  exposure  of  the
talisman  to  the  smoke  of  a  perfume  composed  of
cinnamon,  incense,  saffron,  and  red  sandal,  burnt  with
laurelwood,  and  twigs  of  dessicated  heliotrope,  in  a  new
chafing-dish,  which  must  be  ground  into  powder  and
buried  in  an  isolated  spot,  after  the  operation  is  finished.
The  talisman  must  be  afterwards  encased  in  a  satchel
of  bright  yellow  silk,  which  must  be  fastened  on  the
breast  by  an  interlaced  ribbon  of  the  same  material,  tied
in  the  form  of  a  cross.  In  all  cases  the  ceremony  should
be  preceded  by  the  conjuration  of  the  Four,  to  which
the  reader  has  already  been  referred.  The  form  of  con-
secration, accompanied  by  sprinkling  with  holy  water,
may  be  rendered  in  the  following  manner  : —

In  the  name  of  Elohim,  and  by  the  spirit  of  the  living
waters,  be  thou  unto  me  as  a  sign  of  light  and  a  seal  of
will.

Presenting  it  to  the  smoke  of  the  perfumes : — By  the
brazen  serpent  before  which  fell  the  serpents  of  fire,  be
thou  unto  me  as  a  sign  of  light  and  a  seal  of  will.

Breathing  seven  times  upon  the  talisman : — By  the  firma-
ment and  the  spirit  of  the  voice,  be  thou  unto  me  as  a
sign  of  light  and  a  seal  of  will.

Lastly,  when  placing  some  grains  of  purified  earth  or  salt
upon  the  pentacle : — In  the  name  of  the  salt  of  the  earth
and  by  virtue  of  the  life  eternal,  be  thou  unto  me  as  a
sign  of  light  and  a  seal  of  will.

II.  The  Talisman  of  the  Moon  should  be  composed
of  a  circular  and  well-polished  plate  of  the  purest  silver,
being  of  the  dimensions  of  an  ordinary  medal.  The
image  of  a  crescent,  enclosed  in  a  pentagram,  should  be
graven  on  the  obverse  side.  On  the  reverse  side,  a
chalice  must  be  encircled  by  the  duadic  seal  of  Solomon,
encompassed  by  the  letters  of  the  lunar  genius  Pi- Job.
This  talisman  is  considered  a  protection  to  travellers,
and  to  sojourners  in  strange  lands.  It  preserves  from
death  by  drowning,  by  epilepsy,  by  dropsy,  by  apoplexy,
and  madness.     The  danger  of  a  violent  end  which  is

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  TALISMANS.  115

predicted  by  Saturnian  aspects  in  horoscopes  of  nativity,
may  be  removed  by  its  means.  It  should  be  composed
on  a  Monday,  when  the  moon  is  passing  through  the
first  ten  degrees  of  Capricornus  or  Virgo,  and  is  also  well
aspected  with  Saturn.  Its  consecration  consists  in  ex-
posure to  a  perfume  composed  of  white  sandal,  camphor,
aloes,  amber,  and  pulverised  seed  of  cucumber,  burnt
with  dessicated  stalks  of  mugwort,  moonwort,  and
ranunculus,  in  a  new  earthen  chafing-dish,  which  must
be  reduced,  after  the  operation,  into  powder,  and  buried
in  a  deserted  spot.  The  talisman  must  be  sewn  up  in  a
satchel  of  white  silk,  and  fixed  on  the  breast  by  a  ribbon
of  the  same  colour,  interlaced  and  tied  in  the  form  of  a
cross.

III.  The  Talisman  of  Mars  must  be  composed  of
a  well-polished  circular  plate  of  the  finest  iron,  and  of
the  dimensions  of  an  ordinary  medal.  The  symbol  of  a
sword  in  the  centre  of  a  pentagram  must  be  engraved
on  the  obverse  side.  A  lion's  head  surrounded  by  a
six-pointed  star  must  appear  on  the  reverse  face,  with
the  letters  of  the  name  Erotosi,  the  planetary  genius
of  Mars,  above  the  outer  angles.  This  talisman  passes
as  a  preservative  against  all  combinations  of  enemies.
It  averts  the  chance  of  death  in  brawls  and  battles,  in
epidemics  and  fevers,  and  by  corroding  ulcers.  It  also
neutralizes  the  peril  of  a  violent  end  as  a  punishment
for  crime  when  it  is  foretold  in  the  horoscope  of  nativity.

This  talisman  must  be  composed  on  a  Tuesday,  during
the  passage  of  the  moon  through  the  ten  first  degrees
of  Aries  or  Sagittarius,  and  when,  moreover,  it  is  favour-
ably aspected  with  Saturn  and  Mars.  The  consecration
consists  in  its  exposure  to  the  smoke  of  a  perfume  com-
posed of  dried  absinth  and  rue,  burnt  in  an  earthen  vessel
which  has  never  been  previously  used,  and  which  must
be  broken  into  powder,  and  buried  in  a  secluded  place,
when  the  operation  is  completed.  Finally,  the  talisman
must  be  sewn  up  in  a  satchel  of  red  silk,  and  fastened
on  the  breast  with  ribbons  of  the  same  material,  folded
and  knotted  in  the  form  of  a  cross.

116  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

lY.  The  Talisman  of  Mercury  must  be  formed  of
a  circular  plate  of  fixed  quicksilver,  or  according  to
another  account,  of  an  amalgam  of  silver,  mercury,  and
pewter,  of  the  dimensions  of  an  ordinary  medal,  well-
polished  on  both  sides.  A  "winged  caduceus,  having  two
serpents  twining  about  it,  must  be  engraved  in  the  centre
of  a  pentagram  on  the  obverse  side.  The  other  must
bear  a  dog's  head  within  the  star  of  Solomon,  the  latter
being  surrounded  with  the  name  of  the  planetary  genius,
Pi-Hermes,  written  in  the  alphabet  of  the  Magi.  This
talisman  must  be  composed  on  a  Wednesday,  Avhen  the
moon  is  passing  through  the  ten  first  degrees  of  Gemini
or  Scorpio,  and  is  well  aspected  with  Saturn  and
Mercury.  The  consecration  consists  in  its  exposure  to
the  smoke  of  a  perfume  composed  of  benzoin,  macis,  and
storax,  burnt  with  the  dried  stalks  of  the  lily,  the
narcissus,  fumitory,  and  marjolane,  placed  in  a  clay
chafing-dish  which  has  never  been  devoted  to  any  other
purpose,  and  which  must,  after  the  completion  of  the
task,  be  reduced  to  powder  and  buried  in  an  undisturbed
place.  The  talisman  of  Mercury  is  judged  to  be  a
defence  in  all  species  of  commerce  and  business  industry.
Buried  under  the  ground  in  a  house  of  commerce,  it  will
draw  customers  and  prosperity.  It  preserves  all  who
wear  it  from  epilepsy  and  madness.  It  averts  death  by
murder  and  poison  ;  it  is  a  safeguard  against  the  schemes
of  treason  ;  and  it  procures  prophetic  dreams  when  it  is
worn  on  the  head  during  sleep.  It  is  fastened  on  the
breast  by  a  ribbon  of  purple  silk  folded  and  tied  in  the
form  of  a  cross,  and  the  talisman  is  itself  enclosed  in  a
satchel  of  the  same  material.

V.  The  Talisman  of  Jupiter  must  be  formed  of  a
circular  plate  of  the  purest  English  pewter,  having  the
dimensions  of  an  ordinary  medal,  and  being  highly
polished  on  either  side.  The  image  of  a  four-pointed
crown  in  the  centre  of  a  pentagram  must  be  engraved
on  the  obverse  side.  On  the  other  must  be  the  head  of
an  eagle  in  the  centre  of  the  six-pointed  star  of  Solomon,
which  must  be  surrounded  by  the  name  of  the  planetary
genius  Pi-Z:^0US3  written  in  the  arcane  alphabet.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  TALISMANS.  117

This  talisman  must  be  composed  on  a  Thursday,
during  the  passage  of  the  moon  through  the  first  ten
degrees  of  Libra,  and  when  it  is  also  in  a  favourable
aspect  mth  Saturn  and  Jupiter.  The  consecration
consists  in  its  exposure  to  the  smoke  of  a  perfume
composed  of  incense,  ambergris,  balm,  grain  of  Paradise,
saffron,  and  macis,  which  is  the  second  coat  of  the
nutmeg.  These  must  be  burnt  with  wood  of  the  oak,
poplar,  fig  tree,  and  pomegranate,  and  placed  in  a  new
earthen  dish,  which  must  be  ground  into  powder,  and
buried  in  a  c|uiet  spot,  at  the  end  of  the  ceremony.  The
talisman  must  be  wrapped  in  a  satchel  of  sky-blue  silk,
suspended  on  the  breast  by  a  ribbon  of  the  same
material,  folded  and  fastened  in  the  form  of  a  cross.

The  talisman  of  Jupiter  is  held  to  attract  to  the  wearer
the  benevolence  and  sympathy  of  every  one.  It  averts
anxieties,  favours  honourable  enterprises,  and  augments
well-being  in  proportion  to  social  condition.  It  is  a  pro-
tection against  unforeseen  accidents,  and  the  perils  of  a
violent  death  when  it  is  threatened  by  Saturn  in  the
horoscope  of  nativity.  It  also  preserves  from  death  by
affections  of  the  liver,  by  inflammation  of  the  lungs,
and  by  that  cruel  affection  of  the  spinal  marrow^,  w^hich
is  termed  tabes  dorsalis  in  medicine.

VI.  The  Talisman  of  Yenus  must  be  formed  of  a
circular  plate  of  purified  and  well-polished  copper.  It
must  be  of  the  ordinary  dimensions  of  a  medal,  perfectly
polished  on  both  its  sides.  It  must  bear  on  the  obverse
face  the  letter  G-  inscribed  in  the  alphabet  of  the  Magi,
and  enclosed  in  a  pentagram.  A  dove  must  be  engraved
on  the  reverse,  in  the  centre  of  the  six-pointed  star,
which  must  be  surrounded  by  the  letters  which  compose
the  name  of  the  planetary  Genius  Suroth.  This  talis-
man must  be  composed  on  a  Friday,  during  the  passage
of  the  moon  through  the  first  ten  degrees  of  Taurus  or
Virgo,  and  when  that  luminary  is  well  aspected  with
Saturn  and  Venus.  Its  consecration  consists  in  its  ex-
posure to  the  smoke  of  a  perfume  composed  of  violets
and  roses,  burnt  Avith  olive  wood  in  a  new  earthen
chafing-dish,  which  must  be  ground  into  powder  at  the

118  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

end  of  the  operation  and  buried  in  a  solitary  spot.  The
talisman  must,  finally,  be  sewn  up  in  a  satchel  of  green
or  rose-coloured  silk,  which  must  be  fastened  on  the
breast  by  a  band  of  the  same  material,  folded  and  tied
in  the  form  of  a  cross.

The  talisman  of  Venus  is  accredited  with  extraordinary
power  in  cementing  the  bonds  of  love  and  harmony
between  husbands  and  wives.  It  averts  from  those  who
wear  it  the  spite  and  machinations  of  hatred.  It  pre-
serves women  from  the  terrible  and  fatal  diseases  which
are  known  as  cancer.  It  averts  from  both  men  and
women  all  danger  of  death,  to  which  they  may  be  acci-
dentally or  purposely  exposed.  It  counterbalances  the
unfortunate  presages  which  may  appear  in  the  horoscope
of  nativity.  Its  last  and  most  singular  quality  is  its
power  to  change  the  animosity  of  an  enemy  into  a  love
and  devotion  which  will  be  proof  against  every  tempta-
tion, and  it  rests  on  the  sole  condition  that  such  a  person
should  be  persuaded  to  partake  of  a  liquid  in  which  the
talisman  has  been  dipped.

VII.  The  Talisman  of  Saturn  must  be  composed  of
a  circular  plate  of  refined  and  purified  lead,  being  of  the
dimensions  of  an  ordinary  medal,  elaborately  polished.
On  the  obverse  side  must  be  engraven  with  the  diamond-
pointed  tool  which  is  requisite  in  all  these  talismanic
operations,  the  image  of  a  sickle  enclosed  in  a  pentagram.
The  reverse  side  must  bear  a  bull's  head,  enclosed  in  the
star  of  Solomon,  and  surrounded  by  the  mysterious
letters  which  compose,  in  the  alphabet  of  the  Magi,  the
name  of  the  planetary  Genius  Eempha.  The  person
who  is  intended  to  wear  this  talisman  must  engrave  it
himself,  without  witnesses,  and  without  taking  any  one
into  his  confidence.

This  talisman  must  be  composed  on  a  Saturday  when
the  moon  is  passing  through  the  first  ten  degrees  of
Taurus  or  Capricorn,  and  is  favourably  aspected  with
Saturn.  It  must  be  consecrated  by  exposure  to  the
smoke  of  a  perfume  composed  of  alum,  assa-foetida,  cam-
monee,  and  sulphur,  which  must  be  burnt  with  cypress,
the  wood  of  the  ash  tree,  and  sprays  of  black  helle-

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  TALISMANS.  119

bore,  in  a  new  earthen  chafing-dish,  which  must  be
reduced  into  powder  at  the  end  of  the  performance,  and
buried  in  a  deserted  place.  The  talisman  must,  finally,
be  sewn  up  in  a  satchel  of  black  silk  and  fastened  on
the  breast  with  a  ribbon  of  the  same  material,  folded  and
tied  in  the  form  of  a  cross.  The  talisman  of  Saturn  was
affirmed  to  be  a  safeguard  against  death  by  apoplexy
and  cancer,  decay  in  the  bones,  consumption,  dropsy,
paralysis,  and  decline  ;  it  was  also  a  preservative  against
the  possibility  of  being  entombed  in  a  trance,  against
the  danger  of  violent  death  by  secret  crime,  poison,  or
ambush.  If  the  head  of  the  army  in  war-time  were  to
bury  the  talisman  of  Saturn  in  a  place  which  it  was
feared  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  the
limit  assigned  by  the  presence  of  the  talisman  could  not
be  overstepped  by  the  opposing  host,  which  would
speedily  withdraw  in  discouragement,  or  in  the  face  of  a
determined  assault.

The  names  of  the  presiding  planetary  intelligences
which  are  given  in  the  foregoing  pages  purport  to  be
Egyptian  in  origin.  In  the  Teraphim,  which  were  the
talismans  of  mediaeval  Kabbalistic  rabbis,  these  names
were  replaced  by  Michael,  Gabriel,  Samael,  Raphael,
Zachariel,  Anael,  and  Oriphiel.

Talismanic  theories  and  practice  are  almost  exclusively
confined  to  the  operations  of  White  Magic  ;  but  we  learn,
on  the  authority  of  Christian,  that  the  seven  celestial
talismans  had  also  their  infernal  complement;  there  was
the  white  and  the  black  talisman.  It  was  possible  for
the  perverted  Magus  to  infuse  into  the  material  of  the
metals  the  poison  of  his  vitiated  will,  and  to  combine  it
with  the  diabolical  influence  of  the  seven  demons  who
corresponded  in  eternal  opposition  to  the  seven  planetary
angels.  To  the  angel  of  Saturn  was  opposed  the  demon
Nabam  ;  to  that  of  Jupiter,  the  demon  Acham ;  to  the
angel  of  Mars,  the  demon  Naiibroth ;  to  the  Genius  of
Venus,  the  demon  Lilith  oi^  Naemah ;  to  that  of
Mercury,  the  demon  Astaroth  or  Tharthae  ;  to  the  angel
of  the  Moon,  the  demon  Satan.  I

The  talisman  was  always  an  accessory  of  considerable

"Nr

120  THE  OCCULT  SCIKNCES.

importance,  and  was  invariably  ao  indispensable  adjunct,
in  all  classes  of  evocation,  but  occasionally  in  the  ancient
rituals  it  figures  as  the  chief  condition  of  the  practice.
This  is  especially  the  case  with  the  talisman  called
Almadel,  which  is  described  in  the  earliest  work  on
magic  that  is  known  to  have  been  printed  in  English.
By  the  interveMion  of  this  instrument,  Solomon,  the
father  of  Jewish  mysticism — in  the  sense  that  from  the
altitudes  of  theurgic  experiment  to  the  lowest  science
of  the  abyss,  all  kabbalistic  arts  are  gratuitously
fathered  upon  him —  is  affirmed  to  have  attained  his  great
and  sublime  wisdom  from  the  chief  angels  that  govern
the  four  altitudes  of  the  world,  "for  you  must  observe,"
says  this  curious  ritual,  "  that  there  are  in  the  world  four
altitudes,  which  represent  the  four  corners  of  the  world
— East,  West,  North,  and  South,  these  being  twelve  times
subdivided,  three  to  every  part."  The  angels  of  each  of
these  altitudes  have  their  particular  virtues  and  powers.
The  mysteries  of  talismanic  magic  have  exercised  the
erudition  of  most  writers  on  the  practical  branches  of
mysticism.  Paracelsus  is  the  prince  of  authorities  ;  but
there  is  a  fund  of  information  in  the  "  Occult  Philo-
sophy "  of  Cornelius  Agrippa.  "  The  Magus,"  by
Francis^  Barrett,  is  an  accessible  book  which  summarises
the  anterior  literature.  Secrets  Merveilleiix  de  la  Magie
Naturelle  et  Cabalistique  du  Petit  Albert  contains  also
talismanic  secrets.

DIVINATION.

THE  circle  of  each  of  the  physical  sciences  is  sur-
rounded ^vith  a  fringe  of  light,  easy,  and  pleasing
experiments  which  in  themselves  are  exceedingly
trivial,  but  are  as  so  many  thresholds  of  the  deep  things
of  knowledge,  and  are  to  be  valued  for  that  which  they
lead  to,  and  not  for  what  they  are.  The  profund-
ities of  esoteric  science  have  also  their  light,  fantastic
borderland  where  the  tyro  may  amuse  himself,  and
where  the  vacuous  interest  of  the  modern  dame  de  soci4t4,
who  describes  herself  as  "  very  occult,"  finds  sufficient
nourishment  to  su.stain  a  shallow  and  sentimental  interest
in  the  mysteries  of  psychic  force.  Such  are  the  methods
of  divination  which  abound  in  old  books,  and  in  the
folk-lore  of  all  European  peoples.  They  are  preliminary
and  trivial  experiments  with  the  powers  of  the  interior
man  ;  if  the  conditions  which  are  indispensable  to  the
manifestation  of  these  powers  in  any  of  their  phases  are
fulfilled,  they  are  successful,  they  excite  wonder,  and
nourish  credulity  ;  if  the  ignorance  and  stupidity  of  the
operator,  or  the  inanity  of  a  particular  method,  should
render  a  result  abortive,  the  entire  science  is  condemned.
Yet  physics,  as  much  as  psychology,  though  each  in  their
own  way,  depend  for  success  on  conditions.  The  friction
of  silk  and  sealing-wax  may  produce  an  elementary
phenomenon  of  magnetism,  Imt  the  friction  of  cloth  and
clay  will  be  barren  of  any  such  result,  and  without  any
blame  to  magnetics.

It  should  Ijc  definitely  laid  down  at  the  beginning  that
all  forms  of  divination  are  simply  methods  of  exercising
the  intuitive  faculties ;  they  are  calculated  to  produce
that  temporary  suspension  of  the  outer  senses  which  is
known  as  the  hypnotic  condition.  In  some  varieties  the
phenomena  of  comi)letc  trance  arc  elicited  in  a  suitable

122  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

subject.  On  the  other  hand,  the  several  forms  of  carto-
mancy are  simply  designed  to  awaken  a  dormant  quality
of  psjT-chic  perce2:)tion.  Those  which  are  exclusively  con-
cerned with  the  performance  of  a  barren  rite,  and  pro-
duce no  impression  on  the  interior  nature,  are  either
worthless  impostures,  or  foolish,  superstitious  practices.

Considerable  futility  is  mixed  up  with  divination ;  it
is  essentially  trivial  in  character ;  in  itself  it  can  be  pro-
ductive of  no  valuable  results  ;  the  student  of  discrimina-
tion and  sense  will  not  squander  his  time  and  his  powers
on  the  little  marvels  of  magic  art ;  he  Avill  win  entrance
into  the  larger  field  of  achievement.

The  word  divination  is  occasionally  used  in  a  broad
philosophical  sense  which  places  a  different  complexion
upon  it.  Its  significance  is  extended  till  it  includes  the
sublime  dream  of  astrology,  spiritual  visions,  and  the
gift  of  inspired  prophecy.  According  to  the  vulgar
meaning  of  the  term,  to  divine  is  to  conjecture  what  we
do  not  know,  says  Levi,  but  its  true  significance  is
ineffable  in  its  sublimity.  To  divine  (dwinare)  is  to
exercise  divinity.  To  be  a  diviner  in  all  the  force  of
the  term  is  therefore  to  be  divine,  and  something  still
more  mysterious.  In  a  popular  and  elementary  work,
we  have  judged  it  advisable  to  make  use  of  the  word
divination  in  the  popular  and  narrower  sense.  The
art  in  itself  is  anterior  to  any  historical  period,  and  is
therefore  supposed  to  have  descended  from  primitive
tradition.  "  That  in  the  first  ages  of  earth,"  says  the
Eev.  Henry  Thompson,  "  some  means  of  communication
between  God  and  man,  with  which  we  are  now  un-
acquainted, existed,  appears  from  the  history  of  Cain
and  Abel ;  and  the  same  circumstance  instructs  us  that
these  means  were  connected  with  sacrifice,  an  extensive
source  of  divination  in  later  ages.  After  the  degeneracy
of  mankind  had  banished  those  real  tokens  of  the
divine  interest  with  which  they  had  been  originally
favoured,  they  no  less  endeavoured  to  obtain  counsel
and  information  by  the  same  external  observances ;  but,
finding  them  no  longer  eflBcient,  they  invented  a  multi-
tude of  superstitious  ceremonies,  which,  in  the  progress  of
religious  corruption,  and  beneath  the  influence  of  idolatry,

DIVINATION.  123

became  the  hydra  Divination."  Evolutionists  who  are
also  mystics,  and  mystics  who  are  men  of  reason,  will
discountenance  definite  opinions  on  the  origin  of  religious
beliefs  and  practices  of  the  pre-historic  period.  It  is
sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  know  that  divination
flourished  in  Egypt,  Chaldea,  and  Assyria,  among  the
Babylonians  and  Ethioj)ians,  and  that  in  the  most
distant  regions  of  the  globe  we  find  a  striking  similarity,
descending  even  to  details,  among  its  practised  methods.
Upwards  of  one  hundred  recorded  forms  of  divination
are  known  to  the  magic  of  the  West.  Those  which  are
in  use  in  the  East,  and  among  barbarous  nations,  are  pro-
bably innumerable.  In  selecting  the  following  varieties
for  the  information  and  use  of  the  student,  it  is  just
to  observe  that  they  are  gleaned  from  several  sources,
from  Latin,  French,  and  English  writers,  and  are  re-
produced with  but  slight  adaptation  in  the  words  of  the
originals.

^ROMANCY.

This  is  the  art  which,  sometimes  under  an  alternative
apjjellation,  Meteoromancy,  is  concerned  with  the  pre-
diction of  things  to  come  by  the  observation  of  atmos-
pheric variations  and  the  different  phenomena  of  the
air,  particularly  those  of  thunder,  lightning,  and  fiery
meteors.  It  is  by  virtue  of  this  divination  that  the
apparition  of  a  comet  has  been  supposed  to  portend  the
death  of  a  great  man.  In  his  vast  work  upon  magic,
Francois  de  la  Torre-Blanca,  who  follows  Psellus,
affirms  that  the  veritable  seromantic  art  is  the  prediction
of  the  future  by  the  evocation  of  spectres  in  the  air,  or
the  pictorial  representation  of  things  to  come,  by  the
aid  of  demons,  in  a  cloud,  as  in  a  magic  lantern.  On
this  supposition  it  would  be  simply  a  branch  of
ceremonial  magic ;  on  the  other,  it  may  be  supposed
that  the  observation  of  tremendous  atmospheric  pheno-
mena, of  sunset  pageantries,  auroral  lights,  of  peaceful
midnight  splendours,  of  stars  and  storms  and  lightning,
the  merely  prolonged  contemplation  of  "  the  magical,
measureless  distance,"  would  profoundly  excite  the
imaginations   of   sensitive   persons,   and   transform  the

124  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,

dome  of  the  empyrean  into  a  veritable  "gla^s  of  vision."
"It  is  the  same  with  star-groups  as  with  points  in  geo-
mancy,"  says  Eliphas  Levi,  "and  with  the  card-medleys
of  modern  fortune-telling.  They  are  all  pretexts  for  self-
magnetization,  and  mere  instruments  to  fix  and  deter-
mine natural  intuition.  The  imagination  is  exalted  by
a  long  contemplation  of  the  sky,  and  then  the  stars
respond  to  our  thoughts  accordingly  as  the  soul  is  dis-
turbed or  serene,  the  stars  scintillate  with  menaces,  or
sparkle  with  ho})e.  Heaven  is  thus  the  mirror  of  the
human  soul,  and  when  we  think  that  we  are  reading  the
stars,  it  is  in  ourselves  we  read."

Alectromancy.

From  the  standpoint  of  magical  folk-lore,  the  cock
is  a  bird  of  much  interest  and  many  virtues.  It  is
endowed  with  the  remarkable  power  of  putting  to  flight
the  infernal  hosts,  and  as  according  to  Peter  Delancre
in  his  Tableau  de  Vinconstance  des  Demons,  the  devil,  who
is  the  lion  of  hell,  will  vanish  the  moment  that  he  hears
the  voice  of  this  domestic  fowl,  it  is  popularly  supposed
that  the  natural  lioii,  who  is  the  king  of  beasts,  can  be
subdued  and  put  to  flight  thereby.  The  entire  fantas-
magoria  of  the  Black  Sabbath  disappears  when  the  cock
crows,  and  to  prevent  him  from  sounding  his  clarion
during  the  night-hours,  and  routing  the  whole  assembly,
the  sorcerer,  instructed  by  the  devil,  anointed  his  head
with  olive  oil,  and  twined  a  collar  of  vine  leaves  about
his  neck.  But  while  his  voice  was  inimical  to  the  mid-
night mysteries  of  the  wizard  world,  his  flesh  was
supposed  to  be  possessed  of  valuable  virtues  in  sorcery,
and,  in  particular,  an  ancient  and  venerable  method  of
divination  was  practised  by  the  instrumentality  of  this
bird  of  the  gods  and  of  ^sculapius.  The  modus  operandi
is  as  follows.  A  circle  must  be  traced  on  the  ground
in  a  S23ot  which  shall  be  free  from  observation,  and  it
must  be  divided  into  twenty-four  equal  spaces,  which  shall
be  inscribed  with  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  rejecting  J
and  U,  which  are  usually  represented  in  ancient  wiitings
by  their  correspondents,  I  and  V.     A  grain  of  wheat

DIVINATION.  125

or  barley  must  be  placed  over  every  letter,  beginning
"sWth  A,  and  during  this  operation  the  depositor  must
repeat  the  verse  '^  Ecce  enim  veritatem  tiiam/'  &c.  The
most  favourable  time  for  the  divinatory  performance  is
when  the  sun  or  moon  is  in  Aries  or  Leo.  Set  in  the
centre  of  the  circle  the  cock,  who  is  the  chief  agent  in
the  occult  rite.  The  bird  should  be  wholly  white,  and,
according  to  some  authorities,  he  should  be  deprived  of
his  claws,  which  he  should,  moreover,  be  forced  to
swallow,  together  ^^dth  a  little  scroll  of  lambskin  parch-
ment, inscribed  with  Hebrew  characters.  Then  the
di^aner,  while  his  grasp  is  still  upon  the  cock,  should
repeat,  "  0  Deus  Creator  omnium,  qui  firmament  tun  pulchri-
tudine  stellarum  formasti,  constituens  eas  in  signa  et  tempora,
infunde  virtutem  tuam  operlbiis  nostris,  ut  per  opus  in  eis
consequamur  effectum."  Subsequently,  in  the  act  of  plac-
ing the  bird  within  the  circle,  he  must  repeat  these  two
verses  from  the  Psalms,  "  Domine  dilexi  decorem  domUs
tuae  et  locum  habitationis  tiiae.  Domine  Deus  mrtutum,
converts  nos,  ostende  faciem  suam,  et  salvi  erimus."  All  that
remains  for  the  operator,  after  these  preliminaries,  is  to
note  very  carefully  from  what  letters  the  bird  picks  up
the  grains,  which  should  be  invariably  replaced  by  others
till  his  meal  is  over.  From  the  assemblage  of  letters
thus  obtained,  the  ingenuity  of  the  anagrammatist  can
generally  extract  an  oracle  which  will  give  information
on  the  desired  subject.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  form  of
divination  is  wholly  fortuitous ;  instead  of  appealing  to
the  interior  faculties  of  a  clairvoyant  subject,  it  makes
use  of  an  indiscriminating  instrument,  and,  as  such,  the
entire  rite  is  a  rank  and  unmixed  superstition.

Aleuromancy.

This  divinatory  method  was  practised  by  depositing
small  strips  of  writing,  rolled  into  balls,  in  a  heap  of
flour.  The  whole  was  well  mixed,  and  the  inquirers,
who  should  be  several  in  number,  received  each  an  equal
share.  Subsequently  each  of  them  unrolled  the  strips
that  had  fallen  to  his  lot,  and  extracted  from  the  assem-
blage of  words  and  phrases  the  information  of  which  he

126  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

was  in  search.  Diviners  have  foreborne  to  inform  us
what  should  be  written  on  the  scrolls,  and  the  method,
on  the  whole,  is  worthless,  and  less  curious,  than  that
which  is  concerned  with  the  cock.

Alphitomancy.

This  form  of  divination  is  sometimes  considered  of
importance  and  is  accredited  with  great  anticjuity,  but  it
is  superstitious  and  worthless  from  the  transcendental
standpoint.  AVhen  several  persons  were  accused  or  sus-
pected of  a  certain  crime,  and  when  it  was  desired  to
discover  the  true  culprit,  each  of  them  was  forced  to
swallow  a  morsel  of  hard  bread.  Those  who  could  do
so  without  difficulty  were  dismissed  without  a  stain  upon
their  character.  Those  who  were  nearly  choked  in  the  act
were  held  to  be  guilty.  When  the  test  could  be  success-
fully passed  by  all,  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  esoteric
detectives  went  further  afield  for  the  criminal.  The
pellet  of  bread  was  denominated  the  corsned,  or  morsel
of  execration,  and  it  has  originated  the  common  vindica-
tion, "  If  I  deceive  you,  may  my  next  mouthful  of  food
choke  me."  The  practical  method  was  as  follows  : — Pure
barley  flour,  unmixed  with  leaven,  was  kneaded  with
salt  and  milk,  baked  in  tbe  ashes  in  a  covering  of  greasy
paper,  and  finally  rubbed  over  with  vervain  leaves.  The
composition  became  exceedingly  hard,  and  as  incipient
strangulation  in  swallo\Adng  an  unmasticated  lump  could
only  be  averted  by  a  miracle,  many  guilty  persons  were
naturally  discovered  by  its  means.  In  the  neighbour-
hood of  Lavinium,  there  is  said  to  have  been  a  sacred
wood  where  a  variety  of  this  idiotic  process  was  practised
as  a  test  of  virginity.  A  dragon,  otherwise  a  serpent,
was  kept  in  captivity  by  the  priests  of  the  place,  and,
on  certain  occasions,  young  females  were  commissioned
to  feed  him.  Their  eyes  were  bandaged,  they  were  led
into  the  grotto,  bearing  cakes  of  honey  and  barley  flour,
and  those  whose  contributions  were  refused,  by  the  dis-
criminating reptile,  were  supposed  to  have  contracted
dishonour,

divination.  127

Amniomancy.

Di\nnatiori  was  practised  by  the  Greeks  with  the  caul
of  a  new-born  child.  The  superstition  was  exceedingly
simple  and  excessively  silly,  being  simply  an  inspection
of  the  colour  which  the  membrane  chanced  to  exhibit.
A  fortunate  future  was  predicted  for  the  possessor  of  a
ruddy-tinted  caul,  and  sinister  omens  were  drawn  from
the  presence  of  a  livid  hue.

Anthropomancy.

From  gross  superstition  divination  occasionally  passed
to  foul  and  revolting  practices.  Auguries  were  drawn
from  the  examination  of  the  entrails  of  disembowelled
men  and  women ;  under  the  name  of  anthropomancy
this  rite  is  one  of  considerable  antiquity.  It  is  men-
tioned in  Herodotus,  who  informs  us  that  Menelaus,
when  detained  in  Egypt  by  contrary  winds,  sacrificed  the
native  children  to  his  barbarous  curiosity,  and  sought  in-
formation on  his  destiny  from  the  signs  in  their  stomachs.
The  nature  of  the  signs,  and  the  manner  of  their  inter-
pretation, have,  fortunately,  not  been  recorded.  Similar
but  unaccredited  stories  are  narrated  of  Julian,  the
apostate,  who,  in  his  necromantic  operations  and  noc-
turnal sacrifices,  is  said  to  have  immolated  many  children
in  order  to  consult  their  intestines.  When  in  his  last
expedition,  he  tarried  at  Carra,  in  Mesopotamia,  he  is
affirmed  to  have  retired,  with  some  accomplices,  into  the
Temple  of  the  Moon,  and,  when  their  impious  occupa-
tions were  over,  they  left  it  locked  and  sealed  with  a
guard  round  about  it  to  keep  away  all  comers  till  their
return,  Julian  died,  however,  in  the  war,  and  when  the
temple  was  opened,  in  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Jovien,
a  woman  was  found  hanging  by  her  hair,  her  hands  out-
stretched, her  stomach  cut  open,  and  the  liver  torn  out.
But  the  memory  of  the  Emperor  Julian  has  been  calum-
niated by  partisans,  and  the  reports  of  his  enemies
should  be  received  with  uncommon  caution.

128  the  occult  sciences.

Arithmomancy.

The  mj^stical  projoerties  of  numbers  were  developed
by  Pythagoras  and  Plato,  and  the  science  of  esoteric
mathematics  passed  from  the  Greeks  to  the  Kabbalists,
who  transmitted  it  to  the  western  mystics,  Louis  Claude
de  St  Martin  being  one  of  the  last  and  most  distinguished
of  its  initiates.     The  powers,  and  virtues,  and  mysteries,
which  were  attributed  by  the  ancients  to  numbers  are
similar  to  those  which  have  been  already  described  as
the  properties  of  the  occult  alphabet  of  the  Hebrews.     "  In
estimating  these  doctrines,"  says  Elihu  Rich,  "  it  must  be
remembered  that  all  movement,  proportion,  time,  and,
in  a  word,  all  idea  of  cjuantity  and  harmony,  may  be  re-
presented by  numbers  :  hence,  whatever  may  be  attri-
buted to  the  latter,  may  also  be  expressed  by  numbers,
as  the  signs  of  occult  virtues  and  laws.     It  is  known  to
philosophers  that  the  movements  of  nature  are  rhyth-
mical ;  physicians  have  observed  this  in  the  periodicity
of  diseases ;  and  the  appointment  of  the  seventh  day  as
a  Sabbath,  has  added  a  religious  obligation  to  this  law  of
nature.      The   three,   the   ten,   and   the  twelve  are  also
numbers   of   well-known   import,    and  one  is  the  most
divine  of  all,  as  expressing  the  unity  of  God,  and  the
comprehension  of  all  things  in  perfect  harmony.     The
use  of  numbers  in  divination  has  assumed  many  curious
forms.     It  may  suffice  to  mention  here  the  Gematria,  or
first  division  of  the  Cabbala,  which  teaches  how  to  cast
up  the  letters  of  particular  words  as  numerals,  and  to
form  conclusions  from  the  proportion  between  the  sum  of
one  text  and  the  sum  of  another.     This  method  converts
the  Bible  into  a  book  written  solely  by  numbers,  and
some   curious   results  are   obtained,    probably   as   near
the  truth  as  the  rabbinical  astrology.     Some  curious  pro-
perties of   perfect,   amicable,  and  other  numbers  have
been    elucidated    by    the    English    Platonist,    Thomas
Taylor,  in  his  '  Theoretic  Arithmetic'     The  most  valu-
able remains  of   antiquity  connected  with  this  subject
are  contained  in  the  '  Chaldean  Oracles  of  Zoroaster.' "

In  was  the  custom  of   the  Greeks  to  examine  the
number  and  value  of  the  letters  in  the  names  of  two

DIVINATION.  129

combatants,  and  the  predominant  number,  it  was  held,
would  be  \ictorious  in  conflict.  By  virtue  of  this  science
certain  diviners  predicted  that  Hector  would  be  over-
come by  Achilles.  The  Chaldeans  divided  their  alphabet
into  three  parts,  which  they  attributed  to  the  seven
planets,  and  extracted  their  omens  accordingly.  It  is
evident  that  such  calculations  must  produce  totally
oj^posite  results  in  different  languages,  and  unless  nation-
ality enters  as  a  determining  element  into  destiny,  it  is
difiicult  to  look  upon  these  numerical  arts  as  anything
but  ingenious  curiosities.

ASTRAGALOMANCY

This  was  a  form  of  divination  with  a  pair  of  ordinary
dice,  which  might  be  cast  together  or  singly.  If  it  be  de-
sired to  obtain  information  on  any  subject  by  this  method,
including  the  mysteries  of  the  future,  the  question  must
be  written  upon  paper  which  had  been  passed  through  the
smoke  of  a  fire  of  juniper  wood.  The  writing  must  be
placed  face  downward  on  the  table,  and  the  dice  must  then
be  thrown.  The  result  of  each  cast  must  be  converted
into  its  literal  equivalent,  and  carefully  noted.  If  both
the  dice  are  used,  the  process  must  be  continued  till  the
numbers  from  2  to  12  have  been  all  obtained,  when  the
intuition  of  the  operator  must  be  concentrated  on  the  as-
semblage of  letters.  If  the  order  in  which  they  are  evolved
should  result  in  an  intelligible  message,  he  will  have  cause
to  be  gratified.  If  no  sense  can  be  extracted  he  must  seek
in  another  rite  for  the  required  revelation.  The  alpha-
betical equivalent  of  the  numbers  has  been  thus  given: —
1=A;  2  =  E;  3=Ior  Y;  4  =  0;  5  =  JJ ;  6  =  B;  7  =  C,
K,  or  Q;  8  =  D  or  T;  9=F,  S,  X,  or  Z;  10  =  Gor  J;
11  =  L,  M,  or  N ;  1 2  =  R.  As  most  of  the  numbers  may
signify  any  of  three  letters,  the  calculation  will  be  some-
what embarrassing.  The  letter  H  is  omitted  as  it  is  as
unnecessary  to  successful  divination  as  to  the  speech  of  the
cockney.  The  laws  of  destiny  are  independent  of  those
of  orthography,  says  one  sententious  writer.  Whatever
may  be  thought  of  the  mystic  notary  art,  it  is  unlikely
that  common  numerical  divination,  more  especially  when

i

130  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

restricted  to  the  spots  on  the  cubes  of  the  gambler,  will
provide  the  student  with  any  reliable  result.

AXINOMANCY.

This  method  was  employed  for  the  discovery  of  hidden
treasures  and  the  detection  of  criminals.  In  the  first
case  the  method  is  of  a  singularly  fatuous  kind.  A  round
agate  must  be  carefully  balanced  on  the  edge  of  a  red-hot
hatchet.  If  the  balance  be  preserved  for  a  certain  time
there  is  no  treasure  in  the  neighbourhood.  If  it  fall,
remark  the  direction  in  which  the  ball  will  roll,  and  per-
form the  operation  in  all  three  times.  If  the  direction
taken  by  the  agate  be  the  same  in  each  case,  it  will  not
be  vain  to  dig  ;  should  it  vary,  it  will  be  well  to  conduct
your  experiments  in  another  place.  The  second  method
would  be  discreditable  to  the  intelligence  of  the  Sandwich
Islanders.  To  detect  a  thief  or  other  criminal  the  blade
of  the  hatchet  must  be  buried  perpendicularly  in  the
earth,  with  the  handle  j^rotruding  in  a  perpendicular
position.  The  rest  of  the  performance  consists  in  a
circular  dance  around  the  hatchet  till  the  soil  is  torn  up,
and  the  hatchet  falls  flat  on  the  ground.  The  direction
assumed  by  the  handle  will  indicate  that  cjuarter  of  the
physical  cosmos  in  which  search  should  be  made  for  the
criminal.  It  will  be  well  for  the  operator  to  remember
that  he  has  before  him  the  magical,  measureless  distance  ;
that  he  has  eternity,  if  need  be,  for  the  quest,  and  that
as  Macdonald,  the  poet,  remarks,  "There  is  plenty  of
room  for  meeting  in  the  universe."

Belomancy.

Under  this  name,  divination  with  arrows  was  long
practised  in  ancient  military  expeditions.  A  number  of
darts  were  selected,  favourable  and  unfavourable  answers
to  the  given  question  were  written  indiscriminately  upon
them ;  they  were  then  shuffled  after  the  manner  of  cards,
and  one  of  them  drawn  at  random.  The  reply  which
chance  thus  provided  was  considered  the  voice  of  destiny
and  the  will  of  the  gods.     The  operation  is  supposed  to

DIVINATION.  131

have  been  practised  so  far  back  as  the  time  of  the
Chaldeans.  It  is  a  point  to  be  noticed  that  the  more
ancient  the  method,  the  more  gross  is  the  superstition
which  it  involves,  a  fact  that  may  be  commended  to  the
consideration  of  some  over-zealous  believers  in  the  wis-
dom of  the  far  past.  There  was  another  method  of
Eelomantic  divination,  which  consisted  in  casting  certain
arrows  into  the  air,  and  the  com^se  of  the  inquirer,
whether  an  individual  or  an  armed  host,  was  directed
by  the  inclination  of  the  weapons.

BiBLIOMANCY.

Occasionally  the  forms  of  divination  exceeded  the
bounds  of  superstition,  and  passed  into  the  region  of
frantic  madness.  There  was  a  short  way  with  sorcerers
which  was  probably  the  most  potent  discoverer  of  witch-
craft which  any  ingenuity  could  devise.  A  large  Bible  was
deposited  on  one  side  of  a  pair  of  weighing  scales.  The
person  suspected  of  magical  practices  was  set  on  the
opposite  side.  If  he  outweighed  the  Bible  he  was
innocent ;  in  the  other  case,  he  was  .  held  guilty.
In  the  days  of  this  mystical  weighing  and  measuring,
the  scales  may  be  truly  said  to  have  fallen  from  the
eyes  of  a  bewizarded  generation,  and  to  have  revealed
"  sorcery  and  enchantment  everywhere."

Bibliomancy,  however,  included  a  more  harmless  prac-
tice, and  one  of  an  exceedingly  simple  character.  This
was  the  opening  of  the  Bible  with  a  golden  pin,  and
dravang  an  omen  from  the  first  passage  which  pre-
sented itself.  Books  like  the  Scriptures,  the  "  Follow-
ing of  Christ,"  and  similar  works,  abound  in  suggestive  and
pertinent  passages  which  all  men  may  apply  to  them-
selves, and  the  method  was  consequently  much  in
vogue,  St  Augustine  denounces  the  practice  in  tem-
poral affairs,  but  declares  that  he  had  recourse  to  it  in
all  cases  of  spiritual  difiiculty.  The  appeal  to  chance  is,
however,  essentially  superstitious.

132  the  occult  sciences.

Capnomancy.
This  was  a  method  of  divination  by  smoke,  and
frequently,  it  may  be  judged,  must  have  ended  in  that
whence  it  first  originated.  The  concentration  of  an
impressionable  mind  upon  fantastic  wreaths  of  vapour
might,  however,  produce  a  hypnotic  condition  as  success-
fully as  another  method.  The  shapes  which  imagination
gave  to  the  ascending  fumes  were  interpreted  in  an
oracular  manner,  and  omens  were  drawn  from  the
direction  in  which  they  passed  off,  the  latter  being
wholly  superstitious.  Two  methods  were  followed.  In
the  one,  seeds  of  jasmin,  or  poppy,  were  cast  on  burning
coals,  and  the  form  of  the  fumes  examined ;  in  the
other,  the  smoke  was  inhaled  by  the  operator,  and  was
supposed  to  impart  a  prophetic  gift.  A  powerful  effect
would  undoubtedly  be  produced  by  the  smoke  of  strong
narcotics,  but  the  visions  which  originate  in  poppy  heads
are  not  to  be  counted  among  the  infallibilities  of
magian  art.

Ceroscopy.

Divination  with  wax  has  long  been  replaced  by
divination  in  tea  leaves  and  coffee  grouts,  but  it  has  the
advantage  of  superior  antiquity  over  these  methods,  and
is  further  removed  from  the  commonplace.  Wax  of
the  purest  quality  was  melted  in  a  brazen  vase  and
stirred  into  a  liquid  of  uniform  consistence.  It  was  then
poured  into  another  vase  tilled  with  cold  water,  but
slowly,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  it  congealed  in  tiny
discs  upon  the  aqueous  surface.  A  variety  of  figures
were  thus  presented  to  the  eye  of  the  seer,  and  inter-
preted according  to  the  impulse  of  his  intuitive  powers.
This  is  an  exceedingly  harmless  practice,  which  might
be  productive  of  clairvoyant  results  in  a  suitable
subject.

Cleidomancy.

The  key  which  shuts  and  opens  is  a  favourite  symbol
Avith  all  mystics,  and  is  founded  on  a  natural  analogy,
which  has  a  quality  that  is  rare  in  analogies,  being
perfect  in  its  own  way.  The  suggestiveness  of  the
symbol  reacted  on  the  material  instrument,  and  divina-

DIVINATION.  133

tion  by  means  of  a  key  was  long  practised  after  various
manners.  Each  method,  it  is  said,  should  be  practised
when  the  sun  or  moon  is  in  Virgo.  One  is  for  the  dis-
covery of  the  name  of  a  suspected  person,  or  in  any  case
where  a  name  is  required.  The  latter  should  be  written
on  a  key,  the  key  should  be  tied  to  a  Bible,  and  both
should  be  suspended  from  the  ring  finger  of  a  young
virgin,  who  must  repeat  in  an  undertone  the  words,
"  Exurge  Domine,  adjuva  nos  et  reclime  nos  propter  nomen
sanctum  tuimi."  The  operator  meanwhile  must  repeat
the  supposed  or  suspected  name  mth  a  few  sentences
of  approjDriate  prayer.  If  any  oscillation  of  a  marked
character  is  visible  in  the  book  and  key,  it  may  be  con-
cluded that  the  name  has  been  correctly  divined,  and
proceedings  may  be  taken  accordingly.  On  the  other
hand,  if  they  remain  stationary,  it  is  certain  that  the
inquiry  has  been  pursued  upon  a  wrong  track.  Occa-
sionally more  elaborate  forms  of  prayer  are  used,  such
as  litanies  and  the  seven  penitential  psalms,  when  the
guilty  person  was  accustomed  to  develop  a  miraculous
impression  of  the  mystic  key  upon  his  body ;  he  was
also  liable  to  be  deprived  of  one  of  his  eyes,  a  possibility
which  gave  rise  to  the  proverb,  "  Ex  oculo  quoqiie  excusso
hodie  fur  cognoscitur.^'  The  second  method  was  a  solemn
su]3erposing  of  the  key  upon  a  certain  page  of  a  book.
When  the  Bible  was  used  for  this  purpose,  it  was  opened
at  the  fiftieth  Psalm. "^  The  volume  was  then  closecl  with
the  key  inside,  and  tightly  secured  with  a  cord,  which
was,  if  possible,  a  woman's  garter,  but  in  such  a  manner
that  the  ring  of  the  key  protruded.  The  book  was  then
suspended  from  a  nail  in  the  wall,  or  from  the  finger  of  the
inquirer,  when  it  was  positively  certain  that  it  would
perform  as  complete  a  revolution,  as  the  nature  of  the
case  would  permit,  at  the  name  of  the  person  who  had
committed  that  deed  which  was  the  subject  of  occult  in-
vestigation. By  a  third,  but  less  common  method,  two
persons  suspended  the  volume  between  them,  holding
the  ring  of  the  key  by  their  two  forefingers.

Cleidomancy  is  said  to  be  still  performed  in  Russia

*  Even  at  the  present  day,  divination  witli  the  Bible  is  said  to
be  in  general  use  among  the  uneducated  classes  of  the  dissenting
persuasion.

134  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

for  the  discovery  of  hidden  treasures,  the  index  finger  of
the  right  hand  being  placed  in  the  ring  of  the  ke}^,  and
the  names  of  likely  places  are  repeated  over  it  in  turn.

A  variety  of  these  entertaining  but  fatuous  practices
was  divination  by  means  of  a  sieve  suspended  from  a
thread,  or  by  shears  which  were  hung  from  the  finger.
The  choice  of  instruments  might  be  varied  indefinitely,
and  the  use  of  a  consecrated  pulley  would  be  probably  a
useful  improvement,  which  may  be  commended  to  the
modern  magician.  If  divinatory  rites,  however  super-
stitious and  grotesque,  are  possessed  of  the  potency
ascribed  to  them  in  the  remote  ages  of  faith,  we
may  confidently  look  forward  to  the  time  when  they
will  be  utilised  in  our  Courts  of  Justice,  when  the
godless  skill  of  the  common  detective  shall  have  perished
with  the  reign  of  reason,  and  the  unbounded  resources
of  magic  will  enable  an  illuminated  humanity  to  prove
and  disprove  anything.  Then  may  the  enemies  of  the
initiates  look  forward  to  an  evil  time.  Sacred  and
beautiful  science  of  the  Magi,  last  word  to  humanity,
first  and  final  revelation,  harmony  of  the  whole  uni-
verse, universal  synthesis,  science  of  Barrett  and  of
Solomon,

"  Dies  venit  dies  tua,
In  qua  reflm'ent  omnia  !  "

Dactylomancy.

Who  is  not  aware  of  the  virtues  of  the  ring  in  magic  %
Equally  powerful  for  binding  and  loosing,  it  is  more  im-
portant than  the  ring  in  expousals.  Of  a  truth,  says
Chispa,  there  is  more  in  marriage  than  the  wedding
ring,  but  there  is  nothing  that  is  greater,  worthier,  or
more  wondrous,  than  is  the  great,  worthy,  wondrous,  and
altogether  mystical  ring  of  the  occult  art.  The  ring  of
Eastrada,  the  ring  of  Gyges,  the  ring  of  Solomon,  they  are
better  than  the  bells  of  Fairyland,  better  than  the  cap  of
Fortunatus.  The  chain  of  Mesmer  was  a  magnetic  ring ;
the  seance  circle  is  a  living,  palpitating,  universal  ring  of
humanity ;  the  magic  circle  is  truly  a  ring  also.  Ye
who  would  unearth   treasures,  secure   the  magic  ring  !

DIVINATION.  135

Ye  who  would  be  adepts  of  the  "  divine  science,''  learn
its  many  -  sided  mysteries !     Ye   who   would   fascinate
woman,  wear  it  invisibly  on  your  persons,  and  invisibly
shall  you  enter  into  the  penetralia  of   woman's  affec-
tion, and  be  sure  she  will  then  entertain  you  as  an  un-
seen god  !     Ye  who  would  divine  truly,  divine  only  by
the   ring  !      Compose  it  under  a   benign  constellation,
enchase  it  with  mystic  characters,  suspend  it  by  a  thread
or  a  hair  over  a  tumbler,  and  it  will  oscillate  with  the
celerity  of  a  pendulum,  and  once  for  yes  and  twice  for
NO,  just  as  you  choose  to  determine,  it  mil  respond  to
your  questions  with  delicious,  musical  vibrations  awakened
in  the  sides  of  the  olass.     Inscribe  on  the  edge  of  a  circu-
lar  table  the  symbols  of  the  alphabet,  and  the  intelligent
instrument,  passing   over  certain   letters,  Avill  compose
you  a  definite  answer,  and  reveal  you  the  mysteries  you
are  in  search  of,  with  the  precision  of  the  spirit-rapper's
table.     It  is  well  to  perform  the  operation  with  religious
observances  ;    the  diviner  should  be  clothed   in   white
linen,  his  head  shaven;  he  should  bear  in  his  hand  a
branch  of  vervain,  a  beneficent  plant  provided  by  Nature
to  drive  away  evil  spirits ;  and  the  ring  should  be  con-
secrated solemnly    with   adjurations   and   vows.       The
power  is  indefinitely  increased  by  the  due  constellation
of  the  rings  under  the  influence  of  the  planetary  genii.
The  ring  of  Saturn  should  be  of   lead,  enchased  with
onyx  or  garnet,  which  should  be  engraved  with  a  stone
writhen  about  by  a  serpent.    The  ring  of  Jupiter  should
be  of  brass,  enchased  with  a  topaz,  sapphire,  or  amethyst,
engraven  with  the  image  of  an  eagle  holding  a  pentagram
in  his  beak.     The  ring  of  Mars  should  be  of  iron,  en-
chased with  ruby,  red  jasper,  or  hematite,  engraven  with
the  symbol  of  a  serpent  devouring  the  point  of  a  sword.
The  ring  of  the  Sun  should  be  of  gold,  enchased  with
hyacinthus  or  chrysolite,  engraven  with  a  crowned  and
lion-headed  serpent.     The  ring  of  Venus  should  be  of
copper,  enchased  with  an  emerald,  engraven  with  the
Indian  lingam.     The  ring  of  Mercury  should  be  com-
posed of  an  alloy  of  Ijrass,  lead,  and  fixed  quicksilver,
enchased  with  cornelian  or  alectorine,    engraved   with
the  symbol  of  the  caduceus,  which  is  a  sceptre  interlaced

136  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

by  two  serpents.  The  ring  of  the  Moon  should  be  of
silver,  enchased  with  crystal  or  moonstone,  and  engraven
with  the  image  of  a  sphere  intersected  by  two  crescents.
The  use  of  constellated  rings  involves  a  more  elaborate
ceremonial.  The  day  and  time  of  constellation  regulates
the  use  of  the  rings.  Should  it  take  place  on  a  Tuesday
that  of  Mars  should  be  selected,  and  the  inquiry  con-
ducted during  the  first,  eighth,  fifteenth,  or  twenty-second
hours,  which  are  consecrated  to  the  Genius  of  that  planet.
The  circular  table  already  mentioned,  must  be  engraven
^Wth  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and  of  the  seven  planets.
A  number  of  discs  of  the  metal  proper  to  the  period,  and
having  the  symbols  of  three  alphabets,  should  be  cast
indiscriminately  on  the  table,  a  prayer  should  be  ad-
dressed to  the  Genius,  the  ring  should  be  suspended  by
a  thread  above  the  table,  and  the  priest,  or  the  pythoness,
should  set  fire  to  the  thread  with  a  torch  consecrated  to
Hecate,  the  goddess  of  enchantment.  The  ring  will  then
fall  upon  the  table,  and  the  letters  over  which  it  rolls,
and  those  by  which  it  pauses,  must  be  carefully  noted.
This  operation  should  be  repeated  seven  times,  and  then
the  intuition  of  the  diviner  must  collect  the  sense  of  the
oracles  from  the  assemblage  of  letters  contained.  Now,
the  faculty  of  intuition,  which  is  possessed  to  an  extra
ordinary  degree  by  persons  of  certain  temperaments,  can
be,  doubtless,  as  successfully  exercised  on  a  fortuitous
heap  of  letters  as  on  the  grouts  of  coffee,  and  herein  is
the  extent  of  the  value  which  inheres  in  divination  with

Gastromancy.

This  is  a  method  of  divination  which  induces  clair-
voyance in  suitable  subjects,  and  might  lead  to  very
interesting  results.  Several  circular  glass  vessels  filled
with  clear  water  are  placed  between  a  number  of  lighted
candles.  The  intelligences  of  the  spiritual  world  are
invoked  in  an  undertone,  and  a  virgin  boy  or  girl  is  then
introduced,  and  is  directed  to  concentrate  their  gaze  on
the  surface  of  the  vessels,  when  the  answer  of  the  oracle  be-
comes visible  to  the  magnetised  faculties  in  fantastic  figures
produced  by  refraction  of  the  light  within  the  vessels.

DIVINATION.  137

There  is  another  gastromantic  method,  which  is  more
in  correspondence  with  the  significance  that  belongs  to
the  term — divination  from  the  belly,  which  was  either
the  exercise  of  ventriloquism  or  the  result  of  some  form
of  possession.

Hydromancy.

The  art  of  divination  by  water  is  simply  a  branch  of
clairvoyance,  which  has  been  successfully  practised  in  all
ages  and  nations,  though,  as  the  dem.onologist  Delrio
truly  remarks,  nulla  fcecundior  imjrjosturis.  Several  varie-
ties are  distinguished  by  authorities  on  this  interesting
subject : —

1.  AMien  at  the  conclusion  of  invocations  and  other
magical  ceremonies,  the  names  of  jDersons  or  other  in-
formation required  are  seen  wnritten  upside  down  in  the
water.  2.  When  a  ring  is  suspended  by  a  thread  above
a  glass  of  water,  and  when  vision  begins  after  the  sides
of  the  vessel  have  been  smote  a  certain  number  of  times
durins;  the  course  of  oscillation.  3.  When  three  small
pebbles  are  successively,  and  at  short  intervals,  cast
into  clear  and  tranquil  water,  and  when  the  circles
which  form  on  the  surface,  and  the  intersections  w^hich
they  happen  to  make,  are  interpreted  as  omens.  4.  When
the  innumerable  movements  and  agitations  of  the  waves
of  the  sea  are  attentively  examined  and  clairvoyant  con-
clusions are  drawn.  5.  When  an  interpretation  is  placed
upon  the  colour  of  w^ater,  and  upon  the  figures  which
are  seen  therein.  The  traditions  of  the  ancients  invested
certain  streams  and  springs  with  special  qualifications
for  this  form  of  hydromancy.  7.  When  water  was  poured
into  a  glass  or  crystal  basin  and  a  little  oil  added  which
was  supposed  to  increase  the  visionary  power  of  the
seer.  8.  When  the  twists  and  turns,  together  with  the
noises,  made  by  rivers  and  torrents  when  they  plunged
into  gulfs  or  seethed  in  whirlpools,  Avere  interpreted
as  fatidic  utterances.  This  method  was  much  in  vogue
among  the  primitive  germanic  peoples.  There  are  also
some  minor  species  of  hydromantic  divination  of  a
more  distinctly  superstitious  character.  One  which  is
native  to  Italy   was  used   for  the  discovery   of  thefts.

138  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCE?*.

The  names  of  suspected  persons  were  written  upon
pebbles  and  cast  into  water.  That  of  the  guilty  person
remained  ineffaceable.  Another  device  consisted  in  filling
a  glass  or  cup  with  water  and  pronouncing  mystic  words
above  it.  On  certain  occasions  the  water  was  supposed  to
bubble  and  pour  over  the  brim,  but  under  what  circum-
stances we  are  unable  to  state.  Lastly,  the  ancient  Ger-
mans are  supposed  to  have  made  use  of  a  barbarous
and  stu^^id  perversion  of  hydromantic  art.  When  they
doubted  the  fidelity  of  their  wives  and  desired  to  ascertain
if  a  new-born  child  were  lawfully  or  otherwise  begotten,
they  cast  it  into  water.  If  the  infant  floated,  the  mother
was  held  to  be  stainless,  if  it  sank,  the  child  was  accounted
illegitimate.

" Hydromancy,"  says  Elihu  Rich,  "is,  in  principle,
the  same  thing  as  divination  by  the  crystal  or  mirror,
and  in  ancient  times  a  natural  basin  of  rock  kept  con-
stantly full  by  a  running  stream,  was  a  favourite  medium.
The  double  meaning  of  the  word  refiec-tion  ought  here  to
be  considered,  and  how,  gazing  down  into  clear  wate"",
the  mind  is  disposed  to  self-retirement  and  to  contempla-
tion, deeply  tinctured  with  melancholy.  Rocky  pools
and  gloomy  lakes  figure  in  all  stories  of  witchcraft —
witness  the  Craic-pol-nain  in  the  Highland  woods  of
Laynchork ;  the  Devil's  Glen  in  the  county  of  AVicklow,
Ireland ;  the  Swedish  Blokula ;  the  witch  mountains  of
Italy ;  and  the  Babiagora,  between  Hungary  and  Poland.
Similar  resorts  in  the  glens  of  Germany  were  marked,
as  Tacitus  mentions,  by  salt  sj)rings  ;  for  this  again  there
was  an  additional  good  reason,  which  would  carry  us  far
from  the  present  subject  to 'explain.

"It  was  really  only  another  form  of  divination  by  the
gloomy  water  pool  that  attracted  so  much  public  atten-
tion, .  .  .  when  Mr  Lane,  in  his  work  on  'Modern
Egypt,'  testified  to  its  success  as  practised  in  Egypt  and
Hindostan.  That  gentleman  having  resolved  to  witness
the  performance  of  this  species  of  sorcery,  the  magician
commenced  his  operations  by  writing  forms  of  invocation
to  his  familiar  spirits  on  six  slips  of  paper ;  a  chafing-
dish  with  some  live  charcoal  in  it  was  then  procured,  and
a  boy  summoned  who  had  not  yet  reached  the  age  of

DIVINATION.  139

puberty.  Mr  Lane  inquired  who  were  the  persons  that
could  see  in  the  fluid  mirror,  and  was  told  that  they
were  a  boy  not  arrived  at  puberty,  a  virgin,  a  black
female  slave,  and  a  pregnant  woman.  To  prevent  any
collusion  between  the  sorcerer  and  the  boy,  Mr  Lane
sent  his  servant  to  take  the  first  boy  he  met.  When  all
was  prepared,  the  sorcerer  threw  some  incense  and  one
of  the  strips  of  paper  into  the  chafing-dish  ;  he  then  took
hold  of  the  boy's  right  hand,  and  drew  a  square  "vvith
some  mystical  marks  on  the  palm ;  in  the  centre  of  the
square  he  poured  a  little  ink,  which  formed  the  magic
mirror,  and  desired  the  boy  to  look  steadily  into  it  with-
out raising  his  head.  In  this  mirror  the  boy  declared
that  he  saw,  successively,  a  man  sweeping,  seven  men
with  flags,  an  army  pitching  its  tents,  and  the  various
officers  of  state  attending  on  the  Sultan."  The  rest  must
be  told  by  Mr  Lane  himself.  "  The  sorcerer  now  ad-
dressed himself  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I  wished  the  boy
to  see  any  person  who  was  absent  or  dead.  I  named
Lord  Nelson,  of  whom  the  boy  had  evidently  never
heard ;  for  it  was  ynth  much  difficulty  that  he  pro-
nounced the  name  after  several  trials.  The  magician
desired  the  boy  to  say  to  the  Sultan,  '  My  master  salutes
thee,  and  desires  thee  to  bring  Lord  Nelson  ;  bring  him
before  my  eyes  that  I  may  see  him  speedily.'  The  boy
then  said  so,  and  almost  immediately  added,  '  A  mes-
senger has  gone  and  brought  back  a  man  dressed  in  a
black  (or  rather,  a  dark  blue)  suit  of  European  clothes ;
the  man  has  lost  his  left  arm.'  He  then  paused  for  a
moment  or  two,  and  looking  more  intently  and  closely
into  the  ink,  said  :  '  No,  he  has  not  lost  his  left  arm,  but
it  is  placed  to  his  breast.'  This  correction  made  his
distinction  more  striking  than  it  had  been  without  it ;
since  Lord  Nelson  generally  had  his  empty  sleeve
attached  to  the  breast  of  his  coat ;  but  it  was  the  right
arm  that  he  had  lost.  Without  saying  that  I  suspected
the  boy  had  made  a  mistake,  I  asked  the  magician
whether  the  objects  appeared  in  the  ink  as  if  actually
before  the  eyes,  or  as  if  in  a  glass,  which  makes  the  right
appear  left.  He  answered  that  they  appeared  as  in  a
mirror.     This  rendered  the  boy's  description  faultless.

140  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Though  completely  puzzled,  I  was  somewhat  disappointed
with  the  magician's  performances,  for  they  fell  short  of
what  he  had  accomplished,  in  many  instances,  in  presence
of  certain  of  my  friends  and  countrymen.  On  one  of
these  occasions,  an  Englishman  present  ridiculed  the  per-
formance, and  said  that  nothing  would  satisfy  him  but  a
correct  description  of  the  apj^earance  of  his  own  father,
of  whom  he  was  sure  no  one  of  the  company  had  any
knowledge.  The  boy,  accordingly,  having  called  by
name  for  the  person  alluded  to,  described  a  man  in  a
Frank  dress,  with  his  hand  placed  on  his  head,  wearing
spectacles,  and  with  one  foot  on  the  ground  and  the
other  raised  behind  him,  as  if  he  were  stepping  down
from  a  seat.  The  description  was  exactly  true  in  every
respect ;  the  peculiar  position  of  the  hand  was  occasioned
by  an  almost  constant  headache,  and  that  of  the  foot,  or
leg,  by  a  stiff  knee,  caused  by  a  fall  from  a  horse  in
hunting.  On  another  occasion,  Shakespeare  was  de-
scribed with  the  most  minute  exactness,  both  as  to
person  and  dress ;  and  I  might  add  several  other  cases
in  which  the  same  magician  has  excited  astonishment
in  the  sober  minds  of  several  Englishmen  of  my
acquaintance."

"  It  may  be  worth  adding,"  says  Elihu  Eich,  "  that  in
a  case  of  hydromancy  known  to  the  writer,  the  boy
could  see  better  without  the  medium  than  with  it,
though  he  could  also  see  reflected  images  in  a  vessel  of
water.  This  fact  may  be  admitted  to  prove  that  such
images  are  reflected  to  the  eye  of  the  seer  from  his  own
mind  and  brain  ;  how  the  brain  becomes  thus  enchanted,
or  the  eye  disposed  for  vision,  is  another  question ;  cer-
tainly there  is  no  proof  that  the  recollected  image  in  the
mind  of  the  inquirer  is  transferred  to  the  seer,  evidence
can  be  shown  to  the  contrary."

LiTHOMANCY.

Few  particulars  are  forthcoming  concerning  the
method  of  divination  by  stones.  It  was  performed  by
striking  a  number  of  pebbles  together,  and  concluding
from  the  nature  of  the  sound  emitted  the  will  of  the

DIVINATION.  141

supreme  gods.  The  interrogation  of  a  magnet  which
had  been  washed  in  spring  water  was  supposed  to  evoke
from  that  substance  an  intelligible  response  in  the  feeble
tones  of  a  small  child.  The  amethyst  is  also  possessed  of
lythomantic  properties  ;  the  events  in  the  womb  of  the
future  are  supposed  to  be  laid  bare  in  dreams  to  those
who  are  in  the  habit  of  wearing  this  stone  upon  their
persons.  A  mystic  variety  of  the  ophite  stone  is  men-
tioned in  the  so-called  Orphic  hymns  under  the  name  of
'Hhe  true  and  vocal  sideritis."  Its  appearance  is  rough
and  hard,  it  is  heavy  and  of  a  black  colour,  and  it  is  all
writhened  with  wrinkled  veins.  It  was  given  by  Apollo
to  Helenus,  who,  for  the  space  of  ten  days,  abstained
from  the  nuptial  couch,  from  the  bath,  and  from
animal  food.  "  Then  washing  this  intelligent  stone
in  a  living  fountain,  he  cherished  it  as  a  babe  in
soft  clothing ;  and  having  propitiated  it  as  a  god,  he
at  length  gave  it  breath  by  his  hymn  of  mighty  virtue.
Having  lighted  lamps  in  his  own  purified  house,  he
fondled  the  divine  stone  in  his  hands,  bearing  it  about
as  a  mother  bears  her  infant ;  and  you,  says  the  oracu-
lar writer,  if  you  would  hear  the  voices  of  the  gods,  in
like  manner,  provoke  a  similar  miracle,  for  when  you
have  sedulously  wiped  and  dandled  the  stone  in  your
arms,  on  a  sudden  it  will  utter  the  cry  of  a  new-born
child  seeking  milk  from  the  breast  of  its  nurse.  Beware,
however,  of  fear,  for  if  you  drop  the  stone  upon  the
ground,  you  will  raise  the  anger  of  the  immortals.  Ask
boldly  of  things  future,  and  it  will  reply.  Place  it  near
your  eyes  when  it  has  been  washed,  look  steadily  at  it,
and  you  will  perceive  it  divinely  breathing.  Thus  it
was  that  Helenus,  confiding  in  this  fearful  stone,  learned
that  his  country  would  be  overthrown  by  the  Atridae."

The  possession  of  a  similar  treasure  is  ascribed  to  a
physician,  named  Eusebius,  who  obtained  it  by  an  im-
pressive intervention  of  celestial  phenomena.  "  One
night,  actuated  by  an  unaccountable  impulse,  be  wan-
dered out  from  the  city  Emesa  to  the  summit  of  a
mountain  dignified  by  a  temple  of  Minerva.  There,  as
he  sate  down  fatigued  by  his  walk,  he  saw  a  globe  of  fire
falling  from  the  sky  and  a  lion  standing  by  it.      The

142  THE  OCCTLT  SCIENCES.

lion  disappeared,  the  fire  was  extinguished,  and  Eusebius
ran  and  picked  up  a  baetulum.  He  asked  it  to  what  god
it  appertained,  and  it  readily  answered,  to  Gennseus,  a
deity  worshipped  by  the  HeliopolitDe,  under  the  form  of
a  lion  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter.  During  this  night
Eusebius  said  he  travelled  not  less  than  210  stadia,
more  than  26  miles.  He  never  became  perfectly  master
of  the  baetulum,  but  was  obliged  very  humbly  to  solicit
its  responses.  It  was  of  a  handsome,  globular  shape,
white,  a  palm  in  diameter,  though  sometimes  it  appeared
more,  sometimes  less  ;  occasionally,  also,  it  was  of  purple
colour.  Characters  were  to  be  read  on  it,  impressed  in
the  colour  called  tingaribinus.  Its  answer  seemed  as  if
proceeding  from  a  shrill  pipe,  and  Eusebius  himself  in-
terpreted the  sounds."  While  some  authorities  consider
the  animating  spirit  of  this  mysterious  stone  to  be  divine,
others  refer  it  to  an  elementary  influence.  It  is  said  to
have  been  frequently  found  on  Mount  Libanus,  and  a
parallel  has  been  established  between  it  and  the  black
stone  Elagabalus,  as  well  as  the  monument  anointed  by
Jacob  at  Bethel.

Pyromancy.

The  purest,  most  powerful,  and  most  exalted  elemen-
tary intelligences  were  those  who  inhabited  the  fire ;
sacred  and  consecrated  flame  was  the  most  perfect
method  of  mystic  purgation ;  a  bright  and  clear  fire  was
not  less  effective  in  driving  off  evil  spirits  than  in  scaring
wild  beasts  from  the  hunter's  camp  at  night.  Lights
have  been  used  in  all  religious  ceremonials  from  time
immemorial;  it  would  be  strange,  indeed,  if  it  were
wholly  unconnected  mth  the  mysteries  of  divinatory  art.
Pyromancy,  however,  is  comparatively  obscure  as  it
is  also  essentially  superstitious.  Some  handfuls  of
powdered  resin  were  cast  into  a  fire  ;  and  if  a  bright
fiame  leaped  up,  a  good  omen  was  drawn  from  it ;  a  slow
and  smoky  combustion  prognosticated  misfortune.
When  a  victim  was  burned,  the  future  was  occasionally
predicted  by  observing  the  colour  of  the  flame.  Occa-
sionally, also  a  sick  person  would  be  set  in  front  of  a  large
fire,  when  if  the  shadow  cast  by  the  body  was  straight

DIVINATION.  143

and  at  right  angles  to  the  furnace,  his  speedy  cure  might
be  confidently  expected  ;  if  it  fell  u})on  the  ground  at  an
oblicpe  angle,  it  was  a  certain  sign  of  death.  The
observation  of  lighted  torches  was  also  practised  in
antiquity.  Three  torches  were  arranged  in  a  triangle,
all  of  them  being  composed  of  fine  wax.  The  vacillation
of  the  ilame  from  right  to  left  foretold  approaching
migrations ;  the  manoeuvres  of  secret  enemies  were
signified  by  a  spiral  curl ;  a  fitful  rising  and  falling  pre-
saged dangerous  vicissitudes.  A  preponderating  brilli-
ance in  a  single  torch  was  the  sign  of  unforeseen  fortune  ;
sparkling  and  crackling  were  considered  a  warning  to  be
prudent  and  a  menace  of  reverses  and  treachery.  The
formation  of  an  extremely  brilliant  point  at  the  extrem-
ity of  a  wick  announced  a  permanently  increasing
success ;  the  sudden  extinction  of  one  or  more  of  the
torches  was  considered  especially  disastrous  for  the
subjects  of  consultation  as  well  as  for  the  consulter
himself.

Myomancy.

When  Halton  II.,  surnamed  Bonose,  the  usurper  of
the  archiepiscojoal  seat  of  Mayence,  refused,  about  the
year  1074,  to  give  food  to  the  poor  during  a  famine,  and
persisted  so  far  in  his  sin  that  he  is  accredited  with
burning  a  house  full  of  importunate  bread-seekers,  he  is
said  to  have  been  visited  by  a  heavy  judgment  of  heaven.
He  fell  sick  in  a  castle  which  was  situated  on  a  small
island  in  the  Ehine  where  he  was  devoured  by  a  multi-
tude of  rats.  A  similar  fate  is  traditionally  recorded  of
a  Polish  king.  Common  domestic  vermin  besides  being
the  ministers  of  Divine  retribution  are  other^Wse  of-  a
certain  importance  in  supernatural  history.  It  is  a  good
omen  to  encounter  an  albino  rat,  as  it  is  also  a  sign
of  destruction  when  these  intelligent  animals  bodily
desert  a  ship.  Mice,  on  the  other  hand,  are  of  evil
augury,  and  the  harmony  of  suspicious  circumstances
during  the  consultation  of  an  oracle  would  be  permanently
upset  by  their  cry.  Out  of  these  superstitions  divina-
tion by  rats  and  mice  apparently  originated,  but  the
actual  nature  of  the  operation  has  not  come  down  to  us.

144  the  occult  sciences.

Onomancy.

The   evolution   of   Shakesperian    criticism   has    been
elaborated  to  such  a  degree  that  his  writings  are  some-
times regarded  by  persons  of  adequately  advanced  vision
as  a  complete  course  of  initiation  into  the  mysteries  of
occult  philosophy,  and  into  the  general  history  of  the
soul.    This  is  one  of  the  profundities  of  hypothesis  which
in  a  well-regulated  world  would,  of  course,  have  been
true,  but  it  is  extravagance  within  the  limits  of  space
of   three  dimensions.      A  veritable  Kabbalistic  Magus
would  never   have    penned    that   proverbial   question,
"What's  in  a  name  ?  "     It  is  a  doctrine  inherent  in  all
Kabbalistic   Magic  that  nothing   happens   fortuitously,
that  the  name  which  is  inherited  by  a  child  is  inherited  in
virtue  of  eternal  law,  and  that  even  his  prenominal  desig-
nation, though  apparently  arbitrary,  and  depending  on
parental  taste  and  whim,  or  upon  other  considerations,
is  not  a  product  of  chance,  but  must  also  be  referred  to
the  workings  of  an  arcane  principle.     Thence  it  is  a  step
to  affirm  that  the  name  is  in  itself  the  expression  of  a
destiny  to  come,  or  that  the  events  of  futurity  can  be
discerned  in  the  letters  of  a  name,  and  thus  Onomancy
arises,  which  is  the  art  of  divination  by  names,  and  was
in  high  favour  throughout  the  Pagan  world.     The  ad-
herents of  the  Pythagorean  philosophy  were  accustomed
to  maintain  that  the  talents,  activities,  and  good  fortune
of  men  were  in  conformity  with   their   destiny,  their
genius,  and  their  name.     The  esoteric  significance  of
the  title  Hippolytus   proclaimed  that  its  bearer  would
be    torn    in    pieces   by   horses;    it   was    equally   pre-
determined    that    Agamemnon    would    for    years    be
encamped  without  the  walls  of  Troy,  and  that  Priam
would  be  ransomed  from  slavery.     It  matters  not  that
there  was  more  than   one  Hippolytus   and   that  they
were  by  no  means  identical  in  destinies.       The  patro-
nymic had  also  its  influence,  and  a  second  prenominal
designation  would  act  also  on   the   life  of   its   bearer.
Now,  the  science  of  onomantic  divination  had  two  leading
rules.     An  even  number  of  vowels  in  a  man's  name  sig-
nified  something  amiss    in   the   left   side;   an   uneven
number  indicated  a  similar  imperfection  on  the  right.

DIVINATION.  145

The  causation  of  course  is  not  clear ;  but  God  is  all
knowing.  It  was  no  less  emphatically  certain  that  a
name  with  the  majority  of  letters  would  give  advantage
over  a  rival  whose  progenitors  had  less  copiously  supplied
him  vdth.  alphabetic  resources.  It  was  not  by  sword  or
buckler  that  Achilles  triumphed  over  Hector  ;  it  was  by
the  superior  length  of  his  name  ;  the  mischances  of
modern  warfare,  and  competition  of  every  species,  may
be  definitely  referred  to  the  neglect  of  this  msdom  of
the  ancients,  Happy  is  the  modern  bookmaker  who
falls  across  this  volume,  metaphorically  or  otherwise,
and  is  constrained  by  his  genius  to  glance  at  this  page.
A  permanent  fortune  mil  be  secured  him  in  the  pos-
session of  the  mystic  tips.  It  mil  be  scarcely  less  suit-
able to  ladies  in  a  choice  between  two  suitors,  as  the
only  sure  guide  to  fortune  in  the  lottery  of  the  marriage
market.  Old  times  are  changed,  old  manners  gone,  but
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  virtue  has  departed
from  a  divination  which  was  successfully  practised  in  the
past.  What  is  more  excellent  than  the  authority  of
Cselius  Ehodigunis  1  Has  he  not  informed  us  that
Theodotus  the  Goth  practised  peculiar  and  original
Onomancy  on  the  recommendation  of  a  Jew,  who  was
doubtless  a  king-initiate  1  "  The  divine  advised  the
Prince,  who  was  on  the  eve  of  a  war  with  Eome,  to
shut  up  thirty  hogs  in  three  different  styes,  having  pre-
viously given  some  of  them  Roman  and  others  Gothic
names.  On  an  appointed  day,  when  the  styes  were
opened,  all  the  Romans  Avere  found  alive,  but  with  half
their  bristles  fallen  off;  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  Goths
were  dead  ;  and  from  this  prognostic  the  Onomantist
forl)ode  that  the  Gothic  army  would  be  utterly  destroyed
by  the  Romans,  who,  at  the  same  time,  would  lose  half
their  own  force."

It  appears  on  the  authority  of  the  French  archaeologist,
Count  de  Gebelin,  that  this  method  of  divination  was
found  susceptiljle  of  unheard  of  developments  by  the
"  divine  "  Cagliostro,  who  foretold  to  masonic  illumines  in
solemn  conclave,  the  most  important  events  of  the  French
revolution  by  the  names,  birthplaces,  and  other  natal
circumstances,  of  the  chief  participators  therein.     Inde-

K

146  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

pendent  of  esoteric  philosophy,  the  ingenuities  of  the
modern  intellect  have  extracted  from  the  names  and
titles  of  modern  celebrities  sentences  apposite  to  their
destinies  or  characters  by  the  art  of  the  anagram.

Onychomancy.

Divination  by  the  nails  of  the  fingers  would  appear  to
be  a  trivial  invention,  but  for  some  unexplained  reason
it  has  been  dignified  by  the  title  of  the  observation  of
the  angel  Uriel.     "  Upon  the  nails  of  the  right  hand  of
an  unpolluted  boy  or  a  young  virgin,  or  the  palm  of  the
hand,  is  put  some  oil  of  olives,  or,  what  is  better,  oil  of
walnuts  mingled  with  tallow  or  blacking."     Tallow  was
occasionally  the  sole  ingredient  and  wax  was  sometimes
a  substitute.  The  nails,  when  they  had  been  thus  anointed,
were  turned  towards  the  sun  and  resolutely  considered  by
the  seer.    The  ends  of  the  inquiry  determined  the  time  of
observation.     The  search  after  money  or  articles  buried
in  the  earth  must  be  pursued  with  the  face  towards  the
East,  and  was  thus  of  matutinal  character,  as  the  full  blaze
of  sunlight  must  invariably  fall  upon  the  prepared  nails  of
the  medium.    The  occult  investigation  of  crimes,  and  con-
sultations prompted  by  affection,  were  pursued  with  the
face  to  the  South,  which  also  served  for  murder,  while  the
West  was  for  robbery.     It  was  requisite  that  the  child
should  repeat  the  seventy -two  verses  of  the  Psalms,  which
the  Hebrew  Kabbalists  collected  for  theUrimm  and  Thum-
mim ;  and  which  are  preserved  in  a  treatise  entitled  De
Verho  Mirifico,  and  in  Eeuchlin's  Eabbinical  -collection.
"  In  each  of  these  verses  occurs  the  venerable  name  of  four
letters,  and  the  three-lettered  name  of  the  seventy-two
angels,  which  are  referred  to  the  inquisitive  name  Schema-
hamphores  which  was  hidden  in  the  folds  of  the  lining  of
the  tippet  of  the  high  priest."     The  hypnotic  condition
may  be  produced  in  such  a  variety  of  ways  that  even
the  anointed  nail  should  not  be  too  rigorously  excluded
from   the  category  of  possible  instruments.     There  is,
however,  an  eternal  fitness  which  forbids  the  anti-climax
whether  in  act  or  speech,  and  it  has  definitely  relegated
such  methods  to  the  limbus  land  of  bathos.

DIVINATION.  147

OoiklANCY.

The  domestic  egg  is  redeemed  from  irretrievable
commonplace  by  its  symbolic  value,  its  suggestion  of
hidden  possibilities,  and  of  a  world  in  miniature.  Divin-
ation by  eggs  may  be  therefore  permitted  to  jDass,  if  only
by  reason  of  its  quaintness.  The  ancients  were  wont  to
discern  in  the  exterior  shape  and  in  the  interior  construc-
tion of  the  egg  the  most  impenetrable  arcana  of  futurity,
an  art  which  is  supposed  to  have  originated  with  the
divine  Orpheus.  If  a  pregnant  woman  should  be
anxious  to  ascertain  the  sex  of  her  future  child,  she
must  carry  an  egg  in  her  bosom  at  the  proper  tempera-
ture. When  under  the  influence  of  the  natural  warmth,
a  chick  is  at  length  brought  forth,  its  sex  will  deter-
mine the  infant  as  either  male  or  female.  Divination,
however,  has  of  late  been  more  usually  practised  with
the  whites  of  eggs,  and  this  method  was  in  favour  with
the  celebrated  Mademoiselle  Lenormand.  "  Take  a  glass
of  water,  break  a  fresh  egg  slowly  into  it,  and  from  the
figures  assumed  by  the  white  let  the  presages  of  the
future  be  collected  by  the  intuitive  skill  of  the  seer."
This  is  by  no  means  a  modern  method ;  it  is  referred  to
in  the  following  terms  by  a  Grimoire  of  comparative
antiquity.  "The  operation  of  the  egg  is  to  ascertain
what  will  befall  some  person  who  is  then  present  in  the
company.  An  egg  of  a  black  pullet  must  be  broken  and
the  germ  extracted  therefrom.  A  large  glass,  very  clear
and  clean,  must  stand  ready,  being  filled  with  pure  water.
Therein  must  the  germ  be  placed,  and  subsequently  the
vessel  must  be  exposed  to  the  mid-day  sun  of  summer,
with  many  prayers  and  conjurations,  the  water  also
being  much  stirred  with  the  finger  to  circulate  the  said
germ.  When  this  has  been  done  sufficiently,  it  is  alloAved
to  rest  still  for  an  instant,  and  is  gazed  at  without  touch-
ing. Something  relating  to  the  inquirer  and  the  object
of  divinatory  research  will  then  be  visible  in  the  water."

In  addition  to  the  methods  of  divination  which  we  have
enumerated  above,  there  are  many  of  a  minor  character,
and  many  which  are  confined  to  certain  localities  and

148  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

more  properly  belong  to  folk  lore.  A  brief  reference  to  a
few  of  the  former  class  will  complete  this  exhaustive  notice.
Gykomancy  was  a  kind  of  divination  practised  by
perambulating  a  circle  inscribed  with  the  alphabet.
When  fatigue  was  succeeded  by  giddiness  and  giddiness
by  utter  collapse,  when  the  operator  dropped  to  the
ground,  the  letter  upon  which  he  fell  was  the  first  in  the
response  of  this  oracle.  If  after  an  appropriate  pause,
he  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  recommence,  he  might,
in  the  same  manner,  obtain  a  second  letter,  and  so  on  till
he  evolved  an  intelligible  sentence,  or  till  death  or  mad-
ness intervened.  This  is  an  interesting  instance  of
mystic  practice  which  may  be  commended  to  modern
agility  in  advanced  thaumaturgics  and  to  the  far  behind
followers  of  the  eastern  howling  dervish.  Hippomancy
was  a  Celtic  divination  by  the  neighing  of  white  horses,
set  apart  for  the  purpose,  and  fed  at  the  public  expense
in  consecrated  forests  where  the  trees  were  their  sole
shelter.  They  were  made  to  tramp  behind  a  sacred
chariot,  the  priest  and  king  followed  and  observed  their
every  movement,  drawing  auguries  therefrom  ivith.  an
absolute  and  unfailing  confidence  founded  on  the  con-
viction that  the  animals  participated  in  the  great  arcanum
of  the  sfods.  The  Saxons  also  drew  omens  from  the
movements  of  a  sacred  horse  fed  and  housed  in  a  temple
whence  it  was  driven  before  war  was  declared  against  an
enemy.  If  it  stepped  forward  right  hoof  first,  that  was
a  favourable  augury  ;  in  the  other  case,  they  renounced
their  enterprise.  Ichthyomancy,  like  all  divinations  of
incredible  grossness,  is  of  venerable  antiquity,  and  may
be  commended  to  the  Wisdom  Eeligion,  and  the
apologists  of  a  spoliated  past.  It  was  performed  by  the
inspection  of  the  entrails  of  fish.  An  Apollonian  foun-
tain of  prophetic  fish  was  preserved  at  Mirea  and  was
consulted  by  the  grand  Apuleius,  who  was  initiated  by
Ceres  into  the  many  folded  mysteries  of  the  rose.
Kephalonomancy  is  an  interesting  practice  involving
diverse  ceremonies  with  the  boiled  head  of  a  donkey.
The  ass  is  a  sacred,  prophetic,  divinatory,  mystic,  and
essentially  divine  animal.  By  reason  of  its  auricular
elongations,  it  is  kindred  to  Baphomet  and  to  universal

DIVINATIOX.  149

Pan.  This  is  a  very  interesting,  innocuous,  and  credit-
able operation  which  Deh^io  refers  to  the  mediaeval  Jews.
But  it  seems  to  have  been  practised  by  the  ancients,  who
deposited  the  head  upon  some  live  coals,  recited  super-
stitious prayers,  pronounced  the  names  of  suspected
persons  about  whom  they  desired  information,  and  listened
for  a  cracking  and  convulsive  movement  of  the  jaws  of
the  decapitated  beast.  The  name  which  was  pronounced
at  this  crucial  moment  by  the  intelligent  operator  was
that  of  the  guilty  person.  Lampodomancy  was  a  form
of  divination  by  observing  the  shape,  colour,  and  various
movements  assumed  by  the  flame  of  a  lamp.  The  art
of  di^dnation  by  pearls  was  denominated  Margarito
MANGY.  The  precious  stone  was  set  by  a  fire  and  covered
with  a  glass  vessel.  The  inc|uiry  was  conducted  for  the
recovery  of  stolen  goods  ;  it  consisted  in  the  repetition  of
the  names  of  suspected  persons,  repeated  in  a  loud  voice.
When  that  of  the  guilty  party  was  pronounced  by  the
speaker,  the  pearl  was  supposed  to  leap  up  to  the  top  of
the  glass,  which  it  occasionally  shivered  with  its  force.
This  is  another  entertaining  and  simple  device  which  can
easily  be  tested  by  the  possessor  of  the  stone  in  question,
and  in  the  event  of  its  success,  would  be  a  good  instance
of  di^dning  power,  and  the  production  of  wonderful
effects  Tvithout  causes.  By  means  of  a  simple  ceremonial,
Parthenomangy  guaranteed  to  ascertain  the  presence
or  absence  of  virginity.  The  girth  of  the  girl's  neck
was  measured  with  a  thread,  and  on  the  repetition  of
this  operation,  after  a  reasonable  period,  an  unfavour-
able conclusion  was  drawn  from  an  increase  in  its  size.
Sgiamaxcy  was  performed  by  the  evocation  of  the
shades  of  the  dead.  It  differed  from  necromancy  and
psychomancy  as  it  was  neither  the  soul  nor  body  of  the
deceased  person  which  responded  to  the  appeal  of  the
Magus,  but  a  kind  of  mysterious  simulacrum,  most  prob-
ably an  astral  shell.  Spodanomancy  has  a  definite
advantage  over  most  forms  of  divination  as  the  devil  is
occasionally  supposed  to  interfere  personally  in  its  be-
half. "  It  is  performed,"  says  Grand  Orient,  "  by  scatter-
ing ashes  thickly  in  some  place  exposed  to  the  air,  and
writing  therein  with  the  end  of  the  finger  any  cpiestion

150  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

about   which  information    is   needed.       The   inscribed
ashes  are  then  left  for  the  night,  and  on  the  follow-
ins:  mornino;  the  letters   that  remain  le2;ible  are  made
use  of  as  oracles,  for  which  purpose  they  may  be  placed
in  their  natural  order,  when  if  they  form  an  intelligible
word,  it  may  be  considered  to  contain  the  mystic  sense
of  the  oracle  and  an  answer  to  the  question  j^roposed.
Other^vise  the  insight  of  the  contriver  must  be  used  to
extract  an  appropriate  answer  from  the  assemblage  of
letters  arranged  after  any  fashion."     Innumerable  and
beautiful  alike  are  the  varieties  of  divinatory  mysticisms.
By  Sycomancy  the  leaves  of  the  fig-tree  are  transformed
into  suggestive  oracles.      Interrogatory  remarks  upon
any  subject  about  which  information  is  desired  are  in-
scribed thereon.     If  the  leaves  wither  quickly,  that  is  an
evil  sign ;  if  they  preserve  their  freshness  for  a  consider-
able period,  the  sign  is  fortunate.     Last  in  the  long  list
but  first  in  importance  is  the  Kabbalistic  Theomancy  of
the  Jews,  a  research  into  the  inner  mysteries  of  Divine
Majesty  and  into  the  resources  of  sacred  names.     Those
who  are  in  possession  of  this  tremendous  science  have
broken  the  seals  of  futurity,  may  command  nature,  and
control  both  angels  and  devils.    They  have  also  the  Key
of  miracles.     A  considerable  amount  of  information  on
subjects  connected  with  Theomancy  has  been  embodied
in  the  first  section  of  the  present  book.

AVe  have  treated  the  methods  of  divination  at  such
length,  that  it  mil  be  almost  superfluous  to  make  refer-
ence to  sources  where  more  extensive  information  will
be  found.  Les  Levins,  ou  Commentaire  cles  FrincijMles
Sortes  de  Devinations,  by  Gasper  Peucer,  date  1584,  is  a
quarto  of  nearly  700  pages,  and  may  be  considered  to
exhaust  the  subject.  Works  in  the  English  language
are  few  and  unimportant.

THE  DIVINING  ROD.

THOUGH  essentially  a  method  of  divination,  and
naturally,  as  such,  to  be  included  in  the  section
which  bears  that  name,  the  interest  which  has  so
long  been  attracted  by  the  magnetic  wand,  its  extra-
ordinary history,  and  the  very  large  number  of  witnesses
who  have  testified  to  its  genuine  potency,  demand  its
separate  treatment  as  in  the  case  of  the  magic  crystal.

Our  readers  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the
mystic  properties  of  the  rod  in  necromantic  and  in  black
magic.  But  the  ordinary  divining  rod,  which  is  known
by  reputation  to  everybody,  which  is  still  made  use  of
in  remote  country  places,  is  an  instrument  of  natural
magic  and  not  of  pneumatic  art.  This  is  substantially
equivalent  to  saying  that  if  its  curious  properties  are
really  established  fact,  they  are  unappreciated  phenomena
of  ordinary  science  and  belong,  like  the  loadstone,  to
the  domain  of  magnetism.  They  have,  however,  been
variously  explained,  for  the  subject  has  been  seriously
treated  in  large  volumes  and  has  originated  a  literature
of  its  own ;  sometimes  the  mystery  was  solved  by  help
of  a  "  corpuscular  hypothesis  "  and  sometimes  by  that  of
sub-surface  electricity.  But  the  agency  of  the  devil  was
of  course  the  grand  explanation,  the  ul3iquitous  court  of
infernus  being  the  supreme  fact  of  the  age.

The  divining  rod  was  and  is  a  forked  branch  of  the
wild  hazel,  the  beech,  or  the  apple-tree.  It  answers  best
if  it  be  a  shoot  of  one  year's  growth,  and,  on  the  whole,
it  is  safer,  to  minimise  variations  in  results  under  condi-
tions that  appear  to  be  identical,  to  cut  the  rod  with  some
solemnity.  The  directions  which  are  given  in  the  "  Great
.  Grimoire "  and  in  the  "  Red  Dragon "  are  similar  to
those  which  have  Ijcen  detailed  for  the  verendum  of  black
maeric.     The  wild  hazel  is  recommended,  the  branch  to

152  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

be  seized  in  the  left  hand  and  severed  with  three  blows
of  a  knife  held  in  the  opposite  hand.  This  must  be
performed  at  the  moment  of  sunrise,  and  the  following
recitation  should  be  made  : — "  I  gather  thee  in  the  name
of  Eloim,  Mutrathon,  Adonay,  and  Semiphoras,  that  by
their  power  thou  mayest  possess  the  virtues  of  the  rod
of  Moses  and  Jacob  for  the  discovery  of  all  that  I  desire
to  know."  The  experiments  should  be  invariably  accom-
panied by  a  short  aspiration,  the  rod  being  held  lightly
in  both  hands  by  the  two  ends  which  form  the  fork  : —
"I  command  thee  in  the  name  of  Eloim,  Mutrathon,
Adonay,  and  Semiphoras  to  make  known  to  me  " — here
name  the  special  object  of  your  experiment.

As  a  rule,  the  rod  is  made  use  of  independently  of
magical  ceremonies,  independently  of  prayers  or  for-
mulae, as  a  natural  curiosity  which  produces  singular
practical  results.  In  this  case,  the  power  of  turning  it
is  a  gift  which,  like  mediumship,  belongs  to  exceptional
persons,  and  to  those,  it  would  seem,  alone.  The  opera-
tion is  simple  in  the  extreme ;  it  consists  in  holding  in
each  hand  one  of  the  upper  ends  of  the  rod  and  walking
leisurely  over  the  ground.  When  you  approach  the
object  of  your  quest,  the  rod  turns  of  itself  in  the  hand,
and  the  indication  is  held  to  be  infallible.

The  instrument,  as  will  be  seen  later  on,  was  originally
used  for  the  purposes  of  direct  divination,  for  obtaining  an
omen  or  pressage,  for  discovering  a  thief,  or  unearthing
a  buried  treasure.  In  Europe,  and  especially  in  England,
these  applications  of  its  powers  became  exploded  upon
the  discovery  that  numerous  as  they  may  have  been  in
a  number  of  directions,  not  even  excepting  alchemy,  the
divining  rod  had  a  wider  range  of  sympathy  with  the
old  world  element  of  water  than  with  any  other  ma-
terial substance,  or  with  any  human  delinquent,  whether
fobber  or  witch,  and  henceforth  it  was  generally  utilised
for  the  indication  of  subterranean  springs.  The  testi-
mony already  referred  to  has  reference  exclusively  to
this  aspect  of  its  occult  virtues.

The  discovery  in  question  is  ascribed  to  Jacques
Aymar,  who  obtained  notoriety  at  Lyons  in  1672,  by
the  performance  of  a  variety  of  wonders  which  included

THE  DIVINING  ROD.  153

theyetection  of  assassins,  of  sorcery,  of  thieves,  of  wells
underground,  and  of  obliterated  boundaries.  It  is  curious
to  read  in  a  book  of  the  seventeenth  century  that  the
sensitive  who  was  master  of  the  rod  was  invariably  sub-
ject to  the  same  species  of  facial  contortions,  of  violent
nervous  quivering,  and  of  pulse  elevated  to  fever  point,
which  are  characteristic  of  thouf^ht-readers  and  mediums
at  the  present  day.  It  is  noticeable  also,  murders  being
common  in  those  days  of  comparative  violence,  that
whenever  the  psychological  bloodhound  was  conducted
by  his  rod  or  otherwise  to  the  scene  of  a  murder,  he
always  experienced  a  painful  sensation  of  the  heart,
accompanied  by  oppression  and  occasionally  by  sickness.

Pre^dously  to  the  celebrity  of  Aymar,  this  instrument
of  divination,  as  apart  from  its  use  in  the  practice  of
magical  evocation,  was  devoid  of  any  special  celebrity.
His  prodigies  brought  him  to  the  notice  of  the  Prince  de
Conde,  but  his  operations  when  he  was  under  the  patron-
age of  this  nobleman  at  Paris  were  of  an  equivocal  kind,
and  he  is  alleged  to  have  acknowledged  that  he  was  an
impostor,  that  the  rod  had  no  potency  of  its  own,  and
that  he  had  recourse  to  the  device  of  divining  for  the
reasons  which  most  commonly  influence  the  needy  rogue
in  his  exploits  of  trickery.  These  exceedingly  likely
admissions  notwithstanding,  the  fame  of  the  divining
rod  increased,  and  its  professors  multiplied.  Boys  and
women  became  proficient  in  this  by  way  of  detective
skill.  Books  which  were  ponderous  in  its  praise  and
were  fortified  into  folios  by  big  bundles  of  true  and  cir-
cumstantial relations ;  books  in  exposure  of  the  shallow
and  charlatanic  pretence  ;  books  that  explained  it  by
purely  natural  considerations ;  books  that  insisted  on  its
miraculous  character  ;  books  that  ascribed  it  to  the  devil
— an  entire  literature  arose.  An  avocation  which  had
originated  in  folk-lore  became  fashionable  for  a  moment^
for  a  century,  and  it  returned  whence  it  came,  to  the
peasantrj?"  who  have  created  folk-lore,  and  among  whom
it  has  been  real  and  has  lived.

The  divining  rod,  on  an  impartial  survey  of  its  history,
would  appear  to  have  been  used,  as  was  naturally  most
probable,  in  both  good  and  bad  faith,  and  in  each  case

154  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

indifFerently  much  the  same  results  were  obtained,  for
trickery  is  rigorously  imitative,  and  in  the  production
of  bogus  effects  is  seldom  designed  to  surpass  the  original
and  genuine  model.  Apart  altogether  from  mysticism,
independently  of  magic  and  mediumship,  the  divining
rod  is  capable  of  explanation  by  facts  in  animal  magnet-
ism which  are  now  generally  admitted.  Psychometry,
which  is  a  part  of  clairvoyance  as  clairvoyance  is  a
higher  part  of  mesmerism,  has  many  authenticated
results,  and  offers  some  analogies  with  the  wonders  of  the
filbert  wand.  What  the  disc  is  to  the  eye  in  hypnotism,
the  rod  was  to  the  hand  in  rhabdomancy.  The  mineral
applied  to  the  forehead  of  the  sensitive  awakes  an  in-
stinct, or  an  inner  sense  of  sight,  or  some  other  potential
faculty,  into  transient  life,  and  the  subject  sees — sees,  it
is  averred,  the  past  history  of  the  object  almost  from  the
dawn  of  evolution.  Now,  there  is  a  correspondence,  it
would  seem,  between  the  eye  of  sense  and  the  eye  of
mind,  but  the  activity  of  the  mind's  eye  can  be  some-
times developed  by  sensations  from  the  sense  of  touch,
and  the  discoveries  accredited  to  the  divining  rod  are
often  a  form  of  clairvoyance  in  which  the  operator  at  the
right  moment  sees  what  he  is  required  to  discover,  the
instrument  being  merely  a  pretext  for  the  development
of  interior  vision,  acting  much  after  the  manner  of  the
crystal  where  the  eye  is  concerned,  and  producing  some
hypnotic  or  abnormal  condition.  Though  one  quality
of  wood  may  be  said  to  be  better  than  another,  the  rod
itself  can  possess  no  occult  virtue.  The  effect,  whatever
it  may  be,  acts  possibly  through  the  rod,  but  it  is  the
individual  who  is  affected,  as  is  evident  from  his  nervous
excitement.

Experiments  with  the  divining  wand  have  undoubtedly
an  element  of  interest  and  in  one  sense  a  practical  utility,
but  they  belong  to  the  curiosities  of  the  secret  sciences,
and  have  no  value  from  the  standpoint  of  true  mystic-
ism. An  earnest  inquirer,  who,  in  the  language  of
mystical  allegory,  is  in  search  of  Diana  Unveiled  and  of
the  Way  of  the  Light  should  abstain  from  the  trivialities
of  the  practice  ;  he  is  seeking  his  soul ;  let  him  surrender
the   quest   after   little   marvels  to  the  wonder-stricken

THE  DIVINING  ROD.  155

weaklings  who  follow  in  the  train  of  the  mystics,  and
are  content  with  milk  for  babes.

The  element  of  interest  to  which  we  have  just  referred,
as  distinguished,  for  the  moment,  from  its  practical
utility,  is  the  fact  that  the  search  after  water  is  still
pursued  after  this  old  method  of  magic.  It  is  one  of  the
few  sur\dvals  of  the  antiquated  faith  in  the  sympathy
and  antipathy  of  things,  and  though  the  citation  of  cases
is,  generally  speaking,  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present
work,  the  two  following  testimonies  to  the  persistence
and  the  success  of  this  divinatory  method  in  the  dawn  of
the  twentieth  century  will  show  that  in  even  the  byways
of  mystic  art  there  is  occasionally  a  real  and  recoverable
power  and  truth.  The  accounts  in  each  case  are  drawn
from  the  newspapers  which  commemorated  the  occur-
rence within  a  short  period  of  its  date.

"  The  question  as  to  the  magical  or  the  '  scientific '
value  of  the  '  divining  rod,' "  says  the  Manchester
Exciminer  of  February  17,  1886,  "has  just  been  re-
oj^ened  by  the  success  which  has  attended  its  use  at  the
rielton  Wagon  Works  of  the  Midland  Eailway  Com-
pany in  reference  to  the  discovery  of  a  permanent  supply
of  water.  The  required  diurnal  volume  of  water  was
about  five  hundred  or  six  hundred  gallons,  and  the  well
on  the  premises  only  yielded  half  that  quantity.  It  was
necessary,  therefore,  to  supplement  the  supply  either  by
the  sinking  of  other  wells  or  by  the  construction  of  an
expensive  system  of  piping  from  Peterburgh.  The
former  plan  was  preferred,  and  two  new  wells  were  sunk
to  no  purpose.  The  services  of  a  gentleman  of  the  dis-
trict, who  bore  the  reputation  of  being  skilled  in  the  art
of  discovering  water  by  means  of  the  'divining  rod,'
were  then  called  in.  This  wizard  or  expert  employed
for  his  purpose  a  forked  hazel  twig,  holding  one  prong
of  the  fork  in  each  hand,  the  point  being  directed  to
the  sky.  After  walking  about  the  premises  for  some
time,  the  point  of  the  fork  suddenly  began  to  bend  down,
purely,  as  the  best  evidence  goes,  of  its  own  accord,  and
to  turn  towards  the  earth.  The  wielder  of  the  wand
declared  that  in  the  spot  indicated  there  would  be  found
a  plentiful  supply  of  water.     The  same  phenomenon  was

156  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

repeated  at  another  spot,  where  the  twig  snapped  from
the  violence  of  its  spontaneous  and  sympathetic  motion,
and  the  same  confident  assertions  were  made  with  refer-
ence to  the  presence  of  water — assertions  which  the
results  obtained,  by  actuall}^  sinking  wells,  amply  justi-
fied, the  quantity  of  water  to  be  obtained  being  appar-
ently inexhaustible.  Other  persons  essayed  to  use  the
wand,  but  it  rebelled  against  the  usurpation  of  its
owner's  functions,  and  remained  contumacious  and  irre-
sponsive."

In  the  same  year  a  correspondent  of  Farm  and  Home
gave  the  following  account  of  experiments  conducted,
under  his  direction,  on  one  of  the  largest  estates  of
Yorkshire : —

"  We  are  obliged  here  to  provide  a  supply  of  water
for  a  large  colliery  population,  and  although  we  have
made  large  reservoirs  we  are  deficient  in  gathering-
ground,  the  coal  pits  having  taken  away  the  supply  in
most  directions.  The  past  season  having  been  dry,  my
employer  was  advised  by  several  other  gentlemen —
members  of  Parliament,  magistrates,  and  others — to
employ  the  man  with  the  '  divining  rod '  to  prospect  the
ground  about  the  reservoirs,  and  if  possible  find  a  better
and  more  permanent  supply  of  water  in  order  to  ensure
the  filling  of  them  in  dry  seasons,  it  being  suggested  that
if  the  man  could  find  water  in  August,  after  all  the
other  wells  and  springs  had  gone  nearly  dry,  the  supply
was  likely  to  be  a  good  one.

"  With  that  object,  '  John  Mullins,  Waterspring  Dis-
coverer by  means  of  the  Divining  Rod,  Colerne,  Chip-
penham, Wilts,'  as  his  card  sets  forth,  was  sent  for,  and
arrived  here  about  ten  o'clock  at  night.  I  found  him  to
be  a  plain,  working  mason,  who  has  been  employed  most
of  his  life  on  the  same  gentleman's  estate.  There  was
no  pretence  of  quackery  or  jugglery  about  him  in  any
sense.  He  comes  for  a  moderate  fee  and  his  expenses,
and  he  undertakes  '  to  find '  water  if  it  be  in  the  ground ;
the  best  guarantee  for  his  sincerity  is  that  he  contracts
to  sink  and  build  the  wells  himself  on  the  spot  where  he
says  the  water  exists.

"  To  make  a  long  story  short,  I  took  him  in  hand

THE  DIVINING  ROD.  157

early  next  morning,  starting  him  at  one  end  of  a  long-
walk  with  a  fresh,  hard  twig,  cut  by  myself.  I  asked
him  to  find  water  anywhere  within  the  next  hundred
yards.  I  followed  behind  him,  he  stepping  steadily
forward,  partly  bent,  with  the  twig  held  in  both  hands,
the  twig  being  of  a  <^  shape,  with  the  point  held  down-
wards. When  he  got  about  two-thirds  of  the  way,  it
turned  up ;  he  made  a  mark  on  the  ground,  proceeded
to  the  end  of  his  journey,  then  came  back  again,  the
tAvig  turning  up  again  violently  at  exactly  the  same
spot,  directly  over  an  old  buried  well  I  had  covered  in
with -flags  and  earth  deeply,  and  made  a  walk  over,  some
fifteen  years  ago.  We  were  afterwards  joined  by  my
employer,  the  Vicar,  our  engineer,  and  the  superinten-
dent of  our  waterworks,  and  prosjDected  the  estate  over
in  one  direction,  Mullins  finding  water  in  several  places,
but  no  very  strong  springs.  We  dug  the  day  after  at
some  of  the  places,  arid  found  water ;  and  when  he  left,
the  only  water  running  into  the  reservoir  was  from  a
spring  he  found  not  far  from  it.  In  one  place  a  pit
about  ten  feet  deep  was  hollowed  out,  breaking  through
a  rocky  pan,  and  the  water  rose  about  eight  feet  in  the
hole  during  the  night.

"  The  best  proof  of  the  man's  gifts,  however,  was  the
fact  that  he  set  out  correctly  every  running  drain  or
pipe  under  the  ground  that  he  was  put  to,  by  simply
goiag  over  the  surface  with  his  twig  by  himself.  The
Vicar,  an  avowed  sceptic,  took  the  man  into  his  flower
garden,  the  rest  of  the  party  remaining  outside,  and
asked  him  to  make  two  or  three  casts  with  his  twig
across  his  lawn  and  through  his  shrubs,  which  he  did,
pegging  the  water  out  as  he  proceeded ;  and  it  was  after-
wards found  that  he  had  set  a  main  running  drain  out
correctly  from  the  first  peg  to  the  last,  the  whereabouts
of  which  no  one  knew  but  the  Vicar  himself,  and  of
which  there  were  no  signs  whatever  above  ground.  The
Vicar  turned  to  the  man  and  said,  '  I  give  in ;  you  have
beaten  me.'  I  was  myself  as  disbelieving  as  any  one,
but  interested  and  open  to  conviction.  I  had  much  con-
versation with  the  man  afterwards,  during  the  two  days
he  was  here,  and  was  greatly  amused  by  some  of  his

158  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

tales  about  certain  clever  and  scientific  sceptics  he  had
met  with.  ...  I  have  given  a  plain  statement  of  facts,
and  offer  no  opinion  on  the  subject.  The  man  was
tested  when  here,  and  in  the  fairest  manner,  he  being
perfectly  willing  to  satisfy  us  as  far  as  he  possibly  could.
On  several  occasions  the  Vicar  held  one  end  of  the
forked  twig,  and  I  the  other  end,  the  man's  hands  hold-
ing each  limb  firmly  between  our  hands  and  the  bottom
of  the  <^.  We  took  care  that  the  ends  of  the  two  limbs
did  not  move ;  but  the  point  of  the  <^  twisted  up  irre-
sistibly till  the  bark  wrinkled  and  creaked,  and  some-
times till  it  broke.  The  movement  of  the  twig  is  rapid ;
it  hangs  down  till  it  comes  over  water,  when  it  whirls
round  like  lightning."

It  should  be  added  to  these  narratives  that  modern
Spiritualism  has  discovered  a  new  application  of  the
Divining  Rod,  which  is  made  use  of  as  a  means  of  com-
munication on  the  part  of  the  invisible  intelligence.  It
is  j)laced  in  the  hands  of  the  medium,  or  of  a  sitter  at  a
stance,  and  is  held  over  the  letters  of  the  alphabet
arranged  in  a  circle  or  line.  After  preliminary  sway-
ings,  it  is  said  to  indicate  a  variety  of  letters  with  con-
siderable rapidity,  leaping  from  point  to  point,  and  by
this  simple  process  the  wisdom  of  the  World  Beyond  is
conveyed  to  the  interrogators  of  the  wand  in  intelligible
words  and  sentences.

While  in  magic  the  rod  was  used  chiefly  either  for  the
control  of  visible  spirits  worked  by  the  power  of  certain
words  and  ceremonies  which  formulated  the  will  of  the
magician,  or  else  for  the  discovery  of  hidden  springs  of
water,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  it  was  used  for  the
purposes  of  direct  divination.  So  far  back  as  the  time
of  Hosea,  we  know  that  the  people  sought  counsel  of
their  stocks,  and  that  their  staves  declared  unto  them.
In  the  days  of  Grecian  augury  it  was  the  custom  to
erect  two  staves,  over  which  mystic  verses  and  incanta-
tions were  pronounced  in  an  undertone,  till  the  staves,
influenced  by  the  daimons,  were  suddenly  cast  to  the
ground.  The  direction  of  the  fall  regulated  the  nature
of  the  augury.  The  rods  of  the  Hebrews  were  peeled
on  one  side,  and  an  omen  was  drawn  from  the  manner

THE  DIVINING  ROD.  159

in  which  they  fell.  In  the  days  of  the  witch  fever  it  was
devoted  to  a  more  serious,  and,  at  the  same  time,  more
abhorrent  purpose.  It  had  long  been  made  use  of  in
the  discovery  of  fugitive  thieves  ;  it  was  supposed  to
have  virtues  for  the  detection  of  secret  spell-makers  and
casters  of  the  e\dl  eye  ;  then  it  developed  a  more  unerring
and  awful  power,  for  it  was  affirmed  that  the  Y-shaped
rod  obtained  from  a  shrub  now  called  the  witch-hazel,
would  infallibly  turn  in  the  direction  in  which  a  Avitch
was  to  be  found.  Believing  in  the  truth  of  the  adage
that  a  thief  should  be  set  to  catch  a  thief  if  you  msh  to
track  him,  they  made  use  of  what  the  ignorance  of  the
time  would  have  denominated  witchcraft  to  expose  the
witches.  On  being  led  into  the  presence  of  a  company
of  women,  the  professional  witch-hunter  Avould  balance
his  rod,  and  the  direction  in  which  its  forked  portion
might  chance  to  turn,  or  might  be  secretly  made  to  turn,
indicated  the  guilty  person,  who  was  persecuted,  or  who
perished  accordingly.

The  actual  nature  of  the  connection  between  the  rod
and  the  water  which  it  indicates  has  not  been  made
clear  by  the  numerous  writers  who  have  devoted  their
attention  to  the  subject,  and  have  given  us  the  result  of
their  researches.  Whether  it  is  impossible  to  utilise  it
for  the  discovery  of  f)recious  stones  and  precious  metals
has  not  been  discussed  by  theorists,  nor  has  it  been
attempted  in  experiment.  But  though  the  mystic  rod
may  be  influenced  by  nothing  that  is  denser  than  water,
though  the  attention  of  the  alchemists  was  concentrated
on  the  creation  of  gold  and  silver  in  a  manner  so  com-
pletely exclusive  that  they  had  no  leisure  to  elaborate  a
process  for  their  discovery  in  the  natural  form  in  mines,
the  byways  of  magical  art  have  not  deserted  the  needy
seeker.  This  notice  may  be  fitly  concluded  by  putting
him  in  possession  of  an  exceedingly  curious  method  for
the  detection  of  concealed  treasures,  which  is  so  far
connected  -with  the  subject  now  under  notice,  that  it
involves  the  use  of  a  vervain  rod,  or  branch.

"  When  by  natural  indications,  or  by  those  which  are
considered  supernatural,  as,  for  instance,  by  a  revelation
made  in  a  dream,  you  have  reason  to  believe  that  a

160  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

treasure  has  been  deposited  in  a  certain  place,  you  must
begin  your  operations  by  burning  over  it  the  perfume
proper  to  the  day  on  which  you  have  determined  to  dig.
Next,  you  must  plant  with  your  right  hand  a  branch  of
green  laurel,  and  with  your  left  a  branch  of  vervain,  and
between  these  two  branches  you  must  begin  turning  the
soil.  AVhen  the  foss  has  attained  the  level  of  your  own
stature,  the  branches  must  be  twined  into  a  chaplet  and
placed  around  your  hat,  with  a  talisman  above  it  which
must  be  composed  of  a  circular  plate  of  refined  pewter,
made  in  the  day  and  hour  of  Jupiter,  during  a  propi-
tious celestial  aspect."  On  the  obverse  side  must  be
engraven  the  figure  of  a  Fortuna  poised  with  one  foot
upon  a  small  sphere  and  moving  with  both  hands  above
her  head  a  long  veil  which  conceals  with  its  floating
drapery  the  central  portion  of  her  otherwise  unclothed
form.  Out  of  a  cloud  at  her  left  an  arm  is  thrust  which
bears  in  its  hand  a  heart,  and  has  the  following  inscrip-
tion about  it —

pu^:^0B-[9j
Eriam  f erana —

words  to  which  Ave  are  unable  to  ascribe  any  certain  sig-
nificance or  origin,  but  they  may  belong  to  the  unknown
tongue.  On  the  reverse  side  two  poj"tentous  expressions
must  be  written  in  characters  whose  size  shall  be  indica-
tive of  their  importance,

OMOUSIN  ALBOMATATOS.

If  several  persons  should  assist  in  the  operation  of
delving,  each  must  be  in  possession  of  this  talisman,
and  must  wear  the  garland  that  has  been  described.
Should  the  work  occupy  more  than  a  day,  the  perfume
proper  to  each  day  must  be  invariably  burned.  These
precautions  are  required  to  avert  the  malice  of  the
Gnomes,  who  are  the  guardians  of  treasures,  and  well
qualified  to  give  assistance  in  your  enterprises.

Paracelsus  remarks  in  his  "  Treatise  on  Occult  Philo-
sophy," that  in  order  to  obtain  reliable  indications  of
hidden  wealth  and  treasure,  careful  attention  should  be

THE  DIVINING  ROD.  161

bestowed  on  those  places  where  spectres  and  phantoms
are  addicted  to  appearing  in  the  still  hours  of  the  night ;
particularly  on  Fridays  and  Saturdays.  "  Where  wander-
ing fires  are  visible,  where  tumults  and  strange  brawling
are  heard,  or  any  kindred  manifestations,  it  may  be
reasonably  conjectured  that  in  such  places  there  is  a
concealed  treasure.

"But  a  prudent  man  mil  not  rest  satisfied  at  this  point ;
be  will  take  precautions  to  prevent  being  deceived  by
the  reports  of  strangers,  by  the  deceptions  of  mendicants,
and  by  the  chimeric  visions  in  which  weak  and  silly
women  engage  many  serious  persons.  The  search  should
be  undertaken  on  the  evidence  of  trustworthy  persons
alone,  and  the  operator  will  do  well  to  conduct  it  with-
out assistance,  and  to  make  his  abode  for  the  time  in
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  place.

"  Those  who  would  devote  themselves  to  search  after  a
treasure  supposed  to  be  concealed  in  a  certain  place,
should  examine  the  nature  of  the  place,  comparing  its
present  situation  with  the  accounts  which  may  be  dis-
coverable concerning  it  in  old  histories.  Now,  there  are
two  kinds  of  hidden  treasures.  The  first  is  the  gold  and
silver  which  is  found  in  the  penetralia  of  the  earth  by
the  virtue  of  the  stars  in  combination  with  particular
qualities  resident  in  the  ground  itself.  The  second  is
gold  or  silver  which  has  been  coined  into  money,  or
wrought  by  the  art  of  the  goldsmith,  and  has  been  after-
wards buried  to  preserve  it  in  times  of  war  or  pestilence,
or  for  any  reason  whatsoever.  This  second  species  of
treasure  is  most  commonly  met  with  among  the  debris
of  mansions  and  castles,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  old
churches  and  chapels ;  it  is  perfectly  unheeded  by  the
Gnomes,  unless  those  who  have  buried  it  invoked  their
protection  by  means  of  perfumes  and  talismans  adapted
to  the  purpose.

"The  magical  search  after  hidden  treasures  should
not  be  undertaken  by  persons  who  are  subject  to  fear,
for,  to  fascinate  the  imagination  of  the  seeker,  it  is  a
common  device  on  the  part  of  the  earth  spirits  to  evoke
hideous  visions  and  appearances.  If  subterranean  noises
should  increase  as  the  work  advances,  repeat  the  per-

L

162  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

fumes,  and  recite  in  a  loud  voice  the  mystic  prayer  of
the  Salamanders,  which  will  prevent  the  spirits  from
decamping,  treasure  and  all,  as  their  attention  will  be
concentrated  on  the  mysterious  words.  Their  abstrac-
tion will  be  a  good  opportunity  for  redoubling  your  own
efforts.

"  It  has  occasionally  happened  that  the  Gnomes  have
transmitted  the  precious  metals  into  filthy  or  worthless
substances,  and  thus  have  deceived  those  who  were
unacquainted  with  their  trickeries.  But  the  sage  and
prudent  delver  when  he  finds  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth
some  matters  which  are  foreign  to  the  place,  and  could
not  have  come  there  in  any  natural  manner,  will  care-
fully collect  them,  and  will  subject  them  to  the  test  of  a
fire  of  laurel  wood,  fern,  and  vervain ;  the  charm  will  be
broken  by  this  means,  and  the  metals  will  revert  to  their
original  nature.  One  of  the  most  common  indications
of  these  fantastic  changes  is  the  apparent  deposition  of
vile  and  sordid  substances  in  vessels  of  baked  clay,  hewn
stone,  or  brass — substances  which  cannot,  it  would  seem,
be  subjected  to  the  trickeries  of  Gnomide  transmutation."

The  testimony  to  the  virtue  of  the  Divining  Eod  is
scattered  through  many  works  which  are  but  partially
devoted  to  the  subject,  and  much  information  will  be
found  up  and  down  the  mazes  of  periodical  literature,
treasuries  of  folk-lore,  etc.  For  all  ordinary  purposes,
it  will  be  sufficient  to  consult  "  Jacob's  Rod,"  a  curious
work  on  the  art  of  finding  springs,  mines,  and  minerals
by  means  of  the  hazel  rod.  It  is  a  translation,  by
Thonms  Welton,  of  a  rare  French  book  published  in
1693.

ASTROLOGY.

ONE  of  the  most  ingenious  and  plausible  defences  of
the  science  of  astrology  has  been  made  by  Eliphas
Levi,  in  a  passage  sufficiently  brief  to  admit  of
quotation.  "  Nothing  is  indifferent  in  Nature  ;  a  pebble
more  or  less  upon  a  road  may  crush  or  profoundly  alter  the
fortunes  of  the  greatest  men  and  even  of  the  greatest  em-
pires ;  much  more  then  the  position  of  a  particular  star  can-
not be  indifferent  to  the  destinies  of  the  child  who  is  beino-
born,  and  who  enters  by  the  fact  of  his  birth  into  the
universal  harmony  of  the  sidereal  world.  The  stars  are
bound  together  by  attractions  which  balance  them  and
cause  them  to  perform  their  revolutions  with  regularity
in  space,  the  network  of  light  extends  from  sphere  to
sphere,  and  there  is  no  point  on  any  planet  to  which
one  of  these  indestructible  threads  is  not  attached.  The
precise  place  and  moment  of  birth  should  therefore  be
calculated  by  the  true  astrological  adept ;  then,  after  an
exact  computation  of  the  starry  influences,  it  remains  for
him  to  reckon  the  chances  of  condition,  that  is,  the  op-
portunities or  obstacles  which  the  child  must  one  day
meet  mth  in  his  state  of  life,  in  his  relatives,  in  the  dis-
position he  inherits,  and,  consequently,  in  his  natural
aptitude  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  destinies.  Human
liberty  and  enterprise  must  also  be  taken  into  account,
should  the  child  come  to  be  truly  a  man  and  to  extricate
himself  by  a  bold  will  from  blind  influences  and  from  the
chain  of  fatality.  It  will  be  seen  that  we  do  not  allow
too  much  to  astrology,  but  what  we  leave  it  is  incon-
testable, it  is  the  scientific  and  magical  calculus  of
probabilities."

It  may  be  at  once  admitted  that  there  is  nothing
indifferent  in  Nature ;  it  may  be  admitted  that  a  stone
upon  a  road  may  modify  the  destiny  of  any  person,  and.

164  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

indirectly,  of  any  people ;  it  may  also,  and  not  less,  be
allowed  that  the  aspect  of  the  starry  universe  at  the
moment  of  birth,  the  other  considerations  being  granted,
cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  child ;  all  this  is  suggestive ;
all  this  is,  at  any  rate,  practically  reasonable  ;  but  while
the  stone  upon  the  road,  in  the  event  of  its  producing  an
effect  upon  the  person  who  is  passing,  will  produce
an  effect  that  can  be  calculated,  the  influence  of  the
stars  on  a  nativity  is  one  that  by  ordinary  methods
cannot  be  appreciated,  and  is  appreciated  by  astrology  in
a  completely  empirical  manner,  so  far  as  can  be  judged
from  the  standpoint  of  an  outside  impartiality,  and  it  is
at  any  rate  quite  certain  that  the  calculus  of  probabilities
which  is  described  in  the  paragraph  above  is  impossible
to  carry  through,  and  has  never  been  attempted  by
astrology.

In  discussing  the  claims  of  this,  the  least  occult  of  the
secret  sciences,  which  is,  notwithstanding,  so  venerable
by  its  antiquity,  so  majestic  in  its  associations,  and  so
sublime  in  its  general  theory  and  object,  one  would  like
to  be  as  lenient  as  possible,  and  to  find  a  way  to  believ-
ing what  every  one  must  wish  should  be  true — that  day
unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night  unto  night  showeth
knowledge,  Avhile  it  is  possible  to  translate  the  magical
language  of  the  stars  into  intelligible  prophecies  of  the
unfulfilled.  The  distant  music  of  the  spheres  has  found
an  interpreter,  the  splendid  pageantry  of  "worlds  revolv-
ing unceasingly "  assumes  a  new  significance ;  through
all  the  depths  and  heights  of  the  "magical,  measureless
distance,"  we  behold  intelligence  everywhere ;  the  planets
are  prophets,  the  stars  are  seers,  mind  rules  the  universe  ;
one  dreams  of  Chaldean  lore,  of  the  clear  sight  and  the
patient  study  of  the  wise  workers  of  old.  Astrology,  it
is  clear,  if  we  have  regard  to  the  eternal  fitness,  ought
to  be  a  true  instrument  of  knowledge.

But  those  who  are  mystics  must  remember  that  astro-
logy, though  it  passes  for  a  secret  science,  is  scarcely  a
branch  of  mysticism.  If  it  be  capable  of  producing  really
genuine  results,  it  must  be  considered  to  some  extent  as
standing  alone  among  the  sciences  called  magical,  because
while  it  cannot  be  classified  as  unimportant,  its  best  results

ASTROLOGY.  165

can  contribute  nothino;  to  the  science  of  the  soul.  However
sure  in  its  results  to  him,  it  should  be  no  more  than  a
collateral  study,  and  if  he  set  it  entirely  aside,  it  will  per-
haj^s  be  the  better  for  his  success  in  spiritual  researches.

Astrology  proceeds  upon  methods  which  are  said  to  be
the  result  of  many  ages  of  accumulated  experiment.  The
aspect  of  a  certain  planet  at  the  moment  of  birth  is
supposed  to  have  a  definite  effect  upon  the  life  of  the
"native,"  because  it  has  been  observed  in  the  past  that
it  actually  has  that  effect,  and  it  is  thus  that  the  science
has  been  built  up.  Its  assumptions  are  therefore  of  a
strictly  a  posteriori  kijid  ;  it  asks  no  faith  of  the  student,
and  each  person  is  open  to  test  its  value  by  experiment
of  his  own,  after  which  he  may  reasonably  appraise  it.  It
is  useless  therefore  to  condemn  astrology  till  it  has  been
honestly  weighed  and  found  wanting.  It  is  impossible
in  an  elementary  handbook  to  provide  our  readers  with
the  means  of  examining  the  truth  of  astrological  claims.
If  they  "wish  to  pursue  the  subject,  they  must  have  re-
course to  the  voluminous  authorities  which  exist.  They
must  study  Placidus  cle  Titus  and  Junctin  de  Florence,
Ptolemy,  Lilly,  and  Partridge.

The  writers  who,  under  the  names  of  "  Raphael "  and
"Zadkiel"  issue  "text  books"  and  "guides"  to  the
science,  now  divide  between  them  what  honour  or  profit
is  to  be  derived  from  the  teaching  of  Astrology  in  the
England  of  our  own  day.  Miss  Rosa  Baughan  has,
in  a  recent  book,  made  Astrology  the  basis  of  another
"occult"  science,  viz.,  that  of  Palmistry.

Avoiding  the  responsibility  of  deciding  between  the
rival  systems  of  Placidus  and  Ptolemy  of  Horary  and
Genethliacal  Astrology,  we  proceed  to  give  a  summarised
version  of  the  theory  on  which  all  systems  of  Astrology
must  rest.

At  the  moment  of  the  birth  of  a  child  whose  horo-
scope it  is  required  to  ascertain,  or  on  the  day  of  a  given
occurrence  whose  results  are  required  to  be  traced,  the
astronomical  astrolabe  must  be  consulted  to  determine
the  constellations  and  planets  which  are  then  governing
in  heaven,  so  as  to  define  the  results  which  must  follow
from  their  virtues,   qualities,  and  functions.     If   three

166  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

signs  of  the  same  nature  are  found  in  the  sky,  as,  for
instance,  the  Earn,  the  Lion,  and  the  Archer,  these  three
form  the  trine  aspect,  because  they  divide  the  empyrean
into  three  parts,  and  are  separated  one  from  the  other
by  three  other  constellations.  Such  an  aspect  is  good
and  favourable.  When  those  who  divide  the  sk}^  by
six  meet  in  the  hour  of  the  operation,  as  the  Ram  with
the  Twins,  the  Bull  mth  the  Crab,  the  sextile  aspect  is
formed,  which  is  of  a  middle  quality.  When  those  which
divide  the  sphere  into  four,  as  the  Ram  with  the  Crab,
the  Bull  with  the  Lion,  the  Twins  with  the  Virgin,  meet
in  the  hour  of  operation,  they  form  the  quartile  aspect,
which  is  distinctly  a  bad  one.  When  those  which  belong
to  the  opposite  parts  of  the  sky,  as  the  Ram  with  the
Balance,  the  Bull  with  the  Scorpion,  the  Twins  and  the
Archer,  &c.,  are  found  similarly  placed,  the  contrary
aspect  is  formed,  which  is  wicked  and  malevolent.  The
others  are  in  conjunction  when  two  planets  are  united  in
the  same  sign  and  in  the  same  house ;  they  are  in  opposi-
tion when  they  are  situated  at  two  opposite  points.

Each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  occupies  a  place  which  is
called  the  Celestial  House  or  the  House  of  the  Sun,  and
the  twelve  houses  consequently  divide  the  Zodiac  into
twelve  parts ;  each  house  occupies  thirty  degrees,  and
each  was  represented  by  the  astrologers  of  old  by
numerical  symbols  within  a  square  or  circular  figure
twelve  times  divided.

The  first  house  is  that  of  Aries,  which  is  called  the
Orient  Angle  in  the  language  of  star-gazers.  This  is  the
house  of  life,  because  those  who  are  born  under  its
dominion  enjoy  considerable  length  of  years.  The
second  house  is  that  of  Taurus,  which  is  called  the  In-
ferior Gate.  It  is  the  house  of  wealth,  and  of  the  way
to  fortune.  The  third  house  is  that  of  Gemini,  and  it  is
called  the  Abode  of  the  Brethren.  It  is  the  house  of
inheritance  and  of  solid  patrimony.  The  fourth  house  is
that  of  Cancer,  which  is  called  the  Foundation  of  Heaven,
the  Earth's  Angle,  and  the  Abode  of  Parents.  It  is  the
house  of  treasure,  and  of  the  emoluments  of  patrimony.
The  fifth  house  is  that  of  Leo,  and  it  is  the  abode  of
children  ;  it  is  that  also  of  legacies  and  donations.     The

ASTROLOGY.  167

sixth  house  is  the  house  of  Virgo ;  it  is  called  the  Love
of  Mars  ;  it  is  the  house  of  sadness,  disease,  and  reverses.
The  seventh  is  that  of  Libra,  which  is  called  the  Western
Angle;  it  is  the  house  of  marriage  and  bridals.  The
eighth  house  is  that  of  Scorpio,  which  is  called  the
Superior  Door;  it  is  the  abode  of  terror,  alarms,  and
death.  The  ninth  house  is  that  of  Sagittarius ;  it  is
called  the  Love  of  the  Sun ;  and  piety,  religion,  travels,
and  philosophy  are  contained  therein.  The  tenth  house
is  that  of  Capricornus,  which  is  called  the  Centre  of
Heaven,  and  crowns,  dignities,  and  responsible  offices
are  referred  to  it.  The  eleventh  house  is  identified  with
Aquarius,  which  is  called  the  Love  of  Jove ;  it  is  the
house  of  friends,  benefactions,  and  fortune.  The  twelfth
house  is  that  of  Pisces,  which  is  called  the  Love  of
Saturn.  It  is  the  most  baleful  and  fatal  of  all ;  it  is  the
house  of  poisonings,  of  wretchedness,  of  envy,  of  evil
temper,  and  of  violent  death.

The  Ram  and  the  Scorpion  are  the  houses  affected  by
Mars ;  the  Bull  and  the  Balance  are  referred  to  Venus  ;
the  Tmns  and  the  Virgin  to  Mercury ;  the  Archer  and
Fishes  to  Jupiter;  the  Goat  and  Water-bearer  to
Saturn  ;  the  Lion  to  the  Sun ;  and  the  Crab  to  the  Moon.

The  position  of  the  planets  in  respect  of  the  constella-
tions must  be  carefully  marked,  and  as  the  rapid  re-
volution of  the  earth  causes  changes  every  moment  in
the  disposition  of  the  stars,  so  the  actual  instant  of
nativity  should  be  ascertained  from  the  midwife,  if  an
accurate  horoscope  is  to  be  insured.  When  Mars  is  in
agreement  with  Aries  at  the  moment  of  birth,  it  gives
longevity,  courage  and  pride  ;  if  it  be  in  agreement  with
Taurus,  riches  and  courage  result.  Broadly,  the  in-
fluence of  Mars  augments  that  of  the  constellation  with
which  it  agrees,  adding  strength  and  value.  Saturn,
who  inflicts  penalties,  miseries,  and  disease,  augments
the  evil  and  stultifies  the  good  influences  ;  Venus,  on  the
contrary,  increases  those  which  are  good  while  it  weakens
the  power  of  those  which  are  evil.  Mercury  augments
or  enfeebles  influences  according  to  the  nature  of  its
conjunctions.  In  agreement  with  Pisces,  its  good  effect
is  diminished  ;  with  Capricornus  it  is  extended.     The

168  TEIE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Moon  adds  melancholy  to  fortunate  constellations,  and
sadness  or  insanity  to  others.  Jupiter,  giving  honours
and  riches,  increases  all  favourable  influences  and  almost
destroys  bad  ones.  The  Sun  in  the  ascendant  gives  the
favour  of  princes,  and  its  effect  upon  influences  is  akin
to  that  of  Jupiter;  in  the  descendant  it  foreshadows
reverses.  Gemini,  Libra,  and  Virgo  give  beauty  in  a
superlative  degree ;  Scorpio,  Capricornus,  and  Pisces
give  beauty  in  a  middle  degree ;  the  others  more  or  less
of  ugliness.  Virgo,  Libra,  Aquarius,  and  Gemini  endow
the  native  with  a  pleasant  and  melodious  voice ;  Cancer,
Scorpio,  and  Pisces  give  one  that  is  ordinary  or  disagree-
able, while  the  others  are  devoid  of  influence  in  this
respect.  If  the  planets  and  constellations  are  found  in
the  East  at  the  time  of  the  horoscope,  their  influence
will  be  ex2)erienced  at  the  opening  of  the  life  or  the
enterprise ;  if  they  are  seen  in  the  zenith  the  effect  will
be  postponed  till  the  middle,  and  till  the  latter  end  if
they  appear  in  the  AVest.

These  general  notions  may  be  supplemented  by  an
account  of  the  properties  of  the  seven  planets,  com-
piled by  Elihu  Eich,  from  a  number  of  ancient  authori-
ties. Saturn  is  cold  and  dry,  melancholy,  earthy,
malevolent,  solitary,  and  when  "  ill-governed  "  produces
the  most  malignant  qualities ;  the  Buddhists  represent
him  as  crowned,  and  of  a  black  colour.  Astrologers
consider  him  as  the  "  greater  infortune."  Jupiter,  the
"  greater  fortune,"  is  the  author  of  temperance,  modesty,
sobriety,  and  justice  ;  he  rules  the  lungs. and  blood,  and
the  last  month  in  gestation ;  he  is  represented  of  a  golden
colour,  riding  upon  a  lion.  The  colours  under  him  are  sea-
green,  blue,  and  purple.  Mars,  the  "lesser  infortune,"
is  choleric  and  fierce,  author  of  quarrels,  dissensions,
strife,  war,  and  battle  ;  his  colours  are  red  and  white ;
he  is  depicted  riding  on  a  peacock,  with  a  crown  on  his
head;  fierce  animals,  blood-coloured  stones,  &c.,  are
under  his  influence,  and  he  is  the  cause  of  all  fevers.
The  Moon  is  feminine,  neither  fortunate  nor  unfortunate
in  herself,  but  having  an  influence  in  accordance  with  the
aspect  of  other  planets  ;  her  metal  is  silver  ;  her  colours
white,  pale  green,  and  pale  yellow ;  when  well  dignified

-  ASTROLOGY.  169

she  gives  a  timorous,  imaginative,  engaging  disposition,
and  a  fondness  for  change  and  travelling.  She  is  re-
presented crowned,  and  riding  on  an  elephant.  Venus,
the  "smaller  fortune"  is  the  author  of  mirth  and  con-
viviality, the  queen  of  pleasure  and  the  mistress  of
refinement ;  her  colours  are  white  and  light  blue ;  the
Buddhists  depict  her  crowned,  riding  upon  a  bull ;
when  ill-governed,  she  disposes  to  lewdness  and  profli-
gacy. Mercury  is  the  author  of  the  most  pointed  wit,
ingenuity,  and  invention ;  when  well  dignified  he  pro-
duces a  subtle  imagination  and  retentive  memory ;
otherwise  his  tendency  is  to  all  kinds  of  charlatany,
empty  boasting,  and  tale  bearing.  His  metal  is  quick-
silver, his  angel  is  Raphael,  and  his  colours  are  black
and  azure.  He  rides  on  a  buffalo  and  is  painted  dark
blue.  He  is  masculine  or  feminine  according  to  his
conjunction  with  other  planets.  The  Sun,  if  well  dig-
nified, is  always  equal  to  one  of  the  fortunes ;  in  some
respects,  his  influence  is  equal  to  that  of  Jupiter,  but
magnanimity  is  his  predominant  characteristic.  The
diamond,  the  ruby,  the  carbuncle,  pure  gold,  and  all
yellow  metals  are  under  him ;  he  is  represented  riding
on  a  horse.

In  addition  to  the  direct  influence  which  is  exercised
by  the  celestial  universe  on  the  destinies  and  dispositions
of  men,  there  is  an  influence  of  an  indirect  nature  on  life
and  fortune  through  the  control  which  is  assigned  to  the
planets  and  the  stars  of  the  twelve  constellations  over  the
several  members  of  the  human  body.  The  head,  which
is  the  seat  of  intelligence,  is  assigned  to  the  providence
of  the  sun,  which  is  the  root  and  source  of  the  influences
diffused  from  the  entire  planetary  system;  the  Moon
governs  the  right  arm ;  Venus  has  dominion  over  the
left  j  Jupiter  presides  over  the  stomach  ;  the  energies  of
the  sexual  organs  are  directed  by  the  powerful  spirit  of
the  ruddy-coloured  Mars  ;  Mercury  dominates  the  right
foot,  which  is  said  to  be  the  seat  of  speed ;  the  left  is
assigned  to  Saturn.  In  the  astrology  of  the  twelve  con-
stellations, Aries  governs  the  head,  Taurus  the  neck,
Gemini  the  arms  and  shoulders.  Cancer  the  heart  and
breast,  Leo  the  stomach,  Virgo   the  womb,  Libra   the

170  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

loins  and  back  ;  Scorpio  the  generative  members,  Sagit-
tarius the  thighs,  Capricornus  the  knees,  Aquarius  the
legs,  Pisces  the  feet.

The  pneumatic  hypotheses  of  angelology  have  assigned
to  the  ministers  of  Heaven  the  government  of  empires
and  cities,  but  the  science  of  the  stars  has  discovered
that  the  responsibility  of  the  spiritual  hierarchs  is  shared
by  the  great  constellations,  and  it  has  been  decided  by
German  adepts  in  the  mysteries  of  celestial  influences  that
Frankfort  is  ruled  by  the  Eam,  Wurtzburg  by  the  Bull,
Nuremberg  by  the  Twins,  which  should  therefore  be  the
sign  of  the  Eosicrucian  Fraternity  ;  Magdeburg  by  the
Crab,  Ulm  by  the  Lion,  Heidelberg  by  the  Virgin,
Vienna  by  the  Balance  (which  to-day  has  a  certain  pro-
priety as  it  is  there  that  the  peace  of  Europe  is  held
in  an  oscillating  equipoise) ;  Munich  by  the  Scorpion,
Stutgart  by  the  Archer,  Augsburg  by  the  Goat,  Ingol-
stadt  by  the  Water-bearer,  and  Eatisbonne  by  the  Fishes.

An  authority  more  venerable  than  German  astrologers,
the  mythical  messenger,  Hermes,  has  placed  the  seven
openings  in  the  head  of  humanity  under  the  special
directions  of  the  seven  planets,  and  has  referred  Saturn
and  Jupiter  to  the  ears.  Mars  and  Venus  to  the  nostrils,
the  Sun  and  Moon  to  the  eyes,  and  Mercury  to  the
mouth.  Leon  the  Israelite,  in  his  Kabbalistic  "  Philo-
sophy of  Love,"  explains  that  the  sun  and  moon  are
appropriately  referred  to  the  eyes,  as  those  luminaries
are  the  eyes  of  the  superior  world ;  while  Mercury,  the
messenger,  the  revealer,  the  veritable  Hermes,  the  Lord
of  the  Logos,  has  a  natural  providence  over  speech.

The  enumeration  is  by  no  means  exhausted.  Saturn
has  power  over  life,  over  changes,  buildings,  and  the
circle  of  the  sciences ;  Jupiter  over  honour,  ambition,
wealth,  and  cleanly  habits ;  Mars  over  war,  prisons,
marriages,  and  animosities  ;  the  Sun  over  hopes,  happi-
ness, emolument,  inheritances  ;  Venus,  over  friendship
and  love  ;  Mercury  over  diseases,  losses,  debts,  commerce,
and  the  fountains  of  fear  which  exist  in  the  soul  of  man  ;
the  Moon  over  sores  and  wounds,  over  dreams  and
thefts.  Such  is  the  division  laid  down  in  Albertus
Magnus,  to  wit,   in   the   "Admirable    Secrets"  which.

?

Quartile,

D

^

Trine,

A

(l>

Opposition,

c?

*

Conjunction,

6

ASTROLOGY.  171

though  their  antiquity  is  great  in  their  original  black-
letter  form,  are  undoubtedly  falsely  ascribed.

The  planets  have  also  a  presidence  over  the  seven
days  of  the  week,  a  fact  which  is  too  commonly  known
to  need  more  than  a  passing  reference ;  but  as  the
emblems  which  astrology  has  ascribed  to  the  planets
with  which  it  was  acquainted  are  continually  recurring
in  Hermetic  science,  and  especially  in  physical  alchemy,
it  will  be  as  well  to  reproduce  them  here  for  the  benefit
of  initial  inquirers.

Saturn,  I7  Venus,

Jupiter,  y.  Mercury,

Mars,  ^  Sun,

Moon,  ])  Sextile,

There  is  a  simplified  form  of  astrology  which,  like
most  simplifications  in  occultism,  is  vague  and  unsatis-
fying in  its  results.  This  is  the  method  of  foretelling  the
destiny  of  an  individual  from  the  position  of  the  constel-
lations at  his  birth.  It  considerably  limits  the  varieties
of  human  disposition  and  reduces  the  scope  of  fortune
within  exceedingly  narrow  bounds.  Astrological  computa-
tions have  the  interest  of  curiosity  alone,  and  well-balanced
minds  will  be  indisposed  to  review  the  observations
which  follow  in  anything  but  an  antiquarian  light.

The  Signs  in  the  Heavens,  and  the  Prophetic  Significance
Involved  in  them.

1.  The  Ram. — The  power  or  influence  of  Aries  is  hot
and  dry.  It  rules  in  the  heaven  from  the  21st  of  March
to  the  23rd  of  April.  Those  who  are  born  under  its  in-
fluence are  irascible,  prompt,  lively,  eloquent,  inclined
to  study,  but  violent,  untruthful,  and  inconstant.  They
are  seldom  faithful  to  their  word  and  quickly  forget
their  promises.  The  native  receives  from  the  constel-
lation a  dry,  lean,  and  spare  body  ;  he  is  strong  and
large-boned,  has  piercing  eyes,  sandy  or  red  hair,  and  a
swarthy  complexion.  His  chief  dangers  will  be  from
horses,  and  he  will  be  fond  of  fishing  and  hunting.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  Aries  will  be  vivacious,
inquisitive,    and   pretty.     She  will  be   fond   of  gossip,

172  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

will  have  a  proclivity  to  falsehood,  and  a  taste  for
good  cheer.  She  will  be  subject  to  fits  of  passion,  and
in  old  age  will  be  slanderous  and  a  severe  critic  of  her
own  sex.  She  will  marry  soon,  and  will  be  the  mother
of  many  children.  The  presence  of  Jupiter  or  Venus  in
this  sign  at  the  hour  of  birth  will  impart  to  it  a  better
influence ;  Saturn  or  Mars  will  intensify  its  malignant
qualities.  Aries  rules  the  head  and  face,  produces  small-
pox, epilepsy,  apoplexy,  headaches,  hypochondriasis,
baldness,  ringworm,  &c.  The  colour  which  corresponds
to  it  is  white  mingled  with  red.

2.  The  Bull. — The  influence  of  Taurus  predominates
from  the  22nd  of  April  to  the  21st  of  May.  It  is  cold,
dry,  earthy,  melancholy,  feminine  j  it  imparts  to  the
native  a  broad  brow,  thick  lips,  a  rather  brutal  and
melancholy  temperament,  slow  to  anger,  but  violent  and
difficult  to  be  appeased  when  once  enraged.  From  these
observations  it  is  plain  that  it  imparts  also  the  lower
class  of  courage  as  well  as  the  physical  strength.  The
person  born  under  its  influence  will  make  enemies  but
will  be  able  to  prevent  them  from  injuring  him.  He
will  enjoy  a  certain  kind  of  happiness,  and  will  travel
into  far  countries ;  his  life  will  be  long  and  he  will  be
subject  to  few  diseases.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  this  constellation  is
endowed  with  strength  and  courage.  She  will  have
great  energy  but  will  be  violent  and  easily  carried  away.
At  the  same  time,  she  will  be  able  to  bend  to  her  duty,
and  will  prove  an  obedient  wife.  Much  judgment  and
much  good  sense  will  characterise  her,  but  she  will  be
somewhat  over-talkative.  She  will  be  more  than  once  a
widow ;  she  will  bear  children,  to  whom  she  will  leave
fortunes.  The  colour  corresponding  to  Taurus  is  white
mixed  with  citron.

3.  The  Twins. — The  power  or  influence  of  Gemini  is
hot  and  moist,  like  a  fat,  rich  soil.  The  native  will  be
fair  and  tall,  of  straight  body  and  sanguine  complexion,
rather  dark  than  clear.  The  arms  will  be  long,  the
hands  frequently  short  and  fleshy,  the  hair  and  eyes
generally  a  dark  hazel,  the  looks  wanton,  the  under-
standing skilful  in  business.    This  constellation  is  rich  in

ASTROLOGY.  173

the  gifts  of  friendship  ;  those  who  are  born  under  its
influence  will  be  strong  of  heart,  elegant  in  figure,  full
of  spirit,  prudence,  and  generosity.  Its  fortunate . in-
fluence prevails  from  the  22nd  of  May  to  the  21st  of
June.  The  native,  it  may  be  added,  will  be  confident,
fond  of  the  chase  and  of  travelling,  with  more  of  the
spirit  of  adventure  than  of  fortune-seeking,  but,  as
commonly  happens  with  the  indifferent,  he  will  never
be  actually  poor.  He  will  be  animated,  subtle,  and
pleasure-loving,  and  will  have  some  taste  for  the
arts.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  Gemini  will  be  affec-
tionate and  beautiful,  with  a  gentle  and  simple  heart,
but  somewhat  neglectful  of  domestic  duties.  The  fine
arts,  more  especially  music  and  drawing,  will  exercise
great  fascination  over  her  mind.

The  diseases  which  belong  to  the  sign  are  those  of  the
arms,  shoulders,  and  hands,  also  frenzies,  fevers,  blood
poisoning,  disorders  of  the  brain,  and  insanity.  The
colour  corresponding  to  Gemini  is  white  mixed  with  red.
The  constellation  governs  from  the  22nd  of  May  to  the
21st  of  June.

4.  The  Crab. — This  sign  foments  squabbles ;  it  is
cold  and  moist,  like  a  marshy  and  moorish  land.  It
rules  in  heaven  from  the  22nd  of  June  to  the  21st  of
July.  The  native  who  is  born  under  its  influence  is
fair  and  pale,  of  an  undersized  and  small  stature,  the
upper  part  of  the  body  being  large  in  proportion  to  the
lower,  the  face  round,  the  hair  brown,  the  eyes  grey;
the  disposition  will  be  phlegmatic  and  heavy,  the  con-
stitution effeminate,  the  voice  weak.  Men  under  its
influence  will  be  sensual ;  their  life  will  be  chequered
with  lawsuits  and  quarrels,  from  which,  however,  they
may  often  emerge  successfully.  Their  chief  perils  will
be  on  the  sea.  Moreover,  this  horoscope  commonly
gives  a  tendency  to  gluttony,  though  occasionally  pru-
dence, wit,  and  a  spice  of  modesty.

Women  who  are  born  under  this  constellation  will  be
inclined  to  have  many  children  ;  they  will  be  very  fairly
good  looking,  active,  hasty,  but  soon  appeased.  They
will  have  no  tendency  to  excessive  corpulence.   They  will

174  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

find  pleasure  in  helping  others,  but  will  be  timid  and  a
little  deceitful.

All  diseases  of  the  breast  and  stomach  are  peculiar  to
this  sign,  as  also  indigestion,  cancer,  consumption,  asthma,
&c.  The  colour  which  is  in  harmony  with  it  is  green  or
russet.

5.  The  Lion. — The  dominion  of  Leo  endures  from
the  22nd  of  July  to  the  21st  of  August.  It  is  fiery,  hot,
dry,  masculine,  choleric,  barren,  but  commanding.  It
gives  to  the  native  a  large  masculine  body,  with  broad
shoulders,  an  austere  countenance,  hair  inclining  to
yellow,  eyes  piercing,  looks  sprightly,  voice  strong,  and
countenance  of  a  ruddy  or  sanguine  oval.  The  character
which  it  will  impart  is  courageous  and  resolute,  brave,
audacious,  magnanimous,  proud,  eloquent,  and  self-
sufiicient,  the  mind  aspiring,  the  heart  generous,  the
disposition  open  and  courteous.  Such  a  person  will  love
banter,  will  be  frequently  surrounded  by  danger,  but  his
children  will  be  his  consolation  and  happiness.  He  will
be  continually  abandoning  himself  to  passion,  and  will
as  continually  repent  his  excesses.  Honours  and  dig-
nities will  be  showered  on  him,  but,  in  the  first  instance,
he  will  long  have  sought  them.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  this  constellation  will
be  vivacious,  hasty,  and  brazen.  She  will  nurse  ill-feel-
ing ;  she  will  talk  much,  and  her  speech  will  be  frequently
bitter.  Tor  the  rest,  she  will  be  good-looking,  though
with  a  large  head.  She  must  beware  of  boiling  water
and  of  fire.  She  will  be  subject  to  pains  in  the  stomach,
and  will  have  few  children.  This  constellation  produces
all  the  passions  and  affections  of  the  heart,  as  also  con-
vulsions, violent  fevers,  plagues,  and  pains  in  the  back.
The  colour  is  red  or  green.

6.  The  Virgin. — This  sign  of  the  celestial  sphere
governs  from  the  22nd  of  August  to  the  21st  of  September.
It  is  earthy,  cold,  dry,  barren,  and  feminine ;  the  native
related  thereto  has  a  well-composed,  slender  body,  rather
above  the  middle  stature ;  his  complexion  is  brown,  his
hair  lank,  his  voice  thin  and  shrill ;  he  is  also  witty
and  studious,  generous,  sincere,  intelligent,  fond  of  dis-
tinction, but  he  will  be  unable  to  keep  either  his  own

ASTROLOGY.  175

secrets  or  those  that  may  be  confided  in  him ;  he  will
be  proud,  elegant  in  language  and  carriage,  a  profitable
friend,  and  compassionate  towards  others  in  their  dis-
tresses.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  the  dominion  of  this
constellation  will  be  chaste,  honest,  retiring,  full  of  in-
telligence and  foresight ;  she  will  love  both  to  do  and  to
speak  good ;  she  will  have  becoming  pride,  but  she  will
ever  be  willing  to  serve  others.  Her  anger  will  be
neither  dangerous  nor  long  continued.

Diseases  of  the  intestines  are  referred  to  the  sign  of
the  Virgin.  Black  speckled  with  blue  are  the  colours
which  correspond  to  its  influence.

7.  The  Balance  rules  in  the  celestial  sphere  from  the
22nd  of  September  to  the  21st  of  October.  The  sign  is
volatile  in  character;  it  is  sanguine,  hot,  moist,  and
masculine.  Men  who  are  born  under  this  sign  have  a
tall  and  well-proportioned  body,  a  handsome  coun-
tenance, a  complexion  which  in  youth  is  ruddy,  and  in
age  florid  and  pimply ;  the  eyes  are  grey,  the  hair  yellow
or  flaxen.  According  to  one  account,  for  accounts  diflPer,
the  disposition  is  friendly  and  courteous,  the  character
distinguished  for  rectitude ;  according  to  another  it  is
commonly  quarrelsome  and  pleasure-loving.  Success
may  be  chiefly  expected  in  maritime  enterprise,  though
it  is  attainable  in  any  species  of  commerce  ;  the  native,
in  either  case,  is  certain  to  undertake  long  voyages.
His  manners  will  be  easy,  his  speech  fluent,  his  promises
faithless ;  his  good  fortune  will  be  greater  than  his  pru-
dence, and  he  will  be  the  heir  of  many.  He  will  love
his  first  wife,  and  will  not  have  many  children.  His
chief  dangers  are  from  the  malice  of  the  incendiary  and
from  boiling  water.

The  TV  Oman  who  enters  life  under  the  auspices  of
this  constellation  will  be  amiable,  cheerful,  agreeable,
sprightly,  and  sufliciently  fortunate.  Her  manners  will
be  good,  her  speech  persuasive,  her  disposition  suscep-
tible and  quarrelsome.  She  will  be  married  either  at
seventeen  or  at  twenty-three,  and  must  beware  of  the
same  dangers  as  the  male  native.

The  Balance  is  responsible  for  certain  diseases  of  th^

176  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

abdominal  viscera.     Black,  swarthy,  or  dark  crimson  are
the  colours  which  are  in  sympathy  with  its  influence.

8.  The  Scorpion  is  feminine,  phlegmatic,  and  cold.
It  governs  in  heaven  from  the  22nd  of  October  to  the
21st  of  November.  Those  who  are  born  under  its  in
fluence  will  be  robust  and  corpulent,  of  middle  stature,
broad,  visage,  with  brown  complexion  and  black  curly
hair,  the  neck  will  be  short,  the  legs  thick,  the  body
hairy.  The  authorities  differ  about  the  disposition.
By  some  it  is  defined  as  simply  reserved  and  thoughtful ;
others  depict  it  at  greater  length,  and  with  contrary
qualities.  According  to  them  it  will  be  impudent,
brazen,  fawning,  craftj?-,  concealing  malice  under  an
amiable  exterior.  The  native  will  speak  one  thing  and
think  another,  and  will  be  generally  underhand  and
prone  to  dissimulation.  He  will  be  naturally  change-
able, will  judge  evilly  of  others,  will  nourish  ill  feeling,
will  be  talkative,  but  subject  to  fits  of  despondency.
When  he  laughs,  it  will  be  chiefly  at  the  expense  of
others,  yet  he  will  have  some  friends  and  will  prevail
over  his  enemies.  He  may  expect  substantial  legacies.
Among  indispositions,  he  will  be  chiefly  subject  to  the
disorders  of  the  stomach.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  the  influence  of  this
constellation  will  be  deceptive  and  subtle ;  she  will  be-
have better  to  her  second  than  to  her  first  husband  ;  her
words  will  be  milder  than  her  feelings;  she  will  be
sensuous,  vivacious,  a  great  laugher,  though  also  at  the
expense  of  others.  She  will  be  inconsequential  in  act,
loquacious  in  speech,  and  evil  in  her  thoughts  towards
all.

The  diseases  which  are  ascribed  to  the  constellation
are  similar  to  those  of  the  last,  but  include  scurvy.  The
colour  which  is  in  correspondence  is  dark  brown.

9.  The  Archer  is  a  fiery,  dry,  masculine  sign.  It
can  endow  the  person  who  comes  into  the  world  under
its  auspices  with  a  well-formed  body,  a  little  exceeding
the  medium  height,  with  a  somewhat  long  but  withal
comely  countenance,  with  chestnut  hair,  which,  however,
will  be  inclined  to  baldness,  a  ruddy  complexion,  and  an
active,  intrepid,  and  careless  habit.     The  influence  of

ASTROLOGY.  177

the  sign  will  make  him  a  good  sportsman  and  one
fond  of  equestrian  exercises.  The  predominance  of
Sagittarius  extends  from  the  22nd  of  l!^ovember  to  the
21st  of  December.

The  constitution  of  the  native  will  be  robust,  and  his
mind  studious  ;  he  will  have  a  passion  for  sea  voyages,
which  will  be  the  means  of  his  advancement.  He  will
make  friends,  but  will  squander  their  money,  yet,  on  the
whole,  he  will  be  just,  secret,  faithful,  hard-working,
companionable,  while  his  high  spirit  will  be  equal  to  his
self-love.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  the  influence  of  this
constellation  will  have  a  restless,  active  mind,  and  will
be  fond  of  work  ;  her  soul  will  be  easily  open  to  the  in-
fluence of  pity ;  she  will  have  a  taste  for  travelling,  and
will  never  stay  long  in  one  place.  She  will  be  rash,  but
at  the  same  time  endowed  with  several  advantageous
qualities  alike  of  mind  and  heart.  She  will  be  married
either  at  nineteen  or  at  twenty-four  years  old,  and  will
be  a  good  mother.

The  diseases  which  are  caused  by  the  Archer  are
sciatica,  gout,  rheumatism,  sores,  disorders  consequent
on  intemperance,  and  on  falls  from  horses.  The  colour
which  is  in  correspondence  is  yellow  or  sanguine  green.

10.  The  power  of  the  Goat  extends  from  the  22nd  of
December  to  the  21st  of  January.  Its  nature  is  earthy,
cold,  dry,  melancholy,  and  feminine.  The  person  who  is
born  under  its  influence  will  be  slender  in  build,  and  of
dry  constitution,  with  a  thin  visage,  a  scanty  beard,
dark  hair,  narrow  chest  and  small  chin.  Opposite
accounts  of  his  disposition  are  given  by  difierent  com-
mentators on  the  fortuities  of  simplified  astrology.
By  some  it  is  described  as  collected,  witty  and
subtle,  talented  and  upright.  By  others  he  is  en-
dowed with  an  irascible,  trivial,  and  suspicious  char-
acter ;  he  is  said  to  be  addicted  to  quarrels  and
litigation;  he  will  be  fond  of  work,  but  also  of  bad
company,  and  will  be  made  ill  by  his  excesses.  Nothing
can  be  conceived  more  inconstant  than  the  nature  of  this
man  if  his  birth  takes  place  in  the  night.  He  will  be
cheerful,    active,   and    sometimes   will   do   good.      The

M

178  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

influence  of  his  "star  will  ensure  him  good  fortune  on  the
sea.  He  will  be  temperate  in  speech,  will  have  a  small
head,  and  sunken  eyes.  He  will  become  wealthy  and
avaricious  during  the  latter  part  of  his  life.  It  will  be
well  for  him  to  recollect  that  in  all  his  diseases  he  will
derive  much  benefit  from  the  bath.

The  woman  who  enters  life  under  the  auspices  of  the
Goat  will  be  vivacious,  volatile,  but  at  the  same  time
so  timid  in  her  youth  that  she  will  blush  at  the  smallest
trifle.  As  she  advances  in  age,  her  character  will,
however,  develop  sufficient  firmness  and  courage.  While
endeavouring  to  conceal  it  she  will  expose  the  jealousy
that  will  rule  her.  She  will  speak  much  and  will  act
inconsequently  j  she  will  love  travelling,  and  will  not
be  remarkable  for  beauty.

The  diseases  which  are  chargeable  on  this  constellation
are  those  which  are  caused  by  melancholy,  hysteria,
sprains,  and  leprosy.  The  colours  which  are  in  corre-
spondence with  the  sign  are  black  or  russet.

11.  The  Water-Bearer. — This  sign  is  aerial,  hot,
moist,  rational,  humane,  sanguine,  and  masculine.  It
endows  the  native  with  a  well  set,  thick,  robust  body,  a
long  visage,  a  pale  and  delicate  countenance,  a  clean  and
sanguine  complexion,  and  bright  sandy  or  dark  flaxen  hair.
The  man  who  is  born  under  the  influence  of  this  con-
stellation will  be  amiable,  intelligent,  cheerful,  curious,
quick  at  scheming,  boastful,  and  volatile,  though  not  by
any  means  wanting  in  discretion.  He  will  covet  honours
and  distinction,  will  be  long-lived,  being  poor  during  the
first  part  of  his  life  and  afterwards  moderately  well  off.
He  will  run  many  dangers,  will  contract  several  diseases,
and  will  be  especially  subject  to  fever.  His  children
will  be  few  in  number.

The  woman  who  is  born  during  the  dominion  of  the
Water-Bearer  will  be  constant,  generous,  sincere,  and
liberal.  She  will  be  a  prey  to  sadness,  will  have  struggles
with  adversity,  and  will  undertake  long  voyages.

The  diseases  which  are  ascribed  to  the  influence  of
this  sign  are  affections  of  the  legs  and  ankles,  disloca-
tions, gout,  and  putrefaction  of  the  blood.  The  colours
in  correspondence  are  azure  or  light  blue.     Its  dominion

ASTROLOGY.  179

extends  from  the  22nd  of  January  to  the  21st  of  Feb-
ruary.

12.  The  Fishes. — This  sign  is  watery,  cold,  moist,
idle,  effeminate,  sickly,  phlegmatic,  and  fruitful.  It  rules
from  the  22nd  of  February  to  the  same  date  in  March,
and  it  endows  the  native  with  a  short  stature,  a  pale
complexion,  a  fleshy  and  ill-shaped  body,  light  hair  and
eyes,  thick  shoulders,  a  large  face,  and  an  awkward
carriage  of  the  head.

The  man  who  is  born  under  its  influence  will  be  offi-
cious, lively,  a  lover  of  sport,  of  a  good  temper,  and  out-
side his  own  house  he  will  be  fortunate.  In  his  youth
he  will  not  be  rich,  and  when  he  has  got  into  easier
circumstances,  he  will  take  little  care  of  his  fortune,  and
will  fail  to  profit  by  the  lessons  of  experience.  He  will
be  also  presumptuous,  and  will  be  caused  some  trouble
by  indiscretions  in  his  speech.

The  woman  who  is  born  under  the  rule  of  the  Fishes
will  be  good  in  looks,  but  her  youth  will  be  full  of
troubles  and  weariness.  She  will  love  doing  good,  will
be  sensible,  discreet,  economical,  judicious,  and  will  avoid
the  world.  Her  health  will  be  feeble  up  to  the  age  of
twenty-eight,  then  it  will  become  fairly  robust,  though
she  will  occasionally  suffer  from  colic.

The  sign  of  the  Fishes  governs  the  feet  and  toes,  and
produces  all  the  pains  which  are  incidental  to  those  ex-
tremities, as  also  ulcers  and  pimples.  The  colour  in  cor-
respondence is  that  of  glistening  light.

Could  anything  be  more  futile  than  chiromancy  and
card  prognostication,  it  is  probably  the  zodiacal  astrology
which  has  been  just  described,  and  which  limits  the
varieties  of  human  destiny,  disposition,  and  physical
appearance  to  twelve  kinds. "^

Astrological  students  should  be  made  aware  of  the
palmary  importance  of  two  ancient  and  voluminous
treatises,  which  contain  the  whole  theory  and  practice
of  the  starry  science,  elaborated  with  the  most  perfect

*  It  has  been  suggested  in  this  connection  tliat  as  most  people
belong  to  mixed  types,  the  twelve  kinds  are  multiplied  inde-
finitely.

180  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

precision.  The  first  is  the  Speculum  Astwlogice  of  Junctin
de  Florence,  2  vols.,  1581 ;  the  second  is  the  Matheseos,
Libri  viii.,  1551.  The  foundation  of  the  vast  treatise  of
Junctin  de  Florence  is  a  rare  Greek  treatise  of  Ptolemy
of  Pelouse,  one  of  the  last  of  the  grand  succession  of
oriental  initiates  who  glorified  the  Alexandrian  school  of
philosophy.  The  original  manuscript  enunciated  the  Her-
metic traditions  of  Egyptian  oriental  magic,  while  the
commentary  of  Junctin  de  Florence  contains  the  result
of  its  author's  life-long  researches  among  the  profundities
of  Chaldaic  Astromancy,  Jewish  Kabbalism,  and  Arabian
Theurgy.  Julius  Firmius  Maternus  also  drew  from
the  work  of  Ptolemy  the  foundation  of  his  astrological
methods,  producing,  in  a  smaller  compass,  an  absolutely
practical  manual.  Junctin  de  Florence  was  an  illustrious
doctor  of  theology,  the  almoner  of  Fran9ois  de  Valois,
the  youngest  brother  of  Henry  HI.  of  France.  Julius
Firmius  Maternus  was  a  Sicilian  priest  of  the  fourth  cen-
tury. The  fortunate  possessor  of  these  works  may  soon
place  himself  in  possession  of  the  secret  code  of  As-
trology, but  the  substance  of  both  are  embodied  in
Christian's  "Histoire  de  la  Magie,"  8vo,  Paris,  1870.
This  disciple  of  Eliphas  Levi  gives  a  general  theory  of
the  Horoscope  and  the  Keys  of  Astrological  Science,
which  he  denominates  almost  infallible.

KABBALISM.

AS  in  other  dej^artments  of  magical  literature,  there
are  two  views  current  concerning  Kabbalism.
There  is  that  of  incredulous  criticism  which  con-
siders it  to  be,  historically,  a  flagrant  forgery,  and,  in
itself,  barbarous  and  unintelligible  jargon  ;  and  there  is
that  of  uncritical  credulity  which  accepts  it  as  "  the  key
of  things  kept  secret  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."
The  truth,  as  in  other  cases,  would  appear  to  lie  between
these  two  extremes.  Before  attempting  to  appreciate
the  science,  it  is  necessary,  in  the  interests  of  the  unad-
vanced  inquirer,  to  make  a  few  preliminary  explanations.
Kabbalism  is  an  art  or  a  science  which  is  derived  from
the  Kabbalah,  a  term  which  signifies  "  reception,"  in  the
sense  of  an  heirloom  which  is  handed  down  from  father
to  son.  It  is  used  to  denote  a  considerable  body  of
esoteric  or  mystical  literature  belonging  to  the  Jews.
Its  most  important  divisions  are  the  Bahir,  which  is
said  to  be  the  most  ancient  book  of  rabbinical  literature,
but  which  seems  to  be  wholly  unknown  to  a  number  of
occult  students  at  the  present  day ;  the  Zohar,  or  book
of  splendour ;  the  Sepher  Sephiroth,  or  book  of  emana-
tions ;  the  Sepher  Jetzirah,  which,  treats  of  the  thirty-
two  paths  of  the  Absolute  ;  and  the  Asch  Metzareph.
The  philosophical  doctrines  developed  in  these  works
are  affirmed  to  have  been  perpetuated  by  the  secret
method  of  oral  tradition  from  the  first  ages  of  humanity.
"  The  Kabbalah,"  says  Dr.  Ginsburg,  when  explaining
the  story  of  its  birth,  "  was  first  taught  by  God  Himself
to  a  select  company  of  angels,  who  formed  a  theosophic
school  in  Paradise.  After  the  Fall  the  angels  most
graciously  communicated  this  heavenly  doctrine  to  the
disobedient  child  of  earth,  to  furnish  the  protoplasts  with
the  means  of  returning  to  their  pristine  nobility  and

182  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

felicity.  From  Adam  it  passed  over  to  Noah,  and  then
to  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God,  who  emigrated  with  it
to  Egypt,  where  the  patriarch  allowed  a  portion  of  this
mysterious  doctrine  to  ooze  out.  It  was  in  this  way
that  the  Egyptians  obtained  some  knowledge  of  it,  and
the  other  Eastern  nations  could  introduce  it  into  their
philosophical  systems.  Moses,  who  was  learned  in  all
the  wisdom  of  Egypt,  was  first  initiated  into  the  Kab-
balah in  the  land  of  his  birth,  but  became  most  proficient
in  it  during  his  wanderings  in  the  wilderness,  when  he
not  only  devoted  to  it  the  leisure  hours  of  the  whole  forty
years,  but  received  lessons  in  it  from  one  of  the  angels.
By  the  aid  of  this  mysterious  science  the  law-giver  was
enabled  to  solve  the  difficulties  which  arose  during  his
management  of  the  Israelites,  in  spite  of  the  pilgrimages,
wars,  and  frequent  miseries  of  the  nation.  He  covertly
laid  down  the  principles  of  this  secret  doctrine  in  the
first  four  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  withheld  them
from  Deuteronomy.  Moses  also  initiated  the  seventy
Elders  into  the  secrets  of  this  doctrine,  and  they  again
transmitted  them  from  hand  to  hand.  Of  all  who  formed
the  unbroken  line  of  tradition,  David  and  Solomon  were
the  most  deeply  initiated  into  the  Kabbalah.  No  one,
however,  dared  to  write  it  down  till  Schimeon  ben
Jochai,  who  lived  at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the
second.  After  his  death,  his  son.  Rabbi  Eleazar,  and
his  secretary.  Rabbi  Abba,  as  well  as  his  disciples,  col-
lated Rabbi  Simon  Ben  Jochai's  treatises,  and  out  of
these  composed  the  celebrated  work  called  Z  H  R,
ZoJiar,  Splendour,  which  is  the  grand  storehouse  of
Kabbalism."

This  version  of  the  history  of  Jewish  transcendental
literature  is  accepted  at  the  present  day  by  a  number  of
mystical  thinkers  not  in  themselves  illiterate,  but  whose
veneration  has  blunted  their  critical  faculty.  Their
imaginations  are  overwhelmed  by  the  grandiose  specula-
tions of  the  Jewish  mystics,  and,  naturally  inclined  to
credulity,  they  believe  in  the  antiquity  of  the  Kabbalah
not  actually  for  the  reason  which  prompted  the  stormy
faith  of  Tertullian — Credo  quia  nhsurdum — but  because  it
is  a  large  idea,  just  as  they  believe  in  the  antiquity  of

KABBALISM.  183

the  Rosicrucian  Society,  and  in  the  connection  of  the
Masonic  Brotherhood  with  the  splendid  order  of  the
Temple  and  with  the  vague  wonders  of  Eleusinian
mysteries.  The  student  who  is  in  search  of  truth  must,
however,  be  fortified  against  the  glamour  of  romance,
and  he  will  do  well  to  realise  that  this  supposed  history
of  Kabbalistic  origines  is  almost  wholly  fabulous,  and  no
evidence  worthy  of  the  name  can  be  adduced  to  support
it.  It  is  possible  that  a  certain  amount  of  secret  doctrine
and  a  certain  number  of  secret  exegetical  methods  were
perpetuated  by  tradition  in  Judea,  and  that  they  were
ultimately  incorporated  in  the  Kabbalah,  but  this  is  the
sum  total  of  its  claim  to  antiquity,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  there  is  practically  no  doubt  that  the  most  prized,
the  most  voluminous,  and,  philosophically,  the  most
suggestive  and  valuable  section  of  Kabbalistic  literature
is  a  work  of  the  thirteenth  century.

In  his  essay  on  "  The  Kabbalah ;  its  Doctrines,
Development,  and  Literature,"  Dr  Ginsburg  enters  into
a  detailed  examination  of  the  facts  and  arguments  which
have  satisfied  the  most  eminent  authorities  that  the
"Zohar  "  is  of  modern  origin.  It  would  be  beyond  the
scope  of  our  purpose  to  enumerate  them  in  these  pages  in
any  exhaustive  manner,  but  it  may  be  briefly  remarked
that  this  treatise  provides  a  mystical  explanation  of  the
Hebrew  vowel  points  which  were  introduced  at  the  close
of  the  sixth  century,  that  it  cites  an  author  who  is
known  to  have  lived  and  died  during  the  eleventh
century,  that  it  mentions  the  Crusades,  and  records
events  which  transpired  in  the  year  a.d.  1264.  It  was
some  few  years  previous  to  1291  that  copies  of  the
Zohar  first  began  to  be  circulated  by  a  Spanish  Jew
named  Moses  De  Leon,  who  pretended  to  be  in  posses-
sion of  an  autograph  manuscript  of  its  reputed  author
R.  Simon  ben  Jochai.  The  value  of  this  pretension  was
made  evident  after  his  death,  when  the  wealthy  Joseph
de  Avila  promised  the  destitute  widow  of  Moses  de
Leon,  ''that  if  she  would  give  him  the  original  MS.  of
the  Zohar  from  which  her  husband  made  the  copies,  his
son  should  marry  her  daughter,  and  that  he  would  give
them  a  handsome  dowry.     Whereupon  the  widow  and

184  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

daughter  declared,  that  they  did  not  possess  any  such
MS.,  that  Moses  de  Leon  never  had  it,  but  that  he  com-
posed the  Zohar  from  his  own  head,  and  wrote  it  with
his  own  hand."

In  the  same  way,  the  consensus  of  authorities  refers
the  book  of  Creation,  attributed  to  the  patriarch  Abra-
ham, to  "  the  ninth  century  of  the  Christian  era,  when
it  first  became  known,"  and  the  rest  of  this  curious
literature  to  a  variety  of  periods  ranging  between  the
eighth  and  the  thirteenth  centuries.  So  early  as  the  be-
ginning of  the  fifteenth  century,  it  may  be  added,  the
suspicious  character  of  the  Zohar  was  exposed  by  a
learned  philosophical  Israelite  of  the  University  of
Padua.

The  mysticism  of  the  Mishna  and  the  Talmud  must
be  carefully  distinguished  from  that  of  the  Kabbalistic
writings.  Of  the  comparative  antiquity  of  the  two  former
cycles  of  Jewish  literature  there  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt.  What  antiquity  belongs  to  the  doctrines  which
are  developed  in  the  latter  must  be  traced  to  the  Alex-
andrian school  of  theurgic  magic  which,  post-Christian
as  it  was,  may  be  admitted  to  have  been  the  heir  of  many
antique  traditions.

Having  established,  as  far  as  may  be  possible  in  a
short  summary  of  the  latest  results  of  independent  criti-
cism, the  actual  antiquity  of  the  chief  books  comprised
in  the  Kabbalah,  it  is  necessary  to  say  a  few  words  with
regard  to  its  claims  upon  the  modern  student  of  mystic-
ism. It  is  clear  that  its  philosophical  value  is  not
depreciated  by  its  modern  origin;  that  is  completely
independent  of  its  position  in  history.  It  is  said  by  its
admirers  to  be  an  absolute  guide  to  knowledge  in  all  the
most  profound  problems  of  life.  It  indicates  the  nature
and  attributes  of  God,  the  Supreme  Being,  whom,  how-
ever, it  does  not  attempt  to  define.  It  indicates
the  origin  and  evolution  of  the  cosmos ;  it  describes
the  creation  of  angels  and  of  men,  the  nature  pos-
sessed by  both,  with  the  nature  of  demons,  and  of
the  intermediate  and  elementary  beings  which  fill  the
universe.  It  aifords  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the  grand
mysteries  connected  with  the  soul  of  man,  expounds  the

KABBALISM.  185

interior  significance  of  the  written  law,  and  contains  the
infallible  keys  of  many  other  mysteries.  Truly,  this  is
an  extensive  philosophical  programme,  and  if  so  inclu-
sive a  claim  can  be  substantiated,  it  is  obvious  that  the
student  of  occultism  may  profitably  confine  his  attention
to  the  Kabbalah,  and  may,  without  detriment,  ignore
all  that  is  unconnected  with  it.  On  examination,  how-
ever, it  proves  that  with  all  this  splendour  of  promise,
the  Kabbalah  is  simply  a  series  of  dogmatic  hypotheses ;
it  is  not  a  guide  to  knowledge ;  it  is  a  body  of  positive
doctrine,  based  on  a  central  assumption  which  is  in-
capable of  proof,  and  enunciated  in  a  singularly  bar-
barous and  unintelligible  form.  "  This  tradition,"  says
Eliphas  L6vi,  "  wholly  reposes  on  the  single  dogma  of
magic — that  the  Visible  is  for  us  the  proportional
measure  of  the  Invisible."  And  again:  *' The  religion
of  the  Kabbalists  is  at  once  all  hypothesis  and  all  certi-
tude, for  it  proceeds  by  analogy  from  the  Known  to  the
Unknown."  In  o£her  words,  there  is  a  correspondence
between  the  seen  and  the  unseen,  and  it  is  possible  to
reason  from  the  one  to  the  other.  Pseudo-Hermes  has
given  another  and  axiomatic  presentation  of  the  same
notion  :  "  That  which  is  above  is  in  proportion  with
that  which  is  below,  and  that  which  is  below  is  in  propor-
tion with  that  which  is  above."  You  can  reason  up  from
man  to  God,  from  earth  to  heaven,  from  body  to  spirit.
This  argument  from  analogy  is  something  like  the
argument  from  design ;  it  is  not  satisfactory,  it  is  not
reliable,  and  yet  it  is  diflScult  to  dispense  with  it.  We
fashion  the  World  Beyond  in  the  likeness  of  the  world
about  us,  because  we  are  unable  to  imagine  a  wholly
different  order  of  subsistence  from  that  with  which  ex-
perience has  acquainted  us.  At  the  same  time,  the  limita-
tions of  our  own  nature  cannot  certainly,  nor,  indeed,
reasonably,  be  upheld  as  the  measure  of  eternity,  and  a
philosophy  which  invests  this  limitation  with  an  absolute
value  maybe  bold,  as  it  also  may  be  ingenious,  but  there
is  no  obvious  or  irresistible  reason  for  accepting  it  as  a
sober  guide.

The  Kabbalistic  evolutions  of  the  Macroprosopus,  and
the  revolutions  of  the  soul  of  man,  are  very  interesting

186  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

efforts  of  the  human  mind  to  account  in  an  original
manner  for  the  mysteries  which  encompass  us,  but  they
are  merely  speculations,  they  have  no  claim  on  faith,
and  when  we  turn  from  such  modern  interpretations  of
the  Kabbalah  as  are  provided  by  Eliphas  L6vi  to  the
grotesque  and  unmanageable  typology  of  the  original
works,  and  become  acquainted  with  the  extent  of  their
crudity,  their  inadequacy,  and  their  arbitrariness,  it  will
become  more  than  doubtful  whether  they  will  repay  the
exceedingly  painstaking  study  which  will  be  required
to  master  them.  They  may  be  read  indeed  for  their  occa-
sional touches  of  sublimity,  for  their  occasional  bits  of  in-
sight, at  times  even  for  their  poetic  suggestiveness,  and,
of  course,  they  have  their  place  in  the  history  of  philo-
sophy and  in  the  history  of  Jewish  letters.  Whatever  is
undertaken  in  excess  of  this  we  cannot  believe  will  be
profitable.  The  investigation  of  the  numerical  value  of
words  ;  of  the  effects  which  result  from  beheading  them,
from  curtailing  them,  from  substituting  new  letters ;
and  the  mysteries  which  are  concealed  in  the  shapes  of
alphabetical  symbols,  are  not  subjects  in  reality  more
serious  than  any  other  intellectual  gymnastics  achieved
in  the  world  of  puzzles.  In  the  paper  on  the  evocation
of  angels  at  the  beginning  of  this  book,  we  have  given
some  extensive  specimens  of  Kabbalistic  investigations
conducted  in  the  transcendental  region  of  pneumatology
by  means  of  curious  calculations.  Their  value  is  on
their  surface,  it  is  easily  estimated,  and  it  is  really  too
late  to  attempt  any  serious  resuscitation  of  this  sort  of
occultism.  The  best  lesson  we  can  learn  from  it  is  the
necessity — on  which  we  have  continually  insisted — of
scrupulously  separating  the  experimental  knowledge  of
the  mystics  from  their  bizarre  fields  of  speculation.

We  may  add  in  conclusion  that  it  is  mainly  to  the  Kab-
balistic combinations  of  the  Divine  Names  that  mediaeval
magic  is  indebted  for  the  terms  in  its  rituals,  as  it  was
thence  also  that  it  derived  the  belief  in  a  resident  virtue
in  sacred  names  and  in  numbers.

The  Kahhala  Denudaia  of  Baron  de  Eosenroth  is  the
most  complete  synopsis  of  Kabbalistic  theosophy.  It  is,
however,  in  Latin,  and  the  English  reader  must  content

KABBALISM.  187

himself,  as  best  he  can,  with  a  portion  of  one  of  its  divi-
sions, which  has  been  translated  by  Mr.  S.  Mathers,
and  recently  published  in  London,  under  the  title  of
the  "Kabbalah  Unveiled."  The  more  advanced  student
will  find  in  Maimonides'  "Guide  of  the  Perplexed"  an
ingenuous  and  suggestive  unveiling  of  the  interior  sense
of  scripture  according  to  the  Kabbalistic  laws  of  inter-
pretation.

PART    III.

THE  MYSTICS.

THE  reader  has  been  already  made  acquainted  with
the  defined  end  of  mysticism,  and  with  the  broad
division  of  the  mystics  into  two  classes — physical
and  spiritual.  The  physical  mystics  worked  in  accord-
ance with  Hermetic  mysticism  in  the  world  of  metals  and
minerals ;  the  labours  of  the  others  were  devoted  to  the
development  of  the  secret  possibilities  which  reside  in  the
subject  Man.  For  all  practical  piu-poses,  the  history  of  the
alchemists  proper  begins  with  Geber,  an  Arabian,  whose
life  is  enveloped  in  an  obscurity  which  has  given  a  romantic
warrant  to  a  number  of  magnificent  fables.  He  flourished
most  probably  in  the  eighth  century  of  the  Christian  era.
The  first  ascertainable  reference,  in  Western  literature,
to  the  transmutation  of  metals,  occurs,  as  already  stated,
in  a  writing  of  Zosimus,  the  Pomopolite,  who  belongs  to
the  fifth  century;  but  the  origin  of  the  great  experiment
has  been  very  imperfectly  investigated.  There  is  a  litera-
ture of  Oriental  alchemy  existing  in  Arabian  manuscripts,
now  scattered  and  practically  entombed  in  the  public
libraries  of  Europe,  by  a  study  of  which  the  origins
of  alchemy  can  be  elucidated.  But  we  are  in  want  of  a
history  of  chemistry  as  it  was  known  to  the  ancients.
We  are  in  want,  in  particular,  of  an  exhaustive  catalogue
of  all  chemical  subjects  known  to  the  ancient  Egyptians,
Greeks,  and  Romans,  and  Jews.  That  would  determine
the  actual  nature  of  the  materials  of  which  a  knowledge
was  inherited  by  the  followers  of  the  Arabian  Geber.
It  would  settle  the  debateable  point  how  far  these  men
in  reality  contributed  to  the  foundation  and  extension
of  exoteric  chemistry.     Existing  histories  of  this  interest-

190  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

ing  science  occasionally  enumerate  the  substances  which
are  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in  alchemical  writings,
but  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  information
was  obtained  first  hand  from  the  authorities  quoted,  and
as  most  of  these  histories,  at  least  in  England,  and
undeniably  as  regards  their  earlier  portions,  are  of  the
most  meagre  and  unsatisfactory  character,  it  is  difficult
to  believe  them  the  result  of  any  adequate  inquiry.
Thirdly  ;  we  are  in  need  of  a  history  of  chemical  develop-
ment among  the  Hermetists,  which  could  be  compiled
from  a  study  of  their  voluminous  writings  in  historical
order.  These  matters  must  be  necessarily  handed  over
to  an  inner  circle  of  specialists,  working  to  some  extent
in  common  ;  but  they  are  of  undoubted  importance  to  all
students  of  mysticism,  because  they  will  determine  the
true  place  of  alchemy  in  the  history  of  the  sciences,
and  will  manifest  a  plain  line  of  demarcation  between
alchemists  proper  and  the  spiritual  mystics,  with  whom
they  are  too  completely  identified  by  the  wonder-
mongering  theories  of  an  uncritical  transcendentalism.

From  the  period  of  Geber  to  that  of  Paracelsus,  the
literature  of  physical  alchemy  appears  to  have  been
sufficiently  material,  and  the  methods  pursued  in  the
achieved  or  attempted  performance  of  the  Great  Work,
were  simply  so  much  wading  through  an  enormous  variety
of  processes  which  frequently  dissipated  the  fortunes  and
squandered  the  existence  of  the  workers  without  any
definite  good  being  attained.  When  the  erratic  splend-
our of  the  mind  of  Paracelsus  rose  comet-like  over
the  intellectual  horizon  of  Germany,  a  change  came.
He  was  the  first  to  import  into  the  Hermetic  experiment
an  element  which  was  of  a  magical  character ;  he  ad-
mitted that  gold  might  be  made  by  the  mundane  process
of  common  chemistry,  but  this  he  denounced  as  in-
efficient and  poor,  when  compared  with  the  result  which
might  be  produced  by  an  exercise  of  the  arcane  potencies
of  the  human  soul.  There  are  certain  operations  in
which  one  is  fain  to  believe  that  something  of  the  nature
of  the  worker  passes  into  the  manipulated  substance.
The  cook,  like  the  poet,  is  born  and  not  made,  and
under  the  influence  of  the  culinary  mission  something

THE  MYSTICS.  191

from  the  other  world  passes  into  the  viands  which  he
digests  over  his  furnaces,  and  that  something  is  trans-
mitted direct  from  his  soul — a  process  which  constitutes
the  unteachablc  nature  of  his  art.  Now,  the  alchemist
is  the  cook  of  mineralogy,  and  the  digestion  of  meats
and  minerals  is  described  in  the  French  language  by  the
same  term.  Yet  it  is  eminently  difficult  to  understand
how  a  projection  of  vital  fluid  can  accomplish  metallic
transmutation.  Skill,  genius,  and  will-power  can  modify
forms  and  vary  combinations,  but  it  cannot  change
natures,  whence  one  is  disposed  to  believe  that  the  sub-
stance produced  by  the  psycho-chemistry  of  Paracelsus
was  simply  a  refined  sophistication — a  modified  form,  a
substance  as  to  appearance  changed,  but  as  to  radical
nature  the  same.  On  the  other  hand,  a  discriminating
criticism  might  discern  in  this  magical  psycho-mineralogy
and  pneumatic  metallurgy  an  agreeable  manner  of  dis-
tinguishing between  the  alchemical  methods  of  a  man
of  parts  who  infuses  genius  into  his  operations,  and  the
barren  stupidities  of  the  unimaginative  and  gross-minded
souffleur.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that
Paracelsus  achieved  an  immense  reputation,  and  created
a  school  of  chemistry,  which  subsequently  produced  the
damask-like  wealth  and  richness  of  that  "mysterious
flower"  of  allegory,  the  Eose-Cross.  More  completely
than  ever  the  science  of  alchemy  became  involved  in
mysticism  and  centred  in  religion.  It  was  a  work  which
to  the  unregenerate  was  impossible ;  it  was  one  of  the
secrets  of  God — magnalia  Dei  et  Naturce — and  the  intensi-
fication of  this  idea  more  completely  obscured  it  with
mystery,  for  sacramentum  Regis  ahscondere  honum  est.
From  the  psychic  manufacture  of  gokl,  it  is  but  a  step
to  the  conversion  of  the  metallic  subject  into  an  allegori-
cal idea,  and  men  began  to  attribute  to  the  philosophers
of  old  an  aspiration  less  sordid  than  the  search  after
wealth  unbounded,  and  to  accredit  them  with  a  spiritual
intent.  Some  of  the  writings  of  Khunrath,  a  professed
alchemist,  have  nothing  in  common  with  the  metallic
experiment — they  are  advanced  text-books  of  Christian
theosophy  expressed  in  the  terminology  of  the  turha
pliilosophorum,  and  from   beginning  [to   end   the   entire

192  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

theory  of  the  Hermetic  practice  was  transcendentalized
by  Jacob  Boehnie.  Side  by  side  with  this  new  school,
the  followers  of  the  physical  Avork  continued  to  multiply
their  initiates  till  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, when  for  historical  purposes  it  expired  with  the
mysterious  Archimandrite  Lascaris,  a  revival  attempted
by  Cagliostro,  some  fifty  years  later,  being  probably
fraudulent.

Fascinating  as  is  the  history  of  alchemy  and  the  men
who  pursued  it,  there  can  be  no  comparison  between  its
interest  and  the  history  of  the  larger  opus  of  the  spiritual
mystics.  It  is  at  this  point  that  one  feels  the  want  of  a
history  of  Christian  mysticism  in  its  relation  to  universal
mysticism,  a  work  which  would  reward  and  require  a
lifetime  of  labour  and  study.

One  definition  of  mysticism  has  already  been  given  in
the  course  of  this  work.  There  is  another  which,  with
less  appearance  of  precision,  is  also  good.  We  must  re-
member that  mysticism  is  a  science,  a  moyen  cle  parvenir,
a  way  of  attainment ;  it  endows  the  human  mind  with
an  instrument  of  knowledge ;  it  is,  in  the  words  of  an
encyclopaedist  who  has  treated  the  aspiration  with  a
tolerable  amount  of  respect — it  is  the  endeavour  of  the
human  mind  to  grasp  the  divine  essence  or  ultimate
reality  of  all  things,  and  to  enjoy,  while  in  this  life  and
in  this  body,  the  blessedness  of  an  immediate  communion
with  the  Highest.  It  recognizes  the  totality  of  finite
existence  as  a  theophany — a  "circle  which  ever  returneth
in  to  the  self-same  spot,"  to  that  point  "which  hath  no
parts  and  which  hath  no  magnitude " — God  being  the
beginning  and  the  end  of  all,  universalism  being  im-
plicitly included  in  the  terms  of  the  proposition,  the  law
of  the  universe  necessitating  beatitude,  as  the  end  of  all
that  is  conscious,  namely,  all  that  is  philosophically  cap-
able of  a  permanent  subsistence,  and  thus  definitely
determining  the  nature  of

"  that  far-off",  divine  event
To  which  the  whole  creation  moves. "

As  in  practical  alchemy,  so  in  spiritual  mysticism,
Paracelsus  stands  forth  as  a  figure  of  considerable  his-

THE  IklYSTICS.  193

toriccal  importance  ;  by  the  limitations  of  his  character  it
is  wholly  improbable  that  he  attained  the  end  of  mystic-
ism, but  to  divine  it  in  virtue  of  his  great  intellectual
lucidity  was  however  permitted  him,  and  he  was  con-
scious in  no  ordinary  manner  of  the  arcane  possibilities
which  exist  in  the  soul  of  man.  In  him  the  physical
and  spiritual  mystics  may  be  said  to  have  met  and  joined
hands ;  for  the  alchemists  were  truly  mystics ;  they
sought  to  ameliorate  an  individual  substance  by  its
application  to  a  universal  substance,  and  this,  in  relation
to  another  subject,  was  equally  the  end  of  the  spiritual
adepts.  In  the  illuminated  philosopher  of  Hohenheim,
the  dual  aspiration  may  not  have  attained  its  height,  but
it  attained  its  union,  and  Paracelsus  is  useful  in  the  his-
tory of  philosophy  not  for  what  he  personally  achieved
but  for  the  juncture  which  he  represents,  and  which
materially  aids  in  the  realisation  of  the  integral  nature
of  Hermetic  work  in  all  its  fields  of  elaboration.  He  is
the  sign-post  which  indicates  the  locality  of  the  focus  of
Christian  mysticism.  That  is  undoubtedly  Germany,
which  stands  philosophically  supreme  among  all  the
nations  of  Europe,  and  is  the  source  of  light  and  leading
for  all  forms  of  speculative  thought,  however  high  or  low.
It  is  not  there,  needless  to  say,  that  we  are  to  seek  the
fundamental  elements  of  that  aspirational  Science  of  the
Life  Within  which,  during  all  its  centuries,  has  spiritual-
ised the  church  of  Christ.  It  has  been  truly  said  that
the  appearance  of  mysticism  in  the  West  is  coincident
mth  the  exhaustion  of  Greek  and  Jewish  civilisation.
But  thence  it  should  not  be  concluded  that  these  aspira-
tions are  confined  to  periods  of  decadence,  or  that  they
are  in  themselves  a  sign  of  weakness  and  of  religious  dis-
integration in  any  opprobrious  sense.  The  anxieties  and
desires  of  the  soul  are  quickened  in  those  periods  of
sorrow  when  the  landmarks  of  the  spiritual  life  are  being
effaced  for  a  period,  and  out  of  the  great  fermentation
which  follows  the  operation  of  a  strong  dissolving  instru-
ment, a  new  religious  order  is  being  slowly  evoked.  The
prevalence  of  mysticism  during  such  periods  is  a  sign  of
strength   and   vitality ;  it   shows  the  religious  instinct

N

194  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

rising   superior   to   doctrinal   formalism,  and  while  all
things

' '  change  and  wear  out ;
Change  and  are  turned  about,
Falter  and  fail,"

asserts  very  plainly  and  certainly  its  permanent  vitality
and  strength.

The  foundation  of  Christian  mysticism  is  in  the  Neo-
Platonic,  or  Alexandrian  quest  after  the  ecstatic  intui-
tion of  the  Ineffable  and  Substantial  All.  It  is  probably
derived  through  Philo,  whose  God,  the  end  in  view,  is
defined  in  terms  of  "  absolute  transcendency."  On  the
authority  of  the  last  edition  of  the  "  Encyclopaedia  Brit-
annica,"  it  may  be  stated  that  Neo-Platonism  appeared
during  the  first  half  of  the  third  century.  The  influence
of  Philo  was  probably  strong  in  the  early  Church.
Josephus,  the  pliant  and  courtly  Israelite,  tinctured  so
strongly  with  the  worldly  elements  of  the  Paganism  with
.  which  he  was  surrounded,  was  useful  historically  as  an
ally,  because  he  rejoresented,  well  or  otherwise,  the  his-
torical actuality  of  the  central  figure  of  the  new  and
more  divine  dispensation  ;  but  Philo,  among  all  the  Jews,
most  nearly  approached  the  philosophic  side  of  Chris-
tianity. Yet  his  influence  was  destined  to  be  absorbed
by  that  of  the  so-called  Areopagite  Dionysius,  who,  at
the  end  of  the  fifth  century,  incorporated  Platonic  theo-
sophy  with  Christian  dogma,  and  developed  his  scale  of
the  universe  in  consonance  with  the  Hermetic  doctrine
of  successive  emanations.  This  scheme  is  essentially
mystical,  and  is  a  methodical  application  of  Platonic  and
Hermetic  conceptions  to  the  Christian  realisation  of
heaven  and  the  angelical  intelligences  which  inform  the
superior  spheres.  His  transcendental  tradition  passed
over  to  Scotland,  and  influenced  profoundly  the  extra-
ordinary mind  of  his  translator,  Erigena,  whose  perished
works  are  a  distinct  and  irretrievable  loss  to  the  broader
school  of  Christian  theology  in  the  past.  The  golden
chain  of  speculation  and  the  philosophy  of  transcenden-
tal desire  were  continued  by  St  Bernard  and  his  contem-
porary St  Victor,  who  originated  a  school  of  thought
in   which   the   illuminated  Bonaventura  was   a  promi-

THE  MYSTICS.  195

nent  disciple,  his  little  treatise,  Itinerarlum  Mentis  ad
Deum,  being,  within  certain  limits,  a  complete  handbook
of  transcendental  thought,  having  direct  reference  to
Pseudo-Hermes,  and  destined  in  turn  to  influence  the
great  mind  of  Pascal.  Mediaeval  societies  of  mysticism
sprang  up  by  degrees  in  Germany,  both  for  men  and
women,  who  devoted  themselves  to  the  cultivation  of  the
interior  life,  and  whose  ascribed  writings  were  not  de-
void of  effect  upon  the  powerful  mind  of  Luther,  in  spite
of  its  native  gTossness.  Along  with  these  Christian
schools,  it  is,  on  the  whole,  probable,  though  the  evidence
is  of  an  indirect  character,  that  secret  fraternities  per-
petuated the  doctrines  of  Gnosticism  and  the  illuminism
of  the  Pagan  religions  for  many  centuries  after  their  sup-
posed disappearance,  and  thus  originated  the  colleges  of
magic  in  conjunction  with  Jewish  Kabbalism,  which
entered  so  largely  into  the  practical  mysticism  of  the
period.  Men  like  Eckart  and  Tauler  were  the  product
of  many  elements,  and,  in  a  sense,  all  of  them  lead  us
towards  Paracelsus  as  a  central  point,  though  the  spiritual
powers  of  Paracelsus,  whatever  they  may  have  been,
seem  to  have  been  possessed  as  a  gift,  and  were  not
traceably  consequent  on  any  distinct  personal  advance-
ment in  the  spiritual  life.  It  was  chiefly  by  translations
of  this  hierophant  and  of  Cornelius  Agrippa  that  mystic-
ism was  implanted  in  England  after  the  searching  fires
of  the  Keformation,  and  their  influence  may  be  traced
from  the  period  of  Thomas  Vaughan*  and  More,  his
Platonic  critic,  till  the  beautiful  light  of  Jacob  Bohme
absorbed  it  finally.  The  marvellous  shoemaker  of
Gorlitz,  practically  the  last  of  the  German  mystics,  not
only  exercised  an  immense  influence  in  his  own  Father-
land, but  also  on  the  French  sect  of  the  Martinists,
whose  head  was  the  refined  and  delightful  character,
Louis  Claude  de  St  Martin,  originally  the  disciple  of  a

*  Vaughan  is  deserving  of  more  than  a  passing  notice.  His
writings,  the  most  remarkable  of  which  have  been  recently  reissued
in  London,  reveal  him  as  an  advanced  mystic,  devoted  to  the
development  of  the  interior  powers  of  the  soul,  in  which  he  seems
to  have  made  progress  of  no  ordinary  kind.  He  was  also  a  practi-
cal alchemist,  and  conducted  experiments  with  his  wife,  whom  he
regard  ed  as  his  spiritual  counterpart.

196  THE  OCCUIjT  SCIENCES.

man  only  second  to  himself  in  interest,  and  whose  name
of  Pasquales  Martinez  still  exercises  a  spell  of  glamour.
Perhaps  it  escaped  Madame  Guion,  who  belonged  to  an-
other school,  but  it  bade  fair  to  revolutionize  England  in
the  hands  of  William  Law  and  writers  like  Jane  Lead.
This  is  possibly  an  extreme  statement,  but  it  is  not  devoid
of  warrant.

In  our  own  day  the  philosophy  of  Emerson  and
Carlyle  was  a  kind  of  modified  mysticism,  secularised
for  the  first  time ;  while  actually  and  at  this  moment,
along  with  Spiritualism  and  Theosophy,  there  has
occurred  that  second  spring  of  transcendental  aspiration
which  has  at  once  been  the  source  and  the  warrant  of
this  book,  and  in  which  with  all  humility  we  desire  to  be
included  as  discriminating  but  earnest  followers.

We  cannot  sufficiently  warn  our  readers  that  this  is  a
bald  and  meagre  sketch,  but  it  is  sufficient  to  indicate  that
there  has  been  a  tradition  of  the  interior  life  perpetuated
through  all  the  ages  of  Christendom.  By  it  there  is
proclaimed  the  possibility  of  passing  into  a  state  which
transcends  normal  consciousness  and  constitutes  a  partial
union  with  a  higher  principle  of  being  than  that  with
which  we  are  normally  acquainted.  This  union  was
approached  in  the  ecstasies  of  the  Catholic  saints,  but  it
is  not  confined  to  the  disciples  of  any  special  creed  or
dogma.  Those  who  are  in  search  of  their  souls  must
devote  themselves  to  the  study  of  the  men  called
mystics.  The  most  that  can  be  offered  by  the  pheno-
mena, however  wonderful,  of  magic,  and  of  spiritualism
in  its  most  exalted  forms,  is  a  guarantee  in  fact  that
this  search,  properly  conducted,  is  no  insensate  quest.
They  afford  a  fundamental  source  of  conviction  to
warrant  the  prosecution  of  that  grand  experiment  with
our  own  selves  which  the  mystics  claim  to  have  con-
ducted to  a  successful  issue.  In  their  large  and  sugges-
tive literature  will  be  found  the  way  and  the  life  which
are  calculated  to  reach  that  end,  but  the  student  must  re-
member the  Hermetic  warning  to  reject  all  that  is  super-
fluous, and  the  aspirational  flights  of  the  mystics,  and,  as
we  are  tempted  to  add,  their  attainments,  were  weighted
and  circumscribed  by  all  that  was  unworthy  of  Divinity,

THE  MYSTICS.  197

of  all  that  fell  short  of  God,  in  their  exoteric  beliefs.
The  "  free  perspicuity  of  thought  in  universal  conscious-
ness "  is  beyond  all  the  regions  of  defined  doctrine ;  it
is  the  inmost  sanctuary  of  that  true  religion  of  the  spirit
which  is  behind  all  systems  of  religion,  and  it  is  there
alone  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term  that  the  reader  can
find  his  soul.

An  exhaustive  account  of  the  theurgic  doctrine  of
Alexandria  will  be  found  in  a  "  History  of  the  Neo-
Platonic  Philosophy,"  by  Vacherot,  published  in  three
volumes  at  Paris  in  the  year  1850;  Dr.  Franz  Hart-
mann's  analysis  of  the  writings  of  Paracelsus  will  be
valuable  to  the  elementary  student ;  the  same  author
has  just  issued  a  compendious  digest  of  the  works  of
Jacob  Bohme;  a  mine  of  theosophic  wealth  will  be
found  in  the  correspondence  of  Saint-Martin ;  and  a
complete  exposition  of  Mystical  Philosophy  from  the
modern  standpoint  has  been  undertaken  by  Baron  Carl
Duprel,  and  has  been  admirably  rendered  into  English
by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey.

THE  ROSICEUCIANS.

THE  subject  of  the  Rosicriician  Fraternity  has  long
been  of  interest  from  the  impenetrable  mystery
which  has  surrounded  it,  but  that  mystery  is  not  its
only  interest.  No  student  of  occultism  can  afford  to  ignore
the  Rosicrucian  claims,  which  are  part  and  parcel  of  the
great  and  universal  claim  of  the  transcendental  sciences.
While  the  facts  which  are  alone  ascertainable  concerning
this  arcane  Fraternity  have  done  much  to  dispel  the
romantic  associations  which  have  been  connected  'svith  the
name  Rosicrucian,  that  name,  and  not  altogether  unac-
countably, still  exercises  a  certain  spell  upon  persons  of
imaginative  temperament,  and  continues  to  accomplish
the  transfiguration  of  facts,  which  in  themselves  are  pro-
saic. While  the  name  Rosicrucian  originated  among
mystics  at  a  definite  historical  period,  and  has  a  defined
limit  of  application,  its  original  significance  is  eliminated,
it  is  treated  as  the  equivalent  of  Magus,  of  Man  of
Wisdom,  and  other  general  terms,  and  is  considered  as
an  appropriate  designation  for  the  true  mystic,  whether
he  is  affiliated  or  not  to  the  Brotherhood  which  invented
the  name.  Made  use  of  in  this  manner  as  a  fanciful  or
ornamental  appellation,  or  as  a  titular  dignity  which  is
merely  melodious  and  pretty,  it  is  certainly  unmeaning
and  childish,  but  it  is  dear  to  some  modern  mystics,  who
more  than  the  rest  of  humanity  are  dominated  by  the
pleasing  tyranny  of  verbal  tinsel.

Now,  at  the  outset  of  a  historical  inquiry,  however
brief  and  imperfect,  into  the  origin  of  Rosicrucianism,
it  is  eminently  needful  to  put  aside  from  remembrance
all  preconceived  theories,  the  glamorous  accretions  of
romantic  fabulists,  and  the  fables  of  extravagant  his-
torians, and  to  consider  the  Rosicrucian  problem,  as  all
historical  problems  ought  to  be  considered,  in  the  light

200  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

of  facts  alone.  It  is  needless  to  observe  that,  working
upon  this  principle,  the  nomenclature  which  distin-
guishes the  Society,  should  not  be  applied  indiscrimin-
ately outside  the  pale  of  the  Society.

Was  there  really  and  truly  at  any  period  of  the  past
a  genuine  Eosicrucian  Fraternity  1  If  so,  what  is  its
history,  what  are  the  powers  it  possessed,  and  what  has
become  of  it  ?  When  we  hear  of  Rosicrucian  associa-
tions at  the  present  day,  are  we  to  consider  them  affili-
ated with  the  mysterious  order  of  the  past,  or  are  they
simply  unimportant  gatherings  of  a  semi-antiquarian
character,  and  as  much  in  the  dark  as  ourselves  about
the  arcane  history  and  una  vowed  objects  of  that  Brother-
hood whose  name  they  have  assumed  ?  These  are  the
palmary  questions  which  concern  the  Eosicrucian
mystery.

Now,  whether  the  laudable  and  honourable  Fraternity
of  E.  C.  had  a  real  or  an  imaginary  existence,  the
derivation  of  its  name  is  a  point  of  considerable  import-
ance, and  throws  some  light  on  the  uncertainty  which
involves  the  subject.  It  is  not  derived  from  the  name
of  the  supposed  founder.  Christian  Eosenkreuze,  because
the  given  history  of  the  founder  is  that  of  a  fabulous
person,  and  is  therefore  worthless  from  the  philological
standpoint.  It  is,  we  think,  not  derived  from  the
Latin  words  Bos,  dew,  and  Crux,  cross,  although  this
explanation  was  adopted  by  the  historian  Mosheim,  and
has  been  accredited  by  his  great  reputation.  It  was
founded  on  the  assumption  that  the  originators  of
Eosicrucianism,  in  common  with  numerous  alchemists,
considered  the  dew  of  the  philosophers  to  be  the  most
powerful  dissolvent  of.  gold,  while  the  cross  was,  in
chemical  symbolism,  equivalent  to  light — another  im-
portant factor  in  the  performance  of  the  Magnum  Opus
— because  the  figure  of  a  +  was  supposed  to  exhibit
at  the  same  time  the  three  letters  of  which  the  word
Lux,  or  light,  is  compounded.  We  believe  that  the  name
Eosicrucian  is  derived  from  Bosa,  a  Eose,  and  Crux,
Cross.  In  accordance  with  this  opinion,  the  general
symbol  of  the  supposed  Order  was  a  Eose  crucified  in  the
centre  of  a  Cross,  generally  of  gold  or  of  ebony.     But

THE  ROSICRUCIANS.  201

there  is  a  variation  of  this  emblem  which  has  long  been
practically  unknown.  Yet  if  ever  Rosicrucians  existed
it  was  their  true  and  arcane  badge.  This  was  a  red
cross-marked  heart  in  the  centre  of  an  open  Rose,  which
appears  more  than  once  in  an  old  Rosicrucian  book  of
the  last  centiu-y.  It  has  no  connection  with  the  sublime
symbolism  of  the  Oriental  world ;  Egypt,  Thebes,  Eleu-
sinia,  and  the  sanctuaries  of  antique  initiation  are  inno-
cent of  its  import.  It  is  a  development  of  the  monogram
of  the  monk,  Martin  Luther,  which  was  a  cross-crowned
heart  rising  from  the  centre  of  an  open  Rose.  We  think
that  this  is  a  point  of  importance,  and  the  connecting
link  in  a  long  chain  of  evidence  which  has  been  formed
by  our  independent  researches.

Separately  taken,  the  Rose  and  the  Cross  are  hiero-
gTams  of  the  highest  antiquity.  Their  union  is  modern —
that  is,  it  is  subsequent  to  the  Renaissance  and  the  Re-
formation. So  far  as  history  is  concerned,  the  name  Rosi-
crucian was  unknown  previously  to  the  year  1598.  The
history  of  Rosicrucianism  proper  begins  in  Germany,
where,  in  the  city  of  Cassel,  in  the  year  1614,  the  world
of  alchemists,  Paracelsians,  Theosophists,  and  professors
of  magic  and  mysticism,  was  startled  by  the  publication
of  a  pamphlet  of  unpretending  appearance  but  colossal
importance,  which  bore  for  its  title,  "  The  Fame  of  the
Fraternity  of  the  Meritorious  Order  of  the  Rosy  Cross,
addressed  to  the  learned  in  General  and  the  Governors  of
Europe."  It  embodied  the  universal  proclamation  of  cer-
tain anonymous  men,  endued  with  great  wisdom  and
raised  up  by  God  for  the  renewal  and  perfection  of  all
arts  for  the  instruction  of  mankind  in  his  own  worth  and
nobility,  and  for  the  revelation  of  the  true  and  occult
nature  of  the  Microcosmos.  It  informed  the  rude  world  of
quarrelsome  literati  that  by  combining  their  forces  they
might  establish  a  synthesis  of  science,  the  true  Libriim
Naturce,  the  Perfect  Method  of  all  the  arts.  But  they
were  fostering  squabbles  and  divisions,  were  loth  to  leave
the  old  courses,  and  clung  blindly  to  the  traditions  of
Aristotle  and  Galen,  and  the  antiquated  authorities  of
the  elder  world.  Yet  never  since  the  beginning  of
Christendom  had  the  wise  and  all-merciful  God  so  poured

202  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

out  upon  mankind  the  sublime  knowledge  of  his  Son,
Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  sacred  arcana  of  Nature.  A
reformation  had  taken  place  in  religion,  the  sanctu-
aries of  the  Church  had  been  cleansed;  there  was  a
grand  and  a  radical  reformation  preparing  in  science
and  philosophy.  "  Europe  is  with  child,"  cried  the
Fama.  "  It  will  bring  forth  a  strong  child,  who  will
stand  in  need  of  a  great  baptismal  gift."  They,  the
high-illuminated  Brotherhood,  throned  on  the  pinnacles
of  initiation  by  a  godly  and  high-illuminated  father,  were
the  pioneers  of  this  glorious  revolution.  Heirs  of  the
ages  of  occultism,  children  of  light  and  benediction,
initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Grand  Orient,  they
were  exalted  in  the  midst  of  the  obscurity,  a  miraculous
and  magian  star,  to  light  and  lead  the  age.

And  this  was  their  lineage  and  history.

The  chief  and  original  of  their  Fraternity  was  an  illus-
trious and  immortal  Teuton,  anointed  with  the  most
choice  chrism  of  the  supreme,  magical  hierophant,  who
was  at  that  day  a  beatified  participator  in  the  uncreated
light  of  God,  and  in  the  everlasting  triumph  of  their
King,  Christ.  In  the  fifth  year  of  his  age,  C.  E.  C,
offspring  of  the  kisses  of  angels,  and  beautified  by  the
benediction  of  the  stars,  was  placed  in  a  cloister  where
he  learned  Greek  and  Latin,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen
was  associated  with  one,  Brother  P.  A.  L.,  who  was
minded  to  travel  to  the  Holy  Land.  Now,  this  brother
died  at  Cyprus,  but  the  seraphic  boy,  fired  with  heroic
resolves  and  protected  by  angelical  hierarchies,  pressed
on  to  Damascus,  meaning  to  proceed  to  Jerusalem.
At  Damascus,  he  had  intelligence  of  an  illuminated
circle  of  theosophists,  who  abode  in  an  unknown  city
of  Arabia,  called  Damcar,  of  the  wonders  which  they
wrought  therein,  and  of  the  mysteries  of  Nature  which
were  discovered  to  them.  The  vision  of  the  holy
sepulchre  faded  from  the  boy's  mind ;  he  burned  with
the  laudable  ambition  to  become  acquainted  with  these
marvellous  men,  and  he  bargained  Avith  certain  Arabians
that  they  should  carry  him  for  a  sum  of  money  to
Damcar.  He  reached  that  unknown  city  when  he  was
sixteen  years  of  age,  and  there  he  was  cordially  welcomed

THE  ROSICRUCIANS.  203

by  the  vnse  men,  who  did  not  receive  him  as  a  stranger
but  as  one  whom  they  had  long  been  expecting.  They
welcomed  him,  called  him  by  his  name,  revealed  to  him
several  secrets  of  his  past  life,  and  otherwise  astonished
him  by  their  knowledge  in  things  clivinatory.

He  was  a  pm^e,  virginal  boy ;  they  took  him  at  once
into  their  confidence,  and  instructed  him  duly  and  daily
in  the  mysteries  of  occult  mathematics  and  of  occult
physics.  He  easily  attained  proficiency  in  the  Arabic
tongue,  and  accomplished  the  translation  of  the  divine
book  M  into  good  Latin.  At  the  end  of  three  years  he
departed  from  Damcar,  shipped  himself  over  Sinus  Arabi-
cus  into  Egypt,  and  thence  sailed  into  Fez,  whither  his
magical  instructors  had  directed  him.  There  he  per-
formed evocations  of  the  elementary  spirits  under  the
tuition  of  new  masters,  and  became  familiar  with  the
secrets  of  the  Invisible  World.  He  abode  for  two  years
in  the  city  of  Fez,  and  accomplished  the  period  of  his
initiation,  when,  enriched  by  the  possession  of  many
costly  secrets,  he  proceeded  to  Spain  to  confer  with  its
best  literati,  and  convince  them  of  the  errors  of  their
arts.  He  recounted  the  result  of  his  travels,  and  pre-
scribed them  a  series  of  axioms  for  the  foundation  of  a
universal  natural  science.  But  the  enthusiasm  of  the
young  initiate  was  simply  a  laughing  matter  to  the  fossil-
ized scholars  of  Spain.  Had  not  the  devil  himself  in-
structed them  in  the  principles  and  practices  of  the  Black
Ai^t  at  the  renowned  university  of  Salamanca  *?  "  Who-
so loveth  unquietness,  let  him  be  reformed,"  said  they.
He  retired  in  just  indignation,  but  the  same  treatment
awaited  him  among  several  nations.  The  true  and
infallible  Axiomata,  out  of  all  faculties,  sciences,  and
arts,  the  "  concentrated  centre  of  Nature,"  were  generally
disregarded,  and  he  returned  disappointed  to  Germany,
where  he  ruminated  in  solitude  and  seclusion  on  his
travels  and  his  universal  philosophy.  The  latter  was
reduced  into  writing,  and  he  also  constructed  several  fine
instruments  by  the  power  of  natural  magic.

After  five  years,  his  projected  reformation  returned
very  strongly  to  his  mind.  Was  he  not  in  possession  of
the  great  art  of  transmutation  1     Had  not  the  method  of

204  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

prolonging  life  rewarded  the  zeal  of  his  studies  1     And
must  these  many-sided  marvels  be  lost  to  the  worthy
because  the  world  at  large  was  unfitted  to  receive  or  un-
derstand them  ?     No  ;  a  society  should  be  established  to
secretly  instruct  the  elect  in  the  deep  things  of  Nature,
and  in  the  resources  of  Art,  her  handmaid.     "  After  this
manner,"  says  the  Fama,  "began  the  Fraternity  E.  C—
first  by   four  persons  only,"  who  invented  a  magical
language,  a  cipher  Avi^iting  equally  magical,  and  a  large
dictionary  rejDlete  with  sublime  wisdom.     They  caused  a
House  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  erected,  healed  the  sick,
initiated  further  members,  and  then  under  orders  from
the  founder,   C.   R.   C,  departed  as   missionaries  into
several  countries  to  disseminate  their  wisdom  in  secret.
Many  years  passed  away,  and  at  length   their   loving
Father  C.  R.  C.,  having  finished  his  labours  and  his  pil-
grimage, gave  up  in  the  odour  of  sanctity  his  initiated
spirit  to  God.     The  secret  of  his  sepulchre  was  concealed
for  the  space  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  ;  the
earliest  members  of  the  Fraternity  died ;  it  is  doubtful
whether  those  who  succeeded  had  attained  as  much  wis-
dom, but  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  a  great  and
profitable  discovery  was  made  by  the  adepts  of  the  third
generation.     This  was  the  mystic  tombstone   of  their
illustrious  founder,   C.  R.   C,  the  lost  treasure  of  the
Society,  the  receptacle  of  the  most  hidden  mysteries.     It
was  unearthed  in  a  casual  manner  during  the  reparation
of  an  arcane  abode  of  the  Rosicrucians,  and  was,  in  fact,
a  septagonal  vault,  illuminated  by  the  concealed  Sun  of
the  Magi,  and  overwritten  with  mystic  characters.     The
corpse   of  their  "careful  and  wise  Father"  was  found
perfectly  preserved,  along  with  minutum  mundum,  and  a
select  variety  of  exceedingly  high-class  marvels,  which
operated  so  strongly  on  the  enthusiasm  of  the  existing
members  that  they  decided  to  share  the  unexpected  in-
crease in  their  possessions,  their  powers,  and  their  know-
ledge among  all  worthy  persons  who  might  apply  to  them
for  initiation.

In  accordance  with  this  determination,  after  prophesy-
ing the  dawn  of  aurora — a  divine  light  in  the  intellectual
sky — the  Fama  Fraternitatis  concluded  by  inviting  a  select

THE  ROSICRUCIANS.  205

number  of  suitable  and  like-minded  persons  to  join  their
Fraternity.  The  writers,  however,  declined,  in  the  first
instance,  to  supply  their  names  and  addresses  ;  they  were
sounding  the  temper  of  the  time.  Those  who  desired  to
communicate  could  do  so  by  the  publication  of  printed
letters  which  would  not  escape  the  notice  of  the  Breth-
ren. For  the  rest,  ha\dng  stated  their  absolute  faith  in
the  reformed  Chui^h  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  denounced,  in
a  solemn  and  categorical  manner,  the  innumerable  impos-
tm''es  of  pseudo-alchemists,  claiming  the  possession  of  a
thousand  secrets  superior  to  the  art  of  the  goldmaker.
They  also  warned  the  mcked,  the  false-hearted,  and
those  who  were  covetous  of  worldly  riches,  that  they
would  never  discover  the  Fraternity,  and  that  their
House  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  though  it  had  been  beheld  by
a  hundred  thousand  persons,  should  ever  be  concealed
from  the  world.

Such  was  the  first  proclamation  of  the  Eosicrucian
Society,  and  it  is  no  matter  for  surprise  that  in  the  high-
holiday  of  alchemy,  astrology,  and  magic,  it  created  an
unexampled  excitement.  Letters  ^Wthout  end  were
printed  in  every  part  of  Germany  by  persons  who  sought
initiation.  Pamphlets  were  publis^hed  by  the  score,
criticising,  attacking,  or  defending  the  Society  and  its
manifesto.  The  fabulous  history  of  C.  E.  C.  abounded
with  palpable  discrepancies  ;  there  was  no  such  a  city  as
Damcar ;  there  was  no  House  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  ex-
istence ;  a  building  which  had  been  seen  by  a  hundred
thousand  persons  could  not  be  concealed  from  the
world ;  a  boy  of  fifteen  could  scarcely  have  astonished
the  Turks  by  his  great  skill  in  medicine ;  and  the
very  existence  of  a  boy  mystic  must  have  appeared
somewhat  phenomenal  even  to  that  age.  Yet  the
story  was  very  generally  accredited.  Twelve  months
passed  away,  and  then,  in  the  same  unobtrusive
pamphlet  form,  and  in  the  same  anonymous  manner,
there  appeared  in  1615  the  "  Confession  of  the
Eosicrucian  Fraternity,  addressed  to  the  Learned  in
Europe."  It  still  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  a  refor-
mation in  2^hilosophy,  still  offered  initiation  by  gradual

206  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

stages  to  meritorious  applicants  ;  but,  for  the  rest,  its
energies  were  expended  in  scurrilous  abuse  of  the
PojDe.  It  charged  him  with  blasphemy,  publicly  exe-
crated him,  and  looked  forward  with  intense  eagerness
to  the  time  when  his  "  asinine  braying  "  should  be  put  an
end  to  by  the  singular  process  of  tearing  him  in  pieces
with  nails.

Fresh  excitement,  renewed  confusion,  further  con-
troversy followed  j  and  again  twelve  months  passed
away.  In  the  year  1616  the  "  Chymical  Nuptials  of
Christian  Eosencreutz  "  made  known  for  the  first  time
the  full  name  of  the  supposed  founder  of  the  Order.
This  is  a  wonderful  allegorical  romance,  which  relates  in
an  autobiographical  form  how  an  artist,  a  prepared
student,  was  present  in  the  year  1459  at  the  accom-
plishment of  the  Magmnn  Opus.  The  Fama  FraternUatis
embodied  the  history  of  a  divine  boy  who  obtained
initiation  in  his  'teens.  The  "  Chymical  Marriage "
recounts  the  initiation  of  an  old  man  who  had  devoted
the  whole  of  his  life  to  a  search  after  the  Grand  Secret.
The  history  of  C.  E.  0.  is  not,  therefore,  the  history  of
Christian  Eosencreutz.

After  the  publication  of  this  prolix  but  meritorious
romance,  a  new  element  was  introduced  into  the  con-
troversy. People  had  sought  initiation,  and  had  failed.
Their  feelings  were  naturally  hurt,  and  they  adopted  a
hostile  tone.  Alchemists  and  theosophists  compared
notes ;  if  they  had  failed,  who  deserved  to  be  success-
ful ?  Had  anyone  succeeded  ?  No ;  the  Society  was
cheating  them.  Such  was  the  general  decision ;  the
tide  turned,  the  craze  ceased,  and  by  1620  the  subject,
threshed  to  death,  relapsed  into  its  original  obscurity
for  a  considerable  period  of  years.

The  authorship  and  origin  of  the  Eosicrucian  mani-
festoes have  occupied  the  attention  of  numerous  erudite
investigators.  It  is  impossible  in  the  space  of  this
brief  essay  to  do  justice  to  the  theories  which  have  been
propounded.  After  an  adequate  consideration  of  the
evidence,  we  are  forced  to  conclude  that  none  of  their
views  are  tenable,  while  that  one  in  particular  which  has
been  most  extensively  received   is   open   to   the  most

THE  ROSICRUCIANS.  207

serious,  and  indeed  to  innumerable  objections.  We
refer  to  the  theory  which  accredits  the  theologian
Andreas  with  the  production  of  the  Rosicrucian  mani-
festoes as  a  sort  of  laborious  jest.

We  have  traced  briefly  the  origin  of  Rosicrucianism  so
far  as  its  exoteric  history  is  concerned.  On  the  one  hand,
the  narrative  contained  in  Fama  Frateriiitatis  is  concerned
Avith  a  mythical  person ;  on  the  other,  all  the  mani-
festoes bear  the  indisputable  marks  of  a  terribly  earnest
piu-pose — that  pui^pose  being  a  reformation  in  the  prin-
ciples of  philosophy,  and  in  the  methods  of  scientific
research.  It  is  therefore  preposterous  to  consider  them
a  planned  hoax.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose  that  they  were  the  work  of  a  man,  or  of  men,
who  hoped  to  obtain  fellow-workers  by  their  publication
in  a  cause  which  was  near  to  their  hearts.  It  is  not
incredible  that  they  emanated  from  a  secret  sect  of
theosophists :  the  existence  of  such  an  association  was
almost  inevitable  during  that  age  of  alchemy  So,  in
answer  to  the  first  question — Was  there  ever  at  any
period  a  genuine  Rosicrucian  Society  ? — it  may  be
affirmed  that  there  probably  was.  There  is  fair  pre-
sumptive evidence  to  show  that  some  corporate  body  of
the  kind  did  exist,  and  may  have  published  the  mani-
festoes called  Rosicrucian.  But  the  documents  which
are  the  basis  of  this  belief  give  evidence  also  that  the
association  did  not  originate  as  it  pretended,  while  it  is
clear  from  its  subsequent  history  that  it  was  devoid  of
the  powers  which  it  claimed.  Its  prophecies  have  not
been  fulfilled ;  its  opinions  have  not  been  substantiated ;
its  anti-papal  hysteria  has  passed  into  utter  contempt,
and  it  has  never  in  any  way  contributed  to  the  reforma-
tion or  improvement  of  philosophy.  So  far  as  we  can
tell,  it  became  an  alchemical  Order ;  whether  it  succeeded
in  performing  the  transmutation  of  metals,  there  is  no
evidence  to  decide.

The  true  origin  of  the  Rosicrucian  Fraternity  has
been  food  for  incessant  conjecture.  Romance,  which
accredited  its  adepts  with  all  the  superhuman  attributes
which  have  ever  been  imagined  by  alchemist,  Kabbalist,

208  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

and  retailer  of  magical  traditions,  has  been  at  work  on
this  problem,  and  has  variously  interpreted  the  mystery.
Persons  of  excessive  credulity  and  addicted  to  the
largest  views,  have  represented  it  as  an  Order  of  pre-
ternatural antiquity,  and  its  principles  as  the  origin
of  every  theological  system.  They  are  seen  in  the  solar
mythologies  and  in  phallic  worship  ;  their  symbolism  has
permeated  East  and  A¥est  alike ;  it  is  in  Hindustan  to-day
as  it  was  in  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Scandinavia  at  various
epochs  of  the  past.  There  is  not  a  vestige  of  true  evi-
dence for  all  this  romantic  extravagance,  but  it  has
gained  some  believers  because  it  is  big,  wonderful,  and
incredible.

The  opinions,  religious,  scientific,  and  philosophical,
which  are  to  be  found  in  Rosicrucian  manifestoes,  are
the  foundation  of  the  most  acceptable  hypothesis  con-
cerning them.  These  opinions  are  essentially  modern.
In  things  which  are  magico-scientific,  they  were  the
folloAvers  of  Paracelsus.  This  statement  is  founded,  not
on  the  simple  fact  that,  in  common  with  that  mediaeval
hierophant,  they  believed  in  alchemy,  astrology,  and
occult  forces  in  Natiu-e,  but  on  the  identity  of  their
alchemical,  astrological,  and  occult  theorems  with  those
which  are  propounded  by  Paracelsus,  who  in  such
matters  was  essentially  an  innovator.  In  things  religious,
they  were  equally  modern.  They  were  theosophical
disciples  of  the  great  Lutheran  reformer;  their  chief
symbol,  and,  indirectly,  their  name,  being  borrowed,  as
we  believe,  from  his  own  allegorical  seal.

The  actual  date  of  their  origin  is  to  be  sought  in  the
grand  old  town  of  Nuremburg,  which  in  1598  was  the
abode  of  a  singular  mystic  and  alchemist  named  Simon
Studion.  This  individual,  whose  personality  is  enveloped
in  mystery,  established  a  Militia  Crucifera  Evangelica,
which  held  periodical  meetings  in  Nuremburg.  Its  pro-
ceedings are  reported  in  an  unprinted  work  of  Studion's  ;
and  it  can  be  shown  that,  in  opinions  and  objects,  it  was
substantially  identical  with  the  subsequent  Rosicrucian
Society.  "  Both  associations  were  ultra-Protestant,  both
believed  in  the  inner  sense  and  mystical  interpretation
of  Scripture,  both  expected  the  end  of  the  age  and  the

THE  ROSICRUCIANS.  209

second  coming  of  Christ,  both  abhorred  the  Pope,  both
called  him  Antichrist,  both  coupled  him  with  the  de-
tested name  of  Mahomet,  both  studied  the  secret  char-
acters of  nature,  both  appealed  to  the  appearance  of
new  stars  in  the  sky  as  portentous  of  future  events."
Finally,  the  founder  of  the  Militia  Crucifera  Evangelica
was  an  avowed  alchemist,  and  he  was  the  first  who
elaborated  the  symbolism  of  the  Rose-Cross.  Evidently,
the  Rosic'rucian  Society  of  1614  was  a  transfiguration
or  development  of  the  obscure  sect  established  by  Simon
Studion.

This  view  receives  unexpected  confirmation  in  a  work
of  the  eighteenth  century.  After  a  silence  of  nearly
a  hundred  years,  the  Eosicrucians  reappeared  in  Ger-
many. In  1710,  a  ^vriter  calling  himself  Sincerus
Renatus,  but  whose  true  name  was  Sigmund  Richter,
published  a  "Perfect  and  True  Preparation  of  the
Philosophical  Stone,  according  to  the  Secret  Methods
of  the  Brotherhoods  of  the  Golden  and  Rosy  Cross."
To  this  treatise,  which,  in  itself,  is  excessively  curious,
there  were  annexed  the  "  Rules  of  the  Rosicrucian  Fra-
ternity for  the  Initiation  of  New  Members."  These  rules,
which,  in  eff'ect,  are  the  laws  of  the  Order,  not  only  are
equivalent  to  a  proof  of  the  society's  existence  at  the
period  in  question,  but  they  establish  the  important
fact  that  it  still  held  its  meetings  at  Nuremberg,
where  the  Militia  Crucifera  Evangelica  was  originally
established  by  Studion.

In  1785,  the  publication  of  the  "Secret  Symbols  of
the  Rosicrucians  of  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Cen-
turies "  took  place  at  Altona,  showing  that  the  mysteri-
ous brotherhood  was  still  active.  This  was  their  last
manifesto ;  it  established  the  true  nature  of  the  Rose-
Cross  symbolism,  and  fitly  closed  the  memorials  of  the
Fraternity.

Several  important  points  have  now  been  ascertained-
The  existence  of  a  secret  society  in  or  before  the  year
1614  has  been  shown  to  be  necessary,  in  order  to  explain
the  successive  publication  of  the  numerous  Rosicrucian
manifestoes  ;  it  has  been  traced  to  a  rational  origin ;
the  value  of  its  pretensions  has  been  appreciated,  and

0

210  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

its  literary  history  sketched.  What  became  of  it  must
now  be  ascertained.  So  early  as  the  year  1618,  Henriciis
Neuhusius  testified  in  a  Latin  pamphlet,  which  is  gener-
ally unkno"WTi,  that  the  "high  Rosicrucian  adepts"
migrated  to  India ;  and  it  is  asserted  at  this  day  that
they  inhabit  the  table-lands  of  Thibet.  Their  supposed
Oriental  pilgrimage  may  be  traced  as  far  eastward  as  the
Island  of  Mauritius.  The  recent  dispersion  of  a  valuable
private  library  has  brought  to  light  the  existence  of  a
very  curious  and  seemingly  genuine  manuscript,  which
relates  how  the  Comte  de  Chazal,  having  accomplished
the  performance  called  the  magnum  opus,  or  great  work,
proceeded  to  initiate  Dr  Sigismund  Bacstrom  into  the
mysteries  of  the  Rose  Cross  Order,  exacting  many  extra-
ordinary conditions  and  many  solemn  promises.  This
wonderful  proceeding  took  place  on  September  12th,  1794,
in  the  Isle  of  Mauritius,  District  of  Pampelavuso.  It  is
the  last  known  act  of  any  member  of  the  society,  real  or
supposed.  There  remains  to  be  stated,  on  the  authority
of  personal  researches,  that  the  modern  Rosicrucian
Fraternities  which  are  not  infrequently  heard  of,  both
in  England  and  America — such  as  the  Rosicrucian  Society
of  England,  which  has  branches  in  several  of  our  largest
towns,  and  a  Metropolitan  London  College,  the  Rosi-
crucian Society  of  Boston,  &c. — have  no  connection  other
than  the  names  which  they  have  adopted  with  the  old
and  original  association,  and  they  are  devoid  of  mystical
tradition.  For  all  that  is  known  to  the  contrary,  the
genuine  Order  of  Rosicrucians  may  still  exist,  but  its
brethren  keep  well  the  secret  of  their  initiation.

It  is  only  just  to  add,  that  the  late  Mr  Hargrave  Jen-
nings who  for  many  years  had  endeavoured  unsuccessfully
to  revive  the  Rosicrucian  philosophy  of  Robert  Fludd,
the  Kentish  mystic,  has  obtained  considerable  credence
for  an  extravagant  hypothesis  concerning  the  origin
of  the  society,  which  identifies  them  with  the  builders
of  Stonehenge  and  Carnac,  and  discerns  in  their  philo-
sophy the  historical  basis  of  all  the  religions  of  the
world.  It  has  obtained  a  considerable  foUo^'vdng  among
uncritical  persons ;  but  his  opinions,  whether  considered
in  themselves  or  in  the  manner  of   their  presentation.

THE  ROSICRUCIANS.  211

are  wholly  beside  any  serious  consideration,  and  they
have  been  sufficiently  dealt  mth  in  a  history  of  the
Rose  Cross  Fraternity  and  its  traceable  origin,  which
was  published  in  the  autumn  of  1887.  To  that  work  we
must  venture  to  refer  our  readers,  as  the  only  source  of
unj^erverted  historical  information  which  exists  in  the
English  language.

THE  FREEMASONS.

THE  existing  connection  of  Masonry  with  the  science
of  the  mystics  is  confined  now  to  its  emblems,
but  the  fraternity  originated  in  magic,  and  among
alchemists  and  magicians.  Here  it  is  necessary  to  dis-
tinguish. There  are  two  branches  of  Masonry  as  there
are  two  of  alchemy.  There  is  the  ancient  Craft  Masonry
which  is  unconnected  with  occultism,  and  there  is  the  more
modern  symbolic  form  which  absorbed  the  operative
degrees,  and  it  is  that  which  originated  in  mysticism.
The  present  constitution  of  the  brotherhood  as  an  asso-
ciation for  the  diffusion  of  benevolence,  of  the  principles
of  humanity,  and  the  development  of  moral  perfection,
offers  naturally  a  suitable  field  for  the  labours  of  the
modern  mystic.  The  foundation  of  all  transcendental
philosophy  is  the  doctrine  of  interior  regeneration,  and
its  end  is  the  Perfect  Man.  This  also  is  the  foundation,
and  such  the  end,  of  Masonry.  In  considering  the  in-
stitution, we  must  have  regard  to  its  true  principles.
Undeniably  these  have  been  obscured  in  the  process  of
time ;  it  has  been  corrupted  by  worldly  wealth  and
magnificence ;  it  has  turned  away  its  eyes  from  its
objects  ;  the  transcendental  eucharist  has  been  abandoned
for  the  banquet,  and  the  pomp  of  power  has  out-glittered
the  spiritual  splendour  of  the  great  reconstructive  work  ;
but  the  principles  are  there,  and  let  us  hope  that  within
the  ranks  of  the  brotherhood,  but  without  if  not  within,
it  will  be  possible  to  inform  them  with  new  life.

The  present  paper  will  be  necessarily  of  a  brief
character,  and  is  intended  merely  to  indicate  the  line
of  thought  which  the  student  would  do  well  to  follow
in  his  researches  into  the  mysteries  of  the  symbolic
architects.     Here,  as  occasionally  in  other  cases,  where

214  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

the  results  of  long  reading  are  unavoidably  compressed
into  the  smallest  possible  space,  we  must  entreat  the
good  will  of  the  student,  and  trust  that  he  will  for-
bear to  demand  in  a  summary  the  explicit  reasons  and
detailed  authorities  for  the  statements  we  are  about  to
make.  At  the  same  time,  we  ask  only  a  tentative  faith.
In  a  forthcoming  "Esoteric  History  of  Freemasonry,"  he
will  find  the  entire  subject  exposed,  with  the  necessary
proofs,  documents,  and  available  sources  of  knowledge,  or
if  specially  interested  in  the  Masonic  problem,  he  may
profitably  undertake  an  independent  course  of  research.

The  first  statement  that  it  is  necessary  to  make  em-
bodies a  word  of  warning;  we  are  addressing  in  this  work
a  circle  of  readers  who,  we  suppose,  are  in  search  of  a
positive  knowledge  concerning  the  world  beyond.  We
suppose  them  to  be  dissatisfied  with  what  is  called  super-
natural faith  as  an  evidence  of  things  not  seen.  We
suppose  them  to  have  turned  to  mysticism  as  to  a  pos-
sible instrument  of  communication  with  the  things  trans-
cending sense,  or  as  a  means  of  providing  that  instru-
ment. As  such,  we  have  warned  them  continually  against
stultifying  their  noble  ambition  by  practices  of  super-
stition or  by  accepting  principles  of  credulity.  To  the
best  of  our  ability  we  have  shown  them  where  it  is  pos-
sible that  they  may  find  the  light,  and  we  have  shown  also
the  by-paths  which  no  man  can  traverse  with  profit.
Now,  it  is  needful  that  we  should  add  another  word  of
counsel.  Masonry  is  second  to  Eosicrucianism  alone  in
the  remote  and  misty  magnificence  of  vast  claims,  of
weird  associations,  of  symbolic  grandeur,  and  historic
mystery.  Its  origin  is  supposed  to  be  merged  in  the
night  of  time ;  it  is  referred  to  Solomon,  and  still  in  the
hearts  of  the  brotherhood  is  edified  the  parabolic  temple  ;
it  is  referred  to  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  and  mystic
words  and  inviolable  secrets  are  spoken  daily  in  the  in-
numerable lodges  of  the  Order ;  it  is  referred  again  to
the  Rosicrucians,  and  Masonry  still  embodies,  together
with  its  moral  precepts,  a  tradition  of  alchemy  and
magic  which  is  expounded  in  the  books  of  its  old
initiates.

From  a  century  of  contradictory  sources  it  borrows

THE  FREEI^IASONS.  215

a  many-splendui'ed  aureole  of  romance  and  of  esoteric
fable,  which  is  eminently  liable  to  attract  the  soul-student
at  the  threshold  of  mystic  research,  and  to  tempt  him
to   seek  in  the  penetralia  of  this  unique  institution  a
certain  guiding  light,  till  the  day  dawn  and  the  day-star
arise  from  on  high  upon  his  mind.     We  must  counsel
him  to  overcome  this  gravitation  of  his  desires  towards
Masonry.     There  is  no  light  there ;  there  is  no  secret  of
the  soul  enshrined  in  the  recesses  of  its  suggestive  cere-
monial ;  whatever  it  may  have  been  in  the  past,  at  the
present  day  it  neither  is,  nor  claims  to  be,  more  than
"a   beautiful   system   of   morality   veiled  in  allegories-
and  illustrated  by  symbols."     It  is  true  that  the  alle-
gories  and   the   symbols   admit   of   a   profound   inter-
pretation, but  of  its  nature  Masons,  as  a  body,  have  no
conception.     If  anyone  desire  to  be  affiliated  with  the
Fraternity,  so  as  to  participate  in  the  good  work  of  a
benevolent  society,  to  share  in  the  privileges  of  an  influ-
ential  body,    or   because   they   are  attracted  by  "  the
boast  of  heraldry  "  and  the  "  pomp  of  power,"  let  them
do  so  by  all  means ;  but  not  in  the  search  after  mystic
truth,  not  in  the  hope  of  discovering  the  secrets  of  the
regeneration  and  reconstruction  of  humanity ;  for  though
ostensibly  these  are  the  objects  of  association,  it  is  clear
that  since  the  advent  of  symbolic  Masonry,  it  has  accom-
plished nothing  of  the  kind,  and  no  one  is  seriously  con-
cerned with  the  realisation  of  such  an  idea.     The  exist-
ing relation  of  the  mystic  to  Masonry  should  be  that
of  an  apostle  towards  a  field  which  is  suitable  for  his
labours,  and  not  of  an  earnest  seeker  towards  a  source
of  light.    Otherwise,  to  the  student  it  is  simply  time
squandered  to  master  the  ritual  and  the  mysteries  of
Freemasonry,  or  to  concern  himself  in  any  way  with  the
bogus  hypotheses  which  do  duty  in  many  cases  for  a
sketch  of  its  early  history.     It  is  interesting  only  by
reason  of  those  aims   which   are   so   largely   forgotten,
though  they  are  still  written  about,  and  by  reason  of  the
original  connection  which  it  possessed  with  magic  and
alchemy — a  reiterated  statement  which  brings  us  back
to  a  former  point.

The  ascertainable  origin  of  symbolic  Masonry  is  in

216  «      THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

ancient  Graft  Masonry,  and  of  the  latter  it  may  at  once
be  affirmed  that  we  have  no  means  of  tracing  it  to  its
genesis.  It  is  asserted  by  Paton  to  have  subsisted  from
the  first  ages  of  human  history.  This,  of  course,  is  a
statement  which  transcends  verification,  and  essentially
is  of  the  sphere  of  the  faith  masonic,  which  students
acquainted  with  the  gigantic  literature  of  the  Fraternity
will  acknowledge  to  be  large  in  its  demands  upon
members.  Mr  Paton  adduces,  and,  of  course,  is  able  to
adduce  no  arguments  in  favour  of  his  position,  but  some
have  been  occasionally  attempted  by  anterior  writers
committed  to  similar  views,  and  they  are  uniformly
confined  to  such  sophistic  generalisations  as  follow.
"Architecture  could  only  have  been  preceded  by  Agri-
culture, so  that  in  this  science  the  first  efforts  of  human
skill  must  have  been  tried,  and  man's  first  successes
achieved  over  Nature.  The  first  architects  therefore
would  be  philosophers ;  the  information  acquired  indi-
vidually would  be  imparted  to  others  of  the  same  pro-
fession, and  an  association  would  naturally  be  formed
for  the  communication  of  knowledge  amongst  its  members,
and  their  improvement.  Initiation  ceremonies  would
be  adopted  to  excite  in  outsiders  a  respect  for  the  pro-
fession, and  such  a  society  did  exist  in  Egypt,  and  there
only  we  discover  the  first  traces  of  Freemasonry."

When  the  cogency  of  this  kind  of  reasoning  is  once
admitted,  it  is  only  a  further  step  to  assert  that  the
origin  of  Masonry  is  not  merely  to  be  referred  to  the
first  ages  of  human  history,  but  that  it  is  identical  with
the  first  man,  who  in  all  probability  was  an  architect
after  a  primitive  fashion,  and  whose  rudimentary  experi-
ence was  communicated  to  his  posterity.  Needless  to
say  the  claim  has  been  made  by  a  number  of  ingenuous
authors,  and  as  there  was  no  assignable  reason  why  it
should  stop  with  Adam,  it  has  transcended  the  sublunary
world,  and  as  the  universal  Creator  may  in  a  sense  be
regarded  as  the  Architect  of  the  Universe,  he  has  also
been  strenuously  affirmed  to  be  the  first  Freemason,
and  in  the  minds  of  romantic  historians  the  Order
is  most  logically  regarded  as  invested  with  a  divine
character.

THE  FREEMASONS.  217

Happily  such  reasoning  has  passed  away  with  the
childhood  of  Masonic  literature.  Later  and  more  sober
historians  are  content  to  refer  it  to  Solomon  and  the
architects  whose  consummate  genius  elaborated  the
eastern  splendom^s  of  the  first  Temple ;  to  the  mysteries
of  Eleusis  and  Bacchus  ;  to  the  mystic  sect  of  the  Jewish
Essenes  ;  to  the  Christian  Gnostics  ;  to  the  secret  assem-
blies of  pagans  who  cultivated  the  proscribed  worships
of  Greece  and  Eome  after  the  death  of  the  Emperor
Julian,  and  very  possibly  perpetuated  their  existence
through  the  whole  of  the  dark  ages ;  to  the  orders  of
chivalry,  and  especially  to  that  of  the  Templars  ;  to  the
secret  tribunal  of  Free  Judges ;  to  the  mediaeval  Kabba-
lists ;  and  to  many  other  sources  which,  because  they
are  unaccountable  themselves,  are  thought  adequate  to
explain  the  origin  of  an  association  which  is  supposed
to  have  existed  in  all  ages  and  in  all  nations,  yet  is
practically  without  a  history.

It  is  impossible  in  a  brief  space  to  do  justice  to  these
opinions,  which  are  all  very  curious,  very  interest-
ing, and  an  essential  part  of  the  romance  of  history.
But,  as  far  as  possible  in  the  words  of  masonic  writers,
we  shall  cite  what  has  been  advanced  in  support  of  the
most  important  of  these  theories.

The  Bev.  George  Oliver  claims  to  have  most  carefully
and  impartially  weighed  an  enormous  mass  of  evidence,
collected  from  all  quarters  of  the  historical  horizon,  on
the  question  of  the  alleged  connection  which  subsists
between  Masonry  and  the  Ancient  Mysteries.  He  is
personally  of  opinion  that  the  latter  were  simply  an
idolatrous  corruption  of  the  sacred,  primeval  principles
embodied  in  the  great  fraternal  order,  and  that  Masonry
originated  initiation.  "  The  rites  of  that  science  which
is  now  received  under  the  appellation  of  Freemasonry
were  exercised  in  the  antediluvian  world,  revived  by
Noah  after  the  Flood,  practised  by  mankind  at  the
building  of  Babel  .  .  .  ,  and  at  the  dispersion  spread
into  every  settlement  .  .  .  ,  and  modelled  into  a  form,
the  great  outlines  of  which  are  distinctly  to  be  traced
in  the  mysteries  of  every  heathen  nation,  exhibiting  the
shattered  remains  of  one  true  system  whence  they  were

218  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

derived."  But  the  analogies — real  or  supposed — are
independent  of  personal  opinions,  and  it  is  with  those
alone  that  we  are  concerned.

The  researches  of  various  writers  seem  to  have  estab-
lished the  fact  that  all  ancient  mysteries  of  which  we
have  any  trace,  whether  in  Egypt,  India,  Greece,  or
Kome,  were  radically  identical,  though  formally  different.
Those  of  Egypt,  says  Oliver,  contained  all  the  secrets  of
their  religion  and  politics,  and  inspired  dread  and  terror
throughout  the  world.  By  the  uninitiated  they  were
regarded  as  vehicles  of  knowledge  more  than  human,
and  their  dispensers  were  reputed  to  possess  some  high
and  peculiar  attributes  of  divinity.  When  Grecian
philosophy  began  to  prevail,  the  mysteries  were  applied
by  wise  men  to  a  particular  investigation  of  the  nature
and  attributes  of  the  Deity.  After  Pythagoras  had
remodelled  them,  and  different  sects  of  philosophers
began  to  entertain  new  and  irreconcilable  opinions  on
the  subject  of  research,  the  same  speculations  were
continued  with  untiring  avidity.  They  had  very  indis-
tinct notions  of  the  true  God,  and  entertaining  gross
and  sensual  ideas  of  his  nature,  it  is  no  wonder  that
vice  became  deified,  and  that  the  commission  of  every
unnatural  lust  was  not  only  permitted  but  even  made  a
test  of  reverence  to  the  deity.  Purity  fled  from  these
institutions  as  they  retrograded  from  the  true  worship
of  God.  All,  however,  preserved  a  disguised  tradition
of  the  creation  and  fall  of  man,  as  well  as  of  the  universal
deluge ;  their  most  significant  emblems  were  the  theo-
logical ladder,  the  triple  support  of  the  Universal  Lodge
— called  by  Masons  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty ;  the
Point  within  a  Circle,  and  many  other  undoubted
emblems  of  Masonry.  They  used  the  same  form  of
government  which  is  now  common  to  the  whole  Frater-
nity, the  same  system  of  secrecy,  allegory,  and  symbolic
instruction,  all  tending  to  the  same  point — the  practice
of  moral  virtue.  No  one  was  admitted  without  previous
probation  and  initiation ;  candidates  were  bound  by
solemn  oaths,  united  by  invisible  ties,  taught  by  symbols,
distinguished  by  signs  and  tokens,  and  impelled  by  a
conscientious  adherence   to   the   rules   of   their  Order.

THE  FREEIVIASONS.  219

They  professed   to   practise    the    most   rigid   morality,
justice  towards  men,  and  piety  towards  the  gods.

Those  who  connect  the  first  Temple  of  the  Jews  with
Masonic  architects  do  not  lose  sight  of  the  Mysteries,
though  they  consider  them  under  another  aspect.  They
affirm  on  historical  grounds  that  the  people  of  Attica
went  in  quest  of  superior  settlements  a  thousand  years
before  Christ,  and  settled  in  Asia  Minor,  and  the  provinces
they  acquired  were  called  Ionia.  For  a  short  time  these
Asiatic  colonies  surpassed  the  mother  country  in  prosperity
and  science.  Sculpture  in  marble  and  the  Doric  and  Ionic
orders  of  architecture  were  the  creations  of  their  skill
and  experience.  They  returned  to  instruct  the  mother
country,  and  the  world  is  indebted  to  the  Dionysian
artificers  for  the  noblest  of  the  classical  styles.  The
Dionysiae  were  an  association  of  scientific  men  who
possessed  the  exclusive  privilege  of  erecting  temples,
theatres,  and  other  public  buildings  in  Asia  Minor.
They  existed  under  the  same  appellation  in  Syria,  Persia,
and  India.  They  supplied  Ionia  and  the  surrounding
countries  as  far  as  the  Hellespont  with  theatrical  appa-
ratus by  contract,  and  erected  the  magnificent  temple
at  Icos  to  Bacchus,  the  founder  of  their  Order.  The
members  of  this  association,  which  was  intimately  con-
nected with  the  Dionysian  mysteries,  were  distinguished
from  the  uninitiated  by  the  science  which  they  possessed,
and  by  appropriate  words  and  signs  devised  for  purposes
of  recognition.  Like  Freemasons,  they  were  divided
into  lodges,  which  were  distinguished  by  different
appellations.  They  occasionally  held  convivial  meetings  in
houses  erected  and  consecrated  for  this  purpose,  and  each
separate  association  was  under  the  direction  of  a  master
and  president,  or  wardens.  They  held  a  general  meeting
once  a  year,  which  was  solemnized  with  great  pomp  and
festivity,  and  at  which  the  brethren  partook  of  a
splendid  entertainment  provided  by  the  master,  after
sacrifices  had  been  offered  to  the  gods.  They  used
particular  utensils  in  their  ceremonial  observances,  some
of  which  are  exactly  similar  to  those  which  are  still
employed  by  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons,  and  the  more
opulent  artists  were  bound  to  provide  for  the  necessities

220  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

of  poorer  brethren.  The  very  monuments  which  were
reared  by  these  Masons  to  the  memory  of  their  masters
and  wardens  remain  to  the  present  day  in  the  Turkish
burying  grounds  at  Siverhisson  and  Eraki.  The  inscrip-
tions they  bear  give  expression  in  strong  terms  to  the
gratitude  of  the  Fraternity  for  the  distinguished  exertions
of  their  departed  superiors  in  behalf  of  the  Order,  for
their  generosity  and  benevolence  to  individual  members,
and  for  their  private  virtues,  as  well  as  for  their  conduct
in  public.  If  it  be  possible  to  prove  the  identity  of  any
two  societies,  says  Mr  Cross,  an  earnest  American  Mason,
from  the  coincidence  of  their  external  forms,  we  are
authorized  to  conclude  that  the  Fraternity  of  Ionian
architects  and  the  Fraternity  of  Freemasons  are  exactly
the  same.

Now,  it  is  maintained  by  the  same  writer  that  the
Dionysise  existed  in  Judea,  while,  on  the  authority  of
Josephus,  the  architectural  style  which  they  created  was
used  at  the  erection  of  the  Temple.  "  The  vicinity  of
Jerusalem  to  Egypt,  the  connection  of  Solomon  with  the
royal  family  of  that  land,  the  progress  of  the  Egyptians
in  architectural  science,  their  attachment  to  mysteries
and  hierogiyphical  symbols,  and  their  probable  employ-
ment by  the  King  of  Israel,  are  together  a  considerable
argument  for  the  Syrian  plantation  of  masonry  in  ancient
times."

It  will  be  seen  that  the  writers  whom  we  have  cited  are
by  no  means  content  with  referring  the  origin  of  Masonry
to  either  the  Mysteries  or  Solomon.  Depths  beyond
depths,  heights  above  heights,  vistas  behind  vistas,  were
discerned  by  their  capacious  intelligence  till  the  prospect
was  lost  in  the  nebulous  splendours  of  a  primeval  revela-
tion, indefinite,  yet  dimly  sensed.  These  reasoners  are  on
the  whole  more  acute  than  the  circumscribed  visionaries
who  are  content  to  refer  Freemasonry  to  one  mythico-
historical  source,  and  as  the  analogical  value  is  fairly
well  balanced  in  either  case,  they  are  equally  pertinent
for  citation.  Those  who  in  the  mystic  sects  of  Judea  at
the  dawn  of  the  Christian  age  are  delighted  to  trace  the
supposed  presence  of  the  typical  trowel  and  compass,
and  especially  to  identify  Masons  with  Essenian  mystics.

THE  FREEMASONS.  221

find  it  possible  to  arrange  their  hypothesis  in  harmony
with  both  of  the  preceding  views.  Once  it  is  allowed
that  the  Dionysise  abode  in  Judea,  and  edified  the
Temple  projected  by  the  wisest  of  men,  it  is  desirable
to  know  what  became  of  them  in  subsequent  ages,  and
fortunately  it  can  be  sho^vn,  to  the  complete  satisfaction
of  the  theorists,  that  there  did  exist  an  association  of
men  in  Palestine  who  had  striking  similarities  to  the  Free-
masons, and  that  they  were  called  the  Essenes,  When
a  candidate  was  proposed  for  admission  to  this  society,
the  strictest  scrutiny  was  made  into  his  character.  Had
his  life  been  hitherto  exemplary,  did  he  seem  capable  of
Clubbing  his  passions  and  regulating  his  conduct  according
to  the  austere  maxims  of  the  Order,  he  was  presented,
at  the  expiration  of  his  novitiate,  with  a  white  garment
as  the  emblem  of  the  regularity  of  his  conduct  and  the
purity  of  his  heart.  A  solemn  oath  was  then  adminis-
tered to  him,  that  he  v/ould  never  divulge  the  mysteries
of  his  Order,  that  he  would  make  no  innovations  on  its
doctrine,  and  that  he  would  continue  in  that  honourable
course  of  piety  upon  which  he  had  already  entered.
Like  Freemasons,  the  Essenes  instructed  their  young
members  in  the  knowledge  which  they  derived  from
their  ancestors  :  they  admitted  no  women  into  their
Society ;  they  had  special  methods  of  recognition,  strongly
resembling  Masonic  devices ;  they  had  colleges  of  retire-
ment, where  they  resorted  to  practise  their  rites,  and
settle  the  afifairs  of  the  society.  After  the  performance
of  these  duties  they  assembled  in  a  large  hall,  where  an
entertainment  was  provided  by  the  President  or  Master
of  the  Cottage,  who  allotted  a  certain  quantity  of  provi-
sions to  every  individual.  All  distinctions  of  rank  were
abolished,  and  if  preference  was  ever  given  it  was  to
piety,  liberality,  and  virtue.  Treasurers  were  appointed
in  every  town  to  supply  the  wants  of  indigent  strangers.
The  Essenes  pretended  to  higher  degrees  of  piety  and
knowledge  than  the  uninitiated  vulgar,  and  albeit  in
this  respect  their  pretensions  were  great,  they  were
never  questioned  by  their  enemies.  Though  austerity  of
manner  was  one  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  the
initiated  Essenians,  they  frequently  assembled  in  con-

222  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

vivial  parties.  "These  remarkable  coincidences  between
the  chief  features  of  the  Masonic  and  Essenian  Fraterni-
ties, can  be  accounted  for  only  by  referring  them  to  the
same  origin."

If  we  pass  to  a  later  period,  one  of  the  most  in-
teresting hypotheses  is  that  which  endeavours  to
establish  a  connection  between  Masonry  and  Chivalr}^
It  asserts  that  the  mysteries  of  the  Fraternity  were
preserved  and  transmitted  by  the  Orders  of  knighthood,
and  especially  by  the  Knights  Templars.  Both,  it  is
argued,  were  ceremonial  institutions,  both  were  sym-
bolical, the  objects  were  in  each  case  identical,  pro-
motion took  place  by  degrees,  and  different  Orders  were
in  both  cases  distinguished  by  different  appellations.
In  regard  to  the  Templars,  it  is  advanced  that  almost  all
the  secret  associations  of  the  ancients  either  originated
or  flourished  in  or  about  Syria.  "  It  was  here  that  the
Dionysian  artists  and  the  Essenes  arose.  From  this
country  also  came  several  members  of  that  trading  asso-
ciation of  masons  which  appeared  in  Europe  during  the
dark  ages,  and  we  are  assured  that  notwithstanding  the
unfavourable  condition  of  that  province,  there  exists  at
this  day  on  Mount  Libanus  one  of  these  Syriac  fraterni-
ties."^ As  the  Order  of  the  Templars,  therefore,  was
originally  formed  in  Syria,  and  existed  there  for  a  con-
siderable time,  it  would  be  no  improbable  supposition
that  they  received  their  knowledge  from  the  lodges  in
that  quarter.  But  we  are  fortunately  in  this  case  not
left  to  conjecture,  for  we  are  expressly  informed  by  a
foreign  author,  who  was  well  f  acquainted  ^vith  the  cus-
toms and  history  of  Syria,  that  the  Knights  Templars
were  actually  members  of  the  Syriac  Fraternities."

On  the  other  hand,  filiphas  Levi  supposes  that  this,
the  most  mysterious  of  the  Orders  of  chivalry,  was  a
branch  of  Johannite  mystics  who  were  bent  on  rebuilding
the  Temple,  and  that,  at  the  suppression  of  the  society,
Jacques  de  Molay,  the  last  grand  master,  founded,  on
the  night  before  his  execution,  the  first  three  lodges  of
Masonry  to  perpetuate,  under  another  name  and  in  a

*  "  Anthologia  Hibernica,"  1794,  pp.  279-86.
f  Alder — De  Drusis  Montis  Lihani,  Roma,  1786,

THE  FREEMASONS.  223

still  more  disguised  form,  the  secrets  and  designs  of  the
Templars.

The  diversity  of  all  these  views  is  a  sufficient  index  of
the  uncertainty  which  involves  their  subject,  and  it
justifies  the  statement  already  made  that  the  genesis  of
Craft  Masonry  is  historically  untraceable,  a  fact  which,
however,  in  itself  is  not  an  undeniable  proof  of  immense
antiquity.  The  "Encyclopaedia  Britannica" accounts  for
the  correspondences  "with  the  great  secret  institutions  of
the  far  past  by  the  doctrine  of  psychical  identity,  "  one  of
the  most  important  results  of  anthropological  science."
It  considers  the  mediaeval  building  corporations  to  be
the  true  historical  precursors  of  Freemasonry,  a  view
which  has  simplicity  to  recommend  it,  which  does  vio-
lence to  no  probability,  while  it  fairly  covers  the  facts.
These  corporations  were  originally  grouped  around  the
monasteries,  and  in  the  twelfth  century  the  authority
last  cited  affirms  that  "there  are  distinct  traces  of  a
general  association  acknowledging  one  set  of  craft  laws,
one  set  of  secret  signs  and  ceremonies,  and,  to  a  certain
extent,  one  central  authority  at  Strasbourg.  Albertus
Magnus  is  supposed  to  have  introduced  many  of  the
JeAvish  and  Arabian  symbols  which  were  appropriated  by
the  craft,"  while  the  initiation  ceremonial  is  said  to  have
been  copied  from  a  Benedictine  consecration.  The
architectural  erudition  and  lodge-organization  were  im-
ported from  Germany  into  England,  where  the  authentic
documents  of  operative  Masonry  extend  back  to  the
year  926  a.d.  About  two  centuries  later,  the  principles
of  the  craft  were  imported  into  Scotland,  and  there  they
are  said  to  have  been  continued  long  after  they  had  be-
come extinct  in  continental  kingdoms.  "  In  this  manner,
Scotland  became  the  centre  from  which  these  principles
again  issued  to  illuminate  not  only  the  nations  on  the
continent,  but  every  civilised  portion  of  the  world."

It  is  impossible  here  to  attempt  even  a  brief  sketch
of  the  progress  of  Craft  Masonry  in  Great  Britain.
It  is  sufficient  to  state  that  in  spite  of  its  secret
organization,  its  use  of  symbols,  and  its  patronage  by
the  great,  who  were  occasionally  invested  with  high
ornamental  dignities,  it  was  exclusively  of  a  practical

224  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

nature,  and  its  secrets  were  trade  secrets.  The  first
signs  of  its  transformation  are  found  towards  the  close
of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  celebrated  alchemist
Elias  Ashmole  was,  for  some  unexplained  reason,  ac-
cepted as  an  ordinary  member  of  the  great  trade  guild.
Under  his  influence,  and  also,  it  is  said,  under  that  of
Lord  Wortley  Montagu,  it  rapidly  developed  into  a
purely  symbolic  institution,  the  operative  craft  dis-
appeared, and  its  ostensible  objects  became  purely  of
a  moral  and  intellectual  kind.  Under  this  aspect  it
spread  rapidly,  and  about  a  century  later  took  root  in
France,  where  it  diff'used  a  great  light,  and  attracted
universal  attention  at  a  period  of  social  upheaval  and
restless  research  after  every  species  of  novelty.

It  is  there  and  in  Germany  that  symbolical  Free-
masonry became  largely  and  almost  inseparably  identified
with  magic,  alchemy,  and  the  rest  of  the  secret  sciences.
It  is  there  that  its  ranks  were  recruited  from  the  members
of  the  mystic  sects  of  the  Martinists  ;  it  is  there  that  the
so-called  adept  Cagliostro  established  his  Egyptian  grades
and  revived  the  wisdom  of  the  Magi ;  it  is  there  that
Baron  Tschoudy  instructed  masonic  apprentices  in  the
arcane  doctrine  of  practical  alchemy  ;  it  is  there  that  the
Masonic  grade  of  Eose-Cross  was  developed  from  the
typology  of  the  Rosicrucians ;  it  is  there  that  the
mysterious  Misraim  Rite  was  imported  from  the  coast
of  the  Adriatic,  bearing  Chaldaic  statutes,  distributing
symbolic  and  mystic  degrees,  conferring  alchemical  titles,
and  possessing  veiled  masters ;  it  is  there  that  the
masonic  children  of  the  Primeval  Light  pretended  to  ac-
complish the  work  of  human  reconstruction ;  it  is  there
that  the  mysterious  Count  de  St  Germain  "  scoured  the
Masonic  Lodges,  commercing  in  immortality,  and  re-
counting his  experiences  in  previous  centuries;"  it  is
there  that  the  charitable  and  interesting  Loge  de  la
Bienfaisance  shone  at  Lyons  with  a  pure  light  of  advanced
mysticism ;  it  is  there  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Fraternity
was  adorned  by  the  magnetic  discoveries  of  the  Austrian
doctor  Anton  Mesmer ;  it  is  there,  and  in  Berlin,  that  the
allegories  of  the  Order  were  interpreted  in  a  transcen-
dental sense.     It  was  under  the  shadow  of  Masonic  pro-

THE  FREEMASONS.  225

tection  that  "  Rosicrucians  and  theosophists  performed
innumerable  prodigies,"  that  Schopfer  evoked  the  dead,
and  a  Swedenborgian  propaganda  began.  During  the
whole  of  the  eighteenth  centuiy,  the  European  history  of
magic  and  Hermeticism  is  coincident  with  that  of  Free-
masonry, facts  which  sufficiently  substantiate  the  state-
ment which  opened  this  article,  that  symbolic  Masonry
originated  in  mysticism,  and  was  to  a  large  extent
promulgated  by  magicians  and  alchemists.

No  history  of  Freemasonry  in  its  connection  with
Mysticism  has  been  yet  attempted,  and  as  Freemasonry,
independently  of  Mysticism,  is  without  direct  interest
to  the  occult  student,  we  shall  omit  the  bibliographical
paragraph  ^viih.  which  most  of  our  articles  have  con-
ckided,  and  shall  refer  him  to  the  forthcoming  work —
"  The  Esoteric  History  of  Freemasonry  " — of  which  we
have  made  mention  above — as  a  methodical  account  of
the  Order  in  its  connection  with  transcendental  science.

PART    lY.

MESMERISM.

THE  student  Tvho  has  followed  us  thus  far  in  oiu:
accoiuit  of  the  methods  and  processes  of  the  mystics,
'will  be  aware  that  the  ATonders  of  old  magic  were
accomplished  in  most  cases  by  a  certain  suspension  of  the
senses,  and  by  a  powerfid  artificial  exaltation  of  the
interior  faculties.  An  elaborate,  if  uncouth,  ceremonial
siurroimded  the  operator  for  the  time  being  with  a
species  of  new  environment.  Prayers,  fasts,  ablutions,
watchings,  and  weird  incantations,  combined  for  the
elevation  of  his  intellectual  nature  into  another  plane
of  existence.  The  process  at  times  may  have  missed
its  proper  end,  and  the  Magus  may  have  been  plunged
into  a  chaos  of  hallucination.  At  others  he  emerged
with  cleansed  and  clarified  perceptions  into  a  higher
"  magnetic  "  atmosphere,  and  created  for  himself  a  brief
correspondence  with  the  transcendent  intelligences  in
superior  forms  of  subsistence.  Clairvoyant,  clair-
audient,  clairsentient,  he  invoked  spirits,  and  they  made
answer  to  his  will  because  he  was  "  within  their  plane."
Now,  this  extranatural  condition,  produced  by  the
formulae  of  practical  magic,  was  also  attained,  and  ap-
parently in  an  advanced  degree,  by  the  contemplation
and  absorption  of  the  purely  interior  mystics,  who  in
solitude  and  isolation  entered  into  the  thought-world,
and  inquired  within  themselves  for  that  instrument  of
correspondence  which  was  to  unite  their  better  nature
with  the  higher  law  and  higher  intelligence  of  the  uni-
verse. In  the  monasteries  of  the  Latin  church,  the
saintly  men  of   Christendom  appear  to  have  achieved

228  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

the  highest  altitudes  of  the  spirit  which  are  possible  to
embodied  man,  by  the  process  of  introspection.  This
process,  however,  is  particular  to  no  age  and  to  no
religion.  It  was  practised  in  the  extreme  Orient  many-
centuries  before  the  first  words  of  the  Christian  Evangel
resounded  through  barbaric  Europe ;  and  it  is  un-
doubtedly a  higher  branch  of  that  singular  condition,
which  after  so  much  unbelief  and  misconception  has  at
length  been  recognised  by  modern  science  under  the
name  of  hypnotism.  The  hypnotic  state  is,  however,
but  one  out  of  many  series  of  phenomena  which  have
long  been  familiar  to  professors  and  students  of  that
unexplored  region  of  pathology  which  has  been  termed
mesmerism  and  animal  magnetism.

Magic  is  older  than  history ;  it  is  older  than  the
Records  of  the  Past ;  it  is  older  than  the  Book  of  the
Dead,  and  the  hieroglyphic  literature  of  primeval  Egypt;
and  whether  in  Egypt  or  Chaldea,  or  in  those  highlands
beyond  the  Himalaj^as  which  are  the  su^Dposed  cradle
of  the  Aryan  race,  wherever  magic  flourished,  it  has  ever
been  intimately  associated  with  rites  and  observances
calculated  to  produce  in  the  operator  either  one  or  more
of  the  magnetic  states.  Mesmerism,  therefore,  to  make
use  of  the  older  term,  and  of  one  which  commemorates
an  illustrious,  if  not  wholly  high-minded  discoverer,  was
known  to  the  ancients,  while  the  trances  and  ecstasies,
which  are  included  among  its  most  frequent  phenomena,
are  coincident  with  the  entire  history  of  mystical  re-
ligious experience,  and  constitute,  in  fact,  that  state  of
interior  repose  which,  according  to  the  Platonic  philo-
sophy, is  the  source  of  inspired  visions,  and  wherein
"the  light  of  eternity  .  .  .,  the  light  revealed,  to  Zoro-
aster, and  all  the  sages  of  the  East,"  is  manifested  to
the  mind's  eye.  It  Avill  also  be  obvious,  even  to  the
least  thoughtful  reader,  that  the  trance  artificially  in-
duced by  the  ceremonies  of  magic,  by  the  vigils  of  the
saints,  by  the  contemplation  of  the  quietists,  by  the
passes  of  the  disciples  of  Mesmer,  and  by  the  hypnotic
disc  of  the  modern  pathologists  of  France,  is  essentially
connected  with  the  natural  trance  of  cataleptic  patients.
Now,  the  history  of  cataleptic  affections  has  an  antiquity

MESMERISM,  229

which   is   so   generally   accepted,  as   to   be   practically
beyond  dispute.

The  230wer  of  the  hand,  the  power  of  the  word,  and
the  power  of  the  human  eye,  take  rank  among  the
most  conspicuous  subjects  of  ancient  symbolism.  In  a
remarkable  representation  of  a  mummy  case,  preserved
in  the  priceless  folios  of  the  illustrious  Abbe  Montfau^on,
we  find  "a  bed  or  table,  on  which  lies  a  sick  man,  before
whom  stands  a  person  clothed  in  a  brown  garment,  with
his  eyes  open.  His  countenance  is  turned  upon  the
patient ;  his  left  hand  is  placed  upon  the  breast,  while
the  right  is  held  over  the  head  of  the  sick  man,  cpiite
in  the  position  of  a  magnetizer,"  A  French  writer,  in
the  "Annals  of  Animal  Magnetism,"  appears  to  have
been  the  first  to  draw  attention  to  the  mesmeric  signifi-
cance of  this  picture,  and  he  makes  mention  of  other
mummies,  "where  standing  figures  touch  the  feet,  the
head,  the  sides,  or  the  thighs"  of  recumbent  sufferers.
Elihu  Rich,  in  a  short  cyclopaedic  account  of  magnetic  heal
ing,  has  assured  us  that  these  scenes  do  not  stand  alone.
"Figures  occur  on  the  amulets  or  charms  known  as
'  Abraxei,'  all'more  or  less  manifesting  an  acquaintance
^vith  magnetism.  The  priest  with  the  dog's  head,  or
mask  of  Anubis,  occurs  repeatedly,  with  his  hands  vari-
ously placed  on  the  supposed  patient.  Some  of  these
figures  are  given  by  Montfau^on.  In  one  of  them,  the
masked  figiu'e  places  one  hand  on  the  feet,  the  other
upon  the  head  of  the  patient;  in  a  second,  one  hand  is
laid  upon  the  stomach,  the  other  upon  the  head ;  in  a
third,  the  hands  are  upon  the  loins ;  in  a  fourth,  the
hands  are  placed  upon  the  thighs,  and  the  eyes  of  the
operator  are  fixed  upon  the  patient's  countenance."
These  are  facts  which  might  be  multiplied  almost  in-
definitely could  reference  be  extended  to  the  medical
marvels  of  the  temple  of  Serapis  at  Memphis,  where  cures
are  alleged  to  have  been  performed  by  the  hierophants
in  part  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  and  in  part  by  the
creation  of  an  artificial  lethargy  in  the  patient ;  or
again,  to  the  thaumaturgic  ritual  of  initiation  made
use  of  l)y  the  Greek  mystics  at  Thebes,  Lcmnos,  and
Samothrace,

230  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

The  traditional  secrets  of  magic  which  Greece  acquired
from  Egypt  and  other  regions  of  remote  antiquity,  and
which  she  imparted  in  turn  to  the  Latins,  were  combined
^Wth  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  magic  of  the  Jews,  and
were  somehow  preserved  to  the  Christian  centuries,  and
inherited  by  Western  m3^stics.  The  saints  of  the  Catholic
church  rec£uired  no  traditional  secrets  to  initiate  them
into  the  transcendental  possibilities  of  ecstasy,  for  they
pursued  independently,  and,  as  it  were,  by  a  natural
instinct,  the  path  of  hypnotic  sense-suspension,  and
acquired  a  forced  correspondence  with  the  spiritual  world
by  a  life-isolation  from  all  but  inevitable  connection  with
earthly  things.  But  the  healing  branch  of  that  science,
which  at  its  highest  is  suj^posecl  to  have  made  souls
whole  b}'^  connecting  them  with  the  source  of  the  soul's
health,  and  at  its  lowest  is  supposed  to  have  cured  the
diseases  of  man's  flesh,  reappeared  after  a  slumber  of
centuries,  or  is,  at  least,  for  the  first  time,  openly  re-
ferred to  by  Paracelsus  in  the  sixteenth  century ;  and,
so  far  as  we  can  trace,  it  was  he  also  who  from  the
analogies  of  the  natural  magnet,  would  first  appear
to  have  endowed  it  with  the  dignities  of  a  magnetic
hypothesis.

"  This  remarkable  thinker  maintained,"  says  a  recent
French  work  which  is  of  high  medical  authority,  "  that
the  human  body  was  endowed  with  a  double  magnetism ;
that  one  part  attracted  to  itself  the  planets,  and  was
nourished  by  them,  whence  came  wisdom,  thought,  and
the  senses ;  that  the  other  portion  attracted  to  itself  the
elements,  and  disintegrated  them,  whence  came  flesh
and  blood;  that  the  attractive  and  hidden  \drtue  of  man
resembles  that  of  amber  and  of  the  magnet ;  that  by
this  virtue  the  magnetic  virtue  of  healthy  persons
attracts  the  enfeebled  magnetism  of  those  who  are  sick.
After  Paracelsus,  many  learned  men  of  the  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries  —  Grrocenius,  Burgrave,  Helmont^
Eobert  Fludd,  Kircher,  and  Maxwell — believed  that  in
the  magnet  they  could  recognise  the  properties  of  that
universal  principle  by  which  minds  addicted  to  general-
isation thought  that  all  natural  phenomena  might  be
explained,"    and   the   external   mineral    loadstone   was

MESMERISM.  231

combined  ^vvith  the  interior  Paracelsian  magnes  for  the
alleviation  of  all  disorders.

It  has  been  generally  concluded  that  Mesmer  made
profit  out  of  the  magnetic  speculations  and  experiments
of  his  predecessors,  and  indeed  in  his  capacity  as  physi-
cian he  could  scarcely  have  ignored  what  was  once  so
important  a  branch  of  empirical  healing.  Moreover,  his
explanatory  theorems  are  proof  positive  that  he  was
very  largely  indebted  to  the  theosophical  physics  of  the
past.  If  it  be  evident,  however,  from  the  monuments
of  remote  antiquity  that  the  most  enlightened  nations
of  the  elder  world  healed  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  by
the  mUed  transmission  of  "  vitality, ''  and  by  the  passes
called  magnetic,  it  is  still  more  certain  that  the  pro-
fessors of  the  all-curing  loadstone,  and  the  healing  quali-
ties of  the  hand  and  eye,  were  completely  unacquainted
with  this  fact,  and  though  the  literatm^e  of  mesmerism  is
exceedingly  comprehensive  and  large,  it  does  not  inform
us  by  what  process  of  observation  or  reasoning  the
physician  of  Geneva  was  led  up  to  the  secret  of  the  old
sanctuaries — more  acciu^ately,  the  information  which  it
gives  is  insufficient  to  account  for  the  felicitous  guess
which  recovered  a  lost  science  for  the  benefit  of  the
modern  world.

Mesmer,  a  German  by  birth,  was  born  in  the  year
1734,  and  he  took  his  degree  as  a  doctor  of  medicine  at
Vienna  in  1766.  He  immediately  preceded  the  Revolu-
tion, and  he  just  out-lived  Waterloo.  His  doctrine  was
diffused  at  a  time  when  the  pure  mysticism  of  the
Christian  centuries  seemed  destined  to  perish  with  the
recluse  philosopher  Saint-Martin,  and,  speaking  from  the
historical  standpoint,  his  discovery  was  the  one  thing
which  saved  mysticism  from  complete  oblivion.

The  connection  between  mysticism  and  mesmerism
will  seem  naturally  remote  to  the  ordinary  pathological
student,  but  experiments  in  dual  consciousness,  in  the
possibilities  of  suggestion,  in  the  transference  of  thought,
and  in  the  production  of  a  profound  artificial  sleep,
appear  after  a  careful  study  to  be  only  the  outer  fringe
of  an  ancient  secret  knowledge  by  which  the  sanctuary
of  the  inmost  man  might  be  unlocked,  and  whereby  the

232  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

interior  mystic  might  enter  into  the  realities  which
transcend  the  superficial  truths  of  the  phenomenal
world.  We  speak  tentatively  and  hypothetically,  but  we
base  our  statement  upon  investigations  other  than  our
own,  and  upon  authorities  in  occult  science  who  are
greater  than  ourselves.  It  is  open  to  any  one  who  has
the  necessary  qualifications  of  aspiration,  patience,  and
energy  to  learn  by  his  individual  experience  that  mystic
practice  is  not  hallucination,  and  that  it  is  not  fraud.
He  need  not  go  further,  though  it  is  true  that  he  must
step  with  care,  than  the  modern  phenomena  of  Spirit-
ualism, to  find  out  that  there  is  an  intelligent  world
transcending  sense ;  and  on  the  faith  of  the  evidence  of
all  the  mystics,  we  must  set  down  that  it  is  possible  to
enter  that  world,  and  that  the  door  of  that  entrance  is
mesmerism,  by  which  we  must  be  understood  to  refer  to
the  thing — whatever  it  may  be — and  not  to  the  multi-
tudes of  false  conceptions  which  attach  to  the  name.
We  are  writing  a  hand-book  for  inquirers,  it  is  once
again  necessary  to  observe,  and'  if  any  one  wishes  to
become  acquainted  with  the  quality  of  this  evidence,  he
must  be  referred  to  the  fountain-head,  to  the  unwritten
history  of  mysticism,  as  it  exists  in  the  lives  of  the
mystics,  and  he  will  there  find  after  what  manner  the
ecstatics  of  all  the  Christian  centuries  performed  the
interior  Itinerarium  Mentis  ad  Beum,  and  attained  the
beatific  absorption  of  Nirvana  in  Christ.  Then  he  must
compare  what  he  has  learned  with  the  facts  of  patho-
logical history  in  natural  and  artificial  catalepsy,  and  if
he  can  discriminate  between  disease  which  has  its  seat
in  organic  weakness  and  disruption  of  mind  and  body,
between  the  plimging  of  an  unprepared  nature  into  a
condition  which  is  outside  nature,  and  between  the
sanctified  introspection  of  a  pm^e  mind,  a  purged  will,
and  an  exalted  aspiration  and  purpose,  he  will  be  in  a
position  to  understand  what  is  essentially  identical  and
what  is  incidentally  diverse  in  the  mystic  and  magnetic
trance.  His  practical  acquaintance  with  psychology
and  hypnotism  may  then  be  applied  to  an  appreciation
of  the  claims  of  the  mystics  in  respect  of  their  ecstatic
absorption,   when,   if  he  should  bear  in  mind  the  re-

MESMERISM.  233

iterated  statement  which  has  been  the  keynote  of  this
book,  he  will  conclude  that  these  things  are  not  of  faith,
that  is  to  say,  that  any  one  who  is  vitally  concerned  in
them  should  not  stop  short  at  the  evidence  and  be  con-
tent to  believe.  The  mystics  will  tell  him  that  it  is
open  to  him  also  to  participate  in  the  bona  Dei  in  terra
viventium,  but  that  if  he  Avill  share  their  privileges,  he
must  also  live  their  life.

We  are  conscious  that  we  have  been  unwillingly  speak-
ing in  terms  somewhat  enigmatical,  and  it  will  be  well,
therefore,  if,  avoiding  all  involved  details,  we  can  afford
to  the  student  a  few  lines  of  plain  information  on  the  end
that  was  sought  by  the  mystics  through  their  profound
process  of  introspection,  and  transcendental  self -hypnotis-
ing for  the  suspension  of  sense-correspondences,  and  the
manifestation  of  the  interior  light  and  life.  There  was
neither  secret  nor  mystery  about  it ;  it  was  always  openly
referred  to,  precisely  defined  and  described.  At  the
same  time,  the  methods  necessarily  were  of  an  arcane  or,
at  least,  recondite  character,  because  they  were  concerned
^\dth  the  mystery  of  spiritual  growth,  and  that  great
psycho-alchemical  reconstruction  which  has  been  empha-
sized in  one  term  of  many  heights  and  Avonders — the
New  Birth,  or  Regeneration.  Here  is  what  we  read  in  a
popular  hand-book  of  mysticism,  which  circulated  widely
in  France  in  the  middle  of  this  century : —

"  The  union  of  God  with  the  soul  is  the  principle  of
all  mystic  life.  But  this  union,  the  fulness  and  final
consummation  of  which  cannot  be  experienced  till  death
has  been  passed  through  and  eternity  has  been  achieved,
can  be  accomplished  on  this  earth  in  a  more  or  less  per-
fect manner,  and  the  literature  of  entire  mysticism  has
no  other  end  than  to  unveil  to  us,  by  a  full  and  profound
analysis  of  the  different  stages  of  evolution  in  the  spirit
of  man,  the  diverse  successive  degrees  of  this  divine
union.  Seven  distinct  stages  of  the  soul's  ascent  to-
wards God  have  been  recognised  by  mystics,  and  they
constitute  what  has  been  emblematically  called  the  castle
of  the  interior  man.  They  represent  the  seven  absolute
processes  of  psychic  transfiguration.  The  first  link  in
this  arcane  sequence  is  called  the  state  of  prayer,  which,

234  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

from  the  pneumatic  standpoint,  is  the  concentration  of  the
intellectual  energies  upon  God  as  the  object  of  thought,
which  is  commonly  assisted  by  the  ceremonial  appeal
made  by  religion  to  the  senses.     It  has,  however,  a  higher
aspect,  comprised  in  the  second  evolutionary  process,  and
called  the  state  of  mental  prayer.    Here  the  illusory  pheno-
mena of  the  visible  Avorld,  are  regarded  as  informed  with
an   inner  pneumatic  significance,  to  divine  which  is  a
chief   end   of  mysticism.     In  order  to  make  progress
therein,  and  so  attain  the  third  stage,  it  is  necessary  that
the  aspirant,  shaping  all  practical  life  in  conformity  with
his  theory,  should  perform  no  outward  act  except  with
a  view  to  its  inward  meaning,  all  things  which  are  of
time   and   earth    and    man   being   simply   figures   and
symbols  of  earth  and  heaven  and  God.     The  postulant,
as  he  advances,  mil  perceive  that  the  inmost  thoughts
of   his   own   conscious  being   are   only  a   limited   and
individual  speculation  of  the  speech   or  word  of  God,
concealed  even  in  its  apparent   revelation,    and    itself
a  veil    of   that  divine  truth  which  must   be  removed
for    the    contemplation   of    the    truth    absolute    which
is  behind  it.     ^Yhen  he  has  reached  this  point  the  mystic
will  have  entered  on  the  third  stage  of  his  illumination.
This  is  the  most  difficult  of  all.     It  is  termed  by  mystics
the  obscure  night,  and  here  it  is  necessary  that  the
aspirant  should  become  stark  naked,  should  empty  him
self  completely,  should  be  stripped  of  all  his  faculties,
renouncing  all  his  own  predilections,  his  own  thoughts,
his    own   will — in   a  word,    his  whole   self.      Aridity,
weariness,   temptation,   desolation,   darkness,  are    char-
acteristic   of   this    epoch,   and  they  have  been  experi-
enced by  all  who  have  ever  made  any  progress  in  the
mj^steries  of  mystical  love.    The  fourth  condition  is  deno-
minated the  prayer  of  quietism.    Complete  immolation  of
self  and  unreserved  surrender  into  the  hands  of  God,
have  repose  as  their  first  result.     Such  quietism,  how-
ever, is  not  to  be  confounded  with  insensibility,  for  it
leads  to  the  sole  real  activity,  to  that  which  has  God  for
its  impulse.     The  fifth  degree  in  the  successive  spiritual-
ization  of  the  human  soul  is  called  the  state  of  union,  in
which  the  will  of  man  and  the  will  of  God  become  sub-

MESMERISM.  235

stantially  identified.  This  is  the  mystical  irrigation
which  fertilizes  the  garden  of  the  soul.  During  this
portion  of  his  development,  the  indi\ddual,  imbued  ^^dth
a  sovereign  ^lisdain  for  all  things  \dsible,  as  well  as  for
himself,  accomplishes  in  peace,  serenity,  and  joy  of  spirit,
the  ^Wll  of  Gocl,  as  it  is  made  kno^Aai  to  him  by  the  Word
of  God  su2:)ernaturally  speaking  within  him.  On  the
extreme  fmther  limit  of  this  condition,  the  mystic  enters
the  sixth  state,  which  is  that  of  ecstatic  prayer,  which  is
the  soul's  transport  above  and  outside  itself.  It  consti-
tutes a  union  with  di^dnity  by  the  instrument  of  positive
love,  which  is  a  state  of  sanctification,  beatitude,  and  in-
effable torrents  of  delight  flowing  over  the  whole  being.
It  is  beyond  description,  it  transcends  illustration,  and
its  felicity  is  not  to  be  conceived.  Love,  which  is  a
potency  of  the  soul,  or  of  that  anima  which  vivifies  our
bodies,  has  passed  into  the  spirit  of  the  soul,  into  its
superior,  divine,  and  universal  form,  and  this  process
completed  comprises  the  seventh  and  final  stage  of  pneu-
matic development,  which  is  that  of  ravishment.  Re-
nouncing all  that  is  corporeal  about  it,  the  soul  becomes
a  pure  spirit,  capable  of  being  united,  in  a  wholly  celes-
tial manner  to  the  Uncreated  Spirit,  whom  it  beholds,
loves,  serves,  and  adores  above  and  beyond  all  created
forms.  And  this  is  the  mystic  marriage,  the  perfect
union,  the  entrance  of  God  and  Heaven  into  the  interior
man."

The  history  of  Christian  supernaturalism  informs  us
that  in  these  seven  stages  of  transcendental  adoration
the  body  of  the  mystic  was  seen  to  rise  from  the  ground,
and  to  poise  itself  mysteriously  in  space.  Eavished  by
interior  visions,  he  became  insensible  to  all  that  was
passing  around  him,  and  at  the  same  time  his  physical
senses,  which  had  suspended  correspondence  for  the
moment  with  normal  exterior  environment,  were
ministered  to  in  a  manner  which  we  should  term
magical ;  he  saw,  heard,  felt,  tasted,  but  on  another
plane  of  being  ;  and  occasionally  his  indescribable
ecstasy  was  manifested  in  the  apparition  of  lights  and
halos  about  him,  and  in  the  diffusion  of  an  unearthly
fragrance.     If  all  these  phenomena  arc  to  l)c  accepted

236  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

as  literally  true,  they  surpass  in  degree  what  has  been
achieved  by  psychological  experiment  at  the  present  day,
but  in  respect  of  their  kind  and  class  they  are  the
phenomena  of  ecstatic  hypnotism.

We  have  sufficiently  indicated  the  historical  founda-
tion for  the  antiquity  of  those  classes  of  transcendenta
phenomena  which  are  generically  embraced  by  mes-
merism, and  we  have  exceeded  the  limits  of  our  purpose
to  establish  a  connection  between  them  and  the  highest
altitudes  of  mystic  end  and  action.  If  it  be  impossible
to  do  justice  to  the  latter  subject  in  an  elementary
treatise,  it  is  equally  beyond  our  scope  to  supply  the
student  with  an  account  of  the  various  methods  by
which  the  hypnotic  and  mesmeric  conditions  can  be
induced  in  suitable  subjects.  It  has  been  throughout
our  endeavour  to  make  this  handbook  as  practical  as  its
design  would  permit,  and  in  the  ceremonies  and  ritual
of  occult  science  we  have  given  information  at  first  hand
from  the  most  rare  and  authentic  sources.  In  the
present  instance,  however,  we  are  dealing  with  a  matter
which  is  almost  of  popular  knowledge,  which  possesses
a  vast  literature  in  almost  every  form  and  language,
while  its  methods  and  processes  may  be  learnt  from  any
one  of  the  innumerable  pamphlet  guides  which  may  be
obtained  at  a  nominal  cost.  What  is  superfluous  from
its  general  diffusion  may  be  therefore  reasonabl}^  spared.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  elaborate  courses  of  experi-
ment which  have  been  undertaken  by  investigators
who  have  become  authorities  through  experience,  there
is  obviously  more  than  can  be  comprised  in  a  preliminary
sketch.  It  only  remains  for  us  to  tabulate  the  several
classes  of  phenomena  which  occur  in  the  various  phases
of  mesmerism,  and  to  refer  the  student  who  desires  to
extend  his  knowledge  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper  to
the  authorities  which  he  will  require  to  consult.

Both  mesmerism  and  hypnotism,  in  so  far  as  they  can
be  distinguished  one  from  another,  may  be  divided
broadly  into  two  sections,  of  which  the  first  and  most
important  has  reference  to  therapeutics,  and  is,  in  fact,
the  development  of  the  so-called  magnetic  condition  for
the  cure  of  diseases  in  the  subject,  for  the  performance

MESMERISM.  237

of  painless  operations,  and  for  the  diagnosis  of  medical
cases,  when  the  stage  of  clairvoyance  is  reached.  In  a
sufficiently  susceptible  subject,  the  passes  and  will  of
the  mesmerist  induce  a  condition  of  profound  trance,
which,  before  the  discovery  of  anaesthetics,  was  made
use  of  by  Dr  EUiotson  in  India,  with  precisely  the  same
success  as  anaesthetics,  for  the  amputation  of  limbs,  and
the  removal  of  cancers;  which  were  suffered  by  the
patient  unconsciously,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  of  those
subsecj[uent  ill  effects  which  not  infrequently  attend  upon
chloroform  and  stupefying  gases.

The  ciu'ative  effects  of  mesmerism  are  not  less  as-
tonishing than  its  power  in  the  suspension  of  conscious-
ness during  agonising  operations,  nor  do  they  by  any
means  invariably  depend  upon  the  entrancement  of  the
subject.  Passes  made  over  affected  portions  of  the
body,  sometimes  the  simple  imposition  of  hands,  at
others  that  process  which  is  now  termed  Massage,  being
a  department  of  medical  rubbing,  and  fundamentally  a
mesmeric  treatment,  have  produced  wonders  in  healing,
Avhich  rest  upon  unimpeachable  evidence,  and  their  cita-
tion would  fill  volumes.  It  Avould  be  scarcely  exaggera-
tion to  say  that  almost  every  species  of  disease,  other
than  hereditary,  has  been  successfully  eradicated  by  the
methods  which  transcendental  therapeutics  have  inherited
from  Anton  Mesmer  and  from  the  psychologists  who
succeeded  him.  Painless  parturition,  the  cure  of  paraly-
sis, the  restoration  of  sight  and  hearing,  are  included  in
the  long  list.  Yet  the  nature  of  the  agent  which  is  at
work  in  these  remarkable  physiological  reconstructions
is  entirely  unknown.  The  hypothesis  of  an  imponder-
able magnetic  fluid  projected  by  the  will  of  the  mesmerist
is  now  very  generally  rejected  ;  the  influence  of  the  im-
agination is  insufficient  to  cover  the  facts.  The  trans-
mission of  a  vital  fluid  would  seem  to  have  a  side  of
truth,  for  the  operations  of  curative  mesmerism  exhaust
the  vitality  of  the  mesmerist,  but  this  again  is  insufficient,
for  the  cures  of  some  healers  have  been  performed  on  a
scale  which  is  so  colossal  as  to  be  out  of  all  proportion
with  the  extent  of  their  vitality.  The  insufficiency  of
existing  explanations  has  led  many  to  have  recourse  to

238  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

a  purely  spiritual  theory,  which,  whatever  its  value,  is
naturally  distrusted  by  most  scientific  investigators.

An  acquaintance  with  the  methodical  forms  of
mesmerism  is  by  no  means  indispensable  to  the  healer,
and,  as  a  rule,  the  most  extraordinary  cures  have  been
effected  Avithout  any  devised  process.  In  the  present
century  the  Prince  of  Hohenlohe  and  the  Zouave  Jacob
performed  cures  which  in  nature  and  number  might  well
be  termed  miraculous.  In  the  last  century  we  have  the
authority  of  Prince  Bartenstein,  Avho  witnessed  on  one
occasion  the  complete  restoration  of  four  hundred  blind,
deaf,  dumb,  and  paralytic  people.  The  simple  attouche-
ment  which  in  the  case  of  a  royal  hand  was  once  con-
sidered sufficiently  potent  to  cure  the  most  ineradicable
of  diseases,  "  the  king's  evil,"  aj^pears  to  have  been  the
one  formula  which  was  adopted  by  both  these  phenome-
nal persons,  while  the  mere  presence  of  Jean  Baptiste
Viannay,  the  saintly  Cur 6  D'Ars,  in  the  public  minis-
trations of  the  altar  or  in  the  private  stance  of  the  con-
fessional, is  said  to  have  been  all  that  was  needed  to
effect  conquests  over  a  variety  of  complaints,  commonly
termed  inculpable.

Therapeutic  phenomena  taking  place  in  the  presence
of  the  holy  are  another  phase  of  the  grand  mesmeric
mystery  which  is  as  ancient  as  sense-suspensions,  trance,
and  hypnotic  vision.  Miraculous  healing,  indeed,  has
ever  been  considered  a  prerogative  of  saints,  and  a  test
of  divine  mission.  At  this  day  it  is  still  credited,  and
still  practised,  and  still  applied  to  by  numbers,  who
would  scorn  to  debase  it  by  association  with  the  name
of  Mesmer,  and  who,  disregarding  fundamental  identities,
would  deny  that  it  had  any  connection  with  "animal
magnetism,"  with  the  transmission  of  vitality,  or  the
existence  of  an  odic  force.  By  these  it  is  commonly
classed  among  the  miraculous  effects  of  prayer,  and  Faith -
Healing,  in  one  or  other  of  its  phases,  is  notoriously
a  fact  of  the  times.  It  is  practised  in  many  ways  ]  it  is
associated  with  many  types  of  religious  opinion ;  by
some  of  its  apostles  it  is  connected  with  certain  dogmas,
a  belief  in  which  is  held  to  be  indispensable ;  others
would  identify  it  with  no  creed  and  no  doctrine;  for

MESMERISM.  239

them  it  is  an  universal  influence  of  the  universal  Spirit
of  God.  In  many  cases  the  belief  in  this  abnormal
power,  and  personal  experience  of  its  working,  have
created  ciuTents  of  enthusiasm  which  have  exceeded
reasonable  bounds,  discrediting  testimony  which  might
other'W'ise  have  been  more  generally  accepted,  and  bring-
ing disrepute  upon  movements  which  in  their  aspirations
were  just  and  good.

There  is  one  form  of  psychic  cure  which  is  carefully
distinguished  by  its  professors  from  the  medley  of  mar-
vels which  pass  all  confused  under  the  name  of  Faith-
Healing.  It  is  termed  Christian  Science  Healing,  and
it  claims  to  have  reduced  the  subject  into  the  shape
of  a  methodised  spiritual  gnosis.  Its  disciples  will
charge  us  with  confusion  for  referring  to  it  in  a  paper
on  Mesmerism,  but  we  are  treating  in  a  broacl  and
comprehensive  manner  of  matters  which  in  their  deep
centre  are  either  one,  or,  at  least,  are  radically  joined,
and  defects  of  terminology  are  a  common  disability  to
which  forbearance  should  be  extended  in  what  is  still
the  infancy  of  psychological  research.  Among  many
systems  and  claimants,  we  recognise  in  the  principles  and
disciples  of  this  so-called  Christian  science,  the  most
profound  elements  which  have  entered  into  the  higher
mysticism  of  all  the  ages,  and,  whatever  the  results
which  have  been  achieved,  and  we  have  heard  personal
testimony  from  cultured  and  thoughtful  persons  which
is  of  real  weight  and  value,  we  recognise  that  Christian
Science  Healing  is  to  all  appearance  on  the  j^ath  of  the
mystics ;  it  is  on  the  path  of  Yaughan,  Bohme,  Saint
Martin,  and  the  best  of  the  Quietists  ;  and  it  is  our  duty
in  this  section  to  refer  the  student  to  its  literature  for
the  purest  quality  of  light  in  the  recondite  problems  of
that  spiritual  reconstruction  of  physical  man  which  is
said  to  be  performed  under  the  arcane  potencies  of
prayer  and  faith,  whether  it  be  identified  by  name,  or
not,  with  what  is  called  Faith-Healing.*

*  Particular  attention  is  invited  to  the  Christian  Science  Healing
of  Miss  Frances  Lord.  It  is  regarded  by  a  certain  section  of
modern  mystical  criticism  as,  in  some  sense,  a  clue  to  the  old
mystery  of  the  Elixir  of  Life.  On  the  outer  plane  there  is,  how-
ever, a  correspondence  between  medicine,  diet,  and  the  conduct  of
physical  life.

240  TiiK  oc(;uLT  scikncj:s.

Wo  }i;ivc  s;ii(l  lluit  tlio  (;nros  wliich  arc  atti-ibutcd  to
iMCSiiiorisiii  jtrid  its  colliitonils  mo  not  to  be  cxpljiiiicd
by  the  i)()wor  of  ini;i;^inatioii,  whatever  the  stimuhis  which
may  be  a])])h'e(l  to  it.  TIk;  statcnient  was  not  made  in
the  interests  of  any  hyj)()thcsis,  but  simply  in  view  of
the  evidence.  Iniai^ination,  at  the  same  time,  is  a  great
curative  agcJit,  and  accordingly  it  lias  been  the  fashion
for  over  half  a  century  to  ex'j)lain  all  the  phenomena  of
mcsmei'ic  tlieraj)eutics  by  tliat  alone,  or  by  that  in  con-
junction with  a  tlieoiy  of  piaimed  imposture  when  the
exj)l;i,n;i,l,i()n  would  be  ol)viously  misap])lied.  Both
UKilJiods  are  now  ])i-actically  al)andoned.  JVleii  of  science
have  discovered,  that  in  addition  to  the  plienomena  of
lu3alings,  tlnu'e  are  oIJku-  brancJics  of  mesmeric  experi-
ment udiicli  i('  would  wholly  fail  to  cover,  and  under  the
n;ini('  of  hy|)notisni  the  whole  subject  is  receiving  gradual
investigal-ion.  Scienlilic  ])rocesses  are  like  the  mills  of
the  gods,  they  giind  slowly,  but  in  the  end  they  grind
exceedingly  small,  and  the  generation  of  the  moment
very  usually  does  good  work  by  exploding  the  hyjw-
thescs,  if  not  the  methods,  of  its  predecessor.  This  very
hy|)olJiesis  of  the  imagination  in  its  relation  to  curative
nu\smerism  is  begiruiing  to  bo  reduced  to  its  due  pro-
portions, and  the  ])()wer  of  the  agent  in  question  is  now
Iniing  con  lined  to  those  diseases  which  are  said  to  have
been  caused  by  imagination,  the  existence  of  real  diseases
which  have  oiiginaied  in  this  manner  being  jn-oved  by
the  fact  that  imaginary  or  (iclitious  complaints  can  have
no  existence,  and,  positively  speaking,  by  the  collateral
fact  (hat  comi)laints  which  have-  sometimes  taken  genuine
hold  of  a  patient,  have  demonstrably  begun  in  his
fancy  acting  on  a  nervous  and  abnormally  susceptible
temperament.

The  second  of  the  two  sections  with  which  the  pheno-
mena of  mesmerism  and  hyj)notism  may  be  broadly
divided,  includes  all  experiments  which  are  not  of  a
therapeutic  character.  Their  variety  is  enormous,
and  their  psychological  significance  as  investigations
into  the  undeveloped  ])otencies  of  mind  is  so  great
that    it   is  dillicult  to    attempt   its   expression  without

MESMERISM.  241

using  terms  which  would  seem  to  be  sensational.  We
are  speaking  of  experiments  which  reveal  to  us  the  exist-
ence, deep  down  in  our  being,  of  faculties  w^hich  may  be
called  unknown,  of  other  senses  than  those  which  we
normally  use,  and  of  apparently  foreign  personalities
behind  our  legitimate  manifested  personality,  which  ever
we  have  considered  as  our  most  inalienable  part,  and  as
that  which  constitutes  our  selves.

The  phenomena  included  in  this  section  admit  of
further  subdivision.  There  are  those  which  are  connected
Avith  simple  muscular  aflections  which  are  the  first
results  of  the  trance  condition,  in  whatsoever  manner
produced.  What  is  generally  observed  at  the  beginning-
is,  in  the  words  of  a  recent  writer,  a  remarkable  quiver-
ing of  the  eyelids,  a  "  contraction  and  then  a  dilation  of
the  pupil  of  the  eye,"  followed  by  a  gTadual  closing  of
the  eyelids  and  "  by  all  the  outward  appearances  of  deep
slumber.  The  arms  fall  listlessly  by  the  side,  the  limbs
are  relaxed,  and  to  anyone  not  in  the  secret  the  subject
would  appear  to  be  sleeping  heavily  after  some  great  and
fatiguing  exertion."  The  nervous  centres  which  con-
trol the  action  of  the  muscles  are  at  the  same  time
stimulated  into  an  abnormal  excitability.  "  Even  a
gentle  stroking  of  the  skin  is  enough  to  produce  the
contraction  of  the  muscles  underlying ;  a  continued  irri-
tating of  the  same  spot  will  cause  the  contraction  to  ex-
tend to  the  neighbouring  and  distant  gTOups  of  muscles.
.  .  .  By  employing  the  appropriate  stimuli  we  are  en-
abled to  produce  the  continued  contraction  of  any  set
of  muscles  we  may  select,  and  even  to  induce  rigidity
of  the  whole  body."  This  rigidity  constitutes  a  second
stage  in  physical  entrancement.  The  senses  are  imper-
fectly suspended  in  ordinary  normal  slumber.  In  the
hypnotic  or  mesmeric  state,  the  subject  is  unmoved  by
the  strongest  light  directed  straight  upon  his  eyes,  or
by  a  stunning  report  at  his  ear,  and  he  passes  into  a
condition  which  closely  resembles  that  of  catalepsy.
Experiments  connected  with  the  artificial  suspension  of
the  senses  in  the  hypnotic,  indifferently  with  the  mes-
meric, states,  are  of  a  very  interesting  character,  but
they  are  exclusively  of  an  elementary  kind.     "  In  our

242  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

waking  moments  we  enter  into  relation  mth  the  outer
world  by  means  of  the  external  senses ;  and  the  organic
functions  of  the  body  are  controlled  by  nerve  centres,
which  are  to  a  large  extent  subject  to  the  higher
faculties  of  sense.  In  this  state  our  senses  reveal  to  us
the  other  world  as  it  is,  and  direct  the  functions  of  the
body  appropriately  to  the  nature  of  the  external  agents
by  which  they  are  impressed.  But  in  the  hypnotic
slumber  the  functions  of  external  and  inner  sense  are
perplexingly  disordered.  The  hyjDnotised  subject  does
not  see  what  is  before  his  eyes,  or  hear  the  sound  in  his
ears ;  he  sees  and  hears  only  the  sights  and  sounds  sug-
gested to  him  by  the  magnetiser.  And  the  lower  func-
tions, such  as  nutrition,  which  are  dependent  upon  the
perceptions  of  sense,  are  affected  in  like  measure.  This
power  of  controlling  the  sense  perceptions  enables  the
operator  to  make  the  patient  blind  or  deaf  to  the  pres-
ent sights  and  sounds,  and  to  make  him  see  and  hear —
and  so  of  the  other  senses — what  has  no  present  ex-
istence outside  the  suggestions  of  the  magnetiser.  .  .  .
This  kind  of  hallucination  has  been  called  jjositive,  to
distinguish  it  from  the  former,  to  which  the  name
negative  has  been  assigned."

What  is  suggested  to  the  entranced  sight  of  the  sub-
ject must  not,  however,  be  identified  with  the  normal
figments  of  imagination.  What  is  imposture  on  the  part
of  the  operator  is  a  vivid  actuality  to  the  patient.  The
entranced  senses  are,  moreover,  the  slaves  of  the  hypno-
tist; what  his  methods  have  deadened,  they  can  also
quicken ;  he  can  arouse  them  into  abnormal  activity,
and,  if  he  so  ■wills  it,  his  own  arbitrary  motions  may  be
imitated  automatically  by  the  subject  with  eyes  gripped
close  in  the  vice  of  catalepsy.

The  control  of  the  external  senses  must  obviously
affect  the  intellectual  faculties  and  the  scope  of  will.  In
a  lesser  or  greater  degree,  as  the  power  of  the  operator
and  the  susceptibilities  of  the  subject  may  vary  in  diff"er-
ent  persons,  both  are  under  the  direct  influence  of  the
mesmerist.  It  is  said  that  under  circumstances  which,
however,  are  seldom  met  with,  the  interior  personality
of  the  subject  may  pass  away  from  the  influence  of  the

MESMERISM.  243

operator,  but  as  a  rule  he  controls  for  the  time  being
the  whole  individuality  of  his  patient.  As  a  rule  also
the  intellectual  faculties  are  exceedingly  cjuickened ;  a
dull  person  becomes  an  acute  reasoner ;  he  will  give
answers  upon  subjects  with  which  in  his  normal  state
he  is  practically  unacquainted ;  he  may  occasionally  be
adch^essed  in  a  language  which  he  notoriously  does  not
understand,  but  he  will  reply  pertinently,  his  mind
seeming  to  be  for  the  time  identified  with  the  under-
standing of  the  mesmerist.  It  is  said  that  he  will  him-
self speak  in  what,  to  him,  are  unknown  tongues,  but
evidence  in  this  direction  should  be  received  with  ex-
treme caution.  The  memory  is  also  Cjuickened  to  a
surprising  extent;  there  are  instances  of  ignorant
servant  girls  automatically  repeating  in  the  magnetic
condition,  with  absolute  accuracy,  long  passages  from
the  Greek  poets  which  they  have  heard  recited  by
their  masters  at  a  period  considerably  previous.  The
creative  faculties  are  also  frequently  developed,  some
manifesting  a  remarkable  lyrical  gift,  and  improvising
lengthy  poems  with  conspicuous  fluency ;  Avhile  others
exhibit  an  astonishing  and  hitherto  unknown  aptitude
for  musical  composition  or  painting.

The  suspension  of  will  Avhich  accompanies  the  hypnotic
state,  placing  the  subject,  in  mind,  morals,  and  body,  at
the  complete  disposal  of  the  operator,  also  controls  the
individuality,  which  can  be  effaced  and  transformed
according  to  the  necessities  of  any  experiment.  "  Tell
the  sleeping  individual  he  is  a  child,  and  he  will  begin
to  play  at  the  games  of  children ;  that  he  is  a  girl,  and
he  will  begin  to  sew ;  that  he  is  a  priest,  and  he  will
begin  some  sacerdotal  function ;  that  he  is  an  old  man,
and  he  will  call  for  a  stick  to  support  his  steps ;  that  he
is  a  general,  and  he  Avill  draw  himself  up,  give  the  word
of  command,  &c. ;  that  he  is  a  dog,  and  he  will  crawl
on  all  fours  and  bark."  These,  are,  however,  but  ele-
mentary and  surface  phenomena.  In  some  cases  a  new
and  underlying  personality  will  spontaneously  manifest,
and  if  the  hypnotic  condition  be  prolonged,  several  of
an  opposite  kind,  and  all  more  or  less  foreign  to  the
patient's  normal  nature,  will  appear  in  periodical  succes-

244  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

sion  ;  an  educated  and  virtuous  person  may  develop  a  low
and  vicious  character,  while  a  low  type  of  humanity  will
exhibit  in  the  profundities  of  his  being  a  higher  form  of
consciousness.  We  are  thus  brought  face  to  face  with
some  of  the  most  inscrutable  problems  in  the  esoteric
nature  of  man.

Where  new  personalities  are  not  developed,  we  have
frequently  new  senses  or  new  forms  of  perception  ;  the
chief  of  these  are  clairvoyance,  clairaudience,  and  the
phenomena  which  constitute  psychometry.  Clairvoy-
ance is  the  development  of  the  faculty  of  interior  sight.
It  was  discovered  to  the  modern  world  by  the  Marquis
de  Pus^gTu-,  a  disciple  and  friend  of  Mesmer ;  but  vision
at  a  distance  was  familiar  to  the  old  operators  of  those
forms  of  divination  which  have  been  described  in  a  pre-
vious paper.  That  enlargement  of  mind  to  which  we
have  already  made  reference  is  in  itself  a  part  of  clair-
voyance, and,  under  favourable  conditions,  it  is  brought
to  the  test  by  the  subject  shewing  acquaintance  A\ath
mere  matters  of  fact,  as,  for  instance,  the  priA^ate  history
of  another  person  outside  the  sphere  of  his  knoAvledge.
In  other  cases  he  perceives  what  is  taking  place  at  a
distance,  can  read  in  a  closed  book,  in  a  locked  slate,  or
in  a  sealed  letter.  There  is  also  a  therapeutic  variety  in
which  the  seer  perceives  the  interior  condition  of  a  sick
person,  and  of  himself  occasionally,  and  indicates  the
nature  of  the  required  remedy.  The  third  degree  is
closely  connected  with  the  phenomena  of  modern  spirit-
ualism, and  in  some  cases  perhaps  not  less  intimately
with  those  of  hallucination  and  illusion.  In  those  cases,
which  may  be  reasonably  included  in  the  first  of  these
categories,  the  interior  being  of  the  seer  seems  elevated
into  another  form  of  subsistence,  and  he  enters  into  cor-
respondence with  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  and  with
other  hierarchies  of  extramundane  intelligence.  Clair-
audience in  the  hypnotic  and  mesmeric  states  is  of  un-
common occurrence,  and  this  also  more  properly  belongs
to  spiritualism.  It  is  that  state  in  which  Swedenborg,
Bohme,  and  the  mystics  of  all  the  ages  have  conversed
with  voices  from  the  unseen,  while  absorbed  in  any
one  of  the  known  species  of  entrancement.     It  takes  a

MESMERISM.  245

more  readily  intelligible  form  when  the  spirit  of  the
subject  is  supposed  to  travel  into  distant  earthly  scenes,
where  it  hears  the  conversation  as  well  as  perceives  the
actions  of  other  human  beings.

PSYCHOMETRY  is  comparatively  a  new  departure  in
psychic  science.  Here  the  clairvoyant  is  placed  in  cor-
respondence physically  with  any  object  whatsoever,  and
beholds  in  the  interior  condition  the  chief  points  in  its
history.  A  lock  of  hair  will  reveal  the  entire  personality
of  the  man  from  whose  head  it  has  been  taken ;  a  ring,
a  fragment  cut  from  a  garment,  a  letter,  &c.,  ^^dll  pro-
duce identical  results  — whatever  has  been  connected  in-
timately ^vith  a  human  being  presents  that  being  to  the
mind's  eye  of  the  seer.  It  is  also  asserted  that  the
natural  history  of  a  metal  or  mineral  will  be  unfolded  by
its  mere  pressure  against  the  forehead  of  the  hyjDuotic
subject ;  some  important  and  apparently  hona-fide  books
have  given  details  of  numberless  experiments  in  psycho-
metric mineralogy  and  geology.

The  highest  and  rarest  states  of  mesmerism  are  those
of  the  prophetic  frenzy  and  of  pure  lucidity,  but  these
phases  are  at  present  outside  the  experience  of  profes-
sional men  of  science,  and  they  encroach  upon  a  region
of  mysticism  which  transcends  elementary  limits.

Much,  and  ^\dth  reason,  has  been  ^vritten  on  the
dangers  of  hypnotic  experiments  and  on  the  power  which
it  confides  to  persons  who  may  conceivably  abuse  it.
Body  and  mind,  will  and  imagination,  consciousness  and
personal  identity,  should  not  be  lightly  surrendered  to
any  custodian.  Nevertheless,  where  an  operator  is  pos-
sessed of  all  proper  cjualifications,  we  find  that  the
entranced  subject,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  passes  into
a  higher  condition  of  moral  development.  It  is  un-
doubtedly possible  by  the  process  of  hypnotic  experiment
to  impress  upon  a  patient  the  design  of  committing  a
murder,  and  when  he  has  to  all  appearance  returned  into
his  normal  life  and  senses,  that  impression  ^vill  remain,
and  he  will  commit  that  murder  in  exact  accordance
with  the  directions  laid  down  by  the  mesmerist.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  equally  i^ossible  to  create  an  aversion  in
a  subject  which  will  divert  him  from  a  habit  of  vice  ;  it

246  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

is  possible  to  awaken  positive  virtues  which  were  pre-
viously wanting ;  and,  not  improbably,  though  adequate
experiment  is  wanting  in  this  direction,  it  is  possible  to
originate  in  the  trance  a  quickening  of  the  intellectual
faculties  Avhich  shall  be  permanent  in  the  ordinary  state.
Mesmerism  and  hypnotism  have  been  termed  the  stone
of  the  philosophers  in  action,  and  certainly  they  bring  us
to  the  knowledge  of  a  spiritual  agent  which  is  potent
both  in  the  dissolution  and  reconstruction  of  the  interior
man.  As  such  it  is  to  be  reckoned  among  the  essential
instruments  of  mysticism,  and  the  careful,  reverent,
earnest  development  of  its  possibilities  may  be  con-
sidered by  the  mystic  student  as  indispensable  to  all
progress  in  the  experimental  knowledge  of  the  soul.

The  literatm^e  of  Mesmerism  is  so  enormous  that  it  is
difficult  to  recommend  any  individual  writers.  Deleuze
and  Dupotet  were  gi-eat  authorities  in  France,  as  were
Elliotson  and  Gregory  in  England.  Esdaile  is  valuable
for  his  account  of  surgical  operations  performed  during
the  trance  state.  Sandby  is  an  instructive  writer  on
the  general  subject ;  and  there  is  interesting  matter  in
some  letters  of  Harriet  Martineau.  The  work  of  Binet
and  his  collaborator  ranks  high  among  modern  books.

MODERN  SPIEITUALISM.

\  \TE  have  seen  that  the  traditions  of  mediaeval  magic
VV  in  the  West  were  to  some  extent  perpetuated  in
the  doctrines  and  practices  of  mesmerism.  The
occult  force  which  was  first  made  known  to  the  modern
world  by  the  physician  of  Geneva  constituted  at  least  a
kind  of  connecting  link  between  the  phenomena  of  the  old
theurgic  art  which  was  familiar  to  the  Christian  masters
of  mysticism,  and  the  long  sequence  of  marvels  with
which  every  one  at  the  present  day  has  become  more  or
less  acquainted,  under  the  conventional  name  of  spiritual-
ism. The  pronaos  of  the  spiritual  temple  has  been  said
to  be  animal  magnetism,  and  at  a  period  which  was  prior
to  the  date  of  the  Rochester  knockings,  the  German
historians  of  magic  were  accustomed  to  interpret  the
thaumaturgic  mysteries  of  the  past  by  the  light  of  the
science  of  Mesmer.  Insufficient  as  it  was,  this  explana-
tion had  a  certain  base  in  fact,  and  it  may  be  safely
affirmed  that  both  magic  and  modern  spiritualism  have
had  many  phenomena  in  common  with  animal  magnet-
ism. Things  which  are  thus  interlinked  cannot  be
fundamentally  dissimilar ;  in  all  ages  and  nations  the
science  of  the  soul  must  be  reasonably  supposed  to
consist  in  the  development  and  application  of  the  same
arcane  forces ;  between  ancient  and  modern  psycho-
logical phenomena  there  may  be  difference  of  mode  and
degree,  but  their  manifestation  must  undoubtedly  take
place  by  virtue  of  the  same  laws.

In  the  several  sections  of  this  book  we  have  already
made  reference  repeatedly  to  the  present  condition  of
psychic  science,  to  the  facts  with  which  it  is  connected,
and  to  the  investigations  involved  therein.  We  have
said  that  the  paths  Avhich  we  are  now. essaying  to  travel,
were  travcLlod  by  the  old   mystics,  and  by  such  land-

248  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

marks  of  progress  as  we  can  discover  in  their  mj^sterious
writings,  we  seem  entitled  to  conclude  that  they  had
advanced  beyond  ourselves.  SjDontaneous  occurrences,
such  as  Apparitions,  Hauntings,  Obsessions,  and  other
phenomena  which  are  not  to  be  explained  by  the  applica-
tion of  the  known  laws  of  Nature,  have  been  common  to
all  countries  and  to  all  times,  and  in  the  great  majority
of  cases  they  involve,  if  genuine,  the  supposition  of
intelligence  acting  to  some  extent  outside  the  visible
world.  The  practical  magic  of  the  past  was  a  series  of
methods  and  processes  by  which  men  endeavoured  to
enter  into  a  conscious  communication  with  the  powers
which  produced  these  wonders,  and  to  become  accjuainted,
for  whatever  object,  with  the  mysteries  of  the  invisible.
Modern  spiritualism  is  simply  another  series  of  methods
and  processes,  necessarily  analogous  in  character,  whereby
men  in  the  nineteenth  century  are  seeking  to  accomplish
jDrecisely  the  same  end.  All  that  we  have  ascertained  in
the  present  by  our  independent  psychological  researches
seems  to  substantiate  the  claims  of  the  old  magicians
and  mystics  up  to  the  point  which  our  researches  have
reached,  but  this  statement,  of  course,  presupposes  a
discriminating  separation  of  what  is  obviously  fabulous
and  impossible  in  the  history  of  magic.  If  along
our  own  lines  the  mystics  would  appear  to  have  tran-
scended us,  it  must  be  because  our  methods  are  less
perfect,  and  our  perseverance  is  less.  One  of  the  most
important  divergences  is  indicated  in  the  fact  that  the
niagicians  pretend  to  have  been  acquainted  with  many
hierarchies  of  invisible  intelligences,  while  spiritualism  is
solely  concerned  in  communication  with  the  souls  of  the
dead,  and,  in  this  sense,  if  in  no  other,  it  is,  to  all  intents
and  purposes,  the  Necromancy  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.
We  have  seen  after  what  manner  the  Magus  of  past
centuries  adjured  the  aj^paritions  of  the  departed,  how
elaborate  was  his  ceremonial,  how  diffuse  were  his  rites,
how  enormous  was  the  pneumatic  force  which  he  claims
to  have  become  able  to  exercise,  and  how  impressive
were  the  results  which  he  appears  to  have  achieved  in
the  iDrocess.  He  worked,  for  the  most  part,  alone,  and,
indeed,  isolation  was  essentially  a  part  of  the  prepara-

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  249

tion  which  he  was  bound  to  undergo.  No  ordinary
quality  of  perseverance,  no  common  power  of  Avill,  must
have  been  focussed  on  his  unearthly  aim  by  the  simple
literal  fulfilment  of  the  ritual  acts.  Instead  of  the
thorny  and  toilsome  path  of  the  adept,  with  its  fasts  and
\'igils,  its  sublimities  and  silences,  its  grotesqueries  and
gTandeurs,  Modern  Spiritualism  offers  us  a  royal  road  to
the  accomplishment  of  the  same  thaumatm^gic  mystery
— the  same  face  to  face,  if  not  unveiled,  communication
with  the  dead  of  all  the  ages.  Without  fasts,  without
prayers,  ^\athout  watches,  without  any  indispensable
garnishing  either  outside  or  within  the  house  of  human
life,  it  guarantees  to  us  on  the  evidence  of  a  great  cloud
of  mtnesses,  results  as  phenomenally  tremendous  as  are
any  that  have  been  encompassed  mthin  the  whole  circle
of  historic  witchcraft.  In  virtue  of  what  law  has  such
a  simplification  become  possible,  is  a  tempting  subject  of
incj[uiry  at  the  threshold  of  oiu"  brief  study,  but  it  is  not
one  over  which  we  can  afford  to  dwell.  We  are  con-
cerned— as  before — with  alleged  facts,  and  with  the
means  of  verifying  them,  not  with  hypotheses  on  the
uninvestigated  and  perhaps  inscrutable  laws  which  may
govern  modes  of  manifestation.  If  the  methods  of  the
mag-US  of  old  were  laborious  to  superfluity,  a  cumbrous
system  should  have  interfered  with  the  success  of  his
Avork.  If  they  were  not  prolix  and  in  part  unnecessary,
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  a  slipshod  modus  operandi  can
produce  as  great  results.  If  it  be  fitly  an  operation  of
prayer,  abstinence,  and  sacrifice,  if  it  were  once  essenti-
ally a  sacred  and  religious  matter,  to  be  performed  with
the  whole  heart  and  the  whole  soul,  there  must  be
danger  at  our  doors  when  it  has  deteriorated,  if  not  into
a  profane  pastime,  at  least  into  a  secular  experiment
which  is  stripped  of  its  sanctity  in  conscious  act  and
intention.  This  is  a  moderate  and  reasonable  criticism
which  can  offend  no  sincere  conviction,  and  tampers  with
no  experience,  and  it  must  be  left  at  this  point.

Modern  Spiritualism,  like  its  precursor,  the  mysticism
of  the  past,  asks  nothing  from  the  faith  of  the  observer,
and  it  is  an  unwarrantable  blunder  to  establish  an
inclination  to  believe  as  an  indispensable,  or  as  any,

250  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

element  of  success  in  its  investigation.  True  pheno-
menal spiritualism,  as  expounded  by  its  reasonable
adherents,  is  a  scientific  investigation  into  the  nature,
cause,  and  operation  of  certain  forces  which  appear  to
originate  outside  the  normal  plane  of  Nature,  and  give
evidence  of  human  intelligence  which  cannot  be  identi-
fied Avith  that  which  is  resident  in  the  observers.  Like
that  practical  branch  of  mysticism  which  is  more  rigidly
denominated  magic,  its  avowed  end  is  the  demonstra-
tion of  a  spiritual  world  about,  within,  and  beyond  the
visible  horizon  of  things  called  material — a  world  which
is  ordinarily  imperceptible  by  the  senses  of  embodied
man,  but  which,  under  certain  circumstances,  can  be
openly  manifested  in  a  manner  which  precludes  the
hypothesis  of  hallucination.  These  circumstances  are
the  "conditions"  to  which  reference  has  already  been
made,  and  which  we  have  shewn  to  be  of  equal  import-
ance alike  in  the  operations  of  spiritualism  and  old
magic.  The  conditions  which  are  commonly  required  for
success  in  the  experiments  of  modern  psychology  are —

I.  An  intention  on  the  part  of  the  observers  to  enter,
if  possible,  into  communication  -with  spirits  ;  it  is  this
intention  which  constitutes  the  difference  between  the
phenomena  of  Spiritualism  and  those  of  spontaneous
apparitions.

II.  The  presence  of  a  certain  harmony  of  will  and
A^sh,  and  of  general  good  feeling  among  a  given  number
of  investigators  who  have  determined  to  make  experi-
ments in  common.

III.  A  favourable  state  of  the  atmosphere,  which
should  be  free  from  electric  and  magnetic  disturbance,
and  should  be  dry  and  moderately  warm.

lY.  The  formation  of  the  circle.

y.  The  absence  of  glaring  light.

YI.  The  presence  of  what  is  called  a  medium.

Speaking  broadly,  these  are  the  conditions  which  are
laid  down  as  generally  essential.  Phenomena  which  are
recognised  by  spiritualists  may,  however,  occiu*  in  the
absence  of  any  one  of  these  rules,  and,  so  far  as  the
conscious  preparation  of  the  observer  is  concerned,  they
appear  to  have  taken  place  on  occasions  when  they  have

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM,  251

none  of  them  been  fulfilled.  Accounts  of  spontaneous
manifestations  from  the  other  world  in  the  absence  of
any  thought,  expectation,  or  desire  on  the  part  of  the  "wit-
nesses, have  constituted,  as  already  stated,  a  large  section
of  supernatural  history  in  all  times  and  countries.  So  also
the  concordant  relation  between  individuals  comprised
in  the  circle  may  be  counterbalanced  by  other  advan-
tages j  tornado  and  tempest  cannot  always  interfere  when
a  strong  force  has  been  developed  by  other  conditions ;
hands  clasj)ed  for  the  formation  of  a  circle  are  as  much
a  guarantee  against  impostiure,  when  light  is  obscured  or
excluded,  as  an  indispensable  element  of  success.  Under
certain  circumstances  any  class  of  the  phenomena  may
be  produced  in  open  day,  or  in  the  midst  of  a  brilliant
artificial  illimiination,  while  many  private  circles  are
affirmed  to  have  been  established  mth  the  most  gratify-
ing results  in  the  absence  of  any  developed  medium.

Experiments  which  are  usually  dependent  for  their  suc-
cess upon  atmospheric  conditions,  upon  the  disposition  of
the  observer,  and  upon  those  unknown  faculties  which
constitute  what  is  called  mediumship,  cannot  be  readily
conducted,  because  it  is  only  up  to  a  very  limited  point
that  we  are  able  to  ensure  the  conditions ;  the  investiga-
tion of  the  j^henomena  of  Spiritualism  is  therefore  beset
^Wth  uncertainties ;  the  communication  of  the  two  worlds
is  occasionally  accomplished  very  readily  and  in  a  very
complete  manner ;  at  other  times  it  is  difficult  and  long
in  the  process  mthout  any  assignable  reason.  It  is
evident,  therefore,  that  the  student  of  mysticism,  who
desires  to  assure  himself  that  the  modern  branch  of
magical  practice  can  offer  to  the  conscientious  experi-
menter a  reliable  instrument  of  communication  with
supersensual  planes  and  extramundane  modes  of  sub-
sistence, should  endeavoui^  by  the  most  patient  and  exact
observation  to  increase  the  knowledge  of  conditions.
Those  who  have  directed  their  especial  attention  to  this
branch  of  the  subject  have  frequently  assured  us  that
their  study  is  the  one  thing  needful,  the  beginning  and
the  end  of  all  true  progress  in  psychological  knowledge.
This  is  most  emphatically  a  point  on  which  we  may
look  for  assistance  to  the  processes  of  the  hierophants

252  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

transmitted  to  us  in  Western  magical  literature,  and  the
few  who,  at  the  present  day,  have  reconstituted  the
modus  ojjemndi  of  the  spiritual  circle  along  the  lines  of
lawful  necromantic  ritual,  have  borne  testimony  to  the
success  of  the  attempt.  There  can  also  be  no  reasonable
doubt  that  researches  into  soul  mysteries  should  be
exclusively  undertaken  by  spiritual  minds,  and  that  they
should  be  conducted  in  such  a  manner,  and  with  such
an  end  in  view,  as  "\nll  make  them  an  integral  part  of
their  individual  spiritual  development.  It  would  be
unbecoming  in  the  extreme  to  suggest  that  a  large  pro-
portion of  spiritualists  are  devoid  of  the  interior  qualities
to  which  we  refer,  but  no  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the
movement  can  fail  to  be  aware  that  the  motives  of  investi-
gation are  frequently  frivolous  in  the  extreme,  that  it  is
frecjuently  conducted  under  circumstances  which  make
it  morally  unprofitable,  and  as  a  mere  matter  of  curio-
sity, wonder,  and  amusement.  These  facts  are  indeed
notorious,  and  to  enlarge  upon  them  would  be  a  super-
fluous task.  It  is  more  important  to  observe  that  the
merely  scientific  spirit,  the  simple  thirst  after  knowledge,
the  desire,  lawful  and  commendable  as  it  is,  to  extend
the  field  of  observation,  to  investigate  unknown  forces,  is
an  insufficient  reason  for  spiritual  research,  though  what
is  thus  undertaken  may  occasionally  awaken  in  the  mind
which  is  devoted  to  science,  an  aspiration  and  a  purpose
which  transcends  ordinary  science,  noble  as  it  undoubt-
edly is.  A  spiritual  inquiry  should  be  undertaken  with
spiritual  objects.  In  the  most  exalted  sense  of  the  term,
it  is  legitimate  only  to  two  classes — those  earnest  seekers
into  the  interior  problems  of  being  who  desire  to  attain
to  the  permanent  actualities  which  they  believe  under-
lie the  appearances  of  the  external  universe,  who  are
sufiiciently  absorbed  by  the  fundamental  hyjDotheses  of
religion  to  be  anxious  for  their  rigorous  verification,
who  yearn,  in  the  language  of  the  mystics,  to  find  their
souls,  who  are  probing  the  bases  of  faith,  Avho  are  in
search  of  an  instrument  of  intercourse  with  the  divine
source  of  life.  That  is  the  first  class,  of  which  the
second  is  the  fruit,  being  those  who  have  passed  through
this  initial  stage  wherein  the  faculties  of  being  are  exer-

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  253

cised  in  the  achievement  of  the  grand  realities,  who  have
entered  into  the  interior  light,  and  on  the  path  of  spiritual
evolution.  Such  at  least  is  the  rule  which  is  laicl  down
by  the  mystics  ;  to  such  alone  is  promised  what  they
term  the  opening  of  the  closed  eye  of  the  unknown
darkness,  and  the  gate  which  gives  entrance  into  the
garden  of  cucumbers,  and  into  the  closed  palace  of  the
king.  It  is  needless  therefore  to  say  that  the  required
disposition  is  essentially  religious.  Sanctity  of  thought,
sanctity  of  life,  sanctity  of  soul  and  body,  are  the  first
conditions  of  the  process,  for  the  work  is  one  of  recon-
struction, which  is  the  significance  of  the  word  religion ;
the  system  of  spiritual  communication  which  is  proposed
by  Spiritualism  being  the  way  of  the  soul's  return  into
a  conscious  life  in  God.

'Now  this  end  which  we  have  mentioned  has  been
present  to  the  minds  of  many  persons  connected  AA'ith
the  spiritual  movements  of  modern  times,  and  it  is
identical  mth  the  ambition  of  the  mystics,  but  it  is  far
from  having  been  generally  achieved  at  present.  The  com-
munication, on  the  faith  of  the  evidence,  has  been  indeed
established  ;  the  path  has  been  opened,  but  we  have  not
as  yet  passed  through  the  first  avenue.  In  plain  words,
we  have  discovered  that  there  is  intelligence  on  the
other  side  of  life,  that  under  certain  circumstances  it  can
be  manifested  to  our  o^vn,  and  that  it  can  even  give  evi-
dence of  itself  to  our  physical  senses,  but  it  is  the  lowest
scale  in  the  hierarchy  of  spiritual  subsistence  with  which
we  have  alone  communicated,  or,  if  this  be  too  pronounced
a  statement  in  view  of  our  ignorance,  we  have  evidence,
notwithstanding,  that  the  "  spirits  "  which  frequent  our
seances  are  in  no  sense  appreciably  advanced  beyond
ourselves.  Communications  which  claim  to  come  to  us
from  high  intelligences  and  from  the  superior  spheres,
are  occasionally  received,  but  it  is  seldom  that  they  bear
the  impress  which  we  have  a  right  to  expect  from  those
altitudes,  much  less  from  the  divine  apex  towards  which
the  spiral  paths  of  being  are  supposed  to  lead  us.

In  considering  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  we  have
taken  a  lofty  standpoint,  because  from  our  knowledge  of
the  old  mystics,  and  from  a  reasonable  review  of  the

254  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

entire  subject,  we  are  assured  that  no  true  progress  can
be  made  from  any  other.  The  great  body  of  testimony
which  has  been  recorded  by  an  innumerable  variety  of
observers  belonging  to  all  classes  of  life  and  character,
seems  equivalent  to  a  positive  in-ooi  that  the  experiments
of  Spiritualism  can  be,  and  are,  conducted  in  the  absence
of  any  exalted  motives.  They  are  obtained  among  the
frivolities  of  the  drawing-room,  among  the  vulgarities  of
the  public  seance  ;  they  can  be  produced  in  the  presence
of  debauched  and  vicious  persons.  Only  the  nature  of
the  manifestations  and  the  class  of  the  communicating
intelligences  corresponds  to  the  dispositions  of  the  in-
vestigators, and  he  that  is  himself  filthy,  perverse,  or
debased,  will  attract  what  is  unclean  and  low  on  the
other  side  of  life.

As  in  other  divisions  of  this  volume,  we  have  abstained
from  attempting  a  philosophical  defence  of  Spiritualism,
or  of  debating  its  a  priori  possibility ;  it  is  equally  impos-
sible to  array  the  evidence  which  exists  in  its  favour.
We  are  solely  concerned  mth  supplying  to  the  student
who  is  in  search  of  instruction,  an  account  of  the  classes
of  phenomena  which,  it  is  alleged,  are  produced,  and
with  putting  him  in  possession  of  the  means  by  which  he
may  verify  them  for  himself.  The  conditions  which  are
generally  requisite  have  been  already  enumerated ;  we
have  foreborne  to  discuss  their  value,  for  they  constitute
an  uninvestigated  region  of  exceptional  law,  and  in  the
present  state  of  our  knowledge  it  is  futile  to  attempt  an
explanation  of  the  how  and  why  of  our  phenomena — a
disability,  it  may  be  added,  which  we  possess  in  common
with  the  professors  of  all  branches  of  physical  science.
As  in  chemistry,  as  in  the  formation  of  crystals,  we
know  that  certain  methods  and  processes  produce
certain  results,  but  it  is  a  matter  of  experience  only.
Our  disabilities,  however,  are  greater  than  those  of  the
physicist,  for  he  is  concerned  with  blind  forces,  acting
fatally,  but  we  are  the  investigators  of  a  power  which
under  given  circumstances,  can  at  any  rate  assume
intelligence.

Sixth  in  the  series  of  conditions  was  the  presence  of  a
medium,  and  here  it  is  necessary  to  summarise  the  little

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  255

that  observers  have  told  us  on  the  nature  of  what  is
called  mediumship.  There  is  a  want  of  unanimity  among
the  old  practical  mystics  on  one  important  point,  namely,
whether  it  was  possible  for  all  persons  to  become  magi-
cians and  to  evoke  spirits  with  success.  The  presence
of  a  certain  occult  cpalification  which  is  nowhere  ex-
plained in  their  ^\Titings,  because  in  all  probability  it  was
not  understood,  is  considered  indispensable  by  some,  but
it  seems  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  the  majority  that
evocation  could  be  achieved  by  all  who  were  willing  to
lead  the  life  of  a  magus,  and  to  fulfil  the  rites  of
magic.  Both  parties  distinguished,  notmthstanding,
between  the  natural  and  artificial  magician,  between  the
man  who  was  magically  predestined  from  birth,  and  the
man  who  by  will  and  labour  could  effect  such  a  transmu-
tation in  his  nature  as  would  capacitate  him  for  a  work  to
which  he  was  not  predestined.  As  the  latter  person  was
held  in  superior  consideration,  we  must  understand  by  a
predestined  magician  not  a  person  who  was  ordained  by
mere  automatic  fate  to  a  certain  arbitrary  end,  but  one
who  by  his  birthright  was  constitutionally  gifted  with  a
certain  quality  which  was  favourable  to  the  matter.  The
presence  of  a  natural  magician  at  the  experiments  of
a  master  by  art  was  deemed  always  a  desirable  conjunc-
tion. Now,  the  natural  magician  appears  to  have  been
identical  with  the  modern  medium,  and  the  term  of  the
mystics  in  all  respects  is  preferable  to  the  slipshod  desig-
nation which  has  been  commonized  past  all  endurance
by  the  impostures  and  stupidities  of  the  past  forty
years.

When  a  given  number  of  persons  undertake,  for  what
purpose  soever,  an  investigation  of  the  phenomena  of
Spiritualism,  they  commonly  go  in  search  of  the  assist-
ance of  what  is  called  a  medium.  In  actual  significance
the  name  is  identical  with  the  ecclesiastical  term  Ponti-
fex  ;  he  is  the  bridge  of  communication,  the  intermediary
between  the  seen  and  the  unseen  worlds ;  it  is  through
him  that  the  other  side  of  life  effects  manifestation  to
this,  and  if  there  be  truth  in  the  claims  of  Spiritualism,
his,  most  assuredly,  is  an  exalted  and  holy  vocation,
which  should  be  prized  before  life  itself  by  the  possessor,

256  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

which  should  be  never  prostituted,  but  alone  exercised
for  the  highest  ends.  But  the  Pontifex  and  the  priest
of  the  past  too  frequently  abused  their  office,  and  we
must  not  be  astonished  when  Ave  hear  that  the  power  of
this  new  priesthood  has  gradually  been  converted  into
one  of  the  crafts  of  life,  that  it  is  daily  bought  and  sold,
that  it  has  been  made  sul)servient  to  the  most  sordid  in-
terest, that  every  element  of  consecration  has  been  suc-
cessively stripped  away  from  it,  that  it  has  been  used
for  abetting  imposture  of  almost  every  class,  and  that  it
has  become  so  debased  in  the  hands  of  its  possessors  that
the  genuine  gift  can  often  be  scarcely  distinguished  from
the  fraudulent  impositions  of  mere  mountebanks.

If  we  search  through  the  large  literature  of  Spirit-
ualism for  some  account  of  the  nature  and  cjualities  of
mediumship,  we  find  little  that  is  satisfactory.  There
are  many  plausible  theories ;  there  is  much  skilful  specu-
lation, there  is  a  quantity  of  untutored  guessing,  but
there  is  nowhere  solid  knowledge.  Nor  is  the  reason
far  to  seek.  Where  is  the  scientist  who  can  explain  to
us  why  mustard  is  hot  or  sugar  sweet  ?  Beyond  the
surface  of  phenomena  there  is  no  penetration  possible  ;
we  must  be  content  to  observe  and  record ;  to  the  ulti-
mate reason  of  things  we  have  no  way  of  attainment.
"  What  is  the  state  of  mediumship  ?  What  is  the
peculiarity  of  organisation,  and  how  acquired  ? "  asks  one
writer  who  himself  claims  to  be  in  possession  of  one  of
its  gifts.  "It  would  be  difficult  to  tell  what  it  is.  It  is
often,  and  usually  is,  possessed  at  birth;  or  may  be
slowly  or  suddenly  acquired.  The  spirit  seems  to  have
less  hold  upon  the  body,  and  to  be  more  sensitive  for
that  reason."  The  explanation  is  poor  enough ;  but  it  is
useful  in  its  evidence  for  one  undoubted  fact,  that  the
medium  is  as  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  his  strange
power  as  is  the  most  profound  philosophical  mind  of  the
nature  of  its  own  consciousness.  We  must  be  content
with  the  simple  affirmation  that  there  are  certain
persons  who,  by  their  constitution,  are  endowed  with
a  force  Avhich  transcends  radical  investigation,  but  by
which  force  it  seems  possible  for  spirits  to  become  the
temporary  associates  of  embodied  man,  to  manifest  be-

MODERN  SPIRITUALIiSM.  257

fore  him  in  an  assumed  human  shape,  and  to  perform
many  acts,  which,  on  the  faith  of  existing  evidence,  are
of  the  kind  which  Ave  term  supernatural.  The  same
want  of  unanimity  on  one  point  which  we  have  noticed
in  the  Avi^itings  of  the  mystics  abounds  in  the  literature
of  Spiritualism.  Mediumship,  on  the  one  hand,  is  de-
clared to  be  the  gift  of  a  few  alone  ;  by  others  it  is
considered  possible  to  all.  True  j^bilosophic  prudence
would  have  withheld  both  statements.  While  it  is  difii-
cidt  to  suppose  that  one  section  of  humanity  is  in  the
enjoyment  of  qualities  which  are  foreign  altogether  to
the  constitution  of  the  rest,  while  it  therefore  seems
reasonable  to  assume  that  the  qualities  in  question  are
latent  in  all  mankind,  it  is  rash  to  affirm  that  they  can
be  developed  in  all.  Analogy  and  experience  alike  con-
tradict the  statement.  It  seems,  at  the  same  time,  in  all
respects  probable  that  the  power,  whatever  it  may  be,  is
not  only  inherent,  but  would  admit  of  development  in  a
large  number  of  persons  who,  by  their  circumstances,
are  precluded  from  any  attempt  at  its  exercise,  and  even
from  all  knowledge  on  the  point.  The  faculty  is  com-
monly connected  by  its  students  with  a  passive  or  nega-
tive temperament.  Like  magic  power,  it  may  be  induced,
it  is  said,  by  narcotics,  by  stimulants,  or  by  long  fasts
and  \agils,  by  prostration  of  body,  and  by  an  advanced
degi^ee  of  mental  excitement ;  but  its  natural  and  reliable
development  is  by  sitting  Avith  investigators  in  spiritual
circles,  more  especially  in  the  presence  of  an  already
developed  medium.

The  rules  for  the  formation  of  a  circle,  and  the
conduct  of  research,  have  been  given  by  a  number  of
authorities ;  they  have  little  substantial  difference ;  the
most  simple,  complete,  and  practical  is  perhaps  that
which  has  been  A^ddely  circulated,  under  the  initials
M.A.  (Oxon.),  by  Mr.  Stainton  Moses,  who  is  well  known
as  a  leader  of  psychic  research  in  England,  and  as  a
medium  for  manifestations  of  a  very  advanced  kind.
The  directions  are,  of  course,  written  from  the  stand-
point of  one  whose  experience  has  abundantly  verified
the  genuineness  of  all  classes  of  spiritual  phenomena,  and
they   are   designed   for   the   instruction   of   those   who

R

258  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

intend  to  conduct  an  inquiry  by  mecins  of  private  sittings
on  the  part  of  a  few  earnest  persons  who  can  thoroughly
rely  on  one  another.  It  is  thus,  we  are  told,  that  the
bulk  of  spiritualists  have  arrived  at  their  convictions.

The  circle  of  investigators  should  consist  of  from  four
to  eight  persons,  and  they  should  be  divided  as  equally
as  may  be  into  positive  and  negative  temperaments,  of
which  the  latter  are  more  commonly  to  be  found  among
the  female  sex.     It  is  to  be  understood  that  the  specific
object  in  the  minds  of  all  members  of  the  circle  is  to
enter  into  communication  with  the  intelligences  of  the
unseen  world.     The  possibility  of  such  a  communication
involves    three    things    in   addition    to   the  actual   and
conscious  existence  of  unseen  intelligence.     There  is  first
the  proximity  of  an  invisible  world  of  thinking  beings,
mentally  conditioned  in  much  the  same  way  as  ourselves,
but   the   nature   of   this  proximity  should  not  be  too
closely  connected  with  conceptions  of  space  and  locality.
Secondly,  there  is  the  willingness  on  the  part  of  unseen
intelligence  to  respond  to  attempts  at  communication  on
the  part  of  embodied  humanity.     Thirdly,   the   possi-
bility which  we  are  considering  supposes  the  existence
of  a  poAver  which  if  inherent  can  be  exercised,  and  if
extrinsic  can  be  adajDted  to  establish  the  communication
desired.     If  we  suppose  these  conditions  to  exist,  the
next  thing  to  be  determined  is  a  mode  of  communication,
and  where  one  side  at  least  is  invisible  to  the  other,  it
must  obviously  take  the  form  of  signals.     Now  the  code
of  signals  which  is  commonly  made  use  of  requires  no
other    materials    than    an    ordinary   table,    preferably
circular  in  shape  ;  round  this  the  investigators  take  their
seats,  positive  and  negative  temperaments  alternately,
in  comfortable  and  unconstrained  positions,  the  palms  of
the  hands  being  placed  flat  upon  the  uncovered  upper
surface  of  the  table.     The  rest  of  the  directions  may  be
given  most  fittingly  in  the  words  of  Mr  Stainton  Moses.
"Do  not  concentrate   attention   too    fixedly    on    the
expected  manifestation.     Engage   in   cheerful,  but  not
frivolous,  conversation.      Avoid  dispute   or   argument.
"  Scepticism  has  no  deterrent  effect,  but  a  bitter  spirit  of
opposition  in  a  person  of  determined  will  may  totally

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  259

stop  or  decidedly  impede  manifestations.  If  conversa-
tion flag,  music  is  a  great  help,  if  it  be  agreeable  to  all,
and  not  of  a  Idnd  to  irritate  the  sensitive  ear.  Patience
is  essential,  and  it  may  be  necessary  to  meet  ten  or
twelve  times  at  short  intervals,  before  anything  occurs.
If  after  such  a  trial  you  still  fail,  form  a  fresh  circle.
Guess  at  the  reason  of  your  failure,  eliminate  the  in-
harmonious elements,  and  introduce  others.  An  hour
should  be  the  limit  of  an  unsuccessful  seance.

"  The  first  indications  of  success  usually  are  a  cold
breeze  passing  over  the  hands,  "vvith  involuntary  tmtch-
ings  of  the  hands  and  arms  of  some  of  the  sitters,  and  a
sensation  of  throbbing  in  the  table.  These  indications,
at  first  so  slight  as  to  cause  doubt  of  their  reality,  will
usually  develop  with  more  or  less  rapidity.

"  If  the  table  moves,  let  your  pressure  be  so  gentle  on
its  surface  that  you  are  sure  you  are  not  aiding  its
motions.  After  some  time  you  will  j^robably  find  that
the  movement  will  continue  if  your  hands  are  held  over,
but  not  in  contact  A^dth  it.  Do  not,  however,  try  this
until  the  movement  is  assured,  and  be  in  no  hurry  to
get  messages.

"  When  you  think  that  the  time  has  come,  let  some
one  take  command  of  the  circle  and  act  as  spokesman.
Explain  to  the  unseen  Intelligence  that  an  agreed
code  of  signals  is  desirable,  and  ask  that  a  tilt  may
be  given  as  the  alphabet  is  slowly  repeated  at  the
several  letters  which  form  the  word  that  the  Intelli-
gence mshes  to  spell.  It  is  convenient  to  use  a  single
tilt  for  No,  three  for  Yes,  and  two  to  express  doubt  or
uncertainty.

"  When  a  satisfactory  communication  has  been  estab-
lished, ask  if  you  are  rightly  placed,  and  if  not,  what
order  you  should  take.  After  this,  ask  who  the  Intelli-
gence purports  to  be,  which  of  the  company  is  the
medium,  and  such  relevant  questions.  If  confusion
occurs,  ascribe  it  to  the  difficulty  that  exists  in  directing
the  movements  at  first  with  exactitude.  Patience  will
remedy  this,  if  there  be  a  real  desire  on  the  part  of  the
Intelligence  to  speak  with  you.  If  you  only  satisfy
yourself   at   first   that  it  is  possil)le  to  speak  with  an

260  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Intelligence  separate  from  that  of  any  person  present,
you  will  have  gained  much.

"  The  signals  may  take  the  form  of  raps.  If  so,  use
the  same  code  of  signals,  and  ask  as  the  raps  become
clear  that  they  may  be  made  on  the  table,  or  in  a  part
of  the  room  where  they  are  demonstrably  not  produced
by  any  natural  means,  but  avoid  any  vexatious  imposi-
tion of  restrictions  on  free  communication.  Let  the
Intelligence  use  its  own  means ;  if  the  attempt  to  com-
municate deserves  yom^  attention,  it  probably  has  some-
thing to  say  to  you,  and  will  resent  being  hampered
by  useless  interference.  It  rests  greatly  with  the  sitters
to  make  the  manifestations  elevating  or  frivolous,  and
even  tricky."

However  absolute  and  however  well-grounded  may
be  the  confidence  of  a  circle  in  all  its  members  individu-
ally, the  certainty  derived  from  manifestations  which
do  not  obviously  transcend  the  capabilities  of  the  sitters,
supposing  bad  faith  in  any  of  them,  is  at  its  best  of  a
moral  kind,  and  it  is  still  founded  in  faith,  that  is,  faith
in  the  honesty  of  the  circle.  Now  such  a  certainty  is
not  scientific  in  character,  and  the  energies  of  investiga-
tion should  be  directed  to  establish  experiments  upon
the  most  satisfactory  possible  basis.  AVhen  it  has  been
once  fairly  demonstrated  that  unmistakable  raps  are  being
produced  in  a  fair  light,  and  at  a  reasonable  distance
from  the  sitters,  we  shall  have  entered  the  region  of
positive  knowledge  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  pheno-
mena called  spiritual ;  we  shall  have  proved  to  oui^selves
the  existence  of  a  force  which  is  still  unknown  to  physi-
cal science,  and  possesses  the  qualities  of  intelligence.
It  will  give  pertinent  answers  to  questions,  and  occasion-
ally tests  which  will  identify  it  mth  the  mind  of  some
person  whom  we  know  to  have  once  lived  in  a  human
body  upon  this  earth,  and  who  is  now  dead  to  us.  In
other  cases,  it  will  impart  information  which,  though
not  a  test  of  identity,  is  of  a  kind  that  is  unknown  to
those  present,  and  is  verified  by  subsequent  research.
In  this  way,  by  successive  steps,  the  circle  is  led  to  the
recognition  of  an  independent  understanding  in  another
form  of  subsistence,  and  through  this  one  rent  in  the

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  261

veil,  the  possibilities  of  the  spiritual  universe  begin
to  unfold  before  their  eyes.  In  the  majority  of  cases,
the  progress  of  the  private  circle  is,  we  believe,  arrested
here.  But  should  it  prove  that  one  of  the  company
is  j)ossessed  of  the  qualities  of  mediumship  in  an  ad-
vanced degree,  perseverance  ^Wll  be  ultimately  rewarded
by  more  astounding  phenomena.  The  course  of  their
develojDment  will  vary  in  every  case,  and  the  enumera-
tion which  follows  must  not  be  construed  as  the  actual
method  of  evolution,  but  merely  as  tabulating  the  chief
classes  of  manifestation,  of  which  instances  have  been
hitherto  recorded.

I.  Intensification  in  the  force  of  the  raps,  which  be-
come occasionally  so  powerful  as  to  destroy  the  objects
upon  which  they  are  directed.

II.  The  motion  of  inert  objects,  confined  in  the  initial
stages  to  articles  of  small  size  and  weight,  but  subse-
quently extended  to  the  transportation  of  things  which
no  human  being  could  raise  by  his  individual  efforts.

III.  The  levitation  of  human  beings,  in  most  cases  of
the  person  who  is  used  as  medium.

IV.  The  conveyance  of  small  articles  from  a  distance
and  through  closed  doors.

V.  In  rare  instances,  the  transportation  of  the  medium
from  a  distance  and  through  closed  doors.

YI.  Other  developments  in  the  exj^eriments  of  the
passage  of  matter  through  matter,  such  as  the  introduc-
tion of  a  coin  into  a  sealed  box,  placing  a  metal  ring
upon  the  ^^Tist  of  the  medium  when  his  hands  are  tightly
locked  in  the  grasp  of  other  sitters,  or  when  he  is
otherwise  secured.

YII.  The  transportation  of  fruit,  flowers,  fish,  and
small  animals  from  a  distance,  the  choice  of  species
resting  with  the  circle,  and  the  astonishing  nature  of  the
performance  being  sometimes  increased  by  the  selection
of  things  which  are  out  of  season  or  peculiar  to  distant
countries.

VIII.  Performances  on  musical  instruments,  usually
of  a  small  size,  such  as  the  Oxford  chimes,  and  occasionally
on  the  piano.

IX.  The  apparition  of  lights,  generally  phosphorescent

262  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

in  appearance,  and  sometimes  in  smell.  In  the  elemen-
tary stages  they  are  merely  luminous  points,  hut  as
the  power  and  the  correspondence  develop  large  stars,
emblematic  characters,  and  radiant  spheres,  veined  with
blood-red,  have  been  known  to  manifest.  These,  indeed,
may  l)e  reckoned  among  the  most  frequent  and  attrac-
tive of  phenomenal  exhibitions  at  a  stance,  and,  as  may
be  supposed,  they  increase  with  the  diminution  of
light.

X.  The  appearance  of  living  human  hands,  other  than
those  of  the  circle ;  they  are  seen  to  move  objects,  they
grasp  the  hands  of  the  sitters,  pick  at  their  garments,
and  in  many  ways  give  evidence  of  being  controlled  by
an  intelligence  like  our  own.

XI.  The  entrancement  of  the  medium,  which  is
apparently  a  magnetic  state  induced  by  volition  from
the  unseen.  Usually  it  is  a  condition  of  the  more  ad-
vanced phenomena.  One  of  its  most  common  conse-
qences  is  a  temporary  possession  of  the  human  organism
by  a  foreign  intelligence,  the  intelligence  of  the  medium
for  the  time  being  absent  or  in  abej^ance.  High  moral
teaching  is  occasionally  given  in  this  state,  but  it  is  one
of  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  which  is  most  easily
simulated  by  impostors,  and  its  evidential  value  is  there-
fore small.  So  far  as  it  can  be  considered  genuine,  it
seems  one  of  the  states  of  mediumship  which  can  be
most  easily  induced,  and  those  who  have  once  given
themselves  up  to  it  appear  to  be  able  to  command  it  at
any  time,  and  under  the  most  varied  and  the  least
favourable  circumstances.

XII.  The  spirit  voice  speaking  through  the  medium
is  called  Trance  Speaking.  Kindred  to  this,  and,  under
proper  conditions,  far  more  valuable  as  evidence,  is  the
Direct  Voice,  which  is  heard  in  all  parts  of  the  room,  and
under  circumstances  which  preclude  the  supposition  of
ventriloquism.  During  such  manifestations  the  medium
is  generally  in  a  state  resembling  coma,  and  it  is  supposed
that  his  organs  are  to  some  extent  utilised  in  the  pro-
duction of  the  direct  voice.

XIII.  A  frequent  phenomenon  of  the  spiritual  trance
is   unconscious   impersonation   by  the   medium,   acting

MODERN  SriRITUALISM.  263

under  the  influence  of  the  unseen.  In  this  state  the
subject  is  made  to  pose  as  a  Form  Manifestation  of  the
sjDirits,  and  is  even  draped  in  materials  which  are  said
to  be  transported  for  the  purpose  by  the  controlling-
Intelligence.  As  these  phenomena  are  peculiarly  adapted
to  cloak  the  impostures  of  professional  mediums,  and  as
at  best  they  are  a  deceptive  device  on  the  part  of  the
spirits  themselves,  they  should  not  be  encouraged  by  any
intelligent  circle  of  incpiiry.

XIY.  The  magnum  opus  of  the  spiritual  stance  is  the
appearance  of  human  figiures  which  are  demonstrably
not  those  of  any  person  present  in  the  room,  and  which
cannot  have  been  introduced  into  the  room  for  the
furtherance  of  any  imposition.  Commonly  this  occurs
when  the  medium  is  profoundly  entranced,  and  total
darkness  seems  to  be  the  best  condition.  For  the  latter
reason,  what  is  called  the  stance  for  materialisation  is
unsatisfactory  from  an  eAddential  standpoint.  But  we
are  assured  by  a  number  of  investigators  whose  good
faith  upon  any  other  subject  would  pass  without  chal-
lenging, that  it  is  possible  to  obtain  the  materialisation
of  spiritual  forms  in  the  face  of  open  day,  even  in  the
garden,  in  the  woods  and  forests,  and  certainly  in  a
subdued  light  which  shall  be  sufficient  for  all  purposes
of  investigation.  When  the  seance  is  held  with  shut
and  bolted  doors,  in  a  room  where  there  can  have  been
no  previous  preparation,  where  there  are  no  secret  en-
trances, if  the  few  persons  gathered  together  have  more
than  themselves  in  the  midst  of  them,  they  have  reached
the  furthest  point  to  which  phenomenal  Spiritualism  can
claim  at  present  to  carry  them,  and  have  demonstrated
the  actuality  of  what  has  been  the  dream  and  wonder
of  all  the  ages.  The  figures  manifested  under  favour-
able circumstances  appear  in  rapid  succession  differing
in  height  and  size,  in  vesture  and  appearance,  occa-
sionally exceeding  the  normal  stature  of  humanity,
while  others  are  small  children.  The  manifestation  is
sometimes  so  slight  as  to  be  almost  of  the  tenuity  of
vapour,  sometimes  it  is  so  solid  and  poi'fect  that  it  can
remain  for  a  considerable  period  visible  and  tangible  to
all,   speaking,  walking,  emT)racing  those  about  it.     On

264  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

rare  occasions  more  than  one  of  these  mysterious  beings
appears  at  the  same  time,  one  forming  out  of  the  side
of  the  medium,  while  another  is  developed  out  of  the
apparition  thus  obtained.  The  first  detected  presence
of  materialisation  is  usually  a  little  cloud  or  column  of
luminous  vapour  from  which  a  figure  is  gradually  built
up.  Those  who  desire  a  practical  acquaintance  ^vith  this
most  important  form  of  mecliumship  will  do  well  to  con-
sult the  literature  which  exists  on  the  subject  before
attempting  experiment.

XV.  Automatic  Writing  is  one  of  the  most  common
phenomena  of  a  stance,  and  it  may  be  distinguished
broadly  into  two  classes.  First,  there  is  involuntary  Avrit-
ing  obtained  in  the  normal  state  either  by  holding  a  pen
lightly  and  waiting  for  the  hand  to  be  controlled,  or  by
the  use  of  the  little  instrument  called  a  Planchette,  which
is  so  universally  known  as  to  require  no  description.
Automatic  communications  of  the  same  kind  are  also
obtained  when  the  medium  is  in  an  entranced  state.  In
either  case,  simulation  is  so  easy,  and  the  motives  which
actuate  imposture  are  so  numerous  and  so  untraceable
that  no  value  can  be  considered  as  attaching  to  either
class  unless  information  is  aff'orded  by  the  controlling
agent,  which  is  obviously  beyond  the  knowledge  of  the
automatic  writer,  or  in  a  language  which  is  demonstrably
unknown  to  him.

XVI.  Spirit-writing  is  not  confined  to  the  automatic
type,  and  a  medium  for  Direct  AYriting  is  justly  con-
sidered the  most  valuable  of  all  his  genus,  as  he  is  also
the  most  uncommon.  The  phenomena  in  connection
■with  this  group  of  manifestations  are  familiar  to  the
majority  of  persons  by  report  if  not  by  experience.
In  the  test  cases  which  are  cited  on  the  subject,  a  frag-
ment of  chalk  or  pencil  is  placed  within  a  folding  slate,
which  is  locked,  corded,  and  sealed.  Intelligent  obser-
vers take  care  to  obtain  one  for  themselves,  and  see  that
it  does  not  pass  out  of  their  possession.  It  is  placed  on
a  table  in  front  of  the  medium,  and  the  most  that  he  is
permitted  to  do  is  to  place  one  of  his  hands  upon  it  while
it  is  still  being  held  by  its  owner.  Investigators  in-
form us  that,  despite  these  and  still  more  elaborate  pre-

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  265

cautions,  the}^  have  obtained  writing  ^Adthin  the  locked
slate  :  that  the  chalk  which  they  provided  has  been
sensibly  worn  down  by  the  process ;  that  the  communi-
cation has  been  a  pertinent  answer  to  a  question  asked
mentally  or  ^n^itten  previously  at  their  own  homes  upon
one  of  the  inner  sui'faces  of  the  slate ;  that  it  embodies
information  which  could  not  have  been  kno^^Ti  to  the
medium,  which  was  perhaps  unknowai  to  themselves  at
the  time,  but  which  they  have  successfully  verified  after-
wards. It  should  be  added  that  Direct  Writing  is  not
confined  to  the  methods  of  the  locked  slate.  Instances
are  recorded  of  a  pencil  being  placed  in  a  full  light  upon
a  sheet  of  paper,  which  pencil,  under  the  eyes  of  the
observers,  has  been  raised  by  invisible  agency,  has
assumed  the  perpendicular  position  which  it  would  in
an  ordinary  hand,  and  has  AAT:'itten  intelligible  messages.
XVII.  The  last  and  most  rarely  successful  of  all  the
experiments  we  have  been  enumerating  is  Spirit  Photo-
graphy, which  should  not  be  confused  Avith  the  extremely
simple  process  of  photographing  the  materialised  form  of
a  spirit.  The  experiment  consists  in  obtaining  upon  the
exposed  plate  of  a  camera  the  impression  of  a  form
which,  by  reason  of  its  extreme  tenuity,  is  invisible  to
the  ordinary  eye.  The  result,  when  successful,  is  usually
the  apparition  of  a  ghostly  human  figure.  The  presence
of  a  medium  is  indispensable,  and  the  best  method  of
procedure  is  to  photograph  such  a  person  by  the  ordi-
nary means,  and  trust  to  the  circumstances  favouring  the
development  of  a  spirit  from  within  the  sphere  of  his
magnetic  atmosphere.  The  introduction  of  the  dry-plate
process  has  greatly  favoured  imposture  in  these  experi-
ments, and  the  facilities  for  fraud,  combined  with  the
complete  uncertainty  of  every  genuine  method,  make
this  featm^e  of  the  spiritual  seance  the  most  laborious
and  unsatisfactory  of  all.  It  is  well,  however,  to  bear  in
mind  that  when  a  special  figure  is  obtained  in  front  of
the  sitter  who  is  photographed,  that  this  result  is  en-
tirely beyond  the  skill  of  the  known  processes  of  photo-
graphic art.  When  a  j^late  has  been  previously  tam-
pered with,  the  shadowy  figure  which  is  intended  to
represent  the  ghost  will  ajipear  behind  or  to  one  side,

-QQ  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

and  will  be  generally  out  of  all  relationship  with  the
person  whose  portrait  is  subsequently  taken  upon  the
same  plate.  The  literature  of  Spirit  Photography  is
exceedingly  scanty,  but  portraits  of  persons  whose  hands
are  held  or  who  are  embraced  by  the  spectral  arms  of
some  ghostly  visitant  are  fairly  numerous,  and  they  seem
to  defy  explanation  upon  any  fraudulent  hypothesis.

Such  are  the  most  important  branches  of  the  pheno-
mena termed  spiritual.  AVe  do  not  undertake  to  explain
them,  nor  to  enter  into  a  philosophical  defence  of  their
possibility.  They  are  concerned  with  matters  which  are
altogether  outside  the  legitimate  sphere  of  belief,  and
the  evidence  which  exists  in  their  favour  should  only  be
considered  as  a  warrant  for  personal  inquirj^  AVe  have
j^laced  in  the  hands  of  the  student  an  intelligible  synop-
sis of  the  alleged  facts,  and  a  sketch  of  the  methods  of
experiment.  If  the  investigations  of  a  private  circle
are  arrested  at  an  early  stage  for  w^ant  of  the  neces-
sary power,  recourse  must  be  had  to  a  professional
medium,  when  other  resources  have  failed.  A  profes-
sional medium  is  a  person  who  claims  to  possess  the  re-
quired qualities  in  an  advanced  degree,  and  who  turns
them  to  his  pecuniary  profit.  As  the  exercise  of  such  gifts
is  usually  very  depleting,  and  as  those  who  devote  them-
selves to  it  have,  like  others,  their  bread  to  earn,  it  is
theoretically  in  all  resjDects  right  and  reasonable  that
they  should  receive  adec[uate  compensation ;  but  the
practice  has  encoiKagecl  imposture  of  every  kind.  The
anxiety  to  give  every  investigator  his  money's  value,  lest
he  should  depart  unsatisfied  and  the  trade  should  cease
to  be  lucrative,  has  prompted  the  genuine  medium  to
supplement  a  power,  which  is  not  at  his  command,  by  the
artifices  of  the  conjuror ;  moreover,  the  general  interest
in  the  subject  has  attracted  impostors  into  the  profession
who  have  never  possessed  the  gifts.  Every  precaution
should  therefore  be  taken  by  investigators  to  secure
themselves  against  fraud  when  it  becomes  necessary  to
engage  the  services  of  a  public  medium.  They  should
especially  beware  of  those  who  decline  to  sit  under
reasonable  test  conditions.

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM.  267

It  is  vain  to  attempt,  in  the  space  at  our  disposal,  a
student's  guide  to  the  vast  literature  of  Spiritualism.
For  convincing  testimony  on  the  part  of  men  of  science,
reference  may  be  made  to  Alfred  Russell  Wallace's
"Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism;"  to  Crooke's
celebrated  "  Researches  into  the  Phenomena  called
Spiritual ; "  and  to  Zollner's  "  Transcendental  Physics."
For  the  experiences  and  testimony  of  an  advanced
medium,  who  is  also  an  advanced  thinker,  and  a  man
of  high  cultm^e,  the  reader  should  have  recourse  to  the
numerous  published  works  of  the  Rev.  Stainton-Moses
(M.A.  Oxon.).  For  the  history  of  the  movement,  there
is  "Modern  American  Spiritualism,"  and  "Nineteenth
Centuiy  Miracles,"  both  by  Mrs.  Emma  Hardinge-
Britten.  In  inspirational  writing  there  are  the  works
of  Andrew  Jackson  Davis,  who  is  the  Jacob  Bohme  of
Spiritualism.

Spiritualism  is  the  only  branch  of  the  occult  sciences
which  has  obtained  the  popularity  implied  by  the  issue
of  weekly  newspapers.  The  best  of  these  is  undoubt-
edly Light,  and  the  perusal  of  this  journal  will  keep  the
intending  student  au  courant  Avith  the  progress  of  the
movement  throughout  the  Avorld.

THEOSOPHY.

HOWEVER  apparently  at  variance,  magicians  and
alchemists  were  agreed  on  one  point,  that  they
received  their  knowledge  by  tradition.  What,
then,  was  this  tradition,  and  whence  was  it  derived  ?
Nominally,  in  the  case  of  magicians,  it  was  referred  to
Solomon  and  the  Kabbalah.  But  it  is  clear  that  the
mysticism  of  the  AVest  had  its  complement  in  Oriental
mysticism ;  that  both  had  strong  mutual  affinities  ;  and
that  Sufis,  Brahmans,  and  Buddhists  owed  nothing  to
the  Jews  or  their  wisdom.  Mysticism  antedated  the
Kabbalah,  and  there  was  magic  before  Solomon.  The
appeal  to  the  most  wise  of  mankind  was  very  evidently
a  device ;  the  Kabbalah  was  a  bigger  puzzle  than  the
transcendentalism  which  was  supposed  to  be  derived
from  it.  What,  again,  was  the  tradition,  and  whence
derived?  The  jDroblem  was  gTappled  with  by  many
writers.  Some,  like  the  author  of  "A  Suggestive  In-
quiry into  the  Hermetic  Mystery,"  believed  that  they
had  attained  a  solution,  and  were  alarmed  at  their  mag-
nificent discovery.  Few,  however,  reached  any  settled
light  or  permanent  satisfaction.  But  what  may  be
called  a  partial  revelation  on  this  subject  claims  to  have
appeared  within  a  comparatively  very  recent  period.  It
reduces  the  pretensions  of  the  Western  mystics  within
measurable  dimensions  ;  while  it  affirms  the  solidity  of
their  psychic  knowledge,  it  defines  its  limitations,  and
it  claims  to  be  in  possession  of  the  two  keys — philo-
sophical and  practical — which  give  entrance  into  the
secluded  sanctuary  of  universal  mysticism.  The  keys
have  been  obtained  from  the  East,  to  which  in  things
psychic,  as  in  things  physical,  we  are  told  that  we  must
turn  for  light.  Ex  oriente  Lux.  There  it  bids  us  gaze
upward  and  sec,  for  another  morning  has  broken.     The

270  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

herald    of    which    we    have    been    sj^eaking    is    called
Theosophy.

To  all  Avho  are  acquainted  with  the  literature  of  Western
mysticism,  the  term  Theosophy  is  familiar  in  various
ways.  We  find  it  in  magical  rituals  and  in  the  writings
of  Jacob  Bohme.  It  Avas  used  in  the  seventeenth
century  to  distinguish  the  divine  wisdom  of  magus  and
kabbalist  from  the  theology  of  the  schools, — a  distinction
which  was  intentionally  invidious,  contrasting  the  actu-
alities of  experimental  research  into  the  hidden  mysteries
of  God,  man,  and  the  universe,  with  the  Avordy  specula-
tions of  scholastic  thought.  Concerned  with  facts  and
not  Avords,  the  Theosophy  of  the  mystics  Avas  deemed
to  be  another  and  higher  thing  than  any  current  theology
of  the  time.  Noav,  that  elaborate  system  of  transcen-
dental life  and  doctrine,  that  master-key  to  the  mysteries
of  arcane  science  and  philosophy,  Avhich,  under  the  old
name  of  Theosophy,  has  become  so  extensively  diffused,
has  been  so  much  talked  of,  and  in  a  certain  sense  has
been  in  vogue  at  this  day,  attaches  fundamentally  much
the  same  significance  to  the  same  Avord.  Modern  Theo-
sophy is  the  latest  and  most  extreme  development  of
supernatm^alism,  and  alike  in  the  character  of  its  preten-
sions and  in  the  intellectual  qualifications  of  its  pro-
moters, as  Avell  as  in  the  Avork  Avhich  it  has  accom-
plished, it  deserves  very  serious  investigation  at  the
hands  of  the  mystic  student ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  ignore
it  in  any  appreciation  of  current  psychological  opinion.
It  is  the  legitimate  daughter  of  universal  mysticism,  and,
in  a  certain  manner,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  mystic
synthesis.  It  absorbs  the  transcendentalism  of  the  West,
AA^hile  it  is  the  mouthpiece  of  Eastern  magic.  In  it  the
Oriental  arcane  wisdom  of  the  far  jDast  may  be  said  to
have  renewed  its  youth.  In  principles,  in  comprehen-
siveness, in  tolerance,  it  claims  the  mark  of  catholicity,
and  its  present  diffusion  is  possibly  to  be  regarded  as
only  a  foreshadoAving  and  promise  of  a  geographical
universality  Avhich  is  yet  to  come.

Could  Spiritualism  be  viewed  as,  in  its  origin  and
development,  historically  a  parallel  to  Christianity,
Theosophy  would  be  the  gnosticism  of  the  neAv  Evangel,

THEOSOPHY.  271

and  the  words  which  are  made  use  of  by  Gibbon  in
respect  of  that  singular  mysticism  may  be  equally
applied  to  this.  "It  comprised  the  most  polite,  the
most  learned,  and  the  most  wealthy  of  the  name."  But
though  persons  of  respectable  intelligence  have  believed
in  the  identity  of  primitive  Christianity  and  modern
Sjjiritualism,  the  affinity — historical  and  otherwise —
between  Theosophy  and  the  faith  of  the  gnosis  is  very
much  closer  than  any  that  can  be  legitimately  traced
upon  the  other  side.

It  is  beyond  the  limits  of  our  present  purpose  to
undertake  an  apology  for  any  special  system  of  doctrinal
mysticism,  new  or  old.  Here  we  are  simply  concerned
with  a  non-critical  statement  of  the  character  and  objects
of  TheosojDhy,  and,  with  this  fact  in  view,  no  expression
of  personal  adhesion  or  difference  should  on  any  pretence
be  admitted  in  a  short  elucidatory  paper.  It  is  a  subject
which  is  still  en  evidence,  it  has  not  yet  received  an
impartial  and  thorough  analysis,  and  its  promulgators
are  still  living.  For  these  reasons  an  abridged  epitome
of  an  unfinished  case  should  not  be  followed  by  an
attempt  to  forestall  a  verdict.  Yet,  as  in  other  matters
we  have  ventured  to  direct  the  student,  so  in  this  it
seems  legitimate  to  say  that  he  will  find  in  Theosophy
an  exalted  form  of  transcendental  mysticism  which  will
not  only  repay  investigation,  but  which,  as  one  of  the
psychological  facts  of  the  day,  he  will  find  himself  forced
to  investigate  very  early  in  his  philosophical  incjuiry.
For  the  rest,  we  shall,  in  the  main,  have  recourse  to  the
unadapted  opinions  of  its  best  exponents  ;  we  shall  make
no  reference  to  existing  controversies,  or  existing  divi-
sions, nor  indeed  to  any  matters  of  a  merely  historical
or  personal  character.  There  will  be,  morover,  little
need  to  distinguish  between  Theosophy  as  it  actually  is
and  as  it  appears  under  the  gloss  of  misrepresentation,
or  through  the  medium  of  puljlic  ignorance.  Its  un-
adorned presentation  will  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  the
caricatures  of  the  moment.  It  will  be  well,  nevertheless,
to  lay  down  at  the  outset  that  Theosophy  is  not  to
be  regarded  as  a  refined  form  of  Spiritualism,  though
Spiritualism  has  undoubtedly  alone  made  it  possible  to

272  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

promulgate  Theosophy,  and  though  Theosophy,  as  wouhl
naturally    follow,    admits    broadly    the    facts    of    the
Spiritist.     If  we  are  to  regard  it  from  the  standpoint
of  its  promulgators,  we  shoidd  do  ill  to  consider  that  it
is  associated  integrally  with  the  science  of  the  circle  as
with  an  originating  cause  of  its  existence,  for  Theosophy,
from  that  standpoint,  is  anterior  to  the  historical  religions.
Nor  does  it  differ  from  modern  Spiritualism  simply  by
the  proffering  of  an  alternative  hypothesis  to  account
for  the  existence  of  those  psychic  facts  which  are  equally
acknowledged  by  both.      Absolutely  speaking,  it  claims
to  be  a  comj^lete   spiritual  gnosis,  elaborated,  like   all
sciences,  very  slowly,  very  gradually,  with  much  pain,
with  much  suffering,  with  much  superhuman  persever-
ance, from  a  remote  period  of  antiquity,  and  now  offered
for  the  spiritual  illumination  of  the  Western  world  which
is  ripe  for  participation  in  the  arcane  knowledge  of  the
East.      On  this  view  the  psychic  facts  of  the  period  are
simply  the  indications  of  that  stage  of  spiritual  develop-
ment in  this  hemisphere  which  it  was  indispensable  that
our  race  should  reach  before  its  initiation  into  the  mysteries
of  an  absolute  divine  knowledge.      Further,  Theosophy
is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  modernized  form  of  Buddhism,
adapted  to  the  intelligence  of  the  nineteenth  century,
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  actually  a  reversion  to  the
primeval  fountain  of  Buddhist  doctrine,  though  it  has
been  very  much  identified  by  its  promulgators  with  that
dominant  religion    of    the   East ;    though   it   numbers
innumerable  Buddhists   among  its   foremost  disciples ;
and  though,  finally,  and  on   all  hands,  its  distinctive
name  has  become  almost  interchangeable  with  that  of
Esoteric  Buddhism.      With  the  underlying  principles  of
Buddhist    faith   and   teaching   it   is   undoubtedly   and
actually  to   be  identified,  but   Theosophy  recognises  a
common  foundation  for  all  religions,  and  thus  Esoteric
Buddhism   is   not   to   be   distinguished   from   Esoteric
Christianity,    nor   from   the    spirit  of   the   Zoroastrian
religion.      The  hidden  principles,  the  arcane  sense,  the
scientific  basis  of  each  do  in  fact  constitute  the  divine
wisdom  of  Theosophy.

From  what  has  been  already  said  it  is  equally  clear

THEOSOPHY.  273

that  Theosopli}^  is  not  a  new  religion,  though  the  term
has  been  frequently  applied  to  it.  The  common  founda-
tion of  all  theological  systems  can  be  a  novelty  only  in
the  sense  of  being  generally  or  hitherto  unknown.  But
should  its  claim  to  this  distinction  be  denied,  it  should
not  even  then  be  regarded  as  a  new  departure  in  doc-
trinal belief ;  it  is  rather  a  new  system  of  religious  inter-
pretation. It  teaches  nothing  that  is  actually  fresh  to  the
student  of  comparative  mythology,  but  it  regards  much
that  has  been  previously  taught  in  a  new  light,  and  from
a  new  standpoint.  Taking  the  much-perverted  term  re-
ligion in  its  real  sense,  Theosophy  is  certainly  a  religion,
for  it  professes  to  provide  its  followers  with  a  scientific
instrument  for  the  union  of  their  individual  being  with
the  universal  life  of  God.  The  instrument,  however,  is
not  new  ;  it  is  that  of  all  the  mystics,  though  it  claims  to
be  more  perfect  than  theirs.

Theosophy  at  the  same  time  must  not  be  regarded
as  a  harmonious  combination  of  many  mystic  systems.
We  have  said  that  it  is  a  mystic  synthesis,  but  it  con-
tains something  which  is  over  and  above  all  of  these,
and  that  again  is  the  essential  principle  which  is  behind
them  all,  and  which  for  want  of  a  more  distinctive  name
has  been  termed  by  Theosophists  the  Ancient  Wisdom
Religion,  a  term  which  the  discriminating  student  will  do
well  to  interpret  somewhat  broadly,  for,  as  the  Wisdom
Religion  is  the  radix  of  all  religions,  it  is  therefore  The-
osophy itself  from  the  standpoint  of  those  who  profess
it.  The  principles  of  this  religion  may,  to  some  extent,
be  recovered  from  the  discriminating  study  of  existing
faiths  and  creeds,  and  thus  Theosophy  is,  in  one  of  its
phases,  an  analysis  of  religious  belief.  To  such  analysis
a  considerable  proportion  of  independent  Theosophical
literature  is  devoted  at  the  present  day.

"The  system  of  thought  which  has  been  described
as  '  Esoteric  Buddhism,' "  says  Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett,  "  deals
with  a  highly  practical  matter — the  leading  conclusions
of  a  living  science  closely  associated  with  the  welfare  of
the  human  race  at  the  present  day —  in  Europe  as  well  as
in  Asia.  The  science  to  which  I  refer  is  Theosophy,
.  ,  .  and  that  science  is  closely  associated  in  one  of  its

S

274  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

aspects  with  the  study  of  the  essential  principles  of
religious  belief.  Theosophists  have  no  preconceived
attachment  to  one  presentation  or  form  of  religious
belief  rather  than  to  another.  They  are  in  pursuit  of
truth  pure  and  simple,  convinced  that  there  must  be  a
real  state  of  the  facts  in  regard  to  such  problems  as  the
origin  and  destiny  of  the  soul,  as  well  as  in  reference  to
the  chemical  affinities  of  the  elements  or  the  relations  of
heat  and  electricity.  And  they  find  that  the  comparison
of  various  religious  beliefs  will  often  enable  them  to  elim-
inate the  superficial  corruptions  of  each,  so  that  the  re-
sidual doctrines,  reduced  to  their  lowest  terms,  their
most  abstract  expression,  will  then  be  found  practically
identical,  even  when  the  first  glance  at  their  esoteric
aspects  seemed  to  reveal  great  discrepancies.  In  this  way
the  study  of  any  great  religion  in  its  esoteric  aspect  is  a
theosophical  undertaking."

A  theosophical  inquiry  into  the  laws  of  comparative
mythology  differs  from  an  ordinary  historical  investiga-
tion in  the  vitality  of  purpose  which  the  student  brings
with  him  into  the  field.  He  is  not  a  mere  observer ;  he
does  not  merely  collect,  sift,  and  marshal  the  facts  of
universal  religious  belief,  and  when  he  has  made  out  to
his  satisfaction  the  governing  principles  of  their  being,
when  he  has,  in  other  words,  contrived  some  theory
which  accounts  for  their  existence  to  his  personal  satis-
faction, he  does  not  consider  his  task  ended.  He  believes
in  the  existence  of  an  undying  spirit  in  man,  and  his
search  is  prompted  by  a  lively  desire  to  throw  light  upon
the  mysteries  of  the  spirit ;  it  is  therefore  not  dead  but
living,  and  the  principles  which  he  endeavours  to  dis-
cover are  intimately  associated  with  his  own  interior
evolution.

But  though  the  proper  study  of  comparative  mythology
may  result  in  much  light  to  the  student,  it  is  not  pre-
tended that  it  will  do  more  than  provide  him  with  a
very  partial  theosophical  illumination.  It  will  put  him
in  possession  of  the  cardinal  and  ultimate  principles  of
all  religious  belief.  If  he  would  test  the  truth  of  those
principles,  he  must  abandon  the  plane  of  history  and
enter  that  of  psychology.     The  science  of  comparative

THEOSOPHY.  275

religion  is  indeed  historical  psj^chology,  bnt  it  bears  the
same  relation  to  experimental  psychic  science  that  the
collation  of  alchemical  symbols  bears  to  the  practical
search  after  the  Stone  of  the  Philosophers,  and  experi-
mental psychology  is  a  research  into  the  activities  and
scope  of  the  interior  man  which  mnst  be  prosecuted  by
every  man  in  his  own  interior.  It  is  therefore  the
main  object  of  Theosophy  "to  push  our  knowledge  of
Nature's  laws  on  in  advance  of  the  finest  discoveries  of
modern  civilisation,  keeping  hand  in  hand  with  these,
but  ever  pressing  onward  into  the  region  of  conscious-
ness and  super-material  existence,  guided  by  the  light
already  in  the  world  ; — which  has  been  in  the  world
from  the  first  beginnings  of  that  union  between  divinity
and  matter  which  constitutes  the  sentient  universe."
To  distinguish  the  researches  of  Theosophy  from  those
of  unaided  mysticism  in  the  West,  it  is  necessary  to
point  out  that  the  light  already  in  the  world,  to  which
allusion  is  made  in  this  citation  from  Mr  Sinnett,  is
something  over  and  above  what  can  be  obtained  from
accessible  supernatural  history.  While  Theosophy  by
no  means  underrates  the  value  of  recorded  psychic  facts,
it  claims  to  be  in  possession  of  a  superior  source  of
knowledge — that  knowledge  out  of  which  were  begotten
the  radical  principles  of  the  mysterious  Wisdom  Eeligion,
which  has  been  perpetuated  through  all  the  ages,  which
has  been  extended  in  the  course  of  preservation,  which
has  at  this  day  its  living  custodians,  who  have  consented
to  its  partial  revelation,  and  from  whom  it  will  de^^end
on  ourselves  whether  we  shall  learn  more.

Before  we  attempt  the  presentation  of  such  knowledge
as,  it  is  affirmed,  has  been  thus  imparted,  we  must  speak
briefly  concerning  its  custodians,  and  give  some  explana-
tion of  the  medium  by  which  they  have  come  into
communication  with  the  Western  world.

The  existence  of  a  secret  and  psychological  body  of
knowledge  which  was  of  an  absolute  and  momentous
kind  has  been  affirmed  by  all  mystics,  and  £liphas  L6vi,
as  we  have  seen,  defines  magic  to  be  the  traditional
science  of  the  secrets  of  Nature  which  has  come  down
to  us  from  the  wise  men  of  old.     So  far,  however,  as  wq

27 G  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

lire  aware,  the  name  of  Wisdom  Eeligioii  was  first
applied  to  this  science  in  the  celebrated  volumes  of
"  Isis  Unveiled,"  published  in  America  in  1877,  and  writ-
ten in  English  by  a  Russian  lady,  Madame  Blavatsky.
The  existence  of  high  intelligences,  wearing  a  mortal
form,  and  actual  guardians  of  the  arcane  knowledge  at
this  hour,  was  more  recently  made  known  in  two  ec|ually
celebrated  books,  by  Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett,  "The  Occult
World "  and  "  Esoteric  Buddhism."  While  humanity
in  the  West  has  devoted  itself  almost  exclusively  to
physical  science,  and  has  made  the  progress  therein
with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  the  East  has  been  occu-
pied with  the  study  of  the  soul,  and  it  has  made  even
greater  progress.  The  pursuit  in  the  one  case  has
been  open  and  free  to  all  ;  in  the  other  it  has  been
secret,  more  slowly  accumulated,  and  shared  and  knoAvn
by  few.  But  "checked  and  examined  at  every  point,
verified  in  all  directions,  and  constantly  under  examina
tion,"  it  has  "  come  to  be  looked  on  by  its  custodians
as  constituting  the  absolute  truth  concerning  spiritual
things.  .  .  .  The  secret  knowledge  is  regarded  not  only
by  all  its  adherents,  but  by  vast  numbers  who  have
never  expected  to  know  more  of  it  than  that  such  a
doctrine  exists,  as  a  mine  of  entirely  trustworthy  know-
ledge." In  America,  in  Europe,  and  scattered  all  over
the  East,  there  are  said  to  be  individuals  and  associa-
tions who  have  entered  upon  the  path  of  attainment,
who  are  in  possession  of  more  or  less  knowledge  of
spiritual  mysteries,  and  who,  by  the  fact  of  their
attainment,  would  seem  to  be  more  or  less  in  corre-
spondence with  the  mundane  centre  of  illumination,  but
that  centre  is  in  the  far  East,  and  the  indicated  abode  of
the  gi^and  initiates  is  affirmed,  at  the  present  moment,
to  be  somewhere  in  the  highlands  of  Thibet.  They  are
not  Orientals  exclusively ;  all  distinctions  of  race  and
creed  are  abandoned  among  them  ;  they  are  unseen,
but  not  inactive ;  they  are  a  kind  of  guardian  spirits,
"  masters  of  philosophy  and  metaphysics,"  says  Colonel
Olcott,  "  who  benefit  mankind  without  their  hand  being
even  so  much  as  suspected."  They  constitute  the  "  rare
efflorescence "  of  many  generations  of  researchers  into

THEOSOPHY.  277

the  great  mysteries  of  the  universe.  They  have
transcended  the  regions  of  the  j^henomenal ;  they  have
got  behind  nature  ;  they  can  control  physical  as  well  as
spiritual  forces ;  they  command  the  elements ;  and  if
they  cannot  renew  youth,  they  can  at  least  preserve  the
life  of  their  own  bodies  beyond  the  normal  period,  and,
in  some  cases,  that  life  is  said  to  have  been  extended
over  several  centuries.  Their  science,  hoAvever,  is  not
limited  to  the  adaptation  or  conservation  of  energies ;
it  accjuaints  them  Avith  the  past  of  the  world's  history,
with  the  origin  of  the  universe  and  of  man,  with  the
revolutions  and  the  destinies  of  both,  and  it  informs
them  in  all  its  depths  and  heights  mth  the  mystery  of
the  interior  man,  and  with  the  infinite  hierarchies  of
extra-human  intelligence.  In  the  East  the  existence  of
such  beings  is  a  matter  of  popular  faith,  and  they  are
known  almost  inclifterently  as  Eahats,  Mahatmas,  and
Eishis.  They  are  identified  in  the  popular  mind  with
the  regnant  religions,  and,  whatever  their  position  in
regard  to  them,  we  are  assured  that  they  reverence  the
Lord  Buddha  "  as  the  greatest  among  adepts  of  the
occult  science."  His  religion  is  apparently  considered  to
be  most  in  accordance  with  the  arcane  wisdom,  and  the
perpetuity  of  his  incarnations  also  seems  to  be  regarded
as  a  literal  fact.

Practically  speaking,  all  our  knowledge,  directly  and
indirectly,  concerning  this  mysterious  brotherhood  of
adepts,  has  been  derived  to  us  through  the  Russian
lady  of  whom  we  have  already  made  mention.  She  Avas
their  "accredited  medium  of  communication  Avith  the
outer  AA^orld."  She  Avas  a  AA^oman  of  noble  birth,  the
AvicloAv  of  the  late  gOA^ernor  of  Erivan  ;  she  Avas  intimately
acquainted  AAdth  the  East,  and  for  the  greater  part  of  her
life  she  had  been  a  passionate  student  of  the  occult
sciences.  In  the  year  1874,  Madame  Blavatsky,  then
Avholly  unknoAvn  to  fame,  had  extended  her  AA'^anderings
to  America,  Avhere  she  Avas  Avitnessing  the  phenomena  of
Spiritualism.  It  Avas  then  and  there,  in  the  village  of
Chittenden,  Vermont,  that  she  and  her  future  partner
in  the  propaganda  of  the  theosophical  evangel  Avere  for
the  first  time  brought  into   communication  Avith   each

278  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

other.  "In  the  year  1874,"  says  Colonel  Henry  S.
Olcott,  "  Madame  Blavatsky  and  I  met.  I  had  been  a
student  of  practical  psychology  for  nearly  a  cjuarter  of
a  century.  From  boyhood  no  problem  had  interested
me  so  much  as  the  mystery  of  man,  and  I  had  been
seeking  for  light  upon  it  wherever  it  could  be  found.
To  understand  the  physical  man  I  had  read  something
of  anatomy,  physiology,  and  chemistry.  To  get  an
insight  into  the  nature  of  mind  and  thought,  I  had
read  the  various  authorities  of  orthodox  science,  and
practically  investigated  the  heterodox  branches  of  phren-
ology, physiognomy,  mesmerism,  and  psychometry.
...  In  the  year  above  mentioned,  I  was  investigating
a  most  startling  case  of  mediumship,  that  of  William
Eddy,  an  uneducated  farmer,  in  whose  house  were
nightly  ajDpearing,  and  often  talking,  the  alleged  spirits
of  dead  persons.  .  .  .  AVith  my  own  eyes  I  saw,  within
the  space  of  about  three  months,  some  five  hundred  of
these  apparitions,  under  circumstances  which,  to  my
mind,  excluded  the  possibility  of  trickery  or  fraud.  .  .  .
Madame  Blavatsky  and  I  met  at  this  farm-house,  and
the  similarity  of  our  tastes  for  mystical  research  led  to
an  intimate  acquaintance.  She  soon  proved  to  me
that,  in  comparison  with  the  chela  of  an  Indian
3fahatma,  the  authorities  I  had  been  accustomed  to  look
up  to,  knew  absolutely  nothing.  Little  by  little  she
opened  out  to  me  as  much  of  the  truth  as  my  experi-
ences had  fitted  me  to  grasp.  Step  by  step  I  was
forced  to  relinquish  illusory  beliefs,  cherished  for  twenty
years.  And  as  the  light  gradually  dawned  on  my  mincl,
my  reverence  for  the  unseen  teachers  Avho  had  instructed
her  greAv  apace.  At  the  same  time,  a  deep  and  insatiable
yearning  possessed  me  to  seek  their  society,  or,  at  least,
to  take  up  my  residence  in  a  land  which  their  presence
glorified,  and  incorj^orate  myself  with  a  people  whom
their  greatness  ennobled.  The  time  came  when  I  was
blessed  with  a  visit  from  one  of  these  Mahatmas  in  my
own  room  at  New  York — a  visit  from  him,  not  in  the
physical  body,  but  in  the  '  double,'  or  Mayavi-rupa.  .  .  .
His  conversation  sent  my  heart  at  one  leap  around  the
globe,  across  oceans  and  continents,  over  sea  and  land.

THEOSOPHY.  279

to  India,  and  from  that  moment  I  had  a  motive  to  live
for,  an  end  to  strive  after.  That  motive  was  to  gain  the
Aryan  wisdom  ;  that  end  to  work  for  its  dissemination."
The  outcome  of  this  enthusiasm  was  the  foundation  of  a
Theosophical  Society,  for  the  formation  of  a  Universal
Brotherhood  of  Himianity — the  promotion  of  the  study
of  Aiyan  and  other  Eastern  literature,  religions,  and
sciences — and  the  investigation  of  the  hidden  mysteries
of  natm^e  and  the  psychical  powers  of  man.

How^  this  society  grew  and  flourished,  in  spite  of  the
Utopian  character  of  its  first  object ;  how  its  lodges
exist  at  the  present  day  in  all  parts  of  the  world  ]  how
they  are  the  centres  of  a  systematic  propaganda,  are
questions  for  the  historical  student.  How  also  the
zealous  American  soldier  fulfilled  his  ambition  of  going
to  India,  how  he  was  joined  there  by  Madame  Bla-
vatsky ;  how  Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett  became  convinced  of  the
extraordinary  psychological  phenomena  which  took  place
in  the  presence  of  Madame  Blavatsky;  how  he  also,
like  Colonel  Olcott,  beheld  the  simulacra  of  the  adepts,
are  matters  that  may  be  mentioned  in  passing,  but  must
be  lightly  passed  over.  We  have  stated  as  briefly  as
possible  the  gist  of  what  is  at  present  known  concerning
the  source  of  the  theosophical  revelation,  and  all  that
need  be  said  concerning  their  accredited  representatives
in  the  outer  world.  The  nature  of  this  latest  and
ultimate  message  from  "those  who  know"  to  those
who  would  qualify  to  learn  is  the  final  stage  of  our
appreciation.

Starting  from  the  broad  and  general  claim  that
Theosophy,  or  Esoteric  Buddhism,  as  it  may  be  indiffer-
ently called,  "  offers  us  the  wisdom  acquired  by  thought
and  experience  on  a  higher  plane,"  we  shall  find  that  its
chief  teachings  may  be  classified  under  three  heads — the
Nature  and  Constitution  of  Man — the  Destiny  of  Man —
and  the  AVay  to  Attain.  In  the  first  of  these  classes,  seven
composing  elements,  each  capable  of  still  further  sub-
division, are  recognised  as  substantially  existing  in  man
as  he  is,  though  some  of  the  highest  of  the  series  are  in
a  still  undeveloped  state.  First  comes  the  Physical
Body,  and  to  that  is  united  the  Animal  Vitality  which

280  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

changes  gross  earth  into  living  flesh.  The  third
principle  is  called  the  Astral  Body,  Avhich  is  the
duplicate  of  the  physical  envelope,  and  is  energized
by  the  principles  above  it.  The  fourth  is  the  Animal
Soul,  which  is  the  highest  developed  substance  of  the
brute  creation ;  it  is  one  of  the  superior  elements,  and
can  be  developed  still  further  by  a  union  with  the  fifth
principle,  which  is  the  Human  Soul,  "  the  seat  of  reason
and  memory."  The  sixth  principle  is  called  the  Spiritual
Soul,  and  the  seventh  is  the  Pure  Spirit.

Distinctions  like  this  Avill  aj^pear  to  many  students  as
mere  idle  refinements,  but  they  serve  their  purpose
in  an  exceedingly  complicated  body  of  transcendental
doctrine,  which  includes  not  only  the  history  and
evolution  of  the  cosmic  world,  or  the  sequence  observed
in  the  development  of  the  phenomenal  universe,  but  the
experiment  of  positive  knowledge,  or  perception  into
the  truth  and  reality,  and  between  both  the  theory  and
practice  of  every  species  of  the  multiform  art  of  magic.

From  the  second  body  of  theosophic  instruction  we
learn  that  at  death  there  is  a  final  separation  of  the
three  lower  principles  from  those  which  are  above  them,
and  an  ascent  of  the  superior  constituents  into  what  is
called  the  Astral  Plane,  where  the  complicated  fifth
principle  is  disintegrated,  all  that  is  highest  in  its  nature
seeking  union  with  the  sixth,  the  rest  becoming  identified
with  the  astral  body  and  remaining  in  the  world  of  forms.
On  the  differentiation  of  the  Astral  Body  from  the  real
man  all  the  apparitions  of  the  dead  are  philosophically
based  by  Esoteric  Buddhism.  Meanwhile,  the  sub-
limated remnant  of  the  fifth  principle  departs  with  the
Spiritual  Soul,  and  the  Divine  Spirit  into  a  Spiritual
condition,  an  interior  state  of  absorption,  where  all  the
superior  possibilities  of  "sensuous  emotion"  are  de-
veloped by  the  ministry  of  laws  which  are  proper  to
this  withdrawn  form  of  visionary  subsistence.  There
the  individual  remains  till  the  arcane  process  of
retribution  begins  to  work  and  he  is  reborn  into
objective  existence,  the  reincarnation  continuing  inde-
finitely from  body  to  body  and  from  planet  to  j^lanet.
It   is,    in   fact,    a   most   complex   presentation    of    the

THEOSOPHY.  281

doctrine  acquired  by  Pythagoras  which  Theosophy
offers  to  the  student  as  an  integral  part  of  the  arcane
wisdom,  and,  like  Glanvil  of  old,  as  a  key  to  the  grand
mysteries  of  sin  and  evil.

Beyond   all   incarnations,   beyond  all  trances    of  an
intermediate   state,  there  is   an   abstract   condition    of
jDure  being  which  transcends  the  phenomenal  world  of
illusions  and  pain.     It  is  possible  to  attain  that  state  ;
it  is  possible  to  transcend  the  normal  status  of  one's
evolution  in  the  refining  process  of  the  ages,  to  reach
into  the  sphere  of  a  higher  law,  to  enter  into  a  forcing-
house  of  the  interior  man,  to  walk  in  the  path  of  the
adept,  to  tread  the  way  of  attainment.      And  that  is
the  path  along  which  Theosophy  claims  to  lead  you,
after  the  manner    of   all   the  mystics,  by  detachment,
abstinence,     asceticism     of     the     most     rigid    nature,
contemplation,  solitude,  and  instruction.     It  lays  stress
upon  the  necessity  of  instruction,  and  declares  that  it
will  certainly  come,  for  those  who  earnestly  seek  it,  if
not  in  the  life  when  the  effort  is  first  made,  then  as-
suredly in  the  next  incarnation.     It  affords  the  promise
of   continued    companionship   through  the   ages — both
in    the  spiritual  realms   of   Nature,  and  again  on  the
earth  plane  in  periods  of  reincarnation — for  those  who
are  truly  united  by  the   ties    of   a   loving  sympathy.
There  is  no  material  hell  in  the  theosophical  economy
of   the  universe,  because  the   earth  life   itself,  for  the
normally  wicked,  when  they  reincarnate,  becomes  their
appropriate   sphere    of    punishment;    but   there    is    a
condition   of   spiritual   wretchedness — the    converse    of
the  highest  spiritual  bliss,  which  is  Nirvana — and  this
supremely  evil  state  is  denominated  Avitchi.     Between
the  terrible  destiny   of  Avitchi,  only  possible  for  the
spiritually   wicked,  and  the  supreme  state   of  blessed-
ness, there  lies  a  condition  which  is  all  but  annihilation
for  those  who  grovel  hopelessly  on  the  material  plane  all
through  the  procession  of  the  ages,   during  which  the
material  life  should  be  the  school  of  spiritual  aspiration.
But  the  complete  exposition  of  the  doctrine  would  be  im-
possible here.    With  Nirvana,  the  higher  consciousness —
the  knowledge  which  is  above  self-knowledge,  the  being

282  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

which  is  beyond  existence,  the  student  will  com-
pare the  absoq^tion  of  the  mystic  marriage  which  was
known  to  the  Christian  adepts.  But  whatever  may  be
the  final  verdict  of  the  unbiassed  mind  concerning  the
evidences  which  sujDport  the  revelation,  concerning  the
philosophical  system  which  it  expounds,  and  concerning
the  compensation  which  it  can  ensure  to  a  "  passionate,
bright  endeavour,"  the  investigator  cannot  fail  to  learn
much  by  its  study.  Whether  it  can  take  him  or  not
into  the  whole  truth,  it  is  full  of  the  beauty  of  wisdom
and  the  suggestiveness  of  profundity  and  the  brightness
of  mystic  dream.  If  it  has  not  transformed  the  world
it  has  permeated  all  forms  of  thought.  It  has  attracted
some  of  the  most  accomplished,  the  most  thoughtful,  the
most  refined  intellects.  It  is  certainly  worthy  of  study,
and  they  are  wise  who  suspend  their  judgment  till  the
time  for  judgment  arrives.

The  literature  of  Theosophy  is  already  extensive.  Its
foundation  is  "  Isis  Unveiled."  Its  culminating  point  is
in  "  The  Secret  Doctrine,"  by  the  same  writer.  The  in-
vestigations of  Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett  are  recorded  in  the
''Occult  World;"  the  elements  of  the  arcane  philo-
sophy in  which  he  was  mysteriously  instructed  will  be
found  in  "Esoteric  Buddhism."

A  volume  of  lectures  by  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott  on
"Theosophy,  Religion,  and  Occult  Science,"  has  com-
manded a  Avide  circle  in  the  reading  world,  and  the
latest  developments  of  the  subject  will  be  seen  in
the  "  Key  to  Theosoph}^,"  which  Madame  Blavatsky
had  issued  before  her  decease  in  the  form  of  a  catechism
for  the  benefit  of  her  less  instructed  disciples.  There
are  also  two  official  periodicals,  of  high  excellence  and
great  interest — Lucifer,  a  monthly  magazine  which  is
published  in  London,  and  The  TheosojMst,  which  ante-
dates it  by  several  years,  and  is  the  organ  of  the
head -quarters  at  Bombay.

LIST   OF   AUTHORITIES.

AxoNYMOUS — A  Suggestive  Enquiry  into  the  Hermetic  Mystery
and  Alchemy,  being  an  attempt  to  recover  the  Ancient  Experiment
of  Mature.     1850.     8vo.

Lives  of  the  Alchemysticall  Philosophers  ;  with  a  Critical

Catalogue  of  Books  in  Occult  Chemistry,  and  a  Selection  of  the
most  celebrated  Treatises  on  the  Theory  and  Practice  of  the
Hermetic  Art.     1815.     8vo.

Theosophia  Pneumatica.     Rare  Manuscript  Translation,

by  J.  M.  Rieder.

The  Cabalistic  Science,  or  the  Art  to  know  the  Good

Genie.     Rare  Treatise,  in  Manuscript.

Pneumatologia  ;  or,  a  Discourse  of  Angels,  their  Nature

and  Ofl&ce  or  Ministry.     1701.     4to.

Secret  Symbols  of  the  Rosicrucians  of  the  Sixteenth  and

Seventeenth  Centuries.     Altona,  1785-88.     Fol.

Universal    History    of    Apparitions.      London,    1770.

12mo.

History  of  Witchcraft.     True  Account  of  the  Trials  of

"Wizards  and  Witches.     12mo.     n.d.

Arbatel — De  i\ragia  Veterum,  &c.     Basilife,  1575.     16mo.

Aristarus,  of  Proconnesus — Lettre  d'un  Philosophe  sur  le  secret
du  Grand  (Euvre.     Paris,  1688.  ^   12mo.

Bacon,  Roger — Mirror  of  Alcliemy.     London,  1597.     4to.

Barrett,  Francis — The  Magus  ;  or.  Celestial  Intelligencer.  Lon-
don, 1801.     4to.

Basil,  Valentine — Select  AVorks,  containing  Last  Will,  Twelve
Keys,  and  other  Treatises.  Translated  into  English,  London,
1671.     8vo.

Baxter,  Richard — Certainty  of  the  World  of  Spirits  fully
evinced.     1691.     8vo.

Berlngnier,  Alexis  V.  C— Les  Farfadets,  on  Tousles  Demons  ne
sont  pas  de  I'autre  monde.     3  vols.     Paris,  1821.     8vo.

Binet,  A.,  and  Fere,  C. — Animal  Magnetism.  International
Scientific  Series.     1887.     8vo.

Blavatsky,  H.  P. — Isis  Unveiled.  A  Master  Key  to  the
Mysteries  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Science  and  Theology.  2  vols.
1877.     8vo.

The  Secret  Doctrine.     2  vols.     1888.     4to.

Key  to  Theosophy.     1889.     8vo.

Bodin,  Jean — Demonomanie  des  Sorciers.     Paris,  1581.     4to.
Bohme,  Jacob,  Life  and  Doctrines  of  the  God-taught  Philosopher.

284  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  his  Works.  By  Franz  Hartmann,
M.D.     1891.     8vo.

Bonaventura — Itinerarius  Mentis  in  Deum.     1864.     12nio.

Britten,  Emma  Hardinge — ]\Iodern  American  Spiritualism.  A
Twenty  Years'  Record  of  the  Communion  of  the  Earth  with  the
World  of  Spirits.     1870.     8vo.

Nineteenth  Century  Miracles.  ...  A  complete  Histori-
cal Comi)eiidium  of  .   .   .   Modern  Spiritualism.     1883.     8vo.

Burton,  Robert — The  Anatomy  of  Melanchol3^  Oxford,  1621.
4to.

Christian,  P. — Histoire  de  la  Magie,  du  Monde  Surnaturel  et  de
la  Fatalite  a  traA'ers  les  Temps  et  les  Pen  pies.     Paris,  1871.     8vo.

Christophorus,  Parisicnsis — Eleucidarius,  sen  Artis  transmuta-
torife  summa  major.    "Theatrnm  Chemicum,"  vol.  vi.     1613.    8vo.

Collin  de  Plancy — Dictionnaire  Infernale.  2  vols.  Paris,  1818.
8vo.

Cross,  Jeremy  L. — The  True  Masonic  Chart,  or  Hieroglyphic
Monitor.     Newhaven,  1819.      12mo.

Crookes,  AV.  (F.R.S.) — Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spirit-
ualism.    1874.     8vo.

Delancre,  Pierre — L'Incredulite  et  Mecreance  des  Sortileges
pleinement  convaincu.     Paris,  1612.     4to.

Deleuze— Traite  du  Magnetisme  Animal.     Paris.     8vo.

Delrio,  Martin-Antoine — Disquisitionum  Magicarum  libri  sex.
Louvain,  1599.     4to.

Dionysins,  Areopagiticus.  See  Migne's  ' '  Encyclopedie  Theo-
logique."

Dragon  Rouge,  Le,  ou  I'Art  de  commander  les  Esprits  Celestes,
aerieus,  terrestres,  infernaux,  avec  le  vrai  secret  de  faire  Parler  les
Morts,  &c.     1521.     18mo.

Dupotet,  J.  (Baron) — La  Magie  Devoilee.     Paris,  1852.     4to.

Duprel,  Baron  Carl — Philosophy  of  Mysticism.  Translated  by
C.  C.  Massey.     2  vols.     1889.     8vo.

Eliphas  Levi — Dogme  et  Rituel  de  la  Haute  Magie.  Deuxieme
edition.     2  vols.     Paris,  1856.     8vo.

Histoire  de  la  Magie,  avec  un  Exposition  clair  et  precis

de  ses  Procedes,  ses  Rites,  et  ses  Mysteres.     1860.

EUiotson,  John — Numerous  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without
pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State.     1820.     8vo.

Ennemoser,  Joseph— History  of  Magic.  Translated  by  William
Howitt.     Bohn's  Philosophical  Library.     2  vols.     8vo.

Esdaile,  James — Mesmerism  in  India,  and  its  practical  application
in  Surgery  and  Medicine.      1846.     8vo.

Figuier.  Louis— L'Alchimie  et  les  Alchimistes.  Troisieme
edition.     Paris,  1860.     8vo.

Fludd,  Robert — Apologia  Compendiaria  Fraternitatem  de  Rosea
Cruce,  &c.     Leyden,  1616.     8vo.

Gebelin,  Court  de.  Le  Monde  Primitif.  9  vols.  Paris,  1773-82.
4to.

Geber — Works,  comprising  Sum  of  Perfection,  Investigation  of

LIST  OF  AUTHORITIES.  285

Perfection,  Investigation  of  Verity,  and  Furnaces.  Gedani,  1682.
8vo.

Giusburg,  C.  D. — The  Kabbalah,  its  Doctrines,  Development,
and  Literature.     1865.     8vo.

Girtanner,  Christopher.  Annales  de  Chimie.  No.  100,  Memoir
on  "Azote."

Glanvil,  Joseph — Sadducismus  Triumphatus.     1681.     8vo.

Of  the  Vanity  of  Dogmatizing.     1661.     8vo.

Grand  Grimoire  (Le)  avec  la  Grande  Clavicule  de  Salomon.
ISmo.     Xo  place  or  date.

Gregorj",  "\V.  (]\I.D.) — Animal  Magnetism  ;  or.  Mesmerism  and
its  Phenomena.     Second  edition.     1877.     8vo.

Grimorium  Verum,  vel  probatissima  Salomonis  claviculae
rabbini  Hebraici,  &c.,  a  Memphis,  chez  Alibeek  I'Egyptien.  1517.
16mo.

Hartmann,  Franz  (M.D. ) — Magic:  White  and  Black;  or,  The
Science  of  Finite  and  Infinite  Life.     Third  edition.     1887.     8vo.

Hermes  Mercurius  Trismegistus — Theological  and  Philosophical
Works.     Translated  by  J.  D.  Chambers.     8vo.

The    Virgin    of    the   World.     Now  first  rendered  into

English.  By  Dr  Anna  Kingsford  and  Edward  Maitland.  4to.
1885.

Heywood,  Thomas — Hierarchy  of  the  Blessed  Angels.

Hitchcock — Remarks  on  Alchemy  and  the  Alchemists.  1865.
Svo.

Honorius — Gremoire  du  Pape  Honorius,  avec  un  recueil  des
plus  rares  secrets.     Rome,  1670.     16mo.

Junctin  de  Florence — Speculum  Astrologise,  universam  Mathe-
maticam  Scientiam,  in  certas  classes  digestam,  complectens.
2  vols.     Lugduui,  1581.     Fol.

Khunrath,  H.  C. — Amphitheatrum  Sapientite  ^ternse.  Mag.,
1608.     FoL

Lane,  E.  W.— Modern  Egyptians.     2  vols.     1836.     8vo.

Lee,  F.  G.  (D.D. ) — Glimpses  of  the  Supernatural.  2  vols.
1875.     Svo.

Lenormant,  Francis — Chaldean  Magic.  Its  Origin  and  Develop-
ment.    Translated  from  the  French.     1878.     8vo.

Longueville-Harcourt,  M.  de — Histoire  des  Personnes  qui  out
vecu  plus  d'un  siecle.     Paris,  1716.     12mo.

Lord,  Frances — Christian  Science  Healing,  its  Principles  and
Practice.     1889.     8vo.

Maimonides,    . — Guide   of  the   Perplexed,     Le   Guide   des

Egares.     Paris,  1856.     8vo.

Maternus,  Julius  Firmicus,  IMatheseos  Libri  viii.  Basilese,  1551.
Fol.

Mathers,  S.  L.  MacGregor — The  Kabbalah  Unveiled.  Contain-
ing Three  Books  of  the  Zohar.  Translated  from  the  Latin  version
of  Knorr  von  Rosenroth.     1887.     8vo.

Migne,  Abbe — Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Occultes.  2  vols.
Paris,  1861.     Svo.

Oliver,  Rev.  George — History  of  Initiation.     1841.     Svo,

286  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Olcott,  H.  S. — Theosopliy,  Religion,  and  Occult  Science.  1885.
8vo.

Paracelsus — The  Substance  of  his  Teachings.  .  .  .  Extracted
and  Translated  by  Franz  Hartmann,  M.D.     1886.     8vo.

Paton,  C.  J. — Freemasonry  and  its  Jurisprudence.     1872.     8vo.

Pererius,  Benedictus — Disquisitio  de  Helia  Artista.     1608.    8vo.

Peucer,  Gasper — Les  Devins,  ou  Commentaire  des  Principales
Sortes  de  Devinations,     Anvers,  1584.     8vo.

Sincerus  Renatus  (Sigmund  Richter) — Perfect  and  True  Prepara-
tion of  the  Philosophical  Stone,  according  to  the  Secret  Brother-
hood of  the  Golden  and  Rosy  Cross.     Breslau,  1710.     8vo.

Reuchlin,  Johann — De  Arte  Cabalistica.     1550.     Fol.

Rich,  Elihu  (and  others) — The  Occult  Sciences.  Encyclopaedia
Metropolitana.     1855.     8vo.

Rosenroth,  Baron  de — Kabbalah  Denudata.     4  vols.     1556.     4to.

Ross,  Percy  {i^seud.) — A  Professor  of  Alchemy.  Denis  Zachaire.
1887.     8vo.

Saint-Martin,  Louis  Claude  de — Tableau  Naturel  des  Rapports
.  .   .  entre  Dieu,  I'Homme,  et  I'Univers.     2  vols.     8vo.

Salmon,  W. — Polygraphia.  Containing  chapters  on  Alchemy
and  the  Grand  Elixir  of  the  Philosophers.     8vo.     1701.

Sandby,  George — Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents.     1844.     8vo.

Scott,  Sir  Walter — Letters  on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft.

Sendivogius.  A  New  Light  of  Alcheni}''.  Translated  from  the
Latin.     London,  1640.     4to.

Sibly,  Ebenezer — An  Illustration  of  the  Occult  Sciences.  In  four
parts.     4to.     n.d.

Sinnett,  A.  P.— The  Occult  World.     1881.     8vo.

Esoteric  Buddhism.     1883.     8vo.

Stewart,  Balfour,  and  Tait,  P.  G. — The  Unseen  Universe  ;  or.
Physical  Speculations  on  a  Future  State.  Sixth  edition.  1876.
8vo.

Taylor,  Thomas — Theoretic  Arithmetic.     London,  1816.     8vo.

Thyrpeus,  Peter — De  AjDparitionibus  omnis  generis  Spirituum.
1600.

Tiedemann,  D.  T. — Disputatio  de  cj^usestione  qui  fuerit  artium
magicarum  origo.     Marburgi,  1787.     4to.

Torquemada,  Antoine  de — Hexameron  .  .  .  Mises  en  Francais
par  Gabriel  Chappuys.     Lyon,  1582.     8vo.

Torre-Blanca,  Francois  de  la — Epitome  Delictorum,  sive  de
Magia.     Lugduni,  1678.     4to.

Trevisan,  Bernard. — A  Treatise  of  Bernhard,  Earl  of  Trevisan,
of  the  Philosopher's  Stone.     Collectanea  Chymica.     1604.     8vo.

Tschoudi,  Baron — L'Etoile  Flamboyante.  2  vols.  Francfort,
1766.     12mo.

Vacherot,  E. — Histoire  Critique  de  I'Ecole  D'Alexandrie.  2  vols.
Paris,  1846.     8vo.

Van  Helmont,  J.  B. — Works.  Translated  from  the  Latin.
London,  1664.     Fol.

Yaughan,  Thomas  (Eugenius  Philalethes) — Magical  Writings.  A

LIST  OF  AUTHORITIES.  287

Verbatim  Reprint  ...  with  the  Latin  passages  translated  into
English.     Edited  by  A.  E.  Waite.     1888.     4to.

Yillars,  Abbe  de,  Comte  de  Gabalis,  on  Entretiens  snr  les  Sciences
Occultes.

"Waite,  A.  E. — The  Real  History  of  the  Rosicrucians,  founded
on  their  own  Manifestoes.     18S7.     8vo.

"Wallace,  A.  R. — Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism.    1878.    8vo.

Welton,  Thomas — Jacob's  Rod,  or  the  Art  of  finding  Springs,
Mines,  and  Minerals  by  means  of  the  Hazel  Rod.     8vo.     k.d.

AVierus,  Jean — Des  Prestiges  des  Demons  :  Cinq  livres  de  I'impos-
ture  et  troniperie  des  diables,  des  enchantements  et  Sorcellerie.  .  .  .
Faits  francais  par  Jacques  Gre\dn  de  Clermont.     Paris,  1569.     8vo.

"Wright,  Thomas  (F.S.  A.) — Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic  from
the  most  Authentic  Sources.

Zollner,  J.  C.  F. — Transcendental  Physics.  An  Account  of
Experimental  Investigations.  Translated  by  C.  C.  Massey.  1880.
8vo.

INDEX.

AESOLrxE  Science,  existence  of,
15,  16.

Aeromancy,  123.

Alchemy,  testimony  to  truth  of
transmutation,  83  ;  theory  of
the  physical  work,  ih. ;  source
of  alchemical  philosophy,  ih.  ;
object  of  the  physical  process,
ih.  ;  its  secret  transmitted
orally,  85  ;  philosophical  side
of  the  Hermetic  theory,  ih.  ;
man  as  the  Hermetic  subject,
ih. ;  first  study  of  the  alchemist,
86  ;  seed  of  metals,  87  ;  prim-
eval matter  of  metals,  ih. ;  con-
ception of  metals,  88  ;  recovery
of  the  physical  process  a  hope-
less quest,  89  ;  modern  solu-
tion of  Hermetic  allegory,  90
gold  an  assumed  object,  ih.
what  it  really  concealed,  ih.
testimony  from  the  lives  of
the  alchemists,  91  ;  presump-
tions in  favour  of  the  new
interpretation,  ih.  ;  a  middle
way,  92.

Alectromancy,  124.

Aleuromancy,  125.

Alplmbet,  its  magic  power  among
the  Hebrews,  18  ;  value  of  the
various  letters,  ih.

Alphitomancy,  126.

Amniomancy,  127.

Angels,  their  office,  17  ;  their
free  will,  ih.  ;  derivation  of
angelical  docti'ine,  ih.  ;  the
nine  choirs  or  hierarchies,  19  ;
the  angelical  world,  21 ;  angels
of  the  Great  White  Throne,
22  ;    the    Seven   Stewards   of

Heaven,  24-29  ;  preparations
for  angelical  evocations,  29  ;
ritual  of  evocations,  31.

Anthropomancy,  127.

Aristeus,  his  golden  key  to  the
Grand  Work,  101.

Aritlimomancy,  128.

Arnold  de  Yilleneuve,  his  pro-
cess for  the  Rehabilitation  of
Nature,  99.

Ascent  of  the  Soid,  233.

Astragalomancy,  129.

Astrology,  Levi's  defence  of  the
science,  163  ;  possibility  oif
calculating  influences,  164  ;
not  a  branch  of  mysticism,  ih. ;
advantages  of,  165  ;  theory  of
the  Horoscope,  ih.\  zodiacal
signs,  166  ;  interconnection  of
signs  and  planets,  167  ;  charac-
teristics of  the  planets,  168  ;
influence  of  the  twelve  con-
stellations on  the  body  of
man,  169  ;  their  influence  on
cities,  170  ;  symbols  of  the
planets,  171  ;  significance  of
the  signs  in  the  heavens,  171-
179.

Axinomancy,  130.

Belomancy,  130.

Bibliomancy,  131.

Black  jVFagic,  5,  15  ;  its  pre-
dominance in  the  past,  51  ;
the  central  fact  of  black  magic,
54  ;  conditions  of  tlie  practice,
57,  58  ;  method  in  Goetic  pro-
cess, 59  ;  ritual  of  black  magic,
59-64  ;  Goetic  invocations  in
Egypt,  65.

290

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

BiJhme,  Jacob,  195.
Bonaventura,  liis   mj^stical  way
to  God,  195.

Cagliostro,  process  of  rejuven-
escence, 101.

Capnoniancy,  132.

Castle  of  the  Interior  Man,  233.

Cataleps}',  241.

Ceremonial  Magic,  68.

Ceroscopy,  132.

Christian  Science  Healing,  239.

Clairvoyance,  244.

Cleidomancy,  132-134.

Crystalloniancy,  rationale  of
vision  in  the  crystal,  103  :
connection  with  hypnotism,
ib.  ;  variety  of  stones  and
mirrors  in  nse,  ih. ;  operation
of  the  imagination,  ih.;  relia-
bility of  results,  104  ;  ritual
of  the  subject,  105.

Dactylomancy,  134.

Demons,  their  fall,  51  ;  signifi-
cance of  their  name,  ih. ;  hier-
archy of  the  abyss,  52  ;  value
of  such  tabulations,  54  ;  ortho-
dox views,  56.

Diana  unveiled,  154.

Dionysia?,  219.

Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  194.

Divining  Rod,  interest  attaching
to  it,  151  ;  the  rod  in  magic,
ih.  ;  uses  of  the  divining  rod,
152;  discovery  of  its  proper-
ties, 153;  its  connection  with
animal  magnetism,  154  ;  utility
of  the  experiment,  ih.  ;  the  rod
and  water,  155  ;  evidences,
155-158  ;  the  rod  and  spirit-
ualism, 158  ;  the  rod  and
gold,  159  ;  extraordinary  pro-
cess, 160-162.

Divination,  value  of  the  art,
121.

Elementary  Spirits,  22  ;  doctrine
concerning  them,  35  ;  possi-
bility of  their  existence,  ih. ;
Egyptian  theorems  concerning

them,  36  ;  analog}'  with  angeli-
cal hierarchies,  37  ;  Nymphs,
Undines,  Gnomes,  Salaman-
ders, 37-39  ;  object  of  com-
munication with  elementaries,
39  ;  evocation  of,  42  ;  their
ajiparition  in  crystals,  107.

Elixir  of  Life,  actuality  of  the
([uest,  95  ;  duality  of  its  as-
pect, 96  ;  old  notions,  97,  98  ;
l)rocess  of  Arnold  de  Ville-
neuve,  99  ;  process  of  Tritlie-
mius,  100  ;  secret  of  Cagliostro,
101  ;  the  solar  elixir  of  Aris-
teus,  101  ;  the  process  beyond
recovery,  102.

Essenes,  221.

Exaltation,  how  produced  by  the
Mystics,  227.

Faith  Healing,  239.

Familiar  Spirits,  their  connection
with  Elementary  Spirits,  47  ;
manner  of  their  evocation,  47,
48.

Freemasonry,  its  origin  in
Magic,  213  ;  esoteric  value  of
Masonry,  214  ;  associations
connected  with  it,  215  ;  origin
of  Symbolic  Masonry,  216  ;
fanciful  theories  and  argu-
ments, 216-217  ;  opinion  of
George  Oliver,  217  ;  Masonry
and  the  Mystics,  218  ;  Mason-
ry and  the  Jewish  Temple,
219  ;  the  Dionysian  artificers,
ib.  ;  Essenes  and  Masonry,
221;  Masonry  and  chivalry,
222.

Grim oires,  their  nature  and  value,
55  ;  not  to  be  taken  seriously,
57.

Glanvil,  Joseph,  109.

Gastromancy,  136.

Geber,  189.

Gift  of  Tongues,  243.

Gyromancy,  148.

Hallucination,  positive  and  nega-
tive, 242.

INDEX.

291

Hermetic  Pliilosoph}^  claims  of,
1  ;  reasons  for  its  re\aval,  ih.  :
what  it  promises,  8.

Hipporcaiicy,  148.

Hydromaney,  137.

Hypnotism,  sec  Mesmerism.

Iclithyomancy,  148.

Imagination  as  a  curative  agent,
240  ;  imagination  of  Nature,
87.

Incommunicable  Xame,  18.

Interior  Man,  2.

Introspection,  Avhat  the  Chris-
tian mystics  accomplished  by
its  means,  228.

Kabbalism,  the  views  concerning
it,  181  ;  its  literature,  ib.  ;
oral  perpetuation  of  its  secrets,
ih.;  histor}'  of  the  tradition,
181,  182  ;  modern  origin  of
the  Zohar,  183  ;  claim  of
Kabbalistic  literature  on
modern  students,   184.

Lampadomancy,  149.
Latent  faculties,  2.
Lithomancy,  140.

Magic,  abuses  of,  3  ;  definition
of  the  science,  9  ;  popular
significance  of  the  term,  10  ;
its  derivation,  11  ;  its  signifi-
cance according  to  Hartmann,
12  ;  dictum  of  Elii)has  L^vi,
ih, ;  scope  of  the  science,  ih. ;
its  verbal  equivalents,  13  ;  its
antirpiity,  228.

Magician,  the,  3.

Man,  his  origin  and  destiny,  113.

^Margaritoniancy,  149.

Matter  and  S])irit,  value  of  dis-
tinctions between  them,  6  ;
folly  of  speculations  concerning
their  fundamental  nature,  7.

Mercury,  88.

Mesmerism,  known  to  tlie
ancients,  228,  229  ;  reappear-
ance of  the  healing  art,  230  ;
Mesmer    and     ]iis    discovery,

230,  231  ;  Mysticism  and
^Mesmerism,  231  ;  therapeutic
Mesmerism,  236,  237  ;  other
sections  of  the  subject,  240.

Mishna,  antiquity  of,  184.

^lyoniancy,  143.

Mysticism,  definition  of,  192 ;
locality  of  its  focus  in  the
West,  193  ;  its  foundation,
194.

Xature  Spirits,  55.

Xecromancy,  71  ;  value  of  hy-
])otheses  concerning  souls  of
the  dead,  ih.;  possibility  of
demonstrating  their  survival,
72  ;  communication  Avith  the
departed,  73  ;  ceremonial
evocation  of  the  dead,  74  ;
distinction  between  Avhite  and
black  Necromancy,  ih. ;  pro-
cess in  Xecromancy,  75  ;
evocations  of  infernal  Xecro- ,
mancy,  81,  82.

X'ew  Birth,  233.

Xirvana,  281.

Xirvana  in  Christ,  232.

Onomancy,  144.
Onychomancy,  146.
Ooraancy,  147.

Paracelsus,  190-192  ;  Paracelsus
and  the  concealed  magnes,
108.

Parthenomancy,  149.

Planetary  Intelligences,  119.

Pneumatic  Magic,  23.

Pneumatology,  value  of  its  doc-
trines, QQ.

Psychic  Force,  2.

Psychological  Ex])eriments,  their
result  in  the  ]iast,  14.

Psychometry,  245.

Pyromancy,  142.

Rosicrucian  Fraternit}",  199  ;
origin  of  the  name,  200  ;
typology  of  tlie  Rose  and
Cross,  201  ;  lineage  and  his-
tory of  the  order,    202  ;    the

29:

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

mystic  C.R.C.,  202-205  ;  first
proclamation  of  the  order,
205  ;  second  proclamation,
206;  the  "  Chymical  Nup-
tials," ih.;  probable  existence
of  the  order,  207  ;  its  true
origin,  208  ;  value  of  its  philo-
sophical and  other  views,  208  ;
its  connection  with  Simon
Studion,  208,  209  ;  modern
Rosicrucians,  210.

Saint-Martin,  195,  224.

Sciamancy,  149.

Scyomancy,  150.

Seal  of  Solomon,  111.

Seven  Stewards  of  Heaven,  24.

Sol  and  Luna,  their  interior
significance,  93.

Spiritualism,  connection  with
Mesmerism,  247  ;  Avith  ancient
Magic,  248  ;  simplification  of
the  process,  249  ;  conditions
of  success,  250  ;  philosophical
question  of  conditions,  251  ;
secret  of  spiritual  progress,
253,  254  ;  nature  of  medium-
ship,  256  ;  formation  of  the
circle,  257  ;  various  classes  of
phenomena,  261-266.

Spodanomancy,  149.

Star  of  Bethlehem,  111.

Talismans,  value  of  Talismanic
Magic,  110  ;  definition  of  a
talisman,  ib.]  derivation  of
name,  ib.)  source  of  the  doc-
trine and  practice.  111  ;  scope
of  talismanic  influence,  ih. ;
virtue  attached  to  talismans,

112  ;   planetary  influence  on,

113  ;  talismans  of  the  seven
planets,  113-119  ;  the  black
talisman,  119  ;  talismans  and
evocations,  120.

Talmud,  184.

Theomancy,  150.

Theosoph}^  revelation  of  a  con-
cealed tradition,  269  ;  a  com-
plete spiritual  gnosis,  272  ;
not  Buddhism  modernized,  ih, ;
what  the  divine  wisdom  of
Theosophy  really  is,  ih. ;  Tlieo-
sophy  and  comparative  my-
thology, 274  ;  distinction
between  Eastern  and  "Western
mysticism,  275  ;  custodians  of
the  secret,  276,277  ;  founda-
tion of  a  theosophical  society,
279  ;  teachings  of  Theosophy,
279-282.

Thought  Transference,  231.

Trance,  phenomena  of,  241.

Transcendental  Adoration,  235.

Transcendentalism,  its  object,
3  ;  its  philosophy  the  hope  of
the  age,  4  ;  its  darker  side,
ih. ;  its  foundation,  213.

Transcension,  mode  of,  1.

Transfiguration  of  the  Magus,  40.

Transmutation  of  the  human
body,  95.

Trithemius,  his  process  for  pre-
serving health,  180.

Unison  with  the  Divine,  15.
Universal  Medicine,  see  Elixir  of
Life.

Vassago,  a  spirit  of  the  Crystal,

107.
Verendum,  151.

Will,  seat  of  esoteric  law,  15  ;
influence  of,  109  ;  its  projec-
tion upon  inert  substances,
110  ;  suspension  of  will,  243."

Zodiac,  value  of  the  signs  and

their  influence,  166,167.
Zohar,  its  modern  origin,  183.
Zosimus  the  Pomopolite,  189.

TDENBULL  AND  SPEAE3,  PEIKTEES,  HDINBUEGH.

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.

In  croicn  8w,  454  pages,  icith  illustrations,  7s.  6d.

The
Real   History  of  the  Roslcrucians.

Founded  on  theik  own  Manifestoes,  and  on  Facts

AND  Documents  collected  from  the  Writings

OF  Initiated  Brethren.

By  ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.

Opinions  of  the  Press.

"  We  desire  to  speak  of  Mr  Waite's  work  with  the  greatest  respect  on  the  points
of  honesty,  impartiaUty,  and  sound  scholarship.  Mr  Waite  has  given,  for  the  first
time,  the  documents  -with  which  Rosicrucianism  has  been  connected  in  extenso.'"
—Literary  World.

"  There  is  something  mysterious  and  fascinating  about  the  liistory  of  the  Virgin
Fraternity  of  the  Rose.''— Saturday  Review.

"A  curious  and  interesting  storj- of  the  doings  of  a  mysterious  association  in
times  when  people  were  more  ready  to  believe  in  supernatural  phenomena  than
the  highly-educated,  matter-of-fact  people  of  to-day." — Morning  Post.

"  The  work  not  only  of  a  refined  scholar,  but  of  a  man  who  knows  what  he  is
writing  about,  and  that  is  a  great  deal  moi'e  than  can  be  said  for  other  books  on
the  same  topic.  .  .  .  Much  which  he  has  to  tell  us  has  the  double  merit  of  being
not  only  true,  but  new." — John  Bull.

"Mr  Waite's  book  on  'Rosicrucianism'  is  a  perfect  contrast  to  the  one  we
noticed  a  month  or  two  back.  The  latter  is  a  farrago  of  ill-digested  learning  and
gi'oundless  fancies,  while  the  former  is,  at  all  events,  an  honest  attempt  to  dis-
cover the  truth  about  the  Society  of  the  Rosy  Crot^s.  .  .  .  The  study  of  '  Occultism  '
is  so  popular  just  now  that  all  books  bearing  on  such  topics  are  eagerly  read;  and
it  is  a  comfort  to  find  one  writer  who  is  not  ashamed  to  confess  his  ignorance  after
telling  us  all  he  can  discover." — Wfstminster  Review.

"Mr  "Waite  is  a  great  authority  on  esoteric  science  and  its  literature.  Those
who  have  read  his  extremely  interesting  work  upon  the  writings  of  Eliplias  L6vl,
the  modern  magician,  will  expect  in  his  '  History  of  the  Rosicrucians '  a  treatise
of  more  than  ephemeral  importance,  and  they  will  not  be  disappointed.  .  .  ." —
Morning  Post.

294  ADVERTISEMENTS.

"  Some  of  the  most  interesting  chapters  in  the  book  are  devoted  to  an  account
of  tiie  four  great  apologists  for  Rosicrucianism  :  Robert  Fludd.  Michael  Maier,
Thomas  Vaiighan,  and  Jo^n  Heydon.  Each  of  these  chapters  contains  much
curi'ius  matter,  very  metaphysical  and  very  transcendental,  but  worth  being
stud'ed  by  those  who  appreciate  the  influence  which  the  many  forms  of  occultism
have  exercised  upon  civilisation." — St  James's  Gazette.

"To  many  readers  the  most  fascinating  pages  in  'The  Real  Histoiy  of  the  Rosi-
crucians'  will  be  those  in  which  the  author  reprints  Foxcroft's  1690  translation  of
'The  Chymical  Wedding  of  Christian  Rosencreutz,' which  had  originally  appeared
in  Gei-man  in  1616.  This  strange  romance  is  full  of  wonderful  things."— Saturday
Review.

"  We  would  recommend  Mr  Waiters  very  painstaking  volume  to  all  who  maybe
desirous  to  get  to  the  back  of  the  Rosicrucian  mystery.  ...  So  much  nonsense
has  been  talked  and  written  about  this  imaginary  order  that  it  is  quite  refreshing
to  find  a  writer  competent  and  willing  to  reduce  the  legend  to  its  true  proportions,
and  show  how  and  when  it  had  its  origin." — Knowledge.

ESSAYS  IN  THE  LITERATURE  OF  ALCHEMY.

Small  4:to,  icliitc  doth,  lO.s.  Qd.

The  Magical  Writings  of  Thomas
Vaughan

{EUGENIUS  PHILALETHES).

A  Verbatim  Rephixt  of  his  First  Four  Treatises —

AxTHRorosoPHiA  Theomagica,  Axima  Magica

Abscoxdita,  Magia  Adamica,  The

True  Ccelum  Terr.e.

With  the  Latix  Passages  Traxslated  ixto  Exglish,  and  with  a

Bibliographical  Preface  axd  Essay  on  the  Esoteric

Literature  of  Western  Christendom.

By    ARTHUR    EDWARD    WAITE.

OpiDion  of  the  Press.

"  Some  of  Vaughan's  reflections  remind  us  of  Jacob  Boehm,  but  the  Welsh
myslic  is,  as  a  rule,  more  easily  followed  than  his  German  brother.  Indeed,  with
a  few  exceptions,  the  sense  is  clear  enough  to  make  the  volume  agreeable  reading
even  to  the  uninitiated.  .  .  .  The  seventeenth  century  was  an  age  of  plain  speak-
ing, and  Vaughan,  when  differing  from  anyone,  sometimes  used  terms  more
forcible  than  elegant.  Mr  Waite  supplies  some  inteiesting  information  about  the
history  of  occultism  in  his  Introductory  Lecture  on  the  Esoteric  Literature  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  cin  the  Underlying  Principles  of  Theurgic  Art  and  Practice  in
Western  Chiistei.dom." — Glasgow  Herald.

ADVERTISEMENTS.  295

Demy  d>vo,x>P'  xliii.  and  349,  v:ifh  illustrations,  doth  extra,  10s.  Qd.

The  Mysteries  of  Magic;

.1   DIGEST  OF  THE  WRITINGS  OF  ELI P HAS  LEVI,

With  Biographical  and  Critical  Essay.

By  ARTHUR  EDWARD  AVAITE.

Opinions  of  the  Press.

"  Of  the  many  remarhable  men  ^vllo  have  gained  notorietj-  by  their  proficiency,
real  or  imaginarj-,  in  the  Black  Arts,  probably  none  presents  a  more  strange  and
irreconcilablecharacter  than  the  French  magician,  Alphonse  Louis  Constant.  .
Better  kno-wn  under  the  Je^\•ish  pseudonym  of  Eliphas  Levi  Zahed,  this  enthusi-
astic student  of  forbidden  art  made  some  stir  in  France  and  even  in  London.  .  .  .
His  works  on  magic  are  tliose  of  an  undoubted  genius,  and  divulge  a  philosophy
beautiful  in  conception,  if  totally  opposed  to  common-sense  principles.  .  .  .  There
is  so  great  a  fund  of  learning  and  of  attractive  reasoning  in  these  writings,  that
Mr  Arthur  Edward  "Waite  has  published  a  digest  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  English
readers.  This  gentleman  has  not  attempted  a  literal  translation  in  every  case,
but  has  arranged  a  volume  whicli,  while  reproducing  with  sufficient  accuracy  a
great  portion  of  the  more  interesting  Avorks,  afl'ords  an  excellent  idea  of  the  scope
of  the  entire  literary  remains  of  an  enthusiast  of  whom  he  entertains  a  profound
admiration.  .  .  .  The  reader  may  with  profit  peruse  carefully  the  learned  disserta-
tions penned  by  M.  Constant  upon  the  Hermetic  art  treated  as  a  religion,  a  phil-
osophy, and  a  natural  science.  ...  In  view  of  the  remarkable  exhibitions  of  mes-
meric influence  and  thought-reading  which  have  recently  been  givtn,  it  is  not
improbable  that  the  thoughtfiil  reader  may  find  a  clue  in  the  writings  of  this  cul-
tured and  amiable  magician  to  the  secret  of  many  of  the  manifestations  of  witch-
craft which  formerly  struck  wonder  and  terror  into  the  hearts  of  simple  folks.  . .  ."
— The  Morning  Post.

"  The  present  single  volume  is  a  digest  of  half-a-dozen  books  enumerated  by  the
present  author  in  a  '  Biographical  and  Critical  Essay '  with  which  he  prefaces  his
undeitaking.  These  are  the  '  Dogme  et  Ritual  de  la  Haute  Magie,'  the  '  Histoire
de  la  Magie,'  the  '  Clef  des  Grand  Mystferes,'  the  '  Sorcier  de  Meudon,'  the  '  Phil-
osophic Occulte,'  and  the  '  Science  des  Esprites.'  To  attack  the  whole  series—
which,  indeed,  it  might  be  difficult  to  obtain  now  in  a  complete  form — would  be  a
bold  undertaking,  but  Mr  Waite  has  endeavouied  to  give  his  readers  the  essence
of  the  whole  six  books  in  a  relatively  compact  compass.  .  .  .  The  book  before  us
is  encyclopEedic  in  its  range,  and  it  wciild  be  difficult  to  find  a  single  volume
which  is  better  calculated  to  supply  modern  inquirers  with  a  general  conception
of  the  scope  and  purpose  of  the  occult  sciences  at  large.  It  freely  handles,
amongst  others,  the  ghastly  topics  of  witchcraft  and  black  magic,  but  certainly  it
would  be  difficult  to  imagine  any  reader  tempted  to  enter  those  i)athways  of  ex-
periment by  the  picture  of  their  character  and  purpose  that  Eliphas  Levi  supplies.
In  this  way  the  intrepid  okl  Kabbalist,  though  never  troubling  his  readers  with
sublime  exhortations  in  the  interest  of  virtue,  writes  under  the  inspiration  of  an
uncompnimising  devotion  to  the  loftiest  ideals,  and  all  his  philosophy  makes  for
righteousness." — Mr  A.  P.  Sinnkt,  in  Light.

"  We  are  grateful  to  Sir  Waite  for  translating  the  account  of  how  Levi,  in  a  lone
chamber  in  London,  called  up  tlie  spirit  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana.  This  very  creepy
composition  is  written  in  quite  tlic  finest  manner  of  the  late  Lord  Lytton  when  he
was  discoursing  upon  the  occult." — The  Saturday  Review.

296  ADVERTISEMENTS.

Dciiiy  8vo,  2^P'  315,  cloth,  10s.  Qd.

Lives  of  Alchemystical   Philosophers,

Based  on  Materials  collected  in  1815,  and  Supplemented
BY  Recent  Researches.

With  a  Philosophical  Demonstration  of  the  True  Principles

OF  THE  Magnum  Opus  or  Great  Work  of  Achemical

pteconstruction,  and  some  account  of  the

Spiritual  Chemistry

By  ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.

TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED

A  Bibliography  of  Alchemy  and  Hermetic  Philosophy.

Opinions  of  the  Press.

"The  chapter  about  Flamel  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  in  the  book,  but  the
longest  and  most  enthralling  is  that  containing  a  full  account  of  the  career  of  the
infamous  Cagliostro,  whom  Carlyle  has  immolated.  This  is  really  a  romance  of
the  highest  interest.  .  .  .  There  is  abundance  of  interest  in  Jfr  Waite's  pages  for
those  who  have  any  inclination  for  occult  studies,  and  although  he  founds  his
work  upon  a  book  -which  was  published  in  1815  by  an  anonymous  writer,  yet  he
adds  so  much  fresh  matter  that  this  is  practically  a  new  work.  A  valuable  feature
for  students  is  the  alphabetical  catalogue  which  Mr  Waite  has  prepared  of  all
known  works  on  hermetic  philosophy  and  alchemy." — Glasgow  Herald.

"  Mr  Waite  has  undoubtedly  bestowed  a  vast  amount  of  patient  and  laborious
research  upon  the  present  work,  inspired  by  the  double  conviction  that  the
original  alchemists  had  in  fact  anticipated  and  transcended  the  highest  results  of
chemistry  in  the  metallic  kingdom,  and  had  discovered  in  the  twilight  of  the
Middle  Ages  the  future  development  of  universal  evolution.  The  biographical
sketches  of  the  alchemists,  both  true  and  false,  are  curious  reading,  and  the
alphabetical  catalogue  of  works  on  Hermetic  Philosophy  is  su.rprisingly  suggestive
of  ages  when  leisure  was  less  scarce,  and  literature  scarcer,  than  in  modern  days."
— Daily  News.

"  The  alchemists  more  popularly  known,  such  as  Albertus  Magnus,  Roger
Bacon,  Raymond  LuUy,  Flamel,  Paracelsus,  and  Basil  Valentine  are  dealt  with
fairly  and  fully,  and  the  travels  and  adventures  of  Joseph  Balsarao,  alias  Cag-
liostro, with  his  somewhat  peculiar  developments  of  Egyptian  Freemasonry,  are
excellent  and  interesting  reading.  .  .  .  Such  an  intelligent  study  of  the  subject
must  bring  into  relief  the  infinite  possibilities  which  are  contained  in  a  combina-
tion of  psychical  insight  with  physical  knowledge." — Light.

"  The  lives  of  the  philosophers  themselves  are  interesting  and  curious  reading;
the  stories  of  Lully,  Flamel,  Valentine,  Trevisan,  and  Zachaire  are  full  of  glimpses
of  mediaeval  times.  To  us  the  most  instructive  and  valuable  of  the  lives  is  that
of  the  prince  of  impostors,  Jaseph  Balsamo,  or  Comte  de  Cagliostro,  who  died  at
the  end  of  the  last  century." — Spectator.

"  The  old  alchemists  .  .  .  may,  however,  with  justice  be  regarded  as  the  first
experimentalists  in  analytical  chemistry,  and  on  this  account  are  entitled  to  the
gratitude  of  subsequent  generations.  The  lives  of  the  principal  alchemists  are
briefly  recorded  and  their  works  mentioned.  Amongst  them  are  such  familiar
names  as  Thomas  Aquinas,  Roger  Bacon,  Parscelsus,  Helvetius,  and  Delisl".  The
volume  also  contains  an  alphabetical  catalogue  of  works  on  hermetic  philosophy
and  alchemy." — Morning  Post.
