Island Life (Alfred Russel Wallace, 1880)
==========================================================
The founding text of island biogeography; dispersal vs. land bridges settled by evidence. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (cihm_02104).

+ 


Continental and Island Lite. 


A REVIEW OF WALLACE, 


WiTH REFERENCE TO THE BEARING OF GEOLOGICAL FACTS 
AND THEORIES OF EVOLUTION ON THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF LIFE. 


By J. W. DAWSON, LL.D., F.R.S., Etc. 


FROM THE * 4 
PRINCETON REVIEW, 


FOR 
JULY, 1881. 


bron 


— 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE: THEIR PRES- 
ENT STATE AND PAST HISTORY. 


| HE geographical distribution of living beings in connection 
with biological and geological science, has been perhaps 
more fully worked out by Mr. Alfred Russel Wallace than by 
any other English writer, and his recent work entitled “Island 
Life” is intended as a summing up of his labors in this direction. 
} It thus affords a good occasion to inquire as to the present state 
of knowledge on this subject, and the extent to which natural- 
ists of Mr. Wallace’s school have succeeded in solving its prob- 
lems. All are now agreed that to explain the extraordinary and 
often apparently anomalous distribution of animals and plants 
over the surface of the earth, and the occurrence of like forms 
in very distant localities, and even on islands separated by vast 
stretches of ocean from one another and from the continents, 
we must invoke the aid of geology. We must have reference to 
those changes of climate and of elevation which have occurred 
in the more recent periods of the earth’s history, and must carry 
with us the idea, at first not apparently very reasonable, that 
living beings have existed much longer than many of the lands 
which they inhabit, or at least than the present state of those 
lands i.. reference to isolation or continental connection. To 
what extent we may further require to call in the aid of varietal 
or specific modification to explain the facts, may be more doubt- 
ful; and I think we shall find that a iarger acquaintance with 
geological facts would enable us to dispense with the aid of 
hypotheses of evolution, at least in so far as the establishment 
of new generic and specific types is concerned. 
One of the most remarkable and startling results of geologi- 
cal investigation, and one which must be accepted as an estab- 
I 


2 THE PRINCETON REVIEW, 


lished fact, independently of all theoretical explanations, is that 
the earth has experienced enormous revolutions of climate within 
comparatively late periods, and since the date of the introduc- 
tion of many existing species of animals and plants. To this 
great truth in some of its bearings I have endeavored to direct 
attention in two previous articles in this REVIEW, in connection 
more particularly with the origin and succession of plants, and 
with the antiquity of man. In the present case it wili be neces- 
sary to consider these vicissitudes in their more general aspects 
and with some reference to their causes. 

The modern or human period of geology, that in which man 
and his contemporaries are certainly known to have inhabited 
the earth, was immediately preceded by an age of climatal 
refrigeration, known as the glacial or ice age. This was further 
characterized not only by a prevalence of cold, unexanipled so 
far as known either before or since, but by immense changes of 
the relative levels of sea and land, amounting, in some cases at 
least, to several thousands of feet. The occurrence of these 
changes is clearly proved by the undoubted traces of the action 
of ice, whether land ice or floating ice, on all parts of our conti- 
nents more than half way to the equator, and by the occurrence 
of sea terraces and modern marine shells at high levels on moun- 
tains and table-lands. Perhaps we scarcely realize as we should 
the stupendous character of the changes involved in the driftage 
of heavy ice over our continents as far south as the latitude of 
40°, in the deposit of boulders on hills several thousands of feet 
in height, and in the occurrence of shells of species still living in 
the sea, in beds raised to more than twelve hundred feet above 
its present level. Yet such changes must have occurred in the 
latest geological period immediately preceding that in which 
we live. 

Proceeding farther back in geological time, we find the still 
more extraordinary fact that in the middle and earlier Tertiary 
the northern hemisphere enjoyed a climate so much more mild 
than that which now prevails, that plants at present confined to 
temperat: latitudes could flourish in Greenland and Spitzbergen. 
Thus the age in which we live is one of mediocrity, attaining 
neither to the arctic rigor of the later Pleistocene nor to the 
universal mildness of the preceding Miocene. The cold of the 


a nen SET re A TM, IOs 


PER ea nes oo Paes 


is that 
within 
roduc- 
o this 
direct 
ection 
s, and 
neces- 
spects 


1 man 
ibited 
matal 
irther 
ed so 
ses of 
es at 
these 
iction 
conti- 
rence 
10un- 
10uld 
ftage 
de of 
' feet 
ng in 
'bove 
1 the 
vhich 


- still 
tiary 
mild 
od to 
gen, 
ining 
. the 
f the 


~. > imal 


a at a nl i UES ct ERC a 


A OD I Yi, AC Sa, Bis STB al nS ee 


fi tan alae ar 


; 
: 
A 
a 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 3 


glacial period is no doubt somewhat exaggerated by those geolo- 
gists who imagine our continents to have been covered with a 
continuous ice-sheet of amazing thickness. Some portion of the 
marvellousness of the preceding warmth is also removed by the 
consideration of the local inequalities at present observed in the 
northern regions, as, for instance, betwzen the comparatively tem- 
perate climate of Norway and Sweden and the perpetual ice of 
Greenland in the same latitude. Making all possible allowance 
for these mitigations, the magnitude of the revolutions actually 
proved to have occurred remains but little extenuated, while it 
seems certain that many of the plants and animals still living 
have continued through all these changes, and have been driven 
from place to place for safety as climatal revolutions proceeded. 
So far we may be satisfied that we have certain knowledge ; 
but when we inquire further as to the actual antiquity of the 
glacial period, as to its duration and rates of advance and reces- 
sion, as to its causes, and the relation of these to the remarkable 
submergences and emergences of the land, we find ourselves 
-4,,°: on a tempestuous sea of rival theories. To some ex- 
tent these may be matters of indifference to the physical geog- 
rapher or evolutionary biologist, but he is deeply interested in 
the questions of time and place, and these can scarcely be set- 
tled without reference to the causes and conditions of change. 
Mr. Searles V. Wood, in an able summary of the possible 
causes of the succession of cold and warm climates in the north- 
ern hemisphere, enumerates no fewer than seven theories which 
have met with more or less acceptance, and he might have 
added an eighth. These are: 
(1) The gradual cooling of the earth from a condition of 
original incandescence. 
(2) Changes in the obliquity of the ecliptic. 
(3) Changes in the position of the earth’s axis of rotation. 
(4) The effect of the precession of the equinoxes along with 
changes 0% the eccentricity of the earth’s orbit. 
(5) Variations in the amount of heat given off by the sun. 
(6) Differences in the temperature of portions of space passed 
through by the earth. 
(7) Differences in the distribution of land and water in con- 
nection with the flew of oceanic currents. 


ernie 


THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


(8) Variations in the properties of the atmosphere with ref- 
erence to its capacity for allowing the radiation of heat. 

Something may be said in favor of all these alleged causes ; 
but as efficient in any important degree in producing the cold 
and warm climates of the Tertiary period, the greater number 
of them may be dismissed as incapable of effecting such results, 
or as altogether uncertain with reference to their having oc- 
curred. The earth has been gradually cooling in the course of 
geological time; but this is a continuous process, and its effects 
within the later periods can be shown to have been inappre- 
ciable. The obliquity of the ecliptic is not believed to have 
changed to any great degree, and its effect would be merely a 
somewhat different distribution of heat in different periods of 
the year. The relations of the lines of upheaval of our conti- 
nents to great circles of the earth tangent to the polar circle, and 
the distribution of sediments by the arctic currents along these 
lines, show that throughout geological time the axis of the earth’s 
rotation has occupied its present position. That the absolute 
amount of heat given off by the sun varies from time to time 
there seems tu be evidence in the periodicity of sun-spots, and 
the ei. ‘son climate attributed to this cause; but we know of 
no long and regular cycles of this kind. We can imagine that 
the sun’s heat may have been increased at uncertain intervals 
by the fall of cometary matter or similar causes; but we have 
no knowledge of the actual occurrence of such accidents, and 
we know no similar cause of refrigeration. Of difference in 
temperature in portions of space traversed by the earth we 
have no evidence whatever. It is extremely probable that in 
early geological periods the presence of a larger quantity of 
carbonic dioxide in the earth’s atmosphere may have diminished 
the radiation from its surface, and so have caused its heat to be 
retained; but this cannot have produced any material effect so 
late as the glacial period. 

There remain two theories, the fourth and seventh of the 
above list, which may be said to divide between them the suf- 
frages of geologists at present, tho some have endeavored to 
unite them in one comprehensive explanation. This last was 
the position of Sir Charles Lyell as it is that of Wallace; and 
Croll, who is the most able advocate of the fourth, also admits 


| 
iy 
} 
| 
| 
i 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 5 


to some extent the influence of the other. The theory of pre- 
cession and eccentricity depends on two well-known astronomi- 
cal facts. First, owing to the elliptical form of the earth’s orbit, 
our planet is about three millions of miles nearer to the sun 
in the winter of the northern hemisphere than in the summer, 
while the opposite is of course the case with the southern hemi- 
sphere; but 10,500 years ago this condition of things was re- 
versed, and it will be reversed 10,500 years hence. If this has 
any effect on the seasons, it should be to make the climate of 
the northern hemisphere less extreme—that is, less warm in 
summer and less cold in winter; but the reverse of this is now 
actually the case, since the climate of the southern hemisphere 
is now the less extreme of the two, tho slightly the higher in 
temperature.’ This we know to arise from the distribution of 
land and water, which must thus be a far more potent cause of 
difference. But there is a second cause-affecting the result, and 
whose periods are much longer. This is the lengthening and 
shortening of the earth’s orbit, placing the sun nearer to one 
end of it at one time than at another. The “eccentricity” of 
the earth’s orbit is at present nearly at a minimum, or the sun 
is about as near the centre of our orbit as he can be; but about 
a hundred thousand years ago it was much greater, so that one 
pole of the earth would in winter be nearly eight millions of 
miles nearer to the sun than insummer. In these circumstances 
the effect of the north pole, for example, being nearer to the sun 
in winter would be much greater than at present in producing a 
difference of temperature; but it would be a difference not so 
much in the total amount of heat as in its distribution through- 
out the year. In the hemisphere which had the coldest winter 
there would be a correspondingly warm summer. 

In order, therefore, to establish a probability that these 
changes could have any effect in producing cold and warm 
periods, it is necessary to call in other considerations, in them- 
selves so important that they quite outweigh the astronomical 
causes, and to make some assumptions more or less conjectural. 
Let us consider the latter first. 

It is assumed that the tendency of an exceptionally cold win- 


1 Fenel, ‘‘ Meteorological Researches” (Washington), 1877. 


6 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


ter would be to accumulate so great a quantity of snow and ice 
that these could not be removed in the short tho warm summer, 
and so would go on accumulating from year to year. Actual 
experience and observation do not confirm this supposition. In 
those parts of North America which have a long and severe win- 
ter, the amount of snow deposited is not in proportion to the 
lowness of the temperature, but, on the contrary, the greatest 
precipitation of snow takes place near the southern margin of a 
cold area, and the snow disappears with great rapidity when the 
spring warmth sets in. Nor is there, as has been imagined, any 
tendency to the production of fogs and mists which have been 
invoked as agencies to shield the snow from the sun. In North 
America the melting snow is ord‘narily carried off as liquid 
water or as invisible vapor, and the sky is usually clear when 
the snow is melting in spring. It is only when warm and moist 
winds are exceptionally thrown upon the snow-covered lund that 
clouds are produced; and when this is the case the warm rain 
that ensues promotes the melting of the snow. Thus there is 
no possibility of continued accumulations of snow on the lower 
parts of our continents, under any imaginable conditions of cli- 
mate. It is only on elevated lands in high latitudes and near 
the ocean, like Greenland and the antarctic continent, that such 
permanent snow-clad conditions can occur, except on mountain- 
tops. Wallace very properly maintains, in connection with these 
facts, that permanent ice and snow cannot under any ordinary cir- 
cumstances exist in low lands, and that high land and great pre- 
cipitation are necessary conditions of glaciers. He attaches, 
however, rather too much importance to snow and ice as cool- 
ing agents; for tho it is true that they absorb a large amount of 
heat in passing from the solid to the liquid state, yet the quan- 
tity of snow or ice to be melted in spring is so small in compari- 
son with the vast and continuous pouring of solar heat on the 
suriace, tha’ a very short time suffices for the liquefaction of a 
deep coveriig of snow. He quotes the remarks of Siberian 
travellers on this, and the same fact is a matter of ordinary 
observation in North America. 

Setting aside, then, these assumptions, which proceed from 
incorrect or insufficient information, we may now refer to a con- 
sideration of the utmost importance, and which Mr. Croll, tho 


ae eee 


d ice 
mer, 
ctual 
In 
win- 
» the 
atest 
of a 
| the 
any 
been 
orth 
quid 
yhen 
1oist 
that 
rain 
e is 
wer 
cli- 
near 
such 
‘ain- 
1ese 
’Cir- 
pre- 
hes, 
ool- 
t of 
lan- 
ari- 
the 
fa 
rian 
ary 
‘om 


on- 
tho 


| 
| 
| 
| 
4 
i 
| 
: 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 7 


he adduces it in aid of the astronomical theory of glacial periods, 
has treated in so masterly a manner as really to give it the first 
place as an efficient cause. This is the varying distribution of 
ocean currents, in connection with the differences in the eleva- 
tion and distribution of land. The great equatorial current, pro- 
duced by the action of the solar heat on the atmosphere and 
the water, along with the earth’s rotation, is thrown, by op- 
posing continental shores, northward itito the Atlantic and 
Pacific in the Gulf Stream and Japan current, giving us a hot- 
water apparatus which effectually raises the temperature of the 
whole northern hemisphere, and especially of the western sides 
of the continents. Mr. Croll imagines that if his astronomical 
causes could, to ever so small an extent, intensify the action of 
these currents or their determination to the north, we should 
have a period of warmth, while a similar advantage given to the 
southern hemisphere would produce a glacial age in the north. 
But this requires us to assume what ought to be proved; namely, 
that the position of aphelion and the increase or decrease of 
eccentricity would actually so swing the equatorial current to 
the north or south. lt further requires us to assume—and this 
is the most important defect of the theory—that no change 
occurs i.i the distribution of land and water; because any impor- 
tant change of this kind might obviously exert a dominant influ- 
ence on the currents. Let us take two examples in illustration 
of this. 

At the present time the warm water thrown into the north 
Atlentic not only increases the temperature of its whole waters, 
but gives an exceptionally mild climate to western Europe. Still 
the countervailing influence of the arctic currents and the Green- 
land ice is sufficient to permit numerous iceberge .o remain un- 
melted on the coast of Labrador and Newfoundland through- 
out the summer. Some of the bergs which creep down to the 
mouth of the Strait of Belle Isle, in the latitude of the south of 
England, actually remain unmelted till the snows of a succeed- 
ing winter fall upon them. Now let us suppose that a subsi- 
dence of land in tropical America were to allow the equatorial 
current to pass through into the Pacific. The effect would at 
once be to reduce the temperature of Norway and Britain to 
that of Greenland and Labrador at present, while the latter 


* 


REC URARERRTERENNE ENTREES 


8 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


cuuntries would themselves become colder. The northern ice, 
drifting down into the Atlantic, would not as now be meited 
rapidly by the warm water which it meets in the Gulf Stream. 
Much larger quantities. of it would remain undissolved in sum- 
mer, and thus an accumulation of permanent ice would take 
place, along the American coast at first, but probably at length 
even on the European side. This would still further chill the 
atmosphere, glaciers would be established on all the mountains 
of temperate Lurope and America, the summer would be kept 
cold by melting ice and snow, and at length all eastern America 
and Europe might become uninhabitable, except by arctic ani- 
mals and plants, as far south as perhaps 40° of north latitude. 
This would be simply.a return of the glacial age. I have 
assumed only one geographical change; but other and more 
complex changes of subsidence and elevation might take place, 
with effects on climate still more decisive. 

We may suppose an opposite case. The high plateau of Green- 
land might subside or be reduced in height, and the opening of 
Baffin’s Bay might be closed. At the same time the interior 
plain of America might be depressed, so that, as we know to 
have been the case in the Cretaceous period, the warm waters of 
the Mexican gulf might circulate as far north as the basins of 
the present great American lakes. In these circumstances there 
would be an immense diminution of the sources of floating ice, 
and a correspondingly vast increase in the surface of warm water. 
The effects would be to enable a temperate flora to subsist in 
Greenland, and to bring all the present temperate regions of 
Europe and America into a condition of subtropical verdure. 

It is only necessary to add that we actually know that changes 
not dissimilar from those above sketched have actually occurred 


in comparatively recent geological times, to enable us to perceive - 


that we can dispense with all other causes of change of climate, 
tho admitting that some of them may have occupied a secon- 
dary place. This will give us in dealing with the distribution of 
life the great advantage of not being tied up to definite astro- 
nomical cycles of glaciation which do not well agree with the 
geological facts, and of correlating elevation and subsidence of 
the land with changes of climate affecting living beings. It will, 
however, be necessary, as Wallace well insists, that we shall hold 


| 
! 
j 
: 
{ 
\ 
) 
| 
j 


n ice, 
1elted 
ream. 
sum- 
take 
ength 
ll the 
atains 
- kept 
nerica 
c ani- 
itude. 
have 
more 
place, 


rreen- 
ing of 
terior 
»w to 
ers of 
ns of 
there 
g ice, 
water. 
ist in 
ns of 
re. 

anges 
urred 


‘ceive - 


mate, 
secon- 
on of 
astro- 
h the 
ice of 
t will, 
| hold 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE. 9 


to a certain fixity of the continents in their position, notwith- 
standing the submergences and emergences which they have 
experienced. 

Sir Charles Lyell, more than forty years ago, published in his 
“Principles of Geology” two imaginary maps which illustrate 
the extreme effects of various distribution of land and water. In 
one all the continental masses are grouped around the equator. 
In the other they are all placed around the poles, leaving an 
open equarorial ocean. In the one case the whole of the land 
and its inhabitants would enjoy a perpetual summer, and scarcely 
any ice could exist in the sea. In the other the whole of the 
land would be subjected to an arctic climate, and it would give 
off immense quantities of ice to cool the ocean. Sir Charles re- 
marks on the present apparently capricious distribution of land 
and water, the greater part being in the northern hemisphere, 
and, in this, placed in a very unequal manner. But Lyell did 
not suppose that any such distribution as that represented in his 
maps had actually occurred, tho this supposition has been some- 
times attributed to him. He merely put what he regarded as 
an extre:ne case to illustiate what might occur under conditions 
less exaggerated. Sir Charles, like all other thoughtful geolo- 
gists, was well aware of tne general fixity of the areas of the 
continents, tho with great modifications in the matter of sub- 
mergence and of land conditions. The union, indeed, of these 
two great principles of fixity and diversity of the continents lies 
at the foundation of theoretical geology. . 

We can now more precisely indicate this than was possible 
when Lyell produced his “ Principles,” and can reproduce the 
conditions of our continents in even the more ancient periods 
of their history. An example of this may be given from the 
American continent, which is more simple in its arrangements 
than the double continent of Eurasia. Take, for instance, the 
early Devonian or Erian period, in which the magnificent flora 
of that age, the earliest certainly known.to us, made its appear- 
ance. Imagine the whole interior plain of North America sub- 
merged, so that the continent is reduced to two strips on the 
east and west, connected by a belt of Laurentian land on the 
north. In the great mediterranean sea thus produced the tepid 
water of the equatorial current was circulated, and it swarmed 


fe) THE PRINCETON REVIEIY. 


with corals, of which we know no less than 150 species, and with 
other forms of life appropriate to warm seas. On the islands 
and coasts of this sea was introduced the Erian flora, appearing 
first in the north, and with that vitality and colonizing power 
of which, as Hooker has well shown, the Scandinavian flora is 
the best modern type, spreading itself to the south.’ A very 
similar distribution of land and water in the Cretaceous age 
gave a warm and equable climate in those portions of North 
America not submerged, and coincided with the appearance of 
the multitude of vroad-leaved trees of modern types which 
appeared in the early and middle Cretaceous, and prepared the 
way for the mammalian life of the Eocene. 

We have in America ancient periods of cold as well as of 
warmth. I have elsewhere referred to the boulder conglomer- 
ates of the Huronian, of the early Lower Silurian, and of the 
Millstone-grit period of the Carboniferous; but I have not ven- 
tured to affirm that either of these periods was comparable in 
its cold with the later glacial age, still less with that imaginary 
age of continental glaciation assumed by the more extreme 
theorists. We know that these ancient conglomerates were 
produced by floating ice, and this at periods when in areas not 
very remote temperate floras and faunas could flourish. The 
glacial periods of our old continent occurred in times when the 
surface of the submerged land was opened up to the northern 
currents drifting over it mud and sand and stones, and render- 
ing nugatory, in so far at least as the bottom of the sea was con- 
cerned, the effects of the superficial warin streams. Some of 
these beds are also peculiar to the eastern margin of the conti- 
nent, and indicate ice-drift along the Atlantic coast much as at 
present, while conditions of greater warmth existed in the inte- 
rior. Even in the more recent glacial age, while the mountains 
were covered with snow and the lowlands submerged under a 
sea laden with ice, there were interior tracts in somewhat high 
latitudes of America in which hardy forest-trees and herba- 
ceous plants flourished abundantly, and these were by no means 
exceptional “interglacial” periods.” Thus we can prove that 


1 As { have elsewhere shown, a warm climate in an arctic region seems to have 
afforded the necessary conditions for the great colonizing floras of all geological 
periods. 

2 ‘Notes on the Post-Pliocene of Canada.” 


Ea i i ih NNN 


i sth dis nir Lt  i eaRAE Eat rR Et EN WE RS nt AACE i SA BU i Nita Raat ein 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE II 

vith { from the remote Huronian period to the Tertiary the American 
nds land occupied the sume position as at present, and that its 
ing changes were merely changes of relative level as compared with 
wer the sea, but which so influenced the ocean currents as to cause 
1 is great vicissitudes of climate. 
ery : Having thus endeavored, however roughly and imperfectly, 
age to define the nature, extent, and causes of the vicissitudes of 
rth | climate and other physical conditions on our continents, we shall 
> of . be in a position to consider their present state anc the causes of 
lich | the distribution of their living inhabitants. 
the In speaking of continents and islands it may be as well to j 

remark that all the land existing, or which probably has at any L 
| of | time existed, consists of islands great or small. It is all surround- 
bs ed by the ocean. Two of the greater masses of land are, however, 
the i 


sufficiently extensive to be regarded as continents, and from their 
fen- i very extent and consequent permanence may be considered as 


in the more special homes of the living beings of the land. Two 
ary | other portions of land, Australia and the antarctic polar conti- : 
me nent, may be regarded either as smaller continents or large i 
ere } islands, but partake of insular rather than continental characters . 
not in their animals and plants. All the other portions of land are 
The j properly islands; but while these islands, and more especially 
the those in mid-ocean, cannot be regarded as the original homes of 
ern | many forms of life, we shall find that they have a special interest 
Jer- / as the shelters and refuges of numerous very ancient and now 
an i decaying species. 

of The two great continents of America and Eurasia have been 
nti- | the most permanent portions of the land throughout geological 
at time, some parts of them having always been above water, prob- 
\te- ably from the Laurentian age downward, tho at various times | 
Lins they have been reduced to little inore than groups of islands. 
oti _ On them, and more especially in their more northern parts, in | 
igh which the long continuance of dayli: “+ in summer seems in 
‘ba- warm periods to have been peculiarly t.. orable to the introduc- : 
ens tion of new vegetable forms, and to the giving to them that ; 
hat vigor necessary for active colonization, have originated the ! 
ae greater number of the inhabitants of the land. i 
sical Regarded as portions of the earth’s crust, the continents are | 


areas in which the lateral thrust, caused by the secular contrac- 
tion of the interior of the earth, has ridged up and folded the 


12 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. { 


rocks, producing mountain-chains. This process began in the 
earliest geological periods, and has beeu repeated at long in- 
tervals, the original lines of tolding guiding those formed in 
each new thrust proceeding from th. ‘lat oceanic areas. Along 
the ridges thus produced, and in the :*rrower spaces between 
them, the greater part of the sediment carried by water was 
laid down, thus producing plateaus in connection with the moun- / 
tain-chains. The tendency of the ocean to be thrown toward | 
the poles by the retardation of the earth’s rotation, alternating : 
with great collapses of the crust at the equator, proceeding from 
the same cause along with the secular cooling, have produced 
alternate submergence and emergence of these plateaus. This has 
been further complicated by the constant tendency of the arctic 
and antarctic currents, aided by ice, to drift solid materials, set free 
by the vast denuding action of frost, from the polar to the tem- 
perate regions, and by the further tendency of animal life to 
heap up calcareous accumulations under the warm waters of the 
tropical regions. All these changes, as already stated, have con- 
spired to modify the directions of the great oceanic currents, and 
to produce vicissitudes of climate under which animals and plants 
have been subjected in geological time to those migrations, ex- 
tinctions, and renovations of which their fossil remains and pres- 
ent distribution afford evidence. 

Still it is true that throughout the whole cf these great 
mutations, since the beginning of geological history, there seems 
never to have been any time when the ocean so rega-ned its 
dominion as to produce a total extinction of land life, still less 
was there any time when the necessary conditions for all the 
various forms of marine life failed to be found; nor was there 
any climatal change so extreme as to banish any of the leading 
forms of life from the earth. To geologists it is not necessary 
to say that the conclusions sketched above are those that have 
been reached as the results of long and laborious investigation, 
and which have been illustrated and established by Lyell, Dana, 
and many other writers. They are on the whole fairly stated by 
Wallace in his work on “Island Life.”’ Let us now place beside 


1 The writer has endeavored to popularize these great results of geology in his 
work the ‘Story of the Earth.” They are often overlooked by specialists and by 
compilers of geological manuals. 


{ CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 13 
the them some facts as to the present distribution of life and of the 
in- agencies which influence it. 

1 in If we examine Petermann’s map of the ice of the north and 
ang south polar regions, reproduced by Wallace, we shall find a re- 
een : markable contrast. Inthe soutnern polar region a space extend- 
was ing in all directions twenty degrees, and in some directions twenty- 
yun- five degrees, is occupied with permanent snow. Thus we have 
ard a snow-clad continent, at the outer edge of which the stratum 
‘ing : of solid water is at least a mile in thickness, attaining a diameter | 
rom i of over 2000 miles. Around this we have floating ice dispersed | 
ced } in all directions, on the Atlantic side beyond the parallel of 40°, 
has j and on the Pacific side only a little short of this. In other 
ctic words, we have a distribution of floating ice, bearing with it 
free stones and other land material, over a radius of about 3000 nauti- 
em- cai miles from the south pole. This is an extension of polar ice 
> to | nearly equal to that which occurred in the northern hemisphere 
the in the great glacial age, and as it evidently results from the exist- | 
>on- ence of a compact mass of high land serving as a condensing- | 
and | ground for the aqueous vapor of the surrounding ocean, we 
ints : have only to imagine a few spurs of high ground like Greenland | 
ex- projecting from the antarctic continent to render the present 
res- glacial age of the southern hemisphere even more severe than 

; that of the Pleistocene probably was in the north. As it now 
reat is, Heard’s Island, in south latitude 53°, is glaciated down to the 
ems ‘sea, and New Zealand, in south latitude 43° 35’, has a glacier 
| its descending to within 705 feet of the sea.’ 
less If we turn now to the north polar region, the case is very 
the different. Here the area of permanent ice is scarcely more than 
1ere half that of the south poie, and if we were to remove the excep- | 
ling tionally high and ice-covered tract of Greenland it would be | 
sary scarcely more than one third. The distribution of floating ice is i 
lave in like manner limited to a narrow belt along the west side of the | 
ion, north Atlantic and to the coasts of the most northern part of 
ana, the Pacific. Geological facts indicate that within a compara- : 
1 by 4 tively recent period the state of matters in the north was much q 
side F less favorable as to temperature, but that previously to this for | 
«hte 1 It is a significant fact that while in latitudes lower than 40° the southern 
d by hemisphere is the colder, in higher latitudes it is the warmer. Thus a glacial age : 


may affect temperate latitudes more than those which are polar. : 


I4 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


a very long time, extending apparently through nearly the whole 
Cretaccous and Tertiary periods, the geographical conditions 
were such that the arctic climate was very much milder than at 
present. In testimony of this we have not only the temperate 
flora of Greenland and other northern lands in the Cretaceous 
and Tertiary, and the evidence that then Greenland was not a 
snow-clad table-land as at present, but the fact vouched for by 
Nordenskjéld that no boulders or ice-drifted materials are to be 
found in any of the arctic deposits older than the glacial age. 
We shall find that these facts throw much light on the distribu- 
tion of those animals and plants which have come down to us 
from the preglacial times, as well as on that of more modern 
species. 

Just as political geography sometimes presents boundaries 
not in accordance with the physical structure of countries, so the 
distribution of animals and plants shows many peculiar and 
unexp. “ted features. Hence naturalists have divided the con- 
tinents into what Sclater has called zoological regions, which 
are, so to speak, the great empires of anima! life, divisible often 
by less prominent boundaries into provinces. In vegetable life 
similar boundaries may be drawn, more or less coincident with 
the zoological divisions. Zoologically, North America and Green- 
land may be regarded as one great region, the Nearctic, or 
new arctic, the prefix not indicating that the animals are newer 
than those of the old world, which is by no means the case. 
South America constitutes another region, the Neotropical. If 
now we turn to the greater Eurasian continent, with its two 
prolongations to the south in Africa and Australia, we shall find 
the whole northern portion, from the Atlantic to the Pacific, 
constituting one vast region of animal life, the Palearctic, which 
also includes Iceland and a strip across north Africa. Africa 
itself, with Madagascar, whose allegiance is, however, only par- 
tial, constitutes the Ethiopian region. India, Burmah, the south 
of China, and certain Asiatic islands form the Oriental region. 
Australia, New Guinea, and the Polynesian islands constitute 
the Australian region. All of these regicns may in a geological 
point of view be considered as portions of old and permanent 
continental masses, which, tho with movements of elevation and 
depression, have continued to exist for vast periods. Some of 


aa SIO ath SS ae er 


j 
| 
| 
| 
4 
) 


often 
le life 
‘with 
rreen- 
ic, or 
1ewer 
case. 
ey OEE 
3 two 
il find 
acific, 
vhich 
\frica 
y par- 
south 
gion, 
titute 
gical 
anent 
n and 
me of 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 15 


them, however, seem to have enjoyed greater immunity from’ 
causes of change than others, and present accordingly animals 
and plants havinz an antique aspect, geologically speaking, in 
comparison with the others. In this senge the Australian prov- 
ince may be regarded as the oldest of all in the facies of its ani- 
mal forms, since creatures exist there of genera and families 
which have very long ago become extinct everywhere else. Next 
in age to this should rank the Neotropical or South American 
region, which like Australia presents many low and archaic 
forms of animal lite. The Ethiopian region stands next to it 
in this, the Oriental and Nearctic next, and last and most mod- 
ern in its aspect is the great Palearctic region, to which man 
himself belongs, and the animals and plants of which vindicate 
their claims to youth by that aggressive and colonizing charac- 
ter already referred to, and which has enabled them to spread 
themselves widely over the other regions, even independently 
of the influence of man. On the other hand, the animals and 
plants of the Australian and South American regions show no 
such colonizing tendency, and can scarcely maintain themselves 
against those of other regions when introduced among them. 
Thus we have at once in these continental regions a great and 
suggestive example of the connection of geographical and geo- 
logical distribution, the details of which are of the deepest inter- 
est and have not yet been fully worked out. One great prin- 
ciple is, however, sufficiently established ; namely, that the north- 
ern regions have been the birthplace of new forms of land life, 
whence they have extended themselves to the south, while the 
comparative isolation and equable climate of the South Ameri- 
can and Australian regions have enabled them to shelter and 
retain the old and moribund tribes. 

Those smaller portions of land separated from the continen- 
tal masses, the islands properly so called, present, as might be 
expected, many peculiar features. Wallace divides them into 
two classes, tho he admits that these pass into each other. 
Continental islands are those in the vicinity of continents. They 
consist of ancient as well as modern rock-formations, and con. 
tain animals which indicate a former continental connection. 
Some of these are separated from the nearest mainland only by 
shallow seas or straits, and may be assumed to have become 


16 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


islands only in recent geological times. Others are divided 
from the nearest continent by very deep water, so that they 
have probably been longer severed from the mainland. These 
contain more peculiar assemblages of animals and plants than 
the islands of the former class. Oceanic islands are more re- 
mote from the continents. They consist of rocks belonging to 
the more modern geological periods, and contain no animals of 
those classes which can migrate only by land. Such islands 
may be as.:umed never to have been connected with any conti- 
nent. The study of the indigenous population of these various 
classes of islands affords many curious and interesting results, 
which Wallace has collected with vast industry and care, and 
which on the whole he explains in a judicious manner and in 
accordance with the facts of geology. When, however, he main- 
tains that evolution of the Darwinian type is “the key to distri- 
bution,” he departs widely from any basis of scientific fact. 
This becomes apparent when we consider the following results, 
which appear everywhere in the discussion of the various insu- 
lar faunas and floras: (1) None of these islands, however remote, 
can be affirmed to have been peopled by the spontaneous evolu- 
tion of the higher animals or plants from lower forms. Their 
population is in every case not autochthonous, but derived. (2) 
Even in those which are most distant from the continents, and 
may be supposed to have been colonized in very ancient times, 
there is no evidence of any very important modification of their 
inhabitants. (3) While the facts point to the origin of most 
forms of terrestrial life in the Palearctic and Nearctic regions, 
they afford no information as to the manner or cause of their 
origination. In short, so far is evolution from being a key to 
distribution that the whole question would become much more 
simple if this element were omitted altogether. A few exam- 
ples may be useful to illustrate this, as well as the actual explana- 
tion of the phenomena afforded by legitimate science. 

The Azores are situated in a warm temperate latitude about 
goo miles west of Portugal, and separated from it by a sea 2000 
fathoms in. depth. The islands themselves are almost wholly 
volcanic, and the oldest rocks known in them are of late Mio- 
cene age. There is no probability that these islands have ever 
been connected with Europe or Africa, nor is there at present 


sci i ea Se adie ma NR latch Nile ama 


f their 
f most 
2gions, 
f their 
key to 
1 more 
exam- 
‘:plana- 


about 
a 2000 
wholly 
e Mio- 
e ever 
resent 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 17 


any certainty that they have been joined to one another or 
have formed part o° any larger insular tract. In these islands 
there is only one indigenous mammal, a bat, which is identical 
with a European species, and no doubt reached the islands by 
flight. There is no indigenous reptile, amphibian, or fresh-water 
fish. Of birds there are, exclusive of water-fowl, which may be 
regarded as visitors, twenty-two land birds; but of these four 
are regarded as merely accidental stragglers, so that only eigh- 
teen are permanent residents. Of these birds fifteen are com- 
mon European or African species, which must have flown to 
the islands or have beer drifted thither in storms. Of the re- 
maining three, two are found also in Madeira and tie Canaries, 
and therefore may reasonably be supposed to have been de- 
rived from Africa. One only is regarded as peculiar to the 
Azores, and this is a bullfinch, so nearly related to the European 
bullfinch that it may be regarded as merely a local variety. Wa!- 
lace accounts for these facts by supposing that the Azores were 
depopulated by the cold of the glacial age, and that all these 
birds have arrived since that time. There is, however, little 
probability in such a supposition. He further supposes that 
fresh supplies of stray birds from the mainland, arriving from 
time to time, have kept up the identity of the species. Instead 
of evolution assisting him, he has thus somewhat to strain the 
facts to agree with that hypothesis. Similar explanations are 
given for the still more remarkable fact that the land plants of 
the Azores are almost wholly identical with European and Afri- 
can forms. The insects and the land snails are, however, held 
to indicate the evolution of a certain number of new specific 
forms on the islands. The beetles number no less than 212 
species, tho nearly half of them are supposed to have been intro- 
duced by man. Of the whole number 175 are European, Ig are 
found in Madeira and the Canaries, 3 are American. Fourteen 
remain to be accounted for, tho most of these are closely allied 
to European and other species; but a few are quite distinct from 
any elsewhere known. Wallace, however, very truly remarks that 
our knowledge of the continental beetles is not complete, that the 
species in question are small and obscure, that they may be sur. 
vivors 0‘ the glacial period, and may thus represent species now 
extinct on the mainland ; and that for these reasons it may not 


aren et OE EE, 


SR a eek See 


18 LHE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


be irrational to suppose that these peculiar insects either still 
inhabit or did once inhabit some part of the continents, and may 
be portions of “ancient and wide-spread groups” once widely 
diffused, but now restricted to a few insular spots. Among the 
land snails, if anywhere, we should find evidence either of au- 
tochthonous evolution or of specific change. These animals 
have existed on the earth since the Carboniferous period, and, 
notwithstanding their proverbial slowness and sedentary habits, 
they have contrived to colonize every habitable spot of land on 
the globe—that is, unless in some of these places they have 
originated de novo. In the Azores there are sixty-nine species 
of land snails, of which no less than thirty-two, or nearly one 
half, are peculiar, tho nearly all are closely allied to European 
types. What, then, is the origin of these thirty-two species, 
admitting for the sake of argument that they are really dis- 
tinct and not merely varietal forms, tho it is well known that 
in this group species are often unduly multiplied. Three sup- 
positions are possible. (1) These snails may have originated 
in the islands themselves, either by creation or evolution from 
lower forms, say from sea snails. (2) They may have been 
modified from modern continental species. (3) They may be 
unmodified descendants of species of Miocene or Pliocene age 
now existing on the continents only as fossils. As the islands 
appear to have existed since Miocene times, it is no more im- 
probable that species of that or the Pliocene age should have 
found their way to them than that modern species should; and 
as we know only a fraction of the Tertiary species of Europe 
or Africa, it is not likely that we shall be able to identify all of 
these early visitors. Unfortunately no Miocene or Pliocene 
deposits holding remains of land snails are known in the Azores 
themselves, so that this kind of evidence fails us. In Madeira 
and Porto Santo, however, where there are numerous modern 
snails, there are Pliocene beds holding remains of these animals. 
In Madeira there are, according to Lyell, 36 Pliocene species, 
and in Porto Santo 35, and of these only eight are extinct. 
Thus we can prove that many of the peculiar species of these 
islands iiave remained unchanged since Pliocene times. While 
differing from modern European shells, several of these species 
are very near to European Miocene species. Thus we seem to 


poe as oe 


Sas — as a ee 
Ri CRRA BSE 


ong the 
r of au- 
animals 
iod, and, 
y habits, 
land on 


uropean 
species, 
ally dis- 
wn that 
ree sup- 


cene age 
> islands 
nore im- 
Id have 
Id; and 
Europe 
fy all of 
-liocene 
Azores 
Madeira 
modern 
nimals. 
species, 
2xtinct. 
f these 
While 
species 
eem to 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, I9 


have evidence in the Madeira group, not of modification, but of 
unchanged survival of Tertiary species long since extinct in 
Europe. May we not infer that the same was the case in the 
Azores? These results are certainly very striking wher: we con- 
sider how long the Azores must have existed as islands, how very 
rarely animals, and especially pairs of animals, must have reached 
them, and how complete has been the isolation of these animals 
and how peculiar the conditions to which they have been sub- 
jected in their island retreat. 

Other oceanic islands present great varieties of conditions, 
but leading to similar conclusions. Some, as the Bermudas, 
seem to have been settled in very modern times with animals 
and plants nearly all identical with those of neighboring coun- 
tries. Others, like St. Helena, are occupied apparently with old 
settlers, which may have come to them in early Tertiary or even 
in Secondary periods, which have long since become extinct on 
the continents, and whose nearest analogues are now widely scat- 
tered over the world. Islands are therefore places of survival 
of old species—special preserves for forms of life lost to the con- 
tinents. One of the most curious of these, according to Wallace, 
is Celebes, which seems to be a surviving fragment of Miocene 
Asia, which, tho so near to that continent, has been sufficiently 
isolated to preserve its old population during all the vast lapse 
of time between the middle Tertiary and the present period. 
This is a fact which gives to the oceanic islands the greatest 
geological interest, and induces us to look in their actual faune 
and flore for the representatives of species known on the main- 
land only as fossils. It is thus that we look to the marsupials 
of Australia as the nearest analogues of those of the Jurassic of 
Europe, and that we find in the strange barramunda of its 
rivers the only survivor of a group of fishes once widely dis- 
tributed, but which has long since perished elsewhere. 

Perhaps one of the most interesting examples of this is fur- 
nished by the Galapagos Islands, an example the more remark- 
able that no one who has read in Darwin’s fascinating ‘“ Jour- 
nal”’ the description of these islands, can have failed to perceive 
that the peculiarities of th’s strange archipelago must have been 
prominent among the facts which first planted in his mind the 
germ of that theory of the origin of species which has since grown 


20 THE PRINCETON REVIEW, 


to such gigantic dimensions, It is curious also to reflect that had 
the bearing of geological history on the facts of distribution been 
as well known forty years ago as it is now, the reasoning of the 
great naturalist on this and similar cases might have taken an 
entirely different direction. 

The Galapagos are placed exa’tly on the equator, and there- 
fore out of reach of the glacial cold, tho from their isolation in 
the ocean, und the effects of the currents flowing along the 
American coast, their climate is not extremely hot. They are 
600 miles west of South America, and the separating ocean is 
in some parts 3000 fathoms deep. The largest of the islands is 
75 miles in length, and some of the hills attain an elevation of 
about 4000 feet, so that there are considerable varieties of station 
and climate. So far as known they are wholly volcanic, and 
they may be regarded as the summits of submerged mountains 
not unlike in structure to the Andes of the mainland. Their 
exact geological age is unknown, ut there is no improbability 
in supposing that they may have existed with more or iess of ex- 
tension since the Secondary period. In any case their fauna is 
in some respects a survival of that age. Lyell has truly remarked, 
“In the fauna of the Galapagos Islands we have a state of things 
very analogous to that of the Secondary period.” 

Like other oceanic islands, the Galapagos have no indigenous 
mammals, with the doubtful exception of a South American 
mouse; but, unlike most others, they are rich in reptiles. At 
the head of these stand several species of gigantic tortoises. 
This group of animals, so far as known, commenced its exist- 
ence in the Eocene Tertiary; and in this and the Miocene period 
still more gigantic species existe! on the contisents. It has been 
supposed that at some such early date they reached the Galapa- 
gos from South America. Another group of Galapagan reptiles, 
perhaps still more remarkable, is that of iguana-like lizards of 
the genus Amblyrhyncus, which are vegetable feeders,—one of 
them browsing on marine weeds. They recall the great iguana- 
like reptiles of the European Wealden, and stand remote from all 
modern types. There are also snakes of two species, but these 
are South American forms, and may have drifted to the islands 
in comparatively modern times on floating trees. The birds are 
a curious assemblage. A few are common American species 


= Ue ~— 


ee ee 


that had 
tion been 
ng of the 
taken an 


nd there. 
lation in 
long the 
They are 
ocean is 
islands is 
vation of 
f station 
anic, and 
ountains 
Their 
obability 
ss of ex- 
fauna is 
emarked, 
of things 


digenous 
\merican 
les. At 
ortoises. 
its exist- 
|e period 
has been 
Galapa- 
reptiles, 
zards of 
—one of 
iguana- 
from all 
ut these 
islands 
irds are 
species 


| 
| 
; 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 2I 


like the rice-bird. Others are quaint and peculiar creatures 
allied to South American birds, but probably representing forms 
long since extinct on the continent. The bird fauna, as Wallace 
remarks, indicates that some of these animals are cld residents, 
others more recent arrivals; and it is probable that they have 
#rrived at various times since the early Tertiary. He assumes 
shat the earlier arrivals have been modified in the islands “ into 
a variety of distinct types,” but the only evidence of this is that 
some of the species are closely related to each other. It is more 
likely that they represent to our modern eyes the unmodified 
descendants of continental birds of the early Tertiary. Darwin 
remarks that they are remarkably sombre in coloring for equa- 
torial birds; but perhaps their ancestors came from a cooler 
climate and have not been able to don a tropical garb, or per- 
haps they belong to a far-back age when the vegetable kingdom 
also was less rich in coloring than it is at present, and the birds 
were in harmony with it. This, indeed, seems still to be the 
character of the Galapagos plants, which Darwin says have “a 
wretched, weedy appearance,” without gay flowers. 

These plants are in themselves very remarkable, for they are 
largely peculiar species, and are in many cases confined to par- 
ticular islands, having apparently been unable to cross from one 
island to another, tho in some way able to reach the group. 
The explanation is that they resemble North American plants, 
and came to the Galapagos at a time when a wide strait sepa- 
rated North and South America, allowing the equatorial cur- 
rent to pass through and drift plants to the Galapagos, where 
they have been imprisoned ever since. This was probably in 
Pliocene times, and when we know more of the Pliocene flora 
of the southern part of North America we may hope to recover 
some of the ancestors of the Galapagos ,lants. In the mean 
time their probable origin and antiquity, as stated by Wallace, 
render unnecessary any hypothesis of modification. 

Before leaving this subject, it is proper to observe that on the 
continents themselves there are many remarkable cases of isola- 
tion of species, which help us better to understand the conditions 
of insular areas. The “variable hare” of the Scottish highlands 
and of the extreme north of Europe appears again in the Alps, 
the Pyrenees, and the Caucasus, being in these mountains sepa- 


ii 


22 THE PRINCETON REVIEW, 


rated by a thousand miles of apparently impassable country 
from its northern haunts. It no doubt extended itself over the 
intervening plains at a time when Europe was colder than at 
present. Another curious case, which has evidently much iuter- 
ested Mr. Wallace, since he gives a special map to its illustration, 
is that of the marsh-tit of Europe. This little bird is found 
throughout south-western Europe. It reappears in China, but 
is not known anywhere between. In Siberia and northern 
Europe there is, however, a species or distinct race which con- 
nects these isolated patches. In this case, if the Siberian spe- 
cies is truly distinct, we have a remarkable case of isolation and 
of the permanence of identical characters for a long time, for in 
that case this bird must be a survivor of the Pliocene or Mio- 
cene time. - On the other hand, if, as is perhaps more likely, the 
marsh-tit is only a local variety of the Siberian species, we have i 
an illustration of the local recurrence of this form when the 
conditions are favorable, even tho separated by a great space 
and long time. 

The study: of fossils gives us the true meaning of such facts, 
and causes us to cease to wonder at any case of local repetition 4 
of species, however widely separated. The “ big trees” of Cali- 
fornia constitute a remarkable example. There are at present 
two very distinct specics of these trees, both found only in lim- 
ited areas of the western part of North America. Fossil trees 
of the same genus (Seguoza) occur as far back as the Cretaceous 
age; but in this age no less than ten species are known, and 
there were probably more. Nor are they confined to America, 
but occur in various parts of the Eurasian continent as well. Two 
of the Lower Cretaceous species are so near to the two modern 
ones that even an unbelicver in evolution may suppose them to 
be possible ancestors; the remaining eight are distinct, but some 
of them intermediate in their characters. In the Tertiary period, 
intervening between the Cretaceous and the modern, fourteen 
species of Seguota are believed to have been recognized, and 
they appear to have existed abundantly all over the northern 
hemisphere. Thus we know that these remarkable Californian 
giants are the last remnant of a once widely distributed genus, 
originating, so far as known, in the Cretaceous age. Now had 
a grove of Seguotas, however small, survived anywhere in Europe 


Sree a tie elk A te ne St i PRLS a 


iacesill 


country 
ver the 
than at 
th inter- 
stration, 
s found 
ina, but 
orthern 
ich con- 
lan spe- 
ion and 
e, for in 
or Mio- 
cely, the 
we have 
hen the 
it space 


ch facts, 
petition 
of Cali- 

present 
y in lim- 
ssil trees 
etaceous 
ywn, and 
A merica, 
all, Two 
. modern 
them to 
yut some 
y period, 
fourteen 
zed, and 
northern 
lifornian 
-d genus, 
Now had 
1 Europe 


| 
: 
1 
| 
a 
i 


eee cael 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE. 23 


or Asia, and had we no knowledge of the fossil forms, we might 
have been quite at a loss to account for their peculiar distribu- 
tion. The fossil remains of the Tertiary rocks, both animal and 
vegetable, present us with many instances of this kind. 

In his recent work Wallace has done a great service to sci- 
ence, and indeed to humanity, by showing the entire untenable- 
ness of the idea that a land connection existed in recent times 
between Australia and Africa—that hypothetical “continent of 
Lemuria” of which Haeckel has made so much use as the sup- 
posed home of his “alali,” or speechless men, the missing link 
between man and theapes. The theory of the former existence 
of such a continent was based on certain resemblances of the 
animal population of Africa and Madagascar to that of Aus- 
tralia and the Indian Islands. The great depth, however, of the 
intervening sea, as well as the faunz of its islands, preclude the 
supposition of any continental connection; and the history of 
the animals in question, so far as known to us, favors the belief 
that they entered independently into Africa and Australia from 
the great Palearctic region, in which they existed in early Ter- 
tiary times. A similar explanation applies to a few forms of 
plants common to South Africa and Australia. Lemuria thus 
becomes a mere “survival of a provisional hypothesis which 
affords what seems an easy solution of a difficult problem, and 
has received an appropriate and easily remembered name.” It 
is to be feared that it does not stand alone in this respect 
among modern scientific hypotheses. Failing Lemuria, however, 
the doctrine of the “descent of man” becomes more difficult 
than before. This hypothetical continent was connected with 
the habii.ts of our supposed earliest simian ancestors, the 
lemurs, and also with the countries in which we find the lowest 
types of man, as well as with those regions in southern Asia to 
which historical affiliation traces the origin of the earliest na- 
tions. Thus it formed a very convenient region to which to 
refer anxious inquirers after the “ missing link,” and Haeckel 
did not hesitate to affirm that from this perished continent “the 
distribution of the various species and races of men probably 
took place over the surface of the earth.” What new discovery 
or “ provisional hypothesis” will take the place of Lemuria re- 
mains to be seen. In the mean time we have no reason to be- 


24 THF  °INCETON REVIEW. 


lieve that the Tasmania... or the Bushmen are the originals of 
humanity; but may rather conclude that they are degraded 
races produced by banishment to less congenial abodes than the 
original home of the species in the Palearctic region. 

The discussion of the distribution of animals and plants, 
when carried on in the light of geology, raises many interesting 
questions as to time which we have already glanced at, but 
which deserve a little more attention. As to the vast duration 
of geological time all geologists are agreed, and recently the 
advocates of evolution have even exceeded the geologists in such 
demands. It is, however, now well understood that science sets 
certain limits to the time at our disposal. Edward Forbes hu- 
morously defined a geologist to be “an amiable enthusiast who 
is content if allowed to appropriate as much as he pleases of 
that which other men value least, namely, past time:” but now 
even the geologist is obliged to be content with a ] ‘nit -d quan- 
tity of this commodity, and Wallace has the credit 0. oeing the 
first biological evolutionist who has boldly faced this difficulty. 

The well-known estimate of Sir William Thomson gives one 
hundred millions of years as the probable time necessary for the 
change of the earth from the condition of a molten mass to that 
which we now see. On this estimate we might fairly assume 
fifty millions of years as covering the time from the Laurentian 
age to the modern period. Other physicists, however, reason- 
ing on the constitution of the sun, would greatly reduce this 
time, and even confidently affirm that “twenty millions of years 
ago the earth was enveloped in the fiery atmosphere of the 
sun.”? Geology itself has attempted an independent calculation 
based on the wearing down of our continents, which appears 
to proceed at the rate of about'a foot in four or five thousand 
years, and on the time required to deposit the sediments of the 
several geological formations, estimated at about 70,000 feet in 
thickness. These calculations would give us, say, eighty-six mil- 
lions of years since the earth began to have a solid crust, which 
would, like Sir William Thomson’s estimate, give us nearly fifty 
millions of years for the geological time since the introduction 
of life. In revising these calculations a few years ago I was 


1 Newcomb, Helmholtz, Tait, etc. 


4 


orbes hu- 
siast who 
leases of 
but now 
t <d quan- 
peing the 
ifficulty. 

gives one 
ry for the 
ss to that 
y assume 
aurentian 
r, reason- 
duce this 
s of years 
‘e of the 
alculation 
1 appears 
thousand 
its of the 
90 feet in 
y-six mil- 
ist, which 
carly fifty 
roduction 
go I was 


4 
i 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 25 


inclined to fix on forty-eight millions of years as the probable 
limit of available time ; but new facts and suggestions recently 
obtained induce me to think that the modern rates of denuda- 
tion and deposit must be taken as far below the average, and 
that perhaps the estimate stated by Wallace as resulting from 
one mode of calculation, namely, twenty-eight millions, may be 
not far from the truth, tho perhaps admitting of considerable 
abatement. 

This reduced estimate of geological time would still give 
scope enough for the distribution of animals and plants, but 
it will scarcely give that required by certain prevalent theories 
of evolution. When Darwin says, “If the theory (of natural 
selection) be true, it is indisputable that before the lowest Cam- 
brian stratum was deposited long periods elapsed, as long as or 
probably far longer than the whole interval from the Cambrian 
to the present day,” he makes a demand which geology cannot 
supply; for independently of our ignorance of any formations 
or fossi's, except the Laurentian and its Eozodnu, to represent 
this vast succession of life, the time required would push us 
back into a molten state of the planet. This difficulty is akin 
to that which meets us with reference to the introduction of 
many and highly specialized mammals in the Eocene, or of the 
forests of modern type in the Cretaceous. To account for the 
origin of these by slow and gradual evolution requires us to 
push these forms of life so far back into formations which afford 
no trace »° them, but, on the contrary, contain other creatures 
that appear to be exclusive of them, that our faith in the theory 
fails. The only theory of evolution which seems to meet this 
difficulty is that, advanced by Mivart, Leconte, and Saporta, of 
“critical periods,” or periods of rapid introduction of new spe- 
cies alternating with others of comparative inaction. This 
would much better accord with the apparently rapid introduc. 
tion of many new forms of life over wide regions at the same 
period. It would also approach somewhat near, in its manner 
of stating the problem to be solved, to the theory of “crea- 
tion by law” as held by the Duke of Argyll, or to what may 
be regarded as “ mediate creation,” proceeding in a regular and 
definite manner, but under laws and forces as yet very imper- 
fectly known, throughout geological time. 


26 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


It seems singular, in view of the facts of paleontology, that 
evolutionists of the Darwinian school are so wedded to the idea 
of one introduction only of each form of life, and its subsequent 
division by variation into different species, as it progressively 
spreads itself over the globe or is subjected to different external 
conditions. It is evident that a little further and very natu- 
ral extension of their hypothesis would enable them to get rid 
of many difficulties of time and space. For example, certain 
millipedes and batrachians are first known in the coa -formation, 
and this not in one locality only, but in different ans widely sepa- 
rated regions. If they took beginning in one place and spread 
themselves gradually over the world, this must have required a 
vast lapse of time, more than we can suppose probable. But if, 
in the coal-formation age, a worm could anywhere change into a 
millipede, or a fish into a batrachian, why might not this have 
occurred in many places at once? Again, if the oldest known 
land snails occur in the coal-formation and we find no more speci- 
mens till a much later period, why is it necessary to suppose 
that these creatures existed in the intervening time, and that 
the later species are the descendants of the earlier? Might not 
the process have been repeated again and again, so as to give 
animals of this kind to widely separated areas and successive 
periods without the slow and precarious methods of continuous 
evolution and migration? Thisapparent inconsistency strikes one 
constantly in the study of “Island Life,’ when we find the au- 
thor laboriously devising expedients for the introduction of ani- 
mals into the most unlikely places, when it would seem that they 
might just as well have originated in those places by direct evo- 
lution froin lower forms. Those who believe in a separate cen- 
tre of creation for each species must of course invoke all geo- 
logical and geographical possibilities for the dispersion of ani- 
mals and plants; but surely the evolutionist, if he has faith in 
his theory, might take a more easy and obvious method, espe- 
cially when in any case he is under the necessity of demanding 
a great lapse of time. That he does not adopt this method per- 
haps implies a latent suspicion that he must not repeat his mira- 
cle too often. He also perceives that if repeated and unlimited 
evolution of similar forms had actually occurred, there could 
have remained little specific distinctness, and the present rarity 


& 
ei 
3 
i 
ms 


a 
3 
* 


gy, that 
the idea 
bsequent 
essively 
external 
ry natu. 
get rid 
, certain 
mation, 
ely sepa- 
t spread 
quired a 
But if, 
re intoa 
nis have 
known 
re speci- 
suppose 
ind that 
ight not 
to give 
iccessive 
itinuous 
ikes one 
the au- 
1 of ani- 
iat they 
ect evo- 
ate cen- 
all geo- 
of ani- 
faith in 
d, espe- 
landing 
od per- 
is mira- 
limited 
= could 
t rarity 


aA sat 15 hiss iss ae ea ses =e 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 27 


of connecting links would not have occurred. Further, a new 
difficulty would have sprung up in the geographical and geo- 
logical relations of species and genera, which would then have 
assumed too much of the aspect of a preconceived plan. It is 
only fair to a well-known and somewhat extreme European evo- 
lutionist, Karl Vogt, to state that he launches boldly into the 
ocean of multiple evolution, not fearing to hold that identical 
species of mollusks have been separately evolved in separate 
Swiss lakes, and that the. horse has been separately evolved in 
America and in Europe, in the former along a line beginning 
with Zohippus, and in the latter along an entirely separate line 
commencing with Paleotherium. The serious complications 
resulting from such admissions are evident, but Vogt deserves 
credit for faith and consistency beyond those of his teachers. 
With reference to the actual distribution of species, the ques- 
tion of time becomes most important when applied to the glacial 
period, since it is obvious that much of the present distribution 
must have been caused or greatly modified by that event. The 
astronomical theory would place the close of the glacial age 
as far back as 70,000 or 80,000 years ago. But if we reject this 
theory, we are not under this limitation as to time, and the geo- 
logical evidence would lead to the conclusion that the glacial 
period was much nearer to our own epoch. Croll himself has 
shown that in Scotland the removal of material from the surface 
since that period might be taken to indicate a much shorter 
tinie. In Canada, the character of the river-courses cut through 
the glacial beds, and their very unformed and imperfect excava- 
tions, would lead to the belief that only a few thousands of years 
have elapsed since the glar il beds were laid down. The same 
conclusion can be drawn from the good preservation of the gla- 
ciated surfaces and of the shells and bones found on the terraces. 
Similar evidence is afforded by the rate of recession of coasts 
and waterfalls, and by the condition of eskers and lake ridges. 
If we adopt the shorter estimates afforded by these facts, it will 
follow that the submergences and emergences of land in the 
glacial age were more rapid than has hitherto been supposed, 
and that this would react on our estimate of time by giving 
facilities for more rapid denudation and deposition. Such re- 
sults, would greatly shorten the duration assignable to the human 


28 THE PRINCETON REVIEW. 


period. ‘They would render it less remarkable that no new spe- 
cies of animals seem to have been introduced since the glacial 
age, that many insular faunas belong to far earlier times, and 
that no changes even leading to the production of well-marked 
varieties have occurred in the post-glacial or modern age. 

In conclusion, does all this array of fact and reasoning bring 
us any nearer to the comprehension of that “mystery of mys- 
teries,” the origin and succession of life? It certainly does not 
enable us to point to any species and to say precisely here, at 
this time and thus it originated. If we adopt the theory of 
evolution, the facts seem to restrict us to that form of it which 
admits paroxysmal or intermittent introduction of species, de- 
pending on the concurrence of conditions favorable-to the action 
of the power, whatever it may be, which produces new organ- 
isms. Nor is there anything in the facts of distribution to in- 
validate the belief in creation according to definite laws, if that 
really differs in its nature from certain forms of the hypothesis 
of evolution. We have also learned that, time being given, ani- 
mals and plants manifest wonderful powers of migration, that 
they can vary within considerable limits without ceasing to be 
practically the same species, and that under certain conditions 
they can endure far longer in some places than in others. We 
also see evidence that it is not on limited islands but on the con- 
tinents that land animals and plants have originated, and that 
swarms of new and vigorous species have issued from the more 
northern regions in successive periods of favorable arctic cli- 
mate. The last of these new swarms or “centres of creation,” 
that with which man himself is more closely connected, belongs 
to the Palearctic region. We can scarcely be wrong in sup- 
posing that the six months’ sunlight of arctic regions, along with 
abundant heat and moisture, were important factors in the crea- 
tion of many new plants, or at least conditions of their produc- 
tion. In the case of new marine animals we have a double 
source in the equatorial and pola waters, and for the lower 
forms of life principally in the former. In every geological 
period, when the submerged continental plateaus were pervaded 
by the warm equatorial waters, multitudes of new species ap- 
pear. In times when, on the contrary, the colder arctic currents 
poured over these submerged surfaces, carrying mud and stones, 


it which 
ecies, de- 


s, if that 
pothesis 
iven, ani- 
tion, that 
ing to be 
onditions 
ers. We 
1 the con- 
and that 
the more 
arctic cli- 
reation,” 
, belongs 
r in sup- 
ong with 
the crea- 
‘ produc- 
1 double 
1e lower 
2ological 
yervaded 
cies ap- 
currents 
1 stones, 


ales cca |. 


CONTINENTAL AND ISLAND LIFE, 29 


great extinction took place, but certain northern forms of life 
swarmed abundantly. “Everywhere and at all times multiplica- 
tion of species was promoted by facilities for expansion. The 
great limestones of our continents, full of corals and shells of new 
species, belong to times when the ocean spread itself over the 
continental plateaus, affording wide, untenanted areas of warm 
and shallow water. The introduction of new faunas and floras 
on the land belongs to times when vast supplies of food for plants 
and animals and favorable conditions of existence were afforded 
by the emergence of new lands possessing fertile soils and abun- 
dantly supplied with light, heat, and moisture. Thus geological 
and geographical facts concur with ordinary observation and 
experience in reference to varietal forms, in testifying that it is 
not mere struggle for existence, but facilities for easy existence 
and rapid extension, that afford the conditions necessary for new 
and advanced forms of life. These considerations do not of 
course reach to the first cause of the introduction of species, nor 
even to the precise mode in which this may have acted in any 
particular case; but perhaps we cannot fully attain to tuais by 
any process of inductive inquiry. The study of geographical 
distribution, therefore, does not enable us to solve the question 
of the origin of specific types, but, on the contrary, points to 
marvellous capacities for migration and a wonderful tenacity of 
life in species. In these respects, however, it is a study full of 
interest, and in nothing more so than in the evidence which it 
affords of the practically infinite provisions made for the peo- 
pling of every spot of land or sea with creatures fitted to flourish 
and enjoy life therein, and to carry on the great and progressive 


plan of the Creator. 
J. W. Dawson. 


