The Geographical Distribution of Animals, Vol. 1 (Alfred Russel Wallace, 1876)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1876 first edition, Vol. 1 (https://archive.org/details/geographicaldis04wallgoog). Alfred Russel Wallace (1823-1913) - the founding text of zoogeography, Vol. 1.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


THE   GEOGEAPHICAL 

DISTRIBUTION   OF   ANIMALS. 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


THE  GBOGKAPHICAL 

DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


WITH  A  STUDY  OF  THE  RELATIONB  OF  LIVING  AND  EXTINCT 

FAUNAS  AS  BLUCmATING  THE  PAST  CHANGES 

OF  THE  EAETH'S  SURFACE. 


By  ALFRED  RXJSSEL  WALLACE, 


IN    TWO  VOLtJJVtES. 

Vol.  I. 


MTH    MAPS    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


NEW    YORK: 
HABPEE    &    BROTHERS,    PUBLISHERS, 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


PREFACE. 

The  present  work  is  an  attempt  to  collect  and  summarize  the 
existing  information  on  tlie  Distribution  o£  Land  Animals; 
and  to  explain  the  more  lemarkahle  and  interesting  of  the 
facts,  by  means  of  established  laws  of  physical  and  organic 
change. 

The  main  idea,  which  is  here  worked  out  in  some  detail  for 
the  whole  earth,  was  stated  sixteen  years  ago  in  the  concluding 
pages  of  a  paper  on  the  "  Zoological  Gec^raphy  of  the  Malay 
Archipelago,"  which  appeared  in  the  Jownal  of  Proceedings  oj 
the  Linnean  Society  for  1860 ;  and  again,  in  a  paper  read  before 
the  Eoyal  Gfeographieal  Society  in  1863,  it  was  briefly  sum- 
marized in  the  following  passage  : — 

"My  object  has  been  to  show  the  important  bearing  of 
researches  into  the  natural  history  of  every  part  of  the  world, 
upon  the  study  of  its  past  history.  An  accurate  knowledge  of 
any  groups  of  birds  or  of  insects  and  of  their  geographical  dis- 
tribution, may  enable  us  to  map  out  the  islands  and  continents 
of  a  former  epoch, — the  amount  of  difference  that  exists  be- 
tween the  animals  of  adjacent  districts  being  closely  related 
to  preceding  geological  changes.  By  the  collection  of  such 
minute  facts,  alone,  can  we  hope  to  fill  up  a  great  gap  in  the 


by  Google 


past  history  of  the  earth  as  revealed  by  geology,  and  obtain 
some  indications  of  the  existence  of  tlioae  ancient  lands  which 
now  lie  buried  beneath  the  ocean,  and  have  left  us  nothing  but 
these  living  records  of  their  former  exifitence." 

The  detailed  study  of  several  groups  of  the  birds  and  insects 
collected  by  myself  in  the  East,  brought  prominently  before  me 
some  of  the  curious  problems  of  Geographical  Distribution; 
but  I  should  hardly  have  ventiu-ed  to  treat  the  whole  subject, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  kind  encouragement  of  Mr.  Darwin  and 
Professor  Newton,  who,  about  six  years  ago,  both  suggested  that 
I  ghould  undertake  the  task.  I  accordingly  set  to  work ;  but 
soon  became  discouraged  by  the  great  dearth  of  materials  in 
many  groups,  the  absence  of  general  systematic  works,  and  the 
excessive  confusion  that  pervaded  the  classification.  ^Neither 
was  it  easy  to  decide  on  any  satisfactory  method  of  treating 
the  subject.  '  During  the  next  two  years,  however,  several  im- 
portant catalogues  and  systematic  treatises  appeared,  which 
induced  me  to  resume  my  work ;  and  during  the  last  three  years 
it  has  occupied  a  large  portion  of  my  time. 

After  much  consideration,  and  some  abortive  trials,  an  outline 
plan  of  the  book  was  matured ;  and  as  this  is,  so  far  as  I  am 
aware,  quite  novel,  it  will  be  well  to  give  a  few  of  the  reasons 
for  adopting  it. 

Most  of  the  previous  writiugs  on  Geographical  Distribution 
appeared  to  me  to  be  unsatisfactory,  because  they  drew  their 
couclu&ions  from  a  more  or  leas  extensive  selection  of  facts ;  and 
did  not  cleaily  separate  groups  of  facts  of  unequal  value,  or 
tho^e  relatmg  to  groups  of  animals  of  unequal  rank.  As  an 
example  of  what  is  meant,  I  may  refer  to  Mr..  Andrew  Murray's 
large  and  valuable  work  on  the  Geographical  Distribution  of 
Mammalia,  m  which  an  immense  number  of  coloured  maps  are 


by  Google 


PKEFACE. 


used  to  illustrate  the  distribution  of  various  groups  o 
These  maps  are  not  confined  to  groups  of  any  iixed  rank,  but 
are  devoted  to  a  selection  of  gioups  of  various  grades.  Some 
show  the  range  of  single  species  of  a  genua — as  the  Hon,  the 
tiger,  the  puma,  and  a  species  of  fox ;  others  are  devoted  to 
sections  of  genera, — as  the  true  wolves ;  others  to  genera, — as  the 
hysenas,  and  the  bears ;  others  to  portions  of  families, — as  the 
flying  scLuirrels,  and  the  oxen  with  the  bisons ;  others  to  families, 
— as  the  MuatelidEe,  and  the  Hystricidse;  and  others  to  groups 
of  families  or  to  orders, — as  the  Insectivora,  and  the  opossums 
with  the  kangaroos.  But  in  no  one  grade  are  all  the  groups 
treated  aUke.  Many  genera  are  wholly  unnoticed,  while  several 
families  are  only  treated  in  combination  with  others,  or  are 
represented  by  some  of  the  more  important  genera. 

In  making  these  observations  I  by  no  means  intend  to 
criticise  Mr.  Murray's  book,  but  merely  to  illustrate  by  an 
example,  the  method  which  has  been  hitherto  employed,  and 
which  seems  to  me  not  well  adapted  to  enable  us  to  establish 
the  foundations  of  the  science  of  distribution  on  a  secure  basis. 
To  do  this,  uniformity  of  treatment  appeared  to  me  essential, 
both  as  a  matter  of  principle,  and  to  avoid  all  imputation  of  a 
partial  selection  of  facts,  which  may  be  made  to  prove  anything. 
I  determined,  therefore,  to  take  in  succession  every  well-estab- 
lished family  of  terrestrial  vertebrates,  and  to  give  an  account  of 
the  distribution  of  all  its  component  genera,  as  far  as  materials 
were  available.  Species,  as  such,  are  systematically  disregarded, 
— firstly,  because  they  are  so  numerous  as  to  be  unmanageable ; 
and,  secondly,  because  they  represent  the  most  recent  modifica- 
tions of  form,  due  to  a  variety  of  often  unknown  causes,  and 
are  therefore  not  so  clearly  connected  with  geographical  changes 
as  are  the  natural  grpups  of  species  termed  genera ;  which  may 
be  considered  to   represent  the  average  and  more  permanent 


by  Google 


viii  PREFACE. 

distribution  of  an  organic  type,  and  to  be  more  clearly  influenced 
by  the  various  known  or  inferred  changes  ia  the  o^anie  and 
physical  environment. 

This  systematic  review  of  the  distribution  of  families  and 
genera,  now  forma  the  last  part  of  my  book — Geographical 
Zoology;  but  it  was  nearly  the  first  written,  and  the  copious 
materials  collected  for  it  enabled  me  to  determine  the  zoo- 
geographical  divisions  of  the  earth  (regions  and  sub-regions)  to 
be  adopted.  I  next  drew  up  tables  of  the  families  and  genera 
found  in  each  region  and  aub-iegion  ;  and  this  afforded  a  basis 
for  the  geographical  treatment  of  the  subject — Zoological  Geo- 
graphy— the  most  novel,  and  pei-haps  the  most  useful  and 
generally  interestii^  part  of  my  work.  "While  this  was  in  progress 
I  found  it  necessary  to  make  a  careful  summary  of  the  distribu- 
tion of  extinct  Mammalia.  This  was  a  difficult  task,  owing 
to  the  great  uncertainty  that  prevails  as  to  the  affinities  of  many 
of  tlie  fossils,  and  my  want  of  practical  acquaintance  with 
Palfeontology ;  but  having  carefully  examined  and  combined 
the  works  of  the  best  authors,  I  have  given  what  I  believe  is 
the  first  connected  sketch  of  the  relation  of  extinct  Mammalia 
to  the  distribution  of  living  groups,  and  have  arrived  at  some 
very  intereatii^  and  suggestive  results. 

It  will  be  observed  that  man  is  altogether  omitted  from 
the  series  of  the  animal  kingdom  as  here  given,  and  some  ex- 
planation of  this  omission  may  perhaps  be  required.  If  the 
genus  Homo  had  been  here  treated  like  all  other  genera,  nothing 
more  than  the  bare  statement—"  universally  distributed " — 
could  have  been  given; — and  this  would  inevitably  have  pro- 
voked the  criticism  that  it  conveyed  no  information.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  I  had  given  an  outline  of  the  distribution  of  the 
varieties  or  races  of  man,  I  should  have  departed  from  the  plan 
of  my  work  for  no  sufficient  reason.     Anthropology  is  a  science 


by  Google 


PREFACE.  is 

by  itself;  and  it  seems  better  to  omit  it  altogether  from  a 
zoological  wort,  than  to  treat  it  in  a  necesaarily  superficial 
manner. 

The  best  method  of  illustrating  a  work  of  this  kind  was  a 
matter  requiring  much  conaideration.  To  hare  had  a  separate 
coloured  or  shaded  map  for  each  family  would  have  made 
the  -work  too  costly,  as  the  terrestrial  vertebrates  alone 
would  have  required  more  than  three  hundred  maps.  I  had 
also  doubts  about  the  value  of  this  mode  of  iUuatration,  as  it 
seemed  rather  to  attract  attention  to  details  than  to  favour  the 
development  of  general  views.  T  determined  therefore  to  adopt 
a  plan,  suggested  in  conversation  by  Professor  Newton ;  and  to 
have  one  general  map,  showing  the  regions  and  sub-regions, 
which  could  be  referred  to  by  means  of  a  series  of  numbers. 
These  references  I  give  in  the  form  of  diagrammatic  headings 
to  each  family ;  and,  when  the  map  has  become  familiar, 
these  will,  I  believe,  convey  at  a  glance  a  body  of  important 
information. 

Taking  advantage  of  the  recent  extension  of  our  knowledge 
of  the  depths  of  the  great  oceans,  I  determined  to  give  upon  this 
map  a  summary  of  our  knowledge  of  the  contours  of  the  ocean 
bed,  by  means  of  tints  of  colour  increasing  in  intensity  with 
the  depth.  Such  a  map,  when  it  can  be  made  generally  accurate, 
will  be  of  the  greatest  service  in  forming  an  estimate  of  the 
more  probable  changes  of  sea  and  land  during  the  Tertiary 
period ;  and  it  is  on  the  effects  of  such  changes  that  any  satis- 
factory explanation  of  the  facts  of  distribution  must  to  a  great 
extent  depend. 

Other  important  factors  in  determining  the  actual  distribution 
of  animals  are,  the  zones  of  altitude  above  the  sea  level,  and  the 
strongly  contrasted  character  of  the  surface  as  regards  vege- 
tation— a  primary  condition  for  the  support  of  animal  life.     I 


by  Google 


x  PEEFACB. 

therefore  designed  a  series  of  six  maps  of  the  regions,  drawn  on 
a  uniform  scale,  on  which  the  telts  of  altitude  are  shown  Idj 
contoui-shading,  while  the  forests,  pastures,  deserts,  and  peren- 
nial snows,  are  exhibited  hy  means  of  appropriate  tints  of  colour. 

These  maps  will,  I  trust,  facilitate  the  study  of  geographical 
distribution  as  a  science,  by  showing,  in  some  cases,  an  adequate 
cause  in  the  nature  of  the  terrestrial  surface  for  the  actual  dis- 
tribution of  certain  groups  of  animals.  As  it  is  hoped  they  wiU 
be  constantly  referred  to,  double  folding  has  been  avoided,  and 
they  are  consec[uently  rather  small ;  but  Mr.  Stanford,  and  his 
able  assistant  in  the  map  department,  Mr.  Bolton,  have  taken 
great  care  in  working  out  the  details  from  the  latest  observations ; 
and  this,  combined  with  the  clearness  and  the  beauty  of  their 
execution,  will  I  trust  render  them  both  interesting  and  in- 
structive. 

In  order  to  make  the  book  more  intelbgible  to  those  readers 
who  have  no  special  knowledge  of  systematic  zoology,  and  to 
whom  most  of  the  names  with  which  its  pages  are  often  crowded 
must  necessarily  be  unmeaning,  I  give  a  series  of  twenty  plates, 
each  one  illustrating  at  once  the  physical  aspect  and  the  special 
zoological  character  of  some  well-marked  division  of  a  region. 
Great  care  has  been  taken  to  associate  in  the  pictures,  such  species 
only  as  do  actually  occur  together  in  nature ;  so  that  each  plate 
represents  a  scene  which  is,  at  all  events,  not  an  impossible  one. 
The  species  figured  all  belong  to  groups  which  are  either  pecu- 
liar to,  or  very  characteristic  of,  the  region  whose  zoology  they 
Oluatrate;  and  it  is  hoped  that  these  pictures  will  of  themselves 
serve  to  convey  a  notion  of  the  varied  types  of  the  higher 
animals  in  their  true  geographical  relations.  The  artist,  Mr.  J. 
B.  Zwecker,  to  whose  talent  as  a  zoological  draughtsman  and 
great  knowledge  both  of  animal  and  vegetable  forms  we  are 
indebted  for  this  set  of  drawings,  died  a  few  weeks  after  he 


by  Google 


PREFACE.  si 

i  put  the  final  touches  to  the  pmofs.  He  is  known  to  many 
3  by  his  vigorous  illustrations  of  the  works  of  Sir  Samuel 
Baker,  Livingstone,  and  many  otlier  travellers, — ^but  these,  his 
last  series  of  plates,  were,  at  my  special  request,  executed  with 
a  care,  delicacy,  and  artistic  finish,  which  his  other  designs 
seldom  exhibit.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered,  that  the 
figures  of  animals  here  given  are  not  intended  to  show  specific 
or  generic  characters  for  the  information  of  the  scientific  zoolo- 
gist, but  merely  to  give  as  accurate  an  idea  as  possible,  of  some 
of  the  more  remarkable  and  more  restricted  types  of  beast  and 
bird,  amid  the  characteristic  scenery  of  their  native  country; — 
and  in  carrying  out  this  object  there  are  probably  few  artists 
who  would  have  succeeded  better  than  Mr.  Zwecker  has 
done. 

The  general  arrangement  of  the  separate  parts  of  which  the 
work  is  composed,  has  been,  to  some  extent,  determuied  by 
the  illustrations  and  maps,  which  all  more  immediately  belong 
to  Part  III.  It  was  at  first  intended  to  place  this  part  last,  but 
as  this  arrangement  would  have  brcight  aU  the  illustrations 
into  the  second  volume,  its  place  was  changed, — perhaps  in 
other  respects  for  the  better,  as  it  naturally  follows  Part  II. 
Yet  for  persons  no  well  quainted  with  zoology,  it  will  per- 
haps be  advisabl  o  ad  h  more  important  articles  of  Part 
IV,  (and  espec  ally  1  ol  'ations  at  the  end  of  each  order) 
after  Part  II.  1  n  k  Part  III.  the  conclusion  of  the 
work. 

Part  IV.  is,  in  fact,  a  book  of  reference,  in  which  the  distri- 
bution of  all  the  families  and  most  of  the  genera  of  the  higher 
animals,  is  given  in  systematic  order.  Part  III.  is  treated 
somewhat  more  popularly;  and,  although  it  is  necessarily 
crowded  with  scientific  names  (without  which  the  inferences 


by  Google 


sii  PREJACE, 

and  conclusions  would  have  nothing  solid  to  rest  on),  these  may 
be  omitted  by  the  non-acientifie  reader,  or  merely  noted  as  a 
certain  number  or  proportion  of  peculiar  generic  types.  Many 
English  equivalents  to  family  and  generic  names  are,  however, 
given;  and,  assisted  by  these,  it  is  believed  that  any  reader 
capable  of  understanding  Lyell's  "Principles,"  or  Darwin's 
"  Origin,"  ■wiU  have  no  difSculty  in  following  the  main  argu- 
ments and  appreciatii^  the  chief  conclusions  arrived  at  in  the 
present  work. 

To  those  who  are  more  interested  in  facts  than  in  theories, 
the  book  will  serve  as  a  kind  of  dictionary  of  the  geography 
and  affinities  of  animals.  By  means  of  the  copious  Index,  the 
native  country,  the  systematic  position,  and  the  numerical 
extent  of  every  important  and  well  established  genus  of  land- 
animal  may  be  at  once  discovered ; — information  now  scattered 
through  hundreds  of  volumes. 

In  the  difficult  matters  of  synonymy,  and  the  orthography  of 
generic  names,  I  have  been  guided  rather  by  general  utility 
than  by  any  fixed  rules.  When  I  Lave  taken  a  whole  family 
group  from  a  modem  author  of  repute,  I  have  generally  followed 
bis  nomenclatiire  throughout.  In  other  cases,  I  use  the  names 
which  are  to  he  found  in  a  majority  of  modem  authors,  rather 
than  follow  the  strict  rule  of  priority  in  adopting  some  newly 
dkicovered  appellation  of  early  dat€.  In  orthography  I  have 
adopted  all  such  modern  emendations  as  seem  coming  into 
general  use,  and  which  do  not  lead  to  inconvenience  ;  but  where 
the  alteration  is  such  as  to  completely  change  the  pronunciation 
and  appearance  of  a  weU-known  word,  I  have  not  adopted  it. 
I  have  also  thought  it  best  to  preserve  the  initial  letter  of  well- 
known  and  old-established  names,  for  convenience  of  reference 
to  the  Indices  of  established  works.  As  an  example  I  may  refer 
to  Enimrus, — a  name  which  has  been  in   use  nearly  half  a 


by  Google 


PBEFACE.  xiii 

century,  and  which  is  to  be  found  under  the  letter  E,  in  Jerdon's 
Birds  of  India,  Blyth's  Catalogue,  Bonaparte's  Conspectus,  and 
the  Proceedings  o£  the  Zoological  Society  of  London  down  to 
1865.  Classicists  now  write  Smicwus  as  the  correct  form ; 
hut  this  seems  to  me  one  of  those  cases  in  which  orthographical 
accuracy  should  give  way  to  priority,  and  stOl  more  to  con- 
venience. 

In  combining  and  arranging  so  much  detail  from  such  varied 
sources,  many  errors  and  omissions  must  doubtless  have  occurred, 
Owing  to  my  residence  at  a  distance  from  the  scientific  libraries 
of  the  metropolis,  I  was  placed  at  a  great  disadvantage ;  and  I 
could  hardly  have  completed  the  work  at  all,  had  I  not  been 
permitted  to  have  a  large  number  of  volumes  at  once,  from  the 
library  of  the  Zoological  Society  of  London,  and  to  keep  them 
for  months  together.; — a  privilege  for  which  I  return  my  best 
thanks  to  Mr.  Sclater  the  Secretary,  and  to  the  Council. 

Should  my  book  meet  with  the  approval  of  working  natu- 
ralists, I  venture  to  appeal  to  them,  to  assist  me  in  rendering 
any  future  editions  more  complete,  by  sending  me  (to  the  care  of 
my  publishers}  notes  of  any  important  omissions,  or  corrections 
of  any  misstatements  of  fa<;t ;  as  weU  as  copies  of  any  of  their 
papers  or  essays,  and  especially  of  any  lists,  catalogues,  and 
monographs,  containing  information  on  the  classification  or 
distribution  of  living  or  extinct  animals. 

To  the  many  friends  who  have  given  me  information  or 
assistance  I  beg  to  tender  my  sincere  thanks.  Especially  am  I 
indebted  to  Professor  Newton,  who  not  only  read  through  much 
of  my  rov^h  MSS.,  but  was  so  good  as  to  make  numeroijs  cor- 
rections and  critical  notes.  These  were  of  great  value  to  me,  as 
they  often  contained  or  sn^ested  important  additional  matter, 
or  pointed  out  systematic  and  orthographical  i: 


by  Google 


Professor  Flower  was  so  good  as  to  read  over  my  chapters  on 
extinct  animals,  and  to  point  out  several  errors  into  which  I  liad 
fallen. 

Dr.  Giinther  gave  me  much  valuable  information  on  the 
classifica.tion  of  reptiles,  marking  on  my  lists  the  beet  established 
and  most  natural  genera,  and  referring  me  to  reliable  sources  of 
information. 

I  am  also  greatly  indebted  to  the  following  gentlemen  for 
detailed  information  on  special  subjects  : — 

To  Sir  Victor  Brooke,  for  a  MS.  arrangement  of  the  genera 
of  Eovidffi,  with  the  details  of  their  distribution : 

■To  Mr.  Dresser,  for  lists  of  the  characteristic  birds  of  Northern 
and  Arctic  Europe : 

To  Dr.  Hooker,  for  information  on  the  colours  and  odours  of 
New  Zealand  plants : 

To  Mr.  Kirby,  for  a  list  of  the  butterflies  of  Ohili : 

To  Professor  Mivart,  for  a  classification  of  the  Eatrachia,  and 
an  early  proof  of  his  article  on  "  Apes "  in  the  Eucycltfpedia 
Britannica : 

To  Mr.  Salvin,  for  correcting  my  list  of  the  birds  of  tbe 
Galapagos,  and  for  other  assistance : 

To  Mr.  Sharpe,  for  MS.  lists  of  the  birds  of  Madagascar 
and  the  Cape  Verd  Islands: 

To  Canon  Tristram,  for  a  detailed  arrangement  of  the  difficult 
family  of  the  warblers, — SylviidiB : 

To  Viscount  Walden,  for  notes  on  the  systematic  arrangement 
of  tbe  Pycnonotidje  and  TimaliidiE,  and  for  an  early  proof  of 
bis  list  of  the  birds  of  the  Philippine  Islands. 

I  also  have  to  thank  many  naturalists,  both  in  this  coun- 
try and  abroad,  who  have  sent  me  copies  of  their  papers; 
and  I  trust  they  will  continue  to  favour  me  in  the  same 
manner. 


by  Google 


An  author  may  easily  be  mistaken  in  estimating  his  own 
work.  I  am  well  aware  that  this  first  outline  of  a  great 
subject  is,  in  parts,  very  meagre  and  sketchy;  and,  though 
perhaps  overburthened  with  some  kinds  of  detail,  yet  leaves 
many  points  most  inadequately  treated.  It  is  therefore  with 
some  hesitation  that  I  venture  to  express  the  hope  that  I  have 
made  some  approach  to  the  standard  of  excellence  I  have  aimed 
at ; — which  was,  that  my  book  sLould  bear  a  similar  relation  to 
the  eleventh  and  twelfth  chapters  of  the  "  Origin  of  Species,"  as 
Hr,  DaiTvin's  "  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication  "  does 
to  the  iirst  chapter  of  that  work.  Should  it  be  judged  worthy 
of  such  a  rank,  my  long,  and  often  wearisome  labours,  will  be 
well  repaid. 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   EIRST  VOLUME. 

PAET  I. 
THE   PRINCIPLES  AND  GENEKAL  PHEHOMERA  OF  DISTRIBUTION. 

CHAPTER     I. 


leans  of  Dispersal  of  Mammalia,  {p.  10) — Climate  as  a,  Limit  to  the  Range  of 
Mammals  (p.  II)— Valleys  and  Kivtra  as  BaiTiera  to  Mammals  (p.  12)— Anna 
of  the  Sea  as  Barriers  to  Mammals  (]).  13)^Ioe-lloBa  and  drift-wood  as  aiding 
the  Diapersal  of  Mammals  (p,  14) — Means  of  Dispersal  of  Birds  (p.  15) — Dis- 
persal of  Birds  by  Winda  {p.  16)~Barrier9  to  the  Dispersal  of  Birds  (j).  17)— 
The  Phenomena  of  Migration  (p.  18)— Migrations  of  Birds  (p.  IB)— General 
remarks  ou  Migration  (p.  25) — Means  of  Dispersal  of  Beptilea  and  Amphibia 
(p.  28) — Meansof  Dispersal  of  yiahes  (ii.  29)— Means  of  Diaperaai  of  Mollnsca 
(p.  SO)— Means  of  Dispersal  of  Insects  and  the  Barriers  which  limit  their 
Bangc  (p.  32) 10—31 

CHAPTER  m. 


Land  and  Water  (p.  35) — Continental  Areas  (p.  36)— Beeent  Changes  in  the  Con- 
tinental Areas  (p.  88) — The  Glacial  Epoch  as  affecting  the  Distiibution  of 
Animals  (p.  10)- — Changes  of  Vegetation  as  afTecting  the  Distribution  of  Ani- 
mals (p.  43)— Oiganio  Changes  as  affecting  DietribHtion  (p.  44)         .     36 — 49 

Vol.  I.— 2 


by  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Principles  upon  which  Zoological  Begiocs  should  be  formed  (p.  53) — WMch  class 
of  Animals  ia  of  most  importance  in  determining  Zoological  Regions  (p.  6(1) — 
Tarioua  Zoological  Regions  proposed  since  1857  (p.  68)— Discussion  of  proposed 
Regions  (p.  81)^ReBaons  for  adopting  tiie  Six  Regions  first  proposed  by  Mr, 
Solater  {p.  63) — Objections  to  the  system  of  Circumpolar  Zoaea  (p.  97) — Does 
the  Arctic  Fauna  eharaoteriae  an  independent  Region  (p. 68) — Paliearctic  Region 
(p.  71) — lithiopian  Region  (p.  73) — Oriental  Region  (p.  76) — Australian  Ee- 
giocfp.  77)— Neotropical  Region  (p.  78) — Kearctic  Region  (p.  79)^Observations 
on  the  series  of  Sab-repons  (p,  80) 50—82 


mSTKIBUTIOK. 

CkssiBcation  of  the  Mammalia  (p.  86)— Classificatioii  of  Birds  (p.  92>— Classifica- 
tion of  Reptiles  (p.  B8)—Classiilca,tioQ  of  Amphibia  (p.  1 00)— ClBseification  of 
Fishes  (p.  101)— Classification  of  Insects  (p.  102) — Classification  of  Mollnsea 
(p.  104) 83-104 


PART  II. 
ON  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT   ANIMALS. 

CHAPTER  TI. 


Historic  and  Post-pliocene  Period  (p.  110)- PI  oo        P  n  d  (p    112)— G  n     1 

Conclusions  Bs  to  the  Pliocene  and  P    tphjc  F      as    fE      po  (p   113) — 

Miocene  Period  (p.  114)— Extinct  Aiu     Is   f  G.  (p  116)— M            F  nn 

of  Central  and  Western  Europe  {p.  117) — ^Upp  M  ocen    D  post     f  Ind 

(p.  121)— General  Obsen-ntions  on  th    M  F      as   f  B      p         I  As 

(p.   123)— Eocene  Period  (p.  124)— G      ral  C  n   d     ti               th     E  t     t 

Mammalian  Famia  of  Euiope  (p.  12fl)  107—128 


by  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


CHAPTER  Til. 


Forth  America— Post-plioeene  Period  (p.  129)— Eemarke  on  tlie  Poat-pliocene 
FiHma  of  Foi-th  America  (p.  130)— Tertiary  Period  (p.  I32>— Primates  (p.  32) 
Inseotivora  (p.  133) — Cainivora  [p.  ISi) — Ungulata  {p.  135)^Proboscidea 
(p.l38)— Tillodontia  (p.l89)— Rodentia  (p.  140)— General  Relations  of  theEi- 
tinct  Tertiary  Mammalia  of  North  America  and  Europe  (pl40)— Sonth  Ame- 
rica (p.  143]— Fauna  of  the  Brazilian  Paves  (p.  143)— Pliocene  Period  of  Tem- 
pemto  South  America  (p.  146) — Pliocono  Mammalia  of  the  Antilles  (p.  148) — 
Eocene  Fauna  of  South  America  (p.  148) — General  Ktmarks  on  the  Extinct 
Mammalian  Fauna  of  the  Old  and  New  Worlds  (p.  148) — The  Birth-place  and 
Migrations  of  some  Mammalian  Families  atid  Genera  (p.  153)  .     129 — 156 

CHAPrER  VIIl. 

ND   ON   THE   ANTIQUITY  Of  THE  GBHBEA   Or 


Eittinot  Mammalia  of  Australia  (p  157) — Mammalian  Remains  of  the  Secondary 
Formations  (p,  159)— Extinct  Bii'ds  (p.  169)— Palieflrctio  Region  and  North 
Iinlia  (p,  161) — North  America  (p.  163)— South  America,  Madagascar,  New 
Zealand  (p.  164)- Extinct  Tertiary  Reptiles  (p.  165)— Anti([nity  ofthe  Genera 
of  Insects  (p.  166)— Antiquity  of  the  Genera  of  Land  and  Fresh-water  Sheila 
(p.  168) 167—170 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY  ;  A  REVIEW  OF  THE  CHIEF  FORMS  OF  LIFE 
IN  THE  SEVERAL  KEGIOKS  AND  SUB-BEGIOHS,  WITH  THE  INDICA- 
TIONS THEY  AFFORD  OF  GEOGRAPHICAL  MUrATIONS. 

CHAPTEE  IX. 


Order  of  Bucceesion  of  the   Eegbna   (p.  173)— Cosmopolitan  Groups  (p.  17E) — 
Tahles  of  Distributions  of  Families  and  Genera  (p.  177)         .         .     173—179 


by  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIKST  VOLUME. 


Characterietics  of  the  Paloearctic  Region  (p.  181) — Summary  of  Palie- 
arctic  Vertebtata  (j>.  ISB)— Inaocta  (p.  187)— Land-ahel!s  (p.  100)— The  PaJse- 
Bictic  Sub-regions  (p.  180) — Central  and  Northom  Europe  (p.  191) — North 
Enropean  Islands  (p.  197) — Mediterranean  Sub-region  (p.  199) — The  Mediter- 
ranean and  Atlantic  lalanda  (p.  206)  —The  SibBrian  Sub-region,  or  Northern 
Asia  (p,  216) — Japan  and  North  China,  or  the  Manehurian  Sub-iegion  (p.  220) 
— Birds  (p.  223) — Insects  (p.  227)— Kemarks  on  the  General  Character  of  the 
Fauna  of  Japan  (p.  230)— General  Gonoluaions  as  to  the  Fauna  of  thePal^- 
aretie  Region  (p.  231) — Table  I.  Families  of  Animals  inhabiting  the  Palie- 
arctio  Begion  (p.  28^)— Table  II.  List  of  the  Genera  of  Terrestrial  Mammalia 
and  Birda  of  the  Pdiearctio  Region  (p.  289)  ....     181-260 


CHAFTIE  XI. 


Zoological  Characteristicfi  of  the  Ethiopian  Ii«^on  (p.  252)~Sumni(U7  of  Ethio- 
pian Tertebrates  (p,  2B5]— The  Ethiopian  Sub-regions  (p.  2iS8)— The  East 
Africen  Sab-region,  or  Central  and  East  Afiioa  (p.  2S8)— The  West  AWcan 
Sub-region  (p.  282) — Islands  of  the  West  African  Sub-region  (p.  265) — South 
African  Sub-region  (p.  266) — Atlantic  Islands  of  the  Ethiopian  Region ; — St 
Helena  (p.  269)— Tristan  d'Acunlia  (p.  371) — Madagascar  and  the  Maecarene 
Islands,  or  the  Malagasy  Sub-region  (p.  272) — The  Mascarene  Islands  (p.  280) 
— ExUnot  Fauna  of  the  Mascarene  Islands  and  Madagascar  (p.  282) — General 
Eemarlrs  on  the  Insect  Fauna  of  Madagascar  (p.  284)— On  the  probable  Past 
History  of  the  Ethiopian  Eegion  (p.  286) — Table  I.  Families  of  Animals 
inhabiting  the  Ethiopian  Region  (p.  294)- Table  II.  List  of  Genera  of  Ter- 
restrial Mammalia  and  Birfs  of  the  Ethiopian  Region  (p.  300|     .     251—313 


CHAPTER  XII. 


Zoolc^cal  Characteristies  of  the  Oriental  Bi^gion  (p.  315)— Summary  of  Oriental 
Veiiebrata  (p.  318) — The  Oriental  Sub-regions  (p.  821 )- Hindostan,  or  Indian 
Sub-wgion  {p.  321) — Range  of  the  Genera  of  Mammalia  which  inhabit  the  Sub- 
region  of  Hindostan  (p.  322)— Oriental,  PalsearcUo,  and  Ethiopian  Genera  of 
Birda  in  Central  India  (p.  224) — Sub-region  of  Ceylon  and  South  India 
(p.  326)— The  Past  History  of  Ceylon  and  South  India,  as  indicated  by  its  Fanna 
(p.  328) — Himalayan  or   Indo-Chinese  Sub-region  (p.  329) — islands  of   the 


b,  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIEST  VOLUME.  xxi 

Indo-Chinese  Sub-region  (p.  333) — Indo-Malaya,  or  the  Malayan  Snb-regioii 
(p.  334)— Malayan  Insects  (p.'  341) — The  Zoological  Belationa  of  tie  several 
Islands  of  the  Indo-Malay  Sub-region  (p.  345)— Philippine  Islands  (p.  345}-— 
Java  (p.  349) — Malaeca,  Sumati'a,  and  Borneo  (p.  363)— Probable  recent  Geo- 
graphical Changes  in  the  Indo-Malay  Islands  (p.  857) — Probable  Origin  of  the 
Malayan  Fauna  (p,  359) — Conelnding  Eemarks  on  the  Oriental  Region  (p.  362) 
— Table  I.  Families  of  Animals  inhabiting  the  Oriental  Region  (p.  365) — 
Table  II.  Genera  of  Ten'estrial  Mammalia  and  Birds  in  tiie  Oriental  Re- 
gion (p.  371)        314—386 


CHAPTER  Xni. 


General  Zoological  Characteristics  of  the  Anstralian  Region  (p.  390)— Summary 
of  the  Australian  Vertebrata  (p.  3S7)— Supposed  Land-eonnection  between 
Austi'alia  and  South  America  (p.  898)— Insects  (p.  403)^Iand  shells  {p.  407) 
— Australian  Sab-regions  (p.  408) — Austro-Malayan  Sub-region  (p.  409) — 
Papua,  or  the  New  Guinea  Group  (p.  409) — The  Molnecas  (p.  417)— Insects — 
Peculiarities  of  the  Moluccan  Fauna  (p.  420) — Timor  Group  (p.  432) — 
Celebes  Group  (p.  426)— Origin  of  the  Fauna  of  Celebes  (p.  48S)—  Australia 
and  Tasmania,  or  the  Australian  Sub-region  (p.  438) — The  Pacific  Islands,  or 
Polynesian  Sub-region  (p.  442)— Fiji,  Tonga,  and  Samoa  Islands  (p.  443) — 
Society  and  Marquesas  Islands  (p,  443) — I^drone  and  Caroline  Islands  (p.  444) 
— Hew  Caledonia  and  the  New  Hebrides  (p.  444-)— Sandwich  Islands  (p.  445) 
— Eeptiles  of  the  Polynesian  Sub-region  (p.  448) — Hew  Zealand  Sub-region 
(p.  449) — Islets  of  the  New  Zealand  Sub-repon  (p.  453) — Eeptiies,  Amphibia, 
and  Frosh-water  Fishes  (p.  456) — Insects  (p.  457) — The  Ancient  Fauna  of  New 
Zealand  (p.  459)— The  Origin  of  the  New  Zealand  Fauna  <p.  469)— Cansea  of 
the  Poverty  of  Insect-life  in  New  Zealand  ;  its  Influence  on  the  Character  of 
the  Flora  (p.  462) — Concluding  Eomai'ke  on  the  Early  History  of  the  Austra- 
lian E«gion  (p,  484) — Table  1.  Families  of  Animals  inhabiting  the  Australian 
Region  (p.  468) — Table  II.  Genera  of  Terrestrial  Mammalia  and  Birds  of  Hie 
Australian  Eegion  (p,  473) 387—485 

Index  to  Vol  I 489-503 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


MAPS  AND  ILLIJSTEATIONS  IN  VOL.  I. 


Map  of  the  World,  showing  Ihe  2k)o-Geographical  Regions  and  the 

contour  of  th«  Ocaan-bed Fronlispkce 

Ta  face  pnfle 
Map  of  tho  Palcearotic  Region     ....  ...     181 

Plate        I.  The  Alps  of  Central  Europe  with  Characteristic  Animals     195 

Plate      11.  Chiuaoteristic  llommalia  of  Western  Tartary  . 

Plftte     III.  Chaiactpnstic  inimals  of  North  China    . 

Map  of  the  Ethiopian  Pegion 

Plate    IV.  Chuaotenatic  Animals  of  East  Africa    . 

Plato       T.  s  -ene  in  West  Africa  with  Characteristic  Animals   . 

Plate    VL  Scene  in  Madagascar  with  Charaetiitistic  Animals    . 

Map  of  the  Oriental  Ropon 

Plate    VII.  Scene  in  Fepanl  with  Characteristic  Animals   . 

Plate  VIII.  A  Forest  in  Borneo  with  CharacterisHc  Mammalia   . 

Plate     IS.  A  Malacca  Forest  witli  some  of  its  Peculiar  Birds     , 

,    Map  of  the  Australian  Region 

,     Plate       S.  Scene  in  Hew  Guinea  with  Characteristic  Animals  . 

.     Plate     XI.  The  Characteristic  Mammalia  of  Tasmania 

.     Plate    XII.  The  Plains  of  Few  South  Wales  with  Characteristic  Ani- 

.     Plate  XIII.  Boane  in  New  Zealand  with  s( 


.     442 

ts  Remarkable  Birds     455 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


THE 

GEOGRAPHICAL   DISTRIBUTION 
OF   ANIMALS. 

PAKT  I. 

THS  PMINOIPLES  AND  GESEBAL  TBESOMMNA 
(II  DISTEIBUTION. 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


INTEODUCTORY. 

It  is  a  fact  withiu  the  experience  of  most  persons,  that  the 
various  species  of  animals  are  not  uniformly  dispersed  over  the 
surface  of  the  country.  If  we  have  a  tolerable  acquaintance 
with  any  district,  be  it  a  parish,  a  county,  or  a  larger  extent  of 
territorj',  we  soon  become  aware  that  each  well-marked  portion 
of  it  has  some  peculiarities  in  its  animal  productions.  If  we 
want  to  lind  certain  birds  or  certain  insects,  we  have  not  only  to 
choose  the  right  season  but  to  go  to  the  right  place.  If  we 
travel  beyond  our  district  in  various  directions  we  shall  almost 
certainly  meet  with  something*  new  to  us ;  some  species  which 
we  were  accustomed  to  see  almost  daily  will  disappear,  others 
which  we  have  never  seen  before  will  make  their  appearance, 
If  we  go  very  far,  so  as  to  be  able  to  measure  our  journey  by 
degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude  and  t^a  perceive  important 
changes  of  climate  and  vegetation,  the  differences  in  the  forms  of 
animal  life  will  become  greater ;  till  at  length  we  shall  come  to  a 
country  where  almost  everything  will  be  new,  all  the  famOiar 
creatures  of  our  own  district  being  replaced  by  others  more  or 
less  differing  from  them. 

If  we  have  been  observant  during  our  several  journeys,  and 
have  combined  and  compared  the  facts  we  have  collected,  it  will 
become  apparent  that  the  change  we  have  witnessed  has  been 
of  two  distinct  kinds.  In  our  own  and  immediately  surround- 
ing districts,  particular  species  appeared  and  disappeared  because 


by  Google 


4  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALa  [paet  ^. 

the  soil,  the  aspect,  or  the  vegetation,  was  adapted  to  them  or 
the  reveraa  The  marshes,  the  heaths,  the  woods  and  forests, 
the  chalky  downs,  the  rocky  mountains,  had  each  their  peculiar 
inhabitants,  which  reappeared  again  and  again  aa  we  came  to 
tracts  of  country  suitable  for  them.  But  as  we  got  further  away 
we  began  to  find  that  localities  very  similar  to  those  we  had 
left  behind  were  inhabited  bya  somewhat  different  set  of  species; 
and  this  diflerenee .  increased  with  distance,  notwithstanding 
that  almost  identical  external  conditions  might  be  often  met 
with.  The  first  class  of  changes  is  that  of  stations ;  the  second 
that  of  habitats.  The  one  is  a  local,  the  other  a  geographical 
phenomenon.  The  whole  area  over  which  a  particular  animal 
is  found  may  consist  of  any  number  of  stations,  hut  rarely  of 
more  than  one  kaMtat.  Stations,  however,  are  often  so  extensive 
as  to  include  the  entire  range  of  many  species.  Such  are  the 
great  seas  and  oceans,  the  Siberian  or  the  Amaj;onian  forests, 
the  IToith  African  deserts,  the  Andean  or  the  Himalayan 
highlands. 

There  is  yet  another  difference  in  the  nature  of  the!,change 
we  have  been  considering.  The  new  animals  which  we  meet 
with  as  we  travel  in  any  direction  from  our  starting  point,  are 
some  of  them  very  much  like  those  we  have  left  behind  us, 
and  can  be  at  once  referred  to  familiar  type.s;  while  others 
are  altogether  unlike  anything  we  have  seen  at  home.  When 
we  reach  the  Alps  we  find  another  kind  of  squirrel,  in  South- 
em  Italy  a  distinct  mole,  in  Southern  Europe  fresh  warblers 
and  unfamiliar  buntings.  We  meet  also  with  totally  now 
forms ;  as  the  glutton  and  the  snowy  owl  in  Northern,  the  genet 
and  the  hoopoe  in  Southern,  and  the  saiga  antelope  and 
collared  pratincole  in  Eastern  Europe.  The  first  series  are 
examples  of  what  are  termed  representative  species,  the  second 
of  distinct  groups  or  types  of  animals.  The  one  represents  a 
comparatively  recent  modification,  and  an  origin  in  or  near  the 
locality  where  it  occurs ;  the  other  is  a  resiilt  of  very  ancient 
changes  both  organic  and  inorganic,  and  is  connected  with  some 
of  the  most  curious  and  difficult  of  the  problems  we  shall  have 
to  discuss. 


by  Google 


OiiAF.  I.]  INTKODUCTORY.  5 

Having  thus  defined  our  aubject,  let  us  glance  at  the  opinions 
that  have  generally  prevailed  as  to  the  nature  and  causes  of 
the  phenomena  presented  by  the  geographical  distribution  of 
animals. 

It  was  long  thought,  and  is  still  a  popular  notion,  that  the 
manner  in  which  the  various  kinds  of  animala  are  dispersed 
over  the  globe  is  almost  ■whoUy  due  to  diversities  of  climate  and 
of  vegetation.  There  is  indeed  much  to  favour  this  belief.  The 
arctic  regions  are  strongly  characterised  by  their  white  bears 
and  foxes,  their  reindeer,  ermine,  and  walruses,  their  white 
ptarmigan,  owls,  and  falcons  ;  the  temperate  zone  has  its  foxes 
and  wolves,  its  rabbits,  sheep,  beavers,  and  mannots,  its  sparrows 
and  its  soi^  birds ;  while  tropical  regions  alone  produce  apes  and 
elephants,  parrots  and  peacocks,  and  a  thoi^and  strange  quadru- 
peds and  brilliant  birds  which  are  found  nowhere  in  the  cooler 
regions.  So  the  camel,  the  gazelle  and  the  ostrich  live  in  the 
desert;  the  bison  on  the  prairie;  the  tapir,  the  deer,  and  the 
j^uar  in  forests.  Mountains  and  marshes,  plains  and  rocky 
precipices,  have  each  their  animal  inhabitants ;  and  it  might  well 
be  thought,  in  the  absence  of  accurate  inquiry,  that  these  and 
other  differences  would  sufficiently  explain  why  most  of  the 
regions  and  countries  into  which  the  earth  is  popularly  divided 
should  have  certain  animals  peculiar  to  them  and  should  want 
others  which  are  elsewhere  abundant. 

A  more  detailed  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  productions  of 
different  portions  of  the  earth  soon  showed  that  this  explanation 
was  quite  insufiicient;  for  it  was  found  that  countries  exceed- 
ingly similar  in  climate  and  aU  physical  features  may  yet  have 
very  distinct  animal  populations.  The  equatorial  parts  of  Africa 
and  South  America,  for  example,  are  very  similar  in  climate 
and  are  both  covered  with  luxuriant  forests,  yet  their  animal  life 
is  widely  different ;  elephants,  apes,  leopards,  guinea-fowls 
and  touracos  in  the  one,  are  replaced  by  tapirs,  prehensile- 
tailed  monkeys,  jaguars,  curassows  and  toucans  in  the  other. 
Again,  parts  of  South  Africa  and  Australia  are  wonderfully 
similar  in  their  soil  and  climate ;  yet  one  has  lions,  antelopes, 
zebras  and  giraffes ;  the  other  only  kangaroos,  wombats,  phalan- 


by  Google 


S  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [paet  i. 

gers  and  mice.  In  like  maimer  parts  of  North  America  and 
Europe  are  very  similar  in  all  essentials  of  soil  climate  and 
vegetation,  yet  the  former  has  racoons,  opossums,  and  humming- 
birds ;  while  the  latter  possesses  moles,  hedgehogs  and  true  fly- 
catchers. Equally  striking  are  the  facts  presented  hy  the 
distribution  of  many  large  and  important  groups  of  animals. 
Marsupials  (opossumSj  phalangerg  &e.)  are  found  from  temperate 
Van  Diemen's  land  to  the  tropical  islands  of  Heiw  Guinea  and 

Ocicbea,  and  in  America  from.  Chili  to  Vii^iiria.  M"o  crows 
.  exist  in  South  America,  while  they  inhabit  every  other  part  of 
the  world,  not  excepting  Austtaha.  Antelopes  are  found  only 
m  Africa  and  Asia ;  the  slotha  only  m  South  Amorioa  ;  the  true 
lemurs  are  confined  to  Madagascar,  and  the  hirds-of -paradise  to 
New  Guinea. 

If  we  examine  more  closely  the  distribution  of  animals  in 
any  extensive  region,  we  find  that  different,  though  closely  allied 
species,  are  often  found  on  the  opposite  sides  of  any  considerable 
barrier  to  their  migration.  Thus,  on  the  two  sides  of  the  Andes 
and  Eocky  Mountains  in  America,  almost  all  the  mammaha,  birds, 
and  insects  are  of  distinct  species.  To  a  less  extent,  the  Alps 
and  Pyrenees  form  a  similar  barrier,  and  even  great  rivers  and 
river  plains,  as  those  of  the  Amazon  and  Ganges,  separate  more 
or  less  distinct  groups  of  animals.  Arms  of  the  sea  are  still 
more  effective,  if  they  are  permanent ;  a  circumstance  in  some 
measure  indicated  by  their  depth.  Thus  islands  fax  away  from 
land  almost  always  have  very  peculiar  animals  found  nowhere 
else;  as  is  strikingly  the  case  in  Madagascar  and  New  Zealand, 
and  to  a  less  degree  in  the  West  India  islands.  But  shallow 
straits,  like  the  English  Channel  or  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  are 
not  found  to  have  the  same  effect,  the  animals  being  nearly  or 
quite  identical  on  their  opposite  shores.  A  change  of  climate  or 
a  change  of  vegetation  may  form  an  equally  effective  harrier  to 
migration.  Many  tropical  and  polar  animals  are  pretty  accu- 
rately limited  by  certain  isothermal  lines ;  and  the  limits  of  the 
great  forests  in  most  parts  of  the  world  strictly  determine  the 
ranges  of  many  species. 

Naturalists  bave  now  arrived  at  the  conclusion,  that  by  some 


by  Google 


CHAP.  I.]  INTEODUCTOBY.  7 

slow  process  of  development  or  transmutation,  all  animals  have 
been  produced  from  those  which  preceded  them ;  and  the  old 
notion  that  every  species  was  specially  created  as  they  now 
exist,  at  a  particular  time  and  in  a  particular  spot,  is  abandoned 
as  opposed  to  many  striking  facts,  and  unsupported  by  any 
evidence.  TMs  modification  of  animal  forma  took  place  very 
slowly,  so  that  the  historical  period  of  three  or  four  thousand 
years  has  hardly  produced  any  perceptible  change  in  a  single 
species.  Even  the  time  since  the  last  glacial  epoch,  which  on 
thevery  lowest  estimate  must  be  from  50,000  to  100,000  years, 
has  only  served  to  modify  a  few  of  the  higher  animals  into  very 
slightly  different  species.  The  changes  of  the  forms  of  a 
appear  to  have  accompanied,  and  perhaps  to  have  t 
on,  changes  of  physical  geography,  of  climate,  or  of  veg 
since  it  is  evident  that  an  animal  which  is  well  adapted  to  one 
condition  of  things  will  require  to  be  slightly  changed  in  con- 
stitution or  hafcits,  and  therefore  generally  in  form,  structure,  or 
colour,  in  order  to  be  equally  well  adapted  to  a  changed 
condition  of  surrounding  circumstances.  Animals  multiply  so 
rapidly,  that  we  may  consider  them  as  continually  trying  to 
extend  their  range ;  and  thus  any  new  land  raised  above  the 
sea  by  geological  causes  becomes  immediately  peopled  by  a 
crowd  of  competing  inhabitants,  the  strongest  and  best  adapted 
of  which  alone  svicceed  in  maintaining  their  position. 

If  we  keep  in  view  these  facts — that  the  minor  features  of  the 
earth's  surface  are  everywhere  slowly  changing;  that  the  forms, 
and  structure,  and  habits  of  all  living  things  are  also  slowly 
changing ;  while  the  great  features  of  the  earth,  the  continents, 
and  oceans,  and  loftiest  mountain  ranges,  only  change  after  very 
long  intervals  and  with  extreme  slowness ;  we  must  see  that 
the  present  distribution  of  animals  upon  the  several  parts  of 
the  earth's  surface  is  the  final  product  of  all  these  wonderful 
revolutions  in  organic  and  inorganic  nature.  The  greatest  and 
most  radical  differences  in  the  productions  of  any  part  of  the 
globe  must  be  dependent  on  isolation  by  the  most  effectual 
and  most  permanent  barriers.  That  ocean  which  has  remained 
broadest  and  deepest  from  the  most  remote  geological  epochs 


by  Google 


8  DISTRIBUTION  OP  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

will  separate  coimtries  the  productions  of  which  most  widely 
and  radically  differ;  while  the  most  recently-depressed  seas, 
or  the  last-formed  mountain  ranges,  will  separate  countries 
the  productions  of  which  are  almoat  or  quite  identical.  It 
will  he  evident,  therefore,  that  the  study  of  the  distribution 
of  animals  and  plants  may  add  greatly  to  our  knowledge 
of  the  past  history  of  our  globe.  It  may  reveal  to  us,  in  a 
manner  which  no  other  evidence  can,  which  ai'e  the  oldest 
and  most  permanent  features  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  which 
the  newest.  It  may  indicate  the  existence  of  islands  or  conti- 
nent-a  now  sunk  beneath  the  ocean,  and  which  have  left  no 
record  pf  their  existence  save  the  animal  and  vegetable  pro- 
ductions which  have  migrated  to  adjacent  lands.  It  thus 
becomes  an  important  adjunct  to  geology,  which  can  rarely  do 
more  than  determine  what  lands  have  been  raised  above  the 
waters,  under  what  conditions  and  at  what  period;  but  can 
seldom  ascertain  anything  of  the  position  or  extent  of  those 
which  have  sunk  beneath  it.  Our  present  study  may  often 
enable  us,  not  only  to  say  where  lands  must  have  recently 
disappeared,  but  also  to  fonn  some  judgment  as  to  their  ex- 
tent, and  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  their  submersion. 

Having  thus  briefly  sketched  the  nature  and  objects  of  the 
subject  we  have  to  study,  it  will  be  necessary — before  entering 
on  a  detailed  examination  of  the  zoological  features  of  the 
different  parts  of  the  earth,  and  of  the  distribution  of  the  orders, 
famDies,  and  genera  of  animals  ^to  examine  certain  preliminary 
facts  and  principles  essential  for  our  guidance,  We  must  first 
inquire  what  are  the  powers  of  multiplication  and  dispersal  of 
the  various  groups  of  animals,  and  the  nature  of  the  barriers 
that  most  effectually  limit  their  range.  We  have  then  to 
consider  the  effects  of  changes  in  physical  geography  and  in 
climate ;  to  esandne  the  nature  and  extent  of  such  changes  as 
have  been  known  to  occur ;  to  determine  what  others  are  possiKle 
;  and  to  ascertain  the  various  modes  in  which  such 
I  affect  the  structure,  the  distribution,  or  the  very  exist- 
ence of  animals. 


by  Google 


CEAP,  1.]  INTEODUCTOEY.  9 

Two  subjects  of  a  different  nature  must  next  engage  our 
attention.  We  have  to  deal  with  two  vast  masses  of  facts, 
each  iavolving  countless  details,  and  requiring  subdivision  and 
grouping  to  be  capable  of  intelligible  treatment.  All  the  con- 
tinents and  their  chief  subdivisions,  and  all  the  more  important 
islands  of  the  globe,  have  to  be  compared  as  regards  their  vari- 
ous animal  forms.  To  do  this  effectively  we  require  a  natural 
division  of  the  earth  especially  adapted  to  our  purpose ;  and  we 
shall  have  to  discuss  at  some  length  the  reasons  for  the  particular 
system  adopted, — a  discussion  which  must  to  some  extent 
anticipate  and  summarize  the  conclusions  of  the  whole  work. 
We  have  also  to  deal  with  many  hundreds  of  families  and  many 
thousands  of  genera  of  animals,  and  here  too  a  true  and  natmal 
classification  is  of  great  importance.  We  must  therefore  give  a 
connected  view  of  the  classification  adopted  in  the  various 
classes  of  animals  dealt  with. 

And  lastly,  as  the  existing  distribution  of  animals  is  the 
result  and  outcome  of  all  preceding  changes  of  the  earth  and  of 
its  inhabitants,  we  require  as  much  knowledge  as  we  can  get  of 
the  animals  of  each  country  during  past  geological'  epochs,  in 
order  to  interpret  the  facts  we  shall  accumulate.  We  shall, 
therefore,  enter  upon  a  somewhat  detailed  sketch  of  the  various 
forms  of  extinct  animals  that  have  lived  upon  the  earth  during 
the  Tertiary  period ;  discuss  their  migrations  at  various  epochs, 
the  changes  of  physical  geography  that  they  imply,  and  the 
extent  to  which  they  enable  us  to  determine  the  birthplace 
of  certain  families  and  genera. 

The  preliminary  studies  above  enumerated  will,  it  is  believed, 
enable  us  to  see  the  bearing  of  many  facta  in  the  distribution  of 
animals  that  would  otherwise  be  insoluble  problems ;  and,  what 
is  hardly  less  valuable,  will  teach  us  to  estimate  the  compara- 
tive importance  of  the  various  groups  of  animals,  and  to  avoid 
the  common  error  of  cutting  the  gordian  knot  of  each  difficulty 
by  vast  hypothetical  changes  in  existing  continents  and  oceans 
— probably  the  most  permanent  features  of  our  globe. 

Vol.  I.— 3 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   MEANS  OF  DISPERSAL  AND   THE  MIGKATIONS   OF  ANIMAIS, 

All  animals  are  capable  of  multiplying  so  rapidly,  that  if  a 
single  pair  were  placed  in  a  continent  with  abundance  of  food 
and  no  enemies,  they  might  fully  stock  it  in  a  very  short  time. 
Thus,  a  bird  which  produces  ten  pairs  of  young  during  its  life- 
time (and  this  is  far  below  the  fertility  of  many  birds)  will,  if 
we  take  its  life  at  live  years,  increase  to  a  hundred  millions  in 
about  forty  years,  a  number  sufficient  to  stock  a  large  country. 
Many  fishes  and  insects  are  capable  of  multiplying  several 
thousandfold  each  year,  so  that  in  a  few  years  they  would  reach 
billions  and  trillions.  Even  laa^e  and  slow  breeding  mammals, 
which  have  only  one  at  a  birth  but  continue  to  breed  from  eight 
to  ten  successive  years,  may  increase  from  a  single  pair  to  ten 
millions  in  less  than  forty  years. 

But  as  animals  rarely  have  an  unoccupied  country  to  breed 
in,  and  as  the  food  in  any  one  district  is  strictly  limited,  their 
natural  tendency  is  to  roam  in  every  direction  in  search  cff  fresh 
pastures,  or  new  hunting  grounds.  In  doing  so,  however,  they 
meet  with  many  obstacles.  Rocks  and  mountains  have  to  be 
climbed,  rivers  or  marshes  to  be  crossed,  deserts  or  forests  to  be 
traversed ;  while  narrow  straits  or  wider  arms  of  the  sea  separate 
islands  from  the  main  land  or  continents  from  each  other.  We 
have  now  to  inquire  what  facilities  the  different  classes  of 
animals  have  for  overcomii^  these  obstacles,  and  what  kind  of 
barriers  .are  most  effectual  in  checking  their  progress. 

Means  of  Dispersal  of  Matntnalia. — Many  of  the  largest  mam- 
malia are  able  to  roam  over  whole  continents  and  are  hardly 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGRATION.  11 

stopped  by  any  physical  obstacles.  The  elepbant  is  almost 
equally  at  home  on  plains  and  mountains,  and  it  even  climbs  to 
the  highest  aummit  of  Adam's  Peak  in  Oeylon,  which  is  so  steep 
and  rocky  as  to  be  very  difficult  of  ascent  for  man.  It  traverses 
rivers  with  great  ease  and  forces  its  way  through  the  densest 
jungle.  There  seems  therefore  to  be  no  limit  to  its  powers  of 
wandering,  but  the  necessity  of  procuring  food  and  its  capacity 
of  enduring  changes  of  eKmate.  The  tiger  is  another  animal  with 
great  powers  of  dispersal.  It  crosses  rivers  and  sometimes  even 
swims  over  narrow  straits  of  the  sea,  and  it  can  endure  the 
severe  cold  of  North  China  and  Tartary  as  well  as  the  heats  of 
the  plains  of  Bengal.  The  rhinoceros,  the  Hon,  and  many  of  the 
ruminants  have  equal  powers  of  dispersal ;  so  that  wherever  there 
is  land  and  sufficient  food,  there  are  no  limits  to  their  possible 
range.  Other  groups  of  animals  are  more  limited  in  their  migra- 
tions. The  apes,  lemurs,  and  many  monkeys  are  so  strictly 
adapted  to  an  arboreal  life  that  they  can  never  roam  far  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  forest  vegetation.  The  same  may  be  said  of 
the  squirrels,  the  opossums,  the  arboreal  cats,  and  the  sloths,  with 
many  other  groups  of  less  importance.  Deserts  or  open  country 
are  equally  essential  to  the  existence  of  others.  The  camel,  the 
hare,  the  zebra,  the  giraffe  and  many  of  the  antelopes  could  not 
exist  in  a  forest  country  any  more  than  could  the  jerboas  or  the 
prairie  marmots. 

There  are  other  animals  which  are  confined  to  mountains,  and 
could  not  extend  their  range  into  lowlands  or  forests.  The  goats 
and  the  sheep  are  the  most  striking  group  of  this  kind,  inhabit- 
ing many  of  the  highest  mountains  of  the  globe ;  of  which  the 
European  ibex  and  mouHon  are  striking  examples.  Elvers  are 
equally  necessary  to  the  existence  of  others,  as  the  beaver,  otter, 
water-vole  and  capybara ;  and  to  such  animals  high  mountain- 
ranges  or  deserts  must  form  an  absolutely  impassable  barrier. 

Climate  as  a  Limit  to  the  Range  of  Maminals. — Climate  appears 
to  limit  the  range  of  many  animals,  though  there  is  some  reason 
to  believe  that  in  many  cases  it  is  not  the  climate  itself  so  much 
as  the  change  of  vegetation  consequent  on  climate  which  produces 
the  effect.     The  quadrumana  appear  to  be  limited  by  climate, 


by  Google 


12  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALa  [part  i. 

since  they  inhabit  almost  all  the  tropical  regions  hut  do  not 
range  more  than  about  10°  beyond  the  southern  and  12°  beyond 
the  northern  tropic,  while  the  great  hulk  of  the  species  are 
found  only  within  an  eq^uatorial  belt  about  30^  wide.  But  as 
these  animals  are  almost  exclusively  fruit-eaters,  their  distribu- 
tion depends  as  much  on  vegetation  as. on  temperature;  and  this 
is  strikingly  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Semnopiihecus  scMsta- 
cem  inhabits  the  Himalayan  mountains  to  a  height  of  11,000 
feet,  where  it  has  been  seen  leaping  among  fir-trees  loaded  with 
snow-wreaths !  Some  northern  animals  are  bounded  by  the 
isothermal  of  32°.  Such  are  the  polar  bear  and  the  walrus, 
which  cannot  live  in  a  state  of  nature  far  beyond  the  limits  of 
the  frozen  ocean ;  but  as  they  live  in  confinement  in  temperate 
countries,  their  range  is  probably  limited  by  other  conditions 
than  temperature. 

We  must  not  therefore  be  too  hasty  in  concluding,  that  animals 
which  we  now  see  confined  to  a  very  hot  or  a  very  cold  climate 
are  incapable  of  living  in  any  other.  The  tiger  was  once  con- 
sidered a  purely  tropical  animal,  but  it  inhabits  permanently  the 
cold  plains  of  Manchuria  and  the  Amoor,  a  country  of  an  almost 
arctic  winter  climate.  Pew  animals  seem  to  us  more  truly  in- 
habitants of  hot  countries  than  the  elephants  and  rhinoceroses ; 
yet  ia  Post-tertiary  times  they  roamed  over  the  whole  of  the 
northern  continents  to  withia  the  arctic  circle ;  and  we  know  that 
the  climate  was  then  as  cold  as  it  ia  now,  from  their  entire  bodies 
being  preserved  in  ice.  Some  change  must  recently  have 
occurred  either  in  the  climate,  soil,  or  vegetation  of  Northern 
Asia  which  led  to  the  extinction  of  these  forerunners  of  existing 
tropical  species ;  and  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  similar 
changes  may  have  acted  upon  other  species  which  we  now  find 
restricted  within  narrow  limits,  but  which  may  once  have  roamed 
over  a  wide  and  varied  territory. 

Valleys  and  Bivers  as  Barriers  to  Mam-mals. — To  animals  which 
thrive  best  in  dry  and  hiUy  r^ons,  a  broad  level  and  marshy 
valley  must  often  prove  an  effectual  barrier.  The  difference  of 
vegetation  and  of  insect  Ufe,  together  with  an  unhealthy  atmos- 
phere, no  doubt  often  checks  migration  if  it  is  attempted.     Thus 


by  Google 


CHAP,  rr.]  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGEATION.  13 

many  animals  are  restricted  to  the  slopes  of  the  Himalayas 
or  to  the  moimfcains  of  Central  India,  thp  flat  valley  of  the 
Ganges  forming  a  limit  to  their  range.  In  other  cases,  however, 
it  is  the  river  rather  than  the  valley  which  is  the  harrier.  In 
the  great  Amazonian,  plains  many  species  of  monkeys,  hirds,  and 
even  insects  are  found  up  to  the  river  banks  on  one  side  hnt  do 
not  cross  to  the  other.  Thus  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Eio  Negro 
two  monkeys,  the  Jacchus  hicolor  and  the  Bradviurus  eoiueiou,  are 
found  on  the  north  hank  of  the  river  but  never  on  the  south, 
where  a  red- whiskered  FUhecia  is  alone  found.  Higher  up  Aides 
paniseus  extends  to  the  north  bank  of  the  river  whUe  Lagoikrw 
humioldtii  comes  down  to  the  south  bank ;  the  former  being  a 
native  of  Guiana,  the  latter  of  Ecuador.  The  range  of  the  birds 
of  the  genus  PsopAra  or  trumpeters,  is  also  limited  by  the  rivers 
Amazon,  Madeira,  Eio  Negro  and  some  others ;  so  that  in  these 
cases  we  are  able  to  define  the  limits  of  distribution  with  an 
unusual  degree  of  accuracy,  and  there  is  little  doubt  the  same 
barriers  also  limit  a  laige  number  of  other  species. 

Arms  of  the  Sea  as  Ba/iTters  to  Mammals. — Very  few  mammals 
can  swim  over  any  considerable  extent  of  sea,  although  many  can 
swim  well  for  short  distances.  The  jaguar  traverses  the  widest 
streams  in  South  America,  and  the  bear  and  bison  cross  the 
Mississippi ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  could  swim  over 
equal  widths  of  salt  water,  and  if  accidentally  carried  out  to  sea 
might  sometimes  succeed  in  Teaching  islands  many  miles  distant. 
Contrary  to  the  common  notion  pigs  can  swim  remarkably  well. 
Sir  Charles  LyeU  teUs  us  in  his  "  Principles  of  Geology  "  that 
during  the  floods  in  Scotland  in  1829,  some  pigs  only  six  months 
old  that  were  carried  out  to  sea,  swam  five  miles  and  got  on 
shore  again.  He  also  states,  on  the  authority  of  the  late  Edward 
Forbes,  that  a  pig  jumped  overboard  to  escape  from  a  terrier  in 
the  GreciaJi  Archipelago,  and  swam  safely  to  shore  many  miles 
distant.  Tliese  facts  render  it  probable  that  wild  pigs,  from 
their  greater  strength  and  activity,  might  under  favourable  cir- 
cumstances cross  arms  of  the  sea  twenty  or  thirty  miles  wide ; 
and  there  are  facts  in  the  distribution  of  this  tribe  of  animals 
which  seem  to  indicate  that  they  have  sometimes  done  so.     Deer 


by  Google 


14  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALa  [past  i, 

take  boldly  to  the  water  and  caa  swim  considerable  distances, 
but  we  hstve  no  evidence  to  show  how  long  they  could  live  at 
sea  or  how  many  miles  they  could  traverse.  Squirrels,  rats,  and 
lemmings  often  migrate  from  northern  countries  in  bands  of 
thousands  and  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  pass  over  rivers,  lakes 
and  even  arms  of  the  sea,  but  they  generally  perish  in  the  salt- 
water. Admitting,  however,  the  powers  of  most  mammals  to 
swim  considerable  distances,  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that 
any  of  them  could  traverse  without  help  straits  of  upwards  of 
twenty  miles  in  width,  while  in  most  cases  a  channel  of  half 
that  distance  would  prove  an  effectual  harrier. 

Ice-floes  and  Driftwood  as  Aiding  the,  Dispersal  of  Mammals. — 
In  the  arctic  regions  icehei^  originate  in  glaciers  which  de- 
scend into  the  sea,  and  often  bear  masses  of  gravel,  earth,  and 
even  some  vegetation  on  their  surfaces ;  and  extensive  levelice- 
fields  break  away  and  float  southwards.  These  might  often 
carry  with  them  such  arctic  cLuadrupeds  as  frequent  the  ice,  or 
even  on  rare  occasions  true  land-animals,  which  might  some- 
times be  stranded  on  distant  continents  or  islands.  But  a  more 
effectual  because  a  more  wide-spread  agent,  is  to  be  found  in 
the  uprooted  trees  and  rafts  of  driftwood  often  floated  down 
great  rivers  and  carried  out  to  sea.  Such  rafts  or  islands  are 
sometimes  seen  drifting  a  hundred  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Ganges  with  living  trees  erect  upon  them ;  and  the  Amazon,  the 
Orinoco,  Mississippi,  Congo,  and  most  great  rivers  produce 
similar  rafts.  Spix  and  Maitius  declare  that  they  saw  at  differ- 
ent times  on  the  Amazon,  monkeys,  tiger-cats,  and  squirrels, 
being  thus  carried  down  the  stream.  On  the  Parana.,  pumas, 
squirrels,  and  many  other  quadrupeds  have  been  seen  on  these 
r^s ;  and  Admiral  W.  H,  Smyth  informed  Sir  C.  Lyell  that 
among  the  Phihppine  islands  after  a  hurricane,  he  met  with 
floating  masses  of  wood  with  trees  growing  upon  them,  so  that 
they  were  at  first  mistaken  for  islands  till  it  was  found  that  they 
were  rapidly  drifting  along.  Here  therefore,  we  have  ample 
means  for  carrying  all  the  smaller  and  especially  the  arboreal 
mammals  out  to  sea ;  and  although  in  most  cases  they  would 
perish  there,  yet  in  some  favourable  instances  strong  winds  or 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  DISPBKSAL  AND  MIGRATION.  15 

iinusual  tidal  currents  might  carry  them  safely  to  shores  per- 
haps aeveiaJ  himdred  roilea  fi-om  their  native  country.  The  fact 
of  green  trees  so  often  havii^  been  seen  erect  on  these  rafts  is 
most  important ;  for  they  would  act  as  a  sail  by  which  the  raft 
might  be  propelled  in  one  direction  for  several  days  in  succession, 
and  thus  at  last  reach  a  shore  to  which  a  current  alone  would 
never  have  carried  it. 

There  are  two  groups  of  mammals  which  have  c[uite  excep- 
tional means  of  dispersal — the  bats  which  fly,  and  the  cetacea, 
seals,  &c.,  which  swim.  The  former  are  capable  of  traversing 
considerable  spaces  of  sea,  since  two  North  American  species 
either  regularly  or  occasionally  visit  the  Bermudas,  a  distance 
of  600  miles  from  the  mainland.  The  oceanic  mammals  (whales 
and  porpoises)  seem  to  have  no  barrier  but  temperature;  the 
polar  species  being  unable  to  cross  the  equator,  while  the  tropical 
forms  are  ecLually  unfitted  for  the  cold  polar  waters.  The  shore- 
feeding  manatees,  however,  can  only  live  where  they  find  food ; 
and  a  long  expanse  of  rocky  coast  would  probably  be  as  com- 
plete a  barrier  to  them  as  a  few  hundred  miles  of  open  ocean. 
The  amphibious  seals  and  walruses  seem  many  of  them  to  be 
capable  of  making  long  sea  journeys,  some  of  the  species  being 
found  on  islands  a  thousand  miles  apart,  but  none  of  the  arctic 
are  identical  with  the  antartic  species. 

The  otfcera  with  one  exception  are  freshwater  animals,  and  we 
have  no  reason  to  believe  they  could  or  would  traverse  any  great 
distances  of  salt  water.  In  fact,  they  would  he  less  liable  to 
dispersal  across  arms  of  th«  sea  than  purely  terrestrial  species, 
since  their  powers  of  swimming  would  enable  them  to  regain 
the  shore  if  accidentally  carried  out  to  sea  by  a  sudden  flood. 

Means  of  Dispersal  of  Birds. — It  would  seem  at  first  sight  that 
no  barriers  could  limit  the  range  of  birds,  and  that  they  ought 
to  be  the  most  ubiq^uitous  of  living  things,  and  little  fitted  there- 
fore to  throw  any  fight  on  the  laws  or  causes  of  the  geographical 
distribution  of  animals.  This,  however,  is  far  from  being  the 
case ;  many  groups  of  birds  are  almost  as  strictly  limited  by 
harriers  as  the  mammalia ;  and  from  their  larger  numbers  and 
the  avidity  with  which  they  have  been  collected,  they  famish 


by  Google 


16  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i, 

materials  of  the  greatest  value  for  our  present  study.  The 
different  groups  of  birds  offer  remarkable  contrasts  in  the  extent 
of  their  range,  some  being  the  most  cosmopolite  of  the  higher 
animals,  while  others  are  absolutely  confined  to  single  spots  on 
the  earth's  surface.  The  petrels  {ProceltariidcE)  and  the  gulls 
{Laridm)  are  among  the  greatest  wanderers;  hut  most  of  the 
species  are  confined  to  one  or  other  of  the  great  oceans,  or  to  the 
arctic  or  antarctic  seas,  a  few  only  being  found  with  scarcely 
any  variation  over  almc^t  the  whole  globe.  The  sandpipers  and 
plovers  wander  along  the  shores  as  far  as  do  the  petrels  over  the 
ocean.  Groat  numbers  of  them  breed  in  the  arctic  r^ons  and 
migrate  as  far  as  India  and  Australia,  or  down  to  Chili  and 
Brazil ;  the  species  of  the  old  and  new  worlds,  however,  being 
generally  distinct.  In  striking  contrast  to  these  wide  ranges 
we  find  many  of  the  smaller  perchii^  birds,  with  some  of  the 
parrots  and  pigeons,  confined  to  small  islands  of  a  few  square 
miles  in  extent,  or  to  single  valleys  or  mountains  on  the  main- 
land. 

Dispersal  of  Birds  by  Winds. — Those  groups  of  birds  which 
possess  no  powers  of  flight,  such  as  the  ostrich,  cassowary,  and 
apteryx,  are  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  mammalia  as  regaxds 
their  means  of  dispersal,  or  are  perhaps  even  inferior  to  them ; 
since,  althoi^h  they  are  able  to  cross  rivers  by  swimming,  it  is 
doubtful  if  they  could  remain  so  long  in  the  water  as  most  land 
quadrupeds.  A  very  large  number  of  ahort-winged  birds,  such 
as  toucans,  pittas,  and  wrens,  are  perhaps  worse  off;  for  they  can 
fly  very  few  miles  at  a  time,  and  on  felling  into  the  water  would 
soon  be  drowned.  It  is  only  the  strong-flying  species  that  can 
venture  to  cross  any  great  width  of  sea ;  and  even  these  rarely  do 
so  unless  compelled  by  necessity  to  migrate  in  search  of  food,  or 
to  a  more  genial  climate.  Small  and  weak  birds  are,  however, 
often  carried  accidentally  across  great  widths  of  ocean  by  violent 
gales.  This  is  well  exempliifed  by  the  large  numbers  of 
stragglers  from  North  America,  which  annually  reach  the 
Bermudas.  Ko  less  than  sixty-nine  species  of  American  birds 
have  occurred  in  Europe,  most  of  them  in  Britain  and  Hehgo- 
land.     They  consist  chiefly  of  moratory  birds  which  in  autumn 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  BIRDS.  17 

return  along  the  eastern  coasta  of  the  Unitecl  States,  and  often 
fly  from  point  to  point  acroas  baya  and  inlets.  They  are  then 
liable  to  be  blown  out  to  aea  by  storms,  which  are  prevalent  at 
this  season ;  and  it  is  almost  always  at  this  time  of  year  that 
their  occurrence  has  been  noted  on  the  shores  of  Europe.  It 
may,  however,  be  doubted  whether  this  is  not  an  altogether 
modem  phenomenon,  dependent  on  fcho  number  of  vessels  con- 
stantly on  the  Atlantic  which  afford  resting-places  to  the  wan- 
derers ;  as  it  ia  hardly  conceivable  that  such  birds  as  titlarks, 
cuckooa,  wrens,  warblers,  and  rails,  could  remain  on  the  wing 
without  food  or  rest,  the  time  req^uisite  to  paas  over  2,000  miles 
of  ocean.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  no  European  birds 
reach  the  American  coast  but  a  tevr  which  pass  by  way  of 
Iceland  and  Greenland;  whereas  a  considerable  number  do 
reach  the  Azores,  fully  half  way  across ;  so  that  their  absence 
can  hardly  be  due  to  the  prevaihng  winds  being  westerly.  The 
caae  of  the  Azores  is,  however,  an  ailment  for  the  unassisted 
passage  of  birds  for  that  distance ;  since  two  of  the  finches  are 
peculiar  '  species,'  but  closely  allied  to  European  forms,  so  that 
their  progenitors  must,  probably,  have  reached  the  islands  before 
the  Atlantic  was  a  commercial  highway. 

Barriers  to  the  Dispersal  of  Birds.—^e  have  seen  that,  as  a 
rule,  wide  oceans  are  an  almost  absolute  barrier  to  the  passage  of 
most  birds  from  one  continent  to  another ;  but  much  narrower 
seas  and  straits  are  also  very  effectual  barriers  where  the  habits 
of  the  birds  are  such  as  to  preserve  them  from  being  carried 
away  by  storms.  All  birds  which  frequent  thickets  and  forests, 
and  which  feed  near  or  on  the  ground,  are  secure  from  such 
accidents;  and  they  are  also  restricted  in  their  range  by  the 
extent  of  the  forests  they  inhabit  In  South  America  a  lai^e 
number  of  the  birds  have  their  ranges  determined  by  the  ex- 
tent of  the  forest  country,  while  others  are  equally  limited  to  the 
open  plains.  Such  species  are  also  bounded  by  mountain  ranges 
whenever  these  rise  above  the  woody  region.  Great  rivers,  such 
as  the  Amazon,  also  limit  the  range  of  many  birds,  even  when 
there  would  seem  to  be  no  difficulty  in  their  crossing  them.  The 
supply  of  food,  and   the  kind  of  vegetation,  soil,  and  climate 


by  Google 


18  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGEATION.  [part  i. 

best  suited  to  a  bird's  babits,  are  probably  tbe  causes  wliieh  mark 
out  the  exact  limits  of  tbe  range  of  eacb  species ;  to  -wbich  must 
be  added  the  prevalence  of  enemies  of  either  the  parent  birds, 
the  eggs,  or  the  young.  In  tbe  Malay  Archipelago  pigeons  abound 
most  where  monkeys  do  not  ■  occur ;  and  in  South  America  the 
same  birds  are  comparatively  scarce  in  tbe  forest  plains  lyhere 
monkeys  are  very  abimdant,  while  they  are  plentiful  on  the  open 
plains  and  campos,  and  on  the  mountain  plateaux,  where  these 
nest-hunting  quadrupeds  are  rarely  found.  Some  birds  are 
confined  to  swamps,  others  to  mountains ;  some  can  only  live  on 
rocky  streams,  others  on  deserts  or  grassy  plains. 

The  PMnoTnena  of  Migratif)n.-—-J!he  term  "  migration  "  is  often 
applied  to  tbe  periodical  or  irregular  movements  of  all  animals ; 
but  it  may  be  questioned  whether  there  are  any  regular  mi- 
grants but  birds  and  fishes.  The  annual  or  periodical  movements 
of  mammalia  are  of  a  different  class.  Monkeys  ascend  tbe 
Himalayas  in  summer  to  a  height  of  10,000  to  12,000  feet,  and 
descend  again  in  winter.  Wolves  everywhere  descend  from  the 
mountains  to  the  lowlands  in  severe  weather.  In  dry  seasons 
great  herds  of  antelopes  move  southwards  towards  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope.  The  well-known  lemmings,  in  severe  winters,  at 
long  intervals,  move  down  from  the  mountains  of  Scandinavia  in 
immense  numbers,  crossing  lakes  and  rivers,  eating  their  way 
through  haystacks,  and  surmounting"  every  obstacle  till  they 
reach  the  sea,  whence  very  few  return.  The  alpine  hare,  the 
arctic  fox,  and  many  other  animals,  exhibit  similar  phenomena 
on  a  smaller  scale ;  and  generally  it  may  be  said,  that  whenever 
a  favourable  succession  of  seasons  has  led  to  a  great  multipU- 
cation  of  any  species,  it  must  on  the  pressure  of  hunger  seek 
food  in  fresh  localities.  For  such  movements  as  these  we  have 
no  special  term.  The  summer  and  winter  movements  best 
correspond  to  true  migration,  but  they  are  always  on  a  small 
scale,  and  of  limited  extent ;  tbe  other  movements  are  rather 
temporary  incursions  than  true  migrations. 

The  annual  movements  of  many  fishes  are  more  strictly 
analogous  to  tbe  migration  of  birds,  since  they  take  place 
in  large   bodies   and   often  to  considerable  distances,  and  are 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  BIED&  19 

immediately  connected  witli  the  proeeaa  of  reproduction.  Some, 
as  the  salmon,  enter  rivers ;  others,  as  the  herring  and  mackerel, 
approach  the  coast  in  the  breeding  season ;  but  the  exact  course 
of  their  migrations  is  unknown,  and  owing  to  our  complete 
ignorance  of  the  area  each  species  occupies  in  the  ocean,  and  the 
absence  of  such  barriers  and  of  such  physical  diversities  aa  occur 
on  the  land,  they  are  of  far  less  interest  and  less  connected  with 
our  present  study  than  the  movements  of  birds,  to  which  we 
shall  no^  confine  ourselves. 

Migrations  of  Birds. — In  all  the  temperate  parts  of  the  globe 
there  are  a  considerable  number  of  birds  which  reside  only  a 
part  of  the  year,  regularly  arriving  and  leaving  at  tolerably  fixed 
epochs.  In  our  own  country  many  northern  birds  visit  ua  in 
winter,  such  as  the  fieldfare,  redwing,  snow-bunting,  turnstone, 
and  numerous  ducks  and  waders ;  with  a  few,  like  the  black  red- 
start, and  (according  to  Eev.  C.  A.  Johns)  some  of  the  woodcocks 
from  the  south.  In  the  summer  a  host  of  birds  appear — the 
cuckoo,  the  swifts  and  swallows,  and  numerous  warblers,  being 
the  most  familiar, — which  stay  to  build  their  ne.sts  and  rear  their 
young,  and  then  leave  us  again.  These  are  true  migrants ;  but 
a  number  of  other  birds  visit  us  occasionally,  like  the  waswing, 
the  oriole,  and  the  bee-eater,  and  can  only  be  classed  as 
stragglers,  which,  perhaps  from  too  rapid  multiplication  one  year 
and  want  of  food  the  next,  are  driven  to  extend  their  ordinary 
range  of  migration  to  an  unusual  degree.  We  will  now  endeavour 
to  sketch  the  chief  phenomena  of  migration  in  different 
countries. 

lCwro;p6. — It  is  well  ascertained  that  most  of  the  birds  that 
spend  their  spring  and  summer  in  the  temperate  parts  of  Europe 
pass  the  winter  in  North  Airica  and  Western  Asia,  The  winter 
visitants,  on  the  other  hand,  pass  the  summer  in  the  extreme 
north  of  Europe  and  Asia,  many  of  them  having  been  found  to 
breed  in  Lapland.  The  arrival  of  migratory  birds  from  the 
south  is  very  constant  as  to  date,  seldom  varying  more  than  a 
week  or  two,  without  any  regard  to  the  weather  at  the  time ; 
but  the  departure  is  Jess  constant,  and  more  dependent  on  the 
weather.   Thus  the  swallow  always  comes  to  us  about  the  middle 


by  Google 


20  DISPEHSAL  AND  MIGBATIOW.  [part  i. 

of  April,  however  cold  it  may  be,  while  its  departure  may  take, 
place  from  the  end  of  September  to  late  in  October,  and  is  said  by 
Porster  to  occur  on  the  first  N,  or  N.E,  wind  after  the  20th  of 
September. 

Almost  all  the  migratory  birds  of  Europe  go  southward  to 
the  Mediterranean,  move  along  its  coasts  east  or  west,  and  cross 
over  in  three  places  only ;  either  from  the  south  of  Spain,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Gibraltar,  from  Sicily  over  Malta,  or  to  the 
east  by  Greece  and  Cyprus.  They  are  thus  always  in  sight  of 
land.  The  passage  of  most  small  birds  (and  many  of  the  larger 
ones  too)  takes  place  at  night ;  and  they  only  cross  the  Mediter- 
ranean when  the  wind  is  steady  from  near  the  east  or  west, 
and  when  there  is  moonlight. 

It  is  a  curious  fact,  but  one  that  seems  to  be  well  authenti- 
cated, that  the  males  often  leave  before  the  females,  and  both 
before  the  young  birds,  which  in  considerable  numbers  migrate 
later  and  alone.  These  latter,  however,  seldom  go  so  far  as  the 
old  ones ;  and  numbers  of  young  birds  do  not  cross  the  Mediter- 
ranean, but  stay  in  the  south  of  Europe.  The  same  rule  applies 
to  the  northward  migration;  the  young  birds  stopping  short 
of  the  extreme  arctic  regions,  to  which  the  old  birds  migrate.^ 
When  old  and  young  go  together,  however,  the  old  birds  take 
the  lead.  In  the  south  of  Europe  few  of  the  migratory  birds 
stay  to  breed,  but  pass  on  to  more  temperate  zones ;  thus,  in  the 
south  of  France,  out  of  350  species  only  60  breed  there.  The 
same  species  is  often  sedentary  in  one  part  of  Europe  and  m%ra^ 
tory  iu  another;  thus,  the  chaf&nch  is  a  constant  resident  in 
England,  Germany,  and  the  middle  of  France ;  but  a  migrant  in 
the  south  of  France  and  in  Holland  :  the  rook  visits  the  south 
of  France  iu  winter  only :  the  Falco  ttmiunculvs  is  both  a 
resident  and  a  migrant  in  the  south  ot  France,  according  to 
M.  Marcel  de  Serres,  there  being  two  regular  passages  every 
year,  while  a  certain  number  always  remain. 

1  Maicel  de  Serres  statea  this  as  a  general  &ict  for  wading  and  swimming 
birds.  He  says  that  the  old  birds  arrive  in  the  extreme  north  almost  alone, 
the  yonng  remaining  on  the  sborea  of  the  Baltic,  or  on  the  lakes  of  Austria, 
Hungary,  and  Bussia.  See  his  prize  essay,  Bes  Causes  des  MiffraHons,  &c 
2nd  ed,  Paris,  1846,  p.  121. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  BIRDS.  21 

We  see,  then,  that  migration  is  governed  hy  certain  intelligible 
laws ;  and  that  it  varies  in  many  of  ita  details,  even  in  the  same 
species,  accoi'ding  to  changed  conditions.  It  may  .be  looked 
upon  as  an  exa^eration  of  a  habit  common  to  all  locomotive 
animals,  of  moving  about  in  search  of  food.  This  habit  is  greatly 
restricted  in  c[uadrupeds  by  their  inability  to  cross  the  sea  or 
even  to  pass  through,  the  highly-cultivated  valleys  of  such 
countries  as  Europe ;  but  the  power  of  flight  in  birds  enables 
them  to  cross  every  kind  of  country,  and  even  moderate  widths 
of  sea;  and  as  they  mostly  travel  at  night  and  high  in  the  air, 
their  movements  are  difficult  to  observe,  and  are  supposed  to  be 
more  mysterious  than  they  perhaps  axe.  In  the  tropics  birds 
move  about  to  different  districts  according  as  certain  fruits 
become  ripe,  certain  insects  abundant,  or  as  flooded  tracts  dry 
up.  On  the  borders  of  the  tropics  and  the  temperate  zone 
extends  a  belt  of  country  of  a  more  ot  less  arid  character,  and 
Kable  to  be  parched  at  the  summer  solstice.  In  winter  and 
early  spring  its  northern  margin  is  verdant,  but  it  soon  becomes 
burnt  up,  and  most  of  its  birds  necessarily  migrate  to  the  more 
fertile  regions  to  the  north  of  them.  They  thus  foUow  the  spring 
or  summer  as  it  advances  from  the  south  towards  the  pole,  feeding 
on  the  young  flower  buds,  the  abundance  of  juicy  larvie,  and  on 
the  ripening  fruits ;  and  as  soon  as  these  become  scarce  they 
retrace  their  steps  homewards  to  pass  the  winter.  Others  whose 
home  is  nearer  the  pole  are  driven  south  by  cold,  hunger,  and 
darkness,  to  more  hospitable  climes,  returning  northward  in  the 
early  summer.  As  a  typical  example  of  a  migratory  bird,  let  us 
take  the  nightingale.  During  the  winter  this  bird  inhabits 
almost  all  North  Africa,  Asia  Minor,  and  the  Jordan  Valley, 
Early  in  April  it  passes  into  Europe  by  the  three  routes  already 
mentioned,  and  spreads  over  France,  Britain,  Denmark,  and  the 
south  of  Sweden,  which  it  reaches  by  the  beginning  of  May.  It 
does  not  enter  Brittany,  the  Channel  Islands,  or  the  western  part 
of  England,  never  visiting  Wales,  except  the  extreme  south  of 
Glamoi'ganshire,  and  rarely  extending  farther  north  than  York- 
shire. It  spreads  over  Central  Europe,  through  Austria  and 
Hungary  to  Southern  Etissia  and  the  wanner  parts  of  Liberia, 


by  Google 


22  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGEATION.  [part  i. 

but  it  nevertheless  breeds  in  the  Jordan  Valley,  so  that  in 
some  places  it  is  only  the  surplus  population  that  migrates. 
In  August  ^nd  September,  all  who  can  return  to  their  winter 
quarters. 

Migrations  of  this  type  probably  date  back  from  at  least  the 
period  when  there  was  continuous  land  along  the  route  passed 
over;  and  it  is  a  suggestive  fact  that  this  land  connection  is 
known  to  have  existed  in  recent  geological  times.  Britain  was 
connected  with  the  Continent  during,  and  probably  before,  the 
glacial  epoch ;  and  Gibraltar,  as  well  as  Sicily  and  Malta,  were 
alao  recently  united  with  Africa,  as  is  proved  by  the  fossil 
elephants  and  other  large  mammalia  found  in  their  caverns,  by 
the  comparatively  shallow  water  still  existing  in  this  part  of  the 
Mediterranean  while  the  remainder  is  of  oceanic  profundity, 
and  by  the  large  aniount  of  identity  in  the  species  of  land  animals 
still  inhabiting  the  opposite  shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  The 
submersion  of  these  two  tracts  of  land  (which  were  perhaps  of 
considerable  extent)  would  be  a  slow  process,  and  from  year  to 
year  the  change  might  be  hardly  perceptible.  It  is  easy  to  see 
how  the  migration  that  had  once  taken  place  over  continuous 
land  would  be  kept  up,  first  over  lagoons  and  marshes,  then  over 
a  narrow  channel,  and  siibsequently  over  a  considerable  sea, 
no  one  generation  of  birds  ever  perceiving  any  difference  in  the 
route. 

There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  the  sea-passage  is  now  very 
dangerous  to  many  birds.  Quails  cross  in  immense  flocks,  and 
great  numbers  are  drowned,  at  sea  whenever  the  weather  is  un- 
favourable. Some  individuals  always  stay  through  the  winter 
in  the  south  of  Europe,  and  a  few  even  in  England  and  Ireland ; 
and  were  the  sea  to  become  a  little  wider  the  migration  would 
cease,  and  the  quail,  like  some  other  birds,  would  remain 
divided  between  south  Europe  and  north  Africa.  Aquatic 
birds  are  observed  to  follow  the  routes  of  great  rivers  and 
lakes,  and  the  shores  of  the  sea.  One  great  body  reaches 
central  Europe  by  way  of  the  Danube  from  the  shores  of  the 
Black  Sea;  another  ascends  the  Fihone  Valley  from  the  Gulf 
of  Lyons. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  BIEDS.  23 

IviMa  and  China. — In  the  peninsula  of  India  and  in  China 
great  numbers  of  northern  Hrda  arrive  during  September  and 
October,  and  leave  from  March  to  May.  Among  the  smaller 
birds  are  wagtails,  pipits,  larks,  stonechats,  ■warblers,  thrashes, 
buntings,  shrikes,  starlings,  hoopoes,  and  quails.  Some  species 
of  cranes  and  storks,  many  ducks,  and  great  numbers  of  Scdo- 
paddce  also  visit  India  in  winter ;  and  to  prey  upon  these 
come  a  band  of  rapacious  birds — the  peregrine  falcon,  the  hobby, 
kestrel,  common  sparrowhawk,  hairier,  and  the  short-eaied  owL 
These  birds  are  almost  all  natives  of  Europe  and  Western  Asia ; 
they  spread  over  all  northern  and  central  India,  mingling  ^ith 
the  sedentary  birds  of  the  oriental  fauna,  and  give  to  the  orni- 
thology of  Hindostan  at  this  season  quite  a  European  aspect. 
The  peculiar  species  of  the  higher  Himalayas  do  not  as  a  rule 
descend  to  the  plains  in  winter,  but  merely  come  lower  down  the 
mountains;  and  in  southern  India  and  Ceylon  comparatively 
few  of  these  migratory  birds  appear. 

In  China  the  migratory  birds  follow  generally  the  coast  line, 
coming  southwards  in  winter  from  eastern  Siberia  and  northern 
Japan ;  while  a  few  purely  tropical  forms  travel  northwards  in 
summer  to  Japan,  and  on  the  mainland  as  far  as  the  valley  of 
the  Amoor. 

North  America. — The  migrations  of  birds  in  North  America 
have  been  carefully  studied  by  resident  naturalists,  and  present 
some  interesting  features.  The  birds  of  the  eastern  ports  of 
North  America  are  pre-eminently  migratory,  a  much  smaller  pro- 
portion being  permanent  residents  than  in  corresponding  latitudes 
in  Europe.  Thus,  in  Massachusetts  there  are  only  about  30  species 
of  birds  which  are  resident  all  the  year,  while  the  regular' 
summer  visitors  are  106.  Comparing  with  this  our  own  country, 
though  considerably  further  north,  the  proportions  are  reversed; 
there  being  140  residents  and  63  summer  visitors.  This  differ- 
ence is  clearly  due  to  the  much  greater  length  and  severity  of 
the  -winter,  and  the  greater  heat  of  summer,  in  America  than 
with  us.  The  number  of  permanent  residents  increases  pretty 
regularly  as  we  go  southward ;  but  the  number  of  birds  at  any 
locality  during  the  breeding  season  seems  to  increase  as  we  go 


by  Google 


24  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGRATION.  [part  i. 

northward  as  far  as  Canada,  where,  according  to  Mr.  Allen,  more 
species  breed  than  in  the  warm  Southern  States.  Even  in  the 
extreme  north,  beyond  the  limit  of  forests,  there  are  no  less  than 
60  species  which  hreed;  in  Canada  about  160;  while  in 
Carolina  there  are  only  135,  and  in  Louisiana,  130.  The  extent 
of  the  migration  varies  greatly,  some  species  only  going  a  few 
degrees  north  and  south,  while  others  migrate  annually  from 
the  tropica  to  the  extreme  north  of  the  continent ;  and  every 
gradation  occurs  between  theise  extremes.  Among  those  which 
migrate  furthest  are  the  species  of  Dendrceca,  and  other  Ameri- 
can flycatchir^  warblers  (MnioHltidm),  many  of  which  breed 
on  the  shores  of  Hudson's  Bay,  and  spend  the  winter  in  Mexico 
or  the  West  Indian  islands. 

The  great  moratory  movement  of  American  birds  is  almost 
wholly  confined  to  the  east  coaat ;  the  birds  of  the  high  central 
plains  and  of  California  being  for  the  most  part  sedentary,  or 
only  migrating  for  short  distances.  All  the  species  which  reach 
South  America,  and  most  of  those  which  winter  in  Mexico 
and  Guatemala,  are  exclusively  eastern  species ;  though  a  few 
Eocky  Mountain  birds  range  southward  along  the  plateaux  of 
Mexico  and  Guatemala,  but  probably  not  as  regular  annual 
migrants. 

In  America  as  in  Europe  birds  appear  in  spring  with  great 
regularity,  while  the  time  of  the  autumnal  return  is  less  con- 
stant. More  curious  is  the  fact,  also  observed  in  both  hemi- 
spheres, that  they  do  not  all  return  by  the  same  route  followed  in 
going  northwards,  some  species  being  constant  visitors  to  certain 
locahties  in  spring  but  not  in  autumn,  others  in  autumn  but  not 
in  spring. 

Some  interesting  cases  have  been  observed  in  America  of  a 
gradual  alteration  in  the  extent  of  the  migration  of  certain  birds. 
A  Mexican  swallow  {Hirundo  lunifrons)  first  appeared  in  Ohio 
in  1815.  Year  by  year  it  increased  the  extent  of  its  range  till 
by  1845  it  had  reached  Maine  and  Canada ;  and  it  is  now  quoted 
by  American  writers  as  extending  its  annual  migrations  to 
Hudson's  Bay.  An  American  wren  {Troglodytes  ludovieianm) 
is  another  bird  which  has  spread  considerably  northwards  since 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  BIRDS.  25 

the  time  of  tlie  ornithologist  Wilson ;  and  the  rice-bii'd,  or  "  Bob- 
o'-link,"  of  the  Americans,  continually  widens  its  range  as  rice 
and  wheat  are  more  extensively  cultivated.  This  bird  winters 
in  Cuba  and  other  West  Indian  Islands,  and  probably  also  in 
Mexico.  In  April  it  enters  the  Southern  States  and  parses 
northward,  till  in  June  it  reaches  Canada  and  extends  west  to 
the  Saskatchewan  Eiver  in  54°  north  latitude. 

South  Temperate  America. — The  migratory  birds  of  this  part 
of  the  world  have  been  observed  by  Mr.  Hudson  at  Buenos 
Ayres.  As  in  Europe  and  Korth  America,  there  are  winter  and 
summer  visitors,  from  Patagonia  and  the  tropics  respeetively. 
Specie  of  Fprocephalus,  Milvulus,  swallows,  and  a  humming- 
bird, are  among  the  most  regular  of  the  summer  visitors.  They 
are  all  insectivorous  birds.  From  Pategonia  species  of  Tceni- 
optera,  Ginclodes,  and  Gentrites,  come  in  winter,  with  two  gulls, 
two  geese,  and  six  snipes  and  plovers.  Five  species  of  swallows 
appear  at  Buenos  Ayres  in  spring,  some  staying  to  breed,  others 
passing  on  to  more  temperate  regions  farther  south.  As  a  rule 
the  birds  which  come  late  and  leave  early  are  the  most  regular. 
Some  are  very  irregular  in  their  movements,  the  Molothms  hona- 
Hensis,  for  example,  sometimes  leaves  early  in  autumn,  some- 
times remains  all  the  winter.  Some  resident  birds  also  move  in 
winter  to  districts  where  they  are  never  seen  in  summer. 

General  Remarks  on  Migration. — The  preceding  summary  of 
the  main  facts  of  migration  (which  might  have  been  almost  in- 
definitely extended,  owing  to  the  groat  mass  of  detailed  infor- 
mation that  exists  on  the  subject)  appears  to  accord  with  the 
view  already  suggested,  that  the  "instinct"  of  migration  has 
arisen  from  the  habit  of  wandering  in  search  of  food  common  to 
all  animals,  but  greatly  exaggerated  in  the  case  of  birds  by  their 
powers  of  flight  and  by  the  necessity  for  procuring  a  large 
amount  of  soft  insect  food  for  their  unSedged  young.  Migra- 
tion in  its  simple  form  may  be  best  studied  in  Nortli  America, 
where  it  takes  place  over  a  continuous  land  surface  with  a  con- 
siderable change  of  climate  from  south  to  north.  We  have  here 
(as  probably  in  Europe  and  elsewhere)  every  grade  of  migration, 
from  species  which  merely  shift  the  northern  and  southern 
Vol.  I.— 4 


by  Google 


2G  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGEATION.  [pabt  j. 

limits  of  tlieir  range  a  few  hundred  miles,  so  that  in  the  central 
parta  of  the  area  the  species  is  a  peiTQanent  resident,  to  others 
which  move  completely  over  1,000  miles  of  latitude,  so  that  in 
all  the  intervening  districts  they  are  only  known  as  birds  of 
passage.  Now,  just  as  the  rice-bird  and  the  Mexican  swallow 
have  extended  their  migrations,  owing  to  favourable  conditions 
induced  by  human  agency ;  so  we  may  presume  that  lai^e  num- 
bers of  species  would  extend  their  range  where  favourable  con- 
ditions arose  through  natural  causes.  If  we  go  hack  only  as 
far  as  the  height  of  the  glacial  epoch,  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that  all  North  America,  as  far  south  as  about  40"  north  latitude, 
was  covered  with  an  almost  continuous  and  perennial  ice-sheet. 
At  this  time  the  migratory  birds  would  extend  up  to  this  harrier 
(which  would  probably  terminate  in  the  midst  of  luxuriant 
vegetation,  just  as  the  glaciers  of  Switzerland  now  often  termi- 
nate amid  forests  and  corn-fields),  and  as  the  cold  decreased  and 
the  ice  retired  almost  imperceptibly  year  by  year,  would  follow 
it  up  fai'ther  and  farther  according  as  the  pecuharities  of  vegeta- 
tion and  msect  food  wcie  more  or  less  smted  to  tbeir  several 
constitutions  It  is  an  ascertained  fact  that  mmy  individual 
birds  letuin  year  after  jeartu  bmld  then  ne^ts  m  the  same 
spot.  This  shows  a  stiong  locil  ittachment  and  is  m  fact, 
the  faculty  or  teelmg  on  T\hn,h  their  very  exi'itence  prolahly 
depends  Tor  were  they  to  wandei  at  rmdom  each  je\i  they 
would  almoht  certainly  not  meet  with  plicea  so  well  suited  to 
them,  and  mi^ht  even  get  into  distiicts  where  they  oi  their 
young  would  inevitably  perish.  It  is  also  a  curious  fact  that  in 
so  many  cases  the  old  birds  migrate  first,  leaving  the  young  ones 
behind,  who  follow  some  short  time  later,  hut  do  not  go  so  far  as 
their  parents.  This  is  very  strongly  opposed  to  the  notion  of 
an  imperative  instinct.  The  old  birds  have  been  before,  the 
young  have  not ;  and  it  is  only  when  the  old  ones  have  all  or 
nearly  all  gone  that  the  young  go  too,  probably  following  some 
of  the  latest  stra^lers.  They  wander,  however,  almost  at  ran- 
dom, and  the  majority  are  destroyed  before  the  next  spring. 
This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  birds  which  return  in  spring 
are  as  a  rule  not  more  numerous  than  those  which  came  the 


by  Google 


CHAP.  11.]  BIRDS.  27 

preceding  spring,  whereas  those  which  went  away  in  autumn 
were  two  or  three  times  as  numerous.  Those  young  hirds  that 
do  get  back,  however,  have  learnt  by  experience,  and  the  next 
year  they  take  care  to  go  with  the  old  onea.  The  most  striking 
fact  in  favour  of  the  "  instinct"  of  migration  is  the  "  agitation," 
or  excitement,  of  confined  birds  at  tlie  time  when  their  wild 
companions  are  migrating.  It  seems  probable,  however,  that 
this  is  what  may  be  called  a  social  excitement,  due  to  the 
anxious  cries  of  the  migrating  birds ;  a  view  supported  by  the 
fact  stated  by  Marcel  de  Serres,  that  the  black  swan  of  Australia, 
when  domesticated  in  Europe,  sometimes  joins  wild  swans  in 
their  northward  migration.  We  must  remember  too  that  migra- 
tion at  the  proper  time  is  in  many  cases  absolutely  essential  to 
the  existence  of  the  species ;  and  it  is  therefore  not  improbable 
that  some  strong  social  emotion  should  have  been  gradually 
developed  in  the  race,  by  the  circumstance  that  all  who  for 
want  of  such  emotion   did  not  join  their  fellows  inevitably 


The  mode  by  which  a  passage  originally  overland  has  been 
converted  iuto  one  over  the  sea  offers  no  insuperable  dithcuities, 
as  has  already  been  pointe*!  out.  The  long  flights  of  some  birds 
without  apparently  stopping  on  the  way  is  thought  to  be  inex- 
pKcable,  as  weR  as  their  finding  their  nesting-place  of  the 
previous  year  from  a  distance  of  many  hundreds  or  even  a 
thousand  miles.  But  the  observant  powers  of  animals  are  very 
great ;  and  birds  flying  high  in  the  air  may  be  guided  by  the 
physical  features  of  the  country  spread  out  beneath  them  in  a 
way  that  would  be  impracticable  to  purely  terrestrial  animals. 

It  is  assumed  by  some  writers  that  the  breeding-place  of  a 
species  is  to  be  considered  as  its  true  home  rather  than  that  to 
which  it  retires  in  winter ;  but  this  can  hardly  be  accepted  as  a 
rule  of  universal  application.  A  bird  can  only  breed  success- 
fully where  it  can  find  sufficient  food  for  its  young ;  and  the 
reason  probably  why  so  many  of  the  smaller  birds  leave  the 
warm  southern  regions  to  breed  in  temperate  or  even  cold  lati- 
tudes, is  because  caterpillars  and  other  soft  insect  larviE  are 
there  abundant  at  the  proper  time,  while  in  their  winter  home  the 


by  Google 


28  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGRATION.  [part  i. 

larvfe  have  all  changed  into  winged  insects.  But  this  favourahle 
breeding  district  will  change  its  position  with  change  of  climate ; 
and  as  the  last  great  chaise  has  been  one  of  increased  warmth 
in  all  the  temperate  zones,  it  is  probable  that  many  of  the  migratory 
birds  are  comparatively  recent  visitors.  Other  changes  may 
however  have  taken  place,  affecting  the  vegetation  and  conse- 
quently the  insects  of  a  district;  and  we  have  seldom  the  means 
of  determining  in  any  particular  case  in  what  direction  the  last 
extension  of  range  occurred.  For  the  purposes  of  the  study  of 
geograpliical  distribution  therefore,  we  must,  except  in  special 
cases,  consider  the  true  range  of  a  species  to  comprise  all  the 
area  which  it  occupies  regularly  for  any  part  of  the  year,  while 
all  those  districts  which  it  only  visits  at  more  or  less  distant 
intervals,  apparently  driven  by  storms  or  by  hunger,  and  where 
it  never  regularly  or  permanently  settles,  should  not  be  included 
as  forming  part  of  its  area  of  distribution. 

Means  of  Dispersal  of  Reptiles  and  Amphibia. — If  we  leave 
out  of  consideration  the  true  marine  groups— the  turtles  and  sea- 
snakes-— reptiles  are  scarcely  more  fitted  for  traversing  seas  and 
oceans  than  are  mammalia.  W°  accordingly  find  that  in  those 
oceanic  islands  which  possess  no  indigenous  mammals,  land  rep- 
tiles are  also  generally  wanting.  The  several  groups  of  these  ani- 
mals, however,  differ  considerably  both  in  their  means  of  dispersal 
and  in  their  power  of  resisting  adverse  conditions.  Snakes  are 
most  dependent  on  climate,  becoming  very  scarce  in  temperate 
and  eold  climates  and  entirely  ceasii^  at  62°  north  latitude,  and 
they  do  not  ascend  very  lofty  mountains,  ceasing  at  6,000  feet 
elevation  in  the  Alps,  Some  inhabit  deserts,  others  swamps  and 
marshes,  while  many  are  adapted  for  a  life  in  forests.  They 
swim  rivers  easily,  but  apparently  have  no  means  of  passing 
the  sea,  since  they  are  very  rarely  found  on  oceanic  islands. 
Lizards  are  also  essentially  tropical,  but  they  go  somewhat 
farther  north  than  snakes,  and  ascend  higher  on  the  mountains, 
reaching  10>0()0  feet  in  the  Alps.  They  possess  too  some 
unknown  means  (probably  in  the  ^g-state)  of  passing  over  the 
ocean,  since  they  are  found  to  inhabit  many  islands  where  there 
are  neither  mammalia  nor  snakes. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  H.]  EEPTILES  AHD  FISHES.  29 

The  amphibia  are  much  less  sensitive  to  cold  than  are  true 
reptiles,  and  they  accordingly  extend  much  farther  north,  frogs 
being  found  within  the  arctic  circla  Their  semi-aquatic  life 
also  gives  them  facilities  for  disperaal,  and  their  eggs  are  no  doubt 
sometimes  carried  lay  aquatic  birds  from  one  pond  or  stream  to 
another.  Salt  water  is  fatal  to  them  as  well  as  to  their  eggs,  and 
hence  it  arises  that  they  are  seldom  found  in  those  oceanic 
islands  from  which  mammalia  are  absent.  Deserts  and  oceans 
would  probably  form  the  most  effectual  barriers  tp  their  dis- 
persal ;  whereas  both  snakes  and  lizards  abound  in  deserts,  and 
have  some  means  of  occasionally  passing  the  ocean  which  frogs 
and  salamanders  do  not  seem  to  possess. 

Means  of  Dispersal  of  Fishes. — The  fact  that  the  same  species 
of  freshwater  fish  often  inhabit  distinct  river  systems,  proves 
that  they  have  some  means  of  dispersal  over  land.  The  many 
authentic  accounts  of  fish  falling  from  the  atmosphere,  indicate 
one  of  the  means  by  which  they  may  be  transferred  from  one 
river  basin  to  another,  viz.,  by  hurricanes  and  whirlwinds,  which 
often  carry  up  considerable  quantities  of  water  and  with  it  fishes 
of  small  size.  In  volcanic  countries,  also,  the  fishes  of  subter- 
ranean streams  may  sometimes  be  thrown  up  by  volcanic  explo- 
sions, as  Humboldt  relates  happened  in  South  America,  Another 
mode  by  which  fishes  may  be  distributed  is  by  their  eggs  being 
occasionally  carried  away  by  aquatic  birds ;  and  it  is  stated  by 
Gmelin  that  geese  and  ducks  during  their  migrations  feed  on  the 
e^s  of  fish,  and  that  some  of  these  pass  through  their  bodies 
with  their  vitality  unimpaiied.'  Even  water-beetles  flying  from 
one  pond  to  another  might  occasionally  carry  with  them  some  of 
the  smaller  eggs  of  fishes.  But  it  is  probable  that  fresh-water  fish 
are  also  enabled  to  migrate  by  changes  of  level  causing  streams 
to  alter  their  course  and  carry  their  waters  into  adjacent  basins. 
On  plateaux  the  sources  of  distinct  river  systems  often  approach 
each  other,  and  the  same  thing  occurs  with  lateral  tributaries 
on  the  lowlands  near  their  mouths.  Such  changes,  although 
small  in  extent,  and  occurring  only  at  long  intervals,  would 

'  Quoted  in  Lyeil's  Frineiples  of  Geology  (llth  ed.  vol.  ii.  p.  374),  from 
AiiiMn.  Acad.  Essay  75. 


b,  Google 


30  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGRATION.  [paht  i. 

act  very  poweiMiy  in  modifyii^  the  distribution  of  fresh-water 
fish. 

Sea,  iish  would  seem  at  first  sight  to  have  almost  unlimited 
means  of  dispersal,  but  this  is  far  from  heing  the  case,  Tempera- 
ture forms  a  complete  barrier  to  a  large  number  of  species,  cold 
water  being  essential  to  many,  wlule  others  can  only  dweU.  in 
the  warmth  of  the  tropics.  Deep  water  is  another  barrier  to 
laige  numbers  of  species  which  are  adapted  to  shores  and 
shallows ;  gnd  thus  the  Atlantic  is  quite  as  impassable  a  gulf 
to  most  fishes  as  it  is  to  birds.  Many  sea  fishes  migrate  to  a 
limited  extent  for  the  purpose  of  depositing  their  spawn  in 
favourable  situations.  The  herring,  an  inhabitant  of  the  deep 
sea,  comes  in  shoals  to  oui  coast  in  the  breeding  season ;  while 
the  salmon  quits  the  northern  seas  and  enters  our  rivers,  mount- 
ing upwards  to  the  clear  cold  water  near  their  sources  to  deposit 
its  eggs.  Keeping  in  mind  the  essential  fact  that  changes  of 
temperature  and  of  depth  are  the  main  baiTiers  to  the  dispersal 
of  fish,  we  shall  find  little  difficulty  in  tracing  the  causes  that 
have  determined  their  distribution. 

Means  of  Dispersal  of  MoUusca. — The  marine,  fresh-water,  and 
land  mollusca  are  three  groups  whose  powers  of  dispersal  and 
consequent  distribution  are  very  different,  and  must  be  separately 
considered.  The  Pieroj)oda,  the  Zan&ina,  and  other  groups  of 
floating  molluscs,  drift  about  in  mid-ocean,  and  their  dispersal 
is  probably  limited  chiefly  by  temperature,  but  perhaps  also  by 
the  presence  of  enemies  or  the  scarcity  of  proper  food.  The 
univalve  and  bivalve  mollusca,  of  which  the  whelk  and  the 
cockle  may  be  taken  as  types,  move  so  slowly  in  their  adult 
state,  that  we  should  expect  them  to  have  an  exceedingly  limited 
distribution;  but  the  young  of  all  these  are  free  swimming 
embryos,  and  they  thus  have  a  powerful  means  of  dispersal,  and 
are  carried  by  tides  and  currents  so  as  ultimately  to  spread  over 
every  shore  and  shoal  that  offers  conditions  favourable  fo  then 
development.  The  fresh  water  molluacs,  which  one  m  1 1  at 
first  suppose  could  not  range  beyond  their  own  river  b  n  a  e 
yet  very  widely  distributed  in  common  with  almost  aU  otl  e 
fresh  water  productions ;  and  Mr.  Darwin  has  shown  tl  at  th  s  s 


by  Google 


CHAP,  ir.]  LAHD-SHELLS  AND  INSECTa  31 

due  to  the  fact,  that  ponda  and  marshes  are  constantly  freq^uented 
by  wading  and  swimming  birds  which  are  pre-eminently  wan- 
derers, and  which  frequently  carry  away  with  them  the  seeds  of 
plants,  and  the  eggs  of  molluscs  and  aquatic  insects.  Preah 
water  molluscs  juat  hatched  were  found  to  attach  themselvea  to 
a  duck's  foot  suspended  in  an  aquarium ;  and  they  would  thus  be 
easily  carried  from  one  lake  or  river  to  another,  and  by  the  help 
of  different  species  of  aquatic  birds,  might  soon  spread  all  over 
the  globe.  Even  a  water-beetle  has  been  caught  with  a  small 
living  shell  {Ancylus)  attached  to  it ;  and  these  fly  long  distances 
and  are  liable  to  be  blown  out  to  sea,  one  having  been  caught  on 
board  the  Beagle  when  forty-five  miles  from  land.  Although 
fresh  water  molluscs  and  their  eggs  must  frequently  be  carried 
out  to  sea,  yet  this  cannot  lead  to  their  dispersal,  since  salt 
water  is  almost  immediately  fatal  to  theiu ;  and  we  are  therefore 
forced  to  conclude  that  the  apparently  insignificant  and  uncer- 
tain means  of  dispersal  above  alluded  to  are  really  what  have 
led  to  their  wide  distribution.  The  true  land-shelis  offer  a  still 
more  difficult  ease,  for  they  are  exceedingly  sensitive  to  the 
influence  of  salt  water;  they  are  not  likely  to  be  earned  by 
aquatic  birds,  and  yet  they  are  more  or  less  abundant  all  over 
the  globe,  inhabiting  the  most  remote  oceanic  islands.  It  has 
been  found,  however,  that  land-shells  have  the  power  of  lying 
dormant  a  long  time.  Some  have  lived  two  years  and  a  half 
shut  up  in  pill  boxes ;  and  one  Egyptian  desert  snail  came  to  life 
after  having  been  glued  down  to  a  tablet  in  the  British  Museum 
for  four  years  ! 

We  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Darwin  for  experiments  on  the  power 
of  land  shells  to  resist  sea  water,  and  he  found  that  when  they 
had  formed  a  membranous  diaphragm  over  the  mouth  of  the 
shell  they  survived  many  days'  immersion  (in  one  case  fourteen 
days) ;  and  another  experimenter,  q^uoted  by  Mr,  Darwin,  found  that 
out  of  one  hundred  land  shells  immersed  for  a  fortnight  in  the  sea, 
twenty-seven  recovered.  It  is  therefore  quite  possible  for  them  to 
be  carried  in  the  chinks  of  drift  wood  for  many  hundred  miles 
across  the  sea,  and  this  is  probably  one  of  the  most  effectual 
modes  of  their  dispersal.     Very  young  shells  would  also  some- 


by  Google 


32  DISPBESAL  AND  MIGBATION.  [paht  i. 

times  attach  themselves  t«  the  feet  of  birds  walking  or  resting 
on  the  ground,  and  as  many  of  the  waders  often  go  far  inland, 
this  may  have  been  one  of  the  methods  of  distributing  species 
of  land  shells ;  for  it  must  always  be  remembered  that  nature  can 
afford  to  wait,  and  that  if  but  once  in  a  thousand  years  a  single 
bird  should  convey  two  or  three  minute  snails  to  a  distant  island, 
this  IB  all  that  is  required  for  us  to  find  that  island  welL  stocked 
with  a  great  and  varied  population  of  land  shells. 

Meam  of  Dispersal  of  Insects  and  the  Barriers  which  Limit 
their  Mange. — Willed  insects,  as  a  whole,  have  perhaps  more 
varied  means  of  dispersal  over  the  globe  than  any  other  highly 
oi^njsed  animals.  Many  of  them  can  fly  immense  distances, 
and  the  more  delicate  ones  are  liable  to  be  carried  by  storms 
and  hurricanes  over  a  wide  expanse  of  ocean.  They  are  often 
met  with  far  out  at  sea.  Hawk-moths  frequently  fly  on  board 
ships  as  they  approach  the  shores  of  tropical  countries,  and  they 
have  sometimes  been  captured  more  than  250  miles  from  the 
nearest  laud.  Dragon-flies  came  on  board  the  Adventure  frigate 
when  fifty  miles  off  the  coast  of  South  America.  A  southerly 
wind  brought  flies  in  myriads  to  Admiral  Smyth's  ship  in  the 
Mediterranean  when  he  was  100  miles  distant  from  the  coast  of 
Africa,  A  laige  Indian  beetle  {Chrysochroa  ocellata)  was  quite 
recently  caught  alive  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal  by  Captain  Payne  of 
the  barque  William  Mansoon,  273  miles  from  the  nearest  land. 
Darwin  caught  a  locust  370  miles  from  land;  and  in  1844 
swarms  of  locusts  several  mUea  in  extent,  and  as  thick  as  the 
flakes  in  a  heavy  snowstorm,  visited  Madeira.  These  must  have 
come  with  perfect  safety  more  than  300  nules ;  and  as  they  con- 
tinued Hying  over  the  island  for  a  long  time,  they  could  evidently 
have  travelled  to  a  much  greater  distance,  Numbers  of  living 
beetles  belonging  to  seven  genera,  some  aquatic  and  some  terres- 
trial, were  caught  by  Mr.  Darwin  in  the  open  sea,  seventeen 
miles  from  the  coast  of  South  America,  and  they  did  not  seem 
injured  by  the  salt  water.  Almost  all  the  accidental  canses  that 
lead  to  the  dispersal  of  the  higher  animals  would  be  still  more 
favourable  for  insects.  Floating  trees  could,  carry  hundreds  of 
insects  for  one  bird  or  mammal ;  and  so  many  of  the  larvse,  eggs, 


by  Google 


CHAP.  II.]  DISPERSAL  AND  MIGEATIOBT.  33 

and  pupse  of  insects  have  their  abode  in  solid  timber,  that  they 
might  survive  being  floated  immense  distances.  Great  numbers 
of  tropical  insects  have  been  captured  in  the  London  docks, 
where  they  have  been  broi^ht  in  foreign  timber ;  and  some  have 
emerged  from  furnitate  after  remaining  torpid  for  many  years. 
Most  insects  have  the  power  of  existing  weeks  or  months  with- 
out food,  and  some  are  very  tenacious  of  life.  Many  beetles 
wiE  survive  immersion  for  hours  in  strong  spirit ;  and  water  a 
few  degrees  below  the  boiling  point  will  not  always  kill  them. 
We  can  therefore  easily  understand  liow,  in  the  course  of  ages 
insects  may  become  dispersed  by  means  which  would  be  quite 
inadequate  in  the  case  of  the  higher  animals.  Tlie  drift-wood  and 
tropical  fruits  that  reach  Ireland  and  the  Orkneys ;  the  double 
cocoa-nuts  that  cross  the  Indian  ocean  from  the  Seychelle  Islands 
to  the  coast  of  Sumatra ;  the  winds  that  carry  volcanic  dust  and 
ashes  for  thousands  of  miles ;  the  hurricanes  that  travel  in  their 
revolving  course  over  wide  oceans ;  all  indicate  means  by  which 
a  few  insects  may,  at  rare  intervals  be  carried  to  remote  regions, 
and  become  the  progenitors  of  a  group  of  allied  forms. 

But  the  dispersal  of  insects  I'equires  to  be  looked  at  fi'om 
another  point  of  view.  They  are,  of  all  animals,  perhaps  the 
most  wonderfully  adapted  for  special  conditions ;  and  are  so  often 
fitted  to  fin  one  place  in  nature  and  one  onljr,  that  the  barriers 
against  their  permanent  displacement  are  ahnost  as  numerous 
and  as  effective  as  their  means  of  dispersal.  Hundreds  of  species 
of  lepidoptera,  for  example,  can  subsist  in  the  larva  state  only  on 
one  species  of  plant ;  so  that  even  if  the  perfect  insects  were 
carried  to  a  new  country,  the  continuance  of  the  race  would  de- 
pend upon  the  same  or  a  closely  allied  plant  being  abundant 
there,  Other  insects  require  succulent  vegetable  food  all  the 
year  round,  and  are  therefore  confined  to  tropical  regions ; 
some  can  live  only  in  deserts,  others  in  forests ;  some  are  de- 
pendent oo  water-plants,  some  on  mountain-vegetation.  Many 
are  so  intimately  connected  with  other  insects  during  some 
part  of  their  existence  that  they  could  not  live  without  them ; 
such  are  the  parasitical  hymcnoptera  and  diptera,  and  those 
mimicking  species   whose  welfare   depends   upon  their  being 


by  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS, 


mistaken  for  something  else.  Then  again,  insects  have  e 
in  ereiy  stage  of  their  existence — the  e^,  the  larva,  the  pupa, 
ind  the  perfect  form ;  and  the  abundance  of  any  one  of  these 
anemies  may  render  their  survival  impossible  in  a  country  other- 
wise vifell  suited  to  them.  Ever  bearing  in  mind  these  two 
opposing  classes  of  facts,  we  shall  not  be  surprised  at  the 
enormous  range  of  some  gi'oups  of  insects,  and  at  the  extreme 
localization  of  others ;  and  shall  be  ahle  to  give  a  rational  account 
of  many  phenomena  of  distribution  that  would  otherwise  aeeni 
quite  unintelhgible. 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  III. 

DISTRIBUTION  AS  AFFECTED   liY  THE  CONDITIONS  AND  CHANGES  OF 
THE  earth's   surface. 

The  distribution  of  animals  over  tlie  earth's  surface,  is  evidently 
dependent  in  great  measure  upon  those  grand  and  important 
characteristics  of  our  globe,  the  study  of  which  is  termed  physical 
geography.  The  proportion  of  land  and  water ;  the  outlines  and 
distribution  of  continents;  the  depth  of  s6as  and  oceans;  the 
position  of  islands ;  the  height,  direction,  and  continuity  of  moun- 
tain chains ;  the  position  and  extent  of  deserts,  lakes,  and  forests ; 
the  direction  and  velocity  of  ocean  currents,  as  well  as  of  prevalent 
winds  and  hurricanes ;  and  lastly,  the  distribution  of  heat  and 
cold,  of  rain,  snow,  and  ice,  both  in  their  means  and  in  their 
extremes,  have  all  to  be  considered  when  we  endeavour  to 
account  for  the  often  unequal  and  unsymmetrieal  maimer  in 
which  animals  are  dispersed  over  the  globe.  But  even  this 
knowledge  is  insufficient  unless  we  inquire  further  as  to  the 
evidence  of  permanence  possessed  by  each  of  these  features,  in 
order  that  we  may  give  due  weight  to  the  various  causes  that 
have  led  to  the  existing  facts  of  animal  distribution. 

Land?  and  Water. — The  well-known  fact  that  nearly  three- 
fourths  of  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  occupied  by  water,  and  but 
a  little  more  than  one-fourth  by  land,  is  important  as  mdicating 
the  vast  extent  of  ocean  by  which  many  of  the  continents  and 
islands  are  separated  from  each  other.     But  there  is  another  fact 


by  Google 


36  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  r. 

whieli  greatly  increases  its  importance,  namely,  that  the  mean 
height  of  the  land  is  very  small  compared  with  the  mean  depth 
of  the  sea.  It  has  heen  estimated  by  Humboldt  that  the  mean 
height  of  all  the  land  surface  does  not  exceed  a  thousand  feet, 
owing  to  the  comparative  narrowness  of  mountain  ranges  and  the 
great  extent  of  alluvial  plains  and  valleys ;  the  ocean  bed,  on  the 
contrary,  not  only  descends  deeper  than  the  tops  of  the  highest 
mountains  rise  above  its  surface,  but  these  profound  depths  are 
broad  sunken  plains,  while  the  shallows  correspond  to  the  moun- 
tain ranges,  so  that  its  mean  depth  is,  as  nearly  as  can  be  esti- 
mated, twelve  thousand  feet,^  Hence,  as  the  area  of  water  is  three 
times  that  of  the  land,  the  total  cubical  contents  of  the  land, 
above  the  sea  level,  would  be  only  -gV  that  of  the  waters  which 
are  below  that  level  The  important  result  follows,  thatw 
it  is  scarcely  possible  that  in  past  times  the  amount  of  land  si 
should  eve  g  eatly  have  exceeded  that  wl  ch  now  e  ts,  it  is 
just  posslle  tl  at  all  the  lanl  miy  ha  e  been  at  some  time 
submerge  1  and  th  refo  e  n  the  h  gl  t  le^ree  p  ol  able  that 
among  the  ont  ual  cl  anj,es  of  land  a  d  sea  tl  at  1  ive  been 
always  go  ncr  on  the  amo  mt  of  land  surface  has  often  been 
much  less  tl  i  t  b  no  For  the  same  reason  t  is  probable 
that  ther  have  1  een  t  e  wl  e  1  i^e  ma  ><  s  of  Ian  1  have  been 
more  isckted  from  the  re  t  tl  a  tl  ej  ire  at  p  e  ent  just  as 
South  America  would  be  if  North  America  were  submerged,  or 
as  Australia  would  become  if  the  Malay  Archipelago  were  to 
sink  beneath  the  ocean.  It  is  also  very  impoitaut  to  bear  in 
mind  the  fact  insisted  on  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  that  the  shallow 
parts  of  the  ocean  are  almost  always  in  the  vicinity  of  land ;  and 
that  an  amount  of  elevation  that  would  make  little  difference  to 
the  bed  of  the  ocean  woul  i  raise  up  extensive  tracts  of  dry  land 
ID  the  vicinity  of  ex-istin^  continents  It  is  almost  certain, 
thertfore  that  changes  m  the  di-,tnbution  of  land  and  sea 
must  have  taken  place  moie  frequently  by   additions  to,  or 

'  This  estimate  has  heen  made  for  me  by  Mr.  Stanford  from  the  materials 
nsei  in  delineating  the  contourB  of  the  ocean-bed  on  our  general  map.  It 
embodies  the  result  of  all  the  soundings  of  the  Challenger,  Tuscarora,  and 
other  ■"esaelfi,  obtainable  up  to  August,  1875. 


b,  Google 


CHAP,  III.]     CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  DISTRIBUTION.  37 

modifications  of  pre-existing  land,  than  by  the  upheaval  of 
entirely  new  continents  in  mid-ocean.  These  two  principles 
will  throw  light  upon  two  constantly  recurring  groups  of  facts 
in  the  distribution  of  animals, — the  restriction  of  peculiar  forms 
to  areas  not  at  present  isolated, — and  on  the  other  han(3,  the 
occurrence  of  allied  forms  in  lauds  situated  on  opposite  shores 
of  the  great  oceans. 

Continmtal  Areas. — Although  the  dry  land  of  the  earth's 
surface  is  distributed  with  so  much  irregularity,  that  there  is 
more  than  twice  as  much  north  of  the  equator  as  there  is  south 
of  it,  and  about  twice  as  much  in  the  Asiatic  as  in  the  American 
hemisphere;  and,  what  is  stjll  more  extraordinary,  that  on  a 
hemisphere  of  which  a  point  in  St.  George's  Channel  between 
England  and  Ireland  is  the  centre,  the  land  is  nearly  equal  in 


extent  to  the  water,  while 
the  proportion  of  only  one-ei 
almost  continuous. 


.n  the  opposite  hemisphere  it  is  in 
ighth, — yet  the  whole  of  the  land  is 
itially  of  only  three  masses: 
the  American,  the  Asia- African,  and  the  Australian.  The  two 
former  are  only  separated  by  thirty-six  miles  of  shallow  sea 
at  Behring's  Straits,  so  that  it  is  possible  to  go  from  Cape  Horn 
to  Singapore  or  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  without  ever  being 
out  of  sight  of  land ;  and  owing  to  the  intervention  of  the 
numerous  islands  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  the  journey  might 
be  continued  under  the  same  conditions  as  far  as  Melbourne  and 
Hobart  Town.  This  curious  fact,  of  the  almost  perfect  continuity 
of  all  the  great  masses  of  land  notwithstanding  their  extremely 
irregular  shape  and  distribution,  is  no  doubt  dependent  on  the 
circumstances  just  alluded  to ;  that  the  great  depth  of  the  oceans 
and  the  slowness  of  the  process  of  upheaval,  has  almost  always 
produced  the  new  lands  either  close  to,  or  actually  connected 
with  pre-existing  lands ;  and  this  has  necessarily  led  to  a  much 
greater  uniformity  in  the  distribution  of  organic  forms,  than 
would  have  prev^ed  bad  the  continents  been  more  completely 
isolated  from  each  other. 

The  isthmuses  which  connect  Africa  with  Asia,  and  North 
with  South  America,  are,  however,  so  small  and  insignificant 
compareil  with  the  vast  extent  of  the  countries  they  unite  that 


by  Google 


38  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

we  can  hardly  consider  them  to  form  more  than  a  nominal 
connection.  The  Isthmus  of  Suez  indeed,  heing  itself  a  desert, 
and  connecting  districts  which  for  a  great  distance  are  more  or 
less  desert  also,  does  not  effect  any  real  union  between  the  luxu- 
riant forest-clatl  regions  of  intertropical  Asia  and  Airica.  The 
Isthmus  of  Panama  is  a  more  effectual  line  of  union,  since  it  is 
hiUy,  -well  watered,  and  covered  with  luxuriant  vegetation ;  and 
we  accordingly  find  that  the  main  features  of  South  American 
zoology  are  continued  into  Central  Amerii^a  and  Mexico.  In 
Asia  a  great  transverse  harrier  exists,  dividing  that  continent 
into  a  northern  and  southern  portion ;  and  as  the  lowlands  occur 
on  the  south  and  the  highlands  on  the  north  of  the  great  moun- 
tain range,  which  is  situated  not  far  beyond  the  tropic,  an  abrupt 
change  of  climate  is  produced ;  so  that  a  helt  of  about  a  hundred 
miles  wide,  is  all  that  intervenes  between  a  luxuriant  tropical 
region  and  an  almost  arctic  waste.  Between  the  northern  part 
of  Asia,  and  Europe,  there  is  no  barrier  of  importance ;  and  it  is 
impossible  to  separate  these  regions  as  regards  the  main  features 
of  animal  life.  Africa,  like  Asia,  has  a  great  transverse  barrier, 
but  it  is  a  desert  instead  of  a  mountain  chain ;  and  it  is  found 
that  this  desert  is  a  more  effectual  barrier  to  the  diffusion  of 
animals  than  the  Mediterranean  Sea ;  partly  because  it  coincides 
with  the  natural  division  of  a  tropical  from  a  temperate  climate, 
but  also  on  account  of  recent  geological  changes  which  we  shall 
presently  allude  to.  It  results  then  from  this  outline  sketch  of 
the  earth's  surface,  that  the  primary  divisions  of  the  geographer 
correspond  approximately  with  those  of  the  zoologist  Some 
large  portion  of  each  of  the  popular  divisions  forms  the  nucleus 
of  a  zoological  region ;  but  the  boundaries  are  so  changed  that 
the  geographer  would  hardly  recognise  them :  it  has,  therefore, 
been  found  necessary  to  give  them  those  distinct  names  which 
will  be  fully  explained  in  our  next  chapter. 

Becejii  Changes  in  the  Continental  Areas.— The  important  fact 
has  been  now  ascertained,  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
Sahara  south  of  Algeria  and  Morocco  was  under  water  at  a  very 
recent  epoch.  Over  much  of  this  area  sea^shells,  identical  with 
those  now  living  in  the  Mediterranean,  are  abundantly  scattered. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  Ill,]     CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  DISTRIBUTION.  30 

not  only  in  depressions  below  the  level  of  tlie  sea  but  up  to  a 
height  of  900  feet  above  it.  Borings  for  water  made  by  the 
French  government  have  shown,  that  these  sheUs  occur  twenty- 
feet  deep  in  the  sand;  and  the  occurrence  of  abundance  of  salt, 
sometimes  even  forming  considerable  hills,  is  an  additional  proof 
of  the  disappearance  of  a  large  body  of  salt  water.  The  common 
cockle  ia  one  of  the  moat  abundant  of  the  shells  found ;  and  the 
Eev.  H.  B.  Tristram  discovered  a  new  fiah,  in  a  salt  lake  nearly 
300  miles  inland,  but  which  has  since  been  found  to  inhabit  the 
Gulf  of  Guinea,  Connected  with  this  proof  of  recent  elevation 
in  the  Sahara,  we  have  most  interesting  indications  of  subsidence 
in  the  area  of  the  Mediterranean,  which  were  perhaps  contem- 
poraneous. Sicily  and  Malta  are  connected  with  Africa  by  a 
submerged  bank  from  300  to  1,200  feet  below  the  surface ;  while 
the  depth  of  the  Mediterranean,  both  to  the  east  and  west,  is 
enormous,  in  some  parts  more  than  13,000  feet ;  and  another 
submerged  banlt  with  a  depth  of  1,000  feet  occurs  at  the  straits 
of  Gibraltar.  In  caves  in  Sicily,  remains  of  the  living  African 
elephant  have  been  found  by  Baron  Anca ;  and  in  other  caves  Dr. 
Falconer  discovered  remains  of  the  Elephas  aittiqmis  and  of  two 
species  of  Sippopoiamm.  In  Malta,  three  species  of  elephant 
have  been  discovered  by  Captain  Spratt ;  a  large  one  closely  allied 
to  B.  antiquus  and  two  smaller  ones  not  exceeding  five  feet  high 
when  adult.  These  facts  clearly  indicate,  that  when  North 
Africa  was  separated  by  a  broad  arm  of  the  sea  from  the  rest  oi 
the  continent,  it  was  probably  connected  with  Europe ;  and  this 
explains  why  zoologists  find  themselves  obliged  to  place  it  along 
with  Europe  in  the  same  zoological  region. 

Besides  this  change  in  the  level  of  the  Sahara  and  the  Medi- 
terranean basin,  Europe  has  undergone  many  fluctuations  in  its 
physical  geography  in  very  recent  times.  In  Wales,  abundance 
of  sea-shells  of  living  species  have  been  found  at  an  elevation 
of  1,300  feet;  and  in  Sardinia  there  is  proof  of  an  elevation 
of  300  feet  since  the  human  epoch ;  and  these  are  only  samples 
of  many  such  changes  of  level.  But  these  changes,  though  very 
important  locally  and  as  connected  with  geological  problems, 
need  not  be    ftirther   noticed   here ;    as  they  were  not   of  a 


by  Google 


40  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS,  [part  i. 

nature  to  affect  tlie  larger  features  of  the  earth's  surface  or  to 
determiEe  the  boundaries  of  great  zoological  regions. 

The  only  other  other  recent  change  of  great  importance  which 
can  be  adduced  to  illustrate  our  present  subject,  is  that  which 
has  taken  place  between  Korth  and  South  America.  The  living 
marine  shells  of  the  opposite  coasts  of  the  isthmus  of  Panama, 
as  well  as  the  corals  and  fishes,  are  generally  of  distinct  species, 
but  some  are  identical  and  many  aie  closely  allied ;  the  West 
Indian  fossil  shells  and  corals  of  the  Miocene  period,  however, 
are  found  to  be  largely  identical  with  those  of  the  Pacific  coast. 
The  fishes  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  shores  of  America  are 
as  a  rule  very  distinct ;  but  Dr.  Gunther  has  recently  shown 
that  a  considerable  number  of  species  inhabiting  the  seas  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  isthmus  are  absolutely  identical.  These 
facts  certainly  indicate,  that  during  the  Miocene  epoch  a  broad 
channel  separated  North  and  South  America ;  and  it  seems  pro- 
bable that  a  series  of  elevations  and  subsidences  have  taken 
place  uniting  and  separating  them  at  different  epochs ;  the  most 
recent  submersion  having  lasted  but  a  short  time,  and  thus, 
while  allowing  the  passage  of  abundance  of  locomotive  fishes, 
not  admitting  of  much  change  in  the  comparatively  stationary 
moRusca. 

The  Glacial  M-poch  as  affecting  the  Distrihution  of  Animals. — 
The  remarkable  refrigeration  of  climate  in  the  northern  hemi- 
sphere within  the  epoch,  of  existing  species,  to  which  the  term 
Glacial  epoch  is  applied,  together  with  the  changes  of  level  that 
accompanied  and  perhaps  assisted  to  produce  it,  has  been  one  of 
the  chief  agents  in  determining  many  of  the  details  of  the  exist- 
ing distribution  of  animals  iu  temperate  zones.  A  comparison 
of  the  effects  produced  by  existing  glaciers  with  certain  super- 
ficial phenomena  m  the  temperate  parts  of  Europe  and  North 
America,  renders  it  certain  that  between  the  Newer  Pliocene  and 
the  Eeeent  epochs,  a  laige  portion  of  the  northern  hemisphere 
must  have  been  covered  with  a  sheet  of  ice  several  thousand 
feet  thick,  hke  that  which  now  envelopes  the  interior  of  Green- 
laud.  Much  fuithei  south  the  mountains  were  covered  with 
perpetual  snow,  and  sent  glaciers  down  every  valley ;  and  all  the 


by  Google 


[II.]     CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  DISTRIBUTION. 


great  valleys  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Alps  poured  down 
streams  of  ice  which  stretched  far  out  into  the  plains  of  North- 
em  Italy,  and  have  left  their  debris  in  the  form  of  huge 
mountainous  moraines,  in  some  cases  more  than  a  thousand  feet 
high.  In  Canada  and  New  Hampshire  the  marks  of  moving  ice 
are  found  on  the  tops  of  mountains  from  3,000  to  5,000  feet 
high ;  and  the  whole  surface  of  the  country  around  and  to  the 
north  of  the  great  lakes  is  scored  by  glaj:ier8.  "Wherever  the 
land  was  submerged  during  a  part  of  this  cold  period,  a  deposit 
called  boulder-clay,  or  glacial-drift  has  been  formed.  This  is  a 
mass  of  sand,  clay,  or  gravel,  full  of  angular  or  rounded  stonra 
of  all  sizes,  up  to  huge  blocks  as  lai^e  as  a  cottage ;  and  especi- 
ally characterized  by  these  stones  being  distributed  confusedly 
through  it,  the  largest  being  as  often  near  the  top  as  near  the 
bottom,  and  never  sorted  into  layers  of  different  sizes  as  in 
materials  carried  by  water.  Such  deposits  are  known  to  be 
formed  by  glaciers  and  icebergs ;  when  deposited  on  the  land  by 
glaciers  they  form  moraines,  when  carried  into  water  and  thus 
spread  with  more  regularity  over  a  wider  area  they  form  drift. 
This  drift  is  rarely  found  except  where  there  is  other  evidence  of 
ice-action,  and  never  south  of  the  40th  parallel  of  latitude,  to 
which  in  the  northern  hemisphere  signs  of  ice-aetion  extend. 
In  the  southern  hemisphere,  in  Patagonia  and,  in  New  Zealand, 
exactly  similar  phenomena  occur. 

A  very  interesting  confirmation  of  the  reality  of  this  cold 
epoch  is  deiived  from  the  study  of  fossil  remains.  Both  the 
plants  and  animals  of  the  Miocene  period  indicate  that  the 
climate  of  Central  Europe  was  decidedly  warmer  or  more  equa- 
ble than  it  is  now ;  since  the  flora  closely  resembled  that  of  the 
Southern  United  States,  with  a  likeness  also  to  that  of  Eastern 
Asia  and  Australia.  Many  of  the  shells  were  of  tropical  genera ; 
and  there  were  numbers  of  large  mammalia  allied  to  the 
elephant,  rhinoceros,  and  tapir.  At  the  same  time,  or  perhaps 
somewhat  earlier,  a  temperate  climate  extended  into  the  arctic 
regions,  and  allowed  a  nii^nificent  vegetation  of  shrubs  and 
forest  trees,  some  of  them  evergreen,  bJ  rflourish  within  twelve 
degrees  of  the  Pole.  In  the  Pliocene  period  we  find  ourselves 
Vol  I.— 5 


by  Google 


42  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i 

among  forms  implying  a  climate  very  little  different  from  the 
present ;  and  our  own  Crag  formation  furnishes  evidence  of  a 
gradual  refrigeration  of  climate ;  since  its  three  divisions,  the 
Coralline,  Red,  and  Norwich  Crags,  show  a  decreasing  number 
of  southern,  and  an  incteasiag  number  of  northern  species,  as  we 
approach  the  Glacial  epoch.  Still  later  than  these  we  have  the 
shells  of  the  drift,  almost  all  of  which  are  northern  and  many 
■of  them  arctic  species.  Among  the  mammalia  indicative  of 
cold,  are  the  mammoth  and  the  reindeer.  In  gravels  and  cave- 
deposits  of  Post-Pliocene  date  we  find  the  same  two  animals, 
which  soon  disappear  as  the  climate  approached  its  present  con- 
dition; and  Professor  Forbes  has  given  a  hat  of  fifty  shells 
which  inhabited  the  British  seas  before  the  Glacial  epoch  and 
inhabit  it  still,  biit  are  all  wanting  in  the  glacial  deposits.  The 
whole  of  these  are  found  in  the  Newer  Pliocene  strata  of  Sicily 
and  the  south  of  Europe,  where  they  escaped  destruction  during 
the  glacial  winter. 

There  are  also  certain  facts  in  the  distribution  of  plants,  which 
are  so  well  explained  by  the  Glacial  epoch  that  they  may  be  said 
to  give  an  additional  confirmation  to  it.  All  over  the  northern 
hemLsphei-e  within  the  glaciated  districts,  the  summits  of  lofty 
mountains  produce  plants  identical  with  those  of  the  polar 
In  the -celebrated  case  of  the  White  Mountains  in  New 
fhire.  United  States  (latitude  45°),  all  the  plants  on  the 
summit  are  arctic  species,  none  of  which  exist  in  the  lowlands 
for  near  a  thousand  miles  further  north.  It  has  also  been  re- 
marked that  the  plants  of  each  mountain  are  more  especially 
related  to  those  of  the  countries  directly  north  of  it.  Thus, 
those  of  the  Pjrrenees  and  of  Scotland  are  Scandinavian,  and 
those  of  the  White  Mountains  are  all  species  found  in  Labrador. 
Now,  remembering  that  we  have  evidence  of  an  exceedingly 
mild  and  uniform  climate  in  the  arctic  regions  during  the 
Miocene  period  and  a  gradual  refrigeration  from  that  time,  it  is 
evident  that  with  each  degree  of  change  more  and  more  hardy 
plants  would  he  successively  driven  southwards  ;  till  at  last  the 
plains  of  tte  temperate  zone  would  be  inhabited  by  plants,  which 
were  once  confined  to  alpine  heights  or  to  the  arctic  regions. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  III.]     CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  DISTRIBUTION. 


As  the  icy  mantle  gradually  melted  off  the  face  of  the  earth 
these  plants  would  occupy  the  newly  expoaed  soil,  and  would 
thus  necessarily  travel  in  two  directions,  back  towards  the  arctic 
circle  and  up  towards  the  alpine  peaks.  The  facts  are  thus 
exactly  explained  by  a  cause  which  independent  evidence  has 
proved  to  be  a  real  one,  and  every  such  explanation  is  an  addi- 
tional proof  of  the  reality  of  the  cause.  But  tbis  explanation  im- 
plies, that  in  cases  where  the  Glacial  epoch  catmot  have  so  acted 
alpine  plants  should  not  be  northern  plants ;  and  a  striking*  proof 
of  this  is  to  be  found  on  the  Peak  of  Teneriffe,  a  mountain 
12,000  feet  h^h.  In  the  uppermost  4,500  feet  of  this  mountain 
above  the  limit  of  trees.  Von  Buch  found  only  eleven  species  of 
plants,  eight  of  which  were  peculiar;  but  the  whole  were  allied 
to  those  found  at  lower  elevations.  On  the  Alps  or  Pyrenees  at 
this  elevation,,  there  would  be  a  rich  flora  comprising  hundreds 
of  arctic  plants ;  and  the  absence  of  anything  corresponding  to 
them  in  this  case,  in  which  their  ingress  was  cut  off  by  the  sea, 
is  exactly  what  the  theory  leads  us  to  expect. 

Changes  of  Yegetation  as  affecting  the,  Sistnbution  of  Animals. 
— As  SO  many  animals  are  dependent  on  vegetation,  its  changes 
immediately  affect  theij  distribution.  A  remarkable  example  of 
this  is  afforded  by  the  pre-historic  condition  of  Denmark,  as 
interpreted  by  means  of  the  peat-bogs  and  kitchen-middens. 
This  country  is  now  celebrated  for  its  beech-trees ;  oaks  and  pines 
being  scarce ;  and  it  is  known  to  have  had  the  same  vegetation  in 
the  time  of  the  Eomans,  In  the  peat-bogs,  however,  are  found 
deposits  of  oak  trees ;  and  deeper  still  pines  alone  occur.  Now 
the  kitchen-middens  tell  us  much  of  the  natural  history  of 
Denmark  in  the  early  Stone  period ;  and  a  curious  confirmation 
of  the  fact  that  Denmark  like  Norway  was  then  chiefly  covered 
with  pine  forests  is  obtained  by  the  discovery,  that  the  Caper- 
cailzie was  then  abundant,  a  bird  which  feeds  almost  exclusively 
on  the  young  shoots  and  seeds  of  pines  and  allied  plants.  The 
cause  of  this  change  in  the  vegetation  is  unknown ;  but  from  the 
known  fact  that  when  forests  are  destroyed  trees,  of  a  different 
kind  usually  occupy  the  ground,  we  may  suppose  that  some  such 
i  a  temporary  submergence  might  cause  an  entirely 


by  Google 


44  DISTBIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

different  vegetation  and  a  considerably  modified  fauna  to  occupy 
the  country. 

Organic  Changes  as  affecting  Distribution. — We  have  now  briefly 
touched  on  some  of  the  direct  effects  of  changes  in  physical 
geography,  climate^  and  vegetation,  on  the  distribution  of  ani- 
mals; but  the  indirect  effects  of  such  changes  are  probably  of 
q^uite  equal,  if  not  of  greater  importance.  Every  change 
becomes  the  centre  of  an  ever-widening  circle  of  effects.  The 
different  members  of  the  oi^anic  world  are  so  bound  together  by 
complex  relations,  that  any  one  change  generally  involves 
numerous  other  changes,  often  of  the  most  unexpected  hind. 
We  know  comparatively  Uttle  of  the  way  in  which  one  animal 
or  plant  is  bound  up  with  others,  but  we  know  enough  to  assure 
us  that  groups  the  most  apparently  disconnected  aie  often 
dependent  on  each  other.  We  know,  for  example,  that  the 
introdiiction  of  goats  into  St,  Helena  utterly  destroyed  a  whole 
flora  of  forest  trees;  and  with  them  all  the  insects,  raollusca,  and 
perhaps  birds  directly  or  indirectly  dependent  on  them.  Swine, 
which  ran  wild  in  Mauritius,  exterminated  the  Dodo.  The  same 
animals  are  known  to  be  the  greatest  enemies  of  venomous 
serpents.  Cattle  will,  in  many  districts,  wholly  prevent  the 
growth  of  trees ;  and  with  the  trees  the  numerous  insects  depen- 
dent on  those  trees,  and  the  birds  which  fed  upon  the  insects, 
must  disappear,  as  well  as  the  small  mammalia  which  feed  on 
the  fruits,  seeds,  leaves,  or  roots.  Insects  again  have  the  most 
wonderful  influence  on  theTange  of  mammalia.  In  Paraguay  a 
certain  species  of  fly  abounds  which  destroys  new-bom  cattle 
and  horses ;  and  thus  neither  of  these  animals  have  run  wild  in 
that  country,  although  they  abound  both  north  and  south  of  it. 
This  inevitably  leads  to  a  great  difference  in  the  vegetation  of 
Paraguay,  and  through  that  to  a  difference  in  its  insects,  birds, 
reptiles,  and  wild  mammalia.  On  what  causes  the  existence  of 
the  fly  depends  we  do  not  know,  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  some 
comparatively  slight  changes  in  the  temperature  or  humidity  of 
the  air  at  a  particular  season,  or  the  introduction  of  some  enemy 
might  lead  to  its  extinction  or  banishment.  The  whole  face  of 
the  country  would  then  soon  be  changed :  new  species  would 


by  Google 


CHAP.  HI.]     CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  DISTKIBUTION.  4S 

come  in,  while  many  others  would  be  unahle  to  live  there ;  and 
ih&  immediate  cause  o£  this  great  alteration  would  probably  be 
quit«  imperceptible  to  us,  even  if  we  could  watch  it  in  progress 
year  by  year.  So,  in  South  Africa,  the  celebrated  Tsetse  fly 
inhabits  certain  districts  having  well  defined  limits ;  and  where 
it  abounds  no  horses,  dogs,  or  cattle  can  live.  Yet  asses, 
zebras,  and  antelopes  are  unaifected  by  it.  So  long  as  this  fly 
continues  to  exist,  there  is  a  living  barrier  to  the  entrance  of 
certain  animals,  quite  as  effectual  as  a  lofty  mountain  range 
or  a  wide  arm  of  the  sea.  The  complex  relations  of  one  form 
of  life  with  others  is  nowhere  better  illustrated  than  in  Mr. 
Darwin's  celebrated  ease  of  the  cats  and  clover,  as  given  in  his 
Origin  of  Species,  6th  ed.,  p.  57.  He  has  observed  that  both 
wild  heartsease  and  red-clover  are  fertilized  in  this  country  by 
humble-hees  only,  so  that  the  production  of  seed  depends  on 
the  visits  of  these  insects.  A  gentleman  who  has  specially 
studied  humble-bees  finds  that  they  are  largely  kept  down  by 
field-mice,  which  destroy  their  combs  and  nests.  Field-mice 
in  theic4urn  are  kept  down  by  cats;  and  probably  also  by  owls; 
so  that  these  carnivorous  animals  are  really  the  agents  in  ren- 
dering possible  the  continued  existence  of  red-clover  and  wild 
heartsease.  For  if  they  were  absent,  the  field-mice  having  no 
enemies,  would  multiply  to  such  an  extent  as  to  destroy  all  the 
humble-bees;  and  these  two  plants  would  then  produce  no 
seed  and  soon  become  extinct. 

Mr.  Darwin  has  also  shown  that  one  species  often  exterminates 
another  closely  allied  to  it,  when  the  two  are  brought  mto 
contact.  One  species  of  swallow  and  thrush  are  known  to 
have  increased  at  the  expense  of  allied  species.  Eats,  carried 
aU  over  the  world  by  commerce,  are  continually  extirpating 
other  species  of  rats.  The  imported  hive-bee  is,  in  Australia, 
rapidly  exterminating  a  native  stingless  bee.  Any  slight  change, 
therefore,  of  physical  geography  or  of  climate,  which  allows 
allied  species  hitherto  inhabiting  distinct  areas  to  come  into 
contact,  wUl  often  lead  to  the  extermination  of  one  of  them;  and 
this  extermination  will  be  effected  by  no  external  force,  by  no 
actual  enemy,  but  merely  because  the  one  is  slightly  -better 


by  Google 


46  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [paet  i. 

adapted  to  live,  to  increase,  and  to  maintain  itself  under  adverse 
circwmstanees,  than  the  other. 

Kow  if  we  consider  carefully  the  few  suggestive  facts  here 
referred  to  (and  many  others  of  like  import  are  to  be  found  in 
Mr.  Darwin's  various  works),  we  shall  be  led  to  conclude  that 
the  several  species,  genera,  families,  and  orders,  both  of  animals 
and  vegetables  which  inhabit  any  extensive  region,  are  bound 
together  by  a  series  of  complex  relations ;  so  that  the  increase, 
diminution,  or  extermination  of  any  one,  may  set  in  motion  a 
series  of  actions  and  reactions  more  or  less  affecting  a  large 
portion  of  the  whole,  and  rec[uiring  perhaps  centuries  of  fluctua- 
tion before  the  balance  is  restored.  The  range  of  any  species 
or  group  in  such  a  region,  will  in  many  cases  (perhaps  in  most) 
be  determined,  not  by  physical  barriers,  but  by  the  competition 
of  other  organisms.  Where  barriers  have  existed  from  a  remote 
epoch,  they  will  at  first  have  kept  back  certain  animals  from 
coming  in  contact  with  each  other ;  but  when  the  assemblage 
of  organisms  on  the  two  sides  of  the  banier  have,  after  many 
ages,  come  to  form  a  balanced  organic  whole,  the  destruction  of 
the  barrier  may  lead  to  a  very  partial  intermingling  of  the 
peculiar  forms  of  the  two  regions.  Each  will  have  become 
modified  in  special  ways  adapted  to  the  organic  and  physical 
conditions  of  the  country,  and  will  form  a  living  barrier  to  the 
entrance  of  animals  less  perfectly  adapted  to  those  conditions. 
Thus  while  the  abobtiou  of  ancient  barriers  will  always  lead 
to  much  intermixture  of  forms,  much  extermination  and  wide- 
spread alteration  in  some  families  of  animals ;  other  important 
groups  will  be  unable  materially  to  alter  their  range ;  or  they 
may  make  temporary  incursions  into  the  new  territory,  and  be 
ultimately  driven  back  to  very  near  their  ancient  limits. 

In  order  to  make  this  somewhat  difficult  subject  more  intelli- 
gible, it  may  be  well  to  consider  the  probable  effects  of  certain 
hypothetical  conditions  of  the  earth's  surface  ; — ■ 

1.  If  the  dry  land  of  the  globe  had  been  from  the  first 
continuous,  and  nowhere  divided  up  by  such  boundaries  as  lofty 
mountain  ranges,  wide  deserts,  or  arms  of  the  sea,  it  seems 
probable  that  none  of  the  larger  groups  (as  orders,  tribes,  or 


by  Google 


CHAP.  III.]     CONDITIONS  AFJi'ECTING  DISTRIBUTION,  47 

families^  would  have  a  limited  range ;  but,  as  is.  to  sorae  extent 
the  case  in  tropical  America  east  of  the  Andes,  every  such 
group  would  be  represented  over  the  whole  area,  by  countless 
minute  modifications  of  form  adapted  to  local  conditions. 

2.  One  great  physical  barrier  would,  however,  even  then 
exist ;  the  hot  equatorial  zone  would  divide  the  faunas  and  floras 
of  the  colder  regions  of  the  northern  and  southern  hemisplieres 
from  any  chance  of  intermixture.  This  one  barrier  would  be 
more  effectual  than  it  is  now,  since  there  would  be  no  lofty 
mountain  ranges  to  serve  as  a  bridge  for  the  partial  interchange 
of  northern  and  southern  forms. 

3.  If  such  n  condition  of  the  earth  as  here  supposed  con- 
tinued for  very  long  periods,  we  may  conceive  that  the  action 
and  reaction  of  the  various  oi^aniams  on  each  other,  combinecE 
with  the  influence  of  very  slowly  changing  physical  conditions, 
would  result  in  an  almost  perfect  oiganic  balance,  which  would 
be  manifested  by  a  great  stabihty  in  the  average  numbers,  the 
local  range,  and  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  every  species. 

4.  Under  such  a  condition  of  tilings  it  is  not  improbable  that 
the  total  number  of  clearly  differentiated  specific  forms  might  be 
much  greater  than  it  is  now,  though  the  number  of  generic  and 
family  types  might  perhaps  be  less ;  for  dominant  species  would 
have  had  ample  time  to  spread  into  every  locality  where  they 
could  exist,  and  would  then  become  everywhere  modified  into 
forms  best  suited  to  the  permanent  local  conditions. 

5.  Now  let  us  consider  what  would  be  the  probable  effect  of 
the  introduction  of  a  barrier,  cutting  off  a  portion  of  this  homo- 
geneous and  well-balanced  world.  Suppose,  for  instanee,  that  a 
subsidence  took  place,  cutting  off  by  a  wide  arm  of  the  sea  a 
lai^e  and  tolerably  varied  island.  The  first  and  most  ob\douB 
result  would  be  that' the  individuals  of  a  number  of  species 
would  be  divided  into  two  portions,  whUe  others,  the  limits  of 
whose  range  agreed  approximately  with  the  line  of  subsidence, 
would  exist  in  unimpaired  numbers  on  the  new  island  or  on  the 
main  land.  But  the  species  whose  numbers  were  diminished 
and  whose  original  area  was  also  absolutely  diminished  by  the 
portion  now  under  the  sea,  would  not  be  able  to  hold  their 


by  Google 


48  DISTEIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [paut  i. 

ground  against  the  rival  forms  ■whose  numbers  were  intact. 
Some  would  probably  diminish  and  rapidly  die  out;  others 
which  produced  favourable  varieties,  might  be  so  modified  by 
natural  selection  as  to  maintain  their  existence  under  a  different 
form ;  and  such  changes  would  take  place  in  varying  modes  on 
the  two  sides  of  the  new  strait. 

6.  But  the  progress  of  these  changes  would  necessarily  affect 
the  other  species  in  contact  with  them.  New  places  would  be 
opened  in  the  economy  of  nature  which  many  would  struggle  to 
obtain ;  and  modification  would  go  on  in  ever-widening  circle 
and  very  long  periods  of  time  might  he  required  to  bring  the 
whole  again  into  a  state  of  equilibrium, 

7.  A  new  set  of  factors  would  in  the  meantime  have  come 
into  play.  The  sinking  of  land  and  the  influx  of  a  lai^e  body 
of  water  could  hardly  take  place  without  producing  important 
climatal  changes.  The  temperature,  the  winds,  the  rains,  might 
all  be  affected,  and  more  or  less  changed  in  duration  and  amount. 
This  would  lead  to  a  quite  distinct  movement  in  the  organic 
world.  Vegetation  would  certainly  be  considerably  affected,  and 
through  this  the  insect  tribes.  We  have  seen  how  closely  the 
life  of  the  higher  animals  is  often  bound  up  with  that  of  insects ; 
and  thus  a  set  of  changes  might  arise  that  would  modify  the 
numerical  proportions,  and  even  the  forms  and  habits  of  a  great 
number  of  species,  would  completely  exterminate  some,  and  raise 
others  from  a  subordinate  to  a  dominant  position  And  all  these 
changes  would  occur  differently  on  opposite  aides  of  thcsfcrait, 
since  the  insular  climate  could  not  fail  to  differ  considerably 
from  that  of  the  continent. 

8.  But  the  two  sets  of  changes,  as  above  indicated,  produced 
by  different  modes  of  action  of  the  same  primary  cause,  would 
act  and  react  on  each  other;  and  thus  lead  to  aueh  a  far-spread- 
ing disturbance  of  the  oi^nie  equilibrium  as  ultimately  perhaps 
to  affect  in  one  way  or  another,  every  form  of  life  upon  the 
earth. 

This  hypothetical  case  is  useful  as  enabling  us  better  to  realize 
how  wide-spreading  might  be  the  effects  of  one  of  the  simplest 
s  of  physical  geography,  upon  a  compact  mass  of  mutually 


by  Google 


CHAP.  III.]       CONDITIONS  AFFECTING  DISTRIBUTION.  49 

I  organisms.  Iq  the  actual  state  of  things,  the  physical 
:3  that  occur  and  have  occurred  through  all  geological  epochs 
are  larger  and  more  varied.  Almost  every  mile  of  land  surface 
has  been  again  and  again  depressed  beneath  the  ocean  ;  most  of 
the  great  mountain  chains  have  either  originated  or  greatly 
increased  in  height  during  the  Tertiary  period ,  marvellous 
alterations  of  climate  and  vegetation  have  taken  place  over  -half 
the  land-surface  of  the  earth ;  and  all  these  vast  changes  have 
influenced  a  globe  so  cut  up  by  seas  and  oceans,  by  deserts 
and  snow-clad  mountains,  that  in  many  of  its  more  isolated 
land-masses  ancient  forms  of  life  have  been  preserved,  which, 
in  the  more  extensive  and  more  varied  continents  have  loug 
given  way  to  higher  types.  How  complex  then  must  have  been 
the  actions  and  reactions  such  a  state  of  things  would  bring 
about ;  and  how  impossible  must  it  be  for  us  to  guess,  in  most 
cases,  at  the  exact  nature  of  the  forces  that  Umit  the  range  of 
some  species  and  cause  others  to  be  rare  or  to  become  extinct ! 
All  that  we  can  in  general  hope  to  do  is,  to  trace  out,  more  or 
less  hypothetically,  some  of  the  larger  changes  in  physical 
i'  that  have  occurred  during  the  ages  immediately  pre- 
5  our  own,  and  to  estimate  the  effect  they  will  probably 
have  produced  on  animal  distribation.  We  may  then,  by  the 
aid  of  such  knowledge  as  to  past  organic  niutations  as  the  geo- 
logical i-ecord  supplies  ua  with,  be  able  to  determine  the  probable 
birthplace  and  subsequent  migrations  of  the  more  important 
genera  and  families;  and  thus  obtain  some  conception  of  that 
grand  series  of  eo-ordiuated  changes  in  the  earth  and  its  in- 
habitants, whose  final  result  is  seen  in  the  forms  and  the  geo- 
graphical distribution  of  existiiig  animals. 


by  Google 


CHAPTER   IV. 


ON  ZOOLOGICAL  KEGIONS, 


To  the  older  school  of  Naturalists  the  native  coimtiy  of  an  animal 
waa  of  little  importance,  except  in  as  far  as  chmates  differed. 
Animals  were  supposed  to  he  specially  adapted  to  live  in  certain 
zones  or  under  certain  physical  conditions,  and  it  was  hardly 
recognised  that  apart  from  these  conditions  there  was  any 
influence  in  locality  ■which  could  materially  affect  them.  It 
was  heheved  that,  while  the  animals  of  tropical,  temperate,  and 
arctic  climates,  essentially  diifered ;  those  of  the  tropics  were 
essentially  alike  all  over  the  world.  A  group  of  animals  waa 
said  to  iahabit  the  "Indies;"  and  important  differences  of 
structure  were  often  overlooked  from  the  idea,  that  creatures 
equally  adapted  to  live  in  hot  countries  and  with  certain 
general  resemblances,  would  naturally  he  related  to  each  other. 
Thus  the  Toucans  and  Hombills,  the  Humming- Birds  and  Sun- 
Birds,  and  even  the  Tapirs  and  the  Elephants,  came  to  be 
popularly  associated  as  slightly  modified  varieties  of  tropical 
forms  of  life;  while  to  naturalists,  who  were  acquainted  with 
the  essential  differences  of  structure,  it  was  a  never-failing 
source  of  surprise,  that  under  climates  and  conditions  so 
apparently  identical,  such  strangely  divergent  forms  should 
be  produced. 

To   the   modem   naturalist,   on  the  other  hand,  the  native 
country  (or  "habitat"  as  it  is  technically  termed)  of  an  animal 


by  Google 


CHAP.  iv.J  ZOOLoaiCAL  REGIONS.  51 

or  a  group  o"  animals,  is  a  matter  of  tlie  first  importance;  and, 
as  regards  t  _  general  history  of  life  upon  the  glohe,  may  be 
considered  to  be  one  of  its  essential  characters.  The  structure, 
affinities,  and  habits  of  a  species,  now  form  only  a  part  of  its 
natural  history.  We  req^uire  also  to  know  its  exact  range  at 
the  present  day  and  in  prehistoric  times,  and  to  have  some 
knowledge  of  its  geological  age,  the  place  of  its  earliest  appear- 
ance on  the  glohe,  and  of  the  various  extinct  forms  most  nearly 
allied  to  it.  To  those  who  accept  the  theory  of  development  as 
worked  out  by  Mr.  Darwin,  and  the  views  as  to  the  general 
permanence  and  immense  antiquity  of  the  great  continents  and 
oceans  so  ably  developed  by  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  it  ceases  to  be  a 
matter  of  surprise  that  the  tropics  of  Africa,  Asia,  and  America 
should  differ  in  their  productions,  but  rather  that  they  should 
have  anything  in  common.  Their  similarity,  not  their  diversity, 
is  the  fact  that  niost  frequently  puzzles  us. 

Hie  more  accurate  knowledge  we  have  of  late  years  obtained 
of  the  productions  of  many  remote  regions,  combined  with  the 
greater  approaches  that  have  been  made  to  a  natural  classifica- 
tion of  the  higher  animals,  has  shown,  that  every  continent  or 
well-marked  division  of  a  continent,  every  archipelago  and 
i5ven  every  island,  presents  problems  of  more  or  less  complexity 
to  the  student  of  the  geographical  distribution  of  animals.  If 
we  take  up  the  subject  from  the  zoological  side,  and  study  any 
family,  order,  or  even  extensive  genus,  we  are  almost  sure  to 
meet  with  some  anomalies  either  in  the  present  or  past  distri- 
bution of  the  various  forms.  Let  us  adduce  a  few  examples  of 
these  problems. 

Deer  have  a  wonderfully  wide  range,  over  the  whole  of  Europe, 
Asia,  and  North  and  South  America ;  yet  in  Africa  south  of 
the  great  desert  there  are  none.  Bears  range  over  the  whole  of 
Europe,  Asia,  and  North  America,  and  true  pigs  of  the  genus 
5ws,  over  all  Europe  and  Asia  and  aa  far  as  ISTew  Guinea;  yet 
both  bears  and  pigs,  like  deer,  are  absent  from  Tropical  and 
South  Africa. 

Again,  the  West  Indian  islands  possess  very  few  Mammalia, 
all  of  sinall  size  and  allied  to  those  of  America,  except  one 


by  Google 


52  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i, 

genus ;  and  that  beloDgs  to  an  Order,  "  Insectiv  ra,"  entirely 
aljEcnt  from  South  America,  and  to  a  family,  "  itetidfe,"  all 
the  other  species  of  which  inhabit  Madagascar  only.  And  as 
if  to  add  force  to  this  singular  correspondence  ■we  have  one 
Madagascar  species  of  a  beautiful  day-flying  Moth,  Urania,  all 
the  other  species  of  which  inhabit  tropical  America.  These 
insects  are  gorgeously  arrayed  in  green  and  gold,  aud  are  quite 
unlike  any  other  Lepidoptera  upon  the  globe. 

The  island  of  Ceylon  generally  ^rees  in  its  productions  with 
the  Southern  part  of  India ;  yet  it  has  several  birds  which  are 
allied  to  Malayan  and  not  to  Indian  groups,  and  a  fine  butterfly 
of  the  genus  Hesiia,  as  well  as  several  genera  of  beetles,  which 
are  purely  Malayan. 

Various  important  groups  of  animals  are  distributed  in  a 
way  not  easy  to  explain.  The  anthropoid  apes  iu  West  Africa 
and  Borneo ;  the  tapirs  in  Malaya  and  South  America ;  the 
camel  tribe  in  the  deserts  of  Asia  and  the  Andes  ;  the  trogona 
in  South  America  and  Tropical  Asia,  with  one  species  in  Africa; 
the  marsupials  in  Australia  and  America,  are  examples. 

The  cases  here  adduced  (and  they  might  be  greatly  multiplied) 
are  merely  to  show  the  kind  of  problems  with  which  the 
naturalist  now  has  to  deal ;  and  in  order  to  do  so  he  requires 
some  system  of  geographical  arrangement,  which  shall  serve 
the  double  purpose  of  affording  a  convenient  subdivision  of  his 
subject,  and  at  the  same  time  of  givir^  expression  to  the  main 
results  at  which  he  has  arrived.  Hence  the  recent  discussions 
on  "Zoological  E^ons,"  or,  what  are  the  most  natural 
primary  divisions  of  the  earth  as  regards  its  forms  of  animal 
hfe. 

The  divisions  iu  use  till  quite  recently  were  of  two  kinds ; 
either  those  ready  made  by  geographers,  more  especiillly  the 
quarters  or  continents  of  the  globe ;  or  those  determined  by 
cHinate  and  marked  out  by  certain  parallels  of  latitude  or  by 
isothermal  lines.  Either  of  these  methods  was  better  than 
none  at  all;  but  from  the  various  considerations  explained  in 
the  preceding  chapters,  it  will  be  evident,  that  such  divisions 
must  have  often  been  very  unnatural,  and  have  disguised  many 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  63 

of  the  most  important  and  interesting  phenomeua  wliicli  a 
study  of  the  distribution  of  animals  presents  to  us. 

The  merit  of  initiating  a  more  natural  system,  that  of  determin- 
ing zoological  regions,  not  hj  any  arhitrary  or  a  priori  considera- 
tion but  by  studying  the  actual  ranges  of  the  more  important 
groups  of  animals,  is  due  to  Mr.  Sclater,  who,  in  1S57,  estahhshed 
six  primary  zoological  regions  from  a  detailed  examination  of 
the  distribution  of  the  chief  gunera  and  famUies  of  Birds. 
Before  stating  what  these  regions  ate,  what  objections  have 
been  made  to  them,  what  other  .  divisions  have  been  since 
proposed,  and  what  are  those  which  we  shall  adopt  in  this 
work,  it  will  be  well  to  consider  the  general  principles  which 
should  guide  ua  in  the  choice  between  rival  systems. 

Principles  on  which  Zoological  Begions  should  be  formed. — 
It  will  be  evident  in  the  first  place  that  nothing  like  a  per- 
fect zoological  division  of  the  earth  is  possible.  The  causes 
that  have  led  to  the  present  distribution  of  animal  life  are  so 
varied,  their  action  and  reaction  have  been  so  complex,  that 
anomalies  and  irregularities  are  sure  to  exist  which  will  mar  the 
symmetry  of  any  rigid  system.  On  two  main  points  every  sys- 
tem yet  proposed,  or  that  probably  can  be  proposed,  is  open  to 
objection ;  they  are, — Istly,  that  the  several  regions  are  not  of 
ec^ual  rank ; — 2ndly,  that  they  are  not  equally  applicable  to  all 
classes  of  animals.  As  to  the  fiiat  objection  it  iiill  be  found 
impossible  to  form  any  three  or  moieic^ions  cich  of  which  differs 
from  the  rest  in  an  equal  degree  or  m  the  same  maimei  One 
will  surpass  all  others  in  the  po'ibcssion  ot  peciliir  lamilies 
another  will  have  many  charictLnstic  geneia  while  i  third  will 
be  mainly  distinguished  by  nej,ative  chiiacters  Theie  wdl  also 
be  found  many  Intermediate  districts  which  possess  some  of  the 
characteristics  of  two  well  maiked  regions  with  a  few  spetnl 
features  of  their  own,  or  peihaps  with  none  and  it  will  be  i 
difficult  question  to  decide  m  all  cases  which  region  should 
possess  this  doubtful  territory  oi  whetl  ei  it  shoull  be  formed 
into  a  primary  region  itself.     Again,  two  regions  which  have 

■)w  well-marked  points  of  difference,  may  be  shown  to  have  been 
more  alike  at  a  comparatively  recent  geological  epoch; 


by  Google 


54  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

and  this,  it  may  be  aaid,  proves  their  fundamental  unity  and 
that  they  ought  to  form  but  one  primary  region.  To  obviate 
some  of  these  difBeultiea  a  binary  or  diehotomous  division  is 
sometimes  proposed;  that  portion  of  the  earth  which  differs 
most  from  the  rest  being  cut  off  as  a  region  equal  in  rank 
to  all  that  remains,  which  is  subjected  again  and  again  to 
the  same  process. 

To  decide  these  various  points  it  seems  advisable  that  con- 
venience, intelligibihty,  and  custom,  should  laigely  guide  us. 
The  first  essential  is,  a  broadly  marked  and  easily  remembered 
set  of  regions ;  which  correspond,  as  nearly  as  tmth  to  nature 
will  allow,  with  the  distribution  of  the  most  important  groups 
of  animals.  What  these  groups  are  we  shall  presently  explain. 
In  determining  the  number,  extent,  and  boundaries  of  these 
regions,  we  must  be  guided  by  a  variety  of  indications,  since 
the  application  of  fixed  rules  is  impossible.  They  should  evi- 
dently be  of  a  moderate  number,  corresponding  aa  far  as 
practicable  with  the  great  natural  divisions  of  the  globe  marked 
out  by  nature,  and  which  have  always  been  recognized  by 
geographers.  There  should  be  some  approximation  to  equality 
of  size,  since  there  is  reason  to  beheve  that  a  tolerably  extensive 
area  has  been  an  essential  condition  for  the  development  of 
most  animal  forms ;  and  it  is  found  that,  other  things  being 
equal,  the  numbers,  variety  and  importance  of  the  forms  of 
animal  and  vegetable  life,  do  hear  some  approximate  relation 
to  extent  of  area.  Although  the  possession  of  pecuUar  families 
or  genera  is  the  main  character  of  a  primary  zoological  region, 
yet  the  negative  character  of  the  absence  of  certain  families 
or  genera  is  of  equal  importance,  lehen  this  absence  does  not 
manifestly  d^end  on  unsuUabiliiy  to  the  mtpport  of  the  group, 
and  especially  when  there  is  nov;  no  physical  harrier  preventing 
their  entrance.  This  will  become  evident  when  we  consider  that 
the  importance  of  the  possession  of  a  group  by  one  region  de- 
pends on  its  absence  from  the  adjoining  regions ;  and  if  there  is 
now  no  barrier  to  its  entrance,  we  may  be  sure  that  there  has 
once  been  one ;  and  that  the  possession  of  the  area  by  a  dist= 
and  well  balanced  set  of  organisms,  which  must  have  been 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IV,]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  55 

developed  and  adjusted,  ia  the  living  barrier  that  aow  keeps  out 
intruders. 

When  it  is  ascertained  that  the  chief  differences  which 
now  obtain  between  two  areas  did  not  exist  in  Miocene  or 
Pliocene  times,  the  fact  is  one  of  great  interest,  and  enables  us 
to  speculate  with  some  degree  of  probability  as  to  the  causes  that 
have  brought  about  the  present  state  of  things ;  but  it  is  not  a 
reason  for  uniting  these  two  areas  into  one  region.  Oiu'  object 
is  to  represent  as  nearly  as  possible  the  main  features  of  the 
distribution  of  existing  animals,  not  those  of  any  or  all  past 
geological  epochs.  Should  we  ever  obtain  sufficient  information 
as  to  the  geography  and  biology  of  the  earth  at  past  epochs,  we 
might  indeed  determine  approximately  what  were  the  Pliocene 
or  Miocene  or  Eocene  zoological  regions ;  but  any  attempt  to 
exhibit  all  these  in  combination  with  those  of  our  own  period, 
must  lead  to  confusion. 

The  binary  or  dichotomous  system,  although  it  brings  out 
the  fundamental  differences  of  the  respective  regions,  is  an 
inconvenient  one  in  its  application,  and  rather  increases  than 
obviates  the  difficulty  as  to  equality  or  inequality  of  regions ; 
for  although  a,  6,  c,  and  d,  may  be  areas  of  unequal  zoological 
rank,  a  being  the  most  important,  and  d  the  least,  yet  this 
inequality  will  probably  be  still  greater  if  we  first  divide 
them  into  a,  on  one  side,  and  h,  c,  and  d,  on  the  other, 
and  then,  by  another  division,  make  b,  an  area  of  the  second, 
and  c,  and  d,  of  the  third  rank  only. 

Coming  to  the  second  objection,  the  often  incompatible 
distribution  of  ditferent  groups  of  animals,  affords  ground  for 
opposition  to  any  proposed  scheme  of  zoological  regions.  There 
is  first  the  radical  difference  between  land  and  sea  animals; 
the  most  complete  barriers  to  the  dispersal  of  the  one,  sometimes 
offering  the  greatest  facilities  for  the  emigration  of  the  other, 
and  vice  versa.  A  largo  iminber  of  marine  animals,  however, 
frequent  shallow  water  only ;  and  these,  keeping  near  the  coasts, 
wUr  agree  generally  in  i^heir  distribution  with  those  inhabiting 
the  land.  But  among  land  animals  themselves  there  are  very 
great   differences   of    dis'^ribution,   due   to   certain   specialities 


by  Google 


56  DI8TKIBUTI0N  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

in  their  organization  or  mode  of  life.  These  act  mainly  in 
two  ways,— Istly,  hy  affecting  the  facilities  with  which  they 
can  he  dispersed,  either  voluntarily  or  involuntarily ; — 2ndly, 
by  the  conditions  which  enahle  them  to  multiply  and  establish 
themselves  in  certain  areas  and  not  in  others.  When  both 
these  means  of  diffusion  are  at  a  maximum,  the  dispersal  of 
a  group  becomes  nniversalj  and  ceases  to  have  much  interest 
for  us.  This  is  the  case  with  certain  groups  of  fungi  and 
lichens,  as  well  as  with  some  of  tlie  lower  animals ;  and  in 
a  less  degree,  as  has  been  shown  by  Mr.  Darwin,  with  many 
fresh-water  plants  and  animals.  At  the  other  extreme  we  may 
place  certain  arboreal  vertebrata  such  as  sloths  and  lemurs, 
which  have  no  means  of  passing  such  barriers  as  narrow 
straits  or  moderately  high  moimtains,  and  whose  survival  in 
any  new  country  they  might  reach,  would  he  dependent  on  the 
presence  of  suitable  forests  and  the  absence  of  dangerous  enemies. 
Almost  equally,  or  perhaps  even  more  restricted,  are  the  means 
of  permanent  diffusion  of  terrestrial  mollii^cs;  since  these  are 
without  any  but  very  rare  and  accidental  means  of  being  safely 
transported  across  the  sea ;  their  individual  powers  of  locomo- 
tion are  highly  restricted ;  they  are  especially  subject  to  the 
attacks  of  enemies ;  and  they  often  depend  not  only  on  a 
peculiar  vegetation,  but  on  the  geological  character  of  the  coun- 
try, their  abundance  being  almost  in  direct  proportion  to  the 
presence  of  some  form  of  calesjeous  rocks.  Between  these 
extremes  we  find  animals  possessed  of  an  infinite  gradation  of 
powers  to  disperse  and  to  maintain  themselves ;  and  it  will  evi- 
dently be  impossible  that  the  limits  which  best  define  the 
distribution  of  one  group,  should  be  ec[uaUy  true  for  all  others. 
Which  class  of  Animals  is  of  most  importance  in  determining 
Zoological  Scgions. — To  decide  this  question  we  have  to  con- 
sider which  groups  of  animals  are'  best  adapted  to  exhibit, 
by  their  existing  distribution,  the  past  changes  and  present 
physical  condition  of  the  earth's  surface;  and  at  the  same 
time,  by  the  abundance  of  their  remains  in  the  various  tertiary 
formations  will  best  enable  us  to  trace  out  the  more  recent 
of    the   series   of   cha.nges,   both   of  the   earth's    surface    and 


by  Google 


CHAP,  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  57 

■>f  ite  inhabitants,  by  which  the  present  state  of  things  has 
jeen  brought  about.  For  this  pvirpose  we  rec^iire  a  group 
which  shall  be  dependent  for  its  means  of  dispersal  on  the  dis- 
tribution of  land  and  water,  and  on  the  presence  or  absence 
of  lofty  mountains,  desert  plains  or  plateaux,  and  great  forests ; 
since  these  are  the  chief  physical  features  of  the  earth's  surface 
whose  modifications  at  successive  periods  we  wish  to  discover. 
It  is  also  essential  that  they  should  not  be  subject  to  dispereal 
by  many  accidental  causes;  as  this  would  inevitably  in  time 
tend  to  obliterate  the  eifect  of  natural  barriers,  and  produce  a 
scattered  distribution,  the  causes  of  which  we  could  only  guess  at. 
Again,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  so  highly  oi^anized  as 
lot  to  be  absolutely  dependent  on  other  groups  of  animals,  and 
dtb  so  much  power  of  adaptation  as  to  be  able  to  exist  in  one 
.jrm  or  another  over  the  whole  globe.  And  lastly,  it  is  Mghly 
impoltant  that  the  whole  group  should  be  pretty  well  known, 
and  that  a  fairly  natural  classification,  especially  of  its  minor 
divisions  such  as  families  and  genera,  should  have  been  arrived 
at ;  the  reason  for  which  last  proviso  is  explained  in  our  next 
chapter,  on  classification. 

Now  in  every  one  of  these  points  the  mammalia  are  preemi- 
nent ;  and  they  possess  the  additional  advantage  of  being  the 
most  highly  developed  class  of  organized  beings,  and  that  to 
which  we  oureelves  belong.  We  should  therefore  construct  our 
typical  or  standard  Zoological  Regions  in  the  first  place,  from  a 
consideration  of  the  distribution  of  mammalia,  only  bringing  to 
our  aid  the  distribution  of  other  groups  to  determine  doubtful 
points.  Regions  so  established  wUl  be  most  closely  in  accord- 
ance with  those  long-enduring  features  of  physical  geography, 
on  which  the  distribution  of  all  forms  of  life  fundamentally 
depend;  and  all  discrepancies  in  the  distribution  of  other 
classes  of  animals  must  be  capable  of  being  explained,  either 
by  their  exceptional  means  of  dispersion  or  by  special  condi- 
tions affecting  their  perpetuation  and  increase  in  each  locahty. 

If  these  considerations  are  well  founded,  the  objections  of 
those  who  study  insects  or  moUuscs,  for  example, — that  our 
regions  are  not  true  for  their  departments  of  nature — cannot  be 

Vol.  I.— 6 


by  Google 


58  DISTRIBUTION  01"  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

maintained.  Por  they  will  find,  that  a  careful  cousideration  c 
the  exceptional  means  of  dispersal  and  conditions  of  existence  o 
each  group,  will  explain  most  of  the  divergences  from  the  normal 
distribution  of  higher  animals. 

We  shaU.  thus  be  led  to  an  iatelligent  comprehension  of  the 
phenomena  of  distribution  in  all  groups,  which  would  not  be 
the  case  if  every  specialist  formed  regions  for  his  own  paiticular 
study.  In  many  cases  we  should  find  that  no  satisfactory 
division  of  the  earth  could  be  made  to  correspond  with  the  dis- 
tribution even  of  an  entire  class ;  but  we  should  have  the  cole- 
opterist  and  the  lepidopterist  each  with  his  own  Geography.  Auc' 
even  this  would  probably  not  snfiice,  £or  it  is  very  doubtful  i 
the  det-ailed  distribution  of  the  Longicornes,  so  closely  depender 
on  woody  vegetation,  could  be  made  to  agree  with  that  of  tl 
Staphylinidffi  or  the  Carabidsa  which  abound  in  many  of  th. 
most  barren  regions,  or  with  that  of  the  Scarabeidte,  largely  de- 
pendent on  the  presence  of  herbivorous  mammalia.  And  when 
each  of  these  enquirers  had  settled  a  division  of  the  earth  into 
"  regions  "  which  exhibited  with  tolerable  accuracy  the  plieno- 
mena  of  distribution  of  his  own  group,  we  should  have  gained 
nothing  whatever  but  a  very  complex  mode  of  exhibiting 
the  bare  facts  of  distribution.  "We  should  then  have  to  begin 
to  work  out  the  causes  of  the  divergence  of  one  group  from 
another  in  this  respect ;  but  as  each  worker  would  refer  to  liis 
own  set  of  regions  as  the  type,  the  whole  subject  would  become 
involved  in  inextricable  confusion.  These  considerations  seem 
to  make  it  imperative  that  one  set  of  "  regions "  should  be 
established  as  typical  for  Zoology ;  and  it  is  hoped  tho  reasons 
here  advanced  will  satisfy  most  naturalists  that  these  regions 
can  be  best  determined,  in  the  first  place,  by  a  study  of  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  mammalia,  supplemented  in  doubtful  cases  by 
that  of  the  other  vertebrates.  We  will  now  proceed  to  a  discus- 
sion of  what  these  regions  are. 

Various  Zoological  Regions  proposed  since  1857. — It  has  already 
been  pointed  out  that  a  very  large  number  of  birds  are  limited 
by  the  same  kind  of  barriers  as  mammalia ;  it  wOl  therefore 
not  be  surprising  that  a  system  of  regions  formed  to  suit  the 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  59 

one,  sliould  very  nearly  represent  the  distribution  of  the  other. 
Mr.  Solater'a  regions  are  aa  follows  : — 

1.  The  Palsearctic  Eegion ;  including  Europe,  Temperate  Asia, 
and  N.  Africa  to  the  Atlas  mountains. 

2.  The  Ethiopian  Eegion ;  Africa  south  of  the  Atlas,  Mada- 
gascar, and  the  Mascarene  Islands,  with  Southern  Arabia. 

3.  The  Indian  Eegion ;  including  India  south  of  the  Hima- 
layas, to  South  China,  and  to  Borneo  and  Java. 

4.  The  Australian  Eegion ;  inclnding  Celebes  and  Lombock, 
eastward  to  Australia  and  the  Pacifie  Islands. 

5.  The  Nearctic  Eegion ;  including  Greenland,  and  N. 
America,  to  Northern  Mexico. 

6.  The  Neotropical  Eegion ;  including  South  America,  the 
Antilles,  and  Southern  Mexico. 

This  division  of  the  earth  received  great  support  from  Dr. 
Giinther,  who,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society  for 
1858,  showed  that  the  geographical  dibtiibution  of  Reptiles 
agreed  with  it  veiy  closely,  the  principal  difieienee  beu^  that 
the  reptiles  of  Japan  have  a  more  Indian  character  than  the 
birds,  this  being  especially  the  case  with  the  snakes  In  the 
volume  for  1868  of  the  same  work.  Professor  Huxley  discnsses 
at  considerable  length  the  primary  and  secondary  zoological 
divisions  of  the  earth.  He  gives  reasons  for  thinking  that  the 
moat  radical  primary  division,  both  as  regards  birds  and  mam- 
mals, is  into  a  Northern  and  Southern  hemisphere  (Arctogfea 
and  NotogEea),  the  former,  however,  embracing  all  Africa,  while 
the  latter  includes  only  Australasia  and  the  Neotropical  or 
Austro-Columbian  region.  Mr.  Sclater  had  grouped  his  regions 
primarily  into  Palteogsea  and  Neogsea,  the  Old  and  New 
Worlds  of  geographers ;  a  division  which  strikingly  accords 
with  the  distribution  of  the  passerine  birds,  but  not  so  well 
with  that  of  mammalia  or  reptiles.  Professor  Huxley  points 
out  that  the  Nearctic,  Paltearctic,  Indian,  and  Ethiopian 
regions  of  Mr.  Sclater  have,  a  much  greater  resemblajice  to 
ea«h  other  than  any  one  of  them  has  to  Australia  or  to  South 
America ;  and  he  further  su^ests  that  New  Zealand  alone  has 
peculiarities  which  might  entitle  it  to  rank  as  a  primary  region 


by  Google 


60  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [parti. 

along  with  Australasia  and  South  America ;  and  that  a  Circum- 
polar  Province  might  he  conveniently  recognised  as  of  equal 
rank  with  the  Palsearcttc  and  Nearctic  provinces. 

In  1866,  ,Mr.  Andrew  Muiiay  published  a  la^e  and  copiously 
illustrated  volume  on  the  Geographical  Distribution  of  Mam- 
mals, in  which  he  maintains  that  the  great  and  primary 
mammalian  regions  are  only  four :  1st.  The  PalEearctic  region 
of  Mr.  Selater,  extended  to  include  the  Sahara  and  Nuhia ; 
2nd.  the  Indo- African  region,  including  the  Indian  and  Ethiopian 
tegiona  of  Mr.  Selater;  3rd.  the  Austrahan  r^ion  (unaltered); 
4th.  the  American  region,  including  both  North  and  South 
America.  These  are  the  regions  as  described  by  Mr.  Murray, 
but  his  coloured  map  of  "  Great  Mammalian  Regions  "  shows 
aU  Arctic  America  to  a  little  south  of  the  Isothermal  of  32° 
Fahr.  as  forming  with  Eurape  and  Noriih  Asia  one  great  r^on. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Bntish  Association  at  Exeter  in  1869, 
Mr.  W.  T.  Blanford  read  i  paper  on  the  Eauna  of  British  India, 
in  which  he  maintained  that  a  laige  portion  of  the  peninsula 
of  India  had  derived  its  Fauna  mamlj  from  Africa ;  and  that  the 
term  "  Indian  region  "  of  Mr  ScUter  was  misleading,  because 
India  proper,  if  it  belongs  to  it  at  all,  is  the  least  typical  portion 
of  it  He  therefore  proposes  to  call  it  the  "  Malayan  region," 
because  in  the  Malay  countries  it  is  most  highly  developed. 
Ceylon  and  the  mountain  ranges  of  Southern  India  have  marked 
Malay  affinities. 

In  1871  Mr.  E.  BIyth  published  in  Nature  "A  suggested  new 
Division  of  the  Earth  into  Zoological  Kegions,"  in  which  he 
indicates  seven  primary  divisions  or  regions,  subdivided  into 
twenty-six  sub-regions.  The  seven  regions  are  defined  as 
follows:  1.  The  Boreal  region;  including  the  whole  of  the 
Palsearctic  and  Searctie  regions  of  Mr.  Selater  along  with  the 
West  Indies,  Central  America,  the  whole  chain  of  the  Andes, 
with  Chih  and  Patagonia.  2.  The  Columbian  region,  consisting 
of  the  remaining  part  of  South  America.  3  The  Ethiopian 
region ;  comprising  besides  that  region  of  Mr.  Selater,  the  valley 
of  the  Jordan,  Arabia,  and  the  desert  country  towards  India, 
with  aU  the  plains  and  table  lands  of  India  and  the  noithem 


by  Google 


niAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  01 

half  of  Ceylon.  4  The  Lemurian  region ;  consisting  of  Mada- 
gascar and  its  adjacent  islands.  5,  The  Austral- Asian  ri^on ; 
which  is  the  Indian  region  of  Mr.  Sclater  without  the  portion 
taken  to  be  added  to  the  Ethiopian  region.  6.  The  Melanesian 
region ;  which  is  the  Australian  region  of  Mr.  Sclater  without 
New  Zealand  and  the  Pacific  Islands,  which  form  7.  the 
Polynesian  region.  Mr.  Blyth  thinks  this  is  "  a  true  classifi- 
cation of  zoological  regions  as  regards  mammalia  and  hirda." 

In  an  elaborate  paper  on  the  birds  of  Eastern  North  America, 
their  distribution  and  migrations  {Bidldin  of  Museum  of  Com- 
parative Zoology,  Cambridge,  MassachuseUs,  Vol.  2),  Mr.  J,  A. 
Allen  proposes  a  division  of  the  earth  in  accordance  with  what 
he  terms,  "  the  law  of  circumpolar  distribution  of  hfe  in  zones," 
as  follows :  1.  Arctic  realm.  2.  North  temperate  realm.  3. 
American    tropical    realm.      4.    Indo-African  tropical  realm. 

6.  South  American  tropical  realm.     6.  African  temperate  realm. 

7.  Antarctic  realm.  8.  Australian  realm.  Some  of  these  are 
subdivided  into  regions;  (2)  consisting  of  the  American  and 
the  Eiu:opa30-Asiatic  regions ;  (4)  into  the  African  and  Indian 
regions ;  (8)  into  the  tropical  Australian  n^ion,  and  one  com- 
prising the  southern  part  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  The 
other  realms  each  form  a  single  region. 

Dismission  of  proposed  Regions.— -Before  proceeding  to  define 
the  regions  adopted  in  this  work,  it  may  be  as  well  to  make 
a  few  remarks  on  some  of  the  preceding  classifications,  and 
to  give  the  reasons  which  seem  to  render  it  advisable  to  adopt 
.  very  few  of  the  suggested  improvements  on  Mr.  Sclatei's 
original  proposal.  Mr.  Blyth's  scheme  is  one  of  the  least 
natural,  and  also  the  most  inconvenient  There  can  be  little 
use  in  the  knowledge  that  a  gi'oup  of  animals  is  found  in  the 
Boreal  Region,  if  their  habitat  m:^ht  stiU  be  either  Patagonia, 
the  West  Indies,  or  Japan ,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  on  what 
principle  the  Madagascar  gioup  of  islands  is  made  of  equal 
rank  with  this  enormous  region,  seeing  that  its  forms  of  life 
have  marked  African  affinities.  Neither  does  it  seem  advisable 
to  adopt  the  Polynesian  E^on,  or  that  comprising  New  Zealand 
alone  (as  hinted  at  by  Professor  Huxley  and  since  adopted  by 


by  Google 


G2  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [paet  i. 

Mr.  Sclater  in  his  Lectures  on  Geographical  Distribution  at  the 
Zoological  Gardens  in  May  1874),  because  it  is  absolutely  with- 
out indigenoua  mammalia  and  very  poor  in  all  forms  of  life, 
and  therefore  by  no  means  prominent  or  important  enough  to 
form  a  primary  r^on  of  the  earth. 

It  may  be  as  well  here  to  notice  what  appears  to  be  a  serious 
objection  to  making  New  Zealand,  or  any  similar  isolated 
district,  one  of  the  great  zoological  regions,  comparable  to  South 
America,  Australia,  or  Ethiopia ;  which  is,  that  its  claim  to  that 
distinction  rests  on  grounds  which  are  liable  to  fail.  It  is 
because  New  Zealand,  in  addition  to  its  negative  merita,  possesses 
three  families  of  birds  (Apterygid^  living,  DinornithidEe  and 
Palapterygid^e  extinct),  and  a  peculiai  lizaid  like  reptde, 
Satteria,  which  has  to  be  classed  in  a  distinct  oider,  Ehjncho- 
cephalina,  that  the  rank  of  a  Eegion  is  claimed  foi  it  But 
supposing,  what  is  not  at  all  improbable,  that  other  Rhyncho- 
cephalina  should  be  discovered  in  the  inteiioi  of  Austialia  or 
in  New  Guinea,  and  that  ApterygidEe  oi  Palapteiygidte  should 
be  found  to  have  inhabited  Australia  in  Post-Pliocene  times, 
(as  DinornithidEe  have  already  been  proved  to  have  done)  the 
claims  of  New  Zealand  would  entirely  fail,  and  it  would  be 
universally  acknowledged  to  be  a  part  of  the  great  Australian 
region.  No  such  reversal  can  take  place  in  the  case  of  the 
other  r^ions ;  because  they  rest,  not  upon  one  or  two,  but  upon  a 
large  number  of  peculiarities,  of  such  a  nature  that  there  is  no 
room  upon  the  globe  for  discoveries  that  can  seriously  modify 
them.  Even  if  one  or  two  peculiar  types,  like  Apterygidse  or 
Hatteria,  should  permanently  remain  characteristic  of  New  Zea- 
land alone,  we  can  account  for  these  by  the  extreme  isolation  of 
the  country,  and  the  absence  of  enemies,  which  have  enabled 
these  defenceless  birds  and  reptiles  to  continue  their  existence ; 
just  as  the  isolation  and  protection  of  the  caverns  of  Camiola 
have  enabled  the  Protms  to  survive  in  Europe.  But  supposing 
that  the  Proteus  was  the  sole  representative  of  an  order  of 
Batraehia,  and  that  two  or  three  other  equally  curious  and 
isolated  forms  occurred  with  it,  no  one  would  propose  that  these 
caverns  or  the  district  containing  them,  should  form  one  of  the 


by  Google 


■.  w.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  63 

nary  divisions  of  the  earth.  Neither  can  much  stress  be 
.  on  the  negative  characteristics  of  New  Zealand,  since  they 
found  to  an  ahnost  eq^ual  extent  in  every  oceanic  island. 

Again,  it  is  both  inconvenient  and  misleading  to  pick  out 
certain  tracts  from  the  midst  of  one  region  or  sub-region  and  to 
place  them  in  another,  on  account  of  certain  isolated  affinities 
which  may  often  he  accounted  for  by  local  peculiarities.  Even 
if  the  resemblance  of  the  fauna  of  ChUi  and  Patagonia  to  that 
of  the  Pal^arctic  and  Nearctie  regions  was  much  greater  than  it 
is,  this  mode  of  dealing  with  it  would  be  objectionable;  but  it 
is  still  more  so,  when  we  find  that  tliese  countries  have  a 
strongly  marked  South  American  character,  and  that  the  north- 
ern affinities  are  altogether  exceptional.  The  Eodentia,  which 
comprise  a  large  portion  of  the  mammalia  of  these  countries, 
are  wholly  South  American  in  type,  and  the  birds  are  almost  all 
allied  to  forms  characteristic  of  tropical  America. 

For  analogous  reasons  the  Ethiopian  must  not  be  made  to 
include  any  part  of  India  or  Ceylon  ;  for  although  the  Fauna  of 
Centi'al  India  has  some  African  affinities,  these  do  not  prepon- 
derate ;  and  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  sliow  that  to  follow  Mr. 
Andrew  Murray  in  uniting  boddy  the  Ethiopian  and  Indian 
regions  of  Mr.  Sclater,  is  both  unnatural  and  inconvenient.  The 
resemblances  between  them  are  of  the  same  character  as  those 
which  would  unite  them  both  with  the  Palsearctic  and  Neavctic 
regions ;  and  although  it  may  be  admitted,  that,  as  Professor 
Huxley  maintains,  this  group  forms  one  of  the  great  primary 
divisions  of  the  globe,  it  is  far  too  extensive  and  too  hetero- 
geneous to  subserve  the  practical  uses  for  which  we  require  a 
division  of  the  world  into  zoological  regions. 

Beasom/m-  adopting  the  six  Regions  jwstpropos&d  hi/ Mr.  Sclaier. 
— So  that  we  do  not  violate  any  clear  affinities  or  produce  any 
glaring  irregularities,  it  is  a  positive,  and  by  no  means  an  un- 
important, advantage  to  have  our  named  regions  approximately 
equal  in  size,  and  with  easily  defined,  and  therefore  easdy  re- 
membered, boundaries.  All  elaborate  definitions  of  interpene- 
trating frontiers,  as  well  as  regions  extending  over  three-fourths 

■  the  land  surface  of  the  globe,  and  including  places  which  are 


by  Google 


G4  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [rA: 

the  antipodes  of  each  other,  would  he  most  inconvenient,  e 
if  there  were  not  such  difference  of  opinion  ahout  them,.  H. 
can  he  little  doubt,  for  example,  that  the  most  radical  zoolog: 
division  of  the  earth  is  made  hy  separating  the  Australian  re- 
gion from  the  rest;  but  although  it  is  something  useful  and 
definite  to  know  that  a  group  of  animals  is  peculiar  to  Australia, 
it  is  exceedingly  vague  and  unsatisfactory  to  say  of  any  other 
group  merely  that  it  is  extra- Australian.  Neither  can  it  be  said 
that,  from  any  point  of  view,  these  two  divisions  axe  of  equal 
importance.  The  next  great  natural  division  that  can  be  made 
is  the  separation  of  the  Neotropical  Kegion  of  Mr.  Sclater  from 
the  rest  of  the  world.  We  thus  have  three  primary  divisions, 
which  Professor  Huxley  seems  inclined  to  consider  as  of 
tolerably  equal  zoological  importance.  But  a  consideration  of 
all  the  facts,  zoological  and  palffiontological,  indicates,  that  the 
great  northern  division  (Arctogtca)  is  fully  as  much  more  impor- 
tant than  either  Australia  or  South  America,  as  its  four  compo- 
nent parts  are  less  important ;  and  if  so,  convenience  requires 
us  to  adopt  the  smaller  rather  than  the  larger  divisions. 

This  question,  of  comparative  importance  or  equivalence  of 
value,  is  very  difficult  to  determine.  It  may  he  considered  from 
the  poiut  of  view  of  speciality  or  isolation,  or  from  that  of 
richness  and  variety  of  animal  forms,  In  isolation  and  speciality, 
determined  by  what  they  want  as  well  as  what  thoy  possess,  the 
Australian  and  Neotropical  regions  are  undoubtedly  each  com- 
parable with  the  rest  of  the  earth  (Arctogsea).  But  in  richness 
and  variety  of  forms,  they  are  both  very  much  inferior,  and  are 
much  more  nearly  comparable  with  the  separate  regions  which 
compose  it.  Taking  the  families  of  mammalia  as  established  by 
the  best  authors,  and  leaving  out  the  Cetaeea  and  the  Bats, 
which  are  almo-st  universally  distributed,  and  about  whose 
classification  there  is  much  uncertainty,  the  number  of  families 
represented  in  each  of  Mr.  Sclater's  regions  is  as  follows : 

I.  Palfearctic  region,  haa  31  familieH  of  terrestrial  mammalia. 
II,  Ethiopian       „         „   40         „  „  „ 

III.  Indian  „        „  31        „ 

IV.  Austialian     „         „   14         „  „  „ 
T.  Keottopical  „        „  S6        „                 „  „ 

VL  Nearctio        „        „  23        „  „ 


by  Google 


iV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS,  65 

e  see,  then,  that  even  the  exceedingly  rich  and  isolated  Neo- 
cal  region  is  less  rich  and  diversified  in  its  forms  of  niam- 
an  life  than  the  very  much  smaller  area  of  the  Indian  region, 
he  temperate  Palfearctie,  and  very  much  less  so  than  the 
iopian  region ;  while  even  the  comparatively  poor  Nearetic 
region,  is  nearly  equal  to  it  in  the  number  of  its  family  types.  If 
these  were  united  they  would  possess  fifty-five  families,  a  number 
very  disproportionate  to  those  of  the  remaining  two.  Another 
consideration  is,  that  although  the  absence  of  certain  forms  of 
life  makes  a  region  more  isolated,  it  does  not  make  it  zoologically 
more  important ;  for  we  have  only  to  suppose  some  five  or  six 
families,  now  common  to  both,  to  become  extinct  either  iu  the 
Ethiopian  or  the  Indian  regions,  and  they  would  become  as 
strongly  differentiated  from  all  other  regions  as  South  America, 
while  still  remaining  as  rich  in  family  types.  In  birds  exactly  the 
same  phenomenon  recurs,  the  family  types  being  less  numerous  in 
South  America  than  in  either  of  the  other  tropical  regions  of  the 
earth,but  a  larger  proportion  of  them  are  restricted  to  it.  It  will 
be  shown  further  on,  that  the  Ethiopian  and  Indian,  (or,  aa  I  pro- 
pose to  call  it  in  this  work,  Oriental)  regions,  are  sufficiently  differ- 
entiated by  very  important  groups  of  animals  pecuhar  to  each ; 
and  that,  on  strict  zoological  principles  they  are  entitled  to 
rank  as  regions  of  equal  value  with  the  Keotropical  and  Aus- 
tralian. It  is  perhaps  less  clear  whether  the  Palajaretie  should 
he  separated  from  the  Oriental  region,  with  which  it  has  un- 
doubtedly much  in  common ;  but  there  are  many  and  powerful 
reasons  for  keeping  it  distinct.  There  is  an  unmistakably  different 
facies  in  the  animal  forms  of  the  two  regions ;  and  although  no 
families  of  mammalia  or  birds,  and  not  many  genera,  are  wholly 
confined  to  the  Palsearctic  region,  a  very  considerable  numbes 
of  both  have  their  metropolis  in  it,  and  are  very  richly  represented. 
The  distinction  between  the  characteristic  forms  of  life  in  tropical 
and  cold  countries  is,  on  the  whole,  very  strongly  marked  in  the 
northern  hemisphere ;  and  to  refuse  to  recognise  this  in  a  sub- 
division of  the  earth  which  is  established  for  the  very  purpose  of 
expressing  such  contrasts  more  clearly  and  concisely  than  by 
ordinary  geographical  teiTninology,  would  be  both  illogical  and 


by  Google 


66  DISTEIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [p 

inconvenient.     The   one  (Question   then  remains,   whethei 
Nearotic  region  should  be  kept  separate,  or  whether  it  si 
form  part  of  the  Palsearctic  or  of  the  Neotropical  regions, 
fessor  Huxley  and  Mr.  Blyth  advocate  tho  former  course  ; 
Andrew  Murray  (for  mammalia)  and  Professor  Newton  (for  hi 
think  the  latter  would  be  more  natural.     No  doubt  much  is  to 
be  said  for  both  views,  but  both  cannot  be  right ;  and  it  will  be 
shown  in  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter  that  the  Nearetic  region 
is,  on  the  whole,  fully  as  well  defined  as  the  Palasarctic,  by  posi- 
tive  characters  which  differentiate  it  from  both  the  adjacent 
region,?.     More  evidence  in  the  same  direction  will  be  found  in 
the  Second  Part  of  this  work,  in  which  the  extinct  faunas  of  the 
several  regions  are  discussed. 

A  confirmation  of  the  general  views  here  set  forth,  as  to  the 
distinctness  and  approximate  equivalence  of  the  six  regions,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  if  any  two  or  more  of  them  are  com- 
bined they  themselves  become  divisions  of  the  next  lower  rank, 
or  "  sub-regions ; " — and  these  will  be  very  much  more  important, 
both  zoologically  and  geographically,  than  the  subdivisions  of 
the  remaining  region^.  It  is  admitted  then  that  these  six  r^ous 
are  by  no  means  of  pl'ecisely  equal  rank,  and  that  some  of  them 
are  far  more  isolated  and  better  characterized  than  others  ;  but 
it  is  maintained  that,  looked  at  from  every  point  of  view,  they 
are  more  equal  in  rank  than  any  otheis  that  can  be  formed , 
while  in  geographical  equality,  compactness  of  area,  and  facility 
of  definition,  they  are  beyond  all  compaaison  better  than  any 
others  that  have  yet  been  proposed  for  the  puijio'^e  of  facilitat- 
ing the  study  of  geogi-aphical  diatiibution  They  may  be  ar- 
ranged and  grouped  as  follows,  so  as  to  exhibit  their  vaiious 
relations  and  affinities, 

V j  Neotropical  ...    Austral  zone Notoe«a. 

Pal^Abctic    ...f  Boreal  zone.... 

pai.cg^  Z^^  ■:::::  \  Pai^ot^picai . 

(AosTHALiAN  ...    Austral  none Noti^tea. 

The  above  table  shows  the  regions  placed  in  the  order  followed 
in  the  Fourth  Part  of  this  work,  and  the  reasons  for  which  are 


Arctogiea 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZOULUGIOAL  EEGIONa  G7 

explained  ia  Chapter  IX.  As  a  matter  of  convenience,  and  for 
other  reasons  adduced  in  the  same  chapter,  the  detailed  exposi- 
tion of  the  geographical  distrihution  of  the  animals  of  the  several 
regions  in  Part  III.  commences  with  the  Paltearctic  and  termin- 
ates with  the  Nearctic  region. 

Objections  to  the  system  of  drcumpolar  Zones. — Mr.  Allen's 
system  of  "  realms "  founded  on  climatic  zones  (given  at 
p.  61),  having  recently  appeared  in  an  ornithological  work 
of  considerahle  detail  and  research,  calls  for  a  few  remarks. 
The  author  continually  refers  to  the  "  law  of  th&  distribution  of 
life  in  drcumpolar  zones,"  as  if  it  were  one  generally  accepted 
and  that  admits  of  no  diaputa  But  this  supposed  "  law  "  only 
apphes  to  the  smallest  details  of  distribution — to  the  range  and 
increasing  or  decreasing  numhers  of  species  as  we  pass  from 
north  to  south,  or  the  reverse  ;  while  it  has  little  bearing  on  the 
great  features  of  zoological  geography — the  limitation  of  groups 
of  genera  and  families  to  certain  areas.  It  is  analogous  to 
the  "  lato  of  adaptation "  in  the  organisation  of  animals,  by 
which  members  of  various  groups  are  suited  for  an  aerial,  an 
aquatic,  a  desert,  or  an  arboreal  life ;  are  herbivorous,  carnivorous, 
or  insectivorous;  are  fitted  to  live  underground,  or  in  fresh 
waters,  or  on  polar  ice.  It  was  once  thought  that  these  adaptive 
peculiarities  were  suitable  foundations  for  a  classification, — that 
whales  were  fishes,  and  bats  birds ;  and  even  to  this  day  there 
are  naturalists  who  cannot  recognise  the  essential  diversity 
of  structure  in  such  groups  as  swifts  and  swallows,  sun-birds  and 
humming-birds,  under  the  superficial  disguise  caused  by  adap- 
tation to  a  similar  mode  of  lifa  The  application  of  Mr.  Allen's 
principle  leads  to  equally  erroneous  results,  as  may  be  well  seen 
by  considering  his  separation  of  "  the  southern  thud  of  Aus- 
tralia "  to  unite  it  with  New  Zealand  as  one  of  his  secondary 
zoological  divisions.  If  there  is  one  countrj'  in  the  world  whose 
fauna  is  strictly  homogeneous,  that  country  is  Auatraha;  while 
New  Guinea  on  the  one  hand,  and  New  Zealand  on  the  other, 
are  as  sharply  differentiated  from  Australia  as  any  adjacent  parts 
of  the  same  primary  zoological  division  can  possibly  be.  Yet 
t\i&  " law  of  drcumpolar  distribution"  leads  to  the  division  of 


by  Google 


68  DISTRIBUTION  OP  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

Australia  by  an  arbitrary  east  and  west  line,  and  a  union  of  the 
northern  two-thirds  with  New  Guinea,  tlie  southern  third  with 
New  Ze'aland,  Hardly  less  unnatural  is  the  supposed  equiva- 
lence of  South  Africa  (the  African  temperate  realm)  to  aU 
tropical  Africa  and  Asia,  including  Mada^acar  (the  Indo- 
African  tropical  realm).  South  Africa  has,  it  is  true,  some 
striking  peculiarities ;  hut  they  are  absolutely  unimportant  as 
compared  with  the  great  and  radical  differences  between  tropical 
Africa  and  tropical  Asia.  On  these  examples  we  may  fairly 
rest  our  rejection  of  Mr.  Allen's  scheme. 

We  must  however  say  a  few  words  on  the  zoo-geographical 
nomenclature  proposed  in  the  same  paper,  which  seems  also 
very  objectionable.  The  following  terms  are  proposed ;  naim, 
region,  province,  district,  fauna  and  jiora ;  the  first  being  the 
highest,  the  last  the  lowest  and  smallest  suh-division.  Con- 
sidering that  most  of  these  terms  have  been  used  in  very  different 
senses  already,  and  that  no  means  of  settling  their  equivalence 
in  diiferent  parts  of  the  globe  has  been  even  suggested,  such  a 
complex  system  must  lead  to  endless  confusion.  Until  the 
whole  subject  is  far  better  known  and  its  first  principles  agreed 
upon,  the  simpler  and  the  fewer  the  terms  employed  the  better  ; 
and  as  "  region  "  was  employed  for  the  primary  divisions  by 
Mr.  Selater,  eighteen  years  ago,  and  again  by  Mr.  Andrew 
Murray,  in  his  Geographical  Distribution  of  Mammals ;  nothing 
but  obscurity  can  result  from  each  writer  using  some  new,  and 
doubtfully  better,  term.  For  the  sub-divisions  of  the  regions 
no  advantage  is  gained  by  the  use  of  a  distinct  term — "  pro- 
vince"— which  has  been  used  (by  Swainson)  for  the  primary 
divisions,  and  which  does  not  itself  tell  you  what  rank  it  holds ; 
whereas  the  term  "  sub-region  "  speaks  for  itself  as  being  un- 
mistakably next  in  subordination  to  region,  and  this  clearness  of 
meaning  gives  it  the  preference  over  any  independent  term. 
As  to  minor  named  sub -divisions,  they  seem  at  present  uncalled 
for;  and  till  the  greater  divisions  are  themselves  generally 
agreed  on,  it  seems  better  to  adopt  no  technical  names  for  what 
must,  for  a  long  time  to  come,  be  indeterminate. 
Does  the  Arctic  Fauna  eharacterise  c 


by  Google 


JAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  69 

The  proposal  to  consider  the  Arctic  regions  as  constituting  one  of 
,be  primary  zoological  divisions  of  tie  globe,  has  been  advocated 
>y  many  naturaKsts.  Professor  Huxley  seems  to  consider  it 
jivisable,  and  Mr.  Allen  unhesitatingly  adopts  it,  as  ■weU  as  an 
"  antarctic "  region  to  balance  it  in  the  southern  hemisphere. 
The  reason  why  an  "  Arctic  Eegion  "  finds  no  place  in  this  work 
may  therefore  be  here  stated. 

No  species  or  group  of  animals  can  properly  be  classed  as 
"  arctic,"  which  does  not  exclusively  inhabit  or  greatly  prepon- 
derate in  arctic  lands.  For  the  purpose  of  establishii^  the 
need  of  an  "  arctic  "  zoological  region,  we  should  consider  chiefly 
such  groups  as  are  circumpolar  as  well  as  arctic ;  because,  if 
they  are  confined  to,  or  greatly  preponderate  in,  either  the 
eastern  or  western  hemispheres,  they  can  be  at  once  allocated  to 
the  Nearctic  or  PalEearctic  regions,  and  can  therefore  afford  no 
justification  for  establishing  a  new  primary  division  of  the 
globe. 

Thus  restricted,  only  three  genera  of  land  mammalia  are  truly 
arctic :  Gvio,  Myodes,  and  Raiigifei:  Two  species  of  widely 
dispersed  genera  are  also  exclusively  arctic,  Ursus  maritimus 
and  Vulpes  lagopus. 

Exclusively  arctic  hirds  are  not  much  more  numerous.  Of 
land  birds  there  are  only  three  genera  (each  consisting  of  but  a 
single  species),  Pinieola,  Nystea,  and  Sumia.  Lagopus  is  cir- 
cumpolar, but  the  genus  has  too  wide  an  extension  in  the 
temperate  zone  to  he  considered  arctic.  Among  aquatic  birds 
we  have  the  genus  of  ducks,  Somaterict ;  three  genera  of  Uriidse, 
Uria,  Catarraetes,  and  Mergvlws ;  and  the  small  family  Alcidfe, 
consistii^  of  the  genera  Alca  and  Fraiereida.  Our  total  then 
is,  three  genera  of  mammalia,  three  of  land,  and  six  of  aquatic 
birds,  including  one  peculiar  family. 

In  the  southern  hemisphere  there  is  only  the  single  genus 
Aptenodytes  that  can  be  classed  as  antarctic ;  and  even  that  is 
more  properly  south  temperate. 

In  deahng  with  this  arctic  fanna  we  have  two  courses  open 
to  us ;  we  must  either  group  them  with  the  other  species  and 
genera  which  are  common  to  the  two  northern  regions,  or  we 


by  Google 


70  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part 

must  form  a  separate  primary  region  for  them.  As  a  matter  o 
conveuience  the  former  plan  seems  the  best ;  and  it  is  tha 
which  is  in  accordance  with  our  treatment  of  other  intermediate 
tracts  which  contain  special  forms  of  life.  The  great  desei 
zone,  extending  from  the  Atlantic  shores  of  the  Sahara  across 
Arabia  to  Central  Asia,  is  a  connecting  link  between  the  Palas- 
arctic,  Ethiopian,  and  Oriental  regions,  and  contains  a  number 
of  "  desert "  forms  wholly  or  almost  wholly  restricted  to  it ;  but 
the  attempt  to  define  it  as  a  separate  region  would  introduce 
difficulty  and  confusion.  Neither  to  the  "  desert "  nor  to  the 
"  arctic  "  regions  could  any  defined  limits,  either  geographical 
or  zoological,  be  placed ;  and  the  attempt  to  determine  what 
species  or  genera  should  be  allotted  to  them  would  prove  an 
insoluble  problem.  The  reason  perhaps  is,  that  both  are  essen- 
tially unstable,  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  those  great  masses 
of  land  with  more  or  less  defined  barriers,  which  constitute  our 
six  regions.  The  Arctic  Zone  has  been,  within  a  recent  geologi- 
cal period,  both  vastly  more  extensive  and  vastly  lees  extensive 
than  it  is  at  present.  At  a  not  distant  epoch  it  extended  over 
half  of  Europe  and  of  Korfch  America.  At  an  earUer  date  it 
appears  to  have  vanished  altogether ;  since  a  luxuriant  vegeta- 
tion of  tall  deciduous  trees  and  broad-leaved  evergreens 
flourished  within  ten  degrees  of  the  Pole  !  The  gi-eat  deserts 
have  not  improbably  been  equally  fluctuating;  hence  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  can  present  that  marked  individuaHty 
in  their  forms  of  life,  which  seems  to  have  arisen  only  when 
extensive  ti'acts  of  land  have  retained  some  considerable  sta- 
bility both  of  surface  and  climatal  conditions,  during  periods 
suflicient  for  the  development  and  co-adaptation  of  their  several 
assemblages  of  plants  and  animals. 

We  must  also  consider  that  there  is  no  geographical  difficulty 
in  dividing  the  Arctic  Zone  between  the  two  northern  regions. 
The  only  debateable  lands,  Greenland  and  Iceland,  are  generally 
admitted  to  belong  respectively  to  America  and  Europe. 
Neither  is  there  any  zoological  difficulty ;  for  the  land  mam- 
malia and  birds  are  on  the  whole  wonderfully  restricted  to  their 
respective  regions  even  in  high  latitudes ;  and  the  aquatic  forms 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  71 

are,  for  our  present  purpose,  of  much  less  importance.  As  a 
primary  division  the  "Arctic  region  "  would  be  out  of  all  pro- 
portion to  the  other  six,  whether  as  regai-ds  its  few  peculiar 
,  types  or  the  limited  number  of  forms  and  species  actually  in- 
habiting it ;  but  it  comes  in  well  as  a  connecting  link  between 
two  regions,  where  the  peculiar  forms  of  both  are  specially  modi- 
fied ;  and  is  in  this  respect  quite  analogous  to  the  great  desert 
zone  above  referred  to. 

I  now  proceed  to  characterize  briefly  the  six  regions  adopted 
in  the  present  work,  together  with  the  sub-regions  into  which 
they  may  be  most  conveniently  and  naturally  divided,  as  shown 
in  our  general  map, 

Palmarctic  Eegion.—'i\A&  very  extensive  region  comprises  all 
temperate  Europe  and  Asia,  from  Iceland  to  Eehring's  Straits  and 
from  the  Azores  to  Japan.  Its  southern  boundary  is  some- 
what indefinite,  but  it  seems  advisable  to  comprise  in  it  all 
the  extra- tropical  part  of  the  Sahara  and  Arabia,  and  all 
Persia,  Cabul,  and  Beloochistan  to  the  Indus.  It  comes  down 
to  a  little  below  the  upper  limit  of  forests  in  the  Himalayas, 
and  includes  the  laiger  northern  half  of  China,  not  CLuite  so 
far  down  the  coast  as  Amoy.  It  has  been  said  that  this 
region  differs  from  the  Oriental  by  negative  characters  only ;  a 
host  of  tropical  families  and  genera  being  absent,  while  there  is 
little  or  nothing  but  peculiar  species  to  characterize  it  abso- 
lutely. This  however  is  not  true.  The  Palsearctic  region  is  well 
characterized  by  possessing  3  families  of  vertebrata  peculiar 
to  it,  as  well  as  35  peculiar  genera  of  mammalia,  and  57 
of  birds,  constituting  about  one-third  of  the  total  number  it 
possesses.  These  are  amply  sufiicient  to  characterize  a  region 
positively  ;  but  we  must  also  consider  the  absence  of  many  im- 
portant groups  of  the  Oriental,  Ethiopian,  and  Nearctie  regions ; 
and  we  shall  then  find,  that  taking  positive  and  negative 
characters  together,  and  making  some  allowance  for  the  neces- 
sary poverty  of  a  temperate'  as  compared  with  tropical  regions, 
the  Paliearetic  is  almost  as  strongly  marked  and  well  defined  as 
any  other, 

^  of  the  Polmar die  Region. — These  are  by  no  means 


by  Google 


72  DISTRIBUTION  Q¥  ANIiVIALB,  [part  i, 

SO  clearly  indicated  as  in  some  of  the  otlier  legions,  and  they  are 
adopted  more  for  convenience  than  because  they  are  very  natural 
or  strongly  marked. 

The  first,  or  European  sub-region,  comprises  Central  and 
Northern  Europe  as  far  South  as  the  Pyrenees,  the  Maritime 
and  Dinaric  Alps,  the  Balkan  mountains,  the  Black  Sea,  and  the 
Caucasus.  On  the  east  the  Caspian  sea  and  the  Ural  mountains 
seem  the  most  obvious  limit ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  they  form  the 
actual  boundary,  which  is  perhaps  better  marked  by  the  valley 
of  the  Irtish,  where  a  pre-glacial  sea  almost  certainly  connected 
t-he  Aral  and  Caspian  seas  with  the  Arctic  ocean,  and  formed 
an  effective  barrier  which  must  still,  to  some  extent,  influence 
the  distribution  of  animals. 

The  next,  or  Hediterranean  sub-region,  comprises  South 
Europe,  North'  Africa  with  the  extra-tropical  portion  of  the 
Sahara,  and  Egypt  to  about  the  first  or  second  cataracts ;  and 
eastward  through  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  and  Cabul,  to  .the  deserts 
of  the  Indus. 

The  third,  or  Siberian  sub-region,  consists  of  all  north  and 
central  Asia  north  of  Herat,  as  far  as  the  eastern  limits  of  the 
great  desert  plateau  of  Mongolia,  and  southward  to  about  the 
upper  limit  of  trees  on  the  Himalayas. 

The  fourth,  or  Manchuiian  sub-region,  consists  of  dapan  and 
Worth  China  with  the  lower  valley  of  the  Amoor ;  and  it  should 
probably  be  extended  westward  in  a  narrow  strip  along  the 
Himalayas,  embracing  about  1,000  or  2,000  feet  of  vertical 
distance-  below  the  upper  limit  of  trees,  till  it  meets  an  eastern 
extension  of  the  Mediterranean  suh-region  a  little  beyond  Simla. 
These  extensions  are  necessary  to  avoid  passing  from  the  Oriental 
region,  which  is  essentially  tropical,  directly  to  the  Siberian  sub- 
region,  which  has  an  extreme  northern  character ;  whereas  the 
Mediterranean  and  Manchurian  sub-regions  are  more  temperate 
in  climate.  It  will  be  found  that  botween  the  upper  limit  of 
most  of  the  typical  Oriental  groups  and  the  Thibetan  or  Siberian 
fauna,  there  is  a  zone  in  which  many  forms  occur  common  to 
temperate  China.  This  is  especially  the  ease  among  the  phea- 
sants and  finches. 


by  Google 


CHAP,  rv.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  73 

Mhiopian  Region. — The  limits  of  this  region  have  heen  indi- 
cated by  the  definition  of  the  Palsearctic  region.  Besides  Africa 
south  of  the  tropic  of  Cancer,  and  its  islands,  it  comprises  the 
southern  half  of  Arabia. 

This  region  has  been  said  to  be  identical  in  the  main  eharae- 
ters  of  its  mammalian  fauna  with  the  Oriental  region,  and  has 
therefore  been  united  with  it  by  Mr.  A,  Murray,  Most  impor- 
tant differences  have  however  been  overlooked,  as  the  following 
summary  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  Ethiopian  region  will,  I 
think,  show. 

It  possesses  22  peculiar  families  of  vertebrates ;  90  peculiar 
genera  of  mammalia,  being  two-thirds  of  its  whole  number ; 
and  179  peculiar  genera  of  birds,  being  three-fifths  of  all  it 
possesses.  It  is  further  characterized  by  the  absence  of  several 
famihes  and  genera  which  range  over  the  whole  northern 
hemisphere,  details  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  chapter 
treating  of  the  region.  There  are,  it  is  true,  many  points 
of  resemblance,  not  to  be  wondered  at  between  two  tropical 
regions  in  the  same  hemisphere,  and  which  have  evidently  been 
at  one  time  more  nearly  coniiected,  both  by  intervening  lands 
and  by  a  different  condition  of  the  lands  that  even  now  connect 
them.  But  these  resemblances  only  render  the  differences  more 
remarkable ;  since  they  show  that  there  has  been  an  ancient  and 
long-continued  separation  of  the  two  regions,  developing  a  dis- 
tinct fauna  in  each,  and  establishing  marked  specialities  which 
the  temporary  intercommunication  and  immigration  has  not 
sufficed  to  remove.  The  entire  absence  of  such  wide-spread 
groups  as  bears  and  deer,  from  a  country  many  parts  of  which 
are  well  adapted  to  them,  and  in  close  proximity  to  regions 
where  they  abound,  would  alone  mark  out  the  Ethiopian  region 
as  one  of  the  primary  divisions  of  the  earth,  even  if  it  possessed 
a  less  number  than  it  actually  does  of  peculiar  family  and 
generic  groups, 

Sub-divisioTis  of  the  EtJiiopian  Reffion. — The  African   conti- 
nent south  of  the  tropic  of  Cancer  is  more  homogeneous  in  its 
prominent  and  superficial  zoological  features  than  most  of  the 
other  regions,  but  there  are  nevertheless  important  and  deep- 
VOL.  I.— 7 


by  Google 


74  DISTRIBUTION  OF  AHIMALS.  [part  i. 

seated  local  peculiarities.  Two  portions  can  be  marked  off  as 
possessing  many  peculiar  forms ;  the  luxuriant  forest  district 
of  equatorial  West  Africa,  and  the  southern  extremity  or  Cape 
district.  The  remaining  portion  has  no  well-marked  divisions, 
and  a  large  proportion  of  its  animal  forms  range  over  it  from 
Kubia  and  Abyssinia,  to  Senegal  on  the  one  side  and  to  the 
Zambesi  on  the  other ;  this  forms  our  first  or  East-African 
sub-region. 

The  second,  or  West  African  sub-region  extends  along  the 
coast  from  Senegal  to  Angola,  and  inland  to  the  sources  of  the 
Shary  and  the  Congo. 

The  third,  or  South  African  sub-region,  comprises  the  Cape 
■Colony  and  Watal,  and  is  roughly  limited  by  a  line  from  Delagoa 
Bay  to  Walvish  Bay. 

The  fourth,  or  Malagasy  sub-region,  consists  of  Madagascar  and 
the  adjacent  islands,  from  Eodriguez  to  the  Seychelles  ;  and  this 
diftpis  so  remaihably  from  the  continent  that  it  has  been  pro- 
posed to  form  a  distinct  primary  region  for  its  reception.  Its 
productions  aie  indeed  highly  interesting;  since  it  possesses 
3  familiea,  and  2  sub-families  of  mammals  peculiar  to  itself 
while  almost  all  its  genera  are  pecuhar.  Of  these  a  few 
show  Oriental  or  Ethiopian  alHnities,  but  the  remainder  are 
quite  isolated.  Turning  to  other  classes  of  animals,  we  find 
that  the  birds  are  almost  as  remarkable ;  but,  as  might  be 
expected,  a  larger  number  of  genera  are  common  to  surround- 
ii^  countries.  More  than  30  genera  are  altogether  peculiar, 
and  some  of  these  are  so  isolated  as  to  require  to  he  classed 
in  separate  families  or  sub-families.  The  African  affinity  is  how- 
ever here  more  strongly  shown  by  the  considerable  number  (13) 
of  peculiar  Ethiopian  genera  which  in  Madagascar  have  repre- 
sentative species.  There  can  be  no  doubt  therefore  about  Mada- 
gascar being  more  nearly  related  to  the  Ethiopian  than  to  any 
other  region ;  but  its  peculiarities  are  so  great,  that,  were  it  not 
for  its  small  size  and  the  limited  extent  of  its  fauna,  its  claim  to 
rank  as  a  separate  region  might  not  seem  unreasonable.  It  is 
true  that  it  is  not  poorer  in  mammals  than  Australia ;  but  that 
country  is  far  more  isolated,  and  cannot  be  so  decidedly  and 


by  Google 


CHAP,  IT.]  ZOOLOGICAL  HEGIONR  75 

naturally  associated  with  any  other  region  as  Madagaacar  can 
be  with  the  Ethiopian.  It  is  therefore  the  better  and  more 
natural  course  io  keep  it  as  a  sub-region ;  the  peculiarities  it 
exhibits  being  of  exactly  the  same  kind  as  those  presented  by 
the  Antilles,  by  New  Zealand,  and  even  by  Celebes  and  Ceylon, 
but  in  a  much  greater  degree. 

(Mental  Region.— Oa  aeeount  of  the  numerous  objections 
that  have  been  made  to  naming  a  region  from  the  least  charac- 
teristic portion  of  it,  and  not  thinking  "  Malayan,"  proposed  by 
Mr.  Blanford,  a  good  term,  (as  it  has  a  very  circumscribed  and 
definite  meaning,  and  especially  because  the  "  Malay "  archi- 
pelago is  half  of  it  in  the  Australian  region,)  I  propose  to  use 
the  word  "  Oriental "  instead  of  "  Indian,"  as  being  geographically 
applicable  to  the  whole  of  the  countries  included  in  the  region 
and  to  very  few  beyond  it ;  as  being  euphonious,  and  as  being 
free  from  all  confusion  with  terms  already  used  in  zoological 
geography.  I  trust  therefore  that  it  may  meet  with  general 
acceptance. 

This  small,  compact,  but  rich  and  varied  region,  consists  of 
all  India  and  China  from  the  limits  of  the  Pala;arctic  region  ; 
all  the  Malay  peninsula  and  islands  as  far  east  as  Java  and 
Baly,  Borneo  and  the  Philippine  Islands ;  and  Formosa.  It  is 
positively  characterized  by  possessing  12  pecuhar  families  of 
vertebrata ;  by  55  genera  of  land  mammalia,  and  165  genera 
of  land  birds,  altogether  confined  to  it;  these  peculiar  genera 
forming  in  each  case  about  one  half  of   the  total  number  it 

Suh-divisions  of  the  Orimtal  region. — First  we  have  the 
Indian  sub-region,  consisting  of  Central  India  from  the  foot  of 
the  Himalayas  in  the  west,  and  south  of  the  Ganges  to  the 
east,  aa  far  as  a  line  drawn  from  Goa  curving  south  and  up  to 
the  Kistna  river;  this  is  the  portion  which  has  most  affinity 
with  Africa. 

The  second,  or  Ceylonese  sub-region,  consists  of  the  southern 
extremity  of  India  with  Cejdon ;  this  is  a  mountainous  forest 
r^on,  and  possesses  several  peculiar  forms  as  well  as  some 
Malayan  types  not  found  in  the  first  sub-region. 


by  Google 


76  DKTEIBUTiON  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

Next  we  have  the  Indo-Chinese  sub-region,  comprising  South 
China  and  Biu?mah,  extending  westward  along  the  Himalayan 
range  to  an  altitude  of  about  9,000  or  10,000  feet,  and  south- 
ward to  Tavoy  or  Tenasaerim. 

The  last  is  the  ludo-Malayan  suh-region,  comprising  the 
Peninsula  of  Malacca  and  the  Malay  Islands  to  Baly,  Borneo, 
and  the  Philippines. 

On  account  of  the  absence  from  the  first  sub-r^ion  of  many  of 
the  forms  most  characteristic  of  the  other  three,  and  the  number 
of  families  and  genera  of  mammalia  and  birds  which  occur  in  it 
and  also  in  Africa,  it  has  been  thought  by  some  naturalists  that 
this  part  of  India  has  at  least  an  equal  claim  to  be  classed  as  a 
part  of  the  Ethiopian  region.  This  question  wUl  be  found  fully 
discussed  in  Chapter  XII.  devoted  to  the  Oriental  region,  where 
it  is  shown  that  the  African  affinity  is  far  less  ■  than  has  been 
represented,  and  that  in  all  its  essential  features  Central  India  is 
wholly  Oriental  in  its  fauna. 

Before  leaving  this  region  a  few  words  may  be  said  about 
Lemuria,  a  name  proposed  by  Mr.  Selater  for  the  site  of  a  sup- 
posed submerged  continent  extending  from  Madagascar  to  Ceylon 
and  Sumatra,  in  which  the  Lemuroid  type  of  animals  was  devel- 
oped. This  is  undoubtedly  a  legitimate  and  highly  probable  sup- 
position, and  it  is  an  example  of  the  way  in  which  a  study  of  the 
geographical  distribution  of  animals  may  enable  us  to  reconstruct 
the  geography  of  a  bygone  age.  But  we  must  not,  as  Mr.  Blyth 
proposed,  make  this  hypothetical  land  one  of  our  actual  Zoo- 
logical regions.  It  represents  what  was  probably  a  primary 
Zoological  region  in  some  past  geological  epoch ;  but  what  that 
epoch  was  and  what  were  the  limits  of  the  region  in  question,  we 
are  quite  unable  to  say.  If  we  are  to  suppose  that  it  comprised 
the  whole  area  now  inhabited  by  Lemuroid  animals,  we  must 
make  it  extend  from  West  Africa  to  Burraah,  South  China,  and 
Celebes ;  an  area  which  it  possibly  did  once  occupy,  but  which 
cannot  be  formed  into  a  modem  Zoological  region  without  vio- 
lating much  more  important  aiSnities.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
we  leave  out  all  those  areas  which  undoubtedly  belong  to  other 
regions,  we  reduce   Lemuria  to   Madag^car  and  its  adjacent 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS.  77 

islands,  which,  for  reasons  already  stated,  it  is  not  advisable  to 
treat  as  a  primary  Zoological  region.  The  theory  of  this  ancient 
continent  and  the  light  it  may  throw  on  existing  anomalies  of 
distribution,  will  be  more  fully  considered  in  the  geographical 
part  of  this  work. 

Avstralian  Region. — Mr.  Sclater's  original  name  seems  pre- 
ferable to  Professor  Huxley's,  "Austral-Asian;"  the  incon- 
venience of  which  alteration  is  sufficiently  shown  by  the  fact 
that  Mr.  BIyth  proposed  to  use  the  very  same  term  as  an 
appropriate  substitute  for  the  "  Indian  region  "  of  Mr.  Sclater. 
Australia  is  the  great  central  mass  of  the  region ;  it  is  by  far  the 
richest  in  varied  and  highly  remarkable  forms  of  life ;  and  it 
therefore  seems  in  every  way  fitted  to  give  a  name  to  the  region 
of  which  it  is  the  essential  element.  The  limits  of  this  region 
in  the  Pacific  are  somewhat  obscure,  but  as  so  many  of  the 
Pacific  Islands  are  extremely  poor  zoologically,  this  is  not  of 
great  importance. 

Sill-divisions  of  the  Australian  Tfe^'tm.— The  first  sub-region 
is  the  Anstro-Malayan,  including  the  islands  from  Celebes  and 
Lombock  on  the  west  to  the  Solomon  Islands  on  the  east.  The 
Australian  sub-region  comes  next,  consisting  of  Australia  and 
Tasmania.  The  third,  or  Polynesian  sub-region,  wiU  consist 
of  aR  the  tropical  Pacific  Islands,  and  is  characterized  by 
several  peculiar  genera  of  birds  which  are  aU  allied  to  Australian 
types.  The  fourth,  consists  of  New  Zealand  with  Auckland, 
Chatham,  and  Norfolk  Islands,  and  must  be  called  the  New 
Zealand  sub-region. 

The  extreme  peculiarities  of  New  Zealand,  due  no  doubt  to 
its  great  isolation  and  to  its  being  the  remains  of  a  more 
extensive  land,  have  induced  several  naturalists  to  suggest  that 
it  ought  justly  to  form  a  Zoological  region  by  itself.  But  the 
inconveniences  of  such  a  procedure  have  been  already  pointed 
out ;  and  when  we  look  at  its  birds  as  a  whole  (they  being  the 
only  class  sufficiently  well  represented  to  found  any  conclusion 
upon)  we  find  that  the  majority  of  them  belong  to  Australian 
genera,  and  where  the  genera  are  peculiar  they  are  most  nearly 
related  to  Australian  types.     The  preservation  in  these  islands 


by  Google 


78  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALR  [paet  i. 

of  a  single  representative  of  a  unique  order  of  reptiles,  is,  as 
before  remarked,  of  the  same  character  as  the  preservation  of 
the  Proteus  in  the  caverns  of  Carniola  ;  and  can  give  the  locality 
where  it  happens  to  have  survived  no  claim  to  form  a  primary 
Zoological  region,  unless  supported  by  a  tolerably  varied  and 
distinctly  characterized  fauna,  such  as  never  exists  in  a  veiy 
restricted  and  insular  area. 

Neotropical  Region. — Mr.  Selater's  original  name  for  this 
region  is  presei'ved,  because  change  of  nomenclature  is  always 
an  evil;  and  neither  Professor  Huxley's  suggested  alteration 
"  Austro- Columbia,"  nor  Mr.  Selater's  new  term  "  Dendrogtea," 
appear  to  be  improvements.  The  region  is  essentially  a  tropical 
one,  aud  the  extra-tropical  portion  of  it  is  not  important 
enough  to  make  the  name  inappropriate.  That  proposed  by 
Professor  Huxley  is  not  free  from  the  same  kind  of  criticism, 
since  it  Would  imply  that  the  regiou  w^a  exclusively  South 
American,  whereas  a  considerable  tract  of  Worth  America 
belongs  to  it.  This  region  includes  South  Americaj  the 
Antilles  and  tropical  North  America ;  and  it  possesses  more 
peculiar  families  of  vertebrates  and  genera  of  birds  and  mam- 
malia tlian  any  other  region. 

Subdivisions  of  the  Neotropical  Begion. — The  great  central 
mass  of  Soutli  America,  from  the  shores  of  Venezuela  to  Paraguay 
and  Eastern  Peru,  constitutes  the  chief  division,  and* may  be 
termed  the  Brazilian  sub-region,  It  is  on  the  whole  a  forest 
country;  its  most  remaTkable  forms  are  highly  developed 
arboreal  types ;  and  it  exhibits  all  the  characteristics  of  this  rich 
and  varied  continent  in  their  highest  development. 

The  second,  or  Chilian  sub-region,  consists  of  the  open  plains, 
pampas,  and  mountains  of  the  southern  extremity  of  the  con- 
tinent ;  and  we  must  include  in  it  the  west  side  of  the  Andes  as 
far  as  the  limits  of  the  forest  near  Payta,  and  the  whole  of  the 
high  Andean  plateaus  as  far  as  4°  of  south  latitude ;  which 
makes  it  coincide  with  the  range  of  the  CamelidsB  and  Chin- 
cbillidaa. 

The  third,  or  Mexican  sub-region,  consists  of  Central  America 
and  Southern  Mexico,  but  it  has  no  distinguishing  character- 


by  GoOglc 


CHAP.  IV.]  ZOOLOGICAL  KEGIONS.  79 

iaties  except  the  absence  of  some  of  the  more  highly  specialized 
Keotropieal  groups.  It  is,  however,  a  convenient  division  as 
comprising  the  portion  of  the  North  American  continent  which 
belongs  zoologically  to  South  America. 

The  fourth,  or  AntiUean  sub-region,  consists  of  the  "West 
India  islands  (except  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  which  are  detached 
portions  of  the  continent  and  must  be  grouped  in  the  first  sub- 
legion) ;  and  these  reproduce,  in  a  much  less  marked  degree, 
the  phenomena  presented  by  Madagascar.  Terrestrial  mammals 
are  almost  entirely  wanting,  but  the  larger  i.'ilancts  possess  three 
genera  which  are  altogether  peculiar  to  them.  The  birds  are 
of  South  American  forms,  but  comprise  many  pecidiai  genera. 
Terrestrial  molluscs  are  more  abundant  and  varied  than  in  any 
part  of  the  globe  of  equal  extent;  and  if  these  aloue  were 
considered,  the  Antilles  would  constitute  an  important  Zoological 
region. 

Nearctic  Eegion. — This  region  comprises  all  temperate  Nortli 
America  and  Greenland.  The  arctic  lands  and  islands  beyond 
the  limit  of  trees  form  a  transitional  territory  to  the  Palasarctic 
region,  but  even  here  there  are  some  characteristic  species. 
The  southern  lindt  between  this  region  and  the  Neotropical  is  a 
little  uncertain ;  but  it  may  be  drawn  at  about  the  Eio  Grande 
del  Norte  on  the  east  coast,  and  a  little  north  of  Mazatlan  on 
the  west ;  while  on  the  central  plateau  it  descends  much  farther 
south,  and  should  perhaps  include  all  the  open  highlands  of 
Mexico  and  Guatemala,  This  would  coincide  with  the  range  of 
several  characteristic  Nearctic  genera. 

Distinction  of  the  Nearetia  from  the  Palmarctic  Region. — The 
Nearctic  region  possesses  twelve  peculiar  families  of  vertebrates 
or  one-tenth  of  its  whole  number.  It  has  also  twenty-four 
peculiar  genera  of  mammalia  and  fifty-two  of  birds,  in  each 
case  nearly  one-third  of  all  it  possesses.  This  proportion  is  very 
nearly  the  same  ss  in  the  Palasarctio  region,  while  the  number  of 
peculiar  families  of  vertebrata  is  very  much  greater.  It  has  been 
already  seen  that  both  Mr.  Blyth  and  Professor  Huxley  are 
disposed  to  unite  this  region  with  the  Palfearctic,  while  Pro- 
fessor Newton,  in  his  article  on  birds  in  the  new  edition  of  the 


by  Google 


80  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

Encyclopsedia  Britannica,  thinks  that  as  regards  that  class  it 
can  hardly  claim  to  be  more  than  a  sub-region  of  the  Neotropical. 
These  views  are  mutually  destructive,  but  it  will  be  shown  in 
the  proper  place,  that  on  independent  grounds  the  Nearctic 
region  can  very  properly  be  maintained. 

Subdivisions  of  the  Nearctic  Region. — The  sub-regions  here 
depend  on  the  great  physical  features  of  the  country,  and  have 
been  in  some  cases  accurately  defined  by  American  naturalists. 
First  we  have  the  Californiaii  sub-region,  consisting  of  Cali- 
fornia and  Oregon — a  narrow  tract  between  the  Sierra  Nevada 
and  the  Paciflc,  but  characterized  by  a  number  of  peculiar 
species  and  by  several  genera  found  nowhere  else  in  the  region. 

The  second,  or  fiocky  Mountain  sub-region,  consists  of  this 
great  mountain  range  with  its  plateaus,  and  the  central  plains 
and  prairies  to  about  100°  west  longitude,  but  including  New 
Mexico  and  Texas  in  the  South. 

The  third  and  most  important  sub-region,  which  may  be 
termed  the  AUeghanian,  extends  eastward  to  the  Atlantic,  in- 
cluding the  Mississippi  Valley,  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  and 
the  Eastern  United  States.  This  is  an  .old  forest._[listrict,  and 
contains  most  of  thg^diaracteristic  ajiimaLtypes-of^the  region. 

The  fourth,  or  Canadian  sub-region,  comprises  all  the  northern 
part  of  the  continent  from  the  great  lakes  to  the  Arctic  ocean ; 
a  land  of  pine-forests  and  barren  wastes,  characterized  by  Arctic 
types  and  the  absence  of  many  of  the  genera  which  distin- 
guish the  more  southern  portions  of  the  region. 

Observations  on  the  series  of  Sub-regions. — The  twenty-four  sub- 
regions  here  adopted  were  arrived  at  by  a  careful  consideration 
of  the  distribution  of  the  more  important  genera,  and  of  the 
materials,  both  zoological  and  geographical,  available  for  their 
determination ;  and  it  was  not  till  they  were  almost  finally 
decided  on,  that  they  were  found  to  be  equal  in  number  thraugh- 
out  all  the  regions — four  in  each.  As  this  uniformity  is  of  great 
advantage  in  tabular  and .  diagrammatic  presentations  of  the 
distribution  of  the  several  families,  I  decided  not  to  disturb 
it  unless  very  strong  reasons  should  appear  for  adopting  a  greater 
or  leas  number  in  any  particular  case.     Such  however  have  not 


by  Google 


AP.  IV.] 


ZOOLOGICAL  REGIONS. 


arisen ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  these  divisions  will  prove  as  satis- 
factory and  useful  to  naturalists  in  general  as  they  have  been  to 
the  author.  Of  course,  in  a  detailed  study  of  any  region  much 
more  minute  sub-division  may  be  recLuired;  but  even  in  that 
case  it  is  believed  that  the  sub-regions  here  adopted,  will  be 
found,  with  slight  modifications,  permanently  available  loi  ex- 
hibiting general  results. 

I  give  here  a  table  showing  the  proportionate  richness  and 
speciality  of  each  region  as  determined  by  its  families  of  verte- 
brates and  genera  of  mammalia  and  birds  ;  and  also  a  general 
table  of  the  regions  and  sub-regions,  arranged  in  the  order  that 
seems  best  to  show  their  mutual  relations. 


Comparative  Eiobnbss  op  th 

E  Six 

RsftlONS, 

VEitTEBBAM, 

Mahbalia 

B,nn.. 

REOiosa. 

Peeuliar 

°— ■ 

Por 

G.ne^ 

Pceuliiu- 

Per 

feimiles. 

centflge, 

EBnem, 

centaee. 

PaJsarotic, 

136 

3 

100 

35 

35 

174 

57 

33 

Ethiopian... 

174 

33 

140 

yo 

64 

394 

179 

60 

13 

118 

55 

46 

340 

165 

48 

141 

30 

73 

44 

61 

298 

189 

64 

Neotropical.. 

IfiS 

44 

130 

103 

79 

683 

576 

86 

Nearatic 

133 

12 

74 

34 

32 

169 

53 

31 

Regions. 

anD-reeloiis.                                           Kamarks. 

I.  Paliearctic... 
n.  Ethiopian... 

1.  North  Europe. 

2.  Mediterraaean  (or  S.  En.) 
a  Siberia. 

4.  Manuhiiria  (or  Japan) 

1.  East  Africa. 

2.  West  Africa. 

3.  South  Africa. 

4.  iWaiiagiiscar. 

Transition  to  EthtODian, 
Trausition  to  Neaidic. 
Transition  to  Oriental. 

Transition  to  PaJwarctic. 

b,  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


Table  or  Eboions  a 


IV.  Australian. 


.  1.  Hiiidostaa(orCeutrfllIiid,) 

2.  Ceylon. 

3.  Indo-Ohina  (or  Himalayas) 
'.  Indo-Malaya, 

.  Auatro-SIalaya. 

.  Australia. 

3.  Polynesia. 

4.  New  Zealand. 

.  Chili  (or  S.  Temp.  Am,) 

5.  Brazil 

3,  Mexico  (or  Trop.  N.  Am.) 

4.  Antillea. 

.   1.  California, 

2.  Eocky  Mountains. 

3.  Alleghanies  (or  EastU.  S.) 
':.  Canada, 


Transition  t«  Ethiopian. 

Transition  to  Palaarctic 
Trajisition  to  Australiao 

Transition  to  Oriental. 

Transition  to  Neotropical. 
Transition  to  Australian. 
Transition  to  Nearctie. 

Transition  to  Neotropical. 
Transition  to  Palfcarctic 


b,  Google 


CHAPTER  V. 

CLASSIFICATION     AS    AFFECTING    THE    STUDY    OF    GEOGRAPHICAL 
DISTRIBUTION. 

A  LITTLE  consideration  will  convince  us,  that  no  inquiry  into 
the  causes  and  laws  ■which  determine  the  geographical  distribu- 
tion of  animals  or  plants  can  lead  to  satisfactory  results,  unless 
we  have  a  tolerably  accurate  knowledge  of  the  affimties  of  the 
several  species,  genera,  and  families  to  each  other;  in  other 
words,  we  require  a  natural  classification  to  work  upon.  Lot  us, 
for  example,  take  three  animals — a,  6,  and  c — which  have  a 
general  external  resemblance  to  each  other,  and  are  usually 
considered  to  he  really  allied ;  and  let  ua  suppose  that  a  and  h 
inhabit  the  same  or  adjacent  districts,  while  c  is  found  far  away 
on  the  other  side  of  the  globe,  with  no  animals  at  all  resembling 
it  in  any  of  the  intervening  countries.  We  should  here  have  a 
difficult  problem  to  solve ;  for  we  should  have  to  show  that  the 
general  laws  by  which  we  account  for  the  main  features  of 
distribution,  will  explain  this  exceptional  case.  But  now,  sup- 
pose some  comparative  anatomist  takes  these  animals  in  hand, 
and  finds  that  the  resemblance  of  c  to  ts  and  B  is  only  superficial, 
while  their  internal  structure  exhibits  marked  and  important 
differences ;  and  that  c  really  belongs  to  another  group  ol 
animals,  d,  which  inhabits  the  very  region  in  which  c  was 
found — and  we  should  no  longer  have  anything  to  explain. 
This  is  no  imaginary  case.  Up  to  a  very  few  years  ago  a 
carious  Mexican  animal,  Bassaris  astuta,  was  almost  always 
classed  in  the  civet  family  (Viverridte),  a  group  entirely  con- 


by  GoOglc 


84  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [part  i. 

fined  to  Africa  and  Asia ;  but  it  lias  now  been  conclusively 
shown  by  Pi-ofessor  Flower  that  its  real  affinities  are  with  the 
racoons  (Procyonidie),  a  group  confined  to  North  and  South 
America.  In  another  case,  however,  an  equally  careftd  exami- 
nation shows,  that  an  animal  peculiar  to  the  Himalayas  {^lurus 
fulgens)  has  its  nearest  ally  in  the  Cereoleptes  of  South  America, 
Here,  therefore,  the  geographical  difficulty  really  exists,  and  any 
satisfactory  theory  of  the  causes  that  have  led  to  the  existing 
diatribution  of  living  things,  must  he  able  to  account,  more  or 
less  definitely,  for  this  and  other  anomalies.  From  these  cases 
it  will  he  evident,  that  if  any  class  or  order  of  animals  is  very 
imperfectly  known  and  its  classification  altogether  artificial,  it  is 
useless  to  attempt  to  account  for  the  anomalies  its  distribution 
may  present ;  since  those  anomalies  may  be,  to  a  great  extent, 
due  to  false  notions  as  to  the  affinities  of  its  component  s; 

According  to  the  laws  and  causes  of  distribution  d 
the  preceding  chapters,  we  should  find  hmited  and  defined 
distribution  to  he  the  rule,  universal  or  indefinite  distribution  to 
be  the  exception,  in  every  natural  group  corresponding  to  what 
are  usually  regarded  as  families  and  genera ;  and  so  much  is 
this  the  case  in  nature,  that  when  we  find  a  group  of  this 
nominal  rank  scattered  as  it  were  at  random  over  the  earth,  we 
have  a  strong  presumption  that  it  is  not  natural ;  but  is,  to  a 
considerable  extent,  a  haphazard  collection  of  species.  Of  course 
this  reasoning  will  only  apply,  in  cases  where  there  are  no 
unusual  means  of  dispersal,  nor  any  exceptional  causes  which 
might  determine  a  scattered  distribution. 

From  the  considerations  now  adduced  it  becomes  evident,  that 
it  is  of  the  first  importance  for  the  success  of  our  incLuiry  to 
secure  a  natural  classification  of  animals,  especially  as  regards 
the  families  and  genera.  The  higher  groups,  such  as  classes  and 
oiders,  are  of  less  importance  for  our  purpose ;  because  they  are 
almost  always  widely  and  often  universally  distributed,  except 
those  which  are  so  small  as  to  be  evidently  the  nearly  extinct 
representatives  of  a  once  more  extensive  series  of  forms.  We 
now  proceed  to  explain  the  classification  to  be  adopted,  as  low 
down  as  the  series  of  families.     To  these,  equivalent  English 


by  Google 


v.] 


CLASSIFICATION. 


85 


names  are  given  wherever  they  exist,  in  order  that  readers  pos- 
sessing no  technical  knowledge,  may  form  some  conception  of 
the  meaning  of  the  term  "  family  "  in  zoology. 

The  primary  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom  according  to 
two  eminent  modern  authorities  are  as  follows  : 


2.  Infusoria  j 

3.  C(Elenterata 

4.  Annuloida 


6.  Molluscoida 

7.  Mollasca 

8.  Vert«brata 


1.  Protozoa. 

2.  Occlentjsratflt 

3.  Echinodermata. 
( 4.  Vermes. 

\  5.  Artliropoda. 

6.  Mollu3coida« 

7.  Mollusca. 

8.  Vertebrate. 


For  reasons  already  stated  it  is  only  with  the  fifth,  .seventh, 
and  eighth  of  these  groups  that  the  present  work  proposes  to 
deal ;  and  even  with  the  fifth  and  seventh  only  partially  and  in 
the  most  general  way. 

The  classes  of  the  vertebrata,  according  to  both  the  authors 
above  quoted,  are:  1.  Mammalia.  2.  Aves.  3.  Eeptilia.  4, 
Amphibia.     5.  Pisces,  in  which  order  they  will  be  taken  here. 

The  sub-classes  and  orders  of  mammaUa  are  as  follows : 


M.  Am  MA  ill  A. 
HciLET  (18fi9),  Plcwes  (1S70). 

Cnra  (isee). 

1.  Primates      ... 

(    1.  Primates. 
■■      (5.  Prosimii. 

2.  Chiroptera    ... 

2.  Ohiropteta, 

3.  Insectivoia  ... 

4.  Oamivora     ... 

J    6.  Camivora. 
■■      (7.  Pinnipedia. 

Monodelphia... 

5.  Cetacea) 

6.  Sirenia  J     ■" 

12.  Natantia. 

7.  Ungulata      ... 

1  10.  Artiodactyla. 
■■      )  11.  Perissodactyla 

8.  ProboBcidea... 

9.  Proboscidea. 

9.  Hyracoidea  ... 

10.  Rodentia      ... 

4.  Rodentia. 

13.  Bruta. 

Didelphia 12.  Mavsnpialii.... 

14.  Maraupialia, 

Ornithodelphia 

13.  Motiotremata 

15.  Monotremata. 

b,  Google 


8G  DISTEIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS.  [faht  i. 

The  above  series  of  ordeis  ia  arranged  according  to  Professor 
Flower's  Osteology  of  Mammalia,  and  they  will  follow  in  this 
succession  throughout  my  work.  Professor  Huxley  arranges 
the  same  orders  in  a  different  series. 

In  determining  the  manner  in  which  the  several  orders  shall 
he  suhdivided  into  families,  I  have  been  guided  in  my  choice  of 
classifications  mainly  by  the  degree  of  attention  the  author  ap- 
pears to  have  paid  to  the  group,  and  his  known  ability  as  a 
systematic  zoologist ;  and  in  a  less  degree  by  considerations  of 
convenience  as  regards  the  special  purposes  of  gijographical  dis- 
tributioru  In  many  cases  it  ia  a  matter  of  great  doubt  whether 
a  certain  group  shovdd  form  several  distinct  families  or  be  united 
into  one  or  two ;  but  one  method  may  bring  out  the  peculiarities 
of  distribution  much  better  than  the  other,  and  this  is,  in  our 
case,  a  sufficient  reason  for  adopting  it. 

For  the  Primates  I  follow,  with  some  modifications,  the 
classification  of  Mr.  St  George  Mivart  given  in  his  article 
"  Apes  "  in  the  new  edition  of  the  Eneyclopcedia  Britarmiea,  and 
in  hia  paper  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society  of  London, 
1865,  p.  547.     It  is  as  follows : 

Older— PRIMATES,  dhided  into  two  Sub-orders  ; 
I.  Anthropoid  eik 
II.  Lemuroidea, 

Sub-order — Ant  h  ropoidb  a. 

F»ni. 

Hominida      Man. 

il.  Simiidte Authropoid  Apes. 

2.  Semnopitheeidie     ...  Old-world  Monkeys. 

3.  Cynopithecidie       ...  Baboons  and  Macaques. 

4.  Cebidte American  Monkeys. 

5.  HapaHdte        Mim-ioaetB.  . 

Sub-order—  Lemuroidea. 

Pflin. 

6.  Leniuridie    Lemurs. 

7.  Tarsiidie       Tarsiers. 

8.  CliiroiiiyidEe         Aye-ayes, 

Omitting  man  (for  reasons  stated  in  the  preface)  the  three 
first  families  are  considered  by  Professor  Mivart  to  be  sub- 
famihes  of  Simiidje ;  hut  as  the  geographical  distribution  of 
the  Old  World   apes   ia   especially  interesting,  it   is   thought 


by  Google 


CHAP,  v.]  CLASSIFICATIOH.  87 

better  to  treat  them  as  families,  a  rank  which  is  claimed  for  the 
anthropoid  apes  by  many  naturalists. 

As  no  good  systematic  work  on  the  genera  and  species  of  bats 
has  been  yet  published,  I  adopt  the  five  families  as  generally 
used  in  this  country,  ■with  the  genera  as  given  in  the  papers  of 
Dr.  J.  E.  Gray  and  Mr.  Tomes.  A  monograph  by  Dr.  Peters 
has  long  been  promised,  and  his  outline  arrangement  was 
puhlished  in  1865,  but  this  will  perhaps  be.  materially  altered 
when  the  work  appears. 

Order— CHIBOPTBEA. 

FHtn, 

Pru^vora  9.  PteropWse  ...  Frait-eatiiig  Bats. 

£  Istiophoia         (  10.  PhjllostomidEB  ...  Leaf-nosed  Bats, 

lusectivora      <  ( 11.  Bhinolophidce  ...  Hotse-shoe  Bats. 

(  Gymnorhini     J  12.  Vespertilionidse  ...  True  Bats. 

(  13.  Noctilionidse  ...  Dog-headed  Bats. 

'fhe  genera  of  Chiroptera  are  in  a  state  of  great  confusion,  the 
names  used  by  different  authors  being  often  not  at  all  compar- 
able, so  that  the  few  details  given  of  the  distribution  of  the 
bats  are  not  trustworthy.  We  have  therefore  made  little  use 
of  this  order  in  the  theoretical  part  of  the  work. 

The  osteology  of  the  Inaectivora  has  been  very  carefully 
worked  out  by  Professor  Mivart  in  the  Joimral  of  Anatomy 
and  Physiology  (Vol.  ii.,  p.  380),  and  I  follow  his  classification 
as  given  there,  and  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society 
(1871). 

Order— INSECTIVOEA. 


14.  Galeopitheeidfe 

15.  Maoroacelidid^ 

16.  Tupaiidie      ... 

17.  ErinaceidJE    ... 

18.  Centetidte 

19.  Potamoaalidie 
30.  Chrysoiailoridie 

21.  Talpidte 

22.  Sorioidse 


riying  Lemurs. 
Elephant  Shrews. 
Squirrel  Shrews. 
Hedgehogs. 
Tenrecs. 
Otter  Shrew. 
Golden  Moleg. 

Mol<!B. 

Khrews. 


The  next  order,  Camivora,  has  been  studied  in  detail  by 
Professor  Flower ;  and  I  adopt  the  classification  given  by  him  in 
the  Proceedings  of  the,  Zoological  Society,  1869,  p.  4. 


by  Google 


DlbTfilBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


Pinnipedia 


Ordor-CAENIVOBA. 

;23.  Felidse     

.     Oats,  Lion,  &c. 

\  24.  Cryptoproctidse  .. 

.     Cryptoproct*. 

^lufoidea    '  35.  Viverrid* 
29.  Protelidffi 
(,27.  Hytenidw 

.    CiTetB. 

.    Aard-wolf. 

.     HjEBaas. 

Cynoidea.         28.  Cauidse 

.    Dogs,  Foxes,  &c. 

f39.  Musteltdte 

.     Weasels. 

A    .  -J        J  30-  Procyonidte 
Arctoide«     ^31.^^* 

.     EacooDB. 
.     PandM. 

(33.  Uraid* 

.    Beats. 

f33.  OtatiidM 

.     Eared  Seals. 

J  34.  Trichechidas 

-     Walrus. 

(35.  Phocid* 

.     Seals. 

The  Cetacea  is  one  of  those  orders  the  classification  of  which 
is  veiy  unsettled.  The  animals  comprising  it  are  so  huge,  and 
there  is  so  much  difficulty  in  preserving  them,  that  only  a  very 
few  species  are  known  with  anything  like  completeness.  A  con- 
siderable number  of  genera  and  species  have  been  described  or 
indicated;  but  as  many  of  these  are  founded  on  imperfect  speci- 
mens of  perhaps  a  single  individual,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  those  few  naturalists  who  occupy  themselves  with  the  study 
of  these  large  animals,  cannot  agree  as  to  the  proper  mode  of  group- 
ing theni  into  natural  famihes.  They  are,  however,  of  but  little 
importance  to  us,  as  almost  all  the  species  inhabit  the  ocean,  and 
of  only  a  few  of  them  can  it  foe  said  that  anything  is  accurately 
known  of  their  distribution.  I  therefore  consider  it  hest  to  follow 
Professor  Cams,  who  makes  a  smaller  numfoer  of  families ;  but 
I  give  also  the  arrangement  of  Dr.  Gray  in  his  British  Museum 
catal(^ue  of  whales  and  seals,  as  modified  sufoseijuently  in 
the  Proceedings  of  Zoological  Society,  1870,  p.  772,  The  Zeu- 
glodontidffi,  a  family  of  extinct  tertiary  whales,  are  classed  by 
Professors  Owen  and  Carus  between  Cetacea  and  Sirenia,  while 
Professor  Huxley  considers  them  to  have  been  1 
allied  to  the  seals. 


by  Google 


CLASSIFICATION. 


Ordei^-CETAOEA. 


Sub-order  I,- 
Myst^ceti. 


Bjilfenidfo       ...     . 
Balienoptoridffi 
'  Uatodontidit!  ... 

Hyperoodontidffi    . 

i  Monodontida; 


Extinct  family      Zeuglodontidie. 


ILlGRi 


36.  Batenidie. 

37.  Baiseaopteridfe, 

38.  Catoduiitidffi. 
fHyperoodontiite. 

39.  Epiodoatidffi. 
(Xiphiadte. 

40.  (Part  of  Delphinidte.) 

IPlatanistidie. 
Iniadie. 
Delpliinidse. 
,  n 


41, 


Globiocephalidte. 
Oreadse. 
Beliigidie. 
Pontuporiadse. 


Order— SIEENIA. 

Tlie  order  Sirenia,  comprising  the  sea-cow 
family: 

Family  43.  Manatidie. 


of  ,a  single 


The  extensive  order  TJngnlata  comprises  the  three  orders 
Pachydermata,  Solidungula,  and  Euminsmtia  of  the  older  natu- 
ralists. The  following  classification  is  that  now  generally 
adopted,  the  only  difference  of  opinion  being  as  to  whether 
some  of  the  groups  should  be  classed  as  families  or  sub-families, 
a  matter  of  little  importance  for  our  purpose : 


Order— UNGULATA. 


Perisaodactyla  or 
Odd-toed  Ungulates 


)  43.  Equidse     

{    44.  Ta])iridffi 

'  46.  Eiinocerotidie... 

f«»"  {S  "££'»"-''".. 

I  Tylopoda  48,  Oamelidfe 
(  Ti^ulina  49.  Tragulidas 

rSO.  Cervidie    

Pecora   J  SI.  Camelopardida) 

tss.  Bovidse    


Horses. 

Tapirs. 


Hippopotiuaus. 

Camels. 
OhevTotains. 

Giraffes. 
j  Cattle,    Sheep, 
(     Antelopes,  &c. 


b,  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


The  two  ne^t  orders  consist  of  but  a  single  I'lniily  ea"li  viz  ■ 


54    Hjra, 


We  now  come  to  the  Eodentia  a  very  extensive  and  difficult 
order  in  which  there  is  stdl  much  difieience  of  opinion  a^  to 
the  detaiK  of  cH'^siiicition  althou^jh  the  mam  outhnes  aie  pietty 
well  settled.  The  foundations  ot  a  tme  classihcatiou  of  this 
order  were  laid  hy  Mr.  G.  K.  Waterhouse  moie  than  thirty  years 
ago,  and  succeeding  authors  have  done  little  more  than  follow 
his  arrangement  with  unimportant  modifications.  Professor 
Lilljeborg,  of  Upsala,  has  however  made  a  special  study  of  this 
group  of  animals,  and  has  given  an  original  and  detailed  classifi- 
cation of  all  the  genera.  {Systematisk  Ofoersigt  af  de  Gnct^ande 
Ddggdjurm,  Glires.  Upsala,  1866.)  I  follow  this  arrangement 
with  a  few  slight  modifications  suggested  by  other  natuialista, 
and  which  make  it  better  adapted  for  the  purposes  of  this  work. 

Order— EODENTIA. 


55.  Muridte          ...     . 

.     Eats. 

.    Mole-rats. 

57.  Dipodidse       ...     . 

.     Jerboas. 

Murma 
1,  Waterhouse) 

58.  Myoxidie         ...     . 

.     Dormice. 

59.  Saccomyidai    ...     . 

60.  Oastorid*        ...     . 

.     Pouched  Eats. 
.     Beavers. 

Simplicidentati 

61.  Sciuridie          ...     . 

62.  Haploodontidw      . 

.     Squirrels. 
.    SeweUels. 

63.  Chinchillid*  ...     . 

.     CHnchillas, 

64  Octodontidffi  ...     . 

.     Octodons. 

Hystnciiia 

65.  Echimyidje     ...     . 

.     Spiny  Eats. 

CWateihouse) 

66.  Cercol»bid«   ...     . 

67.  Hystricidie      ...     . 

.     Porcupines. 

66.  Uiviidffi          ...     . 

.    CaTite. 

'n«.^i;nn'i.^»4ni<;  3      Ijeponna 

69.  Lagomyids      ...     . 

70.  Leporidie         ...     . 

.     Pibas. 

^"P^«''^*''"«^'|  (Waterhouse) 

,     Ha,re9. 

The  Edentata  have  been  classified  by  Mr.  Turner,  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society  (1851,  p.  205),  by  Dr. 
Gray  in  the  British  Museum  Catalogue,  and  by  Professor  Carus 
in  his  ffandbuch.    The  former  takes  a  middle  course  between 


by  Google 


CHAP.  V,]  CLASSIFICATION.  91 

the  mitnerous  families  of  Br.  Gray,  seven  in  number,  and  the 
two  families  to  which  Professor  Carus  restricts  the  existing 
species.     I  therefore  follow  Mr.  Turner. 

Order— EDENTATA. 


71.  Bradypodidaj     ...  Sloths. 

r72.  Manididie Scaly  Aat-eaters. 

)73.  DaBJpodidiE       ...  Ariimdilloa. 

174.  Oryoteropodidse...  Ant-bears. 

[  75.  Myrmecophagidse  Ant-eaters. 


The  Marsupials  have  been  well  classified  and  described  by 
Mr.  WaterhoHse  in  the  first  volume  of  his  Natiiral  History  oj 
Mam-nialici,  and  his  arrangement  is  here  followed.  The  sub- 
prders  adopted  by  Professor  Cams  are  aJso  given. 

Order— MAESUPIALIA. 


Rapacia  (Wagner) 

[  7ti.  Didelphide...     . 

177.  Daisyuridie  ...     . 

"      178.  Mjimecobiidse    . 

.    Opossums. 

.    Native  Cats. 

.     Native  Ant-eater. 

Poepliaga  (Owen) 

80.  Macropodidie 

,    Kangaroos. 

Carpophaga  (Owen) 

81.  Phalaugistida*     . 

.     Phalangers. 

82.  Phaaoolomyid*    . 

.     Wombats. 

Order— MONOTREMATA. 

The  last  order,  the  Monotreraata,  consist  of  two  families,  which 
Professor  Carus  combines  into  one,  but  which  it  seems  more 
natural  to  keep  separate. 


by  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALa 


BIRDS. 


Birds  are  perhaps  the  most  difficult  to  classify  of  aU  the 
divisions  of  the  vertebrata.  The  species  and  genera  are 
exceedingly  numerous,  and  there  is  such  a  great  uniformity 
in  general  structure  and  even  in  the  details  of  external  form, 
that  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  find  characters  by  which  orders 
and  families  can  be  characterised.  For  a  long  time  the  system 
of  Vigors  and  Swainson  was  followed ;  but  this  wholly  ^ored 
anatomical  characters  and  in  many  cases  plainly  violated  well- 
marked  afBnities.  Characters  derived  from  the  form  of  the 
sternum,  the  scutellation  of  the  tarsi,  and  the  arrangement  of 
the  feathers,  have  all  assisted  in  determining  natural  groups. 
More  recently  Professor  Huxley  has  applied  the  variations  of  the 
bony  palate  to  the  general  arrangement  of  birds ;  and  still  more 
recently  Professor  Garrod  has  studied  certain  leg-muscles  for 
the  same  purpose.  The  condition  of  the  yoimg  as  regards 
plumage,  and  even  the  form,  texture,  and  coloration  of  the  e^, 
have  also  been  applied  to  solve  doubtful  cases  of  affinity ;  yet 
the  problem  is  not  settled,  and  it  will  probably  remain  for 
another  generation  of  ornithologists  to  determine  with  any 
approach  to  accuracy  what  are  the  most  natural  divisions  of  the 
class  into  orders  and  families.  In  a  worlt  like  the  present  it  is 
evidently  not  advisable  to  adopt  all  the  recent  classifications; 
since  experience  has  shown  that  no  arrangement  in  which  one 
set  of  characters  is  mainly  relied  on,  long  holds  its  ground. 
Such  modifications  of  the  old  system  as  seem  to  be  well 
established  will  be  adopted ;  but  the  older  groups  will  be  ad- 
hered to  in  cases  where  the  most  recent  classifications  are  open 
to  doubt,  or  seem  inconvenient  as  separating  families,  "which, 
owing  to  tlieir  similarity  in  general  structure,  form  and  habits 
are  best  kept  together  for  the  purposes  of  geogi-aphical  dis- 
tribution. 

The  old  plan  of  putting  the  birds  of  prey  at  the  head  of  the 
class,  is  now  almost  wholly  given  up ;  both  because  they  are  not 


by  Google 


CHAP.  ¥,]  CLASSIFICATION.  93 

the  most  highly  organised,  but  only  one  of  the  most  speciaUsed 
forms  of  .hirda,  and  because  their  af&nities  are  not  with  the 
Passeres,  but  rather  with  the  cormorants  and  some  other  of  tihe 
aquatic  groups.  The  Passeres  therefore  are  placed,  first ;  and  the 
series  of  families  is  begun  by  the  thrushes,  which  are  certainly 
the  most  typical  and  generally  well-o^anised  form  of  birds. 
Instead  of  the  Scansores  and  Fissiroatres  of  the  older  authors,  the 
order  Piearife,  which. includes  them  both,  is  adopted,  but  with 
some  reluctajice ;  as  the  former  are,  generally  speaking,  well  marked 
and  strongly  contrasted  groups,  although  certain  famihes  have 
been  shown  to  be  intermediate.  In  the  Picarite  are  included  the 
goat-suckers,  swifts,  and  humming-birds,  sometimes  ( 
as  a  distinct  order,  Macrochires.  The  parrots  and  the  j 
form  each  a  separate  order.  The  old  groups  of  GraU^e  and 
ABseres  are  preserved,  as  more  convenient  than  breakup  them 
up  into  widely  separated  parts ;  for  though  the  latter  plan  may 
in  some  cases  more  strictly  represent  their  affinities,  its  details 
are  not  yet  established,  nor  is  it  much  used  by  ornithologists. 
In  accordance  with  these  views  the  following  is  the  series  of 
orders  and  families  of  birds  adopted  in  this  work : 

Class— AVE8. 

,    p  (  Including  the  great  mass  of  the  smaller  birds — Crows, 

1.  rasseres  ...-j    jjnches,  Fljcatohers, Creepers,  Honejsuckers,  &c., &c. 
„   -r,'      ■  i  Including  Woodpeckers,  Cuckoos,  Toucans,  Kingflahers, 

2.  i-icarise  ...  J      g.^^^^^  ^_  ^^ 

3.  Psittaci  ...  Parrots  only. 

4.  Columbse  ...  Pigeons  and  the  Dodo. 

5.  Gallinffi  ...  Grouse,  Pheasants,  Curassows,  Moiind-huilders,  &c. 

6.  Opisthoeomi  The  Hoiizin  only. 

7.  Aooipitres  ...  Eagles,  Owls,  and  Vultures. 

8.  GralliE  ...  Herons,  Plowrs,  Kails,  &c. 

9.  Anseres  ...  Oulls,  Ducks,  Divers,  &c 

10.  Struthiones ...    Ostrich,  Cassowary,  Apteryx,  &o. 

The  Passeres  consist  of  fifty  families,  which  may  be  arranged 
and  grouped  in  series  as  foUows.  It  must  however  be  remem- 
bered that  the  first  family  in  each  series  is  not  always  that 
which  is  most  allied  to  the  last  famUy  of  the  preceding  series. 
AU.  extensive  natural  groups  consist  of  divergent  or  branching 
alliances,  which  renders  it  impossible  to  arrange  the  whole  in 
one  continuous  series. 


by  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


A.— Typical  o 

R  TmiDoiD  Pabseres. 

1.  Turdidffi            

Thrashes. 

3.  Sylviidio 

Warblers. 

3-  Timaliidffi 

Babblers. 

4.  PanuridK 

Eeedlings. 

5.  CmolidaD 

Dippepg. 

Wreus. 

8.  Certhiidffi 

Creepers. 

9.  Sittidas 

Nutlmtches. 

10.  Parid» 

Tits. 

il.  Liotriohidffi       ... 

Hill-tits. 

12.  Phyllomithidffi... 

Green  Bulbuls. 

13.  Pycnonotidte    ... 

Bulbuls. 

14.  Oriolidre 

Orioles, 

]5.  Campephagid^.,. 

Caterpillar-shrikes. 

16.  Dioturidie          ...      ,   ., 

Flycatchers. 

Thick-heads. 

19.  Laniidw            

Shrikes. 

20.  CorvidiB           

Crows. 

21.  Paradiseid^     

Paradise-birds. 

Honey-suckers. 

23.  Nectarioeide 

Sun -birds. 

B.— Tana 

enoiD  Passeres, 

24.  DicseidK 

Flnwer-peckera. 

25.  Drepanididffi     ... 

26.  OEerebidie 

Sugar-birds. 

Wood-warblers. 

28.  Vireonidie 

Greenlets. 

29.  Ampelidie 

Waxwin^. 

30.  Hirundinide    ... 

Swallows. 

31.  loteiid* 

Hangnests. 

32.  Tiuiagridfe 

Tana^ers. 

33.  FringiUidie       ... 

Finches, 

C— Stuknoid  Passbrbs. 

34.  Ploceidfe 

Weaver-birda. 

35.  StuinidK 

Starlings. 

36.  Artamidie 

.».         Swallow-shrikes. 

37.  Alaudidw 

Larks. 

38.  Motacillidffl 

Wagtails. 

D.— FoEMicAEOiD'  Passbrbs. 

39.  TyrannidfEi 

Tyrants. 

40.  Pipridse 

Manakins. 

41.  OotingidEe 

Chatterers. 

43.  Phjtotomiite    ... 

Plant-cutters. 

43.  Euiytomidffi      ... 

Broad-bills. 

44  Dendrocolaptidie 

4&.  FormicaiiidEe    ... 

Ant-thrushes. 

b,  Google 


CEAP.    V,] 

CLASSIFICATION.                                        95 

D.— 

FoHMicARom  Passeres — c/mtinued. 

46 

47 
48 

Pittid® 
Paiotida; 

Pittas. 

E, 

—Anomalous  Passeres. 

49 
60 

Menuridffi 
AtrichidK 

Ljre-bMs. 

Scrub-birds. 

The  preceding  arraugoment  is  a  modification  of  that  proposed 
Ijy  myself  in  the  Ibis  (1874,  p.  406).  The  prineipal  altera- 
tions are  adding  the  families  PamiridEe  and  Sittid^  in  series 
A,  commencing  aeries  B  with  Dic^eidEe ;  bringing  Vireonida; 
next  to  the  allied  American  family  Mniotiltidfe ;  and  placing 
MotacillidEe  in  series  G  nest  to  AlfLudidse.  At  the  suggestion  of 
Professor  Newton  I  place  Menuridas  and  Atrichida  apart  from 
the  other  Passeres,  as  they  both  possess  striking  peculiarities  of 
anatomical  structure. 

The  heterogeneous  families  constituting  the  order  Picarife  may 
be  conveniently  arranged  as  follows : 


61.  Picidse 

53.  Yungidffi     ... 
Q3.  Tndicatoiidie 

54.  M«galiemidie 

55.  Ehamphastidie 

56.  Musophsgidie 

57.  ColiidEB 

58.  Onculidfe      ... 

59.  LeptoaomidM 

60.  Biicconid»  ... 

61.  Galbulidfe   ... 

62.  CoKwaidse    ... 

63.  Meropidffi    ... 

64.  Todidie 

65.  Moraotidte  ... 

66.  TrogonidsB  ... 

67.  Alcedinidse  ... 

68.  BiioerotidEB  ... 

69.  Upupidje 

70.  Irrisoridte    ... 

71.  PodatgidiB   ... 

72.  Steat-oniithidte 

73.  Oaprimulgidie 

74.  Oypselidaa    ... 
,75.  TroctUidfE  ... 


Woodpeckers. 

Wrynecks. 

Honey-guides. 

Barbels. 

Toacans. 

Plaiitain-eaterB. 

Colies 

Cuckoos. 

The  Leptosoma. 

Puff-birdB. 

Jacamats. 

Rollers. 

Bee-eaters. 

Todies. 

Motmots. 

Trogons. 

Kiugiishers. 

Hombills. 

Hoopoes. 

Promerops. 

I'r<^-mouths. 

Tte  Ouiicharo. 

Goatsnokers. 

Swifts. 

Humming-birds, 


b,  Google 


96 


DISTEIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


[PA 


The  Psittaci  or  parrot  tribe  are  still  m  a  veiy  unsettled  state 
of  clasaitication ;  that  recently  proposeil  by  Piofe'5'?or  Garrod 
differing  ■widely  from  the  arrangement  adopted  m  Di  Finach's 
monograph  of  the  order.  Taking  advantage  ot  the  leaearches 
of  these  and  other  authors,  the  foUoMin?  fimdies  aie  adopted  as 
the  most  convenient  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge : 


The  Oockitoo'J 

The  Broad  txiled  Paroquet')  ot  Australia. 

The  Orientil  Pinota  ind  Paroqueta. 

The  Brush-to ngued  ParoquotB  and  Lories. 

The  Macaws  and  their  allies. 

Tho  African  and  South  American  Parrots. 

The  Nestors  of  Hew  Zealand. 

The  Owl-parrots  of  New  Zealand. 


76.  Cacatuidfe   ... 

77.  Platycercida! 

78.  Palseomitliidie 

79.  Trichoglossidte 

80.  Conuridie    ... 

81.  Psittacidfe  ... 

82.  Nestoridfe   ... 

83.  Stringopidfe 


The  Columbse,  or  pigeons,  are  also  in  a  very  uns 
state  as  regards  a  natural  elassifloation.  The  families,  sub- 
families, and  genera  proposed  by  various  authors  are  very 
numerous,  and  often  q^uite  irreconcilable.  I  therefore  adopt 
only  two  families ;  and  generally  follow  Mr.  G.  E.  Gray's  hand- 
list for  the  genera,  except  where  trustworthy  authorities  exist 
for  a  different  arrangement.     The  families  are : 


84.  Colnlnbidffl 

Pigeons 

and  Doves. 

85.  Dididffl        ... 

...    The  extinct  Dodo  and  allies. 

The   GallinEe,   or 

game-birds, 

may   be    divided    into   se- 

families: 

Fflm. 

Unb-tsto. 

86.  PteroclidEe 

...    Sand-grouse, 

87.  Tetraonidfs 

...     Partridges  and  Grouse. 

Pavoninse    ... 

...     Peafowl. 

Lophophorinse 

...     Tragopans,  &c 

Phaaianinffi  ... 

...     Pheasants. 

88.  Phasianidte  ,,. 

Euplocaminsi 

...    Fire-backed  Pheasunts, 

Gallinie       ,,. 

...     Jungle-i'owl. 

Meleagrinw... 

.-,     Turkeys. 

Numidinie  ... 

...     Guinea-fowL 

89.  Tumicide 

...    Hemipodes. 

90.  Megapodiidte 

...     Mound-makers. 

("Craeinse 

...    Curassows, 

91.  Cracid*       ... 

i  Penelopina? ... 

...     Guans. 

(  Oreophaainffi 

92.  Tinamidie 

, . .    Tiaanious. 

b,  Google 


CLASSIFICATION. 


The  Opisthocomi  consist  of  one  family  containing  a  single 
species,  the  "  Hoazin  "  of  Guiana. 

Fainily  93.  OpisthocoraidK.  ■ 

The  Aeeipitres,  or  birds  of  prey,  wMch  were  long  considered 
to  be  the  highest  and  most  perfect  order  of  birds,  are  now 
properly  placed  lower  down  in  the  series,  their  affinities  being 
more  with  the  aquatic  than  with  the  perching  birds.  The 
following  is  the  arrangement  adopted  by  Mr.  Sharpe  in  his 
recently  published  British  Museum  catalogue  of  diurnal  birds 
of  prey : — 


'"9i.  Vultundm 
Falcones  .  95.  SerpentariidEe   ... 


Pandion6a...97.  Pandionids 
Striges     ...98.  Strigids 


iTuIturinie   .. 
Safoorhaniphiiii 
[  Polj^bom" 
Accipitiii 


Vultures. 

Turkey-liuzzards. 

Caracaraa. 

Hawks. 

Buzzards. 

Eagles. 

Falcons. 

Fishirtg-eagles. 

Owls. 


The  GraUffi  or  Grallatores  are  in  a  very  unsettled  state.  The 
following  series  of  families  is  in  aecordanee  with  the  views  of 
some  of  the  best  modern  ornithologists : 


99.  Rallid* 
IW.  Scolopacide 

101.  Ohionidid* 

102.  Thinooond-e 

103.  Parnd* 

104.  Glareohdffi 

105.  Oharadruda 
108.  Otidid-« 

107.  Gruidffi 

108.  Cariamida: 

109.  Aramidte 

.    110.  Paophiidffi 

111.  Eurypygidie 

112.  Bhinoch<Btida> 

113.  Ardeidie 

114.  Plataleidte 

115.  Cicomidte 

116.  Paiamedeid'B 

117.  Phiemoopteijxie 


yii  111  snipes 
Jicauas 


Heroin 

SpooubJls  md  Ibis. 
Stoiki 


by  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


The  Anseres  or  Natatores  arc  almost  equally  unsettled.  The 
flamingoes  are  usually  placed  in  this  order,  but  their  hahits  best 
assort  with  those  of  the  waders. 


118.  Anatidaj 

119.  Laridse 

120.  Prooellamdffi 

121.  Pelecanidte  ... 

122.  Spheniscidie 

123.  CoIymbidsB 

124.  Podioipida)  ... 

125.  Aloidte 


Duck  jnd  Geese. 

Onlls. 

Petrels. 

Pelicans. 

Penguins. 

Divera. 


The  last  order  of  birds  ia  the  Strutliiones  or  Eatitaj,  considered 
by  many  naturalists  to  form  a  distinct  sub-class.  It  consists  of 
comparatively  few  species,  either  hving  or  recently  extinct. 


nse.  Strathionidte 
Living^  127.  Casuariid*  ... 
(128.  Apteiymdffi  ... 
(  129.  Diiiornithidfe 
Extiiiet<  130.  Palapterygidte 
(  131.  ^pyotnithida; 


Palapteryx. 
jEpjorais. 


In  reptiles  I  follow  the  classification  of  Dr.  GUnther  as  given 
in  the  Philosophical  Tramactiom,  vol.  clvii.,  p.  625.  He  divides 
the  class  into  five  orders  aa  follows ; — 


(  1.  Ophidia  '      ... 

Serpents. 

I.  Sc[iiainata  . . , 

^  2.  LacertUia      ... 

Lizards. 

t  3.  Etyncocephaliaa 

TheHatteria 

II.  Loricata      ... 

4.  Crocodilia     .., 

Crocodiles. 

Ill  Catapiimota 

5.  Chelonia       ... 

Tortoises. 

In  the  arrangement  of  the  families  comprised  in  each  of  these 
orders  I  also  follow  the  arrangement  of  Dr.  Giinther  and  Dr. 
J.  E.  Gray,  as  given  in  the  British  Museum  Catalogue,  or  as 
modified  by  the  former  gentleman  who  has  kindly  given  me 
much  personal  information 


by  Google 


CLASSIFICATION. 


The  OpMdia,  or  Snakes,  foiTa  tlie  first  order  and  are  classified 
as  follows : — 


Innocuous  Snakes' 


3.  Xenopeltidee 

4.  Uropeltidie 

5.  Calamarldffi 

6.  Oligodontidte. 

7.  Colubridse 

8.  Homaiopsidie     ... 

9.  Psammophidte  ... 

10.  Eachiodontidje. 

11.  Dendrophidte     ... 

12.  DryiophidsB 

13.  DipsaaidiB 

14.  Scjtialidte. 
16.  Lycodontidffi 

16.  Aoiblycephalidie 

17.  PythonidiE 

18.  Eryoida)      

19.  AcrochordidEe    ... 


!20.  Elapidffi     

21.  Dendraspididte, 

22.  AbractaspididiB. 

23.  Hydiophidje      .. 


Dwarf  ground-snakes. 

Colubrine  Snakes. 
Fresh-water  Snakes. 
Desert-snakes. 

Tree-suakes. 
"Wlip-snakes. 
Nocturnal  tree-snakes. 

Fanged  ground-snakes. 

Blunt-heads. 

Pythons. 

Sand-snakes. 

Wart-snates. 

Cobras,  &c, 


(24.  Orotalidffi  . 
\  25  Viperid*     . 


The  second  order,  Lacertiiia,  are  arranged  as  follows  :— 


36.  Trogonophidse   ... 

27.  Chirotidfc 

28.  AniphiabKnidEe 

29.  LepidosternidK 

30.  Varanidte 

31.  Helodermidse. 

32.  Teidte     

33.  LacertidiB 

34.  Zonuridffi 

35.  CbaleidEB. 

36.  Anadiads. 

37.  Ohirocolidte. 

38.  Iphisudte. 

39.  Oercosauridas. 

40.  Chamsesauridffi. 

41.  Gymnopthalmidffi 

42.  Pygopodidfe 

43.  AprasiadK. 


Amphisbseniaus, 
Water  Lizards, 
Teguexins 
i  Land  Lizards 


Gape-eyed  Scinis. 
Two-legged  Lizards. 


b,  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  ANIMALS. 


44.  LinlidcG. 

45.  Scincidfe 

46.  Ophiomoridse    .. 

47.  Sepidse 

48.  Aconbiadie. 

49.  Geckotidte 

50.  Ignmiidfe 
61.  Asaiuid^ 

52.  CnameleonidEe  .. 


Scinks. 

Snake-liaards. 

Saad-lizards. 

Geckoes. 
Iguanas. 
Fringed  Lizards. 
Chiimeleoiis. 


The  third  order,  Ehyncocephalina  consists  of  a  single  family  ;— 
53.  Ehyncocnplialidfe     The  Hatteria  of  New  Zealand. 


The   fourth   order,   Crocodilia  or  Loricata,  consists  of  three 
families : — 


54.  Gavialidte 
56.  CrocodilidEe 
56.  AUJ^atoiida 


Gavials. 

Crocodiles. 

Alligators. 


The  fifth  order,  Chelonia,  consists  of  four  families : — 


57.  Testudinidte  Land  and  fresh -water  Tortoises. 

58.  Oheljdidte  Fresh-water  Turtles. 

59.  TriooycMdie  Soft  Turtles. 

60.  Chebniidfe  Sea  Turtles. 


AMPHIBIA. 

In  the  Amphibia  I  follow  the  classification  of  Professor 
Mivart,  as  given  for  a  large  part  of  the  order  in  the  Proceedings 
of  ike  Zoological  Society  for  1869.  For  the  remainder  I  follow 
Dr.  Strauch,  Dr.  Giinther,  and  a  MSS.  arrangement  kindly 
furnished  me  by  Professor  Mivart. 

The  class  is  first  divided  into  three  groups  or  orders,  and  then 
into  families  as  follows : — ■ 


by  Google 


CLASSIFICATION. 

Older  I.— PSEFDOPHIDIA. 
1.  CEBciliadfB  Ctecilia. 


Order  II.— BATEACHIA  UEODELA. 


2.  SirenidiB     ... 

3  Proteidffi 

4  Amphiumidie 

5  Menopomiil  e 

6  foalamanJiidEe 


Proteus. 

Giant  Salamanders. 
Salamandera  and  Newta. 


Order  III.  BATEACHIA  ANOUEA. 


7.  Rhinophrynida) 

8.  Phryniaoidie     ... 

9.  Hylaplesidre     ... 

10.  Bufonidie 

11.  Xenorhinidffi   ... 

12.  EngyBtomidte  ... 

13.  Bambinatorida; 
14  PlectroiaantidtB 
15.  Alytad»    


le.  Pelodryadw 

17.  Hylidfc     ... 

18.  Pol^pedatids 

19.  Eanidffi    ... 
23.  Diacoglossidfe 
21.  Pipidfe      ... 
^2.  Dactjiethiidffi 


riSHES. 

These  are  arranged  according  to  the  classification  of  Dr. 
Giinther,  whose  great  work  "  The  British  Museum  Catalogue  of 
Fishes,"  has  furnished  almost  all  the  material  for  onr  account 
of  the  distribution  of  the  class. 

In  that  work  all  existing  fishes  are  arranged  in  six  sub-classes 
and  thirteen  orders.  A  study  of  the  extraordinary  Ceratodus 
from  Australia  has  induced  Dr.  Gunther  to  unite  three  of  his 
sub-classes ;  hut  as  his  catalogue  will  long  remain  a  handhook 
for  every  student  of  fishes,  it  seems  better  to  follow  the  arrange- 
ment there  given,  indicating  his  later  views  by  bracketing 
together  the  groups  he  now  thinks  should  be  united. 


by  Google 


DISTRIBUTION  OP  ANIMALS. 


9ub-clsss, 

Ordor. 

ti 

....... 

J 

Acanthopterygii 

47 

GistetOBteiJte  to  Hdtacanthi. 

2 

Do   Phw^ftoognithi 

6 

Ponncentridie  to  Chromidie, 

_  ( Teleo  tei 

)    ^ 

Acanthim 

Qadoi  sidse  to  Plenrouectidw. 
bilimdte  to  Pegasidse. 

Phjs  stomi 

•i 

2 

Pleetognathi 

2 

1  1  D  pn  1 

7 

Sireuoides 

1 

1  Ganuidei 

8 

Holostei 

a 

Amiidie  to  Lepiilosteidffi. 

Choiidrostei 

2 

Aooipensendoe  and  Polydontidic. 

10 

Holn^phala 

1 

Chmifendie 

ryg" 

15 

Carebanida  to  Myliobatidie. 

*  yelostomita 

12 

2 

Petromyzontidte  and  Myxmidie. 

LsltOAidu 

13 

Ciirhostorai 

1 

Cmf  (stomi 

INSECTS. 


The  families  and  genera  of  insects  are  so  immensely  numerous, 
probably  exceeding  fifty-fold  those  of  all  other  land  animals, 
that  for  this  cause  alone  it  would  be  impossible  to  enter  fully 
into  their  distribution.  It  is  also  quite  unnecessary,  because 
many  of  the  groups  are  3o  liable  to  be  ti'ansported  by  aj^cidental 
causes,  that  they  afford  no  useful  information  for  our  subject ; 
while  others  are  so  obscure  and  uninteresting  that  they  have 
been  very  partially  collected  and  studied,  and  are  for  this 
reason  equally  ineligible.  I  have  therefore  selected  a  few  of 
the  largest  and  most  conspicuous  families,  which  have  been  so 
assiduously  collected  in  every  part  of  the  globe,  and  so  carefully 
studied  at  home,  as  to  afford  valuable  materials  for  com- 
parison with  the  vertebrate  groups,  when  we  have  made  duo 
allowance  for  the  dependence  of  many  insects  on  peculiar  forms 
uf  vegetation,  and  the  facility  with  which  many  of  them  are 
transported  either  in  the  egg,  larva,  or  perfect  state,  by  winds, 
currents,  and  other  less  known  means. 

I  confine  myself  then,  almost  exclusively,  to  the  sixteen 
families  of  Diurnal  Lepidoptera  or  butterflies,  and  to  six  of  the 
most  extensive,  conspicuous,  and  popular  families  of  Coleoptera- 


by  Google 


CHAP,  v.]  CLARIFICATION.  10;j 

The  number  of  species  of  Butterflies  is  about  the  same  as  that 
of  Birds,  while  the  six  famiHes  of  Coleoptera  afelected,  comprise 
more  than  twenty  thousand  species,  far  exceeding  the  number  of 
all  other  vertebrates.  These  families  have  all  been  recently  cata- 
logued, so  that  we  have  very  complete  information  as  to  their 
arrangement  and  distribution. 

LEPIDOPTERA  IHUKNA,  OR  BUTTERFLIES. 

Fam.  Fam. 

1.  Danaidie.  9.  Libythteidfe. 

2.  SaLyridEB.  10.  Nemeobiidie. 

3.  Elymniid*.  11.  Euvjgonidie. 

4.  Morphidffi.  12.  EryomidEB. 

5.  Braesolidse,  13.  Lycsenidre. 

6.  AcHsid*.  14.  Pieridte. 

7.  Heliconidffi.  15.  Papiliouidte. 

8.  Njmphalidae.  16.  Hesperidie. 

COLEOPTEEA,  OE  BEETLES. 

Fam.  Fam. 

1.  Oicmdelid«...  Tiger-beetles.         4,  CetoniidEe    ...  Eose-chafera. 

2.  Carabidte     ...  Ground-beetles.      5.  Bnprestjdse...  Metallic  Beetles. 

'■i.  Lncarddte     ...  Stag-beetles.  6.  Longicornia  ...  Long-homed  Beetles, 

The  above  families  comprise  the  extensive  series  of  ground 
beetles  (Carabidfe)  containing  about  9,000  species,  and  the  Longi- 
coms,  which  are  nearly  as  numerous  and  surpass  them  in  variety 
of  form  and  colour  as  weU  as  in  beauty.  The  CetoniidEe  and 
Buprestidie  are  among  the  largest  and  most  briUiant  of  beetles ; 
the  Lncanidas  are  pre-eminent  for  remarkable  form,  and  the 
Cicindelidae  for  elegance;  and  all  the  families  are  especial 
favourites  with  entomologists,  so  that  the  whole  earth  has  been 
ransacked  to  procure  fresh  species. 

Results  deduced  from  a  study  of  these  wiU,  therefore,  fairly 
represent  the  phenomena  of  distribution  of  Coleoptera,  and, 
as  they  are  very  varied  in  their  habits,  perhaps  of  insects  in 
general- 


by  Google 


DlffTBIBUTION  OP  ANIMALS. 


The   Mollusca   are    usually    divided   into    five    classes     as 
follows ; — 


I  Cephalopoda 

II  Ga'^teropoda 

III  Pteiopoda 

IV  Brachiopoda 
V  Conclufera 


Outtle-fiBh. 

Snails  and  aquatic  Univalves. 
Oceanic  SnaiU. 
bviainetrical  Bivalves. 
X.  nsymmetrical  Bivalves. 


The  Gasteiopod*  and  Conclufera  alone  contain  land  and 
freshwater  forms,  and  to  these  we  shall  chiefly  confine  our 
illustrations  of  the  geographical  distrihution  of  the  Mollusca. 
The  classification  followed  is  that  of  Dr.  Pfeiffer  for  the 
Operculata  and  Dr.  Von  Martens  for  the  Helicidie.  The 
familiea  chiefly  referred  to  are : — 

Class  IL- GASTEROPODA. 
Order  2. — Pulmonifeia. 
FaiD. 

;  1.  Helicidte. 
I  2.  Limacidce. 
I  a.  Ottcidiadfe. 

In- operculata         S  4.  Linm^idw. 

I  5.  Attriculidce. 


\  7.  Diplommatinidte, 
(  8.  Cyclostomidte. 
\  9.  Helicinidte. 


b,  Google 


PAET   II. 

ON  THE  niSTSIBVTIOM  OF  EXTISCT  ANIMALS. 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE   EXTINCT   MAMMALIA   OF  THE   OLD   WOELD. 

Although  it  may  seem  eomewhab  out  of  place  to  he^n  the 
systematic  treatment  of  our  subject  with  extinct  rather  than 
with  living  animals,  it  is  necessary  to  do  so  in  order  that  we 
may  see  the  meaning  and  trace  the  causes  of  the  existing  dis- 
tribution of  animal  forms.  It  is  true,  that  the  animals  found 
fossil  in  a  country  are  very  generally  allied  to  those  which  still 
inhaljit  it ;  hut  this  is  by  no  means  universally  the  case.  If  it 
were,  the  attempt  to  elucidate  our  subject  by  Palaeontology 
would  be  hopeless,  since  the  past  would  show  us  the  same 
puzzling  diversities  of  faunas  and  floras  that  now  exist.  "We 
find  however  very  numerous  exceptions  to  this  rule,  and  it  is 
these  exceptions  which  tell  us  of  the  past  migrations  of  whole 
groups  of  animals.  We  are  thus  enabled  to  determine  what 
portion  of  the  existing  races  of  animals  in  a  country  are  de- 
scendants of  its  ancient  fauna,  and  which  are  comparatively 
modem  immigrants ;  and  combining  these  movements  of  the 
forms  of  life  with  linown  or  prohable  changes  in  the  distribution 
of  land  and  sea,  we  shall  sometimes  be  able  to  trace  approxi- 
mately the  long  series  of  changes  which  have  resulted  in  the 
actual  state  of  things.  To  gain  this  knowledge  is  our  object  in 
studying  the  "  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals,"  and  our 
plan  of  study  must  be  determined,  mainly,  by  the  facilities  it 
affords  us  for  attaining  this  object.  In  discussing  the  countless 
details  of  distribution  we  shall  meet  with  in  our  survey  of  the 
;1  regions,  we  shall  often  find  it  useful  to  refer  to  the 
e  we  possess  of  the  range  of  the  group  in  question  in 


by  Google 


108  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.        [pabt  ii, 

paat  times  ;  and  when  we  attempt  to  generalise  the  phenomena 
on  a  laige  scale,  with  the  details  fresh  in  our  memory,  we  shall 
find  a  reference  to  the  extinct  faunas  of  various  epochs  to  be 
absolutely  necessary. 

The  degree  of  om'  knowledge  of  the  Palfeontology  of  various 
parts  of  the  world  is  so  unequal,  that  it  will  not  be  advisable  to 
treat  the  subject  under  each  of  our  six  regions.  Yet  some  sub- 
division must  be  made,  and  it  seems  best  to  consider  separately 
the  extinct  animals  of  the  Old  and  of  the  New  Worlds.  Those  of 
Europe  and  Asia  are  intimately  connected,  and  throw  light  on 
the  past  changes  which  have  led  to  the  establishment  of  the 
three  great  continental  Old  World  regions,  with  their  various 
subdivisions.  The  wonderful  extinct  fauna  recently  discovered 
in  Korth  America,  with  what  was  previously  known  from  South 
temperate  America,  not  only  elucidates  the  past  history  of  the 
whole  continent,  but  also  gives  indications  of  the  mutual  rela- 
tions of  the  eastern  and  western  hemispheres. 

The  materials  to  be  dealt  with  are  enormous ;  and  it  will  be 
necessary  to  confine  ourselves  to  a  general  summary,  with  fuller 
details  on  those  points  which  directly  bear  upon  our  special 
subject.  The  objects  of  most  interest  to  the  pure  zoologist  and 
to  the  geologist — those  strange  forms  which  are  farthest  removed 
from  any  now  living — are  of  least  interest  to  us,  since  we  aim 
at  .tracing  the  local  origin  or  birthplace  of  existing  genera  and 
families ;  and  for  this  purpose  animals  whose  affinities  with 
living  forms  are  altogether  doubtful,  are  of  no  value  whatever. 

The  great  mass  of  the  vertebrate  fossds  of  the  tertiary  period 
consist  of  mammalia,  and  this  is  precisely  the  class  which  is  of 
most  value  in  the  determination  of  zoological  regions.  The 
animals  of  the  secondary  period,  though  of  the  highest  -  interest 
to  the  zoologist  are  of  little  importance  to  us ;  both  because  of 
their  very  uncertain  aifinities  for  any  existing  groups,  and  also 
because  we  can  form  no  adequate  notion  of  the  distribution  of 
land  and  sea  in  those  remote  epochs.  Our  great  object  is  to 
trace  back,  step  by  step,  the  varying  distribution  of  the  chief 
forms  of  life ;  and  to  deduce,  wherever  possible,  the  physical 
changes  which  must  have  accompanied  or  caused  such  changes. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VI,]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  109 

I'he  natural  division  of  our  subject  therefore  is  into  geological 
periods.  We  iirst  go  back  to  the  Post-Pliocene  period,  which 
includes  that  of  the  eaves  and  gravels  of  Europe  containing  flint 
implements,  and  extends  back  to  the  deposit  of  the  glacial  drift 
in  the  concluding  phase  of  the  glaeial  epoch.  Next  we  have 
the  Pliocene  period,  divided  into  its  later  portion  (the  Newer 
Pliocene)  which  includes  the  Glacial  epoch  of  the  northern 
heniispheie ;  and  its  earlier  portion  (the  Older  Pliocene),  repre- 
sented by  the  red  and  coralline  crag  of  England,  and  deposits  of 
similar  age  in  the  continent.  During  this  earlier  epoch  the 
climate  was  not  very  dissimilar  from  that  which  now  prevails ; 
but  we  next  get  evidence  of  a  still  earlier  period,  the  Miocene, 
when  a  warmer  climate  prevailed  in  Europe,  and  the  whole 
fauna  and  flora  were  very  different.  This  is  perhaps  the  most 
interesting  portion  of  the  tertiary  deposits,  and  furnishes  us 
with  the  most  valuable  materials  for  our  present  study. 
Further  back  still  we  have  the  Eocene  period,  with  apparently 
an  almost  tropical  climate  in  Europe ;  and  here  we  find  a  clue 
to  some  of  the  moat  puzzling  facts  in  the  distribution  of  living 
animals.  Our  knowledge  of  this  epoch  is  however  very  im- 
perfect; and  we  wait  for  discoveries  that  wiR  elucidate  some 
of  the  mystery  that  still  hangs  over  the  origin  and  migrations 
of  many  important  families.  Beyond  this  there  is  a  great  chasm 
in  the  geological  record  as  regards  land  animals ;  and  we  have  to 
go  so  far  back  into  the  past,  that  when  we  again  meet  with  mam- 
malia, birds,  and  land-reptiles,  they  appear  under  such  archaic 
forms  that  they  cease  to  have  any  local  or  geographical  signi- 
ficance, and  we  can  only  refer  them  to  wide-spread  classes 
and  orders.  Por  the  purpose  of  elucidating  geographical  distri- 
bution, therefore,  it  is,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge, 
unnecessary  to  go  back  beyond  the  tertiary  period  of  geology. 

The  remains  of  Mammalia  being  so  much  more  numerous  and 
important  than  those  of  other  classes,  we  shall  at  first  coniine 
ourselves  almost  exclusively  to  these.  "What  is  known  of  the 
birds,  reptiles,  and  fishes  of  the  tertiary  epoch  will  he  best 
indicated  by  a  brief  connected  sketch  of  their  fossils  in  all  parts 
of  the  globe,  which  we  shall  give  in  a  subsequent  chapter. 


by  Google 


no  DI^RIBUTION  OP  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  rpAur  n. 

Historic  Period. — In  tracing  tack  the  history  of  the  organic 
world  we  find,  even  within  the  limits  of  the  historical  period, 
that  some  animala  have  become  extinct,  while  the  distrihutioii  of 
others  has  been  materially  changed.  The  Bytina  of  the  North 
Pacific,  the  dodo  of  Mauiitius,  and  the  great  auk  of  the  North 
Atlantic  coasts,  have  been  exterminated  almost  in  onr  own 
times.  The  kitchen-middens  of  Denmark  contain  remains  of 
the  capercailKie,  the  Bos  primigeniiis,  and  the  boaver.  The  first 
still  abounds  farther  north,  the  second  is  extinct,  and  the  third 
is  becoming  so  in  Europe.  The  great  Irish  elk,  a  huge-antlered 
deer,  probably  existed  almost  down  to  historic  times. 

Pldstoeme  or  Post-Fliocene  Period. — -We  first  meet  with  proofs 
of  important  changes  in  the  character  of  the  Em-opean  fauna,  in 
studying  the  remains  found  in  the  caverns  of  England  and  France, 
which  have  recently  been  so  well  explored.  These  cave -remains 
are  probably  all  subsequent  to  the  G-laeial  epoch,  and  they  all 
come  within  the  period  of  man's  occupation  of  the  country.  Yet 
we  find  clear  proofs  of  two  distinct  kinds  of  change  in  the 
forms  of  animal  life.  Eirst  we  have  a  change  clearly  trace- 
able to  a  difference  of  climate.  We  find  such  arctic  forms  as 
the  rein-deer,  the  musk-sheep,  the  glutton,  and  the  lemming, 
with  the  mammoth  and  the  woolly  rhinoceros  of  the  Siberian 
ice-cliffs,  inhabiting  this  country  and  even  the  south  of  France. 
This  is  held  to  be  good  proof  that  a  sub-arctic  climate  pre- 
vailed over  all  Central  Europe  ;  and  this  climate',  together  with 
the  continental  condition  of  Britain,  will  sufficiently  explain 
such,  a  southward  range  of  what  are  now  arctic  forms. 

But  together  with  this  change  we  have  another  that  seems  at 
first  sight  to  be  in  an  exactly  opposite  direction.  We  meet 
with  numerous  animals  which  now  only  inhabit  Africa,  or  South 
Europe,  or  the  warmer  parts  of  Asia.  Such  are,  lai^e  felines — 
some  closely  related  to  the  lion  {Felis  spelcea),  others  of  alto- 
gether extinct  type  {MachairoduB)  and  forming  the  extreme  de- 
velopment of  the  feline  race ; — hyaenas  ;  horses  of  two  or  more 
species ;  and  a  hippopotamus.  If  we  go  a  little  further  back,  to 
the  remains  furnished  by  the  gravels  and  brick-earths,  we  still 
find  the  same  association  of  forms.     The  reindeer,  the  glutton. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VI.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WOELD.  Ill 

the  musk-sheep,  and  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  are  associated  with 
several  other  species  of  rhinoceros  and  elephant;  with  nume- 
rous civets,  now  abundant  only  in  warm  countries ;  and  with 
antelopes  of  several  species.  We  also  meet  here  with  a  great 
extension  of  range  of  forms  now  limited  to  small  areas.  The 
Saiga  antelope  of  Kastem  Europe  occurs  in  Prance,  where  wild 
sheep  and  goats  and  the  chamois  were  then  found,  together  with 
several  species  of  deer,  of  hear,  and  of  hytena.  A  few  extinct 
genera  even  come  down  to  this  late  period,  such  as  the  great 
sabre-toothed  tiger,  Machairodus ;  Galeotheriwm,  a  form  of  Viver- 
ridffi ;  Paiceospalaoi,  allied  to  the  mole ;  and  Trogontlierkm.,  a 
gigantic  form  of  beaver. 

We  find  then,  that  even  at  so  early  a  stage  of  our  inquiries  we 
meet  with  a  problem  in  distribution  by  no  means  easy  to  solve. 
How  are  we  to  explain  the  banisliment  from  Europe  in  so  aliort 
a  space  of  time  (geologically  speaking)  of  so  many  forms  of  life 
now  characteristic  of  warmer  countries,  and  this  too  during  a 
period  when  the  climate  of  Central  Europe  was  itself  becoming 
warmer  ?  Such  a  change  must  almost  certainly  have  been  due 
to  changes  of  physical  geography,  which  we  shall  be  better  able 
to  understand  when  we  have  examined  the  preceding  Pliocene 
period.  We  may  here  notice,  however,  that  so  far  as  wo  yet 
know,  this  great  recent  change  in  the  character  of  the  fauna  is 
confined  to  the  western  part  of  the  Paltearctic  r^on.  In  eaves 
in  the  Altai  Mountains  examined  by  Prof.  Brandt,  a  great  col- 
lection of  fossil  bones  was  discovered.  These  comprised  the 
Siberian  rhinoceros  and  mammoth,  and  the  cave  hytena ;  but  all 
the  others,  more  than  thirty  distinct  species,  are  now  living  in 
or  near  the  same  regions.  We  may  perhaps  impute  this  dif- 
ference to  the  fact  tiat  the  migration  of  Southern  types  into 
this  part  of  Siberia  was  prevented  by  the  great  mountain  and 
desert  barrier  of  the  Central  Asiatic  plateau ;  whereas  in  Em-ope 
there  was  at  this  time  a  land  connection  with  Africa.  Post- 
phocene  deposits  and  caverns  in  Algeria  have  yielded  remains 
resembling  the  more  southern  European  types  of  the  Post- 
pliocene  period,  but  without  any  admixture  of  Arctic  forms ; 
as   we  might  expect,  that  the  glacial  cold   did   not 


by  Google 


112  DISTHIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS,  [i'aet  ii. 

extend  so  far  south.  We  have  here  remains  of  Equus,  Bos, 
Antilope,  Sippopoiamus,  Mephas,  Shinoceros,  TIrms,  Canis, 
and  Rycena,  together  with  Phacochcervs,  aii  African  type  of 
swine  which  has  not  occuiTed  in  the  European  deposits. 

It  is  perhaps  to  the  earlier  portion  of  this  period  that  the 
Merycothsriwrn  of  the  Siberian  drift  belongs.  This  was  an 
animal  related  to  the  living  camel,  thus  supporting  the  view  that 
the  CatiieUdce  are  essentially  denizens  of  the  extra-tropical  zone. 

Pliocene  Period. 

PHmates. — We  here  first  meet  with  evidence  of  the  existence 
of  monkeys  in  Central  Europe.  Species  of  Macacus  have  left 
remains  not  only  in  the  Newer  Pliocene  of  the  Val  d'Arno  in 
Italy,  but  in  beds  of  the  same  age  at  Grays  in  Essex  ;  while 
Semnopithecus  and  Oercopithecus,  genera  now  confined  to  the 
Oriental  and  EthiopiEin  regions  respectively,  have  been  found  in 
the  Pliocene  deposits  of  the  South  of  Erance  and  Italy. 

Carnivora. — Most  of  the  genera  which  occurred  in  the  Post 
Pliocene  are  found  here  also,  and  many  of  the  same  species.  Eew 
new  forms  appear,  except  HycBnardos,  a  lai^e  bear  with  characters 
approaching  the  hyisnas,  and  Pristiphoca,  a  new  form  of  seal, 
both  from  the  Older  Pliocene  of  France ;  and  Galect/mis,  a  fox- 
like animal  intermediate  between  Can-is  and  Viverra,  from  the 
Pliocene  of  CEninghen  in  Switzerland. 

Cetacea. — Species  of  Balmia,  Physeter,  and  Ddphinus  occur  in 
the  Older  Pliocene  of  England  and  France,  and  with  these  the 
remains  of  many  extinct  forms,  Balcmodon  and  Hoplocetus 
(Baltenidte) ;  Belemnoziphim  and  Choneziphiiis  (Hj^jei-oodontidai), 
and  JTalitherium,  an  extinct  form  of  the  next  order — Sirenia, 
now  confined  to  the  tropics,  although  the  recently  extinct  .B)/(wk[ 
of  the  N.  W.  Pacific  shows  that  it  ia  also  adapted  for  tem- 
perate climates. 

Ungulata. — The  Pliocene  deposits  are  not  very  rich  in  this 
order.  The  horses  {Equidw)  are  represented  by  the  genus  Equus  ; 
and  here  we  first  meet  with  Ki^arion,  in  which  small  lateral 
toes  appear.     Both  genera  occur  in  British  deposits  of  this  age. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VI.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  113 

A  more  interesting  fact  for  us  is  the  occurrence  of  the  genus 
Tapirus  in  the  Newer  Pliocene  of  France  and  in  the  older  beds 
of  Ixith  France  and  England,  since  this  genus  is  now  isolated 
in  the  remotest  parts  of  the  eastern  and  western  tropics.  The 
genera  Mhinoeeros,  Hvppopotamv^s,  and  Bus,  occur  here  as  in  the 


"We  next  come  to  the  deer  genus  (Cervus),  which  appears  to 
have  been  at  its  maximum  in  this  period,  no  less  than  eight 
species  occurring  in  the  Norwich  Crag,  and  Forest-beds.  Among 
the  Bovidte,  the  antelopes,  ox,  and  bison,  are  the  only  forms  repre- 
sented here,  as  in  the  Post- Pliocene  period.  Passing  on  to  the 
Proboaoidea,  we  iind  three  species  of  elephants  and  two  of  Mcts- 
todon  preserved  in  European  beds  of  this  period,  all  distinct  from 
those  of  Poat-Pliocene  times. 

Sodentia. — In  this  order  we  find  representatives  of  many 
living  European  forms ;  as  Criceius  (hamster),  Arvieola  (vole). 
Castor  (heaver),  Ardomys  (marmot),  Hystrix  (porcupine), 
Lepus  (hare),  and  Lagomys  (pika) ;  and  a  few  that  are  extinct, 
the  most  important  being  Ghalieomys,  allied  to  the  beaver ; 
and  Isdodromys,  said  to  come  nearest  to  the  remarkable 
Pedetes  of  South  Africa,  both  found  in  the  Pliocene  fonnations 
of  France. 

General  Oondtmons  as  to  PHocme  and  Post-Pliocene  Faunas  of 
Ewope. — This  completes  the  series  of  fossil  forms  of  the  Pliocene 
deposits  of  Europe.  They  show  us  that  the  presence  of  numer- 
ous large  camivota  and  ungulates  (now  almost  wholly  tropical)  m 
the  Post- Pliocene  period,  was  due  to  no  exceptional  or  temporary 
cause,  but  was  the  result  of  a  natural  succession  from  similai 
races  which  had  inhabited  the  same  countries  for  long  preceding 
ages.  In  order  to  understand  the  vast  periods  of  time  coveied 
by  the  Pliocene  and  Post-PHocene  formations,  the  works  of  Sir 
Charles  Lyell  musfbe  studied.  We  shall  then  come  to  see,  that 
the  present  condition  of  the  fauna  of  Europe  is  wholly  new  and 
exceptional.  For  a  long  succession  of  ages,  various  forms  of 
monkeys,  hysenafl,  lions,  horses,  hipparions,  tapirs,  rhinoceroses, 
hippopotami,  elephants,  mastodons,  deer,  and  antelopes,  together 


by  Google 


114  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ir. 

with  almost  all  the  forms  now  living,  produced  a  rich  and  varied 
fauna  such  as  we  now  see  only  in  the  open  country  of  tropical 
Africa  During  all  this  period  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that 
the  climate  or  other  physical  conditions  of  Europe  were  more 
favourable  to  the  existence  of  these  animals  than  now.  We  must 
look  upon  them,  therefore,  as  true  indigenes  of  the  country,  and 
their  comparatively  recent  extinction  or  banishment  as  a  remark- 
able phenomenon  for  which  there  must  have  been  some  adequate 
cause.  What  this  cause  was  we  can  only  conjecture ;  but  it 
seems  most  probable  that  it  was  due  to  the  combined  action  of 
the  Glacial  period,  and  the  subsidence  of  large  areas  of  land  once 
connecting  Europe  with  Africa.  The  existence,  in.  the  small 
island  of  Malta,  of  no  less  than  three  extinct  species  of  elephant 
(two  of  very  small  stature),  of  a  gigantic  dormouse,  an  extinct 
hippopotamus,  and  other  mammalia,  together  with  the  occurrence 
of  remains  of  hippopotamus  in  the  caves  of  G-ibraltar,  indicate 
very  clearly  that  during  the  Pliocene  epoch,  and  perhaps  during 
a  considerable  part  of  the  Post-Piiocene,  a  connection  existed 
between  South  Europe  and  Korth  Africa  in  at  least  these  two 
loeahties.  At  the  same  time  we  have  every  reason  to  believe 
that  Britain  was  united  to  the  Continent,  what  is  now  the  German 
Ocean  constituting  a  great  river-valley.  During  the  height  of 
the  Glacial  epoch,  these  lai^e  animals  would  probably  retire  into 
this  Mediterranean  land  and  into  North  Africa,  making  annual 
migrations  northwards  during  the  summer.  But  as  the  connect- 
ing land  sank  and  became  narrower  and  narrower,  the  migrating 
herds  would  diminish,  and  at  last  cease  altogether ;  and  when  the 
glacial  cold  had  passed  away  would  be  altogether  prevented  from 
returning  to  their  former  haunts. 


Miocene  Period. 

We  now  come  to  a  period  which  was  wonderfully  rich  in  all 
forms  of  life,  and  of  which  the  geological  record  is  exceptionally 
complete.  Various  lacustrine,  estuarine,  and  other  deposits  in 
Europe,  North  India,  and  North  America,  have  furnished  such  a 


by  Google 


cn.iP.  VI.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THK  OLD  WORLD.  115 

vast  number  of  remains  of  extinct  mammalia,  as  to  solve  many- 
zoological  problems,  and  to  throw  great  light  on  the  early  distri- 
bution and  centres  of  dispersal  of  various  groups  of  animals.  In 
order  to  show  the  hearing  of  these  remains  on  our  special  snh- 
ject,  we  will  first  give  an  account  of  the  extinct  fauna  of  Greece, 
of  the  Upper  Miocene  period;  since  this,  being  nearest  to  Africa 
and  Asia,  best  exhibits  the  relations  of  the  old  European  fauna 
to  those  countries.  We  shall  then  pass  to  the  Miocene  fauna  of 
France  and  Central  Europe ;  and  conclude  with  the  remarkable 
Siwalik  and  other  Indian  extinct  faunas,  which  throw  an  addi- 
tional light  on  the  early  history  of  the  animal  life  of  the  great 
old-world  continents. 

Extinct  Animals  of  Greece. 

These  are  from  the  Upper  Miocene  deposits  at  Pikermi,  near 
Athens,  and  were  coUeeted  by  M.  Gaudry  a  few  years  ago. 
They  comprise  ten  living  and  eighteen  extinct  genera  of  mam- 
malia, with  a  few  birds  and  reptiles. 

Frimates.— These  are  represented  by  Meso^itMem,  a  genus 
believed  to  be  intermediate  between  the  two  Indian  genera  of 
monkeys,  Semnopithecvs  and  Macacus. 

Carwivtwa.— These  were  abundant.  Of  Fdis  there  were  foul 
species,  ranging  from  the  size  of  a  cat  to  that  o£  a  jaguar,  a  large 
hymia,  and  a  large  weasel  {Mustda).  Besides  these  there  were 
the  huge  Maekairodus,  laiger  than  any  existii^  lion  or  tiger,  and 
with  enormously  developed  canine  teeth ;  Hycenictis  and  Lycmna, 
extinct  forms  of  Hyaanidaj ;  Thalassictis=Ictitkervicm,  an  extinct 
genus  of  Viverridje  but  with  resemblances  to  the  hyenas,  repre- 
sented by  three  species,  some  of  which  were  larger  than  any 
existing  Viverridaa ;  Fromephptis,  an  extinct  form  of  Mustelidat, 
having  resemblances  to  the  European  marten,  to  the  otters,  and 
to  the  S,  African  Zorilla ;  and  lastly,  Simocyon,  an  extraordinary 
carnivore  of  the  size  of  a  small  panther,  but  having  the  canines 
of  a  cat,  the  molars  of  a  dog,  and  the  jaws  shaped  like  those  of 
a  bear. 

Ungulaia. — These  are  numerous  and  very  interesting.     The 
e  are  represented  by  the  three-toed  Ui^a/rion,  which  con- 


by  GoOglc 


116  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

tiiiued  to  exist  till  the  Older  Pliocene  period.  There  are  three 
large  species  of  Bhinoceros,  as  well  aa  a  species  of  the  extinct 
genus  Leptodon,  of  smaller  size.  Eeniains  of  a  very  large  wild 
boar  (ySws)  were  found.  Very  interesting  is  the  occurrence  of  a 
species  of  giraffe  (Camdopardalis)  as  tall  as  the  African  species 
hut  more  slender ;  and  also  an  extinct  genus  ITelladotkerium,  not 
quite  so  tall  as  the  giraife  hut  much  more  robust,  and  showing 
some  approach  to  the  AntilopidEe  in  its  dentition.  Antelopes 
were  abundant,  ranging  from  the  size  of  the  gazelle  to  that  o 
the  largest  living  species.  Three  or  four  seem  referable  to  living 
genera,  but  the  majority  are  of  extinct  types,  and  are  classed 
in  the  genera  Palceotragm,  Palceoryx,  Tragocerus,  and  Palceoreas  ; 
while  Bremotherium  is  an  ancient  generalized  form  of  C&rvid(e 
or  deer. 

Brdboscidea. — These  are  represented  by  two  species  of  Masto- 
don, and  two  of  Dinotherium,  an  extraordinaiy  extinct  form 
be,  to  some  extent,  intermediate  between  the 
s  and  the  aquatic  manatees  (Sirenia.') 

Modentia. — ^This  order  is  represented  by  a  species  of  Hystrix, 
laager  than  living  porcupines. 

Edetitata.—^^iVi  order,  now  almost  confined  to  South  America, 
was  represented  in  the  Miocene  period  by  several  European 
species.  Ancylotherium  and  Maa-oiherium,  belonging  to  an  extinct 
family  but  remotely  allied  to  the  African  ant-bear  (Orycteropiis), 
occur  in  Greece. 

Birds. — Species  of  Phasianus  and  Gallus  were  found ;  the 
latter  especially  interesting  as  being  now  coniined  to  India. 

Beptiles. — These  are  few  and  unimportant,  consisting  of  a 
tortoise  {T&studo)  and  a  large  hzard  allied  to  Yaranus. 

Summwry  of  the  Miocene  Fauna  of  Greece. — Although  we  can- 
not consider  that  the  preceding  enumeration  gives  us  by  any 
means  a  complete  view  of  the  actual  inhabitants  of  this  part 
of  Europe  during  the  later  portion  of  the  Miocene  period,  we 
yet  obtain  some  important  information.  The  resemblance  that 
appeared  in  the  Pliocene  fauna  of  Europe,  to  that  of  the  open 
country  of  tropical  Africa,  is  now  stiU  more  remarkable.     We 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VI.]  MAMMALIA  Ol'  THE  OLD  WORLD.  Ill 

not  only  find  great  felines,  surpassing  in  size  and  destructive 
power  the.  lions  and  leopards  of  .A.frioa,  with  hytenas  of  a  size 
and  in  a  variety  not  to  be  equalled  now,  but  also  huge  rhino- 
ceToses  and  elephants,  two  forms  of  giraffes,  and  a  host  of 
antelopes,  which,  from  the  sample  here  obtained,  were  probably 
quite  as  numerous  and  varied  as  they  now  are  in  Africa. 
Joined  with  this  abundance  of  antelopes  we  have  the  absence 
of  deer,  which  probably  indicates  that  the  country  was  open 
and  somewhat  of  a  desert  charactei,  since  there  were  deer  in 
other  parts  of  Europe  at  this  epoch.  The  occurrence  of  but  a 
single  species  of  monkey  is  also  favourable  to  this  view,  since 
a  weU-wooded  country  would  most  likely  have  supplied  many 
forms  of  these  animals. 

Miocene  Fauna  of  Central  and  Western  Europe. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  Miocene  fauna  of  Europe 
generally,  of  which  we  have  very  full  information  from  nu- 
merous deposits  of  this  age  in  France,  Switzerland,  Italy, 
Germany,  and  Hungary. 

Primates.— ThTBs  distinct  forms  of  monkeys  have  been  found 
in  Europe — in  the  South  of  France,  in  Switzerland,  and  Wurtem- 
berg  ;  ono  was  voiylike  Colobus  or  SeniTurpifhecus ;  the  others — 
Pliopiihecus  and  JM/opii7iecus — were  of  higher  type,  and  be- 
longed to  the  anthropomorphous  apes,  being  nearest  to  the  gemis 
Hylobates  OT  ^hhojia.  Both  have  occurred  in  the  South  of  France. 
The  Dryopiiheeus  was  a  veiy  large  animal  (equal  to  the  gorilla), 
and  M.  Lartet  considers  that  in  the  character  of  its  dentition  it 
approached  nearer  to  man  than  any  of  the  existing  anthropoid 
apes. 

Inseelivora. — These  small  animals  are  represented  by  numerous 
remains  belonging  to  four  families  and  a  dozen  genera.  Of 
Mrinacevs  (hedgehog)  several  species  are  found  in  the  "Upper 
Miocene;  and  in  the  Lower  Miocene  of  A.uvei^ne  two  extinct 
genera  of  the  same  iajmAj^Ampkechiiiiis  and  Tetracus — have 
been  discovered.  Several  species  of  TcUpa  (mole)  occur  in  the 
Upper  Miocene  of  France,  while  the  extinct  Dinylus  is  from  Ger- 
many, and  Falceospalax  from  the  Lower  Miocene  of  the  Isle  of 


by  Google 


118  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

Wight.  The  Malayan  family  TupaiidEe  or  squirrel-shrews,  is 
believed  to  be  represented  by  Oxygomphus,  a  fossil  discovered  in 
South  Germany  (Wiesenau)  by  H.  von  Meyer.,  The  Soricidje  or 
shrews,  are  represented  by  several  extinct  genera — Mesiosorex, 
Mysarach/m  and  OaUospalax ;  as  well  as  by  Amiphi^orex  and  Myo- 
gale  still  living.  EcJdnogale,  a  genus  of  Centetidse  now  confined 
to  Madagascar,  is  said  to  occur  in  the  Lower  Miocene  of  Auvei^e, 
a  most  interesting  determination,  if  correct,  as  it  ■would  form  a 
transition  to  the  Solenodon  of  the  Antilles  belonging  to  the  same 
family ;  but  I  am  informed  by  Prof.  Flower  that  the  affinities  of 
the  animals  described  under  this  name  are  very  doubtful. 

(7(M'«,iTOJ'a.— Besides  Fdis  and  Machairodus,  which  extend  back 
to  the  Upper  Miocene,  there  are  two  other  genera  of  Felidfe, 
I^eudcelwus  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  France,  and  Hymnodon, 
which  occurs  in  the  Upper  and  Lower  Miocene  of  France,  named 
from  some  resemblance  in  ita  teeth  to  the  hya'.nas,  and  c 
by  some  Palfeontologists  to  form  a  distinct  family,  I 
The  Viverridie,  or  civets,  were  very  numerous,  consisting  of  the 
living  genus  Viv&i-ra,  and  three  extinct  forms — Thalassiciis= 
Iditheriwm,  as  large  as  a  panther,  and  Soricictis,  a  smaller  form, 
occurring  both  in  France  and  Hungary.  Of  HymnidfB,  there  was 
the  living  genus  Hycena,  and  the  extinct  ffycenictis,  which  has 
occurred  in  Hungary  as  well  as  in  Greece.  The  Canidte,  or 
wolf  and  fox  family,  were  represented  by  Pseiidocyon,  near  to 
Cams;  Hetnicyon,  intermediate  between  dogs  and  gluttons; 
and  Amphicyon,  of  which  several  species  occur  in  the  Upper 
and  Lower  Miocene  of  France,  some  of  them  larger  than  a 
tiger.  The  Mustelidfe,  or  weasels,  were  represented  by  five 
genera,  the  existing  genera  Lutra  (otter)  and  Mustela  (weasel) ; 
Potamoihenum,  an  extinct  form  of  otter ;  Taxodon,  allied  to  the 
badger  and  otter;  Palmomephitis  in  Germany,  and  the  Prome- 
pkytis  (already  noticed)  in  Greeca  The  bears  were  represented 
only  by  Hya-narctos,  which  has  been  noticed  as  occurring  in 
the  Pliocene,  and  first  appears  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Franca 
Seals  are  represented  by  a  form  resembling  the  Antarctic 
Otdfia,  remains  of  which  occur  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of 
France. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  Ti.]  MAMMALIA  OP  THE  OLD  WORLD.  119 

Cdacea  (whales). — These  occur  frequently  in  the  Miocene  de- 
posits, four  living,  and  five  extinct  genera  having  been  described ; 
but  these  marine  forms  are  not  of  much  importance  for  our 
puiposa 

Sirema  (sea-cows). — These  are  represented  by  two  extinct 
genera,  Halitheriv/m  and  Trackytherium.  Several  species  of  the 
former  have  been  discovered,  but  the  latter  has  occurred  in 
France  only,  and  its  affinities  are  doubtful. 

Vngulata. — Horses  are  represented  by  Bippariort  and  Anchi- 
therimn,  the  latter  occurring  in  both  Upper  and  Lower  Miocene 
and  Eocene;  while  Mipparion,  which  is. more  nearly  allied  to 
living  horses,  first  appears  in  the  Upper  Miocene  and  continues 
in  the  Pliocene. 

Hi'ppotliermm,  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  the  Vienna  basin, 
forms  a  transition  to  Paloplothefnwm,  an  Eocene  genus  of  Tapi- 
ridte  or  Paljeotheridffi.  Tapirs,  allied  to  living  forma,  occur  in 
botli  Upper  and  Lower  Miocene.  Ehinoceroses  are  still  found 
in  the  Upper  Miocene,  and  here  first  appear  the  four-toed  horn- 
less rhinoceros,  Acerotkerimn.  The  Suidse  (swine)  axe  ratlier 
numerous.  Stis  (wdd  boar)  continued  as  far  back  as  the  Upper 
Miocene ;  but  now  there  first  appear  a  number  of  extinct  forms 
which  have  been  named  Hyotherium,  Ihlaoekcerus,  Ohmromorus, 
all  of  a  small  or  moderate  size ;  Hyopotamivs,  nearly  as  large  as  a 
tapir ;  and  Anihracotheriwm,  nearly  the  size  of  a  hippopotamus 
and,  according  to  Dr.  Leidy,  the  type  of  a  distinct  family. 
Listriodon,  from  tlie  Upper  Miocene  of  the  Vienna  basin,  is 
sometimes  classed  with  the  tapirs. 

We  now  come  to  a  well-marked  new  family  of  Artiodactyle 
or  even-toed  Ungulata,  the  Anoplotheriidte,  which  consisted  of 
more  slender  long-tailed  animals,  allied  to  the  swine  but  with 
indications  of  a  transition  towards  the  camels.  The  only  genera 
that  appear  in  the  Miocene  formation  are,  CkalicotheniMn,  nearly 
as  large  as  a  rhinoceros,  of  which  three  species  have  been  found 
in  Germany  and  France ;  and  Synaphodm,  known  only  from  its 
teeth,  which  differ  somewhat  irom  those  of  the  Anoploth&rium, 
which  appears  earlier  in  the  Eocene  formation.  Another  extinct 
family,  Amphimeriddm  or  Xipliodontid<E,  is  represented  by  two 


by  Google 


120  DISTEIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS  [part  ii. 

genera,  Cainotherium  and  Miarotherium,  in  the  Miocene  of 
France.  They  were  of  very  small  size,  and  are  supposed  to  be 
intennediate  between  the  Suidte  and  Tragulida;. 

The  CanielopardalidEe,  or  giraffes,  were  represented  in  Europe 
in  Miocene  times  by  the  gigantic  Hdladoth&rium,  which  has 
been  found  in  the  south  of  France,  and  in  Hungary,  as  well  aa 
in  Greece.  The  chevrotains  (Tragulidse)  are  represented  by 
the  extinct  genua  Kyomoschus. 

The  Cervidae  do  not  seem  to  have  appeared  in  Europe  before 
the  Upper  Miocene  epocii,  when  they  were  represented  by 
Dorcathtriv/m  and  Anvphimoschus,  allied  to  Moschus,  and  also  by 
true  Cervus,  as  well  as  by  small  allied  forms,  Dremotheriv/m, 
AmpMtroffalus  (in  the  Lower  Miocene),  Micromeryx,  Palwomeryx, 
and  Dterocerus, 

The  Bovidte,  or  holiow-homed  ruminants,  were  not  well 
represented  in  Central  Europe  in  Miocene  times.  There  were 
no  sheep,  goats,  or  oxen,  and  only  a  lew  antelopes  of  the  genus 
Tragocei-ws,  and  one  allied  to  Hippotragus ;  and  these  all  lived 
in  the  Upper  Miocene  period,  as  did  the  more  numerous 
forms  o£  Greece. 

Prdboscidea. — The  true  elephants  do  not  extend  back  to  the 
Miocene  period,  but  they  are  represented  by  the  Mastodons, 
which  had  less  complex  teeth.  These  first  appear  in  the  Upper 
Miocene  of  Europe,  five  species  being  known  from  Finance, 
Gennany,  Switzerland,  and  Greece.  JHnotheriam,  already 
noticed  as  occurring  in  Greece,  extended  also  to  Germany  and 
France,  where  remains  of  three  species  have  been  found. 

Hodentia. — ^A  considerable  number  of  generic  forms  of  this 
order  have  been  obtained  from  the  Miocene  strata  The  prin- 
cipal genera  are  Oricelodon,  allied  to  the  hamstLrs  numerous  in 
both  the  Upper  and  Lower  Miocene  peuod  of  Fiance ,  Myoxus 
(the  dormice)  in  France,  and  an  allied  genus,  Braehymys,  in  Ger- 
many. The  beavers  were  represented  by  the  still  living  genus 
Castor,  and  the  extinct  Sleneofiber  in  France.  The  squirrels  by 
the  existing  Scuirus  and  Spei-mophiliis ;  and  by  extinct  forms, 
LHhomys  and  Aulacodon,  in  Germany,  the  latter  resembling  the 
African   genus   Aidacodes.      The  hares,  by  Lagoviys   and  an 


by  Google 


CHAP.  v[,]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  121 

extinct  form  Titwiwmys.  E<!sides  these,  remains  referred  to  the 
South  American  genera,  Cama  (eavy)  and  Dasyprocta  (agouti), 
have  been  found,  the  former  in  the  Tipper  Miocene  of  Switzer- 
land, the  latter  in  the  Lower  Miocene  of  Auvergne.  Palixomys, 
allied  to  the  West  Indian  Cwpromys,  has  been  found  in  the  same 
deposits  ;  as  well  as  Theridornys,  said  by  Gervais  to  be  allied  to 
Anomalurus  and  Eehim/ys,  the  former  now  living  in  W,  Africa, 
the  latter  in  S.  America. 

Edentata. — These  are  only  represented  by  the  Macrotheriwrn- 
and  Ancylotheriv/m  of  the  Grecian  deposits,  the  former  occurring 
also  Ib  France  and  Germany  in  Upper  Miocene  strata. 

Marsupials. — These  consist  of  numerous  species  related  to 
the  opossums  (Didelpkys),  but  separated  by  Gervais  under  the 
name  Peratherium.  They  occur  in  both  Upper  and  Lower 
Miocene  beds. 

Upper  Miocene  Depoaits  of  the  Siwalik  Sills  ami  other  Localities 
in  N.W.India. 

These  remarkable  fresh-water  deposits  form  a  range  of  hills 
at  the  foot  of  the  Himalayas,  a  little  south  of  Simla.  They 
were  investigated  for  many  years  by  Sir  P.  Cautley  and  Dr. 
Falconer,  and  add  greatly  to  our  knowledge  of  the  early  fauna 
of  the  Old  World  continent. 

Primates. — Remains  of  the  genera  Semnopithecus  and  Maeaeus 
were  found,  with  other  forms  of  intermediate  character;  and 
some  teeth  indicated  animals  allied  to  the  orang-utan  of  Borneo, 
and  of  similar  size. 

Camivora. — These  consisted  of  species  of  Felis  and  Machai- 
rodus  of  large  size ;  Symna,  Canis,  Mellivora,  and  an  allied  genus 
UrsHaaytts;  Ursus,  in  the  deposits  of  the  Kerhudda  valley  (of 
Pliocene  age) ;  Hycenardos  as  large  as  the  cave  bear  ;  Amphieyon 
of  the  size  of  a  polar  bear  (in  the  deposits  of  the  Lidus 
valley,  west  of  Cashmere) ;  iMtra,  and  an  extinct  aEied  genus 
Enkydrion. 

Ungulata.—  These  are  very  numerous,  and  constitute  the  most 
important  feature  of  this  ancient  fauna.  Horses  are  represented 
by  a  species  of  Egtms  from  the  Siwalik  Hills  and  the  Trawaddy 

Vol.  I.— 10 


by  Google 


122  DISTEIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [paet  ii. 

deposits  in  Burmah,  and  'hy  two  others  from  t!ie  Pliocene  of  the 
Nerhudda  Valley ;  while  ffippotheriuni^—B.  slender,  antelope-like 
animal,  found  in  the  Siwahk  Hills  and  in  Europe — is  supposed 
to  form  a  transition  from  the  Equidfe  to  the  Tapiridae.  These 
latter  are  found  in  the  Upper  Indus  deposits,  where  there  is  a 
species  of  Tapims,  and  one  of  an  extinct  genus  AnUlotherium. 
Of  Rhinoceros,  five  extinct  species  have  been  found — in  the 
Siwalik  HiUs,  in  Perim  Island,  and  one  at  an  elevation  of  16,000 
feet  in  the  deserta  of  Thibet.  Hippopotamus  occurs  in  the  Plio- 
cene of  the  Nerbudda,  and  is  represented  in  the  older  Miocene 
deposits  by  Hexaprotodon,  of  which  three  species  have  been 
found  in  various  parts  of  India,  Another  remarkable  genus, 
MeryeopotatmtB,  connects  Hippopotwnms  with  Aidhracotherium, 
one  of  the  extinct  European  forms  allied  to  the  swine.  These 
last  are  represented  by  several  large  species  of  Sus,  and  by  the 
extinct  European  genus  Chteroth^wn. 

The  extinct  Anoplotheridie  are  represented  by  a  species  of 
the  European  genus  Ohulicoiherivm,  lai^er  than  a  horse. 

An  extinct  camel,  larger  than  the  living  species,  was  found 
in  the  Siwalik  HiUs. 

Three  species  of  deer  (Cervm)  have  been  found  in  the 
Siwaliks,  and  one  in  the  Nerhudda  deposits. 

A  large  and  a  small  species  of  giraffe  {Gamdopardalis)  were 
found  in  the  Siwalik  Hills  and  at  Perim  Island. 

The  Bovidce  are  represented  by  numerous  species  of  Bos,  and 
by  the  extinct  genera  Hemihos  and  Amphibos.  There  are  also 
three  species  of  antelopes,  one  of  which  is  allied  to  the  African 
Alcephalus. 

,  We  now  come  to  an  extraordinary  group  of  extinct  animals, 
probably  forming  a  new  family  intermediate  between  the 
antelope  and  the  gu'affe.  The  Sivatherium  was  an  enormous 
four-homed  ruminant,  larger  than  a  rhinoceros.  It  had  a  short 
trunk  like  a  tapir,  the  lower  horns  on  the  forehead  were  simple, 
the  upper  pair  palmated.  The  Sramatherium,  an  allied  form 
from  Perim  Island,  showed  somewhat  more  affinity  for  the 
giraffe. 

Probosddm. — No  less  than  seven  species  of  elephants  and  four 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VI.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  123 

of  mastodons  ranged  over  India,  their  remains  being  found  in  all 
the  deposits  from  the  Siwalik  Hills  to  Burmah.  A  large  Dino- 
iheriv/m.  has  also  been  found  at  Perim  Island. 

Untiles. — Many  remains  of  birds  were  found,  but  these  have 
not  been  determined.  Reptiles  were  numerous  and  interesting, 
the  most  remarkable  being  the  huge  tortoise,  Golossoohdys,  whose 
shell  was  twelve  feet  long  and  head  and  neek  eight  feet  more. 
Other  small  tortoises  of  the  genera  Te&tudo,  Emys,  : 
and  Emydida  were  found,  the  Emys  being  a  living  i 
There  were  three  extinct  and  one  living  species  of  crocodile, 
and  one  of  them  was  larger  than  any  now  living.  The  only 
other  reptile  of  importance  was  a  large  lizard  of  the  genus 
VaranvjS. 

General  Obsenations  on  the  Miocme  faunas  of  Europe  and 
Asia. — Comparing  the  three  faunas  of  approximately  the  same 
period,  and  allowing  for  the  necessarily  imperfect  record  of 
each,  we  find  a  wonderful  similarity  of  general  type  over  the 
enormous  area  between  Erance  on  the  west  and  the  Irawaddy 
river  in  Burmah  on  the  east.  We  may  even  extend  our  com- 
parison to  Northern  China,  where  remains  of  Mycena,  Tajnr, 
BMnoeeros,  Ohalicotherium,  and  Elephas,  have  been  recently 
found,  closely  resembling  those  from  the  Miocene  or  Pliocene 
deposits  of  Europe  or  India,  and  showii^  that  the  Palfearctic 
region  had  then  the  same  great  extent  from  west  to  east 
that  it  has  now.  Of  about  forty  genera  comprised  in  the 
Indian  Miocene  fauna,  no  less  than  twenty-seven  inhabited 
Central  and  Western  Europe  during  the  same  epoch.  The  Indian 
Miocene  fossils  are  much  what  we  should  expect  as  the  fore- 
runnei^  of  the  existing  fauna,  the  giraffes  and  hippopotami 
beii^  the  only  additions  from  the  present  Ethiopian  fauna. 
The  numerous  forms  of  the  restricted  bovine  type,  show  that 
these  probably  originated  in  India ;  while  the  monkeys  appear 
to  be  altogether  of  Oriental  types. 

In  Europe,  however,  we  meet  with  a  totally  different  assem- 
blage of  animals  from  those  that  form  the  existing  fauna.  We 
find  apes  and  monkeys,  many  lat^e   Felidte,   numerous  civets 


by  Google 


124  DISTRIBUTION  01)'  EXTINCT  ANIMALS,  [paut  ii. 

and  hyaenas,  tapirs,  rhinoceros,  hippopotamus,  elephants,  giraffes, 
and  antelopes,  such  as  now  characterise  the  tropics  of  Africa 
and  Asia.  Along  with  these  we  meet  with  less  familiar  types, 
showing  relations  with  the  Centetidte  of  Madagascar,  the 
Tupaiidse  of  the  Malay  Islands,  the  Ca^romys,  of  the  West  Indies, 
and  the  Echimys  of  South  America,  And  besides  all  these 
living  types  we  have  a  host  of  extinct  forms, — ten  or  twelve 
genera  allied  to  swine ;  nine  genera  of  tapir-like  animals ;  four 
of  horses ;  nine  of  wolves ;  with  many  distinct  forms  of  the 
long-extinct  families  of  Anoplotheridse,  Xiphodontidce,  and  the 
edentate  MaorotheridEe.  It  is  almost  certain  that  during  the 
Miocene  period  Europe  was  not  only  far  richer  than  it  is  now 
in  the  higher  forms  of  life,  hut  not  improhably  richer  than  any 
part  of  the  globe  now  is,  not  excepting  tropical  Africa  and 
tropical  Asia. 

Eocene  Period. 

The  deposits  of  Eocene  age  are  less  numerous,  and  spread 
over  a  far  more  limited  area,  than  those  of  the  Miocene  period, 
and  only  restricted  portions  of  them  furnish  any  remains  of 
land  animals.  Our  knowledge  of  the  Eocene  mammalian  fauna 
is  therefore  very  imperfect  and  will  not  occupy  us  long,  as 
most  of  the  new  types  it  furnishes  are  of  more  interest  to  the 
zoologist  than' to  the  student  of  distribution.  Some  of  the 
Eocene  mammalia  of  Europe  are,  however,  of  interest  in  com- 
parison with  those  of  North  America  of  the  same  age ;  while 
others  show  that  ancestral  types  of  groups  now  confined  to 
Australia  or  to  South  America,  then  inhabited  Europe. 

Primates.— The  only  undoubted  Eocene  examples  of  this 
order,  are  the  Ccenopitkemis  letnwoid-es  from  the  Jura,  which  has 
points  of  resemblance  to  the  South  American  marmosets  and 
howlers,  and  also  to  the  Lemuridaa ;  and  a  cranium  recently  dis- 
covered in  the  Department  of  Lot  (S.W.  Erance),  undoubtedly 
belonging  to  the  LemuridEe,  and  which  most  resembles  that  of 
the  West  African  "  Potto  "  {Perodiatims).  This  discovery  has 
led  to  another,  for  it  is  now  believed  that   remains  formerly 


by  Google 


CEAP.  VL]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  igg 

referred  to  the  Anoplotheridfe  {Adapis  and  Jfphelotheriunh 
from  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Paris)  were  also  Lemurs.  Some 
remains  from  the  Lower  Eocene  of  Suffolk  were  at  first  supposed 
to  he  allied  to  Macacos,  but  -were  subaeq^uently  referred  to  the 
Ungulate,'  Eyracotkerium.  There  is  still,  however,  some  doubt 
as  to  its  true  affinities. 

Chiroptem.' — In  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Paris  remains  of  bats 
have  been  found,  so  closely  resembling  living  forms  as  to  be 
referred  to  the  genus  Vesp&rtilio. 

Camwora. — The  ouly  feline  remains,  are  those  of  Ifymnodon 
in  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Hampshire,  and  Fterodon,  an  allied  fonn 
from  beds  of  the  same  age  in  France ;  with  j^lurogale,  found 
in  the  South  of  France  in  deposits  of  phosphate  of  lime  of 
uncertain  age,  but  probably  belonging  to  this  period.  Viverridfe 
(civets)  are  represented  by  two  genera,  Tylodon,  the  size  of  a 
glntton  from  the  Upper  Eocene,  and  Palmonyetis,  allied  to 
ViveiTa,  from  the  Middle  Eocene  of  France.  The  Canidte 
(wolves  and  foxes)  appear  to  have  been  the  most  ancient  of 
the  existing  types  of  Camivora,  five  genera  being  represented 
by  Eocene  remains.  Of  these.  Galethylax  and  Cyoiherium  were 
small,  and  with  the  existing  genus  Oanis  are  found  in  the  Upper 
Eocene  of  France.  Arctocyon,  about  the  size  of  a  wolf,  is 
a  very  ancient  and  generalised  form  of  carnivore  which  can 
not  be  placed  in  any  existing  family.  It  is  found  in  the  Lower 
Eocene  of  France,  and  is  thus  the  oldest  known  member  of 
the  Garni  vera. 

Uhgulata. — These  are  more  numerous.  Equidie  (horses)  are 
represented  by  the  Miocene  Anchith&riuvi  in  the  Lower,  and  by  a 
more  ancient  form,  Anckilophus,  in  the  Middle  Eocene  of  France. 
TapiridtB  and  Pakeotheridte  were  very  numerous.  Palisofheriiim. 
and  the  allied  genus  Paloplothermm,  were  abundant  in  France  and 
England  in  Upper  Eocene  times.  They  somewhat  resembled 
the  tapir,  with  aERnities  for  the  horse  and  rhinoceros.  A  new 
genua,  Cadurcotheriwm,  allied  to  the  rhinoceros  and  equally 
large,  has  been  foimd  in  the  same  deposits  of  phosphate  of  lime 
as  the  lemur  and  MlwrogaU.  In  the  Middle  Eocene  of  both 
England  and  France  are  found  LopModon  allied  to  the  tapir, 


by  Google 


126  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

but  in  some  of  the  apecies  i-eaching  a  larger  size ;  Frc^alKothe,- 
riv/m  aad  Pachynolophus  of  smaller  size  and  having  affinities 
for  the  other  genera  named  ;  and  Plagiolophus.  a  small,  slender 
animal  which  Professor  Huxley  thinks  may  have  been  a  direct 
ancestor  of  the  horse.  In  the  Lower  Eocene  we  meet  with 
CoTfphodon,  much  larger  than  the  tapir,  and  armed  with  large 
canine  teeth ;  Fliolophus,  a  generalised  type,  allied  to  the  tapii' 
and  horse ;  and  Syracoiherivm,,  a  small  animal  from  the  Lower 
Eocene  of  England,  remotely  allied  to  the  tapir. 

Among  the  Artiodactyla,  or  even-toed  ungulates,  the  swine 
are  represented  by  several  extinct  genera,  of  moderate  or  small 
size — Acotherium,  Chxropotamus,  Cebockarus  and  Dichdbune,  all 
from  the  Upper  and  the  last  also  from  the  Middle  Eocene  of 
France ;  but  Eutelodon,  from  the  phosphate  of  lime  deposits  is 
large.  The  Biehobime  was  the  most  generalised  type,  pre- 
senting the  characters  of  many  of  the  other  genera  combined, 
and  was  believed  by  Dr.  Ealconer  to  approach  the  musk-deer. 
The  Cainotherium  of  the  Miocene  also  occurs  here,  and  an  allied 
genus  Pleswmeryx  from  the  same  deposits  as  EuteUdon. 

The  Eocene  Anoplotheridfe  were  numerous.  The  Anophthe- 
riv/m  was  a  two-toed,  long-tailed  Pachyderm,  ranging  from  the 
size  of  a  hog  to  that  of  an  ass ;  the  allied  Eurythenwm,  was 
four-toed;  and  there  are  one  or  two  others  of  doubtful  affinity. 
All  are  from  the  Upper  Eocene  of  France  and  England. 

Rodetdia. — Bemains  referred  to  the  genera  Myoxus  (dormouse) 
and  Sciwnis  (scLuirrel)  have  been  found  in  the  Upper  Eocene 
of  France ;  as  well  as  Plesiarctmm/s,  an  extinct  genus  between 
the  marmots  and  sq^uirrela  The  Miocene  Theridomys  is  also 
found  here. 

Marsupials. — The  Didelpkys  (opossum)  of  Cuvier,  now  referred 
to  an  extinct  genus  Peratherivm,  is  found  in  the  Upper  Eocene 
of  France  and  England. 

General  Gonsideratwns  on  the  Extinct  Mammalian  Pawna  of 
Europe. — It  is  a  curious  fact  that  no  family,  and  hardly  a  genus, 
of  European  mammalia  occurs  in  the  Pliocene  deposits,  without 
extending  back  also  into  those  of  Miocene  age.     There  are,  how- 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VI.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  127 

ever,  a  few  groups  which  seem  to  be  late  developments  or  recent 
importations  into  the  Palsearctic  region,  aa  they  occur  only  in 
Post-Pliocene  deposits.  The  most  important  of  these  are  the 
badger,  glutton,  elk,  reindeer,  chamois,  goat,  and  sheep,  which 
only  occur  in  caves  and  other  deposits  of  Post-Pliocene  age. 
Camels  only  occur  in  the  Post-Pliocene  of  Siberia  (Merycotherium), 
although  a  true  Cameliis  of  lai^e  size  appears  to  have  inhabited 
some  part  of  Central  Asia  in  the  Upper  Miocene  period,  beir^ 
found  in  the  Siwalik  beds.  The  only  exclusively  Pliocene 
genera  in  Europe  are  Utsus,  Equus,  Hippopotamus,  Bos,  Mephas, 
Arvicola,  Trogontherium,  Ardomys,  Hystrk>  and  Lepns;  but  of 
these  Equus,  Hippopotamus,  Boa,  and  El^Tias  are  found  in  the 
Miocene  deposits  of  India.  Owing,  no  doubt,  in  part  to  the 
superior  productiveness  of  the  various  Miocene  beds,  large 
numbers  of  groups  appear  to  have  their  origin  or  earliest  appear- 
ance here.  Such  are  Insectivora,  Felidte,  Hytenidse,  Mustelidje, 
Ursm,  Equidte,  Tapinis,  Ehinocerotid^,  Hippopotamidte,  An- 
thracotheridEe  (extinct).  Bus,  Camelopardidte,  Tragulidse,  Cervidse, 
Bovidee,  Elephantidte,  and  Edentata. 

Groups  which  go  back  to  the  Eocene  period,  are.  Primates 
allied  to  Soutli  American  monkeys,  as  well  as  some  of  the 
Lemuridte;  bats  of  the  living  genus  VespertHio ;  Hysnodon- 
tidte,  an  ancestral  form  of  Carnivore ;  ViverridEe ;  Oanidte  (to  the 
Upper  Eocene),  and  the  ancestral  Arctoeyonidse  to  the  Lower 
Eocene ;  Hymnarctos,  an  ancestral  type  of  bears  and  hytenas ; 
Anchitheridie,  ancestral  horses,  to  the  Middle  Eocene ;  Palieo- 
theridas,  comprising  numerous  generalised  forms,  ancestors  of  the 
rhinoceros,  horse,  and  tapir ;  Saida,  with  numerous  generalised 
forms,  to  the  Middle  Eocene ;  Anoplotheridse  and  Xiphodontida, 
ancestral  families  of  even-toed  Ungulates,  connecting  the  rumi- 
uEinte  with  the  swine  ;  and  lastly,  several  groups  of  Rodents, 
and  a  Marsupial,  in  the  Upper  Eocene.  We  thus  find  all 
the  great  types  of  Mammalia  well  developed  in  the  earliest 
portion  of  the  tertiary  period ;  and  the  occurrence  of  Quadru  ■ 
mana,  of  the  highly  specialized  bats  { VespertHio),  of  various 
forms  of  Carnivora,  and  of  Ungulates,  clearly  differentiated  into 
the  odd  and  even-toed  series,  associated  with  such  lower  forms  as 


by  Google 


128  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALa  [rART  ii 

Lemurs  and  Marsupials — proves,  that  we  have  here"liardly  made 
an  approach  towards  the  epoch  when  the  mammalian  type  itself 
began  to  diveige  into  its  various  modifications.  Some  of  the 
Caniivora  and  Ungulates  do,  indeed,  exhibit  a  less  specialised 
structure  than  later  forms ;  yet  so  far  back  as  the  Upper 
Miocene  the  moat  speeiahsed  of  all  carnivora,  the  great  sabre- 
toothed  Machairodus,  makes  its  appearance. 

The  Miocene  is,  for  our  special  study,  the  most  valuable  and 
instructive  of  the  Tertiary-  periods,  both  on  account  of  its 
superior  richness,  and  because  we  here  meet  with  many  types 
how  confined  to  separate  regions.  Such  facts  as  tlie  occurrence 
in  Europe  dining  this  period  of  hippopotami,  tapirs,  giraffes, 
Tragulidte,  Edentata,  and  Marsupials — will  assist  us  in  solving 
many  of  the  problems  we  shall  meet  with  in  reviewing  the 
actual  distribution  of  living  forms  of  those  groups.  Still  more 
light  will,  however,  be  thrown  on  the  subject  by  the  fossil  forms 
of  the  American  continent,  which  we  will  now  proceed  to 
examine. 


by  Google 


CHAPTEE  VII. 

EXTINCT   MAMMALIA.  OF  THE   NEW   WOELD. 

The  discoveries  of  very  rich  deposits  of  mammalian  r 
various  parts  of  the  United  States  have  thrown  great  light  on 
tlie  relations  of  the  faunas  of  very  distant  regions.  North 
America  now  makes  a  near  approach  to  Europe  in  the  number 
and  variety  of  its  extinct  maniinalia,  and  in  no  part  of  the  world 
have  such  perfect  specimens  been  discovered.  In  what  are  called 
th  '  M  vaises  terres  "  of  Nebraska  {the  dried-up  mud  of  an 
an     nt  lake),  thousands  of  entire  craida  and  some  almost  entire 

kit  of  ancient  animals  have  been  found,  their  teeth  abso- 
Int  ly  I    feet,  and  altogether  more  resembling  the  preparations 

f  tl  anatomist,  than  time-worn  fossils  such  as  we  are  accus- 
ton  ed  to  see  in  the  museums  of  Europa  Other  deposits  have 
been  discovered  in  Oregon,  California,  Virginia,  South  Carolina, 
Texas,  and  Utah,  ranging  over  aU  the  Tertiary  epochs,  from 
Post-Pliocene  to  Eocene,  and  furnishing  a  remarkable  picture 
of  the  numerous  strange  mammaha  which  inhabited  the  ancient 
North  American  continent. 

North  Ameeica — Post-Pliocene  Pekiod. 

Iiiseetivora.—1)ie  only  indications  of  this  order  yet  discovered, 
consists  of  a  single  tooth  of  some  insectivorous  animal  found 
in  Illinois,  but  which  cannot  be  referred  to  any  known  group. 

Ca/mivora.~These  are  fairly  represented.  Two  species  of 
Felis  as  large  as  a  hon ;  the  equally  lai^  extinct  Trihdfalis, 
found  only  in  Texas  ;  four  species  of  Ganis,  some  of  them  larger 


by  Google 


130  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [partii. 

than  wolves ;  two  species  of  Galera,  a  genus  now  confined  to  the 
Neotropical  region;  two  bears,  and  an  extinct  genus,  ^rc^oi^ws; 
an  extinct  species  of  racoon  {Proeyon),  and  an  allied  extinct 
genus,  MyxopJhO^s — show,  that  at  a  very  recent  period  North 
America  was  better  supplied  with  Caniivora  than  it  is  now. 
Remains  of  the  walrus  {Trichechus)  have  also  been  found  as  far 
south  as  Vii^nia, 

(Teiacea,— Three  species  of  dolphins  belonging  to  existing 
genera,  have  been  found  in  the  Eastern  States  ;  and  two  species 
of  Mcenatus,  or  sea-cow,  in  Florida  and  South  Carolina. 

Ungulata. — Six  extinct  horses  (Eqmis),  and  one  Hipparitm ; 
the  living  South  American  tapir,  and  a  larger  extinct  species ;  a 
Dicotyles,  or  peccary,  and  an  allied  genus,  Platygonus  ;  a  species 
of  the  South  American  llamas  {Auchmia),  and  one  of  a  kind  of 
camel,  Proeamdus ;  two  extinct  bisons  ;  a  sheep,  and  two  musk- 
sheep  (Oaibos) ;  with  three  living  and  one  extinct  deer  (Cervus), 
show  an  important  increase  in  ita  Herbivora. 

Probosddm. — Two  elephants  and  two  mastodons,  added  to  this 
remaxkable  assemblage  of  large  vegetable-feeding  quadrupeds. 

Jiodentia,-—Thes&  consist  mainly  of  genera  and  species  still 
living  in  North  America ;  the  only  important  exceptions  being  a 
species  of  the  South  American  capybara  (Mydrockcenis)  in  South 
Carolina ;  and  Prmtherium,  an  extinct  form  of  hare,  found  in  a 
bone  cave  in  Pennsylvania. 

Edentata,. — Here  we  meet  with  a  wonderful  assemblage,  of  six 
species  belonging  to  four  extinct  genera,  mostly  of  g^ntic  size. 
A  species  of  Megaiherivm,  three  of  Megahnyx,  and  one  of 
Mylodon — \m:^  terrestrial  sloths  as  large  as  the  rhinoceros 
or  even  as  the  lai^st  elephants — ^ranged  over  the  Southern 
States  to  Pennsylvania,  the  latter  (Mylodon)  going  as  far  as  the 
great  lakes  and  Or^oiL  Another  form,  Ere^todon,  has  been 
found  in  the  Mississippi  Valley. 

Marsupialia.- — The  living  American  genus  of  opossums,  Didd- 
phys,  has  been  found  in  deposits  of  this  age  in  South  Carolina. 

Bemarks  on  the  Post-Pliocene  fajwna  of  North  ^mmca.— The 
assemblage    of   animals    proved,  by  these    remains,  to    have 


by  Google 


CHAP,  VII.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  131 

inhabited  North  America  at  a  comparatively  recent  epoch,  is 
most  remarkable.  In  Europe,  we  found  a  striking  change 
in  the  fauna  at  the  same  period;  hut  that  consisted  aJmost 
wholly  in  the  presence  of  animala  now  inhabiting  countries 
immediately  to  the  north  or  south.  Here  we  have  the  appear- 
ance of  two  new  assemblies  of  animals,  the  one  now  con- 
fined to  the  Old  World — horses,  camels,  and  elephants ;  the 
other  exclusively  of  South  American  type — llamas,  tapirs, 
capybaras,  Galera,  and  gigantic  Edentata^  The  age  of  the 
various  deposits  in  which  these  remains  are  found  is  somewhat 
uncertain,  and  probably  extends  over  a  considerable  period  of 
time,  inclusive  of  tlie  Glacial  epoch,  and  perhaps  both  anterior 
and  subsequent  to  it.  We  have  here,  as  in  Europe,  the  presence 
and  apparent  co-existence  in  the  same  area,  of  .Arctic  and 
Southern  forms— the  walrus  and  the  manatee— the  musk- 
sheep  and  the  gigantic  sloths.  Unfortunately,  as  we  shall  see, 
the  immediately  preceding  Pliocene  deposits  of  North  America 
are  rather  poor  in  organic  remains ;  yet  it  can  hardly  be  owing 
to  the  imperfection  of  the  record  of  this  period,  that  not  one  of 
the  South  American  types  above  numerated  occurs  there,  while 
a  considerable  number  of  Old  World  forms  are  represented. 
Neither  in  the  preceding  wonderfully  rich  Miocene  or  Eocene 
periods,  does  any  one  of  these  forms  occur ;  or,  with  the  exception 
of  Morotkerimn,  from  Pliocene  deposits  west  of  the  Eocky 
Mountains,  any  apparent  ancestor  of  them !  We  have  here 
unmistakable  evidence  of  an  extensive  immigration  from  South 
into  North  America,  not  very  long  before  the  beginning  of  the 
Glacial  epoch.  It  was  an  immigration  of  types  altogether  new 
to  the  country,  which  spread  over  all  the  southern  and  central 
portions  of  it,  and  eatabhshed  themselves  sufficiently  to  leave 
abundance  of  remains  iu  the  few  detached  localities  where  they 
have  been  discovered.  How  such  lai^e  yet  defenceless  animals 
as  tapirs  and  great  terrestrial  sloths,  could  have  made  their  way 
into  a  country  abounding  in  large  felines  equal  in  size  and 
destructiveness  to  the  hon  and  the  tiger,  with  numerous  wolves 
and  bears  of  the  largest  size,  is  a  great  mystery.  But  it  is 
nevertheless  certain  that  they  did  so  ;  and  the  fact  that  no  such 


by  Google 


132  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

migration  had  occurred  for  countless  precediog  ages,  proves  that 
some  great  barrier  to  the  entrance  of  terrestrial  mammalia 
wiiich  Lad  previously  existed,  must  for  a  time  have  been  re- 
moved. We  must  defer  further  discussion  of  this  subject  till 
we  have  examined  the  relations  of  the  existing  faunas  of  Worth 
and  South  America. 

Tebtiaky  Pbeiod. 

When  we  get  to  remains  of  the  Tertiary  age,  especially  those 
o£  tlie  Miocene  and  Eocene  epochs,  we  meet  with  so  many 
interesting  and  connected  types,  and  such  curious  relations  with 
living  forms  in  Europe,  that  it  will  he  clearer  to  trace  the 
history  of  each  order  and  family  throughout  the  Tertiary  period, 
instead  of  considering  each  of  the  subdivisions  of  that  period 


It  will  be  well  however  first  to  note  the  few  American  Post- 
Pliocene  or  living  genera  that  are  found  in  the  Pliocene  beds. 
These  consist  of  several  species  of  Canis,  from  the  size  of  a  fox 
to  that  of  a  lai^e  wolf;  a  Felis  as  large  as  a  tiger;  an  Otter 
{Litira)  ;  several  species  of  Svpparion ;  a  peccary  {Dicoti/les) ; 
a  deer  {Cervus) ;  several  species  of  Proaamelvs ;  a  mastodon ; 
an  elephant ;  and  a  beaver  {Castor).  It  thus  appears  that  out 
of  nearly  forty  genera  found  in  the  Post-Pliocene  deposits,  only 
ten  are  found  in  the  preceding  Pliocene  period.  About  twelve 
additional  genera,  however,  appear  there,  as  we  shall  see  in 
going  over  the  various  orders. 

Primates. — Amoi^  the  vast  number  of  extinct  mammalia 
discovered  in  the  Tertiary  deposits  of  North  America,  no 
example  of  this  order  had  been  recognized  up  to  18V2,  when 
the  discovery  of  more  perfect  remains  showed,  that  a  number 
of  small  animals  of  obscure  affinities  from  the  Lower  Eocene 
of  Wyoming,  were  really  alHcd  to  the  lemurs  and  perhaps 
also  to  the  marmosets,  the  lowest  form  of  American  monkeys, 
but  having  a  larger  number  of  teeth  than  either.  A  number  of 
other  remains  of  small  animals  from  the  same  formation,  pre- 
viotisly  supposed  to  be  allied  to  the  Ungulata,  are  now  shown  to 


by  Google 


CEAP.  viL]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  133 

belong  to  the  Primates ;  so  that  no  less  than  twelve  genera  of  these 
animals  are  recognized  by  Mr.  Marsh,  who  classes  them  in  two 
families — Limnotherid^,  comprising  the  genera  Zdmuiotkertwrn, 
(which  had  larger  canine  teeth),  Thinolestes,  Telmatolestes,  Mesa- 
eodtm,  Bathrodon,  and  Antiacodon  of  Marsh,  with.  Notha/rdos, 
Hipfosyus,  Miero&yops,  and  Paksacodon  previously  described  by 
Leidy ; — and  Lemuravidaj,  consisting  of  the  genera  Zemuravus 
(Marsh)  and  Hyopsodus  (Leidy).  The  animals  of  the  latter 
family  were  most  allied  to  existing  lemurs,  hut  were  a  more 
generalized  form,  Lermiraims  havii^  forty-four  teeth,  the  greatest 
number  known  in  the  order.  These  numerous  forms  ranged  from 
the  size  of  a  small  sq^uirrel  to  that  of  a  racoon.  It  is  especially 
interesting  to  find  these  peculiar  lemnroid  forms  in  America, 
just  when  a  lemur  has  been  discovered  of  about  the  same  age 
in  Europe ;  and  as  the  American  forms  are  said  to  show  an 
affinity  with  the  South  American  marmoaeta,  while  the  European 
animal  is  most  allied  to  a  West  African  group,  we  have 
evidently  not  yet  got  back  far  enough  to  find  the  primeval 
or  ancestral  type  from  which  all  the  Primates  sprang. 

About  the  same  time,  in  the  succeedir^  Miocene  formation, 
true  monkeys  were  discovered.  Mr.  Marsh  describes  Laopithe- 
mis  as  an  animal  nearly  the  size  of  the  largest  South  American 
monkeys,  and  allied  both  to  the  CebidEe  and  the  Eocene  Limno- 
therid^e.  Mr.  Cope  has  described  Menotherium  from  the  Mio- 
cene of  Colorado,  as  a  lemuroid  animal,  the  size  of  a  cat,  and 
perhaps  allied  to  Zminotfterium.  More  Miocene  remains  will, 
no  doubt,  be  discovered,  by  which  we  shall  be  enabled  to  trace 
the  origin  of  some  of  the  existing  forms  of  South  American 
monkeys ;  and  perhaps  help  to  decide  the  question  (now  in  dis- 
pute among  anatomists)  whether  the  lemurs  are  really  Primates, 
or  form  an  altogether  distinct  and  isolated  order  of  mammalia. 

Insectivora. — This  order  is  represented  by  comparatively  few 
forms  in  the  tertiary  beds,  and  these  are  all  very  different  from 
existing  types.  In  the  Tipper  Miocene  of  Dakota  are  found 
remains  indicating  two  extinct  genera,  Zepictis  and  Idops.  In 
the  Miocene  of  Colorado,  Professor  Cope  has  recently  d 
four  new  genera,  Isaois;  allied  to  the  preceding,  but  a 


by  Google 


134  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS  [part  ii. 

Mephitis  or  skunk ;  Rerpetotherium,  near  the  moles ;  Embasis, 
more  allied  to  the  shrews ;  and  Dommina,  of  uncertain  affinities. 
Two  others  have  been  found  in  the  Eocene  of  Wyoming ;  A'nwmys, 
having  some  resemblance  to  hedgehogs  and  to  the  Eastern  Tupaia; 
and  Washahius,  of  doubtful  aflmities. 

Far  back  in  the  Triaaaie  coal  of  North  Carolma  has  been  found 
the  jaw  of  a  small  mammal  (BromotAerium),  the  teeth  of  which 
somewhat  resemble  those  of  the  Australian  Myrmecobins,  and 
may  belong  either  to  the  Insectivora  or  Marsupials ;  if  indeed,  at 
that  early  period  these  orders  were  differentiated. 

Oa/mivora. — The  moat  ancient  forms  of  this  order  are  some 
remains  found  in  the  Middle  Eocene  of  Wyoming,  and  others 
recently  described  by  Professor  Cope  (1875)  from  the  Eocene  of 
New  Mexico,  of  perhaps  earher  date.  The  former  consist  of  three 
genera,  Pdtriofdis,  JJiwtacyon,  and  Sinopa, — animals  of  large  size 
but  which  cannot  be  classed  in  any  existing  family ;  and  two 
others,  Mesonyx  and  Synoplotkenum,  behoved  by  Mr.  Cope  to  be 
allied  to  Sycenodon.  The  latter  consist  of  four  genera, —  Oxycenet, 
consisting  of  several  species,  some  as  large  as  a  jaguar,  was 
allied  to  Hytmiodon  and  Pterodon ;  Pachywna,  allied  to  the  last; 
Prototomus,  allied  to  Amphicyon  and  the  Viverridffi ;  and  Lim- 
nocyon,  a  civet-hke  carnivore  with  resemblances  to  the  Canidse. 

In  the  Miocene  formations  we  find  the  Feline  type  well  deve- 
loped. The  wonderful  Machairodm,  which  in  Europe  lived  down 
to  Post-PHocene  times,  is  found  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  Dakota ; 
and  perfect  crania  have  been  discovered,  showing  that  the  chin 
3  downwards  to  receive  and  protect  the  enormous 
Dinyctis  was  allied  both  to  Machairodiis  and  to  the 
weasels.  Three  new  genera  have  been  lately  described  by  Professor 
Cope  from  the  Miocene  of  Colorado, — Bimwhi/rus,  with  characters 
of  both  cats  and  weasels  ;  DaptophUus,  allied  to  Dinyctis ;  and 
Moplophonevs,  more  aHied  to  Machairodm.  The  Canidee  are  re- 
presented by  Amphicyon,  which  occurs  in  deposits  of  the  same 
age  in  Europe ;  and  by  Canis,  four  species  of  which  genus  are 
recorded  by  Professor  Cope  from  the  Miocene  of  Colorado,  and  it 
also  occurs  in  the  Pliocene.  The  Rywnodon  is  represented  by 
three  species  in  the  Miocene  of  Dakota  and  Colorado.     It  occurs 


by  Google 


CHAP,  vn.]  MAMMALIA  OF  TEE  NEW  WORLD.  135 

also  in  the  European  Miocene  and  Upper  Eocene  formations,  and 
constitutes  a  distinct  family  Hyfenodontidfe,  allied,  according  to 
Dr.  Leidy,  to  wolves,  cats,  hyjenas  and  weasels.  The  Ursidae 
are  represented  by  only  one  species  of  an  extinct  genus,  Leptar- 
chm>  from  the  Pliocene  of  Nebraska.  From  the  Pliocene  of 
Colorado,  Prof.  Cope  has  recently  described  Tomardos,  as  a 
"  short-faced  type  of  dog ;"   as  well   as  species  of  Canis  and 


—The  animals  belonging  to  this  order  being  usually 
of  large  size  and  accustomed  to  feed  and  travel  in  herds,  are 
liable  to  wholesale  destruction  by  floods,  bogs,  precipices,  drought 
or  hui^er.  It  is  for  these  reasons,  probably,  that  their  remains 
are  almost  always  more  numerous  than  those  of  other  orders  of 
mammalia.  In  America  they  are  especially  abundant ;  and  the 
number  of  new  and  intermediate  types  about  whose  position 
there  is  much  difference  of  opinion  among  Palfeontologists,  ren- 
ders it  very  difficult  to  give  a  connected  summary  of  them  with 
any  approach  to  systematic  accuracy. 

Banning  with  the  Perissodactyla,  or  odd-toed  ungulates,  we 
find  the  Eq^uine  animals  remarkably  numerous  and  interesting. 
The  true  horses  of  the  genus  Eguus,  so  abundant  in  the  Post- 
Pliocene  formations,  are  represented  in  the  Pliocene  by  several 
ancestral  forms.  The  most  nearly  allied  to  Equus  is  Pliohipjms, 
consisting  of  animals  about  the  size  of  an  ass,  with  the  lateral 
toes  not  externally  developed,  but  with  some  differences  of  denti- 
tion. Next  come  Protokippns  and  Hipparion,  in  which  the 
lateral  toes  are  developed  but  are  email  and  functionless.  Then 
we  have  the  allied  genera,  Atwhipiims,  Merychipptis,  and  Hyohip- 
pus,  related  to  the  European  Hippotherium,  which  were  all  still 
smaller  animals,  Protoh'ippm  being  only  2^  feet  high.  In  the 
older  deposits  we  come  to  a  series  of  forms,  still  nnmistakaWy 
equine,  but  with  three  or  more  toes  used  for  locomotion  and  with 
numerous  differentiations  in  form,  proportions,  and  dentition. 
These  constitute  the  family  Anchitheridse.  In  the  Miocene  we 
have  the  genera  AncMtherium  (found  also  in  the  European 
Miocene),  Miohippus  and  MesoMppm,  all  with  three  toes  on  each 
foot,  and  about  the  size  of  a  sheep  or  large  goat.    In  the  Eocene  of 


by  Google 


136  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [paet  il 

Utah  and  Wyoming,  we  get  a  step  further  back,  several  species 
having  heen  discovered  atout  the  size  of  a  fox  with  four  toes  in 
front  and  three  behind.  These  form  the  genua  Orohi^p^'os,  and 
are  the  oldest  ancestral  horse  known.  Prof.  Marsh  points  out  the 
remarkably  perfect  series  of  forms  in  America,  which,  beginning 
with  this  minute  ancient  type,  is  gradually  modified  hy  gaining 
increased  size,  increased  speed  by  concentration  of  the  limb-bones, 
elongation  of  the  head  and  neck,  the  canine  teeth  decreased  in 
size,  the  molars  becoming  longer  and  being  coated  with  cement — 
till  we  at  last  come  to  aninxals  hardly  distinguishable,  specifically, 
from  the  living  horse. 

Allied  to  these,  are  a  series  of  forms  showing  a  transition  to  the 
tapirs,  and  to  the  Palteotheriwrn  of  the  European  Eocene.  In  the 
Phocene  wo  have  Parahippus ;  in  the  Miocene  Lophiodon,  found 
in  the  same  formation  and  in  the  Eocene  of  Europe,  and  allied 
to  the  tapir ;  and  in  the  Eocene,  Palwosyops,  as  laige  as  a  rhino- 
ceros, which  had  large  canines  and  was  allied  to  the  tapir  and 
FalcBofherium ;  I/m/nohyus,  formiug  the  type  of  a  family  Limno- 
hyidse,  which  included  the  last  genus  and  some  others  mentioned 
further  on ;  and  Hyrachyus,  allied  to  Lopkiodon,  and  to  Hyracodovi 
an  extinct  form  of  rhinoceros.  Besides  these  we  have  LopMoihe- 
riwm,  (also  from  the  Eocene  of  Europe) ;  Diplaeodon  allied  to 
Zimnohyiis,'hut  with  affinities  to  modem  Perissodactyla  and  nearly 
as  large  aa  a  rhinoceros  ;  and  Golonoeeras,  also  belonging  to  the 
Limnohyidffi,  an  animal  which  was  the  size  of  a  sheep,  and  had 
divergent  protuberances  or  horns  on  its  nose.  A  remarkable 
genus,  Bathmodon,  lately  described  by  Professor  Cope,  and  of 
which  five  species  have  been  found  in  the  Eocene  of  New  Mexico 
and  Wyoming,  is  believed  to  form  the  type  of  a  new  family, 
having  some  affinity  to  Palmosyops  and  to  the  extinct  Bronto- 
theridie.     It  had  large  canine  tusks  but  no  homs. 

The  Ebinocerotidje  are  represented  in  America  by  the  genus 
Rhinoceros  in  the  Pliocene  and  Miocene,  and  by  Aceratherivm 
and  HyroGodon  in  the  Miocene.  Both  the  latter  were  hornless, 
and  Hyracodon  was  allied  to  the  Eocene  Syrachyiis,  one  of  the 
LCphiodontidce.  In  the  Eocene  and  Miocene  deposits  of  Utah, 
and  Or^on,  several  remarkable  extinct  rhinoceroses  have  been 


by  Google 


CHAP.vij.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  137 

recently  discovered,  forming  tlie  genus  DiceratKeriitm.  These  had 
a  pan  of  natal  horns  placed  side  bj  «ide  on  the  snout  not  behind 
each  other  a*  m  existing  two  homed  rhinoceroses,  the  leat  of 
tlieir  ikeleton  resembling  the  hornless  Acei  athvi  mm  They  were 
f  rathei  snnll  size 
Next  to  these  extinct  ihinoceroaes  come  the  Brontothpridje, 
in  Lxtiaordiniry  fimily  of  large  mammilla  some  of  which 
exceeded  m  bulk  tlie  largest  living  rhmoceios  They  hid  four 
tees  to  the  front  and  thiee  to  the  hind  feet  with  i  pair  of  large 
divergent  horns  on  the  fiont  of  the  head  in  both  sexes  Professor 
Marsh  ind  Di  Leidy  ha\  e  described  four  ^enei'i  Brontotherium, 
Titanothei lum  Megaurops  and  Antbacodm.  distinTmshed  by 
peculnrities  of  dentition  Though  most  nearly  allied  to  the 
ihmoceioses  they  show  some  affinity  foi  the  gigantic  Dino- 
ceiata  ot  the  Eocene  to  be  noticed  fuitber  on  Professoi  Oope 
his  since  di,sciibed  mother  genui  Symbmodon  from  the  Mio- 
cene of  Colon lo  with  no  less  than  se\en  species  one  nearly 
the  size  3t  m  eleplimt  He  thinks  they  had  a  short  tapir-like 
picboscis  The  speties  differ  greatly  m  the  form  of  the  cranium 
md  development  of  the  bom  beiiing  piocesses 

We  commence  the  irtiodictyla  or  even  toed  Ungulates  with 
the  hog  tiibe  These  are  lepresentcd  by  species  of  peccaries, 
(Dicotyk  )  from  the  Pliocene  of  Nebraski  and  Oregon  and  by 
in  lUied  form  Tkinohyus  veiy  like  BitotyUt,  but  having  an 
idditi  nil  fiemtlar  ttoth  and  a,  much  smaller  brain  cavity. 
Fijm  the  Miocene  lie  three  alhed  genera  NanohyiiB  Lepto-' 
chcervs  ind  Pcichhiw^  Protessir  Cope  howevei  thmka  iepto- 
lia,TUb  miy  be  Lemuroid  and  allied  to  Meno'htnum  The 
Anthracotheridse,  a  family  which  connects  the  Hippopotamidffi 
and  Eurainanta,  and  which  occurs  in  the  Miocene  of  Europe 
and  India,  are  represented  in  America  by  the  genus  Hyi^otamiis 
from  the  Miocene  of  Dakota,  and  Motherium  from  the  Miocene  of 
Oregon  and  the  Eocene  of  Wyoming;  the  latter  genus  being  some- 
times classed  with  the  preceding  family,  and  lately  placed  by 
Professor  Marsh,  in  the  new  order,  Tillodontia.  Professor  Cope 
has  since  described  three  other  genera  from  the  Eocene  of  New 

Vol.  I— 11 


by  Google 


138  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [f^ 


Mexico :  Meniscotherium,  having  i 
HyopoUtmus,  and  tlie  lamnotlieridfe ;  Pkmacodus,  the  aize  of  a 
hog,  of  doubtful  position,  but  perhaps  near  Elothtrivm  ;  and 
Achanodon,  as  large  as  a  cow,  but  more  hog-like  than  the  pre- 
ceding. Another  new  genus  from  the  Miocene  of  Colorado— 
Pdonasi — is  said  by  Professor  Cope  to  come  between  1 


The  CamelidEe  are  very  abundant,  and  form  one  of  the  moat 
striking  features  of  the  ancient  fauna  of  America.  Procameliis, 
Ifomocamelits,  &nd  Megalomeryx,  are  extinct  genera  found  in  the 
Pliocene  formation;  the  first  very  closely  allied  to  the  Old 
World  camel,  the  last  smaller  and  more  aheep-like.  In  the 
Miocene  two  other  genera  occur,  Pmbrofherium  and  Protomert/x, 
the  former  allied  to  both  the  camel  and  the  llama. 

Deev  are  represented  by  a  single  speciea  of  Cervus  in  the 
Pliocene,  while  two  extinct  genera,  Leptrnnenjx  and  Merycodus, 
are  found  in  the  Miocene  deposits,  the  latter  indicating  a  tran- 
sition between  camels  and  deer.  Two  other  genera,  J 
and  Hypirtragidus,  of  very  small  size,  are  said  by 
Cope  to  be  allied  to  the  Tragulidte  and  to  Leptoineryx. 

The  Bovida,  or  hollow-honied  ruminants,  are  only  represented 
in  the  Kewer  Pliocene  by  a  single  species  of  an  extinct  genus, 
Casoryx,  said  to  be  intermediate  between  antelopes  and  deer. 

We  now  come  to  an  exclusively  American  family,  the  Ono- 
dontidce,  which  consisted  of  small  animals  termed  by  Dr.  Leidy, 
"ruminating  hogs,"  and  which  had  some  general  structural 
resemblances  to  deer  and  camels.  They  aboimded  in  North 
America  during  the  Pliocene,  and  especially  during  the  Miocene 
epoch,  no  less  than  six  genera  and  twenty  species  having  been 
discovered.  Merychus  contains  the  Pliocene  forms;  while 
Oreodon,  E^oreodon,  Merychochcerm,  Leptauckenia.,  and  Agrio- 
ckosTua  are  Miocene.  The  last  genus  extends  back  into  the 
Eocene  period,  and  shows  affinity  to  the  European  Anoplothc- 
ridse  of  the  same  epoch. 

Proboscidea. — The  Elephantid^  are  only  represented  in 
America  by  one  species  of  Mastodon  and  one  of  Mephas,  in 
the  Newer  Pliocene  deposits.     In  the  Older  Pliocene,  Miocene, 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VII.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  139 

and  Upper  Eocene,  no  remains  of  this  order  have  heen  found ; 
and  in  1869,  Dr.  Leidy  remarked  on  the  small  average  size  of 
the  extinct  North  American  mammalia,  which  were  almost  all 
smaller  than  their  living  analogues.  Since  then,  however,  won- 
derful discoveries  have  heen  made  in  deposits  of  Middle  Eocene 
age  in  Wyoming  and  Colorado,  of  a  group  of  huge  animals  not 
only  rivalling  the  elephants  in  size,  but  of  so  remarkable  and 
peculiar  a  structure  as  to  recLiiire  the  formation  of  a  new  order  of 
mammals — Dinoeerata — -for  their  reception. 

This  order  consists  of  animals  with  generalised  Ungulate  and 
Proboscidean  affinities.  The  lower  jaw  resembles  that  of  the 
hippopotamus ;  they  had  five  toes  on  the  anterior  feet  and  four  on 
the  posterior ;  three  pairs  of  homa,  the  first  pair  on  the  top  of  the 
head,  large  and  perhaps  palmated,  the  second  pair  above  the  eyes, 
while  the  third  and  smallest  stood  out  sideways  on  the  snout 
They  had  enormous  upper  canines,  of  which  the  roots  entered 
the  middle  horn  cores,  no  upper  incisors,  and  small  molars. 
Professor  Marsh  believes  that  they  had  no  trunk.  The  remains 
discovered  indicate  four  genera,  Binoe&ras  (3  sp.),  Tinoceras 
,  (2  sp.),  Uiwtatheriuin,  (1  sp.),  and  Eobasileus  (2  sp.).  Many  other 
names  have  been  given  to  fragments  of  these  animals,  and  even 
those  here  given  may  not  be  all  distinct. 

Another  new  order,  TUlodontia,  recently  established  by  Pro- 
fessor Marsh,  is  perhaps  yet  more  remarkable  in  a  zoological 
point  of  view,  since  it  combines  the  characters  of  Carnivora, 
Ungulata,  and  Rodents.  These  animals  have  been  formed  into 
two  families,  Tillotheridfe  and  StyUnodontidfe;  and  three  genera, 
TiUotheriwm,  Anchvppodus,  and  Stylinodovdia.  All  are  from  the 
Eocene  of  Wyoming  and  New  Jersey.  Perhaps  to  these  must  be 
added  Hlotherium  from  the  Miocene  of  Dakota,  the  other  forms 
being  all  Eocene,  They  were  mostly  animals  of  small  size, 
between  that  of  the  capybara  and  tapir.  The  skull  resembled  in 
form  that  of  a  bear ;  the  molar  teeth  were  of  Ungulate  type,  and 
the  incisors  like  those  of  a  Rodent;  but  the  skeleton  was  more 
that  of  the  Ursidte,  the  feet  being  plantigrada  Professor  Cope 
has  since  described  three  new  genera  from  the  Eocene  of 
New  Mexico,  Ectoganvs,  Calamodon,  and  Esthonyx;  comprising 


by  Google 


140  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

seven  species  allied  to  Tillotherium  and  Anckippodus,  and  having 
also  relations,  as  Professor  Cope  believes,  witli  the  South  American 
Toxodontidse. 

Bodenlia.— This  order  is  represented  in  the  Pliocene  by  a 
beaver,  a  porcupine,  and  an  American  mouse  (Ife^eromi/s),  all 
extinct  species  of  living  genera,  the  Systrix  being  an  Old  World 
type;  and  Professor  Cope  has  recently  described  Faiiolax,  a 
new  genus  of  hares  from  the  Pliocene  of  Kew  Mexico.  The 
Miocene  deposits  have  furnished  an  extinct  genus  allied  to  the 
hares — Pakeolagiis;  one  of  the  squirrel  family — Ischyromys ; 
a  small  extinct  form  of  beaver— Pa^ocosfw ;  and  an  extinct 
,mouse — Evmys.  The  Eocene  strata  of  Wyoming  have  lately 
furnished  two  extinct  forms  of  squirrel,  Faramys  and  Seiwavus; 
and  another  of  the  Muridje  {or  mouse  family),  Mysops. 

Cetacea.- — Numerous  i-emains  of  dolphins  and  whales,  be- 
longing to  no  less  than  twelve  genera,  mostly  extinct,  have  been 
found  in  the  Miocene  deposits  of  the  Atlantic  and  Gulf  States, 
from  New  Jersey  to  South  Carolina  and  Louisiana ;  while  seven 
genera  of  the  extinct  family,  ZeuglodontidEe,  have  been  found  in 
Miocene  and  Eocene  beds  of  the  same  districts.  Some  remains 
associated  with  these  are  doubtfully  referred  to  the  Seal  family 
(PhocidEe)  among  the  Carnivora. 

.  Edentata.— TiW  quite  recently  no  remains  of  this  order  have 
occurred  in  any  North  American  deposits  below  the  Post-Plio- 
cene ;  but  in  1874  Prof.  Marsh  described  some  remains  allied  to 
Megatonyx  and  Mylodon,  from  the  Pliocene  beds  of  California 
and  Idaho,  and  forming  a  new  genus,  Morotherium.  As"  these 
remains  have  only  occurred  to  the  west  of  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
and  in  Pliocene  deposits  whose  exact -^e  is  not  ascertained,  tliey 
hardly  affect  the  remarkable  absence  of  this  group  from  the 
whole  of  the  exceedingly  rich  Tertiary  deposits  in  all  other  parts 
of  North  America. 

General  Relations  of  the  extinct  Tertiary  Mammalia  of  North 
America  and  Europe. — Having  now  given  a  sketch  of  the  ex- 
tinct Mammalia  which  inhabited  Europe  and  North  America 
during  the  Tertiary  period,  we  are  enabled  by  comparing  them. 


by  Google 


cuAr.  vii.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  141 

to  ascertain  their  relations  to  each  other,  and  to  see  how  I'at 
they  elucidate  the  problem  of  the  birth-place  a 
migrations  of  the  several  families  and  genera.  We  have  aire 
pointed  out  the  remarkable  features  of  the  Quaternary  (or  P 
Pliocene)  fauna  of  North  America,  and  now  proceed  to  d 
that  of  the  various  Tertiary  periods,  which  is  closely  connected 
with  the  extinct  fauna  of  Europe. 

The  Tertiary  Mammalia  of  North  America  at  present  de- 
scribed belong  to  from  e^hty  to  one  hundred  genera,  while 
those  of  Europe  are  nearly  double  that  number ;  yet  only 
eighteen  genera  are  common  to  the  two  faunas,  and  of  these 
eight  are  living  and  belong  chiefly  to  the  Pliocene  period. 
Taking  first,  the  genera  which  in  America  do  not  go  back  beyond 
the  Pliocene  period  ("ten  in  niunber),  we  find  that  eight  of  them 
in  Europe  go  back  to  the  Upper  Miocene.  These  are  Fdis, 
Pseudmlwus,  Sipparion,  Cervus,  Mastodon,  Elepkas  (in  India), 
Castor  and  Ifystrix;  while  another,  Canis,  goes  back  to  the 
Upper  Eocene  and  the  tenth,  £'g^uus,  confined  to  the  newer 
Pliocene  or  perhaps  to  the  Post-Pliocene  in  America,  extends 
back  to  the  older  Pliocene  in  Europe.  Of  the  seven  European 
genera  which  are  confined  to  the  Miocene  period  in  America, 
three,  Hymnodon,  AiicMtherium,  and  Lophiodon  go  back  to  the 
Eocene  in  Europe;  three  others,  Machairodus,  Rhinoceros,  and 
Aceratheriiim,  are  also  of  Miocene  age  in  Europe ;  Atnphicyon  goes 
back  to  the  Lower  Jtiocene  of  Europe.  LopMotherium  belongs 
to  the  Eocene  of  both  countries. 

If  we  turn  now  to  families  instead  of  genera,  we  find  that  the 
same  general  rule  prevails.  Mustelidje  (weasels),  Ursida?  (bears), 
true  Equidffi  (horses),  and  Bovidte  (oxen  &c.),  go  no  further  baek 
in  America  than  the  Pliocene,  while  they  all  go  back  to  the 
Miocene  in  Europe.  Suidse  (swine)  and  Anoplotheridie  (extinct) 
are  found  in  the  American  Miocene  and  in  the  European  Eocene. 
Anchitheridse  (extinct)  reach  the  Upper  Eocene  in  America, 
while  in  Europe  they  range  through  Upper,  Middle,  and  Lower 
Eocene.  Cervidfe  (deer)  alone  are  Miocene  in  both  countries. 
There  remain  two  families  in  which  America  lias  the  pre- 
eminence.    Camelidfe  (camels)  were  wonderfully  developed  in 


by  Google 


U2  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  n. 

the  American  Pliocene  and  Miocene  periods,  abounding  in 
genera  and  species ;  whereas  in  Europe  the  group  only  exists  in 
the  Poat-Pliocene  or  Lower  Pliocene,  with  one  Upper  Miocene 
species  of  Camelus  in  N.  India.  The  Anthracotheridffi  (extinct), 
found  only  in  the  Upper  Miocene  of  France  and  India,  reach 
even  the  Lower  Eocene  in  America. 

These  facts  may  be  due,  in  part,  to  a  want  of  strict  co-ordina- 
tion between  the  Tertiary  deposits  of  Europe  and  North  America, 
—in  part  to  the  imperfection  of  the  record  in  the  latter  country. 
Yet  it  does  not  seem  probable  tliafc  they  are  altogether  due  to 
these  causes,  because  the  Miocene  beds,  which  are  by  far  the 
best  known  in  America  as  in  Europe,  exhibit  deficiencies  of  the 
same  kind  as  the  less  known  Eocene  deposits.  The  fossil  fauna 
of  botli  countries  is  so  rich,  that  we  can  hardly  impute  great  and 
well  marked  differences  to  imperfect  knowledge ;  yet  we  find 
such  important  families  as  the  Civets,  Hyjenta,  Giraifes,  and 
Hippopotami  absent  from  America,  with  the  Weasels,  and  Ante- 
lopes almost  so ;  while  America  possesses  almost  all  the  CamelidEe, 
two  peculiar  orders,  Dinocerata  and  TiUodontia,  and  four  remark- 
ably peculiar  families,  Limnotheridaa,  Lemuravidse,  Oreodontidas 
and  Brontotheridte  If  then  the  facts  at  present  known  represent 
approximately  the  leal  time  relations  of  the  groups  in  question 
on  the  two  continents  they  lender  it  probable  that  weasels,  bears, 
true  horses,  swme  oxen  sheep  and  antelopes,  originated  on  the 
Old  World  continent  and  were  transmitted  to  America  during 
some  part  of  the  Miocene  peiiod;  while  camels  originated  in  the 
New  World,  and  somewhere  about  the  same  time  passed  over  to 
Europe.  Of  the  extinct  families  common  to  the  two  hemi- 
spheres, the  Anthracotheridte  alone  seem  to  have  had  an 
American  origin.  Of  the  genera  common  to  the  two  countries, 
almost  all  seem  to  have  bad  a  European  origin,  the  only  genera 
of  equal  date  being  the  two  rhinoceroses  and  three  Anchi- 
theridffi ;  but  if  the  Brontotheridse  are  allied  to  the  Ehinoeerotid^, 
these  latter  may  have  originated  in  America,  although  now  an 
exclusively  Old  World  type.  These  conclusions  are  not  im- 
probable when  we  consider  the  much  gi'eater  size  of  the  Old 
World  continents,  extending  far  into  the  tropics  and  probably 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VII.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  X43 

lwa\s  moie  oi  less  united  to  the  tiojical  arois  ^vhile  the 
Mdtnceot  the  extinct  mimimlia  themsehes  sIiow&  thit  South 
iiiicricd  has  1  een  for  the  most  pdrt  ibcHted  tram  the  northern 
tontinent  and  did  not  take  pait  m  the  development  of  iti 
<  haraet«nistic  Tertiary  fauna 

BLfore  speculatmc;  further  on  this  ■'ubject   it  will  be  well  to 
lay  before  om  leaders  a  suinmaij  of  South  American  pal#on 
tolo^   aftei  which  we  shill  be  in  i  better  position  to   draw 
iieft  inferen  cs  frtm  the  whole  body  of  the  e\iden(,e 

Soimi  America. 

Unfortunately,  our  knowledge  of  the  interesting  fossil  fauna 
of  this  continent,  ia  almost  wholly  confined  to  the  Pogt-Pliocene 
and  Pliocene  periods.  A  few  remains  have  been  discovered  in 
deposits  beKeved  to  be  of  Eocene  age,  but  nothing  whatever 
representing  the  vast  intervening  period,  so  rich  in  peculiar 
forms  of  animal  life  both  in  North  America  and  Europe. 

Fauna  of  the  Brazilian  caves. — What  we  know  of  the  Post- 
Pliocene  period  is  chiefly  due  to  the  long-continued  researches 
of  Dr.  Lund  in  the  caves  of  Central  Brazil,  mostly  situated  in 
a  district  near  the  head  waters  of  the  San  ITrancisco  river 
in  the  Province  of  Minas  Geraes.  The  eaves  are  formed  in 
limestone  rocks,  and  are  so  numerous  that  Dr.  Lund  visited 
thousands,  but  only  sixty  contained  bones  in  any  quantity. 
These  caves  have  a  floor  of  reddish  earth,  often  crowded  with 
bones.  In  one  experiment,  half  a  cubic  foot  of  this  earth 
contained  jaws  of  400  opossums,  2,000  mice,  besides  remains 
of  bats,  porcupines  and  small  birds.  In  another  trial,  the 
whole  of  the  earth  in  a  cavern  was  carried  out  for  examin- 
ation, amounting  to  6,552  firkins ;  and,  from  a  calculation 
made  by  measured  samples,  it  was  estimated  to  contain 
nearly  seven  millions  of  jaw-bones  of  cavies,  opossums,  por- 
cupines, and  mice,  besides  small  birds,  lizards,  and  frogs.  This 
immense  accumulation  is  believed  to  have  been  formed  from 
the  bodies  of  animals  brought  into  the  cavern  by  owls ;  and, 
as  these  are   unsocial   birds,  the   quantity  found   imphes   an 


by  Google 


U4  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTIKCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

immense  lapse  of  time,  probably  some  thousands  of  years. 
More  than  100  species  of  Mammalia,  in  all,  were  obtained 
in  these  caves.  Some  were  living  species  or  closely  allied 
to  such;  but  the  majority  were  extinct,  and  a  considerable 
number,  about  one-fourth,  belonged  to  extinct  genera,  or 
genera  not  now  inhabiting  South  America,  Stone  implements 
and  human  remains  were  found  in  several  of  the  caves  with 
extinct  animals.  The  following  enumeration  of  these  remains 
is  from  the  corrected  list  of  M,  Gervais. 

Primates. — Extinct  species  of  Gehus,  GalUthrix,  and  Jacchus — 
South  American  genera  of  monkeys;  with  an  extinct  genus, 
Protopitheiyus—a.'a  animal  of  lai^e  size  but  belonging  to  the 
American  family  Cebidte. 

Chiroptera. — Species  belonging  to  the  South  American  Phyllos- 
tomidse,  and  to  two  South  Anierican  genera  of  other  families. 

Garnivora. — Five  species  of  Felis,  some  aJhed  to  living  ani- 
mals, others  extinct ;  a  species  of  the  widespread  extinct  genus 
Machairodus  ;  and  a  small  species  referred  to  Gi/ncelurus,  the 
genus  containing  the  hunting  leopard  now  found  only  in  Africa 
and  India.  Canidse  are  represented  by  Canis  and  Icticyon  (a 
living  Brazilian  species  of  the  latter  genua),  and  the  extinct 
genus  Speoihos.  Mustelidse  are  represented  by  extinct  species 
of  the  South  American  genera  Mephitis  and  Galicfis.  Procy- 
onidEe,  by  a  species  of  Nasua,.  UrsidEc,  by  Ardotherium,  a 
genus  closely  resembling,  if  not  identical  with,  that  containing 
the  "spectacled  bear"  of  Chili. 

Ungulata. — Equus,  Taptrus,  DicotyUs,  Auchenia,  Cervus,  Lep- 
toiheritim,  and  Antilope,  are  the  cave-genera  of  this  order. 
Eqmts  and  Antelope  are  particularly  interesting,  as  representing 
groups  forming  no  part  of  existing  South  American  zoology; 
while  the  presence  also  of  Leptotherium,  an  extinct  genus  of 
antelopes,  shows  that  the  group  was  fairly  represented  in  South 
America  at  this  compaiatn  ely  recent  period 

Proboscidea. — A  specie^!  of  Masicdon  found  also  in  the  Pliocene 
of  La  Plata,  represents  this  order 

Eodentia. — These  abound  Dasypiocta,  Ccdogenys,  Cavia, 
K&rodon,   all  living   generi    of    Caviidse     ire    represented   by 


by  Google 


CHAP.  ¥11,]  KAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  145 

extinct  species.  Gercolahes,  the  '  tree  porcupine '  (CercolabidEe) 
has  two  species,  one  as  large  as  a  peccary ;  Myopotorjims,  Loncheres, 
Carterodon,  aie  existing  genera  of  spiny  rats  (Echimyidse) ; 
and  there  are  two  extinct  genera  of  the  same  family,  Loncho- 
2>horus  and  Phyllomys.  Lagostomiis  (Chinchillidas),  the  visca- 
cha  of  the  Pampas,  is  represented  by  an  extinct  species. 
There  is  also  an  extinct  species  of  Lepus ;  several  species  of 
Hesperomys  and  Oxymycteni^ ;  and  a  large  Arvicola,  a  genus  not 
living  in  South  America. 

Edentata. — These,  which  constitute  the  great  feature  of  the 
existing  South  American  fauna,  were  still  more  abundant  and 
varied  in  the  Cave  period,  aud  it  is  remarkable  that  moat  of 
them  arc  extinct  genera.  The  armadillos  are  alone  represented 
by  living  forms,  Dasypus,  and  ^enurus ;  Eurydon  and  Hetero- 
don,  are  extinct  genera  of  the  same  family,  as  well  as  Ghlamydo- 
thermm — huge  armadillos  the  size  of  a  tapir  or  rhinoceros,  and 
Fachytherium,  which  was  nearly  as  laige.  The  ant-eaters  are 
represented  only  by  Glossotkeriv/m,  an  extinct  form  allied  to 
Myrmecophaga  and  Manis.  The  sloths  were  more  numerous, 
being  represented  by  the  extinct  genera  Ocelodcn,  Sphmodon 
and  Ochotherium,  the  last  of  large  size.  The  huge  terrestrial 
sloths — Megatheridie,  also  abounded;  there  being  species  of 
Megathermnt  and  Megalonyx,  as  well  as  the  allied  ScelidotJm-iwm, 
supposed  to  have  some  affinity  for  the  African  Oryeteri^nis. 

Marsupials. — No  new  forms  of  these  appear,  but  numerous 
species  of  Didelphys,  all  closely  allied  to  opossums  still  living 
in  South  America, 

The  preceding  sketch  of  the  wonderful  cave  fauna  of  Central 
Brazil,  is  sufficient  to  show  that  it  represents,  in  the  main,  a 
period  of  great  antiquity.  Not  only  are  almost  the  whole  of 
the  species  extinct,  but  there  are  twenty  extinct  genera,  and  three 
others  not  now  inhabitants  of  South  America.  The  fact  that  so 
few  remains  of  the  living  animals  of  the  country  are  found  in 
these  caves,  indicates  that  some  change  of  physical  conditions 
has  occurred  since  they  were  the  receptacles  of  so  many  of  the 
la^er  animals;   and  the  presence  of  many  extinct  genera  of 


by  Google 


U6  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [paut  ii. 

large  size,  especially  among  the  Edentata  and  American  families 
of  EodentiS,  are  additional  proofs  of  a  very  high  antiquity. 
Yet  many  of  these  cave  animals  are  closely  allied  to  those 
which  are  found  in  jSTorth  America  in  the  Post-PHocene  deposits 
only,  so  that  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  the  cave-fauna  to 
be  of  much  earlier  data  But  the  great  amount  of  organic 
change  it  implies,  must  give  us  an  enlarged  idea  of  the  vast 
periods  of  time,  as  measured  by  years,  which  are  included  in 
this,  the  most  recent  of  all  geological  epochs. 

PUoeene  Period  of  Temperate  South  America. — We  have  now 
to  consider  the  numerous  remains  of  extinct  animals  found  in 
various  deposits  in  the  Pampas,  and  in  Patagonia,  and  a  few  in 
Bolivia.  The  age  of  these  is  uncertain;  but  aa  they  are  very 
similar  to  the  cave-fauna,  though  containing  a  somewhat  larger 
proportion  of  extinct  genera  and  some  very  remarkable  new 
forms,  they  cannot  be  ven/  much  older,  and  are  perhaps  hest 
referred  at  present  to  the  newer  portion  of  the  Pliocene 
formation. 

Garmvora. — The  genus  Macliairodus  or  sabre-toothed  tigers, 
represents  the  Felidte.  There  are  several  species  of  wolves 
(Ganis) ;  a  weasel  (Mustela) ;  two  bears  of  the  Brazilian  cave- 
genus  Ardotheriiim;  and  the  extinct  European  genns  Spcenarctos. 

Ungulata. — ^There  are  two  species  of  Sqivus,  found  in  the 
Pampas,  Chili,  and  Bolivia;  two  of  Macravckenia,  an  extra^ 
ordinary  extinct  group  allied  to  the  tapir  and  Palteotherium,  but 
with  the  long  neck,  and  general  size  of  a  camel.  A  second 
species  found  on  the  highlands   of  Bolivia  is  much  smaller. 

A  more  recent  discovery,  in  Patagonia,  is  the  almost  perfect 
series  of  teeth  of  a  large  animal  named  Homalodontofkeriii/m;  and 
which  is  believed  hy  Professor  Flower,  who  has  described  it,  to 
have  been  allied  to  }ihim>eeros,  and  still  more  to  the  Miocene 
Hyrar^don  fTOm  Morth  America;  and  also  to  present  some 
resemblances  to  Maerauchem.ia,  and  though  much  more  remotely, 
to  the  curious  genus  JVesodon  mentioned  further  on. 

The  Artiodactyla,  or  even-toed  Ungulates,  are  represented  hy  a 
species  of  Dieotyles.  or  peccary,  found  in  the  deposits  of  the 


by  Google 


CHAP.  Vii.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WOULD.  147 

Pampas ;  by  Auchenia,  or  llama,  of  which  three  extinct  species 
inhabited  Bolivia,  in  which  eountiy  two  allied  but  extinct 
genera,  Palmolama  and  Camelotherium,  have  also  been  found. 
Three  species  of  deer  [Gervus),  from  the  Pampas  deposits,  com- 
plete the  list  of  Pliocene  Ungulates. 

Probosddea.- — ^The  cave  species  of  Mastodon  is  found  also  in 
the  Pampas  deposits,  and  another  in  the  Andes  of  Chili  and 
Bolivia, 

itoi^eTiis.— These  are  not  so  numerous  aa  in  the  caves.  There 
are  spffcics  of  the  existing  genera,  K&rodon  and  Vavia  (Caviidse) ; 
Lagostomiis  (Chinchillidfe) ;  Ctmomys  (Octodontidse) ;  Lepvs 
(hare) ;  He^eromys  and  OxymycUrus  (Muridas)  ;  Ai-vicola,  a 
genus  not  living  in  South  America ;  and  an  extinct  genus,  Car- 
diodus.  There  is  also  a  remarkable  extinct  form,  Typotherium, 
larger  than  the  capybara,  and  having  affinitiea  to  Edentates  and 
Ungulates.  Three  species  have  been  found  in  the  Pampas  deposits. 

Edentata. — These  are  as  abundant  and  remarkable  as  in  the 
cave  deposits.  Scelidotherium,  Megatherium,  Megalo^yx,  Glosso- 
theritm.  and  J)asypus,  have  already  been  noticed  as  from  the 
Brazilian  caves.  We  have  here,  in  addition,  the  huge  Mylodon 
allied  to  the  Megatherium,  and  the  allied  genera — Gnathnpsis 
and  Lestodon.  We  then  come  to  the  huge  extinct  armadillos, 
Glyplodon  and  ScMdopleurum,  the  former  consisting  of  numerous 
species,  some  of  which  were  as  large  as  an  elephant.  Another 
genus,  Eutaiiis,  is  allied  to  the  living  three-banded  armadillos ; 
and  a  species  of  the  existing  genus  Euphraci/iis  has  been  found 
in  Bolivia. 

Toxodortiidfs. — There  remain  a  number  of  huge  animals 
rivalling  the  Megatherium  in  size,  and  forming  the  genera 
Tosxdon  and  Nesodtm,  but  whose  position  is  doubtful.  Several 
species  have  been  found  in  the  deposits  of  the  Pampas  and 
Patagonia.  They  are  alhed  at  once  to  Ui^ulates,  Itedents,  Eden- 
tates, and  the  aquatic  Sirenia,  in  so  puzzling  a  manner  that  it  is 
impossible  to  determine  to  what  order  they  belong,  or  whether 
they  require  a  new  order  to  be  formed  for  their  reception.  Some 
are  believed  to  date  back  to  the  Miocene  period,  and  they 
indicate  what  strange  forms  may  stiU  be  discovered,  should  any 


by  Google 


148  DlBTHiBUTlON  QF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [fart  u. 

productive  deposits  be  found  in  South  America  of  middle  Ter- 
tiary ^e. 

Pliocene  Mammalm  of  the  Antilles. — These  may  be  noticed 
here,  as  they  are  of  special  interest,  proving  the  connection  of 
the  larger  West  Indian  Islands  with  the  Continent  some  time  in 
the  later  Tertiary  period.  They  consist  of  remains  of  two  large 
animals  beloi^ing  to  the  South  American  ChinchillidEs,  found  in 
cave  deposits  in  the  island  of  Anguilla,  and  forming  two  new 
genera,  AmUyrhiza  and  Loxomylvs ;  and  remain  alKed  to  Mega.- 
lonyx  from   Cuba,   which  have    been  named  Megalomus  and 


Eocene  fauna  of  South  America. — The  few  remains  yet  dis- 
covered in  the  Tertiary  deposits  of  the  Pampas  which  are  beheved 
to  be  of  Eocene  t^e,  are  exceedingly  interestir^,  because  they 
show  us  another  change  in  the  scenery  of  the  great  drama  of 
life ;  there  being  apparently  a  considerable  resemblance,  at  this 
epoch,  between  South  America  and  Europe.  They  consist  of  a 
large  extinct  feline  animal,  Hutemnodws ;  of  Pal^eotheHum  and 
Anoptotherium,  the  weE-known  extinct  Ungulates  of  the  Euro- 
pean Tertiaries,  and  which  have  never  been  found  in  North 
America;  and  of  three  genera  of  Eodents, — Theridroniys,  allied 
to  Echimys,  and  found  also  in  the  Eocene  and  Miocene  of  France  j 
Megamys,  allied  to  the  living  Capromys  of  the  Antilles,  and 
also  to  PalcBOmys,  an  pxtinct  form  of  the  French  Miocene ;  and 
a  very  large  animal  refeiTcd  to  Arvicola,  a  genus  found  also  in 
the  Pliocene  deposits  of  South  America,  and  abundant  in  the 
northern  hemisphere.     No  Edentates  have  been  found. 

The  resemblances  of  this  fauna  to  that  of  Europe  rather  than 
to  any  part  of  America,  are  so  strong,  that  they  can  hardly  be 
accidental.  We  greatly  want,  however,  more  information  on  this 
point,  as  well  as  some  corresponding  evidences  as  to  the  condition 
of  West  and  South  Africa  about  the  same  epoch,  before  we  can 
venture  to  speculate  on  their  bearing  as  regards  the  early  mi- 
grations of  organic  forms. 

General  Semarks  on  the  Extinct  Mammalian  Fauna  of  the  Old 


by  Google 


CFAP.  vii.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  149 

and  N&w  Worlds. — Leaving  the  more  special  applications  of 
palEeontological  evidence  to  be  made  after  discuasing  the  relations 
of  the  existing  fauna  of  the  several  r^ions,  we  propose  here  to 
indicate  briefly,  some  of  the  more  general  deductions  from  the 
evidence  which  has  now  been  laid  before  our  readers. 

The  first,  and  perhaps  the  most  startling  fact  brought  out  by 
our  systematic  review,  is  the  very  recent  and  almost  universal 
change  that  has  taken  place  in  the  character  of  the  fa;una,  over 
all  the  areas  we  have  been  considering ;  a  change  which  seems 
to  be  altogether  unprecedented  in  the  past  history  of  the  same 
countries  as  revealed  by  the  geological  record.  In  Europe,  in 
North  America,  and  in  Soutli  America,  we  have  evidence  that  a 
very  similar  change  occurred  about  the  same  time.  In  all  three 
we  find,  in  the  most  recent  deposits — cave-eaiths,  peat-bogs,  and 
gravels — the  remainii  of  a  whole  series  of  large  animals,  which 
have  since  become  wholly  extinct  Or  only  survive  in  far-distant 
lands.  In  Europe,  the  great  Irish  elk,  the  Maehairodiis  and 
cave-lion,  the  rhinoceros,  hippopotamus,  and  elephant ; — in  North 
America,  equally  lai^  felines,  horses  and  tapirs  larger  than  any 
now  living,  a  llama  as  la^e  as  a  camel,  great  mastodons  and 
elephants,  and  abundance  of  huge  megatheroid  animals  of  almost 
equal  size ; — in  South  America  these  same  megatheroids  in  greater 
variety,  numerous  huge  armadillos,  a  mastodon,  large  horses  and 
tapirs,  lai^e  porcupines,  two  forms  of  antelope,  numerous  bears  and 
felines, including  a.Machairodiis,  and  a  large  monkey, — have  all  be- 
come extinct  since  the  deposition  of  the  most  recent  of  the  fossil- 
bearing  strata.  This  is  certainly  not  a  great  while  ago,  geologi- 
cally ;  and  it  is  almost  certain  that  this  great  organic  revolution, 
implying  physical  changes  of  such  vast  proportions  that  they 
must  have  been  due  to  causes  of  adequate  intensity  and  propor- 
tionate range,  has  taken  place  since  man  lived  on  the  earth. 
This  is  proved  to  have  been  the  case  in  Europe,  and  is  supported 
by  much  evidence  both  as  regards  North  and  South  America. 

It  is  clear  that  so  complete  and  sudden  a  change  in  the  higher 
forms  of  life,  does  not  represent  the  normal  state  of  things; 
Species  and  genera  have  not,  at  all  times,  become  so  rapidly 
extinct     The  time  occupied  by  the  "  Eecont  period,"  that  is  the 


by  Google 


150  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [PAiiT  ii. 

time  since  these  chaDges  took  place  is,  geologically,  miaute. 
The  time  of  the  whole  of  the  Post-Pliocene  period,  as  measured 
by  the  amount  of  physical  and  general  organic  change  known  to 
have  taken  place,  is  exceedingly  small  when  compared  with  the 
duration  of  the  Pliocene  period,  and  still  smaller,  probably,  as 
compared  with  the  Miocene.  Yet  during  these  two  periods  we 
meet  with  no  such  break  in  the  continuity  of  the  forms  of  life,  no 
such  radical  change  in  the  character  of  the  fauna  (though  the 
number  of  specific  and  generic  changes  may  be  as  great)  as  we 
find  in  passing  from  the  Post-Pliocene  to  recent  times.  For 
example,  in  Central  Europe  numerous  hyaenas,  rhinoceroses,  and 
antelopes,  with  the  great  Machairodus,  continued  from  Miocene 
all  through  Pliocene  into  Post-Pliocene  times ;  while  hippo- 
potami and  elephants  continued  to  live  through  a  good  part  of 
the  Pliocene  and  Poat-Pliocene  periods, — and  then  all  suddenly 
became  extinct  or  left  the  country.  In  North  America  there  has 
been  more  movement  of  the  fauna  in  all  the  periods ;  but  we 
have  similar  great  felines,  horses,  mastodons,  and  elephants,  in 
the  Pliocene  and  Post-Pliocene  periods,  while  Ehinoceros  is  com- 
mon to  the  Miocene  and  Pliocene,  and  camels  range  continuously 
from  Miocene,  through  Pliocene,  to  Post-Pliocene  times ;— when 
all  alike  became  extinct.  Even  in  South  America  the  evidence  is, 
as  far  as  it  goes,  all  the  same  way.  We  find  Machairodus,  Eguvs, 
Mastodon,  Megathervu/m,  Scelidothermm,  Megalonyx,  and  numerous 
gigantic  armadillos,  alike  in  the  caves  and  in  the  stratified 
tertiary  deposits  of  the  Pampas ; — yet  all  have  since  passed  away. 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  we  are  now  in  an  altogether 
exceptional  period  of  the  earth's  history.  We  live  in  a  zoolc^i- 
cally  impoverished  world,  from  which  all  the  hugest,  and  fiercest, 
and  strangest  forms  have  recently  disappeared  ;  and  it  is,  no 
doubt,  a  much  better  world  for  us  now  they  have  gone.  Yet  it 
is  surely  a  marvellous  fact,  and  one  that  has  hardly  been  suffi- 
ciently dwelt  upon,  this  sudden  dying  out  of  so  many  large 
mammalia,  not  in  one  place  only  but  over  half  the  land  surface 
of  the  globe.  We  cannot  but  believe  that  there  must  have  been 
some  physical  cause  for  this  great  change ;  and  it  must  have 
been  a  cause  capable  of  acting  almost  simultaneously  over  laige 


by  Google 


criAP.  Yii.]  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  "WORLD.  151 

portions  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  one  wliich,  as  far  as  the 
Tertiary  period  at  least  is  concerned,  was  of  an  exceptional  cha- 
racter. Such  a  cause  exists  in  the  great  and  recent  physical  change 
known  as  "  the  Glacial  epoch."  We  have  proof  in  both  Europe 
and  North  America,  that  just  about  the  time  tliese  large  animals 
were  disappearing,  all  the  northern  parts  of  these  continents 
were  wrapped  in  a  mantle  of  ice ;  and  we  have  every  reason  to 
believe  that  the  presence  of  this  large  quantity  of  ice  (known  to 
have  been  thousands  of  feet  if  not  some  miles  in  thickness)  must 
have  acted  in  various  ways  lo  have  produced  alterations  of 
level  of  the  ocean  as  well  as  vast  local  floods,  which  would  have 
combined  with  the  excessive  cold  to  destroy  animal  life.  There 
is  great  difference  of  opinion  among  geologists  and  physicists  as 
to  the  extent,  nature,  and  duration  of  the  Glacial  epoch.  Some 
believe  it  to  have  prevailed  alternately  in  the  northern  and 
southern  hemispheres ;  others  that  it  was  simultaneous  in  both. 
Some  think  there  was  a  succession  of  cold  periods,  each  lasting 
many  thousands  of  years,  but  with  intercalated  warm  periods  of 
equal  duration ;  others  deny  that  there  is  any  evidence  of  such 
changes,  and  maintain  that  the  Glacial  epoch  was  one  continuous 
period  of  arctic  conditions  in  the  temperate  zones,  with  some 
fluctuations  perhaps  but  with  no  regular  alternations  of  warm 
periods.  Some  baheve  in  a  huge  ice-cap  covering  the  whole 
northern  hemisphere  from  the  pole  to  near  50°  north  latitude 
in  the  eastern,  and  40°  in  the  western  hemisphere  ;  while  others 
impute  the  observed  effects  either  to  glaciers  from  local  centres, 
or  to  floating  ieebei^a  of  vast  size  passing  over  the  surface  during 
a  period  of  submersion. 

Without  venturing  to  decide  which  of  these  various  theories 
will  be  ultimately  p  1  to  b  correct,  we  may  state,  that 
there  is  an  increas  n  h  li  f  a  ig  geologists  in  the  long  duiu- 
tion  of  this  ice-p  d  and  tl  vast  extent  and  great  thick- 
ness attained  by  tl  h  t  One  of  the  most  recent,  and 
not  the  least  able,  of  th  t  nthis  question  (Mr,  Belt)  shows 
strong  reasons  for  adopting  the  view  that  the  ice-period  was 
simultaneous  in  both  hemispheres ;  and  he  calculates  that  the 
vast  amount  of  water  abstracted  from  the  ocean  aiid  locked  up 


by  Google 


152  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [i-abt  ii. 

in  mountains  of  ice  around  tlie  two  poles,  would  lower  the  general 
level  of  the  ocean  ahout  2,000  feet.  This  would  he  equivalent 
to  a  general  elevation  of  the  land  to  the  same  amount,  and  would 
thus  t&ad  to  intensify  the  cold ;  and  this  elevation  may  enable 
us  to  understand  the  recent  discoveries  of  signs  of  glacial 
action  at  moderate  elevations  in  Central  America  and  Brazil,  far 
within  the  tropics.  At  the  same  time,  the  weight  of  ice  piled  up 
in  the  north  would  cause  the  laud  surface  to  sink  there,  perhaps 
unequally,  according  to  the  varying  nature  of  the  interior  crust 
of  the  earth  ;  and  since  the  weight  ha.s  heen  removed  land  would 
rise  again,  still  somewhat  irregularly ;  and  thus  the  phenomena 
of  raised  heds  of  arctic  shells  in  temperate  latitudes,  are  ex- 
plained. 

Now,  it  is  evident,  that  the  phenomena  we  have  been  con- 
sidering— of  the  recent  changes  of  the  mammalian  fauna  in 
Europe,  North  America,  South  Temperate  America,  and  the 
highlands  of  Brazil — are  such  as  might  be  explained  by  the  most 
extreme  views  as  to  the  extent  and  vastness  of  the  ice-aheet, 
and  especially  as  to  its  simultaneous  occurrence  in  the  northern 
and  southern  hemispheres ;  and  where  two  such  completely  in- 
dependent sets  of  facts  are  found  to  combine  harmoniously,  and 
supplement  each  other  on  a  particular  hypothesis,  the  evidence 
in  favour  of  that  hypothesis  is  greatly  strengthened.  An  ob- 
jection that  will  occur  to  zoologists,  may  here  be  noticed.  If 
the  Glacial  epoch  extended  over  so  much  of  the  temperate  and 
even  parts  of  the  tropical  zone,  and  led  to  the  extinction  of  so 
many  forms  of  life  even  within  the  tropics,  how  is  it  that  so 
much  of  the  purely  tropical  fauna  of  South  America  has  main- 
tained itself,  and  that  there  are  still  such  a  vast  number  of 
forms,  both  of  mammalia,  birds,  reptiles,  and  insects,  that  seem 
oi^anized  for  an  exclusive  existence  in  tropical  forests  1  Now 
Mr.  Belt's  theory,  of  the  subsidence  of  the  ocean  to  the  extent  of 
about  2,000  feet,  supphes  an  answer  to  this  objection ;  for  we 
should  thus  have  a  tract  of  lowland  of  an  average  width  of 
some  hundreds  of  miles,  added  to  the  v^holc  east  coast  of  Central 
and  South  America.  This  tract  would,  no  doubt,  become  covered 
with  forests  as  it  was  slowly  formed,  would  enjoy  a  perfectly 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VII.]  MAMMALIA  OF  TUB  NEW  WOELD.  153 

tropical  climate,  and  would  thus  afford  an  ample  area  for  the 
continued  existence  and  development  of  the  typical  South 
American  fauna ;  even  had  glaciers  descended  in  places  so  low 
as  what  is  now  the  level  of  the  sea,  which,  however,  tliere  is  no 
reason  to  believe  they  ever  did.  It  is  probable  too,  that  this 
low  tract,  which  all  round  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  would  be  of  con- 
siderable width,  offered  that  passage  for  intermigration  between 
North  and  South  America,,  which  led  to  the  sudden  appearance 
in  the  former  country  in  Post^Pliooene  times,  of  the  huge  Mega- 
theroids  from  the  latter ;  a  migration  which  took  place  in  op- 
posite directions  as  wo  shaU.  presently  show. 

Tlte  hirih-plaee  and  migrations'  of  some  mammalian  families 
and  genera. — We  have  now  to  consider  a  few  of  those  cases 
in  which  the  evidence  already  at  our  command,  is  sufficiently 
definite  and  complete,  to  enable  us  to  pronounce  with  some  con- 
fidence as  to  the  last  movements  of  several  important  groups  of 
mammalia, 

Primaies. — The  occurrence  in  North  America  of  numerous 
forms  of  Lemuroidea,  forming  two  extinct  families,  which  are 
behoved  by  American  palasontologists  to  present  generalized 
features  of  both  Lemurid^e  and  Hapalidfe,  while  in  Europe  only 
Lemurine  forms  aUicd  to  those  of  Africa  have  occurred  in 
deposits  of  the  same  age  (Eocene),  renders  it  possible  that  the 
Primates  may  have  originated  in  America,  and  sent  one  branch 
to  South  America  to  form  the  Hapalidte  and  Cebidte,  and 
another  to  the  Old  World,  giving  rise  to  the  lemurs  and  true 
apes.  But  the  fact  that  apes  of  a  high  degree  of  organization 
occur  in  the  European  Miocene,  while  in  the  Eocene,  a  monkey 
behevod  to  have  relations  to  the  Lemuroids  and  Cebidte  has  also 
been  discovered,  make  it  more  probable  that  the  ancestral  forms 
of  this  order  originated  in  the  Old  World  at  a  still  earlier  period. 
The  absence  of  any  early  tertiary  remains  from  the  tropical  parts 
of  the  two  hemispheres,  renders  it  impossible  to  arrive  at  any 
definite  conclusions  as  to  the  origin  of  groups  which  were,  no 
doubt,  always  best  developed  in  tropical  regions. 

Camivora. — This  is  a  very  ancient  and  wide-spread  group,  the 
families  and  genera  of  which  had  an  extensive  range  in  very 
Vol.  I.—12 


by  Google 


154  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ir. 

early  times.  The  true  bears  {Vrsiis)  are  almost  the  only 
important  gemos  that  seems  to  have  recently  migrated.  In 
Europe  it  dates  back  to  the  Older  Pliocene,  while  in  iNorth 
America  it  is  Post-Pliocene  only.  Bears,  therefore,  seem  to 
have  passed  into  America  from  the  Palfeajctic  region  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  Pliocene  period.  They  probaHy  came  in  on  the 
north-west,  and  passed  down  the  Andes  into  South  America, 
where  one  isolated  species  still  exists. 

Un^data.—'H.otBSs  are  very  interesting.  In  Europe  they  date 
back  under  various  forms  to  the  Miocene  period,  and  true  Equus 
to  the  Older  Pliocene.  In  North  America  they  are  chiefly 
Pliocene,  true  Egmts  being  Post-Pliocene,  with  perhaps  one  or 
two  species  Newer  Pliocene  ;  but  numerous  ancestral  fonns  date 
back  to  the  Miocene  and  Eocene,  giving  a  more  perfect  "  pedi- 
gree of  the  horse  "  than  the  European  forms,  and  going  back  to  a 
more  primitive  type — Orohippus.  In  South  America,  Hqum  is 
the  only  genus,  and  is  Post-PUocene  or  at  most  Newer  Pliocena 
"While,  therefore,  the  ancient  progenitors  of  the  Eq^uidse  were 
common  to  North  America  and  Europe,  in  Miocene  and  even 
Eocene  times,  true  horses  appear  to  have  arisen  in  the  Paliearctio 
region,  to  have  passed  into  North  America  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  Pliocene  period,  and  thence  to  have  spread  over  all  suitable 
districts  in  South  America.  They  were  not,  however,  able  to 
maintain  themselves  permanently  in  their  new  territory,  and  all 
became  extinct;  while  in  their  birth-place,  the  Old  World,  they 
continue  to  exist  under  several  varied  forms. 

True  tapirs  are  an  Old  World  group.  They  go  back  to  the 
Lower  Miocene  in  Europe,  while  in  both  North  and  South 
America  they  are  exclusively  Post-Pliocene.  They  occur  in 
France  down  to  the  Newer  Pliocene,  and  must,  about  that 
time,  have  entered  America.  The  land  connection  by  -which 
this  and  so  many  other  animals  passed  between  the  Old  and 
New  Worlds  in  late  Tertiary  times,  was  almost  certainly  in  the 
North  Pacific,  south  of  Eehring's  Straits,  where,  as  will  be  seen 
by  our  general  map,  there  is  a  laa^  expanse  of  shallow  water, 
which  a  moderate  elevation  would  convert  into  dry  land,  in  a 
sufficiently  temperate  latitude. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VII.J  MAMMALIA  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD.  15S 

The  peccary  (Dicotyles),  nOw  a  characteristic  South  American 
genus,  ia  a  recent  immigrant  from  North  America,  where  it 
appears  to  have  been  developed  from  ancestral  forms  of  swine 
dating  back  to  the  Miocene  period. 

Antelopes  ore  an  Old  World  type,  but  a  few  of  them  appear  to 
have  entered  North,  and  reached  South  America  in  late  Pliocene 
times.  Camels,  strange  to  say,  are  a  special  North  American  type, 
since  they  abounded  in  that  continent  under  various  ancient 
forms  in  the  Miocene  period.  Towards  the  end  of  that  period 
they  appear  to  have  entered  eastern  Asia,  and  developed  into  the 
Siberian  Merijcofhenum  and  the  North  Indian  Oamelus,  while 
in  the  Pliocene  age  the  ancestral  llamas  entered  South 
America. 

Germdm  are  a  wide-spread  northern  type  in  their  generalized 
form,  hut  true  deer  (Cemus)  are  Pal^arctic.  They  abounded  in 
Europe  in  Miocene  times,  but  only  appear  in  North  and  South 
America  in  the  later  Pliocene  and  Post-Pliocene  periods. 

True  oxen  {Bovinis)  seem  to  be  an  Oriental  type  (Miocene), 
while  they  appear  in  Europe  only  late  in  the  Pliocene  period, 
and  in  America  are  confined  to  the  Post-Pliocene. 

Elephants  (Elephantidx)  are  an  Old  World  type,  abounding 
in  the  Miocene  period  in  Europe  and  India,  and  first  appearing 
in  America  in  Post-PUoeene  or  later  Phocene  times.  Ancestral 
forms,  doubtfully  Proboscidean  (Dinocerata),  existed  in  North 
America  in  the  Eocene  period,  but  these  became  extmct  without 
leaving  any  direct  descendants,  unless  the  Brontotheridce  and 
rhinoceroses  may  be  so  considered. 

Marsupials  are  almost  certainly  a  recent  introduction  into 
South  and  North  America  from  Asia.  They  existed  in  I^urope 
in  Eocene  and  Miocene  times,  and  presumably  over  a  consider- 
able part  of  the  Old  World;  but  no  trace  of  them  appears  in 
North  or  South  America  before  the  Post-Pliocene  period. 

Sdentata. — These  offer  a  most  curious  and  difBcult  problem. 
In  South  America  they  abound,  and  were  so  much  more  nu- 
merous and  varied  in  the  Post-Pliocene  and  Pliocene,  that  we 
maybe  sure  they  lived  also  in  the  preceding  Miocene  period.  A 
few  living  Edentates  are  scattered   over  Africa  and  Asia,  and 


by  Google 


156  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  n. 

they  flourished  in  Europe  during  the  Miocene  age — animals  as 
large  (in  some  species)  as  a  rhinoceros,  and  most  allied  to  living 
African  forms.  In  North  America  no  trace  of  Edentata  has  been 
found  earlier  than  the  Post-Pliocene  period,  or  perhaps  the  Newer 
Pliocene  on  the  west  coast.  Neither  is  there  any  trace  of  them 
in  South  America  in  the  Eocene  formations ;  hut  this  may  well 
he  owing  to  our  very  imperfect  knowlet^e  of  the  forms  of 
that  epoch.  Their  absence  from  North  Aiherica  is,  however, 
prohably  real ;  and  we  have  to  account  for  their  presence  in  the 
Old  World  and  in  South  America.  Their  antiquity  is  no  doubt 
very,  great,  and  the  point  of  divergence  of  the  Old  World  and 
South  American  groups,  may  take  ua  back  to  early  Eocene,  or 
even  to  Pre-Eocene  times.  The  distribution  of  land  and  sea  may 
then  have  been  very  different  from  what  it  is  now ;  and  to  those 
who  would  create  a  continent  to  account  for  the  migrations  of 
a  beetle,  nothing  would  seem  more  probable  than  that  a  South 
Atlantic  continent,  then  united  parts  of  what  are  now  Africa 
and  South  America.  There  is,  however,  so  much  evidence  for 
the  general  permanence  of  what  are  now  the  great  continents 
and  deep  oceans,  that  Professor  Huxley's  supposition  of  a  con- 
siderable extension  of  land  round  the  borders  of  the  North  Pacific 
Ocean  in  Meaozoic  times,  best  indicates  the  probable  area  in 
which  the  Edentate  type  originated,  and  thence  spread  over  much 
of  the  Old  World  and  South  America.  But  while  in  the  latter 
country  it  flom^ished  and  increased  with  little  check,  in  the 
other  great  continents  it  was  soon  overcome  by  the  competition 
of  higher  forms,  only  leaving  a  few  small-sized  representatives 
in  Africa  and  Asia. 


by  Google 


CHAPTEK  VIII. 


VAEIOUS   EXTINCT   ANIMALS; — AND   ON  THE  ANTIQUITY   OP  THE 
GENERA  OP  INSECT'S  AND   LAND   MOLLUBOA. 


These  have  all  been  obtained  from  caves  and  late  Tertiary  or 
Post-Tertiary  deposits,  and  consist  of  a  lai^e  number  of  extinct 
forms,  some  of  gigantic  size,  but  all  marsupials  and  allied  to  the 
existing  fauna.  There  are  numerous  forms  of  kangaroos,  some 
larger  tlian  any  lining  species ,  and  ^mong  these  are  two  genera, 
Frotem/nodon  md  Stkunviut,  \\liicli  Piofessor  Garrod  has  lately 
shown  to  have  been  allied,  not  to  inj  Australian  forms,  but  to 
the  Dendiolag%  or  tree  kangaroos  of  H'ew  Guinea.  We  have 
also  remains  ot  Thijlacvmis  and  Dui^wriis,  which  now  only  exist 
in  Tasmania ,  and  extinct  species  ot  Jfyptiprymnus  and  Fkasco- 
lomys,  the  latter  as  large  as  a  tapir.  Among  the  more  remarkable 
extinct  genera  are  Diprotodon,  a  huge  thick-limbed  animal 
allied  to  the  kangaroos,  but  nearly  aa  large  as  an  elephant; 
NoMherium,  having  characters  of  Madvpis  and  Phascolarctos 
combined,  and  as  large  as  a  rhinoceros ;  and  Tkylacoleo,  a  pha- 
langer-like  marsupial  nearly  as  large  as  a  h'on,  and  supposed  by 
Professor  Owen  to  have  been  of  carnivorous  habits,  though  this 
opinion  is  not  held  by  other  naturalists. 

Here  then  we  find  the  same  phenomena  as  in  the  other  coun- 
tries we  have  already  discussed, — the  very  recent  disappearance 
of  a  large  number  of  peculiar  forms,  many  of  them  far  surpassing 
in  size  any  that  continue  to  exist.  It  hardly  seems  probable 
that  in  this  case  their  disappearance  can  have  been  due  to  the 
direct  effects  of  the  Glacial  epoch,  since  no  very  extensive  glada^ 


by  Google 


158  EXTINCT  ANIMALS  OF  AUSTRALIA.  [paut  ii. 

tion  could  have  occurred  in  a  country  like  Australia;  but  if  the 
ocean  sank  2,000  feet,  the  great  eastern  mountain  range  might 
have  given  riae  to  local  glaciers.  It  is,  however,  almost  certain 
that  during  late  Tertiary  times  Australia  must  have  heen  much 
more  extensive  than  it  is  now.  This  is  necessary  to  allow  of  the 
development  of  its  peculiar  and  extensive  fauna,  especially  as  we 
see  that  that  fauna  comprised  animals  rivalling  in  bulk  those  of 
the  great  continents.  It  is  further  indicated  by  the  relations 
with  New  Guinea,  already  alluded  to,  and  by  the  general  character 
of  the  various  faunas  which  compose  the  Australian  region,  de- 
tails of  which  will  be  found  in  the  succeeding  part  of  this  work. 
The  lowering  of  the  opean  during  the  Glacial  period  would  be 
favourable  to  the  still  further  development  of  the  fauna  of  such 
a  country ;  and  it  is  to  the  unfavourable  conditions  produced  by 
its  subsequent  rising^ecLuivalent  to  a  depression  of  the  land  to 
the  amount  of  two  thousand  feet — that  we  must  impute  the 
extinction  of  so  many  remarkable  groups  of  animals.  It  is  not 
improbable,  that  the  disappearance  of  the  ice  and  the  conseq^uent 
(apparent)  subsidence  of  the  land,  might  have  been  rapid  as 
compared  Tsith  the  rate  at  which  large  animals  can  become 
modified  to  meet  new  conditions.  Extensive  tracts  of  fertile 
land  might  have  been  submerged,  and  the  consequent  crowding 
of  large  numbers  of  species  and  individuals  on  limited  areas 
would  have  led  to  a  struggle  for  existence  in  which  the  less 
adapted  and  less  easily  modiiiable,  not  the  physically  weaker, 
would  succumb. 

There  is,  however,  another  cause  for  the  extinction  of  large 
rather  than  small  animals  whenever  an  important  change  of 
conditions  occurs,  which  has  been  suggested  to  me  by  a  corre- 
spondent,^ but  which  has  not,  I  believe,  been  adduced  by  Mr. 
Darwin  or  by  any  other  writer  on  the  subject.  It  is  dependent 
on  the  fact,  that  lai^e  animals  as  compared  with  small  ones  are 
almost  invariably  slow  breeders,  and  as  they  also  necessarily 
exist  in  much  smaller  numbers  in  a  given  area,  they  offer  far 
less  materials  for  favourable  variations  than  do  smaller  animals. 
In  such  an  extreme  case  as  that  of  the  rabbit  and  elephant,  the 
'  Mr.  Join  Hickman  of  Deaborongh. 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  VIII.]  MESOZOIO  MAMMALIA.  159 

young  born  each  year  in  the  world  are  prohahly  as  some  millions 
to  one;  and  it  is  very  easily  conceivable  that  in  a  thousand 
years  the  former  might,  under  pressure  of  rapidly  changing  con- 
ditions, become  modified  into  a  distinct  species,  -while  the  latter,, 
not  offering  enough  favourable  variations  to  effect  a  suitable 
adaptation,  would  become  extinct.  AVe  must  also  remember 
the  extreme  specialization  of  many  of  the  lai^e  animals  that 
have  become  extinct — a  specialization  ■which  ■would  necessarily 
render  modification  in  any  new  direction  difiicult,  since  the  in- 
herited tendency  of  variation  would  probably  he  to  increase  the 
specialization  in  the  same  directions  which  had  heretofore  been 
beneficial.  If  to  these  two  causes  ^we  add  the  difficulty  of 
obtaining  sufftcient  food  for  such  large  animals,  and  perhaps  the 
injurious  effects  of  changes  of  climate,  we  shall  not  find  it  diffi- 
cult to  understand  how  such  a  vast  physical  revolution  as  the 
Glacial  epoch,  with  its  attendant  phenomena  of  elevations  and 
subsidences,  icy  winds,  and  sudden  floods  by  the  bursting  of  lake 
Vi-Txriera,  might  have  led  to  the  total  extinction  of  a  vast  number 
of  the  most  bulky  forms  of  mammalia,  while  the  less  bulky 
were  able  to  survive,  either  by  greater  hardiness  of  constitution 
or  by  becoming  more  or  less  modified.  The  result  is  apparent  in 
tHe  comparatively  small  or  moderate  size  of  the  species  consti- 
tuting the  temperate  fauna,  in  all  parts  of  the  globe. 

It  is  much  to  he  regretted  that  no  mammalian  remains  of  earlier 
date  have  been  found  in  Australia,  aa  we  should  then  see  if  it  is 
really  the  case'  that  marsupials  have  always  formed  its  highest 
type  of  mammalian  life.  At  present  its  fossil  fauna  is  chiefly 
interesting  to  the  zoologist,  hut  throws  httle  light  on  the  past 
relations  of  this  isolated  country  with  other  parts  of  the  globe. 

Mammalian  remains  in  the  Secokdaey  Formations. 
In  the  oldest  Tertiary  beds  of  Europe  and  North  America,  we 
have  (even  with  our  present  imperfect  record)  a  rich  and  varied 
mammalian  fauna.  As  compared  with  our  living  or  recent  highly 
specialized  forms,  it  may  be  said  to  consist  of  generalised  types ; 
but  as  compared  with  any  primeval  mammalian  type,  it  must  be 
pronounced  highly  specialized.     Not  only  are  such  diversified 


by  Google 


ICO  DISTEIBUTION  01?  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [pa 

groups  as  Carnivora,  Perriaaodactyle  and  Artiodactyle 
Primates,  Chiroptera,  Eodenta,  and  Marsupials  already  well 
marked,  but  in  many  of  these  thoro  is  a  differentiation  into 
numerous  families  and  genera  of  diverse  character.  It  is  impossi- 
ble therefore  to  doubt,  that  many  peculiar  forms  of  mammalia 
must  have  lived  long  anterior  to  the  Eocene  period ;  but  there 
is  unfortunately  a  great  gap  in  the  record  between  the  Eocene 
and  Cretaceous  beds,  and  these  latter  being  for  the  moat  part 
marine  continue  the  gap  as  regards  mammals  over  an  enormoua 
lapse  of  time.  Yet  far  beyond  both  these  chasms  in  the  Upper 
Oolitic  strata,  remains  of  small  mammalia  have  been  found ; 
again,  in  the  Stonesfield  slate,  a  member  of  the  Lower  Oolite, 
other  forms  appear.  Then  comes  the  marine  Lias  formation 
with  another  huge  gap ;  but  beyond  this  again  in  the  Upper 
Trias,  the  oldest  of  the  secondary  formations,  mammalian  teeth 
have  been  discovered  in  both  England  and  Germany,  and  these 
are,  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained,  of  the  same  age  as  the 
Bromatkerwrn  already  noticed,  from  North  America.  They 
have  been  named  Mierolestes,  and  show  some  resemblance  to 
those  of  the  West  Australian  MymucoMus.  In  the  Oolitic 
strata  numerous  small  jawbones  have  been  found,  which  have 
served  to  characterise  eight  genera,  all  of  which  are  believed  to 
have  been  Marsupials,  and  in  some  of  them  a  resemblance  can  be 
tracfld  to  some  of  the  smaller  living  Australian  species.  These, 
however,  are  mere  indications  of  the  number  of  mammaUa  that 
must  have  hved  in  the  secondary  period,  so  long  thought  to  be 
exclusively  "  the  age  of  reptiles ; "  and  the  fact  that  the  few  yet 
found  ai'e  at  all  comparable  with  such  specialised  forms  as  still 
exist,  must  convince  us,  that  we  shall  have  to  seek  far  beyond 
even  the  earliest  of  these  remains,  for  the  first  appearance  of  the 
mammalian  type  of  vertehrata 

Extinct  Bieds. 

Compared  with  those  of  mammalia,  the  remains  of  birds  are 
exceedingly  scarce  in  Europe  and  America;  and  from  the  wander- 
ing habits  of  so  many  of  this  class,  they  are  of  much  less  value 


by  Google 


CHAP.  Yiii.]  BIEDS.  161 

as  indications  of  past  changes  in  physical  geography.  A  large 
proportion  of  the  remains  belong  to  aquatic  or  wading  types, 
and  a8  these  haye  now  often  a  world-wide  range,  the  occun'ence 
of  extinct  forma  can  have  little  heaiing  on  our  present  inquiry. 
There  are,  however,  a  few  interesting  cases  of  extinct  land-hirds 
belonging  to  groups  now  quite  strangers  to  the  country  in  which 
they  are  found ;  and  others  scarcely  less  interesting,  in  which 
groups  now  peculiar  to  certain  areas  are  shown  to  have  been 
preceded  by  allied  species  or  genera  of  gigantic  size. 

Palaardic  Hegion.  and  JV.  India. — In  the  caves  and  other 
Post-Pliocene  deposits  of  these  countries,  the  remains  of  birds 
almost  all  beloi^  to  genera  now  inhabiting  the  same  districts. 
Almost  the  only  exceptions  are,  the  great  auk  and  the 
capereaUzie,  already  mentioned  as  being  found  in  the  Danish 
mounds  ;  the  latter  bird,  with  Tetrao  albus,  in  Italian  caverns ; 
and  a  species  of  pheasant  (Phasianus)  said  to  have  occurred  in 
the  Post.  Pliocene  of  Prance,  considei'ably  west  of  the  existing 
range  of  the  genus  in  a  wild  state. 

In  the  preceding  Pliocene  deposits,  but  few  remains  have 
been  found,  and  all  of  existing  genera  but  one,  a  gallinaceous 
bird  (GaU%s  bravardi)  aUied  to  the  domestic  fowl  and  peacock. 

The  Miocene  beds  of  France  and  Central  Europe  have  pro- 
duced many  more  remains  of  birds,  but  these,  too,  are  mostly  of 
existing  European  genera,  though  there  are  some  notable  excep- 
tions. Along  with  forms  uudistinguishable  from  crows  (Conms), 
shrikes  {Zaniws),  wagtails  (MotaciUa),  and  woodpeckers  (Picus), 
aie  found  remains  allied  to  the  Oriental  edible-nest  swift  (Col- 
locaiia)  and  Trogrni;  a  parrot  resembling  the  African  genus 
Psitlaem;  an  extinct  form  Necromis,  perhaps  alhed  to  the 
plantain-eaters  {Musophaga) ;  Homalophus,  doubtfully  alhed  to 
woodpeckers,  and  Lim/natorwis  to  the  hoopoes.  The  gallina- 
ceous birds  are  represented  by  three  species  of  pheasants,  some 
very  close  to  the  domesticated  species ;  Polceop&r&x  allied  to  the 
partridges ;  and  Palmortyx,  small  birds  aUied  to  the  American 
genua  Ort'ip,  but  with  larger  wings.  There  are  also  species  of 
Pterodts  alhed  to  living  birds,  and  a  small  pigeon.  There  are 
numerous  living  genera  of  Accipitres ;  such  as  e^le  {Aquila), 


by  Google 


162  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [i'ABT  ii. 

kite  (Milvus),  eagle-owl  (Bubo),  and  screecli-owl  (Sti-ii;) ;  with 
the  African  eeeretary-bird  {Serpenianus},  aud  some  extinct  forms, 
as  Palmocereus,  Palwohierix  and  Fal(eetus. 

Aquatic  and  wading  birds  were  abundant,  including  numerous 
rails,  bustards,  herons,  sandpipers,  gulls,  divers,  and  pelicans. 
There  were  also  many  ducks,  some  allied  to  the  genus  Dendw- 
eygna;  the  Oriental  genus  of  storks,  LeptoptHm;  Ibidipodm,  a 
remarkable  form  allied  to  76is  and  Giconia ;  Elomis,  near 
Idtnosa;  Pdagwnis,  a  large  bird  aUied  to  ganneta  and  pelicans ; 
Hydromis,  allied  to  the  ducks  and  petrels ;  Dolichoptems,  allied 
to  plovers.  Perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  these  extinct  birds 
are,  however,  the  flamingoes,  represented  by  forms  hardly  distin- 
guishable from  living  species,  and  by  one  extinct  genus  Pcdce- 
lodus,  which  had  very  long  toes,  and  probably  walked  on  aquatic 
plants  like  the  tropical  jacanas. 

The  Miocene  beds  of  Korth  India  have  furnished  few  birds ; 
the  only  one  of  geographical  interest  being  an  extinct  species 
of  ostrich,  not  very  different  from  that  now  inhabiting  Arabia. 

On  the  whole,  the  birds  of  Europe  at  this  period  were  very 
like  those  now  living,  with  the  addition  of  a  few  tropical  forms. 
These  latter  were,  however,  perhaps  more  numerous  and  import- 
ant than  they  appear  to  be,  as  they  belong  to  inland  and  forest- 
haunting  types,  which  would  not  be  so  frequently  preserved  as 
the  marsh  and  lake-dwelling  species.  Taking  this  into  con- 
sideration, the  assemblage  of  Miocene  birds  accords  well  with 
what  we  know  of  the  mammalian  fauna.  We  have  the  same 
indications  of  a  luxuriant  vegetation  and  subtropical  climate, 
and  the  same  appearance  of  Oriental  and  especially  of  African 
types,  TTog<yn,  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  all  the  forms 
yet  discovered,  since  it  furnishes  us  with  a  centra]  point  whence 
the  living  ttogons  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  South  America  might 
have  diverged. 

In  the  Eocene  we  find  ouiselves  almost  wholly  among  extinct 
forms  of  birds.  The  earliest  known  Passerine  bird  is  here 
met  with,  in  Protm-nis,  somewhat  similar  to  a  lark,  found  in 
the  Lower  Eocene  of  Switzerland ;  while  another  Passerine  form, 
FaXcegithaliis,  and  one  allied  to  the  nuthatch  {SUta),  have  been 


by  Google 


CUAP.  vni.]  BIRDS.  163 

discovered  in  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Paris.  Picarife  of  ei^ual  anti- 
quity aie  found.  Cryptomis,  from  tlie  Paris  Eocene,  and  Sal- 
cyomis  from  the  Lower  Eocene  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey,  were 
both  allied  to  kingfishers ;  -while  a  form  allied  to  Cmtropus  a 
genus  of  cuckoos,  or,  as  Milne-Edwarda  thinks,  to  the  Madagas- 
car Leptoscmtus,  has  been  found  in  the  Upper  Eocene  of  Pranca 
Several  Accipitres  of  somewhat  doubtful  affinities  have  been 
found  in  the  same  country;  while  lAihoi-nds,  from  the  Lower 
Eocene  of  the  Isle  of  Sheppey,  was  a  small  vulturine  bird  sup- 
posed to  be  allied  to  the  American  group,  Cathartes.  Among 
the  waders,  some  extinct  forms  of  plovers  have  been  found,  and  a 
genus  (Agnopterm),  allied  to  the  flamingoes ;  while  there  are 
many  swimming  birds,  such  as  pelicans,  divers,  and  several 
extinct  types  of  doubtful  affinities.  Most  jntersting  of  all  is  a 
portion  of  a  cranium  discovered  in  the  Lower  Eocene  of  Shep- 
pey, and  lately  pronounced  by  Professor  Owen  to  belong  to  a 
large  Struthious  bird,  allied  to  the  New  Zealand  Dinomis  and 
also  perhaps  to  the  ostrich.  Another  gigantic  bird  is  the  Gas- 
tomis,  from  the  Lower  Eocene  of  Paris,  which  was  as  large  as  an 
ostrich,  but  which  is  believed  to  have  been  a  generalised  type, 
alhed  to  wading  and  swimming  birds  as  well  as  to  the  Struthiones. 

Beyond  this  epoch  we  have  no  remains  of  birds  in  European 
strata  till  we  come  to  the  wonderful  Archwopteryx  from  the 
Upper  Oolite  of  Bavaria ;  a  bird  of  a  totally  new  type,  with  a 
bony  tail,  longer  than  the  body,  each  vertebra  of  which  carried 
a  pair  of  divei^ng  feathers. 

i^'orfA  America. — ^A  number  of  bird-remains  have  lately  been 
found  in  the  rich  Tertiary  and  Cretaceous  deposits  of  the  United 
States ;  but  here,  too,  comparatively  few  sjie  terrestrial  forms. 
No  Passerine  bird  has  yet  been  foimd.  The  Picarije  are  repre- 
sented by  T/iniorms,  an  extinct  form  allied  to  woodpeckers,  from 
the  Eocene  of  Wyoming,  Species  of  turkey  (Mdeoffiis)  occur 
in  the  Post-Pliocene  and  as  far  back  as  the  Miocene  strata, 
showing  that  this  interesting  type  is  a  true  denizen  of  temperate 
North  America.  The  other  birds  are,  Acdpitres;  waders  and 
acLiiatics  of  existing  genera ;  and  a  number  of  extinct  forms  of 
the  two  latter  orders— such    as,  Aletorms  an   Eocene  wader; 


by  Google 


164  DISTRIBUTION  Or  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

Ptdmotringa,  allied  to  the  sandpipers,  and  Telmatdbius  to  the 
laila,  hoth  Cretaceous ;  'with  Qrcwalaiym,  allied  to  Graealus ; 
Zaomis  allied  to  the  swans ;  Hesperomis  a  gigantic  diver ;  and 
lethyorms  a  very  low  form,  with  biconcave  vertebra,  such  as  are 
only  found  in  iishes  and  some  reptiles — also  from  Cretaceous 


South  ^«imc«.— The  caverns  of  Brazil  produced  thirty-four 
species  of  birds,  roost  of  them  referable  to  Brazilian  genera,  and 
many  to  stUl  existing  species.  The  moat  interesting  were  two 
species  of  American  ostrich  (Shea),  one  larger  than  either  of 
the  living  species ;  a  laige  turkey-buzzard  (Cathartes)  j  a  new 
species  of  the  very  isolated  South  American  genus  Opisihocomus  ; 
and  a  Cariama,  or  allied  new  genus. 

Madagascar  and  the  Mascarene  Islands. — We  have  here  only 
evidence  of  birds  that  have  become  extinct  in  the  historical 
period  or  very  little  earlier.  Pirst  we  have  a  group  of  birds  in- 
capable of  ilight,  allied  to  pigeons,  but  forming  a  separate  family, 
Dididee ;  and  which,  so  far  as  we  yet  know,  inhabited  Mauritius, 
Rodriguez,  and  probably  Bourbon.  Apkanapt&ryx,  an  extinct 
genus  of  rails,  inhabited  Mauritius ;  and  another  genus,  {Eryfhro- 
niachiis),  Rodriguez.  A  large  parrot,  said  by  Prof.  Milne  Edwards 
to  be  alHed  to  Ara  and  Microglossus,  also  inhabited  Mauritius; 
and  another  allied  to  Uclectus,  the  island  of  Eodriguez.  None 
of  these  have  been  found  in  Madagascar ;  but  a  gigantic  Strathious 
bird,  ^ppomis,  forming  a  peculiar  family  distinct  both  from 
the  ostriches  of  Africa  and  the  IHnm-nis  of  Wew  Zealand 
inhabited  that  island ;  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that 
this  may  have  lived  less  than  200  years  ago, 

A^eiw  Zealavd. — -A  number  of  extinct  Struthious  birds,  form- 
ing two  families,  DiTtormthidce  and  Palapter^gidw,  have  been 
found  in  New  Zealand.  Some  were  of  g^ntio  size.  They  seem 
allied  both  to  the  hving  Apteryx  of  New  Zealand  and  the  emu 
of  Australia.  They  are  c[uite  recent,  and  some  of  them  have 
probably  lived  withiu  the  last  few  centuries.  Remains  of 
Dinomis  have  also  been  found  in  a  Post-Pliocene  deposit  in 
Queensland,  N.  E.  Australia  ^ — a  very  important  discovery,  as  it 
^  Tram.  Zool.  Soc.  of  London,  vol.  viii.  p.  381. 


b,  Google 


TEETIAKy  EEPl'ILES. 


gives  support  to  the  theory  of  a  great  eastward  extension  of 
AnstraKa  in  Tertiary  times. 


ESTiKCT  Tbetiaey  Reptiles. 

These  will  not  occupy  us  long,  as  no  very  great  number  are 
known,  and  most  of  them  belong  to  a  few  principal  forms  of 
comparatively  little  geographical  interest. 

Tortoises  are  perhaps  the  most  abundant  of  the  Tertiary 
reptiles.  They  are  numerous  in  the  Eocene  and  Miocene 
formations  both  in  Europe  and  North  America,  The  genera 
Emys  a.nA  Trioiuyx  abound  in  both  countries,  as  well  as  in  the 
Miocene  of  India.  Land  tortoises  occur  in  the  Eocene  of  North 
America  and  in  the  Miocene  of  Europe  and  India,  where  the 
hi^e  Golossoehelys,  twelve  feet  long,  has  been  found.  In  the 
Pliocene  deposits  of  Switzerland  the  living  American  genus 
CMydra  has  been  met  with.  These  facts,  together  with  the 
occurrence  of  a  living  s^des  in  the  Miocene  of  India,  show 
that  this  order  of  reptiles  is  of  great  antiquity,  and  that  most 
of  the  genera  once  hud  a  wider  range  than  now. 

Crocodiles,  allied  to  the  three  forms  now  characteristic  of 
India,  Africa,  and  America,  have  bsen  fonnd  in  the  Eocene  of 
our  own  country,  and  several  species  of  Grocodihis  have  occurred 
in  beds  of  the  same  age  in  North  America. 

Lizards  are  very  ancient,  many  small  terrestrial  forma 
occuiTing  in  all  the  Tertiary  deposits.  A  species  of  the  genus 
ChainwUo  is  recorded  from  the  Eocene  of  North  America,  to- 
gether with  several  extinct  genera, 

Snakes  were  well  developed  in  the  Eocene  period,  where 
remains  of  several  have  been  found  which  must  have  been  from 
twelve  to  twenty  feet  long.  An  extinct  species  of  true  viper  has 
occurred  in  the  Miocene  of  France,  and  one  of  the  Pythonidse 
in  the  Miocene  brown  coal  of  Germany. 

Batraehia  occur  but  sparingly  in  a  fcasil  state  in  the  Ter- 
tiary deposits.  The  most  remarkable  is  the  large  Salamander 
(Andreas)   from   the   Upper    Miocene   of   Switzerland,   which 


by  Google 


ICC  DICTRTBDTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

is  allied  to  the  Mmopoma  living  in  North  America.  Species 
of  frog  {Eana),  and  Falmop?m/us  an  extinct  genua  of  toads, 
have  been  found  in  the  Miocene  deposits  of  Germany  and 
Switzerland. 

Presh  water  fish  are  almost  unknown  in  the  Tertiary 
deposits  of  Europe,  although  most  of  the  families  and  some 
genera  of  living  manne  hsh  are  represented  from  the  Eocene 
downwards. 


Antiquity  of  the  Genera  of  Insects. 

Fossil  insects  are  far  too  rarely  found,  to  aid  us  in  our  determi- 
nation of  difficult  questions  of  geographical  distribution ;  but  in 
discussing  these  questions  it  will  be  important  to  know,  whether 
we  are  to  look  upon  the  existing  generic  forms  of  insects  as  of 
great  or  small  antiquity,  compared  with  the  higher  vertebrates  ; 
and  to  decide  this  question  the  materials  at  our  command  are 
ample. 

The  conditions  requisite  for  the  preservation  of  insects  in  a 
fossil  state  are  no  doubt  very  local  and  peculiar ;  the  result  being, 
that  it  is  only  at  long  intervals  in  the  geological  record  that  we 
meet  with  remains  of  insects  in  a  recognisable  condition.  None 
appear  to  have  been  found  in  the  Pliocene  formation ;  but  in  the 
Upper  Miocene  of  (Eninghen  in  Switzerland,  associated  with  the 
wonderfully  rich  fossil  flora,  are  fojmd  immense  quantities  of 
insects.  Prof.  Heer  examined  more  than  5,000  specimens  be- 
longing to  over  800  species,  and  many  have  been  found  in  other 
localities  in  Switzerland ;  so  that  more  than  1,300  species  of 
Miocene  insects  have  now  been  determined.  Most  of  the  orders 
are  represented,  but  the  beetles  (Coleoptera)  are  far  the  most 
abundant.  Almost  aU  belong  to  existing  genera,  and  the  majority 
of  these  genera  now  inhabit  Europe,  only  three  or  four  being 
exclusively  Indian,  African,  or  American. 

In  the  Lower  Miocene  of  Croatia  there  is  another  rich  de- 
posit of  insects,  somewhat  more  tropical  in  character,  comprising 
large  white-ants  and  dragon-flies  differently  marked  from  any 


by  Google 


CHAP,  vin.]  ANTIQUITY  OF  INSECTS.  167 

now  inhabiting  Europe.  A  butterfly  is  also  well  preserved,  with 
all  the  markings  of  the  wings ;  and  it  seems  to  be  a  Junoma,  a 
tropical  genus,  though  it  may  be  a  Vanessa,  which  is  European, 
but  the  fossil  most  resembles  Indian  species  of  Junoma. 

The  Eocene  formations  seem  to  have  produced  no  in- 
sect remains ;  but  they  occur  again  in  the  Upper  Cretaceous 
at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  where  two  butterflies  have  been  found, 
Cyllo  sepidta  and  Satyriks  Reynedi,  both  belonging  to  the  Saty- 
ridte,  and  the  former  to  a  genus  now  spread  over  Africa,  India, 
and  Australia. 

A  little  earlier,  in  the  Wealden  formation  of  our  own  country, 
numerous  insects  have  been  found,  principally  dragon  flies  (Libel- 
lula,  Mshna) ;  aquatic  Hemiptera  ( Vdia  Mydrometrd) ;  crickets 
cockroaches,  and  cicadas,  of  familiar  types. 

Further  back  in  the  Upper  Oohte  of  Bavaria — which  produced 
the  wonderful  long-tailed  bird,  Arehceopteryx — insects  of  all  orders 
have  been  found,  including  a  moth  referred  to  the  existing  genus 
S;phi'nx. 

In  the  Lower  Oolite  of  Oxfordshire  many  fossil  beetles  have 
been  found  whose  affinities  are  shown  by  their  names : — Bupres- 
tidiwm,  OwcvJionidiiim,  Mapsidiutn,  MdolontMdiiim,  and  Frio- 
nidium  ;  a  wing  of  a  butterfly  has  also  been  found,  allied  to  the 
Brassolidas  now  confined  to  tropical  America,  and  named  Fal^- 
ontina  oolitica. 

Still  more  remote  are  the  insects  of  the  Lias  of  Gloucester- 
shire, yet  they  too  can  be  referred  to  well-known  family  types — 
CarabidEc,  Melolonthida;,  Telephoridse,  Elateridte,  and  Curculio- 
nidte,  amoi^  beetles;  Gryllidaa  and  Blattidfe  among  Orthoptera; 
with  Zibellula,  Agrion,  Mskna,  Ephem&'a,  and  some  extinct 
genera.  When  we  consider  that  almost  the  only  vertebrata  of 
thia  period  were  huge  Saurian  repKles  like  the  Icthyosawms, 
FUsiosaurus,  and  Dinosaums,  with  the  flying  Pterodaotyles ; 
and  that  the  great  mass  of  our  existing  genera,  and  even  fami- 
lies, of  fish  and  reptiles  had  almost  certainly  not  come  into  exist- 
ence, we  see  at  once  that  types  of  insect-form  are,  proportionately, 
far  more  ancient.  At  this  remote  epoch  we  find  the  chief  family 
types  (the  genera  of  the  time  of  Linnteus)  perfectly  differentiated 


by  Google 


1G8  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [pabt  ir. 

and  recognisable.  It  is  only  when  we  go  further  back  atill,  into 
the  Palseozoic  formations,  that  the  insect  forms  begin  to  show  tliat 
generalization  of  type  which  renders  it  impossible  to  classify 
them  in,  any  existing  groups.  Yet  even  in  the  coal  formation  of 
Nova  Scotia  and  Durham,  the  fossil  insects  are  said  by  competent 
entomologists  to  be  "  allied  to  Ephemera"  " near  Blatta"  " near 
PkasmidcB  ;  "  and  in  deposits  of  the  same  age  at  Saarbriick  near 
Treves,  a  well-preserved  wing  of  a  grasshopper  or  locust  has  been 
found,  as  well  as  a  beetle  referred  to  the  Scarabeidte.  More 
remarkable,  however,  is  the  recent  discovery  in  the  carboniferous 
shales  of  Be^um,  of  the  clearly-defined  wir^  of  a  large  moth 
(Breyeria  iorinensis),  closely  resembling  some  of  the  Satumiida; ; 
so  that  we  have  now  all  the  chief  orders  of  Insects — ^inclndii^ 
those  supposed  to  be  the  most  highly  developed  and  the  rnost 
recent — well  represented  at  this  very  remote  epoch.  Even  the 
oldest  insects,  from  the  Devonian  rocks  of  North  America,  can 
mostly  be  classed  as  Neuroptera  or  Myriapoda,  but  appear  to 
form  new  families. 

We  may  consider  it,  therefore,  as  proved,  that  many  of  the 
laJ^er  and  more  important  genera  of  insects  date  back  to  the 
beginning  of  the  Tertiarj'  period,  or  perhaps  beyond  it ;  but  the 
family  types  are  far  older,  and  must  have  been  differentiated  very 
early  in  the  Secondary  period,  while  some  of  them  perhaps  go 
back  to  Palaeozoic  times.  The  great  comparative  antic[uity  of 
the  ffenera.  is  however  the  important  feet  for  us,  and  we  shall 
have  occasion  often  to  refer  to  it,  in  endeavouring  to  ascertain 
the  true  bearing  of  the  facts  of  insect  distribution,  as  elucidating 
or  invalidating  the  conclusions  arrived  at  from  a  study  of  the 
distribution  of  the  higher  animals. 


Antiquity  of  the  Genera  of  Land  and  Feesh-Watee 
Shells. 

The  remains  of  land  and  ftesh- water  shells  are  not  much  more 
frequent  than  those  of  insects.  Like  them,  too,  their  forms  are 
very  stable,  continuing  unchanged   through   several  geological 


by  Google 


CHAP.  VIII.]  ANTIQUITY  OP  LAND  SHELLa  lt>9 

periods.  In  the  Pliocene  and  Miocene  formations,  most  of  the 
sheila  are  very  similar  to  living  species,  and  some  are  quite  iden- 
tical. In  the  Eocene  we  meet  with  ordinary  forms  of  the  genera 
Helix,  Cktimlia,  Fiipa,  Bulintm,  Qlandina,  Cydodoma,  Megdlos- 
toma,  Planorhis,  Paludina  and  Limncea,  some  resembling  Euro- 
pean species,  others  more  like  tropical  forms.  A  British  Eocene 
species  of  ^isZ-iiG  is  still  living  in  Texas ;  and  in  the  South  of  France 
are  found  species  of  the  Brazilian  sub-genera  Megaspira  and 
Anastoma.  In  the  secondary  formation  no  true  land  shells  have 
been  found,  but  fresh  water  shells  are  tolerably  abundant,  and 
almost  all  are  still  of  living  forms.  In  the  Wealden  (Lower 
Cretaceous)  and  Purbeck  (Upper  Oolit«)  arc  found  Unio,  Melania, 
Fahidina,  FlanorUs,  and  Limncea ;  while  the  last  named  genus 
occurs  even  in  the  Lias. 

The  notion  that  laud  shells  were  really  not  in  existence  during 
the  secondary  period  is,  however,  proved  to  be  erroneous  by  the 
startling  discovery,  in  the  Paleozoic  coal  measures  of  Nova  Scotia, 
of  two  species  of  llelicidffi,  both  of  living  genera — Fv/pa  vetusta, 
and  Zonites  priscus.  They  have  been  found  in  the'  hollow  trunk 
of  a  Sigiilaria.,  and  in  great  quantities  in  a  bed  full  of  Stigmarian 
rootlets.  The  most  minute  examination  detects  no  important 
differences  of  form  or  of  microscopic  structure,  between  these 
shells  and  living  species  of  the  same  genera !  These  moUusca  were 
the  contemporaries  of  Labyrinthodonts  and  strange  Ganoid  fishes, 
which  formed  almost  the  whole  vertebrate  fauna.  This  unex- 
pected discovery  render's  it  almost  certain,  that  numbers  of  other 
existing  genera,  of  which  we  have  found  no  traces,  lived  with 
these  two  through  the  whole  secondary  period ;  and  we  are  thus 
obliged  to  assume  as  a  probability,  that  any  particular  genus  has 
lived  through  a  long  succession  of  geological  ages.  In  esti- 
mating the  importance  of  any  peculiarities  or  anomalies  in  the 
geographical  distribution  of  land  shells  as  compared  with  the 
higher  vertebrates,  we  shall,  therefore,  have  to  keep  this  possible, 
and  even  probable  high  antic[uity,  constantly  in  mind. 

We  have  now  concluded  our  sketch  of  Tertiary  Palseontology 
as  a  preparation  for  the  intelligent  study  of  the  Geographical 
Vol.  L— 13 


by  Google 


170  DISTRIBUTION  OF  EXTINCT  ANIMALS.  [part  ii. 

Distribution  of  Land  Animals ;  and  however  imperfectly  the  task 
has  been  performed,  the  reader  will  at  all  events  have  been  con- 
vinced tliat  some  aueh  preliminary  investigation  is  an  essential 
and  most  important  part  of  our  work.  So  much  of  palseontology 
is  at  present  tentative  and  conjectural,  that  in  combining  the 
information  derived  from  numerous  writers,  many  errors  of  detail 
must  have  been  made.  The  main  conclusions  have,  however,  been 
drawn  from  as  large  a  basis  of  facts  as  possible  ;  and  although 
fresh  discoveries  may  show  that  our  views  as  to  the  past  history 
of  some  of  the  less  important  genera  or  families  are  erroneous, 
they  can  hardly  invalidate  our  results  to  any  important  degree, 
either  as  regards  the  intercommunications  between  separate 
regions  in  the  various  geological  epochs,  or  as  to  the  centres 
from  which  some  of  the  more  important  groups  have  been  dis- 
persed 


by  Google 


PART  III. 

ZOOLOGICAL   GEOORAFEY: 

A  REVIEW  OF  THE  CHIEF  FOSMS  OF  ANIMAL  LIFE  IN  THE 
SEVERAL  REGIONS  AND  SUB-REGIONS,  WITS  THE  INDICA- 
TIONS THEY  AFFORD  OF  GEOGSAFHIOAL  MUTATIONS. 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE    OEDER    OF    BITCCESSION    OF    THE    EEGIONS.— COSMOPOLITAN 
GKOUPS   OF  ANIMALS. — TABLES   OF  DISTRIBUTION. 

Havino  discussed,  in  our  First  Part,  such  general  and  preliminary 
matters  as  are  necessary  to  a  proper  comprehension  of  our 
subject ;  and  having  made  ourselres  aec[uainted,  in  our  Second 
Part,  with  the  most  important  results  of  Paleontology,  wo  now 
come  to  our  more  iromediate  subject,  which  we  propose  to  treat 
first  under  its  geographical  aspect.  Tating  each  of  our  six 
regions  in  succession,  we  shall  point  out  in  some  detail  the  chief 
zoological  features  they  present,  as  influenced  by  climate,  vege- 
tation, and  other  physical  features.  We  shall  then  treat  each 
of  the  sub-rt^ons  by  itself,  as  well  as  such  of  the  islands  or 
other  sub-divisions  as  present  features  of  special  interest ;  en- 
deavouring to  ascert^  their  true  relations  to  each  other,  and  the 
more  important  changes  of  physical  geography  that  seem  neces- 
sary to  account  for  their  present  zoological  condition. 

Order  of  Succession  of  the  Regions. — We  may  here  explain 
the  reason  for  taking  the  several  regions  in  a  different  succession 
from  that  in  which  they  appear  in  the  tabular  or  diagrammatic 
headings  to  each  family,  in  the  Fourth,  and  concluding  part  of 
this  work.  It  will  have  been  seen,  by  our  examination  of  extinct 
animals  (and  it  will  be  made  still  clearer  during  our  study  of 
the  several  regions)  that  all  the  chief  types  of  animal  life  appear 
to  have  originated  in  the  great  north  t-emperate  or  northern 
continents ;  while  the  southern  continents — now  represented  by 


by  Google 


174  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [fart  hi. 

South  America,  Australia,  and  South  Africa  with  Madagascar- 
have  heen  more  or  less  completely  iaolated,  during  long  periods, 
hoth  from  the  northern  continent  and  from  each  other.  These 
latter  countries  have,  however,  been  subject  to  more  or  less  im- 
migration from  the  north  during  rare  epochs  of  approximation 
to,  or  partial  union  with  it.  In  the  northern,  more  extensive,  and 
probably  more  ancient  land,  the  process  of  development  has 
been  more  rapid,  and  has  resulted  in  more  varied  and  higher 
types ;  while  the  southern  lands,  for  the  most  part,  seem  to  have 
produced  numerous  diverging  modifications  of  the  lower  grades 
of  oi^anization,  the  original  types  of  which  they  derived  either 
from  the  north,  or  from  some  of  the  ancient  continents  in  Meso- 
zoic  or  Palaeozoic  times.  Hence  those  curious  resemblances  in 
the  fauna  of  South  America,  Australia,  and,  to  a  less  extent, 
Madagascar,  which  have  led  to  a  somewhat  general  belief  that 
these  distant  countries  must  at  one  time  or  other  have  been 
united ;  a  belief  which,  after  a  careful  examination  of  all  the 
facts,  does  not  seem  to  the  author  of  this  work  to  be  well 
founded.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  the  most  satisfactory 
evidence  that  each  southei'n  region  has  been  more  or  less 
closely  united  (during  the  tertiary  or  later  secondary  epoch) 
with  the  great  northern  continents,  leading  to  munerous  resem- 
blances and  affinities  in  their  productions. 

In  endeavouring  to  present  at  a  glance  in  the  most  convenient 
manner,  the  distribution  of  the  families  in  the  several  regions 
and  sub-regions,  it  was  necessary  to  arrange  them,  so  that  those 
whose  relations  to  each  other  were  closest  should  stand  side  by 
side ;  the  first  and  last  being  those  between  which  the  relations 
were  least  numerous  and  least  important.  Influenced  by  the 
usual  opinions  as  to  the  relations  between  Australia  and  South 
America,  the  series  was  at  first  begun  with  the  Kearctic,  and 
terminated  with  the  Australian  and  Neotropical  regions ;  and  it 
was  not  till  the  whole  of  the  vertebrate  families  had  been  gone 
through,  and  their  distribution  carefully  studied,  that  these  last 
two  regions  were  seen  to  be  really  wider  apart  than  any  others 
of  the  series.  It  was  therefore  decided  to  alter  the  arrangement, 
beginning  with  the  Neotropical,  and  ending  with  the  Australian 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IX.]      OBDER  or  SUCCESSION  OF  THE  REGIONS.  175 

r^ons ;  and  a  careful  inspection  of  the  diagrams  themselves, 
taken  in  their  entirety,  will,  it  is  believed,  show  that  this  is 
the  most  natural  plan,  and  most  truly  exhibits  the  relations  of 
the  several  r^ons. 

In  the  portion  of  our  work  now  commencing,  we  are  not, 
however,  by  any  means  bound  to  begin  at  either  end  of  this 
series.  Each  region  is  studied  by  itself,  but  reference  will  often 
have  to  be  made  to  all  the  other  regions ;  and  wherever  we 
begin,  we  must  occasionally  refer  to  facts  which  will  be  given 
further  on.  As,  however,  the  great  northern  continents  form 
the  central  mass  from  which  the  southern  regions,  as  it  were, 
diverge,  and  as  the  Palsearctic  region  is  both  more  extensive  and 
much  better  known  than  any  other,  it  undoubtedly  forms  the 
most  convenient  starting-point  for  our  proposed  survey  of 
the  zoological  history  of  the  earth.  We  thus  pass  from  the 
better  known  to  the  less  known — ^from  Europe  to  Africa  and 
tropical  Asia,  and  thence  to  Australia,  completing  the  series  of 
regions  of  the  Eastern  Hemisphere.  Beginning  again  with  the 
Neotropical  region,  we  pass  to  the  Nearctie,  which  has  such 
striking  relations  with  the  preceding  and  with  the  PalEearctic 
i-^on,  that  it  can  only  he  properly  understood  by  constant 
reference  to  both.  We  thus  keep  separate  the  Eastern  and  West- 
ern hemispheres,  which  form,  from  our  point  of  view,  the 
most  radical  and  most  si^gestive  division  of  terrestrial  faunas ; 
and  as  we  are  able  to  make  this  also  the  dividing  point  of  otir 
two  volumes,  reference  to  the  work  will  be  thereby  facilitated. 

Cosmopolitan  Groups. — Before  proceeding  to  sketch  the  zoo- 
logical features  of  the  several  Kegions  it  will  be  well  to  notice 
those  family  groups  which  belong  to  the  earth  as  a  whole,  and 
which  are  so  widely  and  universally  distributed  over  it  that  it 
will  be  unnecessary,  in  some  cases,  to  do  more  than  refer  to 
them  under  the  separate  geographical  divisions. 

The  only  absolutely  cosmopolitan  famUies  of  Mammalia  are 
those  which  are  aerial  or  marine;  and  this  is  one  of  the  striking 
proofs  that  their  distribution  has  been  effected  by  natural  causes, 
and   that  the   permanence    of   barriers   is    one    of  the    chief 


by  Google 


176  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

agencies  in  the  limitation  of  tlieir  range.  Even  among  the 
aerial  bats,  however,  only  one  family — the  Vespertihoniiiie — -is 
truly  cosmopolitan,  the  others  having  a  more  or  less  restricted 
range.  Neither  are  the  Cetacea  necessarily  cosmopoHtan,  most  of 
the  families  being  restricted  either  to  warm  or  to  cold  seas ;  hut 
one  family,  the  dolphins  (Delphinids),  is  truly  so.  This  order 
however  will  not  require  further  notice,  as,  being  exclusively 
marine  the  groups  do  not  enter  into  any  of  our  terrestrial 
regions.  The  only  other  family  of  mammals  that  may  be  con- 
sidered to  be  cosmopolitan,  is  the  Muridse  (rats  and  mice) ;  yet 
these  are  not  entirely  so,  since  none  are  known  to  be  truly 
indigenous  in  any  part  of  the  Australian  region  except  Australia 
itself: 

In  the  class  of  Birds,  a  number  of  families  are  cosmopolites, 
if  we  reckon  as  such  all  which  are  found  in  each  region  and 
sub-region ;  hut  several  of  these  are  so  abundant  in  some  parts, 
while  they  are  so  sparingly  represented  in  others,  that  they 
cannot  fairly  be  considered  so.  We  shall  confine  that  term 
therefore,  to  such  as,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  inhabit  every 
important  sub-division  of  each  region.  Such  are,  among  the 
Passerine  birds  the  crows  (Corvidte),  and  swallows  (Hinindi- 
nidse) ;  among  the  Picaiiie  the  Idngfishers  (Alcediaidte) ;  among 
other  Land  birds  the  pigeons  (Columbidte),  grouse  and  partridges 
(Tetraonidje),  hawks  (Falconidse),  and  owls  (StrigidEc) ;  among 
the  "Waders  the  rails  (Eallida)),  snipes  (ScolopaeidEe),  plovera 
(CharadriadEe),  and  herons  (Ardeidee) ;  and  among  the  Swimmers 
the  ducks  (Anatidte),  gulls  (Laridse),  petrels  (ProceUariida;), 
pelicans  (Pelecanidie),  and  grebes  (Podicipidse). 

In  the  class  of  Reptiles  there  are  few  absolutely  cosmopolitan 
famiUes,  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  members  of  this  group  in  some 
insular  sub-regions,  such  as  New  Zealand  and  the  Pacific  Islands. 
Those,  which  are  most  nearly  so  are  the  Colubridte  among  snakes, 
and  the  Seincidse  among  lizards. 

There  is  no  cosmopolitan  family  of  Amphibia,  the  true  frogs 
(Eanid^e)  being  the  most  widely  distributed. 

Neither  is  any  family  of  Freshwater  Fishes  cosmopolitan, 
the    Siluridie,  which   have   the   widest    range,  being   confined 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IX.]  TABLES  OF  DISTRIBUTION.  177 

to  warm  regions,  and  becoming  very  scarce  in  the  temperate 
zones. 

Among  the  Diurnal  and  Crepuscular  Lepidoptera  (butterflies 
and  aphingea)  the  following  families  are  cosmopolitan : — Satyridfe, 
NymphaUdfe,  Zyg^enidse,  Pieridte,  Papilionidte,  Heaperidte, 
Lycienidse,  and  Sphingid*. 

Of  the  Coleoptera  almost  all,  except  some  of  the  small  and 


Of  the  terrestrial  MoUusca,  the  Helicidse  alone  are  true  cos- 
mopolites. 

Tables  of  Distribution  of  Families  and  Genera. — Having  been 
obliged  to  construct  numerous  tables  of  the  distribution  of  the 
various  groups  for  the  purposes  of  the  descriptive  part  of  the 
work,  I  have  thought  it  well  to  append  the  most  important  of 
them,  in  a  convenient  fomi,  to  the  chapter  on  each  region ;  as 
much  information  will  thereby  be  given,  which  can  only  be 
obtained  from  existing  works  at  the  cost  of  great  labour.  AU 
these  tables  aie  drawn  up  on  a  uniform  plan,  the  same  generic 
and  family  names  being  used  in  each ;  and  all  are  arranged  in 
the  same  systematic  order,  so  as  to  be  readily  comparable 
with  each  other.  This,  although  it  seems  a  simple  and  natural 
thing  to  do,  has  involved  a  very  great  amount  of  labour,  because 
hardly  two  authors  use  the  same  names  or  follow  the  same 
arrangement.  Hence  comparison  between  them  is  impossible,  till 
all  their  work  has  been  picked  to  pieces,  their  synonymy  un- 
ravelled, their  differences  accounted  for,  and  the  materials  recast ; 
and  this  has  to  be  done,  not  for  two  or  three  authors  only,  but 
for  the  majority  of  those  whose  works  have  been  consulted  on 
the  zoology  of  any  part  of  the  globe. 

Except  in  the  two  higher  oi?ders — Mammalia  and  Birds — 
materials  do  not  exist  for  complete  tables  of  the  genera  brought 
down  to  the  present  time.  We  have  given  therefore,  first,  a 
complete  table  of  all  the  families  of  Yettebrata  and  Diurnal 
Lepidoptera  found  in  each  region,  showing  the  sub-regions  in 
which  they  occur,  and  their  range  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
reg,on.     Families  which  ate  wholly  peculiar  to  the  region,  or 


by  Google 


178  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [part  hi. 

very  characteristic  and  almost  exclvisively  confined  to  it,  are  in 
'iialics.  The  number  prefixed  to  each  family  corresponda  to 
that  of  the  series  of  families  in  the  Pourth  Part  of  this  work, 
so  that  if  further  information  la  required  it  can  be  readily 
referred  to  without  consulting  the  index.  Karnes  inclosed  in 
parentheses — (  .  .  -  )  thus — indicate  families  which  only  just 
enter  a  region  from  an  adjacent  one,  to  which  they  properly 
belong.  The  eye  is  thus  directed  to  the  more,  and  the  less  im- 
portant families ;  and  a  considerable  amount  of  information  as 
to  the  general  features  of  the  zoology  of  the  region,  is  conveyed 
in  the  easiest  manner. 

The  tables  of  genera  of  Mammalia  and  Birds,  are  arranged  on 
a  somewhat  different  plan.  Each  genus  is  given  under  its 
Family  and  Order,  and  they  follow  in  the  same  succession  iu  all 
the  tables.  The  number  of  species  of  each  genus,  inhabitii^ 
the  region,  is  given  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained ;  but  in  many 
cases  this  can  only  he  a  general  approximation.  The  distribution 
of  the  genem  ■within  the  region,  la  then  given  with  some  detail ; 
and,  lastly,  the  range  of  the  genus  beyond  the  region  is  given 
in  general  terms,  the  words  "  Oriental,"  "  Ethiopian,"  &c.,  being 
tiaed  for  brevity,  to  indicate  that  the  genus  occurs  over  a  con- 
siderable part  of  such  regions.  Genera  which  are  restricted  to 
the  region  (or  which  ate  very  characteristic  of  it  though  just 
transgressing  its  limits)  are  given  in  italics  ;  while  those  which 
only  just  enter  the  r^on  from  another  to  which  they  really 
belong,  are  enclosed  in  parentheses — (  .  .  .  )  thus.  The  genera 
are  here  numbered  consecutively,  in  order  that  the  number  of 
genera  in  each  family  or  each  order,  in  the  region,  may  he  readily 
ascertaiaed  (by  one  process  of  subtraction),  and  thus  compari- 
sons made  with  other  regions  or  with  any  other  area,  As  the 
tables  of  birds  would  be  swelled  to  an  inconvenient  length  by 
the  insertion  in  each  region  of  all  the  genera  of  Waders  and 
Aquatics,  most  of  which  have  a  very  wide  range  and  would 
have  to  be  repeated  in  several  or  all  the  regions,  these  have 
been  omitted ;  but  a  list  has  been  given  of  such  of  the  genera 
as  are  peculiar  to,  or  highly  characteristic  of  each  region. 

Aa  this  is  the  first  time  that  any  such  extensive  tables  of 


by  Google 


CHAP.  IX.]  TABLES  OF  DISTRIBUTION.  179 

diBtribution  have  been  constructed  for  the  whole  of  the  Mam- 
malia and  Birda,  they  must  necessarily  contain  many  errors  of 
detail ;  but  with  all  their  imperfections  it  is  believed  they  will 
prove  very  useful  to  naturahsts,  to  teachers,  and  to  aU  who  take 
an  intelligent  interest  in  the  wider  problems  of  geography  and 
natural  history. 


by  Google 


THE   PALJUAKCTIC   REGION. 

This  region  is  of  immense  extent,  comprising  all  the  temperate 
portions  of  tlie  great  eastern  continents.  It  thus  extends  from 
the  Azores  and  Canary  Islands  on  the  west  to  Japan  on  the 
east,  a  distance  not  far  short  of  half  the  circumlerenee  of  the 
glohe.  Tet  so  great  is  the  zoological  unity  of  this  vast  tract, 
that  the  majority  of  the  genera  of  animals  in  countries  so  far 
removed  as  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Japan  are  identical. 
Throughout  its  northern  half  the  animal  productions  of  the 
Paltearctic  region  are  very  uniform,  except  that  the  vast  elevated 
desert-regions  of  Central  Asia  possess  some  characteristic  forms ; 
but  in  its  southern  portion,  we  find  a  warm  district  at  each  ex- 
tremity with  somewhat  contrasted  features.  On  the  west  we  have 
the  rich  aud  luxuriant  Mediterranean  sub-region,  possessing  many 
peeuhar  forms  of  life,  as  well  as  a  few  which  are  more  especially 
characteristic  of  the  Ethiopian  region.  On  the  east  we  have  the 
fertile  plains  of  Iforthem  China  and  the  rich  and  varied  islands 
of  Japan,  possessii^  a  very  distinct  set  of  peculiar  forms,  with 
others  belonging  to  the  Oriental  region,  into  which  this  part  of 
the  Paltearctic  region  merges  gradually  as  we  approach  the 
Tropic  of  Cancer.  Thus,  the  countries  roughly  indicated  by  the 
names— Northern  Europe,  the  Mediterranean  district.  Central 
and  Northern  Asia,  and  China  with  Japan — have  each  well- 
marked  minor  characteristics  which  entitle  them  to  the  rank  of 
sub-regions.  Their  boundaries  are  often  indefinable ;  aud  those 
here  adopted  have  been  fixed  upon  to  some  extent  by  considera- 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CEAP,  X.]  THE  PALiEAECTIC  EEaiON.  181 

tiona  of  convenience,  dependent  on  custom  and  on  the  more  or 
less  perfect  kuowledge  we  possras  of  some  of  tlie  intervening 
countries. 

Zmlogiml  Charadensties  of  the  Palcmrctic  Begion. — The  Palfe- 
arctic  region  has  representatives  of  thirty-flve  families  of 
mammalia,  fifty-five  of  birds,  twenty-five  of  reptiles,  nine  of 
amphibia,  and  thirteen  of  freshwater  fishes.  Comparing  it  with 
the  only  other  wholly  temperate  region,  the  Nearetic,  we  find  a 
much  greater  variety  of  types  of  mammalia  and  birds.  This 
may  be  due  in  part  to  its  greater  area,  but  more,  probably, 
to  its  southern  boundary  being  conterminous  for  an  enormous 
distance  with  two  tropical  regions,  the  Ethiopean  and  Oriental ; 
whereas  the  Nearetic  has  a  comparatively  short  southern  bound- 
ary conterminous  with  the  Neotropical  region  only.  This  is  so 
very  important  a  difference,  that  it  is  rather  a  matter  of  surprise 
that  the  two  north  temperate  regions  should  not  be  more  unequal 
in  the  number  of  their  higher  vertebrate  forms,  than  they 
actually  are. 

It  is  also  to  the  interblending  of  the  Paliearctic  with  the  two 
adjacent  tropical  regions,  that  we  must  attribute  its  possession 
of  so  few  peculiar  family  groups.  These  are  only  three ;  two 
of  reptiles,  TTogonophid(^  and  Opkitmoridce,  and  one  of  fishes, 
GomephorifUe.  The  number  of  peculiar  genera  is,  however,  con- 
sideiable,  as  the  following  enumeration  will  show. 

Mammaha. — The  monkey  of  Gibraltar  and  North  Africa,  and 
an  allied  species  found  in  Japan,  are  now  considered  to  belong 
to  the  extensive  eastern  genus  Macacm.  The  former,  however, 
IS  pecuhar  m  the  entire  absence  of  the  tail,  and  has  by  many 
naturah^ts,  been  held  to  form  a  distinct  genus,  Inuus,  confined 
to  the  Palasarctic  region. 

Of  bats  there  are  one  or  two  genera  {Barhastdliis,  PUcoius] 
which  seem  to  be  mainly  or  wholly  Palsearetic,  but  the  elaasifl- 
cation  of  these  animals  is  in  such  an  unsettled  state  that  the 
distribution  of  the  genera  is  of  little  importance. 

In  the  next  order,  Insectivora,  we  have  almost  the  entire 
family  of  the  Moles  confined  to  the  region.  Talpa  juat  enters 
Northern  India ;  and  Urotriehus  is  common  to  Japan  and  North- 


by  GoOglc 


182  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

Western  America,  but  the  remainii^  genera,  six  in  number,  are 
all  exclusively  Palfearctic. 

Among  Caraivora  we  have  Jfyctereutes,  the  cunous  racoon-dog 
of  Japan  and  N'orth-Eastem  Asia ;  Lutronectes,  an  otter  peculiar 
to  Japan ;  and  the  badger  {Meles),  which  ranges  over  the  whole 
K^on,  and  just  enters  the  Oriental  region  as  far  as  Hongkong ; 
.^wopus,  a  curious  form  of  the  Himalayan  panda,  inhabiting 
the  high  mountains  of  Eastern  Thibet ;  and  Feloffiiis,  a  genus  of 
seals,  ranging  from  the  shores  of  Madeira  to  the  Black  Sea. 

The  TJngulata,  or  hoofed  animals,  are  still  more  productive  of 
forms  peculiar  to  this  region.  Eirst  we  have  the  Camels,  whose 
native  home  is  the  desert  region  of  Central  and  Western  Asia  and 
Northern  Africa,  and  which,  even  in  their  domesticated  condition, 
are  confined  almost  wholly  within  the  limits  of  the  Palajarctic 
region.  OfDeer  wehave  six  peculiar  genera,  i?([ma  and  f^iyweo/ws 
found  in  Europe,  with  Ela/phodvs,  L<yphotra,gus,  Hydropotes,  and 
Moschvs,  confined  to  Northern  China  and  Mongolia.  The  great 
family  Bovidie — comprising  the  oxen,  sheep,  goats  and  antelopes 
— furnishes  no  less  than  seven  peculiar  Palfearctic  genera. 
These  are  Poephagvs,  the  yak  of  Thibet;  Addaai,  a  weU-known 
antelope  of  Northern  Africa  and  Syria ;  Procapra,  Pantho- 
lops  and  Budorcas,  antelopinie  genera  peculiar  to  Thibet  and 
Mongolia ;  with  Eupieapra  (the  chamois),  and  the  extraordinary 
large-nosed  antelope  Sai^d,  confined  to  Europe  and  Western  Asia, 
e  we  have  Capra  (the  wild  sheep  and  goats),  all  the 
is  of  which,  except  two,  are  exclusively  Pahearctic. 

Coming  to  the  Eodents,  we  have  again  many  peculiar  forms. 
Of  Muridse  (the  mouse  and  rat  tribe),  we  have  six  peculiar 
genera,  the  more  important  being  Gricetus,  Khomhomys  Smin- 
thus,  and  Myospalax.  Of  Spalacidie  (mole-rats)  both  the  Palte- 
arctic  genera,  Ellobius  and  Spalax,  are  pecuhar.  Ctenodadylus, 
a  genus  of  the  South  American  family  Octodoutidce,  is  found 
only  in  North  Africa  To  these  we  may  add  Myoxus  (the 
dormice)  and  Lagomys  (the  pikas  or  tail-less  hares)  as  essentially 
Paleearctic,  since  but  one  species  of  each  genus  is  found  be- 
yond the  limits  of  the  region. 

Birds. — It  appears  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  many  natural- 


by  Google 


UEAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^ARCTIC  REGION.  1S3 

iste  that  the  Palatarctic  region  could  not  be  well  characterised  by 
its  peculiar  genera  of  bitds.  In  Mr.  Sclater's  celebrated  paper 
already  referred  to,  he  remarks,  "  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the 
ornithology  of  the  Palsearctic  region  is  more  easily  characterised 
by  what  it  has  not  than  by  what  it  has,"  and  this  has  been  quite 
recently  q^noted  by  Mr.  Allen,  in  his  essay  on  the  distribution 
of  North  American  birds,  as  if  it  represented  our  present  know 
ledge  of  the  subject.  But,  thanks  to  the  labours  of  Dr. 
Jerdon,  Mr,  Swinhoe,  P6re  David  and  others,  we  have  now 
learnt  that  a  large  number  of  birds  included  in  the  Indian 
list,  are  cither  mere  winter  emigrants  from  Central  Asia,  or  only 
inhabit  the  higher  ranges  of  the  Himalayas,  and  thus  really 
belong  to  the  Palffiarctic  region.  The  result  is,  that  a  host  of 
genera  are  now  seen  to  be  either  exclusively  or  characteristically 
Palsearctic,  and  we  have  no  further  difficulty  in  giving  positive 
ornithological  characters  to  the  region.  In  the  tables  appended 
to  this  chapter,  all  these  truly  PalEearctie  genera  will  be  found 
printed  in  italics,  with  an  indication  of  tlieir  distribution,  which 
will  sometimes  be  found  more  fully  given  under  the  respective 
families  in  the  fourth  part  of  this  work,  Referring  to  this  table 
for  details  we  shall  here  summarise  the  results. 

Of  the  Sylviidse  or  warblers,  no  less  than  fourteen  genera  are 
either  exclusively  or  characteristically  Palsearctic,  of  which 
LocvMdla,  Sylvia,  Gv/rruca  and  Erifhaeiis  are  good  examples. 
Of  the  oriental  family  Timaliidte,  the  genus  Pterorhinus  is  Palse- 
arctic.  Of  Panurid£e,  or  reedlings,  there  are  four  peculiar  genera 
(comprising  almost  the  whole  family) ;  of  CerthiidEC,  or  creepers, 
onG—Tichodroma — which  extends  southward  to  the  Abyssinian 
highlands.  Of  Paridte,  or  tits,  one — Acredula  ;  of  Corvidse,  or 
crows,  four — /■-«!«  (containing  our  magpie)  being  a  good  example;  of 
Eringillidse,  or  finches  and  buntings,  twelve,amongwhieh^i;K»(Ais, 
P-yrrhula  and  Emherim  are  good  illustrations ;  of  Alaudida3,  or 
lai'ks,  there  are  two  peculiar  genera.  Leaving  the  Passeres  we  next 
come  to  peculiar  forms  among  the  gallinaceous  birds :  Syrrha2>tes 
among  the  Pteroclidse  or  sand  grouse;  fonr  genera  of  Tetraonid*  or 
grouse  and  partridges,  and  five  of  Phasianidie  or  pheasants,  com- 
prising some  of  the  most  magnificent  birds  in  the  world.     Lastly 


by  Google 


184  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

among  the  far-wandering  ac[uatic  birds  we  have  no  less  than  five 
genera  which  are  more  especially  Voy^watvir—Ortygometra,  the 
corn-crake,  and  Otis,  the  great  bustard,  being  typical  examples. 
We  may  add  to  these,  several  genera  almost  confined  to  this 
region,  such  as  Garrulus  (jaya),  Fringilla  (true  finches),  Yiinx 
{wrynecks)  and  some  others  ;  so  that  in  proportion  to  its  total 
generic  forms  a  very  large  number  are  found  to  be  peculiar  or 
characteristic. 

This  view,  of  the  high  degree  of  speciality  of  the  PalEearctic 
region,  wiR  no  douht  be  objected  to  by  some  naturalists,  on  the 
ground  that  many  of  the  genera  reckoned  as  exclusively 
Palsearctic  are  not  so,  but  extend  more  or  leas  into  other  regions. 
It  is  well,  therefore,  to  consider  what  principles  should  guide  us 
in  a  matter  of  this  kind,  especially  as  we  shall  have  to  apply 
the  same  rules  to  each  of  the  other  regions.  We  may  remark 
first,  that  the  limits  of  the  regions  themselves  are,  when  not 
formed  by  the  ocean,  somewhat  arbitrary,  depending  on  the 
average  distribution  of  a  number  of  charaeteristie  forms ;  and 
that  slight  local  peculiarities  of  soil,  elevation,  or  climate,  may 
cause  the  species  of  one  region  to  penetrate  more  or  less  deeply 
into  another.  The  land  boundary  between  two  regions  will  be, 
not  a  defined  hne  hut  a  neutral  territory  of  greater  or  leas 
width,  within  which  the  forma  of  both  regions  wiU  intermingle; 
and  this  neutral  territory  itself  will  merge  imperceptibly  into 
hoth  regions.  So  long  therefore  as  a  species  or  genus  does  not 
permanently  reside  considerably  beyond  the  possible  limits  of 
this  neutral  territory,  we  should  not  claim  it  aa  an  inhabitant 
of  the  adjacent  region.  A  consideration  of  perhaps  more  im- 
portance arises,  from  the  varying  extent  of  the  range  of  a  genus, 
over  the  area  occupied  by  the  region.  Some  genera  are  repre- 
sented by  single  species  existing  only  in  a  very  limited  area ; 
others  by  numerous  species  which  occupy,  entirely  or  very 
nearly,  the  whole  extent  of  the  region  ;  and  there  is  every  inter- 
mediate grade  between  these  extremes.  Now,  the  small  local- 
ised genera,  are  always  reckoned  as  among  the  best  examples 
of  types  peculiar  to  a  region ;  while  the  more  wide-spread  groups 
are  often  denied  that  charaeter  if  they  extend  a  little  beyond 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.J  THE  PALa;ABCTIO  REGION.  185 

the  supposed  regional  limits,  or  send  one  or  two,  out  of  a  large 
number  of  species,  into  adjacent  regions ;  jet  there  is  some 
reason  to  believe  that  the  latter  are  really  more  important  as 
characterising  a  zoological  region  than  the  former.  In  the  ease 
of  a  single  isolated  species  or  genws  we  have  a  dying-out  group ; 
and  we  have  so  many  cases  of  discontinuons  species  of  such 
groups  (of  which  Urotriehus  in  Japan  and  British  Columbia, 
E-wpetes  in  Sumatra  and  New  Guinea  are  examples),  that  it  is 
quite  as  prohahle  as  not,  that  any  such  isolated  species  has  only 
become  peculiar  to  the  region  by  the  recent  extinction  of  an 
allied  form  or  forms  in  some  other  region.  On  the  other  hand, 
a  genua  consisting  of  numerous  species  ranging  over  an  entire 
region  or  the  greater  part  of  one,  is  a  dominant  group,  which 
has  most  likely  been  for  some  time  extending  its  range,  and 
whose  origin  dates  back  to  a  remote  period.  The  slight  exten- 
sion of  such  a  group  beyond  the  limits  of  the  region  to  which 
it  mainly  belongs,  is  probably  a  recent  phenomenon,  and  in  that 
case  cannot  be  held  in  any  degree  to  detract  from  its  value  as 
one  of  the  peculiar  forms  of  that  region. 

The  most  numerous  examples  of  this  class,  are  those  hirds  of 
the  temperate  regions  which  in  winter  migrate,  either  wholly  or 
partially,  into  adjacent  warmer  countries.  This  migration  most 
likely  began  subsequent  to  the  Miocene  period,  during  that 
gradual  refrigeration  of  the  temperate  zones  which  culminated 
in  the  glacial  epoch,  and  which  still  continues  in  a  mitigated 
form.  Most  of  the  genera,  and  many  even  of  the  species  of 
birds  which  migrate  southwards  in  winter,  have  therefore,  most 
hkeiy,  always  been  inhahitants  of  our  present  Paltearctic  and 
Nearctic  regions  ;  permanent  residents  during  warm  epochs,  bat 
only  able  now  to  maintain  their  existence  by  migration  in 
winter.  Such  groups  belong  truly  to  Hie  temperate  zones,  and 
the  t«st  of  this  is  the  fact  of  their  not  having  any,  or  very  few, 
representatives,  which  are  permanent  residents  in  the  adjacent 
tropical  regions.  A¥hen  there  are  such  representative  species,  we 
do  not  claim  them  as  peculiar  to  the  N'orthern  regions, 
in  mind  these  various  considerations,  it  will  he  found  that  w£ 
been  very  moderate  in  our  estimate  of  the  numher  of  g 

Vol.  I.— 14 


by  Google 


18S  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  m. 

that  may  fairly  be  considered  as  exchisively  or  characteristically 
PalEeaictic. 

Ee^tUes  and  Amphibia. — The  Palffiarctie  region  possesses,  in 
proportion  to  its  limited  reptilian  feuna,  a  full  proportion  of 
peculiar  types.  We  have  for  instance  two  genera  of  snakes, 
Ehinechis  and  Halys ;  seven  of  lizards,  Trigonophis,  Psammo- 
drimvas,  Hyalosawus,  Sdticus,  Ophiomorvs,  Megalockilus,  and 
Phrynocephalus ;  eight  of  tailed  batrachians,  Protms,  Saktman- 
dra,  Sdranota,  OMoglossa,  Hynobius,  Onychodadplits,  Geotriton, 
and  Sidoldia ;  and  eight  of  tail-less  batrachians,  Bornbinaior, 
Peldbcdes,  Didoeus,  Alytes,  Pelodytes,  Discoglosms,  Laprissa,  and 
Latonia.  The  distribution  of  these  and  other  Palaearctic  genera 
will  be  found  in  our  second  vol,  chap.  xix. 

Freshwater  Fish. — About  twenty  genera  of  freshwater  fishes 
are  wholly  confined  to  this  region,  and  constitute  a  feature  which 
ought  not  to  be  overlooked  in  estimating  its  claim  to  the  rank 
of  a  separate  primary  division  of  the  earth.  They  belong  to  the 
following  families  : — Percidte  (three  genera),  Acerina,  Percarina, 
Aspro ;  Oomephoridje  (que  genus),  C'omephorus,  found  only  in 
Lake  Baikal ;  Salmonid^e  (three  genera),  Brachymystax,  Lima- 
tnitta,  and  Plecoglossus ;  CyprinodontidEe  (one  genus),  Tellia, 
found  only  in  Alpine  pools  on  the  Atlas  Mountains ;  Cyprinidie 
(thirteen  genera),  Cyprmus,  Carassus,  Paraphocdntis,  Tinea, 
Achihgnath'us,  Bhodeus,  ChoTidrostovia,  Psmdoperilampus,  Oche- 
tehius,  Aspius,  Albm'mts,  Misgumns,  and  Nemachilvs. 

Summary  of  Paimardie  Vertebrata. — Summarising  these  de- 
tails, we  find  that  the  PalEearctic  region  possesses  thirty-five 
peculiar  genera  of  mammalia,  fifty-seven  of  birds,  nine  of 
reptiles,  sixteen  of  amphibia,  and  twenty-one  of  freshwater 
fishes;  or  a  total  of  138  pecuHar  generic  types  of  vertebrata. 
Uf  these,  87  are  mammalia  and  land-birds  out  of  a  total 
of  274  genera  of  these  groups ;  or  rather  less  than  one-third 
peculiar,  a  number  which  will  serve  usefully  to  compare  with 
the  results  obtained  in  other  regions. 

In  our  chapter  on  Zoological  Eegions  we  have  already  pointed 
out  the  main  features  which  distinguish  the  Palsearctic  from  the 
Oriental  and  Ethiopian  regions.     Tlie  details   now  given  will 


by  Google 


cum:  x,]  THE  PAL^AEOTIC  REGION.  187 

strengtlien  our  view  of  their  radical  distinctness,  by  showing  to 
how  considerable  an  extent  the  former  is  inhabited  by  peculiar, 
and  often  very  remarkable  generic  types. 

Insects :  Zepidoptera. — The  Diurnal  Lepidoptera,  or  butterflies, 
are  uob  very  abundant  in  species,  their  number  being  probably 
somewhat  over  500, and  these  belong  to  not  more  than  fifty  genera. 
Bat  no  less  than  fifteen  of  these  genera  are  wholly  confined  to 
the  region.      Nine  of  the  families  are  represented,  as  follows  : — 

1,  Banaidce;  having  only   a   single  species  in   South  Europe. 

2.  Satyridm;  well  represented,  there  being  more  than  100  species 
in  Europe,  and  three  peculiar  genera.  3.  Nynvphalidm ;  rather 
poorly  represented,  Europe  having  only  about  sixty  species,  but 
there  is  one  peculiar  genua.  4.  Idbptheidte  ;  a  very  small  family, 
represented  by  a  single    species   occurring   in   South  Europe. 

5.  'Nem^dbiidxe ;  a  rather  small  femily,  also  having  only  one 
apeciea  in  Europe,   but   which   constitutes   a  peculiar  genera. 

6.  LycfenidcB  i  an  extensive  family,  fairly  represented,  having 
about  eighty  European  species  ;  there  are  two  peculiar  genera 
in  the  Pahearctic  region.  7.  Pieridm  ;  rather  poorly  represented 
with  thirty-two  European  species ;  two  of  the  genera  are,  how- 
ever, peculiar.  8.  Pwpiliomdm ;  very  poorly  represented  in 
Europe  with  only  twelve  species,  but  there  are  many  more  in 
Siberia  and  Japan.  No  less  than  five  of  the  smaU.  number  of 
genera  in  this  family  are  wholly  confined  to  the  r^on,  a 
fact  of  much  importance,  and  which  to  a  great  extent  redeems 
the  character  of  the  Palsearctic  region  as  regard  this  order  of 
insects.  Their  names  are  Mesapia,  Sypermnestra,  Boritis, 
Sericinus,  and  T/mis  ;  and  besides  these  we  have  Pai-Ttassius — 
the  "  ApoUo  "  butterflies — highly  characteristic,  and  only  found 
elsewhere  in  the  mountains  of  the  Nearctic  region.  9.  Hes- 
peiHdm  ;  poorly  represented  with  about  thirty  European  species, 
and  one  peculiar  genus.    . 

Four  families  of  Sphingina  occur  in  the  Palasarctic  region, 
and  there  are  several  peculiar  genera. 

In  the  ZygmiidcB  there  are  two  exclusively  European  genera, 
and  the  extensive  genus  ZygijEiha  is  itself  mainly  Palffiarctic. 
The  small  family   Stygiidce  has  two   out  of  its   three   genera 


by  Google 


188  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGHAPHy.  [pabt  iu, 

confined  to  the  Paleearctic  region.  In  the  j^geriidce  the  genus 
^geria  is  mainly  Palffiarctic.  The  SpMngidce  have  a  wider 
general  range,  and  none  of  the  larger  genera  are  peculiar  to  any 
one  region. 

Coleoptei-a.—The  Palffiaictic  region  is  the  richest  portion  of 
the  globe  in  the  great  famOy  of  Carabidm,  or  predacious  ground- 
beetles,  about  50  of  the  genera  being  confined  to  it,  while  many 
others,  including  the  magnificent  genus  Caraiws,  have  here  their 
h^hest  development.  While  several  of  the  smaller  genera  are 
confined  to  the  eastern  or  western  sub-regions,  most  of  the  larger 
ones  extend  over  the  whole  area,  and  give  it  an  unmistakable 
aspect ;  while  in  passing  from  east  to  west  or  vice^ersd,  allied 
species  and  genera  replace  each  other  with  considerable  regu- 
larity, except  in  the  extreme  south-east,  where,  in  China  and 
Japan,  some  Oriental  forms  appear,  as  do  a  few  Ethiopian  types 
in  the  south-west, 

Cicindelidfe,  or  tiger-beetles,  are  but  poorly  represented  hy 
about  70  species  of  the  geaua 'Oicindela,  and  a  single  Tetraeha, 
in   South  Europe. 

Lucanidfe,  or  stag-beetles,  are  also  poor,  there  being  represen- 
tatives of  8  genera.  One  of  these,  ^salus  (a  single  species), 
is  peculiar  to  South  Europe,  and  two  others,  Oladognathus  and 
Gydopthalmiis,  are  only  represented  in  Japan,  China,  and  Thibet. 

Cetoniidffl,  or  rose-chafers,  are  represented  by  13  genera, 
two  of  which  are  peculiar  to  South  Europe  {Tropinota  and 
Seteromerms),  while  Stalagrihosoma,  ranging  from  Persia  to 
Nubia,  and  the  fine  DicTanocephaliis  inhabiting  North  Chiiia, 
Corea,  and  Nipal,  may  also  be  considered  to  belong  to  it,  The 
genera  Trichnis,  Gnorimus,  and  Osmoderma  are  confined  to  the 
two  north  temperate  regions. 

Buprestidse,  or  metallic  beetles,  are  rather  abundant  in  the 
warmer  parts  of  the  region,  27  genera  being  represented,  nine 
of  which  are  peculiar.  By  far  the  larger  portion  of  these  are 
confined  to  the  Mediterranean  sub-region.  A  considerable 
number  also  inhabit  Japan  and  China. 

The  Longicorns,  or  long-horned  beetles,  are  represented  by 
no  less  than  196  genera,  51  of  which  are  peculiar.     They  are 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  EEGION.  189 

much  more  abundant  in  the  southern  than  the  northern  half 
of  the  region.  Several  Oriental  genera  extend  to  Japan  and 
North  China,  and  a  few  Ethiopian  genera  to  North  Africa. 
Thirteen  genera  are  confined  to  the  two  north  temperate  regions. 
Several  large  genera,  such  as  Dorcadion  (154  species),  PJhyt<scia 
(85  species),  Fogonochmnis  (22  species),  AgwpantMa  (22  species), 
and  Vesfp&rus  (7  species),  are  altogether  peculiar  to  the  Palte- 
arctic  region ;  and  with  a  preponderance  of  Le-ptii/ra,  Orainmc^ 
leva,  Stenocorus,  and  several  others,  strongly  characterise  it  as 
distinct  from  the  Nearctic  and  Oriental  regions. 

The  other  famiKes  which  are  well  developed  in  the  Palamrctic 
r^ons,  are,  the  StaphyHnidffi  or  tove-heetles,  Silphidfe  or 
hurying-beetles,  Histeridffi  or  mimie-heetles,  Nitidnlidffi,  Apho- 
diid£e,  Copridte  (especially  in  South  Europe),'  Geotrupidse  or 
dung-beetles,  Melolonthidje  or  chafers,  Eiateridte  or  click- 
beetles,  the  various  families  of  Malacoderms  and  Heteraraera, 
y  Pimeliidffi  in  the  Mediterranean  sub-region,  Curculion- 

:  or  weevils,  the  Phytophaga  or  leaf-eaters,  and  Cocinellidie 
or  lady-birds. 

The  number  of  species  of  Coleoptera  in  the  western  part  of 
the  Palfearctic  region  is  about  15,000,  and  there  are  probably 
not  more  than  2,000  to  add.  to  this  number  from  Siberia, 
.Tapan,  and  North  China;  but  were  these  countries  as  -well 
explored  as  Europe,  we  may  expect  that  they  would  add  at 
least  5,000  to  the  number  above  given,  raising  the  Palcearctie 
Coleopterous  fauna  to  20,000  species.  As  the  total  number  of 
species  at  present  known  to  exist  in  collections  is  estimated  (and 
perhaps  somewhat  over-estimated)  at  70,000  species,  we  may 
be  sure  that  were  the  whole  earth  as  thoroughly  investigated 
as  Europe,  the  number  would  be  at  least  doubled,  since  we 
cannot  suppose  that  Europe,  with  the  Mediterranean  basin,  can 
contain  more  than  one-fifth  of  the  whole  of  the  Coleoptera  of 
the  globe. 

Of  the  other  orders  of  insects  we  here  say  nothing,  because  in 
their  case  much  more  than  in  that  of  the  Coleoptera  and  Lepi- 
doptera,  is  the  disproportion  enormous  between  our  knowledge  of 
the  European  fauna  and  that  of  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  globe. 


by  Google 


190  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [pabt  iii. 

They  are,  therefore,  at  present  of  comparatively  little  use  for 
purposes  of  geographical  distribution,  even  were  it  advisable 
to  enter  into  the  subject  in  a  work  which  will,  perhaps,  be  too 
much  overburdened  with  details  only  of  interest  to  specialists. 

Lattd  Shells.-— Th&se  are  very  numerous  in  the  warmer  parts 
of  the  region,  but  comparatively  scarce  towards  the  North. 
South  Europe  alone  possesses  over  600  species,  whereas  there  are 
only  200  in  all  Northern  Europe  and  Asia.  The  total  number 
of  species  in  the  whole  region  is  probably  about  1,250,  of  which 
the  great  majority  are  Helicidfe ;  the  Operculated  families  being 
very  poorly  represented.  Several  smaU  genera  or  sub-genera 
are  peculiar  to  the  region,  as  Testacella  (West  Europe  and 
Canaries);  iewcocAj-oa  (Mediterranean  district) ;  Acicula  (Europe); 
Oraspedopoma  (Atlantic  Islands) ;  Leonia  (Algeria  and  Spain) ; 
Potnatias  (Europe  and  Canaries) ;  Cecina-  (Mongolia),  The  laigest 
genera  are  Helix  and  Glmmlia,  which  together  comprise  more 
than  half  the  species ;  Pwpa,  very  numerous ;  JBulvmus  and 
Achatina  in  moderate  numbers,  and  all  the  rest  small. 
Helix  is  the  only  genus  which  contains  large  and  handsome 
species ;  Bulimus  and  Aehatina,  so  magnificent  in  tropical  coun- 
tries, being  here  represented  by  smaU  and  obscure  forms  only. 
Daudebardia  is  confined  to  Central  and  South  Europe  and  New 
Zealand ;  Glandina  is  chiefly  South  American ;  Hyalina  is  only 
American  and  European ;  Buliminus  ranges  over  all  the  world 
except  America ;  and  the  other  European  genera  of  Helicidas  are 
widdy  distributed.  Of  the  Opereulata,  Gydotus,  Cydophorus, 
and  Pupina  extend  from  the  Oriental  region  into  Japan  and 
North  China ;  Tudoria  is  found  in  Algeria  and  the  West  Indies ; 
Hydrocena  is  widely  scattered,  and  occurs  in  South  Europe  and 
Japan.  The  genera  of  freshwater  shells  are  aU  widely  dis- 
tributed. 

The  Pal.*;arctio  SuB-REGIO^fs. 

The  four  sub-regions  which  are  here  adopted,  have  been 
fixed  upon  as  those  which  are,  in  the  present  state  of  our  know- 
ledge, at  once  the  moat  natural  and  the  only  practicable  ones. 


by  Google 


CHAP,  s.]  THE  PAL^ARCmC  EEGION.  191 

Ko  doubt  all  of  them  could  be  advantageously  again  sub- 
divided, m  a  detailed  study  of  the  geographical  distribution  of 
species.  But  in  a  genera,!  work,  which  aims  at  treating  oil  parts 
of  the  world  with  ec[ual  fulness,  and  which  therefore  is  confined 
almost  wholly  to  the  distribution  of  famiKes  and  genera,  such 
further  subdivision  would  be  out  of  place.  It  is  even  diiHcult, 
in  some  of  the  classes  of  animals,  to  find  peculiar  or  even 
characteristic  genera  for  the  present  sub-regions ;  but  they  all 
have  well  marked  climatic  and  physical  differences,  and  this 
leads  to  an  assemblage  of  species  and  of  groups  which  are  suffi- 
ciently distinctive. 

/.  Central  and  Northei-n  Eti/r<ype. 

This  sub-region,  which  may  perhaps  be  termed  the  "  European," 
is  zoologically  and  botanically  the  best  known  on  the  globe.  It 
can  be  pretty  accurately  defined,  as  bounded  on  the  south  by 
the  Pyrenees,  the  Alps,  the  Balkans,  the  Black  Sea,  and  the 
Caucasus  range ;  and  by  the  Ural  Mountains,  or  perhaps  more 
correctly  the  vaEey  of  the  Irtish  and  Caspian  Sea,  on  the  east ; 
whUe  Ireland  and  Iceland  are  its  furthest  outliers  in  the  west. 
To  the  north,  it  merges  so  gradually  into  the  Arctic  zone  that 
no  demarcation  is  possible.  The  great  extent  to  which  this 
sub-region  is  interpenetrated  by  the  sea,  and  the  prevalence 
of  westerly  winds  bringing  warmth  and  moisture  from  an  ocean 
influenced  by  the  gulf-stream,  give  it  a  climate  for  the  most 
part  genial,  and  free  from  extremes  of  heat  and  cold.  It 
is  thus  broaiily  distinguished  from  Siberia  and  Northern 
Asia  generally,  where  a  more  extreme  and  rigorous  climate 
prevails. 

The  whole  of  this  sub-region  is  well  watered,  being  pene- 
trated by  rivers  in  every  direction;  and  it  consists  mainly  of 
plains  and  undulating  country  of  moderate  elevation,  the  chief 
mountain  ranges  being  those  of  Scandinavia  in  the  north-west, 
and  the  extensive  alpine  system  of  Central  Europe.  But  these 
are  both  of  moderate  height,  and  a  very  small  portion  of  their 
surface  is  occupied  either  by  permanent  snow-fields,  or  by 
barren  uplands  inimical  to  vegetable  and  animal  life.     It  is,  in 


by  Google 


192  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

fact,  to  these,  and  the  aumerous  leaser  moiintains  and  hills 
which  everywhere  diversify  the  surface  of  Europe,  that  the 
variety  and  abundance  of  its  animal  life  is  greatly  due.  They 
afford  the  perennial  supplies  to  rivers,  and  furnish  in  their 
valleys  and  ever  varying  slopes,  stations  suited  to  every  form 
of  existence.  A  considerable  area  of  Central  Europe  is  oc- 
cupied by  uplands  of  moderate  elevation,  a  comparatively 
small  portion  being  flat  and  marshy  plains. 

Most  of  the  northern  and  much  of  the  central  portions  of 
Europe  are  covered  with  vast  forests  of  coniferous  trees ;  and 
these,  occupying  as  they  do  those  tracts  where  the  winter  is 
most  severe,  supply  food  and  shelter  to  many  animals  who  could 
not  otherwise  maintain  their  existence.  It  is  probable  that 
the  original  condition  of  tho  greater  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of 
temperate  Europe,  except  the  flat  marshes  of  the  river  valleys 
and  the  sandy  downs  of  the  coast,  was  that  of  woodland  and 
forest,  mostly  of  deciduous  trees,  but  with  a  plentiful  admixture 
of  such  hardy  evergreens  as  holly,  ivy,  privet,  and  yew.  A 
sufficient  proportion  of  these  primeval  woods,  and  of  artificial 
plantations  which  havo  replaced  them,  fortunately  remain,  to 
preserve  for  us  most  of  the  interesting  forms  of  life,  which 
were  developed  before  man  had  so  gieatly  modified  the  surface 
of  the  earth,  and  so  nearly  exterminated  many  of  its  original 
tenants.  Almost  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of 
woodland  that  still  remains  in  any  part  of  Europe,  do  we 
iind  (other  things  being  equal)  the  abundance  and  variety 
of  wild  animals;  a  pretty  clear  indication  that  the  original 
condition  of  the  country  was  essentially  that  of  a  forest,  a 
condition  which  only  now  exists  in  the  thinly  inhabited  regions 
of  the  north. 

Although  the  sub-region  we  are  considering  is,  foi;  its  extent 
and  latitude,  richly  peopled  with  animal  life,  the  number  of 
genera  altogether  peculiar  to  it  is  not  great.  There  are,  however, 
several  which  are  very  characteristic,  and  many  species,  both 
of  the  smaller  mammalia  and  of  birds,  are  wholly  restricted 
to  it. 

Mammalm. — The  genera  wholly  confined  to  this  sub-region  are 


by  Google 


THE  PAL^ABCTIC  EEGION. 


only  two.  Myogale.  the  desman,  is  a  curious  lonp;-snouted 
Insectivorous  animal  somewhat  resembling  the  watei-rat  m  its 
habits.  There  are  two  species,  one  found  only  on  the  banks  of 
streams  in  the  French  Pyrenees,  the  other  on  the  great  nvers  of 
Southern  Russia.  The  other  peculiar  genus,  Supitapia  (the 
chamois  of  the  Alps),  is  found  on  all  the  high  mountains  of 
Central  Europe.  Almost  peculiar  are  Spalax  (the  mole-rat) 
found  only  in  Eastern  Europe  and  Western  Siberia,  and  Saiga, 
an  extraordinary  large- nosed  antelope  which  has  a  nearly 
similar  distribution.  Highly  characteristic  forms,  which  inhabit 
nearly  every  part  of  the  sub-regiou,  are,  ^alpa  (the  mole), 
Erinaceus,  [the  hedgehog),  Sorex  (the  shrew),  Meles  (the  badger), 
(Irsus  (the  bear),  Canis  (the  wolf  and  fox),  Mustda.  (the  weasel), 
I/idra  (the  otter),  Arvicola  (the  vole),  Mpoxus  (the  dormouse), 
and  Lejms  (the  hare  and  rabbit) ;  while  Bos  (the  wild  bull)  was, 
until  exterminated  by  man,  no  doubt  equally  characteristic. 
Other  genera  inhabiting  the  sub-region  will  be  found  in  the  list 
given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 

Birds. — It  is  difficult  to  name  the  bh-ds  that  are  most  charac- 
teristic of  this  snb-r^on,  because  so  many  of  the  most  familiar 
and  abundant  are  emigrants  from  the  south,  and  belong  to 
groups  that  have  a  different  range.  There  is  perliaps  not  a 
single  genus  wholly  confined  to  it,  and  very  few  that  have  not 
equal  claims  to  be  placed  elsewhere.  Among  the  more  charac- 
teristic we  may  name  Twrdus  (the  thrushes),  Sijlvia  (the  war- 
blers), Panurus  (the  reedling)  Parus  (the  tits),  Anthus  (the 
pipits),  Motacilla  (the  wagtails),  which  are  perhaps  more  abun- 
dant here  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,  Emberiza  (the 
buntings),  PUctrophanes  (the  snow  buntings).  Passer  (the  house 
sparrows),  Loxia  (the  crossbills),  Linota  (the  linnets).  Pica  (the 
magpies),  Tetrao  (grouse),  Lagopus  (ptarmigan)  and  many  others. 

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  H.  E.  Dresser,  who  is  personally  ac- 
quainted with  the  ornithology  of  much  of  the  North  of  Europe, 
for  some  valuable  notes  on  the  northern  range  of  many  Emo- 
pean  birds.  Those  which  are  characteristic  of  the  extreme 
Arctic  zone,  extending  beyond  70°  north  latitude,  and  toler- 
ably abundant,  are  two  falcons  (Falco  gyrfaho  and  F.  peregrinns) ; 


by  Google 


194  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [pabt  hi. 

the  rough-legged  buzzard  [ArcMbuteo  lagopus);  the  snowy  owl 
(Nydea  scajidiaca) ;  the  raven  {Gorvus  corax) ;  three  buntings 
{Emieriza  schmnictdus,  Pledrophanes  nivalis  and  P.  calcarata) ;  a 
lark  (Otoeon/s  alpestris) ;  several  pipits,  the  most  northern  being 
Anthus  ceroinus ;  a  wagtail  {Budytes  dnereocapilla) ;  a  dipper 
{GvnclUs  mdanogaster) ;  a  warbler  {Gyanecula  sztedca) ;  the 
wheatear  (Saxicola  emanthe) ;  and  two  ptarmigans  {Lagopm 
albus  and  Z,  salicetus).  Most  of  these  birds  are,  of  course,  only 
suromer  visitors  to  the  Arctic  regions,  the  only  species  noted  as 
a  permanent  resident  in  East  Finmark  (north  of  latitude  70") 
being  the  snow-bupting  (Pleetrophanes  nivalis). 

The  birds  that  are  characteristic  of  the  zone  of  pine  forests, 
or  from  about  61°  to  70°  north  latitude,  are  very  numerous,  and 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  note  the  genera  and  the  number  of 
species  (where  more  than  one)  to  give  an  idea  of  the  ornitho- 
logy of  this  part  of  Europe,  The  birds  of  prey  are,  Falco  (three 
species),  Aslur  (two  species),  Buteo,  Fandion,  Swmia,  Bubo, 
Syrnium,  Am,  Nyciala.  The  chief  Passerine  birds  are,  Gorvus 
(two  species).  Pica,  Gamilus  (two  species),  Nucifraga,  Bomiy- 
dlla,  Hirwndo  (two  species),  Musdcapa  (two  species),  Lanius, 
Stumits,  Passer  (two  species),  PyrrJmla,  Garpodaeus,  Zada  (two 
species),  Pinicola,  Fringilla  (eight  species),  Emherita  {five 
species),  Alauda,  Avihns,  Twrdws  (five  species),  BatidUa,  Pratin- 
cola.  Accentor,  Sylvia  (four  8-geci&i),Hypolais,  Seguhts,PhyUoscopiis 
(two  species),  Acroc^halus,  Troglodytes,  and  Parus  (six  species). 
Woodpeckers  are  abundant,  Picus  (four  species),  Gedims,  and 
riwiic  The  kingfisher  (Alcedo),  goatsucker  {Caprimulgiis),  and 
swift  (Cypselus)  are  also  common.  The  wood-pigeon  (Columba) 
is  plentiful  The  gallinaceous  birds  are  three  grouse,  Tetrao  (two 
species)  and  Bonifia,  and  the  common  quail  {Coturnix). 

Tlie  lemairung  genera  and  species  of  temperate  or  north- 
European  buds,  do  not  usually  range  beyond  the  region  of 
deciduous  trees,  roughly  indicated  by  the  parallel  of  60"  north 
latitude. 

Plate  I. — lUvstrating  ike  Zoology  of  Central  Eii/rope. — 
Before  considering  the  distribution  of  the  other  classes  of 
vertebrata,  it  wiU  be  convenient  to  introduce  our  first  iUustra- 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


OHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  EEGION.  195 

tion,  which  rcpteBents  a  scene  in  the  Alps  of  Central  Europe, 
with  ligurea  of  some  of  the  most  characteristic  Mammalia 
and  Birds  of  this  sub-region.  On  the  left  is  the  hadger 
{Meles  Taxus)  one  of  the  weasel  family,  and  belonging  to  a 
genus  which  is  strictly  Paltearctie.  It  abounds  in  Central  and 
Northern  Europe  and  also  extends  into  North  Asia,  but  is  repre- 
sented hy  another  species  in  Thibet  and  by  a  third  in  Japan. 
The  elegantly-formed  creatures  on  the  right  are  clmmois  {Bupi- 
capra  tragus),  almost  the  only  European  antelopes,  and  wholly 
confined  to  the  higher  mountains,  from  the  Pyrenees  to  the 
Carpathians  and  the  Caucasus.  The  chamois  is  the  only 
species  of  the  genus,  and  is  thus  perhaps  the  most  characteristic 
European  mammal.  ITie  bird  on  the  left,  above  the  badgers,  is 
the  Alpine  chough,  (Fregilus  pyi-rhocOrax).  It  is  found  in  the 
high  mountains  from  the  Alps  to  the  Himalayas,  and  is  aUied 
to  the  Cornish  chough,  which  is  still  found  on  our  south- 
western coasts,  and  which  ranges  to  Abyssinia  and  North 
China.  The  Alpine  chough  differs  in  having  a  shorter  bill  of 
an  orange  colour,  and  vermilion  red  feet  as  in  the  other 
species.  In  the  foreground  are  a  pair  of  ruffs  (Machetes  pugnax) 
belonging  to  the  ScolopacidEc  or  snipe  family,  and  most  nearly 
allied  to  the  genus  Tringa  or  sandpiper.  This  bird  is  remark- 
.  able  for  the  fine  collar  of  plumes  which  adorns  the  males  in  the 
breeding  season,  when  they  are  excessively  pugnacious.  It  is 
the  only  species  of  its  genus,  and  ranges  over  all  Europe  and 
much  of  Northern  Asia,  migrating  in  the  winter  to  the  plains  of 
India,  and  even  down  the  east  coast  of  Africa  as  far  as  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope ;  but  it  only  breeds  in  the  Palfearctic 
region,  over  the  greater  part  of  which  it  ranges. 

Reptiles  and  Amphibia.— Ihem  are  no  genera  of  reptiles 
peculiar  to  this  sub-region.  Both  snakes  and  lizards  are  compara- 
tively scarce,  there  being  about  fourteen  species  of  the  former 
and  twelve  of  the  latter.  Our  common  snake  {Tropidcnotus 
■aatrix)  extends  into  Sweden  and  North  Bussia,  but  the  viper 
(yipertis  hems)  goes  further  north,  as  far  as  Archangel  (64°  N), 
and  in  Scandinavia  (67°  N.),  and  is  the  most  Arctic  of  all  known 


by  Google 


196  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [taut  in. 

snakes.  Of  the  lizards,  Lacerta  stirpium  (the  sand  Lizard)  has 
the  moat  northerly  range,  extending  into  Poland  and  Northern 
Eussia;  and  Angnis  fragilis  (the  hhnd  or  slow-worm)  has  almost 
an  equal  range. 

Amphihia,  being  more  adapted  to  a  northern  climate,  have 
acquired  a  more  special  development,  and  thus  several  forms 
are  peculiar  to  the  North  European  suh-region.  Most  remaikahle 
is  Proteus,  a  singular  eel-like  aquatic  creature  with  small  legs, 
found  only  in  the  subterranean  lakes  in  Camiola  and  Carinthia ; 
Alytes,  a  curious  toad,  the  male  of  which  carries  about  the  eggs 
till  they  are  hatched,  found  only  in  Central  Europe  from 
France  to  the  east  of  Hungary ;  and  Pelodytes,  a  frog  found  only 
in  France.  Frogs  and  toads  are  very  abundant  all  over  Europe,  the 
common  frog  {Rcma  temporaria.)  extending  to  the  extreme  north. 
The  newts  {Triton)  are  also  very  abundant  and  widely  spread, 
though  not  ranging  so  far  north  as  the  frogs.  The  genera  £om- 
hinatOT  {a  toad-like  frog),  M\ASyla  (the  tree  frog)  are  also  com- 
mon in  Central  Europe. 

Ft-eahwater  Fish. — Two  genera  of  the  perch  family  (Percidfe)  are 
peculiar  to  this  sub-region, — JPercarma,  a  fish  found  only  in  the 
river  Dniester,  and  Aspro,  confined  to  the  rivers  of  Central 
Europe.  Of  the  very  characteristic  forms  are,  Gasterosttvs 
(stickle-back),  which  alone  forms  a  peculiar  family — Gasteros- 
teidse ;  Perm,,  Acerina  and  Ltwioperca,  genera  of  the  perch  family ; 
Silvmis,  a  large  fish  found  in  the  rivers  of  Cenrtal  Europe,  of 
the  family  Siluridse ;  Esox  (the  pike),  of  the  family  Esocidte , 
Cyprinus  (carp),  GoUo  (gudgeon),  Leumcm  (roach,  chub,  dace, 
&c.).  Tinea  (tench),  Abramus  (bream),  AUmmus  (bleak),  C(Aitis 
(loach),  all  genera  of  the  family  Cyprinidsa 

Itisects — Lepidoptera. — No  genera  of  butterflies  are  actually 
confined  to  this  sub-region,  but  many  are  characteristic  of  it 
Famassms,  Aporia,  LmicopJuma,  Golias,  Mditcea,  Argynnis, 
Vanessa,  Imnenitis,  and  Chionohas,  are  all  very  abundant  and 
widespread,  and  give  a  featm'e  to  the  entomology  of  most  of  the 
countries  included  in  it. 

Ooleoptera. — This  suh-region  is  very  rich  in  CaiabidEe;  the 
genera  Blaphnis,  Nebria,  Garahm,  Cyckrus,  Pterostichm,  Amara, 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^ARCTIC  BEGION.  197 

Tredms  and  Feryphtis  being  especially  characteristic,  Staphy- 
linidte  abound.  Among  LameUicoms  the  gen«s  Aphodius  is 
most  eharacteriatic.  Bupreatidai  are  scarce  ;  Elateridte  more 
abundant.  Among  Malacoderms  Tehphorus  and  MalacMus  are 
characteristic,  CurculionidEe  abound :  Otiorkpuehtis,  Omias, 
HHrhinus,  Bagous,  Ithynchites  and  Cavtiyrhynchus  being  very 
characteristic  genera.  Of  Longicoms  Ccdlidiv/m.,  Dorcadion, 
Pogonochnerus,  Paakyta  and  Zeplura  are  perhaps  the  best  re- 
presentatives, Donaaia,  Gnoceris,  Chrysomela,  and  Altica.,  are 
typical  Phytophaga;  while  Coccinella  is  the  best  representa- 
tive of  the  Secnripalpes, 

.  INorth  European  Islands. — The  British  Islands  are  known  to 
have  been  recently  connected  with  the  Continent,  and  their 
animal  productions  are  so  tmLfonnly  identical  with  continental 
species  as  to  require  no  special  note.  The  only  general  fact  of 
importance  is,  that  the  number  of  species  in  ah  groups  is  much 
leas  than  in  continental  districts  of  equal  extent,  and  that  this 
number  is  still  farther  diminished  in  Ireland.  This  may  be 
accounted  for  by  the  smaUer  area  and  less  varied  surface  of  the 
latter  island;  and  it  may  also  be  partly  due  to  the  great  extent 
of  low  land,  so  that  a  very  small  depression  would  reduce  it 
to  the  condition  of  a  cluster  of  small  islands  capable  of  sup- 
porting a  very  hmited  amount  of  animal  hfe.  Yet  further,  if 
after  such  a  submergence  had  destroyed  much  of  the  higher 
forms  of  hfe  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  both  were  elevated  so 
as  to  again  form  part  of  the  Continent,  a  migration  would  com- 
mence by  which  they  would  be  stocked  afresh ;  but  this  migra- 
tion would  be  a  work  of  time,  and  it  is  to  be  expected  that 
many  species  would  never  reach  Ireland  or  would  find  its  exces- 
sively moist  climate  unsuited  to  them. 

Some  few  British  species  differ  shghtly  from  their  continental 
allies,  and  are  considered  by  many  naturalists  to  be  distinct. 
This  is  the  case  with  the  red  grouse  {Lagopus  scoticus)  among 
birds  ;  and  a  few  of  the  smaller  Passeres  have  also  been  found 
to  vary  soinewhat  from  the  allied  forms  on  the  Continent,  show- 
ing that  the  comparatively  short  interval  since  the  glacial  period, 
and  the  shghtly  different    physical   conditions   dependent   on 


by  Google 


198  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  in. 

insularity,  have  sufBced  to  commence  the  work  of  specific 
modification.  There  are  also  a  few  small  land-shells  and  several 
insects  not  yet  found  elsewhere  than  in  Britain ;  and  even  one 
of  the  smaller  Mammalia — a  shrew  (Sorex  rusticus).  These  facts 
are  all  readily  explained  by  the  former  union  of  these  islands 
with  the  Continent,  and  the  alternate  depressions  and  elevations 
which  are  proved  by  geological  evidence  to  have  occurred,  by 
which  they  have  been  more  than  once  separated  and  united 
again  in  recent  times.  For  the  evidence  of  this  elevation  and 
depression,  the  reader  may  consult  Sir  Charles  Lyell's  Antiquity 
of  Man. 

Iceland  is  the  only  other  island  of  importance  belonging  to 
this  sub-region,  and  it  contrasts  strongly  with  Great  Britain, 
both  in  its  Arctic  climate  and  oceanic  position.  It  is  situated 
just  south  of  the  Arctic  circle  and  considerably  nearer  Green- 
land than  Europe,  yet  its  productions  are  almost  wholly  European, 
The  only  indigenous  land  mammalia  are  the  Arctic  fox  (Oanis 
lagopus),  and  the  polar  bear  as  an  occasional  visitant,  with  a 
mouse  (Mus  islandicus),  said  to  be  of  a  peculiar  species.  Four 
species  of  seals  visit  its  shores.  The  birds  are  more  interesting. 
According  to  Professor  Newton,  ninety-five  species  have  been 
observed ,  but  many  of  these  are  mere  stragglers.  There  are 
twenty-three  lini  and  seventy-two  aquatic  birds  and  waders. 
Four  or  five  are  peculiar  species,  though  very  closely  related  to 
others  inhabiting  Scandinavia  or  Greenland.  Only  two  or 
three  species  aie  more  neaily  lelated  to  Greenland  birds  than  to 
those  of  Northern  Europe  so  that  the  Pal^earctic  character  of 
the  fauna  is  unmibtakible  The  following  lists,  compiled  from 
a  paper  by  Piofessor  Newton  may  be  interesting  as  showing 
more  exactly  the  character  of  Icelandic  ornithology. 

1.  Peculiar  species.  — Troglodytes  horealis  (closely  allied 
to  the  common  wren,  found  also  in  the  Faroe  Islands) ;  Falco 
islandims  (closely  allied  to  F.  gyrfaho);  Lagffp'm  idandoruM 
(closely  allied  to  L.  rupestris  of  Greenland). 

2.  European  species  resident  in  Iceland.— SjtSeWsa  nivalis, 
Cffi-vus  corax,  Malicsetus  alMdlla,  Sallus  aguatieus,  Ifiematopus 
ostraUgus,  OygnvjS  ferits,  Mergus  (two  species),  Phalaeocorax  (two 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL-IIARCTIC  REGION.  199 

species),  Svla  hassana,  Larus  (two  species),  Stercorarius  catar- 
Toctes,  Puffimis  a-nglorwm,  Mm-gidus  alle,  Uiia  (three  species), 
Alca  tarda. 

3.  American  species  resident  in  Iceland. — Clariffida  islandwa, 
Histrionicus  t<yrqiiatvs. 

4.  Annual  visitants  from  Europe. — Twdus  iUaeus,  S/atidlla 
Utkys,  Saadcola  mnanthe,  Mot<mlla  alha,  AtdJiMs  pratmds,  Linota 
linaria,  Chelidon  wrbica,  Hinindo  rvstiea,  Falco  cBsalon.,  Swnvia 
nyctea,  Otus  hraohyotus,  Charadnm  pluvicdis,  jEgialites  hiafimla, 
Sir^sHas  inierpres,  Phalaropm  fidiearivs,  Totanus  ealidrts, 
Idmosa  (species),  Trin^a  (three  species),  CaHdAHs  a/rmaria, 
GaUinago  media,  Nvrnienms  pTiKOpm,  Ardea  cin&rea,  Anser.  (two 
species),  Bemicla  (two  species),  Aiuie  (four  species),  Fuliffula 
tnarUa,  Harelda,  glacialis,  Somateria  moUissima,  (Edemia  niffi-a, 
Sterna  macrura,  Hissa  ti-idactpla,  Larus  luecopleTUS,  Stercorarius 
(two  species),  Fratercnda  aiiim,  Colymbm  (two  speciea),  Fodi- 
ceps  cortmim. 

5.  Annual  visitant  from  Greenland. — Falco  candicans. 

6. — Former  resident,  now  extinct. — Alea  impmnis  (the 
great  auk). 

II. — Mediterranean  Sub-region. 
This  is  by  far  the  richest  portion  of  the  Palisarctic  region, 
for  although  of  moderate  extent  much  of  it  enjoys  a  climate  in 
which  the  rigours  of  winter  are  almost  unknown.  It  includes 
ail  the  countries  south  of  the  Pyrenees,  Alps,  Balkans,  and 
Caucasus  mountains ;  all  the  southern  shores  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean to  the  Atlas  range,  and  even  beyond  it  to  include  the 
extra-tropical  portion  of  the  Sahara ;  and  in  the  Nile  valley 
as  far  as  the  second  cataract.  Further  east  it  includes  the 
northern  half  of  Arabia  and  the  whole  of  Persia,  as  well  as 
Beluchistan,  and  perhaps  Affghanistan  up  to  the  hanks  of  the 
Indus.  This  extensive  district  is  almost  wholly  a  region  of 
mountains  and  elevated  plateaus.  On  the  west,  Spain  is 
mainly  a  table-land  of  more  than  2000  feet  elevation,  deeply 
penetrated  by  extensive  valleys  and  rising  into  lofty  moun- 
tain chains.     Italy,  Corsica,  Sardinia,  and  Sicily,  are  all  very 


by  Google 


900  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi, 

mountainous,  and  much  of  their  surface  considerably  elevated. 
Further  east  we  have  all  European  Turkey  and  Greece,  a 
mountain  region  with  a  comparatively  small  extent  of  level 
plain.  Tn  Asia  the  whole  country,  from  Smyrna  through 
Armenia  and  Persia  to  the  further  herders  of  Affghanistan,  is  a 
vast  mountainous  plateau,  almost  all  ahove  2000,  and  extensive 
districts  ahove  50u0  feet  in  elevation.  The  only  laige  tract  of 
low-land  is  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates.  There  is  also  some 
low-land  south  of  the  Caucasus,  and  in  Syria  the  valley  of  the 
Jordan.  In  North  Africa  the  valley  of  the  Nile  and  the  coast 
plains  of  Tripoli  and  Algiers  are  almost  the  only  exceptions  to 
the  more  or  less  mountainous  and  plateau-like  character  of  the 
country.  Much  of  this  extensive  area  is  now  hare  and  arid, 
and  often  even  of  a  desert  character;  a  fact  no  doubt  due,  in 
great  part,  to  the  destruction  of  aboriginal  forests.  This  loss 
is  rendered  permanent  by  the  absence  of  irrigation,  and,  it  is 
also  thought,  by  the  abundance  of  camels  and  goats,  animals 
which  are  exceedingly  injurious  to  woody  vegetation,  and  are 
able  to  keep  down  the  natural  growth  of  forests.  Mr,  Marsh 
whose  valuable  work  Mam,  and  Nature  gives  much  information 
on  this  subject)  believes  that  even  large  portions  of  the  African 
and  Asiatic  deserts  would  become  covered  with  woods,  and  the 
climate  thereby  greatly  improved,  were  they  protected  from 
these  destructive  domestic  animals,  which  are  probably  not 
indigenous  to  the  country.  Spain,  in  proportion  to  its  extent, 
is  very  barren ;  Italy  and  European  Turkey  are  more  woody  and 
luxuriant ;  but  it  is  perhaps  in  Asia  Minor,  on  the  range  of  the 
Taurus,  along  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  and  to  the  south  of 
the  Caucasus  range,  that  this  sub-region  attains  its  maximum  of 
luxuriance  in  vegetation  and  in  animal  life.  From  the  Caspian 
eastward  extends  a  region  of  arid  plains  and  barren  deserts, 
diversified  by  a  few  more  fertile  valleys,  in  which  the  charac- 
teristic flora  and  fauna  of  this  portion  of  the  Palfearctic  region 
abounds.  Farther  east  we  come  to  the  forests  of  the  Hindoo 
Koosh,  which  probably  form  the  hmit  of  the  sub-region. 
Beyond  these  we  enter  on  the  Siberian  sub-region  to  the  north, 
and  on  the  outlying  portion  of  the  Oriental  region  on  the  south. 


by  Google 


ctTAp.  X.]  THE  PALiEAEOTIC  REGION.  201 

111  addition  to  the  territories  now  indicated  as  forming  part 
of  the  Mediterranean  sub-region,  we  must  add  the  group  of 
Canary  Islands  off  the  west  coast  of  Africa  which  seem  to  he 
an  extension  of  the  Atlas  mountains,  and  the  oceanic  groups  of 
Madeira  and  the  Azores ;  the  latter  ahout  1,000  miles  from  the 
continent  of  Europe,  yet  still  unmistakably  alKed  to  it  both  in 
their  vegetable  and  animal  productions.  The  peculiarities  of  the 
faunas  of  these  islands  wiU  be  subsequently  referred  to. 

It  seems  at  first  sight  very  extraordinary,  that  so  large  and 
wide  a  sea  as  the  Mediterranean  should  not  separate  distinct 
faunaa,  and  this  is  the  more  remarkable  when  we  find  how  very 
deep  the  Mediterranean  is,  and  therefore  how  ancient  we  may 
well  suppose  it  to  be.  Its  eastern  portion  reaches  a  depth  of 
2,100  fathoms  or  12,600  feet,  while  its  western  basin  is  about 
1  fiOO  fathoms  or  9  600  feet  in  greatest  depth,  and  a  considerable 
iici  of  both  baisins  is  more  than  1,000  fathoms  deep.  But  a 
fuithei  examimtion  shows,  that  a  comparatively  shallow  sea  or 
■iUbmerj^ed  bank  incloses  Malta  and  Sicily,  and  that  on  the 
oipoaite  coiat  %  similar  bank  stretches  out  from  the  coast  ol 
Tiipoh  leavmg  a  i  arrow  channel  the  greatest  depth  of  which  is 
^40  fathomo  Here  therefore  is  a  broad  plateau,  which  an 
elevation  of  ibout  1,500  feet  would  convert  into  a  wide  extent 
ot  land  connecting  Italy  with  Africa;  while  the  same  elevation 
would  also  connect  Morocco  with  Spain,  leaving  two  extensive 
likes  to  represent  what  is  now  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  afford- 
ing tree  communication  for  land  animals  between  Europe  and 
North  Africa  Thit  such  a  state  of  things  existed  at  a  com- 
p  iitncly  lecent  jeriod,  is  almost  certain;  not  only  because  a 
considerable  number  of  identical  spenies  of  mammalia  inhabit  the 
)res  of  the  Mediterranean,  but  also  because  numerous 
s  of  three  species  of  elephants  have  been  found  in  caves 
in  Malta, — now  a  small  rocky  island  in  which  it  would  be  im- 
possible for  such  animals  to  live  even  if  they  could  reach  it. 
Eemains  of  hippopotami  are  also  found  at  Gibraltar,  and  many 
other  animals  of  African  types  in  Greece ;  all  indicating  means 
of  commtmication  between  South  Europe  and  North  Africa  which 
no  longer  exist.     (See  Chapter  VI.  pp.  113 — 115.) 

Vol.  I.~15 


by  Google 


202  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAI'HY,  [part  iir. 

Mammalia. — There  are  a  few  groupa  of  PalEearctio  Mammalia 
that  are  peculiar  to  this  sub-region.  Such  are,  Bavia,  the 
fallow  deer,  which  is  now  found  only  in  South  Europe  and  Iforth 
Africa;  Psammomys,  a  peculiar  genus  of  MuridEe,  found  only  in 
I^pt  and  Palestine ;  while  Ctmodactylus,  a  rat-like  animal 
classed  in  the  South  American  family  OetodontidEe,  inhabits 
Tripoli.  Among  characteristic  genera  not  found  in  other  sub- 
regions,  are,  Dysopes,  a  bat  of  the  family  Koctilionidie;  Macros- 
celides,  the  elephant  shrew,  in  Forth  Afiica;  Gmetta,  the 
cavet,  in  South  Europe;  Ilerpestes,  the  ichneumon,  in  Korth 
Afiica  and  (?)  Spain ;  Hy<mia,  in  South  Europe ;  Guzella,  Oryx, 
Alcffphedus,  and  Addax,  genera  of  antelopes  in  North  Africa 
and  Palestine;  Hyrax,  in  Syria:  and  Hy&trix,  the  porcupine, 
in  South  Europe.  Besides  these,  the  camel  and  the  horse 
were  perhaps  once  indigenous  in  the  eastern  parts  of  the  sub- 
region  ;  and  a  wild  sheep  (Ovis  mtmnon)  still  inhabits  Sardinia, 
Corsica,  and  the  mountains  of  the  south-east  of  Spain.  The 
presence  of  the  large  feline  animals — such  as  the  hon,  the 
leopard,  the  serval,  and  the  hunting  leopard — ^in  North  Africa, 
together  with  several  other  quadrupeds  not  found  in  Europe, 
ha^e  been  thought  by  some  naturalists  to  prove,  that  this  dis- 
trict should  not  form  part  of  the  Pal^arctic  region.  Ho  doubt 
several  Ethiopian  groups  and  species  have  entered  it  from  the 
south,  but  the  bulk  of  its  Mammalia  still  remains  PalaBarctic, 
although  several  of  the  species  have  Asiatic  rather  than  Euro- 
pean afiiDities.  The  Macacits  mnuus  is  allied  to  an  Asiatic 
rather  than  an  African  group  of  monkeys,  and  thus  denotes  an 
Oriental  affinity.  Ethiopian  affinity  is  apparently  shown  by  the 
three  genera  of  antelopes,  by  M&rpedes,  and  by  Macroscdides  ;  but 
our  examination  of  the  Miocene  fauna  has  shown  that  these  were 
probably  derived  from  Europe  originally,  and  do  not  form  any 
part  of  the  truly  indigenous  or  ancient  Ethiopian  fauna.  Against 
these,  however,  we  have  the  occurrence  in  North  Africa  of 
such  purely  Palsearctic  and  non-Ethiopian  genera  as  Ursus,  Meles, 
Pvtorius,  Sus,  Cirms,  Dama,  Catpra,  Alactaga;  together  with 
actual  European  or  West  Asiatic  species  of  Canis,  Gemita,  Felis, 
Putorms,  Lutra,  many  bats,  Sorex,  Croddwa,  Crossc^m,  Systrix, 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  REGION,  203 

D'i'pus,  Zeptcs,  and  Mus.  It  is  admitted  that,  as  regards  every 
other  group  of  animals,  North  Africa  is  Palffiarctie,  and  the 
above  enumeration  shows  that  even  in  Mammalia,  the  inter- 
mixture of  what  are  now  true  Ethiopian  types  is  altogether 
insignificant.  It  must  be  remembered,  also,  that  the  lion 
inhabited  Greece  even  in  historic  times,  wMle  large  oamivora 
were  contemporary  with  man  all  over  Central  Europe, 

Birds. — So  many  of  the  European  birds  migrate  over  large 
portions  of  the  region,  and  so  many  others  have  a  wide  perma- 
nent range,  that  we  cannot  expect  to  find  more  than  a  few 
genera,  consisting  of  one  or  two  species,  ea<!h,  confined  to  a  sub- 
region  ;  and  such  appear  to  be,  Lusciniola.  and  Pyrophthalma, 
genera  of  Sylviidte.  But  many  are  characteristic  of  this,  as 
compared  with  other  Palsearetie  sub-regions ;  such  as,  Bradyp- 
ietits,  Aedon,  Dromolcea,  and  Cereomela,  among  Sylviidte ;  Crate- 
roptos  and  Malacocerem,  among  Timaliicla3;  Telophonm  among 
Laniidse ;  Certhilauda  and  Mirqfra.  among  larks ;  Pastor  among 
starlings ;  Ufupa,  the  hoopoe ;  Haiycon  and  Geryle  among 
kingfishers;  Twnvs  and  Caccahis  among  GJallinie,  and  the 
pheasant  as  an  indigenous  bird ;  together  with  Cfyps,  Vultur  and 
Neophron,  genera  of  vultures.  In  addition  to  these,  almost  all 
our  summer  migrants  spend  their  winter  in  some  part  of  this 
favoured  land,  mostly  in  North  Africa,  together  with  many 
species  of  Central  Europe  that  rarely  or  never  visit  us.  It 
follows,  that  a  large  proportion  of  all  the  birds  of  Europe  and 
Western  Asia  are  to  be  found  in  this  sub-region,  as  will  be  seen 
by  referring  to  the  list  of  the  genera  of  the  region,  Palestine 
is  one  of  the  remote  portions  of  this  region  which  has  been 
weU  explored  by  Canon  Tristram,  and  it  may  be  interesting  to 
give  his  summary  of  the  range  of  the  birds.  We  must  bear 
in  mind  that  the  great  depression  of  the  Dead  Sea  has  a  tropical 
climate,  which  accounts  for  the  presence  here  only,  of  such  a 
tropical  form  as  the  sun-bird  (Nectarimea  osea). 

The  total  number  of  the  birds  of  Palestine  is  322,  and  of 
these  no  less  than  260  are  European,  at  once  settling  the  question 
of  the  general  affinities  of  the  fauna.  Of  the  remainder  eleven 
belong  to  North  and  East  Asia,  four  to  the  Red  Sea,  and  thirty- 


by  Google 


204  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [past  hi. 

one  to  East  Africa,  -while  twenty-seven  are  peculiar  to  Palestine. 
It  is  evident  therefore  that  an  unusiial  number  of  East  African 
birds  have  extended  their  range  to  this ,  congenial  district,  but 
most  of  these  are  desert  species  and  hardly  true  Ethiopians, 
and  do  not  much  interfere  with  the  general  Palsearctic  character 
of  the  whole  assemblage.  As  an  illiistration  of  how  wide-spread 
are  many  of  the  Palasarctic  forms,  we  may  add,  that  seventy- 
nine  species  of  land  birds  and  fifty-five  of  water  birds,  are  com- 
mon to  Palestine  and  Britain.  The  Oriental  and  Ethiopian 
genera  Pyoionotus  and  Nectarinea  are  found  here,  while  Bessornis 
and  Dromolma  are  characteristically  Ethiopian  Almost  all  the 
other  genera  are  Paliearctic. 

Persia  is  another  remote  region  generally  associated  with  the 
idea  of  Oriental  and  almost  tropical  forms,  but  which  yet  undoubt- 
edly belongs  to  the  Palsearctic  region.  Mr.  Blanford's  recent 
collections  in  this  coimtry,  with  other  interesting  information,  is 
summarised  in  Mr.  Elwes's  paper  on  the  "  Geographical  Distri- 
bution of  Asiatic  Birds  "  {Ptoc.  Zool  Soo.  1873,  p.  647).  No  less 
than  127  species  are  found  also  in  Europe,  and  thirty-seven 
others  belong  to  European  genera ;  seven  are  allied  to  birds  of 
Central  Asia,  or  Siberia,  and  fifteen  to  those  of  North-Eaat  Africa, 
while  only  three  are  purely  of  Indian  affinities.  This  shows  a 
preponderance  of  nearly  nine-tenths  of  Patearctic  forms,  which 
is  fully  as  much  as  can  be  expected  in  any  country  near  the 
limits  of  a  great  region. 

B&ptiles  and  Amphibia. — The  cUmatal  conditions  being  here 
more  favourable  to  these  groups,  and  the  genera  being  often  of 
limited  range,  we  find  some  peculiar,  and  several  very  interesting 
forms.  SfUneehis,  a  genus  of  Colubrine  snakes,  is  found  only  in 
South  Europe ;  Trogonophis,  one  of  the  AmphisbEenians — 
curious-  snafce-like  lizards — is  known  only  from  North  Africa ; 
PswiRmoswums,  belonging  to  the  water  lizards  (Varanidte)  is 
foHnd  in  North  Africa  and  North-West  India ;  FsammodroTims, 
a  genus  of  Lacertidte,  is  peculiar  to  South  Europe ;  Hj/alomwus, 
belonging  to  the  family  Zonuridas,  is  a  lizard  of  especial  in- 
terest, as  it  inhabits  North  Africa  while  its  nearest  ally  is  the 
"  glass  snake  "  of  North  America ;  the  family  of 


by  Google 


CHAP,  X.]  THE  PALiEARCTIC  REGION.  205 

the  seinks  is  represented  by  Scincus  found  in  North  Africa  and 
Arabia.  Besides  these  ^eps,  agenus  of  sand  lizards  (Sepidie)  and 
Agama,  a  genua  of  AgamidEe,  are  abundaQt  and  characteristic. 

Of  Amphibia  we  have  Seiranota.,  a  genua  of  salamanders 
found  only  in  Italy  and  Dalraatia ;  Chioglossa,  in  Portugal,  and 
Oeotriton,  in  Italy,  belonging  to  the  same  family,  are  equally 
peculiar  to  the  sub-region. 

Freshwater  Fish. — One  of  the  moat  interesting  is  Tdlia,  a 
genus  of  GyprinodontidsB  found  only  in  alpine  pools  in  the 
Atlas  mountains.  Para^hoxiniuB,  found  in  South- East  Europe, 
and  Ohondrostoma,  in  Europe  and  Western  Asia,  genera  of  Cypii- 
midffi,  seem  almost  peculiar  to  this  sub-region. 

Insects — Lepidoptera. — Two  genera  of  butterflies,  Thais  and 
Doritis,  are  wholly  confined  to  this  sub-region,  the  former 
ranging  over  all  Southern  Europe,  the  latter  confined  to  Eastern 
Europe  and  Asia  Minor,  Anthodmris  and  Zegris  are  very  cha- 
racteristic of  it,  the  latter  only  extending  into  South  fiussia, 
while  Dwnais,  Charaxes,  and  Libythea  are  tropical  genera  un- 
known in  other  parts  of  Europe. 

Coleopte.ra. — This  sub-region  is  very  rich  in  many  groups  of 
Coleoptera,  of  which  a  few  only  can  be  noticed  here.  Among 
Carabidte  it  possesses  Procm-us  and  Procrustes,  almost  exclusively, 
while  Brachiwus,  GymimMs,  LeMa,  Qrafhiftervs,  Scarites,  C%lis- 
nivs,  Calathits,  and  many  others,  are  abundant  and  characteristic. 
Among  LameUicorns — Copridffi,  G-laphyridse,  Melolonthide,  and 
Cetoniidse  abound.  Bnpreatidfe  are  plentiful,  the  gQU&mJulodis, 
Acmaodera,  Suprestis,  and  Sphenoptera  being  characteristie. 
Among  Malacodenna— Cebrionidse,  Lampyridie,  and  Malachiidse 
abound.  The  Tenebrioid  Heteromera  are  very  varied  and  abun- 
dant, and  give  a  character  to  the  sub-region.  The  Mylabridse, 
Cantharidfe,  and  CEdemeridfe  are  also  charactetistio.  Of  the 
immense  number  of  Curculionidffi — Thylacites,  Brachyceras, 
Lixus,  and  Acalles  may  be  mentioned  as  among  the  most  pro- 
minent. Of  Longicorns  there  are  few  genera  especially  cha- 
racteristic, but  perhaps  Frinohitis,  Furpuricenus,  ffesperophanes, 
and  Farmma  are  most  so.  Of  the  remaining  families,  we  may 
mention  OlythridEe,  Hispidee,  and  Cassididfe  as  being  abundant. 


by  Google 


206  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [I'ABT  hi. 

The  Mediterranean  and  Atlantic  Islands.— IHlie  various  ialanda 
of  the  Mediterranean  are  interesting  to  the  student  of  geo- 
graphical distribution  as  affordii^  a  few  examples  of  local  species 
of  very  restiicted  range,  but  aa  a  rule  they  present  us  with 
exactly  the  same  forms  as  those  of  the  adjacent  mainland-^ 
Their  peculiarities  cto  not,  therefore,  properly  come  within  the 
scope  of  this  work.  The  islands  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean  belong- 
ir^  to  this  sub-region  are,  from  their  isolated  position  and  the 
various  problems  they  suggest,  of  much  more  interest,  and  their 
natural  history  has  been  carefully  studied.  We  shall  therefore 
give  a  short  account  of  their  peculiar  features. 

Of  the  three  groups  of  Atlantic  islands  belongir^  to  this  sub- 
region,  the  Canaries  are  nearest  to  the  Continent,  some  of  the 
islands  being  only  about  fifty  miles  from  the  coast  of  Africa. 
They  are,  however,  separated  from  the  mainland  by  a  very  deep 
channel  (more  than  5,000  feet),  as  shown  on  our  general  map. 
The  islands  extend  over  a  length  of  300  miles  ;  they  are  very 
mountainous  and  wholly  volcanic,  and  the  celebrated  peak  of 
Teneriffe  rises  to  a  height  of  more  than  12,000  feet  The  small 
Madeira  group  is  about  400  miles  from  the  coast  of  Morocco 
and  600  from  the  southern  extremity  of  Portugal ;  and  there  is 
a  depth  of  more  than  12,000  feet  between  it  and  the  continent. 
The  Azores  are  nearly  1,000  miles  west  of  Lisbon,  They  are 
quite  alone  in  mid-Atlantic,  the  most  westerly  islands  being 
nearer  Newfoundland  than  Europe,  and  are  surrounded  by  ocean 
depths  of  from  12,000  to  16,000  feet.  It  wiU  be  convenient  to 
take  these  islands  first  in  order. 

Azores. — Considering  the  remoteness  of  this  group  from  every 
other  land,  it  is  surprising  to  find  as  many  as  fifty-three  species 
of  birds  inhabiting  or  visiting  the  Azores ;  and  still  more  to 

^  Malta  is  interesting  as  farming  a  resting-place  for  migratory  birds,  while 
crossing  the  Mediterranean.  It  has  only  eight  land  and  three  aqnatic  birds 
which  are  permauenC  residents  ;  yet  no  less  than  278  species  have  been 
recorded  by  Mr.  E.  A.  Wright  as  visiting  oi  passing  over  it,  comprising  a 
la:^  proportion  of  the  European  migratory  birds.  The  following  are  the 
permanent  residents  :  Cerdmeis  titmwaeulus,  Stnx  Jlammea,  Fasser  mlidcola, 
Maiherisa  miliaria,  Coniw:  monetiula,  Montkola  cyaneo,  Sylvia  conspicQlata, 
Oohimba  livia,  Ftiffinv^  cinerevs,  P.  aatglorv/m,  Tkalaseiihwiia  pdagiea. 


b,  Google 


CHAP,  s.]  THE  PAL^ARCTIC  REGION.  207 

find  that  they  are  of  Palffiarctic  genera  and,  with  one  exception, 
all  of  species  found  either  in  Europe,  Korth  Africa,  Madeira, 
oT  the  Canaries.  The  exception  is  a  bullfinch  peculiar  to  the 
islands,  hut  closely  allied  to  a  European  species.  Of  land  birds 
there  are  twenty-two,  belonging  to  twenty-one  genera,  all  Euro- 
pean. These  genera  are  Oerckrms,  Buteo,  Ado,  Strix,  Tv/rdus, 
Oriolm,  Sritkams,  Sylvia,  Eeffidus,  Saxicola,  Motcmlla,  Plec- 
trophanes,  Fringilla,  Pyrrhida,  Serimis,  Stwmus,  Piem, 
JJfwpa,  Coltimba,  Caccahis,  and  Cotwnix.  Besides  the  bull- 
finch [PyiThvia)  other  species  show  slight  differences  from  their 
European  aJliee,  but  not  such  as  to  render  them  more  than 
varieties.  The  only  truly  indigenous  mammal  is  a  bat  of  a 
European  species.  Nine  butterflies  inhabit  the  Azores;  eight 
of  them  are  European  species,  one  North  American.  Of  beetles 
212  have  been  collected,  of  which  no  less  than  175  are  Euro- 
pean species;  of  the  remainder,  nineteen  are  found  in  the 
Canaries  or  Madeira,  three  in  South  America,  while  fourteen 
are  peculiar  to  the  islands. 

Now  these  facts  (for  which  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Godman's 
Sattiral  History  of  the  Azores)  are  both  unexpected  and  exceed- 
ingly instructive.  In  most  other  eases  of  remote  Oceanic 
islands,  a  much  lai^er  proportion  of  the  fauna  is  endemic,  or 
consists  of  peculiar  species  and  often  of  peculiar  genera ;  as  is 
well  shown  by  the  case  of  the  Galapagos  and  Juan  Fernandez, 
both  much  nearer  to  a  coutiaent  and  both  containing  peculiar 
genera  and  species  of  birds.  Now  we  know  that  the  cause  and 
meaning  of  this  difference  is,  that  in  the  one  case  the  original 
immigration  is  very  remote  and  has  never  or  veiy  rarely  been 
repeated,  so  that  under  the  unchecked  influence  of  new  condi- 
tions of  life  the  species  have  become  modified ;  in  the  other 
case,  either  the  original  immigration  has  been  recent,  or  if  remote 
has  been  so  frequently  repeated  that  the  new  comers  have  kept 
up  the  purity  of  the  stock,  and  have  not  allowed  time  for  the 
new  conditions  to  produce  the  effect  we  are  sure  they  would  in 
time  produce  if  not  counteracted.  Eor  Mr.  Godman  tells  us 
that  many  of  the  birds  are  modified — instancing  the  gold-crested 
wren,  blackcap,  and  rock  dove — and  he  adds,  that  the  modifica- 


by  Google 


208  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paet  hi. 

tion  all  tends  in  one  direction — to  produce  a  more  sombre 
plumage,  a  greater  strength  of  feet  and  legs,  and  a  more  robust 
bill.  We  further  find,  that  four  of  the  land-birds,  including  the 
oriole,  anow-buntiug,  and  hoopoe,  are  not  resident  birds,  but 
straggle  accidentally  to  the  islands  by  stress  of  weather;  and 
we  are  told  that  every  year  some  fresh  birds  are  seen  after 
violent  storms.  Add  to  thia  the  fact,  that  the  number  of 
species  diminishes  in  the  group  as  we  go  from  east  to  west,  and 
that  the  islands  are  subject  to  fierce  and  frequent  storms 
blowing  from  every  point  of  the  compass, — and  we  have  all  the 
facts  requisite  to  enable  ns  to  understand  how  this  remote 
archipelago  has  become  stocked  with  animal  life  without  ever 
probably  being  much  nearer  to  Europe  than  it  is  now.  Tor 
the  islands  are  all  volcanic,  the  only  stratified  rock  that  occurs 
being  believed  to  be  of  Miocene  date. 

Madeira  and  th&  Canaries. — Coming  next  to  Madeira,  we  find 
the  number  of  genera  of  land  birds  has  increased  to  twenty-eight, 
of  which  seventeen  are  identical  with  those  of  the  Azores.  Some 
of  the  commonest  European  birds — swallows,  larks,  sparrows, 
linnets,  goldfinches,  ravens,  and  partridges,  are  among  the  addi- 
tions. A  gold-crested  warbler,  Begulus  Maderensis,  and  a  pigeon, 
Colwnba  Trocas,  are  peculiar  to  Madeira. 

In  the  Canaries  we  find  tliat  the  birds  have  again  very  much 
increased,  there  being  more  than  fifty  genera  of  land  birds ;  but 
the  additions  are  wholly  Eiuropean  in  character,  and  almost  all 
common  European  species.  We  find  a  few  more  peculiar  spe- 
cies (five),  while  some  others,  including  the  wild  canary,  are 
common  to  all  the  Atlantic  Islands  or  to  the  Canaries  and 
Madeira.  Here,  too,  the  only  indigenous  mammalia  are  two 
European  species  of  bats. 

Land  Shells. — The  land,  shells  of  Madeira  offer  us  an  instruc- 
tive contrast  to  the  birds  of  the  Atlantic  Islands.  About  fifly- 
six  species  have  been  found  in  Madeira,  and  forty-two  in  the  small 
adjacent  island  of  Torto  Santo,  but  only  twelve  are  common  to 
both,  and  all  or  almost  aU  are  distinct  from  their  nearest  allies 
in  Europe  and  Worth  Africa.  Great  numbers  of  fossil  shells 
are  also  found  in  deposits  of  the  Newer  Pliocene  period ;  and 


by  Google 


OBAF.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  EEGION.  20!' 

although  these  comprise  many  freah  species,  tlie  two  faunas  and 
that  of  the  continent  still  remain  almost  as  distinct  from  each 
other  as  before.  It  has  heen  already  stated  (p.  31)  that  the 
means  by  which  land  mollusca  have  been  carried  across  arms 
of  the  sea  are  unknown,  although  several  modes  may  be 
suggested ;  but  it  is  evidently  a  rare  event,  requiring  some 
concurrence  of  favourable  conditions  not  always  present  The 
diversity  and  specialization  of  the  forms  of  these  animals  is, 
therefore,  easily  explained  by  the  fact,  that,  once  introduced 
they  have  been  left  to  multiply  under  the  influence  of  a  variety 
of  local  conditions,  which  inevitably  lead,  in  the  course  of  ages, 
to  the  formation  of  new  varieties  and  new  species. 

Coleoptera.— The  beetles  of  Madeira  and  the  Canaries  have 
been  so  carefully  collected  and  examined  by  Mr.  T.  V.  Wollaston, 
and  those  of  the  Azores  described  and  compared  by  Mr.  Crotch, 
and  fchey  illustrate  so  many  curious  points  in  geographical  dis- 
tribution, that  it  is  necessary  to  give  some  account  of  thera.  Ko 
less  than  1,480  species  of  beetles  have  been  obtained  from  the 
Canaries  and  Madeira,  only  360  of  which  are  European,  the 
remainder  being  peciiliar  to  the  islands.  The  Canaries  are 
inhabited  by  a  little  over  1,000  species,  Madeira  by  about  700, 
while  240  are  common  to  both ;  but  it  is  believed  that  many  ot 
these  have  been  introduced  by  man.  In  the  Azores,  212  species 
have  been  obtained,  of  which  175  are  European ;  showing,  as  in 
the  birds,  a  closer  resemblance  to  the  European  fauna  than  in 
the  other  islands  which,  although  nearer  to  the  continent,  offer 
more  shelter  and  are  situated  in  a  less  tempestuous  zone.  Ot 
the  non-European  species  in  the  Azores,  19  are  found  also  in 
the  other  groups  of  islands,  14  are  peculiar,  while  3  are  American. 
Of  the  European  species,  132  are  found  also  in  the  other  Atlantic 
islands,  while  43  have  reached  the  Azores  only.  This  is  inter- 
esting as  showing  to  how  great  an  extent  the  same  insects 
reach  aU  the  islands,  notwithstanding  the  difference  of  latitude 
and  position ;  and  it  becomes  of  great  theoretical  importance, 
when  we  find  how  many  extensive  families  and  genera  are  alto- 
gether absent. 

The  Madeira  group  has  been  more  thoroughly  explored  than 


by  Google 


210  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  in. 

any  other,  and  its  comparatively  remote  situation,  combined  with 
its  luxuriant  vegetation,  have  been  favourable  to  the  develop- 
ment and  increase  of  the  peculiar  forms  which  charaetei'ize  all 
the  Atlantic  islands  in  a  more  or  less  marked  degree.  A  con- 
sideration of  some  of  its  peculiarities  will,  therefore,  best  serve 
to  show  the  bearing  of  the  facta  presented  by  the  insect  fauna  of 
the  Atlantic  islands,  on  the  general  laws  of  distribution.  The 
711  species  of  beetles  now  known  from  the  Madeira  group, 
belong  to  236  genera ;  and  no  less  than  44  of  these  genera  are 
not  European  but  are  peculiar  to  the  Atlantic  islands.  Most  of 
them  are,  however,  closely  allied  to  European  genera,  of  which 
they  are  evidently  modifications.  A  most  curious  general  feature 
presented  by  the  Madeiran  beetles,  is  the  total  absence  of  many 
whole  families  and  large  genera  abundant  in  South  Europe. 
Such  are  the  CicindehdEe,  or  tiger  beetles ;  the  Melolonthidee,  or 
chafers;  the  Cetoniidte,  or  rose-chafers;  the  Eumolpidfe  and 
GalerucidEB,  large  famihea  of  Phytophagous,  or  leaf-eating  beetles; 
and  also  the  extensive  groups  of  Elateridge  and  Buprestidte, 
which  are  each  represented  by  but  one  minute  species.  Of 
extensive  genera  abundant  in  South  Europe,  but  wholly  absent 
in  Madeira,  are  Oaraitis,  Bhizotrogm,  Lampyris,  and  other 
genera  of  Malacoderms;  Otiorhynchus,  Braehycerua,  and  20 
other  genera  of  CurculionidEe,  comprising  more  than  300  South 
European  and  North  African  species ;  Fimdia,  Tetibyra,  Blaps, 
and  18  other  genera  of  Ileteroraera,  comprisii^  about  .550  species 
in  South  Europe  and  North  Africa ;  and  Timarcha,  containing 
44  South  European  and  North  African  species. 

Another  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  Madeiran  Coleoptera 
is  the  unusual  prevalence  of  apterous  or  wingless  insects.  This 
is  especially  the  case  with  groups  which  are  confined  to  the 
Atlantic  islands,  many  of  which  consist  wholly  of  wingless 
species ;  but  it  also,  affects  the  others,  no  less  than  twenty-two 
genera  which  are  usually  or  sometimes  winged  in  Europe,  having 
only  wingless  species  in  Madeira ;  and  even  the  same  species 
which  is  winged  in  Europe  becomes,  in  at  least  three  cases, 
wingless  in  Madeira,  without  any  other  perceptible  change  having 
taken  place.     But  there  is  another  most  curious  fact  noticed  by 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  REGION.  211 

Mr.  Wollaston ;  that  those  species  which  possess  wings  in 
Madeira,  often  have  them  rather  larger  than  their  alhes  in 
Europe.  These  two  facts  were  connected  by  Mr.  Darwin,  who 
suggested  that  flying  mseets  are  much  more  exposed  to  he 
blown  out  to  sea  and  lost,  than  those  which  do  nob  fly  (and  Mr- 
Wollaston  had  himself  supposed  that  the  "  stormy  atmosphere ' 
of  Madeira  had  something  to  do  witli  the  matter) ;  so  that  the 
most  frequent  filers  would  be  continually  weeded  out,  while  the 
more  sluggish  individuals,  who  either  could  not  or  would  not 
fly,  remained  to  continue  the  race  ;  and  this  piocess  going  on  from 
generation  to  generation,  would,  on  the  well-ascertained  princi- 
ples of  selection  and  abortion  by  disuse,  in  time  lead  to  the 
entire  loss  of  wings  by  those  insects  to  whom  wings  were  mot  a 
necessity.  But  those  whose  wings  were  essential  to  their  exist- 
ence would  he  acted  upon  in  another  way.  All  these  must  fly 
to  obtain  their  food  or  provide  for  their  offspring,  and  those  that 
flew  best  would  be  best  able  to  battle  with  the  storms,  and  keep 
themselves  safe,  and  thus  those  with  the  longest  and  most 
powerful  wings  would  he  preserved.  If  however  all  the  indi- 
viduals of  the  species  were  too  weak  on  the  wing  to  resist  the 
storms,  they  would  soon  become  extinct.^ 

Kow  this  explanation  of  the  facts  is  not  only  simple  and 
e  in  itself,  but  it  also  serves  to  explain  in  a  lemartable 
ir  some  of  the  peculiarities  and  deficiencies  of  the  Madeiran 
insect  fauna,  in  harmony  with  the  view  (supported  by  the  distri- 
bution of  the  birds  and  land  shells,  and  in  particular  by  the 
t  birds  and  insects  of  the  Azores)  that  all  the  insects 
3  been  derived  from  the  continent  or  from  other  islands,  by 


^  A  remarkable  confirmation  of  this  theory,  is  fumiahed  in  the  Report  to 
the  Eoyal  Society  of  the  naturalist  to  the  Kergnelen  Island,  "Transit  Expe- 
dition " — the  Rev.  A.  B.  Baton.  Insects  were  assiduously  collected,  and  it 
was  found  that  almost  all  were  either  completely  apterous,  or  had  greatly 
abbreviated  wings.  The  only  moth  found,  several  flies,  and  numerous  beetle, 
were  alike  incapable  of  flight.  As  this  island  is  subject  to  violent,  and 
almost  perpetual  gales,  even  in  the  finest  season,  the  meaning  of  the  extra- 
ordinary loss  of  wings  in  almost  all  the  insects,  can,  in  this  case,  hardly  be 
niiannderstood. 


b,  Google 


212  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGKAPHY.  [paet  in. 

inimigration  across  the  ocean,  in  various  ways  and  during  a  long 
period.  Tliese  deficiencies  are,  on  the  other  hand,  quite  incon- 
sistent with  the  theory  (still  held  hy  some  entomologists)  that 
a  land  communication  is  absolutely  necessary  to  account  for 
the  origin  of  the  Madeiran  fauna. 

First,  then,  we  can  understand  how  the  tiger-beetles  (Cicinde- 
lidse)  are  absent ;  since  they  are  insects  which  have  a  short  weak 
flight,  but  yet  to  whom  flight  is  necessary.  If  a  few  had  been 
blown  over  to  Madeira,  they  would  soon  have  become  exter- 
minated. The  same  thing  applies  to  the  Melolonthidte,  Ceto- 
niidse,  Eumolpidte,  and  Galeracidfe, — all  flower  and  foliage- 
haunting  insects,  yet  bulky  and  of  comparatively  feeble  powers 
of  flight.  Again,  all  the  large  genera  abundant  in  South  Europe, 
which  have  been  mentioned  above  as  absent  irora  Madeira,  are 
wholly  apterous  (or  without  wings),  and  thus  their  absence  is  a 
most  significant  fact ;  for  it  proves  that  in  the  case  of  all  insects 
of  moderate  size,  flight  was  essential  to  their  reaching  the  island, 
which  could  not  have  been  the  case  had  there  been  a  land  con- 
nection. There  are,  however,  one  or  two  curious  exceptions  to 
the  absence  of  these  wholly  apterous  European  genera  in  Madeira, 
and  as  in  each  case  the  reason  of  their  being  exceptions  can 
be  pointed  out,  they  are  eminently  exceptions  that  prove  the 
rule.  Two  of  the  apterous  species  common  to  Europe  and 
Madeira  are  found  always  in  ants'  nests ;  and  as  ants,  when 
winged,  fly  in  great  swarms  and  are  carried  by  the  wind  to 
great  distances,  they  may  have  conveyed  the  minute  eggs  of 
these  vSiy  small  beetles.  Two  European  species  of  Blwps 
occur  in  Madeira,  but  these  are  house  beetles,  and  are  admitted 
to  have  been  introduced  by  man.  There  are  also  three  species 
of  Mdoe,  of  which  two  are  European  and  one  peculiar. 
These  are  large,  sluggish,  wingless  insects,  but  they  have  a 
most  extraordinary  and  exceptional  metamorphosis,  the  larvje 
in  the  first  state  being  minute  active  insects  parasitic  on  bees, 
and  thus  easily  conveyed  across  the  ocean.  This  case  is  most 
su^estive,  as  it  accounts  for  what  would  be  otherwise  a  difficult 
anomaly.  Another  case,  not  quite  so  easily  explained,  is  that 
of  the  genus  Aealles,  which  is  very  abundant  in  all  the  Atlantic 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AKCTIC  BEGION.  213 

islands  and  also  occurs  in  South  Europe  but  is  always  apterous. 
It  is  however  closelj  ilhed  tj  anjther  j^i^nus  C) jpiorhTjnchus, 
which  is  apterous  m  some  speeieb  winged  m  others  A\  e  may 
therefore  well  suppose  that  the  ancestors  of  4ui!l  i  \\eTe  once  in 
the  same  condition,  ind  thit  ome  ot  the  win^e  1  forms  reached 
Madeira,  the  genus  having  sint-e  beccme  wholly  ifteiois 

We  may  look  at  this  curious  subject  in  another  way.  The 
Coleopfcera  of  Madeira  may  be  divided  into  those  which  are 
found  also  in  Europe  or  the  other  islands,  and  those  which  are 
peculiar  to  it.  On  the  theory  of  introductiou  by  accidental 
immigration  across  the  sea,  the  latter  must  be  the  more  ancient, 
since  they  have  had  time  to  become  modified ;  while  the  former 
are  comparatively  recent,  and  their  introduction  may  be  supposed 
to  be  now  going  on.  The  peculiar  influence  of  Madeira  in 
aborting  the  wings  should,  therefore,  have  acted  on  the  ancient 
and  changed  forms  much  more  powerfully  than  on  the  recent 
and  unchanged  forms.  On  ciirefully  comparing  the  two  seta  of 
insects  (omitting  those  which  have  almost  certainly  been 
introduced  by  man)  we  find,  that  out  of  263  species  which 
have  a  wide  range,  only  14  are  apterous ;  while  the  other  class, 
consisting  of  393  species,  has  no  less  than  178  apterous ;  or 
about  5  per  cent  in  the  one  case,  and  45  per  cent  in  the  other.' 
On  the  theory  of  a  land  connection  as  the  main  agent  in  intro- 
ducing the  fauna,  both  groups  must  have  been  introduced  at  or 
about  the  same  time,  and  why  one  set  should  have  lost  theii 
wings  and  the  other  not,  is  c[uite  inexplicable. 

Taking  aU  these  singular  facts,  in  connection  with  the  total 
absence  of  all  truly  indigenous  terrestrial  mammalia  and  reptiles 
from  these  islands — even  from  the  extensive  group  of  the  Cana- 
ries so  comparatively  near  to  the  continent,  we  are  forced  to 
reject  the  theoiy  of  a  land  connection  as  c[uite  untenable ;  and 
this  view  becomes  almost  demonstrated  by  the  case  of  the 
Azores,  which  being  so  much  further  off,  and  surrounded  by 
such  a  vast  expanse  of  deep  ocean,  could  only  have  been  con- 

'  The  facts  on  which  these  statements  rest,  will  be  found  more  fully 
detailed  in  the  Author's  Presidential  Address  to  the  Entomological  Society 
of  London  for  the  year  1871. 


b,  Google 


214  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRArHY.  [pabt  hi. 

nected  with  Europe  at  a  far  remoter  epoch,  and  ought  therefore 
to  exhibit  to  us  a  fauna  composed  almost  entirely  of  peculiar 
forms  both  of  birds  and  insects.  Yet,  so  far  from  this  being  the 
case,  the  facts  are  exactly  the  reverse.  Far  more  of  the  birds 
and  insects  are  identical  with  those  of  Europe  than  in  the 
other  islands,  and  this  difference  is  clearly  traced  to  the  more 
tempestuous  atmosphere,  which  is  shown  to  be  even  now 
annually  bringing  fresh  immigrants  (both  birds  and  insects)  to 
its  shores.  We  here  see  nature  actually  at  work ;  and  if  the 
case  of  Madeira  rendered  her  mode  of  action  probable,  that  of 
the  Azores  may  be  said  to  demonstrate  it. 

Mr,  'Wollaston  has  objected  to  this  view  that  "  storms  and 
hurricanes "  are  somewhat  rare  in  the  latitude  of  Madeira  and 
the  Canaries ;  but  this  little  affects  the  question,  since  the  time 
allowed  for  such  operations  is  so  ample.  If  but  one  very 
violent  storm  happened  in  a  century,  and  ten  such  storms 
recurred  before  a  single  species  of  insect  was  introduced  into 
Madeira,  that  would  be  more  than  sufficient  to  people  it,  as  we 
now  find  it,  with  a  varied  fauna.  But  he  also  adds  the  import- 
ant information  that  the  ordinary  winds  blow  almost  uninter- 
ruptedly li-om  the  north-east,  so  that  there  would  be  always  a 
chance  of  a  little  stronger  wind  than  usual  bringing  insect,  or 
larva,  or  ^g,  attached  to  leaves  or  twigs.  Neither  Mr.  Wollaston, 
Mr.  Crotch,  Mr.  A.  Murray,  nor  any  other  naturalist  who 
upholds  the  land-connection  theory,  has  attempted  to  account 
for  the  fact  of  the  absence  of  so  many  extensive  groups  of 
insects  that  ought  to  be  present,  as  well  as  of  all  small 
mammalia  and  reptiles. 

Ga^e.  Verd  Islands. — There  is  yet  another  group  of  Atlantic 
islands  which  is  very  little  known,  and  which  is  usually  con- 
sidered to  be  altogether  African — the  Cape  Verd  Islands,  situated 
between  300  and  400  miles  west  of  Senegal,  and  a  little  to  the 
south  of  the  termination  of  the  Sahara.  The  evidence  that  we 
possess  as  to  the  productions  of  these  islands,  shows  that,  like 
the  preceding  groups,  they  are  truly  oceanic,  and  have  probably 
derived  their  fauna  from  the  desert  and  the  Canaries,  to  the 
north-east  of  them  rather  than  from  the  fertile  and  more  truly 


by  Google 


OTiAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^ARCTIC  BBGIOH.  215 

Ethiopian  districts  of  Senegal  and  Gambia  to  the  east.  There  is 
;i  mingling  of  the  two  faunas,  but  the  preponderance  seems  to 
be  undoubtedly  with  the  Paltearctie  rather  than  with  the 
Ethiopian.  I  owe  to  Mr.  E.  B.  Sharpe  of  the  British  Museum, 
a  MS.  Hat  of  the  birds  of  these  islands,  twenty-three  species  in 
all.  Of  these  eight  are  of  wide  distribution  and  may  be  ne- 
glected. Seven  are  undoubted  Paltearctic  species,  viz.  :■ — Mihus 
ietinus,  Sylvia  atricapilla,  S.  conspicillata,  Corvits  corone.  Passer 
salicarim,  Gerthilauda  desertorum,  Coluwha  lima.  Three  are 
peculiar  species,  bat  of  Paltearctic  genera  and  affinities,  viz. : — 
Calatiwherpe  hrmpennis,  Ammomanes  cmctura,  and  Passer  jago- 
msis.  Against  this  we  have  to  set  two  West  African  species, 
Estrilda  dnerea  and  Numida  meleagris,  both  of  which  were 
probably  introduced  by  man ;  and  three  which  are  of  Ethiopian 
genera  and  affinities,  viz,  r — Halcyon  erythrorhyneha,  closely 
aUied  to  H.  semiecerulea  of  Arabia  and  North-east  Africa,  and 
therefore  almost  Paliearctie;  Accipiter  melanoleums;  and  Pyrrku- 
lauda  mgriceps,  an  Ethiopian  form ;  but  the  same  species  occurs 
in  the  Canaiies, 

The  Coleoptera  of  these  islands  have  been  also  collected  by 
Mr.  Wollaston,  and  he  finds  that  they  have  generally  the  sanu? 
European  character  as  those  of  the  Canaries  and  Madeira,  several 
of  the  peculiar  Atlantic  genera,  such  as  Acalles  and  JTegeter, 
occurrii^,  while  others  are  represented  by  new  but  closely  allied 
genera.  Out  of  275  species  91  were  found  also  in  the  Canaries 
and  81  in  the  Madeiran  group ;  a  wonderful  amount  of  similarity 
when  we  consider  the  distance  and  isolation  of  these  islands 
and  their  great  diversity  of  climate  and  vegetation. 

This  connection  of  the  foUr  groups  of  Atlantic  islands  now 
referred  to,  receives  further  support  from  the  occurrence  of  laud- 
shells  of  the  sul^enus  Leptaxis  in  all  the  groups,  as  well  as  in 
Majorca ;  and  by  another  siibgenus,  Remiet/da,  being  common  to 
the  Canaries  and  Cape  Verd  islands.  Combining  these  several 
classes  of  facts,  we  seem  justified  in  extending  the  Mediterranean 
sub-region  to  include  the  Cape  Verd  Islands. 


by  Google 


216  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi, 

III. — The  8'ihenan  Sub-region,  or  Northern  Asia. 

This  large  and  comparatively  Kttle-known  siiljdivision  of  the 
PalEearctie  region,  extends  from  the  Caspian  Sea  to  Kamschatka 
and  BehTing's  Straits,  a  distance  of  about  4,000  miles ;  and 
from  the  shores  of  the  Arctic  Ocean  to  the  high  Himalayas  of 
Sikhim  in  North  Latitude  29°,  on  the  same  parallel  as  Delhi. 
To  the  east  of  the  Caspian  Sea  aud  the  Ural  Mountains  ia  a  great 
extent  of  lowland  which  is  continued  round  the  northern  coast, 
becoming  narrower  as  it  approaches  the  East  Cape.  Beyond 
this,  in  a  general  E.N.E.  direction,  rise  hills  and  uplands,  soon 
becoming  lofty  mountains,  which  extend  in  an  unbroken  line 
from  the  Hindu  Koosh,  throxigh  the  Thian  Shan,  Altai  and 
Yablonoi  Mountains,  to  the  Stanovoi  range  in  the  north-eastern 
extremity  of  Asia.  South  of  this  region  is  a  great  central  basin, 
which  is  almost  wholly  desert ;  beyond  which  again  ia  the  vast 
plateau  of  Thibet,  with  the  Kuenlun,  Karakorum,  and  Hima- 
layan snow-capped  ranges,  forming  the  most  extensive  elevated 
district  on  the  globe. 

The  superficial  aspects  of  this  vast  territory,  as  determined  by 
its  vegetable  covering,  are  very  striking  and  weE  contrasted.  A 
broad  tract  on  the  northern  coast,  varying  from  150  to  300  and 
even  600  miles  wide,  is  occupied  by  the  Tundras  or  barrens, 
where  nothing  grows  but  mosses  and  the  dwarfest  Arctic  plants, 
and  where  the  ground  is  permanently  frozen  to  a  great  depth. 
This  tract  has  its  greatest  southern  extension  between  the  rivers 
Obi  and  Yenesi,  where  it  reaches  the  parallel  of  60"  north  lati- 
tude. Next  to  this  comes  a  vast  extent  of  northern  forests, 
mostly  of  conifers  in  the  more  northern  and  lofty  situations, 
while  deciduous  trees  preponderate  in  the  southern  portions  and 
in  the  more  sheltered  valleys.  The  greatest  extension  of  this 
forest  region  is  north  of  Lake  Baikal,  where  it  is  more  than 
1,200  miles  wide.  These  forests  extend  along  the  mountain 
ranges  to  join  those  of  the  Hindu  Koosh.  South  of  the  forests 
tlie  remainder  of  the  sub-region  consists  of  open  pasture-lands 
and  vast  intervening  deserts,  of  which  the  Gobi,  and  those  of 
Turkestan  between  the  Aral  and  Balkash  lakes,  are  the  most 


by  Google 


we    cannot   expect 
in  those  f 
ions ;  yet  the  country  is  S' 


CBAP,  X.]  THE  PAL^AECl'IC  KEGION.  217 

extensive.  The  former  is  nearly  1,000  miles  long,  with  a  width 
of  from  200  to  350  miles,  and  is  almost  as  complete  a  desert  as 
the  Sahara. 

With  very  few  exceptions,  this  vast  territory  is  exposed  to 
an  extreme  climate,  inimical  to  animal  Ufa  All  the  lower  parts 
being  situated  to  the  north,  have  an  excessively  cold  winter,  so 
that  the  limit  of  constantly  frozen  ground  descends  below  the 
parallel  of  60°  north  latitude.  To  the  south,  the  land  is  greatly 
elevated,  and  the  climate  extremely  dry.  In  summer  the  heat 
is  excessive,  while  the  winter  is  almost  as  severe  as  further 
noith.  The  whole  country,  too,  is  subject  to  violent  storms,  both 
in  summer  and  winter ;  and  the  rich  vegetation  that  clothes  the 
steppes  in  spring,  is  soon  parched  up  and  replaced  by  dusty 
plains.  Under  these  adverse 
animal  life  to  be  so  abundant  as  i 
more  favourable  physical  conditio 
tensive  and  so  varied,  that  it  does  actually,  as  we  shall  sf 
a  very  considerable  and  interesting  fauna. 

Mammalia. — Eour  genera  seem  to  be  absolutely  confined  to 
this  sub-region,  N'eclogale,  a  peculiar  form  of  the  mole  family 
(Talpidfe) ;  Poe^hagus,  the  yak,  or  hairy  bison  of  Thibet ;  with 
Procapra  and  Pantholt>ps,  Thibetan  antelopes.  Some  others 
more  especially  belong  here,  although  they  just  enter  Europe,  as 
Saiga,  the  Tartarian  antelope ;  Sminthus,  a  desert  rat ;  and 
Mlobim,  a  burrowing  mole-rat;  wliile  Myospalax,  a  curious 
rodent  aUied  to  the  voles,  is  found  only  in  the  Altai  mountains 
and  North  China  ;  and  Mosclms,  the  musk-deer,  is  almost  confined 
to  this  sub-region.  Among  the  characteristic  animals  of  the 
extreme  north,  are  Mmtela,  and  Marks,  including  tlie  ermine 
and  sable ;  Gvlo,  the  glutton ;  Tarandm,  the  reindeer ;  Myodes, 
the  lemming ;  with  the  lynx,  arctic  fox,  and  polar  bear ;  and 
here,  in  the  Post-pliocene  epoch,  ranged  the  hairy  rhinoceros 
and  Siberian  mammoth,  whose  entire  bodies  still  remain  preserved 
in  the  ice-cliffs  near  the  mouths  of  the  great  rivers.  Farther 
south,  species  of  wild  cat,  bear,  wolf,  deer,  and  pika  (Zagomys) 
abound ;  while  in  the  mountains  we  find  wild  goats  and  sheep 
of  several  species,  and  in  the  plains  and  deserts  wild  horses 

Vol.  I.— 16 


by  Google 


218  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [fart  hi. 

and  asses,  gazelles,  two  species  of  antelopes,  flying  squirrels 
(Pteromys),  ground  squirrels  [Twmias),  marmots,  of  the  genus 
SpemwpMlus,  with  camels  and  dromedaries,  probably  natives 
of  the  south-western  part  of  this  sub -region.  Tlie  most 
abundant  and  conspicuous  of  the  mammalia  are  the  great 
herds  of  reindeer  in  the  north,  the  wolves  of  the  steppes,  with 
the  wild  horses,  goats,  sheep,  and  antelopes  of  the  plateaus  and 
mountains. 

Among  the  curiosities  of  this  sub-region  we  must  notice  the 
seal,  found  in  the  inland  and  freshwater  lake  Baikal,  at  an  eleva- 
tion of  about  2,000  feet  above  the  sea.  It  is  a  species  of  Ccdlo- 
cephalus,  closely  alhed  to,  if  not  identical  with,  one  inhabiting 
northern  seas  as  well  as  the  Caspian  and  Lake  Aiul.  This 
would  indicate  that  almost  all  northern  Asia  was  depressed 
beneath  the  sea  very  recently ;  and  Mr.  Belt's  view,  of  the  ice 
'during  the  glacial  epoch  having  dammed  up  the  rivers  and  con- 
verted much  of  Siberia  into  a  vast  freshwater  or  brackish  lake, 
perhaps  offers  the  best  solution  of  the  dif&culty.^ 

Plate  IL— Characteristic  Mammalia  of  Western  Tartary. — 
Several  of  the  most  remarkable  animals  of  the  Pal^arctic  region 
inhabit  Western  Tartary,  and  are  common  to  the  European  and 
Siberian  sub-regions.  We  therefore  choose  this  district  for  one 
of  our  illustrative  plates.  The  large  animals  in  the  centre  are  the 
remarkable  saiga  antelopes  {Saiga  Tartarica),  distinguished  from 
all  others  by  a  lai^e  and  fleshy  proboscis-like  nose,  which  gives 
them  a  singular  appearance.  They  differ  so  much  from  all  other 
antelopes  that  they  have  been  formed  into  a  distinct  family  by 
some  naturalists,  but  are  here  referred  to  the  great  family  Bovidffi. 
They  inhabit  the  open  plains  from  Poland  to  the  Irtish  Eiver 
On  the  left  is  the  mole-rat,  or  sand-rat  (Spalax  muHnus).  This 
animal  burrows  under  ground  like  a  mole,  feeding  on  bulbous 
roots.  It  inhabits  the  same  country  as  the  saiga,  but  extends 
farther  south  in  Europe.  On  the  right  is  a  stiU  more  curious 
animal,  the  desman  {Myogale  Muscovitica),  a  long-snouted 
water-mole..  This  creature  is  fifteen  inches  long,  including  the 
tad  ;  it  burrows  in  the  banks  of  streams,  feeding  on  insects, 
'  Quarterly  Journal  of  the  Geological  8ocwly,  1874,  p.  494 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^ARCTIC  REGION.  219 

worms,  and  leeches  ;  it  swims  weE,  and  remains  long  under 
water,  raising  the  tip  of  the  snout,  where  the  nostrils  are 
situated,  to  the  surface  when  it  wants  to  hreathe.  It  is  thus 
well  concealed ;  and  this  may  he  one  use  of  the  development 
of  the  long  snout,  as  well  as  serving  to  follow  worms  into 
their  holes  in  the  soft  earth.  This  species  is  confined  to  the 
rivers  Volga  and  Don  in  Southern  Russia,  and  the  only  other 
species  known  inhabits  some  of  the  valleys  on  the  north  side 
of  the  Pyrenees.  In  the  distance  are  wolves,  a  characteristic 
feature  of  these  wastes. 

Birds. — But  few  genera  of  birds  are  absolutely  restricted  to 
this  sub-region.  Fodoces,  a  curious  form  of  starling,  is  the  most 
decidedly  so ;  Myeerdbas  and  Pyrrho^piza  are  genera  of  finches 
confined  to  Thibet  and  the  snowy  Himalayas ;  Lewcostiete,  another 
genus  of  finches,  is  confined  to  the  eastern  half  of  the  sub- 
region  and  North  America ;  Tetraogallus,  a  large  kind  of 
partridge,  ranges  west  to  the  Caucasus ;  Byrrkwptes,  a  form  of 
sand-grouse,  and  Lerwa  (snow-partridge),  are  almost  confined 
here,  only  extending  into  the  next  sub-r^on ;  as  do  Grandalc 
and  Gallwpe,  genera  of  warblers,  Uragus,  a  finch  allied  to  the 
Korth  American  cardinals,  and  Grossaptilon,  a  remarkable  group 
of  pheasants. 

Almost  all  the  genera  of  central  and  northern  Europe  are 
found  here,  and  give  quite  a  European  character  to  the  ornitho- 
logy, though  a  considerable  number  of  the  species  are  different. 
There  are  a  few  Oriental  forms,  such  as  Ahrornis  and  Larvivora 
(warblers) ;  with  Ceriomis  and  Ithagmis,  genera  of  pheasants, 
which  reach  the  snow-line  in  the  Himalayas  and  thus  just  enter 
this  sub-region,  but  as  they  do  not  penetrate  farther  north,  they 
hardly  serve  to  modify  the  exclusively  Palsearctic  character  of 
its  ornithology. 

According  to  Middendorf,  the  extreme  northern  Asiatic  birds 
are  the  Alpine  ptarmigan  (Lagopus  muius);  the  snow-bunting 
(Pketropkanes  nivalis) ;  the  raven,  the  gyrfalcon  and  the  snowy- 
owL  Those  which  are  characteristic  of  the  barren  "  tundras," 
but  which  do  not  range  so  far  north  as  the  preceding  are, — the 
wUlow-grouse  {Lagopus  albus) ;  the  Lapland-bunting  {Pkctropkanet 


by  Google 


^i.0  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

lapponica) ;  the  shore-lark  [Otocorys  alfestris)  ■  the  sand-martin 
{Gotyle  riparia),  and  the  sea-eagle  {Hcdimekbs  alhicilla). 

Those  which  are  more  characteristic  of  the  northern  forests, 
and  which  do  not  pass  heyond  them,  are— the  Hnnet ;  two  cross- 
bills [Loxia  Zmccrptera  and  L.  Om-virostra) ;  the  pine  grosbeak 
(Pinicola  eimcleator) ;  the  waxwing ;  the  common  magpie ;  the 
common  swallow ;  the  peregrine  falcon ;  the  rough-legged  buzzard ; 
and  three  species  of  owls. 

Fully  one-half  of  the  land-birds  of  Siberia  are  identical  with 
those  of  Europe,  the  remainder  being  mostly  representative 
species  peculiar  to  Northern  Asia,  with  a  few  stiagglers  and 
immigrants  from  China  and  Japan  or  the  Himalayas.  A  much 
larger  proportion  of  the  wading  and  aquatic  families  are  Euro- 
pean or  Arctic,  these  groups  having  always  a  wider  range  than 
land  birds. 

Reptiles  and  AmpMbia.: — !From  the  nature  of  the  country  and 
climate  these  are  comparatively  few,  but  in  the  more  temperate 
districts  snakes  and  lizards  seem  to  be  not  nncommoa  Maiys, 
a  genus  of  Orolaiine  snakes,  and  Fhryrwcephalus,  lizards  of  the 
family  Agamidse,  are  chaxacteristic  of  these  parts.  Simotes,  a 
snake  of  the  family  OligodontidEe,  reaches  an  elevation  of  16,000 
feet  in  the  Himalayas,  and  therefore  enters  this  sub-region. 

Insects.- — Mesapia  and  Kypermnestra,  genera  of  Papilionidte, 
are  butterflies  peculiar  to  this  sub-region ;  and  Paraassius  is  as 
characteristic  as  it  is  of  our  European  mountains.  Carahidse 
are  also  abundant,  as  will  be  seen  by  referring  to  the  Chapter 
on  the  Distribution  of  Insects  in  the  succeeding  part  of  this 
work.  The  insects,  on  the  whole,  have  a  strictly  European 
character,  although  a  large  proportion  of  the  species  are  pecu- 
liar, and  several  new  genera  appear. 

1 V. — Japan  and  North  China,  or  ihe  Manchurian  Sub-region. 

This  is  an  interesting  and  very  productive  district,  correspond- 
ing in  the  east  to  the  Mediterranean  sub-region  in  the  west,  or 
rather  perhaps  to  all  western  temperate  Europe.  Its  limits  are 
not  very  well  defined,  but  it  probably  includes  all  Japan; 
the  Corea  and  Manchuria  to  the  Amour  river  and  to  the  lower 


by  Google 


CHAP  X.]  THE  PALiEAECTIC  REGION.  221 

slopes  of  the  Khingau  and  Peling  mountains ;  and  China  to 
the  Nanlin  mountains  south  of  the  Yang-tae-kiang.  On  the 
coast  of  China  the  dividing  line  between  it  and  the  Oriental 
region  seems  to  be  somewhere  about  Foo-chow,  but  as  there  is 
here  no  natural  barrier,  a  great  intermingling  of  northern  and 
southern  forms  takes  place. 

Japan  is  volcanic  and  mountainous,  with  a  fine  climate  and  a 
most  luxuriant  and  varied  vegetation,  Manchuria  is  hilly,  with 
a  high  range  of  mountains  on  the  coast,  and  some  desert  tracts 
in  the  interior,  but  fairly  wooded  in  many  parts.  Much  of 
northern  China  is  a  vast  alluvial  plain,  backed  by  hills  and 
mountains  with  belts  of  forest,  above  which  are  the  dry  and 
barren  uplands  of  MongolieL  "We  have  a  tolerable  knowledge 
of  China,  of  Japan,  and  of  the  Amoor  valley,  but  very  little  of 
Corea  and  Manchuria.  The  recent  researches  of  P^re  David  in 
Moupin,  in  east  Thibet,  said  to  be  between  31"  and  32°  north 
latitude,  show,  that  the  fauna  of  the  Oriental  region  here  advances 
northward  along  the  flanks  of  the  Yun-ling  mountaios  (a 
c  ntmuation  ot  the  Himalayas) ;  since  he  found  at  different 
iltitudes  leire&entatives  of  the  Indo-Chinese,  Manchurian,  and 
Sil  enin  faunas  On  the  higher  slopes  of  the  Himalayas,  there 
must  bt,  a  narrow  strip  from  about  8,000  to  11,000  feet  elevation 
intervening  between  the  tropical  fauna  of  the  Indo-Chinese  sUb- 
jegion  and  the  almost  arctic  fauna  of  Thibet ;  and  the  animals 
of  tl  IS  zone  will  for  the  most  part  belong  to  the  fauna  of 
temperate  Ch  ni  and  Manchuria,  except  in  the  extreme  west 
tew  aids  Cashmere  where  the  Mediterranean  fauna  will  in  like 
manner  intei\ene  On  a  map  of  sufficiently  large  scale,  there- 
foie  it  would  be  necessary  to  extend  out  present  sub-region 
westward  akng  the  Himalayas,  in  a  narrow  strip  just  below 
the  upper  limits  of  forests.  It  is  evident  that  the  laige  number 
of  Fringillidfe,  Corvidas,  Troglodytidte,  and  Paridai,  often  of  south 
Palffiarctic  forms,  that  abound  in  the  higher  Himalayas,  are  some- 
what out  of  place  as  members  of  the  Oriental  fauna,  and  are 
equally  so  in  that  of  Thibet  and  Siberia;  but  they  form  a 
natural  portion  of  that  of  Korth  China  on  the  one  side,  or  of 
South  Europe  on  the  other. 


by  Google 


222  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGKAPHi'.  [part  hi. 

Mammalia. — This  sub-region  contains  a  number  of  peculiar 
and  very  interesting  forms,  most  of  which  have  been  recently 
discovered  by  P^re  David  in  Korth  and  West  China  and  East 
Thibet.  The  following  are  the  peculiar  genera : — Ehinapifhecus, 
a  sub-genus  of  monkeys,  here  classed  under  Semrtopiihei^uB  ; 
Anurosorex,  ScaptocMncs,  TJropsilus  and  Scaptonyx,  new  forma  of 
Talpid^e  or  moles ;  j^luropm  (^uridte) ;  Nydermdes  (Canidae) ; 
Latronectes  (MuatelidEe) ;  Crieetultts  (Muridae) ;  Sydropoles,  Mos- 
chus,  and  Elaphodus  (Cervidai),  The  BJdnopithecm  appears  to 
be  a  permanent  inhabitant  of  the  highest  forests  of  Moupin, 
in  a  cold  climate.  It  has  a  very  thick  fur,  as  has  also  a  new 
species  of  Macacus  found  in  the  same  district  Koith  China  and 
East  Thibet  seem  to  be  very  rich  in  Inaectivora.  Seaptochirus  is 
lite  a  mole;  Xlropsilus  between  the  Japanese  Jlroiriehus  and 
Sorm;  Scaptonyx  between  Urotridms  and  Talpa.  j^luropus 
seems  to  be  the  most  remarkable  mammal  discovered  by  Vhre 
David,  It  is  allied  to  the  singular  panda  (jElurvs  falgens)  of 
Nepal,  but  is  as  large  as  a  bear,  the  body  wholly  white,  with 
the  feet,  ears,  and  tip  of  the  tail  black.  It  uihabits  the  highest 
forests,  and  is  therefore  a  true  Palffiarctic  animal,  as  most  likely 
is  the  JEluTus.  Nydere^tes,  a  curious  racoon-like  dog,  ranges 
from  Canton  to  North  China,  the  Amoor  and  Japan,  and  there- 
fore seems  to  come  best  in  this  sub-region;  Mydropotes  and 
LopkotraguB  dx%  small  hornless  deer  confined  to  Nortli  China ; 
Maphodus,  from  East  Thibet,  is  another  peculiar  form  of  deer ; 
while  the  musk  deer  (Mosehiis)  is  confined  to  this  sub-r^on  and 
the  last  Besides  the  above,  the  following  Pal^earctic  genera 
were  found  by  P&re  David  in  this  sub-region  :  Maeacus ;  five 
genera  or  sub-genera  of  bats  {Vesperiilio,  Vesperus,  Vesperugo, 
Ehinolophus,  and  Murina) ;  Urinaceus,  Nectogale,  Talpa,  Croci- 
dwa  and  Screx,  among  Insectivora;  Mmtela,  Fiiiorms,  Martes, 
Lutra,  Viverra,  Meles,  ^Iwm,  Urms,  Felis,  and  Gavds,  among 
Camivora ;  Hystrix,  Arctomys,  Myoapalax,  BpefrmophUus,  6er- 
lUliiS,  Bipus,  Lagomys,  Zepm,  Seiums,  Pteromys,  Arvicola,  and 
Mus,  among  Eodentia;  Budorcas,  Nemorhed/as,  Antilcpe,  Oris, 
Moscfms,  Cervulus  and  Cervus  among  Ruminants ;  and  the  wide- 
spread 8vs  or  lyUd  boar.     The  following  Oriental  genera  are  also 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  REGION.  223 

included  in  Pere  David's  list,  but  no  doubt  occur  only  in  the 
lowlands  and  warm  valleys,  and  can  hardly  be  considered  to 
belong  to  the  Pafearctic  region :  Fagmna,  Helictis,  Ardonyx, 
RMzomys,  Mania.  The  Shizomys  from  Moupin  is  a  peculiar 
species  of  this, tropical  genua,  but  all  the  others  inhabit  Southern 
China. 

A  few  additional  forma  occur  in  Japan :  Urotrichus,  a  peculiar 
Mole,  which  ia  found  also  in  north-west  America ;  Enkydra,  the 
sea  otter  of  California;  and  the  dormouse  (Myoxv^s).  Japan  also 
i  of  Macacus,  Talpa,  Meles,  Canis,  and 

,It  will  be  seen  that  this  sub-region  is  remarkably  rich 
in  Inseetivora,  of  which  it  possesses  ten  genera;  and  that 
it  has  also  several  peculiar  forms  of  Carnivora,  Eodentia,  and 
Euminants. 

Mrds. — To  give  an  accurate  idea  of  the  ornithology  of  this 
sub-region  ia  very  difficult,  both  on  account  of  its  extreme  rich- 
ness and  the  impossibility  of  defining  the  limits  between  it  and 
the  Oriental  region.  A  considerable  number  of  genera  which 
are  well  developed  in  the  high  Himalayas,  and  some  which  are 
peculiar  to  that  district,  have  hitherto  always  been  classed  as 
Indian,  and  therefore  Oriental  groups ;  but  they  more  properly 
belong  to  this  sub-region.  Many  of  them  freq^uent  the  highest 
forests,  or  descend  into  the  Himalayan  temperate  zone  only  in 
winter ;  and  others  are  so  intimately  connected  with  Paliearctic 
species,  that  they  can  only  be  considered  as  stragglers  into  the 
border  land  of  the  Oriental  region.  On  these  principles  we 
consider  the  following  genera  to  be  confined  to  this  sub-region : — 
Grandala,  Neitiura  (Sylviidffi)  ;  Fterorhinus  (Timaliidfe) ; 
Choiomis,  Gonostoma,  Heteromorpha  (Panurida);  Gyanoptila 
(Muscicapidfe) ;  Eophona  (Fringillidte) ;  Dendrotreron  (Colum- 
bidse) ;  Lophophoi'vs,  Tetraophasis,  Crossoptilon,  Puerasia,  Thau- 
maUa,  and  Zthagims  (Phasianidie).  This  may  be  called  the 
sub-region  of  Pheasants ;  for  the  above  six  genera,  comprising 
sixteen  species  of  the  most  magnificent  birds  in  the  world,  are 
all  confined  to  the  temperate  or  cold  mountainous  regions  of 
the  Himalayas,  Thibet,  and  China ;   and  in  addition  we  have 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY. 


[part  iir. 


most  of  the  species  of  tragopan  (Ceriomis),  and  some  of  the 
true  pheasants  (Pkasianus). 

The  most  abundant  and  characteristic  of  the  smaller  birds  are 
warblers,  tits,  and  finches,  of  Paloearctic  types  ;  but  there  are 
also  a  considerable  number  of  Oriental  fonus  which  penetrate 
far  into  the  country,  and  mingling  with  the  northern  birds 
give  a  character  to  the  Ornithology  of  this  sub-region  very 
different  from  that  of  the  Mediterranean  district  at  the  western 
end  of  the  region-.  Leaving  out  a  large  number  of  wide-ranging 
groups,  this  mixture  of  types  may  be  best  exhibited  by  giving 
lists  of  the  more  striking  Palfearctic  and  Oriental  genera  which 
are  here  found  intermingled. 

PaljBaectic  Genera. 


Bylvudm. 

OOBVID^ 

AtAUDID^ 

Erithaous. 

Fregilus. 

Otooorys. 

EutioiUa. 

Nucifraaa. 

Pjcid*. 

Locustella. 

pk.. 

Picoides. 

Cyaneouta. 

§=r 

Pious, 

■  SylTia. 

Hyopicus. 

Potamodus. 

Ampelid^. 

Dryocopua. 

Eegoloides. 

Ampelis. 

Ydnmd*. 

Begulus. 

Frimgillib*. 

Yum. 

AecBiitor. 

Pringilla. 

Ptbroclidje. 

CVysomitris. 

Syrrhaptes. 

Cinclus. 

Ohlorospim. 

TBTBAONIDia. 

Trohlodttid^. 

Passer. 

Tetrao. 

Troglodytidffi. 

OoccothrauiStes. 

Tetraogailui 

Cbrthiida 

Pyrrhula. 

LetwK. 

Cecthia. 

Oarpodaous. 

Lagopas. 

Sitta. 

Uragus. 

YuLTURID^fl^ 

Tichodroma. 

Loxia. 

Gypaetns. 

Parid^. 

Vultur. 

Parus. 

Emberiza. 

Valcoswm. 

Lophophanes. 

Sturbid^, 

Archibuteo. 

Acredula. 

Sturnug. 

Oriental  Genera. 


Sylviid^. 

S  YL  VI  iDJE— {continued). 

TlMALUD^ 

Suya. 

Abrornis, 

Calliope. 

Oopsycliua 

Timalia. 

LarriTOiu. 

TURDID^. 

Pterocyclua. 

OMbuia. 

Oreocincla. 

GaiTulas. 

Horites. 

Trouhaloptf 

b,  Google 


THE  PALiEAECTIC  REGION. 


Oriental  Genera — continued. 


Ti  M  AL 1 1  DM — (eontmued). 

MuscicAPrD^. 

PlClD^. 

Poaiaf.orhinus, 

Vivia. 

Suthora. 

Niltaya. 

Yungipiciis, 

pAHnaiD*. 

TcMtrea. 

Geeinus. 

Paradoxotnis. 

OoRVIDiE. 

CORACIIDS. 

GlXChlBJE. 

Urocissa. 

EurystomuB. 

Mjiophonus. 

TrOQLODYTIDjE. 

Nbctarineid.^ 
-^thopyga. 

Alcedinid^. 
Haloyoa. 
Ceryle. 

Pncepyga. 

MOTACILLID.*;. 

LlOTBlCeiDJE. 

Nemoricola. 

Updpids. 

Liotlris. 

BicsmjE. 

tJpupa. 

Yuhina. 

Zosterops, 

PSITTACID.*:. 

Ptenithiua. 

FRINOlLLro^ffl. 

PalEeornw. 

Ptchonotib*. 

Mi^roseelis. 

Pycnonotua. 

HjpBipetes. 
Campbphaqid^. 

Melopfius. 
Pjigiiauda. 
Plocbid.*;. 

OOLUMBID^. 

lanth^enas. 

Munia. 

Ma«ropygia. 

Periorocotos. 

Sturnid.*:. 

Pius  IAN  iD^, 

Aeridotherea. 

Pbasianus. 

DlCRTIRlD^ 

Diorunis. 

Stumia. 

Ceriornis. 

Chibia. 

PlTTTD.1!. 

SrRioiD^. 

Buchaiiga. 

Pitta- 

Scops. 

In  the  above  lists  there  are  rather  more  Oriental  tlian  Pal^e- 
arctic  genera ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  most  of  the 
former  are  summer  migrants  only,  or  stragglers  just  entering  the 
sub-region;  whereas  the  great  majority'  of  the  latter  are  per- 
manent residents,  and  a  large  proportion  of  them  range  over  the 
greater  part  of  the  Manchurian  district.  Many  of  those  in  the 
Oriental  column  should  perhaps  be  omitted,  as  we  have  no  exact 
determination  of  their  mnge,  and  the  limits  of  the  regions  are 
very  uncertain.  It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  Palsearctic 
genera  of  Sylviidse,  Paridffi,  and  FringiUidfe,  are  often  represented 
by  numerous  species,  whereas  the  corresponding  Oriental  genera 
liave  for  the  most  part  only  single  species ;  and  we  shall  then 
find  that,  except  towards  the  borders  of  the  Oriental  region  the 
Palffiarotic  element  is  strongly  predominant.  Four  of  the  more 
espeoi^y  Oriental  groups  are  confined  to  Japan,  the  southern 


by  Google 


226  ZOOLOGICAL  GEUGRAPHy.  [pabt  in. 

extremity  of  which  should  perhapa  come  in  the  Oriental  regiou. 
The  great  richness  of  this  sub-region  compared  with  that  of 
Siberia  is  well  shown  by  the  fact,  that  a  list  of  all  the  known 
land-birds  of  East  Siberia,  including  Dahuria  and  the  compara- 
tively fertile  Amoor  Valley,  contains  only  190  species;  whereas 
P^re  David's  catalogue  of  the  birds  of  Northern  China  with 
adjacent  parts  of  East  Thibet  and  Mongolia  (a  very  much 
smaller  area),  contains  for  the  same  families  366  species.  Of  the 
Siberian  birds  more  than  50  per  cent,  are  European  species,  while 
those  of  the  Manchurian  sub-region  comprise  about  half  that 
proportion  of  land-birds  which  are  identical  with  those  of 
Europe, 

Japan  i.?  no  doubt  very  imperfectly  known,  as  only  134  land- 
birds  are  recorded  from  it.  Of  these  twenty-two  are  peculiar 
species,  a  number  that  would  probably  be  diminished  were  the 
Corea  to  be  explored.  Of  the  genera,  only  nine  are  Indo- 
Malayan,  while  forty-three  are  Palaiaretie. 

Plate  III. — Scene  on  the  Borders  of  JVorth-  West  China  and 
Mongolia  with  Gkaraeteristie  Mammalia  and  Birds.  —  The 
mountainous  districts  of  Northern  China,  with  the  adjacent 
portions  of  Thibet  and  Mongolia,  are  the  head-quarters  of  the 
pheasant  tribe,  many  of  the  most  beautiful  and  remarkable 
species  being  found  there  only.  In  the  north-western  provinces 
of  China  and  the  southern  parts  of  Mongolia  may  be  found  the 
species  figured.  That  in  the  foreground  is  the  superb  golden 
pheasant  {Thaumaka  picta),  a  bird  that  can  hardly  be  surpassed 
for  splendour  of  plumage  by  any  denizen  of  the  tropics,  The 
lat^e  bird  perched  above  is  the  eared  pheasant  (Crossoptilon 
aurititm),  a  species  of  comparatively  sober  plumage  but  of 
remarkable  and  elegant  form.  In  the  middle  distance  is  Pallas's 
sand  grouse  (Syrrhaptes  paradoxus),  a  curious  bird,  whose  native 
country  seems  to  be  the  high  plains  of  Northern  Asia,  but  which 
often  abounds  near  Pekin,  and  in  1863  astonished  European 
ornithologists  by  appearing  in  considerable  numbers  in  Central 
and  Western  Europe,  in  every  part  of  Great  Britain,  and  even 
m  Ireland. 

The  quadruped  figured  is  the  curious  racoon  dog  {Kyctereutes 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PAL^AECTIC  EEGION.  227 

pwct/<moides),  an  animal  confined  to  North  China,  Japan,  ard 
the  Amoor  Valley,  and  havii^  no  cloSe  allies  in  any  other  part 
of  the  globe.  In  the  distance  ai'e  some  deer,  a  group  of  animals 
very  abundant  and  varied  in  this  part  of  the  Pahearctic  region. 
Reptiles  and  ^m^Aifim.— Eeptiles  are  scarce  in  North  China, 
only  four  or  five  species  of  snakes,  a  lizai"d  and  one  of  the  Geck- 
otidee  occurring  in  the  country  round  Pekin,  The  genus  Salys 
is  the  most  characteristic  form  of  snake,  while  Callophis,  an 
oriental  genus,  extends  to  Japan.  Among  lizards,  Plestiodon, 
Mayhouya,  Tachydromus,  and  Gecko  reach  Japan,  the  two  latter 
being  very  characteristic  of  the  Oriental  region. 

Amphibia  are  more  abundant  and  interesting ;  Eyndbiv^, 
Onychodaclylus,  and  Sieioldtia  (Salamandridffi)  being  peculiar 
to  it,  while  most  of  the  European  genera  are  also  represented. 

Fresh-water  Fish. — Of  these  there  are  a  few  peculiar  genera ; 
as  Flecoglossws  (Salmonida;)  from  Japan ;  Aehilognathus,  Fsm- 
doperUampus,  Ochdobius,  and  Opsanichthys  (Cyprinidte) ;  and 
there  are  many  other  Chinese  Cyprinidae  belonging  to  the  border 
land  of  the  Palsearctic  and  Oriental  regions. 

Iiiseets — The  butterflies  of  this  sub-region  exhibit  the  same 
mixture  of  tropical  and  temperate  forms  as  the  birds.  Most  of 
the  common  European  genera  are  represented,  and  there  are 
species  of  Famassius  in  Japan  and  the  Amoor.  Isod&ma-,  a 
peculiar  genus  of  Nymphalidse  is  found  near  Ningpo,  just  within 
our  limits ;  and  Seridmts,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  genera  of 
Papilionidfe  is  peculiar  to  North  China,  where  four  species  occur, 
thus  balancing  the  Thais  and  Dm-itis  of  Europe.  The  genus 
ZephyniB  (Lycfenidfe)  is  well  represented  by  six  species  in  Japan 
and  the  Amoor,  against  two  in  Europe.  FapUio  paris  and 
P.  Uanor,  magnificent  insects  of  wholly  tropical  appearance, 
abound  near  Pekin,  and  allied  forms  inhabit  Japan  and  tlie 
Amoor,  as  well  as  P.  demetrius  and  P.  alcinous  belonging  to 
the  "  Protenor  "  group  ot  the  Himalayas.  Other  tropical  genera 
occurring  in  Japan,  the  Amoor,  or  North  China  are,  Fehis, 
Aeope,  Myealesis,  Ypthimia  (Satyridfe) ;  ITiaumantis  (Mor- 
phidffi),  at  Shanghae ;  Euripm,  Neptis,  Athytim  (Nymphalidie) ; 
Terias  (Pieridse) ;  and  the  above-mentioned  PapUionidse. 


by  Google 


228  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paiit  hi, 

CoUc^Um.—Th.Q  lieetles  of  Japan  decidedly  exhibit  a  mixture 
of  tropical  forma  with  others  truly  Palfearctic,  and  it  has  heen 
with  some  naturalists  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  the  southern  and 
best  known  portion  of  the  islands  should  not  be  joined  to  the 
Oriental  region.  An  important  addition  to  our  knowledge  of 
the  insects  of  this  country  has  recently  been  mside  by  Mr.  Geoi^e 
Lewis,  and  a  portion  of  his  collections  have  been  described  by 
various  entomologists  in  the  Transactions  of  the  ErdoTnological 
Society  of  London.  As  the  cLuestion  is  one  of  considerable  in- 
terest we  shall  give  a  summary  of  the  results  fairly  deducible 
from  what  is  now  known  of  the  entomology  of  Japan ;  and  it 
must  be  remembered  that  almost  all  our  collections  come  from 
the  southern  districts,  in  what  is  almost  a  sub-tropical  climate ; 
so  that  if  we  find  a  considerable  proportion  of  Paltearetic  forms, 
we  may  be  pretty  sure  that  the  preponderance  will  be  much 
greater  a  little  further  north. 

Of  Carabidce  Mr.  Bates  enumerates  244  species  belonging  to 
84  genera,  and  by  comparing  these  with  the  Coleoptera  of  a 
tract  of  about  ec[ual  extent  in  western  Europe,  he  concludes  that 
there  is  little  similarity,  and  that  the  cases  of  affinity  to  the  forms 
of  eastern  tropical  Asia  preponderate.  By  comparing  his  genera 
with  the  distributions  as  given  in  Gemminger  and  Hnrold's 
Catalogue,  a  somewhat  different  result  is  arrived  at.  Leaving 
out  the  generic  types  altogether  peculiar  to  Japan,  and  also  those 
genera  of  such  world-wide  distribution  that  they  afford  no  clear 
indications  for  our  purpose,  it  appears  that  no  less  than  twenty- 
two  genera,  containing  seventy-four  of  the  Japanese  species,  are 
either  exclusively  Paltearctie,  Pal^aretic  and  Nearctic,  or  highly 
characteristic  of  the  Palcearctic  region ;  then  come  thirteen  genera 
containing  eighty-seven  of  the  species  which  have  a  very  wide 
distribution,  but  are  also  Palfcarctic :  we  next  have  seventeen 
genera  containing  twenty-four  of  the  Japanese  species  which  are 
decidedly  Oriental  and  tropical.  Here  then  the  fair  compaiison 
is  between  the  twent3'-two  genera  and  seventy-four  species  whose 
affinities  are  clearly  Palfearctic  or  at  least  north  temperate,  and 
seventeen  genera  with  twenty-four  species  which  are  Asiatic 
and  tropical;    and  this  seems  to  prove  that,  although  South 


by  Google 


CHAP.  X.]  THE  PALiEABCTIC  REGION.  229 

Japan  (like  North  China)  has  a  considerable  infusion  of  tropical 
forms,  there  is  a  preponderating  substratum  of  PalEearetic  forms, 
which  clearly  indicate  the  true  position  of  the  islands  in  zoolo- 
gical geography.  There  are  also  a  few  cases  of  what  may  be 
called  eccentric  distribution ;  which  show  that  Japan,  like  many 
other  island-groups,  has  served  as  a  kind  of  refuge  in  which 
dying-out  forms  continue  to  maintain  themselves.  These,  which 
are  worthy  of  notice,  are  as  follows :  (h-thotrichus  (1  sp.)  has 
the  only  other  species  in  E^pt ;  TrecMchus  (1  sp.)  has  two 
other  species,  of  which  one  inhabits  Madeira,  the  other  the 
Southern  United  States ;  Perileptus  (1  sp.)  has  two  other  species, 
of  which  one  inhabits  Bourbon,  the  other  West  Europe ;  and 
lastly,  Crcpidogaster  (1  sp.)  has  the  other  known  species  in 
South  Africa.  These  cases  diminish  the  value  of  the  indications 
afforded  by  some  of  the  Japanese  forms,  whose  only  allies  are 
single  species  in  various  remote  parts  of  the  Oriental  region. 

The  StaphyluiidiE  have  been  described  by  Dr.  Shai'p,  and  his 
list  exhibits  a  great  preponderance  of  north  temperate,  or  cosmo- 
politan forms,  with  a  few  which  are  decidedly  tropical.  The 
Pselaphidffi  and  Scydmenidtc,  also  described  by  Dr.  Sharp, 
exhibit,  according  to  that  gentleman,  "even  a  greater  resemblance 
to  those  of  North  America  than  to  those  of  Europe,"  but  he  says 
nothing  of  any  tropical  affinities.  The  water-beetles  are  all 
either  Paltearctic  or  of  wide  distribution. 

The  Lucanid^  {Gemni.  and  Htm:  Cat,  1868)  exhibit  an  inter- 
mingling of  Palsearctic  and  Oriental  genera. 

The  Cetoniida  {Gemm.  and  Sar.  Cat.  1869)  show,  for  North 
China  and  Japan,  three  Oriental  to  two  Palffiarctic  genera. 

The  Buprestid<e  collected  by  Mr.  Lewis  have  been  described 
hy  Mr.  Edward  Saunders  in  the  Journal  of  the  Linncean  Soeiety, 
vol.  XL  p.  509.  The  collection  consisted  of  thirty-six  species 
belonging  to  fourteen  genera.  No  less  than  thirteen  of  these 
are  known  also  from  India  and  the  Malay  Islands ;  nine  from 
Europe ;  seven  from  Africa ;  six  from  America,  and  four  from 
China.  In  six  of  the  genera  the  Japanese  species  are  said  to  be 
allied  to  those  of  the  Oriental  region  ;  while  in  three  they  are 
alhed  to  European  forms,  and  in  two  to  American.     Considering 


by  Google 


230  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [part  m. 

the  southern  latitude  and  warm  climate  in  which  these  inseete 
were  mostly  collected,  and  the  proxiniity  to  Formosa  and  the 
Malay  Islands  compared  with  the  enormous  distance  from 
Europe,  this  shows  as  much  Palsearctie  affinity  as  can  he 
expected.  In  the  Palfearctic  region  the  group  is  only  plentiful 
in  the  southern  parts  of  Europe,  which  is  cut  off  by  the  cold 
plateau  of  Thibet  from  all  direct  communication  with  Japan ; 
while  in  the  Oriental  region  it  everywhere  abounds  and  is,  in 
fact,  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  and  dominant  families  of 
Coleoptera. 

The  Longicoms  collected  by  Mr.  Lewis  have  been  described 
by  Mr.  Bates  in  the  Annals  of  Natural  History  for  1873.  The 
number  of  species  now  known  from  Japan  is  107,  belonging  to 
sixty-four  genera.  The  most  important  genera  are  Leptura, 
Glytanthus,  Monohammtis,  Praonetha,  Exoeentrus,  Glenea,  and 
Oberea.  There  are  twenty-one  tropical  genera,  and  seven 
peculiar  to  Japan,  leaving  thirty-six  either  Palffiarctic  or  of  very 
wide  range.  A  number  of  the  genera  are  Oriental  and  Malayan, 
and  many  characteristic  European  genera  seem  to  be  absent ; 
but  it  is  certain  that  not  half  the  Japanese  Longicoms  are  yet 
known,  and  many  of  these  gaps  will  doubtless  be  filled  up  when 
the  more  northern  islands  are  explored. 

The  Phytophaga,  described  by  Mr.  Ealy,  appear  to  have  a 
considerable  preponderance  of  tropical  Oriental  forms. 

A  considerable  collection  of  Hymenoptera  formed  by  Mr. 
Lewis  have  been  described  by  Mr.  Frederick  Smith  ;  and  exhibit 
the  interesting  result,  that  while  the  bees  and  wasps  are  decidedly 
of  tropical  and  Oriental  forms,  the  Tenthredinidfe  and  Ichneu- 
monidiE  are  as  decidedly  Palfearctio,  "  the  general  aspect  of  the 
collection  being  that  of  a  European  one,  only  a  single  exotic 
form  being  found  among  them." 

Bemarks  on  the  Genial  Character  of  the  Fawna  of  Japan  — 
From  a  general  view  of  the  phenomena  of  distribution  we  feel 
justified  in  'placing  Japan  in  the  Paltearctic  region ;  although 
some  tropical  groups,  especially  of  reptiles  and  insects,  have 
largely  occupied  its  southern  portions ;  and  these  same  groups 
have  in  many  cases  spread  into  Korthem  China,  beyond  the 


by  Google 


CHAP.x.]  THE  TALMAnCTlC  REGION  231 

usual  dividing  line  of  the  Palfearctic  and  Oriental  r^ous.  The 
cauaea  of  such  a  phenomenon  are  not  difficult  to  conceive.  Even 
now,  that  portion  of  the  PalcCarctic  region  between  Western 
Asia  and  Japan  is,  for  the  most  part,  a  bleak  and  inhoapitable 
region,  abounding  in  desert  plateaus,  and  vrith  a  rigorous  climate 
even  in  its  most  favoured  districts,  and  can,  therefore,  support 
but  a  scanty  population  of  snakes,  and  of  such  groups  of 
insects  as  require  flowers,  forests,  or  a  considerable  period  of 
warm  summer  weather ;  and  it  is  precisely  these  which  are 
represented  in  Japan  and  North  China  by  tropical  forms.  We 
must  alao  consider,  that  during  the  Glacial  epoch  this  whole 
region  would  have  become  still  less  productive,  and  that,  as  the 
southern  limit  of  the  ice  retired  northwai'd,  it  would  be  followed 
up  by  many  tropical  forms  along  with  such  as  had  been  driven 
south  by  its  advance,  and  had  survived  to  return  to  their 
northern  homes. 

It  is  also  evident  that  Japan  has  a  more  equable  and  probably 
moister  climate  than  the  oppoaite  shores  of  China,  and  has  also 
a  very  different  geological  character,  being  rocky  and  broken, 
often  volcanic,  and  supporting  a  rich,  varied,  and  peculiar  vege- 
tation. It  would  thus  be  well  adapted  to  support  all  the  more 
hardy  denizens  of  the  tropics  which  might  at  various  times 
reach  it,  while  it  might  not  be  so  well  adapted  for  the  more 
boreal  forms  from  Mongolia  or  Siberia.  The  fact  that  a  mixture 
of  such  forms  occurs  there,  is  then,  little  to  be  wondered  at,  but 
we  may  rather  marvel  that  they  are  not  more  predominant,  and 
that  even  in  the  extreme  south,  the  most  abundant  forms  of 
mammal,  bird,  and  insect,  are  modifications  of  familiar  Palfearctic 
types.  The  fact  clearly  indicates  that  the  former  land  con- 
nectiona  of  Japan  with  the  continent  have  been  in  a  northerly 
rather  than  in  a  southerly  direction,  and  that  the  tropical  immi- 
grants have  bad  difficulties  to  contend  with,  and  have  found  the 
land  already  fairly  stocked  with  northern  aborigines  in  almost 
every  class  and  order  of  animals. 

General  Conclusions  as  to  the  Fauna  of  the  Pal(earctie  He- 
ijifffi. — From  the  account  that  has  now  been  given  of  the  fauna 


by  Google 


232  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [pakt  hi. 

of  the  Pakearetic  region,  it  is  evident  that  it  owes  many  of  its 
deficiencies  and  some  of  its  peculiarities  to  the  influence  of  the 
Glacial  epoch,  combined  with  those  important  changes  of  physi- 
cal geography  which  accompanied  or  preceded  it.  The  elevation  of 
the  old  Saiahan  sea  and  the  complete  formation  of  the  Mediterra- 
nean, are  the  most  important  of  these  changes  in  the  western 
portion  of  the  region.  In  the  centre,  a  wide  arm  of  the  Arctic 
Ocean  extended  southward  Irom  the  Gulf  of  Obi  to  the  Aral  and 
the  Caspian,  dividing  northern  Europe  and  Asia.  At  this  time 
our  European  and  Siherian  sub-regions  were  probably  more 
distinct  than  they  are  now,  their  complete  fusion  having  been 
effected  since  the  Glacial  epoch.  As  we  know  that  the  Himalayas 
have  greatly  increased  in  altitude  during  the  Tertiary  period,  it  is 
not  impossible  that  during  the  Miocene  and  Pliocene  epochs  the 
vast  plateau  of  Central  Asia  was  much  less  elevated  and  less 
completely  cut  off  from  the  influence  of  rain-bearing  winds.  It 
might  then  have  been  far  more  fertile,  and  have  supported  a  rich 
and  varied  animal  population,  a  few  relies  of  which  we  see  in 
the  Thibetan  antelopes,  yaks,  and  wild  horses.  The  influence 
of  yet  earlier  changes  of  physical  geography,  and  the  relations  of 
the  Palfearctic  to  the  ti'opical  regions  immediately  south  of  it, 
wiLl  be  better  understood  when  we  have  examined  and  d 
the  faunas  of  the-  Ethiopian  and  Oriental  regions. 


by  Google 


THE  PALjEARCTIC  REGION. 


TABLES  OF  DISTEIBUTION. 

In  conatruetiiig  these  tables  showing  the  distribution  of  vari- 
ous classes  of  animals  in  the  Paltearctic  region,  the  following 
sources  of  information  have  been  chiefly  relied  on,  in  addition 
to  the  general  treatises,  monographs,  and  catalogues  used  in 
compiling  the  fourth  part  of  this  work. 

Mamtiudia. — Lord  Clement's  Mammalia  and  Eeptiles  of 
Europe  ;  Siebold's  Fauna  Japonica  ;  Pere  David's  List  of 
Mammalia  of  North  China  and  Thibet ;  Swinhoe's  Chinese 
Mammalia ;  Eadde's  List  of  Mammalia  of  South-Eastem  Siberia ; 
Canon  Tristram's,  Lists  for  Sahara  and  Palestine ;  Papers  by- 
Professor  Milne-Edwards,  Mr,  Blanford,  Mr.  Sclater,  and  the 
local  lists  given  by  Mr,  A.  Murray  in  the  Appendix  to  his 
1  Distribution  of  Mammalia. 
!s.— Blaaius'  List  of  Birds  of  Europe;  Godman,  On 
Birds  of  Azores,  Madeira,  and  Canaries ;  Middendorf,  for 
Siberia;  Pke  David  and  Mr.  Swinhoe,  for  China  and  Mongolia; 
Homeyer,  for  Eaat  Siberia;  Mr,  Blanford,  for  Persia  and  the 
high  Himalayas ;  Mr.  Elwes'a  paper  on  the  Distribution  of 
Asiatic  Birds;  Canon  Tristram,  for  the  Sahara  and  Palestine; 
Professor  Newton,  for  Iceland  and  Greenland;  Mr,  Dresser, 
for  Scandinavia ;  and  numerous  papers  and  notes  in  the  Ibis ; 
Journal  fttr  Omithologie ;  Annals  and  Mag,  of  Nat.  History ;  and 
Proceedings  of  the  Zoological  Society. 

Reptiles  and  Amphibia. — Schreiber's  European  Herpetology, 

Vol.  I— 17 


by  Google 


234 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


TABLE  I. 
FAMILIES  OF  ANIMALS  INHABITINO  THE  FALMARCTIG  REGION. 
Explanation. 
Names  in  italics  ahow  families  peculiar  to  the  region. 

ITainea  iaoloaed  thus  ( )  twely  outer  the  region,  and  are  not  considered  properly 

to  belong  to  it. 
Numbers  are  not  conseontive,  but  correspond  to  those  in  Part  IV. 


Eai^  beyond  tho  Region 


MAMMALIA 
Primates. 
3.  CynopitheeidEe 


fi.  {Pteropidffil   ... 

11.  EMnolopbidEe 

12.  Vespertilionidfe 

13.  NoctiEonidte . . . 

iHSECnVORA. 

15.  Macroscelididse 


CARHn'ORA. 

Jelidffi   

Viverridie 
Hysnidte 

Canidie 

Mustolidie     ., 
Muridffl 

Ursidse 

Otariidfe 

TriehechidEe  .. 


■.  Saidae     ... 

I.  Camelids 

I.  Cervidce  . , . 

1.  Bovidie  ... 


Tropics  of  E 
Warmer  par 
Cosmopolite 
Ti'opical  regi 


Ethiopian 

Oiiental,  S.  Africa 

Nearetio,  Oriental 

Cosmopolite,  escL  Australia  and  8.  America 


All  regions  but  Australian 

Etliiopian,  Oriental 

Ethiopian,  Oriental 

All  regions  but  Australian 

All  regions  but  Australian 

Oriental 

Neorctic,  Oriental,  Andes 

N.  and  S.  temperate  zones 

Arctic  regions 

N.  and  S.  temperate  zonea 


Tropics,  from  Brazil  to  N.  Australia 


Ethiopian 

Cosmopolite,  aicl.  Nearetio  reg.  and  Anstralia 

All  regions  but  Ethiopian  and  Australian 
All  regions  but  Neotropical  and  Aiistralian 


b,  Google 


THE  PAL^AECTIO  EEGION. 


Sul,-HKion«. 

Order  and  Family. 

1 

ii 

i 

1 

Bango  beyond  Uio  KegioH. 

Hyeaooidae. 

54.  (HyracidEe)    ,. 

~ 

RoEENriA, 

55.  MaridK 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

56 

Spalacidie 

Ethiopiao,  Oriental 

57 

Dipodidffi 

58 

Etiiiopian 

60 

CastoridiB      ... 

Nearctic 

61 

Scinridie 

All  resions  but  Australian 

64 

Octodontide... 

Abyssinia,  Heotropical 
Ethiopian,  Orient^ 

67 

LaKomyidte    ... 

Nearctic 

70.  Leporidte 

— 

— 

_ 

~ 

All  regions  but  Australian 

BIRDS. 

PASSBEES. 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

1.  TuididiB 

CosmopoKte 

2.  SylviiilK 

3.  Tmialiidie      ... 

Cosmopolite 

Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Australian 

4.  PttimridB) 

Searctic,  Oriental 

6.  Cinclids 

Oriental 

e.  TroglodyliaiB... 
8.  Certhiidfe 

American,  Oriental 

Oriental,  Hearotio 

9.  SittidK 

10.  PariJie   

13.   Pycnonotidfe... 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

14.  OriolJdie 

17.  Muscicapidie.., 

19.  Laniidie 

20.  Corridfe 

23,  (NfictarinUdffl) 

Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Australian 

34.  (DiiMEidffi)      ... 

Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Anstraliau 

29.  Ampelid^      ... 

Nearctic 

30.  HirundinidEe... 

Cosmopolite 

33.  Fringillid*    ... 

AU  regions  but  Australian 

3fi.  Stnrnid^       ... 

Eastern  Hemisphere 

87,  Alaudid^       ... 

38,  Motacillidaj  ... 

47.  {Pittid*) 

- 

Oriental,   Australian,  Etiiiopian 

PlOAEIffi. 

51.  PiQidff    

All  reirions  tut  Anstralian 

53,  Yungidffi 

58.  Cuculidie       ... 

F.  W.  India,  N.  E.  Africa,  S.  Africa 

62.  Coraciidie      ... 

Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Australian 

63.  Meiupidie      ... 
67,  Akedinidffi    „. 

Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Australian 

Cosmopolite 

69.  Upupidffl       ... 

Ethiopian,  Oriental 

73.  Capiinml^ds>, 

Cosmopolite 

74 

CypselidtB     ... 

— 

~ 

— 

- 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY, 


Order  and  Fiunily. 

i 

^ 

COHTMG^, 

84.  Colambids  ... 

~ 

GiLUNS. 

8S.  FteTQclidiB  ... 

— 

87.  Totraonids  ... 

89.  Tnmicidie    .. 

ACCrPITBBS. 

94.  VulturidsB  ... 

— 

98.  Falconidffl   ... 

98.  Strigidie      ... 

— 

Grallm. 

99.  Eallite 

100.  ScolopacidtB... 

104.  Gkroolida  ... 

105.  CharadriidiB... 

106.  OtididK       ... 

107.  Qniidffi 

113.  ArdeidflB       ... 

114  PlataMdK   ... 

115.  Ciooniidw     ... 

117.  Ph^niGopterids 

Aksbbbs. 

lig.  AnatidK      ... 

118.  Larid* 

120.  Procellariid* 

121.  Felecanidie  ... 

123.  Calymbidce  ... 

125.  Alcidie 

- 

BEPTILIA. 

Ophidia. 

1.  Typhlopidfe... 
5.  Calamatiid^... 

6.  OligodontidiE 

7.  ColabHdiB   ... 

9.  Fsammophida! 

18.  Erycidse...  ... 

20.  Elapid^ 

24.  OroiaUda    ... 

25.  Vjperids      ,„ 

— 

EaDgo  bi:yand  tli 


Ethiopian,  Indian 
Nearotie,  Ethiopian,  Oriental 
Oriental,  Ethiopian,  Searctic 
Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Australian 


All  regions  bat  Austi'alian 
Cosmopolite 
Cosmopolite 
Cosmopolite 


Cosmopolite 


Ethiopian,   Oriental,  Australian 

Cosmopolite 

Ethiopian,  Oriental  Australian 

Eastern  Hemisphere,  and  N.  America 

Cosmopolite 

Almost  Cosmopolite 


iopian,  Indian 


Cosmopolite 
Cosmopolite 
Cosmopolite 


Arctic  and  U.  Temperate 

Cosmopolite 

N.  Temperate  zone 


All  regions  but  Ncarctte 
All  other  regions 
Oriental  and  Neotropical 


Ethiopian  and  Oriental 
Oriental  and  Ethiopian 
Australian  and  all  otlier  regions 
Kearctic,  Heotropical,  Oriental 
Ethiopian,  Oriental 


b,  Google 


THE  PAL^ARCTIC  REGION 


Order  anil  Family. 


LaoehtILIA, 
26.   Trogwiophidce 
i!8.  Amphisbtenidie 
30.  Varanidie 

33.  Lacertidte 

34.  Zonuridai 
41.  Gymnopthal- 

45.   Siiineidffi 

i6.  Opliimiuirida: ... 

47.  Sepidie   

49.  Goukotidie      ... 

fll.  Asamidai 

52.  Chamisleonidie 

Chelonia. 
67.  Testudinidfe  ... 
59.  Trionychidoe ... 
tiO.  CliBlwiiidfe    ... 

AMPHIBIA. 

UliODEI.A. 
3.  Proteidce 

5.  Meiiopomidie . , . 

6.  Salamandridte 

Anouba. 
10.  Bufonidse 
13.  Bombinatorid* 
IS.  Alytidte 

17.  Hylidtc 

18.  Polyrodatidffi 

10.  Hjimdie 

20.  BieuogloaBidtB 

PISHES  (PKESH- 
WATER). 

ACANTHOPTERTGII. 

1.  Gaateroataidfe 
3.  Percidce 

12.  Scienidie 

26.  Cfnneplwrid/e... 

37.  AtheriiiidiB    ... 


70.  Esocidto... 

71.  Umbridie 
73.  Cypriiiodontidie 
7B.  Cyprinidse 


aub-reglons. 

1 

s  ^ 

i 

i 

BBnga  teyond  the  Reeion. 

_ 

- 

_ 

_ 

Ethiopian,  Neotropical 
Oriental,  Etiiiopian,  Australian 
All  continents  but  AmericEii 
America,  Africa,  N.  India 

z 

z 

- 

_ 

Ethiopian,  Australian,  HeotropioaJ 

z 

z 

- 

Ethiopian 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

All  continonts  but  America 

Ethiopian,  Ortentttl 

- 

- 

- 

All  continents  tut  Australia 
Ethiopian,  Oriental,  Nearotio 
Marina 

- 

„ 

„ 

z 

Hearctic 
Neatctic 
Nearctic  fo  Andes  of  Bogota 

z 

- 

z 

; 

All  continents  but  AnBtralia 
Neotropical,  New  Zealand 
All  regions  but  Oriental 

All  the  Tenons 
Almost  Cosmopolite 
All  re^ons  but  Searotie 

^■ 

z 

- 

z 

^ 

NeareHe 

All  Togions  but  Auatralian 

All  regions  hut  Auatralian 

- 

- 

N.  America  and  Australia 

'«■ 

z 

I 

~ 

= 

All  warm  regions 

Nearetie,  Hew  Zealand 

Nearctic 

Nearotio 

All  regions  but  Australia 

Allregiotishut  Australian  and  Neotropical 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOaiCAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Sub-regions. 

Order  and  FaiDlly. 

i. 

^S 

i 

^ 

Range  beyond  tlie  Region. 

1 

n 

S 

1 

.-_ 

»i 

s 

Gahoisei. 

97.  Polj'aontids  ... 

Nearctio 

— 

Nearctic 

INSECTS.       LEPI. 

DOPTERA  (PART). 

DORINI  (BUTTBa- 

FLIBS). 

_ 

_ 

_ 

All  tropical  regions 

9 

Satynda 

CosmopoEte 

Nymphalidffi... 
Liby&eidfe    ... 

Cosmopolite 

9 

10 

Femeobeidie .. 

Abaent  from  Nearetic  region  and  Australia 

13 

Lyefemdte      ... 

u 

PieridK 

IB 

Papilionidw  ... 

16.  H^parute     ... 

— 

— 

— 

— 

SPBinOIDEA. 

17.  Zygienidai     ... 

_ 

_ 

_ 

— 

21.  Stygiite        ... 

23.  Jlgeiiiite       ... 

Absent  only  from  Australia 

-HL 

— 

— 

— 

CosTnopoiite 

GOLBOPTEBA.— Of  about  80  families  into  which  the  Coleoptera         d     d  i      11 
more  important  are  cosmopolite,  or  nearly  so.     It  would  theraf      ua        ssa  ly 
space  to  give  tables  of  the  whole  for  each  region. 

Land  Shells. — The  more  important  families  being  cosm  p  1 1  and  th  m 
ones  being  somewhat  nncertain  in  their  limits,  the  roader  is  rof  rr  d  to  th  cc  n 
the  families  and  genera  under  each  region,  and  to  the  chapter        M  11  n  th 

eluding  part  of  Uiis  work,  for  such  information  as  can  be  given   f  tl   ir  di  tnl  uti  n 


by  Google 


THE  PAL^AECTIC  REGION. 


EXPI,A] 

n  italics  show  genera  peculiar  to  the  region. 


Names  inclosed  thus  { 

■  jshowgonGrawhiohjuHt  outer  the  region,  hut  are  not  considered 

propBTly  to  DeIon|^  tu  m. 

conseeutiToly. 

MAM2WALIA. 

Ordor.  ramUy,  and 
OeniiB. 

ii 

Bange  Hithin  tlie  Bfgion. 

BuEgc  beyond  tlie  Region. 

PRIMATES. 

Sf.M  NOPITHBUI D^. 

(Semnopitheeus 

1 

Eastern  Thibet) 

Oriental  genus 

CYNOPITHECIDil. 

1.  Macacus 

CHIKOPTEKA. 

i 

Gibraltar,  N.  Africa,  E.  Thibet 
to  JapRJi 

Oriental 

PTBROFIDi]. 

(Ptetopus       ... 
(Xantharpyia  ... 

2 

N^^Mc^^alestine) 

Tropics  of  the  E,  Hemis. 
Otieutal,  Austro-Malayan 

2    Khmoliihua 
(AseOla 
(Njctens 

9 

1 

I 
1 

Temperate  &  Southern  parts  of 

Region 
Egypt) 

Egypt,  Palestine) 
Egypt) 

Warmer  parts  E.  Hemi- 
sphere 
Ethiopian,  Java 
[1]  InSia 
Nubia,  Himalaya 

VnsPBRTHJoKri)* 

3  \eaperngo 

4  Otonycleni 

5  Vespertilio 
(KLnvouU 

6  Miniuptens 

7  Pleiotua 

8  Barba'rtellua 

1 
I 
35 
1 
1 

: 
2 

Siberia,  Amoorland 

TE^hole  region 

S,  China) 

S.  Europe,  K  Africa,  Japan 

Mid.  and  S.  Europe,  Palestine 

Cosmopolite 

Oriental,  S.  Africa 

S.  Afric.  Malaya,  Anatral. 

Darjettling,  Timor 

NOLTILIONlDa; 

9  MolossUB 

2 

S.  Europe,  H.  Africa 

Ethiop-,  Keotrop.,  Aus- 
Oriental,  Africa. 

INSECTIVORA. 

Ebihacbid^. 
10,  ErinaEeus 

i 

The  whole  re^on ;  excl.  Japan 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,    J^Tiiny,  and 


TALPISJU. 

11.  Talpa       ...     . 

12.  Seaptochims   . 

13.  Anarosorex 

14.  Scaptonyx 

15.  Myogale  ... 

16.  HectoqaU ...     , 

17.  Urotriolius 
IS.   UropfU/us... 


VrvBRnma. 
(Vireira 
23    Geaetta 
(Heipestes 


fANIDj; 

25    Cams 

2fl   jlfyclereaies 


30  Vison 

31  Giilo 
3Z    Lutra 

33   IMroneUes 
a   EnEiydns 
55   MeUs 

37   .^laa-opva 

36   ThalassarLtO' 
39    Uraus 


Rnngo  Hithin  the  Regi 


Ths  whole  region 

"S.  China 

N.  China 

N.  China 

S.  E.  Russia,  Fjren 

Thibet 

E.  Thibet 


The  whole  region 

"W".  Europe  to  N.  China 


The  whole  region  ;  exel,  e 

North 
S.  Europe  to  Arctic  Bca. 


N".  W.  America 


Absent  from  Australia  & 
8.  America 


e  All  regions  hut  Austral. 
AmcrieaN  of66°N.Lat. 


N.  China) 

S,  Europe  &  If,  Africa,  Palestine 

N.  Africa,  Spain  [!],  Palestine) 

IT.  Africa  and  S.  W,  Asia 


Oriental  and  Ethiopian 

Ethiopian 

Oriental  and  Ethiopian 


Ail  reg.  but  Austral.  [!] 


N.  Europe  and  Aeia,  E,  Thibet 
W,  Europe  to  N.  E.  Asia 
The  whole  region 

Europe  and  Siberia 

The  Arctic  re^ona 
The  whole  region 

N.  Asia  and  Japan 
Cen.  Europe,  Palestine,  H.China, 
Japan 


intal,  Ncaretio 

Nearotic,  Ethiop.,  Hima- 
layas, Pern 
If.   America,  N".   India, 

Arctic  America 
Oriental 


b,  Google 


THE  PALiEAKCTIC  REGION. 


Oriar,  Famny,  ajid 
Genus. 

Kaiige  wifhin  the  Region. 

Range  Ijejond  Uie  REe"™ 

Ota  Bill)*:. 

40.  Callorhiniis     ... 

41.  ZiUoplms—      „. 

42.  Eumiitopias     ... 

I 
1 

1 

Kainschaffii  nndBdlring's  Straits 
Japan,  Behriug's .Straits 

California 
California 

TntomiCHira. 

43.  Trichechus      ... 

1 

PolM  Seas 

Arctic  America 

44.  Callooephalus  ... 

45.  Pagomys 

48,  PagopMlus      ... 

47.  PhoBa      

48.  Halichierua      ,„ 

49.  Pdagins 

50.  Cystophora      ... 

3 
2 
3 

2 

2 

North  Sea,  Caspian,  Lake  Baikal 

North  Sea,  Japan 

Nortl,erii  Seas 

Northern  Seas 

North  Sea  and  Baltic 

Madeira  to  Black  Sei 

N.  Atlantic 

Greenland 
N.  Pacific 
N.  Pacific 
N.  Pacific 
Greenland 

N.  Atlantic 

aiRENIA 

Tropics  ftBehring'sStris. 

CETACEA 

Oceanic 

UNGULATA. 

51.  Equus      

4 

Ceot.  &  and  "W".  Asia  &N.  Africa 

Ethiopian 

Sun>B 
5J    Sua 

- 

The  whole  region 

Oriental,AnBtro- Malayan 

Li    Caixolui 

2 

Deserts  of  Cent,  and  W.  Asia  and 
N.  Africa 

54  il  .3 

55  Tdrindu? 

57    J^a-Bff 

19    Ijophvli  ugas 
60    Ui/prcolui. 

1 
1 

1 
1 
1 

a 

North  Europe  aad  Asia 
Arctic  Europe  and  Asia 
The  wliole  region 

N.  Vf.  China 

N.  China 

Temp.  Europe  aJid  W.  Asia  and 

N,  China 
Anioor  R.,   N.  China,  to  Hima 

N.  China 

Ari.'tic  America 

All  regions  hut  AustiiLl. 

61    JfosftMS 
02    SylropotS', 

1 
1 

6d    IBcs 
«4      Bison 
(j5    (  Foephagm 
Ob    ^(Ma->- 
er    Oijt 
68    lawlla 

n   ( Pi  ocapra 

1 
1 

1 

12 

Europe,  (not  wild) 

Poland  and  Cauoaaiu 

Thibet 

N.  Africa  to  Syria 

N.  Africa  to  Syria 

N.  Africa  to  Persia,  and  Beloo 

"W".  Thibet  and  Mongolia 

Oriental 
Nearctic 

Ethiopian  deserts 
S.  Africa,  India 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Older,  Fsmll;,  and 

I 

Rai^  within  tlio  Eegion. 

RMge  Heyond  tHe  Region, 

70.  \  Saiga. 

I 

E.  Europe  and  W.  Asia 

71.  \  PaiUholops     ... 

1 

W.  Thibet 

1 

Syria) 

Sthiopiau  genua. 

72.  Budorcas 

2 

E.  Himalayas  to  E.  Thibet 

73.  Itupieapra 

7*.  Nemorledus  ... 

2 

Pyrenees  to  Caucasus 

7 

E.  Himalayas  to  E.  China  and 

Oriental    to     Sumatra, 

Fonnoaa 

76.  Capra       ...     ... 

20 

Spain  to  Thibet  ^d  H.E.  Africa 

NilghoiTies,  EookyMtns. 

HYRACOIDEA. 

Hybacid^ 

(Hyrax     

1 

Syria) 

Ethiopian  genus 

RODENTIA. 

MtTRin^. 

76.  Mus  

?15 

The  whole  region 

E.  Hcmiapiicro 

77.  CHedm   

9 

The  whole  region 

78.  OH^ulus 

3 

N.  China 

79.  Meriones 

W.  and  Central  Asia  to  H.  China, 
N.  Africa 

6 

E.  Europe.  Cent.  Asia,  H".  Africa 

3 

Egypt  and  Palestine 

82.  Sminlhiis 

8 

East  Europe,  Siberia 

83.  Amoola 

?21 

The  whole  region 

Himalayas,  Nearctie 
Arctic  America 

84.  Cunienlua 

H.E.  Europe,  Siberia 

85.  Myodea     

Horth  of  region 

Nearotio 

88.  Myospalax       ... 

3 

Altai  Mountains  and  S.  China 

Sfalacibs. 

87.  Mlobim 

I 

S.  Euasia  and  9.  W.  Siberia 

88.  Spalax     

1 

Hungary  and  Greeee  to  W.  Asia, 
Palestine 

DiPODirs. 
89.  Dipus       

!1G 

8.  E.  Europe  and  N.  Africa  to 
N,  China 

Afi'ica,  India 

Kyoxism. 

90.  MyoiuB   

12 

Temperate  parts  of  whole  region 

Ethiopian 

Castoiuds. 

91.  Castor      

1 

Temperate  2one,  from  Erance  to 

H.  America 

SciuEiBai. 

92.  Scmnis     

8 

The  whole  region 

All  r^ons  but  Austral. 

93a.  Tamias 

1 

All  Northern  Asia 

N.  America 

i 

Finland  k>  Siberia  and  Japan 

Oriental,  Hearodc 

94.  Ptei-omvB 

3 

.lapan  and  W.  China 

Oriental 

10 

E.   Europe   to   N.  China   and 

Nearctic 

96.  Arctomys 

4 

Alps  to  E.  Thibet  and  Kam- 
chatka 

Nearctic 

OOTODONTID^. 

97.   Ctenodaciylus ... 

1 

H.  Africa 

HTSTBlCIOa!. 

98.  IIjBtiix    

2 

a  Europe,  Palestine,  N.  China 

Etbiop{i.n.  (luentiil 

b,  Google 


THE  PAL^AECTIC  REGION. 


Oraar,  Family,  ond 

10 

■  BiQge  within  the  lieglon. 

99.   IsgomjS 
lOO.  Lepua     

Volga  to  E.  Thibet  and  Kain- 
schatlta 

The  whole  region 

Bange  beyoud  the  BbbIotl 


All  regions  but  Austral. 


TOUDIDiL 

1.  Turdus     

3,  Oreocincla 

8.  Monticola 

(Bossomia 

SiLvima. 

4. 
6. 

Cisticola—    ... 

1. 

8. 
9. 

Lmemioia     .. 
Lomdella      .. 

10. 
11. 

1^ 

Btadyptetns  .. 
Calamud'us    .. 
Phylloscopus., 

:..J 

Hypolaia 

14. 
15. 
IS. 

Abrornis 
Eeguloides     .. 
Eegulus 

17.  /Aedon    

2o!  1  SyMa    ...     !. 

21.  [fun^cit 

22.  f  Lmcmia 

23,  Cyanocula      .. 

24. 
25. 
26. 

Galliope 
Erithacus      .. 
Grandala      .. 

The   whole    region    (excluding 

Spitzbergen) 
N.  E.  Asia  and  Japan,  stra^ler 

to  Europe 
S.  Europe,  N.  Africa,  Paleatiae, 

N.  China 


S.  W.  Europe,  TT.  Africa,  Japan 


W.  and  S.  Europe,  N.  Africa, 

E.  Thibet 
S.  Europe 
W.  Europe  and  JT.  Africa  to 

S.  Europe  and  Palestano 
Europe,  H.  Africa,  Palestine 
The   whole   region    (escJuding 

western  islands) 
Europe,   N.   Africa,   Palestine, 

China 
Cashmere,  E.  Thibet 
Europe  and  China 
The   whole   legion    (esclnding 

Iceland,  &c.) 
S,  Europe,  W.  Asia,  N.  Aliica 
E.  Europe  and  Palestine 
W.  and  8.  Euroiia,  Sardinia 
Madeira  to  W.  India,  K.  Africa 

Madeii'a  to  India,  K".  Africa 

W.  Europe,  N.  Africa,  Persia 
Europe  and  N.  Africa  to  Eam- 

schatka 
S,  Asia,  Himalayas,  China 
Atlantic  Islands  to  Japan 
High  Himalayas  and  E.  Thibet 


Oriental  and  Australian 
Oriental  and  8.  African 
Tropical  and  S.  Africa 


India,  winter  migrants  (?) 

E.  and  S,  Africa 

Oriental 

China,  MoIuccaB,  India, 

Oriental  region 

N.  India,  Formosa 

N.  and  Central  America 

E.  and  S.  Africa 

N.E.  Africa,  Ceylon  mi. 

grants  (!) 
E.    Africa,     India,     mi- 
grants 

Abyssinia    and     India 

Centl  India  {1  migrant) 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,  Family,  and 

'Si 

Range  witliin  tM  Region, 

Eange  beyond  the  Re^on. 

27  (fiutioilk 

28  J  LaiTivora 

29  Dromolcea 

30  Soxicola— 

31  Cercomek 
82    PrBtmoola 
33   Aa-eiiior 

10 
2 
3 

10 
2 
3 

13 

Eu.  to  Japan,  N,  Afr.,  Himalftyas 
E.  Thibet,  Amoor,  Japan 
8,  Europe,  N.  Africa,  Palestine 
The  whole  remoa 
Palestine  (a  deaett  genua) 
W.  Europe,  K.  Africa  to  India 
W.    Europe    to   Japan;    high 
Himalayas 

Abyssinia,  India 

Oriental 

Ethiopian 

E.  ana  a  Afriea,  India 

N.E.  Africa,  N.W.India 

Ethiopian  to  Oriental 

Himalayas  (!)  in  winter 

TlMALllDJl 

(Malacoceroiia 
(Crateropofl     — 

3 

1 
2 
S 

Thibet  and  IT.  W.  China 

Paleatine) 

K  Africa,  Perda) 

E.  Tliibet) 

E.  THbet) 

Oriental  geuns 
Ethiopian  genm 
Oriental  genua  ■ 
Oriental  goniis 

Panubidh 

(Parado>romi3 

35  Conosttnita 

36  Sutlioift 

3 

1 
3 

Hirttalftvflfl  and  E.  Thibet) 
High  HimaJayaa  and  E.  Thibet 
K  Thibet 

(?)  Oriental  genus 
Himalayas,  China,  For- 

37  Fimriis 

38  Sderomc-pha 

39  Cholo7n^ 

1 
1 

1 

"W",  Europe  to  W.  Siberia 
Nepaul    nnd  E.    Thibet,    from 

10,000  feet  altitude 
E.  Thibet 

CiBCLlDB 

40    tiidiia 

|Mj  oxlionus 

TKjeLOBlTID^ 

5 
1 

Tho  whole  region  (Atlantic  Is- 
lands exclnded) 

Turkestan,   Thian-Shau  Moun- 
tains, 6,000  feet 

Ameriean  highlands 
Oriental  genus 

41    Troglodytes 

3 

Iceland  and  Biitain  to  Japan 

Neotroiinl  lud  Neare- 

(Pnoepygft 

2 

B.  Thibet) 

tic    Hiinalijas 
Oueutal  „  nus 

Cbrthud^ 

42  Ceithia 

43  TiJwdromi 

2 

1 

W.  Europe  to  N.  China 
S.  Europe  to  N.  China 

Himalftyas,  Ncarctic  _ 
Abyssinia,  Nepali!,  high 

SiTTina: 
44    Sitta 

PAElIffll. 

7 

W.  Europe  to  Himalayas  and 
Japan 

India,  Nearctio 

45  Pams 

46  Loplio]  lianes 

47  A&"edv.la, 

48  X^iflialus 

20 

6 
6 

1 

"W.  Europe  to  Kamschatfea,  H". 
Africa 

W.   Europe  to  H.  China  and 

Eamachatka 
S.  E.  Europe 

Fearotie,  Oriental,  Ethi- 
opian 
Hearctic 

LllTRlCHIBa 

(P'\)paruH 

4 

Moupin,  in  E.  Thibet) 

Oriental  genus  and  fain. 

b,  Google 


THE  PALiEAECTIC  REGION. 


Order,  Family,  «nd 


PVOBOHOTIDa:. 
49    M    ro    el 
0    Py  u  no 


(Santhopygm 
(Eumyias — 
(CyanoptUa 

;.  ToEitrea  '.'.'. 


56.  Lanius     

(Tdephonus    .. 

57.  Garmlus 

fiS.  Perisoreiis 

59.  N'lieifraga 

60.  Pica 

61.  Cyaiiopiea 
63.  i'regilus  ... 

NECTABiNIIIl^. 

(ArachnocUira 

'DlCMlDM. 

(Zosteroja 


HlKlINDISlD^. 

65.  Himndo  ... 

66.  Cotyle      ... 
e7.  Chelidon... 

FRlNOlLLIBffl. 

98.  Frinfplk  ... 


Central  Ettropo  to  F.  China  and 

Japan) 
E.  Thibet) 
Japan  and  Amoor) 
Moupui,  E.  Thibet) 
~S.  cSiina  and  Japan 


The  wholo  re^on  (excl.  Atlantic 

Islands) 
N.  Afnea) 


Ethiopian  and  Oriental 


Ethiopian. 

E.  and  S.   Africa,  Mo- 
luccas 
Oriental  &  Madagascar 

Oriental  genua 
Oriental  genus 
Oriental  genus 
Oriental  genua 
Ethiopian  and  Oriental 

iffearctie,  Ethiopian, 

Oriental 
Ethiupun  genus 


W.  Europe,  N.  Africa,  to  Japan 
N.  Europe  and  Siberia 
Cashmere,  Japan) 
W.  Europe  to  Japan,  and  Hima- 

W.  Europe  to  China  and  Japan 


Amoor  and  Japan) 
Northern  half  of  re^on 


The  whole  region 

The  whole  region(exel.  Atlan.Is.) 

The  whole  region 


Himalayas,  Formoi 
N.  Amenca 
Onental  genns 
Himalayan  pine  fi: 


Cosmopolite  (excl.S,  Am. ) 
Abyasinian  roountains 
Oriental  genus 

Ethiop.,  Orien.,  Austral. 
Horth  America 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,  Family,  a 


70. 
71. 
72. 

PncardueUs  ... 
CairysoiDitris— 
Bryo^iM      ... 

73. 
74. 

76. 

76. 

77. 

Mdopmdn      ... 
Chlorospiza  ... 

Passer     

Montifringilk 

78 

79. 
80 
81 

82 

Mycerobas      ... 

Eophona 

PyrrhaUi       ... 
Crithflgni       ... 
Carpodoicus    ,,. 

83 

Erythfospka ... 

84 
86 
86. 
87 

89 
BO 

91 
92 
B8 

9i 

Pinkok!!!     Z 
Propip^hiila... 
Fyrrho^^   ... 

llnota    

LenoostictB  ... 

8tijenid«. 

96 
9fi 

97 

Pastor    

Stnmitt 

SturmiB 

98 

'Sr...  :: 

99.  Otooorys 

100 
101 

Alauda    ..     .. 
Galarita 

102 

Calandrella    .. 

103 
104 

PallatM..     .. 
(Cerftyauda .. 

Europe  and  N.  Afiioa  to  Central 

High  Himalayas  and  E.  Thitet 

W.  Europe  to  Japan 

Atlantic  ialanda  to  Palestiae,  N. 

¥.  E.  Europe  to  W.  Himalayas 
W.  Europe,  N.  Africa  to  Japan 
The  whole  n^Ion 
Europe  to  Caaimore  snd  Siberia 
N".  W.  Himalayas  to  E.  Thibet, 

f.  Europe,  Hi^  Himalayas  to 

Japan 
Central  Asia  &  High  Himalayaa 
E.  Thibet,  China,  and  Japan 
Azores  to  japan.  High  Himalayas 
Palestine) 

Japan,  High  Hima- 


Afghflj, 


layas 
H.  Afriea   t 

Turksstan 
Turkestan  &  E.  Thibet  to  Japan 
Europe,  High  Himalayas  to  Japai 


Snowy  Himalayas 
The  whole  reginn 
Turkestan  to  Kamschatka 

E.  Europe  to  Japan 
Europe  to  Japan 
8.  Europe,  H.  Africa 
Horthem  half  of  region 


K  and  S.  America 


Alaska 

Ethiopian  genus 

India  &  China,  N.  Amer. 


N.  America 
Darjeeling  in  winter 


N.  America 
JT.  India,  China 
African  genus 
N.  America 


East  Europe,  Central  Asia 
Amoor,  Japan,  N.  China 
The  whole  region  (excL  Atlantic 

Islands) 
Palestine! 
Cen.  Asia,  Turkestan,  Yarkand 

IT.  Eiu^ope  to  Japan,  N.  Africa, 

Arabia 
The  whole  region  (eicl,  Iceland) 
Central  Europe  to  N.  China,  N. 

Africa 
Central  Europe  to  N.  China,  K 

S.  Eu.  H.  Africa,  H.  &  Cen.  Asia 

Mongolia 

N.  Africa) 

N.  Africa,  Arabia) 


Oriental 
India,  China 

N.  E.  African  genus 


India, It?. America,  Andes 


H.  W.  India 


by  Google 


THE  PAL^AECTIC  EEGIOS. 


,%  Rouge  oitbln  tJie  Region. 


105.  Ammonianes.., 

MoTAClLIJDJl, 

106.  Motacilla 

107.  Badytes 

108.  Calobates 

(Pitta     

FICABIJI, 
Vkitim. 

109.  Pieoides 

110.  Pifius      

111.  Hypopicus     ., 
(YviiiKipicus  .. 

112.  Dvyocopus 

113.  Geeinus 

YUNCIDE. 

114.  Yims      ...     .. 


118.  Meraps  ...     . 

ALOEDINIOa. 

(Halcyon       . 

119.  Akedo   ..,     . 

120.  Cei^le    ..,     . 

Upupinfi. 

121.  Upupa   ...     . 

CAPEIMULGrDj:. 

122.  Caprimnlgus, 


S     S.   Europe,  F.   Africa,  to  Cash- 


The  whole  region 
Europe  to  China 
Atlantic  Is.,  W.  Europe,  la  Chii 


K".  and  Cen.  Europe  to  Thiliat  < 

TLj  whole  region  (excL  Atlantic 

Islands) 
N.  China 
H.  China) 

N.  &  Con.  Europe  to  H.  China 
W.  EuTopo  to  Thibet,  Amoor 


Oriental,  E 
Oriental,  Moluccna 
Mah^isis,  Madagascar 


Orients]  &  Austral,  s 


Korth  America 

India,  Cliina,  H".  and.  f 

America 
HiLimlayoa 
Orietital  genua 
Neotropical 
Oriental 


L  E.  Africa,  a  AMna 


The  whole  region  (excl.  Atlantic 

Islanda) 
H.  Europe  and  H,  Africa 


i.  Enrope  to  Cashmere,  IT.  Africa 


W.  Asia,  N.  China,  Japan) 
Europe,  F.  China 
S.  E.  Europe,  Japan 


Ethiop.  Oriental  Anstral. 
Ethiopian  and  Oriental 


Ethiopian  and  Oriental 


Ethiop.,  Orien.,  Austral. 
Afriea,  India,  Ameriea 


Ethiop.  4  Oriental  genus 
Ethiopian  and  Oriental 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


COLUMB^. 
ConTMBiua;. 

125.  Columbft 

126.  Turtvir   ... 
(Alstecomu 


Tetraonida. 

129.  Franoolinns  .. 

130.  Pa^x   ... 

131.  CoturoiK 

132.  Lenm    

183.  C(Kcafiis ...     ., 


136.  Tetrao    ... 

136.  Bonnsa   ... 

137.  Lagopus... 

Phahiaimds. 

138.  Crasioplilo! 

139.  Zoph^hoTTis  ... 


143.  Fliosianus 
141.   TiMiimaka   . 

145.  Ithaginis 

T0B.NIC1D« 

146.  Turnix   ...     . 
ACCIPITEES. 

VuLTUttlDa 

147.  Viiltii^  ...     . 

148.  Gyps      ...     . 

149.  Otogyps 

150.  Neophton 

Faloobidh, 

151.  Circus     ...     . 

152.  Aatur      ...     . 
163,  Accipiter 
154.   Buteo     ...     . 


The  whole  region 
W.  Etirope  to  Japan 
E.  Thibet) 


era  of  Meditermncan 
_„_pe  to  Mongolia 
Qsntral  and  S.  Europe  la  Japai 
Snowy  Hiinalayaa  to  E.  Thibet 
Cen,  Europe  and  N.  Africa  tot 

W.  HimaWas 
Cancasus  to  E,  Thibet  and  Altai 

Mountains 
Europe  and  3.  Ada 
Europe  and  H.  Asia 
Iceland,  W.  Enrops  to  Japan 


Thibet,  Mongolia,  TJ.  China 
Caahmere  to  E,  Thibet  (highest 

woods) 
E.  Thibet 

K,  W.  Himalayas  (high) 
N.  "W".  Himalayas  to  N.  W.  China 
Western  Asia  to  Japan 
E.  Thibet  to  Amoor,  N.  China 
Nepaul  to  E.  Thibet  (high) 


Spain  and  N.  Africa,  N.  China 


Spain  and  R.  Africa  to  H.  China 
S.  Europe,  Palestine,  Cea.  Asia 
S.  Eniopo,  TT,  Africa 
Atlantic  Isds.  to  Palestine 


Europe  to  Japan 
Europe  to  N.  China 
Europe  to  Japan 
Europe  to  Japan 


Africa,  Asia,  America, 
Ethiopian  and  Oriental 
Oriental  genus 


Ethiopian,  Oriental 
Ethlop.,  Orion.,  Austral. 

Abyasiaia,  Arabia 


S.  America 
N.  America 
N.  America,  Greenland 


E.  Thibet  (?) 

Himalayas  to  W.  China 

Himalayas 

W.  Himalayas,  Formosa 

West  China 


Ethiop,,  Orien.,  Atistral. 


E.  Africa,  India 
S.  Africa,  India 
Africa,  India 


Almost  Cosmopolite 
Almost  Cosmopolite 
Almost  Cosmopolite 
Cosmopolite   (exol.  Ai 
tralia) 


b,  Google 


THE  PAL^ARCTIC  REGION. 


166.  Archibuteo 
156.  Gypaetus 

167.  Aquila    ... 
ISS.  Niaaetus... 

I.  Circaetus 


1(57.  Pandiou— 


1/5    Otna 

176  H-\ctala 

177  Stnx 


;,  H.  Aftica 


E.  and  S.  Europe,  N.  Afiica,  W. 
Itelaad  and  S.  Enrope  to  Japan 


JT  Europe  and  Sihei  i » 
Ari.tic  reyons 
(  pntnl  and.  i>  Mrope  : 
N   rhma  and  Japan) 
jps  to  N   China 
*oH  China 


N.  America 
Abyssinia,  Himalayas 
Naarotic,  Ethiop.,  Otien. 
India,  Australia 
Africa,  India 

Cosmopolite  (exoL   Heo- 

trapicftl  region) 
TheOldWorid&Anstral. 
Cosmopolite   (escl.   East 


Coamop,  (excl.  Oceania) 


North  America 
Arctic  America 
Ethiop. ,  Orien. ,  Austral. 
Oiiental  geutia 
America 

Africa,  liiditt,  America 
Atijcan.  Orr  ;i ,  Anstral. 
'.iVtc/in,  Oiiental,  Amur, 
I  liiinisi  Cosmopolite 

AH  natm  &temp.  re^ns 


Peculiar  or  very  characlensUc  Genera  of  Wading  and 
GKALLM. 

Ortygonietra    ...       8    Europe,  N.  E.  Africa 


ScOMIPAOlDa. 

Ibidorliyneha   , 
Tetekia 


GlJkBXOTAT>M. 

Fluviantis 

CHABAflKini*. 

Tanellus 

Vol,  L— 18 


Cashmere  &  Can.  Asia,  N.  China 
N.  E.  Europe  and  Siberia 
E.  and  N.  Europe,  N.  India 
N.  and  Cen.  Europe,  Cen.  Aala 
N.E.  Asia 


Europe  to  tlie  Pnnjaub 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


»•".£;?■"' 

Bangc  -ivithiD  the  Region. 

Kange  beyond  ibo  Region, 

OriDiDa 

Otis 

2 

W.  Eurepe  to  Mongolia,  N.  Africa 

ANSERES. 

Amatic^ 

AU 

Bucephala     ... 
Histnonicus  ... 

Harelda 

Somateria      ... 
CEdemia 

1 
3 

1 
1 
3 
3 

N".  China  to  Amoor 
Iceland,  N,  Europe,  and  Asia 
Iciiland,  N.  Sibma 
Korth  of  whole  ref^on 
Horth  of  whole  region 
North  of  whole  region 

N.America 
N.  America 
N.  America 
Arctic  America 
N.  America 
N.  America 

Larid*. 

Eisea      

1 

¥ortIi  ooaata  of  whole  region 

H.America 

COLTMBID*. 

Colymbua      ... 

3 

North  of  whole  region 

N.  America 

Aloidji. 

Alea       

Jratercula     ... 
XTria        

Mergulus      ... 

2 
8 
3 
1 

North  coasts  of  whole  region 
Nortli  coasts  of  whole  region 
North  eoaats  of  whole  region 

Iceland  and  Acetic  coasts 

N.  America 
N.  America 
N.  Amenia 
Arcti.  America 

b,  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAPTER  XI. 

THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 

This  is  one  of  the  best  defined  of  the  great  zoological  regions, 
consisting  of  tropical  and  South  Africa,  to  which  must  be  added 
tropical  Arabia,  Madagascar,  and  a  few  other  islands,  all  popu- 
larly known  as  African.  Some  naturalists  would  extend  the 
region  northwards  to  the  Atlas  Mountains  and  include  the  whole 
of  the  Sahara ;  but  the  animal  life  of  the  northern  part  of  that 
great  desert  seems  more  akin  to  the  PalEearctic  fauna  of  Korth 
Africa.  The  Sahara  is  really  a  debatable  land  which  has  been 
peopled  from  both  regions ;  and  imtil  we  know  more  of  the  natural 
history  of  the  great  plateaus  which  rise  like  islands  in  the  waste 
of  sand,  it  will  be  safer  to  make  the  provisional  boundary  line  at 
or  near  the  tropic,  thus  giving  the  northern  half  to  the  Paljearctic, 
the  southern  to  the  Ethiopian  region.  The  same  line  may  be 
continued  across  Arabia. 

With  our  present  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  interior  of 
Africa,  only  three  great  continental  sub-regions  can  be  well  de- 
fined. The  open  pasture  lands  of  interior  tropical  Africa  are 
wonderfully  uniform  in  their  productions ;  a  great  number  of 
species  ranging  from  Senegal  to  Abyssinia  and  thence  to  the 
Zambesi,  while  almost  aU  the  commoner  African  genei-a  extend 
over  the  whole  of  this  area.  Almost  aU  this  extensive  tract  of 
country  is  a  moderately  elevated  plateau,  with  a  hot  and  dry 
climate,  and  characterised  by  a  grassy  vegetation  interspersed 
with  patches  of  forest.  This  forms  om'  first  or  East  Airican 
sub-regioiL  The  whole  of  the  west  coast  from  the  south  side  of 
the  Gambia  Eiver  to  about  10°  or  13°  south  latitude,  is  a  very 


by  Google 


252  ZOOLOaiCAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

different  kind  of  country ;  being  almost  wholly  dense  forests 
where  not  cleared  by  man,  and  having  the  hot  moist  uniform 
climate,  and  perennial  luxuriance  of  vegetation,  wbich  charac- 
terise the  great  equatorial  belt  of  forest  all  round  the  globe.  This 
forest  country  extends  to  an  unknown  distance  inland,  but  it  was 
found,  with  its  features  well  marked,  by  Dr.  Schweinfurth  directly 
he  crossed  the  south-western  watershed  of  the  Nile ;  and  fax  to 
the  south  we  find  it  again  unmistakably  indicated,  in  the  exces- 
sively moist  forest  country  about  the  head  waters  of  the  Congo, 
where  the  heroic  Livingstone  met  his  death.  In  this  forest 
district  many  of  the  more  remarkable  African  types  are  alone 
found,  and  its  productions  occasionally  present  us  with  curious 
similarities  to  those  of  the  far  removed  South  American  or 
Malayan  forests.  This  is  our  second  or  West  African  sub- 
region. 

Extra-tropical  South  Africa  possesses  features  of  its  own,  quite 
distinct  from  those  of  both  the  preceding  regions  (although  it  has 
also  much  in  common  with  the  first).  Ita  vegetation  is  known 
to  he  one  of  the  richest,  most  peculiar,  and  most  remarkable  on 
the  globe ;  and  in  its  zoology  it  has  a  speciality,  similar  in  kind 
but  less  in  degree,  which  renders  it  both  natural  and  convenient 
to  separate  it  as  our  third,  or  South  African  sub-region.  Its 
limits  are  not  very  clearly  ascertained,  but  it  is  probably  bounded 
by  the  Kalahari  desert  on  the  north-west,  and  by  the  lampopo 
Valley,  or  the  mountain  range  beyond,  on  the  north-east,  although 
some  of  its  peculiar  forms  extend  to  Mozambique.  There 
remains  the  great  Island  of  Madagascar,  one  of  the  most  isolated 
and  most  interesting  on  the  globe,  as  regards  its  animal  produc- 
tions ;  and  to  this  must  be  added,  the  smaller  islands  of  Bourbon, 
Mauritius  and  Rodriguez,  the  Seychelles  and  the  Comoro  Islands, 
forming  together  the  Masoarene  Islands, — the  whole  constituting 
our  fourth  sub-region. 

Zoological  Gharact&risties  of  the  Ethiopian  Region. — We  have 
now  to  consider,  briefly,  what  are  the  peculiarities  and  charac- 
teristics of  the  Ethiopian  Region  as  a  whole, — those  which  give 
it  its  distinctive  features  and  broadly  separate  it  from  the  other 
primary  zoological  regions. 


by  Google 


£1.]  .THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 


— Thia  region  lias  9  peculiar  families  of  mammalia. 
Chiromyidffi  (containing  the  aye-aye) ;  PotamogalidiE  and  Cliry- 
soehloridse  (Insectivora) ;  CryptoproctidEe  and  Protelidse  (Carni- 
vora) ;  Hippopotamidse  and  Camelopardalidie  (Ungulata) ;  and 
Orycteropodida;  (Edentata).  Besides  these  it  possesses  7  peeu- 
iiar  genera  of  apes,  Troglodytes,  Colohis,  Myi<ypithecua  G^co- 
pithecus,  Cercocehvs,  Tkeropitkecus,  and  Cynoc&pJmlus ;  2  sub- 
families of  lemurs  containing  6  genera,  confined  to  Madagascar, 
with  3  genera  of  two  other  suh-families  coniined  to  the  con- 
tinent ;  of  Insectivora  a  femily,  Centetidte,  with  5  genera, 
peculiar  to  Madagascar,  and  the  genera  Petrodromus  and  Rhyn- 
chocyon  belonging  to  the  Macroscelidid^,  or  elephant-shrews, 
restricted  to  the  continent ;  numerous  peculiar  genera  or  sub- 
genera of  civets ;  Lycaon  and  Megalotis,  remarkable  genera  oi 
Canidffi ;  Idonyx,  the  zorilla,  a  genus  allied  to  the  weasels ; 
13  peculiar  genera  of  Muridse ;  Feotinator,  a  genns  of  the  South 
American  family  Octodontidfc ;  and  2  genera  of  the  South 
American  Echimyida;  or  spiny  rats.  Of  abundant  and  charac- 
teristic groups  it  possesses  Sfacroseelides,  Felis,  Mymna,  Hyrax, 
Mhinoeeros,  and  Elephas,  as  well  as  several  species  of  zebra  and 
a  great  variety  of  antelopes, 

TliG  great  speciality  indicated  by  these  numerous  peculiar 
families  and  genera,  is  still  farther  increased  by  the  absence 
of  certain  groups  dominant  in  the  Old- World  continent, 
an  absence  which  we  can  only  account  for  by  the  persistence, 
through  long  epochs,  of  barriers  isolating  the  greater  part  of  Africa 
front  the  rest  of  the  world.  These  groups  are,  Ursid^,  the  bears ; 
Talpidie  the  moles ;  Camelidte,  the  camels ;  Cervidffi,  the  deer ; 
Oaprinte,  the  goats  and  sheep ;  and  the  genera  Bos  (wild  ox.) ;  and 
S-us  (wild  boar).  Combining  these  striking  deficiencies,  with 
the  no  less  striking  peculiarities  above  enumerated,  it  seems 
hardly  possible  to  have  a  region  more  sharply  divided  from 
the  rest  of  the  globe  than  this  is,  by  its  whole  assemblage  of 
mammalia 

Birds. — In  birds  the  Ethiopian  region  is  by  no  means  so 
strikingly  peculiar,  many  of  these  having  been  able  to  pass  the 
ancient  barriers  which  so  long  limited  the  range  of  mammalia. 


by  Google 


254  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [part  hi. 

It  is,  however,  sufficiently  rich,  possessing  54  famihes  of  land 
birds,  besides  a  few  genera  whose  position  is  not  well  ascertained, 
and  which  may  constitute  distinct  families.  Of  these  6  are 
peculiar,  MusophagidEe  (the  plantain  eaters) ;  Coliidfe  {the  colies) ; 
Leptosomidfe,  alKed  to  the  cuckoos.;  Irrisoridje,  allied  to  the 
hoopoes ;  and  Serpentaridfe,  allied  to  the  hawks.  Only  one 
Passerine  family  is  peculiar — Paictidse,  while  most  of  the  other 
tropical  regions  possess  several;  but  Uwn/ceros  and  Suphaga, 
here  classed  with  the  Stumidse,  ought,  perhaps,  to  form  two 
more.  It  has,  however,  many  peculiar  genera,  especially  among  the 
fruit-thrushes,  Pycnonotidce ;  flycatchers,  Muscicapidffi ;  shrikes, 
Lanidte ;  crows,  Corvidse ;  starlings,  Sturnidffi ;  and  weaver-birds, 
Ploceidje;  the  latter  family  being  very  characteristic  of  the  region. 
It  is  also  rich  in  barbeta,  Megalffimidte  (7  peculiar  genera) ; 
cuckoos,  CuculidEe;  rollers,  Coraciid^ ;  bee-eaters,  Meropidfe; 
hornbiUs,  Bucerotidje;  and  goat-suckers,  Caprimulgidte.  It  is 
poor  in  parrots  and  rather  so  in  paeons;  but  it  abounds  in 
Fterocles  and  Frctneoliniis,  genera  of  Gallinte,  and  possesses  4 
genera  of  the  pecuKar  group  of  the  guinea-fowls,  forming  part  of 
the  pheasant  family.  It  abounds  in  vultures,  eagles,  and  other 
birds  of  prey,  among  which  is  the  anomalous  genus  Serpentarim, 
the  secretary-bird,  constituting  a  distinct  faraUy.  Many  of  the 
most  remai'kable  forms  are  confined  to  Madagascar  and  the 
adjacent  islands,  and  wiU  be  noticed  in  our  account  of  that  sub- 
region. 

SepHles. — Of  the  reptiles  there  are  4  peculiar  Ethiopian 
families ; — 3  of  snakes,  Eachiodontidffi,  Dendraspidffi,  and  Atrac- 
taspidse  and  1  of  lizards,  ChamEesauridfe. 

Psammophid^e  (desert  snakes)  are  abundant,  as  are  Lycodontida) 
(fanged  ground-snakes),  and  Viperidfe  (vipers). .  The  following 
genera  of  snakes  are  peculiar  or  highly  characteristic : — Zepto- 
rhynchm,  BhwnmopMs,  Herpetethiops  and  Qrayia  (Golubridffi) ; 
S<y)sidropJm  and  Bucephalus  (Dendrophidsfl)  ;  Langalia  (Dryo- 
phidse) ;  Pythonodipsas  (Dipsadidte) ;  Boedon,  Lycophidion,  Holu- 
rophilis,  Simocephahis  and  LampropMs  (Lycodontidte) ;  Hortulia 
and  San&inia  (Pythonidae) ;  Cyrptophis,  Elapsoidea  and  Pceeilo- 
phis  (Elapidte) ;  and  Athens  (Viperida^).     The  following  genera 


by  Google 


OHAP.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGION.  25 

of  lizards  are  the  moat  characteristic: — Monotrophds  (Lepidoa 
ternid^e) ;  Cordylus,  Fs&udocordylus,  Platysaurus,  Cor< 
Plmrodiehus,  Saurophis  and  Zonitrus  (Zonuridse) ; 
Seeloies,  Spfuenocephalm  and  Sepsina  (Sepidee) ;  j 
(Geckotid£e) ;  ^jrosma  (Agamidffi);  and  Chameleon  (ChameleonidEe), 
Of  tortoises,  Ch/nya?is,  Pyxis  and  Chersitta  (TestadinidEe),  and 
Cydoderma  (Trionychidfe)  are  the  most  characteristic, 

Am/pMbia. — Of  the  9  families  of  amphibia  there  is  only 
1  peculiar,  the  Daetylethridfe,  a  group  of  toads ;  but  the 
Alytidse,  a  family  of  frogs,  are  abundant 

Fresh-water  Fish.~Of  the  14  families  of  fn^h-water  fishes 
3  are  peculiar:  Mormyridje  and  Gymnarchidte,  small  groups 
not  far  removed  from  the  pikes ;  and  PolypteridEe,  a  small  group 
of  ganoid  fishes  allied  to  the  gar-pikes  (LepidosteidEe)  of  North 
America. 

Sumviary  of  Ethiopian  Vertebrates. — Combining  the  results 
here  indicated  and  set  forth  in  greater  detail  in  the  tables  of 
distribution,  we  find  that  the  Ethiopian  region  possesses  ex- 
amples of  44  families  of  mammalia,  72  of  birds,  35  of  reptiles, 
9  of  amphibia,  and  15  of  fresh-water  fishes.  It  has  23  (or 
perhaps  25)  familiea  of  Yertebrata  altogether  peculiar  to  it  out 
of  a  total  of  175  famihes,  or  almost  exactly  one-eighth  of  the 
whola  Out  of  142  genera  of  mammaha  found  within  the 
region,  90  are  peculiar  to  it ;  a  proportion  not  much  short  of 
two-thirds.  Of  land  birds  there  are  294  geuera,  of  which 
.  179  are  peculiar;  giving  a  proportion  of  a  Kttle  less  than 
three-fifths. 

Compared  with  the  Oriental  n^on  this  shows  a  con- 
siderably larger  amount  of  speciality  under  all  the  heads; 
but  the  superiority  is  mainly  due  to  the  wonderful  and  iso- 
lated fauna  of  Madagascar,  to  which  the  Oriental  region  has 
nothing  comparable.  Without  this  the  regions  would  be  nearly 
equal. 

Insects:  Lepidopt&ra. — 11  out  of  the  16  families  of  butter- 
flies have  representatives  in  Africa,  but  none  are  pecubar. 
Acratidte  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  families,  and  there. 


by  Google 


256  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

are  many  interesting  forms  of  Nymphalidie,  LycaBuid^,  and 
PapilionidEe.  The  peculiar  or  characteristic  forms  are  Amauris 
(DanaidEe);  GnopJiodes,  Leptoneura,  Bieyclus,  Heteropsis  and 
Ccmyra  (SatyridBe) ;  A(yrwa  (AcrseidEe) ;  Zaehnoptera,  Precis, 
Salainis,  Grenis,  Godartia,  Ainphidema,  Pseudaercea,  Catiina, 
Euryphem,  Somalfwsoma,  Hamanmnida,  Aterica,  Harma, 
Meneris,  Okaraxes,  and  Philognoina  (NymphaUdse) ;  PmtUa, 
Liptena,  Durbania,  Zerltis,  Capya,  Phytala,  Spitola,  Hewitsonia 
and  Delonewra  (Lycfenidse) ;  Pseudopontia,  Jdmais,  TerfMolus, 
Callosune  (Pieridffi) ;  Ahantis,  Cerairichia  and  Oaprona  (Hes- 
peridte).  The  total  numher  of  species  known  is  about  750 ; 
which  is  very  poor  for  an  extensive  tropical  region,  but  thia 
is  not  to  be  wondered  at  when  the  nature  of  much  of  the 
country  is  considered.  It  is  also,  no  doubt,  partly  due  to  our 
comparative  ignorance  of  the  great  equatorial  forest  district, 
which  is  the  only  part  likely  to  be  very  productive  in  this 
order  of  insects. 

Gokoptera.—  ln  our  first  representative  family,  CicindeUdse 
or  tiger-beetles,  the  Ethiopian  region  is  rather  rich,  having  13 
genera,  11  of  which  are  peculiar  to  it;  and  among  these  are 
such  remarkable  forms  as  Manticora,  Myrmecoptera  and  Bromica; 
with  Megac&phala,  a  genus  only  found  elsewhere  in  Australia 
and  South  America. 

In  Carabidae  or  carnivorous  ground  beetles,  there  are 
about  75  peculiar  genera.  Among  the  most  characteristic 
are  Anikia,  PolyrMna,  Grapkipterm  and  Pie^a,  which  are 
almost  all  peculiar ;  while  Orihogordvs,  Hexagmiia,  Macrochilus, 
Thyreoplerus,  Evdema,  and  Abacet'M  are  common  to  this  and 
the  Oriental  region ;  and  Hypolithm  to  the  Neotropical. 

Out  of  27  genera  of  Buprestidte,  or  metallic  beetles,  only  6  are 
peculiar  to  the  region,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  being  Poly- 
6oi^7- its,  confined  to  Madagascar.  Stemocefra  MiA  Chrysochroa  are 
characteristic  of  this  region  and  the  Oriental ;  it  has  Julodis  in 
common  with  the  Mediterranean  sub-region,  and  Belionota 
with  the  Malayan. 

The  region  is  not  rich  in  Lucanidre,  or  stag-beetles,  possessing 
only  10  genera,  7  of  which  are  peculiar,  but  most  of  them  con- 


by  GoOglc 


CHAI-.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  BEGION.  257 

sist  of  single  species.  The  other  three  genera,  Cladognathvs, 
Mgidius,  and  Figvlus,  axe  the  moat  characteristic,  though  all 
have  a  tolerahly  wide  range  in  the  Old  World. 

In  the  .elegant  CetoniidEe,  or  rose-chafers,  this  region  stands 
preeminent,  possessing  76  genera,  64  of  which  are  peculiar  to 
it.  The  others  are  chiefly  Oriental,  except  Oxythrwa  which  i^ 
European,  and  Siethodesma  which  is  Neotropical,  Preeminent 
in  size  and  beauty  is  Goliathus,  comprising  perhaps  the  most 
hulky  of  all  highly-coloured  beetles.  Other  large  and  char- 
acteristic genera  are  Ceratorhina,  Isehnostoma,  Anochilia, 
Diplognaiha,  Agenius,  and  niany  others  of  less  extent. 

In  the  enormous  tribe  of  Longicorns,  or  long-homed  beetles, 
the  Ethiopian  is  not  so  rich  as  the  other  three  tropical  regions  ; 
but  this  may  be,  in  great  part,  owing  to  its  more  productive 
districts  having  never  been  explored  by  any  competent  entomo- 
logists. It  nevertheless  possesses  262  genera,  216  of  which  are 
peculiar,  the  others  being  mostly  groups  of  very  wide  range. 
Out  of  such  a  large  number  it  is  difficult  to  select  a  few  as  most 
characteristic,  but  soine  of  the  peculiarities  of  distribution  as 
regards  other  regions  may  be  named.  Among  Prionidte,  Tithoes 
is  a  characteristic  Ethiopian  genus,  A  few  species  of  the 
American  genera  Pa/randra  and  Mallodon  occur  here,  wiiile  the 
North  Temperate  genus  Prionus  is  only  found  in  Madagascar. 
Among  CerambycidEe,  Froineces  is  the  most  characteristic.  The 
American  genera  Oeme  and  Cyrtomerus  occur;  while  Homalaeh- 
vAis  and  Phila.gaihes  are  Malayan,  and  Leptoce/ra,  occurs  only  in 
Madagascar,  Ceylon,  Austro-Malaya,  and  Australia.  The  Lamiidse 
are  very  fine;  Stemoiomis,  Tragoeefphala,  Ceroplesis,  Phryneta, 
Volumtiia,,  and  Nitoaris,  being  very  abundant  and  characteristic. 
Most  of  the  non-peculiar  genera  of  this  family  are  Oriental, 
but  Spalacopsis  and  Acawthoderes  3.ve  American,  while  Tetraglenes 
and  Schcenionta  have  been  found  only  in  East  and  South  Africa 
and  in  Malaya. 

Terrestrial  MoUusea — In  the  extensive  family  of  the  Helicida 
or  suails,  13  genera  are  represented,  only  one  of  which, 
Columna,  is  peculiar.  This  region  is  however  the  metropolis  of 
Achaiina,   soihe   of  the   species   being  the  largest  land-shells 


by  Google 


258  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGHAPHY.  [part  hi. 

known.  BuUmmus,  St&nogyra,  and  Pupa  are  characteristic 
genera.  Bulimus  is  absent,  though  one  species  inhabits  St. 
Helena.  The  opereulated  shells  are  not  very  well  represented, 
the  great  family  of  Cyclostomidte  having  here  only  nine  genera, 
■iVith  but  one  peculiar,  Xithidion,  found  in  Madagascar,  Socotm, 
and  Arabia.  None  of  the  genera  appear  to  be  well  represented 
throughout  the  region,  and  they  are  almost  or  cLuite  absent  from 
West  Africa. 

According  to  Woodward's  Manual  (1868)  West  Africa  has 
about  200  species  of  land-shells.  South  Africa  about  100, 
Madagascar  nearly  100,  Mauritius  about  50.  AU  the  islands 
have  their  peculiar  species ;  and  are,  in  proportion  to  their 
extent,  much  richer  than  tlie  continent ;  as  is  usaally  the  case. 

The  ETHioriAN  Sud-regioks. 

It  has  been  already  explained  that  these  are  to  some  extent 
provisional ;  yet  it  is  believed  that  they  represent  generally  the 
primary  natural  divisions  of  the  region,  however  they  may  be 
subdivided  when  our  knowledge  of  their  productions  becomes 
more  accurate. 

/,  The  Eust  African  Suib-reffion,  or  Central  and  Hast  Africa. 

This  division  includes  all  the  open  country  of  tropical  AMca 
south  of  the  Sahara,  as  well  as  an  undefined  southern  margin  of 
that  great  desert.  With  the  exception  of  a  narrow  strip  along 
the  east  coast  and  the  valleys  of  the  Niger  and  Mle,  it  is  a  vast 
elevated  plateau  from  1,000  to  4,000  feet  high,  hilly  rather  than 
mountainous,  except  the  lofty  table  land  of  Abyssinia,  with 
mountains  rising  to  16,000  feet  and  extending  south  to  the 
ecLuator,  where  it  terminates  in  the  peaks  of  Kenia  and  Kilt- 
mandjaro,  18,000  and  20,000  feet  high.  The  northern  portion 
of  this  sub-region  is  a  belt  about  300  miles  wide  between  the 
Sahara  on  the  north  and  the  great  equatorial  forest  on  the  south, 
extending  from  Cape  Verd,  the  extreme  western  point  of  Africa, 
across  the  northern  bend  of  the  Niger  and  Lake  Tchad  to  the 
mountains  of  Abyssinia.     The  greater  part  of  this  tract  has  a 


by  Google 


CHAP.  SI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  259 

moderate  elevation.  The  eastern  portion  reaches  from  about  the 
second  cataract  of  the  Nile,  or  perhaps  from  about  the  parallel 
of  20°  N.  Latitude,  down  to  about  20°  S.  Latitude,  and  from  the 
east  coast  to  where  the  great  forest  region  commences,  or  to  Lake 
Tanganyika  and  about  the  meridian  of  28°  to  30°  E.  Longitude. 
The  greater  part  of  this  tract  is  a  lofty  plateau. 

The  surface  of  all  this  sub-region  is  generally  open,  covered 
with  a  vegetation  of  high  gr^ses  or  thorny  shrubs,  with  scat- 
tered trees  and  isolated  patches  of  forest  in  favourable  situations. 
The  only  parts  where  extensive  continuous  forests  occur,  are  on 
the  eastern  and  western  slopes  of  the  great  Abyssinian  plateau, 
and  on  the  Mozambique  coast  from  Zanzibar  to  Sofala.  The 
whole  of  this  great  district  has  one  general  zoological  character. 
Many  species  range  from  Senegal  to  Abyssinia,  others  from 
Abyssinia  to  the  Zambesi,  and  a  few,  as  Mungos  fasciatus  and 
Phacochcerus  ceihiopicus,  range  over  the  entire  sub-region.  F&ime- 
eus,  Idonyx,  and  several  genera  of  antelopes,  charftcterise  every 
part  of  it,  as  do  many  genera  of  birds.  Goracias  nmvia,  Cory- 
thomis  eyaiiostigma,  TocTms  nasidm,  T.  erythrorhynchus,  Farus 
Imtcopterus,  Bv/phaga  afrimna.  Vidua  paradtsea,  are  examples 
of  species,  which  are  found  in  the  Gambia,  Atyssinia  and  South 
East  Africa,  but  not  in  the  West  African  sub-region ;  and  con- 
sidering how  very  Httle  is  known  of  the  natural  history 
of  the  country  immediately  south  of  the  Sahara,  it  may 
well  be  snpposed  that  these  are  only  a  small  portion  of  the 
species  really  common  to  the  whole  area  in  question,  and  which 
prove  its  fundamental  unity. 

Although  this  sub-region  is  so  extensive  and  so  generally 
uniform  in  physical  features,  it  is  by  far  the  least  peculiar  part 
of  Africa.  It  possesses,  of  course,  all  those  wide-spread  Ethiopian 
types  which  inhabit  every  part  of  the  region,  but  it  has  hardly 
any  special  features  of  its  own.  The  few  genera  which  are 
peculiar  to  it  have  generally  a  limited  range,  and  for  the  most 
part  belong,  either  to  the  isolated  mountain-plateau  of  Abyssinia 
which  is  almost  as  much  Palajarctic  as  Ethiopian,  or  to  the  woody 
districts  of  Mozambique  where  the  fauna  has  more  of  a  West 
or  South  African  character. 


by  Google 


260  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

Mammalia. — The  only  forms  of  Mammalia  peculiar  to  this 
sub-region  are  Theropilheeus,  one  of  the  CynopithecidEe  eoniiiied 
to  Abyssinia ;  Petrodromus  and  Ehynehoayon,  belonging  to  the 
insectivorous  Macroscelididie,  have  only  been  found  in  Mozam- 
bique ;  the  Antelopine  genus  Neotragus,  from  Abyssinia  south- 
ward ;  SaccostosrMS  and  Felomys  genera  of  Muridfc  inhabiting 
Mozambique ;  SeUrocephalvs  from  Abyssinia,  and  Heliophohius 
from  Mozambique,  belonging  to  the  Spalacidte ;  and  FecHnator 
from  Abyssinia,  belonging  to  the  Octodontid^,  CyTiocephahis, 
Mkinoceros,  Cam^lopardalis,  and  antelopes  of  the  genera  Orpx, 
Kobiis,  Nanotragibs,  G&phalophtis,  HvppotTog'm,  Alce- 
,  aad  CatdbUfas,  are  eharaoteristic ;  as  well  as  Felis, 
Hymia,  and  numerous  civets  and  ichneumons. 

Birds. — Peculiar  forms  of  birds  are  hardly  to  be  found  here; 
we  only  meet  with  two — Hypocolius,  a  genus  of  shrikes  in  Abys- 
sinia ;  and  Faleeniceps,  the  great  boat-billed  heron  of  the  Upper 
Nile.  Yet  throughout  the  country  birds  are  abundant,  and  most 
of  the  typical  Ethiopian  forms  are  well  represented. 

Beptiks.—Oi  reptiles,  the  only  peculiar  forms  recorded  are 
Xenocalamus,  a  genus  of  snakes,  belonging  to  the  CalamariidEe ; 
and  Pytkonodipsas,  one  of  the  Dipsadidas,  both  from  the  Zambesi ; 
and  among  lizards,  Pistv/rus,  one  of  the  Geckotidse,  from  Abys- 
sinia. 

Amphibia  and  Fishes. — There  are  no  peculiar  forms  of  amphibia 
or  of  fresh-water  fishes. 

Insects. — Insects  are  almost  equally  unproductive  of  peculiar 
forms.  Among  butterflies  we  have  Ahaniis,  one  of  the  HesperidEe, 
from  Mozambique ;  and  in  Goleoptera,  2  genera  of  OicindehdEe, 
8  of  CarabidEe,  1  or  2  of  CetoniidEe,  and  about  half-a-dozen  of 
Longicorns :  a  mere  nothing,  as  we  shall  see,  compared  with  the 
hosts  of  peculiar  genera  that  characterise  each  of  the  other  sub- 
regions.  Neitlier  do  land-shells  appear  to  present  any  peculiar 
forms. 

The  fact  that  so  very  few  special  types  characterise  the  exten- 
sive area  now  under  consideration  is  verj'  noteworthy.  It  justifies 
us  in  uniting  this  hirge  and  widespread  tract  of  country  as 
forming  essentially  but  one  sub-division  of  the  great  Ethiopian 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


^;*   ^^-' 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  SI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGION.  261 

region,  and  it  suggests  some  curious  speoulatious  as  to  tlie  former 
history  of  that  region,  a  subject  which  must  he  deferred  to  the 
latter  part  of  this  chapter.  In  none  of  the  other  great  tropical 
regions  does  it  occur,  that  the  largest  portion  of  their  area, 
although  swarming  with  life,  yet  possesses  hardly  any  distinctive 
features  except  the  absence  of  numerous  types  characteristic  of 
the  other  aub-r^ons. 

J?ffl(6  IV. — lU-nstraiing  the  Zoology  of  East, Africa. — ^Although 
this  sub-region  has  so  little  speciality,  it  is  that  which  abounds 
most  in  large  animals,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  best  representative  of 
AMca  as  regards  zoology.  Some  of  the  most  distinctive  of  African 
animals  range  over  the  whole  of  it,  and  as,  from  recent  explora- 
tions, many  parts  of  this  wide  area  have  been  made  known  to  the 
reading  public,  we  devote  one  of  our  plates  to  illustrate  the 
especially  African  forms  of  life  that  here  abound.  The  antelopes 
represented  are  the  koodoo  (Tragelaphus  stre^ceros)  one  of  the 
handsomest  of  the  family,  which  ranges  over  all  the  highlands 
of  Africa  from  Abyssinia  to  the  southern  districts.  To  the  left 
is  the  aardvarb,  or  earth  pig,  of  North  Eastern  Africa  (Oryderopus 
(^tMopicus)  which,  to  the  north  of  the  equator  in  East  Africa, 
represents  the  allied  species  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  These 
Edentata  are  probably  remnants  of  the  ancient  fauua  of  Africa, 
when  it  was  completely  isolated  from  the  northern  continents 
and  few  of  the  higher  types  had  been  introduced.  The  large 
bird  in  the  foreground  is  the  secretary-bird,  or  serpent-killer 
{Serpentarius  r^HUvorm),  which  has  affinities  both  for  the  birds- 
of-prey  and  the  waders.  It  is  common  over  almost  all  the  open 
country  of  Africa,  destroying  and  feeding  on  the  most  venomous 
serpents.  The  bird  on  the  wing  is  the  red-hilled  promerops 
(Irrisor  erythrorhynehus),  a  handsome  bird  with  glossy  plumage 
and  coral-red  bill.  It  is  allied  to  the  hoopoes,  and  feeds  on 
insects  which  it  hunts  for  among  the  branches  of  trees.  This 
species  also  ranges  over  a  lai^e  part  of  east  and  central  Africa  to 
near  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Other  species  are  found  in  the 
west;  and  the  genus,  which  forms  a  distinct  family,  Trrisoridce,  is 
one  of  the  best  marked  Ethiopian  types  of  birds.  In  the  distance 
is  a  rhinoceros,  now  one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  African 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


■,  though  there  is  reason  to  helieve  that  it  is  a  compara- 
tively recent  intruder  into  the  country. 

II.  The  West-African  Sub-region. 

This  may  be  defined  as  the  equatorial-forest  suh-regioa,  since  it 
comprises  all  that  portion  of  Africa,  from  the  west  coast  inland, 
over  which  the  great  equatorial  forests  prevail  more  oi  less  unin- 
terruptedly. These  commence  to  the  south  of  the  Gambia  Eiver, 
and  extend  eastwards  in  a  line  roughly  parallel  to  the  southern 
margin  of  the  great  desert,  as  far  as  the  sources  of  the  upper 
Nile  and  the  mountains  forming  the  western  boundary  of  the 
basin  of  the  great  lakes  ;  and  southward  to  that  high  but  marshy 
forest-country  in  which  Livingstone  was  travelling  at  the  time 
of  his  death.  Its  southern  limits  are  undetermined,  but  are  pro- 
bably somewhere  about  the  parallel  of  11''  S.  Latitude,^ 

This  extensive  and  luxuriant  district  has  only  been  explored 
zoologically  in  the  ne^hbourhood  of  the  West  coast.  Much,  no 
doubt,  remains  to  be  done  in  the  interior,  yet  its  main  features 
are  sufficiently  weE  known,  and  most  of  its  characteristic  types 
of  animal  life  have,  no  doubt,  been  discovered. 

Mammalia. — Several  very  important  gi-oups  of  mammals  are 
peculiar  to  this  sub-region.  Most  pTOrainent  are  the  great 
anthropoid  apes — the  gorilla  and  the  chimpanzee — forming  the 
genus  Troglodytes ;  and  monkeys  of  the  genera  MyiapUkecm 
and  Cercocebus.  Two  remarkable  forms  of  lemurs,  Perodictims 
and  Arctocehus,  are  also  peculiar  to  West  Africa.  Among  the 
Inseetivora  is  Fotamogale,  a  semi-aquatic  animal,  foiining  a 
distinct  family ;  and  three  peculiar  genera  of  civets  (Vivenidje) 
have  been  described.  Hyomosckus,  a  small,  deer-like  animal, 
belongs  to  the  Tragulidie,  or  chevrotains,  a  family  otherwise 

1  Dr.  Sdiweinfurtli  has  accurately  determined  the  limits  of  tlie  sub-region 
at  tlie  point  where  he  crossed,  the  waterahed  between  the  Nile  tribntaries  and 
those  of  the  Shari,  in  i^"  N.  Lat.  and  28^°  E.  Long.  He  describes  a  sudden 
change  in  the  character  of  the  vegetation,  which  to  the  southward  of  this 
point  assumes  a  West-African  character.  Here  also  tie  chimpanzee  and 
grey  parrot  first  appear,  and  cert^n  species  of  plants  only  known  elsewhere 
in  Western  Africa. 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  SI,]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  2C3 

confined  to  the  Oriental  region ;  and  in  the  squirrel  family  is  a 
curious  genus,  Anomalwrm,  -whicli  resembles  the  flying  squiiTels 
of  other  parta  of  the  world,  without  being  diiectly  allied  to  them. 

Birds. — In  this  class  we  find  a  larger  proportionate  number 
of  peculiar  forma.  Hy^ergervs  and  Aleihe,  belonging  to  the 
TimaliidEe,  or  babblers,  are  perhaps  allied  to  Malayan  groups 
Parinia,  a  peculiar  form  of  tit,  is  found  only  in  Prince's  Island 
Iwnotus  is  an  abundant  and  characteristic  form  of  Pycnonotidas 
Fraseria,  Hy;podes,  Civphopt&rus,  and  Chaiinanotvs,  are  pecuhar 
genera  of  shrikes ;  Pieathartes  is  one  of  the  many  strange  forms 
of  the  crow  family ;  Ginnyncindus  is  a  pecuhar  genus  of  sun- 
birds  ;  Pholidornis  is  supposed  to  belong  to  the  Oriental  DicEeidte, 
or  flower-peckers;  Wald&nia  is  a  recently-described  new  form 
of  swallow;  Ligwrrms,  a  finch,  Spermospiga,  a  weaver  bird,  and 
OnychognathuB  a  starling,  are  also  peculiar  West  African  genera. 
Coming  to  the  Picarife  we  have  Verreavxia,  a  peculiar  wood- 
pecker ;  three  pecuhar  genera  of  barbets  (MegalEemidse)  ; 
the  typical  plantain-eaters  (Musophaga) ;  Myioceyx,  a  peculiar 
genus  of  kingfishers ;  ■while  Berenieornis  is  a  genus  of  crested 
hornbills,  only  found  elsewhere  in  Malaya.  The  grey  parrots, 
of  the  genus  PsHtams,  are  confined  to  this  sub-region,  as  are 
two  peculiar  genera  of  partridges,  and  three  of  guinea- 
fowl.  We  have  also  here  a  species  of  Pitta,  one  of  the  Ori- 
ental family  of  ground-thrushes ;  and  the  Oriental  paroquets, 
Palceornis,  are  found  here  as  well  as  in  Abyssinia  and  the 
Mascarene  Islands. 

We  thus  find,  both  in  the  Mammalia  and  birds  of  West  Africa, 
a  special  Oriental  or  even  Malayan  element  not  present  ui  the 
other  parts  of  tropical  Africa,  although  appearing  again  in 
Madagascar.  In  the  Mammalia  it  is  represented  by  the  anthro- 
poid apes ;  by  Colohus  allied  to  SemnopitJiecKs,  and  by  Cercocebus 
allied  to  Macacus ;  and  especially  by  a  form  of  the  Malayan 
family  of  chevrotains  (TraguHdas).  The  Malayan  genus  of  otters, 
Aonyx,  is  also  said  to  occur  in  West  and  South  Africa.  In 
birds  we  have  special  Oriental  and  Malayan  afQnities  in.  Alet?ie, 
Pholidornis,  Berenieornis,  Pitta,  and  Palwomis;  while  the 
Oriental  genus  Treron,  has  a  wide  range  in  Africa.     We  shall 


by  Google 


264  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPIIY.  [pAirr  iii. 

endeavour  to  ascertain  the  meaning  of  tliis  special  relation  at 
a  subsec[uent  stage  of  our  inq^uiries. 

Plate  V.—Siwr  Scene  in  West  Africa,  with  Characteristic 
Animals. — Our  artist  has  here  well  represented  the  luxuriance 
and  heauty  of  a  tropical  forest ;  and  the  whole  scene  is 
such  as  might  be  witnessed  on  the  banks  of  one  of  the 
rivers  of  eq^uatorial  West  Africa.  On  the  right  we  see  a 
red  river-hog  (Fota-mochcsrus  penicillatits),  one  of  the  hand- 
somest of  the  swine  family,  and  highly  characteristic  of  the 
West  African  sub-region.  In  a  tree  overhead  is  the  potto 
{Perodidiem  potto),  one  of  the  curious  forms  of  lemur  con- 
fined to  West  Africa.  On  the  left  is  the  remarkable  Pota- 
mogale  velox,  first  discovered  by  Du  Chaillu, — an  Insectivorous 
animal,  with  the  form  and  habits  of  an  otter.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  river  are  seen  a  pair  of  gorillas  (Troglodytes  gorilla), 
the  lai'gest  of  the  anthropoid  apes. 

The  bird  on  the  wing  ia  the  Whydah  finch  ( Vidua  paradisea), 
remarkable  for  the  enormous  plumes  with  which  the  tail  of  the 
male  bird  is  decorated  during  the  breeding  season.  The  crested 
bird  overhead  is  one  of  the  beautiful  green  touracos  {Turacus 
■macr&rhynch'us),  belonging  to  the  Musophagida?,  or  plantain-eaters, 
a  family  whoUy  African,  and  most  abundant  in  the  western 


BeptUes. — In  this  dass  we  find  a  large  number  of  peculiar 
forms  ;  13  genera  of  snakes,  3  of  lizards,  and  2  of  tortoises  being 
confined  to  the  sub-region.  The  snakes  are  Pariaspis,  Elapops, 
and  Prosyrrma  (Gal amari idee),  Mhamnophis,  Herpetethiops,  and 
Grayia  (Colubridfe),  Nmsterophis  and  Limnophis  (HomalopsidEe), 
Simocephalus  and  Solurophis  (LycodontidEe) ;  PdophUvs  (Pytho- 
nidse);  Elapsoidea  (Elapida) ;  and  Atheris  (ViperidEe).  The 
lizards  are  Dalophia  (Lepidosternidie) ;  Otosaurus  (ScincidEe) ; 
Pdlodactylus  (Geckotidffi).  The  tortoises,  Ginyxis  (Testudinidai) 
and  Tetrathyra  (Trionichidaj), 

Amphibia. — Of  Amphibia,  there  are  2  peculiar  genera  of  tree- 
frogs,  Eylamhaiis  and  Rem-imantis,  belonging  to  the  Polype- 
datidse. 


by  Google 


#  ■ 

> 

* 

/ 

w.  > 

4 

4;'. 

f- 

r:n 

b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP,  si.j  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  265 

Here,  too,  we  find  some  interesting  relations  with  the  Oriental 
region  on  tlie  one  side,  and  the  Neotropical  on  the  other.  The 
snakes  of  the  family  Homalopsidte  have  a  wide  range,  in  America, 
Europe,  and  all  over  the  Oriental  region,  but  are  confined  to 
West  Africa  in  the  Ethiopian  region.  Bryixyphis  (Dryiophidse) 
and  Vipmdohoa  (Dipsadidte)  on  the  other  hand,  are  genera  of 
tropical  America  which  occur  also  in  West  Africa.  The  family 
of  lizards,  Acontiadse,  are  found  in  West  and  South  Africa, 
Ceylon,  and  the  Moluccas.  The  family  of  toads,  Engystomidte, 
in  West  and  South  Africa  and  the  whole  Oriental  region ;  while 
the  Phrynisoidse  inhahit  tropical  Africa  and  Java. 

Insects. — We  have  here  a  large  number  of  peculiar  genera. 
There  are  10  of  butterflies,  Zachnoptera,  AmpJiddema,  and  Catwtia 
belonging  to  the  Kymphalidse,  while  four  others  are  Lycsenidie. 
The  genus  Euxanthe  is  common  to  West  Africa  and  Madagascar, 

Of  Goleoptera  there  are  53  peculiar  genera ;  20  are  Carabidje, 
2  LucanidEe,  12  Cetoniid^,  3  Trionidte,  16  Cerambycidse,  and 
34  Lamiidfe.  Besides  these  there  are  4  or  5  genera  coiifitied  to 
West  Africa  and  Mad^ascar. 

Land  Shells. — West  Africa  is  very  rich  in  land  shells,  but  it 
does  not  appear  to  possess  any  well-marked  genera,  although 
several  of  the  smaller  groups  or  sub-genera  are  confined  to  it. 
Helicidaa  of  the  genera  JVanina,  Bulimimis  and  Achatiim  are 
abundant  and  characteristic. 

Islands  of  the  Wed  African  Sui-region. — The  islands  in  the 
Gulf  of  Guinea  are,  Fernando  Po,  very  near  the  main  land,  with 
Prince's  Island  and  St.  Thomas,  considerably  further  away  to  the 
south-west.  Fernando  Po  was  once  thought  to  be  a  remarkable 
instance  of  an  island  possessing  a  very  peculiar  fauna,  although 
close  to  the  main  land  and  not  divided  from  it  by  a  deep  sea. 
This,  however,  was  due  to  our  having  obtained  considerable 
collections  from  Fernando  Po,  while  the  opposite  coast  was 
almost  unknown.  One  after  another  the  species  supposed  to  be 
peculiar  have  been  found  on  the  continent,  till  it  becomes  prob- 
able, that,  as  in  the  case  of  other  islands  similarly  situated,  it 
contains  no  peculiar  species  whatever.  The  presence  of  nume- 
rous mammalia,  among  which  ai-e  baboons,  lemurs,  Hyra^,  and 

Vol.  I.— 19 


by  Google 


2C6  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [i-akt  hi. 

Anomalums,  shows  that  tliis  island  has  probably  once  been  united 
to  the  continent. 

Prince's  Island,  situated  about  IOC  miles  froin  the  coast,  has 
no  mammals,  but  between  30  and  40  species  of  birds.  Of  these 
7  are  peculiar  s];ieeies,viz.,Zos(eropsJiceduUna,  Gii/plu^tefrus  dohmi 
(a  peculiar  genus  of  Sylviidie),  Sympleetes  princepa,  CHfhagra 
rtijilata,  Coluinba.  ehiorqpkma,  Peristera  frincipaUs,  and  Sirue 
thontensis. 

In  the  Island  of  St.  Thomas,  situated  on  the  equator  about  150 
mOes  from  the  coast,  there  are  6  peculiar  species  out  of  30  known 
birds,  viz.,  Seops  Ima^sis,  Zosterirps  lugvhris,  Titrdus  olivaceo- 
fuscus,  Oriolus  crassirostris,  Sympledes  sandi-thoiMe  and  AplopeUa 
simplex ;  also  iS^m!  thomensis  in  common  with  Prince's  Island. 
The  remainder  are  all  found  on  the  adjacent  coasts.  It  is  re- 
markable that  in  Prince's  Island  there  are  no  birds  of  prey,  auy 
that  appear  being  driven  off  by  the  parrots  (PsUtacits  eritkacun) 
that  abound  there ;  whereas  in  St,  Thomas  and  I'emando  Po 
they  are  plentiful 

III.  South-African  Sub-reffion. 

This  is  the  most  peculiar  and  interesting  part  of  Africa,  but 
owing  to  the  absence  of  existing  barriers  its  limits  cannot  be 
well  defined.  The  typical  portion  of  it  hardly  contains  more 
than  the  narrow  strip  of  tenitory  limited  by  the  mountain  range 
which  forms  the  boundary  of  the  Cape  Colony  and  Natal,  while 
in  a  wider  sense  it  may  be  extended  to  include  Mozambique.  It 
may  perhaps  be  best  characterised  as  bounded  by  the  Kalahari 
desert  and  the  Limpopo  river.  It  is  in  the  more  limited  district 
of  the  extreme  south,  that  the  wonderful  Cape  flora  alone  exists. 
Here  are  more  genera  and  species,  and  more  peculiar  types  of 
plants  congregated  together,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  globe 
of  equal  extent.  There  are  indications  of  a  somewhat  similar 
richness  and  specialization  in  the  zoology  of  this  country;  but 
animals  are  so  mush  less  closely  dependent  on  soil  and  climate, 
that  much  of  the  original  peculiarity  has  been  obliterated,  by 
long  continued  interchange  of  species  with  so  vast  an  area  as 


by  Google 


ciiAr.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOriAN  BEGION.  267 

that  of  Africa  south  of  the  equator.  The  extreme  peculiarity 
and  isolation  of  the  flora  must  not,  however,  be  lost  s^ht  of,  if 
we  would  correctly  interpret  the  phenomena  afforded  hy  the  dis- 
tribution of  animal  life  on  the  African  continent. 

Mammalia. — A  much  lai^er  number  of  peculiar  forma  of  mam- 
mals are  found  here  than  in  any  of  the  other  sub-regions, 
although  it  is  far  leas  in  extent  than  either  of  the  three  divi- 
sions of  the  continent.  Among  Insectivora  we  have  the 
Chrysochloridffi,  or  golden  moles,  consisting  of  two  genera  confined 
to  South  Africa ;  while  the  Maeroscelidid^,  or  elephant  shrews, 
are  also  characteristically  South  African,  although  ranging  as  far  as 
Mozambique  and  the  Zambezi,  with  one  outlying  species  in  North 
Afi'ica.  The  YiverridEe  are  represented  by  three  peculiar  genera, 
Ariela,  Cynictis,  and  Suricata.  The  Camivora  present  some 
remarkable  forms :  Froteles,  forming  a  distinct  family  allied  to 
the  hysanas  and  weasels ;  and  two  curious  forms  of  Canidse — ■ 
Megalotis  (the  long-eared  fox)  and  Lyeaon  (the  hyjena-dog),  the 
latter  found  also  in  parts  of  East  Africa.  Hydrogale  ia  a 
peculiar  form  of  Mustelidie ;  Pelea  one  of  the  antelopes ;  De-n- 
dromys,  Malacothrix,  and  Mystromys  are  peculiar  genera  of  the 
mouse  family  (Muridfe) ;  Bathyerges  one  of  the  mole-rats  (Spa- 
lacid^) ;  Pedeies,  the  Cape-hare,  a  remarkable  form  of  jerboa ;  and 
Petromys,  one  of  the  spiny-rats  (Ecbimyidte).  The  remarkable 
Oryderopus,  or  earth-pig,  has  one  species  in  South  and  one  in 
Korth  East  Africa.  We  have  thus  eighteen  genera  of  mammalia 
almost  or  quite  peculiar  to  South  Africa. 

Birds.- — These  do  not  present  so  many  peculiar  forms,  yet 
some  are  very  remarkable.  Chcetops  is  an  isolated  genus  of 
thrushes  (Turdidffi).  Zioptilus,  one  of  the  fruit-thruahes  (Pycno- 
notidfe).  Pogonodekla,  one  of  the  fly-catchers;  Urokstes,  a 
shrike ;  Promerops,  a  sun-bird ;  PhUetcerus  and  Chera, 
birds ;  and  three  peculiar  genera  of  larks — Spizocorys,  J 
and  T&phrocorys,  complete  the  list  of  peculiar  types  of  Passeres. 
A  wood-pecker,  Geocolwptes,  is  nearly  allied  to  a  South  American 
genus.  The  Cape-dove,  (Ena,  is  confined  to  South  and  East  AMc-a 
and  Madagascar ;  and  Tkalassornis  is  a  peculiar  form  of  duck. 
Several  genera  are  also  confined  to  West  and  South  Africa; — 


by  Google 


2(18  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paet  hi. 

as  PhylloBtrefhus  (PyononotidEe),  Smithomis  (MuscicapidEe), 
Coninella  (LaniidEe) ;  Barbatiila  and  Xylobueco  (MegaltemidEe) ; 
Ceiiihmochares,  also  in  Madagascar,  {Cueulida}) ;  Typanistrm 
({jolumbidaB}.  Other  remarkable  forma,  though  widely  spread 
over  Africa,  appear  to  have  their  metropolis  here,  as  Coitus  and 
Indicator.  Others  seem  to  be  eoiiiiiied  to  South  Africa  and 
Abyssinia,  as  the  curious  Buphaga  (SturnidEe.) ;  and  Apalo- 
d&rma,  (Trogonidee).  Mac/usrkamphus  (FaleonidEe)  is  found  only 
in  South- West  Africa,  Madagascar,  and  the  Malay  Peninsula. 

Reptiles. — There  are  4  peculiar  genera  of  snakes, — Ty^hline, 
belonging  to  the  blind  burrowing  snakes,  Typhlopidse ;  Lampro- 
pkis  (LycodontidEe) ;  Cyrtophis  and  PmeHophiB  (ElapidEe),  a 
family  which  is  chiefly  Oriental  and  Australian.  Of  Lizards 
there  are  10  peculiar  genera ;  Monoirophis  {Lepidostemidje),  but 
with  an  allied  form  in  Angola ;  Gordylus,  Psendocordylus,  Platy- 
sawrus,  Cordylosawrus,  Plewrostiekus,  and  SauropJvis,  all  peculiar 
genera  of  ZonuridEe  ;  Gkamwsaura,  forming  the  peculiar  family 
CbamEesantidEe ;  Colopus  and  -Rhopitropus  (GeckotidEe). 

Amph-Sna. — Of  Amphibia  there  are  4  peculiar  genera : 
Schismaderma  (BufonidEe) ;  Brachymervs  (EngystomidEe) ;  Pkry- 
nohatrachus  and  Sterwrh.ynch'm  (Eanidffi).  These  last  are  allied 
to  Oriental  genera,  and  the  only  other  EngystomidEe  are  Oriental 
and  KeotropicaL 

Fre^vKiier  Fish. — -Of  iresh-watei'  fishes  there  is  1  genus — Ah- 
rostomus — belonging  to  the  carp  family,  peculiar  to  South  Africa. 

/Ttsecfe.— South  Airica  is  excessively  rich  in  insects,  and  the 
number  of  peculiar  types  surpasses  that  of  any  other  part  of  the 
region.     We  can  only  here  summarize  the  results. 

LepidopteTa.—Oi  butterflies  tbere  are  7  peculiar  genera ;  2 
belonging  to  the  SatyridEC,  1  to  AcrfeidEe,  '6  to  Lyc^enidEe, 
and  1  to  Hesperidie,  Zeritis  (LycEenidfe)  is  also  characteristic 
of  this  sub-region,  although  1  species  occurs  in  West  Africa, 

Ooleoptera. — These  are  very  remarkable.  In  the  family  of 
Cicindelidae,  or  tiger-beetles,  we  have  the  extraordinary  Manticora 
and  PlatycMle,  forming  a  sub-family,  whose  nearest  allies  are  in 
North  America  ;  as  well  as  Ophryodera  and  Sromica,  the  latter 
an  extensive  genus,  which  ranges  as  far  north  as  Mozambique 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  269 

and  Lake  Ngami.  Another  genus  of  this  family,  Jansenia,  ia 
common  to  South  Africa  and  South  India. 

In  the  lai^e  family  of  Carabidse,  or  ground-beetles,  there  are 
17  peculiar  South  African  genera,  the  most  important  being 
■.st&r,  Hytrickopits,  Ardnoe,  and  Piezia.  Three  others — 
Glyphodadyla,  and  Megalonychus — are  common  to 
South  Africa  and  Madagascar  only.  There  ia  also  a  genus  iu 
common  with  Java,  and  one  with  Australia. 

Of  Lucanidse,  or  stag-beetles,  there  are  3  peculiar  genera ;  of 
CetoniidEe,  or  rose-chafers,  14;  and  of  BuprestidEe,  2. 

In  the  great  family  of  Longicoms  there  are  no  less  than  67 
peculiar  genera— an  immense  number  when  we  consider  that  the 
generally  open  character  of  the  country,  is  such  as  is  not  usually 
well  suited  to  this  group  of  insects.  They  consist  of  5  peculiar 
genera  of  Prionidse,  25  of  Cerambycidse,  and  37  of  I-amiidie. 

StiTtiman/  of  SouiftrAfi-iean  Zoology. — Summarizing  these  re- 
sults, we  find  that  South  Africa  possesses  18  peculiar  genera  of 
Mammalia,  12  of  Birds,  18  of  Eeptiles,  1  of  Fishes,  7  of  Butter- 
flies, and  107  of  the  six  typical  families  of  Coleoptera.  Besides 
this  large  amount  of  speciality  it  contains  many  other  groups, 
which  extend  either  to  West  Africa,  to  Abyssinia,  or  to  Mada- 
gascar only,  a  number  of  which  are  no  doubt  to  be  referred  as 
originating  here.  We  also  find  many  eases  of  direct  affinity  with 
the  Oriental  region,  and  especially  with  the  Malay  districts,  and 
others  with  Australia ;  and  there  are  also  less  marked  indica- 
tions of  a  relation  to  America. 

Atlaiitie  Islands  of  the  Ethiopian  Region.  St.  Hehna.—'S'h^ 
position  of  St  Helena,  about  1,000  miles  west  of  Africa  and  16° 
south  of  the  equator,  renders  it  difficult  to  place  it  in  either  of 
the  sub-regions  ;  and  its  scanty  fauna  has  a  general  rather  than 
any  special  resemblance  to  that  of  Africa.  The  entire  destruc- 
tion of  its  luxuriant  native  forests  by  the  introduction  of  goats 
which  kiUed  all  the  young  trees  (a  destruction  which  was  nearly 
completed  two  centuries  ago)  must  have  led  to  the  extermination 
of  most  of  the  indigenous  birds  and  insects.  At  present  there  ia 
no  land  bird  that  is  believed  to  be  really  indigenous,  and  hut  one 


by  Google 


270  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [part  hi, 

wader,  a  small  plover  {j^gicditis  samctcB-hdeim)  which  is  peculiar 
to  the  island,  but  closely  aJlied  to  African  species.  Numerous 
imported  birds,  such  as  canaries,  Java  sparrows,  some  African 
iinches,  guinea-fowls,  and  partridges,  are  now  wild.  There  are 
no  native  butterflies,  but  a  few  introduced  species  of  almost 
world-wide  range.  The  only  important  remnant  of  the  original 
fauna  consists  of  beetles  and  land  shells.  The  beetles  are  the 
more  numerous  and  have  been  critically  examined  and  described 
by  Mr.  T.  V.  Wollaston,  whose  researches  in  the  other  Atlantic 
islands  are  so  well  known. 

CoUcyptera,  of  St.  Selena. — Omitting  those  beetles  which  get 
introduced  everywhere  through  man's  agency,  there  are  59  species 
of  Coleoptera  known  from  St.  Helena ;  and  even  of  these  there 
are  a  few  widely  distributed  species  that  may  have  been  intro- 
duced by  man.  It  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  confine  ourselves 
almost  wholly  to  the  species  pecnliar  to  the  island,  and,  therefore, 
almost  certainly  forming  part  of  the  endemic  or  original  fauna. 
Of  these  we  find  that  10  belong  to  genera  which  have  a  very 
wide  range,  and  thus  afford  no  indication  of  geographical  affinity ; 
2  belong  to  genera  which  are  characteristic  of  the  Pala;arctic 
fauna  (Bembidium,  Lmigitarsus) ;  3  to  African  genera  (Adoretvs, 
Sciolnus,  Aspidomorpha) ;  and  two  species  of  Calosotna  are  most 
allied  to  African  species.  There  are  also  4  African  species, 
which  may  be  indigenous  in  St.  Helena.  The  peculiar  genera, 
7  in  number,  are,  however,  the  most  interesting.  We  have  first 
Ha/^othoraxc,  a  large  beetle  allied  to  Carabus  and  (7(tfosom((,  though 
of  a  peculiar  type.  This  may  be  held  to  indicate  a  remote 
Palfearctic  affinity.  Mdissius,  one  of  the  Dynastidse,  is  allied  to 
South  African  forms.  Mieroxtflobius,  one  of  the  Cossonides  t^ 
sub-family  of  Cureulionidfe)  is  the  most  important  genus,  com- 
prising as  it  does  13  species.  It  is,  according  to  Mr,  WoUaston, 
an  altogether  peculiar  type,  most  allied  to  Pentarthrum,  a  genus 
found  in  St.  Helena,  Ascension,  and  the  south  of  England,  and 
itself  very  isolated.  JVesiotes,  another  genus  of  Curculionidse, 
belongs  to  a  small  group,  the  allied  genera  forming  which  inhabit 
Europe,  Madeira,  and  Australia.  A  third  peculiar  and  isolated 
genus  is  TraehypMceosoma.     The  Anthribidse  are  represented  by 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGIO>f.  271 

2  genera,  Rotioxenus  and  Hommod&ra,  which  are  altogether 
peculiar  and  isolated,  and  contain  9  species.  Thna  no  less  than 
27  species,  or  more  than  half  of  the  undoubtedly  indigenous 
beetles,  belong  to  5  peculiar  and  very  remarkable  genera  of 
Ehyncophora. 

.  It  appears  from  this  enumeration,  that  the  peculiar  species  as 
a  whole,  exhibit  most  affinity  to  the  Ethiopian  fauna;  next  to 
the  South  European  fauna ;  and  lastly  to  that  of  the  islands  of 
the  North  Atlantic ;  while  there  is  such  a  large  amount  of  pecu- 
liarity in  the  most  characteristic  forms,  that  no  special  geogra- 
phical affinity  can  be  pointed  out. 

Land  Shells. — These  consist  of  abqut  a  dozen  living  species,  and 
about  as  many  extiact  found  in  the  surface  soil,  and  probably 
exterminated  by  the  destruction  of  the  forests.  The  genera  are 
SuccineO;  Zoniies,  Sdix,  Bv2im.us,  Pupa,  and  Achatina.  The 
Bulimi  (all  now  extinct  but  one)  comprise  one  laige,  and 
several  small  species,  of  a  peculiar  type,  most  resembling  forma 
now  inhabiting  South  America  and  the  islands  of  the  Pacific. 
Zonites  is  chiefly  South  European,  but  the  other  genera  are  of 
wide  range,  and  none  are  peculiar  to  the  island. 

The  marine  shells  are  mostly  Mediterranean,  or  West  Indian 
species,  with  some  found  in  the  Indian  Ocean ;  only  4  or  5  species 
being  peculiar  to  the  island. 

Tristan  d'A<yitnhu.—1h.iA  small  island  is  situated  nearly  mid- 
way between  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  the  mouth  of  the  La 
Plata,  but  it  is  rather  nearer  Africa  than  America,  and  a  little 
nearer  stOl  to  St,  Helena.  An  island  so  truly  oceanic  and  of  whose 
productions  so  little  is  known,  cannot  be  placed  in  any  region, 
and  is  only  noticed  here  because  it  comes  naturally  after  St.  Helena, 
It  is  known  to  possess  three  peculiar  land  birds.  One  is  a  thrush 
(Nesodchla  eremita)  whose  exact  affinities  are  not  determined; 
the  other  a  small  water-hen  (G/dlinula  iteaiotis)  allied  to  our 
native  species,  but  with  shorter  and  softer  wings,  which  the  bird 
does  not  use  for  flight.  A  finch  of  the  genus  Critkagra  shows 
African  affinities  ;  while  another  recently  described  as  Nesospiza 
actmhoi  (Joum.  fiir  Orn.,  1873,  p.  154)  forms  a  new  genus  said  to 
resemble  more  nearly  some  American  forms. 


by  Google 


272  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [pabt  hi. 

The  only  known  land-shells  are  2  peculiar  species  of  Balm.,  a 
genus  only  found  elsewhere  in  Europe  and  Brazil. 

IV,  Madagascar  a-nd  the  Mascarmie  Islands,  or  the  Malagasy 
Sub-region. 

This  insular  sut-region  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  zoo- 
logical districts  on  the  globe,  bearing  a  similar  relation  to  Africa 
as  the  Antilles  to  tropical  America,  or  New  Zealand  to  Australia, 
but  possessing  a  much  richer  fauna  than  either  of  these,  and  in 
some  respects  a  more  remarkable  one  even  than  New  Zealand. 
It  comprises,  besides  Madagascar,  the  islands  of  Mauritius, 
Bourbon,  and  Rodriguez,  the  Seychelles  and  Comoro  islands. 
Madagascar  itself  is  an  island  of  the  first  class,  being  a  thousand 
miles  long  and  about  250  miles  in  average  width.  It  lies 
parallel  to  the  coast  of  Africa,  near  the  southern  tropic,  and  is 
separated  by  230  miles  of  sea  from  the  nearest  part  of  the  con- 
tinent, although  a  bank  of  soundings  projecting  from  its  western 
coast  reduces  this  distance  to  about  160  miles, 
a  mountainous  island,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  interior  ci 
of  open  elevated  plateaus ;  but  between  these  and  the  coast  there 
intervene  broad  belts  of  luxuriant  tropical  forests.  It  is  this 
forest-district  which  has  yielded  most  of  those  remarkable  types 
of  animal  life  whic-h  we  shall  have  to  enumerate ;  and  it  is 
probable  that  many  more  remain  to  be  discovered.  As  all  the 
main  features  of  this  sub-region  are  developed  in  Madagascar, 
we  shall  first  endeavour  to  give  a  complete  outline  of  the  &una 
of  that  country,  and  afterwards  show  how  far  the  surrounding 
islands  partake  of  its  peculiarities. 

Mammalia. — The  fauna  of  Madagascar  is  tolerably  rich  in 
genera  and  species  of  mammalia,  although  these  belong  to  a  very 
limited  number  of  families  and  orders.  It  is  especially  charac- 
terized by  its  abundance  of  LemuridEe  and  Insectivora ;  it  also 
possesses  a  few  peculiar  Camivora  of  small  size ;  but  most  of 
the  other  groups  in  which  Africa  is  especially  rich— apes  and 
monkeys,  lions,  leopards  and  hytenas,  zebras,  giraffes,  antelopes, 
elephants  and  rhinoceroses,  and  even  porcupines  and  squirrels, 
are  wholly  wantii^.     No  less  than  40  distinct  families  of  land 


by  Google 


■a.] 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEaiON. 


273 


manunala  are 
which   occur 
peculiar  to  itself.     The 
Mammalia  as  yet  known 


on  the  continent  of  Africa,  only  11  of 
which  also  poasesaes  3  families 
following  is  a  list  of  all  the  genera  of 
to  inhabit  the  island :— 


PEIMATES. 

INSECTIVORA. 

Lemdrid^, 

Centetid^. 

Indtisiii*. 

6 

CmtUes           

Leraurinfe. 

Hemicentetes 

Lemur 

IlapalemtiT 

16 

EricvMs           

2 

OryxoricUs      

EAi%ops          

Microcehm      

4 

adi'oijakus      ...    ' 

5 

SORICIBJ5.1 

Lcpiteniim-        

2 

Sores 

Chieomtid^ 

OAENIVOBA, 

Ckiromys 

1 

CRYPTOPROCTro* 

Cnjptoprocta 

BATS— (Ohiroptera). 

VlVERRlD^. 

PlBBOPlU^. 

Fossa 

Pteropus         

2 

Galidia.             

aalidutis         

EmwoLOPHiDJi:, 

Euvleres           

KHnolopbiis 

1 

UNGULATA. 

SUIDA 

VBSPEETILIONID.B. 

Potamoch[tru3 

Tespertilio      

1 

EODENTIA. 

TaphoK0U3       

1 

MVRID^ 

NocriLioNiB^. 

JVeaom^s           

nypogeomys    

1 

Brachytarsomys 

We  have  here  a  total  of  12  families,  27  genera,  and  65  species 
of  Mammals  ;  3  of  the  famiHea  and  20  of  the  genera  (indicated 
by  italics)  being  peculiar.  All  the  species  are  peculiar,  except 
perhaps  one  or  two  of  the  wandering  bats.  Eemains  of  a  Hip- 
popotamus have  been  found  in  a  suh-fossil  condition,  showing 
that  this  animal  probably  inhabited  the  island  at  a  not  very 
remote  epoch. 

The  assembl^e  of  animals  aboA'e  noted  is  remarkable,  and 
seems  to  indicate  a  very  ancient  connection  with  the  southern  por- 
tion of  Africa,  before  the  apes,  ungulates,  and  feUnes  had  entered 
it.     The  lemurs,  which  are  here  so  largely  developed,  are  repre- 


by  Google 


274  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPIIY.  [part  hi 

sented  by  a  single  group  in  Africa,  with  two  peculiar  forms  on 
the  West  coast.  They  also  re-appear  under  peculiar  and  isolated 
forms  in  Southern  India  and  Malaya,  and  are  evidently  but  the 
remains  of  a  once  wide-spread  group,  since  in  Eocene  times  they 
inhabited  Uorth  America  and  Europe,  and  very  probably  the 
whole  northern  hemisphere.  The  Insectivora  are  another  group 
of  high  antiq^uity,  widely  scattered  over  the  globe  under  a 
number  of  peculiar  forms ;  but  in  no  equally  limited  area  repre- 
sented by  so  many  peculiar  types  as  in  Madagascar.  South  and 
West  Africa  are  also  rich  in  this  order. 

The  Carnivora  of  Madagascar  are  mostly  peculiar  forms  of 
Viverridee,  or  civets,  a  family  now  almost  confined  to  the 
Ethiopian  and  Oriental  regions,  but  which  was  abundant  in 
Europe  during  the  Miocene  period. 

The  Potamochcerus  is  a  peculiar  species  only,  which  may  be 
pei'haps  explained  by  the  unusual  swimming  powers  of  swine, 
and  the  semi-aquatic  habits  of  this  genus,  leading  to  an  immi- 
gration at  a  later  period  than  in  the  case  of  the  other  Mammalia. 
The  same  remark  will  apply  to  the  small  HippopotaTtms,  which 
was  coeval  with  the  great  Struthious  bird  .iSIpiornis. 

Eodents  are  only  represented  b;j  three  peculiar  fonns  of 
Muridte,  but  it  is  probable  that  others  remain  to  lie  discovered. 

.Birife.— Madagascar  is  exceedingly  rich  in  hirds,  and  espe- 
cially in  remarkable  forms  of  Passeres.  No  less  than  88  genera 
and  m  species  of  land-birds  have  been  discovered,  and  every 
year  some  additions  are  being  made  to  the  hst.  The  African 
families  of  Passeres  are  almost  all  represented,  only  two  being 
absent — Parida!  and  FringillidEe,  both  very  poorly  represented  in 
Africa  itself.  Among  the  Piearise,  however,  the  case  is  very 
different,  no  less  than  7  families  being  absent,  viz.— Picidse, 
or  woodpeckers;  Indieatoridse,  or  honey-guides ;  Megalasmidte, 
or  barbets ;  Musophagidffi,  or  plantain-eaters ;  Coiiidffi,  or  cohes; 
Bucerotidffi,  or  hombills ;  and  Irrisoridas,  or  mockers.  Three  of 
these  are  peculiar  to  Africa,  and  all  are  well  represented  there, 
so  that  their  absence  from  Madagascar  is  a  very  remarkable  fact. 
The  number  of  peculiar  genera  in  Madagascar  constitutes  one  of 
the  main  features  of  its  ornithology,  and  many  of  these  are  so 


by  Google 


:l.j 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGION. 


275 


isolated  tliat  it  is  very  difElcult  to  classify  them,  and  they 
remain  to  this  'day  a  puzzle  to  oniithologista.  lu  order  to 
exhibit  clearly  the  striking  characteristics  of  the  bird-fauna  of 
this  island,  we  shall  first  give  a  list  of  all  the  peculiar  genera ; 
another,  of  the  genera  of  which  the  species  only  are  peculiar ; 
and,  lastly,  a  list  of  the  species  which  Madagascar  possesses 
in  common  with  the  African  continent. 


GfBfEEA  OF  Birds  pbculiau 

TO  Madagascar,  or  found  bl 
E  Mascaebnb  Islands. 

Stlviid^                               S[ 

1.  Bernieria        

2.  Ellisia              

a  Mystaoomis    

4.  Eroessa            

6,  Gervasia         

S 
1 
I 
1 
I 

Sturnibje, 

19.  Bnryceros  (!) 

20.  Hartlaubia    ... 

21.  Falculia 

Paictit);e. 

TlMALlTI)^. 

K.  Oxjiabes        

3 

22.  Philepitta      ... 

7.  Mesites           

1 

33.  Ooua 

SlTTlD^. 

8.  Hfpkerpes       

1 

LEPTOSOMIDje, 

PYCSONOTlDi;  (?) 

9.  Tylas 

OBIOLIBiE. 

10.  Artftmia         

11.  Cyanolanius 

Mnso5CAPiD«, 

12.  Newtonia      

1 

3 

1 

1 
1 

COBAC    D^ 

"b    \t  loni  s 

"      Br,djpte      1. 

28    Geobia    es 

Pa  TTA     D  B 

9   Cora  ops  3 

C           B      « 

in    A        a~n. 

LAsnD^. 

14.  Calicalioiw  (!) 

15.  Vanga            

1 
4 

Tetba  VT,¥ 

31    Mo  garopt  I  t 

Nectariniida 

16.  Neodrepanis 

HlRHlTDINIll*;. 

17.  Phedina         

1 
1 

Ealcon  de 

82    Nsodes 
33    E  tnorchis 

Tot'il    p     e^  of  pe 

PlOCEiDffi, 

la  Nelicurvias 

1 

JPT   RN  TH  B^    e  t  D  t 
4     ^1    0  n^ 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY. 


ErmopiAK  oa  Oeibnt 

„a.„„  „„.„.„„„.. 

Madaoasoak  bt  peculiar  species. 

ToRDma. 

Species,      Alcedimid^.                              gpe 

i.  Besaoiiomis    ... 

1               21.  Oorythornis 

22.  Ispidina         

Sylvtid,*:. 

2.  Acrocophalus ... 

3.  Gopsydus  (Or.) 

4.  Pratinook 

1      TJpupiDje. 

••        1             23,  Upupaa)     

Pycnosotid^. 

Capri  MULom^. 

5.  Hypdpetes  (Or.) 

^               24.  Caprimulgus 

6.  Aiidropadas    ... 

CTPfiBUD^. 

Oampephaoid.^, 

7.  Campephaga   ... 

25,  OypseluB      

J             26.  (ftiseturtt       

DlCRDRIB^. 

PSITTACID^, 

8.  Dicnii-us 

I              27.  Poiiopsitta    ... 

MUSCIOAPITIJE. 

C0LTJMBID.B. 

9.  TcMtrea 

1             28.  Treron          

29.  Cohunba       

Lanhd^. 

30,  Turtur           

10.  Laniarius 

1        . 

Pte  HOC  LID  ail. 

Nectariniid^. 

31.  Pterodlea       

11.  Nectarinifl     ... 

1 

Tetraonid^. 

PLOOBlJBJil. 

12.  Foudia 

2 

13.  Hypargos      ... 

1      Phasianid^. 

14.  Spermeates    ... 

1             33.  Niimida       

AlAUDIDJiJ. 

15.  Mirafta 

TUUNICID*. 

34.  Tumix          

MOTACILLID-E. 

Fai,conid,«, 

16.  Motacilla      ... 

"         ^               35.  Poljboroides 

OUCULIDA^ 

36.  Circus 

37.  Astur 

17.  Oeuthmochares 
la  CentropuB     ... 

1               3a  Acoipiter       ... 
'              39.  Buteo 

19.  Oiioulus 

■•■               40.  Hulia;etU8      .., 
41.  Peraia 

OOUACIID^. 

42.  Baza 

20.  Eurystomus... 

1               43.  Cerahneis      ,., 

by  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  BEG-ION. 


44.  Athene         

45.  ScopB 

IS.        PLATALEII)^.                                 Swedes . 

I             49.  Ibis 1 

RitLlUJE. 

46.  Eallus            

47.  Porzana        

PoDICIPIDiB. 

1             50.  Podiceps       1 

SCOLOPAOIB^B. 

48.  Gallinago      

Total  peculiar  species  of  Eth.    i  -„ 
1         or  Or.  genera          r 

Species  oy  Bieds  common  to 

Madagascar  and  Africa  or  Asia. 

1.  Oisticola  GursitanB. 
3.  CrithMtra  canicollis. 
5.  CoUoooIia  fuoiphaga. 

7.  Aplopelia  tympanistria. 

8.  Falco  minor. 

9.  Falco  coneolor. 

10.  MilvuB  iegyptius. 

11.  Milvua  migrans. 

These  three  tables  show  us  an  amount  of  speciality  hardly  to 
be  found  in  the  hirds  of  any  other  part  of  the  globe.  Out  of 
m  land-birds  in  Madagascar,  only  12  are  identical  with  species 
inhabiting  the  adjacent  continents,  and  most  of  these  belong  to 
powerful-winged,  or  wide-ranging  forms,  which  probably  now 
often  pass  from  one  country  to  the  other.  The  peculiar  species 
— 49  laud-birds  and  7  waders,  or  aquatics — are  mostly  well- 
marked  forms  of  African  genera.  There  are,  however,  several 
genera  (marked  by  italics)  which  have  Oriental  or  PalEearctic 
affinities,  but  not  African,  viz. — Oopsychus,  Hypmpetes,  Kppherpes, 
Alectrmnas,  and  Margaroperd'ka.  These  indicate  a  closer  ap- 
proximation to  the  Malay  countries  than  now  exists. 

The  table  of  33  peculiar  genera  is  of  great  interest  Most  of 
these  are  well-marked  forms,  belonging  to  families  which  are 
fully  developed  in  Africa;  though  it  is  singular  that  not 
one  of  the  exclusively  African  families  is  represented  in 
any  way  in  Madagascar.  Others,  however,  are  of  remote  or 
altogether  doubtful  affinities  Siitidix  is  Oriental  and  Palsearctic 
hi  t  not  Etl  lopian  Orjlotts  and  Mysta  iis  aie  of  doubtfil 
affinities  iitm  i,  &,n\  Cy  wli  s  still  more  so  and  it  is 
quite  unlec  led  ^\hat  fimily  they  belong  to  Calvxheii  is 
almost  equilly  obscuie  N  I  la  is  oie  cf  tie  most  recent 
diico\eries   seems  to  connect  the  Kectar  iiite  with  tie  Pacific 


by  Google 


278  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [pakt  hi. 

Depanididaj.  Ewryceros  is  a  complete  puzzle,  having  been 
placed  with  the  hornbills,  the  starlings,  or  as  a  distinct  family, 
Faimlia  ia  an  exceedingly  aberrant  form  of  stalling,  long  thought 
to  be  allied  to  Irrisor.  PMkpita,  forming  a  distinct  family, 
(PaictidEe),  is  most  remarkable  and  isolated,  perhaps  with  remote 
South  American  affinities.  Leptosoma  is  another  extraordinary 
form,  connecting  the  cuckoos  with  the  rollers.  Atelomis, 
Brackypt&racias,  and  Geobiastes,  are  terrestrial  raUers,  with  the 
form  and  colouring  of  Pitta.  So  many  perfectly  isolated  and 
remarkable  groups  are  certainly  nowhere  else  to  be  found ;  and 
they  fitly  associate  with  lihe  wonderful  aye-aye  (Chiromys), 
the  insectivorous  Centetids,  and  carnivorous  Gryptoproata, 
among  the  Mammalia-  They  speak  to  us  plainly  of  enormous 
antiquity,  of  long-continued  isolation  ;  and  not  less  plainly  of 
a  lost  continent  or  continental  island,  in  which  so  many,  and 
various,  and  peculiarly  organized  creatures,  could  have  been 
gradually  developed  in  a  connected  fauna,  of  which  we  have 
here  but  the  fragmentary  remains. 

Plate  VI. — Illustraiing  the  diaracferistic  features  of  the 
Zoology  of  Madagascar. — The  lemurs,  which  form  the  most 
prominent  feature  in  the  zoology  of  Madagascar,  being  com- 
paratively well-known  from  the  numerous  specimens  in  our 
zoological  gardens ;  and  good  figures  of  the  Insectivorous  genera 
not  being  available,  we  have  represented  the  nocturnal  and 
extraordinary  aye-aye  {Chironvys  nutdagascariensis)  to  illustrate 
its  peculiar  and  probably  very  ancient  mammalian  fauna ;  whUe 
the  river-hogs  in  the  distance  {Potamochctrus  edwarddi)  allied  to 
African  species,  indicate  a  later  immigration  from  the  main- 
land than  in  the  case  of  most  of  the  other  Mammalia.  The 
peculiar  birds  being  far  less  generally  known,  we  have  figured 
three  of  thenx  The  largest  is  the  JSuryceros  pr&vosti,  here  classed 
with  the  starlings,  although  its  remarkable  bill  and  other  pecu- 
liarities render  it  probable  that  it  should  form  a  distinct  family. 
Its  colours  are  velvety  black  and  rich  brown  with  the  bill  of  a 
pearly  grey.  The  bird  beneath  (Vanga  lywrvvrostrii)  ia  one  of  the 
peculiar  Madagascar  shrikes  whose  plumage,  variegated  with 
green-black  and  pure  white  is  very  conspicuous;  while  that  in 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGION.  279 

the  right  hand  comei  is  tlie  Leptosoma  discolor,  a  bird  wbich 
appears  to  be  intermediate  between  siich  very  distinct  families 
as  the  eiickoos  and  the  roRers,  and  is  thexefore  considered  to 
form  a  family  by  itself.  It  is  a  copp6r3'-green  above  and  nearly 
■white  beneath,  -with  a  black  bill  and  red  feet.  The  fan-shaped 
plant  on  the  left  is  the  traveller's  tree  (Urania  spedosa),  one  of 
the  peculiar  forms  of  vegetation  in  this  marvellous  island. 

Untiles. — ^These  present  some  very  curious  features,  compara- 
tively few  of  the  African  groups  being  represented,  while  there 
are  a  considerable  number  of  Eastern  and  even  of  American 
forniB.  Beginning  with  the  snakes,  we  find,  in  the  enonuous 
family  of  Colubridffi,  none  of  the  African  types ;  but  instead  of 
them  three  genera — Umpetodryas,  Philodryas,  and  Heterodon — 
only  found  elsewhere  in  South  and  North  America.  The 
Psammophidse,  which  are  both  African  and  Indian,  are  repre- 
sented by  a  peculiar  genus,  Mimophis.  The  Dendrophidffi  are 
represented  by  Ahceivila,  a  genus  which  is  both  African  and 
American.  The  Hryiophidse,  which  inhabit  all  the  tropica  but 
are  most  developed  in  the  Oriental  region,  are  represented  by 
a  peculiar  genus,  Langaha.  The  tropical  Pythonidse  are  repre- 
sented by  another  peculiar  genus,  Sansima.  The  Lycodontidte 
and  Viperidte,  so  well  developed  in  Africa,  are  entirely  absent. 

The  lizards  are  no  less  remarkable.  The  Zonuridse,  abun- 
dantly developed  in  Africa,  are  represented  by  one  peculiar 
genus,  Cicigna.  The  wide-spread  Scinddfe  by  another  peculiar 
genus,  Pygomdes.  The  African  Sepsidre,  are  represented  by  three 
genera,  two  of  which  are  African,  and  one,  Amphigloesus,  peculiar. 
The  Acontiadse  are  represented  by  a  species  of  the  African  genus 
Acontias.  Of  Scincidai  there  is  the  wide-spread  Euprepm.  The 
Sepida  are  represented  by  the  African  genera  Seps  and  Sceloks. 
The  GeetotidEc  are  not  represented  by  any  purely  African 
genera,  but  by  Phyllodactylus,  which  is  American  and  Aus- 
tralian ;  Eemidactylm,  which  is  spread  over  all  the  tropics ;  by 
two  peculiar  genera ;  and  by  Uroplatis,  Geekolepis,  and  Phelswma, 
confined  to  Madagascar,  Bourbon,  and  the  Andaman  Islands. 
The  Agamidffi,  which  are  mostly  Oriental  and  are  represented  in 


by  Google 


280  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  in. 

Africa  by  the  single  genus  Agama,  have  here  three  peculiar 
genera,  Trachdoptyehiis,  Chalarodon,  and  Hoplmii->  Lastly,  the 
AmericaQ  Iguanidse  are  said  to  be  represented  by  a  speues  of  the 
South  American  genus  Opbirm.  The  classification  oi  Eeptiles 
is  in  such  an  unsettled  state  that  some  of  these  detemunations 
of  affinities  are  probably  erroneous ;  but  it  is  not  bkely  that 
any  con'ections  which  may  be  required  will  materially  afiuct  the 
general  bearing  of  the  evidence,  as  indicating  a  remarkable 
amount  of  Oriental  and  American  relationship. 

The  other  groups  are  of  less  interest.  Tortoises  are  repre- 
sented by  two  African  or  wide-spread  genera  of  Testudinidse, 
Testudo  and  dwrsina,  and  by  one  peculiar  genus,  Py!ds  ;  and 
there  are  also  two  African  genera  of  Chelydidje. 

The  Amphibia  are  not  very  well  known.  They  appear  to  be 
confined  to  species  of  the  wide-spread  Ethiopian  and  Oriental 
genera — Hylarana,  Polypedates,  and  Bappia  (Polypedatidse) ; 
and  PysAc&phalus  (Ranidte). 

Freshr^ater  Fishes.- — These  appear  to  be  at  present  almost 
unknown.  "When  carefully  collected  they  will  no  doubt  furnish 
some  important  facts. 

Th6  Mascarene  Islands. 

The  various  islands  which  surround  Madagascar— Bourbon, 
Mauritius,  Rodriguez,  the  Seychelles,  and  the  Comoro  Islands 
— all  partake  in  a  considerable  degree  of  its  peculiar  fauna, 
while  having  some  special  features  of  their  own. 

Indigenous  Mammalia  (except  bats)  are  probably  absent  from 
all  these  islands  (except  the  Comoros),  although  Lemur  and  Cm-- 
tetes  are  given  as  natives  of  Bourbon  and  Mauritius.  They  have, 
however,  perhaps  been  introduced  from  Madagascar.  Lemur 
mayottensis,  a  peculiar  species,  is  found  in  the  Comoro  Islands, 
where  a  Madagascar  species  of   Vtverra  also  oecura. 

Bourbon  and  Mauritius  may  be  taken  together,  as  they  much 
resemble  each  other.  They  each  possess  species  of  a  peculiar 
genus  of  CampephagidEB,  or  caterpillar  shrikes,  Oxynn^UB ;  while 
the  remarkable  Frec/Hiipus,  belonging  to  the  starling  family, 
inhabits  Bourbon,  if  it  is  not  now  extinct.     They  also  have 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XL]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  281 

peculiar  species  of  Pratincola,  Ilypsipetes,  Fkedina,  Tchitrea, 
Zosterops,  Faitdia,  Golloealia,  and  Coracapsis ;  while  Mauritius  has 
a  very  peculiar  form  of  dove  of  the  sub-genus  Trocasa ;  an  Alec- 
irmnas,  extinct  within  the  last  thirty  years  ;  and  a  species  of  the 
Oriental  genus  of  parroc[uets,  Palceomis.  The  small  and  remote 
island  of  Eodr^ez  has  another  Palmomis,  as  weE  as  a  peculiar 
Foudia,  and  a  Drymceca  of  apparently  Indian  affinity. 

Coming  to  the  Seychelle  Xslands,  far  to  the  north,  we  find  the 
only  mammal  an  Indian  species  of  bat  (^Pieropus  edwardsii).  Of 
the  twelve  land-birds  all  but  one  are  peculiar  species,  but  all  belor^ 
to  genera  found  also  in  Madagascar,  except  one — a  peculiar  species 
of  Pal<eornis.  This  is  an  Oriental  genus,  but  found  also  in  several 
Mascarene  Islands  and  on  the  African  continent.  A  species  of 
black  parrot  (Coracapsis  larUayi)  and  a  weaver  bird  of  peculiar- 
type  {Foudia  seyekeUamm)  show,  however,  a  decided  connection 
with  Madagascar.  There  are  also  two  peculiar  p^eona — a  short- 
winged  Ttiriur  and  an  AUdrwnas. 

Most  of  the  birds  of  the  Comoro  Islands  are  Madagascar  spe^ 
cies,  only  two  being  African,  Five  are  peculiar,  belonging  to  the 
genera  Nectarinia,  Zonte-rops,  Bicrnrus,  Foudia,  and  Alectrmias. 

Reptiles  are  scarce.  There  appear  to  be  no  snakes  in  Mauri- 
tius and  Bourbon,  though  some  African  species  are  said  to  be 
found  in  the  SeycheUe  Islands.  Lizards  are  fairly  represented. 
Mauritius  has  GryptoU&pharus,  an  Australian  genus  of  Gymno- 
pthalmidse;  HewAdadylus  (a  wide-spread  genus);  Peroptts 
(Oriental  and  Australian) — both  belonging  to  the  GeckotidEC, 
Bourbon  has  ffderopus,  a  Moluccaa  and  Australian  genus  of 
Scincidae ;  Fhelsuma  (Geckotidffi),  and  Ohamdeo,  both  found  also 
in  Madagascar;  as  well  as  Pycds,  one  of  the  tortoises.  The 
Seychelles  have  Theconyx,  a  peculiar  genus  of  Geckotidie,  and 
Chamdeo.  Gigantic  land-tortoises,  which  formerly  inhabited 
most  of  the  Mascarene  Islands,  now  only  survive  in  Aldabia,  a 
small  island  north  of  the  Seychelles.  These  will  be  noticed 
again  further  on.  Amphibia  seem  only  to  be  recorded  from  the 
Seychelles,  where  two  genera  of  tree-frogs  of  the  family  Poly- 
pedatidie  are  found ;  one  {Megalixalus)  peculiar,  the  other 
{Bap2>ia)  found  also  in  Mad^ascar  and  Africa. 

Vol.  I.— 20 


by  Google 


282  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [i-abt  hi. 

The  few  insect  groups  peculiar  to  these  islands  will  be  noted 
when  we  deal  with  the  entomology  of  Madagascar. 

Extinct  faima  of  the  Mascarene  Islands  and  Madagascar. — Before 
quittii^  the  vertebrate  groups,  we  must  notice  the  remarkible 
birds  which  have  become  extinct  in  these  islands  little  moie 
than  a  century  ago.  The  most  celebrated  is  the  dodo  of  the 
Mauritius  {Didus  ineptws),  hut  an  allied  genus,  Fezophaps  m 
habited  Rodriguez,  and  of  both  of  these  almost  perfect  skeletons 
(have  been  recovered.  Other  species  probably  existed  in  Bomhon 
Eemains  of  two'genera  of  fl^htless  rails  have  also  been  found 
Aphanapteryx  and  Eryihromach/us ;  and  even  a  heion  {Aid  a 
/ffiB^ocepAo/d)  which  was  short-winged  and  seldom  flew,  while 
in  Madagascar  there  lived  a  gigantic  Struthious  bird,  the 
^pyomis.  Some  further  details  as  to  these  extinct  forms  will 
be  found  rander  the  respective  (amilies,  Didid^e,  Ealhd«,  and 
.^Ipyomithidie,  in  the  fourth  part  of  this  work ;  and  their  bear- 
ing on  the  past  history  of  the  region  will  be  adverted  to  in  the 
latter  part  of  this  chapter.  Dr.  Giinther  has  recently  dis- 
tinguished five  species  of  fossil  tortoises  from  Mauritius  and 
Rodriguez, — all  of  them  CLuite  different  from  the  living  species 
of  Aldabra. 

JnseclB. — The  butterflies  of  Madagascar  are  not  so  remarkable 
as  some  other  orders  of  insects.  There  seems  to  be  only  one 
peculiar  genus,  ITeUropsis  (Satyridte).  The  other  genera  are 
African,  Leptoneura  being  confined  to  Madagascar  and  South 
Africa.  There  are  some  fine  Fapilios  of  uncommon  forms.  The 
most  interesting  lepidopteious  insect,  however,  is  the  fine  diurnal 
moth  {Uranta)  as  all  the  other  species  of  the  genus  inhabit 
tropical  America  and  the  West  Indian  Islands. 

The  Coleoptera  have  been  better  collected,  and  exhibit  some 
very  remarkable  aftimfcies  There  is  but  one  peculiar  genus  of 
Cicindelidaj,  Pogonostoma,  which  is  allied  to  the  South  American 
genus,  Ctenosioma.  Another  genus,  Peridexia,  is  common  to 
Madagascar  and  South  America,  None  of  the  important  African 
genera  are  represented,  except  ^n/moryAa ;  \ihS\&  Mtglaomma 
is  common  to  Madagascar  and  the  Oriental  region. 

In  the  CarabidEC  we  have  somewhat  similar  phenomena  on  a 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  283 

wider  scale.  Such  lai^e  and  imjKirtaiit  AMcan  genera  as 
Polyhirma  and  Anthia,  are  absent ;  but  there  are  four  genera 
in  common  with  South  Africa,  and  two  with  West  Africa ;  while 
three  others  are  as  much  Oriental  as  African.  One  genus, 
Disirigus,  is  wholly  Oriental ;  and  another,  HomahsowM,,  Aus- 
tralian. Col'podes,  well  developed  in  Bourbon  and  Mauritius,  is 
Oriental  and  South  American.  Of  the  peculiar  genera,  Spheero- 
Btylis  has  South  American  affinities ;  Misrochila,  Oriental ;  the 
others  being  related  to  widely  distributed  genera. 

The  Lucanidte  are  few  in  number,  and  all  have  African  affini- 
ties. Madagascar  is  very  rich  in  Cetoniid^,  and  possesses  20 
peculiar  genera.  BothrorMna,  and  three  other  genera  belonging 
to  the  Ichnostoma  group,  have  wholly  African  relations.  Bwy- 
scelis  and  Chromoptila  are  no  less  clearly  allied  to  Oriental 
genera,  A  series  of  eight  peculiar  genera  belong  to  the  Schizo- 
rhjnidse,afamilythe  bulk  of  which  are  Australian,  while  there  are 
only  a  few  African  forms.  The  remaining  genera  appear  to  have 
African  affinities,  but  few  of  the  pecuharly  African  genera  are 
represented.  Glyciphana  is  characteristic  of  the  Oriental  region. 
The  Buprestidffi  of  Madagascar  consist  mainly  of  one  large 
and  peculiar  genus,  Polybothris,  aihed  to  the  almost  cosmopohte 
Fsihptera.  Most  of  the  other  genera  are  both  Ethiopian  and 
Oriental;  but  Polyeesta  is  mainly  South  American,  and  the 
remarkable  and  isolated  genus  Sponsor  is  confined  to  the 
Mauritius  with  a  species  in  Celebes  and  New  Guinea, 

The  Longieoms  are  numerous  and  interesting,  there  being  no 
less  than  24  peculiar  genera.  Two  of  the  genera  of  Prionidfe 
are  very  isolated,  while  a  third,  Closterus,  belong  to  a  group 
which  is  Malayan  and  American. 

Of  the  Cerambycidse,  PhUematmnb  ranges  to  Africa  and  the 
West  Indies ;  L&ptocera  is  only  found  eastward  in  Ceylon  and 
the  New  Hebrides ;  while  Hitporus  is  African.  Of  the  peculiar 
genera,  2  are  of  African  type ;  3  belong  to  the  Z^tura  group, 
which  are  mostly  Palsearctic  and  Oriental,  with  a  few  in 
South  Africa ;  while  PMlocaloeera  is  allied  to  a  South  American 
genus. 
Among  the  Lamiidfe  there  are  several  wide-ranging  and  7 


by  Google 


•284  ZOOLOaiCAL  GEOGEAPHT.  [part  hi. 

African  genera  ;  but  Goptops  is  Oriental,  and  the  Oriental 
Praonetha  occurs  in  the  Comoro  Islands.  Among  the  peculiar 
genera  several  have  African  affinities,  but  Tropidmia  belongs  to 
a  group  which  is  Oriental  and  Australian ;  Oopsis  is  found  also 
in  the  Pacific  Islands ;  Mythergates,  Bidemvs,  and  Coedomcea,  are 
allied  to  Malayan  and  American  genera. 

General  Remarks  on  the  Insect-fauna  of  Madagascar. — Taking 
the  insects  aa  a  whole,  we  find  the  remarkable  result  that  their 
affinities  are  largely  Oriental,  Australian,  and  South  American: 
while  the  AMcan  element  is  represented  chiefly  by  special 
South  African  or  West  African  forms,  rather  than  by  such  as 
ate  widely  spread  over  the  Ethiopian  region,^  In  some 
families-r— as  Cetoniidaj  and  Lamiidie — the  African  element 
appears  to  preponderate ;  in  others — as  CicindelidEe — the  South 
American  aifinity  seems  strongest;  in  Caxabidte,  perhaps  the 
Oriental ;  while  in  Bupi^estidte  and  Cerambyeidfe  the  African 
and  foreign  elements  seem  nearly  balanced.  We  must  not  im- 
pute too  much  importance  to  these  foreign  alHances  among 
insects,  because  we  find  examples  of  them  in  every  country  on 
the  globe.  The  reason  they  are  ao  much  more  pronounced  in 
Madagascar  may  be,  that  during. long  periods  of  time  this  island 
has. served  as  a  refuge  for  groups  that  have  been  dying  out  on 
the  great  continents;  and  that,  owing  to  the  numeions  de- 
ficiencies of  a  somewhat  similar  kind  in  the  series  of  vertebrata 
in  Australia  and  South  America,  the  same  groups  have  often 
been  able  to  maintain  themselves  in  all  these  countries  as  well 
as  in  Madagascar.  It  must  be  remembered  too,  that  these  pecu- 
liarities in  the  Malagasy,  and  Mascarene  insect-fauna  are  but  ex- 
onerations of  a  like  phenomenon  on  the  mainland.  Africa  also 
has  numei-ous  affinities  with  South  America,  with  the  Malay 
countries,  and. with  Australia ;  but  they  do  not  bear  anything  like 
so  lai^e  a  proportion  to  the  whole  fauna,  and  do  not,  therefore, 
attract  so  much  attention.  The  special  conditions  of  existence 
and  the  long-continued  isolation  of  Madagascar,  will  account  for 
much  of  this  difference  ;  and  it  will  evidently  not  be  e 


'  There  are  aha  some  special  respnibJances  between  the  plants  of  Mada- 
gascar and  South  Africa,  according  to  Dr.  Kirk. 


b,  Google 


ciiAF.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  285 

to  introduce,  as  some  writers  are  disposed  to  do,  a  special  land 
connection  or  near  approach  between  Madagascar  and  all  these 
conntries,  independently  of  Africa;  except  perhaps  in  the  case 
of  the  Malay  Islands,  as  wiH  be  discussed  further  on. 

Land-shells. — Madagascar  and  the  adjacent  islands  are  all 
rich  in  land-ahella.  The  genera  of  Helicidaa  are  VUrinaf  Hehx, 
Acliatina,  Colvmna  (peculiar  to  Madagascar  and  West  Africa), 
BuHmimts,  Oiondla  (chiefly  Oriental  and  South  American^  but 
not  African),  Pupa,  Strqttaxis,  and  Suednea.  Among  the  Oper- 
culata  we  have  Tmncatella  (widely  scattered!,  bat  not  African) ; 
Cpdotiis  (South  American,  Oriental,  and  South  African) ;  Cydo- 
phorm  (mostly  Oriental,  with  a  few  South  African) ;  Leptopoma 
(Oriental) ;  Megalommtotna  (Malayan  and  South  American) ; 
LitMdion  (peculiar  to  Madagascar,  Socotra,  and  South-West 
Arabia) ;  OtopoTJia  (with  the  same  range,  but  extending  to  West 
India  and  New  Ireland) ;  Cyclostomus  (widely  spread  but  not 
African)  ;  and  Omphalotropis  (wholly  Oriental  and  Auatrahan). 
We  thus  find  the  same  general  features  reproduced  in  the  land- 
shells  as  in  the  insects,  and  the  same  remarks  will  to  a  great 
extent  apply  to  both.  The  classification  of  the  former  is,  how- 
ever, by  no  means  so  satisfactory,  and  we  have  no  extensive 
and  accurate  general  catalogues  of  shells,  like  thrae  of  Lepi- 
doptera  and  Coleoptera,  which  have  furnished  us  with  such 
valuable  materials  for  the  comparison  of  the  several  faunas. 

On  the  probable  Past  History  of  the  Ethiopian  Begion. 

Perhaps  none  of  the  great  zoolt^ical  regions  of  the  earth 
present  us  with  problems  of  greater  diificulty  or  higher 
interest  than  the  Ethiopian.  We  find  in  it  the  evidence  of 
several  distinct  and  successive  faunas^  now  intermingled;  and  it 
is  very  difficult,  with  our  present  imperfect  knowledge,  to  form 
an  adequate  conception  of  how  and  when  the  several  changes 
occurred.  There  are,  however,  a  few  points  which  seem  suffi- 
ciently clear,  and  these  afford  us  a  secure  foundation  in  our 
endeavour  to  comprehend  the  rest. 

Let  us  then  consider  what  are  the  main  facts  we  have  to 
account  f  or.~ 1.  In  Continental  Africa,  more  especially  in  the  south 


by  Google 


286  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [pabt.  in. 

and  west,  wo  find,  along  with  much  that  is  peculiar,  a  number  of 
genera  showing  a  decided  Oriental,  and  others  with  an  equally 
strong  South  American  affinity;  this  latter  more  particularly  show- 
ing itself  among  reptiles  and  insects.  2.  All  over  Africa,  but  more 
especially  in  the  east,  we  have  abundance  of  large  ungulates  and 
felines — antelopes,  giraffes,  buffaloes,  elephants,  and  rhinoceroses, 
with  hons,  leopards,  and  hyaenas,  all  of  types  now  or  recently 
found  in  India  and  Western  Asia.  3.  But  we  also  have  to  note 
the  absence  of  a  number  of  groups  which  abound  in  the  above- 
named  countries,  such  aa  deer,  bears,  moles,  and  true  pigs ;  while 
camels  and  goats — characteristic  of  the  desert  regions  just  to 
the  north  of  the  Ethiopian — are  equally  wanting.  4.  There  is 
a  wonderful  unity  of  type  and  want  of  speciaUty  in  the  vast 
area  of  our  first  sub-region  extending  from  Senegal  across  to  the 
east  coast,  and  southward  to  the  Zambezi;  while  West  Africa  and 
South  Africa  each  abound  in  peculiar  types.  5.  We  have  the 
extraordinary  fauna  of  Madagascar  to  account  for,  with  its 
evident  main  derivation  from  Africa,  yet  wanting  all  the  larger 
and  higher  African  forms ;  its  resemblances  to  Malaya  and  to 
Soutli  America ;  and  its  wonderful  assemblage  of  altogether 
peculiar  types. 

Here  we  find  a  secure  starting-point,  for  we  are  sure  that 
Madagascar  must  have  been  separated  from  Africa  before  the 
assemblage  of  large  animals  enumerated  above,  had  entered 
it.  Now,  it  is  a  suggestive  fact,  that  all  these  belong  to  types 
which  abounded  in  Europe  and  India  about  the  Miocene  period. 
It  is  also  known,  from  the  prevalence  of  Tertiary  deposits  over 
the  Sahara  and  much  of  Arabia,  Persia,  and  Northern  India, 
that  during  early  Tertiary  times  a  continuous  sea  from  the  Bay 
of  Bengal  to  the  British  Isles  completely  cut  off  aU  land  com- 
munication between  Central  and  Southern  Africa  on  the  one 
side,  and  the  great  continent  of  the  Eastern  hemisphere  on  the 
other.  When  Africa  was  thus  isolated,  its  fauna  probably  had  a 
character  somewhat  analogous  to  that  of  South  America  at  the 
same  period.  Most  of  the  higher  types  of  mammalian  life  were 
absent,  while  lemurs,  Edeutates,  and  Insectivora  took  their  place. 
At  this  period  Madagascar  was  no  doubt  united  with  Africa, 


by  Google 


OHAP.  XL]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  287 

and  helped  to  form  a  great  southern  continent  which  must  at  one 
time  have  extended  eastward  as  far  as  Southern  India  and 
Ceylon ;  and  over  the  whole  of  this  the  lemurine  type  no  douht 
prevailed. 

During  some  portion  of  this  period,  South  Temperate  Africa 
must  have  had  a  much  greater  extension,  perhaps  indicated  by 
the  numerous  shoals  and  rocks  to  the  soutli  and  east  of  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  by  the  Crozets  and  Kerguelen  Islands 
further  to  the  south-east.  This  would  have  afforded  means  for 
that  intercommunion  with  Western  Australia  which  is  so  clearly 
marked  in  the  flora,  and  to  some  extent  also  in  the  insects  of  the 
two  countries ;  and  some  such  extension  is  absolutely  recLuired 
for  the  development  of  that  wonderfully  rich  and  peculiar 
temperate  flora  and  fauna,  which,  now  crowded  into  a  narrow 
territory,  is  one  of  the  greatest  marvels  of  the  organic  world. 

During  this  early  period,  when  the  great  southern  continents 
— South  America,  Africa,  and  Australia — were  equally  free  from 
the  inciu"sion8  of  the  destructive  felines  of  the  north,  the 
Struthious  or  ostrich  type  of  birds  was  probably  developed  into 
its  existing  forms.  It  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  suppose  that 
these  three  continents  were  at  any  time  united,  in  order  to 
account  for  the  distribution  of  these  great  terrestrial  birds  ;  as 
this  may  have  arisen  by  at  least  two  other  easily  conceiv- 
able modes.  The  ancestral  Struthious  type  may,  like  the 
Marsupial,  have  once  spread  over  the  larger  portion  of  the  globe  ; 
but  as  higher  forms,  especially  of  Carnivora,  became  developed, 
it  would  be  exterminated  everywhere  but  in  those  regions 
where  it  was  free  from  their  attacks.  In  each  of  these  it  would 
develope  into  special  forms  adapted  to  surrounding  conditions  ■  and 
the  large  size,  great  strength  an  I  e\ces&l^e  sjeel  of  the  o  tiicl 
may  have  been  a  comparatively  late  devel  pment  ca  sed  bj  its 
exposure  to  the  attacks  of  enemies  which  renderel  snch  modi 
fication  necessary.  This  seems  the  most  pr  bable  exjlanation 
of  the  distribution  of  Struthious  b  ids  i.nd  it  is  rendered  ilmost 
certain  by  the  discovery  of  lemaii  a  of  this  order  m  Europe  m 
Eocene  deposits,  and  by  the  occurionce  of  an  ostrich  ■imong  the 
fossils  of  the  Siwalik  hiUs    but  it  is  just  possible  also  that  the 


by  Google 


288  ZOOJ,OGICAL  GEOGEAPHT.  [paet  hi. 

ancestral  type  may  have  teen  a  bird  capable  of  fligiit,  and  that 
it  spread  from  one  of  the  three  southern  continents  to  the  others 
at  the  period  of  their  near  approach,  and  more  or  less  completely 
lost  the  power  of  flight  owing  to  the  long  continued  absence 
of  enemies. 

During  the  period  we  have  been  considering,  the  ancestors  of 
existing  apes  and  monkeys  flourished  (as  we  have  seen  in 
Chapter  VI.)  along  the  whole  southern  shores  of  the  old  Palje- 
arctic  continent ;  and  it  seems  likely  that  they  first  entered 
Africa  by  means  of  a  land  connection  indicated  by  the  extensive 
and  lofty  plateaus  of  the  Sahara,  situated  to  the  south-east  of  Tunis 
and  reaching  to  a  little  north-west  of  Lake  Tchad ;  and  at  the  same 
time  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros  type  may  have  entered.  This 
will  account  for  the  curious  similarity  between  the  higher  faunas 
of  "West  Africa  and  the  Indo-Malay  sub-region,  for  owing  to  the 
present  distribution  of  land  and  sea  and  the  narrowing  of  the 
tropical  zone  since  Miocene  times,  these  are  now  the  only 
lowland,  equatorial,  forest-clad  countries,  which  were  in  connec- 
tion with  the  southern  shores  of  the  old  Paltearctic  continent  at 
the  time  of  its  greatest  luxuriance  and  development.  This 
western  connection  did  not  probably  last  long,  the  junction  that 
led  to  the  greatest  incursion  of  new  forms,  and  the  complete 
change  in  the  character  of  the  African  fauna,  having  apparently 
been  effected  by  way  of  Syria  and  the  shores  of  the  Bed  Sea  at 
a  somewhat  later  date.  By  this  route  tlie  old  South-Pal£earctic 
fauna,  indicated  by  the  fossils  of  Pikemii  and  the  Siwalik  Hills, 
poured  into  Africa;  and  finding  there  a  new  and  favourable 
country,  almost  wholly  unoccupied  by  large  Mammalia,  increased 
to  an  enormous  extent,  developed  into  new  forms,  and  finally 
overran  the  whole  continent. 

Before  this  occurred,  however,  a  great  change  had  taken  place 
in  the  geography  of  Africa.  It  had  gradually  diminished  on  the 
south  and  east ;  Madagascar  had  been  left  isolated ;  while  a 
number  of  small  islands,  banks,  and  coral  reefs  in  the  Indian 
Ocean  alone  remained  to  indicate  the  position  of  a  once  extensive 
equatorial  land.  The  Mascarene  Islands  appear  to  represent 
the  portion  which  separated  earliest,  before  any  camivora  had 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.]  THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGION.  289 

readied  the  country ;  and  it  was  in  consequenee  of  this  total 
exemption  from  danger,  that  several  groups  of  birds  altogether 
incapable  of  flight  became  developed  here,  culminating  in  the 
huge  and  unwieldy  Dodo,  and  the  more  active  Aphanapteryx. 
To  the  same  cause  may  be  attributed  the  development,  in  these 
islands,  of  g^antic  land-tortoises,  far  surpassing  any  others  now 
living  on  the  globe.  They  appear  to  have  formerly  inhabited 
Mauritius,  Eouibon,  and  Eodriguez,  and  perhaps  all  the 
other  Mascarene  islands,  but  having  been  recklessly  destroyed, 
now  only  survive  in  the  small  uninhabited  Aldabra  islands 
north  of  the  Seychelle  group.  The  largest  living  specimen 
(54  feet  long)  is  now  in  our  Zoological  Gardens,  The  only 
other  place  where  et^ually  large  tortoises  (of  an  allied  species) 
are  found,  is  the  Galapagos  islands,  where  they  were  equally  free 
from  enemies  till  civilized  man  came  upon  the  scene ;  who,  partly 
by  using  them  for  food,  partly  by  the  introduction  of  pigs,  which 
destroy  the  eggs,  has  greatly  diminished  their  numbers  and 
size,  and  wUl  probably  soon  whoUy  exterminate  them.  It  is  a 
curious  fact,  ascertained  by  Dr.  Giinther,  that  the  tortoises  of 
the  Galapagos  are  more  nearly  related  to  the  extinct  tortoises  of 
Mauritius  than  is  the  living  tortoise  of  Aldabra.  This  would 
imply  that  several  distinct  groups  or  sub-genera  of  Testudo  have 
had  a  wide  rai^e  over  the  globe,  and  that  some  of  each  have 
survived  in  very  distant  localities.  This  is  rendered  quite  con- 
ceivable by  the  known  antiquity  of  the  genus  Tcshtdo,  which 
dates  back  to  at  least  the  Eocene  formation  (in  North  America) 
with  very  little  change  of  form.  These  slu^ish  reptiles,  so 
long-lived  and  so  tenacious  of  life,  may  have  remained  un- 
changed, while  every  higher  animal  type  around  them  has 
become  extinct  and  been  replaced  by  very  different  forms ;  as 
in  the  case  of  the  living  Smys  tectwm,  which  is  the  sole  survivor 
of  the  strange  Siwalik  fauna  of  the  Miocene  epoch.  The  ascer- 
tained history  of  the  genus  and  the  group,  thus  affords  a  satis- 
factory explanation  of  the  close  affinity  of  the  gigantic  tortoises 
of  Mauritius  and  the  Galapagos. 

The  great  island  of  Madagascar  seems  to  have  remained  longer 
united  with  Africa,  till  some  of  the  smaller  and  more  active 


by  Google 


290  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

carnivora  had  reached  it;  and  we  conseijueutly  find  there,  no 
wholly  terrestrial  form  of  bird  but  the  gigantic  and  powerful 
jEpyornis,  well  able  to  defend  itself  against  such  enemies.  As 
already  intimated,  we  refer  the  South  American  elenient  in 
Madagascar,  not  to  any  special  connection  of  the  two  countriea 
independently  of  Africa,  but  to  the  preservation  there  of  a 
number  of  forma,  some  derived  from  America  tlirough  Africa, 
others  of  once  almost  cosmopolitan  range,  but  which,  owing  to  the 
severer  competition,  have  become  extinct  on  the  African  con- 
tinent, while  they  have  continued  to  exist  under  modified  forms 
in  the  two  other  countries. 

The  depths  of  all  the  great  oceans  are  now  known  to  be  so 
profound,  that  we  cannot  conceive  the  elevation  of  their  beda 
above  the  surface  without  some  corresponding  depression  else- 
where. And  if,  as  is  probable,  these  opposite  motions  of  the 
earth's  crust  usually  take  place  in  parallel  bands,  and  are  to 
some  extent  dependent  on  each  other,  an  elevation  of  the  sea 
bed  could  hardly  fail  to  lead  to  the  submei^ence  of  large  tracts 
of  existing  continents ;  and  this  is  the  more  likely  to  occur  on 
account  of  the  great  disproportion  that  we  have  seen  exists 
between  the  mean  height  of  the  land  and  the  mean  depth  of  the 
ocean.  Keeping  this  principle  in  view,  we  may,  with  some 
probability,  suggest  the  successive  stages  by  which  the  Ethiopian 
region  assumed  its  present  form,  and  acquired  the  striking 
peculiarities  that  characterise  its  several  sub-regions.  Duriug 
the  early  period,  when  the  rich  and  varied  temperate  flora  of  the 
Cape,  and  its  hardly  less  peculiar  forms  of  insects  and  of  low  type 
mammaUa,  were  in  process  of  development  in  an  extensive 
south  temperate  land,  we  may  be  pretty  sure  that  the  whole  of 
the  east  and  much  of  the  north  of  Africa  was  deep  sea.  At  a 
later  period,  when  this  continent  sank  towards  the  south  and 
east,  the  elevation  may  have  occurred  which  connected  Mada- 
gascar with  Ceylon;  and  only  at  a  still  later  epoch,  when  the 
Indian  Ocean  had  again  been  formed,  did  central,  eastern,  and 
northern  Africa  gradually  rise  above  the  ocean,  and  effect  a 
connection  with  the  great  northern  continent  by  way  of  Abys- 
sinia and  Arabia.     And  if  this  last  change  took  place  with 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XI.}  THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION.  291 

tolerable  rapidity,  or  if  the  elevatory  force  acted  from  the  north 
towards  the  south,  there  would  be  a  new  and  unoccupied 
territory  to  be  taken  posaeaaion  of  by  immigrants  from  the 
north,  together  with  a  few  from  the  south  and  west.  The  more 
highlj  oi^anized  types  from  the  great  northern  continent,  how- 
L\er,  would  inevitably  prevail;  and  we  should  thus  have 
Lxplimed  the  curious  uniformity  in  the  fauna  of  so  large  an 
Ilea  tot,cther  with  the  absence  from  it  of  those  peculiar 
Ethiopian  types  which  so  abundantly  characterise  the  other 
three  sub-regions. 

We  may  now  perhaps  see  the  reason  of  the  singular  absence  from 
tropical  Africa  of  deer  and  bears ;  for  these  are  both  groups 
which  live  in  fertile  or  well-wooded  countries,  whereas  the  line 
of  immigration  from  Europe  to  Africa  was  probably  always,  as 
now,  to  a  great  extent  a  dry  and  desert  tract,  suited  to  antelopes 
and  lai^e  felines,  but  almost  impassable  to  deer  and  bears.  We 
find,  too,  that  whereas  remains  of  antelopes  and  giraffes  abound 
in  the  Miocene  deposits  of  Greece,  there  wete  no  deer  (which 
are  perhaps  a  somewhat  later  development) ;  neither  were  there 
any  bears,  but  numerous  forms  of  Fclidse,  Viverridfe,  Mustelidie, 
and  ancestral  forms  of  Hymna,  exactly  suited  to  be  the 
pre^enitors  of  the  most  prevalent  types  of  modern  African 
Zoology. 

There  appears  to  have  been  one  other  change  in  the  geo- 
graphy of  AMea  and  the  Atlantic  Ocean  that  requires  notice. 
The  rather  numerous  cases  of  close  similarity  in  the  insect 
forms  of  tropical  Africa  and  America,  seem  to  indicate  some 
better  means  of  transmission,  at  a  not  very  remote  epoch,  than 
now  exists.  The  vast  depth  of  the  Atlantic,  and  the  absence  of 
any  corresponding  likeness  in  the  vertebrate  fauna,  entirely 
negative  the  idea  of  any  union  between  the  two  countries ; 
but  a  moderate  extension  of  their  shores  towards  each  other  is 
not  improbable,  and  this,  with  large  islands  in  the  place  of  the 
Cape  Verd  group,  St.  Paul's  Eocka,  and  Eernando  Noronha,  to 
afford  resting  places  in  the  Atlantic,  would  probably  suffice  to 
explain  the  amount  of  similarity  that  actually  exists. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  geology  and  paheontology  of  Africa 


by  Google 


292  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [past  in. 

being  so  scanty,  it  would  be  imprudent  to  attempt  any  more 
detailed  explanation  of  the  peculiarities  of  its  existing  fauna. 
The  sketch  now  given  is,  it  is  believed,  founded  on  a  sufficient 
"basis  of  facts  to  tender  it  not  only  a  possihle  but  a  probable 
account  of  what  took  place ;  and  it  is  somethm^  gamed  to  be 
able  to  show,  that  a  lai^e  portion  of  the  peculiarities  and 
anomalies  of  so  remarkable  a  fauna  as  that  of  the  Ethiopian 
region,  can  be  accounted  for  by  a  serie?  of  changes  of  physical 
geography  during  the  tertiary  epoch  wliu,h  can  hiidly  be  con- 
sidered extreme,  or  in  any  way  unlikely  tu  have  o<  cuiied 


by  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION, 


TABLES  OF  DISTEIBUTION. 

In  drawing  up  these  tables  showing  the  distribution  of  vaiious 
classes  of  animals  in  the  Ethiopian  Eegion,  the  following  sources 
of  iuformation  have  been  chiefly  relied  on,  in  addition  to  the 
general  treatises,  monographs,  and  catalogues,  used  for  the  Fourth 
Part  of  this  work : — 

Mammalia. — Blanford'a  Abyssinia  ;  Peters's  Mozambique  ; 
Ileuglin  and  Schweinfurth  for  North  East  Airica ;  Grandidier 
Schlegel,  &e.,  for  Madagascar ;  the  local  lists  given  by  Mr. 
Andrew  Murray ;  numerous  papers  by  Fraser,  Gray,  Kirk, 
Mivart,  Peters,  Sclater,  and  Speke;  and  a  MS.  Mat  of  Bovidat 
from  Sir  Victor  Brooke. 

Birds. — Finsch  and  Hartlaub  for  East  Africa;  Heuglin  for 
Korth-East  AMca ;  Blanford  for  Abyssinia ;  Layard  for  South 
Africa ;  Hartlaub  for  West  Africa ;  Dohrn  for  Princes  Island ; 
Anderason  for  Damaraland ;  and  papers  by  Gurney,  Hartlaub, 
Kirk,  Newton,  Peters,  Sharpe,  Sclater,  Scblegel,  and  Pollen ; 
and  a  MS.  list  of  Madagascar  Birds  from  Mr.  Sharpe. 


by  Google 


4  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  i 

TABLE  1. 

FAMILIES  OF  ANIMALS  INHABITINO  TEE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 

Explanation. 


Knmbers  are  not  consecutive,  liut  correspond  ta  those  in  Part  IV, 

3«b-«elon8. 

Order  aad  ramlly. 

II 

H 

M 

Il 

Range  beyond  tho  ReEion, 

MAMMALIA. 

Pkimatrb. 

1.  Simiida 

2.  Semnopithecids 

3.  CynopitheeidtB 
6.    Lemnrids 

8.   ChiromyidsB  ... 

z 

- 

= 

- 

Oriental 

Oriental 

Oriental,  Palffiarctic 

Oriental 

CHBiaOPTBEA. 

9.  PteropidsB      ... 

11.  KhinolopHdfe 

12.  Vespertilionidse 

13.  NoctilionidK... 

E 

z 

= 

z 

Oriental,  Australian 

The  Eastern  Hemisphere 

Cosmopolite 

AU  Tropical  regions 

Ihsbotivoba. 

17.  Etinaceidie    ... 

18.  CeiOemm      ... 

32.  SoiicidfB 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Sonth  Palsarctie 
Paliearetie,  Oriental 
Greater  AntiUes 

All  regions  but  Australian  and  Neotropical 

CAENrvORA. 

23.  Felidffl   

35.  Viverrid^      ... 

26,  FroUlidee      ... 

27.  Hyaaud^        .. 

23.  Ciuiid^ 

39.  Muatelidle      ... 
83.  Otariida 

- 

~ 

z 

= 

All  regions  but  AuBtrahaa 

Orlsntal,  S   Paltearotic 

S.  Paliearetie,  India 
Almost  cosmopolite 
All  regions  but  Auatralian 

Cbtaoba. 

36  to  41 

Oceanic 

SiRENIA. 

- 

~ 

Neotropical,  Oriental,  Australian 

TTrJOULATA. 

iS.  E([mdie 

- 

- 

PalEearctie 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOMAN  REGION. 


Sub.regi™s. 

Order  and  PamUy. 

?" 

^i 

■si 

^u 

Bangs  beyonil  the  Region. 

H 

H 

H 

k 

Z" 

3 

_ 

Oriental 

47.  Suidffl     

Cosmopolite  ;  excl.  Auatralin 

4U.  TiBgulid^      ... 

Oriental 

51.  CainelapardidiB 

E2.  Bovidie 

— 

— 

~ 

All  regions  but  Neotrop.  and  Anstrdian 

pEOliOSOlDEA. 

53.  Elephantidie... 

— 

- 

- 

Oriental 

Hybacoidea. 

S*.  Hjracidte 

- 

- 

- 

Syria 

KODENTIA, 

55.  MmidEe 

68.  SpuladdK      ... 
57.  Dipodiiite       ... 

Paliearetic,  Oriental 

PalfeaTctiu,  Nearctic 

58.  llyoxidBi 

FaliGarctio 

61.  Scim-idB 

AU  regions  but  Anatralian 
N.  Africa,  Kootropical 

65.  Echimyidie    ... 

- 

Neotropical 

67.  HystrieidK    ... 

S.  Paliearetic,  Oriental 

70.  Lepoiidie       ... 

- 

— 

All  regions  but  Anetralian 

Edentata. 

72.  Manididie      ... 

_ 

_ 

__ 

Oriental 

— 

— 

BIRDS. 

Passbees. 

1.  Turdidie 

_ 

_ 

„ 

_ 

'Z.  Sylviida! 

3.  Timaliidte      ... 

Oriental,  Australian 

G.  Cinolid^f      ... 

Widely  scattered 

SriS'"*.. 

- 

- 

— 

Pnlsarotio,  Oriental,  Auatralian 

10.  Pavidre   

AD  regions  but  AuaUaliajj 

13.  Pycnonotidte... 

Oriental 

14.  OriolidlB 

Oriental,  Australian 

16.  Dicninilfe      ... 

— 

— 

3 

— 

Oriental,  Australian 
Oriental,  Australian 

17.  MHsdcapidte  ... 

11).  laniidfe 

20.  Corrida 

Cosmopolite 

33.  Nectarmiids... 

Oriental,  Australian 

24.  Dicffiid^ 

Oriental,  Australian 

30.  Hirundiiiid^,,. 

Cosmopolite 

33.  JringilMse    ... 

34.  Ploctidiu 

Oriental,  Australian 

35.  StiirnidBi       ... 

37.  AlaudidiB       ... 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Eastern  Hemisphere  and  Norlji  Ameriea 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY. 


and  Family.       «  d    „ 


38.  Kotacillideo  . 

47.  PiUidEB  ...     . 

48.  Paiclidte 


PiCARia;. 
Picidfe 
YungidfB 


E3.  Indicatoridte... 

54.  Megal^Riidce... 

S6.  MitsophagidfB 

67.  Coiiikm 

58.  Cucnlidie 

59.  Leptosoraidte  ... 
S2.  Coraciidfe 

63.  MeropidK 

66.  TrogoniJm     ... 

ST.  Alcedinid^    ... 

tiS.  Bucerotidce    ... 

89.  Upupidfe 

70.  IrrmridiB    ... 

7S.  Caprimutgidii) 

74.  CypselidEB 

PaiTTAOI.    . 

78.  PftlMomithidfe 
81.  Psittacidw 


Galling. 
86.  Pteroolidte     . 
37.  TBtraoiiids    . 
88.  Phasiauidie    . 
39.  TurnieidEe 

AccrpiTKBS. 

94.  Vultniidce 

95.  Falconidee 
06.  Serpentariidce 

97.  PandioQidse  ... 

98.  Strigidte 

GnALLffl. 

99.  Ba,mdis 
100.  Soolopacidie... 

103.  Pamdie 

104.  Olareolidie  ... 

105.  Charadriidce 


ub.ro 

giona 

i| 

li 

II 

M 

BEUigo  beyond  the  EegioD. 

- 

- 

- 

The  Eastern  Hemisphere 
Oriental,  Aiiatraliaii 

- 

- 

Cosmopolite,  cxcl.  Australian  region 

Pfliearctic 

Oriental 

Oriental,  Neotropical 

" 

^ 

- 

- 

Cosmopolite 

- 

z 

z 

- 

Oriental,  AuatiaJian 
Oriental,  Australian 
Oriental,  Heotropical 

Oriental  and  to  N.  Gtiinea 
Pulffiarctio,  Oriental 

- 

- 

- 

" 

Cosmopolite 

z 

- 

- 

z 

Oriental 
Heotrapioal 

- 

- 

- 

- 

(Extinct) 

= 

z 

z 

z 

Palsearctic,  Oriental 
Eastern  Hemisphere  and  N.  America 
Old  World  aiitf  K  America 
Eastern  Hemiaphere.- 

- 

z 

- 

_ 

All  the  continents  but  Australia 
Ooatuipohte 

~ 

— 

= 

= 

Cosmopolite 
CosmopoJito 

z 

- 

^ 

z 

Cosmopolite 
Cosmopjhte 

~ 

— 

z 

=^. 

Cosmopolite 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 


sub-region,. 

Order  and  Family. 

S^ 

^s 

5d 

4^ 

BanBe  LeyoJia  ttie  Region, 

al 

II 

|| 

l| 

lOe.  Otidids       ... 

3 

Eastern  Hemisphere 

107.  Gniids 

All  regions  but  Heotopical 

113.  Ardeidte 

Cosmopolite 

114.  HatajBidffi    ,., 

Almost  Cosinopolito 

115.  Cicoiiiids     ... 

Oriental  and  H  eotropical 

117,  PIicsnicopteridEB 

- 

- 

- 

- 

ANSBRES. 

118.  Anatid*      ... 

_ 

_ 

_ 

119 

Laridie 

Cosmopolite 

120 

Procellariidie 

lai 

pBleeaiiidffi  ... 

122 

Sphcnisoidie 

124 

Cosmopolite 

Temperate  S.  America 

131.   j^pyvr/lithidte 

- 

(Extinct) 

TEPTILU 

1    Typhlopidie 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

All  regions  but  Nearotio 

6    Calamanidw 

Warms  parts  of  aU  regions 

7    ColubcidiB 

Almost  Cosmopolite 
Oriental,  and  all  otlier  ref^ons 

8    Humalopsids 

e    Paaminopliid'e 

Oriental  and  S.  Paliearctio 

10    SaLhuodont-ida. 

11    DendiophidB, 

Oriental,  Australian,  Neotropical 

\1    Drjiophidw 

Oriental,  NeotropioftI 

Oriental,  Australian,  Neotropical 

16    Jjrodontida! 

Oriental_ 

17    Ijlhoiudse 

All  tropical  regions 
Oriental,  S.  J'aliearetic 

18    ]l.iy(,idK 

20    tlaplda 

Tropical  regions,  S.  U.  States  and  Japau 

21    Ik-ndraspididoe 

22    Airactaindidt 
Ai    Hydcopfiida 
25    Vipendie 

Oriental,  Australian,  Panama 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Oriental,  Palsarctio 

LilCBRTILIA 

-•)    Amphisba'nid'e 

_ 

_ 

N.  America 

3tl   ViraaidLE 

Warm  parts  of  E   Hemisphere 

3J    Lapcrtadu- 

All  continents  hut  America 

34    Zominds 

AU  Amenta,  H   Inlm   S.  Europe 

4tl    C/iamrBsitundiE 

41    bymnopthal   ) 

- 

- 

4'i    aeim  1  Jh, 

47    StpidEP 

South  Pal-eiKtic 

48     ^oontlaJffi 

Ceykn  and  Moluccas 

49    Geckotidu. 

^ 

^OL.  I.— 21 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Chelokia. 
67.  Toatudinidaj  ... 

58.  Ohelydidie     ... 

59.  TrioujchidEe ... 

60.  Cheloniidie    .. 

AMPHIBIA. 


Oriental,  Keotiopicsl 


ta  but  Australia 
Australia,  S.  Ameiiea 
Oriental,  Japan,  E,  United  Sta 
Murine 


AWOURA. 

7.  PhrjiiiscidoB  ... 

.  9.  Bufonid^ 

11.  EngjstomidEe.. 

14.  Alytid^ 

17.  Polypedatidse 

18.  Kanae 


Neofiopioal,  Australia,  Java 
Ali  regions  but  Australian 
All  regions  but  PaliBaiiitio 
All  regions  bnt  Oriental 
All  tie  ragions 
Almost  Coaniopolite 
All  rsgioHS  but  Nearctic 


FISHES  (FRESH- 
WATER). 

AoABTHOPTBRYeil. 

3.  PercidEE 

12.  Sdenidfe 
35.  Labyrinthiei , . . 
38.  Mu^Iidis 
52.  Chromid^ 

Physobtomi. 

59.  Silnridie 

flO.  GharaoiniiLe  ... 

68.  Hortnyridie  ... 

69.  (fymnaTchida 
73.  Cypriiiodontidte 
76.  Cyprinidte     ... 
78.  Osteogloasidie 
82,  Notopteridffi  ... 

Ganoidbl 
92.  Sireiioidei 


egions  but  Austi'uliati 
All  regions  but  Australian 
Orien&l,  Moluccas 
Australian,  Heotropical 
Oriental,  Seo tropical 


Neotropical,  Australian 


b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  KEGION. 


SuH-regiona. 

Order  and  Famllr. 

ij 

II 

II 

i| 

Range  heyond  the  Keginii, 

INSECTS.       LEPI- 

DOPTEEA  (PAKT). 

DlTJKNI  (BUTTER- 

PtlBS). 

1.  Danaidie 

All  warm  (countries  and  Caiiada 

2.  Satyridte 

3.  Elymniidie    ... 

Oiieiital,  Moluccas 

6   Aarseidai 

All  tropical  regions 

9.  lAytheiaffi    „. 

- 

- 

— 

- 

CoGinopolite 

Abgent  from  Anetwlia  oaly 

Absent  from  AuBtralin  and  Nearctic  region 

13.  LyciBnidffi     ... 

Cosmopolite 

U.  Pieiid^ 

Coamopolita 

16.  PapilionicUe  ... 

Cosmopolite 

16.  Heaperidte      ... 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Cosmopolita 

SFHIKeiDBA. 

17.  Zygserads      ... 

„ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

18.  Agaristidre     ... 
20.  Ifianiidie       ... 

All  tropical  regions 

23.  ^ngidffi     '.'.'. 

Cosmopolite,  exol,  Australia 

— 

- 

- 

— 

Cosmopolite 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Explanation. 
Names  in  HoMcs  show  genera  peculiar  to  the  region 
Names  iucloeed  thus  (...)shDw  genera  which  just  en 

properly  to  belong  to  it. 
Genera  which  undoubtedly  belong  to  tte  region  are 

MAJ\{MAI.TA. 


ter  tlie  re^an,  but  are  not  considored 
numbered  consecutively. 


Order,  Faniilj,  aud 

3 

Range  «iHiin  the  Be^on, 

Range  beyond  the  Resion, 

PRIMATES. 

SlMlIDJt 

1.  Troglod!^     ... 

3 

W.     Africa    to   Western    Nile 
Sources 

2.  Colabus    

11 

Abyssinia  to  Vest  Africa 

CYKOEITnEOinai. 

S.  Myit^thwM   ... 

1 

West  Africa 

4,  O^copHhecus  ... 

24 

Tropical  Africa 

S.   Oercocebua       ... 

5 

West  Africa 

6.   Theropithema  ... 

% 

North-east  Africa,  Arabia, 

Palestine 

10 

Nubia    to    Cape,    W.    Africa, 
Arabia 

(^ub  Older) 

LEMUROIDEA 

Lbmurids 

8    Indns 

6 

Madagascar 

9   Zeitmr 

15 

Madagascar 

10  Sapalemtr 

2 

lladaga.scar 

11    Jtf«.?ooe4!« 

4 

Madagascar 

IL   GhirogciUus 

6 

13   Lepilemur 

2 

Madagascar 

li    FeiodiLliois 

1 

Sierra  Leone 

I'i    Aictooebus 

1 

Old  Calabar 

10    Galago 

14 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

CmnaxiTiDM. 

n    Chiromya 

1 

Madagascar 

CHIKOPTEEA. 

PlBKOPina. 

18.  Pt«vopu3 

7 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

Tropics  of  Eastern  Hemis- 
Oriental,Austro.MiLlajan 

19.  Xantharpya    ... 

1 

AH  Africa 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 


Orfor.  Paniiljr,  ana 

Bj 

M 

BajigP  within  the  Re^on, 

Ranj-u  beyond  the  Region. 

2i)    Cynupteru? 
'ii    EypsMpifOhia 

I 

6 
1 

Tropical  Africa 

Tropical  Africa  and  Abyaaiiii  a 

W.  Africa 

Orieutal 

EHHfOLOPHIDJS. 

23    Ehinolophua 

2i    Mocronyctervs 
2n    Phyllorhma 

2t,    A=iPllia 

6 

1 

1 

Afiioa  and  Madagascar 

"W".  Africa 
Tropical  Africa 

Nubia 

Warmer  parts  of  Eastern 
Hemisphere 

Indo -Malaya,   Austro- 

Malaya 
Indo-Malaya,   Anatro- 

Malaya 
Oriental,  Molneoas 
Java 

27    Mtgad.iim 
2-    Nytten. 

I 

irfe^"""" 

1  rsIFRTILIIlNlDjE 

2 '    "^  p'iptrtilio 
.<!    keiiYOHla 

31  Minioptens 

32  N>.ti:nu. 
J  J     rapliozoiia 

NOOTILlCWIBjfJ 

14 
7 

Africa  and  Mailagasfar 
S.  Africa 
S.  Africa 
Tropical  Africa 
Africa  and  Madagascar 

Cosmopolite 
Oriental 
Indo-Malaya 
India 

Oriental,   Au'itro  Jlala> 
an,  Neotrofical 

14    JTj  ctinoinus 

1 

Madagascar 

Oriental,    American,    s 

Palaarotic 
Neotropical,  S   Pal,earc 

35.  Molossus 

3 

Africa,  Bourbon 

INSECTIVORA. 

IC 

37.  Fetrodrojnm     .. 

38,  M.ynchoey<m   ... 

2 
1 

1 

Sontli  and  East  Africa 

Mozambique 

Mozambit[ue 

H.  Africa. 

EBISAOBO)*!. 

30.  Eriuflceua 

2 

Ccn.  and  Soath  Africa 

Palffiarctic,  N.  India 

Cbntbtide. 

41.  HDmiceiitdes    ... 

42.  EHealus 

43.  OryzoHcles 

44.  Eehimps 

2 
2 

1 
8 

Madagascar  and  Mauritius 
Madagascar 
Madagascar 
Madagascar 

POTAMOOALID^. 

46.  Potomogale     ... 

1 

Old  Calabar 

CHRYSOOHIORIBJ]. 

ifi.   GhnjSBCklorU  ... 

3 

Capo  to  Mommliique 

So&ici-DM. 

47.  Sores       

15 

All  Africa  and  Madagascar 

Palmare,  Nearc,  Ori 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GIOGEAPHY. 


Orflar,  Family,  and 
Genus. 

1 

Eniige  -ivitUin  the  RegioD, 

Range  lieyond  the  Resioii. 

CARNIVOEA. 

Fes.it>m. 

is.  Felis 

AH  Africa 

All  reg.  but  Australian 

ifl.   Lyuxpl 

1 

N,  and  S.  Africa 

Paln^arctic  and  Kearcti.; 

50.  Cynfolurns       ... 

1 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

Persia,  India 

CRYTTOPItOOTID^H. 

61.  Gryplo2nvda    ... 

1 

MadagBsoar 

TlVBBBlTia. 

52.  Viyem    

1 

Tropical  Africa 

Onental 

53 

Qenetta    

4 

Tropical  and  8.  Africa 

S.  Paltearctio 

54 

Fo^       

2 

55 

Poiana     

S6 

Qalidia    

3 

Madaftascar 

57 

NaiuUma 

1 

W.  Africa- 

6S 

Qamidia 

2 

Mada^soar 
AliATrica 

sg 

Herpestes 

13 

S.  EuTope,  Oriental 

60 

Athylme   

S.  and  E.  Africa  <?)  Madagaaear 

61 

Cdogsle 

9 

Tropical  and  S,  Africa 
E.  Africa 

Oriental 

62 

Oakrella 

1 

63 

Ariela     

1 

S.  AMea 

6i 

4 

E.  Africa,  Senegal,  S,  Afriwi 

65 

SdeogcUe 

3 

Tropical  Africa 

Mdogaie 

2 

E.  and  a  AMca 

67 

OyrMs   

3 

S.  Africa 

68 

BhiTtogaU 

1 

E.  AMca 

69 

Mwagoa    

8 

Tropieal  and  S.  Africa 

70 
71 

Onmamkwi     ... 
EupletVi  ...     1.. 

.1 
1 

Tropical  Africa 
Madagascar 

72.  Svirieata 

1 

a  Africa 

Protelide. 

78.  FrotelM    

1 

S.  Africa 

'a.Yassmm. 

74.  Hytena     

3 

All  Africa 

S.  Palaiartic,  India 

CANIDiB. 

75.  Lycaon     

1 

8.,  Central,  and  E,  Africa 

76.  Oafflis        ...     :.. 

5 

All  Afiica 

Almost  Cnsmopolitan 

77.  MesaloU^ 

1 

S.  Africa 

^  MraTELlDB. 

'&.  MUBtela    

1 

Angola 

Palfeai-ctic,  JTearctle 

9,  Gjmnopusp]  ... 

1 

Oriental 

1 

9.  and  W.  Africa 

Oriental 

31.  Hydr-3gaU       ... 

1 

S.  Africa 

82.  MeUivora        .. 

2 

Sffutli  and  Tropical  Africa. 

India 

83.  Ictonyx     

2 

Tropical  and  8.  Africa 

Otamids. 

S 

1 

Cape  Of  Good  Hope 

8outh  Temperate  Zone 

b,  Google 


CBAP.  xi.j  THE  BTHIOPIAIT  EEGION. 

Order,  Fanillj',  ancl 


Ehinocbroiide. 


HlPPOPOTAMIB^. 

89.  Sippopolamtis 


Bl.  Fhaeoehcerus  „■ 
02.  Syomc»(^ms  . . 

CAMELOPAItDiLIB«. 

93.  Ca/melopa'rdaMs 

Boyibj:. 

94.  BubdQB 

96.  Oreas     : 

86.  Tra^Ja^httt  ... 
8?.  Oryi      


100.  Cferwieajim     .. 

101,  ffofriis     

302,  Feka      ...     ■ 
108.  NaTtotTagvs  . 
104.  ^eofrogus 
106.  G^halopkus  . 

106.  Hippatragm  . 

107.  Alcephahie    . 

108.  CalMepas     . 
(Capnt  ...     ... 

PHOBOSCIDEA. 

BlEFHA^^TIDifi. 

109.  Elephas 


Tropical  and  S.  Africa 
All  Tropica]  and  S.  Africa 
Great  Eivera  of  Africa 


Africa  S.  of  Sahara 
Arabian  and  African  deserts 
Africa  H.   of  EqnalOT   and  t 

S.  E.  Africa 

All  Tropical  Africa 

Pastures  pf  all  Africa 

South  Africa 

Africa  8.  of  Sahflra 

Abysainia  and  K.  S.  Africa 

AE  tropical  Africa 

Gambia,  Central  Africa  to  Cape 

All  Africa 

Africa  8.  of  Equator 

Aljyssim'a,  high) 


1    Tropical  and  S.  Africa 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY. 


Order,  Family,  anil 

^1 

■~-«- 

Riingo  tojond  the  Region. 

HYRAGOIDEA. 

HYRS-CIDJi, 

110.  Hyrax    

10 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

Syria 

RODENTIA. 

MUBII)^. 

:n.  Mus     

2Q 

All  Africa 

E.  Hemis,  excL  Ocesinia 

112.  Lasimays 

1 

W.  Africa 

113.  Acanthomys,., 

4 

Tropical  Africa 

India 

114.  Gricetomya     ... 

1 

Tropical  Aftica 

2 

Moaambiqae 

2 

S.  Africa 

117.  Ife$am,ys 

1 

Madagaaoiir 

2 

Eaat  and  S.  Africa 

lU.  Felomys 

1 

Mozambique 

120.  Olamya   

e 

8.  and  E.  Africa 

121.  Meriones       ... 

14 

Africa 

Taliearatic,  India 

133.  miacatkrix  ... 

2 

S.  Aftica 

128.  My^romys    ... 

1 

S.  Africa 

1 

Madagascar 

125.  Mypogeomya  ... 

1 

Madagascar 

12e.  Lophionyys    ... 

1 

S.  Arabia  and  K  E.  Africa 

Spalaoidjb. 

137.  Rhizomys      „. 

4 

Abyssinia 

Oriental  to  Malacca 

138.  Baihyerges    ... 

1 

S,  Africa 

129.  Georychm      ... 

e 

E.  Central,  and  S.  Africa 

130.  Sd-iopkoUva ... 

1 

Mozambique 

DlPODIDJl. 

131.  Dipus     

7 

N.  and  Central  Africa, 

Central  Palisarotic 

132.  Pedtites    

1 

S,  Af.  to  Mozambique  and  Angola 

MYOxroai. 

138.  Myoxus 

1 

Africa  to  Cape 

Paltearctic 

HCDIKID^ 

134    S-'mrus 

IS 

All  woody  districts  of  Africa 

AllreponsbutAustralia 

136   Aliomal«ru=    . 

5 

"W".  Africa  and  Fernando  Po. 

OcrODOBTlBJ] 

136  Peclimlur 

1 

Abyssinia 

ECHlMYIDiB 

187   Pdromys 

1 

S,  Africa 

133    Aalaeodes 

1 

W.,  E„  and  S.  Africa 

HTSTBICIDa; 

18B    Hjstiix 

1 

Africa  to  Cape 

S.  Pal^arcfic  Oriental 

140   Atlienira 

1 

W.  Africa 

Patearctio 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 


Order.  Famtly,  and 

I 

llango  within  tlie  Reainn. 

REmge  beyond  the  Begion, 

LispomoM. 

141.  LepiiB    

5 

East  and  South  Africa 

All  regions  Tjut  Austral!  an 

EDENTATA. 

Masididm. 

H2.  Mimis     

i 

Sennaar  to  W.  Africa  and  Cape 

Oriental 

143.  Omsisropan   ... 

2 

N,E,  Africa  to  Nik  Sourofs,  and 
S.  Africa 

The  wliole  reg.  (esol.  Madasas.) 

Almost  Cosmopolite 
Palajarorie  and  Oriental 

S.  Africa   ' 

S.  Africa 

Tlia  whole  region 

Palestine 

The  whole  region: 

Palestine 

The  whole  legion 

Paltearo.  .Orion, ,  Austral 

S.  Africa 

Australian 

Africa 

The  whole  region 

Palmare.,  Orien.,  Austral 

Abjssinia  and  S.  Africa 
All  Africa 
MadagaBRac 

8.  Europe,  Palestine 

Madagascar 

Madagascar 

8.  Afnca 

Palffiarctio,  Oriental 

All  Afiiea 

Madagascar 
S.  Afnca 

Palflsarctio,  Oriental 

1.  and  S.  Africa 

Patearctio 

S.    E.    Africa,    GamMa, 

Verd  Ids. 
S.  Africa 

Cape 

Palsarctic,  Oriental 

Palfearctio 

Abyssinia  and  Senegal 

Paliearctic,  Oriental 

N.  E.  Africa 

Paliearctic 

Ids. 

Oriental 

All  Africa 

Oriental 

W.  and  N.  E.  Africa 

W.  Africa 

All  Africa 

Ids. 

S.  Paliearctic,  India 

Oentrel,  E.  and  B.  Africa 

PalEEarotic,  India 

N.  E.  Africa 

PaleaHne,  N.  W.  India 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

PalsarcHo,  Oriental 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Ordar,  PainUy,  and 

I 

.„„„..«., 

Eai^c  Leyoad  tlie  Region, 

TlHALUDM. 

U.  Oi-cderopva      ... 
35.  Sypergerua     ... 
86.  Okhladwsa     ... 

37.  Akth^      

88.  (hsylabes 

17 
1 
3 
4 

a 

Aliy&'iiiua 

All  Africa 

W.  Africa 

W.  and  E.  Africa 

W.  AtMca 

MadHgas<!at 

Oriental,  Palestine 
H".  Africa,  Persia 

ClNCLIDa.    [?1 

89.  MesUes     

^ 

Madagascar 

TROGLODYTirji.[?] 

40.  Sylvietta 

2 

Central,  E.  and  S.  Afiiofl 

SiTTIBJ!. 

41.  Hypkerpea 

1 

Madagascar 

PARioai. 

.i2.  Pftrus       

U.  ^thalus       ... 
45.  Farmia   

5 

6 
4 

1 

All  Africa 

All  Africa 

"W,,  Central,  and  S.  Africa 

W.  Aftica,  Prince's  Isteid 

Paliearc.,  Oiien.,  ITeare. 
Pakearotie 

PrCHONOTIBB. 

i6.  Pycnonotus     ... 

48.  Hypaipetea      .. 

50."  Criniger  '.'.'.     ..'. 
Bl.  lanmotiM 

52.  AmWopadua    ... 

53.  Uoplilus 

4 
4 
1 
14 

1 

All  Africa 

W.  and  S.  Africa 

M]idagaacar  and  Mascarene  Ids. 

Msdsgascat 

W.  and  3.  Africa 

W.Afiica 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

B.  Africa 

S.  Palsarctic,  Oriental 

Oriental 

Oriental 

ORIOHB.B. 

54.  Oriohis    

65."  Artamia\n     ... 

10 

1 

All  Africa 
Madagil^r 

Palioarotic,  Oriental 

CAMPBPHAGm^ 

57.  Lamdema      ... 
68.   Ox^ynotus 

5 
2 
5 

AlIAftica 

Mauritius  and  Bonrbon 

The  whole  region 

Celebes  to  New  Caledonia 

DlCEDEIDil 

60.  Ditrams 

11 

The  whole  K^on 

Oriental,  Anstraliaii 

MUSOICAPID^. 

61.  Butalis     

02,  Musnieapa 

88.  Alaeonax 

64.  Neivtoaia 

10 
4 
1 

AU  Africa 

All  tropical  Africa 

a.  Africa 

PalHjarctlc,  N.  Oriental 

Palifiaratic 

Oriental 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 


"■'■S?'"' 

I 

Kungo  within  Uie  Rsgion. 

Bnnge  beyond  the  Region 

65    Svhota 

2 

W,  Africa 

6e    E,y!h,oreTcus 

2 

Tropical  Afiioa 

67    Artumipas 

2 

W.  Africa 

b8    P^Mdvbias 

1 

HadagasQEi 

6')    UniUhm-ius 

2 

"W.  and  8.  Africa 

70  Met/aliifis 

71  '».s<ii(a 

1 

W,  Africa 
W.  Africa 

73    7-iu- 

i 

Tropical  Africa 

71    WwiiitK 

2 

Tropical  Africa 

7i    F'aliitijii 

12 

All  Africa 

76    Tdiitrea 

18 

Tlie  whole  region 

Oriental 

76      i'uJlMiO^wWC 

S.  Africa 

77    Bnidyoims 

7 

All  Africa 

Laniid^ 

78    i^"ra«]i(;/a  [T 

I 

W.  Africa 

7^    Oaliralicui 

Madagascar 
All  Africa 

^0    Lanius 

15 

Palfearc,  Orien,,  Nearo. 

^1    Hypo,., has 

1 

Abyssinia 

83    Vor^neUa 

1 

S.  and  W.  Africa 

8  J     ?7ii.&3fes 

I 

S.  Africa 

S4    Fraoena, 

W.AMca 

8'i    Syfodi.' 

1 

W.  Africa 

^a    C&phot'rva 

1 

Prince's  Island 

37    iWaiM 

1 

.111  Africa 

8H    Pnonops 

All  Africa 

89    EiiToetphalus 

H.  a  and  S.  Airica 

qn    Chaummoius 

1 

W.  Africa 

91     raM« 
^2    Ltrntiarvus 

3b 

Madagascar 

1'.    MtusUs 

2 

W.  and  S,  E,  Africa 

li    Aiailoi 

1 

E.  Africa 

as    TdLphmiis 

10 

All  Africa 

N.  Africa 

CORVID^ 

9b    IltJrstomia 

i 

W.  andE,  Africa 

9?      f'0111.13 

All  Afiica  and  Madagascar 

Cosmop.,  exel.  S.  AmtiT. 

y?     L-nimllui- 

2 

N.  E.  to  S.  AMoa 

99   Ficaiharlt!. 

W.  Africa 

(Fregilus 

1 

Abyssinia) 

Palienrotic  genns 

Mectaiumibje. 

100   M..taniiia 

55 

The  whole  regfim 

I 

S.  Africa 

102    Ciitayrii.incJlis 

W.Africa' 

103    Ni.adri'paj'is 

1 

Madjigaaoar 

Dll  fflD^ 

104    Zuflt/inps 

28 

The  whole  region 

Oriental  and  Anstralian 

liiS    Phohdomis 

1 

W.  Africa 

HiKUNDINlDiB 

106.  nmmdo 

17 

The  whole  region 

Cosmopolite 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY, 


Order,  F«nilj,  and 

Banga  within  the  Begion. 

Eange  Ijpyond  ihe  P.ogloTi. 

107.  PsaXid^rogm 

10 

The  whole  re^oa 

108.  Phediiut 

2 

Madagascar  and  ManritloB 

100.  Petrochelidott 

S.  Africa 

Neotropical 

110.  delidon 

1 

A?  Africa 

PalKarctic,  Oriental 

111.  Ootyle    

6 

Pal^aretic,  Oriental 

112.  Waldenia.     ... 

1 

W.  Africa 

FmoiLLira 

llf.  az?„ ::: 

g 

All  Africa 

S.  Pakarctio 

4 

Aljjssiraa  to  Cape 

Palrearcfjc 

HE.  Passer      

18 

All  Africa 

Pal^atctic,  Oriental 

118.  Gnthagra      ... 

12 

All  Africa 

N.  Africa,  Syria 

117.  Ugwrmts       ... 

2 

W.  Africa 

(Ei-ythrospiza, 

1 

Fnbia,  Aiubk} 

S.  Palicaretic  genus 

118.  Pimcolap]    ,., 

Camcroons,  "W.  Africa 

N.  Temperate  genua 

119.  IHiigHlana  ... 

9 

All  Africa 

Soutli  Patearctic 

pLoctunm. 

120.  Textor     

5 

All  Afrioa 

32 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

W.  and  E.  Africa 

124.  Ploceos 

W.  and  B.  Africa 

Oriental 

125.  Neluwrvi'as   ... 

Madagascar 

136,  Fmidia 

11 

Tropical  Atrios,  Madagascar,  &e. 

1 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

12 

Tropic^  and  S  Africa 

129.  PhUetmme    ... 

1 

S.  Africa 

ISO.  JVigHla 

7 

W.  and  N.  E.  Africa 

181.  Flocepaeser    ... 

E.  and  S.  Africa 

132.   Vidua   

6 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

183.  Oolliuspasser... 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 
S.  Afrioa 

184.  Ohem     

1 

ISS.  i^ermospta  ... 

2 

W.  Africa 

Tropical  and  8.  j5,frica 

187.  Eatrilda 

16 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

Orienta^ 

138.  Pytaia ' 

20 

Tropica!  and  S.  Africa 

2 

6 

Tropical  and  S.  Afiioa 

141.  Spermestes     ... 

7 

The  whole  region 
E.  and  W.  Africa 

142.  Amaweatkes... 

1 

148.  ffypocbera,    ... 

2 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

Stobnids. 

144.  miophva       ... 

1 

S.  Africa.  Loanda,  Sennaar 

145.  Bapkaga       .... 

146.  Suiyeeros      ... 

147.  Jam 

2 

1 

Trop.  and  S.  Africa  ([!]  a  family 

5 

148.  Lamprocdlias 

16 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

2 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

2 

W.  Africa 

151.  Spreo 

5 

Tropioal  and  S.  Africa 
N.  E.  Africa 

152.  Aitydrm       ... 

5 

Palestine 

153.  HarOamit'i ... 

1 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGION. 


150.  Alauda 
lET.   5p!  ^)borya 
158.  Qdenda 
IS  9.  CaUMdiila 

{ Melinoeorypha 

160.  Ceathilandi 

161.  Alaemon 

162.  Ildorocorys 
lea.  Mirafra 

164.  AmniomiTies 

165.  MegalophmiuB 
1S8.  Fepkromrys 
18T.  Pyrrliulftudft 


Abyaaioia  and  S.  W.  Africa 

Soutli  Africa 

Mortli  of  tropical  Africa 

Abyssinia,  S,  Afriea 

Abjmni.) 

South  Africa 

South.  Afriea 

Soutli  Africa 

South.  Africa,  Madagascar 

AfricEUi  dassrts 

Tropical'  and  S.  Afriea 

S.  Afriea 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 


Palieavctio,  ludian 

Paltoarctic,  Indian 

PalEcaretie  genua 
S.  Europe 
3.  Palicarctie 


Oriental,  Canary  lalands 


Paljearctic,         Oriental, 
Australian 

tf^ons,  exc.Auatralia 


Oriental,  Australian 


172.  Pkilepitta      .. 

PICAEI*. 
Picroj;. 

173.  Verreauxia   .. 

174.  2>e>uir<^nea3  .. 

175.  Cmnpethera  ., 

176.  €teoa/lapiea    .. 

177.  Yunx     


179.  Pogonorh^jachiis    : 

180.  Buecanodon  .. 

181.  Sladolimna    .. 

182.  BcM-baiala^     .. 

183.  Zylobucco      .. 

184.  Qymnoinieco .. 

185.  Fnmhyf^icmus 


W.  Africa 

Tropical  and  S.  Afriea 
Tropical  and  S.  Africa 
South  Africa 


N.  E.  Africa,  S.  Africa 


Tropical  and  S.  Africa 


Tropical  and  3.  Afiiea 

Wast  Afriea 

West  Africa 

West  and  South  Afriea 

West  and  South  Afriea 

West  Afriea 

Tropical  and  South  Africa 


Paliearctic 
Oriental 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,  Fimily,  Md 

I 

l.^...t.H..n, 

Range  beyond  the  Ko^on. 

187.  Tm-acus 

188.  Schisorhk     ... 

10 
6 

Tropiail  and  S.  Africa 
Tropical  and  S.  Attica 

COLIIDJ]. 

189.  CoMns    

7 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

CooDLioa). 

191.  Cnwi      

192.  OochJM^usles 

103.  Centrojius      ... 

104.  Cuculus 

105.  Chrjsocoocys 
10a.  Coceystea       ... 

2 

1 

10 

7 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

Madagascar 
A&ica  and  Madagascar 
Africa  and  Madagascar 
Tropical  and  S.  Africa 
Tropical  and  9,  Africa 

Oriental,  Australian 
PalEearc,  Orien.,  Austral. 
Oriental,  Australian 
S.  Palaiaretic,  Oriental 

LEProsoMiBai. 

197.  Leptosimms     .. 

1 

Madagascar 

CoKAcnDa. 

198.  Coracias 

188.  Emystomns  ... 

200.  AUtomis       ... 

201.  £rachypiemdas 

E 

2 

1 
1 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

Madagascar 
Mada^scar 
Madflgaacar 

S.  Palaiarctic,  Oriental 
Oriental,  Australian 

Mbropis^. 

203.  Merops 

204.  MeUaopkagus 

U 
6 

Africa  uid  Madagascar 
Ti'opical  and  S.  Africa 

S.Paliear.,  Orien., Austral. 

Tbdoosidm. 

2 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

Alcbdihisx. 

206.  Alcedo   

207.  Corythomis  ... 

208.  Cerjle    

209.  Myioeewc       ... 

211.  Halcyon 

3 

2 

4 
10 

W.  Africa,  Abjssinis,  Tfalal 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

W.  Africa,  Abyssinia,  Natal 

West  Africa 

Africa  and  MadMasear 

Africa,  Prince's  Is.,  St.  Thome 

Palaiar.,Oricn,,  Austral, 
American,  Pal^aretic 

S,PaliEar.,0rien.An8ttaL 

Bticbbotii»«. 

212.  Bai'fmiconiia  ... 

213.  Toakve    

21*.  Syco/aides     ... 
215.  Buarrms 

2 

West  Africa 
Tropical  and  S.  Africa 
Tropical  and  S.  Africa 
Tropical  and  S,  Africa 

Malaya 

TJPUPIDJH. 

216.  Upupa    

3 

Africa  and  Madagascar' 

S.  Palfearctio,  Oriental   , 

URIBOaiDB. 

217.  Irrisor    

12 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  EEGIOK 


Order,  Pflmily,  and 

t 

liango  Kithin  tte  Region. 

Range  Ijoyonil  the  BegiOD 

OatiUMULOIIiS. 

218.  Caprimulgus  ... 

18 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

Palfcarc.  ,Orien., Austral. 

219.  SeOTtoravi 

3 

Tropical  AMoa 

220.  Maorodipteryx 

3 

W.  Africa  to  Abyssinia 

1 

Tropical  Africa  to  tbo  Zambesi 

Cyfselid^e. 

232.  Cypselus 

6 

Tbo  whole  region 

Paljearctio,  Oriental 

223.  Oollocalia        ... 

Maacarane  Ida.,  Madagascar 
Tropicsl  Africa  and  Madagascar 

Oriental,  Australian 

224,  Chretura 

4 

Cosmop.,  exc.  W.  Pa!^- 

ISlTTAfl 

8 

W.  Africa  to  Abys,  &  Mauritius 

Oriental 

P^IITAdl)*: 

2,b     |-<i/<2»'s 
227   P  IK:  «> 

5 

W.  Mica 

223    Paoreihalus 

@ 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

23"*   Agaperav, 

Tropical  and  S,  Africa 

-30    Poliupsittu 

2 

Trop.  Africa  and  Madagascar 

GOLUMB^. 

COLUMEIDJ!. 

331.  Tniron    

3 

Africa,  and  Madagascar 

Oricntid 

2S2.  Akdrmi^     ... 

5 

MadaaaacarandMaacIds,  (est-*. 

233.    Columba 

12 

PaiEearctio,  Oriental 

234.    (Ehia       

1 

Tropical  aM  S.  Africa 

235.  Tiirtur   

10 

Serclielle  Islanila 

PfllEearctio,  Oriental 

236.  Aplopdia      ... 

4 

Abyssinia,  S.  Africa  and  W.s 
African  Islands 

237.   Chakopelia   ... 

3 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

DitiYom  (sxtinct) 

238.  IHcliis    

5 

Mascarene  Islands 

GALLIN/E. 

Ptbroclib.*. 

•m.  Pterooles       ... 

^ 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

S.  Paliearctio,  Indian 

Tetkaosid^, 
310.  FtUapachm    ... 

1 

West  Africa 

241.  rraneoliiius  ... 

SO 

S,  Palicarotic,  Indian 

243.  Feliperdiss     ... 

1 

West  Africa 

243.  Margaroperdis: 

1 

244,  Cotviraix 

a 

Tropical  and  8.  Africa 

Paliear.,  Orient., Austral. 

(Caccabis       .. 

1 

Abyssinia) 

Palffiarctic  genua 

pHASIANinj:. 

246.  FhoMd-m       ... 

1 

West  Africa 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Oraei  F»m,lj-  and 
toioia 

il 

Bnnge  withia  the  Region, 

Range  beyond  tlic  Region, 

240    Agilast^a 

I 

West  Africa 

247    Ai.,yllmm 

1 

Wdst  Africa 

248    humnda 

g 

Africa  to  Katal  and  Madagaaoiir 

TUENICID^ 

249    Tarmx 

4 

Palmare., Orient,  Anstrl. 

2o0    Oitycth:> 

1 

Africa 

ACCIPITEES 

VwiTuaiDj] 

2-11  Gyps 

■  2 

Pahearctic,  Oriental 

2S2    Paendogypa 

1 

N.E.  Africa  to  Senegal 

Oriental 

263    Otogyps 

1 

N.  E.  and  S.  Africa 

Patearetic,  Oriental 

254   Ix^lwgypa 

1 

N,  E.  and  a  Afriea  and  Senegal 

256.  Neophron     ... 

2 

AMca,  excL  west  coast 

S.  Palfcarotio,  Oriental 

FAMONma;. 

3 

Africa  and  Madagaaear 

257.  Circas    

Afrita  and  Madago^eat 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

W.  Africa 

269.  Mdierws 

6 

Africa,  esd.  west  coast 

260.  Aatnr     

5 

Almost  Coeraopolite 

m..Nlsoides 

Madagascar 

262.  S^iMiyi-chU    ... 

1 

263.  Accipitar 

Africa  and  Jladagascor 

264.  Bnteo     

6 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

Cosmon.,  esel.  Austral. 

285.  GvpaetUB       ... 

1 

N.  E.  and  S.  Afrfea 

S.  Paliaretic 

263.  Aqnila   

5 

All  Africa 

Nearc.,  Paltcarc.,  Indian 

267.  KiiaetaB 

^ 

W.  Aftlea 

S.  Pahearctic,  Oritiital, 
Anstralia 

3 

All  Africa 

Neotropical,  Oriental  to 
N.  Guinea 

269.  Lof^uxetm     ... 

I 

All  Africa 

270.  Aatminula    ... 

1 

Tropical  Africa 

271.  Dryotnorehia 

I 

W,  Africa 

272.  CSrcaetofl       ... 

5 

All  Africa 

Patearotic,  Oriental 

273.  Bntastur 

K.  E.  Africa 

Oriental  to  New  Guinea 

274.  Melotarsits     ... 

2 

Tropical  and  S.  Africa 

276.  HaliasetnB      ... 

2 

The  ivliole  region 

Cosmopolite,  esrf.  Heo- 
tropical  region 

276.  OymMnrax  ... 

1 

"West  and  Ea  t  Af    a 

1 

■West  and  N.E  Af    a 

278.  Milvua 

1 

The  whole  legi  q 

The  Eastern  Hemisphere 

279.  Elanus   

I 

Africa 

India  to  Australia 

280.  MachEerliamphus 

I 

8.  W.  Africa  and  M  d  f,     a 

Malacca 

281.  Peniis    

I 

S.  Africa  and  Md          a 

Palflsarctic,  Oriental 

282,  Baza       

Africa  and  Madagas  a 

India  to  H"  Au5tialia 

283.  Polioliiorax  ... 

1 

East  Africa 

Buimah 

234.  Palco      

4 

All  Africa 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

285.  Corchneis       ... 

8 

The  whole  region 

Almost  Coi,tiiojohtB 

SBRPBNTARUDai. 

286.  Sefpmtwriim  ... 

1 

The  greater  part  of  AMca 

b,  Google 


THE  ETHIOPIAN  REGION. 


Order,  Family,  and 

Jl             Rai«e  within  tba  BegiOE. 

Bangs  beyond  tie  R^on. 

Pamdionid^ 

287.  Pandiou 

1 

All  Africa 

Cosmopolite 

Stbkidji. 

288,  Athene  

5 

Palwarotic,        Oriental, 

quez  (extinct) 

Australiatt 

289.  Bubo      

8 

Africa  and  Ma,dagascar 

Coamcpolite 

eSO.  Scotopelia      ... 

2 

Weet  and  8.  Africa  to  Zambesi 

291.   Scops     

3 

W.  and  8.  Africa,  Madagascar, 
Comoro  Islands 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

292.  Syrnimn 

2 

Paliearctio,        Oriental, 
American 

N.  E.  and  S.  Africa 

29*.  Strix      

* 

Africa  and  Madagascar 

Cosmopolite 

Peculiar  or  very 
GRALL*, 

Podiea 

aa 
1 

raeUristic  Genera  of  Ti 

West  Africa 
Africa 

GLARBOr.IDJB. 

.CuTsoiius 

g 

AUAfriEi 

OTiDi»ai. 

16 

AH  Africa 

Gs.vn)M. 

BaUarka.      ... 

2 

Ail  Africa 

Abpeidm. 

Balamiceps    ... 

1 

Upper  Nile 

pLATAlEIBa 

Scopus 

1 

Tropical  and  S,  Africa 

AN8ERES. 
Anatids. 

] 

South  Africa 

STRUTHIONES. 

StRUIHIONIDa;. 

295.  Slrulhio 

.    2 

All  Africa 

MfiOEsrcBTDsi. 
29S.  ^pyomis      ... 

Vol.  L— 22 

3[?J 

(Eitinct) 
Madagagcav 

India,  Australia 


b,  Google 


CHAPTEH  XII. 

THE  OEIEKTAL  REGION. 

This  region  is  of  comparatively  small  extent,  but  it  has  a  very 
diversified  surface,  and  is  proportionately  very  rich.  The  de- 
serts on  the  north-west  of  India  are  the  debatable  land  that 
separates  it  from  the  Paljearctic  and  Ethiopian  regions.  The 
great  triangular  plateau  which  forms  the  peninsula  of  India  is 
the  poorest  portion  of  the  region,  owing  in  part  to  its  arid  climate 
and  in  part  to  its  isolated  position  ;  for  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  in  the  later  Tertiary  period  it  was  an  island,  separated  by  an 
arm  of  the  sea  (now  forming  the  valleys  of  the  Ganges  and 
Indus)  from  the  luxuriant  Himalayan  and  Burmese  countries. 
Its  southern  extremity,  with  Ceylon,  has  a  moister  cKmatfi  and 
more  luxuriant  vegetation,  and  exhibits  indications  of  a  former 
extension  southwards,  with  a  richer  and  more  peculiar  fauna, 
partly  Malayan  and  partly  Mascarene  in  its  character.  The 
whole  southern  slopes  of  the  Himalayas,  with  Burmah,  Siam  and 
Western  China,  as  well  as  the  Malay  peninsula  and  the  Indo- 
Malay  islands,  are  almost  everywhere  covered  with  tropical 
forests  of  the  most  luxuriant  character,  which  abound  in  varied 
and  peculiar  forms  of  vegetable  and  animal  life.  The  flora  and 
fauna  of  this  extensive  district  are  essentially  of  one  type 
throughout;  yet  it  may  be  usefully  divided  into  the  Indo- 
Chinese  and  the  Malayan  sub-regions,  as  each  possesses  a 
number  of  peculiar  or  characteristic  animals.  The  former  aub- 
r^on,  besides  having  many  tropical  and  suh-tropical  types 
of  its  own,  also  possesses  a  large  number  of  peculiarly  modi- 
iied  temperate  forms  on  the  mountain  ranges  of  its  northern 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


..Google 


CHAP,  xii.]  THE  OEIENTAL  REGION.  315 

boundary,  -which  are  wholly  wanting  in  the  Malayan  suh- 
region.  The  Philippine  islands  are  best  classed  with  the  Indo- 
Malay  group,  although  they  are  strikingly  deficient  in  many 
Malayan  types,  and  exhibit  an  approach  to  the  Celebesian  divi- 
sion of  the  Austro-Malay  sub-region. 

Zoological  Chardetei'isties  ofihe.  Oriental  Region. — The  Oriental 
Eegion  possesses  examples  of  35  families  of  Mammalia, ,  71  of 
Birds,  35  of  Eeptiles,  9  of  Amphibia,  and  13  of  IVesh-water 
Fishes.  Of  these  163  families,  12  are  peculiar  to  the  region; 
namely,  Tarsudte,  Galeopitheeidfe,  and  Tupaiidse  among  Mam- 
malia, while  jEluridte,  though  confined  to  the  higher  Himalayas, 
may  perhaps  with  more  justice  he  claimed  by  the  Palffiarctic  re- 
gion ;  Liotrichidie,  Phyllomithid£e,  and  Enrylremid^  among  birds ; 
Xenopeltidse  (extending,  however,  to  Celebes),  TJropeltidEe,  and 
Acrochordidfe  among  reptQes ;  Luciocephalidse,  Ophiocephalids 
and  MastacembelidEe  among  fresh-water  fishes.  A  number  of 
other  families  are  abundant,  and  characteristic  of  the  region ;  and 
it  possesses  many  peculiar  and  characteristic  genera,  which  must 
be  referred  to  somewhat  more  in  detail. 

Mammalia. — The  Oriental  region  is  rich  in  quadrumana,  and 
is  especially  remarkable  for  its  orang-utans  and  long-armed  apes 
(Simia,  Hylobates,  and  Siamanga) ;  its  abundance  of  n^onkeys 
of  the  genera  Presbytes  and  Maeaeus  ;  its  extraordinary  long-nosed 
monkey  (Fresbytes  nasalis) ;  its  Lemuridte  (Nydicelms  and  Loris) ; 
and  its  curious  genus  Tarsivs,  forming  a  distinct  family  of 
lemurs.  All  these  quadramanous  genera  are  confined  to  it, 
except  Tarsius  which  extends  as  far  as  Celebes.  It  pos- 
sesses more  than  30  genera  of  bats,  which  are  enumerated  in 
the  lists  given  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.  In  Insectivora  it  is 
very  rich,  and  possesses  several  remarkable  forms,  such  as  the 
flying  lemur  (Galeopithecus) ;  the  squirrel-like  Tupaiidje  consisting 
of  three  genera ;  and  the  curious  Qymnura  allied  to  the  hedge- 
hogs. In  Carnivora,  it  is  especially  rich  in  many  forms  of  civets 
(ViverridEe),  possessing  10  pecnMar  genera,  among  which  Frio- 
nodon  and  Cynogale  are  remarkable;  numerous  Mustelidte,  of 
which  Gymnopus,  Mydaibs,  Aonyx  and  Kelictis  are  the  most  cpn- 
spicuoua ;  Mlv/rus,  a  curious  animalj  cat-like  in  appearance  but 


by  Google 


316  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [part  hi. 

more  allied  to  the  teara,  formiiig  a  distinct  family  of  Camivora, 
and  confined  to  the  high  forest-districts  of  the  Eastern  Hima- 
layas and  East  Thibet ;  Mdwrms  and  Helarctos,  peculiar  forms  of 
bears  ;  Flatanista,  a  dolphin  peculiar  to  the  Ganges  and  Indus. 
Among  Euminants  it  has  the  beautiful  ehevrotain,  forming 
the  genus  Tragulus  in  the  family  Tragulidte ;  with  one  peculiar 
genus  and  three  peculiar  sub-genera  of  true  deer.  The  Antilo- 
pinffi  and  Caprinje  are  few,  confined  to  limited  districts  and  not 
characteristic  of  the  region ;  but  there  are  everywhere  wild  cattle 
of  the  genera  Bibos  and  Bubaliis,  which,  with  species  of  Bhinoceros 
and  Elephas,  form  a  prominent  feature  in  the  fauna.  The  Eodeuts 
are  leas  developed  than  in  the  Ethiopian  region,  but  several  forms 
of  squirrels  everywhere  abound,  together  with  some  species  of 
porcupine ;  and  the  Edentata  are  represented  by  the  scaly  manis. 
Birds. — The  families  and  genera  of  birds  -which  give  a  cha- 
racter to  Oriental  lands,  are  so  numerous  and  varied,  that  we 
can  here  only  notice  the  more  prominent  ajid  more  remarkable. 
The  TinialiidEe,  represented  by  the  babblers  (Garrulcw,  Pomatov- 
hinits,  Ti'oialia,  &e.),  are  abntKt  everywhere  to  be  met  with,  and 
no  less  than  21  genera  are  peculiar  to  the  r^ion;  the  elegant 
fork-tailed  lUnimms  and  rich  blue  Myiophonus,  though  com- 
paratively scarce,  are  characteristic  of  the  Malayan  and  Indo- 
Chinese  faunas ;  the  elegant  little  "  hiU-tits  "  {Liotrichidje} 
abound  in  the  same  part  of  the  region;  the  green  bulbuls  (Phyl- 
lornis)  are  found  everywhere  ;  as  are  various  forms  of  Pycnono- 
tidffi,  the  black  and  crimson  "  minivets  "  (JWicrocotus),  and  the 
glossy  "  kmg-ciows  "  (B-krv/ms) ;  Vrocissa,  PlatylopJms  and  Dm- 
drociita,  are  some  of  the  interesting  and  chaiacteristiQ  forms 
of  the  crow  family ,  sun-birds  (Netariniidse)  of  at  least  three 
genera  are  found  throughout  the  region,  as  are  the  beautiful  little 
ilower-peukers  (Dica^idte),  and  some  peculiar  forms  of  weaver- 
birds  {Ploceus  and  Munia).  Of  the  atarling  family,  the  moat 
conspicuous  are  the  glossy  mynahs  (Bulabes).  The  swaUow- 
shrikes  (Artamus)  are  very  peculiar,  aa  are  the  exquisitely 
coloured  pittas  (Pittidfe),  and  the  gaudy  broad-biUs  (Eury- 
Ifemidte).  Leaving  the  true  Passeres,  we  find  woodpeckers, 
barbets,  and  cuckoos  everywhere,  often  of  peculiar  and  re- 


by  Google 


CEAP.  xn.] .  THE  ORIENTAL  REGION.  317 

markable  forms;  among  the  bee-eaters  we  have  the  exq^uisite 
Nydiomis  with  its  pendent'  neck-plumes  of  hlue  or  scarlet; 
brilliant  kingfishers  and  strangely  formed  hombills  abound 
everywhere ;  while  brown-hacked  trogons  with  ted  and  orange 
breasts,  though  far  less  frec[uent,  are  ec^ually  a  feature  of  the 
Ornithology.  Mext  we  have  the  frog-mouthed  goatsuckers  {Bat- 
trachosiomus),  and  the  whiskered  swifts  (BmdroekeUdon),  both 
wide-spread,  remarkable,  and  characteristic  gix)ups  of  the  Oriental 
region.  Coming  to  the  parrot  tribe,  we  have  only  the  long-tailed 
PaUeomis  and  the  exquisite  Ettle  Lorimlus,  as  characteristic 
genera.  We  now  come  to  the  pigeons,  amoi^  which  the  fruit- 
eating  genera  Tr&ron  and  Carpophaga  are  the  most  conspicuous. 
The  gallinaceous  birds  offer  ws  some  grand  forms,  such  as 
the  peacocks  (Pavo) ;  the  argus  pheasants  {Argusianm) ;  the  fire- 
backed  pheasants  (Suplocamus) :  and  the  jungle-fowl  {Gallm),i^ 
strikingly  characteristic ;  and  with  these  we  may  close  our  sketch, 
since  the  birds  of  prey  and  the  two  Orders  comprising  the 
waders  and  swimmers  offer  nothing  sufficiently  remarkable  to 
be  worthy  of  enumeration  here. 

Pepliles.^—Oiiiy  the  more  abundant  and  characteristic  groups 
will  here  be  noticed.  In  the  serpent  tribe,  the  OligodontidEC, 
a  small  family  of  ground-snakes;  the  Homalopsidte,  or  fresh- 
water snakes ;  the  Dendrophidfe,  or  tree-snakes ;  the  Dryiophidfe, 
or  whip-snakes ;  the  Dipsadidie,  or  nocturnal  tree-snakes ;  the 
Lyeodontidfe  or  fanged  ground-snakes ;  the  Pythonidfe,  or  rock- 
snakes  ;  the  Elapid^,  or  venomous  coluhrine  snakes  (including 
the  "  cobras  "} ;  and  the  Crotalidse,  or  pit-vipers,  are  all  abundant 
and  characteristic,  ranging  over  nearly  the  whole  region,  and  pre- 
senting a  great  variety  of  genera  and  species.  Among  lizards,  the 
Varanidfe  or  water-liKards ;  the  Scincidte  or  "  scinks ; "  theGecko- 
tidffi,  or  geckoes ;  and  the  Agamidaa,  or  eastern,  iguanas ;  are  the 
most  universal  and  characteristic  groups.  Among  crocodiles  the 
genus  Orocodilus  is  widely  spread,  Oavialis  being  characteristic 
of  the  Ganges.  Among  Chelonia,  or  shielded  reptiles,  forms  of 
fresh-water  Testudinid^  and  Trionychid^e  (soft  tortoises)  are 
tolerably  abundant. 
.  Amphibia. — The  only  abundant  and  characteristic  groups  of 


by  Google 


ZOOLOaiCAL  QEOGEAPHY. 


this  class  are  toads  of  the  family  Engystomidfe ;  tree-frogs  of 
the  family  PolypedatidEe ;    and   several   genera   of  true   frogs, 


Fresh-water  Fishes. — The  more  remarkable  and  characteristic 
fishes  inhabiting  the  fresh  waters  of  the  Oriental  region  belong 
to  the  following  families:  Nandidse,  Labyrinthici,  OphiocephaKdje, 
SUnridEe,  and  Cyprinid^ ;  the  last  being  specially  abundant. 

The  sketch  here  very  briefly  given,  must  be  supplemented  by 
an  examination  of  the  tables  of  distribution  of  the  genera  of  all 
the  Mammalia  d  B  d,  nl  ab  t  ng  the  region.  We  will  now 
briefly  s  mn   r  ze  the  re  ults 

Summa  j  of  il  e  0  tal  1  tb  ata. — The  Oriental  region 
possesses  examples  of  16o  fanile  of  Vertebrata  of  which  12 
are  pecul  ar  a  j  oport  on  of  a  httle  more  than  one-fourteenth 
of  the  wl  ole 

Out  of  lis  (,6"^  ^  '*f  Mann  lia  54  seem  to  be  peculiar  to 
the  region  cl  1  to  a  j  f  o  t  on  of  -^  or  a  little  less  than  half 
Of  Land  E  rds  the  e  are  -iP  genera  ot. which  165  are  peculiar, 
bringing  tl  e  p  opo  t  on  very  close  to  a  half. 

In  tl  e  Etl  op  a  reg  on  the  pr  portion  of  peculiar  forma 
both  of  Man  mal  a  ind  Bis  j,reater ;  a  fact  which  ia  not 
surpriaii^  wl  en  we  con  de  tl  e  lon^,  continued  isolation  of  the 
latter  leg  on — ■  n  Lolat  n  vihch  s  even  now  very  complete, 
owing  to  the  vast  extent  ot  leserts  ntervening  between  it  and 
the  PaLea  t  c  e^  n  wh  le  the  0  icntal  and  PalEcarctic  were, 
during  mucl  of  tl  e  Tert  a  y  epo  h  ha  dly  separable. 

/  t 
Le^idopt  a  — ^A\  e  ■in  onlv  ^lan  e  hastily  at  the,  more  pro- 
minent features  of  tl  e  wo  dert  ill  rich  and  varied  hutterSy- 
fauna  of  the  Or  entil  re^,  on  In  tl  e  first  family  Danaidaj,  the 
genera  i)  na  inl  Eupla  are  ever}  where  abundant,'  and  the 
latter  e  pe  ally  forms  i.  nsp  ois  feature,  in  the  .entomo- 
logical a  feet  of  the  co  ntry  tie  large  "spectre-butterflies" 
{Hestict)  are  e  i  illy  c!  a  acte  st  c  of  the  Malayan  sub-region. 
Satyridse  though  abundant  a  e  not  very  remarkable,  Debis, 
Melanit  s  My  a!  sts  and  Iptk  na  1  emg  the  most  characteristic 


by  Google 


CHAP,  XII.]  THE  ORIENTAL  REGION.  319 

genera.  Morphidse  are  well  represented  by  tho  genera  Ama- 
ihma,  Zeitccidia,  Discvphora,  and  Thawmaiiiis,  srane  of  the 
species  of  which  almost  equal  the  grand  South  American 
Morphos.  The  NymphalidBe  furnish  ua  with  a  host  of  charac- 
teristic genera,  among  the  most  remarkable  of  which  are, 
Terinos,  Adolias,  Cethosia,  Cyrestis,  LimeMitis,  and  Ifymphalis, 
all  abounding  in  beautifttl  species.  Among  the  LycEcnidie  are 
a  number  of  fine  groups,  among  which  we  may  mention  Herda, 
Myrina,  Deudoryx,  ApJmms,  lolaus,  and  AmUypodia,  as  charac- 
teristic examples.  The  Pieridse  furnish  many  fine  forms,  such 
as  Thyca,  Iphias,  Thestias,  Eronia,  I'rioneris,  and  Dercas,  the  last 
two  being  peculiar.  The  PapiHonid^e  are  unsurpassed  in  the 
world,  presenting  such  grand  genera  as  Teinopaipas  and  Bhu- 
taniiis;  the  yellow-marked  Orniihopierce;  the  superb  "Erookiana;" 
the  elegant  Le^tQe&rcas ;  and  Papilios  of  the  "Coon,"  "Philo- 
xenus,"  "  Menmon,"  "  Protenor,"  and  especially  the  '  green-and- 
gold-dusted '  "  Paris  "  groups. 

The  Moths  call  for  no  special  observations,  except  to  notice 
the  existence  in  Northern  India  of  a  number  of  forma  which 
resemble  in  a  striking  manner  some  of  the  most  remarkable 
of  the  above  mentioned  groups  of  the  genus  Papilio,  espe- 
cially the  "  Protenor  "  group,  which  there  is  reason  to  believe  is 
protected  by  a  peculiar  smell  or  taste  like  the  Heliconias  and 
Danaidfe. 

Coleoptera. — The  most  characteristic  Oriental  form  of  the 
Cicindelidte  or  tiger  beetles,  is  undoubtedly  the  elegant  genus 
Gollyris,  which  is  found  over  the  whole  r^on.and  is  almost 
confined  to  ifc.  Less  abundant,  but  equally  characteristic,  is  the 
wingless  ant-like  Trieondyla.  Two  small  genera  Apteroessa  and 
Drormddia  are  confined  to  the  Indian  Peninsula,  while  Therates 
only  occurs  in  the  Malayan  sub-region. 

The  Carabidre,  or  ground  carnivorous  beetles,  are  so  numerous 
that  we  can  only  notice  a  few  of  the  more  remarkable  and 
characteristic  forms.  The  wonderful  Mormolyce  of  the  Indo- 
Maiay  sub-region,  stands  pre-eminent  for  sii^ularity  in  the 
entire  family.  Thyreopt^'us,  Orihoyonitis,  Caf-ascopus,  and  Peri- 
callus   are  very  characteristic   forms,  as  well  as  Planetes  and 


by  Google 


320  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOQEAPHY.  [pabt  hi. 

Distrigus,  the  latter  having  a  single  species  in  Madagascar. 
There  are  80  genera  of  fchia  family  peculiar  to  the  region,  10 
of  which  have  only  been  found  in  Ceylon. 

Among  the  Lueanidas,  or  st^-beetles,  Lumnus,  Odontolahris, 
and  Gladogv/ithm  are  the  most  characteristic  forms.  Sixteen 
genera  inhabit  the  region,  of  which  7  are  altogether  pecuUar, 
while  three  others  only  extend  eastward  to  the  Austro-Malayan 
sub-region. 

The  beautiful  Cetoniidfe,  or  rose-chafers,  are  weU.  represented 
by  Rhomhorhina,  Helerorhina,  Clinteria,  Maoronoici,  Agestrata, 
Ohalcothm  and  many  fine  species  of  Cetowia.  There  are  17 
peculiar  genera,  of  which  Myeteristes,  Phmdimus,  Flectrone,  and 
Rhagopteryx,  are  Malayan ;  while  Narycius,  Olerota,  Bombodes, 
and  CkUoloha  are  Indian. 

In  Buprestidfc — ^those  elongate  metallic-coloured  beetles  whose 
elytra  are  used  as  ornaments  in  many  parts  of  the  world — this 
region  stands  pre-eminent,  in  its  gigantic  Gatoxantka,  its  fine 
Cfu-ysockroa,  its  Indian  Siemocera,  its  Malayan  C}w,lcophofa 
and  Belionota,  as  well  as  many  other  beautiful  forms.  It 
possesses  41  genera,  of  which  14  are  peculiar  to  it,  the  rest 
being  generally  of  wide  range  or  common  to  the  Ethiopian  and 
Australian  regions. 

In  the  extensive  and  elegant  group  of  Longicoms,  the  Oriental 
region  is  only  inferior  to  tlie  Neotropical  It  possesses  360 
genera,  25  of  which  are  Prionidfe,  117  Cerambicidje,  and  218 
LanuidiE; — about  70  per  cent,  of  the  whole  being  peculiar. 
The  most  characteristic  genera  are  MhapMdopodus  and  j^gosoma 
amoi^  PrionidEe ;  Neocerwmhyx,  Mwrywrthnim.,  Pachyteria,  Aero- 
cyrta,  Teiraonmutius,  Chloridolum,  and  Polyzoniis  among  Oeram- 
bycidte;  and  Ccelostema,  Bhytidophora,  Batocera,  Agdasta,  and 
A^atkes  among  LamiidEc. 

Of  remarkable  forms  in  other  families,  we  may  mention  the 
gigantic  homed  Ckalcosoma  among  ScarabseidEe ;  the  metallic 
OampsostemMS  among  Elateridse ;  the  handsome  hut  anomalous 
Tridenotoma  forming  a  distinct  family;  the  gorgeous  Paehy- 
rhynchi  of  the  Philippine  Islands  among  Curculionidfe ;  Dmras 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ORIENTAL  KEfflON,  321 

among  Breuthidie ;    with  an  immense  number  and  variety  of 
Anthotribidfe,  Heteromera,  Malacoderma,  and  Phytophaga. 

The  Oriental  Sub-regioss. 
The  four  sub-regions  into  which  we  have  divided  the  Oriental 
region,  are  very  unequal  in  extent,  and  perhaps  more  ao  in 
productiveness,  but  they  each  have  well-marked  special  features, 
and  serve  well  to  exhibit  the  main  zoological  characteristics  of 
the  region.  As  they  are  all  tolerably  well  defined  and  their 
faunas  comparatively  well-known,  their  characteristics  will  be 
given  with  rather  more  than  usual  detail. 


;,  or  Indian  Sub-region. 
This  includes  the  whole  peninsula  of  India  from  the  foot  of  the 
Himalayas  on  the  north  to  somewhere  near  Seringapatam  on  the 
south,  the  boundary  of  the  Ceylonese  sub-region  being  unsettled. 
The  deltas  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmaputra  mark  its  eastern 
limits,  and  it  probably  reaches  to  about  Cashmere  in  the  north- 
west, and  perhaps  to  the  valley  of  the  Indus  further  south ;  but 
the  great  desert  tract  to  the  east  of  the  Indus  forms  a  transition 
to  the  south  PalEearetic  sub-region.  Perhaps  on  the  whole  the 
Indus  may  be  taken  as  a  convenient  boundary.  Many  Indian 
naturalists,  especially  Mr.  Blyth  and  Mr,  Blanford,  are  impressed 
with  the  relations  of  the  greater  part  of  this  sub-region  to  the 
Ethiopian  region,  and  have  proposed  to  divide  it  into  several 
zoological  districts  dependent  on  difference  of  climate  and  vege- 
tation, and  characterized  by  possessing  faunas  more  or  less  allied 
either  to  the  Himalayan  or  the  Ethiopian  type.  But  these  sub- 
divisions appear  far  too  complex  to  be  useful  to  the  general  stu- 
dent, and  even  were  they  proved  to  be  natural,  would  be  beyond 
the  scope  of  this  work.  I  agree,  however,  with  Mr.  Elwes  in 
thinting  that  they  really  belong  to  local  rather  than  to  geo- 
graphical distribution,  and  confound  "  station  "  with  "  habitat." 
Wherever  there  is  a  marked  diversity  of  surface  and  vegetation 
the  productions  of  a  country  will  correspondingly  differ;  the 
groups  peculiar  to  forests,  for  example,  will  be  absent  from  open 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPIIY. 


IVA 


plains  or  arid  deserts.  It  happens  that  the  three  gi'eat  Old 
World  regions  are  separated  irom  each  other  by  a  debatable  land 
which  is  chiefly  of  a  desert  character ;  hence  we  must  expect  to 
find  a  resemblance  between  the  inhabitants  of  such  districts  in 
each  region.  "We  also  find  a  fjreat  resemblance  between  the  acLuatie 
birds  of  the  three  regions ;  and  as  we  generally  give  little  weight 
to  these  in  our  estimate  of  the  degree  of  affinity  of  the  faunas  of 
diiferent  countries,  so  we  should  not  count  the  desert  fauna  as  of 
equal  weight  with  the  more  restricted  and  peculiar  types  which 
are  found  in  the  fertile  tracts, — -in  the  mountains  and  valleys,  and 
especially  in  the  primeral  forests.  The  supposed  preponderance 
of  exclusively  Ethiopian  groups  of  Mammalia  and  Birds  in  this 
sub-region,  deserves  however  a  close  examination,  in  order  to 
ascertain  how  far  the  facts  really  warrant  such  an  opinion. 

Mammalia. — ^The  following  list  of  the  more  important  genera 
of  Mammalia  which  range  over  the  larger  part  of  this  sub-region 
wiU  enable  naturalists  to  form  an  independent  judgment  as  to 
the  preponderance  of  Ethiopian,  or  of  Oriental  and  Palfearetic 
typ^,  in  this,  the  most  important  of  all  the  classes  of  animals 
for  geographical  distribution. 
ILiNOB  OF  THE  Genera  of  Mammalia  which  Inhabit  the  Sub-ueoion 

OF    HiNDOSTAN, 

1.  Presbytea         ...  Oriental  only, 

2.  Macacus          ...  Oriental  only. 
„.  Paliearetic  genua. 
...  Widely  distributed, 
...  Almost  CoamopolitiUL 
,..  Ethiopian  uid^.  Pal^arctic. 
. . .  Ethiopian  and  Oriental  to  China  and  Malaya. 
...  Orient^  only. 
...  Oriental  only. 

. . .  Ethiopian,  S.  Pahearctic,  and  Oriental  to  Malaya. 

...  Ethiopian,  Oriental  to  Cambodja. 

...  Oriental. 

...  Pal^arctic  and  Ethiopian  {a  Palicarctic  species.) 

...  Paltearctic  and  Oriental  to  Malaya. 

...  Oriental  to  Malaya. 

...  Very  wide  range. 

. . .  Oriental  and  Palsearctic. 

...  Ethiopian. 

...  Oriental  only;  family  not  Ethiopian, 

...  Paliearotic  and  Oriental,  not  Etniopian. 

...  Oriental 


5.  Felis    ... 

6.  Qjmelutiw 

7.  Viverni 

8.  Viverrioula 

9.  Paradoxurus 

10.  Herpestes 

11.  OJogale 

12.  Tieniogale 

13.  Hysena 

14.  Canis    ... 

15.  Cuon    ... 
J6.  Vulpes 

17.  Lutra  ... 

18.  Mellivoia 

19.  Melursus 

20.  Sus       ... 


by  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  REGION. 


22.  Cervus 

Oriental  and  Paleearctic  ;  family  not  Ethiopian. 

23.  Cervnlus 

Oriental ;  family  not  Ethiopian. 

24.  Bibos 

25.  Portax 

Oriental. 

26.  Gaaella 

Fatearctic  and  Ethiopian. 

27.  Antilope 

Oriental. 

28.  TotraceroB 

Oriental 

29.  Mephas 

Oriental  species. 

30.  Mm     

Cosmopolite  nearly. 

Oriental. 

32.  Meriones 

Yery  wide  range. 

33.  Spalacomys     ... 

Oriental. 

34.  Sciiirus 

Almost  Cosmopolite. 

35.  Pteromys 

Paliearctic  and  Oriental  to  China  and  Malaya. 

Wide  range. 

37.  Lopus 

Wide  range. 

38.  Manis 

Ethiopian  and  Oriental  to  Malaya. 

Out  of  tlie  above  38  genera,  8  have  so  wide  a  distributioii  as 
to  give  no  special  geographical  indications.  Of  the  remaining  30, 
whose  geographical  position  we  have  noted,  14  are  Oriental  only ; 
5  have  as  much  right  to  he  oonsidertd  Oriental  aa  Ethiopian, 
extending  as  they  do  over  the  greater  part  of  the  Oriental 
region  ;■  2  (the  hyrena  and  gazelle)  show  PalEearctic  rather  than 
Ethiopian  affinity ;  7  are  Palsearctic  and  Oriental  but  not  Ethio- 
pian ;  and  only  2  {Cynixlurus  and  Mellivora)  can  be  considered 
as  especially  Ethiopian.  We  must  also  give  due  weight  to  the 
fact  that  we  have  here  TTrsidEe  and  Cervidse,  two  families  entirely 
absent  from  the  Ethiopian  region,  and  we  shall  then  be  forced 
to  conclude  that  the  affinities  of  the  Indian  peninsula  are  not 
only  clearly  Oriental,  but  that  the  Ethiopian  element  is  really 
present  in  a  far  less  d^ee  than  the  Palaearctic.     . 

Birds.— The  naturalists  who  have  adopted  the  "Ethiopian 
theory  "  of  the  fauna  of  Hindostan,  have  always  supported  their 
views  by  an  appeal  to  the  cl'jss  of  birds ;  maintaining,  that  not 
only  are  almost  all  the  characteristic  Himalayan  and  Malayan 
genera  absent  but  thit  then  place  is  to  a  great  extent  supplied 
by  others  which  aie  characteristic  of  the  Ethiopian  region.  After 
a  careful  examination  of  the  subject,  Mr.  Elwes,  in  a  paper  read 
before  the  Zoological  Society  (June  1873)  came  to  the  conclu- 
sion, that  this  view  w»s  an  enoneous  one,  founded  on  the  fact 
that  the  birils  of  the  j-lams  aie  the  more  abundant  and  more 


by  Google 


324  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paet  hi. 

open  to  observation ;  and  that  these  are  often  of  wide-spread 
types,  and  some  few  almost  exclusively  African.  The  facts  he 
adduced  do  not,  however,  seem  to  have  satisfied  the  objectors ; 
and  as  the  subject  is  an  important  one,  I  will  here  give  Ksts 
of  all  the  genera  of  Passeres,  Picarite,  Psittaci,  Columbffi,  and 
GaUinaa,  which  inhabit  the  sub-region,  leaving  out  those  which 
only  just  enter  within  its  boundaries  from  adjacent  sub-regions. 
These  are  arranged  under  four  heads:— 1.  Oriental  genera;  which 
are  either  wholly  confined  to,  or  strOtingly  prevalent  in,  the 
Oriental  region  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Indian  peninsula.  2. 
Genera  of  Wide  Eange ;  which  are  fuEy  as  much  entitled  to  be 
considered  Oriental  or  Palasarctic  as  Ethiopian,  and  cannot  be 
held  to  prove  any  Ethiopian  aifinity.  3.  Paltearetie  genera; 
which  are  altogether  or  almost  absent  from  the  Etiiiopian  region. 
4.  Ethiopian  genera ;  which  are  confined  to,  or  very  prevalent 
in,  the  Ethiopian  region,  whence  they  extend  into  the  Indian 
peninsula  but  not  over  the  whole  Oriental  region.  The  last  are 
the  only  ones  which  can  be  fairly  balanced  against  those  of  the 
first  list,  in  order  to  determine  the  character  of  the  fauna. 

1.  Oriestal  Genera  in  Central  India. 
Qeocichla,  Orthotomus,  Prinia,  Megalurus,  Ahrorms,  Zarvi- 
vora,  Gopsychus,  Kittadncla,  Pomatorkinus,  Malacocercus,  Chatwr- 
rkma,  LayardAa,  GarTulax,  Trochalopteron,  Pellomeum,  Dumetia, 
Pydoris,  Alcippe,  Myiopkonus,  Silta,  DendrophUa,  PhyUomis, 
lora,  ffyjmpeies,  Pericrocotus,  (fraucalm,  Volwdvora,  OkiMa, 
Ghaptia,  Irena,  Erythrosterna,  Henwpus,  Hemichelidon,  Niltaea, 
Cyomis,  Ewmyias,  Hypothymis,  Myialestes,  Tephrodomis,  Dendro- 
eitta,  Aracktiechthra,  Mciart^hila,  AracMothera,  Dic<mm,,  Pipri- 
soma,  Munia,  Evlabes,  Pastor,  Amdotheres,  Stumia,  Stumopastcm, 
Artamus,  Nemoncola,  Pitta,  Ywngipims,  GKrysocolapies,  JTemi- 
ei/rcus,  Oednus,  MuUenpicus,  Prach/ypterKus,  Tiga,  MicroptermiS, 
Megalwma,  XwnthoUe'ma;  Mhopodytes,  Taccocoua,  Su/mi&ulus, 
Sieroeoecyx,  Eudynamnis,  Nyetiornis,  Harpades,  Pelargopsis, 
Geyx,  Syd/ro<ds3a,  Memceros,  BatracJiostomiis,  Dendrochelidon, 
Collocalia,  Palmorms,  Treron,  Carpophaga,  Chalcophaps,  Orty- 
gomis,    Perdix,   Paw,    Gallus,    Galloperdix; — 87  genera;    and 


by  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  BKGION. 


one  peculiar  genus,  Salpomis,  whose  affinities  are  PalEearctic  or 
Oriental. 

2.  Genera  of  Wide  Kakge  occureing  in  Central  India. 
Tardus,  Monticola,  Drymceca,  Cisticola,  Acroeephalus,  Phyllo- 
Scopus,  ^atincola,  Fams,  Pymonotus,  Griniger,  Oriolvs,  Dicrurus, 
Tchitrea,  Zanms,  Gffrvus,  Zosierops,  Hirwrido,  CotyU,  Passer, 
Plocms,  Mstrilda,  Ala-uda,  Calandrella,  Mirafra,  Ammomanes, 
Motadlla,  AntJms,  Pious,  Yv/iuc,  Centropus,  Cuculus,  Chrysoccocyx, 
Goccystes,  Ooracias,  Eurystomus,  Merops,  Aloedo,  Ceryle,  Halcyon, 
Vpvpa.,  Caprvmulgus,  Gypselus,  ChcEtura,  Golu7nba,Tiirtur,Pt6roclcs, 
Gotwmix,  Turnise; — 48  genera. 

3.  Pal;eaectio  Geneea  occurring  in  Centeal  India. 
Hi/polais,  Sylvia,  Guri-uca,  GyanccvXa,  Calliope,  Chelidon,  Mu- 
.•^pisa,  Sviberiza,  Galerita,  Galdbaies,  Gorydalla; — 11  genera. 

4.  Ethiopian  Genera  occubeing  in  Central  India. 
Thamnoiia,  Pyrrhulcmda.,  Fterocles,  Francolinus  ; — 4  genera. 

A  consideration  of  the  above  lists  shows  us,  that  the  Hindostan 
aub-region  is  by  no  means  so  poor  in  forms  of  bird-life  as  is 
generally  supposed  (and  as  I  had  myself  anticipated,  it  would 
prove  to  be),  possessing,  as  it  does,  151  genera  of  land-birds, 
without  counting  the  Aceipitres.  It. must  also  set  at  rest  the 
question  of  the  zoological  affinities  of  the  district,  since  a  pre- 
ponderance of  88  genera,  against  4,  cannot  be  held  to  be  insuffi- 
cient, and  cannot  be  materially  altered  fiy  any  corrections  in 
details  that  may  be  proposed  or  substantiated.  Even  of  these 
four,  only  the  first  two  are  exclusively  Ethiopian,  Pterocles  and 
Francolimis  both  being  PalEearctic  also.  It  is  a  question,  indeed, 
whether  anywhere  in  the  world  an  outlying  sub-region  can 
be  found,  exhibiting  less  zoological  affinity  for  the  adjacent 
regions ;  and  we  have  here  a  striking  illustration  of  the  necessity 
of  deciding  all  such  eases,  not  by  examples,  which  may  be  so 
chosen  as  to  support  any  view,  but  by  carefully  weighing  and 
contrasting  the  whole  of  the  facta  on  which  the  solution  of  the 


by  Google 


326  ZOOLOGICAL  GR06EAPHY.  [part  ni. 

problem  admittedly  depends.  It  will,  perhaps,  be  said  that  a 
great  many  of  the  88  genera  above  given  are  very  scarce  and  very 
local;  but  this  is  certainly  not  the  case  with  the  majority  of  them; 
and  even  where  it  is  so,  that  does  not  in  any  degree  affect  their 
value  as  indicating  zoo-geographical  affinities.  It  is  the  pre- 
sence of  a  type  in  a  region,  not  its  abundance  or  scarcity,  that  is 
the  important  fact ;  and  when  we  have  to  do,  as  we  have  here, 
with  many  groups  whose  habits  and  mode  of  life  necessarily 
seclude  them  from  observation,  their  supposed  ecaicity  may  not 
even  be  a  fact. 

Rattles  and  Amphibia. — Heptiles  entirely  agree  with  Mam- 
malia and  Birds  in  the  main  features  of  their  distribution. 
Out  of  17  families  of  snalces  inhabiting  Hindoatan,  16  range 
over  the  greater  part  of  the  entire  region,  and  only  two  can 
be  supposed  to  show  any  Ethiopian  affinity.  These  are  the 
Psammophidte  and  Erycidse,  both  desert-haunting  groups,  and 
almost  as  much  South  Palfearctic  as  African.  The,  genus  Tro- 
pidococct/x  is  peculiar  to  the  sub-region,  and  A^idura,  Passerita 
and  Cynophis  to  the  peninsula  and  Ceylon ;  while  a  large  number 
of  the  most  characteristic  genera,  as  Dipsas,  Simotes,  Bunga/rus, 
Naja,  Trmeresv/ms,  Lycodon  and  Python,  are  characteristically 
Oriental. 

Of  the  six  families  of  lizards  aU  have  a  wide  range  The 
genera  Evmeces,  Pmtadactylus,  Gecko,  EwUepharis,  and  Draco,  are 
characteristicaUy  or  wholly  Oriental;  Opkiops  and  UTomastisc 
are  Paltearctic ;  while  Ghamceleon  is  the  solitary  case  of  decided 
Ethiopian  affinity. 

Of  the  Amphibia  not  a  single  family  exhibits  special  Ethiopian 
affinities. 

//,  Sith-region  of  Ceylon  and  South-India. 

The  Island  of  Ceylon  is  characterised  by  such  striking  pecu- 
liarities in  its  animal  productions,  as  to  render  necessary  its 
separation  from  the  peninsula  of  India  as  a  sub-region  ;  but  it 
is  found  that  most  of  these  special  features  extend  to  the  .Neil- 
gherries  and  the  whole  southern  mountainous  portion  of  India, 
and  that  the  two  must  be  united  in  any  zoo-geograpMcal  pro- 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  OBIENTAL  EEGION.  327 

vince.  The  main  features  of  this  division  are, — the  appearance 
of  Humerous  animals  allied  to  forms  only  found  ^aia  in  the 
Himalayas  or  in  the  Malayan  sub-region,  the  possession  of 
several  pecnliar  generic  types,  and  an  unusual  number  of 
peculiar  species. 

Mammalia. — Among  Mammalia  the  most  remarkahle  form 
is  Loris,  a  genus  of  Lemurs  altogether  peculiar  to  the  sub- 
region;  several  peculiar  monkeys  of  the  genus  Pfeshytes:  the 
Malayan  genus  Twpaia ;  and  Plaiacanihomys,  a  peculiar  genus 
of  MvuridEa 

Birds. — Among  birds  it  has  Ochromela,  a  peculiar  genus  of 
flycatchers  ;  Fhamcophaes  {CueulidEe)  and  Brymoeataphiis  (Tima- 
liidffi),  both  Malayan  forms ,  a  species  of  Myiophorms  whose 
nearest  ally  is  in  Java;  Twthalopteron,  Srachyj)teryx,  Buceros 
and  Lorimlus,  which  are  only  found  elsewhere  in  the  Himalayas 
and  Malayana.  It  also  possesses  about  80  peculiar  species  of 
birds,  including  a  large  jungle  fowl,  one  owl  and  two  boiabiUs. 

Beptiles. — It  is  however  by  its  Eeptiles,  even  more  than  by  its 
higher  vertebrates,  that  this  sub-region  is  clearly  characterised. 
Among  snakes  it  possesses  an  entire  family,  XJropeltidEe,  consisting 
of  5  genera  and  18  species  altogether  confined  to  it, — RMnopMs 
and  Uropdtis  in  Ceylon,  Silyhira,  Phcturus  and  MdanopMdium 
in  Southern  India,  Four  other  genera  of  snakes,  Eaploceriyus, 
Cercaspis,  Peltc^dor,  and  Syjynah  are  also  pecuKar ;  Chersydrus 
is  only  found  elsewhere  in  Malaya ;  while  Aspidura,  Passerita, 
and  Oynophis,  only  extend  to  Hindostan ;  and  species  of  Eryx, 
Echis,  and  PsammopMs  show  an  affinity  with  Ethiopian  and 
Pal^earctie  forms.  Among  lizards  several  genera  of  AgamidcB 
are  peculiar,  such  as  OtocrypHs,  Lyricoepkalus,  Ceratophr/ra,  Co- 
photts,  Saha,  Sitana  and  Gharasia.  In  the  family  Acontiadte, 
Nessia  is  peculiar  to  Ceylon,  while  a  species  of  the  African 
genus  Acontia^  shows  an  affinity  for  the  Ethiopian  region. 

Amphibia. — The  genera  of  Amphibians  that  occur  here  are 
generally  of  wide  range,  but  Nannophrys,  Haphhatrachus, 
and  Gacopus  are  confined  to  the  sub-region ;  while  Megah- 
phrys  is  Malayan,  and  the  species  found  in  Ceylon  also  inhabit 
Java. 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [paet  ni. 


Insects. — The  insects  of  Ceylon  also  furniah  some  i 
examples  of  its  distinctness  from  Hindostan,  and  its  affinity  with 
Malaya.  Among  its  butterflies  we  find  Papilio  jvphon,  closely 
allied  to  P.  antiphus  of  Malaya.  The  remarkable  genus  Hestia,  so 
characteristic  of  the  Malay  archipelago,  only  occurs  elsewhere  on 
the  mountains  of  Ceylon ;  while  its  Cynihia  and  Partheiws  are 
closely  allied  to,  if  not  identical  with,  Malayan  species.  Among 
Coleoptera  we  have  yet  more  striking  examples.  The  highly  cha- 
racteristic Malayan  genus  Tricondyla  is  represented  in  Ceylon  hy 
no  less  than  10  species  ;  and  among  Longicorns  we  find  the  genera 
Tdraotntnatiis,  Thra/nivs,  Gaem,  Praonetha,  Ropica,  and  SeriaAa, 
all  exclusively  Malayan  or  only  just  entering  the  Indo-Chinese 
peninsula,  yet  all  represented  in  Ceylon,  while  not  a  single 
species  occurs  in  any  part  of  India  or  the  Himalayas. 

The  Past  History  of  Ceylon  and  South-India,  as  indicated  hy  its 
Fauna.— In.  our  account  of  the  Ethiopian  r^on  we  have  already 
had  occasion  to  refer  to  an  ancient  connection  between  this  sub- 
r^on  and  Madagascar,  in  order  to  explain  the  distribution  of 
the  Lemurine  type,  and  some  other  curious  affinities  between  the 
two  countries.  This  view  is  supported  hy  the  geology  of  India, 
which  shows  us  Ceylon  and  South  India  consisting  mainly  of 
granitic  and  old  metamorphic  rocks,  while  the  greater  part  of  the 
peninsula,  forming  our  first  sub-region,  is  of  tertiary  formation, 
with  a  few  isolated  patches  of  secondary  rocks.  It  is  evident 
therefore,  that  during  much  of  the  tertiary  period,  Ceylon  and 
South  India  were  bounded  on  the  north  by  a  considerable  extent 
of  sea,  and  probably  formed  part  of  an  extensive  southern  con- 
tinent ot  great  island.  The  very  numerous  and  remarkable  cases 
of  affinity  with  Malaya,  require  however  some  closer  approxima- 
tion to  these  islands,  which  probably  occurred  at  a  later  period. 
When,  still  later,  the  great  plains  and  table-lands  of  Hindostan 
were  formed,  and  a  permanent  land  communication  effected  with 
the  rich  and  highly  developed  Himalo-Chinese  fauna,  a  rapid  im- 
migration of  new  types  took  place,  and  many  of  the  less  specia- 
lised forms  of  mammalia  and  birds  (particularly  those  of  ancient 
Ethiopian  type)  became  extinct.  Among  reptiles  and  insects  the 
competition  was  less  severe,  or  the  older  forms  were  too  well 


by  Google 


II.]  THE  OEIENTAL  REGION. 


i  to  local  conditions  to  be  expelled ;  so  that  it  is  among 
these  groups  alone  that  we  find  any  considerable  number,  of  what 
are  probably  the  remains  of  the  ancient  fauna  of  a  now  sub- 
mei^ed  southem  continent. 

III.  Himalayan  or  Indo-Chinese  Sub-region. 

This,  which  is  probably  the  richest  of  all  the  sub-regions,  and 
perhaps  one  of  the  richest  of  all  tracts  of  eq^ual  extent  on  the 
face  of  the  globe,  is  essentially  a  forest-covered,  mountainous 
country,  mostly  within  the  tropics,  but  on  its  northern  margin 
extending  some  degrees  beyond  it,  and  rising  in  a  continuous 
moimtiin  range  tdl  it  meets  and  intercalates  witli  the  Man- 
chunan  lub-division  of  the  PalEearctie  region.  The  peculiar 
mammalii  birds  and  insects  of  this  sub-region  begin  to  appear 
at  the  very  foot  of  the  Himalayas,  but  Dr.  Gunther  has  shown 
thit  many  of  the  reptiles  characteristic  of  the  plains  of  India 
Ke  touud  to  a  height  of  from  2,000  to  4,000  feet. 

In  Sikhim,  which  may  be  taken  as  a  typical  example  of  the 
Himalayan  portion  of  the  sub-region,  it  seema  to  extend  to  an 
altitrrde  of  little  less  than  10,000  feet,  that  being  the  limit  of  the 
characteristic  Timaliidse  or  babbling  thrushes ;  while  the  equally 
characteristic  Pycnonotidfe,  or  bulbuls,  and  Treronidro,  or  thick- 
billed  fruit-pigeons,  do  not,  according  to  Mr.  Blanford,  reach 
C[uite  so  high-  We  may  perhaps  take  9,000  feet  as  a  good 
approximation  over  a  large  part  of  the  Himalayan  range;  but 
it  is  evidently  not  possible  to  define  the  line  with  any  great 
precision.  Westward,  the  sub-region  extends  in  diminishing 
breadth,  till  it  terminates  in  or  near  Cashmere,  where  the  fauna 
of  the  plains  of  India  almost  meets  that  of  the  Palfearctic 
r^on,  at  a  moderate  elevation.  Eastward,  it  reaches  ijito  East 
Thibet  and  North-west  China,  where  Pere  David  has  found  a 
large  number  of  the  peculiar  types  of  the  Eastern  Himalayas.  A 
fauna,  in  general  features  identical,  extends  over  Burmah  and 
Siam  to  South  China;  mingling  with  the  Palajaretic  fauna  in 
the  mountains  south  of  the  Yang-tse-kiang  river,  and  with 
that  of  Indo-Malaya  in  Tenasserim,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in 
Southern  Siam  and  Cochin  China. 

Vol.  I.— 23 


by  Google 


330  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [r^ 


CharacterisHcs  of  the  Himalayan  Biib-region. — 
Taking  this  sut-region  as  a  whole,  we  lind  it  to  he  charac- 
terised by  3  genera  of  maminalia  (without  counting  hats),  and 
44  genera  of  land-birda,  which  are  altogether  peculiar  to  it ; 
and  by  13  genera  of  mammalia  and  36  of  birds,  which  it 
possesses  in  common  with  the  Malayan  sub-region;  and 
besides  these  it  has  almost  all  the  genera  before  enumerated 
as  "  Oriental,"  and  several  others  of  wide  range,  more  especially 
a  number  of  PaUeaictic  genera  which  appear  in  the  higher 
Himajayaa.  The  names  of  the  more  characteristic  genera  are 
as  follows: — 

Peculiak  Himalo-Chinbse  Gbsera. 


Mammalia. — Uroa,  Ardonyx, 

Birds.  —  Swya,  Horiies,  duemarrhomis,  Tar&ig&r,  Orek-ola, 
Acanthoptila,  Gratnmatffptila,  Trockalopieron,  Actinodura,  StHa, 
Svihora,  Paradamrtiis,  OhieiKmcuB,  Teda,  Minator,  j^githaliscus, 
Gephalopj/rus,  Liothrix,  Siva,  Mirda,  Proparus,  Cutta,  Yiihina, 
Isoidus,  Myzornis,  Hrpomis,  Semiams,  GhiMa,  Niltava,  AiiiMpes, 
Ghdidorhynx,  Urocissa,  Pachyglossa,  Heterwra,  Scematospim, 
Ampdiceps,  Saroglossa,  Psarisomus,  Senl&phus,  Vivia,  Hy<ypicvi 
Gicinulus,  Aceros,  Cenornis. 

Genbka  common  to  the  Himalo-Chinese  and  Malayan 
sub-ebgions, 


Mammalia,  —  Hylohates,   Nydicehm,    Viverrimla, 
Arditis,  Pagwma,  Ardogale,  Cuon,  Gymnopus,  Aonyx,  Helictis, 
Rhvnoceros,  Nemorhedus,  Rhizomys. 

Birds. — Oreodncla,  Notodda,  Jarttkoeirtda,  Timalia,  Stachyris, 
Mixomis,  Trichastoma,  Enicwms,  Pncepyga,  Melanocklora,  Allo- 
trius,  Mieroscelis,  Pole,  Analcipus,  Gochoa,  Bhringa,  Xanikopygia, 
Hylockaris,  Gissa,  Tenmurus,  Orypsirhitia,  Chalcosidha,  Ati- 
threptes,  Ghalc&paria,  Gymbirhyncfms,  Sydrorrds,  Sasia,  Venilia, 
Indicator,  Carcineutes,  Lyncomis,  Maeropygia,  Argimanus  Poly- 
plectron,  Ev/plocamvs,  Phodilus. 

Plate  VII.  Scene  in  Nepal,  with  Gkaracteristie  Simalayan 
Animals. — Our  illustration  contains  figures  of  two  mammals 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP,  xii.]  THE  OEIENTAL  REGION.  331 

and  two  birds,  characteristic  of  the  higher  woody  region  of  the 
Himalayas.  The  lower  figure  on  the  left  is  the  Hdidis  n^xthftsis, 
confined  to  the  Eastern  Himalayas,  and  belonging  to  a  genus  of 
the  weasel  family  which  is  exclusively  Oriental.  It  ia  marked 
with  white  on  a  grey-hcown  ground.  Above  it  ia  the  remark- 
able Panda  {^Iwrus  fulgens),  a  beautiful  animal  with  a  glossy  fur 
of  a  reddish  colour,  darker  feet,  and  a  white  somewhat  cat-like 
face.  It  is  distantly  allied  to  the  hears,  and  more  nearly  to  the 
American  racoons,  yet  with  sufScient  differences  to  constitute  it 
a  distinct  family.  The  laige  bird  on  the  tree,  is  the  homed 
Tragopan  (Oei-ioniis  satyra),  one  of  the  fine  Himalayan  pheasants, 
magnificently  spotted  with  red  and  white,  and  ornamented  with 
fleshy  erectile  v/attles  and  horns,  of  vivid  blue  and  red  colours. 
The  bird  in  the  foreground  is  the  IMdorhynckiiB  struthersii,  a 
rare  and  curious  wader,  allied  to  the  curlews  and  sandpipers  but 
having  the  bni  and  feet  red.  It  freq^uents  the  river-beds  in  the 
higher  Himalayas,  but  has  also  been  found  in  Thibet. 

Eq)tiks. — Very  few  genera  of  reptiles  are  pecuiliar  to  this 
sub-region,  all  the  more  important  ranging  into  the  Malay 
islands.  Of  snakes  the  following  are  the  more  characteristic 
genera : — TypMine,  Oplmdrophis,  Xenopeltis,  Oalamaria,  Xetmla- 
;phis,  Hypsirhina,  Fordonia,  several  small  genera  of  Homalop- 
sidfe  {Kerpdon  and  Sipistes  being  characteristic  of  Burmah  and 
Siam)  Psammodynades,  Gonyosoma,  Chrysopdea,  Tragops,  Dipsas, 
Fareas,  Python,  Hungarus,  Kaja,  Oallophis,  and  Trtmeremrus. 
JVa/a  reaches  8,000  feet  elevation  in  the  Himalayas,  Tropidonotws 
9,000  feet,  AWabes  10,000  feet,  and  Simotes  15,000  feet 

Of  Kzards,  Fseudopm  has  one  species  in  the  Khasya  hills 
while  the  other  inhabits  South-east  Europe ;  and  there  are  two 
small  genera  of  AgamidiE  peculiar  to  the  Himalayas,  while 
Draco  and  Galotes  have  a  wide  range  and  Acanthosaura,  Dilo- 
phyras,  Pkystgmathm,  and  Idohpis  are  found  chiefly  in  the 
Indo-Chinese  peninsula^  There  are  several  genera  of  Scincidie ; 
and  the  extensive  genus  of  wall-lizards.  Gecko,  ranges  over  the 
whole  region. 

Of  Amphibia,  the  peculiar  forms  are  not  numerous.   Ichthyophis 


by  Google 


332  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

a  genus  of  CcciliadEe,  is  peculiar  to  the  Khasya  Hills ;  Tylo- 
tritron  (SalamandridBe)  to  Yunan  in  Western  Cliina,  and  perhaps 
helongs  to  the  Palteai'ctic  region. 

Of  the  tail-less  Batrnehiana,  Glyphoglosms  is  found  in  Pegu ; 
1  the  Eastern  Himalayas;  while  Calhda,  Ixahis, 
;  Hyliirana,  Oan/glossus,  and  Phrynoglossus,  are  com- 
mon to  the  Himalo- Chinese  and  Malayan  suh-regiona. 

Of  the  lizards,  Colotes,  Barycepkalus,  and  Hinulia, — and  of 
the  Batrachia,  Bufo, — are  found  at  ahove  11,000  feet  elevation  in 
the  Himalayas. 

Insects. — So  little  has  teen  done  in  working  out  the  insect 
faunas  of  the  separate  sub-regions,  that  they  cannot  be  treated 
in  detail,  and  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  chapter  on  the  dis- 
tribution of  insects  in  the  part  of  this  work  devoted  to  Geogra- 
phical Zoology.  A  few  particulars  may,  however,  be  given  as  to 
the  hutterflios,  which  have  been  more  systematically  collected  in 
tropical  countries  than  any  other  order  of  insects.  The  Hima- 
layan butterflies,  especially  in  the  eastern  portions  of  the  range — 
in  Assam  and  the  Khasya  Hills— are  remarkably  fine  and  very 
abundant;  yet  aU.  the  larger  groups  extend  into  the  Malayan 
sub-region,  many  to  Ceylon,  and  a  considerable  proportion  even 
to  Africa  and  Austro-Malaya,  There  are  a  large  number  of 
peculiar  types,  but  most  of  them,  consist  of  few  or  single  species. 
Such  are  Mope,  Orenoma,  and  BhapMcera,  gener  a  of  Satyrida ; 
Enispe  (Morphidffi) ;  ffestiria,  Pemikema,  and  Abrota  (Nympha- 
lidfe) ;  Dodona  (Erycinidte) ;  Ilerda  (LyctenidEe) ;  Galinaga,  Tdno- 
paipus,  and  Ehutanitis  (Papilionidte).  Its  more  prominent  fea- 
tures are,  however,  derived  from  what  may  be  termed  Malayan, 
or  even  Old  World  types,  such  as  Euplma,  among  Danaidaj; 
Amaihima,  Cler<mte,  and  Thaumantis,  among  Morphidte ;  Ev/npus, 
JMadema,  Athyma,  Limeniiis,  and  Adolias,  among  Nymphalidse, 
Zemeros  and  Taxila  among  Erycinidse;  Ambh/podia,  Miletus, 
ll&rda,  and  Myrina,  among  Lycasnidas ;  Thyaa,  Prwneris,  Bercas, 
Iphias,  and  Tkestias  among  Pieridse ;  and  Papihos  of  the 
"  Amphnsiiis,"  "  Coon,"  " Philoxenus"  " Protenor"  " Paris,"  and 
"  Sarpedon "  groups.  In  the  Himalayas  there  is  an  unusual 
abundance  of  large  and  gorgeous  species  of  the  genus  Papilio, 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xn.]  THE  ORIENTAL  REGION.  333 

and  of  large  and  showy  KymphaJidfe,  Morphidse,  and  Danaida;, 
which  render  it,  in  favoured  ioualities,  only  second  to  South 
America  for  a  display  of  this  form  of  beauty  and  variety  in 
insect  life. 

Among  the  other  orders  of  insects  in  which  the  Himalayas 
are  remarkably  rich,  we  may  mention  large  and  brilliant  Ce~ 
toniidse,  chiefly  oi  the  genns  Shomioi  hzina ,  a  masnifioent  Lamel- 
licorn,  Suchirus  mackayii,  allied  to  the  gigantic  long  armed 
beetle  {E.  hiigwwmis)  of  Amhoyna ,  su]  erh  motha  of  the 
families  Agaristidae  and  Sesiidse ;  elegant  and  remarkable  Ful- 
goridffi,  and  strange  forma  of  the  gigantic  Phismid  e  ,  most  of 
which  appear  to  he  of  larger  size  oi  of  moie  biilhant  colours 
than  their  Malayan  allies. 

Islands  of  the  Indo-Chinese  Siih-region. — A  few  important 
islands  belong  to  this  suh-region,  the  Andamana,  Formosa,  and 
Hainan  heiug  the  most  interesting. 

Andamans. — The  only  mammalia  are  a  few  rats  and  mice,  a 
Paradmswrm,  and  a  pig  supposed  to  be  a  hybrid  race, — all  of 
which  may  have  been  introduced  by  man's  agency.  The 
birds  of  the  Andaman  Islands  have  been  largely  collected,  no 
less  than  155  species  having  been  obtained ;  and  of  these  17, 
(all  land-birds)  are  peculiar.  The  genera  are  aU  found  on  the 
continent,  and  are  mostly  characteristic  of  the  Indo-Chinese 
fauna,  to  which  most  of  the  species  belong.  KeptUes  are  also 
tolerably  abundant ;  about  20  species  are  known,  the  majority 
being  found  also  on  the  continent,  while  a  few  are  peculiar. 
There  are  also  a  few  Batrachia,  and  some  fresh-water  fishes,  closely 
resembling  those  of  Eurmah.  The  absence  of  such  mammalia 
as  monkeys  and  5C[nirrels,  which  abound  on  the  mainland,  and 
which  are  easily  carried  over  straits  or  narrow  seas  by  floating 
trees,  is  sufficient  proof  that  these  islands  have  not  recently 
formed  part  of  the  continent.  The  birds  are  mostly  such  as 
may  have  reached  the  islands  while  in  their  present  geographical 
position ;  and  the  occurrence  of  reptiles  and  fresh-water  fishes, 
said  to  be  identical  in  species  with  those  of  Burmah,  must  be 
due  to  the  facilities,  which  some  of  these  animals  undoubtedly 


by  Google 


334  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

possess,  for  passing  over  a  considerable  width  of  sea.  We  must 
conclude,  tlierefore,  that  tliese  islands  do  not  owe  their  exist- 
ing fauna  to  aa  actual  union  with  the  mainland ;  hut  it  is  pro- 
hable  that  they  may  have  been  formerly  more  extensive,  and 
have  thee  been  less  distant  from  the  continent  than  at  the 
present  time. 

The  Kicobar  Islands,  naually  associated  with  the  Andamans, 
are  less  known,  but  present  somewhat  similar  phenomena.  They 
are,  however,  more  Malayan  in  their  fauna,  and  seem  properly 
to  belong  to  the  Indo-Malay  sub-region. 

Formosa. — This  island  has  been  cai'cfully  examined  by  Mr. 
Swinhoe,  who  found  144  species  of  birds,  of  which  34  are  peculiar. 
There  is  one  peculiar  genus,  but  the  rest  are  all  Indo-Chinese, 
though  some  of  the  species  are  more  allied  to  Malayan  than  to  . 
Chinese  or  Himalayan  forms.  About  30  species  of  mammalia 
were  found  in  Formosa,  of  which  11  are  peculiar  species,  the  rest 
being  either  Chinese  or  Himalayan.  The  peculiar  species  belong 
to  the  genera  Tal'pd,  Selictis,  Sciurt^tenis,  Pteromys,  Mvs,  Sus, 
Cervm,  and  Oapncoi-nis.  A  few  lizards  and  snakes  of  conti- 
nental species  have  also  been  found.  These  facts  clearly  indicate 
the  former  connection  of  FoiTQOsa  with  China  and  Malaya,  a 
connection  which  ia  rendered  the  more  probable  by  the  shallow 
sea  which  still  connects  all  these  countries. 

Hainan. — The  island  of  Hainan,  on  the  south  coast  of  China, 
is  not  so  well  known  in  proportion,  though  Mr,  Swinhoe  col- 
lected 172  species  of  birds,  of  which  130  were  land-birds.  Of 
these  about  20  were  peculiar  species ;  the  reniaittder  being  either 
Chinese,  Himalayan,  or  Indo-Malayan.  Mr,  Swinhoe  also  ob- 
tained 24  species  of  mammalia,  all  being  Chinese,  Himalayan, 
or  Indo-Malayan  species  except  a  hare,  which  is  pecuhai'.  This 
assemblage  of  animals  would  imply  that  Hainan,  as  might  be 
anticipated  from  its  position,  has  been  more  i 
from  the  continent  than  the  more  distant  is 


IV.   IndO'Malaya,  or  the  j 

This  sub-region,  which  is  almost  wholly  insular  (including 

only  the  Malayan  peninsula  on  the  continent  of  Asia),  is  equal,  if 


by  Google 


CHAP,  sii.]  THE  OKIENTAL  REGION.  335 

not  superior,  in  the  variety  aiid  beauty  of  its  productions,  to  that 
which  we  have  just  been  considering.  Like  Indo- China,  it  is  a  re- 
gion of  forests,  but  it  is  more  exclusively  tropical ;  and  it  is  there- 
fore deficient  in  many  of  those  curious  forms  of  the  temperate 
zone  of  the  Himalayas,  ■which  seem  to  have  been  developed  from 
Palffiarctic  rather  than  from  Oriental  types.  Here  alone,  in  the 
Oriental  r^on,  are  found  the  most  typical  equatorial  forms  of 
life  organisms  adapted  to  a  climate  characterised  by  uniform  but 
not  excessive  heat,  abundant  moisture,  and  no  marked  departure 
from  the  aver^;e  meteorological  state,  throughout  the  year.  These 
favourable  conditions  of  life  only  occur  in  three  widely  separated 
districts  of  the  globe — the  Malay  archipelago,  "Western  Africa, 
and  equatorial  South  America.  Hence  perhaps  it  is,  that  the 
tapir  and  the  trogons  of  Malacca  should  so  closely  resemble  those 
of  South  America  ;  and  that  the  great  anthropoid  apes  and  crested 
hombills  of  Western  Africa,  should  find  their  nearest  allies  in 
Borneo  and  Sumatra. 

Although  the  islands  which  go  to  form  this  sub-region 
are  often  separated  from  each  other  by  a  considerable  ex- 
panse of  sea,  yet  their  productions  in  general  offer  no  greater 
differences  than  those  of  portions  of  the  Indo-Chinese  sub- 
region  separated  by  an  equal  extent  of  dry  land.  The  ex- 
planation is  easy,  however,  when  we  find  that  the  sea  which 
separates  them  is  a  very  shallow  one,  so  shallow  that  an  eleva^ 
tion  of  only  300  feet  would  unite  Sumatra,  Java,  and  Borneo  into 
one  great  South-eastern  prolongation  of  the  Asiatic  continent' 
As  we  know  that  our  own  country  has  been  elevated  and  de- 
pressed to  a  greater  amount  than  this,  at  least  twice  in  recent 
geological  times,  we  can  have  no  diificulty  in  admitting  similar 
changes  of  level  in  the  Malay  archipelago,  where  the  sub- 
terranean forces  which  bring  about  such  changes  are  stiU  at 
work,  as  manifested  by  the  great  chain  of  active  volcanoes  in 
Sumatra  and  Java.  Proofs  of  somewhat  earlier  changes  of  level 
arc  to  be  seen  in  the  Tertiary  coal  formations  of  Borneo,  which 
demonstrate  a  succession  of  elevations  and  subsidences,  with  as 
much  certainty  as  if  we  had  historical  record  of  them. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose,  nor  is  it  probable,  that  all  these 


by  Google 


336  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  it^Ki  m. 

great  islands  were  recently  united  to  the  continent,  and  that 
their  separation  took  place  hy  one  general  auhaidence  of  the 
whole.  It  is  more  consonant  with  what  we  know  of  such  mat- 
ters, that  the  elevations  and  depressions  were  partial,  varying 
in  their  points  of  action  and  often  recuiring ;  sometimes  ex- 
tending one  part  of  an  island,  sometimes  another;  now  joining 
an  island  to  the  main  land,  now  bringing  two  islands  into  closer 
proximity.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  aometiniea  an  inter- 
vening island  has  sunk  or  receded  and  allowed  others  which  it 
before  sejDarated  to  effect  a  partial  union  independently  of  it.  If 
we  recognise  the  probability  that  such  varied  and  often-renewed 
changes  of  level  have  occurred,  we  shall  be  better  able  to  under- 
stand-how certain  anomalies  of  distribution  in  these  islands  may 
have  been  brought  about.  We  will  now  endeavour  to  sketch  the 
general  features  of  the  zoology  of  this  interesting  district,  and 
then  proceed  to  discuss  some  of  the  relations  of  the  islands  to 
each  other. 

Mar/mmlia. — We  have  seen  that  the  Indo-Chinese  sub-region 
possesses  13  species  of  mammalia  in  common  with  the  Indo- 
Malay  sub-region,  and  4  others  peculiar  to  itself,  besides  one 
Ethiopian  and  several  Oriental  and  Paliearctic  forms  of  wide 
range.  Of  this  latter  class  the  Malay  islands  have  compara- 
tively few,  but  they  possess  no  less  than  14  peculiar  genera,  viz. 
Simio;  Siamanga,  Tarslus,  Qaleopiihecus,  Hylomys,  Ptilocents, 
Gymnura,  Cynogale,  He^migalea,  Ardogcde,  Barangia,  Mydmis, 
Helarctos,  .and  Tapirus.  The  islands  also  possess  tigers,  deer, 
wild  pigs,  wild  cattle,  elephants,  the  scaly  ant-eater,  and  most 
of  the  usual  Oriental  genera ;  so  that  they  are  on  the  whole 
fully  as  rich  as,  if  not  richer  than,  any  part  of  Asia ;  a  fact  very 
unusual  in  island  faunas,  and  very  su^estive  of  their  really 
continental  nature. 

Plati  VIII.  Scene  in  Borneo  wilh  Characteristic  Malayan 
Quadrupeds. — The  Malayan  fauna  is  so  rich  and  peculiar  that 
we  devote  two  plates  to  illustrate  it.  We  have  here  a  group  of 
mammalia,  such  as  might  be  seen  together  in  the  vast  forests  of 
Borneo.  In  the  for^round  we  have  the  beautiful  deer-like 
Chevrotain    {Tragulus  javaniciti).      These    are   delicate   little 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP,  sii.]  THE  ORIENTAL  REGION.  337 

animals  whose  body  is  not  laiger  tlian  a  rabbit's,  thence  often 
called  "mouse-deer."  They  were  formerly  classed  with  the 
"  musk-deer,"  owing  to  their  similar  tusk-like  upper  canines ; 
but  their  anatomy  shows  them  to  form  quite  a  distinct  family, 
having  more  resemblance  to  the  camels.  On  the  branch  above 
is  the  curious  feather-tailed  Tree-Shrew  {PtUocerus  lowii),  a  small 
insectivorous  animal  altogether  peculiar  to  Borneo,  Above  this 
is  the  strange  little  Taraier  (Tardus  speetrvm),  one  of  the  lemurs 
confined  to  the  Malay  islands,  but  so  distinct  from  aU  others  as 
to  constitute  a  separate  family.  The  other  small  animals  are 
the  Flying  Lemurs  (Galceopithecus  volans)  formerly  classed  with 
the  lemurs,  but  now  considered  to  belong  to  the  Insectivora. 
They  have  a  very  large  expansion  of  the  skin  connecting  the 
fore  and  hind  limbs  and  tail,  and  ^re  able  to  take  long  flights 
from  one  tree  to  another,  and  even  to  rise  over  obstacles  in  their 
course  by  the  elevatory  power  of  the  tail-membranG,  They 
feed  chiefly  on  leaves,  and  have  a  very  soft  and  beautifully 
marbled  fiir. 

In  the  distance  is  the  Malayan  tapir  {Tapims  iTidicus),  a 
representative  of  a  group  of  animals  now  confined  to  the  larger 
Malay  islands  and  tropical  America,  but  which  once  ranged 
over  the  greater  part  of  temperate  Europe. 

Birds. — Owing  to  several  of  the  families  consisting  of  very 
obscure  and  closely  allied  species,  which  have  never  been  criti- 
cally examined  and  compared  by  a  competent  ornithologist, 
the  number  of  birds  inhabiting  this  sub-region  is  uncertain. 
From  the  best  available  materials  there  appear  to  be  somewhat 
less  than  650  species  of  land-birds  actually  known,  or  exclud- 
ing the  Philippine  Islands  somewhat  less  than  600.  The 
larger  part  of  these  are  peculiar  species,  but  mostly  allied  to 
those  of  Indo-China ;  36  of  the  genera,  as  already  stated,  being 
common  to  these  two  sub-regions.  There  are,  however,  no  less 
than  46  genera  which  are  peculiarly  or  wholly  Indo  Malayan 
and,  in  many  eases,  have  no  close  affinity  with  other  Oriental 
groups.  These  peculiar  genera  are  as  follows: — Timalia,  Mala- 
copteron,  Macronits,  Napothe^a,  Turdimts,  and  Triehixos — genera 


by  Google 


338  ZOOLOGICAL  GBOGRAPEY.  [paet  hi. 

of  Timaliidae ;  Eupetes,  a  most  remarkable  form,  perhaps  allied 
to  Eniewnis,  and  Oinelus ;  BTtahdomis  (Certhiidfe)  found  only  in 
the  Philippines ;  Psali/ria,  a  diminutive  hird  of  doubtful  affinities, 
provisionally  classed  among  the  tits(Parid£e);  jSfe/omis(Pyenono- 
tidaj) ;  Lalage,  (Campepht^daB)  extending  eastward  to  the  Pacific 
Islands  ;  PyenospJvn/s,  Philenioma  (Muscicapidse)  ;  Lanidlus, 
a  beautiful  bird  doubtfully  classed  with  the  shrikes  (Laididie) ; 
)Ams  and  Pityriasis,  the  latter  a  most  anomalous  form — 
I  distinct  family,  at  present  classed  with  the  jays,  in 
Corvidaj ;  PnonochUus,  a  curious  form  classed  with  DicBeidae ; 
Eryihrtira  (Ploceidee),  extending  eastwards  to  the  Fiji  Islands ; 
Gymnops,  Calomis,  {Stumidffi) ;  Eurylcmms,  Ccnrydon,  and  Calyp- 
toiiiena  (Euryla^midas)  ;  EucicMa,  the  longest  tailed  and  most 
elegantly  marked  of  the  Pittidse ;  Beinwardtipieus  and  Mi^lyptes 
(Picidre) ;  Psilopogon  and  Calorhamphvs,  (Megahemidffi) ;  SMtto- 
coccyx,  Dasyl&ph/as,  Zqndogrammus,  Cdrpococct/x,  Zancloshm/us, 
Poliococcyx,  Ehvnorfha,  (Ouculidfe) ;  Bermicomis,  Caldo,  Cranor- 
Mnvs,  Pmelopides,  Bhinoplasc,  (BucerotidEe) ;  PsiUinus,  (Psitta- 
cidte) ;  PtUopus,  Phapitreron,  (ColumbidEe) ;  Mollulus,  (Trero- 
nidre) ;  Mache^hamphus,  (Falconidffi).  Many  of  these  genera  are 
abundant  and  wide-spread,  while  some  of  the  most  characteristic 
Himalayan  genera,  such  as  Zarvivora,  Garrulax,  Hypsipetes, 
Pomatorhinus,  and  Dendrocitta,  are  here  represented  by  only 
a  few  species. 

Among  the  groups  that  are  chara^iteristic  of  the  Malayan 
sub-region,  theTimaliidfe  and  Pyenonotidai  stand  pre-eminent;  the 
former  represented  chiefly  by  the  genera  Timalia,  Malacopteron, 
Macronus,  and  Trickasloma,  the  latter  by  Crin^er,  Microscelis, 
and  many  forms  of  Pymonotus.  The  Muscicapid^e,  Dicruridte, 
Campepbagidse,  Ploceidai,  and  Nectariniidse  are  also  well 
developed ;  as  well  as  the  Pittida3,  and  the  EurylEemidEe,  the 
limited  number  of  species  of  the  latter  being  compensated  by 
a  tolerable  abundance  of  individuals.  Among  the  Picarite  are 
many  conspicuous  groups ;  as,  woodpeckers  (Picidte) ;  barbets 
(Megalsemidfe) ;  trogons  (Trogonidte) ;  kingfishers  (Alcedinidse) ; 
and  hornbills  (Bucerotida;) ;  five  families  which  are  perhaps  the 
most  conspicuous  in  the  whole  fauna.     Lastly  come  the  pigeons 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  OEIENTAL  BEGION.  339 

(Columbidte),  and  the  pheasanta  (PhasianidEe),  wHch  are  fairly 
represented  by  such  fine  gecera  as  Treron,  Ptilopm,  Euploeamm, 
and  Argusianus.  A  few  forms  whose  atSnities  are  Australian 
rather  than  Oriental,  help  to  give  a  character  to  the  ornithology, 
though  none  of  them  are  numerous.  The  swallow-shrikes 
(Artamus) ;  the  w^-tail  fly-catchers  {EhApidwrct)  \  the  green  fruit- 
doves  (Ptilopus) ;  and  the  mound-makers  (Megapodius),  are  the 
chief  of  these. 

There  are  a  few  curioua  examples  of  remote  geographical 
aUiancea  that  may  be  noted.  First,  we  have  a  direct  African 
connection  in  Machcerkamphns,  a  genus  of  hawks,  and  Bermicornis, 
a  genus  of  hombiUs ;  the  only  close  allies  being,  in  the  former 
case  in  South,  and  in  the  latter  in  West  Africa.  Then  we  have 
a  curious  Neotropical  affinity,  indicated  by  Carpococeyx,  a  large 
Bomean  ground-cuckoo,  whose  nearest  ally  is  the  genus  Nio- 
mm-phiis  of  South  America;  and  by  the  lovely  green-coloured 
Calypiomena  which  seems  unmistakably  allied  to  the  orange- 
coloured  Ev/picola,  or  "  Cock  of  the  rock,"  in  general  structure 
and  in  the  remarkable  form  of  crest,  a  resemblance  which  has 
been  noticed  by  many  writers. 

In  the  precedii^  enumeration  of  Malayan  genera  several 
are  included  which  extend  into  the  Austro-Malay  Islands,  our 
object,  at  present,  being  to  show  the  differences  and  relations  of 
the  two  chief  Oriental  sub-regions. 

Flats  IX.  A  Malayan  Fwest  with  some  of  its  peculiar  Birds. — 
Our  second  illustration  of  the  Malayan  fauna  is  devoted  to  its 
bird-life;  and  for  this  purpose  we  place  our  scene  in  the  Malay 
peninsula,  where  birds  are  perhaps  more  abundant  and  more 
interesting,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  sub-region.  Con- 
spicuous in  the  foreground  is  the  huge  Rhinoceros  Hornbill 
{Bueeros  rhinoceros),  one  of  the  most  characteristic  birds  of  the 
Malayan  forests,  the  flapping  of  whose  wings,  as  it  violently 
beats  the  air  to  support  its  heavy  body,  may  be  heard  a  mile 
off.  On  the  ground  behind,  is  the  Argus  pheasant  {Argiis- 
ianus  giganteus)  whose  beautifully  ocellated  wings  have  been 
the  subject  of  a  most  interesting  description  in  Mr.  Darwin's 
Descent   of   Man.    The  wing-feathers  are  here  ao   enormously 


by  Google 


340  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

developed  for  display  (a3  shown  in  our  iigure)  that  they 
become  almost,  if  not  c[uite,  useless  for  their  original  purpose  of 
flight ;  yet  the  colours  are  so  sober,  harmonizing  completely 
with  the  surrounding  vegetation,  and  the  bird  is  so  wary,  that 
in  the  forests  where  it  abounds  au  old  hunter  assured  me  he  had 
never  been  able  to  see  a  specimen  till  it  was  caught  in  his 
snares.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  that  during  the  display  of  the 
plumage  the  bird's  head  is  concealed  by  the  wings  from  a 
spectator  in  front,  and,  contrary  to  what  usually  obtains  among 
pheasants,  the  head  is  entirely  unadorned,  having  neither  crest 
nor  a  particle  of  vivid  colour, — a  remarkable  confirmation  of 
Mr.  Darwin's  views,  that  gayly  coloured  plumes  are  developed 
in  the  male  bird  for  the  purpose  of  attractive  display  in 
the  breeding  season.  The  long-tailed  bird  on  the  right  is 
one  of  the  Drongo-ahrikes  {Bhi-inga  remifer),  whose  long  bare 
tail-feathers,  with  an  oar-hke  web  at  the  end,  and  blue- 
black  glossy  plumage,  render  it  a  very  attractive  object  as  it 
flies  after  its  insect  prey.  On  the  left  is  another  singular  bird 
the  great  Broad-biU  (fioryclon  sumatramis),  with  dull  and  sombre 
plumage,  but  with  a  beak  more  Kke  that  of  a  boat-bill  than  of  a 
fruit-eating  passerine  bird.  Over  all,  the  white-handed  Gibbon 
{Hylohatcs  lar)  swings  and  gambols  among  the  topmost  branches 
of  the  forest, 

Eeptiles  and  Amphibia.~~Thestt  are  not  sufliciently  known  to 
be  of  much  use  for  our  present  purpose.  Most  of  the  genera 
belong  to  the  continental  parts  of  the  Oriental  region,  or  have  a 
wide  range.  Of  snakes  Bkabdosoino.,  TypMocalamus,  Tetragono- 
Boma,  AcTocliord%iS,  and  Atropos,  are  the  most  peculiar,  and  there 
are  several  peculiar  genera  of  Homalopsidje,  Of  Oriental  genera, 
Gylindrophis,  Xmopeltes,  Calamaria,  ffypsirhina,  Psamvwdy- 
nastes,  Gonyosoma,  Tragops,  Dipsas,  Pareas,  Python,  Bwngarua^ 
Naja,  and  Callophis  are  abundant;  as  well  as  Simotes,  AUabes. 
Tropidonotus,  and  Bcndrophis,  which  are  widely  distributed, 
Among  lizards  Wydvosawrv.s  and  Gtcko  are  common;  there  are 
many  isolated  groups  of  ScincidEe;  while  Draco,  Calotes,  and 
many  forms  of  Agamidfe,  some  of  which  are  peculiar,  abound. 

Among  the  Amphibia,  toads  and  frogs  of  the  genera  Micrhyla, 


by  Google 


^ 

%   t 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  ORIENTAL  EEGION.  3il 

Kalophrynus,  Antonio,  and  Psetcdoiufo,  are  peculiar :  while  the 
Oriental  Megaiophrys,  Ixalus,  Mhacopkorus,  and  Eylovana  are 
ahundant  and  characteristic. 

Fishes. — The  fresh-water  fishes  of  the  Malay  archipelago 
have  been  so  well  collected  and  examined  by  the  Dutch 
naturalists,  that  they  -  offer  valuable  indications  of  zoo-geo- 
graphical affinity ;  and  they  particularly  weR  exhibit  the 
sharply  defined  limits  of  the  regioa,  a  large  number  of  Oriental 
and  even  Ethiopian  genera  extending  eastward  aa  far  as  Java 
and  Borneo,  but  very  rarely  indeed  sending  a  single  species 
further  east,  to  Celebes  or  the  Moluccas.  Thirteen  families  of 
fresh-water  fishes  are  found  in  the  Indo-Malay  sub-region.  Of 
these  the  Scieiiidfe  and  Symbranchidte  have  mostly  a  wide 
range  in  the  tropics.  Ophiocephalidje  are  exclusively  Oriental, 
reaching  Borneo  and  the  Philippine  islands.  The  Mastacem- 
belidte  are  also  Oriental,  but  one  species  is  found  as  far  as  Ceram. 
Of  the  NandidEe,  3  genera  range  over  the  whole  region.  The 
Labyrinthiei  extend  from  Africa  through  the  Oriental  region  to 
Amboyna,  The  single  species  constituting  the  family  Lucio- 
cephalidaj  is  confined  to  Borneo  and  the  small  islands  of  Biliton 
and  Banea.  Of  the  extensive  family  Siluridfe  17  genera  are 
Oriental  and  Malayan,  and  11  are  Malayan  exclusively;  and 
not  one  of  these  appears  to  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  the  sub- 
region.  The  CypiinidEc  offer  an  equally  striking  example,  23 
genera  ranging  eastward  to  Java  and  Borneo  and  not  one 
beyond;  14  of  these  being  exclusively  Malayan.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  this  is  not  from  any  want  of  knowledge  of  the 
countries  farther  east,  as  extensive  collections  have  also  been 
made  in  Celebes,  the  Moluccas,  and  Timor ;  so  that  the  facts  of 
distribution  of  fresh-water  fishes  come,  most  unexpectedly,  to 
fortify  that  division  of  the  archipelago  into  two  primary 
regions,  which  was  founded  on  a  consideration  of  mammalia 
and  birds  only. 

Itisects. — Few  countries  in-the  world  can  present  a  richer  and 
more  varied  series  of  insects  than  the  Indo-Malay  islands,  and 
we  can  only  here  notice  a  few  of  their  more  striking  peculiarities 
and  more  salient  features. 


by  Google 


342  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

The  butterflies  of  this  sub-region,  according  to  the  best  esti- 
mate that  can  be  formed,  amount  to  about  650  described  species, 
a  number  that  will  yet,  no  doubt,  be  very  considerably  increased. 
The  genera  which  appear  to  be  peculiar  to  it  are  Entes  (Saty- 
ridte)  ;  ZeimMa  (Morpliidte) ;  Amnoda,  XaiUkotmnia,  and 
Tanmda,  (NymphaHdfe).  The  groups  which  are  most  charac- 
teristic of  the  region,  either  from  their  abundance  in  individuals 
or  species,  or  from  their  size  and  beauty,  are— -the  rich  dark- 
coloured  J'ttp^wa ;  the  large  semi-transparent  Hestia;  the  plain- 
coloured  Myealesis,  which  replace  our  meadow-brown  butterflies 
(Hipparchia) ;  the  curious  Elpnmas,  which  often  closely  resemble 
Euplteas;  the  large  and  handsome  ThamarUis  and  Zmiasidia,, 
which  take  the  place  of  the  giant  Morphos  of  South  America ; 
the  Oethosia,  of  the  brightest  red,  and  marked  with  a  curious 
zigzag  pattern ;  the  velvety  and  blue-glossed  Tennos;  the  pale 
and  delicately-streaked  Cyrestis;  the  thick-bodied  and  boldly 
coloured  Adolias;  the  small  wine-coloured  Taxila;  the  fine  blue 
AmUypodia ;  the  beautiful  Thyca,  elegantly  marked  under- 
neath with  red  and  yellow,  which  represent  our  common  white 
butterflies  and  are  almost  equally  abundant ;  the  pale  blue 
Eroma,  and  the  large  red-tipped  Iphias.  The  genus  PapUio 
is  represented  by  a  variety  of  fine  groups ;  the  lai^e  Ornithop- 
t&ro.,  with  satiny  yellow  under -wings ;  the  superb  green-marked 
" brookeana ;  "  the  " paradosu"  group,  often  closely  resembling 
the  Eupljeas  that  abound  in  the  same  district;  the  "pans'" 
group  richly  dusted  with  golden-green  specks ;  the  "  helmus " 
group  with  wide-spreading  black  and  white  wmgs ,  the  black 
and  crimson  "polydcmis"  group;  the  "memntm"  group,  of  the 
largest  size  and  richly-varied  colours  ,  and  the  "  burypilus " 
group,  elegantly  banded  or  spotted  with  blue  or  green  all  these 
are  so  abundant  that  some  of  them  are  met  with  m  every  walk, 
and  are  a  constant  delight  to  the  naturahst  who  has  the  privilege 
of  observing,  them  in  their  native  haunts. 

The  Coleoptera  are  far  less  prominent  and  recLuire  to  be  care- 
fully sought  after;  but  they  then  well  repay  the  collector.  As 
some  measure  of  the  productiveness  of  the  tropics  in 
e  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  give  a  few  notes  of  the 


by  Google 


ciur.  XII.]  THE  OBIENl'AL  KBGION.  343 

number  of  species  collected  by  myself  in  some  of  the  best 
localities,  At  Singapore  300  species  of  Coleoptera  were  col- 
lected in  15  days,  and  in  a  month  the  number  had  increased  to 
520  ;  of  which  100  were  Longicorns  and  140  Ehyncophora.  At 
Sarawak  in  Borneo  I  obtained  400  species  in  15  days,  and 
600  in  a  month.  In  two  months  this  number  bad  increased  to 
about  850,  and  in  three  months  to  1,000  species.  This  was  the 
most  prolific  spot  I  ever  collected  in,  especially  for  Longicorns 
which  formed  about  one-fifth  of  all  the  species  of  beetles.  In 
the  Aru  Islands  in  one  month,  I  obtained  only  235  species  of 
Coleoptera,  and  about  600  species  of  insects  of  aU  orders ;  and 
this  may  be  taken  as  a  fair  average,  in  localities  where  no 
specially  favourable  conditions  existed.  On  the  average  40  to 
60  species  of  Coleoptera  would  be  a  good  day's  collecting ;  70 
exceptionally  good ;  while  the  largest  number  ever  obtained  in 
one  day  was  95,  and  the  majority  of  these  would  be  very 
minute  insects.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  many 
very  common  species  were  passed  over,  yet  had  every  species  met 
with  been  collected,  not  much  more  than  100  species  would  ever 
have  been  obtained  in  one  day's  collecting  of  four  or  five  hours. 
These  details  may  afford  an  interesting  standard  of  comparison 
for  collectors  in  other  parts  of  the  world. 

Of  CicindelidEe  the  most  peculiarly  Malayan  form  is  Thcrates, 
found  always  on  leaves  in  the  forests  in  the  same  localities  as 
the  more  widely  spread  Collyris.  Five  genera  of  this  fiimily  are 
Indo-Malayan, 

The  CarabidEe,  though  sufficiently  plentiful,  are  mostly  of  small 
size,  and  not  conspicuous  in  any  way.  Biit  there  is  one  striking 
exception  in  the  purely  Malayan  genus  Mormolyce,  the  lai'gest 
and  most  remarkable  of  the  whole  family.  It  is  nocturnal, 
resting  during  the  days  on  the  under  side  of  large  holeti  in  the 
virgin  forest.  Pericalhis  and  Cctiaseopus  are  among  the  few 
genera  which  are  at  all  brillantly  coloured. 

BuprestidiC  are  abundant,  and  very  gay ;  the  genus  Bdionoia, 
being  perhaps  one  of  the  most  conspicaoua  and  characteristic. 
The  giant  Catoxantha  is,  however,  the  most  peculiar,  though 
comparatively  scarce.      Ckrysochroa  and  Chalayphwa  are  also 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


abundant  and  characteristic.     Out  of  the  41  Oriental  genera  21 
are  Malayan,  and  10  of  these  are.  not  found  in  the  otlier  sub- 


In  Lucanidte  the  Malay  islands  are  rich,  14  out  of  the  16 
Oriental  genera  occurring  there,  and  3  being  peculiar.  There 
are  many  fine  species  of  Odontolabris,  which  may  be  considered 
the  characteristic  genua  of  the  sub-region. 

The  Cetoniidffi  are  well  represented  by  16  genera  and  about  120 
species.  The  genera  Myct&ristes,  Phmdimus,  Pkctrone,  Euremina, 
Shagopleryx  and  Centrognathiis  are  peculiar,  while  Agestrata, 
Ghalcothea,  and  Macronoia  are  abundant  and  characteristic. 

The  Longicorns,  as  in  all  continental  forest  regions  near  the 
equator,  are  very  abundant  and  in  endlessly  varied  forms.  Ko 
less  than  55  genera  containing  about  200  species  are  peculiar  to 
this  aub-region,  the  Cerambycidse  being  much  the  most  numerous, 
Suryarthrmrh,  C<dostema,  Agdasta,  and  Astathes  may  be  consi- 
dered as  most  charaetoristic ;  but  to  name  the  curious  and  in- 
teresting forms  would  be  to  give  a  list  of  half  the  genera.  Por 
the  relations  of  the  Longicorns  of  the  Indo-Malay,  and  those  of 
the  Austro-Malay  r^on,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  chapter  on 
the  distribution  of  insects  in  the  succeeding  part  of  this  work. 

Terrestrial  Mollusca. — The  Philippine  islands  are  celebrated 
as  being  one  of  the  richest  parts  of  the  world  for  land  shells, 
about  400  species  being  known.  The  other  islands  of  the  sub- 
region  are  far  less  rich,  not  more  than  about  100  species  having 
yet  been  described  from  the  whole  of  them.  Helix  and  BuH- 
mus  both  aboiuid  in  species  in  the  Philippines,  whereas  the 
latter  genus  is  very  scarce'  in  Borneo  and  Java.  Ten  genera  of 
Helicidfe  inhabit  the  sub-region ;  P/dfferia  is  found  in  the 
Philippines  and  Moluccas,  while  the  large  genus  Cochlostyla  is 
almost  peculiar  to  the  Philippines.  Of  the  Operculata  there  are 
representatives  of  20  genera,  of  which  Dermatoma  and  iV^ 
nella  are  peculiar,  while  Segistoma  and  Gallia  extend  to  the 
Australian  region.  Gyclophorus,  Le^iffpama,  and  Piipina  are 
s  the  most  characteristic  genera. 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xii.]  THE  OEIENTAL  REGION.  345 

The  Zoological  Melations  of  the  Several  Islands  of  tlm  Indo-Malay 
Suh-regi<m. 

Although  we  have  grouped  the  PhiEppine  islands  witii  the 
Indo-Malay  sub-region,  to  which,  as  we  shall  see,  they  un- 
doubtedly belong,  yet  most  of  the  zoological  characteristics  we 
have  just  sketched  out,  apply  more  especially  to  the  other  groups 
of  islands  and  the  Malay  peninsula.  The  Philippine  islands 
stand,  to  Malaya  proper,  in  the  same  relation  that  Madagascar 
does  to  Africa  or  the  Antilles  to  South  America ;  that  ia,  they 
are  remarkable  for  the  absence  of  whole  families  and  genera 
which  evei'ywhere  characterise  the  remainder  of  the  district. 
They  are,  in  fact,  truly  insular,  while  the  other  islands  are  really 
continental  in  all  the  essential  features  of  their  natural  histoiy. 
Before,  therefore,  we  can  conveniently  compare  the  separate 
islands  of  Malaya^  with  each  other,  we  must  first  deal  with  the 
Philippine  gixjup,  showing  in  what  its  speciality  consists,  and 
why  it  must  be  considered  apart  from  the  sub-region  to  which 
it  belongs. 

Mammals  of  the  Philippine  Islands. — The  only  mammalia  re- 
corded as  inhabiting  the  Phihppine  Islands  are  the  following  : — 

QuADiroMAKA.     J.  Macacus  cynomolgus. 

2.  0  jniopithecus  niger.         Dr.  Semper  doubts  this  being 
a  Philippine  apeciea. 
Lbmuboidba.      3.  Tarsins  spectrum. 
Ibsbotivora.      4.  Galeopithecus  philippinensis, 

5.  Tnpaia  (specieB).  On  Dr.  Semper's  auttority. 

Caknivora.         6.  Viverra  tangalun^. 

7.  Paradoxurus  phiLppeosis. 
Ungulata.         8.  Su3  (species).  On  Dr.  Semper's  authority. 

10.  Cerviis  philipjienais. 

11.  Cervua  alfredL 

12.  Bos  (species).  Wild  cattle ;  perhaps  intro- 

duced. 
EoDEBTiA.  13.  Phlteomjs  cmnmingii. 

14.  Scuirus  pliilippinensia. 
Also  24  species,  belonging  to  17  genera,  of  bats. 

^  As  so  many  typical  Malay  groups  are  absent  only  from  the  Philippines,  I 
have  adopted  the  t«rm  "  Malaya,"  to  show  the  distribution  of  these,  nsing 
the  term  "  Indo-MaJaya"  when  the  range  of  the  group  includes  the 
Philippines.  This  mnst  be  remembered  when  consulting  the  tables  of  dis- 
tribution at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 
Vol.  I.— 24 


by  Google 


346  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [i-agt  hi. 

The  foregoing  list,  although  small,  contains  an  assemblage  of 
species  which  are  wholly  Oriental  in  character,  and  several  of 
which  {Tardus,  Gakopithecus,  Tupaia)  are  characteristic  and 
highly  peculiar  Malayan  forma.  At  the  same  time  these  islands 
are  completely  separated  from  the  rest  of  Malaya  by  the  total 
absence  of  SeniTiopithectis,  Hylohates,  Felis,  Helardos,  Rhinoceros, 
Manis,  and  other  groups  constantly  found  iu  the  great  Indo- 
Malay  islands  and  peninsula  of  Malacca  We  iind  apparently 
two  seta  of  animals  :  a  more  ancient  series,  represented  by  the 
deer,  OaleopitheGus,  and  squirrel,  in  which  the  species  are  distinct 
from  any  others;  and  a  more  recent  series,  represented  by 
Macamis  cynomolgus,  and  Viverra  twngalunga,  identical  with 
common  Malayan  animals.  The  former  indicate  the  earliest 
period  when  these  volcanic  islands  were  connected  .with  some 
part  of  the  Malayan  sub-region,  and  they  show  that  this  was 
not  geologically  remote,  since  no  peculiar  generic  types  have 
t)een  preserved  or  differentiated.  The  latter  may  indicate  either 
the  termination  of  the  period  of  union,  or  merely  the  effects  of 
introduction  by  man.  The  reason  why  a  larger  number  of 
mammalian  forms  were  not  introduced  and  established,  was 
probably  because  the  union  was  effected  only  with  some  small 
Islands,  and  from  these  communicated  to  other  parts  of  the 
archipelago ;  or  it  may  well  be  that  later  subsidences  extin- 
guished some  of  the  forms  that  had  established  themselves. 

Birds  of  the  Philippine  Islands. — These  have  been  carefully 
investigated  by  Viscount  Walden,  in  a  paper  read  before  the 
Zoological  Society  of  London  in  1873,  and  we  are  thus  furnished 
with  ample  information  on  the  relations  of  this  important 
portion  of  the  fauna. 

The  total  number  of  birds  knowij"  to  inhabit  the  Philippines 
is  219,  of  which  106  are  peculiar.  If,  however,  following  our 
usual  plan,  we  take  only  the  land-birds,  we  find  the  numbers 
to  be  159  species,  of  which  100  are  peculiar ;  an  unusually  large 
proportion  for  a  group  of  islands  so  comparatively  near  to 
various  parts  of  the  Oriental  and  Australian  regions.  The 
families  of  birds  ■which  are  more  especially  characteristic  of  the 
Indo-Malay  sub-region  are  about  28  in  number,  and  examples 


by  Google 


CHAP.  x:i.]  THE  ORIENTAL  IlEGION.  347 

of  all  these  are  found  in  the  Philippines  except  four,  viz.,  Ciii- 
clidte,  Phyllomithid^,  EurylEemidffi,  and  Podargid*.  The  only 
Philippine  familiea  which  are,  otherwise,  exclusively  Austro- 
Malayan  are,  Cacatuidie  and  Megapodiidfe.  Yet  although  the 
birds  are  unmistakahly  Malayan,  as  a  whole,  there  are,  as  in 
the  mammalia  (though  in  a  less  degree),  marked  deficiencies  of 
most  characteristic  Malayan  forms.  Lord  Walden  gives  a  list 
of  no  leas  than  69  genera  thus  absent ;  but  it'  will  be  sufficient 
here  to  mention  such  wide-spread  and  specially  Indo-Malay 
groups  as, — Ev.ryl<Miivs,  Nyctiomis,  Arachnofhera,  Oeocichla, 
Malacopteron,  Timalia,  Foviaiorhinus,  Phyllornis,  lora,  Griniger^ 
Eiiicwnis,  Chaplia,  TcJiitrm,  J)mdrociita,  Eulahes,  Palmomis, 
Miglyptes,  Tiga,  and  Euplocamiis.  These  deficiencies  plainly 
show  the  isolated  character  of  the  Philippine  group,  and  imply 
that  it  has  never  formed  a  part  of  that  Indo-Malayan  extension 
of  the  continent  which  almost  certainly  existed  when  the  pecu- 
liar Malayan  fauna  was  developed ;  or  that,  if  it  has  been  so 
united,  it  has  been  subsequently  submerged  and  broken  up  to 
such  an  extent,  as  to  cause  the  extinction  of  many  of  the  absent 
types. 

It  appears  from  Lord  Walden's  carefid  analysis,  that  31  of  the 
Philippine  species  occur  in  the  Papuan  sub-region,  and  47  in 
Celebes  ;  69  occur  also  in  India,  and  75  in  Java.  This  last  fact 
is  curious,  since  Java  is  the  most  remote  of  the  Malayan  islands, 
but  it  is  found  to  arise  almost  wholly  from  the  birds  of  that 
island  being  better  known,  since  only  one  species,  Xantholcema 
rosea,  is  confined  to  the  Philippine  Islands  and  Java. 

Ihfi  wading  and  swimming  birds  ara  mostly  o£  wids-spreai3 

forma,  only  6  out  of  the  60  species  being  peculiar  to  the  Philippine 
ai-chipelago.  Confining  ourselves  to  the  land-birds,  and  com- 
bining several  of  the  minutely  subdivided  genera  of  Lord  Wal- 
den's  paper  so  as  to  agree  with  the  arrangement  adopted  in  this 
-work,  we  find  that  there  are  112  genera  of  land-birds  repre- 
sented in  the  islands.  Of  these,  50  are  either  cosmopolitan,  of 
wide  range,  or  common  to  the  Oriental  and  Australian  regions, 
and  may  be'put  aside  as  affording  few  indications  of  geographical 
affinity.     Of  the  remaining  62  no  less  than  40  are  exclusively 


by  Google 


348  ZOOLOGICAL  Ul^uGEAPHY  [pvrTiii. 

or  mainly  Oriental,  and  most  of  tliem  are  genera  which  nnge 
widely  over  the  region,  only  two  {Philentoma  and  Eollulxib)  hemg 
exeluaively  Malayan,  and  two  others  [Megalui  us  and  Mcdaeoui  eus) 
more  especially  Indian  or  continental,  live  other  genera  though 
having  a  mde  range,  are  typically  Pal-^arctic  and  have  reached 
the  islands  through  North  China.  They  ^re  Monh  ola.  Aero 
eephalus,  Pkylloscopus,  Calliope,  and  Pflistr  the  two  first  hiving 
extended  their  range  southward  into  the  Moluccas  The  pcou 
liarly  Australian  genera  are  only  12,  the  mijonty  being  charic 
teristic  Papuan  and  Molnccan  forma  such  •\s—Ca'mpe}.'haga 
Alcyone,  Gaeatua,  Tanygnathus,  PtUqp^is  Janfhwnas  PMoymias 
and  Megapodius,  One  is  peculiar  to  Celebes  {Pnomtarus) ,  one 
to  the  Papuan  group  {Cydopsitta) ;  and  one  is  chiefly  Australian 
(Gerygone).  The  beautiful  little  pan'oquets  forming  the  genus 
Loricvius,  are  characteristic  of  the  Philippines,  which  possess  5 
species,  a  larger  number  than  occurs  in  any  .other  group  of 
islands,  though  they  range  from  India  to  New  Guinea.  There  re- 
main six  peculiar  genera — Bhahdomis,  an  isolated  form  of  creep- 
ers (Certhiidge) ;  Gymnops,  a  remarkable  bareheaded  bird  belong- 
ing to  the  starlings  (Stumid^);  Dasyl(yphus,&aA  L&jndograminus, 
remarkable  genera  of  cuckoos  (Cuculidte) ;  Penelopides,  a  pecul- 
iar hornbil],  and  Phapitreron,  a  genus  of  pigeons.  Besides  these 
there  are  four  other  types  (here  classed  as  sub-genera,  but  con- 
sidered to  be  distinct  by  Lord  Walden)  which  are  peculiar  to 
the  Philippines.  These  are  Pseudoptynx,  an  owl  of  the  genus 
Athene;  Pseudolalage,  a  sub-genus  oi  Lalage;  Zeocephus,  a  sub- 
genus ofTehitrea;  and  Ptilocolpa,  included  under  Carpophaga. 

When  we  look  at  the  position  of  the  Philippine  group,  con- 
nected by  the  Eashee  islands  with  Pormosa,  by  Palawan  and  the 
Sooloo  archipelago  with  Borneo,  and  by  the  Tulour  and  other 
islets  with  the  Moluccas  and  Celebes,  we  have  little  difficulty  in 
accounting  for  the  peculiarities  of  its  bird  fauna.  The  absence 
of  a  large  number  of  Malayan  groups  would  indicate  that  the 
actual  connection  with  Borneo,  which  seems  necessary  for  the 
introduction  of  the  Malay  types  of  inammaJia,  was  not  of  long 
duration  ;  while  the  laige  proportion  of  wide-spread  continental 
genera  of  birds  would  seem  to  imply  that  greater  facilities  had 


by  Google 


CHAP,  sii-l  THE  ORIENTAL  KEGION.  349 

once  existed  for  immigratioa  from  Soutliern  CHua,  perkapa  by 
a  land  connection  through  Formosa,  at  which  time  the  ancestors 
of  the  peculiar  forms  of  deer  entered  the  country.  It  may  in- 
deed be  objected  that  our  knowledge  of  these  islands  is  far 
too  imperfect  to  anive  at  any  satisfactory  conclusions  as  to  their 
foimer  history ;  but  althov^h  many  more  species  no  doubt 
remain  to  be  discovered,  experience  shows  that  the  broad  cha- 
racters of  a  fauna  are  always  determined  by  a  series  of  eolleetiona 
made  by  different  persons,  at  various  localities,  and  at  different 
times,  even  when  more  imperfect  than  those  of  the  Phihppine 
birds  really  are.  The  isolated  position,  and  the  volcanic  struc- 
ture of  the  group,  would  lead  us  to  expect  them  to  be  somewhat 
lees  productive  than  the  Moluccas,  close  to  the  rich  and  varied 
Papuan  district,— or  than  Celebes,  with  its  numerous  indications 
of  an  extensive  area  and  great  anticLuity;  and  taking  iuto  account 
the  excessive  poverty  of  its  maromalian  fauna,  which  is  certain 
to  be  pretty  well  ioiown,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  no  future 
discoveries  will  materially  alter  the  character  of  Philippine 
ornithology,  as  determined  from  the  materials    already  at  our 


Java. — Following  the  same  plan  as  we  have  adopted  in  iirst 
discussing  the  Philippine  islands,  and  separating  them  from  the 
body  of  the  sub-region  on  account  of  special  peculiarities,  we 
must  next  take  Java,  as  possessing  marked  individuality,  and  as 
being  to  some  extent  more  isolated  in  its  productions  than  the 
remaining  great  islands. 

Java  is  well  supplied  with  indigenous  mammalia,  possessing 
as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained  55  genera  and  90  species.  None 
of  these  genera  are  peculiar,  and  only  about  5  of  the  species, 
— 3  quadrumana,  a  deer  and  a  wild  pig.  So  far  then  there  is 
nothing  remarkable  in  its  fauna,  but  on  comparing  it  with  that  of 
the  other  great  islands,  viz.,  Borneo  and  Sumatra,  and  the  Malay 
peninsula,  we  find  an  unmistakable  deficiency  of  characteristic 
forms,  the  same  in  kind  as  that  we  have  just  commented  on  in 
the  case  of  the  Philippines,  though  much  less  in  degree.  First, 
taking  genera  whicli  are  found  in  all  three  of  the  above-named 


by  Google 


360  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [pakt  hi. 

localities  and  wHch  must  therefore  be  held  to  be  typical  Ma- 
layan groups,  the  following  are  absent  from  Java:  Viverra, 
Ch/7/inopus,  Lutra,  Helardos,  Tafvnis,  Elephas,  and  Gymnura; 
while  of  those  hwi/m  to  occur  in  two,  and  which,  owing  to  our 
imperfect  knowledge,  may  very  probably  one  day  be  discovered  in 
the  third,  the  following  are  equally  wantii^ ;  Simia,  Siamanga, 
Hemigalea,  PagurMi,  RMnosciurus,  and  Bhizomys.  It  may  be 
said  this  is  only  negative  evidence,  but  in  the  case  of  Java  it  is 
much  more,  because  this  island  is  not  only  the  best  known  of 
any  in  the  archipelago,  but  there  is  perhaps  no  portion  of 
British  India  of  equal  extent  so  well  known.  It  is  one  of  the 
oldest  of  the  Dutch  possessions  and  the  seat  of  their  colonial 
government ;  good  roads  traverse  it  in  every  direction,  and  ex- 
perienced naturalists  have  been  resident  in  various  parts  of 
it  for  years  together,  and  have  visited  every  mountain  and  every 
forest,  aided  by  bands  of  diligent  native  collectors,  "We 
should  be  almost  as  likely  to  find  new  species  of  mammalia 
in  Central  Europe  as  in  Java ;  and  therefore  the  absence  of 
such  animals  as  the  Malay  bear,  the  elephant,  tapir,  gymnura, 
and  even  less  conspicuous  forms,  must  be  accepted  as  a 
positive  feet. 

In  the  other  islands  there  are  still  vast  tracts  of  forest  in  the 
hands  of  natives  and  utterly  unexplored,  and  any  similar  absence 
in  their  case  will  prove  little ;  yet  on  making  the  same  com- 
parison in  the  case  of  Borneo,  the  most  peculiar  and  the  least 
known  of  the  other  portions  of  the  sub-region,  we  find  only 
2  genera  absent  which  are  found  in  the  three  other  divisions, 
and  only  3  which  are  found  in  two  others.  A  fact  to  be  noted 
also  is,  that  the  only  genns  found  in  Java  but  not  in  other  parts 
of  the  sub-region  (HeU<Mi)  occurs  again  in  North  India;  and 
that  some  Javan  species,  as  Bkinoceros  javaidcus,  and  Lepiis  hcr- 
ffosa  occur  again  in  the  Indo-Chinese  sub-region,  but  not  in  the 
Malayan. 

Among  the  birds  we  meet  with  facts  of  a  similar  import ; 
and  though  the  absence  of  certain  types  from  Java  is  not  quite 
so  certain  as  among  the  mamuiaHa,  this  is  more  than  balanced 
by  the  increased  number  of  such  deficiencies,  so  that  if  a  few 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xji.]  THE  OMENTAL  EEOION/  361 

should  be  proved  to  be  erroceoua,  the  main  result  will  remain 
unaltered. 
Java  possesses  about  270  species  of  land  birds,  of  which  about 

■  40  are  peculiar  to  it.  There  are,  however,  very  few  peculiar 
genera,  Lanidlus,  a  beautiful  spotted  shrike,  being  the  most 
distinct,  while  Cochoa  and  Psaltria  are  perhaps  not  diiferent  jrom 
their  Indian  allies.  The  island  has  however  a  marked  indivi- 
duality in  two  ways — ^in  the  absence  of  characteristic  Malayan 
types,  and  in  the  presence  of  a  number  of  forms  not  yet  found 
in  any  of  the  other  Malay  islands,  but  having  their  nearest  allies 
in  various  parts  of  the  Indo-Chinese  sub-region.  The  following 
16  genera  are  all  found  in  Malacca,  Sumatra,  and  Borneo, 
but  are  absent  from  Java:  Selomis,  Tmmwrus,  Dend/roGitta, 
Gorydon,  Calyptomena,  Vemlia,  BeimoardHpicus,  Galorainphus, 
Ehinortha,  Nyetwrnis,  Oranorhiniis,  Psittinus,  Polpplectron,  Ar- 
gusianm,  Ev/ploeamus,  and  Eollulus.  The  following  9  are  known 
from  two  of  the  above  localities,  and  will  very  probably  be 
found  in  the  third,  but  are  absent  from,  and  not  likely  to 
occur  in,  Java :  Tridiixos,  Siipetes,  Melanochlora,  Chaptia,  Pity- 
riasis, Lyncomis,  C'arpococeyx,  Poliococcyx,  and  RMnoplcuo.  "We 
have  thus  25  typically  Malayan  genera  which  are  not  known 
to  occur  in  Java. 

The  following  genera,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  occur  in  any 
of  the  Malayan  sub-divisions  except  Java,  and  they  all  occur 

■  again,  or  under  closely  allied  forms,  in  the  Indo-Chinese  sub- 
region  :  Brachypte^-yx  (allied  species  in  Himalayas) ;  Zoothera 
allied  species  in  Aracan) ;  Notodela  {allied  species  in  Pegu) ; 
Pnoepyga  (allied  species  in  Himalayas) ;  AUotrius  (allied  species 

.  in  the  Himalayas) ;  Cochoa  (allied  species  in  the  Himalayas) ; 
Ci-ypsirhina  (allied  species  in  Burmah) ;  Estrilda  (allied  species 
in  India) ;  Psaltria  (allied  genus — jEgithaliscus — ^in  Himalayas) ; 
Paw  mutims  and  Harpacfes  oreskios  (same  species  in  Siam 
and  Burmah) ;  Gecropis  striolata  (same  species  in  Java  and 
Formosa,  and  allied  species  in  India). 

Here  we  have  12  instances  of  very  remarkable  distribution, 
and  considering  that  there  are  nearly  as  many  birds  known  from 
Sumatra  and  Borneo  as  from  Java,  and  considerably  more  from 


by  Google 


352  ZOOLOGICAL  GBOGBAPHY.  [i-art  ni. 

the  Malay  peninsula,  it  is  not  likely  that  many  of  these  well 
marked  forms  will  be  discovered  in  these  countrieB. 

There  are  also  a  considerable  number  of  species  of  bu'ds 
common  to  Malacca,  Sumatra,  and  Borneo,  but  represented  in 
Java  by  distinct  though  closely  allied  species.    Such  are, — 


iJava 

by 

V.  miniata. 

D.  eapisfratm. 

M.  r^fifmns. 

Irma,  oyanm                             ■   „ 

L  tureosa. 

Floceus  Jmya                             „ 

P.  hypoxantha. 

Iiorieithis  galyulus                    „ 

L.  pudllus. 

Ptilopusjamhu                            „ 

P.  porphyreu). 

Now  if  we  look  at  our  map  of  the  region,  and  consider  the 
position  of  Java  with  regard  to  Borneo,  Sumatra,  and  the  Indo- 
Chinese  peninsula,  the  facts  just  pointed  out  appear  most 
anomalous  and  perplexing.  First,  we  have  Java  and  Sumatra 
forming  one  continuous  line  of  volcanoes,  separated  by  a  very 
narrow  strait,  and  with  all  the  appearance  of  having  formed  one 
continuous  land ;  yet  their  productions  differ  considerably,  and 
those  of  Sumatra  show  the  closest  resemblance  to  those  of 
Borneo,  an  island  ten  times  further  off  than  Java  and  differing 
widely  in  the  absence  of  volcanoes  or  any  continuous  range  of 
lofty  mountains.  Then  again,  not  only  does  Java  differ  from 
these  two,  but  it  agrees  with  a  country  beyond  tliem  both — 
a  country  from  which  they  seem  to  have  a  much  better  chance 
to  have  been  supplied  by  immigration  than  Java  has,  and  to 
have  (almost  necessarily)  partieipitpl  eien  more  largely,  in  the 
benefits  of  any  means  of  transmi'<=(ion  cipible  of  reaching  the 
latter  island.  Yet  more;  whatevei  uhan^es  have  occurred  to 
bring  about  the  anomalous  state  of  tlungs  that  exists  must  have 
been,  zoologically  and  geologically  iccent  fcr  the  strange  cross- 
affinities  between  Java  and  the  Indo-Chinese  continent  (in 
which  Sumatra  and  Borneo  have  not  participated),  as  well  as 
that  between  Malacca,  Sumatra,  and  Borneo  {in  which  Java  has 
not  participated)  are  exhibited,  in  many  cases  by  community  of 
species,  in  others  by  the  presence  of  very  closely  allied  forma 
of  the  same  genera,  of  mammalia  and  birds.    Now  we  know  that 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  ORIENTAL  EEGIOK.  353 

these  higher  animala  become  replaced  by  allied  species  much 
more  rapidly  than  the  mollusca;  and  it  is  also  pretty  certain 
that  the  modification  by  which  this  replacement  is  effected 
takes  place  more  rapidly  when  the  two  sets  of  individuals  are 
isolated  from  each  other,  and  especially  when  they  are  restricted 
to  islands,  where  they  are  necessarily  subject  to  distinct  and 
pretty  constant  conditions,  both  physical  and  organic.  ,  It 
becomes  therefore  almost  a  certainty,  that  Siam  and  Java  on 
the  one  hand,  and  Sumatra,  Borneo,  and  Malacca  on  the  other 
must  have  been  brought  into  some  close  connexion,  not  earlier 
than  the  newer  Pliocene  period ;  but  while  the  one  set  of 
conntries  were  having  their  meeting,  the  other  must  have  been 
by  some  means  got  out  of  the  way.  Before  attempting  to 
indicate  the  mode  by  which  this  might  have  been  effected  in 
accordance  with  what  we  know  of  the  physical  geography, 
geology,  and  vegetation  of  tlie  several  islands,  it  will  be  as  well 
to  complete  our  sketch  of  their  zoological  relations  to  each 
other,  so  as  ascertain  with  some  precision,  what  are  tlie  facts 
of  distribution  which  we  have  to  explain. 

Malacca,  Sumatra,  aiid  Someo.—Aitev  having  set  apart  the 
Philippine  Islands  and  Java,  we  have  remaining  two  gi'eat 
islands  and  a  peninsula,  which,  though  separated  by  con- 
siderable arms  of  the  sea,  possess  a  fauna  of  wonderful  uni- 
formity having  all  the  typical  Malayan  features  in  their  fiiU 
development.  Their  unity  is  indeed  so  complete,  that  we  can 
find  hardly  any  groups  of  sufficient  importance  by  which  to 
differentiate  them  from  each  other ;  and  we  feel  no  confidence 
that  future  discoveries  may  not  take  away  what  speciality  they 
possess.  One  after  another,  species  or  genera  once  peculiar  to 
■  Borneo  or  Sumatra  have  been  found  elsewhere;  and  this  has 
gone  to  such  an  extent  in  birds,  that  hardly  a  peculiar  genus 
and  very  few  peculiar  species  are  left  in  either  island.  Borneo 
however  is  undoubtedly  the  most  peculiar.  It  possesses  three 
genera  of  Mammalia  not  found  elsewhere :  Cynogale,  a  curious 
carnivore  allied  to  the  otters ;  with  Dendrogale  and  PHlocerus, 
small  insectivora  allied  to  Tupaia.    'It  has  Simia,  the  Orang- 


by  Google 


354  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paut  in. 

litan,  and  Paguma,  one  of  the  Viverridfe,  in  common  with 
Sumatra ;  as  weR  aa  BMnoscmrvs,  a  peculiar  form  of  scLuirrel,  and 
Bemigalea,  one  of  the  Viverridis,  in  common  with  Malacca. 
Sumatra  has  only  one  genus  not  found  in  any  other  Malayan 
district — Nemorludus,  a  form  of  antelope  which  occuia  again 
in  l^orth  India.  It  also  has  Siamanga  in  common  with  Malacca, 
Mydaus  with  Java,  and  Bhizomys  with  India.  The  Malay  Penin- 
aiila  seema  to  have  no  peculiar  forms  of  Mammalia^  though 
it  is  rich  in  all  the  characteristic  Malay  types. 

The  bats  of  the  various  islands  have  been  veiy  unequally 
collected,  36  species  being  recorded  from  Java,  23  from  Sumatra, 
but  only  16  each  from  Borneo  and  Malacca,  Leaving  these  out 
of  consideration,  and  taking  into  account  the  terrestrial  mam- 
mals only,  we  find  that  Java  is  the  poorest  in  species,  while 
Borneo,  Sumatra,  and  Malacca  are  tolerably  eq^ual ;  the  numbers 
being  55,  62,  66,  and  65  respectively.  Of  theae  we  find  that 
the  species  confined  to  each  island  or  district  are  (in  the  same 
order)  6,  16,  5,  and  6.  It  thus  appeara  that  Borneo  is,  in  its 
mammalia,  the  most  isolated  and  peculiar ;  next  comes  Sumatra, 
and  then  Malacca  and  Java,  aa  ahown  by  the  following  table. 


Borneo  ... 
Sumatra 
Malacca 


This  reault  differs  from  that  whicJi  we  have  arrived  at  by  the 
more  detailed  consideration  of  the  fauna  of  Java ;  and  it  serves 
to  show  that  the  estimate  of  a  country  by  the  number  of  its 
peculiar  genera  and  species  alone,  may  not  always  represent  its 
true  zoological  importance  or  its  most  marked  features.  Java," 
as  we  have  seen,  is  differentiated  from  the  other  three  districts 
by  the  absence  of  niimeroua  types  common  to  them  all,  and  by 
its  independent  continental  relations.  Borneo  is  also  well  dis- 
tinguished by  its  peculiar  genera  and  specific  types,  yet  it  is  at 
the  same  time  more  closely  related  to  Sumatra  and  Malacca 
than  is  Java.  The  two  islands  have  evidently  had  a  very 
different  history,  "which  a  detailed  knowledge  of  their  geology 


by  Google 


cnAr.  xn.]  THE  ORIENTAL  REGION.  365 

■would  alone  enable  ua  to  trace.  Should  we  ever  arrive  at  a 
fair  knowledge  of  the  physical  changes  that  have  resulted  in 
the  present  condition,  we  shaR  almost  certainly  find  that  many 
of  the  differences  and  anomalies  of  their  existing  fauna  and 
flora  will  be  accounted  for. 

In  Birda  we  hardly  find  anything  to  differentiate  Borneo  and 
Sumatra  in  any  clear  manner.  Pityriasis  and  Carpococeyx,  once 
thought  peculiar  to  the  former,  are  now  found  also  in  the  latter ; 
and  we  have  not  a  single  genus  left  to  characterize  Borneo  except 
Schwaneria  a  peculiar  fly-catcher,  and  Indicator,  an  African  and 
Indian  group  not  known  to  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Malay 
snb-region.  Sumatra  as  yet  alone  possesses  PsUopogon,  a  remark- 
able form  of  harbet,  hut  we  may  well  expect  that  it  will  be  soon 
found  in  the  interior  of  Borneo  or  Malacca ;  it  also  has  Bereni- 
c&fnis,  an  African  form  of  hombill.  The  Malay  Peninsula 
appears  to  have  no  genus  peculiar  to  it,  but  it  possesses 
some  Chinese  and  Indian  forms  wliich  do  not  pass  into  the 
islands.  As  to  the  species,  our  knowledge  of  them  is  at  present 
very  imperfect.  The  Malay  Peninsula  is  perhaps  the  best 
known,  but  it  is  probable  that  both  Sumatra  and  Borneo  are 
quite  as  rich  in  species.  With  the  exception  of  the  genera 
noted  above,  and  two  or  three  others  as  yet  found  in  two  islands 
only,  the  three  districts  we  are  now  considering  may  be  said  to 
have  an  almost  identical  bird-famia,  consisting  largely  of  the 
same  species  and  almost  wholly  of  these  together  with  closely 
allied  species  of  the  same  genera.  There  are  no  well-marked 
groups  which  especially  characterise  one  of  these  islands  rather 
than  the  other,  so  that  even  the  amount  of  speciality  which 
Borneo  undoubtedly  exhibits  as  regards  mammalia,  is  only 
faintly  shown  by  its  birds.  The  Pittidaa  may  perhaps  he  named 
as  the  rnost  characteristic  Bomean  group,  that  island  possessing 
six  species,  three  of  which  are  peculiar  to  it  and  are  among  the 
most  beautiful  birds  of  an  unusually  beautiful  family.  Yet  Suma- 
tra possesses  two  peculiar,  and  hardly  less  remarkable  species. 

In  other  classes  of  vertebrates,  in  insects,  and  in  land-shells, 
our  knowledge  is  far  too  imperfect  to  allow  of  our  making  any 
useful  comparison  between  the  faunas. 


by  Google 


356  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  in. 

Banca. — ^We  must,  however  note  the  fact  of  peculiar  species 
occurring  in  Eanca,  a  small  island  close  to  Sumatra,  and  thus 
offering  another  prohlem  in  distribution.  A  squirrel  (Sciurv^s 
langkamis)  is  allied  to  three  species  found  in  Malacca,  Sumatra, 
and  Borneo  respectively,  hut  quite  as  distinct  from  them  all  as 
they  are  from  each  other.  More  curious  are  the  two  species  of 
Pitta  peculiar  to  Banca ;  one.  Pitta  megarhynchtis,  is  allied  to 
the  P.  lyrackyuTus,  which  inhabits  the  whole  sub-region  and  ex- 
tends to  Siam  and  China,  but  differs  from  it  in  its  very  large  bill 
and  differently  coloured  head ;  the  other,  P.  hangkanus,  is  allied 
to  P.  cucuUatus,  which  extends  from  Nopal  to  Malacca,  and  to 
P.  sordidus,  which  inhabits  both  Borneo  and  Sumatra  as  well  as 
the  Philippines. 

We  have  here,  on  a  small  scale,  a  somewhat  simitar  problem 
to  that  of  Java,  and  as  this  is  comparatively  easy  o£  solution  we 
will  consider  it  first.  Although,  on  the  map,  Banca  is  so  very 
close  to  Sumatra,  the  observer  on  the  spot  at  once  sees  that  the 
proximity  has  been  recently  brought  about.  The  whole  south- 
east coast  of  Sumatra  is  a  great  alluvial  plain,  hardly  yet  raised 
above  the  sea  level,  and  hrjl'  flooded  in  the  wet  season.  It  is 
plainly  a  recent  formation,  caused  by  the  washing  down  into  a 
shallow  sea  of  the  debris  from  the  grand  range  of  volcanic 
mountains  150  miles  distant.  Banca,  on  the  other  hand  is, 
though  low,  a  rugged  and  hilly  island,  formed  almost  wholly  of 
ancient  rocks  of  apparently  volcanic  origin,  and  doaely  resem- 
bling paiis  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  and  the  intervenii^  chain  of 
small  islands.  There  is  every  appearance  that  Banca  once 
formed  the  extremity  of  the  Peninsula,  at  which  time  it  wotdd 
probably  have  been  separated  from  Sumatra  by  50  or  lOO  miles 
of  sea.  Its  productions  should,  therefore,  most  resemble  those  of 
Singapore  and  Malacca,  and  the  few  peculiar  species  it  possesses 
will  be  due  to  their  isolation  in  a.  small  tract  of  countiy,  sur- 
rounded by  a  limited  number  of  animal  and  vegetable  forms,  and 
subject  to  the  influence  of  a  peculiar  soil  and  climate.  The 
parent  species  existing  in  such  large  tracts  as  Borneo  or  Suma- 
tra, subjected  to  more  varied  conditions  of  soil,  climate, 
vegetation,  food,  and  enemies,  would  preserve,  almost  or  quite 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  OEIBNTAL  EEGION.  357 

uiielianged,  the  cliartuiteristics  which  had  heen  developed  under 
nearly  identical  conditions  when  the  great  island  formed  part 
of  the  continent.  Geology  teaches  us  that  similar  changes  in 
the  forms  of  the  higher  vertebrates  have  taken  place  during  the 
Post-Tertiary  epoch ;  and  there  are  other  reasons  for  believiag 
that,  under  such  conditions  of  isolation  as  in  Banca,  the 
change  may  have  required  hut  a  very  moderate  period,  even 
reckoned  in  years.  We  will  now  return  to  the  more  difficult 
problem  presented  by  the  peculiar  continental  relations  of  Java, 
as  abeady  detailed. 

ProbahU  Recent  Geographical  Changes  in  the  Indo-Malay 
Islands. — Although  Borneo  is  by  far  the  largest  of  the  Indo- 
Malay  islands,  yet  its  physical  conformation  is  such  that,  were 
a  depression  to  occur  of  one  or  two  thousand  feet,  it  would  be 
reduced  to  a  smaller  continuous  area  than  either  Sumatra  or 
Java.  Except  in  its  northern  portion  it  possesses  no  lofty 
mountains,  while  alluvial  valleys  of  great  extent  penetrate  far 
into  its  interior.  A  very  moderate  depression,  of  perhaps  500 
feet,  would  convert  it  into  an  island  shaped  something  like  Cele- 
bes ;  and  its  mountains  are  of  so  smaU  an  average  elevation,'  and 
consist  so  much  of  isolated  hiUs  and  detached  ranges,  that  a 
depression  of  2,000  feet  woidd  almost  certainly  break  it  up  into 
a  group  of  small  islands,  with  a  somewhat  larger  one  to  the 
north.  Sumatra  (and  to  a  less  extent  Java)  consists  of  an  almost 
continuous  range  of  lofty  monntMns,  connected  by  plateaus  from 
3,000  to  4,000  feet  high ;  so  that  although  a  depression  of  2,000 
feet  would  greatly  diminish  their  size,  it  would  probably  leave 
the  former  a  single  island,  while  the  latter  would  be  separated 
into  two  principal  islands  of  stUl  considerable  extent.  The  en- 
ormous amount  of  volcanic  action  in  these  two  islands,  and  the 
great  number  of  conical  mountains  which  must  have  been  slowly 
raised,  chiefly  by  ejected  matter,  to  the  height  of  10,000  and 
12,000  feet,  and  whose  shape  indicates  that  they  have  been  for- 
med above  water,  renders  it  almost  certain  that  for  long  periods 
they  have  not  undergone  submersion  to  any  considerable  extent. 
In  Borneo,  however,  we  have  no  such  evidences.     Ko  volcano, 


by  Google 


358  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  nr. 

active  or  extinct,  is  known  in  its  entire  area ;  white  extensive 
beds  of  coal  of  tertiary  age,  in  every  part  of  it,  prove  that  it  has 
been  subject  to  repeated  suhmeraions,  at  no  distant  date  geolo- 
gically. An  indication,  if  not  a  proof,  of  atiU  more  recent  sub- 
mersion is  to  fee  found  in  the  great  alluvial  valleys  wliich  on 
the  south  and  south-west  extend  fully  200  miles  inland,  while 
they  are  to  a  less  degree  a  characteristic  feature  all  round  the 
island.  These  swampy  plains  have  been  formed  by  the  combined 
action  of  rivers  and  tides ;  and  they  point  clearly  to  an  immedi- 
ately preceding  state  of  things,  when  that  wldch  is  even  now 
barely  raised  above  the  ocean,  was  more  or  1^3  sunk  below  it. 
These  various  indications  enable  us  to  claim,  aa  an  admissible 
and  even  probable  supposition,  that  at  some  epoch  during  the 
Pliocene  period!  of  geology,  Borneo,  as  we  now  kuow  it,  did  not 
exist ;  but  was  represented  by  a  mountainous  island  at  ita  present 
northern  extremity,  with  perhaps  a  few  smaller  islets  to  the 
south,  We  thus  have  a  clear'opening  from  Java  to  the  Siamese 
Peninsula ;  and  as  the  whole  of  that  sea  is  less  than  1 00  fathoms 
deep,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  an  elevation  of  land 
connecting  the  two  together,  ijuite  independent  of  Borneo  on  the 
one  hand  and  Sumatra  on  the  other.  This  union  did  not  prob- 
ably last  long ;  but  it  was  suiHcient  to  allow  of  the  introduction 
into  Java  of  the  Rhinoceros  jat'anims,  and  that  group  of  Indo- 
Chinese  and  Himalayan  species  of  mammaha  and  birds  which 
it  alone  possesses.  When  this  ridge  had  disappeared  by  sub- 
sidence, the  next  elevation  occurred  a  little  more  to  the  east, 
and  produced  the  union  of  many  islets  which,  aided  by  sub- 
aerial  denudation,  formed  the  present  island  of  Borneo.  It  is 
probable  that  this  elevation  was  sufficiently  extensive  to  unite 
Borneo  for  a  time  with  the  Malay  Peninsula  and  Sumatra,  thus 
helping  to  produce  that  dose  resemblance  of  genera  and  even  of 
species,  which  these  countries  exhibit,  and  obliterating  much 
ot  their  former  speciality,  of  which,  however,  we  have  still 
some ,  traces  in  the  long-nosed  monkey  and  Ptilocenis  of 
Borneo,  and  the  considerable  number  of  genera  both  of  mam- 
malia and  birds  confined  to  two  only  out  of  the  three  divisions 
of  typical  Malaya,      The  subsidence  which  again  divided  these 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XII.]  THE  OEIENTAL  REGION.  359 

countries  by  arms  of  the  sea  rather  wider  than  at  present, 
might  have  left  Banca  igolatfid,  as  already  referred  to,  with  its 
proportion  of  the  common  fauna  to  be,  in  a  few  instances, 
subsequently  modified. 

Thus  we  are  enabled  to  understand  how  the  special  relations 
of  the  ^mes  of  these  islands  to  each  other  may  have  been 
brought  about.  To  account  for  their  more  deep-seated  and 
general  zoological  features,  we  must  go  farther  back. 

Probable  Origin  of  th&  Malayan  Fauna. — The  typical  Malayan 
fauna  is  essentially  an  equatorial  one,  and  must  have  been 
elaborated  in  an  extensive  equatorial  area.  This  ancient  land 
almost  certainly  extended  northward  over  the  shallow  sea  as  far 
as  the  island  of  Palawan,  the  Paraeels  shoals  and  even  Hainan. 
To  the  east,  it  may  at  one  time  have  included  the  Philippines 
and  Celebes,  but  not  the  Moluccas.  To  the  south  it  was  limited 
by  the  deep  sea  beyond  Java,  It  included  all  Sumatra  and  the 
Kicobar  islands,  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it 
stretched  out  also  to  the  west  so  as  to  include  the  central  peak 
of  Ceylon,  the  Maldive  isles,  and  the  Cocos  islands  west  of 
Sumatra.  We  should  then  have  an  area  as  extensive  as  South 
America  to  15°  south  latitude,  and  well  calculated  to  develop 
that  luxuriant  fauna  and  flora  which  has  since  spread  to  the 
Himalayas.  The  submei^ence  of  the  western  half  of  this  area 
(leaving  only  a  fragment  in  Ceylon)  would  greatly  diminish  the 
number  of  animals  and  perhaps  extinguish  some  peculiar  types; 
but  the  remaining  portion  would  still  form  a  compact  and  exten- 
sive district,  twice  as  large  as  the  peninsula  of  India,  over  the 
whole  of  which  a  uniform  Malayan  fauna  would  prevail.  The 
first  important  change  would  be  the  separation  of  Celebes  ;  and 
■j  his  was  probably  effected  by  a  great  subsidence,  forming  the  deep 
strait  that  now  divides  that  island  from  Borneo.  During  the 
process  Celebes  itself  was  no  doubt  greatly  submerged,  leaving 
only  a  few  islands  in  which  were  preserved  that  remnant  of  the 
ancient  Malayan  fauna  that  now  constitutes  one  of  its  most 
striking  and  anomalous  features.  The  Philippine  area  would 
next  be  separated,  and  perhaps  be  almost  wholly  s 


by  Google 


360  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [faut  hi. 

broken  up  into  many  small  voieanie  islets  in  which  a  limited 
number  of  Malayan  types  alone  survived.  Such  a  condition  of 
things  will  account  for  the  very  small  variety  of  mammalia  com- 
pared with  the  tolerably  numerous  genera  of  birds,  that  now 
characterise  its  fauna ;  while  both  her^  and  in  Celebes  we  find 
some  of  the  old  Malayan  types  preserved,  which,  in  the  extended 
area  of  tiie  Sunda  Isles  have  been  replaced  by  more  dominant 
foims. 

The  next  important  change  woiild  be  the  separation  of  Java ; 
and  here  also  no  doubt  a  considerable  submeigence  occurred, 
rendering  the  island  an  unsuitable  habitation  for  the  various 
Malay  types  whose  absence  forms  one  of  its  conspicuous  features. 
It  has  since  remained  permanently  separated  from  the  other 
islands,  and  has  no  doubt  developed  some  peculiar  species,  while 
it  may  have  preserved  some  ancient  forms  which  in  the  larger 
area  have  become  changed.  From  the  fact  that  a  number  of  its 
species  are  confined  either  to  the  western  or  the  eastern  half  of 
the  island,  it  is  probable  that  it  long  continued  as  two  islands, 
which  have  become  united  at  a  comparatively  recent  period. 
It  has  also  been  subjected  to  the  immigration  of  Indo-Chinese 
forms,  as  already  referred  to  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  sketch. 

We  have  thus  shown  how  the  main  zoological  features  of  the 
several  sub-divisions  of  the  Malayan  sub-region  may  be 
accounted  for,  by  means  of  a  series  of  suppositions  as  to  past 
changes  which,  though  for  the  most  part  purely  hypothetical, 
are  alwaj^  in  accordance  with  what  we  know  both  of  the 
physical  geography  and  the  zoology  of  the  districts  in  question 
and  those  which  surround  them.  It  may  also  be  remarked,  that 
we  know,  with  a  degree  of  certainty  which  may  be  called  absolute, 
that  alternate  elevition  ind  subsidence  is  the  noimil  state  of 
things  all  over  the  globe,  that  it  was  the  :nle  in  the  earliest 
geological  epochs  ind  that  it  has  contmued  down  to  the 
historical  era.  We  know  too,  that  the  amount  of  elevition  and 
subsidence  that  can  be  plowed  to  h^ve  occurred  again  and  again 
in  the  same  area  is  often  much  gieiter  than  is  lequired  for  the 
changes  here  speculated  on— while  the  tiirn'  requued  for  such 
changes  is  certainly  less  than  that  neeeshitated  b)  the  changes 


by  Google 


CHAP.  Sir.]  THE  OKIEKTAL  BBGION.  361 

of  specific  and  generic  forms  which  have  coincided  ■with,  and  heen 
to  a  lai^e  extent  dependent  on  them.  We  have,  therefore,  true 
causes  ftt  work,  and  ottr  only  suppositions  have  been  as  to  how 
those  causes  could  have  brought  about  the  results  which  we 
see;  and  however  complex  and  unlikely  some  of  the  supposed 
changes  may  seem  to  the  reader,  the  geologist  who  has  made  a 
study  of  such  changes,  as  recorded  in  the  crust  of  the  earth, 
will  not  only  admit  them  to  he  probable,  but  will  be  inclined 
to  believe  that  they  have  really  been  far  more  complex  and 
more  unexpected  than  any  supposition  we  can  make  about 
them. 

ITiere  is  one  other  external  relation  of  the  Malayan  fauna 
about  which  it  may  be  necessary  to  say  a  few  words.  I  have 
supposed  the  greatest  westward  extension  of  the  Malayan  area; 
to  be  indicated  by  the  Maldive  islands,  but  some  naturalists 
would  extend  it  to  include  Madagascar  in  order  to  account  for 
the  range  of  the  Ijemuridie.  Such  an  extension  would,  however, 
render  it  difficult  to  explain  the  very  small  amount  of  corre- 
spondence with  a  pervading  diversity,  between  the  Malayan  and 
Malagasy  faunas.  It  seems  more  reasonable  to  suppose  an 
approximation  of  the  two  areas,  without  actual  union  having 
ever  occurred.  This  approximation  would  have  allowed  the 
interchange  of  certain  genera  of  birds,  which  are  common  to 
the  Oriental  Eegion  and  the  Mascarene  islands,  but  it  would 
have  been  too  recent  to  account  for  the  diffusion  of  the  lemurs 
which  belong  to  distinct  genera  and  even  distinct  families.  This 
probably  dates  back  to  a  much  earher  period,  when  the  lemurine 
type  had  a  wide  range  over  the  northern  hemisphere.  Sub- 
jected to  the  competition  of  higher  forms,  these  imperfectly 
developed  groups  have  mostly  died  out,  except  a  few  isolated 
examples,  chiefly  found  in  islands,  and  a  few  groups  in  Africa, 

In  our  discussion  of  the  origin  of  the  Ethiopian  fauna,  we 
have  supposed  that  a  close  connection  once  existed  between 
Madagascar  and  Ceylon.  This  was  during  a  very  early  tertiary 
epoch ;  and  if,  long  after  it  had  ceased  and  the  fauna  of  Ceylon 
and  South  India  had  assumed  somewhat  more  of  their  present 
character,   we  suppose  the   approximation  or  union  of  Ceylon 

ToL.  I.— 25 


by  Google 


3C2  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

and  Malaya  to  have  taken  place,  we  shall  perhaps  be  able  to 
account  for  most  of  the  special  affinities  they  present,  with  the 
least  amount  of  simultaneous  elevation  of  the  ocean  bed ;  which 
it.  must  always  bo  remembered,  requires  a  corresponding  de- 
pTession  elsewhere  to  balance  it. 

Concluding  BemaThs  on  the  (h'iental  Region. — We  have  already 
so  fully  discussed  the  internal  and  external  relations  of  the 
several  sub-regions,  that  little  more  need  be  said.  The  rich  and 
varied  fauna  which  inhabited  Europe  at  the  dawn  of  the  ter- 
tiary period, — as  shown  by  the  abundant  remains  of  mammalia 
■wherever  suitable  deposits  of  Eocene  age  have  been  discovered, — 
[proves,  that  an  extensive  PalEearctic  continent  then  existed ; 
and  the  character  of  the  flora  and  fauna  of  the  Eocene  deposits 
'is  80  completely  tropical,  that  we  may  be  sure  there  was  then  no 
barrier  of  climate  b#\v«en  it  and  the  Oriental  region.  At  that 
early  period  the  noritem  plains  of  Asia  were  probably  under 
water,  while  the  great  Thibetan  plateau  and  the  Himalayan  range, 
had  not  risen  to  more  than  a  moderate  height,  and  would  have 
supported  a  luxuriant  sub-tropical  flora  and  fauna.  The  Upper 
Miocene  deposits  of  northern  and  central  India,  and  Burmah, 
agree  in  their  mammalian  remains  with  those  of  central  and 
southern  Europe,  while  closely  allied  forn^  of  elephant,  hyasna, 
tapir,  rhinoceros,  and  Ghalicoiheniini  have  occurred  in  North 
China;  leading  us  to  conclude  that  one  great  fauna  then 
extended  over  much  of  the  Oriental  and  Palfearctio  regions. 
Perim  island  at  the  mouth  of  the  Eed  Sea,  where  similar 
remains  are  found,  probably  shows  the  southern  boundary  of 
this  part  of  the  old  Palsearctic  region  in  the  Miocene  period. 
Towards  the  equator  there  would,  of  course,  be  some  peculiar 
groups ;  but  we  can  hardly  doubt,  that,  in  that  wonderful  time 
when  even  the  lands  that  stretched  out  farthest  towards  the 
pole,  supported  a  luxuriant  forest  vegetation,  substantially  one 
fauna  ranged  over  the  whole  of  the  great  eastern  continent  of  the 
northern  hemisphera  During  the  Pliocene  period,  however,  a 
progressive  change  went  on  which  resulted  in  the  complete 
differentiation   of   the   Oriental    and   Palajarctic    faunas.     The 


by  Google 


CHAP,  sii.]  THE  OMENTAL  REGION.  363 

causes  of  this  change  were  of  two  kinds.  There  was  a  great 
geographical  and  physical  revolution  effected  by  the  eleration 
of  the  Himalayas  and  the  Thibetan  plateau,  and,  probably  at 
the  same  time,  the  northward  extension  of  the  great  Siberian 
plains.  This  aloUe  would  produce  an  enormous  change  of 
climate  in  all  the  extra-tropical  part  of  Asia,  and  inevitably 
lead  to  a  s^r^ation  of  the  old  feuna  into  tropical  and  tem- 
perate, and  a  modification  of  the  latter  so  as  to  enable  it  to 
support  a  climate  far  more  severe  than  it  had  previously  known. 
But  it  is  almost  certain  that,  concurrently  with  this,  there  was 
a  change  going  on  of  a  cosmical  nature,  leading  to  an  alteration 
of  the  climate  of  the  northern  hemisphere  from  equable  to 
extreme,  and  culminating  in  that  period  of  excessive  cold  which 
drove  the  last  remnants  of  the  old  sub-tropical  fauna  beyond 
the  hmits  of  the  Pala^arctie  region.  From  that  time,  the  Oriental 
and  the  Ethiopian  regions  alone  contained  the  descendants  of  many 
of  the  most  remarkable  types  which  had  previously  flourished 
over  all  Europe  and  Asia ;  but  the  early  history  of  these  two 
regions,  and  the  peculiar  ecLuatorial  types  developed  in  each, 
sufSeiently  separate  them,  as  we  have  already  shown.  The 
Malayan  sub-region  is  that  in  which  characteristic  Oriental 
types  are  now  beat  developed,  and  where  the  fundamental  con- 
trast of  the  Oriental,  as  compared  with  the  Ethiopian  and 
Palffiarctic  regions,  is  most  distinctly  visibla 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


TABLES  OF  DISTEIBUTIOK 

In  constructing  these  tables,  showing  the  distribution  of 
various  classes  of  animals  in  the  Oriental  region,  the  following 
sonrces  of  information  have  been  chiefly  relied  on,  in  addition 
to  the  general  treatises,  monographs,  catalogues,  &c.,  used  for 
the  compilation  of  the  Fourth  Part  of  this  work. 

Mammalia. — Jerdon's  Indian  Mammalia ;  Kelaart's  Fauna  of 
Ceylon;  Horsfield  and  Moore's  Catalogue  of  the  East  India 
Museum ;  Swinhoe's  Catalogue  of  Chinese  Mammalia ;  S. 
Miilia:'s.  Zoology  of  the  Indian  Archipelago ;  Dr.  J.  E.  Gray's 
list  of  Mammalia  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  (Voyage  of  Sama- 
rang) ;  and  papers  hy  Anderson,  Blyth,  Cantor,  Gray,  Peters, 
Swinhoe,  &c. 

Birds. — Jeidon's  Birds  of  India ;  Horsfield  and  Moore's  Cata- 
logue; Holdsworth's  list  of  Ceylon  Birds  ;  Schlegel's  Catalogue 
of  the  Leyden  Museum  ;  Swinhoe  on  the  Birds  of  China,  For- 
mosa, and  Hainan ;  Salvadori  on  the  Birds  of  Borneo ;  Lord 
Walden  on  the  Birds  of  the  Philippine  Islands ;  and  papers 
by  Blyth,  Blanford,  Elwes,  EUjot,  Stoliczka,  Sclater,  Sharpe, 
Swinhoe,  Verreaux,  and  Lord  Walden. 

Se^liles. — Giinther's  Reptiles  of  British  India;  papers  by 
same  author,  and  by  Dr.  Stoliczka. 


by  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  REGION. 


FAMILIES   OF  ANIMALS  INHABITING   TEE  ORIENTAL  REGION. 

Explanation. 
Names  in  italics  show  families  peciuliar  to  the  region. 
Niimbers  eorrespond  with  those  in  Part  IV. 

Names  enclosed  thus  ( )  barely  enter  the  region,  and  are 

belong  to  it. 


5ut)-r(«lcm3. 

Order  and  Family. 

|l 

1 

11 

« 

Range  liejoni  the  Re^on, 

MAMMALIA. 

PaiMATEH. 

1.  Simiidse 

3.  Cynopithecidte 

6.  Lemuridfe 

7.  Tarsiidm 

- 

Z 

— 

— 

W.  Africa 

Tropical  Africa 

All  Africa,  S.  Palasarctio 

Ethiopian 

Celebes 

OHIBOPTEEa. 

3.  Pterovidie 
13.  HoctiUoQidie  ... 

E 

~ 

- 

E 

Ethiopian,  Australian 
The  Eastern  Hemisphere 
Cosmopolite 
Tropical  regions 

iNseorn'OKA, 
14.   GaUopilhcddm 

16.  TupaiidtE 

17.  Erinamda!     ... 

21.  Talpidfe 

22.  Sorieidfe 

- 

z 

- 

- 

Pal,eaivtic,  S.  Africa 
PaliearotiL,  Nearctio 
Pal^rctic,  EtMopian,  K  America 

Cabnivoba. 

S3,  Felidsi     

E'i    TivernddO 

27  Hj'emd^ 

28  tanide 

29  Must^lid^ 

31  mvindiP 

32  Ursidie 

~ 

- 

- 

- 

Ethiopian,  S.  Paliearetic 

All  regions  but  Australian  [?! 

All  regions  but  Anstralisn 

Palsarctic 

Palsearetio,  Nearetic,  Chill 

Oceaivio 

SlPENIA 

42    Mumtid'B 

_ 

_ 

_ 

„ 

Ethiopian,  N.  Paoifio 

UNGULArA, 

J3.  (Equida) 

_ 

Palsarctio,  Ethiopian 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOG-ICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Sub-refSona. 

Order  and  Family. 

o   . 

*J. 

Rfli^a  beyond  Uia  Rsglon. 

1^ 

■^ 

•S.S 

fl" 

6 

"6 

"s 

U-.Tmni^ 

~ 

Neotropical 

Ethiopian 

47.  Suid*      

PalieaTCtic,  Ethiopian,  Neotropical 

49.  Tragulidfe       ... 

W.  Africa 

EO    Cervid^ 

All  regions  but  Ethiopian  and  Australian 
All  regiona  Ijut  Australian  and  Neotropical 

62    BoTidffi 

63    Elephantidfe    .. 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Ethiopian 

EOBBNTIA. 

55    MandtB 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_- 

Cosmopolite,  escl,  Oceania 

56    Spalacida 

bl    SciiindT 

All  regions  but  Australian 

67.  Hystricidie     ... 

8.  Palffiarctic,  Ethiopian 

70.  Leporidffi 

— 

^ 

— 

All  regions  but  Australian 

InENTATA. 

72.  Monididte       ... 

- 

- 

-■ 

- 

Etliiopian 

BIRDS. 

Pabsbbbb. 

1.  TnrdidfB 

_ 

_ 

_ 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

2.  Sylviidm 

8.  TimaliidoB      ... 

Ethiophin,  Austiolian 

i.  Pannridfe 

Palsearctic 

6.  Ciuolidte 

fTot  Ethiopian  or  Australian 

8.  CerSuiife      ... 

Amnricau  and  Pal-eaTLtic 

PahearLtio,  Noitctic,  Australian 

B.  Sittidw   ...       . 

1_ 

Palcearctic,  Hearttac,  Australian,  Madagascar 

10.  FftridEB    

The  Jiastem  Henusphero  and  North  America 

11.  MlirickiiUe    ... 

13.  Pycnonotidte... 

Ethiopian,  MoluLcas 

14;  Oriolid*...    ... 

Ethiopian,  Australian 

a.  DionmW      ... 

Ethiopian,  Australian 

9.  Laniidie 

The  Eastern  Hemisphere  ind  North  America 

20.  CocvidiB 

33.  NectttTiniidse  ... 

Ethiopian,  iuatralian 

24.  DioseidiB 

Ethiopian  Australian 

CosmopoliU, 

All  regions  but  Auetraliin 

34.  Ploceidw 

36.  StumidE 

36.  Artamidoe      ... 

Australian 

All  regions  bnt  Neotropical 

38.  MotacilUdte   ... 

47.  Pittida 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Ethiopian,  Australian 

b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  EESION. 


8ub-regious.          1 

Onlet  aiid  Family. 

Ranga  beyond  tlie  Region. 

u 

i 

it 
1^ 

PlCABIS 

^1     PlOlJ* 

_ 

_ 

_ 

All  regiona  but  Australian 

5'    Yungidie 

Paltearctic 

53    Indieatond'B 

Ethiopian 

51    Megatemidte 

Eaiiopinn,  Neotroiiical 

58    Cuoulidfe 

62   Coracudx 

Ethiopian,  Australian 

63    MewpiJ-B 

EtHopian,  Australian 

6tt    Trogomda 

67    Aloedinid-e 

Coamopolite 

6"*    BuoerotidB 

Ethiopian,  Austm-Malayan 

99    TJpupidte 

Ethbpian,  S.  Pai^arelie 

71    Podaigidfp 

Australian 

74.  Cypsehda 

- 

— 

— 

— 

PsrrTACL 

76.  (Cacatuidse) ... 
78.  Palsomitliiiiffi 

_ 

Australian 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Ethiopian,  Auatro-Mdayan 

COLUMBJS. 

— 

— 

- 

— 

Cosmopolite 

Gallins. 

86.  Ptwoolidte    ... 

EthiopiaJi,  Pai^arctic 

87.  Tetiaonidie  ... 

Ethiopian,  Pclffiarctic,  North  America 

89.  TurnioidiB     ... 

Ethiopian,  AusfraUan,  S.  Palsarctic 

90.  Megapodiid* 

- 

Australian 

ACC1PITKE.S. 

94.  Vulturidie    .. 

_ 

_ 

_ 

AU  regions  bat  Australian 

96.  Fitlconidie     ... 

97.  Pandionidte  ... 

Cosmopolite 

98.  StrigidK 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Coamopolite 

QUJjLM. 

99.  Ediidffi 

103.  Parrid^ 

Cosmopolite 

Tropical  regions 

104.  GlBTeolidffi   ... 

Eastern  Hemisphere 

106.  Charadriiilie... 

Cosmopolite 

106.  Otidid^ 

Eastern  Hemisphere 

107.  GruidEB 

All  r^ons  but  Neotropiea 

lis.  Ardflidfe       ... 

Cosmopolite 

IH.  Plataleida    .. 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

116.  Ciooniidffl     .. 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

— 

— 

Ethiopian,  Neotropical,  S.  Palsarotlo      ■ 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Sub-reglona. 

Oniur  end  Family. 

Range  beyoiiii  the  Region. 

ij 

as" 

t 

a 

M 

AsseBm. 

118.  Anatidffi       ... 

Cosmopolite 

119.  Laiidte 

Cosmopolite 

121.  Pelecanida   ... 

Cosmopolite 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Cosmopolite 

EEPTILIA. 

Ophidia. 

1.  TypMopidte    ... 

All  regions  but  Nearetie 

2.  TortricidsB 

Auatra-Maiaya,  S.  America 

CelelMsfe 

5.  (MomariidK  ... 

All  the  warmer  regions 

7.  Coabridfe      ... 

S.  America,  Japan 

All  the  regions 

la!  i^yiopiSdK  :;■ 

Ethiopian,  S.  Palsearctio 

Ethiopia*,  Neotropical 

14.  ScjtaUdie       '.'.'. 

Tropical  America 

17.  Pythoniifo     ... 

Neotropical 

The  tropical  regions,  and  California 
Ethiopian,  S,  Palfearctic 

18.  Eryoids 

19.  AorixAcrdidte... 

23!  HySophid^ '.:; 

Tropical  regions,  Japan,  S.  Carolina 

24.  Crotalidie       ... 

Ameriea,  E.  Pafeaietic 

25.  ViperidiB 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Ethiopian,  PdEearclie 

Lacehtilia.. 

_ 

_ 

— 

_ 

Africa,  Anstralia 

33.  Lii«6rtidiB       ... 

34.  Zonucid^       ... 

America,  S.  Enrope,  Ethiopian 

45-  Scmoidffi 

Almost  Cosmopohte 
Ethiopian,  MoluooM 

48.  Acontiadso      ... 

49.  GeokotidBe 

Almost  Cosmopolite 
The  Eftstfirn  Hemisphere 

51.  AgamidiB 

— 

- 

Ethiopian 

CltOC0»ILIA. 

64.  Gayialid^       ... 

N.  Austi'alia 

55.  CrooodilidK    ... 

— 

— 

— 

JEthiopian,  Neotropical,  N.  Australia 

Chelokia. 

All  continents  tut  Australia 

69.  Trionyeliidie  ... 

Japan,  E.  of  N.  America,  Africa 

60.  Cheloididfe     ... 

Mal'ine 

b,  Google 


THE  OEIENTAL  REGION. 


Bub-regicnB, 

Order  Mid  Family, 

k 

g 

II 

ii 

Range  beyond  ttie  Kegion. 

w 

3 

AMPHIBIA. 

PMItUTlOPfllDiA. 

1,  Cteciiiadie      . 

- 

- 

- 

Ethiopian,  Neotropical 

5.  SalamandriilEB 

_ 

N»rth  temperate  zone 

Anoura. 

7.  Flii-yniseida)    ,. 

„ 

Ethiopian,  Australian,  Neotropical 

9.   Bufoniiiffi 

All  continents  but  Australia 

11.  Engvstomidai... 
Ifl.  Hyfidie 

All  i^ous  but  Palfearetic 

All  rsgioiia  but  Ethiopian 
Neotropical  and  all  other  regions 

17.  Polypedatidte... 

18.  Eimidffi    

19.  Discoglo&sida; 

- 

- 

- 

All  re^ons  but  Nearetic 

FISHES. 

(FRESHWATER). 

AOANTEOPTERYGIl. 

3    Percidte 

All  regions  but  Anstraliaa 

12 

Scienidte 

All  regions  but  Australian 

Handidffi 

Neotropical 

35 

S.  Africa,  Moluccas 

36 

40 

52 

Chromidsi      ... 

— 

Ethiopian,  Neotropical 

FilYSOSTOMI. 

59.  Siluridie 

All  warm  regions 

S.  Paliearctic,  Ethiopian,  American 

75,  Cyptinidie 

Not  in  a  America  and  Anatralia 

78,  Osteoglossid*.., 

— 

All  tmpical  regions 

82.  NotopteridsB  ... 

W.  Africa 

85.  Symbranehida 

- 

- 

- 

Auatrahan  (!  Marine)  Neotropical 

INSECTS. 

LEPIDOPTEEA 

(PART). 

DlUIi.NI 

(BUTTEIIFLIBS,) 

1.  DsnaJiire 

All  warm  regions  and  to  Canada 

Satyridffi 

Cosmopolite 

; 

Elvmniidx     . , . 

Ethiopian,  MokcMa 

4 

Nsotropioal,  Moluccas,  and  Polynesia 

6 

Acrffiidffl 

All  tropical  regions 

S 

Nymphttlidte  .„ 

~ 

- 

- 

^ 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


ub-rf«Iona 

OrSer  and  Family. 

is 

i 

II 

Eange  li«yond  tho  Regiou. 

9.  LibyUieiite     ... 
10.  Nemeobeidse  .. 

13.  Lycffimdie 

14.  Fieridie 

15.  PapUionidte    ... 

16.  H^sperids      ... 

Sraiil&iDBA. 

17.  Zygoenidm      ... 

19.  j^istite      ... 

20.  Umniidfe 
22,  JEgoriidte 

E 

= 

- 

- 

Absent  from  Australia 

Not  in  Auati'alie  or  Nearotio  regions 

Coaniopolite 

Cosmopolite 

Cosmopolite 

Cosmopolite 
AnatraliaTi,  Ethiopian 
All  tropical  reoiona 
Absent  from  Australia 
Cosmopolite 

b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  REGIOIT. 


Explanation. 
Names  in  ■Ualii^  show  genera  peenliar  to  tlie  ref^on. 


Names  in  Haliss  show  genera  peenliar  to  the  refpon. 

ITames  iudosed  thus  {...)  show  genera  which  just  enter  the  region,  bntare  not  considewd 

properly  to  Ijeloiig  to  it. 
Genera  truly  belonging  to  the  region  are  nnmhered  consecutively. 


Order,  Family,  and 
Qcnus. 

Kuogo  yAma  the  Keglon. 

Eange  lieyoiia  tJie  Ke^on. 

PRIMATES. 

SlWTDM. 

1.  mmia      

2.  Bylubaic3 

2 

7 
1 

Borneo  and  Snmatra 
Sylhet  to  Java  and  S.  GHna 
Mnlaooa  and  Sumatra 

SBMKUPITHECIBiB. 

4.  Freslyks 

28 

Simla  ia  Aracan  and  E.  Thibet, 
CeyloD,  and  Java 

Moupin,  PalKaretie  [fJ 

CTKOPirnBciDj;. 

5.  motcTM 

6.  CynopiOuxm     .. 

22 
1 

The  whole  re^on 
Philippines 

S.  Palfeatctio 
Celebes 

(Sub-Order) 
lEMUmiDEA. 

LEMtTBIDA 

8.  Laris        

1 

E.  Bengal  to  Java,  and  S.  China 
Ceylon  and  S.  India 

TAEBrnjJB. 

9.   Tarsius   

CHIROPTEEA. 

1 

Sumatra,   Borneo   and   Philip- 
pines 

N.  Celebes 

Ptbkopidje. 

10.  Pteropus 

11.  Xantharpyia    ... 

12.  Cynopterua      ... 
IZ.  Megi^m 

15.  Haipyia   

6 
1 

S 
1 

1 
1 

The  whole  region 
The  whole  region 

The  whole  region 
Sumatra 

Tropica  of  E.  Hemisp. 
Austro-Malaya,  EtMop., 

S.  Paliearctic 
Tropical  Afiiea 

Austro-Malaya 
Austro-Malaya 

Ehinolophids. 

la.  Aqiiias     

2 

Nepal  to  Java 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


I    Phvilor 


24  Shiaoi  oma 

26  Megailerma 
28  TTjUeria 

Vbspbrtiliomde 

27  Sootoihilua 

28  Veaperlilio 

29  Eenovuk 

30  Tnloiitus 

31  itfbrfufma 

32  MinioptCTiB 

33  Manna 
3i  Nyoticejoa 

35  Haroiotpphfllus 

86  Tapfiozons 

87  Myolis 


NofTILIONIP^ 

42  Njetinomua 
INSECTIVOKA. 

GALEOPIT  HEl  id  JE. 

43  C!aleopithe<MS 

TDFAiipa. 

44  Tirptta 

45  ityliatys 
48   Ptilocerui 

Lrihaleid^ 

47  Etinaceua 

48  Gymwwra 

TALPlDffl 

49  Talpft 


J'HK,  Snmatra 

India  (Bengal) 

AU  ludia 

lilt,  iiliole  rtgiun 


The  while  rpj^on 

The  whole  region 

The  whole  region 

Indo-Malara 

Nepal  to  Philippinea 

Java  Phihppines,  and  China 

Himalayae  to  Java 
All  India 

Jivi  ani  Philippines 
Tha  whole  region 


Himaliyas 
l>  xrjetlmg 
Himalayaa 


S  and  E  (f  India  to  Borneo 
Tena^senm  to  Java  and  Borneo 


Himalayas  to  Assam,  &  Formosa 
The  wh(l  legion 


Kango  beyond  tie  Region 


Warmer  parts  of  E.  Hem. 
Auatro-Httlaya 
Auatro-Malaya,  Trapical 

Amboyiia,  Egypt 


Egypt,  Palestine 
Temate,  N.  Ethiopial 
Ethiopian 


Austral.,  Neare.,  Feotrop. 

Cosmopolite 

S.  Africa,  H.  China 


Trop.  Afeioa,  Temp.  Amar. 


Timor,  S,  Palfearctic 

Europe 

Australian 


Madagascar,  America 


Paiiearctic,  S.  Africa 


b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  EEGION. 


Order,  Family,  enil 

=1 

Rango  iviUiin  the  Hegioa. 

Range  teyond  the  Region. 

CAEKIVORA. 

Fblib^. 

51.  Fdis 

20 

The  whole  region 

All  re^ona  but  Aostral. 

(Ljnx      

Central  India) 

Palicarctio,  Ethiopian 
S.  Palieavetii'.,  Ethiopian 

62.  Oynielurus 

1 

S.  and  W.  India 

VivBuama. 

63    Viyerra 

2 

The  whole  region 

Ethiopian,  Moluccas 

64    Vx'VemmU 

2 

India  to  China  and  Java 

55    Prwnodffa 

2 

Hepal  to  Borneo  and  Java 
Mulacoa  and  Borneo 

66   Hm,iyalea 

2 

67   .^jcfiiis 

1 

Nepal  to  Sumatra  and  Java 

8 

The  whole  region 

Nepal  to  Makya  and  China 

KeIal£Lnd3(?introduMdl 

59    Pa^wM 

3 

60   Araogale 

I 

TenasBerim  and  Malaya 

61    C^i^fo 

1 

Borneo 

62    H6i2>esf«s 

7 

Thewholereg.,  excl.  Philippinss 
India  to  Cambodjia 

S.  Paliearctic,  Ethiopian 

03   Calog^a 

i 

64    Caiirfis 

1 

Ceylon  f 

66    Un'o. 

I 

N.  India 

66    i-owwoZe 

1 

Central  India 

1 

Ceylon 

HlJBNlDffi. 

68   Hjffltm 

1 

Hindostan,  open  country 

S.  Palsarctic,  Ethiopian 

CiNID^ 

69    Canii 

2 

All  India 

70    Cuim 

1 

India  to  Java 

71    Vulpes 

4 

AlUndia 

AU   Continents   but  S. 
America  and  Australia 

(Nycteteutea  ... 

1 

China) 

Japan  and  Amoorland 

MUSTELlDffl. 

72    Martra 

3 

India,  Ceylon,  Java,  and  CHn^ 

Palffiarctic  Nearctic 

75   Mustela 

3 

Himalayas  to  Bhotan  and  China 

Pai£earc.,Ethiop.,Nearc, 

74   GvOTwopi' 

Nepal  to  Borneo 

75    ffaranflltt 

Sumatra 

76    Lutia 

5 

The  whole  region 

Palsaretic 

77    Aonyx 

K.  India,  Malaya 

W.  and  S.  Africa 

78    Aidiraw! 

I 

Nepal  to  Araoan 
8.  China) 

(Meles^ 

1 

Palisarotio  genus 

79  3(jitoiM 

1 

Sumatra,  Java 

80   Mellnora 

1 

Hindostan 

Ethiopian 

81   Ilt!u.hi 

i 

Nepal,  Formosa,  China  &  Java 

iElURlDB 

82    JElurua 

1 

K  Himalayas  to  E.  Thibet 

Palsaretic  ? 

83   Urans 

2 

Himalayas  to  China 

Palaiarctic,  Nearctic 

8i   if<.tor<*!3 

1 

Indo-Malaya 

86  miuma 

1 

Ganges  to  Ceylon 

b,  Google 


OBlar,  Family,  and 
Genus, 

CETACEA, 

DELPHJNlDal, 

86.  Flaiwmsta     ... 

8IBENIA. 
MAHATLDa:, 

87.  Halicore 

tTNGULATA. 
Tamhid*. 

88.  Tapirna 

Rhihoceeotidje. 


TfiAGULIDiE. 

91.   Tmguliis 


95.  Bubalus 

Sa   Forlax    

97.  Gazella 

88.  Anlilope 

99.   Tdraceros 

100.  Nomorhedus 

101.  Capra    

PEOBOSCIDEA. 

ELEPHANTlDaL 

102.  Elephaa 

EODENTIA. 

ilUWDM. 

103.  Mns         , 

104.  Acauthotnys  .. 

105.  PMceomys 

106.  PlatacaiUhomys 

107.  Herionea 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


witbin  tho  Region. 


Nepal  to  Bengal,  Siam,  &  Java 


The  whole  region 
The  whole  region 
HimalayaB  above  8,000  feet) 


India  to  Burmali,  Formosa,  and 

H.  and  IT.  Central  India 
Feninsnla  of  India 
Deserts  and  plains  of  India 
Open,  conntiy  of  India 
Hilly  districts  all  over  India 
E.  Himalayas  and  Sumatra 
Noilgherries 


India  to  Siam,  Sumatra&Borneo  Ethinpian 


E.  Africa,  W.  Anstralia 

ITeotropiea! 

Ethiopian 

Paliearc.,  Anetro-Molaya 


Paleeare.,  Amer.,  Moluc. 
Central  Asia,  Paliearctdc 


The  whole  te^on 

Phflippinea 
S.  W.  India 
India  and  Ceylon 

Himalayas 


Palmarctic,  Ethiopian 
Palaarctie,  ITeMotio 


b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  REGION. 


110,  EMzomya 


112.  Seiuropteru 

113.  Fteromys 
(Arotomys 

HTsnticiD^ 

114.  HystriK... 


LEPOBIBai, 

117.  Lsjms    ... 
■ENDENTATA. 

118.  Maiiia     ... 


India,    and.    Ceylon     to     Java, 

FormoBEi 
India  &,  Ceylon  to  Borneo,  Java, 

Formosa 
V.  Himalayas  above  8,000  ft.) 


India  and  Ceylon,  to  Malacca  i 

S.  Ciiina 
India  to  Malaya 
Nepal  to  Borneo  and  Java 


e  beyond  ihc  RBgion. 


Cosmop.,    excL  Austral. 

region 
S.  and  E.  Palsearotic 

PalEearctio  aad  ITearotic 

S.  Paltearetic,  Ethiopiam 
West  Africa 


AH  regions  but  Austral. 


9,  Pi^ma 

10  JDrymteca 

11  iCiataeola 

12  \jSu/ya 

IS   \MegaTuru3 
14.  (AciocephalilB 

[  (Dumeticola 


Himalayas,  Ceylon  and  Java 
N    W.  Himalayas  to   E.  TMbot 
Cejlon,  Burmali,  Malaya,  For- 


The  whole  repon 

The  whole  reg.,  tr. 

The  whole  r^,  csrcl.  Philippini 

The  whole  region 

Nepal  to  8,  China  and  Formosa 

CLntnal  India,  Java,  Philippines 

India  to  Cevlon,  S.  China,  and 

Philippines 
Kopal  and  E.  Thibet) 


Palteatctie,  Austraffaii 


Almost  Ci 

Celebos,  Xiomhock,  ti 

Australia 
Paltearctio,      Ethiopial 

Moluccas 

Lonibock,  Timor  ! 


PiJffiaro.  ,Ethiop. ,  Austial , 
A  Falxarctic  genus 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Oracr,  P-Jiuily,  and 

Eeuibo  Biihin  the  Rt«ion. 

Range  beyond  the  Brigion. 

l5.[Lofiuste]la       ... 

i 

Keial,  Hindosten,  8.  CMnik 

Palsaretio 

le.SHoritea     

■1 

Himalayaa,  Formosa 

All  India  and  Ceylon,  toChinr 

Philippine  Islands) 
Allln§itt,!migi'ant) 

High  HimaL.E.  Thibet 
Patearetie,  Ethiopian 

17.  PhyUoseopus  ... 

10 

(Hypolaia 

Aoatralian  genua 
Paliearctie  genus 
Cashmere,  E.  Thibet 

18.  Abromis 

The  whole  reg.,  excl.  Philippinot 

19.  Regabides 

Himalayas  and  Central  India 

Patearetio 

»-::;  ;;: 

PakeBretio  and  Hearctic 

India  and  Ceylon) 

Paliearetie  genus 

(Curruoa 

India) 

Patearctic  genus 

iCvaneonla      ... 

India) 

Palwarotic  genus 

20. 

Oa^iope   

Himalayas    and  Central   India, 
Philippine  Islands 

Patearctic 

21. 

Ruticilla 

Palfearctio,  Ethiopian 

22. 

Qh/BBia/rrhomis 

23.= 

10 

and  China 

24. 

NotodeU 

Himalayas     to      Pegn,     Java, 

26. 

TaTsiger 

Nepal  and  E.  Thibet,  high) 

Paliearotio  genua 

26. 

The  whole  region 

Madagascar 

27. 

The  whole  region 

28. 

N.  W.     India,   HindoBtan,   and 

Ceylon 
F.  W.  India) 

Ethiopian 

(Dromolrea      ... 

Ethiopian  genus 

(Saxicola 

W.  W.  India) 

PalsarctioandKthiopfan 

29. 

Oreioola? 

Burnmh 

Timor 

(Ceruomela      ... 

N.  W.  India,  a  desert  genus) 

N.E.  Africa,  S.  "W.Asia 

80. 

JPratincola 

The  wbole  region 

Paliearctie,      Ethiopian, 

Celebes,  and  Timor 

(AeeentOT 

Himalayas,  in  winter) 

Paliearctie  genus 

TlMALIID^ 

31.  Pomatorhinus... 

20 

The  whole  rapon 

All  India  to  Bucmah,  Philippines 

S3.  Malaeocercus  ... 

14 

Arabia,  Ntthia 

83.  ChatarrhKa     ... 

India,  Bnrniah,  Philippines 

Palestine,  Abyssinia 

^i.  Zayardia 

India  and  Ceylon 

SS.  Acantki^Ta  ... 

Fepal 

86.  OarruCaa; 

22 

The  whole  region 

HimalayastflE.  Thibet, Sam atva, 

Nemi 

N.  India 

10.  IVocfctlqptenwi 

22 

N.  W.  Himalayas,  India,  China, 

ForaiosH 
E.  Himalayas,  8,000  to  10,000 

8 

India,  Ceylon,  Tenaseerim 

43.  lymaelia, 

2 

India  and  Ceylon 

14.  TimaUa 

10 

Malacca  to  Java 

45.  Stachyris 

0 

mosa,  Snmatra 

M.  PyAirris   

3 

India,  Ceylon,  and  Up.  Bnrmali 

47.  Miscamis 

Himalayas  to  Bomeo  and  Java 

48. 

Malm^iterm  ... 

3 

Malacca  to  Java 

b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  EEGION. 


Order,  Family,  end 
Gonns. 

•ss 

Esuge  nithin  the  Region. 

Range  beyond  fte  Bagion, 

49.  Aldppo    

16 

The  whole  region 

New  Guinea 

50.-  MaeroMia 

Malacca  la  Java 

SI.   Campiita 

5 

Java,  Borneo,  Sumatra 

9 

Fepa;  Malacca  to  Java 
Malacca  to  Java 

Celebes 

53.  Napotkera       '... 

S 

54.  Jlrymoeataphus 

6 

Malacca  to  Java,  Ceylon 

Timor 

55.   Turdimis 

i 

Tenasserim,  Malacca 

56.  K^iOTS 

Malacca,  Borneo 

67.  Sibin        ...     ,„ 

6 

H.  W.  Himalayas  to  Tenasserim 

Panukid^. 

eS.  Pwmdoxomis  ... 

3 

Nepal  to  Aracan  and  E.  Thibet, 
8,000-6,000  ft. 

59.  SutiiOTa   

8 

Himalayas  to  E.  Thibet,  China 

F.  W.  China,  E.  Thibet 

60.  Chle-nasioas     ... 

1 

Sikhim 

ClNOLID^ 

til.  Ciadus     

2 

Himalayas,  China,  and  Formosa 

Paliearctic  and  American 

02.  Eupetes   

2 

Malacca  and  Sumatra 

New  Guinea 

63.  SiicuTMS 

9 

U.  W.  Himalayas  (to  11,000  ft.) 
to  Java  and  West  China 

61  Myioplum-us    ... 

6 

All  India  (to  9,000.  ft.  in  N.W. 
Himalayas)  S.  China,  Formosa, 
Java,  Sumatra 

Turkestan 

TKOClLODYTIDa:, 

65.   Testa 

2 

Eastern  Himalayas 

66.  Pmepyga 

F.  W   Himilayas  to  E.  Thibet, 
Java 

67.  Troglodytes    ... 

1 

Himalayas  to  E.  Thibet 

Paliearctic  and  American 

68.  RimiiWr 

2 

Daijeeling 

Cehthiidje. 

69,  Certhia     

2 

Pahearctic  and  Kearctic 

70.  Salpornis 

1 

Central  India 

71.  BhaMomu     ... 

1 

Philippine  Islands 

(I'iohodroma   ... 

1 

Himalayas  in  winter) 

Palfearetic  genua 

(imiDM. 

72.  Sitta 

5 

Himalayas  to  S.   India,  S.  China 

Palfearctic  and  Nearclic 

73.  De-ndrr^hila    ... 

2 

All  India  and  Ceylon   to  Pegn 

PAKIDffl. 

74.  Paras       

16 

The  whole  region 

Paliearctic  and  Kearctic 

76.  Mdaitadhlora.  ... 

2 

Nepal  to  Malacca  and  Sumatra 

76.  PsaMria    

1 

West  Java 

77.  Mgithaliscas    .. 

W.  Himalayas  to  Chiua 

Afglianiatan 

78.  SyMparm      ... 

1 

W.  Himalayas  to  Centra    India 
and  E.  Thibet 

1 

F.  W.  Himalayas 

LlOTRICHlDiB. 

80,  Liothrix 

3 

Nepal  to  S.  W.  China 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGHAPHY. 


Order  Fajnily  and 

a 

Ranee  wiain  tbe  Esgion. 

Hange  beyond  tbc  Region. 

81     'iiva 

3 

Himalayas  1—3,000—7,000  ft. 

82    Mi/aa 

4 

Nepal  to  E.  Thibet ;  moderate 

N.  V^  Himalayas  to  E.  THbot; 
high 

S3    Proparus 

6 

Perhaps  also  Palsarctic 

84   AUotmis 

7 

K  THbet  and  Java 

SB    Outia 

3 

Nepal  and  Sildiim 

86    l-ahwa 

4 

Perhaps  PaliBai'ctic 

87    Ixulwi 

4 

Darjeeling  to  Tenassetim 
Nepal  and  Sikhim 

38    Myzorma 

1 

PmLIUPtJITHlDffl. 

89    Fhylhm)^ 

10 

The  whole   re^on;    excluding 
China  and  Philippines 

qf|    /ora 

6 

The  whole  reg.,  excl.  PUKppines 
Nepsl  and  Hainan 

91   Erpornis 

2 

PiCNONOTID^ 

93.  Mwroscelts 

5 

Blirmah,  China,  Malaya 

Japan 

40 

The  whole  region 

Ethiopian 

94   im^^ 

2 

Himalayas  and  Hainan 

95   Hypstpetea 

15 

The  whole  region 

Madagascar 

96    Cniuger 

11 

India,  Cevlon,  Malaya,  Hainan 
Malacca,  Sumatra,  Borneo 

Afi-ica,  Moluccas 

17     Selm-nis 

3 

88   lole 

4 

Aracan  and  Malaya 

OmoLiBJB. 

99    OnoluB 

12 

The  whole  region 

Paluiare.  Ethiopian,  Ce- 
lebeB,  Flores 

100    Anolapiis 

3 

Himalayas,    Malava,    Formosa, 

Hainan 

CATIPBPHVlilDaL 

101    Perwrccohis 

22 

The  whole  region 

Lomboek  ;  the  Amoor, 
migrant 

103   Graaealus 

7 

India,  Ceylon,  Malaya,  Philip- 
pines, Hainan  and  Jormosa 
Philippine  Islaads 
Tho  wiole  reg.,  excL  Philippines 

Australian 

103    Oampepliagi 

Celebes  to  N.  Guinea 

104    VoIvoctBora 

lOB    Lalaga 

Malaya  and  Philippines 

Celebes  to  Pacific  Is. 

106    (7«Aoa 

Himalayas  and  Java 

DlCBUBlD^ 

107    Dicrunts 

17 

The  whole  region 

Ethiop.  aniJ  Australian 

108    Bhri7\^<t 

Himalayaa  to  Burmah  and  Java 

109    CkiMa 

India  to  China 

Pekin  in  summer 

110    (ffiapfta 

India  to  Borneo  and  Formosa 

111    Irem 

8.  India  and  Ceylon,  Assam  to 
Malaya  and  Philippines 

Mttscioapid* 

112    Minncapvia 

Cashmere  to  W.  C3iina,  8.  India 

113   Erjthrobtema 

The  whole    region,    excludinfi 

PaJajarctio   and     Mada- 

gascar 

b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  BEGION. 


Orffr  Fomil-v  and 

=  1 

Baneo  wilhin  the  Region. 

Bsnge  DeyoDd  the  Region. 

114    Xantlipy{,ia 

2 

Malacca  to  China 

N.  Chm  and  Japan 

115    H>mp«j> 

1 

India  and  Geylon 

Ilo    Pyncophiiii 

Java 

lir    Hcmiihelidon 

3 

¥ .  India  to  Ceylon,  and  CMna  ; 
?  Philippines 

Eastern  Aaia 

113    MJinia 

Himalayas  t»  W.  China 

119    Cyorius 

14 

The  whole  region 

Gelehfls  and  Timor 

1 

Hainan  to  Japan 

Japan  and  N.  China 

121    E'tmyias 

The  whole  reg.,  exeL  Philippines 

122    SipJiM 

^ 

N.  W.  India,  Ceylon,  Foimoaa, 

E,  Thibet 
Nei)al 

12i    Ai'iAip.s 

1 

124    bckinaMna 

1 

Boraeo 

125    Tlypofliimi-, 

1 

The  whole  ragion 

Celebes 

lio    RMiaduia 

7 

All  India  and  Ceylon,  Malaya, 

Philippines 

Anstvalian 

13r    Chdidoihyni. 

N.  India 

128    IJrvp'oIuplui 

1 

The  whole  region 

Celebes 

12n    TJutixa 

« 

The  whole  region 

K    China,    and  Japan, 

13t>   Pkihainma 

4 

Malaya  and  PhUippincs 

PiCHU'EPHALIDa] 

131    H>lwl.ms 

2 

Aracan  to  Malaya  &  Philippines 

Cdebes,  Timor 

Lahiidj: 

132    Lanius 

16 

The  whole  Te^on 

Hearo.,Pal(eare.,Ethiop. 

13f    in5i,-;;u^ 

1 

Java 

134    T.p}iiodo,m-. 

5 

India,     Ceylon,     and     Malaya ; 
Hanian 

135    JWyMo^ii 

1 

Borneo,  Sumatra 

I3b    PlalylapMa 

1 

Malaya 

137    GaiTiilus 

4 

Himalayas,  S,  China,  Formosa 

Pahearetie 

138    C«s« 

3 

Himalayas  and  Aracan  to  Java 

139    tftw^OT 

r 

IT.  China  and  Japan 

mah,  China,  Foimoss 

110    r,mi'(frU5 

3 

Halaya  and  Cochin  CMna 

141    DtTulioiiilta 

^ 

All  India  to  S.  Chms,  Formosa, 
and  Sumatra 

142    Cn/pniJima 

2 

Java  and  Burmah 

1 43   Nucilnga 

2 

Himalayas    and   E.    Thibet;— 
8,000— 10, 000  feet 

Palieatctie  genus 

144    Pi^a 

2 

Pahearetie  and  Nearctie 

14fi    Coims 

Tho  whole  region 

Cosmop.,  excl,  S.  Am. 

(FregUua 

2 

Himalayas,  high) 

Paliearetic  genus 

Neitabiviidj; 

14S    .-Eflippagn, 

13 

Himakyas  fc)  W.  China  &  Java, 
Csntral  India 

Celebes 

147    Chal-'oatetlia 

1 

Malaya  and  Siam 

Celebes  to  New  Guinea 

12 

Celebes.  Lombock,  New 

Guinea 
Celebes  to  Now  Icelmd 

149   AradmeelheTa 

7 

The  whole  region,  exol.  China 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Otdw  Family,  and 

M 

Eange  wlililn  tla  Hogion. 

BaQso  tojond  tlio  Kogioii. 

ISn    Nrfluirplaiv 

i 

India,  Ceylon,  Malaya,  Philipp. 

Celebes 

151    Aidhr^UA, 

1 

Malaya  and  ludo-Olima 

Celebes 

Diamtim 

152   Diueum 

10 

The  whole  region 

Anstralian 

1B5    Faehyglossa 

1 

Nepal 

India  and  Ceylon 

Celebes 

16J    Fi^ma 

1 

i 

Malaya 

158   Zosterops 

8 

The  whole  rogion 
Atacanto  Malaya 

Ethiopian,  Australian 

1 

HlRUBDlSlDS. 

158    Hirando 

10 

The  whole  region 

159   Cotyle 

5 

India  to  China 

Falieavc,  Ethiop.,  Amur, 

160   Chelidott 

3 

India,  Borneo 

Pal^rctic 

JfaiNSILLIDa: 

(Fnngilli 

1 

Pal^rctic  genus 

(Acanthis 

Patearetio  genus 

High  Himalayaa) 

Palfearetie  genus 

(Chloro'ipiza 

China) 

The  whole  region 

Paltearctic  and  Ethiopian 

161    Passer 

6 

(Frmgillaada 

1 

High  Himakyas) 

Paliearctic  genus 

(Coccothraustes 

2 

High  Himalayas) 

Paiiearetio  and  Nearctic 

(Myoetobas 
162   Ecphona 

1 
1 

High  Himalayas) 
China 

Pa  ffiarctic  genua 
Pa  iearctic 

(Pyrrhula 

i 

Pa  ffiai'ctic 

tCarpoda^na 

* 

winter) 

Pahearetic  and  Fearotic 

(Propyrrliok 

1 

&10WS  Himalayas) 

Palsearctio  and  Nearctic 

1 

Daijeeling,  in  winter) 

[!]  Paltearctic 

1 

S  E.  Hinial.,  6,000  to  10,000  ft. 

{S  am  EMBBRlZINffl 

164    Eii'ipiz'i 
1S6    EmBeuza 

4 

N.  W.  India  to  Burraah,  ft  China  Pslfcaretif  and  Kearctic 

7 

AH  India  and  China,  in  winter    .  PaLeaitticgennH 

Flocbid* 

16S    Ploceus 

4 

India  ft  Ceylon,  Bnrmah,  Malaya  Ethiopian 

167    Mumi 

20 

The  whole  region                          1  Atiatro  M^laTan 

laa    Estnldii 

2 

India  and  Ceylon,  Burraah,  Java  Fthiopiin,  Austialian 

169   irythrura 

1 

Java,  Sumatra                                Molu  '^  to  Fiji  islands 

STlJIlNIDiG. 

. 

170   Eulabes 

7 

The  whole  reg.,  exel.  Philippines  Floreg,  Papna 

ITl    Ampehe<.pa 

I 

Tenaasei'im  to  Cochiu-China 

372.  Gvtaiwpa 

1 

Philippine  Islands 
All  India  to  Bnrmah 

173    PastoE 

1 

S.  Pahearctic 

174   Acndoiheres 

6 

The  whole  region 

Celebes 

175   Slurma 

12 

The  whole  region 

178    Stnrniis 

3 

India  and  China 

Paliearotic 

3 

Cen.  India  to  Bnrmah  ft  Malaya 

178    CaloiniB 

2 

Malaya  and  Philippines                 [?]  Celebes,  Moluccas  to 
j     Samoan  Islands 

179    Sfi^oglossa 

1 

W.  and  Central  Himalayas 

by  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  EEGION. 


Order,  Fsmilj,  and 
Genns, 

•si 

it 

Rangs  within  tho  Region.           i  Rango  Heyorni  Uio  Region. 

Art  AMI  D^. 

I 

ISO.  Artamus 

3 

The  wliole  region 

Australian 

Alaudid^. 

(Otoeorys 

I 

IT.  India,  in  winter) 

Palieaictic  and  Nearctic 

181.  Alauda 

7 

[ndiaacd  China 

Pdffiarctic  and  Ethiopian 

182.  Galerite 

2 

Ccntnd  India 

Palfearetic 

183.  Calandrella    ... 

2 

India  and  Burmali 

Palffiarctb  and  Ethiopian 

(Melanocorvpha 

N.  W.  India) 

Paliearctio 

184.  Mimfm  ...     ... 

S 

India,  Ceylon,  and  Java 

Ethiopran 

1 

Central  India 

Pahearctic  and  Ethiujaan 

188,  Pyrrliulaada... 

1 

India  and  Ceylon 

Ethiopian 

MOTACILLIDffi. 

187.  MoUciUa       ... 

9 

India  and  Ceylon  to  China  and 
China  and  Philippines 

PalEearctie  and  EtWopian 

isa.  Budyto 

2 

Pal^retio  &  Ethiopian, 
Pahearutic 

189.  Calobatea       ... 

1 

The  wholo  region 

190.  Nemoricola    ... 

1 

India,  CBjlon,  and  Malaya 

191.  Auttus 

3 

India  and  China 

102.  Corydalla 

The  whole  region 

Pal^rctic,  Australian 

193.  Eekrara       ... 

1 

Himalayas 

EURYLjailDffi. 

l&i.  Ewryltemm   ... 

2 

Mahvi 

196.  Senlovkii^     ... 

1 

Himalayas 

196.  Fsarisomntt    .. 

1 

Himalayas 

197.  Cmydtm 

1 

Malacca,  Sumatia,  Boineo 

2 

Ancm,  Slim  andMUiji 

199.  C'alypbnaciia... 

1 

MhIilh,  iinmatia,  Loiaeo 

PlTIIDS 

200.  Pitta      

201.  Sucickla 

11 

Tha  whole  resion. 
Malaya 

Australian,  Ethiopian 

202,  UydTornis      . 

3 

Himalayas  and  Malaya 

PICARI^ 

VlCiDM. 

203.   ViBia.     

1 

N.  W.  Himalayas  to  E.  Thibet, 
3,000-6.000  i^t. 

204.  Sasia     

Nepal  to  Malaya  and  Borneo 

205.  Rous      

14 

The  whole  region,  excL  Philip 

Palteawtic,  American 

2D6.  Hyo»icua      ... 

1 

Himalayas 

N.  Cliina 

12 

The  whole  region 

N.  China,  Japan,  Celebes 

1 

Penang  to  Snmatra  and  Bome<i 

209.   VmUia 

2 

Nepal  to  Sumatra  and  Borneo 
Imfia,  Ceylon,   Malaya,  Philip 

S 

211.  Semkerrm   ... 

5 

l£k.r,  Pegu  to  Malaya 

212.  Geoittua 

n 

AU  India  and  Ceylon  to  Pegu 
and  Malaya 

Palsarctio 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPKY. 


Order,  Pamllr,  and 
GeiUB. 

■3g 

41 

Range  within  tlu-.  Begion. 

Hauge  liejond  the  Be^on. 

213.  Miilleripimts... 

21E.  T^ga      

216.  Gsdmulna      ... 

217.  Miglyples      ... 

218.  Mieroplertma... 

5 

6 
6 
2 

Malabar,  Araean  to  Malaya   and 

PhUippines 
India,  Ceybn,  and  Ghina 
India  to  Malaya 
S.  Himalayaa  to  Bnrmali 
Malaya 
India  and  Ceylon,  t«  Boineo  ajid 

S.  China 

Celeles 

YUKGID^ 

219.  Yuiix     

1 

Central  and  S.  China 

Paliearctie,  S    AMca 

lKDICATOmn.ffl. 

220.  Indicator       ... 

2 

Himalayas  and  Borneo 

Ethiopian 

JlsOAhMMlTIM. 

221.  MegalcEBia     ... 

27 

The  whole  region,  cxeL  Pliilip 

222.  XatUhoUsma ... 

223.  Psilopogmi.     ... 

224.  Calorcmi^m... 

4 

1 

2 

All  India  and  Ceylon  to    Pegu 
and  Malaya 

Malacca,  Sumatra  and  Borneo 

COCULIBJB. 

226.  BkiiwawqfiO  ... 

228.  Lepidogrammits 
228.  CaTpoeoceya  ... 

230.  Zimciostonwi  .. 

231.  Sh(^yte3     ... 

1 
1 
1 
1 

1 
1 

7 

Ceylon 

Philippine  Islands 

Philippine  Islands 

Borneo,  Sumati'a 

Malaya 

Hepal  to  Ceylon,   Hainan  and 

]&ya 
AU  India,  Ceylon,  Malacca 
Malacca,  Snraatva,  Borneo 
Malacca,  Sumatra,  Borneo 
The  whole  region 
The  whole  region 
ITie  whole  region 
The  whole  region 
India,  Ceylon  and  Malaya 
The  whole  region 

285.  CentropuB      ... 

236.  Cneulus 

237.  Caoomantia    ... 

239.  Sumiealus    ... 
210.  Hiecococoyx  ... 

4 
1 

1 
14 

10 

5 

2 

Ethiopian,  Anstralian 
Palmare,,  Ethiop.,Aust. 
Australian 
Ethiopian,  Australian 

Celehes,  N.    China  and 

241.  Cocoystes 

a 

The  whole  I'egion,  excl.  Philip-;  Ethiopiioi 

242.  Endynamis   ... 

2 

Tho  whole  region                          j  Australian 

CORACIID*. 

243.  Coraeias 

2 

India,  Ceylon  and  Barmah          '  Ethiopian,  S.  Faltearctic 

244.  Eurystomus  ... 

1 

The  whole  region 

Meropib^, 

245.  NyeHornU     ... 

3 

S.  India  to  Himalayas,  Bnrmah, 
Sumatra,  and  Borneo 

b,  Google 


THE  OEIENTAL  REGION. 


Order,  Family,  and 

4 

EaugB  witbln  the  Resion, 

RaDgc  bejciiid  the  lisgloii. 

2*6.  Merops 

5 

Thfi  whole  re^on 

S.  Pal^aretic,  Ethiopian, 
Australian 

TaoQONira. 

247.  Earpadss      ... 

10 

The  whole  region,  excl.  China 

Alcbdihib^ 

248.  Haleyoii 

10 

The  whole  region 

S.  Pal:fiarctic,  Ethopian, 
Auatraliau 

249.  PelmvopsM    ... 

7 

The  whole  region,  excl.  China 

Celebes  and  Timor 

250.   Carcmemlea    ... 

Biwmah,  Siam,  and  Malaya 

251.   Ceys      

6 

India   and  Ceylon,  Malaya  and 

Moluccas  k  Few  Guin. 

252.  Alcedo   

5 

Philippines 
The  whole  region 

Palsearotie,    Ethiopian, 
Austro-Malayan 

353.  Alcyone 

1 

Australian  genus 
Ethiopian,  S.  Pflla:arctio, 
American 

354.  Cerylo     

■  2 

India  to  S.  Ohiim 

BtrOBBOMD*. 

255.  Buceros 

256.  RyATodsaa     ... 

257.  BecenJBomis  ... 

i 

7 
1 

H^al    to     Malaya,    9.    India, 

India,  (Sylon  and  Malaya 
Sumatia 

W.  Africa 

268.  Calao      

2 

Tenasserim,  Malaya 

Auatro-Malaya 

269.  Aceros    

1 

S.  E.  Himalayas 

260.  OrmiorrhiTtus 

2 

Malacca  to  Boi-neo    and  Philip 

Celebes 

261.  Pemlojades    ... 

262.  BMnoplax     ... 

1 
1 

PhUippinea 
Sumatra,  Borneo 

263.  Mmi<XT03      ..   '     3 

India  and  Ceylon  to  Tenassei-im 

XTEUPiBa 

264.  TJpupa    

3 

India,  Ceylon  and  Bnnnah 

Ethiopian,  S.  Palfearctic 

PODAKOID^ 

265.  Batrachostoimis 

6 

India,  Ceylon  and  Malaya 

Moluccas 

Capbimtooidji. 

18 

The  whole  ragion 

The  Eastern  HemisphoK 

267.  l>vncomis      ... 

i 

Celebes 

CTMBLlDa. 

2BS.  Cypaeliis 

g 

The  region,  exel.  Pliilippines 
Ceylon,  India,  Malaya,  I'hilipp 

Tho01dWorld&S.Amer. 

269.  Dandroclielidoii 

3 

Auatro-Malaya 

270.  CoUocaUa      ... 

3 

The  whole  region 

Madagascar,    Moluccas, 
Pacific  Islands 

271.  Cliaitnra 

3 

Ceylon,  India,  Mdaya,  Hainan 

America,  Africa 

PSITTACI. 

CAOATniDS. 

(Cacatua 

1 

Australian  genus 

PAiaoraiTniDJi. 

272.  PalieomiB      ... 

14 

N.  "W".  India  to  Ceylon,  Siam  & 

Ethiopian 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,  Fttmily,  end 


278.  PrionituruB  . 

27*.  Cyclopsitta    . 

375.  PmUi/aim 

278.  Tanygnathua. 

277.  Loricnlua 

COLUMB^. 

COLUMBID^ 

278.  Treron    ... 
278.  Ptilopua... 


281. 


Uactopygia  . . 
Turtur  ...  .. 
Chaleopliaps  .. 

Phjipitrermt  . 
Calffinas...  . 
Phlegrenaa    . 


GALLIN.ffi. 

PTEEOCLIDa:. 

290.  Pterocles 

TBTEAONHlffl. 

291.  Franeolinna 
.  292.   Oriygomia 

293.  Perdix    ... 

2S4.  Cotnrnix 

295.  Bolialus... 

(Caccubis 


fLophophoti 
(Tetraophaa: 
2S9.  Ceriornis 


Philippine  Islands 
Philippine  Islands 
!U!aUya,  excl.  Java 
Philippine  Islands 
Ceylon,  India,  Malaya,   Philip- 


The  whole  region 

Malaya  and  Philippines 

India  and  Ceylon  to  HainEin  and 

Philippines' 
Ceylon  and  India  to  Tenasaerira 
Philippine,  Andaman  &  Hicobar 

Isiuids 
Sepal,  Java,  Hsdnan,  Philippines 
The  whole  region 
India,  Ceylon,   Malaya,  Hainan, 

Philippines,  Formosa 
PhUippiiie  Islanda 
Nieooar  and  PMKppine  Islanda 
Philippine  and  Sooloo  Islands 
Philippine  Islands,  Java 


Central  and  S,  India 


Ethiopian,  Molnceas 

Australian 

Aostralian 

Palmare.,  Ethiop.,  Amer. 
Japan,   Moluccas  to  Sa- 

nioan  Islands 
Austro-MalajB,  Australia 
OldWorld,  Austro-Malay. 
Austl'O-Malara,  AuEtrafia 

Austro-Midaya 
AustrO'Mal.  &  Polynesia 
Anstto-Malaya  ftAustral, 


S.  Palicarotlo,  Ethiopian 


a.  Palfearotic,  Ethiopian, 


India,  Malaya,  Philippines,  China 
The  whole  region 
Malacca,  Siam,  Borneo,  PiiUipp. 
W.  Himalayas) 


Ceylon  to  Himalayas,  S.W.  China 

and  Java 
Siam,  Malacca,  Borneo 
Upper  Assam  to  8.  W.  China  i 

Sumatra 
Cashmere  and  E.  Thibet) 
E.  Thibet) 

N.  W.  Himalayas  to  W.  China 
N.   W.    Himalayas  to  N.  China 

and  Mongolia) 
W.  Himalayas,S.  China,  Fontiosa 
U.    W.    Himalayas     to    China 

Sumatra  and  Borneo 
The  region,  eKCl,  China 
CentraJ  India  to  Ceylon 


Palwarctic  genus 
Pahearetic  genus 
8.  E.  Pal^arotio 
Pahearotio  genus 


b,  Google 


THE  ORIENTAL  EBGION. 


Order,  FamitF,  and 

Range  withm  ito  fiasion. 

Bangs  beyond  the  Baglon. 

TUBNIOID^. 

304.  Tnruix   

9 

The  whole  region 

S,    Pakearc,  Ethiopian, 

Australian 

MEOArODIIB.B. 

305,  Megapodins  .. 

2 

Kicotar  Is.,  Philippiuef^  K  W. 

Celeties   t^  Sanioan  Ik,, 

Borneo 

N,  Australia 

ACGIPITRES. 

VTrLTDEinai. 

30S.  Vultur   

Himalaviis 

8.  Paltearetic,  Ethiopian 

307.  Gyps      

3 

ludii  and  Siam 

S.  Paliearctic,  Ethiopian 

308.  Pseudogyps     ... 

1 

India  and  Burmali 

H.  Ethiopian 

309.  Neopbraii 

1 

All  India 

S.PflliCBietie,  Ethiopian 

^10    fhi  us 

4 

India  pjid  China 

Almost  Coaniopolite 

311    Astui 

J 

The  whole  region 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

012    Accitiiter 

■2 

The  whole  rfj^ou. 

J 13    Biiteo 

2 

ndia  to  China, 

314   Aquila 

4 

ndia  to  China 

Hearo,  Palmare,, Ethiop. 

ill    Nisaihls 

2 

ndia  and  Ceylon 

S.  Palseai',,  Ethiop.,  Aus, 

ilR    Lophutrion  hi3 

1 

ndo-Malaya 

Neoti'opic^ 

)17    Hcopus 

1 

ndia  to  Burmah  and  Malaj-a 

Celebes  md  Molnecaa 

318    'i.iiiPietiis 

5 

Indiii  to  Malaya  and  Formosa 

Neotropical,    Ethiopian, 

Auatro-Malayan 
Palsearc.,  Ethiop,,  Timor 

319    Ciinetus 

1 

3JU     'iiidmma 

5 

The  whole  region 

Celebes 

21     Buta^tar 

^ 

The  whole  region 

N.    E.    Africa,   Celebes, 
New  Guinea 

J  22    H'ili'eetus 

2 

The  whole  region 

Cosmopolite  ;  escl.  Neo- 
tropical region 

323    Hiliastur 

1 

India  te  Malaya 

Anstro-Malaja,  Austral. 

i2i    JIilvus 

The  whole  regiou 

325    Minus 

2 

India,  Malaya 

AJriea,  Australia 

3^0   M'wlitPihamplinB 

I 

Malacca 

S.W.  Africa &Madas. 

3Jr    Pernis 

1 

India 

PaJiRarctiu  and  Ethiopian, 

138    Baza 

S 

India  to  Malaya 

Moluocaa  and  N.  Austrl. 

■iu3    Hi  /(c 

4 

N.  India,  Bnrmah,  Malaya 

Jul!    Poliohieiax 

I 

BuTmBh 

E,  Africa 

i'l    Fdi^o 

8 

The  whole  region 

«3    l^lihni-is 

3 

The  whole  region 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

333    Pimhun 

1 

The  whole  region 

CoamouoUtfl 
Indo-Malaja  &  Polynesia 

o34    PolKjuttua 

2 

India  to  Malaya 

"35    AtlieuL 

9 

The  whole  region 

«i      Vl  Mr 

7 

Tho  whole  region 

N.  China  and  Japan 

3>?    Pubo 

4 

India,  Ceylon.  Malaya  and  Philip 
The  whole  region 

Cosmop,  exc.  Austr.  reg. 

'  --    A^rf'/^ 

3 

339    beopB 

7 

The  whole  region 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,  Familj.  and 
Genus. 

Si 

KflDgo  wiUiin  tho  Region. 

Rajige  beyoiul  tJie  Region, 

340.  Syrnium 

(Asio      

3«.  Stiix      

842.  Phodilns       ... 

6 
2 

4 

The  whole  region 

India) 

The  whole  regioQ 

Nepal,  Malttja 

Cosmop.  ese.  Ansfcr.  reg. 
Paltearc,  Ethiop.Amer. 
Cosmopolite 

Pecaliar  or  very  OlnwactmsUc  &enera  of  Wading  or  Swimming  Birds. 


GEALL^. 

Rallip^. 

EalHna  

10 

The  whole  region 

Auatro- Malaya 

PAEalBiB. 

Eydrophasiamus 

1 

The  whole  region 

CfrAEADRlIDffi. 

^saeus 

1 

The  whole  regioa 

Anstro-Malayaii 

b,  Google 


b,  Google 


A  IT  S  T  K  -i 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


THE   AUSTRALIAN  EEGION. 


The  Australian  is  the  great  insular  region  of  the  earth.  As  a 
whole  it  is  one  of  the  hest  marked,  and  has  even  been  considered 
to  |)e  eqVial  in  zoological  value  to  all  the  rest  of  the  glohe ;  but 
its  separate  portions  are  very  heterogeneous,  and  their  limits 
sometimes  ill-defined.  Its  central  and  most  important  masses 
consist  of  Austraha  and  New  G-uinea,  in  whieh  the  main  features 
of  the  region  are  fully  developed.  To  the  north-west  it  extends  to 
Celebes,  in  which  a  large  proportion  of  the  Austrahan  eharaetera 
have  disappeared,  while  Oriental  types  are  mingled  with  them 
to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  rather  difHcult  to  determine  where  to 
locate  it.  To  the  south-east  it  includes  New  Zealand,  which  is 
in  some  respects  so  peculiar,  that  it  has  even  been  proposed  to 
constitute  it  a  distinct  region.  On  the  east  it  embraces  the 
whole  of  Oceania  to  the  Marq^uesas  and  Sandwich  Islands,  whose 
very  scanty  and  often  peculiar  fauna,  must  be  afliliated  to  the 
general  Australian  type, 

Australia  is  the  largest  tract  of  land  in  the  region,  being 
several  times  more  extensive  than  ail  the  other  islands  combined, 
and  it  is  here  that  the  greatest  variety  of  peculiar  types  have 
been  developed.  This  island-continent,  being  situated  in  the 
track  of  the  southern  desert  zone,  and  having  no  central  moun- 
tains to  condense  the  vapours  from  the  surrounding  ocean,  has  a 
laj^e  portion  of  its  interior  so  parched  up  and  barren  as  to  be 
abnoat  destitute  of  animal  lifa  The  most  extensive  tract  of 
fertile  and  well-watered  country  is  on  the  east  and  southeast. 


by  Google 


388  ZOOLOGICAL  GBOGEAPIIY.  [part  hi. 

wlaere  a  fine  range  of  mountains  reaches,  in  the  Colony  of  Vic- 
toria, the  limits  of  perpetual  snow.  The  west  coast  also  possesses 
mountains  of  moderate  height,  but  the  climate  ia  very  dry  and 
hot.  The  northern  portioia  is  entirely  tropical,  yet  it  nowhere 
presents  the  luxuriance  of  vegetation  characteristic  of  the  great 
island  of  New  Guinea  immediately  to  the  north  of  it.  Taken  as 
a  whole,  Australia  is  characterized  hy  an  arid  climate  and  a  de- 
ficiency of  water ;  conditions  which  have  prohahly  long  prevailed, 
and  under  which  its  very  peculiar  fauna  and  flora  have  heen  de- 
veloped. This  fact  will  account  for  some  of  the  marked  differ- 
ences between  it  and  the  adjacent  sub-regiona  of  New  Guinea 
and  the  Moluccas,  where  the  climate  is  moist,  and  the  vegetation 
luxuriant;  and  these  divergent  features  must  never  be  lost  sight 
of,  in  comparing  the  different  portions  of  the  Australian  region. 
In  Tasmania  alone,  which  is  however,  essentially  a  detached 
portion  of  Australia,  a  more  uniform  and  moiater  climate  pre- 
vails; but  it  is  too  small  a  tract  of  land,  and  has  been  too 
recently  severed  from  its  parent  mass  to  have  developed  a 
special  fauna. 

The  Austro-Malay  sub-region  (of  which  New  Guinea  is  the 
central  and  typical  mass)  is  strikingly  contrasted  with  Australia, 
being  subjected  to  purely  equatorial  conditions, — a  high,  but 
uniform  temperature,  excessive  moisture,  and  a  luxuriant  forest 
vegetation,  exactly  similar  in  general  features  to  that  which 
clothes  the  Indo-Malay  Islands,  and  the  other  portions  of  the 
great  equatorial  forest  zona  Such  a  climate  and  vegetation,  being 
the  necessary  result  of  its  geograpliical  position,  must  have 
existed  from  remote  geological  epochs  with  but  little  change,  and 
must  therefore  have  profoundly  affected  all  the  forms  of  life 
which  have  been  developed  under  their  influence.  Around  New 
Guinea  as  a  centre  are  grouped  a  number  of  important  islands, 
more  or  less  closely  agreeing  with  it  in  physical  features,  climate, 
vegetation,  and  forms  of  life.  In  most  immediate  connection  we 
place  the  Aru  Islands,  Mysol  and  Waigiou,  with  Jobie  and  the 
other  Islands  in  Geelvinck  Bay,  all  of  which  are  connected  with 
it  by  shallow  seas  ;  they  possess  one  of  its  most  characteristic 
groups,  the  Birds  of  Paradise,  and  have  no  doubt  only  recently  (ia 


by  Google 


[I.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  389 

1  sense)  been  separated  fiom  it  In  the  next  rank  come 
the  large  islands  of  the  Moluccas  on  the  west^  and  the  range 
terminating  in  the  Solomon  Islands  on  the  east,  both  of  which 
groups  possess  a  clearly  Papuan  fauna,  although  deficient  in 
many  of  the  most  lemarkahle  Papuan  types. 

All  these  islands  agree  closely  with  New  Guinea  itself  in 
heing  very  mountainous,  and  covered  with  a  luxuriant  forest 
vegetation ;  but  to  the  south-west  we  find  a  set  of  islands  ex- 
tending from  Timor  to  Lomhock,  which  agree  more  nearly  with 
Australia,  both  in  climate  and  vegetation;  being  arid  and 
abounding  in  eucalypti,  acacias,  and  thickets  of  thorny  shrubs. 
These,  like  the  Moluccas,  are  surrounded  by  deep  sea,  and  it  is 
doubtful  whether  they  have  either  of  them  been  actually  con- 
nected with  New  Guinea  or  Australia  in  recent  geological  times ; 
but  the  general  features  of  their  zoology  oblige  us  to  unite  all 
these  islands  with  New  Guinea  as  forming  the  Austro-Malay 
sub-division  of  the  Australian  region.  Still  further  west  how- 
ever, we  have  the  laa^e  island  of  Celebes,  whose  position  is  very 
difficult  to  determine.  It  is  mountainous,  but  has  also  extensive 
plains  and  low  lands.  Its  climate  ia  somewhat  arid  in  the  south, 
where  the  woods  are  often  scattered  and  thorny,  while  in  the 
north  it  is  moister,  and  the  forests  are  luxuriant.  It  is  surrounded 
by  deep  seas,  but  also  by  coralline  and  volcanic  islets,  indicatii^ 
former  elevations  and  subsidences.  Its  fauna  presents  the  most 
puzzling  relations,  showing  affinities  to  Java,  to  the  Philippines, 
to  the  Moluceas,'to  New  Guinea,  to  continental  India,  and  even  to 
Africa;  so  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  decide  whether  to  place 
it  in  the  Oriental  or  the  Australian  region.  On  the  whole  the 
preponderance  of  its  relations  appears  to  be  with  the  latter, 
though  it  is  undoubtedly  very  anomalous,  and  may,  with  almost 
as  much  propriety,  be  classed  with  the  former.  This  will  be 
better  understood  when  we  come  to  discuss  its  zoological  pecu- 
liarities. 

The  next  sub-region  consists  of  the  extensive  series  of  islands 
scattered  over  the  Pacific,  the  principal  groups  being  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  the  MaK[uesas  and  Society  Islands,  the  Naviga- 
tors', Friendly,  and  Fiji  Islands.    New  Caledonia  and  the  New 


by  Google 


390  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHT.  [part  hi. 

Hebrides  have  lather  an  uncertain  position,  and  it  is  difficult 
to  decide  whether  to  class  them  with  the  Austro-Malay  Islands, 
the  Pacific  Islands,  or  Australia.  The  islands  of  the  west  Pacific, 
north  of  the  ecLuator,  also  probably  come  into  this  region, 
although  the  Ladrone  Islands  may  belong  to  the  Philippines ; 
but  as  the  fauna  of  aU  these  small  islets  is  very  scanty,  and 
very  little  known,  they  are  not  at  present  of  much  importance. 

There  remains  the  islands  of  New  Zealand,  with  the  surround- 
ing small  islands,  as  far  as  the  Auckland,  Chatham,  and  Nor- 
folk Islands.  These  are  situated  in  the  south  temperate 
fm-est-zona  They  are  mountainous,  and  have  a  moist,  ec[uahle, 
and  temperate  climate.  They  are  true  oceanic  islands,  and  the 
total  absence  of  mammalia  intimates  that  they  have  not  been 
connected  with  Australia  or  any  other  continent'  in  recent  geolo- 
gical times.  The  general  character  of  their  zoology,  no  less 
than  their  botany,  affiliates  them  however,  to  Australia  as  por- 
tions of  the  same  zoological  region. 

Gmeral  Zoological  Cha/racteristics  of  the  Aibstralian  Region. — 
For  the  purpose  of  giving  an  idea  of  the  very  peculiar  and 
striking  features  which  characterise  the  Australian  region,  it 
will  be  as  well  at  first  to  confine  ourselves  to  the  great  central 
land  masses  of  Australia  and  New  Guinea,  where  those  features 
are  manifested  in  their  greatest  force  and  purity,  leavii^  the 
various  pecuharities  and  anomahes  of  the  outlying  islands  to  be 
dealt  with  subsequently. 

MammaUa. — The  Australian  region  is  broadly  distinguished 
from  all  the  rest  of  the  globe  by  the  entire  absence  of  all  the 
orders  of  non-ac[uatic  mammalia  that  abound  in  the  Old 
World,  except  two — the  winged  bats  (Chiroptera),  and  the  eq;ually 
cosmopolite  rodents  (Eodentia).  Of  these  latter  however,  only 
one  family  is  represented — ^the  Murida) — (comprising  the  rats 
and  mice),  and  the  Australian  representatives  of  these  are  all  of 
small  or  moderate  size-— a  suggestive  fact  in  appreciating  the  true 
character  of  the  Australian  fauna.  In  place  of  the  Quadrumana, 
Carnivora,  and  Ungulates,  which  abound  in  endless  variety 
in  all  the  other  regions  under  equally  favourable  conditions, 
Australia  possesses  two  new  orders  (or  perhaps  sub-classes)— 


by  Google 


OEAP.  nil.]  TEE  AUSTEALIAN  EEGIOK  391 

Maa^upialia  and  Monotremata,  found  nowhere  else  on  the  globe 
except  a  single  family  of  the  former  in  America.  The  Marsu- 
pials are  wonderfully  developed  in  Australia,  where  they  exist 
in  the  most  diversified  forms,  adapted  to  different  modes  of  life. 
Some  are  carnivorous,  some  herbivorous ;  some  arboreal,  others 
terrestrial.  There  are  insect-eaters,  root-gnawers,  fruit-eaters, 
honey-eaters,  leaf  or  grass-feeders.  Some  resemble  wolves, 
others  marmots,  weasels,  squirrels,  flying  scLuirrels,  dormice  or 
jerboas.  They  are  classed  in  six  distinct  families,  comprising 
about  thirty  genera,  and  subserve  most  of  the  purposes  in  the 
economy  of  nature,  fulfilled  in  other  parts  of  the  world  by  very 
different  groups ;  yet  they  all  possess  common  peculiarities  of 
structure  and  habits  which  show  that  they  are  members  of 
one  stock,  and  have  no  real  aifinity  with  the  Old-World  forms 
which  they  often  outwardly  resemble. 

The  other  order,  Monotremata,  is  only  represented  by  two  rare 
and  very  remarkable  forms,  Omithorhfnchus  and  Echidna,  pro- 
bably the  descendants  of  some  of  those,  earlier  developments  of 
mammahan  life  which  in  every  other  part  of  the  globe  have  long 
been  extinct. 

The  bats  of  Australia  all  belong  to  Old-World  genera  and 
possess  no  features  of  special  interest,  a  result  of  the  wandering 
habits  of  these  aerial  mammals.  The  Kodents  are  more  interest- 
ing. They  are  all  more  or  less  modified  forms  of  mice  or  rats. 
Some  belong  to  the  widely  distributed  genus  Mus,  others  to  four 
allied  genera,  which  may  be  all  modifications  of  some  common 
Old-World  form.  They  spread  all  over  Australia,  and  allied 
species  occur  in  Celebes  and  the  Papuan  Islands;  so  that  al- 
though not  yet  known  from  the  Moluccas,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  some  of  them  exist  there. 

Birds. — The  typical  Australian  r^on,  as  above  defined,  is 
almost  as  well  characterized  by  its  hirda,  as  by  its  mammalia ; 
but  in  this  case  the  deficiencies  are  less  conspicuous,  while  the 
peculiar  and  characteristic  families  are  numerous  and  important 
The  most  marked  deficiency  as  r^rds  wide-spread  families,  is 
the  total  absence  of  FringillidEe  (true  finches),  Picidte  (wood- 
peckers), Vultnridie  (vultures),  and    PhasianidES  (pheasants) 


by  Google 


392  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [pabt  ni. 

and  among  prevalent  Oriental  groups,  Pycnonotidte  (bulbuls), 
Phyllo'rnithidte  (green  bulbuls),  and  Megalaamidte  (barbets)  are 
families  whose  absence  is  significant.  Nine  families  are  peculiar 
to  the  region,  or  only  just  pass  its  limits  in  the  case  of  single 
species.  These  are  Paridiseidie  (paradise-birds),  MeHphagidas 
(honey-suckers),  Menuiidfe  (lyre-birds),  Atrichidje  (scrub-birds), 
CacatuidfE  (cockatoos),  Platycercidaa  (broad-tailed  and  grass- 
paroquets),  Trichoglossidte  (bruah-tongued  paroquets,  Megapo- 
diidsB  (mound-makers),  and  Casuatiidse  (cassowaries).  There  are 
also  eight  very  characteristic  famOies,  of  which  four,— Pachy- 
cephalidffi  (thick-headed  shrikes),  Campephagidte  (caterpillar 
shrikes),  DicaiidEe  (flower-peckers),  and  ArtamidEe  (swallow- 
shrikes) — are  feebly  represented  elsewhere,  while  the  other  four 
— Ploceidte  (weaver-finches),  AlcEedinidse  (kingfishers),  Podargidfe 
(frog-moutha),  and  Columbidfo  (pigeons) — although  widely  dis- 
tributed, are  here  unusually  abundant  and  varied,  and  (except 
in  the  case  of  the  Ploceidfe)  better  represented  in  the  Australian 
than  in  any  other  region.  Of  all  these  the  Meliphagidie  (honey- 
suckers)  are  the  most  peculiarly  and  characteristically  Australian. 
This  family  abounds  in  genera  and  species ;  it  extends  into  eveiy 
part  of  the  region  from  Celebes  and  Lombock  on  the  west,  to 
the  Sandwich  Islands,  Marquesas,  and  New  Zealand  on  the  east, 
while  not  a  single  species  overpasses  its  limits,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  one  (Ptilotis  linibata)  which  abounds  in  all  the  islands  of 
the  Timorese  group,  and  has  crossed  the  narrow  strait  from 
Lombock  to  Baly ;  but  this  can  hardly  be  considered  to  impugn 
the  otherwise  striking  fact  of  wide  diffusion  combined  with 
strict  limitation,  which  characterizes  it.  This  family  is  the  more 
important,  because,  like  the  Trichoglossidte  or  brush-tongued 
paroquets,  it  seems  to  have  been  developed  in  co-ordination  with 
that  wealth  of  nectariferous  flowering  shrubs  and  trees  which  is 
one  of  the  marked  features  of  Australian  v^etation.  It  probably 
originated  in  the  extensive  land-area  of  Australia  itself,  and 
thence  spread  into  all  the  tributary  islands,  where  it  has  become 
variously  modified,  yet  always  in  such  close  adaptation  to  the 
other  great  features  of  the  Australian  fauna,  that  it  seems  unable 
to  maintain  itself  when  subject  to  the  competition  of  the  more 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  EEGION. 

varied  forma  of  life  in  the  Oriental  region ;  to  which,  ] 
great  powers  of  fl^ht,  some  species  must  occasionally  have  emi- 
grated. Its  presence  or  ahsence  serves  therefore  to  define  and 
limit  the  Australian  i^on  with  a  precision  hardly  to  be 
equalled  in  the  case  of  any  other  region  or  any  other  family  of 
birds. 

The  Triehogloasidte,  as  already  intimated,  are  another  of  these 
peculiarly  organized  Australian  families, — parrots  with  an  ex- 
tensile brush-tipped  tongue,  adapted  to  extract  the  nectar  and 
pollen  from  ilowers.  These  are  also  r^dly  confined  to  this 
region,  but  they  do  not  range  so  completely  over  the  whole  of  it, 
being  absent  from  New  Zealand  (where  however  they  are  repre- 
sented by  a  closely  alhed  form  Nesior),  and  from  the  Sandwich 
Islands.  The  Paradiseidse  (birds  of  paradise  and  allies)  are 
another  remarkable  family,  confined  to  the  Papuan  group  of 
Islands,  and  the  tropical  parts  of  Australia,  The  Megapodiidfe 
(or  mound-buUders)  are  another  most  remarkable  and  anomalous 
group  of  birds,  no  doubt  specially  adapted  to  Australian  con- 
ditions of  existence.  Their  peculiarity  comsists  in  their  laying 
enormous  e^a  (at  considerable  intervals  of  time)  and  burying 
them  either  in  the  loose  hot  sand  of  the  beach  above  high-water 
mark,  or  in  enormous  mounds  of  leaves,  sticks,  earth,  and  refuse 
of  an  kmds,  gathered  together  by  the  birds,  whose  feet  and 
claws  are  enlarged  and  strengthened,  for  the  work.  The  warmth 
of  this  sHghtly  fermenting  mass  hatches  the  eggs ;  when  the 
young  birds  work  their  way  out,  and  thenceforth  take  care  of 
themselves,  as  they  are  able  to  run  quickly,  and  even  to  fly  short 
distances,  as  soon  as  they  are  hatched.  This  may  perhaps  be  an 
adaptation  t^  the  peculiar  condition  of  so  large  a  portion  of 
Australia,  in  respect  to  prolonged  droughts  and  scanty  water- 
supply,  entailing  a  periodical  scarcity  of  all  kinds  of  food.  In  such 
a  country  the  confinement  of  the  parents  to  one  spot  during  the 
long  period  of  incubation  would  otten  lead  to  starvation,  and  the 
consequent  death  of  the  offsprmg  But  the  same  birds  with  free 
power  to  roam  about,  might  readily  mamtain  themselves.  This 
peculiar  constitution  and  habit,  which  enabled  the  M^apodii  to 
maintain  an  eMStence  under  the  unfavourable  conditions  of  their 
Vol.  I.— 27 


by  Google 


394  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [part  m. 

original  habitat  gives  them  a  great  advantage  in  the  luxuriant 
islands  of  the  Moluccas,  to  which  they  have  spread.  There 
they  ahound  to  a  remarkable  extent,  and  their  eggs  furnish  a 
luxurious  repast  to  the  natives,  They  have  also  reached  many 
of  the  smallest  islets,  and  have  spread  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
r^on  to  the  Philippines,  and  North-Western  Borneo,  as  well 
as  to  the  remote  Mcobar  Islands. 

The  Platyeercidffi,  or  broad-tailed  paroquets,  are  another 
■wide-spread  Australian  group,  of  weak  structure  but  gorgeously 
coloured,  ranging  from  the  Moluccas  to  New  Zealand  and  the 
Society  Islands,  and  very  characteristic  of  the  region,  to  which 
they  are  strictly  confined.  The  Cockatoos  have  not  quite  so 
wide  a  range,  being  confined  to  the  Austro-Malayan  and  Austra- 
lian sul>r^ons,  while  one  species  extends  into  the  Philippine 
Islands.  The  other  two  peculiar  families  are  more  restricted  in 
their  range,  and  wiU  be  noticed  under  the  sub-regions  to  which 
they  respectively  belong. 

Of  the  characteristic  families,  the  PachycephalidEe,  or  thick- 
headed shrikes,  are  especially  Australian,  ranging  over  all  the 
r^on,  except  New  Zealand;  while  only  a  single  species  Las 
spread  into  the  Oriental,  and  one  of  doabtful  affinity  to  the 
Ethiopian  region.  The  Artamidje,  or  swallow-shrikes,  are  also 
almost  wholly  confined  to  the  region,  one  species  only  extendii^ 
to  India.  They  range  to  the  Fiji  Islands  on  the  east,  but  only 
to  Tasmania  on  the  south.  These  two  families  must  be  con- 
sidered as  really  peculiar  to  Australia.  The  Podargidce,  or  frog- 
mouths — laige,  thick-billed  goat-suckers — are  strange  birds  very 
characteristic  of  the  Australian  region,  although  they  have 
representatives  in  the  Oriental  and  Neotropical  regions.  Cam- 
pephagidai  (caterpillar-shrikes)  also  abound,  but  they  are  fairly 
represented  both  in  India  and  Africa.  The  Ploceidse,  or  weaver- 
birds,  are  the  finches  of  Australia,  and  present  a  variety  of 
interesting  and  beautiful  forms. 

We  now  come  to  the  kingfishers,  a  cosmopolitan  family  of 
birds,  yet  so  largely  developed  in  the  Australian  region  as  to 
deserve  special  notice.  Two-thu:ds  of  all  the  genera  are  found 
here,  and  no  less  than  10  out  of  the  19  genera  in  the  family  are 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xiii.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  305 

peculiar  to  the  Australian  region.  Another  of  the  universally  dia- 
tributed  femilies  wliicli  have  their  metropolis  here,  is  that  of  the 
Columbidte  or  pigeons.  Three-fourths  of  the  genera  have  represen- 
tatives in  the  Australian  region,  while  two-fifths  of  the  whole  aie 
confined  to  it ;  and  it  possesses  as  many  species  of  pigeons  as  any 
other  two  regions  combined.  It  also  possesses  the  most  remark- 
able forms,  as  exemplified  in  the  great  crowned  pigeons  (Goum) 
and  the  hook-billed  Biduncuhis,  while  the  green  fruit-pigeons 
{Ftilopus)  are  sometimes  adorned  with  colours  vying  with  those 
of  the  gayest  parrots  or  chatterers.  This  enormous  development 
of  a  family  of  birds  so  defenceless  as  the  pigeons,  whose  rude 
nests  expose  their  eggs  and  helpless  young  to  continual  danger, 
may  perhaps  be  correlated,  as  I  have  suggested  elsewhere  (Ibis, 
1865,  p.  366),  with  the  entire  absence  of  monkeys,  cats,  lemurs, 
weasels,  civets  and  other  arboreal  mammals,  which  prey  on  e^s 
and  young  birds.  The  very  prevalent  green  colour  of  the  upper 
part  of  their  plumage,  may  be  due  to  the  need  of  concealment 
from  their  only  enemies, — birds  of  prey ;  and  this  is  rendered 
more  probable  by  the  fact  that  it  is  among  the  pigeons  of  the 
small  islands  of  the  Pacific  (where  hawks  and  their  allies  are  ex- 
ceedingly scarce)  that  we  alone  meet  with  species  whose  entire 
^mnage  is  a  rich  and  conspicuous  yellow.  "Where  the  need  of 
concealment  is  least,  the  brilhancy  of  colour  has  attained  its 
maximum.  We  may  therefore  look  upon  the  genus  Ptilopus, 
with  its  fifty  species  whose  typical  coloration  is  green,  with 
patches  of  bright  blue,  red,  or  yellow  on  the  head  and  breast, 
as  a  special  development  suited  to  the  tropical  portion  of  the 
Australian  region,  to  which  it  is  almost  wholly  confined. 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  sketch  just  given,  that  the  ornitho- 
logical features  of  the  Australian  region  are  almost  as  remark- 
able as  those  presented  by  its  Mammalian  fauna ;  and  from  the 
fidler  development  attained  by  the  aerial  class  of  birds,  much 
more  varied  and  interestizig.  Wone  of  the  other  regions  of  the 
earth  can  offer  us  so  many  families  with  special  points  of 
interest  in  structure,  or  habits,  or  general  relations.  The 
paradise-birds,  the  honeysuekers,  the  brush-tongued  paroquets, 
the  mound-builders,  and  the  cassowaries— all  strictly  peculiar 


by  Google 


396  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

to  the  region — with  such  remarkable  developments  as  we  have 
indicated  in  the  kingfiahera  and  pigeons,  place  the  Australian 
region  in  the  first  rank  for  the  variety,  singularity,  and  interest 
of  its  birds,  and  only  second  to  South  America  as  regards 
numbers  and  beauty, 

Beptiles. — In  Eeptiles  the  peculiarity  of  the  main  Australian 
r^ion  is  less  marked,  although  the  fauna  is  sufficiently  distinct. 
There  is  no  family  of  snakes  confined  to  the  region,  but  many 
peculiar  genera  of  the  families  Pythonidse  and  Elapidse.  About 
two-thirds  of  the  Australian  snakes  belong  to  the  latter  family, 
and  are  poisonous ;  so  that  although  the  Crotalidte  and  Viperidas 
are  absent,  there  are  perhaps  a  larger  proportion  of  poisonous 
to  harmless  snakes  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.  Accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Gerard  Krefft  the  proportion  varies  considerably  in  the 
different  colonies.  In  Victoria,  New  South  Wales,  and  Queens- 
land the  proportion  is  about  two  to  one ;  in  West  Australia 
three  to  one ;  and  in  South  AustraKa  six  to  one.  In  Tasmania 
there  are  only  3  species  and  all  are  poisonous.  The  number 
of  species,  as  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  seems  to  increase 
with  temperature.  The  3  in  Tasmania  have  increased  to  12 
in  Victoria,  15  in  South  Australia  and  the  same  in  "West 
Auflt]'alia ;  31  in  New  South  "Wales,  and  42  in  sub-tropical 
Queensland. 

The  lizards  of  Australia  have  lately  been  catalogued  by  Dr. 
Grunther  in  the  concludmg  part  of  the  "  Voyage  of  the  Erebus 
and  Terror,"  issued  in  1875.  They  belong  to  8  families,  3  of 
which  are  peculiar ;  57  genera  of  which  36  are  peculiar ;  and 
about  140  species,  aU  but  2  or  3  of  which  are  peculiar.  The 
scinks  and  geckoes  form  the  great  bulk  of  the  Australian 
lizards,  with  ai  few  Agamidfe,  OymnopthalmidEc,  and  Varanidie. 
The  three  peculiar  families  are  the  Pygopodidte,  Aprasiidaj  and 
LiahdEe;  comprising  only  4  genera  and  7  species.  The  above 
all  belong  to  Australia  proper.  Those  of  the  other  sub-regions 
are  few  in  number  and  will  be  noticed  under  their  respective 
ioealities.  They  will  perhaps  bring  up  the  number  of  genera  to 
70.  West  and  South  Australia  seem  to  offer  much  peculiarity 
in  their  lizards;  these  districts  possessing  12  peculiar  genera. 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTRALrAN  REGION.  397 

while   a  much  smaller  number  are  confined  to  the  East  and 
South-East,  or  to  the  North. 

Among  the  fresh-water  tnrtles  of  the  family  Chelydidte 
there  are  three  peculiar  genem—Ckelodina,  Ghelemys,  and  Elseya, 
all  from  Australia. 

Amphibia. — No  tailed  amphibians  are  known  from  the  whole 
region,  but  no  less  than  eleven  of  the  families  of  taU-less  Batra- 
chians  (toads  and  frogs)  are  known  to  inhabit  some  part  or 
other  of  it.  A  peculiar  family  {Xenorhinidje),  consisting  of 
a  single  species,  is  found  in  New  Guinea;  the  true  toads 
(Bufonidte)  are  only  represented  by  a  single  species  of  a  pecu- 
har  genus  in  Australia,  and  by  a  Bufo  in  Celebes.  Nine  of  the 
families  are  represented  in  Australia  itself,  and  the  following 
genera  are  peculiar  to  it  -.—Pseudc^hrpne  (Phryniscidse),  Paahy- 
hairaclms,  and  Chelydobatraehvs  (EngyetomydEe) ;  Hetioporus 
\Alytid£e) ;  Pelodyras  and  Ghirodyras  (Pelodryadte) ;  Notaden 
(Bufonidte). 

Fresh-waier  Fish — There  is  only  one  peculiar  family  of  fresh- 
water fishes, in  this  region — the  Gadopsid^ — represented  by  a 
single  genus  and  species.  The  other  species  of  AustraKa  belong 
to  the  families  TrachinidEe,  Atherinidje,  Mtigillidte,  SiluridEe, 
Homalopterte,  HaplochitonidEe,  Galaxidas,  Osteoglossidte,  Sym- 
branchidffi,  and  Sirenoidei ;  most  of  the  genera  being  peculiar. 
The  lai^e  and  widely-distributed  families,  CyprinodontidEe  and 
C3T)rinidEe,  are  absent.  The  most  remarkable  fish  is  the  recently 
discovered  Ceratodus,  allied  to  the  L&pidosir&n  of  Tropical 
America,  and  Protopterws  of  Tropical  Africa,  the  three  species 
constituting  the  Sub-class  Dipnoi,  remains  of  which  have  been 
found  fossil  in  the  Triassic  foiination. 

of  Australian  Vertehrata. — In  order  to  complete 
1  sketch  of  Australian  zoology,  and  to  afford  materials 
for  comparison  with  other  regions,  we  will  here  summarize  the 
distribution  of  Vertebrata  in  the  entire  Australian  region,  as 
given  in  detail  in  the  tables  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.  When 
an  undoubted  Oriental  family  or  genus  extends  to  Celebes  only 
we  do  not  count  it  as  belonging  to  the  Australian  region,  that 
island  being  so  very  anomalous  and  intermediate  in  character. 


by  Google 


898  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHT.  [part  hi. 

The  Australian  region,  then,  possesses  examples  of  18  families 
of  Mammalia,  8  of  which  are  peculiar  ;  71  of  Birds,  16  being 
peculiar;  31  of  Reptilea,  4  being  peculiar ;  11  of  Amphibia,  with 
1  peculiar ;  and  11  of  Fresh-water  fish,  with  1  peculiar.  In  ail, 
142  families  of  Vertebrates,  30  of  which  are  almost  or  quite 
confined  to  it,  or  between  one-fourth  and  one-flfthof  the  whole 
□umber. 

The  genera  of  MammaliSi  occurring  within  the  limits  of  this 
region  are  70,  of  which  45  are  almost,  or  quite,  confined  to  it. 

Of  Land-Biids  there  are  296  genera,  196  of  which  are  equally 
limited.  The  proportion  is  in  both  cases  very  nearly  five- 
eighths. 

This  shows  a  considerable  deficiency  both  in  families  of  Ver- 
tebrates and  genera  of  Mammalia,  as  compared  with  the  Oriental 
and  Ethiopian  regions ;  while  in  genera  of  Birds  it  is  a  little 
superior  to  the  latter  in  total  numbers,  and  considerably  so  in 
the  proportion  of  peculiar  types. 

Swpposed  Land  Connectiim  hetween  Aiisiralia  and  South  America. 

We  may  now  consider  how  far  the  different  classes  and  orders 
of  vertebrates  afford  indications  that  during  past  ages  there 
has  been  some  closer  connection  between  Australia  and  South 
America  than  that  which  now  exists. 

Among  Mammalia  we  have  the  remarkable  fact  of  a  group 
of  marsupials  inhabiting  South  America,  and  extending  even 
into  the  temperate  regions  of  North  America,  while  they  are 
found  in  no  other  part  of  the  globe  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
Australian  region ;  and  this  has  often  been  held  to  be  evidence 
of  a  former  connection  between  the  two  countries.  A  prelimi- 
nary objection  to  this  view  is,  that  the  opossums  seem  to  be 
rather  a  tropical  group,  only  one  species  reaching  as  far  as  42° 
south  latitude  on  the  west  coast  of  South  America ;  but  what- 
ever evidence  we  have  which  seems  to  require  a  former  union 
of  these  countries  shows  that  it  took  place,  if  at  all,  towards  their 
cold  southern  limits,  the  tropical  faunas  on  the  whole  showing 
no  similarity.  This  is  not  a  very  strong  objection,  since  climates 
may  have  changed  in  the  south  to  as  great  an  extent  aa  we 


by  Google 


CBAP.  xiir,]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  KEGION.  22^ 

know  they  have  in  the  north.  Perhaps  a  more  important  con- 
sideration is,  that  Didelphys  is  a  family  type  unknown  in  Aus- 
tralia ;  and  this  implies  that  the  point  of  common  origin  is  very 
remote  in  geological  tima  But  the  most  conclusive  fact  is  that 
in  the  Eocene  and  Miocene  periods  this  very  family,  Didel- 
phyidte,  existed  in  Europe,  while  it  only  appeared  in  America 
in  the  Post-pliocene  or  perhaps  the  Pliocene  period ;  so  that  it 
is  really  an  Old- World  group,  which,  though  long  since  extinct 
in  its  birthplace,  has  survived  in  America,  to  which  country  it 
is  a  comparatively  recent  emigrant.  Primeval  forms  of  marsu- 
pials we  know  abounded  in  Europe  duiing  much  of  the  Secondary 
epoch,  and  no  doubt  supplied  Australia  with  the  ancestors  of 
the  present  fauna.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  in  this  case  there 
is  not  a  particle  of  evidence  for  any  former  union  between 
Australia  and  South  America ;  while  it  is  almost  demonstrated 
that  both  derived  their  marsupials  from  a  common  source  in  the 
northern  hemisphere. 

Birds  offer  us  more  numerous  but  less  clearly  defined  cases  of 
this  kind.  Among  Passeres,  the  wonderi'ul  lyre  bird  (Menura) 
is  believed  by  some  ornithologists  to  be  decidedly  alUed  to  the 
South  American  Pteroptochidie,  while  others  maintain  that 
it  is  altogether  peculiar,  and  has  no  such  affinity.  The  Aus- 
tralian Pachycephalidfe  have  also  been  supposed  to  find  their 
nearest  allies  in  the  American  Vireonidte,  but  this  is,  perhaps, 
equally  problematical.  That  the  mound-makers  (Megapodiidte) 
of  tlie  Australian  region  are  more  nearly  allied  to  the  Soiith 
American  curassows  {CracidEe)  than  to  any  other  family,  is  per- 
haps better  established ;  but  if  proved,  it  is  probably  due,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  marsupials,  to  the  survival  of  an  ancient  and 
once  wide-spread  type,  and  thus  lends  no  tupport  to  the  theory 
of  a  land  connection  between  the  two  regions.  A  recent  author, 
Professor  Garrod,  classes  Phaps  and  other  Australian  genera  of 
pigeons  along  with  Zenaida  and  allied  South  American  forms ; 
but  here  again  the  aflinity,  if  it  exists,  is  so  remote  that  the  ex- 
planation already  given  will, suffice  to  account  for  it.  There 
remain  only  the  penguins  of  the  genus  Eiidyptes;  and  these 
have  almost  certainly  passed  from  one  region  to  the  other,  but 


by  Google 


400  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [part  ui. 

no  actual  land  connection  is  required  for  birds  which  can  cross 
considerable  arms  of  the  aea. 

Eeptiles  again  seem  to  offer  no  more  support  to  the  view  than 
do  mammalia  or  birds.  Among  snakes  there  are  no  families  in 
common  that  have  not  a  very  wide  distribution.  Among  hzards 
the  Gymnopthalmidce  are  the  only  family  that  favour  the 
notion,  since  they  are  found  in  Australia  and  South  America, 
but  not  in  the  Oriental  region.  Yet  they  occur  in  both  the 
Palfearctic  and  Ethiopian  regions,  and  their  distribution  is  alto- 
gether too  erratic  to  be  of  any  value  in  a  case  of  this  kind ; 
and  the  same  remarks  -apply  to  the  tortoises  of  the  family 
Chelydidse. 

The  Amphibia,  however,  furnish  us  with  some  more  decided 
facts.  "We  have  first  the  family  of  tree-frogs,  Pelodryade,  con- 
fined to  the  two  regions ,  Litoria,  a  genus  of  the  family  Hyhdie 
peculiar  lo  Australia,  but  with  one  species  in  Paraguay  ;  and  in 
the  family  Discoglossidfe,  the  Australian  genus  Chw-deptes  has 
its  nearest  ally  in  the  Chdian  genus  Galyptocefhalus. 

Fresh-water  fishes  give  yet  clearer  evidence.  Three  groups  are 
exclusively  found  in  these  two  regions ;  Aphritis,  a  fresh-water 
genus  of  Trachinidas,  has  one  species  in  Tasmania  and  two 
others  in  Patagonia;  the  HaploohitonidEe  inhabit  only  Terra  del 
Fuego,  the  Falkland  Islands  and  South  Australia;  while  the 
genus  Galaxias  (forming  the  family  Galaxidse)  is  confined  to 
South  Temperate  America,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand.  We 
have  also  the  genus  Osteoglossum  confined  to  the  tropical 
rivers  of  Eastern  South  America,  the  Indo-Malay  Islands  and 
Australia. 

It  is  important  here  to  notice  that  the  heat-loving  Eeptilia 
afford  hardly  any  indications  of  close  affinity  between  the  two 
regions,  while  the  cold-enduring  amphibia  and  fresh-water 
6sh,  offer  them  in  abundance.  Taking  this  fact  in  con- 
nection with  the  absence  of  all  indications  of  close  afflnity 
among  the  mammalia  and  terrestrial  birds,  the  conclusion  seems 
inevitable  that  there  has  been  no  land-connection  between  the 
two  regions  within  the  period  of  existing  species,  genera,  or 
families.     Yet  some  interchange  of  amphibia  and  fresh-water 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xiii.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGIOH.  401 

fialies,  as  of  plants  and  insects,  has  undoubtedly  occurred',  but 
this  has  been  effected  by  other  means.  If  we  look  at  a  globe 
we  see  at  once  how  this  interchange  may  have  taken  place. 
Immediately  south  of  Cape  Horn  we  have  the  South  Shetland 
Islands  and  Graliam's  land,  which  is  not  improbably  continuous, 
or  nearly  so,  with  South  Victoria  land  immediately  to  the  south 
of  New  Zealand.  The  intervening  space  is  partly  occupied 
by  the  Auckland,  Campbell,  and  Macquaries'  Islands,  which, 
there  is  reason  to  beheve  are  the  relics  of  a  great  southern  ex- 
tension of  New  Zealand,  At  all  events  they  form  points  which 
would  aid  the  transmission  of  many  organisms ;  and  the  farthest 
of  the  Macquaries'  group.  Emerald  Island,  is  only  600  miles  from 
the  outlying  islets  of  Victoria  land.  The  ova  of  fish  will  survive 
a  considerable  time  in  the  air,  and  the  successful  transmission  of 


salmon  ova  to  New  Zealand  packed 


naight  travel  on  icebergs.     Now  there  is  evidently  some 


in  ice,  shows  how  far  they 


led  moderate  distances,  from 
distinct  river  systems  often 
have  pools 


by  which  ova  or  young  fi 
the  fact  that  remote  alpine  lakes  and 
have  the  same  species.  Glaciers  and  i( 
of  fr^h  water  on  their  surfaces ;  and  whatever  cause  transmits  fish 
to  an  isolated  pond  might  occasionally  stock  these  pools,  and  by 
this  means  introduce  the  fishes  of  one  southern  island  into 
another.  Batrachiaus,  which  are  equally  patient  of  cold,  might 
be  transported  by  similar  means ;  while,  as  Mr.  Darwin  has  so 
well  shown,  (Ongin  of  Species,  6th  Ed.  p.  345)  there  are  various 
known  modes  by  which  plants  might  be  transmitted,  and  we 
need  not  therefore  be  surprised  that  botanists  find  a  much 
greater  similarity  hetween  the  production  of  the  several  Southern 
lands  and  islands,  than  do  zoologiste.  It  is  important  to  notice 
that,  however  this  intercommunication  was  effected,  it  has  con- 
tinued down  to  the  epoch  of  existing  species ;  for  Dr.  Giinther 
finds  the  same  species  of  fresh-water  fish  (Galaxias  attenuatus) 
inhabiting  Tasmania,  New  Zealand,  the  Falkland  Islands,  and 
Temperate  South  America ;  while  another  species  is  common  to 
New  Zealand  and  the  Auckland  Islands.  We  cannot  believe 
that  a  land  connection  has  existed  between  all  these  remote 
lands  within  the  period  of  existence  of  this  one  species  of  fish. 


by  Google 


402  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [fabt  hi. 

not  6nly  oq  account  of  what  we  know  of  the  pennanence  of 
continents  and  deep  oceans,  but  because  such  a  connection  nmat 
have  led  to  much  more  numerous  and  important  cases  of  simi- 
larity of  natiu-al  productions  than  we  actually  find.  And  if 
within  the  hfe  of  species  such  interchange  may  have  taken 
place  across  seas  of  greater  or  less  extent,  still  more  easy  is  it 
to  understand,  how,  within  the  life  of  gevera  and  families,  a  num- 
ber of  such  interchanges  may  have  occurred ;  yet  always  limited 
to  those  groups  whose  conditions  of  life  render  transmission 
possible.  Had  an  actual  land  connection  existed  within  the 
temperate  zone,  or  during  a  period  of  warmth  in  the  Antarctic 
regions,  there  would  have  been  no  such  strict  limitations  to  the 
inter-migration  of  animals.  It  may  be  held  to  support  the  view 
that  floating  ice  has  had  some  share  in  the  transmission  of  fish 
and  amphibia,  when  we  find  that  in  the  case  of  the  narrow 
tropical  sea  dividing  Borneo  from  Celebes  and  the  Moluccas,  no 
proportionate  amount  of  transmission  has  taken  place,  but 
numerous  species,  genera,  and  whole  families,  terminate  abruptly 
at  what  we  have  other  reasons  for  believing  to  be  the  furthest 
limits  of  an  ancient  continent.  We  can  hardly  suppose,  how- 
ever, that  this  mode  of  transmission  would  have  sufficed  for 
such  groups  as  tree-frogs,  which  are  inhabitants  of  the  more 
temperate  or  even  warm  portions  of  the  two  southern  lands. 
Some  of  these  cases  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  the  supposi- 
tion of  a  considerable  extent  of  land  in  the  South-Temperate  and 
Antarctic  regions  now  submerged,  and  by  a  warm  or  temperate 
climate  analogous  to  that  which  prevailed  in  the  Arctic  regions 
during  some  part  of  the  Miocene  epoch;  while  others  may  be 
due  to  cases  of  survival  in  the  two  areas  of  once  wide-spread 
groups,  a  view  supported  in  the  case  of  the  Amphibia  by  the 
erratic  manner  in  which  many  of  the  groups  are  spread  over 
the  globe. 

From  an  examination  of  the  facts  presented  by  the  vari- 
ous classes  of  vertebrates,  we  ate,  then,  led  to  the  conclusion, 
that  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  former  land-connection  be, 
tween  the  Australian  and  Neotropical  regions ;  but  that  the 
various  scattered   resemblances   in    their  natural  productions 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  403 

that  undoubtedly  occur,  are  probably  due  to  three  distinct 
causes. 

Pirst,  we  have  the  American  Didelphyidie,  among  Mammals, 
and  the  Cracidte,  among  birds,  allied  respectively  to  the  Marsu- 
pials and  the  Megapodiidas  of  Australia.  This  is  probably  more 
a  coiiicidenee  than  an  affinity,  due  to  the  preservation  of  ancient 
wide-spread  types  in  two  remote  areas,  each  cut  oif  from  the 
great  noithem  continental  masses,  in  which  higher  forms  were 
evolved  leading  to  the  extinction  of  the  lower  types.  In  each 
of  these  southern  isolated  lands  the  original  type  would  undergo 
a  special  development ;  in  the  one  case  suited  to  an  arboreal 
existence,  in  the  other  to  a  hfe  among  arid  plains. 

The  second  case  is  that  of  the  tree-frogs,  and  the  genus  Osleo- 
glosmm  among  fishes ;  and  is  most  likely  due  to  the  extension 
and  approximation  of  the  two  southern  continents,  and  the  exist- 
ence of  some  intermediate  lands,  during  a  warm  period  when 
facilities  would  be  afforded  for  the  transmission  of  a  few  or- 
ganisms by  the  causes  which  have  led  to  the  exceptional  diffusion 
of  fresh-water  productions  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  As  however 
Osteoglossuw,  occurs  also  in  the  Sunda  Islands,  this  may  be  a  case 
of  survival  of  a  once  wide-spread  group. 

The  third  case  is  that  of  the  same  genera  and  even  species  of 
fish,  and  perhaps  of  frogs,  in  the  two  countries ;  which  may 
be  due  to  transmission  from  island  to  island  by  the  aid  of  float- 
ing ice,  with  or  without  the  assistance  of  more  intervening 
lands  than  now  exist. 

Having  arrived  at  these  conclusions  from  a  consideration  of 
the  vertebrata,  we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  examine  how  far 
the  same  causes  will  explain,  or  agree  with,  the  distribution  of  the 
invertebrate  groups,  or  elucidate  any  special  difiiculties  we  may 
meet  with  in  the  relations  of  the  sub-regions. 

Insects. 

The  insects  of  the  Australian  region  are  as  varied,  and  in 

some  respects  as  peculiar  as  its  higher  forms  of  life.     As  we 

have  already  indicated  in  our  sketch  of  the  Oriental  region,  a 

vast  mtmber  of  forms  inhabit   the   Anstro-Malay  sub-region 


by  Google 


404  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

which  are  absent  from  Australia  proper.  Such  of  these  as  are 
common  to  the  Malay  archipelago  as  a  whole,  have  been  already 
noted;  we  shall  here  confine  ourselves  more  especially  to  the 
groups  peculiar  to  the  region,  which  are  almost  all  either 
Australian  or  Austixj-Malayan,  the  Pacific  Islands  and  New 
Zealand  being  very  poor  in  insect  life 

Lepidoptera. — Australia  itself  is  poor  in  hutterflies,  except  in 
its  northern  and  more  tropical  parts,  where  green  OmithopUrw 
and  several  other  Malayan  forms  occur.  In  South  Australia 
there  are  less  than  thirty-five  species,  whereas  in  Queensland  there 
are  probably  over  a  hundred.  The  peculiar  Australian  forms 
are  few.  In  the  family  Satyridte,  Xeniea  and  Het&i-onymfha, 
with  Hypocista  extending  to  New  Guinea ;  among  the  LycEC- 
nidse,  Ogyris  and  JJtica,  are  confined  to  Australia  proper,  and 
Hypoclwysops  to  the  region;  and  in  Papilionidse,  the  remark- 
able Euryeus  is  confined  to  Australia,  but  is  alhed  to  Euryades, 
a  genus  found  in  Temperate  South  America  (La  Plata),  and  to 
the  Pamassius  of  the  North-Temperate  zone. 

The  Austro- Malay  sub-region  has  more  peculiar  forms,  Hama- 
dryas,  a  genus  of  Danaidffi,  approximates  to  some  South  American 
forms ;  Hyades  and  Hyantis  are  remarkable  gix)ups  of  Morphidse; 
Mynes  and  ProtkoS  are  fine  Nymphalidje,  the  former  extending  to 
Queensland ;  Dicallaneura,  a  genus  of  Eiycinidce,  and  Elodina, 
of  Pieridje,  are  also  peculiar  forms.  The  fine  Mgeus  group  of 
Papilio,  and  Priamus  group  of  Omiikoptera,  also  belong  exclu- 
sively to  this  r^on, 

Xois  is  confined  to  the  Fiji  Islands,  Bletogona  to  Celehes,  and 
Acropthalmia  to  New  Zealand,  all  genera  of  Satyrid^.  Seven- 
teen genera  in  aU  are  confined  to  the  Australian  region. 

Among  the  Sphingina,  Pollanimis,  a  genus  of  ZygEenidse,  is 
Australian ;  also  four  genera  of  Castniidse — Synemon,  Euschemon, 
Damias,  and  Cocytia,  the  latter  being  confined  to  the  Papuan 
islands.  The  occurrence  of  this  otherwise  purely  South  American 
family  in  the  Australian  region,  as  well  as  the  affinity  of  Euryeus 
and  Euryades  noticed  above,  is  interesting ;  hut  as  we  have  seen 
that  the  genera  and  famihes  of  insects  are  more  pennanent  than 
those  of  the  higher  animals,  and  as  the  groups  in  question  are 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xm.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  EBGION.  405 

eonflned  to  the  wanner  parts  of  both  countries,  they  may  be  best 
explained  as  cases  of  survival  of  a  once  wide-spread  type,  and 
may  probably  date  back  to  the  period  when  the  ancestors  of  the 
Marsupials  and  Megapodii  were  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 

Coh(yptera. — The  same  remark  applies  here  as  in  the  Lepidop- 
tera,  respecting  the  affinity  of  the  Austro-Malay  fauna  to  that  of 
Indo-Malay  Islands;  but  Australia  proper  is  much  richer  in 
beetles  than  in  butterflies,  and  exhibits  much  more  speciality. 
Although  the  other  two  parts  of  the  Australian  region  (Polynesia 
and  New  Zealand)  are  very  poor  in  beetles,  it  will,  nevertheless, 
on  the  whole  compare  favourably  with  any  of  the  regions  except 
the  very  richest. 

Cicindelid^e  are  not  very  abundant.  Therates  and  Tricondyla 
are  the  characteristic  genera  in  Austro-Malaya,  but  are  absent 
from  Australia,  where  we  have  Tetraeha  as  the  most  character- 
istic genus,  with  one  species  of  Megacepha,la  and  two  of  IHstyp- 
sidera,  &  genua  which  is  found  also  in  New  Zealand  and  some 
of  the  Pacific  Mands.  The  occurrence  of  the  South  American 
genus,  Tetracha,  may  perhaps  be  due  to  a  direct  transfer  by 
means  of  intervening  lands  during  the  warm  southern  period; 
but  considering  the  permanence  of  coleopterous  forms  (as  shown 
by  the  Miocene  species  belonging  almost  wholly  to  existii^ 
genera),  it  seems  more  probable  that  it.  is  a  case  of  the  survival 
of  a  once  wide-spread  group, 

Carabidfe  are  well  represented,  there  being  no  less  than  94 
peculiar  genera,  of  which  19  are  confined  to  New  Zealand.  The 
Australian  genera  of  most  importance  are  Cannum  (68  species), 
Promecoderus  (27  species),  Silpkomorpha  (32  species),  Adelotopus 
(27  species),  Scaraphites  (25  species),  Noionomvs  (18  species), 
6nathoxj/s  (12  species),  Eutoma  {9  species),  Enigma  (16  species), 
Lacordairea  (8  species),  Famborus  (8  species),  Gatadrom/M  (4  spe- 
cies),— the  latter  found  in  Australia  and  Celebes.  Common  to 
Australia  and  New  Zealand  are  Meeodema  (14  species),  Monialo- 
soina  (32  species),  Iliarochih  (12  species),  and  Scopodes  (5  species). 
The  laiger  genera,  confined  to  New  Zealand  only,  are  Metaglyinnia 
(8  species),  and  Demeirida  (3  species).  The  curious  genus 
PsmdOTiiorpha  (10  species),  is  divided  between  California,  Brazil, 


by  Google 


406  ZOOLOaiCAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

and  Australia ;  and  the  Australian  genera,  Adehtopus,  Silpho- 
■morpha,  and  Sphallomorpha,  form  with  it  a  distinct  tribe  of  Cole- 
optera.  These  being  all  confined  to  the  -warmer  t^ons,  and  having 
80  scattered  a  distribution,  are  no  doubt  the  relics  of  a  wide- 
spread group.  The  Australian  genus,  Promecoderus,  has,  how- 
ever, closely  allied  genera  {Casp-elius  and  its  allies),  in  Chili  and 
Pat^onia;  while  two  small  genera  confined  to  the  Auckland 
Islands  (Heierodactyliis  and  Pnsta,ncydus)  are  allied  to  a  group 
found  only  in  Terra-del-Fuego  and  the  Falkland  Islands, 
(Migadops) ;  and  in  these  cases  we  may  well  believe  that  a  direct 
transmission  has  taken  place  by  some  of  the  various  means 
already  indicated. 

In  LueaiiidEe,  Australia  is  only  modertitely  rich,  having  7 
peculiar  genera.  The  most  important  are  Ceratognathus  and  Ehys- 
sonotm,  confined  to  Australia ;  Lissotes  to  Australia  and  New 
Zealand ;  Lamprvma  to  Australia  and  Papua.  Mitophylhis  and 
Dendrdblax  inhabit  New  Zealand  only ;  while  Syndesus  is  found 
in  Australia,  New  Caledonia,  and  tropical  Sonth  America. 

The  beautiful  Cetoniidte  are  poorly  repA^aented,  there  being 
only  3  peculiar  genera  y—Se/tizorkina,  maiidy  Australian,  but 
extending  to  Papua  and  the  Moluccas ;  Anaeamptorhina,  con- 
fined to  New  Guinea,  and  Stemoplus  to  Celebes.  Lomapt&ra  is 
very  characteristic  of  the  Austro-Malay  Islands.  This  almost 
tropical  family  shows  no  approximations  between  the  Austrahan 
and  Neotropical  faunas. 

In  Euprestidte,  the  Australian  region  is  the  richest,  possessing 
no  less  than  47  genera,  of  which  20  are  peculiar  to  it.  Of  these,  15 
are  peculiar  to  Australia  itself,  the  most  important  being  Stig- 
modera  (212  species),  Ethon  (13  species),  and  Kasdo  (3  species) ; 
Cisseis  (17  species),  and  the  magnificent  Otilodema  (3  species), 
are  common  to  Australia  and  Austro-Malaya ,  while  Samhus 
(10  species)  and  Anthaxomorpha  (4  species),  with  some  smaller 
groups,  are  peculiarly  Austro-Malayan.  In  this  family  o(.,our 
several  points  of  contact  with  the  Neotropical  region  Siigino- 
dera  is  said  to  have  a  species  in  Chili,  while  theie  are  undoubt- 
edly several  allied  genera  in  Chili  and  South  Temperate  Ameiica 
'I'he  genus  Curin  has  5  Australian  and  3  Chilian  species   and 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xin.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  407 

Ack&rusia  has  2  species  in  Brazil,  1  in  Australia.  These  re- 
semblances may  probably  bave  arisen  from  intercommunication 
during  the  warm  southern  period,  when  floating  timber  would 
occasionaUy  transmit  a  few  larvse  of  this  family  from  island  to 
island  across  the  antarctic  seas.  When  the  cold  period  returned, 
they  would  spread  northward,  and  become  more  or  less  modified 
under  the  new  physical  conditions  and  organic  competition,  to 
which  they  were  subjected. 

We  now  come  to  the  very  important  group  of  Longicoms,  in 
which  the  Australian  region  as  a  whole,  is  very  rich,  possessing 
360  genera,  of  which  263  are  peculiar  to  it.  Of  these  about  50 
are  confined  to  the  Austro-Malay  Islands,  12  to  New  Zealand, 
and  the  remainder  to  Australia  proper  with  Tasmania.  Of  the 
genera  confined  to,  or  highly  characteristic  of  Australia,  the 
following  are  the  most  important  : — OneriKypUtes,  belonging  to 
the  PrionidEe ;  Fhoracantha,  to  the  Cerambycidfe ;  Zygocera, 
Hebeeenis,  Sympkpletes,  and  Rhytidophora,  to  the  Lamiidse. 
Confined  to  the  Austro-Malay  Islands  are  TetMonea  (Ceramby- 
cidte)  :  Imesistemua,  Arrhenotvs,  Micraeantha,  and  Sybra 
(LamiidEc) ;  but  there  are  also  such  Malayan  genera  as  Batomra 
Gnoma,  Praonciha,  and  Spkenura,  which  are  very  abundant  in 
the  Austro-Malay  sub-r^on.  A  species  of  each  of  the  Austra- 
lian genera^  Zygocera,  SylUtus,  and  Pseudocsfphalus,  is  said  to 
occur  in  Chili,  and  one  of  the  tropical  American  genus,  ITamma- 
tocluerus,  in  tropical  Australia ;  an  amount  of  resemblance 
which,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Buprestidte,  may  be  imputed 
to  trans-oceanic  migration  during  the  Southern  warm  period. 
This  concludes  our  illustrations  of  the  distribution  of  some  of 
the  more  important  groups  of  Australian  insects  ;  and  it  wQl  be 
admitted  that  we  have  not  met  with  any  such  an  amount  of 
identity  with  the  fauna  of  Temperate  South  America,  as  to 
require  us  to  modify  the  conclusions  we  arrived  at  from  a  eon- 
sideratiou  of  the  vertebrate  groups, 

Land-Shells. — The  distribution  of  many  of  the  larger  genera 
of  land-shells  is  very  erratic,  while  others  are  exceedingly  re- 
stricted, so  that  it  requires  an  experienced  conchologist  to 
investigate  the  affinities  of  the  several  groups,  and  thus  work 


by  Google 


408  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHV.  [paet  hi. 

out  the  important  facta  of  distribution.  AU  that  can  be  done 
here  is  to  not*  the  characteristic  and  peculiar  genera,  and  any 
others  presentii^  features  of  special  interest. 

In  the  great  family  of  the  snails  (Helieidfe),  the  only  genera 
strictly  confined  to  the  region  are,  Fartida,  now  containing  above 
100  species,  and  ranging  over  the  Pacific  from  the  Solomon  Isles 
on  the  west,  to  the  Sandwich  Islands  and  Tahiti  on  the  east ; 
and  Achati'ndla,  now  containing  nearly  300  species,  and  wholly 
confined  to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  Pftifferia  is  confined  to  the 
Philippine  Islands  and  Moluccas ;  GooMostyla  to  the  Indo-Malay 
Islands  and  Australia ;  BuUmus  occurs  in  most  of  the  insular 
groups,  including  New  Zealand,  hut  is  absent  from  Australia. 

Among  the  AeicuUdEe,  the  widely-scattered  Tmncatella  is  the 
only  genus  represented.  Among  Diplommatinidte,  DiploTn/matina 
is  the  characteristic  genus,  ranging  over  the  whole  r^on, 
and  found  elsewhere  aa  far  as  India,  with  one  species  in 
Trinidad.  The  extensive  family  Cyclostomidte,  is  not  well 
represented.  Seven  genera  reach  the  Austro-Malay  Islands, 
one  of  which,  Megistoma,  is  confined  to  the  Philippines,  Moluc- 
cas, New  Caledonia,  and  the  Marshall  Islands,  Omphalotropis 
is  the  most  characteristic  genus,  ranging  over  the  whole  region ; 
Gailia  is  confined  to  the  PhDippines,  Ceram,  and  Australia; 
Eealia  to  New  Zealand  and  the  Marq^uesas.  The  genus  Helicma 
alone  represents  the  HeUcinidfe,  and  is  found  in  the  whole  region 
except  New  Zealand.  The  number  of  species  known  from 
Australia  is  perhaps  about  300;  while  the  Polynesian  sub-region, 
according  to  Mr.  Harper  Pease,  contains  over  600  ;  the  Austro- 
Malay  Islands  will  furnish  probably  200 ;  and  New  Zealand 
about  100 ;  making  a  total  of  about  1,200  species  for  the  whole 
region, 

Australian  Sub-kegions. 

Few  of  the  great  zoological  regions  comprise  four  divisions  so 
strongly  contrasted  as  these,  or  which  present  so  many  interesting 
problems.  We  have  first  the  Austro-Malay  Islands,  an  ecLuatorial 
forestr-region  teeming  with  varied  and  beautiful  forms  of  life; 
next  we  have  Australia  itself,  an  island-continent  with  its  satellite 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  409 

Taamania,  both  tropical  and  temperate,  but  for  the  moat  part 
arid,  yet  abounding  in  peculiar  forma  in  all  the  classes  of  animals;, 
then  come  the  Polynesian  Islands,  another  luxuriant  region  of 
tropical  vegetation,  yet  excessively  poor  in  most  of  the  higher 
groups  of  anim.als  as  well  as  in  some  of  the  lower;  and;  lastly, 
we  have  New  Zealand,  a  pair  of  temperate  forest-clad  islands 
far  in  the  southern  ocean,  with  a  very  limited  yet  strange  and 
almost  wholly  peculiar  fauna.  "We  have  now  to  consider  the 
general  features  and  internal  relations  of  tho  faunas  of  each  of 
these  sub-regions,  together  with  any  external  relations  which 
have  not  been  discussed  while  treating  the  region  as  a  whole. 

/,  Austro-Malayan  Suh^egion.. 

The  central  mass  on  which  almost  every"  part  of  this  sub- 
region  is  clearly  dependent,  is  the  great  island  of  New  Guinea, 
inhabited  by  the  Papuan  race  of  mankind ;  and  this,  with  the 
surrounding  islands,  which  are  separated  ftom  it  by  shallow  seas 
and  possess  its  most  marked  zoological  features,  are  termed  Papua. 
A  little  further  away  lie  the  important  groups  of  the  Moluccas 
on  one  side  and  the  Eastern  Papuan  Islands  on  the  other,  which 
possess  a  fauna  mainly  derivative  from  New  Guinea,  yet  wanting 
many  of  its  distinctive  types  ;  and,  in  the  case  of  the  Moluccas 
possessing  many  groups  which  are  not  Australian,  but  derived 
from  the  adjacent  Oriental  region.  To  the  south  of  these  we 
have  the  Timor  group,  whose  fauna  is  clearly  derivative,  from 
Australia,  from  Java,  and  from  the  Moluccas.  Lastly  comes 
Celebes,  whose  fauna  is  most  complex  and  puzzling,  and,  so  far 
as  we  can  jnt^e,  not  fundamentailly  derivative  from  any  of  the 
surrounding  islands. 

PapviO;  or  the  New  Guinea  Group. — Kew  Guinea  is  very 
deficient  in  Mammalia  as  compared  with  Australia,  though  tliis 
apparent  poverty  may,  in  part,  depend  on  our  very  scanty  know- 
ledge. As  yet  only  four  of  the  Australian  famihes  of  Marsupials 
axe  known  to  inhabit  it,  with  nine  genera,  several  of  which 
are  pecuhar.  It  also  possesses  a  peculiar  form  of  wild  pig; 
but  as  yet  no  other  non-marsupial  terrestrial  mammal  has  been 
discovered,  except   a  rat,   described  by   Dr.   Gray   as   Jlromys 

Vol.  I.— 28 


by  Google 


410  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [part  iir. 

arumsis,  but  about  the  locality  of  which  there  seems  some 
doubt^  Omitting  bats,  of  which  our  knowledge  is  very  imperfect, 
the  Papuan  Mammals  are  as  follows  : — 


FBinily. 

Spefi 

Suid«      

Sus 

Eastern  iimit  of  the  gen 

Muridffi 

Uromys 

1 

Aru  Islands  (?) 

Dasyimdje     ... 

Phaicogak 
Awteehirms 

1 
1 

"             '.'.', 

1 

To  Nortl  Australia  only. 

.    Myoietis 

A™  islands  only. 

Peramelidte    ... 

Permieks 

1 

New  Guinea  only. 

Macropodidse... 

DendTolagus 

2 

New  Guinea  only. 

.    Diyrcopm 

3 

Papua  only. 

Phakngistid*.. 

.     Oascus 

.   Celebes  to  New  Guinea. 

„ 

,    Bdvhm 

1 

Australia  and  Moluccaa. 

We  have  here  no  sign  of  any  approach  to  the  Mammalian 
fauna  of  the  Oriental  region,  for  though  f>us  has  appeared,  the 
Muridfe  (rats  and  mice)  seem  to  be  wanting. 

In  Bii-da  the  case  is  very  different,  since  we  at  once  meet 
with  important  groups,  either  wholly,  or  almost  peculiar  to 
the  Papuan  fauna,  According  to  a  careful  estimate,  embodying 
the  recent  discoveries  of  Meyer  and  D'Albertis,  there  are 
S50  species  of  Papuan  land-birds  comprised  in  136  genera. 
About  300  of  the  species  are  absolutely  peculiar  to  the  dis- 
tiict,  whOe  39  of  the  genera  are  exclusively  Papuan  or  just 
extend  into  the  Moluccas,  or  into  North  Austmha  where  it 
closely  approaches  New  Guinea.  In  analysing  the  genera  we 
may  set  aside  31  as  havii^  a  wide  range,  and  being  of  no  signifi- 
cance in  distribution ;  such  ai'e  most  of  the  birds  of  prey,  with 
the  genera  Hirundo,  Cwprimitlgus,  Zosterops ;  and  others  widely 
spread  in  both  the  Oriental  and  AustraUan  regions,  as  JHcmim, 
Mania,  Mudynamis,  &c.  Of  the  remainder,  as  above  stated, 
about  39  are  peculiar  to  the  Papuan  fauna,  50  are  characteristic 
Australian  genera ;  9  are  more  especially  Malayan,  and  as  much 
Australian  as  Oriental;  while  7  only,  appear  to  be  typically 
Oriental  with  a  discontinuous  distribution,, none  of  them  occurring 
in  the  Moluccas. 

'  &ee  Ann.  Nat.llist.,  1873,  p.  41'-,  wliiri,  the  ipecies  is  itil  to  inhibit 
the  Am  Islands  and  Celeljes,  which  rcnd-rs  it  not  iniproliable  that  it  niav 
have  been  carried  to  the  former  islands  Irom  tho  littti 


b,  Google 


"■] 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


This  Papuan  faniia  is  so  interesting  and  remarkable,  that  it 
seems  advisable  to  give  lists  of  these  several  classes  of  generic 
types. 

I.  Genera  occiirring  in  the  Papuan  Islands  which  are  charac- 
teristic of  the  Australian  r^on  (89).  Those  marked  with  an 
asterisk  are  exclusively  Papuan, 


SylviidiB... 
CertliiidtB 
Sittidie  ... 
Oriolidse... 


'    Pachycephalidse. 
Laniidie  ... 
Corvklie  ... 
Paiiidiseidre 


NectariaiidEB 
Artamidce 
PiUidEe   ... 
Cueulidffi 
AlcedinicUe 

Podargidat 
Caprimul^die    , 
Cacatuidse 
Pktyeercidie 
Pal^Bomithidee , . 
Tricho^lossicUe 
NeBtond» 
Columbidie 


Megapodiidte 

Falconidte 

CasoariidEE 


Mahi/ras,  Gerygone,  Feiroica,  Orthtmyx. 
Glimaeteris. 
Sittdla. 
Mwieta,. 

GroMcoIus,  Lalage, 
^ChmtorhptchMS. 

*Felteps,  MonardM,  *L&ueophantu,  Micraifia, 
Siswra,  Myiagra,   *Mach^'i/rhynchus,  Rhi- 
pidura,  *Todopsis. 
Packyoepliala. 
*Bectes. 

Graetieus,  ^Gymnocorvus. 

*P<wadiaea,  ^Mwiucodio,,  *AstTapia,  *ParoUa, 
*Lophorina,    ^Diphyllodeg,    *Xamthomdits, 
*Ci^nurv£,    *ParaAigalta,     *Epvma^'m, 
*Drepa/nomist^Sele'uciaes,  Ftilorhit,i^lv/r<e- 
dus,  *Amblyom,is. 
Mysomela,  EntomimhUa.   GUcyphila,  PtHotis, 
*Melidectes,    *Melipotei,    *Memrhtiphetet, 
AntkochtETa,    Fhilemaii.,    *Ev&yrlv^n(hus, 
MdithrepUs. 
Chalcosletha,  "^Ooimetira. 
ATtam-as. 
.     *Mela/nipilUi. 
.    *GaUechthrus. 
,    Alcyone,      *Syma,      Dacdo,     *Tav,ysvptera, 

*Melidora. 
.    Podargin,  j^gotkdes. 
EvTostopodus. 

CacahM,  *Mie3'oglossus,  Licmetis,  *Nasitema. 
.    Aprosmktiis 

Tanysnaihus,  Edectui,  Geeffiroyns,  *OyelopnUa. 
.     Trichoglossua,  *Ghannosyna,  Eos,  Lorius. 
.    ^DasyptUvi. 

■     FtiU^as,   Garpophaga,   lan&wnas,  Ednward- 
tienas,  *Trugofi,  *Semeopha,ps,  Phlogrnias, 
*OtiAifpkaps,  *Goura. 
Tolegallus,  Megwpodius. 


Camarius. 


The  chief  points  of  interest  here  are  the  richnesa  and  speciah- 
zation  of  the  parrots,  pigeons,  and  kingfishers ;  the  wonderful  para^ 
dise-hirds ;  the  honeysuckers ;  and  so 


by  Google 


412  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOaRAPHY.  [pakt  hi. 

The  most  prominent  deficiencies,  aa  compared  with  Australia, 
are  in  Sylviidse,  Timaliida),  Ploceidfe,  Platycercidfe,  and  FalconidEe. 
II,  The  genera  which  are  characteristic  of  the,  whole  Malay 
Archipelago  are  the  following  (10)  :— 


1.  EryOwiwa    ...  (Ploccicte) 

2.  PiUa (PittidEe) 

3.  Cep: (Aloedinidte) 

4  Cmoo  ...  (Bucerotidie) 

5.  ZfewfrocAeiiiofl.  (CypselidK) 


Lorisulm     ...  (Psittaoidffi) 

Macropygia  ...  (Columbidfe) 

Chcdeophaps ...  „ 

Cattenas        ...  „ 

Boza (Faloonidse) 


III.  The  curious  set  of  genera  apparently  of  Indo-Malayan 
origin,  but  unknown  in  the  Moluccas,  are  aa  follows  : — 

1.  EwpelBS  ...     (Cinelidce)  4.  Arachnotk^a       (Neetariniidffi) 

2.  Alcippe         ...     (TinialiidEe)  5.  FrionockUve...     (Dicffiidffi) 

3.  Pmaatorhva'Os  „  6,  EvXoIbs         ...     (StiimidEe) 

The  above  six  birds  are  very  important  as  indicating  past 
changes  in  the  Austro-Malay  Islands,  and  we  must  say  a  few 
words  about  each.  (1)  Uii^etes  is  very  remarkable,  since  the 
New  Guinea  birds  resemble  in  all  important  characters  that 
which  is  confined  to  Malacca  and  Sumatra,  They  are  pro- 
bably the  survivors  of  a  once  wide-apread  Malayan  group. 
(2)  Aleippe  or  JM/mocataphus  (for  in  which  genus  the  birds 
should  be  placed  is  doubtful)  seems  another  clear  case  of 
a  typical  Indo-Malayan  form  occuning  in  New  Guinea  and 
Java,  but  in  no  intervening  island.  (3)  Pomatorkinm  is  a  most 
characteristic  Himalayan  and  Indo-Malayan  genus,  occurring 
again  in  New  Guinea  and  also  in  Australia,  but  in  no  interme- 
diate island.  The  New  Guinea  bird  seems  as  nearly  related  to 
Oriental  as  Australian  species. ,  (4)  Arachnothera  is  exactly 
parallel  to  Alavppe,  occurring  nowhere  east  of  Borneo  except  in 
New  Guinea.  (5)  PrionocMlm,  a  small  black  bird,  sometimes 
clawed  as  a  distinct  genus,  but  evidently  allied  to  the  Prionockili  of 
the  Indo-Malay  Islands.  (6)  Sulahes,  the  genus  which  contains 
the  well  known  Mynahs  of  India,  extends  east  of  Java  as  far  as 
Flores,  but  is  not  foimd  in  Celebes  or  the  Moluccas.  The  two  New 
Guinea  species  are  sometimes  classed  in  different  genera,  but  they 
are  undoubtedly  allied  to  the  Mynahs  of  India  and  Malaya, 

We  iind  then; .  tSiat  while  the  ornithology  of  New  Guinea  is 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xii:.]  THE  AU^EALtAN  EEGION.  413 

preeminently  Australian  in  character  and  possesses  many  peculiar 
developments  of  Australian  types,  it  has  also— as  might  he  ex- 
pected from  its  geographical  position,  its  climate,  and  its  vege- 
tation— received  an  infusion  of  Malayan  forms.  But  while  one 
group  of  these  is  spread  over  the  whole  Archipelago,  and  occa^ 
sionally  beyond  it,  there  is  another  group  which  presents  the 
unusual  and  interesting  feature  of  discontinuous  distribution, 
jumping  over  a  thousand  miles  of  island-studded  sea  from  Java 
and  Borneo  to  New  Guinea  itself.  It  is  a  parallel  case  to  that 
of  Java  in  the  Oriental  r^on,  which  we  have  already  discussed, 
but  the  su^ested  explanation  in  that  case  is  more  difficult  to 
apply  here.  The  recent  soundings  by  the  Ohallenger  show  us, 
that  although  the  several  islands  of  the  Moluccas  are  surrounded 
by  water  from  1,200  to  2,800  fathoms  deep,  yet  these  seaa  form 
inclosed  basins  with  rims  not  more  than  from  400  to  900 
fathoms  deep,  suggesting  the  idea  of  great  lakes  or  inland  seas 
which  have  sunk  down  bodily  with  the  surroundii^  land,  or  that 
enormous  local  and  restricted  elevations  and  subsidences  have 
here  occurred.  We  have  also  the  numerous  small  islands  and  coral 
banks  south  of  Celebes  and  eastward  towards  Timor-Laut  and  the 
Am  Islands,  indicating  great  subsidence;  and  it  is  possible  that 
there  was  an  extension  of  Papua  to  the  west,  approaching  sufl- 
eiently  near  to  Java  to  receive  occasional  straggling  bii-ds  of  Indo- 
Malay  type,  altogether  independent  of  the  Moluccas  to  the  north. 
Bright  Colov/rs  and  OrTUtmrntal  Plv/mage  of  New  Guinea  Birds. 
— One  of  the  most  striking  features  of  Papuan  ornithology  is  the 
lai^  proportion  which  the  liandsome  and  bright-coloured  birds 
bear  to  the  more  obscure  species.  That  this  is  really  the  case 
has  been  ascertained  by  going  over  my  own  collections,  made  at 
Am  and  New  Guinea,  and  comparing  them  with  my  collection 
made  at  Malacca — a  district  remarkable  for  the  number  of  hand- 
some birds  it  produces.  Using,  as  nearly  as  possihle,  the  same 
standard  of  beauty,  about  one-third  of  the  Malacca  birds  may  be 
classed  as  handsome,^  while  in  Papua  the  proportion  comes  out 
exactly  one-half.     This  is  due,  in  part  to  the  great  abundance  of 

^  I  also  find  about  this  proportion  i. 
counting  all  the  humming-birds,  parrots, 


b,  Google 


4U  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [past  hi. 

parrots,  cockatoos,  and  lories,  almost  all  of  which  are  beautiful ; 
and  of  pigeons,  more  than  half  of  which  are  very  beautiful ;  as 
well  as  to  the  numerous  kingfishers,  most  of  which  are  excessively 
brilliant.  Then  we  have  the  absence  of  thrushes,  and  the  very 
small  numbers  of  the  warblers,  shrikes,  and  Timaliidte,  which  are 
dull-coloured  groups ;  and,  lastly,  the  presence  of  numerous  gay 
pittas,  flycatchers,  and  the  unequalled  family  of  paradise-birds. 
A  large  number  of  birds  adorned  with  metallic  plumage  is  also  a 
marked  feature  of  this  fauna,  more  than  a  dozen  genera  being  so 
distinguished.  Among  the  remarkable  forms  are  Teltops,  a  fly- 
catcher, long  classed  as  one  of  the  Indo-Malayan  Eurylajmidjo, 
which  it  resembles  both  in  bill  and  coloration ;  MackfeHrhynckus, 
curious  little  boat-billed  flycatchers  ;  and  Todopsis,  a  group  of  ter- 
restrial flycatchers  with  the  brilliant  colours  of  Piita  or  Mcdums. 
The  paradise-birds  present  the  most  wonderful  developments  of 
plumage  and  the  most  gorgeous  varieties  of  colour,  to  be  found 
among  passerine  birds.  The  great  whiskered-swift,  the  handsomest 
bird  in  the  entire  family,  has  its  head-cLuart«r3  here.  Among  king- 
fishers the  elegant  long-tailed  Tanysipierce  are  preeminent,  whether 
for  singularity  or  beauty.  Among  parrots,  New  Guinea  possesses 
the  great  black  cockatoo,  one  ofthe  largest  and  most  singular  birds 
in  the  order;  Nasitema,  the  smallest  of  known  parrots;  and 
Charmosyna,  perhaps  the  most  elegant.  Lastly,  among  the 
pigeons  we  have  the  fine  crowned-paeons,  the  lai^est  and  most 
remarkable  group  of  the  order, 

Plate  X.  Illustrating  the  Ornithology  of  New  Q-winm. — The 
wonderful  ornithological  fauna  we  have  just  sketched,  could 
only  be  properly  represented  in  a  series  of  elaborate  coloured 
plates.  We  are  obliged  here  to  confine  ourselves  to  representing 
a  few  of  the  more  remarkable  types  of  form,  as  samples  of  the 
great  number  that  adorn  this  teeming  bird-land.  The  large 
central  figure  is  the  fine  twelve-wired  paradise-bird  {Sekucides 
albus),  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  remarkable  of  the  family. 
Its  general  plumage  appears,  at  first  sight,  to  be  velvety  black; 
but  on  closer  examination,  and  by  holding  the  bird  in  various 
lights,  it  is  found  that  every  part  of  it  glows  with  the  most  ex- 
quisite metallic  tints— rich  bronze,  intense  violet,  and,  on  the 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  XIIL]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  41fi 

edges  of  the  breaat-feathers,  brilliant  green.  An  immense  tuft  of 
dense  plumes  of  a  fine  orange-buff  colour,  springs  irom  each  side 
of  the  body,  and  six  of  these  on  each  side  terminate  in  a  blaol; 
curled  rachis  or  shaft,  which  form  a  perfectly  unicLue  adornment 
to  this  lovely  bird.  To  appreciate  this  wonderful  family  (oi' 
which  no  good  mounted  collection  exists)  the  reader  should 
examine  the  series  of  plates  in  Mr.  Elliot's  great  work  on  the 
Paradiseidge,  where  every  species  is  figured  of  the  size  of  life,  and 
with  a  perfection  of  colouring  that  leaves  httle  to  be  desired. 

Below  the  Sehucides  is  one  of  the  elegant  racquet-tailed 
king-hunters  {Tanysiptera  galalm)  whose  plumage  of  vivid  blue 
and  white,  and  coral-red  bill,  combined  with  the  long  spatulate 
tad,  renders  this  bird  one  of  the  most  attractive  of  tlie  interest- 
ing family  of  kingfishers.  On  a  high  branch  is  seated  the  little 
Papuan  parrocLuet  {Charwiosyna  papuensis),  one  of  the  Tricho- 
glossidte,  or  brush-tiii^jied  parrots, — richly  adorned  in  red  and 
yellow  plumage,  and  with  an  unwsually  long  and  slender  tail  On 
the  ground  is  the  well-known  crowned  pigeon  (Goura  eoronata,) 
a  genus  which  is  wholly  confined  to  New  Guinea  and  a  few  of 
the  adjacent  islands.  One  of  the  very  few  Papuan  mammals,  a 
tree-kangaroo  (J)endrolagus  inustus),  is  seated  on  a  high  branch. 
It  is  interesting,  as  an  arboreal  modification  of  a  family  which  in 
AustraHa  is  purely  terrestrial ;  and  as  showing  how  very  little 
alteration  of  form  or  structure  is  needed  to  adapt  an  animal  to 
such  a  different  mode  of  life. 

Reptiles  and  Amphibia. — Of  these  classes  comparatively  little 
is  at,  present  known,  but  there  is  evidence  that  the  same  inter- 
mixture of  Oriental  and  Australian  forms  that  occurs  in  birds  and 
insects,  is  also  found  here.  Dr.  A.  B.  Meyer,  the  translator  of  this 
work  into  Gterman,  and  well  known  for  his  valuable  discoveries  in 
New  Guinea,  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  a  manuscript  list  of 
Papuan  reptiles,  from  which  most  of  the  information  I  am  able 
to  give  is  derived. 

Of  Snakes,  24  genera  are  known,  belonging  to  11  families.  Six 
of  the  genera  are  Oriental, — Calatnaria,  Cerberus, .  ChTysopelm, 
Lycodon,  Chersydrus,  and  Ophiophagus.      Pour  are  Australian, 


by  Google 


416  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [?abt  m. 

— Morelia,  Idasis,  JHem-enia,  and  Acanthophis ;  while  four  others 
are  more  especially  Papuan, — Dibwmus  (Typhlopidae),  Brachy- 
orros — a  suh-genus  of  the  wide-spread  Hhahdosoma  {CalamariidEe}, 
found  also  in  Timor ;  Nardoa  and  Enygrus  (Pythonidce),  ranging 
from  the  Moluccas  to  the  Tlji  Islands.  The  rest  are  either  com- 
mon to  the  Oriental  and  Australian  regions  or  of  wide  range. 

Of  Lizards  also,  24  genera  are  recorded,  belonging  to  5  families. 
Three  only  are  peculiarly  Oriental, — Humeces,  Tiaris,  and  Nyde- 
ndiuTib ;  but  another,  Gfmyocepkedus,  is  Malayan,  ranging  from 
Java  and  Borneo  to  the  Pelew  Islands.  Three  are  Australian, — 
Gydodtis,  Reteropws,  and  Gekyra ;  while  six  are  especially  Papuan, 
— Kenefoxia  (extending  to  the  Philippines),  Mania,  Ca/fUa  (to 
North  Australia),  Lipmia  (to  the  Philippine  Islands),  and  Tri- 
holortotws, — all  belonging  to  the  Scincidte ;  and  Arua  belonging 
to  the  Agamidfe.  We  must  add  Ci-ypiobhpharus,  which  is  con- 
iined  to  the  Australian  region,  except  a  species  ia  Mauritius. 
The  other  genera  have  a  wider  distribution. 

The  preponderant  Oriental  element  in  the  snakes  as  compared 
with  the  lizards,  is  suggestive  of  the  dispersal  of  the  former  being 
dependent  on  floating  trees,  or  even  on  native  canoes,  which  for 
an  luiknown  period  have  traversed  these  seas,  and  in  which 
various  species  of  snakes  often  secrete  themselves.  This  seems 
the  more  probable,  as  snakes  are  usually  more  restricted  in  their 
range  than  lizards,  and  exhibit  less  numerous  examples  of  wide- 
spread genera  and  species.  The  other  orders  of  reptiles  present 
no  features  of  interest. 

Of  Amphibia  only  8  genera  are  known,  belonging  to  6  families. 
Rana,  Sylarana,  and  Hyla,  are  wide-spread  genera,  the  former 
being,  however,  absent  from  Australia.  HyperoUus,  Pehdryas, 
TAtwia,  and  Atteropkrys  are  Australian;  while  Platymantis  is 
Polynesian,  with  a  species  in  the  Philippine  Islands.  Hence 
it  appears  that  the  amphibia,  so  far  as  yet  known,  exhibit 
no  Oriental  affinity;  and  this  is  a  very  suggestive  fact.  We 
have  seen  (p.  29)  that  salt  water  is  almost  a  ccmplete  barrier 
to  the  dispersal  of  these  creatures ;  so  that  the  wholly  Aus- 
tralian character  of  the  Papuan  batraehia  is  what  we  might 
expect,  if,  as  here  advocated,  no  actual  land  connection  between 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xuij  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  417 

the  Oriental  and  Australian  regions,  has  prohahly  occurred  during 
the  entire  Tertiary  and  Post-tertiary  periods. 

Insects. — The  general  character  of  the  Papuan  insects  has 
heen  sufficiently  indicated  in  our  sketch  of  the  Entomology  oi' 
the  region.  We  will  here  only  add,  that  the  metallic  lusti'e  so 
prevalent  among  the  birds,  is  also  apparent  in  such  insects  as 
SphingnotiismirahUis,?L  most  brilliant  metallic  Longicom;  Lomap- 
tsra  ■waUaeei  and  Anacamyptorhma  fitlgida,  Cetonii  of  intense 
lustre ;  Galodmta  wallacd  among  the  Euprestidee  ;  and  the  ele- 
gant blue  Eupholi  among  the  weevils.  Even  among  moths 
we  have  Goiyytia  dvjrvillii,  remarkable  for  its  brilliant  metallic 


The  Moluccas.— T\iQ  islands  of  Gdolo,  Bouru,  and  Ceram,  with 
several  smaller  islands  adjacent,  together  with  Sanguir,  and 
perhaps  Tulour  or  Salihaboo  to  the  north-west,  and  the  islands 
from  Ke  to  Timor-Laut  to  the  south-east,  form  the  group  of  the 
Moluccas  or  Spice-Islands,  remarkable  for  the  luxuriance  of 
their  vegetation  and  the  extreme  beauty  of  their  birds  and 
insects.  Their  Mammalia  are  of  Papuan  character,  with  some 
foreign  intermixture.  Two  genera  of  the  New  Guinea  marsu- 
pials, £did&us  and  Omens,  abound ;  and  we  have  also  the  wide- 
spread Siis.  But  besides  these,  we  find  no  less  than  five  genera 
of  placenta]  Mammals  quite  foreign  to  the  Papuan  or  Australian 
feunaa.  These  are  1.  Cynopifhecfus  niffi'escens,  found  only  in  the 
small  island  of  ^tehian,  and  probably  introduced  from  Celebes, 
where  the  same  ape  oeeurs.  2.  Viverra  tangahmga,  a  common 
Indo-Malayan  species  of  civet,  probably  introduced.  3.  Cervus 
Tii^elafhiis,  var.  Moiitccensis,  a  deer  abundant  in  all  the  islands, 
very  close  to  a  Javan  species  and  almost  certainly  introduced 
by  man,  perhaps  very  long  ago.  4.  Bahirma  alfwrvs,  the 
bahirusa,  found  only  in  the  island  of  Bouru,  and  perhaps  origi- 
nally introduced  from  Celebes.  5.  8iw(x  sp.,  small  shrews. 
With  the  exception  of  the  last,  all  these  species  are  animals 
habitually  domesticated  and  kept  in  confinement  by  the  Malays ; 
and  when  we  consider  that  none  of  the  smaller  Mammalia  of  Java 
and  Borneo,  numbering  at  least  fifty  different  species,  are  found 


by  Google 


418  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part,  in, 

in  any  of  the  Moluccas,  we  can  liardly  suppose  that  such  large 
animals  as  the  deer  and  ape,  could  have  reached  them  by 
natural  means.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe,  therefore,  that 
the  indigenous  Mammalia  of  the  Moluccas  are  whoUy  of  Papuan 
stock,  and  very  limited  in  number. 

The  birds  are  much  more  varied  and  interesting.  About  200 
species  of  laud-birds  are  now  known,  belonging  to  85  genera.  Of 
the  species  about  15  are  Indo-Malayan,  32  Papuan,  and  about 
140  peculiar.  Of  the  genera  only  two  are  peculiar,— /Sfemiopf&ra, 
a  paradise  bird,  and  Lycocorax,  a  singular  form  of  CorvidBe ;  but 
there  is  also  a  peculiar  rail-like  wader,  Habroptila.  One  genus, 
BasUomis,  is  found  only  in  Ceram  and  Celebes ;  another,  iSfc^iArops, 
is  Australian,  and  perhaps  a  migi-ant.  About  30  genera  are 
characteristic  Papuan  types,  and  87  others,  of  more  or  less  wide 
lange,  are  found  in  New  Guinea  and  were  therefore  probably 
derived  thence.  There  remains  a  group  of  birds  which  are  not 
found  in  H^ew  Guinea,  and  are  either  Palaiarctic  or  Oriental. 
These  are  13  in  number  as  follows : — 

1.  Moutieola.  8.  Corydalla. 

2.  Acrooephatus.  9.  Hydromis. 

3.  Cistioola.  10.  Batraohoatomus. 

4.  ilypolais.  11.  Loriculiis, 

5.  Criuiger.  13.  Treron. 

6.  Batolis.  13.  Neopus. 

7.  Budytes, 

Of  these  the  Montimla,  found  only  in  Gilolo,  appears  to  be  a 
straggler  or  migrant  from  the  PhiKppine  islands.  Acrocefphalus, 
of  which  four  species  occur,  is  a  wide-sprea^  group ;  one  of 
the  Moluccan  birds  is  an  Australian  and  another  a  North-Asian 
species,  which  perhaps  indicates  that  there  has  long  been  some 
migration  southward  from  island  to  island,  across  the  Moluccas. 
Gisticola  is  a  genus  of  very  wide  range,  extending  to  Australia. 
Sypolais  is  probably  a  inodilied  form  of  a  Chinese  or  Java- 
nese species.  Griniger  is  a  pure  Indo-Malay  form,  represented 
here  by  three  iine  species.  Butnlis  is  a  Chinese  species,  no 
doubt  straggling  southward.  Budytes  and  Corydalla  are  wide- 
spread Oriental  and  Palfearctic  species  or  slight  modifications  of 
them  Hydrm-nis  is  a  Malayan  form  of  Pittidse.  Bairachosiamus 
is  a  distinct  representative  of  a  purely  Indo-Malay  genus.   Lori- 


by  Google 


ciiAi'.  xiii.J  THE  AUSTRALIAN"  REGION.  419 

culm  is  Malayan,  and  especially  Philippine,  bnt  it  veaehes  as  far 
as  Mysol.  Treron  ia  here  at  its  eastern  limit,  and  is  represented 
in  Bourn  and  Ceram  by  one  of  the  moat;  beautiful  species. 
Ne&pus,  a  Malayan  eagle,  is  said  to  occur  in  the  Moluccas.  "We 
find  then  only  three  characteristic  Indo-Malay  types  in  the 
Moluccas, — Crimger,  Batrachostomtis,  and  Trm-on.  AH  are  repre- 
sented by  distinct  and  well  marked  apecies,  indicating  a  some- 
what remote  period  since  their  ancestors  entered  the  district 
but  all  are  birds  of  considerable  powers  of  flight,  so  that  a  very 
little  extension  of  the  islands  in  a  south-westerly  direction 
would  afford  the  means  of  transmission,  but  this  could  not  well 
have  been  by  way  of  Celebes,  because  the  two  former  genera  are 
unknown  in  that  island. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  Moluccas  are  wholly  Papuan 
in  their  zoology  ;  yet  they  are  no  leas  clearly  derivative,  and  must 
have  obtained  their  original  immigrants  under  conditions  that 
rendered  a  full  representation  of  the  fauna  impossible.  Such 
remarkable  and  dominant  types  as  the  eleven  genera  of  Para- 
diseidie,  with  Oractims,  Mectes,  Todopsis,  Maehcenrhynehus,  Gery- 
gone,  Dacelo,  Podargus,  Oydopsitta,  Microglossum,  Nasitema,  Choi- 
cffp&itta,  and  Qov/ra, — all  characteristic  Papuan  groups,  found  in 
almost  all  the  islands  and  most  of  them  very  abundant,  are  yet 
totally  absent  from  the  Moluccas.  Taking  this,  in  conjunction 
with  the  absence  of  the  two  genera  of  Papuan  kangaroos  and 
the  other  smaller  groups  of  marsupials,  and  we  must  be 
convinced  that  the  Moluccas  cannot  be  mere  fragments  of  the 
old  Papuan  land,  or  they  would  certainly,  in  some  one  or  other 
of  their  large  and  fertile  islands,  have  preserved  a  more  com- 
plete representation  of  the  parent  fauna.  Most  of  the  Moluecan 
birds  are  very  distinct  from  the  allied  species  of  New  Guinea ; 
and  this  would  imply  that  the  entrance  of  the  original  forms 
took  place  at  a  remote  period.  The  two  peculiar  genera  with 
clearly  Papuan  aflinities,  show  the  same  thing.  The  cassowary, 
found  only  in  the  large  island  of  Ceram  and  distinct  from  any 
Papuan  species,  M'ould  however  seem  to  have  required  a  land 
connection  for  its  introduction,  almost  as  much  as  any  of  the 
lai^ger  mammalia. 


by  Google 


420  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGKAPHT.  [paet  hi. 

Takir^  all  the  facts  into  consideration,  I  would  suggest  aa  the 
most  probable  explanation,  that  if  the  Mohiccas  ever  formed  part 
of  the  main  Papuan  land,  they  were  separated  at  an  early  date, 
and  subsequently  so  greatly  submerged  as  to  destroy  a  large 
proportion  of  their  fauna.  They  have  since  risen,  and  have 
probably  been  larger  than  at  present,  and  rather  more  closely 
approximated  to  the  parent  land,  whence  they  received  a  con- 
siderable imm^ration  of  such  animals  as  were  adapted  to  cross 
narrow  seas.  This  gave  them  several  Papuan  forms,  but  still 
left  them  without  a  number  of  the  types  more  especially  eon- 
fined  to  the  forest  depths,  or  powerful  enough  to  combat  the 
gales  which  often  blow  weaker  flyers  out  to  sea.  Most  of  the 
birds  whose  absence  from  the  Moluccas  is  so  conspicuous  belong 
to  one  or  other  of  these  classes. 

Among  the  most  characteristic  birds  of  the  Moluccas  are  the 
handsome  crimson  lories  of  the  genera  Lorius  and  Eos.  These 
are  found  in  every  island  (but  not  in  Celebes  or  the  Timor 
group) ;  and  a  fine  species  of  Eos,  peculiar  to  the  small  islands  of 
Siau  and  Sanguir,  just  north  of  Celebes,  obliges  us  to  place 
these  with  the  Moluccas  instead  of  with  the  former  island,  to 
which  they  seem  most  naturally  to  beloi^.  The  crimson  parrots 
of  the  genus  Eclectus  are  almost  ec[ually  characteristic  of  the 
Moluccas,  and  add  greatly  to  the  brCliancy  of  the  ornithology  of 
these  favoured  islands. 

Exiles. — The  Reptiles,  so  far  as  known,  appear  to  agree  in 
their  distribution  with  the  other  vertebrates.  In  some  small 
collections  from  Ceram  there  were  no  less  than  six  of  the  genera 
peculiar  to  the  Australian  region,  and  which  were  before  only 
known  from  Australia  itself.  These  are,  of  snakes,  Liasis  and 
Enyg'ms,  genera  of  Pythonidse ;  with  Eiemenia  and  AcanthopJds 
{Elapidje) ;  of  lizards,  Cydodus,  a  genus  of  Scincidffi ;  and  of 
Amphibia,  a  tree-frog  of  the  genus  PeloAryas. 

Insects — Peeidiarities  of  the  Moluccan  Fav/na. — In  insects  the 
Moluccas  are  hardly,  if  at  all,  inferior  to  New  Guinea  itself.  The 
islands  abound  in  grand  Papilios  of  the  largest  si^e  and  extreme 
beauty  ;  and  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fact,  that  when  the  closely- 
aUied  species  of  the  Moluccas  and  New  Guinea  are  compared, 


by  Google 


CUAP.  xiiij  THE  AUfiTBALIAN  EEGION.  421 

the  former  are  almost  always  the  largest.  As  examples  may  be 
mentioned,  Ornithopt&ra  2'»'iiiyfits  and  0.  helena  of  the  Moluccas, 
both  larger  than  the  varieties  (or  species)  of  Papua ;  Papilio 
ulysses  and  deiphohm  of  Amboyna,  usually  larger  than  their 
allies  in  Kew  Guinea;  Hestia  it^ea,  the  lai^est  speciaa  of  the 
genus ;  Diadem.a  pandanis  and  Charaxes  etm/ahts,  both  larger 
than  any  other  species  of  the  same  genera  in  the  whole  archi- 
pelago. It  is  to  be  noted  also,  that  in  the  Moluccas,  the  very 
largest  specimens  or  races  seem  always  to  come  from  the  small 
island  of  Amboyna ;  even  those  of  Ceram,  the  much  largec  island 
to  which  it  is  a  satellite,  being  almost  always  of  less  dimensions. 
Among  Coleoptera,  the  Moluccas  produce  E-uchirus  longimaims, 
one  of  the  largest  and  most  remarkable  of  the  LameUieornea  ; 
Bphingnotus  dimningi,  the  largest  of  the  Austro-Malayan  Tme- 
sisteminje ;  a  Sphemi/ra,  the  largest  and  handsomest  of  an  exten- 
sive genus ;  an  unusually  lai^e  Schizorhina  (GetoniidEe) ;  and 
some  of  the  most  remarkable  and  longest-homed  Anthotribidfe. 
Even  in  birds  the  same  law  may  be  seen  at  work, — in  the  Tany- 
siptera  nais  of  Ceram,  which  has  a  larger  tail  than  any  other  in 
the  genus  ;  in  Gmtrop^is  goUatli  of  Gilolo,  being  the  largest  and 
longest-tailed  species ;  in  Hydromis  vrnxttrvm  of  Gilolo,  the 
largest, and  perhaps  the  most  elegantly  and  conspicuously 
coloured  of  all  the  Pittidsa ;  in  Platyaercus  aTnhoiiterms,  being 
pre-eminent  in  its  ample  blue  tail ;  in  the  two  Moluccan  lories 


and  Eos  rubra,  being  more  eonspi 


icuously  red  than  the  allied  New 


Guinea  species ;  and  in  Megapodms  ■wallacei  of  Bouru,  being  the 


only  species  of  the  genus  eonspi 

All  these  examples,  of  larger 

appendages,  and  of  more  eonspi 


icuously  marked  and  banded, 
size,  of  longer  tails  or  other 
colouring,  are  probably 


indications  of  a  less  severe  struggle  for  existence  in  these  islands 
than  in  the  larger  tract  o£  New  Guinea,  with  a  more  abundant 
and  more  varied  fauna ;  and  this  may  apply  even  to  the  smaller 
islands,  as  compared  with  the  larger  in  the  immediate  vicinity. 
The  limited  number  of  forms  in  the  small  islands  compared 
with  a  similar  area  in  the  parent  land,  implies,  perhaps,  less 
competition  and  less  danger ;  and  thus  allows,  where  all  other 
conditions   are  favourable,   an  unchecked  and  continuous  de- 


by  Google 


422  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

velopment  in  size,  form,  and  colour,  until  they  become  positively 
injurious.  This  law  may  not  improbably  apply  to  the  New 
Guinea  fauna  itself,  as  compared  with  that  of  Borneo  or  any 
other  similar  country ;  and  some  of  its  peculiarities  (such  as  its 
wonderful  paradise-birds)  may  be  due  to  long  isolation,  and  con- 
sequent freedom  from  the  influence  of  any  competing  forms. 
The  difference  between  the  very  sober  colours  of  the  Coleoptera, 
and  in  a  less  degree  of  the  birds,  of  Borneo,  as  compared  with 
their  brilhancy  in  New  Guinea,  always  struck  nie  most  forcibly, 
and  was  long  without  any,  even  conjecfcural,  explanation.  It  is 
not  the  place  here  to  go  further  into  this  most  curious  and 
interesting  subject.  The  reader  who  wishes  for  additional  facts 
to  aid  him  in  forming  an  opinion,  should  consult  Mr.  Darwin's 
Descent  of  Man,  chapters  x.  to  xv. ;  and  my  own  OontrHmHons 
to  the  Them-y  of  Natural  Selection,  chapters  iii.  and  iv. 

Timor  Group. — Mammalia. — In  the  group  of  islands  between 
Java  and  Australia,  from  Lombok  to  Timor  inclusive,  we  find  a 
set  of  mammals  similar  to  those  of  the  Moluccas,  but  some  of 
them  different  species.  A  wide-spread  species  of  Cuseiis  repre- 
sents the  Papuan  element.  A  Sorex  and  a  peculiar  species  of 
wild  pig,  we  inay  also  accept  as  indigenous.  Three  otheiB  have 
almost  certainly  been  introduced.  These  are,  (1.)  Macacus  cyno- 
molgus,  the  very  commonest  Malay  monkey,  which  may  have 
crossed  the  narrow  straits  from  island  to  island  between  Java 
and  Timor,  though  it  seems  much  more  probable  that  it  was  in- 
troduced by  Malays,  who  constantly  capture  and  rear  the  young 
of  this  species.  (2.)  Cervus  timorienm,  a  deer,  said  to  be  a  dis- 
tinct species,  inhabits  Timor,  but  it  is  probably  only  a  variety  of 
the  Certms  M^elapkus  of  Java.  This  animal  is,  however,_  much 
more  likely  to  have  crossed  the  sea  than  the  monkey.  (3.)  Biror 
doxurm  fasdaius,  takes  the  place  of  Viverra  tangalunga  in  the 
Moluccas,  both  common  and  wide-spread  civets  which  are  often 
kept  in  confinement  by  the  Malays.  The  I'elis  megalotis,  long 
supposed  to  be  a  native  of  Timor,  has  been  ascertained  by  Mr, 
Elliot  to  belor^  to  a  different  country  altogether. 

Birds. — The  birds  are  miich  more  interesting,  since  they  are 


by  Google 


CHAP.  xiiL]  THE  AUSTBALIAN  REGION.  423 

sufficiently  numerous  to  allow  us  to  determine  their  relations, 
and  trace  their  origin,  with  unusual  precision.  There  are  96 
genera  and  160  species  o{  land-birds  known  to  inhabit  this  group 
of  islands ;  and  on  a  careful  analysis,  they  are  found  to  be  abnost 
ecLuaUy  related  to  the  AustraJiau  and  Oriental  regions,  30  genera 
being  distinctly  traceable  to  the  former,  and  the  same  number  to 
the  latter.  Their  connection  with  the  Moluccas  is  shown  by  the 
presence  of  the  genera  Mimeta,  Geoffroyiis,  Cacatua,  Ptilopus,  and 
lanthcenas,  together  with  Megapodius  and  C&rchnm  represented 
by  Moluccan  species.  Turaaoina  shows  a  connection  with 
Celebes,  and  Scops  is  represented  by  a  Celebesian  species.  The 
connection  with  Australia  is  shown  by  the  genera  Spkcecothera,, 
Gerygone,  Myiagra,  Pardalotus,  Glicipkila,  Amadina,  and  Apros- 
w/iMus ;  while  Milvus,  Hypotriorchis,  Eud^TUiniis,  and  Shirysto- 
-rrms,  are  represented  by  Australian  species.  Other  genera  con- 
fined to  or  cbaiactenstic  of  the  Australian  region,  are  Rhvpidura, 
MonarcJm,  Artamus,  Campephaga,  Pachi/c^hala, Philemon, Ptilo- 
tis,  and  M'/zomeia 

We  now  come  to  the  Indo-Malay  or  Javaii  element  represented 
by  the  following  genera : 


1.  Tnrdns  (T.) 

11.  Oriolns. 

21.  Yungipicua. 

2.  Geooiohla  (T.) 

12.  Periorocotns, 

22.  Merops. 

3.  Zoothera. 

13.  Oyomis  (T.) 

14.  Hjpotlijinis, 

23.  Pelai^opsis. 

4.  Megaluraa  (T.) 

24.  Cejx. 

15.  TcMtrea, 

25.  Loriculna. 

6.  Pratincola  (T.) 

16.  Laniua  (T.) 

26.  Treron  (T.) 

7.  Oreicola  (T.) 

17.  Anthreptes. 

27.  Iotreroii(s.g.ofP<iiopMs). 

8.  Drjmocataplius  (T.)   18.  Eulabes. 

9.  Parus. 

19.  Estrada(T,) 

29.  Gfdlua  (T.) 

10.  Pycnonotus. 

20.  Erythrura  (T.) 

30.  Strix. 

Such  genera  as  Merops  and  Strix,  which  are  as  much  Austra- 
lian as  Oriental,  are  inserted  here  because  they  are  represented  by 
Javan  species.  The  list  is  considerably  swelled  by  genera  which 
have  reached  lombok  across  the  narrow  strait  from  Baly,  but 
have  passed  no  further.  Such  are  Zoothera,  Orthotomvs,  Pycno- 
notus, Pencroeotm  and  Sirix.  A  much  larger  number  (12)  stop 
short  at  Floies,  leaving  only  13,  indicated  in  the  list  by  (T)  after 
their  names,  which  reach  Timor,  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that 
these  islands  have  been  stocked  from  three  chief  sources,— the 


by  Google 


424  ZOOLO&ICAL  GEOGKAPHY.  [paiit  iil 

Moluccas  (with  New  Guinea  and  Celebes,)  Australia,  and  Java. 
The  Moluccan  forms  may  well  have  arrived  as  stra^lera  from 
island  to  island,  aided  by  whatever  facilities  have  been  afforded 
by  lands  now  submerged.  Most  of  the  remainder  have  been  de- 
rived either  from  Australia  or  from  Java ;  and  as  their  relations 
to  these  islands  are  very  interesting,  they  must  be  diacussed 
with  some  detail. 

Origin  of  the  Timorese  Fauna. — We  must  first  note,  that  80 
species,  or  exactly  one-half  of  the  land-bu'ds  of  the  islands,  are 
peculiar  and  mostly  very  distinct,  intimating  that  the  immigra- 
tion commenced  long  enough  back  to  allow  of  much  specific 
modification.  There  is  also  one  pecuUar  genus  of  kingfishers, 
Caridonax,  found  only  in  Lombok  and  Flotes,  and  more  allied 
to  Australian  than  to  Oriental  types.  The  fine  wliite-banded 
pigeons  (a.  g,  L&ucotreroTh)  are  also  almost  peculiar ;  one  other 
less  typical  species  only  being  known,  a  native  of  W.  Celebes. 
In  order  to  compare  the  species  with  regard  to  their  origin,  we 
must  first  take  away  those  of  wide  distribution  from  which  no 
special  indications  can  be  obtained.  In  this  case  49  of  the  land- 
birds  must  he  deducted,  leaving  111  species  which  afford  good 
materials  for  comparison.  These,  when  traced  to  their  origin, 
show  that  62  came  from  some  part  of  the  Australian  region,  49 
from  Java  or  the  Oriental  region.  But  if  we  divide  them  into 
two  groups,  the  one  containing  the  species  idetitical  with  those 
of  the  Australian  or  Oriental  regions,  the  other  containing  allied 
or  representative  species  peculiar  to  the  islands,  we  have  the  fol- 
lowing result : 


Total  49 

Species   common   to  the   Timorese   Islands  and  the  Australian 
Region        ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...     18 

Peculiar  Timorese  species  allied  to  those  of  the  Australian  Region     44 

Total  62 

This  table  is  very  important,  as  indicating  that  the  connection 


by  Google 


CEAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  BEQION.  425 

with  Australia  was  probably  earlier  than  that  -with  Java ;  since 
the  majority  of  the  Australian  species  have  become  modified, 
while  the  majoi-ity  of  the  Oriental  species  have  remained  un- 
changed. This  is  due,  no  doubt,  in  part  to  the  continued  im- 
migration of  fresh  individuals  from  Java,  after  that  from  Australia, 
the  Moluccas  and  New  Guinea  had  almost  wholly  ceased.  We 
must  also  notice  the  very  small  proportion  of  the  genera,  either 
of  Australia  or  Java,  that  have  found  their  way  into  these  islands, 
many  of  the  largest  and  most  wide-spread  groups  in  both  coun- 
tries being  altogether  absent.  Taking  these  facts  into  considera- 
tion, it  is  pretty  clear  that  there  has  been  no  close  and  long- 
continued  approximation  of  these  islands  to  any  part  of  the 
Australian  region ;  and  it  is  also  probable  that  they  were  fairly 
stocked  with  such  Australian  groups  as  they  possess  before  the 
immigration  &om  Java  commenced,  or  a  larger  number  of  cha- 
racteristic Oriental  forms  would  have  been  able  to  have  estab- 
lished themselves. 

On  looldng  at  our  map,  we  iind  that  a  shallow  submerged  bank 
extends  from  Australia  to  within  about  twenty  miles  of  the  coast 
of  Timor;  and  tMs  is  probably  an  indication  that  the  two 
countries  were  once  only  so  far  apart.  This  would  have  allowed 
the  purely  Australian  types  to  enter,  as  they  are  not  numerous; 
there  being  about  6  Australian  species,  and  10  or  12  representa- 
tives of  Australian  species,  in  Timor.  All  the  I'cst  may  have  been 
derived  from  the  Moluccas  or  Kew  Guinea,  being  mostly  wide- 
spread genera  of  the  Australian  region;  and  the  extension  of 
Papua  in  a  south-west  direction  towards  Java  (which  was  sug- 
gested as  a  means  of  providing  New  Guinea  with  pecuUai-  Indo- 
Malay  types  not  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  region)  may 
have  probably  served  to  supply  Timor  and  Flores  with  the  mass 
of  their  Austro-Malayan  genera  across  a  narrow  strait  or  arm  of 
the  sea,  Lombok,  Baly,  and  Sumbawa  were  probably  not  then 
in  existence,  or  nothing  more  than  small  volcanic  cones  rising 
out  of  the  sea,  thus  leaving  a  distance  of  300  miles  between 
Mores  and  Java,  Subsequently  they  grew  into  islands,  which 
offered  an  easy  passage  for  a  number  of  Indo-Malay  genera 
into  such  scantily  stocked  territories  as  Flores  and  Timor.     The 

Vol.  I.— 29 


by  Google 


426  ZOOLOCilOAL  GEOGR'APHY.  [part  ill. 

north  coast  of  Australia  then  sank,  cutting  off  the  supply  from 
that  countiy ;  and  this  left  the  Timorese  group  in  the  position  it 
now  occupies. 

The  reptiles  and  fishes  of  this  group  are  too  little  known  to 
enable  us  to  make  any  useful  comparison. 

Jnsecis,— The  insects,  though  not  numerous,  present  many  fine 
species,  some  cLuite  unlike  any  others  in  the  Archipelago.  Such 
are — Papilio  Hris,  JHeris  Iceta,  Cirrochroa  lamarckii  and  0.  lesche- 
naultii  among  hutterfiies.  The  Coleoptera  are  comparatively  little 
known,  hut  in  the  insects  generally  the  Indo-Malay  element  pre- 
dominates. This  may  have  arisen  from  the  peculiar  vegetation 
and  arid  climate  not  being  suitable  to  the  Papuan  insects.  Why 
Australian  forms  did  not  establish  themselves  we  cannot  conjec- 
ture ;  but  the  field  appears  to  have  been  open  to  immi^nts  from 
Java,  the  climate  and  vegetation  of  which  island  at  its  eastern  ex- 
tremity approximates  to  that  of  the  Timorese  group.  The  insects 
are,  however,  so  peculiarly  modified  as  to  imply  a  very  great  anti- 
quity, and  this  is  also  indicated  by  a  group  of  Sylviine  birds  here 
classed  under  Oreicola,  but  some  of  wliich  probably  form  distinct 
genera.  There  may,  perhaps,  have  been  an  earlier  and  a  later 
approximation  to  Java,  which,  with  the  other  changes  indicated, 
would  account  for  most  of  the  facts  presented  by  the  fauna  of 
these  islands.  One  deduction  is,  at  all  events,  clear :  the  ex- 
treme paucity  of  indigenous  mammals  along  with  the  absence  of 
so  many  groups  of  birds,  renders  it  certain  that  the  Timorese 
islands  did  not  derive  their  animal  life  by  means  of  an  actual 
union  with  any  of  the  lai^e  islands  either  of  the  Australian  or 
the  Oriental  regions, 

Celebes  Group. — "We  now  come  to  the  Island  of  Celebes,  in 
many  respects  the  most  remarkable  and  interesting  in  the  whole 
region,  or  perhaps  on  the  globe,  since  no  other  island  seems  to 
present  so  many  curious  problems  for  solution.  We  shall  there- 
fore give  a  somewhat  full  account  of  its  peculiar  fauna,  and 
endeavour  to  elucidate  some  of  the  causes  to  which  its  zoological 
isolation  may  be  attributed. 
.    Mammalia. — The  following  is  the   list  of  the  mammalia  of 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xiii.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  437 

Celebes  as  far  as  at  present  known,  though  many  small  species 
may  yet  be  discovered, 

1.  CynopithecuB  nigreacenB.  7.  BatbicuBa  alfaruB. 

2.  Tarsins  specttam.  8.  Sciunis  (5  peculiar  sp.) 

3.  Yiverra  tangaluuga.  9.  Mus  (3  peculiar  sp.) 

4.  Cetvua  hippelaphns,  10.  Cubcus  (9  peculiar  sp.) 

.   5.  Anoa  deprossicorQie.  AIbo  7  species  of  bats,  of 

G.  Saa  celelioDBis.  wMoli  5  are  peoullai'. 

The  first — a  large  black  ape — is  itself  an  anomaly,  since  it  is 
not  closely  allied  to  any  other  form  of  quadvuraana.  Its  flat 
projecting  muzzle,  large  superciliary  crests  and  maxillary  ridges, 
with  the  form  and  appearance  of  its  teeth,  separate  it  altogether 
from  the  genua  Macacus,  as  represented  in  the  Indo-Malay  isl- 
ands, and  ally  it  closely  to  the  baboons  of  Africa,'  We  have  al- 
ready seen  reason  to  suppose  that  it  has  been  carried  to  Batchian, 
and  there  is  some  doubt  about  the  allied  species  or  variety  ((7. 
n^e)-)ofthe  Philippines  being  really  indigenous  there;  in  which 
case,  this  interesting  form  will  remain  absolutely  confined  to  Cel- 
ebes. (2.)  The  tarsier  is  a  truly  Malayan  species,  but  it  is  said  to 
occur  in  a  small  island  at  the  northern  extremity  of  Celebes  and 
on  some  of  the  Philippine  islands.  It  might  possibly  have  been 
introduced  there.  (3)  and  (4) — a  civet  and  a  deer — are,  almost  cer- 
tainly, as  in  the  Moluccas,  introduced  species.  (5.)  Anoa  depressicor- 
wis.  This  is  one  of  the  peculiar  Celehcsian  types;  a  small  straight- 
homed  wild-bull,  anatomically  allied  to  the  buffaloes,  and  some- 
ivhat  resembling  the  bovine  antelopes  of  Africa,  but  having  no 
near  allies  in  the  Oriental  region.  (6.)  Sus  Cdebensis ;  a  peculiar 
species  of  wUd-pig.  (7.)  Bahirusa  cilfwrus  ;  another  remarkable 
type,  having  no  near  allies.  It  differs  in  its  dentition  from  the 
typical  Suidas,  and  seems  to  approach  the  African  PhaeoehceridaB, 
The  manner  in  which  the  canines  of  the  upper  jaw  are  reversed, 
and  grow  directly  upwards  in  a  spiral  curve  over  the  eyes,  is 
unic^ue  among  mammalia.  (8.)  Five  squirrels  inhabit  Celebes,  and 
all  are  peculiar  species,  (9,)  These  are  forest  rats  of  the  sub-genus 
Gymnomys,  allied  to  Australian  species.    10.  Cv^cus.    This  typical 

.'  The  general  form,  of  the  skull  agrees  brat  with  that  of  Gynocephalus 
MOMaon,  the  largest  and  most  typical  of  the  African  baboonB  ;  while  the 
position  of  the  nostrils  bringfi  it  nearer  the  macaqiiea. 


b,  Google 


423  ZOOLOG-ICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paiit  in. 

Australian  form  is  represented   in   Celebes    by   two    peculiar 


Leaving  out  the  Indo-Malay  spems,  wliieb  may  probably  have 
been  introduced  by  man,  and  ai-e  at  all  events  comparatively 
recent  immigrants,  and  the  wild  pig,  a  genus  which  ranges  over 
the  whole  archipelago  and  which  has  therefore  little  significance, 
we  find  two  genera  which  have  come  from  the  Australian  side, 
— Ctisetis  and  Mm  ;  and  four  from  the  Oriental  side, — Gynopi- 
tkeeus,  Anoa,  BaMrusa,  and  Sciurus.  But  Sciwrus  alone  corre- 
sponds to  Cuseus,  as  a  genua  still  inhabiting  the  adjacent  islands; 
the  other  three  being  not  only  peculiar  to  Celebes,  but  incapable 
of  being  affiliated  to  any  specially  Oriental  group.  We  seem,  then, 
to  have  indications  of  two  distinct  periods ;  one  very  ancient, 
when  the  ancestors  of  the  three  peculiar  genera  roamed  over  some 
unknown  continent  of  which  Celebes  formed,  perhaps,  an  outlying 
portion ; — anothec  more  recent,  when  from  one  side  there  entered 
Scmrus,  and  from  the  other  Cusous.  But  we  must  remember 
that  the  Moluccas  to  the  east,  possess  scarcely  any  indigenous 
mammals- except  Cuscus ;  whereas  Borneo  and  Java  on  the  west, 
have  neatly  50  distinct  genera.  It  is  evident  then,  that  the 
facilities  for  immigration  must  have  been  much  less  with  the 
Oriental  than  with  the  Australian  region,  and  we  may  be  pretty 
certain  that  at  this  later  period  there  was  no  land  connection 
with  the'  Indo-Malay  islands,  or  some  other  animals  than  squirrels 
would  certainly  have  entered.  Let  us  now  see  what  hght  is 
thrown  upon  the  subject  by  the  birds. 

Birds. — The  total  number  of  birds  known  to  inhabit  Celebes 
is  205,  belonging  to  about  150  genera.  We  may  leave  out  of 
consideration  the  wading  and  aquatic  birds,  most  of  which  are 
wide-ranging  species.  There  remain  123  genera  and  152  species 
of  land-birds,  of  which  9  genera  and  66  species  are  absolutely 
confined  to  the  island,  while  20  more  are  found  also  in  the  Sula 
or  Sanguu-  Islands,  so  that  we  may  take  86  to  be  the  number  of 
peculiar  Celebes  specie.  Lord  Walden,  from  whose  excellent 
paper  on  the  birds  of  Celebes  (Trcms.  Zool.  Soc^vdl.  viii.  p.  23) 
most  of  these  figures  are  obtained,  estimates,  that  of  the  species 
which  are  not  peculiar  to  Celebes,  55  are  of  Oriental  and  22  of 


by  Google 


u.] 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  EEGION. 


429 


Australian  origin,  the  remainder  being  common  to  both  regions. 
This  shows  a  preponderant  recent  immigration  from  the  West 
and  North,  which  is  not  to  he  wondered  at  when  we  look  at  the 
long  coast  line  of  Java,  Borneo,  and  the  Philippine  islands,  with 
an  abundant  and  varied  bird  population,  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  small  scattered  islands  of  the  Moluccas,  with  a  compara- 
tively scanty  bird-fauna,  on  the  other. 

But,  adopting  the  method  here  usually  followed,  let  us  look 
at  the  relations  of  the  gemra  found  in  Celebes,  omitting  for 
the  present  those  which  are  peculiar  to  it.  I  divide  these  genera 
into  two  series : — ^those  which  are  found  in  Borneo  or  Java  but 
not  in  the  Moluccas,  and  those  which  inhabit  the  Moluccas  and 
not  Borneo  or  Java ;  these  being  the  respective  sources  from 
whieh,  primd  facie,  the  species  of  these  genera  must  have  been 
derived.  Genera  which  range  widely  into  both  these  districts 
are  rejected,  as  teaching  us  nothing  of  the  origin  of  the  Cele- 
besian  fauna.  In  a  few  cases,  sub-genera  which  show  a  decided 
eastern  or  western  origin,  are  given. 


Uenbh4  derived  from  Borneo  j 


1.  Geocichla. 

17.  Hydrocisaa. 

2.  Pratincola   (sp.) 

10.  Anfchreptes  (ap.) 

18.  Oranorrhinua. 

a  Trichastoma. 

11.  Mania  (sp.) 

19.  LyncomiB. 

4,  OrioluB  (sp.) 

12.  Acridotherea. 

20.  Treroa  (ep.) 

5.  Cyomis, 

21.  Gallus  (ap.) 

6.  Hypothymis, 

7.  Hyfocliaris. 

14.  MuUenpicus. 

15.  Ehamphoixiccyx. 

22.  Spilorais. 

23.  Butastur. 

6.  .^thopyga. 

16.  Hierococcyx. 

24.  Pemis. 

Gehera  db 

IIVED   PROM    THE   MOLUCCAS   OR   TiMOR. 

1.  Graucalus  (sp.) 

6.  Tanygnathus. 

11.  MyriiStidTOra  (a.  g,) 

2.  Clialcostetlia. 

7.  TrichogloBBus. 

12.  Ducula  (s.  g.) 

3.  Myzomela. 

8.  Scythrops  (sp.) 

13.  Zoncenas  (s.  g.) 

4.  Mmiia(sp.) 

5.  Cacatua  (sp.) 

9.  Turaccena. 

14.  Lamproteron  (a.  g.) 

These  tables  show  a  decided  preponderance  of  Oriental 
over  Austrahan  forms.  But  we  must  remember  that  the  imme- 
diately adjacent  lands  from  whence  the  supply  was  derived,  is 


by  Google 


430 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY. 


[PA 


very  much  richer  in  the  one  caae  than  in  the  other.  The  24 
genera  derived  from  Borneo  and  Java  are  only  about  one  fourth 
of  the  characteristic  genera  of  those  islands;  while  the  15 
Moluccan  and  Timorese  genera  are  fully  owe  third  of  their 
characteristic  types.  The  proportion  derived  from  the  Australian, 
is  greater  than  that  derived  from  the  Oriental  side. 

We  shall  exhibit  this  perhaps  more  clearly,  by  giving  a  list  of 
the  important  groups  of  each  aet  of  islands  which  are  absent 
from  Celebes. 


1.  Euryl^micUe.  5.  Laniidse, 

2.  Timaliidfe.  6.  Megalsemidie. 

3.  Phylloraithidaj.  7.  Trogoiiidte. 

4.  Pycnonotidie  8,  Phasianidie. 


1.  Mimeta. 

2.  Monarcha. 

3.  Bhipiduia. 

4  Pam;cephala. 

5.  Ljcocorau. 

6.  Alcyone. 

7.  Tanyaiptera. 

8.  Geoffrojus. 

9.  Eclectus. 

10.  Platycetcus. 

11.  Eos. 

12.  Loriun. 


omeo  absent  ftom  Celebes. 

1.  Orthotoraua. 

2.  Copsychus. 

3.  EniciiruK. 

4.  Tchitrea. 

B.  Petiorocotus. 

6.  Irena. 

7.  Platylophus. 

8.  Dendrocitta. 

9.  Eulabes. 

10.  HemieereuB, 

11.  Ohryaocolaptes. 
13.  Tigft. 

13.  Microptemus. 

14.  Batrachostomus. 

15.  Palieornis. 

16.  EoUulus. 


If  we  reckon  the  absent  families  to  be  each  represented  by 
only  two  important  genera,  we  shall  find  the  deficiency  on  the 
Oriental  side  much  the  greatest ;  yet  those  on  the  side  of  the 
Moluccas  are  sufficiently  remarkable.  The  Meliphagidse  are  not 
indeed  absolutely  wanting,  since  a  Myzomda  has  now  been 
found  in  Celebes ;  but  all  its  larger  and  more  powerful  forms 
which  range  over  almost  the  entire  region,  are  absent.  This 
may  be  balanced  by  the  absence  of  the  excessively  abundant 
Timaliidje  of  the  Indo-Malay  islands,  which  are  represented  by 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII,]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  431 

only  a  single  species ;  and  by  the  powerful  PhaaianidEe,  repre- 
sented only  by  the  common  Malay  jungle  fowl,  perhaps  intro- 
duced. The  entire  absence  of  Pycnonotidce  is  a  very  anomalous 
fact,  since  one  of  the  lai^est  genera,  Criniger,  is  well  represented 
in  several  islands  of  the  Moluccas,  and  one  has  even  been  found 
in  the  Togian  islands  in  the  great  northern  inlet  of  Celebes ; 
but  yet  it  passes  over  Celebes  itself.  Gei/x,  a  genus  of  emdl 
kingfishers,  is  a  parallel  ease,  since  it  is  found  eveiywhere  from 
India  to  New  Guinea,  leaving  out  only  Celebes ;  but  this  comes 
among  those  curiosities  of  the  Celebesian  fauna  which  we  shall 
notice  farther  on.  In  the  hst  of  genera  derived  from  Borneo  or 
Java,  no  less  than  6  are  represented  by  identical  species  (indi- 
cated by  sp.  after  the  name) ;  while  in  the  Molucean  list  5 
are  thus  identical.  These  must  he  taken  to  indicate,  either  that 
the  genus  is  a  recent  introduction,  or  that  str^glers  still  occa- 
sionally enter,  crossing  the  breed,  and  thus  preventing  specific 
modification.  In  either  case  they  depend  on  the  existing  state 
of  things,  and  throw  no  light  on  the  different  distribution  of 
land  and  sea  which  aided  or  checked  migration  in  former  times ; 
and  they  therefore  to  some  extent  diminish  the  weight  of  the 
Indo-Malay  affinity,  as  measured  by  the  relations  of  the  peculiar 
species  of  Celebes, 

Prom  our  examination  of  the  evidence  thus  far, — ^that  is,  taking 
account  firstly,  of  the  species,  and,  secondly,  of  the  genera,  which 
are  common  to  Celebes  and  the  groups  of  islands  between  which 
it  is  situated,  we  must  admit  that  the  connexion  seems  rather 
with  the  Oriental  thau  with  the  Australian  region;  hut  when  we 
take  into  account  the  proportion  of  the  genera  and  species  pre- 
sent, to  those  which  are  absent,  and  giving  some  weight  to  the 
greater  extent  of  coast  line  on  the  Indo-Malay  side,  we  seem 
justified  in  stating  that  the  Austro-Malay  element  is  rather  the 
most  fully  represented.  This  result  applies  both  to  birds  and 
mammals ;  and  it  leads  us  to  the  belief,  that  during  the  epoch  of 
existing  species  and  genera,  Celebes  has  never  been  united  with 
any  extensive  tract  of  land  either  on  the  Indo-Malay  or  Austro- 
Malay  side,  but  has  received  immigrants  from  both  during  a  very 
long  period,  the  facilities  for  immigration  having  been  rather  the 


by  Google 


432  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [part  hi. 

greatest  on  the  Austro-Malay  or  Australian  side.  We  have  now 
to  consider  what  further  light  can  be  thrown  on  the  suhject  by 
the  consideration  of  the  'p&^vMar  genera  of  Celebes,  and  of  those 
cnriosities  or  anomalies  of  distribution  to  which  we  have 
referred, 

Wine  genera  of  birds  are  altogether  peculiar  to  Celebes ;  three 
more  are  found  only  in  one  other  island,  and  seem  to  be  typi- 
cally Celebesian ;  while  one  is  found  in  the  Sula  islands  (which 
belongs  to  the  Celebes  group)  and  probably  exists  in  Celebes 
also.     The  following  is  a  list  of  these  13  genera : 

1.  ArUmmdei...  (OampepliagidEe)  8.  Mowicliale^an.  (Alcedinidw) 

2.  Slre^tooiltii: ..  (Corvidee)  9.   Gittura      ...             „ 

3.  OAimtonsM..  „  10.  Ceyeoptii  ...            „ 

4.  Oamsola,  (s.  g.)  „  11.  Meropogon ..  (Meropidie) 

5.  Badlamis  ..  (Sturnidte)  12.  Pnonitarus.  (Psittacidte) 

6.  Enodes       ...  „  13.  JHegacepAoJon  (Megapodiidje) 

7.  StimrostTU/m  „ 

Of  the  above,  Ariamides,  Monaehalcyon,  Cittura,  and  Megaae- 
phalon,  are  modifications  of  types  characteristic  of  the  Australian 
region.  AH  are  peculiar  to  Celebes  except  Gittivra,  found  also  in 
the  Sanguir  islands  to  the  northward,  but  which  seems  to  belong 
to  the  Moluccan  group.  Streptocitia,  Chariiorma,  and  Ga^ola, 
are  peculiar  types  of  Corvidte;  the  two  former  allied  to  the 
magpies,  the  latter  to  the  jackdaws.  Charitomts  is  known  only 
from  the  Sula  islands  east  of  Celebes,  and  is  closely  related  to 
Slreptocitia.  There  is  nothing  comparable  to  these  three  groups 
in  any  of  the  Malay  islands,  and  they  seem  to  have  relations 
rather  with  the  Corvidte  of  the  old-world  northern  continent. 
Basilornis,  Enodes,  and  Seissirostrum,  are  remarkable  forms  of 
Stumidse.  Basilomishas  a  beautiful  compressed  crest,  which  in 
the  allied  species  found  in  Ceram  is  elongated  behind.  Enodes 
has  remarkable  red  superciliary  streaks,  but  seems  allied  to 
Calornis.  Soissirostrum  seems  also  allied  to  Calomis  in  general 
structure,  but  has  a  very  peculiarly  formed  bill  and  nostrils.  We 
can  hardly  eay  whether  these  three  forms  show  more  affinity  to 
Oriental  or  to  Australian  types,  but  they  add  to  the  weight  of 
evidence  as  to  the  great  antiquity  and  isolation  of  the  Celebesian 
i  has  been  classed  with  Euryeeras,  a  Mada- 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xiii.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  433 

gasoar  bird,  and  with  Buphaga,  an  African  genus ;  but  the  pecu- 
har  beak  and  nostrils  approximate  more  to  Oractiom  and  ita 
alhes,  of  the  Austrahan  region,  which  should  probably  form  a 
distinct  family.  Oei/copsis  is  undoubtedly  intermediate  between 
the  Malayan  Geyx  and  the  African  Tspidina,  and  is  therefore  es- 
pecially interesting.  Menpogon  is  a  remarkable  form  of  bee- 
eater,  allied  to  the  Indo-Malayan  Ni/ctiomis.  Prioniturus  (the 
racLuet-tailed  parrots)  of  which  two  species  inhabit  Celebes,  and 
one  the  Phihppines,  appears  to  be  alhed  to  the  Austro-Malayan 


We  must  finally  notice  a  few  genera  found  in  Celebes,  whose 
nearest  allies  are  not  in  the  surrounding  islands,  and  which  thus 
afford  illustrations  of  discontinuous  distribution.  The  most  re- 
markable, perhaps,  is  Ooradas,  of  which  a  fine  species  inhabits 
Celebes ;  while  the  genus  is  c[mte  unknown  in  the  Indo-Malay 
sub-region,  and  does  not  appear  again  till  we  reach  Burmah  and 
India;  and  the  species  has  no  closer  affinity  for  Indian  than  for 
African  forms.  Myvxlestes,  a  small  yellow  flycatcher,  is  another 
exmple ;  its  nearest  ally  (M.  cinereocapilla)  being  a  common  Indian 
bird,  but  unknown  in  the  Malay  islands.  The  Celebesian  bird 
described  by  me  as  Prionochilus  aureolimiatus,  is  probably  a 
third  case  of  discontinuous  distribution,  if  (as  a  more  careful 
examination  seems  to  show)  it  is  not  a  Prionochilus,  but  con- 
generic with  Pachyglossa,  a  bird  only  found  in  the  Himalayas. 
The  fine  pigeon,  Cctrpophaga  forsteni,  belongs  to  a  group  found  in 
the  Philippines,  Australia,  and  New  Zealand;  but  the  Celebes 
species  is  very  distinct  from  all  the  others,  and  seems,  if  any- 
thing, more  allied  to  that  of  New  Zealand. 

The  Sula  islands  (Sula-mangola,  Sula-taliabo,  and  Sula-besi) 
lie  midway  between  Celebes  and  the  Moluccas,  being  80  miles 
from  the  nearest  part  of  Celebes,  with  several  intervening 
islands,  and  40  miles  from  Bouru,  all  open  sea.  Their  birds 
show,  as  might  be  expected,  a  blending  of  the  two  faunas,  but 
with  a  decided  preponderance  of  that  of  Celebes.  Out  of  43 
land  birds  which  have  been  collected  in  these  islands,  we  may 
deduct  6  as  of  wide  range  and  no  significance.  Of  the  37  re- 
maining, 21  are  Celebesian  species,  and  4  are  new  species  but 


by  Google 


434  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [PAirr 

allied  to  those  of  Celebes;  while  there  are  10  Moluccan  sped 
and  2  new  species  allied  to  those  of  the  Moluccas.  It  is  c 
that  no  less  than  3  Moluccan  genera,  quite  unknown  in  C 
itself,  occur  here, — MoTiarcha,  Pachyoephala,  and  GHn-iger;  but  all 
these,  as  well  as  several  other  of  the  Moluccan  birds,  are  rather 
weak  flyers,  and  such  as  are  likely  to  have  been  carried  across 
by  strong  winds.  Of  the  gm&ra,  23  are  from  Celebes,  10  from 
the  Moluccas.  These  facts  show,  that  the  Sula  islands  form  part 
of  the  Celebes  group,  although  .they  have  received  an  infusion  of 
Moluccan  fomis,  which  will  perhaps  in  time  spread  to  the  main 
island,  and  diminish  the  remarkable  individuality  that  now  cha- 
racterises its  fauna. 

Insects. — Of  the  reptiles  and  fishes  of  Celebes  we  have  not 
sufficient  information  to  draw  any  satisfactory  conclusions.  I 
therefore  pass  to  the  insects  of  which  something  more  is 
known. 

The  Butterflies  of  Celebes  are  not  very  numerous,  less  than 
200  species  in  all  having  been  collected ;  but  a  very  laige  pro- 
portion of  them,  probably  three-fourths  of  the  whole,  are  peculiar. 
There  is  only  one  peculiar  genus,  -Amechania,  allied  to  Zethera  (a 
group  confined  to  the  Philippine  Islands),  with  which  it  should 
perhaps  he  united.  Most  of  the  genera  are  of  wide  distribution 
in  the  archipelago,  or  are  especially  Malayan,  only  two  truly 
Australian  genera,  Medina  and  Acropthalmia,  reaching  Celebes. 
On  the  other  hand,  7  peculiar  Oriental  genera  are  found  in  Celebes, 
but  not  further  east,  viz.,  Clerome,  Adolias,  Eurvpus,  Apativra, 
Limenitis,  lolaus,  and  Lepfocinyus.  There  are  also  several  indi- 
cations of  a  direct  affinity  with  the  continent  rather  than  with 
Malaya,  as  in  the  cases  already  enumerated  among  birds.  A 
fine  butterfly,  yet  unnamed,  almost  exactly  resembles  Bichorra- 
gia  jtmwwicAMs,  a  Himalayan  species.  Euripws  robustusls  closely 
allied  to  E.  halitherses  of  K.  India ;  there  are  no  less  than  5  species 
of  Limenitis,  all  quite  unlike  those  found  in  other  parts  of  the 
archipelago.  The  butterflies  of  Celebes  are  remarkably  distin- 
guished from  all  others  in  the  East,  by  peculiarities  of  form,  size, 
and  colour,  which  run  through  groups  of  species  belonging  to 
different  genera.      Many  Papilionidte  and  Pieridie,   and  some 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xui.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  435 

Nymphalida;,  have  the  anterior  wings  elongated,  with  the  apex 
often  acute,  and,  what  is  especially  remarkable,  an  abrupt  bend 
or  shoulder  near  the  base  of  the  wing.  (See  Malay  ArcMpelago, 
.Srd  Ed.  p.  ,281,  woodcut.)  No  less  than  13  species  of  Papilio,  10 
Pieridie,  and  4  or  5  NymphaKdte,  are  thus  distinguished  from 
their  nearest  allies  in  the  surrounding  islands  or  in  India.  In 
size  again,  a  large  number  of  Celebesiaoi  butterflies  stand  pre- 
eminent over  their  allies.  The  fine  Papilios-T-at^amaJriiiw,  ilvmwi, 
and  gigon—aie  perfect  giants  by  the  side  of  the  closely-allied 
forms  of  Java ;  while  F.  androdes  is  the  largest  and  longest-tailed, 
of  all  the  true  swallow-tailed  group  of  the  Old  World.  Among 
Nymphalidse,  the  species  of  Shinopalpa  and  Ev/ripus,  peculiar  to 
Celebes,  are  immensely  larger  than  their  nearest  allies ;  and 
several  of  the  Pieridse  are  also  decidedly  larger,  though  in  a  less 
marked  degrea  In  colour,  many  of  the  Celebesian  butterflies  differ 
from  the  nearest  allied  species;  so  that  they  acquire  a  singu- 
larity of  aspect  which  niarks  them  off  from  the  rest  of  the  group. 
The  most  curious  case  is  that  of  three  butterflies,  belongii^ 
to .  three  distinct  genera  (OetJiosia  myrina,  Messaras  mwonides, 
and  Atella  celebmsis)  all  having  a  deUcate  violet  or  lilac  gloss  in 
lines  or  patches,  which  is  wholly  wanting  in  every  allied  species 
of  the  surrounding  islands.  These  numerous  peeuliaritiea  of 
Celebesian  butterflie'5  are  very  extraordinary ;  and  imply  isolation 
from  surrounding  lands,  almost  as  much  as  do  the  strange  forms 
of  mammals  and  birds,  which  more  prominently  characterise  this 
interesting  island. 

Of  the  Coleoptera  we  know  much  leas,  but  a  few  interesting 
fact's  may  be  noted.  There  are  a  number  of  fine  species  of 
Gidndela,  some  of  peculiar  forms ;  and  one  Odontochila,  a  South 
American  genus;  while  Gollyris  reaches  Celebes  from  the 
Oriental  region.  In  Carabidaj  it  has  one  peculiar  genus,  Dicra^ 
speda ;  and  a  species  of  the  fine  Australian  genus  Catadromm. 
In  Lueanid^  it  has  the  Oriental  genus,  Odoriidabris.  In  Oeton- 
iidte  it  has  a  peculiar  genus,  Stemoplm,  and  several  fine  Cetonice; 
but  the  characteristic  Malayan  genus,  Lomaftera,  found  in  every 
other  island  of  the  archipelago  from  Sumatra  to  New  Guinea, 
is  absent — an  analogous  fact  to  the  case  of  Ceyx  among  birds. 


by  Google 


43S  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [pakt  in. 

In  Buprestidie,  the  principal  Austro-Malay  genus,  Sambus,  is 
found  here;  while  Sponsor,  a  genus  8  species  of  which  inhabit 
Mauritius,  has  one  species  here  and  one  in  New  Guinea,  In 
Longicoms  there  are  four  peculiar  genera,  Comusut,  PyOwlia, 
BityU,  and  Omhrosaga ;  hut  the  most  important  features  are  the 
occurrence  of  the  otherwise  purely  Indo-Malayan  genera  Age- 
lasta,  NyctimeTie,  and  Astatkes;  and  of  the  purely  Auatro- 
Malayan  Arrhenotm,  Trysimia,  Xenolea,  AinUymora,  JHallus, 
and  JSgoddnus.  The  remaining  genera  range- over  both  portions 
of  the  archipelago.  In  the  extensive  family  of  CurcuHonidse 
we  can  only  notice  the  elegant  genus,  Celebia,  allied  to  EupJui- 
lus,  which,  owing  to  its  abundance  and  beauty,  is  a  conspicuous 
feature  in  the  entomology  of  the  island. 

Origin  of  the  fauna  of  Celebes. — We  have  now  to  consider, 
briefly,  what  past  changes  of  physical  geography  are  indicated 
by  the  curious  assemblage  of  facta  here  adduced.  We  have 
evidently,  in  Celebes,  a  remnant  of  an  exceedingly  ancient  land, 
■which  has  undergone  many  and  varied  revolutions ;  and  the 
stock  of  ancient  forms  which  it  contains  must  be  taken  account 
of,  when  we  speculate  on  the  causes  that  have  so  curiously 
limited  more  recent  immigrations.  Going  back  to  the  arrival 
of  those  genera  which  are  represented  in  Celebes  by  peculiar 
species,  and  taking  first  the  Austro-Malay  genera,  we  find 
among  them  such  groups  as  Zorusnas  (s.g.),  PMogcenas,  Leuco- 
treron  (s.g.),  and  Turaeceim,  which  are  not  found  in  the  Moluccas 
at  aU ;  and  Myzotnela,  found  in  Timor  and  EandEt,  but  not  in 
Ceram  or  Bouru,  which  are  nearest  to  Celebes.  This,  combined 
with  the  curious  absence  of  so  many  of  the  commonest  Molnccan 
genera,  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Austro-Malay  immigra- 
tion took  place  by  way  of  Timor  and  the  southern  part  of  Hew 
Guinea.  It  will  be  remembered,  that  to  account  for  the  Indo- 
Malayan  forms  in  New  Guinea,  we  suggested  an  extension  of 
that  country  in  a  westerly  direction  just  north  of  Timor.  Now 
this  is  exactly  what  we  recLuire,  to  account  for  the  stockit^ 
of  Celebes  with  the  Australian  forms  it  possesses.  At  this  time 
Borneo  did  not  approach  so  near,  and  it  was  at  a  somewhat  later 
period  that  the  last  great  Indo-Malay  migration  set  in;   but 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTEALIAM  REGION.  437 

finding  the  country  already  fairly  stocked,  comparatively  few 
groups  were  able  to  establish  themselves. 

Going  back  a  little  farther,  we  come  to  the  entrance  of  those 
few  birds  and  insects  which  belong  to  India  or  Indo-China ;  and 
this  probably  occurred  at  the  same  time  as  that  continental 
extension  southward,  which  we  found  was  required  to  acuoimt  for 
a  similar  phenoraenoti  in  Java.  Celebes,  being  more  remote, 
received  only  a  few  str^glers.  "We  have  now  to  go  much 
farther  back,  to  the  time  when  the  ancestors  of  the  peculiar 
Celebesian  genera  entered  the  country,  and  here  our  conjectures 
must  necessarily  be  less  defined. 

On  the  Australian  side  we  have  to  account  for  Megajiefphalon, 
and  the  other  genera  of  purely  Papuan  type.  It  may  perhaps 
be  sufiicient  to  say,  that  we  do  not  yet  know  that  these  genera, 
or  some  very  close  allies,  do  not  still  exist  in  Kew  Guinea ;  in 
which  case  they  may  well  have  entered  at  the  same  time  with 
the  spedes,  already  referred  to.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are 
really  as  isolated  as  they  appear  to  be,  they  represent  an  earlier 
communication,  either  by  an  approximation  of  the  two  islands 
over  the  space  now  occupied  by  the  Moluccas ;  or,  what  is  per- 
haps more  probable,  t!ux)ugh  a  former  extension  of  the  Moluccas, 
which  have  since  undeigone  so  much  subsidence,  as  to  lead  to 
the  extinction  of  a  large  proportion  of  their  ancient  fauna. 
The  wide-spread  volcanic  action,  and  especially  the  prevalence  of 
raised  coral-reefs  in  almost  all  the  islands,  render  this  last 
supposition  very  probable. 

On  the  Oriental  side  the  difficulty  is  greater ;  for  here  we  find, 
what  seem  to  be  clear  indications  of  a  connection  with  Airica,  as 
well  as  with  Continental  Asia,  at  some  immensely  remote  epoch. 
Cynopitheciis,  Baiirusa,  and  Anoa;  C^jcopsis,  SireptocUta,  and  Gaz- 
zola  (s.  g.),  and  perhaps  Scissirostrum,  may  be  weR  explained  as 
descendants  of  ancestral  types  in  their  respective  groups,  which 
also  gave  rise  to  the  special  forms  of  Africa  on  the  one  hand,  and  of 
Asia  on  the  other.  For  this  immigration  we  must  suppose,  that  at 
a  period  before  the  formation  of  the  present  Indo-Malay  Islands, 
a  great  tract  of  land  extended  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  till 
it  met  the  old  Asiatic  continent.     This  may  have  been  before 


by  Google 


438  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY.  [past  hi. 

the  Himalayas  had  risen  to  any  great  height,  anci  when  a  lai^e 
part  of  what  are  now  the  cold  plateaus  of  Central  Asia  may 
have  teemed  with  life,  some  forms  of  which  are  preserved  in 
Africa,  some  in  Malaya,,  and  a  few  in  Celebes.  Here  may 
have  lived  the  common  ancestor  of  Siis,  BaMmisa,  and  Fhaco- 
chmrws ;  as  well  as  of  Oynopitheotis,  Cyiiocephalus,  and  Macaeus  ; 
of  Atwa,  and  Biibalus;  of  Scissirostrwm  and  Ewryceros;  of  Cefyx, 
Ceycopsis,  and  Ispidina.  Such  an  origin  accounts,  too,  for  the 
presence  of  the  Tforth-Indian  forms  in  Celebes ;  and  it  offers  less 
difficulties  than  a  direct  connection  with  continental  Africa, which 
onee  appeared  to  be  the  only  solution  of  the  problem.  If  this 
south-eastward  extension  of  Asia  occurred  at  the  same  time  as 
the  north-eastward  extension  of  South  Africa  and  Madagascar, 
the  two  early  continents  may  have  approached  each  other  suffi- 
ciently to  have  allowed  of  some  interchange  of  forms :  Tarsius 
may  be  the  descendant  of  some  Lemurine  animal  that  then 
entered  the  Malayan  area,  while  the  progenitors  of  Cryptoproda 
may  then  have  passed  from  Asia  to  Madagascar. 

It  is  true  that  we  here  reach  the  extremest  limits  of  specula- 
tion ;  but  when  we  have  before  us  such  singular  phenomena  as 
are  presented  by  the  fauna  of  the  island  of  Celebes,  we  can  hardly 
help  endeavouring  to  picture  to  our  imaginations  by  what  past 
changes  of  land  and  sea  (in  themselves  not  improbable)  the  actual 
condition  of  things  may  have  been  brought  about. 

//.  Australia,  and  Tasmania,  or  the  Australian  Suh-region. 
A  general  sketch  of  Australian  zoology  having  been  given  in  the 
earUer  part  of  this  chapter,  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  occupy  much 
time  on  this  sub-region,  which  is  aa  remarkably  homogeneous  as 
the  one  we  have  just  left  is  heterogeneous.  Although  much  of 
the  northern  part  of  Australia  is  within  the  tropics,  while  Vic- 
toria and  Tasmania  are  situated  from  36°  to  43°  south  latitude, 
there  is  no  striking  change  in  the  character  of  the  fauna 
throughout  the  continent ;  a  number  of  important  genera  extend- 
ing over  the  whole  country,  and  giving  a  very  uniform  character 
to  its  zoology.  The  eastern  parts,  including  the  colonies  of  New 
South  Wales  and  Queensland,  are  undoubtedly  the  richest,  several 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


Wv 

r 

1  ■*' 

•i- 

.fc  - 


'4      ^ff 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  XIII,]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  439 

peculiar  types  being  found  ouly  here.  The  southern  portion  is 
somewhat  poorer,  and  has  very  few  peculiar  forms ;  and  Tasmania 
being  isolated  is  poorer  still,  yet  its  zoology  has  much  resem- 
blance to  that  of  Victoria,  from  which  country  it  has  evidently 
not  been  very  long  separated.  The  north,  as  far  as  yet  known,  is 
characterised  by  hardly  any  peculiar  forms,  but  by  the  occurrence 
of  a  numter  of  Papuan  types,  which  have  evidently  been  derived 
from  New  Guinea. 

Mammalia. — The  Australian  sub-region  contains  about  160 
species  of  Mammalia,  of  which  3  are  Monotremata,  102  Marsu- 
pials, 23  Chiroptera,  1  Carnivora  (the  native  dog,  probably  not 
indigenous),  and  31  Muridee.  The  north  is  characterised  by  a 
species  of  the  Austro-MaJayan  genus  Ousctts.  Phascolarctos  (the 
koala,  or  native  bear)  is  found  only  in  the  eastern  districts; 
Phaseolomys  (the  wombat)  in  the  south-east  and  Tasmania; 
Fetaurista  (a  peculiar  form  of  flying  opossum),  in  the  east.  Thy- 
lacinus  (the  zebra- wolf ),  and  Sarco;philus  (the  "  native  devil "), 
two  carnivorous  marsupials,  are  confined  to  Tasmania.  West 
Australia,  the  most  isolated  and  peculiar  region  botanicaUy, 
alone  possesses  the  curious  little  honey-eating  Tarsipes,  and  the 
Feragalea,  or  native  rabbit.  The  remarkable  Mp'mecohi'us,  a 
small  ant-eating  marsupial,  is  found  in  the  west  and  south  ; 
and  Onychogalea,  a  genus  of  kar^aroos,  in  West  and  Central 
Australia.  All  the  other  genera  have  a  wider  distribution,  as 
will  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  the  list  at  the  end  of  this 
chapter. 

Flate  XI.  A  Scene  in  Tasmania,  with  Characteristic  Mammalia. 
— ^As  some  of  the  most  remarkable  Mammalia  of  the  Australian 
region  are  now  found  only  in  Tasmania,  we  have  chosen  this 
island  for  the  scene  of  our  first  illustration  of  the  fauna  of  the 
Australian  sub-region.  The  pair  of  large  striped  animals  are 
zebra-wolves  (Thylacinus  eynocephalv£),  the  loosest  and  most  de- 
structive of  the  carnivorous  marsupials.  These  creatures  used  to 
be  tolerably  plentiful  in  Tasmania,  where  they  are  alone  found. 
They  are  also  called  "  native  tigers,"  or  "  native  hyaenas ;"  and  being 
destructive  to  sheep,  they  have  been  destroyed  by  the  farmers 
and  will  doubtless  soon  be  exterminated.     In  the  foreground  on 


by  Google 


440  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

the  left  is  a  bandicoot  (Perameles  gv/nnii).  These  are  delicate  little 
animals  allied  to  the  kangaroos ;  and  they  are  found  in  all  parts  of 
Australia,  and  Tasmania,  to  which  latter  country  this  species 
is  confined.  On  the  r^ht  is  the  wombat  {Phascolomys  wombat), 
a  root-eating  marsupial,  with  large  incisor  teeth  like  those  of  our 
rodents.  They  inhabit  south-east  Australia  and  Tasmania.  In 
the  foreground  is  the  porcupine  ant-eater  {Echidna  sdosa),  belong- 
ing to  a  distinct  order  of  mammalia,  Monotremata,  of  which  the 
only  other  member  is  the  duck-billed  Omithorhynehm-  These 
animals  are,  however,  more  nearly  allied  to  the  marsupials,  than 
to  the  insectivora  or  edentata  of  the  rest  of  the  world,  which  in 
some  respects  they  resemble.  An  allied  species  {Echidna  hystrix) 
inhabits  south-east  Australia, 

Birds. — ^Australia  (with  Tasmania)  possesses  about  630  species 
of  birds,  of  which  485  are  land-birds.  Sot  more  than  about  one- 
twentieth  of  these  are  found  elsewhere,  so  that  it  has  a  lai^r 
proportion  of  endemic  species  than  any  other  sub-region  on  the 
globe.  These  birds  are  divided  among  the  several  orders  as 
follows ; 

Passeres  306  Acoipitres 36 

PicaritB  41  Gralla;         77 

Psittaci  60  Aiiseres       65 

Oolumbie  24  Strathionts        ...  3 

GaUinffi  15 

The  Psittaci,  we  see,  are  very  richly  represented,  while  the 
Picariie  are  comparatively  few  ;  and  the  Columbaj  are  scarce 
as  compared  with  their  abundance  in  the  Auatro-Malay  sub- 
region. 

Birds  seem  to  be  very  evenly  distributed  over  all  Australia ; 
comparatively  few  genera  of  importance  being  locally  re- 
stricted. In  the  eastern  districts  alone,  we  find  Origma, 
and  Orihonyx  (Sylviidae) ;  Sericidus  and  Ptilorhymikas  (Para- 
diseidte);  Leueosarcia  (Columbidse) ;  and  Takgalla  (Megapodiidje). 
Nectarinia,  Pitta,  PtilorMs,  CMamydodera,  and  Sphecotheres, 
range  from  the  north  down  the  east  coasts.  Nanodex  (Psittacidse), 
and  Lipoffi  (Megapodiidse),  are  southern  forms,  the  first  extending 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTBALIAN  EEGION.  441 

to  Tasmania;  which  island  appears  to  possess  no  peculiar 
genus  of  birds  except  Mvdyptes,  one  of  the  penguins.  West 
Australia  has  no  wholly  peculiar  geiras  except  Qeopsiitacm,  a 
curious  form  of  ground  parroquet;  the  singular  Atrichia,  first 
found  here,  haVing  been  discovered  in  tlie  east.  In  North 
Austialia,  SmUema  (Ploceidai)  is  the  only  peculiar  Australian 
genus,  but  several  Austro -Malayan  and  Papuan'  genera  enter,— 
as,  Syma  and  Tanydptera  (Aleedinidse)  ;  Mackmrihynchus 
(MuscicapidEc) ;  Calomis  (Sturnidte) ;  Manueodia,  Ptilorkis,  and 
j^lwrcedus  (ParadiseidEe) ;  Megwpodius;  and  Casuarius.  Tlie  pre- 
sence of  a  species  of  bustard  (Ewpodotis)  in  Australia,  is  very 
curious,  its  nearest  allies  being  in  the  plains  of  India  and  Africa. 
Among  waders  the  genus  Trihonyx,  a  thick-legged  bird  some- 
what resembling  the  Notomis  of  New  Zealand,  though  not  closely 
allied  to  it,  is  the  most  remarkable.  The  district  where  the 
typical  Australian  forms  most  abound  is  undoubtedly  the  eastern 
side  of  the  island.  The  north  and  south  are  both  somewhat 
poorer,  the  west  much  poorer,  although  it  possesses  a  few  very 
peculiar  forms,  especially  among  Mammalia.  Tasmania  is  the 
poorest  of  all,  a  considerable  number  of  genera  being  here  want- 
ing ;  but,  except  the  two  pecuKar  carnivorous  marsupials,  it 
possesses  nothing  to  mark  it  off  zoologically  from  the  adjacent 
parts  of  the  main  land.  It  is  probable  that  its  insular  climate, 
more  moist  and  less  variable  than  that  of  Australia,  may  not  be 
suitable  to  some  of  the  absent  forms ;  while  others  may  require 
more  space  and  more  varied  conditions,  than  are  ofiered  by  a 
comparatively  small  island. 

The  remaining  classes  of  animals  have  been  already  discussed 
in  our  sketch  of  the  region  as  a  whole  (p.  396). 

PlaU  JCII.  lUvMrating  the  Fauna  of  Aiistralia. — In  this 
plate  we  take  New  South  Wales  as  our  locality,  and  represent 
chiefly,  the  more  remarkable  Australian  types  of  birds.  The 
most  conspicuous  figure  is  the  wonderful  lyre-bird  (Menura  su- 
■pm-ba),  the  elegant  plumage  of  whose  tail  is  altogether  unique  in 
the  whole  class  of  birds.  The  unadorned  bird  is  the  female.  In 
the  centre  is  the  emu  {Brotiumts  novfe-hollaiidim),  the  represen- 
tative in  Australia,  of  the  ostrich  in  Africa  and  America,  but  be- 

ToL.  I.— 30 


by  Google 


442  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOaEAPHY.  [part  hi. 

loiigiug  to  a  different  family,  the  CasurariiclEe.  To  the  right  are 
a  pair  of  crested  pigeons  {Ocypkaps  lojthoies),  one  of  the  many  sin- 
gular forms  of  tlie  pigeon  family  to  ■which  the  Australian  re- 
gion gives  birth.  In  eveiy  other  part  of  the  globe  pigeons  are 
smooth-headed  birds,  but  here  they  have  developed  three  dis- 
tinct forms  of  crest,  as  seen  in  this  bird,  the  crowned  pigeon 
figured  in  Plate  X.,  and  the  double-crested  pigeon  {Lopholcsmus 
antarclieus).  The  large  bird  oo  the  tree  is  one  of  the  Australian 
frog-mouthed  goat-suckers  {Podargm  strigoides),  which  ate 
called  in  the  colony  "  More-pork,"  from  their  peculiar  cry.  They 
do  not  capture  their  prey  on  the  wing  like  true  goat-suekers,  bnt 
hunt  about  the  branches  of  trees  at  dusk,  for  large  insects,  and 
also  for  unflei^ed  birds.  A  large  kangaroo  (Macropus  giganteus) 
is  seen  in  the  distance ;  and  passing  through  the  air,  a  flying 
opossum  {Petaurus  sdureus),  a  beautiful  modification  of  a  marsu- 
pial, so  as  to  resemble  in  form  and  habits  the  flying  squirrels 
of  the  northern  hemisphera 

///.  Tke  Pacific  Islands,  or  Polynesian  Sub-region. 

Although  the  area  of  this  sub-region  is  so  vast,  and  the 
number  of  islands  it  contains  almost  innumerable,  there  is  a 
considerable  amount  of  uniformity  in  its  forms  of  animal  life. 
Erom  the  Ladrone  islands  on  the  west,  to  the  Marquesas  on  the 
east,  a  distance  of  more  than  5,000  miles,  the  same  characteristic 
genera  of  birds  prevail ;  and  this  is  the  only  class  of  animals  on 
which  we  can  depend,  mammalia  being  quite  absent,  and  reptiles 
very  scarce.  The  Sandwich  Islands,  however,  form  an  exception 
to  this  uniformity;  and,  as  iar  as  we  yet  know,  they  are  so 
peculiar  that  they  ought,  perhaps,  to  form  a  separate  sub-region. 
They  are,  however,  geographically  a  part  of  Polynesia;  and  a 
more  carelul  investigation  of  their  natural  history  may  show 
more  points  of  agi'eement  with  the  other  islands.  It  is  therefore 
a  matter  of  convenience,  at  present,  to  keep  them  in  the  Poly- 
nesian sub-region,  which  may  be  divided  into  Polynesia  proper 
and  the  Sandwich  Islands, 

Polynesia  proper  consists  of  a  number  of  groups  of  islands  of 
some  importance,  and  a  host  of  smaller  intermediate  islets. 


by  Google 


.-;N'  u-^s** 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  xiii.J  THE  ADSTEALIAN  REGION.  443' 

For  the  purpose  of  zoological  comparison,  we  may  class  them  in 
four  main  divisions,  1.  The  Ladrone  and  Caroline  Islands ; 
2.  New  Caledonia  and  the  New  Hebrides ;  3.  The  Fiji,  Tonga, 
and  Samoa  Islands;  4.  The  Society,  and  Maixj^uesas  Islands. 
The  typical  Polynesian  fauna  is  tnost  developed  in  the  third 
division ;  and  it  vrill  lie  well  to  describe  this  first,  and  then  show 
how  the  other  islands  diverge  from  it,  and  approximate  other 


Fiji,  Tonga,  and  Sanwa  Islands. — The  land-hirds  inhabiting 
these  islands  belong  to  41  genera,  of  which  17  are  characteristic 
of  the  Australian  region,  and  9  more  peculiarly  Polynesian. 
The  characteristic  Australian  genera  are  the  foUovping :  Petroica 
(Sylviidse) ;  Lalage  (Campephagidas) ;  Monarcha,  Myiagra,  RMpi- 
dwra  (Muscicapidte) ;  Pachymphaia  {PaehyeephalidEe) ;  Bectes 
(Laniidfe) ;  Myzomda,  Ptilotis,  Anthoohcsra  (Meliphagidie) ;  Ama- 
dina,  Myihrma,  (Ploceidse) ;  Artamus  (Artamidfe) ;  LoHus  (Tri- 
choglossidEe) ;  Ptilopus,  PMogcmas  (Columbidse) ;  Megapodius 
(M^apodiidae). 

The  peculiar  Polynesian  genera  are  : — Tatare,  ZamproUa 
(Sylviidffi)  ;  Aplonis,  Stwmodes  (Sturnidje) ;  Todiramphus 
(Alcedinidfe) ;  PyrMlopsis,  Cyanoramphus,  (Platyeercidje) ;  Co>4- 
philus  (Trichoglossid^) ;  Bidunealvs  (DiduneulidEe). 

The  wide-spread  genera  are  Turdus,  Zost&nyps,  JTinindo,  Hal- 
cyon, Collocalia,  Evdynamis  Ciiculas,  lawtlumas,  Garpophaga, 
Turlur,  Haiimetus,  Asiur,  Cvrcfus,  Sirix,  Am.  The  aquatic  birds 
are  fifteen  in  number,  all  wide-spread  species  except  one — a  form 
of  moor-hen  (GaUinulidEe),  which  has  been  constituted  a  new 


Society,  and  Marguesas  Islands. — Here,  the  number  of  genera  of 
land-birds  has  considerably  diminished,  amounting  only  to  16 
in  all  The  characteristic  Australian  genera  are  5  ; — Monarcha, 
Anikockwra,  Trichoglossm,  Ptilopm,  and  PMoganas.  The  Poly- 
nesian genera  are  4  •,~jCatai-e,  Todii-amphus,  Cyanoramphus, 
CoripMlus,  and  one  recently  described  genus,  Serresius,  an  ex- 
traordinary form  of  large  fruit  pigeon,  here  classed  under  Car- 
pophaga.  These  remote  groups  have  thus  all  the  character  of 
Oceanic  islands,  even  as  rega,rds  the  rest  of  Polynesia,  since  they 


by  Google 


444  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPIIT.  [part  hi. 

possess  hardly  anything,  but  what  they  might  have  received 
by  immigration  over  a  wide  extent  of  ocean. 

Ladrone;  mid  Caroline  Islands.— Th^a^  extensive  groups  of 
small  islands  are  very  imperfectly  known,  yet  a  considerable 
number  of  birds  have  been  obtained.  They  possess  two 
peculiar  Polynesian  genera,  Tatars  and  Sturnodes ;  one  peculiar 
suh-geaus,  PsammatJmtr  (here  included  under  Acrocephalus) ; 
and  ten  of  the  typical  Australian  genera  found  in  Polynesia, — 
Lalage,  Monarcha,  Myiagra,  Rb/i/pidura,  Myzomela,  Erythrwra, 
Artamus,  Phlog<mias,  FtHojms,  and  Megapodius,  as  well  as  the 
Papuan  genus  Hedes,  and  the  Malayan  Galoi'nis ; — so  that  they 
cau  he  ceiiainly  placed  in  the  sub-region.  Genera  which  do 
not  occur  in  the  other  Polynesian  islands  are,  Aeroc^halus,  (s.g. 
Psammathia)  originally  derived  perhaps  from  the  Philippmes ; 
and  Caprimulgiis,  a  peculiar  species,  allied  to  one  from  Japan. 

New  Caledonia,  aitd  the  New  Mebrides.- — ^Although  these  islands 
seem  best  placed  with  Polynesia,  yet  they  form  a  transition  to 
Australia  proper,  and  to  the  Papuan  group.  They  possess  30 
genera  of  land-birds,  18  of  which  are  typical  of  the  Australian 
region  ;  but  while  13  are  also  Polynesian,  there  are  5  which  do 
not  pass  further  east.  These  are  Acanthiza,  Eopsaltna,  Glici- 
phila,  Philemon,  and  lanthienas.  The  peculiar  Polynesian  genus, 
Aplonis,  of  which  three  species  inhabit  New  Caledonia,  link  it  to 
the  other  portions  of  the  sub-region.  The  following  are  the 
genera  at  present  known  from  Hew  Caledonia : — Turdus,  Aea/nr- 
thiza,  Campe2>haga,,  Lalage,  Myiagra,  Uhipidura,  Packyc&phala, 
Bopsaltria,  Corvus,  Physocorax  (s.g.  of  Corvus,  allied  to  the  jack- 
daws), Qlic^hila,  Anihochmra,  Pkilenwn,  Zosteraps,  ErySimra, 
Aplonis,  Artamus,  Cuculus,  Halcyon,  CollocaUa,  CyanorampfiMS, 
Tfichoglossus,  Ptilopus,  Carpophaga,  Macropygia,  lanthcenas, 
Chalcophaps,  Scdiastur,  Accipifsr.  The  curious  SMnoehetus 
fuhaius,  forming  the  type  of  a  distinct  family  of  birds  (Rhino- 
chetidie),  allied  to  the  heTOns,  is  only  known  from  New  Cale- 
donia. 

It  thus  appears,  that  not  more  than  about  50  genera  and  150 
species  of  land-birds,  are  known  from  the  vast  number  of  islands 
that  are  scattered  over  the  Central  Pacific,  and  it  is  not  probable 


by  Google 


CHAP.  Sill.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  445 

that  the  number  will  be  very  largely  increased.  Some  of  the 
species,  as  the  Midynamis  taitensis  and  Tatare  longvrostris,  range 
over  40°  of  longitude,  from  the  Fiji  Islands  to  the  Marquesas.  In 
other  genera,  as  Cyanoraw/phus  and  Ptilopus,  each  important 
island  or  group  of  islands,  has  its  peculiar  species.  The  connec- 
tion of  all  these  islands  with  each  other,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
their  close  relation  to  the  Australian  region,  on  the  other,  are 
equally  apparent ;  hut  we  have  no  sufficient  materials  for  specu- 
lating with  any  success,  on  the  long  series  of  changes  that  have 
brought  about  their  existing  condition,  as  regards  their  peculiar 
forms  of  animal  life. 

Sandwich  Islands. — This  somewhat  extensive  group  of  large 
islands,  is  only  known  to  contain  11  genera  and  18  species  of 
indigenous  land-birds ;  and  even  of  this  small  number,  two  birds 
ofprey  are  wide  ranging  species,  which  may  well  have  reached  the 
islands  durii^  their  present  isolated  condition.  These  latter  are, 
Strix  delicatula,  an  owl  spread  over  Australia  and  the  Pacific  ; 
and  Asio  acd^itrinus,  a  species  which  has  reached  the  Galapagos 
from  8.  America,  and  thence  perhaps  the  Sandwich  Islands.  Of 
the  remaining  8  genera,  one  is  a  crow  (Gonms  ha-fvaiensis),  and 
another  a  fishing  eagle  (Pandion  solitaries),  of  peculiar  species ; 
leaving  7  genera,  which  are  all  (according  to  Mr.  Sclater)  pecuhar. 
First  we  have  Chasiempis,  a  genus  of  Muscicapidfe,  containing 
two  species  (which  may  however  belong  to  distinct  genera) ;  and 
as  the  entire  family  is  unknown  on  the  American  continent 
these  birds  must  almost  certainly  he  allied  to  some  of  the 
numerous  Muscicapine  forms  of  the  Australian  region.  Next 
we  have  the  purely  Australian  family  Meliphagidee,  represented 
by  two  genera, — Moho,  an  isolated  form,  and  Chmtoptila,  a  genus 
established  by  Mr.  Sclater  for  a  bird  before  classed  in  Entomyza, 
an  Australian  group.  The  four  remaining  genera  are  believed 
by  Mr.  Sclater  to  belong  to  one  group,  the  Drepanididte,  altogether 
coniined  to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  Two  of  them,  Ihepanis  and 
HemignathMS,  with  three  species  each,  are  undoubtedly  allied ; 
the  other  two,  Loxops  and  Psittirostva,  have  usually  been  classed 
as  finches.  The  former  seem  to  approach  the  Dicteidte ;  and  all 
resemble  this  group  in  their  coloration. 


by  Google 


m  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [past  hi. 

The  aciuatio  birds  and  waders  all  belong  to  "wide-spread 
genera,  and  only  one  or  two  are  peculiar  species. 

The  Sandwich  Islands  thus  possess  a  laiger  proportion  of 
pecuHai  genera  and  species  of  land-hirds  than  any  other  group 
of  islands,  and  they  are  even  more  strikingly  characterised  by 
what  seema  to  be  a  peculiar  family.  The  only  other  class  of 
terrestrial  animals  at  all  adequately  represented  on  these  islands, 
are  the  land  shells ;  and  here  too  we  find  a  peculiar  family,  sub- 
family, or  genus  (Achatinella  or  AchatineUidas)  consisting  of  a 
number  of  genera,  or  sub-genera,— according  to  the  divergent  views 
of  modem  conchologista, — and  nearly  300  species.  The  Eev,  J, 
T.  Gulick,  who  has  made  a  special  study  of  these  shells  on  the 
spotj  considers  that  there  are  10  genera,  some  of  which  are  con- 
fined to  single  islands.  The  species  are  so  restricted  that  their 
average  range  is  not  more  than  five  or  six  squaie  miles,  while 
some  are  confined  to  a  tract  of  only  two  square  miles  in  extent, 
and  very  few  range  over  an  entire  island.  Some  species  are 
confined  to  the  mountain  ridges,  others  to  the  valleys ;  and  each 
ridge  or  valley  possesses  its  peculiat  species.  Considerably 
more  than  half  the  species  occur  in  the  island  of  Oahu,  where 
there  is  a  good  deal  of  forest.  Very  few  shells  helongii^  to 
other  groups  occur,  and  they  are  all  small  and  obscure ;  the 
AchatinellEB  almost  monopolising  the  entire  archipelago. 

Remarks  on  the  probable  past  history  of  the  Sandwich  Islands. 
—The  existence  of  these  peculiar  groups  of  birds  and  land- 
shells  in  30  remote  a  group  of  volcanic  islands,  clearly  mdicates 
that  they  are  but  the  relica  of  a  more  extensive  land;  and  the 
reefs  and  islets  that  stretch  for  more  than  1,000  miles  in  a  west- 
north-west  direction,  may  be  the  remains  of  a  country  once 
sufficiently  extensive  to  develope  these  and  many  other,  now 
extinct,  forms  of  life.^ 

Some  light  may  perhaps  he  thrown  on  the  past  history  of  the 

'  A  new  genua  of  Beetles  (^ApUroc^oliis)  of  the  family  Lucaiiidfe,  has 
recently  been  described  from  tlie  Sandwich  Islands,  and  it  is  said  to  be  most 
nearly  related  to  a  group  inhabiting  ChiU, — an  indication  either  of  the  great 
antiquity  of  the  founa,  or  of  the  varied  accidental  migrations  from  which  it 
has  had  ita  origin. 


b,  Google 


CHAP.  xiiL]  THE  AUSTBALIAN  BEGION.  44/ 

Sandwich  Islands,  by  the  peculiar  plants  wliich  are  found  ou 
their  mountains.  The  peak  of  Teneriffe  produces  no  Alpine 
plants  of  European  type,  and  this  has  be€n  considered  to  pixive 
that  it  has  been  always  isolated ;  whereas  the  occurrence  of  North 
Temperate  forms  on  the  mountains  of  Java,  accords  with  other  evi- 
dence of  this  i=5land  having  once  formed  part  of  the  Asiatic  con- 
tinent. Now  on  the  higher  summits  of  the  Sandwich  Islands, 
nearly  30  genera  of  Arctic  and  North  Temperate  flowering  plants 
have  been  found.  Many  of  these  occur  also  in  the  South  Temperate 
zone,  in  Australia  or  New  Zealand ;  but  there  are  others  which 
seem  plainly  to  point  to  a  former  connection  with  some  North 
Temperate  land,  probably  California,  as  a  number  of  islets  aie 
scattered  in  the  ocean  between  the  two  countries,  The  most 
interesting  genera  are  the  following  : — SUene,  which  is  wholly 
North  Temperate,  except  that  it  occurs  in  S.  Africa  ;  Vicia, 
also  North  Temperate,  and  in  South  Temperate  America; 
Fragaria,  with  a  similar  distribution;  Aster,  widely  spread 
in  America,  otherwise  North  Temperate  only ;  Vaccinium, 
wholly  confined  to  the  northern  hemisphere,  in  cold  and 
temperate  climates.  None  of  these  are  found  in  Australia  or 
New  Zealand  ;  and  their  presence  in  the  Sandwich  Islands 
seems  clearly  to  indicate  a  former  approximation  to  North 
Temperate  America,  although  the  absence  of  any  American 
forms  of  vertebrata  renders  it  certain  that  no  actual  land  con- 
nection ever  took  place, 

Eecent  soundings  have  shown,  that  the  Sandwich  Islands 
rise  from  a  sea  which  is  3,000  fathoms  or  18,000  feet  deep ; 
while  there  is  a  depth  of  at  least  2,000  fathoms  all  across  to 
California  on  one  side,  and  to  Japan  ou.  the  other.  Between 
the  riji  Islands,  New  Caledonia,  the  Solomon  Islands,  and 
Australia,  the  depth  is  about  1,300  fathoms,  and  between  Sydney 
and  New  Zealand  2,600  fathoms ;  showing,  in  every  case,  a 
general  accordance  between  the  depth  of  sea  and  the  approxi- 
mation of  the  several  faunas.  In  a  few  more  years,  when  it  is 
to  be  hoped  we  shall  know  the  contour  of  the  sea-bottom  better 
than  that  of  the  continents,  we  shall  be  able  to  arrive  at  more 
definite  and  trustworthy  conclusions  as  to  the  j 


by  Google 


448  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [paet  hi. 

of  land  and  sea  by  which  the  phenomena  of  animal  distribution 
in  the  Pacific  have  been  brought  about. 

Reptiles  of  the  Polynesian  Sub-region. — The  researches  of 
Mr.  Darwin  on  Coral  Islands,  proved,  that  large  areas  in  the 
Pacific  Ocean  have  been  recently  subsiding;  but  the  peculiar 
forms  of  life  which  they  present,  no  less  clearly  indicate  the 
former  existence- of  some  extensive  lands.  The  total  absence  of 
Mammalia,  however,  shows  either  that  these  lands  never  formed 
part  of  the  Austrahan  or  Papuan  continents,  or  if  they  did,  that 
they  have  been  since  subjected  to  such  an  amount  of  subsidence 
as  to  exterminate  most  of  their  higher  terrestrial  forms  of  life. 
It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance,  that  although  Mammalia  (except 
bats)  are  wanting,  there  are  a  considerable  number  of  reptiles 
ranging  over  the  whole  sub-region.  Lizards  are  the  most 
numerous,  five  families  and  fourteen  genera  being  represented, 
as  follows : — 

1.  Cryptobiephams  (Gymnopthalmidse)  F^ji  Islands. 

2.  Ablepharua     ...  „  All  the  islands. 

3.  Lygosoma        ...  (ScinGidsaj  ...  Pelew  lalauda.  New  Caledonia. 

4.  Mabouya         ...         „  ...  Samoa  Mauds. 

5.  Euprepes         ...         „  ...  Pacific  Islands. 

6.  HaciyZojwrits  ...  (Gecltotidse)  ...  Sacdwieli  Islands. 

7.  Doryura         ...  {Gieckotidte)  ...  Pacific  Islands. 

8.  Gehyra  ...        „  ...  Fiji  Islands. 

9.  AmydosauTUS...         „  ...  TaiitL 

10.  Heteronoti     ...        .,  ...  Fiji  Islands. 

11.  Oorrelophus    ...        „  ...  New  Caledonia. 

12.  Brachyhphus ...  (Iguanidse)  ...  Fiji  Islands. 

13.  LopUura  ...  (Agamid^)  ...  Pelew  Islands. 

14.  ChMTOBcaTUs  ...         „  ...  Fiji  Mauds. 


The  first  five  are  wide-spread  genera,  represented  mostly  by 
peculiar  species ;  but  sometimes  the  species  themselves  have  a 
wide  range,  as  in  the  case  of  AUephanis  pcecilopleiirus,  which 
(according  to  Dr.  Gtiuther)  is  found  in  Timor,  Australia,  New 
Caledonia,  Savage  Island  (one  of  the  Samoa  group),  and  the 
Sandwich  Islands !  Gehyra.  and  Heteronota  are  Australian 
genera  ;  while  Lophura  has  reached  the  Pelew  Islands  from  the 
Moluccas.  The  remainder  (printed  in  italics),  are  peculiar  genera ; 
Mrachyiophus  being  especially  interesting  as  an  example  of  an 


by  Google 


OTAP.  XTii.]  THE  AUSTEALIAN  REGION.  449 

otherwise  peculiar  American  family,  occurring  so  fat  across  the 
Pacific. 

Snakes  are  much  less  abundant,  only  four  genera  beii^  repre- 
sented, one  of  them  marina  Tliey  are,  Anoplodipsas,  a  peculiar 
genus  of  Amblycephalidaj  from  New  Caledonia;  Enygrus,  a 
genus  of  Pythonidte  from  the  Fiji  Islands ;  Ogmodon,  a  peculiar 
genus  of  Elapidse,  also  from  the  Fiji  Islands,  but  ranging  to 
Papua  and  the  Moluccas  ;  and  Platurm,  a  wide-spread  genus  of 
sea-snakes  (Hydrophidfe).  In  the  more  remote  Sandwich  and 
Society  Islands  there  appear  to  be  no  snakes.  This  accords 
with  our  conclusion  that  lizards  have  some  special  means  of 
dispersal  over  the  ocean  which  detracts  from  their  value  as 
indicating  zoo-geographical  affinities ;  which  is  further  proved 
by  the  marvellous  range  of  a  single  species  (referred  to  above) 
from  Australia  to  the  Sandwich  Islands. 

A  species  of  Ht/la  is  said  to  inhabit  the  Wew  Hebrides,  and 
several  species  of  Platymantis  (tree-frogs)  are  found  in  the  Fiji 
Islands ;  but  otherwise  the  Amphibians  appear  to  be  unrepre- 
sented in  the  sub-region,  though  they  will  most  likely  be  found 
in  so  large  an  island  as  Kew  Caledonia. 

rrom  the  foregoing  sketch,  it  appears,  that  although  the 
reptiles  present  some  special  features,  they  agree  on  the  whole 
with  the  birds,  in  showing,  that  the  islands  of  Polynesia 
all  belong  to  the  Australian  region,  and  that  in  the  Fiji  Is- 
lands is  to  be  found  the  fullest  development  of  their  peculiar 


IV.  New  Zealand  Sul-i-egion. 

The  islands  of  New  Zealand  are  more  completely  oceanic 
than  any  other  extensive  tract  of  land,  being  about  1,200 
miles  from  Australia  and  nearly  the  same  distance  from  New 
Caledonia  and  the  Friendly  Isles.  There  are,  however,  several 
islets  scattered  around,  whose  productions  show  that  they 
belong  to  the  same  sub-region ; — the  principal  bcii^,  Norfolk 
Island,  Lord  Howe's  Island,  and  the  Kermadec  Isles,  on  the 
north  ;  Chatham  Island  on  the  east ;  the  Auckland  and  Mac- 
quarie  Isles  on  the   south ;— and  if  these  were  once  joined  to 


by  Google 


450  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  ni. 

New  Zealand,  there  would  have  heen  formed  an  island-con- 
tinent not  much  inferior  in  extent  to  Australia  itself. 

New  Zealand  is  wholly  situated  in  the  warmer  portion  of 
the  Temperate  zone,  and  enjoys  an  exceptionally  mild  and. 
equable  chmate.  It  lias  abundant  moisture,  and  thus  comes 
within  the  limits  of  the  South-Temperate  forest  zone ;  and  this 
leads  to  its  productions  often  resembling  those  of  the  tropical, 
but  moist  and  wooded,  islands  of  the  Pacific,  rather  than  those 
of  the  temperate,  but  arid  and  scantily  wooded  plains  of  Aus- 
tralia. The  two  islands  of  New  Zealand  are  about  the  same 
extent  (approximately)  as  the  British  Isles,  but  the  difference  in 
the  general  features  of  their  natural  history  is  very  gi-eat.  There 
are,  in  the  former,  no  mammalia,  less  than  half  as  many  birds, 
very  few  reptiles  and  fresh-water  fishes,  and  an  excessive  and 
most  unintelligible  poverty  of  insects;  yet,  considering  the 
situation  of  the  islands  and  their  evidently  long-continued 
isolation,  the  wonder  rather  is  that  their  fauna  is  so  varied 
and  interesting  aa  it  is  found  to  be.  Our  knowledge  of  this 
fauna,  though  no  doubt  far  from  complete,  is  sufdciently 
ample ;  and  it  will  be  well  to  give  a  pretty  full  account  of 
it,  in  order  to  see  what  conclusions  may  be  drawn  as  to  its 
origin. 

Mammalia. — The  only  mammals  positively  known  as  indi- 
genous to  New  Zealand  are  two  bats,  both  peculiar  to  it, — Scoto- 
philus  tuheradatus  and  Mystadna  tub&rculata.  The  former  is 
allied  to  Australian  forms ;  the  latter  is  more  interesting,  aa 
beii^  a  peculiar  genus  of  the  family  NoctilionidEe,  which  does 
not  exist  in  Australia ;  and  in  havii^  decided  resemblances  to 
the  Phyllostomidie  of  South  America,  so  that  it  may  almost  be 
considered  to  be  a  connecting  link  between  the  two  families.  A 
forest  rat  is  said  to  have  once  abounded  on  the  islands,  and  to 
have  been  used  for  food  by  the  natives ;  but  there  is  much  doubt 
as  to  what  it  really  was,  and  whether  it  was  not  an  introduced 
species.  The  seals  are  wide-spread  antarctic  forms  which  have 
no  geographical  significance. 

Birds. — ^About  145  species  of  birds  are  natives  of  New  Zealand, 
of  which  88  are  waders  or  aquatics,  leaving  57  land-birds  belong- 


by  GoOglc 


CHAP.  Xlll.} 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  BEGION. 


ing  to  34  genera.  Of  this  latter  number,  Ifi,  or  nearly  half,  are 
peculiar ;  and  there  are  also  5  pecuhai'  genera  of  waders  and 
aquatic  birds,  making  21  in  all.  Of  the  remaining  genera  of 
land-birds,  four  are  cosmopolite  or  of  very  wide  range,  while  the 
remainder  are  characteristic  of  the  Australian  region.  The 
following  is  a  list  of  the  Australian  genera  found  in  New 
Zealand ;  ^henceaeus,  Gerygone,  Orthonyx  (Sylviid^e) ;  Graucalus 
(Campephagidas) ;  SMpidura  (Muscicapidas) ;  Anthockcera  (Meli- 
phagidas);  Zosteraps  (Dicteidse) ;  C^awwampAws  (Platycercidte) ; 
Carpophaga.  (Columbida;) ;  Hieracidea  (Falconidte) ;  Trihonyx 
(Rallidai).  Besides  these  there  are  several  genera  of  wide 
range, .  as  follows ; — Anthus  (Motacillidffi) ;  Hirundo  (Hirun- 
dinidfe) ;  Chrysococoyx,  Evdynamis  (CuculidEe) ;  Jlalcyon  (Alce- 
dinidie) ;  Cotumis  (TetraonidEe) ;  Circiis  (Falconidse) ;  Athene 
(Strigidffi). 

Most  of  the  above  genera  are  represented  by  peeidiar  New 
Zealand  species,  hut  in  several  cases  the  species  are  identical 
with  those  of  Australia,  as  in  the  following :  Anthockeera  carun- 
mlata,  Zosierops  lateralis,  Hirundo  nigricans,  and  Chrysococcifx 
hicidtis  ;  also  one — Mudynamis  taitensis — which  is  Polynesian, 

We  now  come  to  the  genera  peculiar  to  New  Zealand,  which 
are  of  especial  interest : 


f  Geseha  0 


3  Pectiliak  to  N"ew  Zealand. 


Stlvudje. 

J.  Myiomoira 
2.  Mixo  ... 


3      AllicdtoPetroica.anAustraliaJi  genus 


5.  Acantliisitta 


Of  doubtful  affinities. 


Meliphagid.e. 

7.  Prosthemailera 

8.  Pogonomis 

9.  Anthornis 


Of  doubtful  affinities. 


I       Peculiar  genera  of  honeysu titers,   a 
1  fsmily  wliich  is  eonfined  to  the 

3  Australian  Region. 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Family  snd  Gomis. 

10.  Creiidion 

11.  Heterolocha    ... 

12.  Callieas 

..'.        1 
3 

These  three  genera  are  protably 
allied,  and  perhaps  form  adia- 
tinct  family. 

Nestorid^, 

13.  Nestor 

3 

A  peculiar  family  of  Parrots. 

14.  Stringops 

1 

A  peculiar  fiimily  of  Parrots. 

Stbiqid^. 

15.  (SceloglaUx)    ... 

1 

s.g.  of  Athene. 

IB.  Ocydromua      ... 

6 

Allied  to  Mukibeornis,  an  Australian 

17.  Notornis 

18.  Thiiiorais 

19.  Aniirhynchus  ... 

1 
.'.'.         1 

Allied  to  Porphyj-io,  a,  genus  of  wide 
range. 

ASATIDX. 

20.  Hymemoliemus 

APTEB,rGID.B. 

21.  Apteryx 

1 

4 

Allied  to  MaJacorhyndius,  an  Aus- 
tralian genus. 

I'orming  a.  peculiar  feimily. 

We  have  thus  a  wonderful  amount  of  speciality;  yet  the  affi- 
nities of  the  fauna,  whenever  they  can  be  tiEtced,  are  with  Aus- 
tralia or  Polynesia.  Nine  genera  of  New  Zealand  birds  are 
characteristically  Australian,  and  the  eight  genera  of  wide  range 
are  Australian  also.  Of  the  peculiar  genera,  7  or  8  are  undoubtedly 
aUied  to  Australian  groups.  There  are  also  four  Australian  and 
one  Polynesian  species.  Even  the  peculiar  famUf/,  Nestoridte,  is 
allied  to  the  Australian  Trichoglossidse.  We  have  therefore  every 
gradation  of  similarity  to  the  Australian  fauna,  from  identical 
species,  through  identical  genera,  and  alhed  genera,  to  distinct 
but  allied  families;  clearly  indicating  very  long  continued  yet 
rare  immigations  from  Australia  or  Polynesia;  immigrations  wliich 
are  continued  down  to  our  day.  Por  resident  ornithologists  be- 
lieve, that  the  Zosterops  lateralis  has  found  its  way  to  New  Zea- 
land within  the  last  few  years,  and  that  the  two  cuckoos  now 
migrate  annually,  the  one  from  Australia,  the  other  from  some 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xni.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  453 

part  of  Polyneaia,  distances  of  more  than  1,000  miles  !  Tlieae 
facts  seem,  however,  to  have  been  accepted  on  insufficient  evidence 
and  to  be  in  themselves  extremely  improbable.  It  is  observed 
that  the  cuckoos  appear  annually  in  certain  districts  and  again 
disappear ;  but  their  course  do^  not  seem  to  have  heen  traced, 
still  less  have  tbey  ever  been  actually  seen  arriving  or  departing 
across  the  ocean.  In  a  country  which  has  still  such  wide  tracts 
of  unsettled  land,  it  is  very  possible  that  the  hirds  in  cLuestion 
may  only  move  from  one  part  of  the  islands  to  another. 

Islets  of  the  New  Zealand  Sub-region. 

We  will  here  notice  the  smaller  islands  belonging  to  the  sub- 
region,  as  it  is  chiefly  their  birds  that  possess  any  interest. 

Morfolh  Island. — The  land-hirds  recorded  from  this  island 
amount  to  15  species,  of  which  8  are  Australian,  viz. ;  Climac- 
tens  seandens,  Symmorpkus  Imcopygius,  Zost.erops  tmuirostris  and 
Z.  alhogularis,  Halcyon  saiicitts,  Platycercus  pmina'rUi,  Carpiypkaga 
spadicea,  Phapspicata  and  P.  chalcoptera.  Of  the  peculiar 
species  three  helong  to  Australian  genera ;  Petroica,  Gerygone,  and 
Ehipidwra ;  one  to  a  cosmopolitan  genus,  Turdus.  So,  far  the 
affinity  seems  to  be  all  Australian,  and  there  remain  only  three 
birds  which  ally  this  island  to  Kew  Zealand, — Nestor  prodiictus, 
CyanorawphU'S  rayneri,  and  Notornis  alba.  The  former  inhabited 
the  small  PhilUp  Island  (close  to  Norfolklsland)  but  is  now  extinct. 
Being  a  typical  New  Zealand  genus,  quite  incapable  of  flying 
across  the  sea,  its  presence  necessitates  some  former  connexion 
between  the  two  islands,  and  it  is  therefore  perhaps  of  more 
weight  than  all  the  Australian  genera  and  species,  which  are  birds 
capable  of  long  flights.  The  Cyanorampkus  is  allied  to  a  New 
Zealand  broad-tailed  parroquet.  The  Notornis  alba  is  extinct, 
but  two  specimens  exist  in  museums,  and  it  is  even  a  stronger 
case  than  the  Nestor,  as  showing  a  former  approximation  or  union 
of  this  island  with  Now  Zealand.  A  beautiful  figure  of  this 
bird  is  given  in  the  Ibis  for  1873. 

Lord  Howe's  Island. — This  smaU  island,  situated  half-way 
between  Australia  and  Norfolk  Island,  is  interesting,  as  contain- 
ing a  pecuhar  species  of  the  New  Zealand  genus  Ocydrmnus,  or 


by  Google 


454  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi. 

wood-hen  {0.  sylvestris).  There  is  also  apecuhat  thrash,  Turdus 
vinitinctus.  Ite  other  hirds  are  wholly  of  Australian  types,  and 
most  of  them  probably  Australian  specie.  The  following  have 
been  observed,  and  no  doubt  constitute  nearly  its  whole  indigeii- 
OTis  bird  fauna.  Acanthiza,  sp.,  Shipidwa  sp.,  Pachycepkala  gut- 
turalis,  Zosterops  strennimis  and  Z.  tephroplewnis,  Sirepera  sp., 
Halcyon  sp.,  and  Ghakophaga  chrysoehlara.  The  two  species  of 
Zosterops  aje  peculiar.  The  Oeydrofnus  is  important  enough  to 
ally  this  island  to  New  Zealand  rather  than  to  Australia ;  and  if 
the  white  bird  seen  there  is,  as  supposed,  the  Notorms  alba  which 
is  extinct  in  Norfolk  Island,  the  connection  wiU  be  rendered 
still  more  clear. 

Gkatha/m,  Islands. — These  small  islands,  450  miles  east  of  Kew 
Zealand,  posses  about  40  species  of  birds,  of  which  13  are  land- 
birds.  AH  but  one  belong  to  New  Zealand  genera,  and  all  but 
five  are  New  Zealand  species.  The  following  are  the  genera  of 
the  land-birds  :  Sphenceacus,  Oerygone,  Myiomoira,  Hhipidura, 
Zosterops,  AiUhus,  ProstJiemadera,  Anthomis,  Ohrysococcyx,  Cyo/m- 
ramphvs,  Garpophaga.,  Circm.  The  peculiar  species  are  Aii- 
ihomis  melanocephala,  Myiomoira,  diffenbacM  and  M.  traversi, 
Ehipidura  fiaiieUifera,  and  a  peculiar  rail  incapable  of  flight, 
named  by  Captain  Hutton  Gaialus  modestus.  It  is  stated  that 
the  Zosterops  differs  from  that  of  New  Zealand,  and  is  also  a 
migrant ;  and  it  is  therefore  believed  to  come  every  year  from 
Australia,  passing  over  New  Zealand,  a  distance  of  nearly  1,700 
miles !  Further  investigation  will  perhaps  discover  some  other 
explanation  of  the  facts.  It  is  also  stated,  that  the  pigeon  and 
one  of  the  small  birds  (?  Gmygone  or  Zosterops)  have  arrived  at 
the  islands  within  the  last  eight  years.  The  natives  further  de- 
clare, that  both  the  Stringops  and  Aptm/x  once  inhabited  the 
islands,  but  were  exterminated  about  the  year  1835. 

The  Audcland  Islands. — These  are  situated  nearly  300  miles 
south  of  New  Zealand,  and  possess  six  laud-birds,  of  which  three 
are  peculiar, — Anthus  aucMandicus,  Cyanormnphus  aucklandicus, 
and  G.  malherHi,  the  others  being  New  Zealand  species  of 
Myiomoira,  Prosthemadera,  and  Anthoi-nis.  It  is  remarkable 
that  two  peculiar  parrots  of  the  same  genus  shonld  inhabit  these 


by  Google 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


CHAr.  xiii.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  EEGION,  455 

small  islands ;  but  such  localities  seem  favouratle  to  the  Platy- 
cercidfe,  for  another  peculiar  species  is  found  in  the  remote  Mac- 
quarie  Islands,  more  than  400  miles  farther  south.  A  peculiar 
species  and  genus  of  ducks,  Nesonetta  aucklandica,  is  also  found 
here,  and  as  far  as  yet  known,  nowhere  else.  A  species  of 
the  northern  genus  M&rgus  is  also  found  on  these  islands,  and  has 
been  recently  obtained  by  Earon  von  Hiigel. 

PlaU  XIII.  Illvstrating  the-  peculiar  Ondihology  of  New  Zea- 
land.— Our  artist  has  here  depicted  a  group  of  the  most  remark- 
able and  characteristic  of  the  New  Zealand  birds.  In  the  middle 
foreground  is  the  Owl-parrot  or  Kakapoe  {Stringops  hahroptilus), 
a  nocturnal  burrowing  parrot,  that  feeds  on  fern-shoots,  roots, 
berries,  and  occasionally  lizards ;  that  climbs  but  does  not  fly ; 
and  that  has  an  owl-like  mottled  plumage  and  facial  disc. 
The  wings  however  are  not  rudimentary,  but  fully  developed; 
and  it  seems  to  be  only  the  muscles  that  have  become  useless 
for  want  of  exercise.  This  would  imply,  that  these  birds  have 
not  long  been  inhabitants  of  New  Zealand  only,  but  were  deve- 
loped in  other  countries  (perhaps  Australia)  where  their  wings 
were  of  use  to  them. 

Beyond  the  Kakapoe  are  a  pair  of  the  lai^e  rails,  Notornis 
mantelli;  heavy  birds  with  short  wings  quite  useless  for 
flight,  and  with  massive  feet  and  bill  of  a  red  colour.  On 
the  right  is  a  pair  of  Kiwis  {Apteryx  australis),  one  of  the 
queerest  and  most  unbird-like  of  living  birds.  It  has  very  small 
and  rudimentary  wings,  entirely  concealed  by  the  hair-like 
plumage,  and  no  tail.  It  is  nocturnal,  feeding  chiefly  on  worms, 
which  it  extracts  from  soft  earth  by  means  of  its  long  bill.  The 
genus  Apteryx  forms  a  distinct  famQy  of  birds,  of  which  four 
species  are  now  known,  besides  some  which  are  extinct.  They 
are  allied  to  the  Cassowary  and  to  the  gigantic  extinct  Dinomis. 
On  the  wing  are  a  pair  of  Crook-billed  Plovers  {Anarhynchus 
frontalis),  remarkable  for  being  the  only  birds  known  which 
have  the  bill  bent  sideways.  This  was  at  first  thought  to  be  a 
malformation ;  but  it  is  now  proved  to  be  a  constant  character  of 
the  species,  as  it  exists  even  in  the  young  chicks ;  yet  the  pur- 
pose served  by  such  an  anomalous  structure  is  not  yet  discovered. 


by  Google 


456  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [part  hi, 

No  country  on  the  globe  can  offer  such  aa  extraordinary  set  of 
birds  as  are  here  depicted. 

Jteptiles. — These  consist  almost  -wholly  of  lizards,  there  being 
no  land-snakes  and  only  one  frog.  Twelve  species  of  lizards  are 
known,  belonging  to  three  genera,  one  of  which  is  peculiar,  as 
are  all  the  species.  Hinulia,  with  two  species,  and  Mocoa,  with 
four  species  (one  of  which  extends  to  the  Chatham  Islands), 
belong  to  the  Scincidre ;  both  are  very  wide-spread  genera  and 
occur  in  Australia,  The  peculiar  genus  iVaM?ft!)i7*s,  with  six  species, 
belongs  to  the  Greckotid^,  a  family  spread  over  the  whole  world. 

The  inost  extraordinary  and  iateieating  reptile  of  New  Zea- 
land is,  however,  the  Hattena  punctata,  a  lizard-like  animal 
living  in  holes,  and  found  in  small  islands  on  the  north-east 
coast,  and  more  rarely  on  the  main  land.  It  is  somewhat  inter- 
mediate in  structure  between  lizards  and  crocodiles,  and  also  has 
bird-like  characters  in  the  form  of  ita  ribs.  It  constitutes,  not 
only  a  distinct  family,  EhyncocephalidEe,  but  a  separate  order  of 
reptiles,  Ehyhcocbphauna.  It  is  quite  isolated  from  all  othe? 
members  of  the  class ;  and  is  probably  a  slightly  modified  repr&- 
sentative  of  an  ancient  and  generalised  form,  which  has  been 
superseded  in  larger  areas  by  the  more  specialized  lizards  and 


The  only  representatives  of  the  Ophidia  are  two  sea-snakes 
of  Australian  and  Polynesian  species,  and  of  no  geographical 
interest. 

AmpMiia. — The  solitary  frog  indigenous  to  New  Zealand, 
belongs  to  a  peculiar  genus,  Liopdma,  and  to  the  family  Bom- 
buratoridse,  otherwise  confined  to  Europe  and  temperate  South 
America. 

Fresh-water  Fishes. — There  are,  according  to  Captain  Hutton, 
15  species  of  fresh- water  fish  in  New  Zealand,  belonging  to  7 
genera ;  six  species,  and  one  genus  (Refropinna),  being  peculiar, 
Hetropinna  iHchardsoni  belongs  to  the  Salmonida?,  and  is  the 
only  example  of  that  family  occurring  in  the  Southern  hemi- 
sphere, where  it  is  confined  to  New  Zealand  and  the  Chatham 
Islands.    The  wide  distribution  of  Galaxias  attenuatus—iroia  the 


by  Google 


(HAP.  xiJL]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  EEGION.  457 

Ohatliam  Islands  to  South  America— has  already  been  noticed  ;, 
while  another  species,  Q.  fasdatus,  ia  found  in  the  Chatham  and 
Auckland  Isles  as  well  as  Kew  Zealand.  A  second  genus 
peculiar  to  B'ew  Zealand,  Neaehanna,  alhed  to  Galaxias,  has 
recently  been  described.  Prototroctes  oxyrhynckus  is  allied  to  an 
Australian  species,  but  belongs  to  a  family  (HaplochitonidEe) 
which  is  otherwise  South  American.  An  eel,  Anguilla  latirosiris, 
is  found  in  Europe,  China,  and  the  West  Indies,  as  well  as  in 
New  Zealand !  while  the  genua  Agonostoma  raises  to  Australia, 
Celebes,  Mauritius,  and  Central  Ameiica, 

Insects. — The  great  poverty  of  this  class  is  well  shown  by  the 
fact,  that  only  eleven  species  of  butterflies  are  known  to  inhabit 
New  Zealand,  Of  these,  six  are  peculiar,  and  one,  Argyvoph&nga 
(Satyridje),  is  a  peculiar  genus  alhed  to  the  Northern  genus 
Hrebia.  The  rest  are  either  of  wide  range,  as  Fyrameis  eardwi 
and  Diadema  holma  ;  or  Australian,  as  Ha/mdyaas  zoilus  ;  while 
one,  Danais  erippus,  is  American,  but  has  also  occurred  in  Australia, 
and  is  no  doubt  a  recent  introduction  into  both  countries. 
Only  one  S;pMnx  is  recorded,  and  no  other  species  of  the  Sphin- 
gina  except  the  British  currant-moth,  Mge,rvi  tipidifor-mis, 
doubtless  imported.  Coleoptera  are  better  represented,  nearly 
300  species  having  been  described,  all  or  nearly  all  being  pecu- 
liar. These  belong  to  about  150  genera,  of  which  more  than  50 
are  peculiar.  No  less  than  14  peculiar  genera  belong  to  the 
Carabidte,  mostly  consisting  of  one  or  two  species,  but  D&metrida 
has  3,  and  Metaglymma  8  species.  Other  important  genera  are 
Dicrochile,  JTomalosoma,  Mecodema,  and  Scopodes,  all  in  common 
with  Australia.  Mecodema  and  Metaglymma  are  the  laa^est 
genera.  Even  the  Auckland  Islam^  have  two  small  genera 
of  Carabidse  found  nowhere  else, 

CicindelidEe  are  represented  in  New  Zealand  by  6  species  of 
Cidndela,  and  1  of  DysHpsidera,  a  genus  peculiar  to  the  Austra- 
lian region. 

The  Lucanidfe  are  represented  by  two  pecuhar  genera,  Den- 
droblax  and  Oxyomus ;  two  Australian  genera,  Lissotes  ■  and 
C&ratognatbAis ;  and  by  the  almost  cosmopoKte  iJorcM^. 

The  Scatabeidffi  consist  of  ten  species  only,  belonging  to  four 
Vol.  X.— 31 


by  Google 


468  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPIIY.  [part  in. 

genera,  two  of  whicli  are  peculiar  (Odontria  and  Stethaspis) ;  and 
two  AnsfcraKan  {Pmcoptm  and  Calonota).  There  are  no 
Cetoniidse. 

There  is  only  one  Buprestid,  belonging  to  the  Australian  genus 
Cisseis.  ■  The  Elateridfe,  (about  a  dozen  species,)  belong  mostly 
to  Australian  genera,  but  two,  MetaUax  and  Ochostemus,  are 
peculiar. 

There  are  30  species  of  CurculionidEe,  belonging  to  22  genera. 
Of  the  genera,  12  are  peculiar ;  1  is  common  to  New  Zealand 
and  New  Caledonia ;  6  belong  to  the  Austrahan  region,  and  the 
rest  are  widely  distributed. 

Longicoms  are,  next  to  Carabid^,  the  most  numerous  family, 
there  being,  according  to  Mr.  Bates  {Ann.  Nat.  Hist.,  1874),  about 
35  genera,  of  which  26  are  peculiar  or  highly  characteristic, 
and  7  of  the  others  Australian.  The  latest  and  most  character- 
istic genera  are  ^rrwna  and  Xyloteles,  both  being  peculiar  to 
New  Zealand ;  few  of  the  remainder  having  more  than  one  or 
two  species.  Demonax  extends  to  the  Moluccas  and  S.  E. 
Asia.  A  dozen  of  the  genera  have  no  near  relations  with  those 
of  any  other  country. 

Phytpphaga  are  remarkably  scarce,  only  two  species  of 
Colaspie  being  recorded ;  and  there  is  only  a  single  species  of 
Ooednella. 

The  other  orders  of  Insects  appear  to  be  equally  deficient. 
Hymenoptera  are  veiy  poorly  represented,  only  a  score  of  species 
being  yet  known ;  but  two  of  the  genera  are  peculiar,  as  are  all 
the  species.  The  Neuroptera  and  Heteroptera  are  also  very 
scarce,  and  several  of  the  species  are  wide-spread  forms  of  the 
Australian  region.  The  few  species  of  Homoptera  are  all 
peculiar.  The  Myriapoda  afford  some  interesting  fiicts.  There 
are  nine  or  ten  species,  all  peculiar.  One  genus,  Zithohius, 
ranges  over  the  northern  hemisphere  as  far  south  as  Singapore, 
and  probably  through  the  Malay  Archipelago,  but  is  not  found 
in  Australia.  Hemcops  occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Tasmania 
and  Chili,  Gryptops,  only  in  the  north  temperate  zone ;  while 
two  others,  Cei-matia  and  Gormoeephalvs,  both  occur  in 
Australia. 


by  Google 


CHAP,  xiii.]  THE  AUSTBALIAN  EEGION.  459 

Land-Shells.— Oi  these,  114  species  are  known,  97  being 
peculiar.  Three  species  of  Helix  ate  also  found  in  Australia, 
and  five  more  in  various  tropical  islands  of  the  Paciiio.  JVanina, 
I/ywimd,  and  Asdmmea,  are  found  in  Polynesia  or  Malaya, 
but  not  in  Australia.  Ain^phihola  is  an  Australian  genus,  as  is 
Jandla.    Teaiacella  and  Zimax  belong  to  the  Paltearctie  region, 

From  the  Chatham  Islands,  82  species  of  shells  are  known, 
all  being  New  Zealand  species,  except  nine,  which  are  peculiar. 

The  Andent  Fauna  of  New  Zealand. — One  of  the  most  re- 
markable features  of  the  New  Zealand  fauna,  is  the  existence, 
till  quite  recent  times,  of  an  extensive  group  of  wingless  birds, 
— called  Moas  by  the  natives — many  of  them  of  gigantic  size, 
and  which  evidently  occupied  the  place  which,  in  other  countries, 
is  filled  by  the  mammalia.  The  most  recent  account  of  these 
singular  remaiiis,  is  that  by  Dr.  Haast,  who,  from  a  study  of 
the  extensive  series  of  specimens  in  the  Canterbury  museum, 
believes,  that  they  belong  to  two  families,  distinguished  by 
important  differences  of  structure,  and  constitute  four  genera, — 
Dinomis  and  Miomis,  forming  the  family  Dinomithidse ; 
Palapteryr.  and  EuryapUryx,  forming  the  family  Palapterygidte. 
These  were  mostly  lai^er  birds  than  the  living  Afteryx,  and 
some  of  them  much  larger  even  than  the  African  ostrich,  and 
were  more  allied  to  the  Casuariidfe  and  Struthionidte  than  to 
the  Apterygidse.  No  less  than  eleven  species  of  these  birds 
have  been  discovered;  all  are  of  recent  geological  date,  and 
there  are  indications  that  some  of  them  may  have  been  in 
existence  less  than  a  century  ago,  and  were  really  exter- 
minated by  man.  Eemains  have  been  found  (of  apparently 
the  same  recent  date)  of  species  of  Apievyx,  Stringops,  Ocydro- 
mm,  and  many  other  living  forms,  as  well  as  of  Hwrpagomis, 
a  large  bird  of  prey,  and  Cnemiornis,  a  gigantic  goose.  Bodies 
of  the  Hatteria  punctata  have  also  been  found  along  with  those 
of  the  Moa,  showing  that  this  remarkable  reptile  was  once  more 
abundant  on  the  main  islands  than  it  is  now. 

ITie  Origin  of  the  New  Ze'dand  Fauna. — Having  now  given 


by  Google 


460  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [part  iir. 

an  outline  sketch  of  the  main  features  of  the  New  Zealand 
fauna  and  of  its  relations  with  other  regions,  we  may  consider 
what  conclusions  are  fairly  deduciMe  from  the  facts.  As  the 
outlying  Worfolk,  Chatham,  and  Lord  Howe's  Islands,  are  all 
inhabited  (or  have  recently  been  so)  by  birds  of  N"ew  Zealand 
type  or  even  identical  species,  almost  incapable  of  flight,  we  may 
infer  that  these  islands  show  us  the  former  minimnm  extent  of  the 
land-area  in  which  the  peculiar  forms  which  characterise  the 
sub-iegion  were  developed.  If  we  include  the  Auckland  and 
Macq^uarie  Islands  to  the  south,  we  shall  have  a  territory  of  not 
much  leas  extent  than  Australia,  and  separated  from  it  by  per- 
haps several  hundred  miles  of  ocean.  Some  such  ancient  land 
must  have  existed  to  allow  of  the  development  and  specialization 
of  so  many  pecuHar  forms  of  birds,  and  it  probably  remained 
with  but  shght  modifications  for  a  considerable  geological  period. 
During  all  tliis  time  it  would  interchange  many  of  its  fpims  of 
life  with  Australia,  and  there  would  arise  that  amount  of  identity 
of  genera  between  the  two  countries  which  we  find  to  exist  Its 
extension  southwards,  perhaps  considerably  beyond  the  Mac- 
CLuaries,  would  bring  it  within  the  range  of  floating  ice  during 
colder  epochs,  and  within  easy  reach  of  the  antarctic  continent 
durii^  the  warm  periods ;  and  thns  would  arise  that  interchange 
of  genera  and  species  with  South  America,  which  forms  one  of 
the' characteristic  features  of  the  natural  history  of  New  Zealand. 
Captain  F,  W.  Hutton  (to  whose  interesting  paper  on  the 
Geographical  relations  of  the  New  Zealand  Fauna  we  are 
indebted  for  some  of  our  facts)  insists  upon  the  necessity  of 
former  land-connections  in  various  directions,  and  especially 
of  an  early  southern  continental  period,  when  New  Zealand, 
Australia,  Southern  Africa,  and  South  America,  were  united. 
Thus  he  would  account  for  the  existence  of  Struthious  birds 
in  all  these  countries,  and  for  the  various  other  groups  of 
birds,  reptiles,  fishes,  or  insects  which  have  no  obvious  means 
of  traversing  the  ocean, — and  this  union  must  have  occurred 
before'  mammalia  existed  in  any  of  these  countries.  But 
such  a  supposition  is  quite  unnecessary,  if  we  consider  that 
all  wingless  land-birds  and  some  water-birds  (as  the  Gare-fowl 


by  Google 


CHAP,  sm.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION.  461 

and  Steamer  Duck)  are  probably  cases  of  abortion  of  use- 
less organs,  and  that  the  common  ancestors  of  the  various 
forms  of  Sfcruthiones  may  have  been  capable  of  a  moderate 
degree  of  flight ;  or  they  may  have  originated  in  the  northern 
hemisphere,  as  already  explained  in  Chap.  XI.  p.  287.  The  exis- 
tence of  two,  if  not  three,  distinct  famihes  of  these  birds  in  New 
Zealand,  proves  that  the  original  type  was  here  isolated  at  a 
very  early  date,  and  being  wholly  free  from  the  competition  of 
mammalia,  became  more  differentiated  than  elsewhere.  The 
Hattcria  is  probably  coeval  with  these  early  forms,  and  is  the 
only  relic  of  a  whole  order  of  reptiles,  which  once  perhaps 
ranged  far  over  the  globe. 

Still  less  does  any  other  form  of  animal  inhabitii^  New  Zea- 
land, recLnire  a  land  connection  with  distant  countries  to  account 
for  its  presence.  With  the  example  before  us  of  the  Bermudas 
and  Azores,  to  which  a  great  variety  of  birds  fly  annually  over  vast 
distances,  and  even  of  the  recent  arrival  of  new  birds  in  New 
Zealand  and  Chatham  Island,  we  may  be  sure  that  the  ancestors 
of  every  New  Zealand  bird  could  easily  have  reached  its  shores 
during  the  countless  ages  which  elapsed  while  the  Binomis  and 
Apteryx  were  developing.  The  wonderful  range  of  some  of  the 
existing  species  of  lizards  and  fresh- water  fish,  as  already  given, 
proves  that  they  too  possess  means  of  dispersal  which  have 
sufficed  to  spread  them,  within  a  comparatively  recent  period, 
over  countries  separated  by  thousands  of  miles  of  ocean;  and  the 
fact  that  a  group  like  the  snakes,  so  widely  distributed  and  for 
which  the  climate  of  New  Zealand  is  so  well  adapted,  does  not 
exist  there,  is  an  additional  proof  that  land  connection  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  introduction  of  the  existing  fauna.  We  have 
already  (p.  398),  discussed  in  some  detail  the  various  modes  in 
which  the  dispersal  of  animals  in  the  southern  hemisphere  has 
been  effected ;  and  in  accordance  with  the  principles  there  estab- 
lished, we  conclude,  that  the  New  Zealand  fauna,  living  and 
extinct,  demonstrates  the  existence  of  an  extensive  tract  of  land 
in  the  vicinity  of  Australia,  Polynesia,  and  the  Antarctic  con- 
tinent, without  having  been  once  actually  connected  with  either 
of  these  countries,  since  the  period  when  mammalia  had  peopled 


by  Google 


462  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGBAPHY.  [i'aRt  hi. 

all  the  great  continents.  That  event  certainly  dates  hack  to 
Secondary,  if  not  to  Palaxtzoic,  times,  hecause  so  dominant  a 
group  must  soon  have  spread  over  the  whole  continuous  land- 
area  of  the  globe.  We  have  no  reason  for  helieving  that  birds 
were  an  earlier  development ;  and  certamly  cannot,  with  any 
probability,  place  the  origin  of  the  Struthio-nes  before  that  of 
Mammals. 

Cavses  of  the  Fovei-ty  of  Insect-life  in  New  Zealand :  its  Inflw- 
ence  on  the  Character  of  the  Mora. — The  extreme  paucity  of  in- 
sects in  New  Zealand,  to  which  we  have  already  alluded,  seems 
to  call  for  some  attempt  at  explanatioiL  No  other  country  in  the 
world,  in  wiiich  the  conditions  are  ec[ually  fiivourable  for  insect- 
life,  and  which  has  either  been  connected  with,  or  is  in  proximity 
to,  any  of  the  large  masses  of  land,  presents  a  similar  pheno- 
menon. The  only  approach  to  it  is  in  the  Galapagos,  and  in 
some  of  the  islands  of  the  Pacific ;  and  in  each  of  these  cases  the 
absence  of  mammals  leads  us  to  infer,  that  no  connection  with  a 
continent  has  ever  taken  place.  Yet  the  fauna  of  New  Zealand 
evidently  dates  back  to  a  remote  geological  epoch,  and  it  seems 
strange  that  an  abundance  of  ind%enoaa  insects  have  not  been 
developed,  especially  when  we  consider  the  vast  antiquity  that 
most  of  the  orders  and  families,  and  many  of  the  genera,  of  insects 
possess  (see  p.  166),  and  that  they  must  always  have  reached  the 
country  in  greater  numbers  and  variety  than  any  of  the  higher 
animals.  The  undoubted  fact  that  such  an  indigenous  insect- 
fauna  has  not  arisen,  wonld  therefore  lead  us  to  conclude,  that 
insects  find  the  conditions  requisite  for  their  development  only  in 
the  great  continental  masses  of  land,  in  strict  adaptation  to,  and 
dependance  on,  a  varied  fauna  and  flora  of  ever-increasing  richness 
and  complexity.  A  small  number  of  widely-separated  forms,  intro- 
duced into  a  country  where  the  fauna  and  flora  are  alike  scanty 
and  unrelated  to  them,  seem  to  have  little  tendency  to  vary 
and  branch  out  into  that  vast  network  of  insect-life  which 
enriches  all   the  great  continents  and    their    once   connected 


It  is  a  striking  confirmation  on  a  large  scale,  of  Mr.  Parwin's 
beantifnl  theory — that  the  gay  colours  of  flowers  have  mostly,  or 


by  Google 


CHAP.  XIII.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  EEUION.  4G3 

perhaps,  wholly  heen  produced,  in  order  to  attract  insecta  which  aid 
in  their  ferUlization — that  in  New  Zealand,  where  insects  are  so 
strikingly  deficient  m  vaiiety,  the  flora  should  be  almost  as  strik- 
ii^ly  deficient  id  gaily-coloured  blossoms.  Of  course  there  are  some 
exceptions,  but  js  a  whole,  gieen,  inconspicuous,  and  imperfect 
flowers  prevail,  to  an  extent  not  to  be  equalled  in  any  other  part 
of  the  globe ;  and  aSbrdmg  a  marvellous  contrast  to  the  general 
brilliancy  of  Australian  flowers,  combined  with  the  abundance 
and  variety  of  its  miect-life  We  must  remember,  too,  that  the 
few  gay  or  conspicuous  flowering-plants  possessed  by  New  Zea- 
land, are  almost  all  of  Australian,  South  American,  or  European 
genera;  the  peculiar  New  Zealand  or  Antarctic  genera  being 
almost  wholly  without  conspicuous  flowers.  In  the  tropical 
Galapagos  the  same  thing  occurs.  Mr.  Darwin  notices  the 
wretched  weedy  appearance  of  the  vegetation ;  and  states  that 
it  was  some  time  before  he  discovered  that  most  of  the  plants 
were  in  flower  at  the  time  of  hia  visit !  And  the  insect-life  was 
correspondingly  deficient,  consisting  mainly  of  a  few  terrestrial 
beetles. 

The  poverty  of  insect-life  in  New  Zealand  must,  therefore,  be 
a.  very  ancient  feature  of  the  country ;  and.  it  furnishes  an  addi- 
tional argument  against  the  theory  of  land-eohnection  with,  or 
even  any  near  approach  to,  either  Australia,  South  Africa,  or 
South  America,  For  in  that  case  numbers  of  winged  insects 
would  certainly  have  entered,  and  the  flowers  would  then,  as  in 
every  other  part  of  the  world,  have  been  rendered  attractive  to 
them  by  the  development  of  coloured  petals ;  and  this  character 
once  acquired  would  long  maintain  itself,  even  if  the  insects  had, 
from  some  unknown  cause,  subsequently  disappeared. 

After  the  preceding  paragraphs  were  written,  it  occurred  to  me, 
that  if  this  reasoning  were  correct,  New  Zealand  plants  ought  to 
be  also  deficient  in  scented  flowers  ;  because  it  is  a  part  of  the 
same  theory,  that  the  odours  of  flowers  have,  like  their  colours, 
been  developed  to  attract  the  insects  required  to  aid  in  their  fer- 
tilization. I  therefore  at  once  applied  to  my  friend  Dr.  Hooker, 
aa  the  highest  authority  on  New  Zealand  botany  ;  simply  asking 
whether  there  was  any  such  observed  deficiency.  His  reply  was: — 


by  Google 


464  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY.  [imrt  iu 

"  New  Zealand  plants  are  remarkably  scentless,  both  in  regard  to 
the  rarity  of  scented  flowers,  of  leaves  with  immersed  glands 
containing  essential  oils,  and  of  glamiular  hairs."  There  are  a 
few  exceptional  cases,  but  these  seem  even  more  rare  than  might 
be  expected,  so  that  the  confirmation  of  theory  is  very  complete. 
The  circiunstance  that  aromatic  leaves  are  also  very  scarce,  sug- 
gests the  idea  that  these,  too,  serve  as.  an  attraction  to  insects. 
Aromatic  plants  abound  most  in  arid  countries,  and  on  Alpine 
heights ;  both  localities  where  winged  insects  are  comparatively 
scarce,  and  where  it  may  be  necessary  to  attract  them  in  every 
possible  way.  Dr.  Hooker  also  informs,  me  that  since  his  Intro- 
duction to  the  New  Zealand  Flora  was  written,  many  plants  with 
handsome  flowers  have  been  discovered,  especially  among  the 
Eammeiili,  shrubby  Veronicas,  and  herbaceous  Compositte.  The 
two  former,  however,  are  genera  of  wide  range,  which  may  have 
originated  in  New  Zealand  by  the  introduction  of  plants  with 
handsome  flowers,  which  the  few  indigenous  insects  would  be 
attracted  by,  and  thus  prevent  the  loss  of  their  gay  corollas ;  so 
that  these  discoveries  will  not  much  affect  the  general  character 
of  the  flora,  and  its  very  curious  bearing  on  the  past  history  of 
the  islands  through  the  relations  of  flov/ers  and  insects. 

In  judging  of  the  relation  here  supposed  to  exist,  it  must  be 
remembered,  that  if  the  New  Zealand  insects  have  been  intro- 
duced from  the  surrounding  countries  by  chance  immigrations  at 
distant  intervals,  then,  as  we  go  back  into  the  past  the  insect 
fauna  wiU  become  poorer  and  poorer,  and  still  more  inadequate 
than  at  present  to  lead  to  the  development  of  attractive  flowers 
and  odours.  This  quite  harmonizes  with  the  fact  of  the  ancient 
indigenous  flora  being  so  remarkably  scentless  and  inconspi- 
cuous, while  a  few  of  the  more  recently  introduced  genera  of 
plants  have  retained  their  floral  attractions. 

Concluding  SemarM  on  the  Harly  History  of  the  Australian 


We  have  already  discussed  in  some  detail,  the  various  relations 
of  the  Australian  sub-regions  to  the  surrounding  Ee^ons,  and  the 
geographical  changes  that  appear  to  have  taken  place.     A  very 


by  Google 


OHAP.  X!.i.]  THE  AUSTRALIAN  EEGION.  465 

few  oliservations  will  therefore  suffice,  on  the  supposed  early 
history  of  the  Australian  region  as  a  whole. 

It  was  probably  far  back  in  the  Secondary  period,  that  some 
portion  of  the  Australian  region  was  in  actual  connection  with 
the  northern  continent,  and  became  stocked  with  ancestral  forms 
of  Marsupials ;  but  from  that  time  till  now  there  seems  to  have 
been  no  further  land  connection,  and  the  Australian  lands  have 
thenceforward  gone  on  developing  the  Marsupial  and  Monotre- 
mate  types,  into  the  various  living  and  extinct  races  we  now  find 
there.  Durii^  some  portion  of  the  Tertiary  epoch  Australia  pro- 
bably comprised  much  of  its  existing  area,  together  with  Papua 
and  the  Solomon  Islands,  and  perhaps  extended  as  far  east  as  the 
Fiji  Islands  ;  while  it  might  also  have  had  a  considerable  exten- 
sion to  the  south  and  west.  Some  light  has  recently  been  thrown 
on  this  subject  by  Professor  McCoy's  researches  on  the  Pale- 
ontology of  Victoria.  He  finds  abundant  marine  fossils  of 
Eocene  and  Miocene  age,  many  of  which  are  strikingly  similar 
to  those  of  Europe  at  the  same  period.  Among  these  are  Ceta- 
ceans of  the  genus  Sgualodon ;  European  species  of  Plagiostom- 
ous  fishes ;  molluaea  and  corals  closely  resembling  those  of 
Europe  and  North  America  of  the  same  age, — such  as  numerous 
Volutes  closely  allied  to  those  of  the  Eocene  beds  of  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  and  the  genus  Dentalmm  in  great  abundance,  almost  or 
quite  identical  with  European  tertiary  species.  Along  with 
these,  are  found  some  living  species,  but  always  such  aa  now 
live  farther  north  in  tropical  seas.  The  Cretaceous  and  Meso- 
zoic  marine  fossils  are  equally  close  to  those  of  Europe. 

The  whole  of  these  remains  demonstrate  that,  as  in  the 
northern  so  in  the  southern  hemisphere,  a  much  warmer  cUmate 
prevailed  in  the  Eocene  and  Miocene  periods  than  at  the  present 
time.  This  is  a  most  important  result,  and  one  which  strongly 
supports  Mr,  Belt's  view,  before  referred  to,  that  the  warmer 
climates  in  past  geological  epochs,  and  especially  that  of  the 
Miocene  as  compared  with  our  own,  was  caused  by  a  diminution  of 
the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  leading  to  a  much  greater  uniformity 
of  the  seasons  for  a  considerable  distance  from  the  equator,  and 
greatly  reducing  the  polar  area  within  which  the  sun  would  ever 


by  Google 


406  ZOOLOGICAL  GEOaEAPHY.  [part  hi. 

disappear  during  an  entire  rotation  of  the  earth.  During  sucli 
a  period,  tropical  forms  of  marine  animals  would  have  been  able 
to  spread  north  and  south,  into  what  are  now  cool  latitudes ;  and 
identical  genera,  and  even  species,  might  then  have  ranged  along 
the  southern  shores  of  the  old  Pal^arctic  continent,  from  Britain 
to  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  and  southward  along  the  Malayan  coasts 
to  Australia. 

Numerous  Miocene  plant-beds  have  also  been  found  in  Vic- 
toria, containing  abundance  of  Dicotyledonous  leaves,  which  are 
said  generally  to  resemble  those  of  the  Asiatic  flora,  and  of  the 
Miocene  plant-beds  of  the  Rhine.  It  is  to  be  hoped  these  beds 
will  be  more  closely  examined  for  remains  of  insects,  land-shells, 
and  vertebrates,  and  that  the  plants  will  be  carefully  preserved  and 
critically  studied ;  for  here  probably  lies  hidden  the  bey,  that 
will  solve  much  of  the  mystery  that  attaches  to  the  past  history 
of  the  Austrahan  fauna. 


by  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


TABLES  OF  UlSTEIBUTION 

In  drawing  up  these  tables,  showing  the  distribution  of  the 
various  classes  of  animals  in  the  Australian  region,  the  following 
sources  of  information  have  been  relied  on,  in  addition  to  the 
general  treatises,  monographs,  and  catalogues  used  in  compiling 
the  4th  Part  of  this  work. 

Mammalia. — Gould,  Mammals  of  Australia ;  Waterhouse  on 
Marsupials  ;  Dr.  J.  E.  Gray's  List  of  Mammalia  of  New  Guinea; 
MilUer,  Temminck  and  Schlegel  on  Mammals  of  the  Moluccas; 
papers  by  Dr.  Gray  ;  and  personal  observations  by  the  Author. 

Birds. — Gould's  Birds  of  Australia ;  Builer's  Birds  of  New 
Zealand ;  G.  K.  Gray's  Lists  of  Birds  of  Moluccas,  &c. ;  Hart- 
laub  and  Finsch  on  Birds  of  Pacific  Islands ;  Selater  on  Birds 
of  Sandwich  Islands  ;  papers  by  Haast,  Hutton,  Meyer,  Salvin, 
Schlegel,  Selater,  Travers,  Lord  Walden  and  the  Author. 

Rept'iles. — Krefft,  Catalogue  of  Snakes ;  Gunther,  List  of 
Lizards  in  Voyage  of  Hrelnis  mid  Terror  (1875) ;  and  numerous 
papera. 


by  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


TABLE  I. 
FAMILIES  OF  ANIMALS  HfllAIIITIIfG  TEE  AUSTRALIAN  REQION. 
,  Explanation. 
Nnmes  in  italics  show  families  which  are  peeuliar  to  the  region. 

Fames  in^osed  thus  ( )  show  families  which  only  just  enter  the  region,  and  a 

not  considered  properly  to  belong  to  it. 
Nambera  correspond  to  the  series  of  numbers  to  the  families  in  Ptirt  IV, 


Sub-regionB. 

Ordei' and  Family. 

1 

h 

y 

i 

Eange  iMyotid  tl.a  EegioiL 

MAMMALIA. 

■   Primatbs. 

3.  Cynopitheoidie 

- 

Oriental  and  Ethiopian 

CHIEOPTBnA. 

9.  Pteropidic      ... 
IS.  Nootilionidie... 

E 

E 

- 

z 

Oriental  and  Ethiopian 

The  Eastern  Hemisphere 

Cosmopolite 

All  tropical  regions 

Cabbivoba. 

26.  (Vivenidre)    ... 

33.  OtariidtB 

35.  Phooidte 

" 

z 

~ 

Oriental 

N".  and  S.  temperate  zones 

Cetaosa. 

36  toil 

Oceanic 

SlHBNlA. 

42.  Manatidie      ... 

— 

Ethiopian,  Oriental 

Ungulata. 

47.  Suidai     

60.  (Cervidoe)       ... 
52,   (Bovid^) 

= 

All  other  regions  bnt  Nearotis 
All  otljer  regions  but  Ethiopian 
All  other  le^oHS  but  Ifeotropieal 

KoDENTtA. 

66.  MnridK 

61.  (Scnicidte)      ... 

- 

- 

All  other  regions 
All  other  regions 

Mabsupialia. 

77.  DasyuTidie    ... 

78.  Myi-mecoUidie 

z 

Zl 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


MONOTEBMATA 

83.  Oi^itharhyn-  ) 

cMd<e,..      j 

8i,  EchiMi^     .. 


1,  Turdidte 

2,  Sylviidie 

3,  Timaliidw  ... 
S.  CinclidEs 

8.  Certhiiiifs      ... 

0.  Sittidro 

10.  Faridx   

13.  FjcnonotidEB.., 

14.  OiiolulK 

15.  OampepIiB^^ 

16.  Dicranite 

17.  MusdcapidiB  ... 

18.  PaehMj^ihalidie 

19.  LaniidEe 

20.  Corvidie 

21.  Paradiseida  ... 

22.  MeUphagidiE... 

23.  Fectariniidie 

24.  DiciddEe 

26.  Drepanididce.. 
SO.  Hirundinidie , . . 
34.  Floceidse 

36.  Sturuidfe 
3fl.  ArtamidEe 

37.  Alandidie 

38.  MotncUlidco  ... 

47.  PittidK 

49.  Meriaridix 

60,  Alrii:kiid(e     ... 


PiCABIA. 

51.  Picidfe    ... 

58.  Cnenlidte 

62.  Cotaciidie 

63.  Merapidce 


Oriental  family 
Orientul  mid  Mhiopian 
Oriental  and  Etliiupian 
Oriental  nnd  Ethiopian 
The  Old  World 
Almost  peculiar  to  rogion 
The  Old  "World 
Cosmopolite 


Cosmcpolit  e 

Oritnta],  EtJiiopiiu; 

The  Old  "World 

Oriental 

The  Old  Worid  and  N.  America 

The  Old  Worid 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

Peculiar  to  Australia 

Peculiar  to  Anstrolia 


All  ofeer  regions 

Cosmopolite 

Oriental  and  Ethiopian 

Oriental  and  Ethiopian 

Cosmopolite 

Oriental  and  Elhiopiaa 

Oriental 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Sub-rsglons. 

Order  and  Family. 

i^ 

A 

^ 

« 

Bange  bojona  the  Hegion, 

ll 

If 

t 

M 

PSITTAOI. 

76.  Gacatuidm   ... 

— 

_ 

Philippine  Islands 

77.  FMycereidK 

78.  Palfeomithidie 

OrienM 

88.  Btringopidm... 

— 

COLlTMBffl. 

84.  Columbidte  ... 

-^ 

_ 

— 

— 

Cosmopolite 

84a.  Didnnoulidm 

— 

Galling. 

87.  Tetrsonida! ... 

_ 

_ 

_ 

— 

Old  World  and  N.  Amerirat 

88.   (Phasianidrel 

Oriental 

89.   Tnrnieidie    .. 

The  Old  World 

— 

- 

- 

ACCJPITRES. 

96.  Falconidss   ... 

_ 

_ 

„ 

„ 

Coamoplite 

Ctemopolite 

88.  Strigid»      ... 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Gball^ 

99.  EallidiB        ... 

„ 

_ 

_ 

„ 

Cosmopolite 

Cosmopolite 

103.  ParridiB 

Tropical 

Tlie  Eastern  Hemisphere 

106.  CharadriidiB 

lOS.  Otidida       .., 

107.  Graid^       ... 

112.  IChiiiocheHd(E 

J13.  Ardeidte       ... 

Coemopolite 

114.  Pktoloidfo   ... 

Almost  cosmopolite 

115.  Ciconiidse     ... 

— 

— 

Widely  distribotfid 

Ansekbs. 

118.  Anatidie       ... 

_ 

_ 

_. 

_ 

Cosmopolite 

119.  Laridre 

120:  Procellaradia 

121.  Peleoanidw  ... 

Cosmopolito 

124.  Podicipidie    .. 

— 

— 

— 

— 

STRimHOKES. 

127.  GasaaHtdix  ... 

_ 

_ 

129.  DiMfmilMdoi 

Extinct 

130.   PalapSe>-Dgidce 

~ 

Extinct 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


Range  Iteyoml  the  K*gfon, 


REPTILIA. 

OPHIDIi. 

1.  TypWopidte  ... 

2.  TortricidiB 

Z,  Xenopeltidfe  , , , 
5.  Calamariidm  ... 
7.'  Colabrid» 
8,  HomaLopBidie 
U.  Dendiophidra 
12.  Dryiophidse  ... 
18.  Dipaadidre  ... 
16.  LycodontidEe.., 
16.  Amblyoepha-  ) 


23.  HydropHdEB... 

I^CBftTILIA. 

30.  Varacidie 
33.  Lacartidis 

41.  Gynmopthal-  j 

42.  Pygopodid(e  .. 

43.  Aprmiadts     ., 

44.  lMdid<B 

45.  SoiacidES 

48.  Acontiadie     .. 

49.  Geobotidffi    .. 

50.  Iguauidm 

51.  Agamidoe 


?.gioiis  but  Nearotic 
Oriental,  8.  America,  California 
Orieutal 

All  warm  countries 
Almost  cosmopolite 
Oriental,  and  all  other  regions 
Orienlni,  Ethiopian,  Feotropical 
Oriental,  Etliiopian,  Neotropical 
Oriental,  Ethiopian,  Neotropical 
Ethiopian  and  Oriental 
Oriental,  1 


Tropical  togiona,  California 

Oriental 

Tropical  regions,  Japan,  S.  Carolin 

Oriental,  Mailagascar,  Panama 


Neotropical,  Ethiopian,  Palsarctic 


Almost  cosmopolitfl 
Ethiopian,  Oriental 
Almost  coFiinopolite 
N.  and  S.  America 

Eaatei'n  Hemispheri 


Gbocodilia. 
54.  Gavialidfo 
65.  Croeodilidte    , 


10.  XenorhmidiE... 

11.  Engystcmidie., 
X2-  Sombinatoridie 


All  other  regions 
EtMopian,  Keotiopical 
Marine 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GROGBAPHY. 


Sub-r 

giona 

Order  audEamUy. 

|l 

h 

h 

il 

Range  lieyond  the  RegioD. 

It  Alytite 

AH  regions  but  Oriental 

15.  Pelodryadte  ... 

Neotropical 

16.  HyUdES 

All  regions  but  Ethiopian 

17.  Polypadatid* 

18.  KanidK 

All  the  regions 

19.    DisiiOglMMdlB 

— 

— 

All  regiona  but  Nearotic 

FISHES  (FRESH- 

WATER). 

AOAHTHOPM.KTO11 

II    Trarliiiudie 

Patagonia  (?  marine) 

Oriental,  8.  Africa 

Europe,  America 

38    MugiUidw 

— 

~ 

— 

Ethiopian,  Neotropipal 

Anacutthihi 

53    Gadqpsidm 

— 

Phy^ostomi 

59    Silnnd^ 

Tempemto  8.  Amciioa 

65   SalmonidEe 

Pftkiarotic,  Heacctie' 

67    Galaiida- 

Temperate  S.  Ameiioa 

78    OstegoIossidEO 

All  tropical  regions 
OriBQta],  Neotropioal 

85    (SymbranthidH,) 

— 

DiFHOl 

92    Sirenoidei 

— 

Ethiopian,  Neotropical 

INSECTS.       LEPI- 

DOPTERA  (PART), 

Dttkibi  (Buttbr- 

1.  DanaidEe*      ... 

__ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

All  warm  regions,  and  to  Canada 

a.  Satyridte 

3.  Elymnitdie    ... 

Oriental,  Btliiopian 

4.  Morphtdffi      ... 

Oriental,  Heotropieal 

e.  AoweMtB 

AE  tropical  regions 

8.  Nymph^die... 

9.  Lftyfiieidie   ... 

— 

~ 

~ 

_ 

Cosmopolite 

AD  the  other  regiona 

10.  Nemeobeid^.. 

AH  other  regions  but  Nearetic 

13.  LyoEenidEe      ... 

14.  KeridiB 

Cosmopolite 

le.  HeaporidBB     ... 

— 

— 

— 

— 

OosmopoEto 

Sphinsiqea. 

17.  Zygtenidis      ... 

Cosmopolite 

18.  CaatniidK      ... 

Neotropical 
Oiiental,  Ethiopian 

IB.  Agaristid^     ... 

20.  Uraiiiidffi      „. 

All  tropical  regions 

as.  Sphin^dffi     ... 

~" 

~ 

" 

"" 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  KEGION. 


GENERA  OF  TERRESTRIAL  MAMMALIA  AND  BIRDS  INHABITING   i 
AUSTRALIAN  &EOI0N. 


Explanation. 

Namea  in  ^alias  show  gensra  peculiar  to  the  iroon . 

Ifames  enclosed  thna( )  show  genera  which  jnat  e' 

sidered  properly  to  belong  to  it. 
Geneiti  truly  belonging  to  &is  region  are  ftumbered  con! 

MAMMALIA. 


PRIMATES. 

CYSOtlVEmSTDM. 

(MacacTiB 

1.  Cynopitiiecua  ... 

Lbmukidji, 

(Tareina   

CHIBOPTEEA. 

PTBEOPrD*. 


to.  Hipposideroa  ... 

11.  Fhyllorhina    ... 

12.  Aaellia     

13.  Megadarma     ... 

VESPBnTILIONIDffl. 

14.  Scotophilua     ... 

15.  Veapertilio 

16.  MiniopterlB     ... 

17.  TaphozouB       ... 

18.  PlecotuB  

19.  H'yctophilUB   ... 

Vol.  I.— 32 


er  the  re^on,  but  ai 


Bange  lieyoud  tlie  Region. 


The  whole  reg,  except  New  ZeaL 

Moluccas  aatt  Timor 

Morty  Island 

Celebes,  Moluceas,  Timor 

Ccleljea  and  Moluccas 

Celebes,  Moluccas,  and  Timor 

Fiji  Islands 


Moluccas,  Timor,  Australia 
Moluccas  and  Aru  Islands 
Moluccas  and  Timor 
Amboyna 
Tomato 


Molu    B.    Tm      A    tral 

An  tral  a 

Mol    ^.3  TnOT  a  dAu 

Celbes  M  1      a.   N   Au 

Timo 

Australia  and  Taamima 


Tropica  of 
Oriental,  S 
Oriental 
Indo-Malaya 
Philippinea 


Warmer  pta,ofE.Heini3. 
Oriental 
1 11  do- Malaya 
Indo-Malaya 
Oriental,  Ethiopian 


Oriental 
Coamopolite 
Indo-Malaya,  S.  AMea 
Orien.,Eihiop.,  ITeotrop. 
N.  India,  S.  I^ls^arctic 


b,  Google 


474 

ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPHY. 

[»""■■■ 

Order,  Femily,  ajid 
Oenns. 

KsngB  witliin  the  Region. 

Rnngo  bejond  tbe  Keglon. 

'So'jcihiosaix. 

20.  Molttssus 

21.  Mystaeima 

1 
1 

Australia 
New  Zealand 

Neotrop,,Ethiop.,S.Pal. 

INSECTIVORA. 
SoaioiD^ 

22.  Sorei       

2 

Moluccas  and  Timor 

ThoE.HemiB.&H.Amer. 

CARHIVORA. 

VlTBRKIDa. 

(Tiverra 

(Paradoxnrns  ... 

1 

1 

Celebes  and  Molncoaa) 

Timor,  Ea  Idaada,  !  inttodnoed) 

Oriental  genwa 
Oriental  genua 

Otaeuhs. 

23.  Arutooephalue... 
21.  Zaiophus 

1 
1 

S.  Australia,  New  Zealand 
Australia 

S.  Temperate  shores 
North  Pacific 

Phooibs. 

26.  Stenorhjnchns 

1 

New  Zealand 

Antarctic  stores 

SIEENIA. 

26.  Halieore 

1 

K  Australia 

Oriantal  Ethiopian 

UNGULArA. 

27.  Sus   

as.  Babirtisa 

4 

Celeljes  to  New  Guinea 

PalEearotio,  Oriental 

Cebvibjs. 

(Cervua    

2 

Celeles,  Moluccas,  Timor) 

Oriental  genua 

B0V1D<E. 

29.  Ama,        

1 

Ccletea 

RODENTIA. 

SciTJlUDai. 

(Sciurua   

5 

Celetes) 

All  the  other  regions 

Murium 

30.  Mu3 

81.  Pssudimys       .. 

82.  Hapahlis 

38.  Mydromys       ... 
84.  Aamihamni)    ... 
35.  J^eftiofWE       ... 

IS 
1 
IS 

5 
1 

1 

Austtalin,  Celebes,  Papua 

Australia 

Anatralia,  and  Tasmania 

S.  Australia 

Australia 

TheWsatemEemispliEve 

MAESUPIALIA. 
Dasyurid^. 

M.  FhasmgmU      ... 

' 

New  Guinea  and  Australia 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


Range  beyond  the  Region. 


46. 


Aniedtimis 
Chadotcrcm     .. 
Dadylojmla    .. 

Fodahnii 

Myoidia    

Dasyums 

Thylara/mis 

Mtewecobiidje. 

46.  Myr'mecobias   .. 

PEKAllEtIQ.a!. 

47.  pBrameUa 

48.  Fsragalsa 

49.  Clump'os 

JlAOIiOPODIDai. 

60.  JWocTOpaa...  . 
"    Osphramier 

Ma^ifiatv/riis  , 

Pefrogale ...  . 

Dendrolagua  . 

Dorcofms,..  . 

Onychogalea  . 

Lagwaiestea  . 

Bettongia...  . 


PSALAKIGISTID^. 

60.  Fhaacola/rdoa  . 
81.  Fhalcatgiata     . 


Aerobata 

Ih-omicia 

Tardpes 

PRASCOLOBIYIDE. 

68.  P/mscolomys    ... 
MONOTREMATA. 

OBSlTHdilHTNCHIDat. 

69.  OraithBfhjfnchiis 


S.  Australia  (intBrior) 

Amlds.  Australia  and  Tasmania 

S.  Australia 

Am  Islands  and  N.  Australia 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

Am  lalanda 

Tasmania 

Australia 

Tasmania 


S.  and  W.  Australia 


t.  Guinea,  Axu  Ids,,  Australia, 

and  Tasmania 
W.  Austialia 
"i.  E.  Mid  W.  Australia 


Australia  and  Tasmania 

All  Australia 

Austi'alia  and  Tasmania 

All  Australia 

NewQuinea 

Ara,  Myaol,  and  H.  Guinea 

Central  Australia 

!N.,  W.,  and  8.  Australia 

v.,   8.,  and  E.   Australia   and 

Tasmania 
W.  and  E.  Australia  &  Tasmania 


E.  Australia 

E.,  S,,   and  W.    Australia  and 

Tasmania 
Celebes  to  N.   Guinea,  Timor  & 

"S.  Australia 
E.  Austi'alia 
S.,  E.,  &  W.  Austral,,  K  Guinea, 

and  Moluccas 
S.  and  E,  Australia 
W.  &  E,  Australia  &  Tasmania 
W.  Australia 


S.  E.  Austmlia  and  Tasmania 


,  and  E.  Australia  &  Tasmania 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Order,  Family,  and 

^1 

Bange  within  the  Regiou. 

Raiit'C  beyond  the  Bsgion. 

EcHiDNiBa:. 

70.  Echidna 

S.  &  E.  Australia,  &  Tasmania 
BIllDH. 

PASSERES. 

'EvsmnjE 

1    Tnrdn^ 

^ 

Timor,  Austral.,  New  Caledoma 
Norfolk  Island,    Lord  Howe's 
and  Samoan  lelajids 

Cosmopolite 

3    Orcotincla 

1 

S.  E.  Australia  and  Tasmania 

Falsearctic,  Oriental 

3    GeoeicMa 

4 

Cdolies,  Lombok,  Timor,  Austral 

Oriental 

(Montieola 

1 

Gilolo,  Celebes) 

Paliearctic  and  Oriental 

(Zoothera 

1 

Lombok) 

Oriental  genus 

SrLMiDS 

4    Cii,tiJ)lB 

7 

Celebes,  Bwini,  Timor,  Australia 

Patearetie,  Oriental 

5   Spliiaifettciis 

* 

Australia,  N.  Zealand.  Chatham 
Islands 

Ethiopian 

e   Megalunu 

Timor 

Oriental 

7    Poadyles 

2 

Australia 

8    Amyiis 

3 

Australia 

9    SphetiTtm 

4 

Australia 

1 

Austrdia,  Tasmania 

11    IfcUm^ 

le 

12   Sylaeola 

8 

Australia 

2 

Australia  and  Taemaaia 

14   Acrocephitlua 

7 

Celebes,     Moluccas,      Australia, 
Caroline  Islands 

Palmare,  Orien.,  Ethiop. 

15    Tatoj^ 

2 

Samoan  to  Marquesas  Islands 

18    Hypolais 

1 

Moluocaa 

Paliearc,  Orien,,  Ethiop. 

17    Seruxmits 

7 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

18    ^cajrfftsm 

14 

AustraL,  Tasmania,  N.Ccledoni 

19    Oem'x^ 

24 

The  whole  region,  excl.  Molucca 

Philippines 

20   .Drvmodss 

2 

Australia 

al    Oieioola 

4 

Lombok  to  Timor 

Burmah  ? 

(Pratmcola 

1 

Celebes  to  Timor) 

Oriental,  Pal^aretic 

22   ^tlhtatmra 

3 

AustraUfl 

23    PeiWMM 

18 

Papua  to  Samoaii  Ids.,  Anstraiia 

24    Mytomotra 

S 

F.  Zealand 

35    Lampi^ia 

1 

Fiji  Islands 

36    MiTO 

8 

New  Zealand 

27    OmfZcD&impaiM 

3 

Australia 

28    Orjmnij 
39    (Mhmyx 

1 

S 

N.  Guinea,  Austral.,  New  Zeald 

TlHALIISX 

30    PoinatorhiiniB 

e 

N.  Guinea  and  Australia 

Oriental 

4 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

32    Tvmagra 

3 

New  Zealand 

33    Pophud's 

2 

S.  E.  and  W.  Australia 

(TnSiastomB 

3 

New  Guinea 

Oriental 

1 

Celebes) 

Oriental  genua 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


"-=!'•- 

^1 
^1 

Hioige  ■yitiiin  ths  Rcsinn, 

Range  beyond  the  B  egioii. 

35.  Diymocatapliua 

36.  Struthidea       ... 

1 

Tioior 

N.  and  K.  Australia 

Oriental 

Cmcu-DM. 

37.  Eupetes    

2 

New  Quinea 

Malayan 

Cbethiids. 

38.  Gli'/moteHs      ... 

s 

Australia  and  N.  Guinea 

SirriDa. 

3».  Smella    

41.  Xenism    

5 
1 

a 

Australiaand  H.  Guinea 
Few  Zealand 
New  Zedaud 

Paeids. 

42.  Gerthiparas     ... 

e 

2 

New  Zealand 

E.  and  S.  Australia 

Py^juonotid^. 

44.  Criniger 

Obioud*. 

5 

Moluccas,  ond  small  islands  E. 
of  Celebes 

Oriental 

45.  SpJieaotkeres    ... 

46,  Otiolus    

s 

Timor  and  Australia 
Celabea,  Sulla  Ids.,  Lomliok  and 
Elores 

Australia 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

47.  MMeta.    

10 

CAWPBPHAGIDffl. 

(Peiicroeotaa  ... 
48.  Graucalus 

61.  Campephaga   ... 

52.  Lakge      

53.  SyminorphMS  ... 

1 

20 

1 
1 

12 
15 

I 

Lombok) 

Celebes  to  New  Hebrides  and  N 

Zealand 
Celebes 

Celebes  to  Timor  &  New  Guinea 

E.  Australia  and  Norfoli:  Id. 

Oriental  genus 
Oriental 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 
Malayan 

DiCBOiUBa;, 

54,  Dicnirus 

65.  Chcdorhynchus 

11 
1 

Celebes  to  N.  Ireland  &  Austral 
New  Guinea 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

MuacicAPma. 

56.  Feltops     

67.  Hona/rcM 

(Bntalia   

59.  liiatwca 

1 
30 

1 
1 
6 
2 
1 
5 

Papuan  Islands 

The  whole  region  (esol.  Celebes 

and  N.  Zealand) 
N,  Gninca 

Moluccas  and  Celebes) 
Timor,  N.  Guinea,  Austraiia 
Celebes  ^d  Timor 
Timor 
Moluccas  to  N.  Ireland,  Austral 

Palmare,  Orien.,  Etbiop. 

Oriental 
Oriental 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GEOGEAPH\. 


Order,  Pamilj,  snd 

^1 

SsDgo  nitliin  tlie  Reijioa. 

Bulge  1)e;ond  tlie  Beglan, 

68.  Myiagra 

15 

Molucosa  to  Samoan  Ids-Aostral 

(Hypoaymis 

2 

(Mebes) 

Oriental 

fH-MoAxTirhmelms 

4 

Papuan  Ids.  and  N.  Australia 

05.  Rhipidnn.     ... 

82 

The  legioD  to  Samoan  Ids.  ant 
N.  Zealand 

Oriental 

ffiS"  ;:: 

1 

Celebes) 

Oriental  genus 

] 

Flm-es) 

Orien.  &  Ethiop.  genus 

66.  Todopda 

S 

Papuan  Islands 

2 

Sandwich  Islands 

.-  PACaYOBPHAUD^. 

63.  Or«aw   

1 

Temperate  Australia 

2 

Temperate  Austral^ 

70.  Paehycephala 

45 

Moluccas  to     ToDga   Ida.    and 
Taamania 

71.  Hylooharis    ... 

2 

Celebes  and  Timor 

Oriental 

72.  EopmUria     ... 

10 

Australia  to  Hew  Hebrides 

Laniidjb. 

78.  GollwHeoKla... 

4 

Auatralia  and  Tasmania 

7*.  Reaes     

18 

Papuan  to  Piji  Ids.,  IS.  Austrai. 

(Lauius  ...     ... 

1 

Lombok) 

CoBViDa!. 

76.  Strepera 

4 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

7fi.  Ba/rUa   

3 

Australia  and  Taama.ma 

77.  OeaiMeM       ... 

0 

Papuan  Ids.  to  TasmanU 

78.  Grallim 

1 

Australia 

79.  SlreptoeUta   ... 

2 

Celebes 

1 

Sulla  lalanda  (Celebes  group) 

81.  Corvns   

The  whole  region,  exoh  N.  Zeal 
Papuan  Islands 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

2 

1 

Australia 

3 

Moluccas 

pABADISBIBffl        ... 

86,  Faradisea      ... 

4 

Papuan  Islanfls 

85.  Manwiodia    ... 

3 

Papuan  Ids.  and  H".  Australia 

87.  Adrapia 

1 

New  Guinea 

88.  Parotia 

1 

Now  Guinea 

89.  JMorvna     ... 

1 

90.  mphyUodea   ... 

8 

Papuan  Islands 

91.  Xanihomeliia... 

1 

H"ew  Guinea 

92.  CKimmwnu)    ... 

1 

Papuan  Islands 

98.  Fwradigdlla,  ... 

I 

New  Guinea 

Si.  Semioptera    ... 

1 

Gilolo  and  Batohian 

S5.  .^iraotAus    ... 

1 

New  Guinea 

1 

Now  Guinea 

1 

Kew  Guinea 

B8.  PtHorhSa       ... 

4 

Wow  Guinea  and  N.  Australia 

99.  Sericulus       .. 

1 

E.  Australia 

1 

E.  Australia 

4 

N.  and  E.  Australia 

102.  .^lured-M      ..-. 

3 

Papuan  Islands  and  E.  Australia 

108.  A'BiUyomU   .. 

1 

New  Guinea 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


feSS 

Oiacr,  Family,  and 

il 

RfXDgeniOiiDffieEogioD. 

Range  bejond  tha  Hegion. 

MELirttAaroai, 

104.  Mysomela     ... 

20 

The  re^on  ;  excl.  N.  Zealand 

106.  Etttomophila... 

4 

Papuan  Islands  and  Australia 

106.  Olidi/hila     ... 

10 

Papuan   Ida.  Timor,   Australia, 
It.  Caledonia 

107.  Acanfhorhyneh-as 

2 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

108.  Meli^mga     ... 

1 

East  and  S.  Australia 

109.  JPHlotk 

43 

Lombok  and  Gilolo  to  Tasmania 
and  Samoan  Ids. 

(Baly) 

110.  Meliorma      ... 

5 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

111.  B-oaOiemadi^a 

1 

112.  .rfrrfJomis      ... 

i 

Few  Zealand  and  Chatham  Ids. 

118.  Anthachrem  ... 

10 

New  Guinea  to  Tasmania  and 
Samoan  Ids.,  N.Zealand 

Hi.  Pogorwmlt    ... 

1 

Hew  Zealand 

116.  Fhaemao.      ... 

18 

Lombok  ba  H.  Guinea,  N.  Cale 
donia,  Australia 

US.  .Etom&»       ... 

2 

Austialia 

117.  mnorhma    ... 

E 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

118.  MdHhrepim  ... 

8 

119.  Jtoftsn-ApwAiM 

S 

N.  Guinea 

120.  JfeiwSopABiM 

2 

N,  Guinea 

131.  Melidectet      ... 

1 

H.  Guinea 

122.  miipom       ... 

1 

N.  Guinea 

128.  JtfoAo      

3 

Sandwich  Islands 

124.  Oh^Bhptaa    ... 

1 

Sandwich  Islands 

Neotawhiidjb. 

125.  Cosmdira      ... 

I 

Papnan  Islands 

(^thopyga    ... 

1 

N.Celebes) 

Orienta  genua 

128.  Clialcoatetha... 

5 

Celebes,  Moluccas.  Papuan  Hb. 

Malaya- 

127.  AraclmEothra 

6 

Anstro-Malaya  and  B.Australia 

Oriental 

(NaoteTopliila, 

I 

Celebes) 

Oriental  genua 

1 

Celebes  and  Sulla  Islands 

Malayan  gauus 

1 

Papaun  Islands,  Lombok 

Oriental 

Diommsi. 

129.  Zoateropa       ... 

28 

TheregiontoPijilds.  &N.  Zeal 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

180.  DiojBion 

12 

Celebes  to  Solomon  I  ds.&  Austral 

Oriental 

131.  Pachyglossa  ? 

1 

N.  Celebes 

Himalayas 
India,  Ceylon 

132.  Pipiieomn 

1 

Timor 

133.  Fardaloias    ... 

1 

Australia  and  Tasmania,  Timor 

13i.  Prionochilna... 

Papuan  Islands 

Malaya 

DEBPABIDIDa. 

135.  Xhepanis       ... 

8 

Sandwioh  Islands 

186.  Semigwdhaii... 

3 

Sandwich  Islands 

137.  Jjxa^   

1 

Sandwich  islands 

138.  Paittiroatra   ... 

1 

Sandwich  Islands 

B.I&VSD1SIBM. 

139.  Hmmdo 

7 

The  whcle  region 

CosmOTioHta 

140.  Atticora 

1 

Australia 

Neotropieal 

b,  Google 


480 

ZOOLOGICAL  GEO&EAPHY. 

[PAUTii:, 

Order,  Family,  and 

ii 

Range  wiOiln  tlie  Ragiou. 

IlEinge  lieyond  tbe  Re^on. 

Pi,  K-EIDiE 

141    EstjilOa 

4 

Mnres  Timor  Austrah 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

142   EmbUiaa 

1 

H  W  Australia 

148    Muma 

6 

Celebes  to   N    Cum  a  and  N 
Austcalia 

Oriental 

144   DmacoU 

3 

Australia 

145    Pi,t_yMhi, 

Australia 

148    Amaama 

9 

Mores  to  Tasmann  anl  Samnin 
Islands 

Ethiopian 

147    Eiythniri 

7 

Molut  u     to  Laruline  aid  Fiji 
Islands   Tim  r  N   Calelonia 

Tava,  Sumatra 

SXDRNIM. 

148    Ealabes 

4 

Sumba  \  a    Florea    Papuan  anc 
Solomon  Islands 

Oriental 

149    BamJojnn 

2 

Celebes  and  Leram 

(Acndotheres 

1 

Celebes) 

Oriental  genns 

IGO    Creadim, 

2 

K  Zealaiid 

161    HiieroloJia. 

1 

F.  Zealand 

162    CoJ^os 

2 

N.  Zealand 

153   ^jiIotiht 

M.  Caledonia  to  Tonga  Islands 
Cdobes  to  Solomon  Islands  .lad 

154    Ciilorms 

IS 

Malaya 

N".  Australia 

165  Enodes 

Celebes 

1E6   ScimTOSt-nm 

1 

Celelies 

AKTAMID*! 

167   Ai+»mus 

15 

Celebes  to  Fiji  Ids.  and  Tasmania 

Oriental 

AlABDIDS 

158  llitafta 

2 

Flores  and  Australia 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

MOTUILUDjB 

151    Biidytes 

Moluccas,  Timor,  Australia 

Palo.,  Ethiopian,  Orien. 
Paliearotie,  Otisntal 

leO    Corid-dla 

5 

Lomliok   and   Molnecaa  to  N 

Zealand 

PlTTIDJ} 

161    Rtta 

12 

Celebes    and    Lombok    to    K 
Guinea  and  Australia 

Oriental 

162    Hydrorms 

Gilolo,  Batchian 

.Himalayas  to  Java 

168   MelampiUa 

I 

B".  Guinea 

Mehubidb 

16*   Meaura 

2 

E.  Australia 

AlJlIOHUD^. 

165.  ^WcAto 

2 

W.  Australia  and  Queensland 

TICAMM. 

PiCIDffl. 

168,  YimgipicnB   ... 
(Miifferipicus... 

2 

Celebes,  Lombok,  aad  Flores 

Oriental 

I 

Celebes) 

Oriental  genus 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTEALIAN  REGION. 


Orfar.jrflmlj,  s.nd 

=  1 

Bange  within  Oie  Hf^iju. 

Range  teyond  tHe  He^on. 

CUCULID.S. 

168.  Ceutropns      ... 
160.  Cuculiis 

171.  Caoomautis... 
173.  Chrjaococeyx 

(HieroEoooyx... 
17i.  Scythro^       ... 

13 

5 

10 

6 

1 
6 

1 

Celebes 

Anatro-Malaya  and  Australia 

Austro-Malaya  and  Australia 

Papuan  lalanda 

Austro-Malaya  and  Australia 

Austio-Malaya   to   Piji   Islands 
and  N.  Zealand 

Celebes) 

The  whole  region ;  esel.   Sand- 
wich lelanda 

Celebes,  Molnoeas,  and  Australia 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 
Pale.,  Orien.,  Ethiopian 

Oriental 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

Oriental  genus 
Oriental 

CORACIID^. 

(Coi'aoiKs 
175.  Euryatomna  ... 

1 

4 

Celebes) 

Oriental  and  Ethiopian 
Oriental  and  Ethiopian 

MBROPlDa:. 

177.  Merops. 

I 

Celebes 

Austro-Malaya  and  Australia 

Pale  ,  Onen  ,  Ethiopian 

Alcedinid^. 

178.  Aloedo   ... 
17fi.  Aleyono  - 

180.  Palaigopsis 

181.  Ceyi 

183.  Csyeopm       . 

183.  Syma     ... 

184.  Halcyon... 

185.  Todirhamha. 

186.  Dacdo    ... 

187.  MffMu^ialeym 

188.  Giwidmax 

189.  Tattyeiptera 

2 
7 
1 

19 

S 
1 
1 
14 

Celebes  to  Hew  Ireland 

Batehiaa  to  Taamania 

Celebes,  Flores 

Celebes  to  Hew  Guinea 

Celebes 

Papuan  Islands  and  N.  Australia 

The  whole  region;  excl.  Sand 

wich  Islands 
Central  Pacific  and  Sandwich  Ids, 
Papuan  Islands  and  Australia 
Celebes 

Lomhot  and  Flores 
Batchian  to  H.  Guinea  and  N. 

Aostralia 
Celebes  and  Sanguir  Islands 
Hew  Guinea 

Palt ,  Orion  ,  Ethiopian 

Oncntal 
OnenW 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

190.  Oma-a 

ISI.  Melidora 

1 

BtroEROTiDJi. 

192.  Hydrocisaa!  ... 

103.  Calao      

194.  Ctanorrhmus! 

1 
1 

1 

Celebes 

Moluccas  to  Solomon  Islands 

Celebes 

Oriental 
Malayan 
Malayan 

PODARQIDJE. 

195,  Podargw       ... 
197.  ^olkeles      ... 

10 
2 
6 

Papuan  Islands  to  Tasmania 

Moluccas 

Papusn  Idaads  to  Tasmania 

Oriental 

Capbimulgid^. 

198.  Caprimnlgua 

i 

Lombok  to  Australia,  H.  Guinea 
to  Pelew  Islands 

Palo.,  EtHopian,  Orieu. 

b,  Google 


ZOOLOaiCAL  GEOGRAPHY. 


Ordsr,  Family,  and 
Genua. 

4 

Baiige  within  tho  lie^on. 

Rai^  beyoail  tlie  Region. 

2 

Ara  islands  and  Australia 

Oriental  genus 

(Lyneoniis    ... 

1 

Celebea) 

Ctpsblibjb. 

£00.  Dandroohslidon 

2 

Celebes  to  F.  Puinea 

Ouenlal 

201.  CollDcalia      ... 

i 

Celelws  to  Paciflo  Islands 

Oriental 

202,  Cypselus 

203.  Chietnra 

1 

Australia 

Pale,  Orien,,  Ethiopian 

2 

Celebes,  Australia 

Ethio.,  Orien.,  Ametioau 

PSITTACI. 

CAOATUIDai. 

204.  Cacatua 

17 

Celelies  and  Lombot,   to  Solo- 
mon Islands  and  Tasmania 

Philippines 

205.  CalopsUia      ... 

1 

Australia 

206.  Gal^m-hymchm 

Aijstralia  and  Tasmania 

207.. Miarogloasus  ... 

2 

Papuan  Islands  and  M.  Austra]. 

208.  Llcmais 

Austi-.,  Solmn.  Ids.,  &  F.Guin.! 

3 

Papuan  and  Solomon  Islands 

PLATTOBEOrojB. 

14 

Austral,,  Tasmania,  Norfolk  Id. 

311.  iVpAoftA)       ... 

Australia 

212.  Polyklii 

Australia 

218.  IfympMcm    ... 

1 

Australia  and  N.  Caledonia 

214.  AproimMm  ... 

Moluccas,    Timor,   Papuan   Is- 
lands, Australia 

216.  iVn-ft!(Zopm... 

Tonga  to  Tiji  Islands 

14 

N.  Zealand,  Norfolk  Island,  N. 
Caledonia,  Society  Islands 

1 

Australia 

218.  Mif/tema      ... 

7 

Australia 

Australia  and  TManania 

S20.  GeopsUtaaus  ... 

^ 

W.  Australia 

PALalOHNITHIDffl. 

221.  Pnmitwrus  ... 

g 

Celebes 

Philippines 

222.  Oeoffroms     ... 

5 

Borneo  to  Timor  &  Solomon  Ids. 

nS.  Tfmygnaihm... 

Celebes  to  New  Guinea 

Philippines 

22i.  Mdeetm 

Moluccas  and  Papuan  Islands 
Papuan  Ids.  and  F.l.  Austral. 
Celebes  to  Myaol,  Flores 

225.  Gyclcpma.    ... 

228.  Loriculns 

Oriental 

227.  Trv-Mglosma 

29 

The  wbole  region,  excl.  Sandwich 
Islands,  a^  N.  Zealand 

228.  ]>ranodes 

1 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

1 

New  Guinea 

230.  £os 

'' 

Sanguir  Ids.   and   Molnccaa  to 
Solomon  Ids, 

231.  Lorim    

Bourn  and  Gilolo  to  Solomon  Ids, 

232.  Coryahiliia     ... 

4 

Samoan  to  Marquesas  Islands 

NESTORIUfl 

iSS.Neslor 

New  Zealand  and  Norfolk  Ids. 

1 

New  Guinea 

b,  Google 


Stkinoopid«. 

235.  Sirm^ops 
COLUMRffl. 

236.  Treron   ... 


Maiaopygia   ... 

Turaaetut 

Beiatimrdlaiaas 

Tutttir   

Oq/phtm 
Petrophcma   ... 
Chalcophaps . .. 


OiiMpha^  ... 
Phli^nas  ... 
Qoara    

DlDTTHOUtniffl, 

230.  BidrnwullM  ... 

GALLING. 
Tethaonid^ 
SCI.  CoturTtiiB 

(GaUus 


MEQAIODIlDiH. 

263.  Takgalhis     . 

264.  MegiK^liaton 

265.  Lipm 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


.  Zealand,  Chatham  Islands  ? 


Celel>e3,Boura,  and  Ceram,Flori 

and  Timor 
The  whole    region ;   osol.    I 

Zealand 
The  whole  region 
Gtilolo,  Timor,   Papnan  Ids,    I 

Samoan  Islands 
Australia 
Australia 

Lombok  to  Tasmania 
Anstvo-Malaya,  Australia 
CelehsB,  Timor,  Solomon  Ids, 
Celebes  to  Wew  Guinea 
Anstro'ltlalaya 
AuBti'alia 
H.  W.  Australia 
Aiistro-Malaya,  Australia  „ 
N.  Guinea 
Papuan  Islands 
Anstndia  and  Tasmania 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Anstro-MfJaja 
N.  Guinea 

Celebes,  S.  Guinea  to  Jrladagasc 
Papuan  Islail<ls 


Celebes  to  Timor) 
Celebes&Molnoeas  to  Tasmania 


Oriental,  Ethiopian 

Indo-Malaya 

Oriental 

[,  Philippines,   An- 
lan  Islanda 


Paliearo.,  Orien.,  Ethiop. 


Indo-Malaya 
Philippine  Islands 


Palsearo.,  Orien. ,  Ethiop. 
Oriental  genns 
Palmare,  Orien.,  Ethioji. 


b,  Google 


ZOOLOGICAL  GlOGBAPHy. 


Order,  FBmUy,  and 

Ejingo  wifliln  tho  Eegion. 

Hangs  beyond  the  Region, 

ACCIPITEES 

Falcobid^ 

267    Circua 

2 

LeleTies,  9.  and  E.  Austral 

2S8    Aatur 

20 

The  region,  to  Fiji  Islands 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

289   Accipitor 

The  whole  region,  to  Fiji  Islands 

270    Urmprnt 

AlIBtraKa 

271    Uroaetia 

instralia  and  Tasmania 

272   Nisaetua 

Aiistralia 

S.   Paliearc.,  Ethiopian, 

Oriental 
Oriental 

273    Neopua 

Celebes  and  Ternate 

274  Spizietua 

275  Ofrcaetus 

Celebes  and  K  Guinea 

Neotrop.,Ethiop.,  Oricn. 

Timor  and  Florca 

Palcearc,  Ethiop,,  Orien. 

(SptlomiB 

Celebes  and  Sulla  Islands) 

Oriental  eenna 

276    Butastur 

Celabea  to  mw  Guinea 

Oriental,  H.  E.  Africa 

Tho  wtole  re^on 

Cosraop.,  excl  Neotrop. 

278    Haliaetur 

Australia  and  N.  Caledonia 

Orients 

27»    Milvns 

Celebes  to  Australia 

Paliearc,  Orien,,  Ethiop. 

280   Lophmchnia 

Aostralia 

Australia 

282    Elaniw 

Celebes  and  Australia 

Oriental,  Ethiopian 

283   Hrmcoperms 

Papuau  Islands 

(Pemia 

Cetobea) 

Palfearctic,  Oriental,  and 

284   Baza 

Molueeas  and  Australia 

385    Earpa 

F   Zealand  and  Auckland  Ida. 

286    Faloo 

6 

Austro- Malaya  and  Anatralia 

28?    Hteraetdea 

a 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

288   Cerolmeis 

2 

iuatro-Malaya  and  Australia 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

PA^IBIOKIDa 

289    Pandion 

1 

The  irhole  re^on 

Cosmopolite 

290    Polioaetna 

1 

Celebes  and  Sandwich  Islands 

Oriental 

SriuaiDi!. 

291    Aaene 

21 

The  whole  reg.,  exol.  Paeific  Ids. 

Palieare. ,  Orien.,  Ethiop. 

292    bi.ops 

6 

Celebes,  MoIuc<!as,  N.  Zealand 

Almost  Cosmopolite 

(A=fo 

1 

Sandwich  Islands) 

Almost  Cosmopolite,  excl. 
Austi-alian  region 

293    Stnt 

' 

The  whole  region 

Cosmopolite 

Pecuha/r  or  lery  Ili&racferUtic  Genera  of  Wading  a-n 

d  Swinwning  Birds. 

GEALLJL 

Eallidji. 

Oi^droTom 

fi 

New  Zealand 

CaMlus 

1 

Chatham  Islands 

3 

New  Zealand,  Norfolk  and  Lord 

Tn.bo»yx 

J 

Howe's  Islands 
Australia  and  N.  Zealand 

1 

Moluccas 

b,  Google 


THE  AUSTRALIAN  REGION. 


ora.,^^n„™. 

Rango  within  tlie  Region, 

Banga  Ijeyond  tie 

Rcgioiu 

EflJlma 

Parmidiastes  ... 

1 

AuBtro -Malaya 
Samoan  Islands 

Oiiental 

ScoLOPAoroai. 

1 

Australia 

Chabahriidje. 

BsacnB 

Ilrylkrogonys... 
Thixamv,     ... 

I 
1 

1 

1 

Austro-Malaya,  Australia 

Australia 

New  Zealand 

Kew  Zealand 

Australia 

OrieL-tftl 

RHurocEETiDai. 

EhitiochelM  ... 

1 

Now  Caledonia 

kSkTTDX. 

Ifesonem       ... 
Malam-kyndms 
Bymenolmniis 
Btomra 

Oereqpsfe        ... 

1 
1 
1 
1 

1 

Auckland  Islands 

New  Zealand 

Aostralifl 

Australia 

Australia  and  Tasmania 

Psooellabiida:. 

Prion     

6 

New  Zealand 

Antaretii:  Hess 

Sphbniscids;. 

Eudyptes 

4 

Austcalia  aud  N.  Zealand 

Antarctic  shove 

STfiUTHIONES. 

CASUAKriDiH. 

294.  Dronueas       ... 

295.  CasaarvM      ... 

2 
9 

Ceramto  NewBritaiu,  N.Austrl. 

Aptbbtgidjs. 

296.  Apkrya: 

i 

New  Zealand 

DlNOaNlTHID.II. 

(Extinct) 

297.  Dinomw 

298.  Mirmmiia      ... 

5 

N.  ZeaUnd 
N.  Zealand 

PAIAPTEKYOniai. 

(Extinct) 

299.  Palnptery^    ... 

2 

N.  Zealand 
N.  Zealand 

b,  Google 


b,  Google 


INDEX  TO  VOL.  I. 


b,  Google 


b,  Google 


INDEX  TO  VOL.  1. 


Note. — In  tliis  Index  the  names  in  Italioa  all  refer  to  fossil  ^neni  or  families 
menHoned  in  Part  II.  The  sjstematic  names  of  genera  and  families  oecurriuRin 
aimost  every  page  of  Part  111.  are  not  ^ven,  as  they  would  unneoesamly  swell 
the  Index  ;  but  they  can  be  readily  referred  to  by  tlie  Class  or  Order,  or  '—  '■'— 
Geographical  Division  (Sejpon  or  Sub-tegion)  uncter  which  tliey  oecur. 
will,  however,  all  he  found  in  the  General  Index,  with  a  reference  to  the 
VoL  II.,  Fart  IV.)  where  a  systematic  account  of  thdr  distribution  is  gi? 


They 


Aatdvark  o!  East  Africa,  figuta  of,  25 

FBoge  of  PalfEOTDtlfl  geoora  of,  ^! 
IaI^ta  of  Ithioplau  geaua  of,  31i 
nnge  of  Orienul  ganem  of,  3S£i 
nnga  of  AlutnUaD  EBDfsa  of,  4Bi 
AaavHiirium,  Bnmpmn  MIoDene.  Hi 
K.  Amorioan  Tartiaiy,  1S6 
-"--  "   ■-OHlOBiiTBrttfliy,  i: 


.^4l7fi«pteruA,  Quropean  Eocene,  16S 
Agrioelvenit,  N.  Amarlcan  TorUary,  138 
Aorim,  from  the  Lias,  laT 
Aicephalvi,  Indian  ULocene,  li2 
Aldabn  lelaods,  laud-tortoiBss  of,  239 

Aigeiia,  Post-Pliocece  deposits  and  caves  < 

AUea,  Mr.  J.  A, ,  on  aoDlogicsl  regions,  ff. 


leparoUon    of  North  and 


JmWw-Mai,  Pilo 

AmeiDaa,  recent 

BouU^  m 

NotUi-I — , 

Amrmni,  S.  American  Tertiar]',  II 
Ata^iecMmit,  Buropean  Miucene,  in 
Ampbibia,  means  of  dtspenBl  of,  9S 

clueiHoLtion  of,  loO 

poonliar  to  Palffisrcljc  region,  IB6 

of  Central  EurolH,  196 

of  Biberien  sub  region,  220 

Vol.  I— 33 


Amphibia, 


If  the  Usnehurlan  s 
PaliKBrctlc  famlliea 
Itlilopian  region,  25J 


0,9^ 


of  M»da£9ecar,3) 
of  the  (Jrientaf  re 


of  Auatisltnn  and  Sonth- 


w  Zealand.  457 
Indian  Ulocene,  Ji 
n,  European  Miocei 


Av^ltdtoroD,  Eoropean  Miocene,  118 
Amphiiraffttijay  Daropean  Ulwene,  ] 
Aiwi^tonuL  Eni^ean  Tertiary,  109 
AnchUopfi/uf.  Bnropean  Eocene,  125 
ArtahipitoAiie,  N.  Amorleui  Eocene, ' 
AnGkippas,  N.  American  Ternary,  1: 
AnchmerUlai,  N.  Anieriean  Tertiaiy; 


European  Eocene,  126 

K.  American  Teitiary,  136 

Ani^ent  fauna  of  New  Zealand.  iS* 

'^ropearMlocene,  121 

Andaman  Islands,  zoology  of,  3B8 

ptobahle  paat  history  of,  33* 
Ani£-tas.  European  Miocene,  106 

is=i."rtE:re,'S£- 

ra... 

dieperaal  and  migration  o^  1( 


b,  Google 


ABiiDala,  rapid  mnltlplicfttlaii  or,  10 
Awisacodont  N^  Araonnan  Tertiary,  I 
Aaoa  of  CdebeB, jiiJitnliaiiUea  of,  4^ 
Ano^lBtlarHila,  Eumpean  Uiooene, : 


beelies  ot,  ^i 


■it  ftulmal  life,  20S 


j7il«loffi»i*M»,  IndiBQ  Miiicene,  122 
Jjiftraoottei^iiio,  N.  Aineriean  Tertlarj',  137 
AnthneMtnam,  Bnropeen  Minaene,  119 
^nMamdOB,  H,  Amsricnn  Tertiary,  13S 
AiitlI1eB,Fl!ocBDe]ilBmiRaltaof,  US 
AtUiJDfe,  Post-PUoflene,  112 

in  HrasillBii  cuTes,  144 
Aiitliiiiitrofi]KBeneraoflnseclfl,16a 

ca  -uie  ganara  of   land  and  H'oaiiwater 

^plttBOpiersi  ot  MaariUnB,  16* 
^pitfloltorfuin,  Enn4>e9ii  Eocene,  12& 
Jptiio,  European  Miocene,  Ifll 
AnAieopltrgx,  Bavarian  Oolite,  J68 

ATOtoemn,  BuropcKi  Eocene,  126 
^reto£nr,N.AmBriconPo>il-PliocenB,  130 
Arattmv,  Buropean  Pllooane,  lia 
■Inttottertiim  in  Braailiiui  caves,  144 

B.  American  Pliocene,  lit 
Algns  phaasaot,  flgure  of,  339 

peculiarit;   in  display  of  plnmage,  acd 
oonfltiimKon  of  Mr,  Dacwln's  views, 
MO 
ArStHtacljiIa,  European  Eocene,  IZS 

IT.  AmerleaB  Iftrtiary,  IBT 

AniaHa,  Bntopean  Pliocene,  118 
in  Brazilian  csves,  I4C 

S,  Ameilcau  Eocene,  148 
AtuAena,  N.  imarlean  Post-Plfooene,  130 
Auckland  Isianda,  birds  of,  466 
Australia,  phy^cal  Csatnrea  o£  387 
Aoatralia  undS,  America,  supposed  land  con- 


rusa  or  Celebes,  peculiarities  of,  42s 

(er,  fiuure  of,  196 

BAO,  European  Pliocene,  113 
Balanwdtm,  Eni-opean  Pliocene,  112 
Baly,  Mr.,  on  Phytophaga  of  Japan,  230 
"'"  ^  It^  peculiar  species  and  eolntion  o 

problem  ia  disEnbution,  856 
Buriers.  as  afitoiit^  ^BtrlbuClon,  6 

permanence  o^  as  afTeoting  distrilmijot 

to  the  dispeieal  of  btids,  17 
Botes.  Ur.,  on  Caisbidieaf  Japan,  198 

on  Longicoma  of  Japan.  280 
BaUmodm^  N.  Ameriosn  Tertiary,  13f 
Sol'irodqn,  N.  Ameiican  TerlJBi:r,  Hi 
Balmchia,  Tettiarv,  IflO 
Bats,  powers  of  flight  of,  16 

Glassificatinn  of,  87 

of  Kew  »:ealand,  450 
Bears,  probable  cause  of  absenoe  of.  fVi 


troploal  Ati 
leaver,  N.  Amsrl 


jHMBipditia,  Bnropesn  Pliocene,  112 

Belt,  Mr.,lLiRtlieorsofa  great  SUberlsn  lake 
dnringtlia  gioidal  epoch,  218 

™tion  ofobllQuity  of  oclipOe,  4«6 
irds,  means  ot  dispetail  ot,  15 
diepeiaal  of  by  ivinds,  16 

reaching  the  Azores,  17 

limited  bj'  forests,  17  ' 
clsasifica^on  of,  OB 
Miocene  ot  Greece,  IIB 


Urds  of,  31 

reptiles  ot  hmb 

am^thibia  of.  397 

fi-esh-water  flsh  of,  89T 

summatv  ot  vevtebrati  of.  M7 

supposed  land^connectiou  oi  with  3,  A 


lepidontflra  of,  < 
coieoptera  of,  40 


Australian  r 
illustisl 
birds  of 


jlogy  of,  409 
e,  fenre  of,  2T 
,  vmted  by  Ei 


of  Malta,  20S  (mole) 
of  Aiores,  207 
of  the  Cape  Verd  Tstani 
of  Siberian  sub-regioo. 


b,  Google 


sub-iegion,  2S4 
eharaotedaUo  of  N.W.  China  and  1 

gDli«,aaB 
table  of  Pateorctlc  femilies  of,  23S 
of  West  Aftlua,  24S 
llHt  of  PalfearnUc  genem  of^  243 
of  the  aOilopiBU  ngion,  293 
of  the  Bast  AfrlcitD  rab-reeion,  200 
B.  AMoan,  2e; 
gsusiB  at,  peanBar  to  UsdogaEcar,  271 


BUtluplan  regions  S76 

ot  iaiB^a7T 
table  of  lithioptu  fiunllies  of,  2»s 
table  of  BCtalopiiui  geosta  of,  906 
of  tlis  Orisntd  raglon,  S16 
of  Uie  lodlau  sub-reg)Dii,  g2S 
Oriental  aeneta  of  in  Central  India 
Fslenu'dje   and    Bthioptan     gsue 

Central  India,  325 
of  Ceylon,  &S7 

of  Iado-Ciiine«e  subr  egion,  330 
of  loda-HalBjan  aub-reglon,  337 
Ulofltia^on  of  pemiliaT  Holayim,  5S 
of  the  FbiUi^e  lalands,  346 
labia  of  Oriental  &m11iH  nt  raa 
table  of  Oriental  ES 


of  the  UoltieBaa,  4IS 
IWQuliaritieB  of,  421 
of  Timor  group.  tSS 
of  Celebee,  428 
of  AustraliA,  440 
of  Neir  Zealand,  HI 
peoullar  to  tlew  Zealai 
of  NoTfblkIduid,«e8 


tnble  of  ge 
Black  ape  of  C 
Blanltonl,    Mr, 


rBorAneCrii]ieu,478 


Borneo,  probable  recent  cha 
Boa,  Fost-Flioeaie.  UH 

Indian  Miocene,  1^2 
Boorbon.  soology  of,  !S0 

reptlleao^  asi 
JtwidiB,  Bnropean  Mioeene, 
Braokymya,  European  Mjovi 
BranaiheAvm,  Miocene  of  ! 


Brmtria  ftoKnaniii,  carhonlferoua  Id 

Britiab'Meg,  BooJogy  of,  101 
Btoad-bill,  Malayan,  flgnre  of,  340 


ofthe«edlterra 

nianenb-reglon 

peculiar  b 

aiberi 

oftt 

uidKo 

rthCblna,m 

number  ( 

■es 

b-Mglon,  B43 

of  Indo-Malaysu 

ofUieAoE 

Iro- Malay  enb-region. 

of  OieMo 

of  Celebe 

.^^■^ 

arities  of,  434 

Gomopiihieus,  Enropean  Eoce 

CaiTMJlfc«-ii™,  European  Mioc 

lilnropean  Boeene,  126 


Canidie,  Buropian  Miocene,  118 

K.  American  Teiliary,  IM 
remarkable  S.  Afiloan,  2(17 
CanU,  Enropeau  Pliocene,  113 
KBt-Hlbcone,  112 
Eitropean  Hloeone,  lis 

Eampeai 

y.  Amerl 

jQ  Brazilian  ca 

Camei,  fossil  In  Indian  Miocene,  liiS 
birtb-place  and  mlgiatfone  of,  ui 

CamelidiE,  eBBentlally  ertra-tropiual,  112 

CUmetoaT^oife,  Mioeene  of  Greece,  116 

Capo  of  Good  Hope,  pecnllar  Boca  and  &un 


Canliodni,  S.  America. 
Corta^TBrariliancav 

"i" 

Co.r«iffi™of&.rapea 

Indian  Miocene,  1 

EuioBean  Eooeue, 

N.  American  Post- 

S,  American  Tertiary, 

of  BrasUian  caves, 

Camlvnra,  cJaMiflcstioi 

oof, 

antiq^uity  of,  153 

.  ■ 

b,  Google 


Cams,   and  Gerst 


Ca^nRiea,  Braalimi 
Osie-fiHina  of  Brsi 
CEoia,  Hnropean  H 


B.  AneriMn  Pliocene,  Iir 
Cebaikirrm,  Enropean  EooeDB,  ise 
Cebai  in  Brndlltui  CHVes,  144 
Oelebss,  plijslcal  I^Btiicea  of,  389 


CentmOAtauiuSaropiMi  Pliocene, 
Cfntidfe,  Etifopeui  Miooene,  1^0  < 

Iditli-plAca  and  mlgiatjoiu^  of^  15l 
Obwu,  BiuDpam  PltooanB,  lis 
Indian  Puocsna  and  Mioeeno,  12 
tt.  AmertBon  Foet-PUoceiiK,  130 
H.  Ameiloan  Tu-blBiy,  ISS 

9.  Anieiioan  PUooene,  U7 
Ottama,  European  Pliocene,  112 

K.  American  Post-Plfooene,  130 

Cettu«*,  clasaiHcation  of,  89 

nu^  of  Oiient^  genus,  3T4 
Ceylon  and  Malaya,  reaenililmcB  of  i 

CejloncBe  sub-region,  SM 


hirdsc 


past  history  of,  as  indii^ted 

Ghalieomtii,  Bmvpsiin  Pliocene,  1 
Challmtherhim,  EnropeJin  Mtoceii 

(baall  In  N.  CUna,  IZ3 
Cftonorieo,  H.  American  Eocene, 

Chatham'  iMaads,  \)^a  of.  464 
Chelonla,  claselll  cation  of,  100 
Chetsfdra,  Europaan  Pliocene,  166 
Chenotain  of  Jilalays,  llgucc  of, '. 
ClUti  ehonid  not  be  placed  int) 

or  NearcUe  T^ona,  88 
Chimi,  fOBsU  mamnwa  lu,  lesenil 
Indian  and  European  Mioc 

north,  nuunnialia  of,  m 
CkkuhUUda  In  Bissllian  oavefi,  ] 

~    "■       ■    n  Hlocsne,  IIT 


Ohiroptora^ai 

llat  of  Falsaran';  genera  ui, 
list  of  Ethiopian  genan  of, 
noige  of  Oriental  geneia  of 
list  of  Auetralian  genen  ol, 

CkWo^)tera,  Bumpean  Eooene,  1 

OjUam^;dbtAfHuin  in  Br&zlllan  a 
Cftffniwarus,  Bnropean  Mloceni 
Chfentpota/n^,  European  Eocei 


ChieroBieriim 


inMloo 


Cftoncaipfciii^  Eoropcan  Pliocene,  112 
Cliough,  Alpine,  flgiu'e  of,  I9b 
Cirouniuolar  Bones,  ohjBctiona  to  syatflui  of,  ff 
ClsasUlcatian  as  aft^ctjng  the  study  of  djatri 

aemsiiia,  Eocene,  169 

Climftte,  as  a  limit  to  the  rajtge  of  mammalie 

gradual  ehangeof,  before  the  glacial  epoch 

Ooleoplera.  families  selected  fct  study,  IDS 
Palssmtio,  ise 

nuniber  of  PaleaictiG  species.  189 
'  of  Central  Enrope,  196 
of  On  Mediterranean  suh-region,  205 
of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands,  21S 
of  Uis  Elhioinan  region,  266 
8.  African,  MS 
of  Madagascar,  262,  2S8 
of  tliR  Oriental  region,  319 
of  Indo-Malay  sub-region,  842 

of  Gdel>»,  486 

of  New  Zealand,  U.'! 
ColliitaUa,  European  Miocene.  Ml 
CoMws,  BuR>T>«an  Uioeene,  117 
Colonoon-os,  N.  American  Tertiary,  186 
Cclrmcdleias  of  Ipdi.i  MiwMs.  i?b  !\m 
Colnm'"  -'--" 


range  oi  urieuiai  jjouhia  ui,  m4 
range  of  Austnlian  genem  of,  a 
Comoro  Islanda,  soology  of,  2B1 
CouUoents,  dlstiibationof,  ST 


Coriui,  Enropean  Miocene.  I 
Ciayphedoii,  Ilniopean  Eocei 


Criiptanif  a,  aaropeffii  Eocene,  168 
Clmomiia,  a.  Amariean  Flhicens,  147 
Cuba,  eittnct  mammalia  of,  148 
Cvreulionid^ma,  Oolitic  luaect,  167 
(^cTojio™*,  Eooene,  169 
Cylio  mpnlla.  Enropean  Crataeeons,  16! 
OmvuhiTui,  in  Brazilian  oaves,  144 
CynopKheens  of  Celebes,  sRinities  of.  427 
Cyo&eHma,  European  Eocene,  126 


ftisumns.  Austtalian  PoBt-Tertiary,  151 
David,  Pire,  his  researches  hi  China  ar 

on  birds  i^  N.  Obina,  226 


b,  Google 


niaraOifrbm 


In  Bisdliau  c&.v., 

S.  Amertoan  PUoo-.-,,  — 

tdriliplsGe  and  mfgialiaEs  of,  Ibb 


!&nTBrlJai7,  1ST 


East  Africa,  geographicsl  fentnres  at,  ibH 

few  apeuial  types  in.  260 
Bast  African  aob-i-egion,  description  of,  258 


turds  of,  iSQ 

repltles  of,  280 

ampiiiWs  and  Sahos  of,  269 


Dldtl 


(lii/iss,  European  Bocen 
S,  Amerioan  Post-Plioi 


isriOMi  Eoesne,  1E9 
Ziteornis,  siHcd  tbpm  in  Bumpean  Booi 
af  New  2calaad  and  Anati^ia,  164 
mwrraWiMe  of  New  Zealand,  lU 
DiP/OtJurtsa,  Mioaena  of  Greece,  tl6 
BniopsaD  lliiiitm%  ISO 
Uiooene  of  Feiim  Island,  123 
DiagaUi,  ».  Amerioan  Tertiary,  134 
Wnshu,  Enropean  Miocene,  117 
CililanicfcB,  N,  AmeriejaTertiiry,  1, 
i«p™todoB,  Anntrallan  Po-'  "— "— 
DlaperBal  of  animals,  10 


Eckimgidai,  in  Bradlisn 
Eehmegale,  Buropaji  M 
ffirtto{nm(*Mi,  "    ■ ■-- 


imphlbla,  B8 

Diatrilrafein,  affooted  By  ollniata,  5 
aSectedDjphj^ciil  features,  5 
contisata  nt.  In  etmnar  cUmatBS,  5 


HhnllariUes  of,  In  diverae  olimBtes,  0 

liBiiSere  as  sffaeting,  8 

study  oC  dependent  on  a  good  class 


ve^tatjon. 


B  affected  by  thegladalepoch* 
03  affeoied  by   ehaijges  of 

d  affected  by  organic  cbanges, 
of  animals,  bypotbetfcal  illuabiaUou  of, 
of  animals,  complexity  of  the  canses  af- 
of  animus, 


)  of  Hanritius,  !S3 


Dorcatiaivm,  Bntopoan  Miocene,  120 
DTsaaOaTivm,  Uioceue  of  Greece,  IW 

Bncopean  Miocene,  12l> 
llTMBer,  Str.    HI  B.,  on  notthsm  tango  a 

Bnropeaii.  birds,  lOS 
i>nnii«fierj»iii,  H.  Anterican  Ttiaseic,  1S4 

oldest  American  mammal,  180 
Sroflgo-Elirike.  Malayan  ligiiie  of.  MO 
In^opUliems  European  Miocene,  117 


ui  PoBt^PliocenO; 


lentata,  classiflcatiou  ^  HO 
probable  birthplauc  of,  ISl 
range  of  Ethiopian  genera  of,  SOS 

iBjigeof  Oder'-' ' 

BLephsnta,  * — "  ' 


genua  of,  87S 
American  Post-Pliocene  tc 
of,  ISQ 


birthplace  ant. ...  ^ ,  _ 

Elephant  elirews,  a,  Attlam,  207 
Elepliai,  FoetPUoaene,  112 

H.  Amedcan  Tertiai?,  188 
Elliot,  Mr.,  Ills  great  work  on  the  bhds  0 

™^EuiopEBn  Miocene,  162 

acHsM,  N.  American  Tertiary,  187,  189 

on  tme  relaUons  of  tho  Wrde  of  Central 

EmboG^  N.  American  Ternary,  181 


feunaofS.  America,  14 


id  by  the  glaoial  epoch. 


Eqwis,  European  Plioc 


Erylhnmacl- 
"sthoapx,  N 
tbioplanrE 


b,  Google 


Ethiopian  region,  gsneral  ftatttraa  of,  261 
KUologlGal  chaniclerlatlus  or,  ibi 

greit  Bpoidality  of,  263 
Blids  of,  298 
reptiles  of,  261 
tunphiUa  of,  2KS 
fn^wnter  flsb  of,  35S 
aummoi^  of  Tortalnate?  of,  255 
Inseclao^  3M 
coleoptera  of,  36e 
temstrial  mallnaca  of,  26T 

Atla^clalands  of,  269 
the  protHble  past  alstoiy  of,  2S9 
tables  of  distribution  of  sdIiuuIs  of,  293 
Bumys,  X.  American  TeiUary,  140 
JfKpSiiwfMs,  8.  Ameriean  Pliocene,  147 
Eucopa,  teeent  changes  in  physical  geography 


of  lioplcsl  AfliB  flnd  AMca,  i; 
Ijoropean  sub-K^n,  description  of 

mKnimalia  of,  192 


Emrceras  otVid^»aDar,  flgnre  of, 
Eta^don,  in  Brazilian  oaves,  146 
ICHTsMerimn,  European  Booene,  12e 
BUIatia,  8.  Amerloan  Pliocene,  lil 
Eutihiim,  Huropeui  Eocene,  12a 


mBmmolia  -'  "■' 
msmmaila 


lolia  of  the  Antilles,  14S 


lo^m 


leril  chBiMtoc  and  offinl- 


extinet,   of  Modagaaoar  and  Masc 

IslaudB,  282 
Malayan,  probabts  origin  of.  369 


N.  Ameriean  fost-Flloc( 

hi  BiBiilhiD  caves,  144 

Fernando  Po,  siologleal  features 


of  the  Enropean  snb-rcgion,  IM 
of  the  Mediterranean  sub-region, 
of  Hie  Mauebnrian  aub-raglon.  22 


Fishe»,frf«h-waler,lal)leofPalffiaiotio  fatniliea 

of  the  Ethiopian  region,  269 

of  Soatli  AfnCB,  208 

tresh-»ater,  table  of  Ethiopian  lamiliea  of, 

fiesU-wat£r,of  the  Oriental  Teglou,3I& 
of  the  Imlo-Malay  sub-region,  311 
fiesh-woter,  lable  of  Orients!  fsmiliesaf. 


fteeli-iv 


Plyii^  Ijemur,  Malayan,  fignre  of,  387 
Flying  Opossum,  llgure  of,  442 
Formosa,  !ool<w  of,  sss 
Forests,  essential  Co  existence  of  many 


Galapagos,  scarcity  of  i«Bt 
Goii^iiM,  in  Eitiopean  Hi . . .  ,  . 
Qalera,  s.  Amerloan  Post-Fllocsne, 
OaUomdloK,  Buropean  Miocene,  lis 
GahaOuTiiaii,  Foet-Plloceue,  111 
OaUihjtIaa,  Enropean  Eocene,  lafi 
Galletii,  iu  Biaiiliiu  eaves,  lU 


1,112 


nu^of  Palfean 
rai^of  BUiior' 


of  Orieni     , 
of  Australian  genera  of, 
"  Oreeoe,  IW 


Goitos  6to , „ , 

Oaiftrnit,  European  Eocone,  163 
Geneitt  common  to  roat-Plioeene  and  Plii 

Geoloflioal'lilBto^  of  <Men^  regiua,  30S 

Oibraftor,  cave  fanns  ot  114 

Qlaolal  epoeh,  as  affifting  the  distributi 

OS  a  cause  of  the  great  change  1r 
l^una  of  tbe  tempecate  zones 
Pliocene  tbnes,  151 

probably    fiimnlianenus  . 


b,  Google 


GiBllffl,  peonllar  Orlantal  geneni  of,  3S6 

peooHu  AQBtnllHu  ESaen  ol,  4S« 
(bny,Dr.  J.  K,  onulagaTaoaKooaf  CetacHi,S3 
Oneca,  Opper  iDoosiu  depoalts  o^  lis 
Bumraacy  of  UlooenB  iaaim  of,  US 
Groups  pHnulaT  to  a  region,  how  deAncdp  181 
Gh^lck.  Raw.  J.  T.,  on  AuhftUneUida^  of  the 

zjimilwloh  iBlaiuls,  440 
QUntber,  Dr.,  hie  clsssifieetion  of  reptilea,  SS 


la  ot  New  Zealttnd, 


HiUcff<mii8,  Enropeoii  Bucene,  103 
ifoKIAertBn,  Bniopean  Plioeenc,  112 

European  Mlooeue,  110 
ElUadoliieriitm,  JUiocene  of  Qreece,  116 

EotopeAH  Mlooene,  120 
Uatterla  of  ISefr  Zealand,  4Ge 
HelioUs,  Himalayan,  figure  of,  331 
Bella,  Soceoe,  leD 
flemiiw,  Indian  Miocene,  122 
Bem^qiov,  Enropean  IHioGsne,  US 

■■ -«-— —  "   ■ -nerioan Tertiary.  1B4 

Lean  Tertiary,  140 


%  Amerloui  PUocena,  147 
H^apavmii,  K  Ameiicaii  Cniaeeona,  181 
Hetervdon^  m  BradUan'OaTeSi  146 
Hexaipr^odtm,  Indian  HioeeiLe,  122 
Hjeunan.ltfr,  John,  on  a  cause  of  the  extinc- 
tion of  iBisB'Sidinals,  IDS 
TTimaiBjaaj  altitude  TeacTiea  by  Tai^uagronps 

mtlie,a29,  33a 
Btpparbm,  Eoiopetm  Pliocene,  112 

Bmopoan  Miocene,  11» 

N.  AmaricBn  Past-Eocene,  ISO 

N.  Ajnerican  Tettdary,  ISB 
Bippopotama,  Pcat-Piiocene,  118 

£[irapein  Pliocene,  113 

Indian  Fllooene,  1^ 
Bippoewtt,  K.  American  Tertiary,  L'"' 
BippoOierivm,  Enrr ■" ' 

Bi^potra^aay  JSuropean 
Bomaladmito^&rivnt,  S 


in  Mioeene,  u 


lie 

ffomolopJais,  Enn 


mopean  Miocene,  161 
iS.  imerloan  Tertiaiy,  IS8 
,    biide  specially    adapts    to 
Aaetrali^  832 
Hooker,  Dr.,  on  deficiency  of  odoura  in  New 

So^bmtss,  Euiopeao  Fllocene,  112 
HgplopA&ntttet  N.  American  Tc^aiy,  134 
Hcn:5«fl,  f6e^l,  in  Indian  Miocene,  121 

perfect  aeriea  of  ancestral,  in  N.  America, 

probaMe  Mrthplaee  of,  164 
Hation,  Cipt.  F,  W.,  onoiigin  of  Nor  Zealand 

fiinna,  481 
Huxley,  Profhseor,  on  zoological  regions,  69 

ditielon  of  animal  kingdom  by,  66 


Bysna,  Indian  Miocene,  1^ 


Eumpcao  Miocene.  U: 


Svaneiatliila,  Bnropean  Miocene,  IIS 
i^rdrocftrerua,  K.  Amerioanpofit-Pliooene,'  130 
B^anit,  fiuropean  Miocene,  181 
Ht(ilt^ipua,.H.  American  Teitlaiy,  136 
Jf^omo^ua,  Enropean  Miocene,  130 
H^apfittmnv,  European  Miocene,  119 

N.  AmffllesB  TartaUT.  18T 
SffopgodttB,  N.  AmericoD  Tartdary,  183 
UyMerimn,  ^Bnropsan  Miocene,  lis 
JtowirnimliM,  K:  Ametlcan  Tortiaiy,  188 
H^isod'ot,  N.  American  Ter^air.  183 
JffpmprjmiKKs,  AustmJian  Poet-TertiBry,  16T 
BpTQ^t^,  N.  American  1'ertJary,  186 
Hl/roairfDTi,  N.  American  Tertinty,  136 
Byraeoidta,  ckisaification  of,  M 

Palffiaretic,  242 

EUdoplan,  304 
iivrnrot'iniim,  supposed.  In  Bntopain   Eo- 


IHdipodiii,  European  Miocene, 
Ibidorbynoliua,  Ilgure  of,  831 
Iceland,  zoology  of, 
/clkj/omii,  N,  Ajnei 
iGtievim  in  BreKlUan 
Ii^U^erivm,  Mioceni 

Suiopean  Mioct.._,  ___ 
Idovs,  N,  Ajoeiican  Tertiary, 

Europe,  i: 

geol<^cfll  fe 

Indian,  aub-r^^i 


ui  Crelaceous,  164 
If  Oraece,  HB 

>t  allied  to  thai  of 


reptiles  and  ampIiil^B  of.  SSe 
Indo-Chinese;  sub-region,  dcscdpllon 
zcoii^cal  charactei^sticB  of,  330 
illustration  of,  831 


islands  b^onging  to,  838 
Indo-Malayan  snb-region,  deaciiption 

illuetmtions  of,  836,  389 
birds  o^  337        , 


Taphical  chajiges  in.  35 


b,  Google 


iBeiitB,iaitaGltforiifeof,33 

adapted  Co  special  uODdiUonB,  S3 
gronps  ejected  tor  the  study 
gflographjcal  distribaljaii,  102 
auHqnltyofHifl  genera  of,  166 
fosall  of  Eiin>p»in  Miocene,  IM 
Xuropeiui  Cre&ceous,  167 
BmTiiean  WflBlden,  W7 
PoIeqoeoIo,  IflS 


of  Centnil  Bluwpa,  11 

of  the  MedlteTraneui 

of  the  Siberian  eab-r»i< 

of  the  ManOhurian  snh-resJon,  327 

of  the  Eifchloplan  regioD,  25S 

ot  ibe  Bast  Afcican  eali-regioa,  260 

of  West  AMo,  Ki 

B.  African,  268 

of  HadagasiMi,  SS3 

general  Temu-ke  on,  SS4 

of  iTOi^cfll  AiVioA  and  Aujerioa^  probj 

cause  ol  Bhrnlnrities  In,  sei 
or  IMo-OUueee  BUb-ieglon,  332 
of  His  Oriental  region,  313 
of  Oeylan.'SaT 

of  Indo-Malay  auh-i^on,  S41 
statistics  of  collecting  in  VhB    vari 
ialonda  of  the  Malay  Archlpsl^o,  S4 
of  the  AostraliHu  region,  lOK 
of  Xav  Guines,  417 
of  the  Holuccns,  420 
■of  Timor  group,  426 
of  Celabee,  454 
of  New  ZeolBSd,  4fiS 
Bcarcily  of.  In  New  Zealand,  462 
inHnetice  of  on  liie  don,  163 
IwecUxora,  Bunmean  Miocene,  117 

m'.  American  Terttoty,  133  ' 
Iniaotiyoi*,  classifleatton  of,  87 
of  the  FalEearctic  region,  131 
of  H.  Ohijaaud  K  TbilMt,  392 


io-Chineae  snb-re^on,  33 
ol  Indo-Ualay  aub  region,  34fi 
FIJI,  Tonga,  and  Samoa,  443 
Society  tai  Marqaesna,  444 
New  Caledonia  and  New  Hebridea, 
Sandwich.  446 


Japan  and  North  China,  i^slcal  fe 


productii>ns  <^,  well-know 
represenlotive  apedas  of  t 


Kahapoe,  of  New  Zealand,  451 
Kan^ivoos,  eiUnet  In  Anatrall 
Kerguelen  Tnlaud,   apterous  ! 

Kerodim,  In  Brazilian  caves,  14 

King-Usher,  racqoet  tailed,  oi 


Lacertilia,  daasiflcation.  of,  99 
Ladimie  Jslanda,  birds  of,  444 
Ltt^omya.  Europ4aa  Pliocene,  11 

Enropeen  Miocene,  120 
Lageslomis,  in  Brazilian  caves,  1 


XiomAas,  European  Miocene,  161 
LaopUheaie,  S  .Amsrlcan  TertiaiT,  133 
Laontii,  S.  Amerloan  CraloeBoua,  164 
Lomurla,  a  hypothetical  land,  76 
XonunrnrfK,  N.  American  Tmlaiy,  183 
Xgnntntiua,  N.  inuaieaa  Tertiary,  183 
LanvfiilfB,  European  Eocene,  124 
Lemuioldea,  range  of  Ethiopian  senem  o^  866 

range  of  Orienla]  genera  ot,  371 
LepicliB,  N,  American  Tertiary,  133 
Lepidoptcra,  cosmcpolitaQ  &niilios  o^  177 

table  of  PalEearctia  bmiliee  o^  288 

a  African,  268 

table  of  Ethiopian  Suniliea  of,  290 

of  the  Oriental  region,  818 

table  of  Oriental  huuiliea  o(  369 

of  the  Anatralian  legion,  104 

table  of  Anstralian  bmlllea  of,  472 
LeptanAus,  N.  American  Tertiary,  135 
Lcptaaiihsaia,  H.  Anierican  Tertiary,  138 
Lsplochafv^,  N.  Amerii^n  Tertiary,  137 
L^lodaa,  Miocene  of  Grewe,  116 


b,  Google 


_..  ..      ...    1  form  fn  Buropesn 

LeptoBoniua  of  Uadi^Bcar^  2TS 

DgDce  of,  370 
tsploiSeriuiK,  in  Bnmlian  oBves,  M 


inseiste,  323 
LtttHsia,  ftom  aie  lAm,  187 
Ulljeboix,  Proteaaor,  on  elas^flcatlon  t 

Bodantla,  90 

Buropean  Secondary,  1B9 
Uauuitofiile,  BuropBBn  Mlficeas,  lai 
Linnocj/on,  N.  AmericaD  Tertiary,  1S4 
Mimwdim,  N.  Amorioan  Tertlaiy,  ISft 
Zjmndfj^^Hi'rE,  N,  Anxerloaa  Tartfar;^  IBS 
Lknaot?ier1aim^  N.  Amarlcan  Tertiary,  131 
LiiModin,  Europeiui  Uloceoe,  119 
Eavwi^w,  Bnropean  Miooana,  120 
Xltftf^mis,  Enropean  Eocsene^  lOH 
IdZardB,  elaxBiflcBtloii  of,  9e 

TMtlfliy,  MS 

wiilarai^ofaapede?liiFo]yne8ia, 
Lmchrm,  in  Braziliiin  eaves,  14D 
lowiAraitnTU,  in  Btaalllan  caves,  146 
Lophiodoa,  Burapean  liocene,  ISi 

H.  AmedCBn  Tertisiy.  130 
LapMolAeHuin,  S.  American  Teriinry,  13 
liwd  Howe's  Islanil,  blnla  of,  45E 
loawailu*.  Pliocene  of  Antilles,  148 
Lund,  Dr.,  bia  reaearches  In  eaves  of  Bwz 
Liitra,  Huropasii  Miocene,  118 

Indlsu  Hloeeno.  121 

I^s-l£d,  flgute  of,  441 


laeaaa,  EnropeBn  Plioei 
Miocene  ol^areeoe,  11 
Indian  Miocene,  121 
supposed  in  Bnropeai 

^o^aWjwf,  110,  111 
Miocene  of  Qreece,  11 

Indian  Hiocene,  121 


biida  d(  3T4 
ropljlea  of,  9?9 
ampUbia  oC  280 
ext^cttumaof,  282 
general  remains  on  i 

Uad^a,  birds  of,  20S 
laud  ahells  of,  308 
beeUeB  ot  210 
'wjnglesa  insects  nnn 
bow  stocked  ivith  ai 

Malacca,   S 


nals.  21 


unicy  of,  SEi$ 

of  bS^MB 
Malseasy  snb-reaion,  deaoriptlon  of,  2! 

bims  oE  2r4 ' 

IlliLBtrablon  of  zoology  of,  2T8 


early  biatoty  of,  2M 
Maiaya  and  Indo-Malaya,  tfirais  daflned,  345 

Malayan  forms  of  life  reappeaiing  in  West 

fbnna,  probJible  origin  of,  350 
resemblances  to  tbat  of  Hadagasear  and 

Malts,  Fost-Fliocene  ^una  of,  114 
formerly  Joined  to  jlftica,  201 
fossil  clephanla  of,  SOI 

Mammalia,  means  of  dispsisalof,  10 
(LB.  limited  by  dlmate,  II 
aa  Umited  by  rivers,  12 
bo»  far  limited  by  the  sea,  13 
^speraed  by  ic«-noes  and  drift-wood,  14 
means  of  dia|>ersal  of  aqnaUc,  IS 
of  most  importancs  in  deterniinine  loo- 


lo^csl  regions,  G7 
classifioatior  ''  "' 


oefkniliea 


of  tbe  European  anb-recion,  103 
of  tbe  MediterraDein  snb-ienOD,  302 
of  tbe  BIberian  snln^on,  aiT 
oiiaracteriB^e  of  Western  Tartary,  318 
of  tbe  Manobntian  sub-isgian,  2S2 
Falfcarotlo  genera  of,  in  tbe  Manclmrian 


if  EUiiopian  genera  of,  300 
of  the  Oriental  region,  310 
ran^  of  the  genera  iubal>iting  the  Indian 

of™cy!^,™aT' 

nf  the  Indo-Cbinese  sub-H^on,  330 

of  tbe  Indo-Mslajan  sub-region,  338 

of  tbe  Philippine  Islands,  345 
table  of  Oriental  tamllles  ol,  306 
table  of  Oriental  Benera  of,  371 
of  Australian  region,  390 
of  tbe  Papuan  Islands,  410 

of  Timor  group,  422 

of  Celelies,  427 

of  Auetraiin,  439 

illustration  of,  439 

of  New  Zealand.  450 

table  of  ^unities  of  Auetiiilian,  470 

MmmuiHa,  extinct,  of  Old  World,  l4j 
extinct,  of  historic  period,  110 
eiUnot,  comparative  Mte  of  in  Kutotie,l!7 


b,  Google 


fl7£tlncfc>  of  N.  America  aod  Enrope»  oom 
orf^nal  Wttli-place  of  some  fkmiliea  act 

ot  tlie  eeeooaMj  period,  160 
VaRRltis.  S.  Ameiican  Post  i'liocene,  130 
UsDchiiriBn  anb-r^on,  desoriptiOD  a(  220 

nianinudia  of,  i!!S 

birds  at,  323 

reptiles  and  ampblbia  of,  2ZI 


fiist  laigniljoa  b)  A. 


Indian  U  locene,  13S 

Jertlar^.  13 


Ujtnrliins,  Eoology  'of, 

rspUlss  of,  2.°' 
UoCoy,     Froress 


on     PalEBODlologr 
chants  iti,  39 


fteah.urater  fish  of,  M5 


sea  not  aepMaUng  diaMnct  annaa.  201 
Megaeerepi.  B.  Ainertean  rertiaiy,  137 

Megaiotui'm.  tOaail  In  Ouba,  1^ 
Migalimax,  n.  Amerlcnn.  Post-PlloceDa,  130 


iVillii^osltiiiH^  BocsnB,  1B9 
XegamjfB,  R  Amsrlcan  Et 
■'         ■       "    opsanTer 


e,  143 


Kegiapira.  Enrops 

HFegoMridfE,  In  Bi ,,  „„ 

Megatierimi,  H.  American  Posb-Flioeene,  li 

En  BraiilUin  cavss,  14S 

B.  American  Fliucsne,  117 
MeUmia,  Huropean  aocond^r,  189 
Xsleaaria,  H.  Amsrlcau  Miocene,  1^ 
maimm,  Indian  Uiooens,  ISl 
Keieioatliidiim,  OdtiUa  Ensect,  lfl7 
jVcninsjAffrium,  N.  AmerToan  TortiH^,  13B 
MfmOteTiam,  S.  American.  Tartluy,  IBS 
MipAjjts,  In  Brazilian  caves,  144 
MerycKaa.  N,  American  TsrtlAJT,  ISS 
Meryehijipiis.  N.  American  Tertiai;,  IBS 
MernGJvKh'snrji,  N".  American  Tertiary,  138 
^fri/mdnB,  N.  American  TerCIai;,  133 


"- °— '—  'it  eoxtiua  drift,'  lia 

AmerloBn  Tertia^,  1^& 
Maottsx,  S,  Amsiicaa  Tsrtioi},  194 
Mtmn^liema,  Miooene  of  Greeoe,  116 
Msjer,  Dr.  A.  B.,  on  repUles  and  ampMl^  01 

New  Quinea,  415 
Mienltsles,  oldest  Hutopean  mammal,  ISO 
Miettaieryv,  European  hfioeene,  120 
leiorosmpi,  N.  American  Tertltry,  133 
Mierot^^nm^  Eumjiean  Miooene,  120 
Middendorf,  on  ext^me  northern  birda,  210 
Migrating  birds,  la  wblcli  region  to  be  placed, 

185 
M^stloi     -  ■       - 


phen. 


of,  IS 


If  birds  In  India  and  China,  2i 


tannaof  Central  Inrope,  117' 
depodls  of  Siwalik  HIllB.  121 
tanas  of  Europe  and  Asia,  genoral  obsep- 


on  DlaaelScati^ 

Mole-rat,  of  W.  Tartaiy.  218 

GlaBBincation  of.  104 
group!  SBleeted  ftir  etndy,  104 
Moluccas,  zoolc«y  of,  417 
birds  ot  419 
reptiles  of,  420 
inseete  of,  420 

Monleys  on  the  high  Himalayas,  li 
Ibssil  In  N.  Ameiican  Miocene 

abundance  of  In  the  Oriental  rei 
MonaCremata,  classiRcation  of,  01 

"  More-pork"  of  Australia,  fl^re  o 
Morotherivm.  N,  American  Phoeeni 
JfodMUto,  Kuropeui  Miooene.  Ifll 
Honnd  builders,   peculiar  .  Austral 

39S 
Honpjn,  poaltlon  and  };ool<^  of,  22 
XuiidiB.  a,  American  Pllooane,  147 

Wtmlelii,  Miocene  of  Greece,  lia 


S.  AmieTlaau  Pliocene,  147 
StfOffaiSr  Enropetut  Aflocane,  LIS 
MyomofpKitB,  fbaail  in  Cuba 
if^potomw(,.inBntz[Uan  cavea,  145 
MjoittE,  Bnropaan  Ifioeene,  120 

Em^psdn  Eocene^  120 
M>ra(tractiw,  European  Miocene,  113 
Mfftopt,  N.  American  Eocene,  140 
iitmpkagat,  N.  American  Poat-PIiocene.  130 


b,  Google 


svbdlTiBlone  of,  && 

distinct  from  Pnlffiarctic,  79 
Neamttii,  European  Mioceue,  lai 
Keotnniloal  i^on,  dtllued,  73 

BUbdlvlBlODS  of,  TS       . 

lalfltioos  ofW.  AfiiMnflub-TeglomrifJi,2eE 

Kewton,  Frofessor,  od  pusition  of  Xemtrida 

on  btrde  of  loalaud,  198 
New  OHledoidii,  Idrda  of,  414 
daw  Hutaea.  mology  of,  409 

mBminBHa  ot,  410 

UtdB  of,  HI 

paonUsriHes  of  Its  omitliology,  413 

lUaatraJJoii  of  omltfiolwy  of,  414 

reptiles  scd  tuDphlblB  olV41E 

lnBoata  or.  Hi 
Now  2ealQiid,  olfjoctlonB  to  making  a  ^riiMJy 
Eoalof^eal  tegjon,  fiS 

extinct  bii^  of,  164 

su1>-r^on,  desctipaon  of.  449 

compared  with  BiiUah  Islea,  449 

mainmBlta  oi;  461 

islets  of,  453 

inustraClon  of  omithalogy  of,  4EIG 

r^it^lea  of,  450 

amphibis  at,  457 

fteab-water  flsh  of,  457 

Insects  ot  468 

Longicorae  of,  KB 

JSjna^aia  of,  458 

laiid-elielle  of,  460 

origin  of  ftona  of,  400 

povarty  of  Inaeets  in,  402 

lelstions  of  inaeet-fknna  and  flom,  472 
Hicobar  lelaude,  tbeii  zoolcgieal  relations,  S3S 
Nigbtingale,  migration  of  the,  21 
Norfouadand,  WMe  of,  458 
North    Amerloa,    remarks  on   Post-Pliocene 

Post-PUooene  fauna  of,  partly  derived  ttom 
8.  AmaricB,  131 

extinct  birds  of.  lOE 
Horlii  AMcB,  zoolc^iail  relalions  of,  WS 
Jftffioiuloa.  N.  American  Tertiair,  188 

SotoOieritim,  iustiBlian  Post-Tertiary,  187 


n  Flloeene.  14 


OcttatheHitm,  in  Bra 
OaodmUdai,  B.  Aiq< 
Opliidia,  elaaalficatl' 
OpiaUvKiHtaat  Bnudhan  caves,  joi 
OposBiaa,  erunet,  In  European  Miocene,  12 
C^ndiHi,  K  AmBrioan  Tactiary,  138 
OrmdniKdiE,  N.  Ameriean  Tertiaiy,  ISE 
Oiieutal  nglon,  defined,  75 

deaeriptlon  o£  E14 
Eooli^cal  features  of.  315 
mammalia  of,  S16 


tallies  of  distributi 


Oriental  and  Btliiopian  fannaa,  cause  of  their 

resemblances,  »63 
OroMvpvs,  H.  American  Ternary,  180 
OslHch,  Miocene  of  N.  India.  102 
iitcriOj  Eurupeoji  Uioceno,  1 18 


O^ffomphits,  European  Miocene, 
8,  Amei^eon  PUooene,  147 


Pach^aina,  S.  Ametliaa  Terl 
FocKyju)Ioph'ut!,  Earopean  Eoc 
FsdiyOuiHwa,  iji  BpaiHfaa  ca 


summary  ot  vertebrala  of,  ISO 

Golaoptrnq  <^,  1S7 

land-ehelhi  of,  190 
snli-Teaions  of,  190 
general  conclDsiouson  Che  Guma  < 

PaJ^BOiodim,  N.  American  Tertinry,  13} 
palmiiu,  EnrDpean  Uiocene,  102 
Paiagtaalia,  Burapean  Eocene,  101 
PaliElodui,  Huropeaii  Mioeena,  IBS 
PaUeocaeter,  N.  American  TerUajr,  IK 
PiUmxavas,  Euiopean  Uiooene,  1B£ 


Pc^£«>in2»,  European  M , 

'^limtUina  ooHMta,  Oiditic  lueect,  107 
i'alffioalolnfiy,  107 

how  best  studied  in  its  bearing  on  geo- 

grsphical  distribution,  108 
as  an  InCroductJun  to  the  atudy  of  geo- 
graphical dlstribntion,   concluding  re- 
merke  on,  109 
Palf&mnctis.  European  Eocene.  126 
ropesn  Miocene,  101 


Falaor^x,  Euiopeen  Miocene,  Ml 
Pal^OTyx,  Miocene  of  Greece,  110 
PaTtsoepaliiiCr  111 

European  Miocene,  117 
Pat/eosBOfs,  S.  American  Tertiaiy,  180 
FaJao&eriSm,  European  Eocene,  125 
Palreoth^riumi  Eoropeaa  Eocene.  125 

a.  Ameriean  Eocene,  148 


b,  Google 


b,  Google
