The Great Society
Graham Wallas (1914)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Graham Wallas's 'The Great Society: A Psychological Analysis' (London: Macmillan, 1914). Scan via Internet Archive (University of Toronto). Presentation and publisher's matter trimmed from the front; ends with the edition's index and 'THE END'. The Macmillan catalogue at the back is trimmed. This 1914 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


A  PSYCHOLOGICAL  AN


"ii  '^


BY

GRAHAM  WALLAS

AUTHOR  OF  '  HUMAN  NATURE  IN  POLITICS,'  ETC.


MACMILLAN AND  CO., LIMITED

ST.  MARTIN'S  STREET, LONDON

1914


COPYRIGHT


fffi


kO'*.,- ;  - :  • ,
AVAM  A9iE


PREFACE

DEAR  WALTER  LIPPMANN,

This  book  develops  the  material  of
that  discussion -course  ("  Government  31  ")  which
you  joined  during  my  stay  at  Harvard  in  the
spring  of  1910.

Now  that  the  book  is  finished,  I  can  see,  more
clearly  than  I  could  while  I  was  writing  it,  what  it  is
about ;  and  in  particular  what  its  relation  is  to  my
Human  Nature  in  Politics  (1908).  I  may,  therefore,
say  briefly  that  the  earlier  book  was  an  analysis  of
representative  government,  which  turned  into  an
argument  against  nineteenth-century  intellectualism  ;
and  that  this  book  is  an  analysis  of  the  general  social
organisation  of  a  large  modern  state,  which  has
turned,  at  times,  into  an  argument  against  certain
forms  of  twentieth-century  anti-intellectualism.

I  send  it  to  you  in  the  hope  that  it  may  be  of  some
help  when  you  write  that  sequel  to  your  Preface  to
Politics  for  which  all  your  friends  are  looking.—

Sincerely  yours,

GRAHAM  WALLAS.


THE  LONDON  SCHOOL  OF  ECONOMICS

AND  POLITICAL  SCIENCE,
CLARE  MARKET,  LONDON,  W.C.


CONTENTS

SYNOPSIS  .......... ix

PAET I
CHAPTEE  I

PAGE

THE  GREAT  SOCIETY .......  3

CHAPTER  II

SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  . . . . . . . 21

CHAPTER III
INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 34

CHAPTER IV
DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIRONMENT ..... 60

CHAPTER  V
HABIT 73

CHAPTER VI
FEAR 89

CHAPTER  VII

PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS ..... 99

vii


viii  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

CHAPTER  VIII

PAGE

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD . . . . .120

CHAPTER IX

LOVE  AND  HATRED  . . . . . . . .145

CHAPTER  X
THOUGHT 185

PART II

CHAPTER XI

THE  ORGANISATION  OP  THOUGHT ..... 249

CHAPTER XII
THE  ORGANISATION  OP  WILL ...... 305

CHAPTER  XIII
THE  ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS . . . . .341

INDEX .  395


SYNOPSIS


PART I

CHAPTER  I.  (The  Great  Society). — The  extension  of  social  scale  which
created  the  Great  Society  was  mainly  due  to  certain  mechanical  inventions.
Those  who  first  developed  these  inventions  expected  that  their  results
would  be  entirely  good.  But  we  now  feel  some  misgiving  when  we  compare
the  states  of  consciousness  typical  of  the  Great  Society  with  those  typical
of  more  primitive  social  organisations ;  or  when  we  estimate  the  forces
making  for  its  coherence  or  dissolution.  This  misgiving  leads  to  an  effort
to  understand  the  problems  of  the  Great  Society  as  a  whole,  which  runs
counter  to  the  intellectual  specialisation  of  the  nineteenth  century.  To
that  effort  the  study  of  psychology  has  as  yet  made  little  effective  contri-
bution.

CHAPTER  II.  (Social  Psychology),  page  21. — Social  Psychology  deals  with
those  more  conscious  facts  of  the  human  type  which  are  relevant  to  the
behaviour  of  mankind  in  society.  It  is  convenient  to  call  such  inherited
type-facts  "  dispositions,"  and  to  leave  to  philosophy  their  relation  to  the
general  problem  of  free-will  and  determinism.  The  type-facts  dealt  with  by
Social  Psychology  may  be  divided  either  into  elementary  or  into  complex
dispositions.  The  complex  dispositions  are  generally  the  more  important
in  social  analysis  ;  though  they  are  not  easily  examined  by  those  laboratory
methods  which  have  been  so  successful  in  other  branches  of  the  science.

CHAPTER  III.  (Instinct  and  Intelligence),  page  34. — The  complex  human
dispositions  may  be  divided  into  the  Instincts,  and  Intelligence.  All
Instincts  are  to  some  extent  adaptable,  and  their  action  may  in  the  higher
animals  be  accompanied  by  consciousness,  and,  as  life  goes  on,  memory  and
imagination.  Intelligence  is  not  a  subordinate  "  apparatus  "  set  in  action
by  Instinct ;  and  the  tendency  so  to  treat  it  constitutes  a  real  social  danger.
Curiosity,  Trial  and  Error,  Thought,  and  Language  are  intelligent  disposi-
tions acting  as  "  naturally  "  as  any  of  the  Instincts.  The  whole  body  of
complex  dispositions  (instinctive  and  intelligent)  forms  a  series  of  increasing
consciousness  and  decreasing  fixity.  Social  Psychology  is  not  a  safe  guide
for  social  action  unless  it  is  combined  with  personal  experience,  and  the
study  of  history,  eugenics,  and  other  human  sciences.

CHAPTER  IV.  (Disposition  and  Environment),  page  60. — Each  human
disposition  has  its  appropriate  stimuli.  An  examination  of  the  action  of.

ix


x  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

these  stimuli  reveals  a  high  degree  of  variation  in  our  dispositions.  Stimula-
tion involves  a  process  of  recognition  of  the  character  of  the  object  acting
as  stimulus.  This  process  has  always  been  inexact.  In  the  Great  Society
the  original  stimuli  to  which  our  dispositions  were  adapted  by  the  course
of  evolution  have  largely  disappeared,  and  inappropriate  stimuli  have  often
taken  their  place.  If  a  disposition,  however,  remains  unstimulated  that
fact  produces  the  condition  of  "  baulked  disposition."  The  main  task  of
civilisation  is,  therefore,  to  produce  a  new  environment  whose  stimulation
of  our  existing  dispositions  shall  tend  towards  a  good  life.

CHAPTEB  V.  (Habit),  page  73. — Each  social  psychologist  has  in  the  past
generally  taken  one  disposition  to  explain  all  social  phenomena.  The
Habit-Philosophers  are  right  in  emphasising  the  importance  of  Habit  in  a
modern  community.  But  Habit  is  not  the  only  important  factor  in  the
problem.  Nor  is  Habit  "  second  nature."  It  is  unstable,  and,  unless
provided  with  an  intellectual  background,  dangerously  narrow.  The
process  of  habituation  itself,  unless  it  is  adapted  to  all  our  nature,  is  un-
certain. In  the  Great  Society  the  influence  of  men  who  can  resist  habitua-
tion, and  therefore  originate,  is  of  increasing  importance.

CHAPTER  VI.  (Fear),  page  89. — Hobbes  is  the  classical  Fear-Philosopher  ;
and  he  distorted  his  conception  of  Fear  in  making  it  the  universal  social
motive.  Under  modern  conditions  the  action  of  Fear,  both  in  Education
and  Government,  is,  in  fact,  uncertain,  and  often  harmful.

CHAPTEB  VII.  (Pleasure- Pain  and  Happiness),  page  99.  —  Bentham  is
the  classical  Pleasure-Philosopher.  His  Utilitarianism  failed  because  of
its  Intellectualism  and  Hedonism,  and  of  the  inadequate  psychology  of  the
Greatest  Happiness  Principle.  In  fact,  Pain  is  not  the  negation  of  Pleasure ;
Pleasure  and  Pain  are  not  the  same  as  Pleasantness  and  Unpleasantness ;
and  Pleasantness  and  Unpleasantness  are  not  the  same  as  Happiness  and
Unhappiness.  Bentham's  identification  of  Pleasure  with  Happiness  made
bis  choice  of  Happiness  as  the  end  less  defensible  than  the  same  choice  by
Aristotle.  After  Bentham's  death,  Utilitarianism  shared  the  fate  of  the
philistine  Political  Economy.

CHAPTEB  VIII.  (The  Psychology  of  the  Crowd),  page  120. — Comte  failed
to  establish  a  Social  Psychology  of  Love ;  and,  after  Darwin,  many  socio-
logists resorted  to  mechanical  conceptions  of  Imitation,  Sympathy,  or
Suggestion,  as  explaining  social  action.  Modern  psychology  tends  to  reject
these  conceptions  and  the  "  Crowd  Psychology  "  based  upon  them,  and
to  substitute  a  more  complex  conception  of  the  stimulation  (conscious  and
unconscious)  of  all  our  dispositions  by  our  social  environment.

CHAPTEB  IX.  (Love  and  Hatred),  page  145. — Is  love  of  our  fellows  natural
to  us  ?  Mother-Love  is  certainly  natural ;  and  so  are  the  weaker  forms  of
Love  arising  from  Fatherhood,  Sex,  and  Fellow-membership  of  the  human
species.  Philanthropy,  however,  in  order  to  become  the  Public  Spirit
required  in  the  Great  Society,  must  be  strengthened  by  Imagination,  Know-
ledge, Habit,  the  aesthetic  emotion,  and  other  dispositions.  Hatred  is  as
natural  as  Love,  and  had  its  own  "  survival-value  "  in  the  course  of  evolu-


SYNOPSIS  xi

tion. But  the  biological  and  psychological  arguments  advanced  against
the  possibility  of  organised  peace  among  the  Great  Powers  seem  insufficient-

CHAPTER  X.  (Thought),  page  185. — Is  there  an  art  of  Thought  ?  Modern
Psychology,  with  its  insistence  upon  the  essential  identity  and  subconscious
action  of  Memory,  Imagination,  and  Reasoning,  might  seem  to  answer,  No.
But  though  we  cannot  control  the  moment  of  Thought,  we  can  control
(a)  the  material  circumstances  necessary  for  Thought ;  (6)  the  mental
attitudes  which  are  favourable  or  unfavourable  to  Thought ;  (c)  our  relation
to  the  subject-matter  of  Thought.  This  last  consists  of  (1)  Memory  and
Record  (each  of  which  has  its  own  advantages  and  dangers) ;  (2)  the
alterations  which  we  may  deliberately  produce  in  our  environment,  in  order
more  effectively  to  think  about  it ;  and  (3)  the  Logical  rules  and  terms  by
which  we  may  direct  Attention.  Modern  improvements  in  Logic  are  mainly
mathematical,  and  that  fact  has  helped  in  the  reaction  towards  Intuition
(Instinctive  Inference)  hi  the  moral  sciences.  But  the  most  effective
relation  between  Thought  and  Intuition  in  the  work  of  organising  the  Great
Society  will  give  the  pre-eminence  to  Thought  with  its  appropriate  passion.


PART II

CHAPTER  XI.  (The  Organisation  of  Thought),  page  249. — The  analysis  of
the  forms  of  Organisation  in  the  Great  Society  may  be  conveniently  based,
not  upon  our  structural  dispositions,  but  upon  the  three  forms  of  conscious-
ness (Cognition,  Conation,  and  Feeling)  one  of  which  may  be  dominant  hi
any  Organisation.  The  simplest  form  of  Thought-Organisation  is  oral
group-dialectic,  which  is  now  unduly  neglected  in  favour  of  the  impersonal
organisation  of  Thought  made  possible  by  the  printing  press.  But  the
English  use  the  oral  discussions  of  Committees,  Councils,  and  Parliament  for
most  of  their  political  work,  though  with  a  certain  loss  of  efficiency  due  to  a
neglect  of  the  necessary  psychological  conditions.  The  Cabinet  corresponds
more  closely  to  the  psychological  conditions  of  effective  discussion,  but  may
be  transformed  in  the  future  by  the  increasing  pressure  of  its  work.  The
present  organisation  of  the  Civil  Service  has  psychological  advantages  and
disadvantages  of  its  own.  The  Thought-Organisation  of  business  is  often
inefficient ;  and  the  Organisation,  personal  or  impersonal,  of  the  Thought
of  the  ordinary  working  citizen  is  limited  by  many  incidents  of  modern
industrial  life,  and  is  only  now  beginning  to  be  seriously  studied.

CHAPTER  XII.  (The  Organisation  of  Will),  page  305. — Organised  Will  can
only  exist  in  a  community  provided  with  the  necessary  social  machinery.
In  the  Great  Society  the  need  of  such  machinery  is  increasingly  felt.  The
three  chief  Will-Organisations  now  advocated  are  Property  (Individualism),
the  democratic  State  (Socialism),  and  non-local  Association  (Syndicalism).
Property  is  based  on  a  true  human  instinct.  But  that  instinct  was  adapted
by  evolution  to  an  environment  now  obsolete ;  and  the  Property-Instinct
is  now  only  an  effective  directing  force  when  it  is  supported  by  other  psycho-
logical factors.  Socialism  was  an  inevitable  reaction  against  nineteenth -
century  Individualism ;  but  increasing  dissatisfaction  with  electioneering


xii  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

methods  has  helped  to  compel  a  recognition  that  it  cannot  be  the  sole
form  of  Will-Organisation  in  the  Great  Society.  Syndicalism  has  gained
by  this  recognition ;  but  the  history  of  Syndicalism  in  practice  shows  that
it  cannot  act  alone  as  a  sufficient  Will-Organisation.  All  three  elements
will  obviously  be  required  in  the  future  State ;  but  this  organisation  will
require  invention  rather  than  merely  mechanical  combination.  Similar
analysis  and  invention  is  required  for  the  organisation  of  an  international
Will.

CHAPTER  XIII.  (The  Organisation  of  Happiness),  page  341. — Happiness
is  often  a  better  basis  for  social  analysis  than  Wealth,  or  Thought,  or  Will.
The  men  employed  in  the  Great  Industry  describe  themselves  as  less  often
happy  dining  the  working  day  than  were,  apparently,  those  employed  in
primitive  handicrafts  ;  and  the  steps  now  being  taken  (under  the  guidance
of  industrial  psychology)  to  increase  industrial  output  may  increase  the
kmd  of  unhappiness  of  which  they  complain.  Happiness,  both  during  and
outside  of  the  working  day,  is  dependent  on  the  size  of  the  social  and  in-
dustrial unit  and  on  the  relation  between  work  and  oversight.  Happiness
is  more  necessary  as  a  basis  of  social  analysis  in  the  case  of  women  than  in
the  case  of  men  ;  and  the  results  of  that  analysis  are  the  main  factor  in  the
case  for  women's  suffrage.  Social  analysis  on  the  basis  of  Happiness  is
often  made  easier  by  the  use  of  the  concepts  of  the  Mean  (especially  in
relation  to  Freedom  and  Variety)  and  of  Economy.  But  both  the  Mean
and  Economy  require  to  be  supplemented,  as  ideals,  by  the  concept  of
the  Extreme.


PART  I


CHAPTEE  I

THE GREAT SOCIETY

"  Yesterday,  and  ever  since  history  began,  men  were  related  to
one  another  as  individuals.  .  .  .  To-day  the  every-day  relationships
of  men  are  largely  with  great  impersonal  concerns,  with  organisations,
not  with  other  individual  men.

"  Now  this  is  nothing  short  of  a  new  social  age,  a  new  era  of  human
relationships,  a  new  stage-setting  for  the  drama  of  life." — President
WOODKOW  WILSON,  The  New  Freedom,  1913,  pp.  6  and  7.

DURING  the  last  hundred  years  the  external  conditions
of  civilised  life  have  been  transformed  by  a  series  of
inventions  which  have  abolished  the  old  limits  to  the
creation  of  mechanical  force,  the  carriage  of  men  and
goods,  and  communication  by  written  and  spoken
words.  One  effect  of  this  transformation  is  a  general
change  of  social  scale.  Men  find  themselves  working
and  thinking  and  feeling  in  relation  to  an  environ-
ment, which,  both  in  its  world-wide  extension  and  its
intimate  connection  with  all  sides  of  human  existence,
is  without  precedent  in  the  history  of  the  world.

Economists  have  invented  the  term  The  Great
Industry  for  the  special  aspect  of  this  change  which
is  dealt  with  by  their  science,  and  sociologists  may
conveniently  call  the  whole  result  The  Great  Society.
In  those  countries  where  the  transformation  first
began  a  majority  of  the  inhabitants  already  live


4  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

either  in  huge  commercial  cities,  or  in  closely  populated
industrial  districts  threaded  by  systems  of  mechanical
traction  and  covering  hundreds  of  square  miles.
Cities  and  districts  are  only  parts  of  highly  organised
national  states,  each  with  fifty  or  a  hundred  million
inhabitants  ;  and  these  states  are  themselves  every
year  drawn  more  effectively  into  a  general  system  of
international  relationships.

Every  member  of  the  Great  Society,  whether  he
be  stupid  or  clever,  whether  he  have  the  wide  curiosity
of  the  born  politician  and  trader,  or  the  concentration
on  what  he  can  see  and  touch  of  the  born  craftsman,
is  affected  by  this  ever-extending  and  ever-tightening
nexus.  A  sudden  decision  by  some  financier  whose
name  he  has  never  heard  may,  at  any  moment,  close
the  office  or  mine  or  factory  in  which  he  is  employed,
and  he  may  either  be  left  without  a  livelihood  or  be
forced  to  move  with  his  family  to  a  new  centre.  He
and  his  fellows  can  only  maintain  their  standard  wage
or  any  measure  of  permanency  in  their  employment
if  the  majority  of  them  judge  rightly  on  difficult
questions  put  to  them  by  national  political  parties
and  national  or  international  Trade  Unions.  Even
in  those  English  villages  into  which  the  Great  Industry
may  seem  to  have  scarcely  penetrated  the  change  of
scale  is  already  felt.  The  widow  who  takes  in  washing
fails  or  succeeds  according  to  her  skill  in  choosing
starch  or  soda  or  a  wringing-machine  under  the  in-
fluence of  half-a-dozen  competing  world-schemes  of
advertisement.  The  boys  playing  football  on  the
village  green  think  of  themselves  as  possible  members


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  5

of  a  champion  English  team.  The  spectacled  young
schoolmaster  who  looks  on  is  brooding,  with  all  his
future  happiness  consciously  at  stake,  on  his  chances
of  advancement  in  the  Transvaal  or  West  Australia,
or  on  the  relation  between  his  own  religious  opinions
and  an  analysis  of  Hebrew  eschatology  by  a  German
professor.

The  English  factory  girl  who  is  urged  to  join  her
Union,  the  tired  old  Scotch  gatekeeper  with  a  few
pounds  to  invest,  the  Galician  peasant  when  the
emigration  agent  calls,  the  artisan  in  a  French  pro-
vincial town  whose  industry  is  threatened  by  a  new
invention,  all  know  that  unless  they  find  their  way
successfully  among  world- wide  facts  which  reach  them
only  through  misleading  words  they  will  be  crushed.
They  may  desire  to  live  the  old  life  among  familiar
sights  and  sounds  and  the  friends  whom  they  know
and  trust,  but  they  dare  not  try  to  do  so.  To  their
children,  brought  up  in  the  outskirts  of  Chicago  or
the  mean  streets  of  Tottenham  or  Middlesbrough,
the  old  life  will  have  ceased  to  exist,  even  as  an
object  of  desire.

Fifty  years  ago  the  practical  men  who  were  bring-
ing the  Great  Society  into  existence  thought,  when
they  had  time  to  think  at  all,  that  they  were  thereby
offering  an  enormously  better  existence  to  the  whole
human  race.  Men  were  rational  beings,  and,  having
obtained  limitless  power  over  nature,  would  certainly
use  it  for  their  own  good.  In  1867,  for  instance,
Bernard  Cracroft  described  the  intense  optimism  of
the  typical  English  manufacturer  of  his  time  :


6  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

The  mercantile  feeling  and  fever,  the  ardent  faith  in  pro-
gress, the  belief  ...  in  a  mercantile  millennium,  to  be
obtained  partly  by  the  boundless  development  of  human
energy  striving  like  fire  ever  upwards,  partly  by  unforeseen
but  probable  discoveries,  which  at  any  moment  may  throw
additional  millions  into  the  lap  of  human  comfort,  and  so
raise  humanity  another  stage  above  the  gulf  of  wretchedness
and  want.1

The  Great  Society,  even  if  it  should  deprive  men
of  some  of  the  romance  and  intimacy  of  life,  must,
they  thought,  at  least  give  them  such  an  increase  of
security  as  would  be  far  more  than  an  equal  return.
Famine  would  be  impossible  when  any  labourer  could
buy  flour  and  bacon  from  the  world-market  in  his
village  shop.  Wars  would  be  few  and  short  if  they
meant  disaster  to  an  international  system  of  credit.

Now,  however,  that  the  change  has  come,  hardly
any  one  thinks  of  it  with  the  old  undoubting  en-
thusiasm. Actual  famine  has,  it  is  true,  disappeared
from  the  Great  Society,  but  there  remains  the  constant
possibility  of  general  and  uncontrollable  depressions
of  trade.  The  intervals  between  great  wars  are
apparently  becoming  longer,  but  never  has  the  ex-
penditure on  armaments  been  so  great  or  the  fear  of
war  so  constant.

Wars,  however,  and  commercial  crises  may  be
thought  of  as  merely  accidental  interruptions  to  a
social  development  which  steadily  advances  in  spite
of  them.  The  deeper  anxiety  of  our  time  arises  from
a  doubt,  more  or  less  clearly  realised,  whether  that
development  is  itself  proceeding  on  right  lines.

1  Essays  on  Reform  (1867),  p.  169.


CH.  i  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  7

We  come  back  perhaps  to  London  or  Leeds  after  a
visit  to  a  place  where  a  simpler  form  of  life  is  still  in
some  degree  possible.  We  may  have  been  watching
a  group  of  Cornish  fishermen,  who  have  forgotten  the
fish-steamer  and  the  London  market,  and  are  mending
their  nets  while  the  children  play  by  the  boats  ;  or
we  have  been  talking  day  by  day  with  a  Yorkshire
sheep-farmer  whose  father  and  grandfather  held  the
same  land  as  himself.  On  the  morning  after  our
return,  we  notice  from  a  fresh  point  of  view  the  men
and  women  who  hurry  with  us  out  of  the  trains,  or
bend  over  ledgers  in  banks  and  offices,  or  stand  tired
and  vacant  outside  factories  in  the  dinner  hour.  Here
and  there  we  see  an  eager  dark-haired  boy,  who  seems
to  have  found  the  environment  that  fits  him  best.
He  has  perhaps  been  taken  on  as  an  assistant  porter
at  King's  Cross,  and  is  irradiated,  not  only  with  con-
fidence in  his  own  future,  but  with  a  glorious  sense  of
identity  between  himself  and  the  Great  Northern
Railway.  Such  faces  are,  however,  rare  exceptions.
Of  the  rest,  not  many  perhaps  are  consciously  un-
happy, but  there  are  strangely  few  signs  of  that
harmony  of  the  whole  being  which  constitutes
happiness.

In  the  presence  of  mere  stupid  social  inequality
we  feel  comparatively  hopeful.  We  can  contrive
schemes  for  dealing  with  the  row  of  broken  men
waiting  for  the  casual  ward  to  open,  or  the  dull  fat
women  who  pass  in  their  uselessly  efficient  motor-
cars. But  all  our  schemes  involve  an  increase  in  the
number  of  clerks  and  mechanics  and  teachers  with  no


8  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.i

essential  change  in  their  way  of  life.  Even  the
parks  and  picture  galleries  and  libraries  and  the
other  mitigations  of  the  new  environment,  for  which
during  the  rest  of  the  year  we  are  working  and
voting,  seem  to  us,  for  the  moment,  to  be  tragically
inadequate.

Those  who  have  watched  the  more  rapid  change
from  the  old  to  the  new  in  the  East  describe  them-
selves as  having  the  same  feeling  in  a  sharper  form.
A  Hindoo  peasant,  who  exchanges  the  penury  and
uncertainty  of  village  agriculture  for  the  steadier
work  and  better  pay  of  a  Bombay  cotton  factory,
never  looks,  they  say,  as  if  he  had  thereby  attained
greater  satisfaction  for  the  inner  needs  of  his  nature.
Lafcadio  Hearn  wrote  in  1894,  when  the  resolute
determination  of  the  Japanese  to  enter  the  Great
Society  was  already  beginning  to  take  effect,  "  The
new  Japan  will  be  richer  and  stronger  and  in  many
things  wiser,  but  it  will  neither  be  so  happy  nor  so
kindly  as  the  old."  1

Our  fathers,  under  the  influence  of  Herbert  Spencer
and  the  popular  science  of  1850,  could  trust  that,  even
if  the  members  of  a  single  generation  should  find  it
difficult  to  adapt  their  nervous  structure  to  the  new
conditions,  yet  that  adaptation  when  once  it  had  been
achieved  by  habit  would  be  handed  on  to  succeeding
generations  by  biological  inheritance.  The  biologists
of  our  time  have  forced  us  to  realise  that  such  "  ac-
quired characteristics "  are  not  inherited.  Each
generation,  except  in  so  far  as  we  create  by  selective

1  Quoted  in  Collier's  Weekly,  March  7,  1910.


CH.  i  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  9

breeding  a  somewhat  better,  or  by  the  sterility  of  the
finer  individuals  a  somewhat  worse,  human  type,  will
start,  we  are  told,  in  essentials,  not  where  their  fathers
left  off,  but  where  their  fathers  began.

And  we  find  ourselves  sometimes  doubting,  not
only  as  to  the  future  happiness  of  individuals  in  the
Great  Society,  but  as  to  the  permanence  of  the  Great
Society  itself.  Why  should  we  expect  a  social
organisation  to  endure,  which  has  been  formed  in  a
moment  of  time  by  human  beings,  whose  bodies  and
minds  are  the  result  of  age-long  selection  under  far
different  conditions  ?

Social  organisation  on  a  large  scale  is  not  a  wholly
new  thing.  For  certain  restricted  purposes — chiefly
the  levying  of  taxes  and  the  gathering  of  armies —
the  empires  of  Assyria,  Persia,  and  Rome  organised
men  on  a  scale  not  less  than  that  of  a  modern  state.
Any  one  of  those  empires,  at  the  moment  of  its  greatest
efficiency,  must  have  seemed  to  the  statesmen  who
were  directing  it  from  the  centre  to  fulfil  all  the  con-
ditions of  permanency.  Each  of  them  possessed  not
only  irresistible  military  power,  but  a  monopoly  of
all  means  of  rapid  communication,  and  the  control
of  the  only  important  body  of  accumulated  wealth  in
the  world  which  they  knew.  Yet  the  systems  which
created  these  powerful  cohesive  forces  created  at  the
same  time  disruptive  forces  which  proved  even  more
powerful.  As  the  ancient  empires  became  larger
they  became  too  distant  and  too  unreal  to  stimulate
the  affection  or  pride  of  their  subjects.  The  methods
of  their  agents  became  more  mechanical  and  inhuman,


10  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.i

and  the  passions  which  grouped  themselves  round
smaller  units,  local  or  racial  or  religious,  produced  an
ever-increasing  inner  strain.  In  Hosea,  or  Daniel,  or
Revelations,  or  almost  any  of  the  scriptures  of  that
tiny  East-Mediterranean  people  who  were  incorpor-
ated into  all  the  ancient  empires  in  succession,  we  can
feel  the  tension  which  ultimately  broke  up  the  systems
of  Nineveh  and  Rome.  And  in  the  colder  analysis
of  Thucydides'  Corcyrean  chapters  we  can  estimate
the  passions  of  class  and  city  which  prevented  the
formation,  even  for  a  single  generation,  of  a  purely
Hellenic  national  state.

Are  there  any  signs  of  such  an  inner  strain  resulting
from  the  size  and  impersonal  power  of  the  Great
Society  ?  Has  the  invention  of  representative  govern-
ment, as  its  advocates  used  to  argue,  prevented  the
forces  of  class  or  race  or  religion  or  self  from  ever  again
thrusting  against  the  larger  cohesion  of  the  State  ?
No  one  who  tries  to  interpret  the  obscure  feelings  of
half -articulate  men  and  women  will  say  so.  France
is  a  representative  republic,  and  that  republic  is
supported  by  a  stronger  feeling  of  political  solidarity
than  is  to  be  found  in  any  other  European  nation.
But  who  can  be  sure  that  the  forces  represented  by
the  "  sabotage  "  of  the  French  railway  servants  or  the
turbulence  of  the  vine-growers  are  declining  ?  In
America  the  racial  and  class  feeling  of  the  new  im-
migrants shows  itself  unexpectedly  resistant  to  the
dissolving  force  of  national  consciousness.  In  England
the  "  particularism  "  of  trades  and  professions  and
the  racial  feeling  of  Wales  or  Ulster,  of  Scotland  or


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  11

Catholic  Ireland,  seem  to  be  growing  stronger  and
not  weaker.

More  threatening  still  to  the  cohesion  of  the  Great
Society  are  the  motives  openly  avowed  by  some  of
the  American  and  European  masters  of  concentrated
capital,  the  men  who  direct  enormous  social  power
without  attempting  to  form  a  social  purpose,  who
smash  working-class  Unions  with  no  idea  of  any
system  which  may  take  their  place,  who  boast  that
their  trade  is  their  politics,  and  corrupt  whole  parties
merely  to  increase  the  personal  wealth  which  they
will  waste  in  making  or  buying  things  that  they  hardly
desire.  The  "  cash  nexus  "  has  no  more  than  the
"  voting  nexus  "  secured  that  common  membership
of  the  Great  Society  shall  mean  a  common  interest
in  its  solidarity.  Even  the  Churches  which  claim  to
be  Catholic,  and  whose  formulas  imply  that  it  is  their
first  duty  to  see  ecumenical  society  as  a  whole,  too
often  seem  to  put  up  their  political  and  social  influ-
ence to  be  sold  to  the  highest  bidder,  and  swing  from
side  to  side  in  the  ship  of  state  like  a  loose  gun.
And  everywhere  the  preachers  of  Syndicalism  and
"  direct  action,"  the  editors  of  clericalist  newspapers,
the  owners  of  "  predatory  wealth,"  claim  to  represent
the  real  and  growing  social  forces  as  against  the
phrase-makers,  the  undenominationalists,  the  blood-
less traitors  to  class  or  church,  who  stand  for  the
community  as  a  whole.

If  one  looks  from  the  forces  acting  within  the
separate  states  to  the  forces  which  bear  upon  that
relation  between  states  without  which  world-industry


12  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

and  world-commerce  cannot  exist,  one  sees  there  too
that  the  "  Realpolitiker,"  the  men  who  claim  to  voice
in  England  or  in  Germany  the  living  human  passions,
stand  not  for  European  unity  but  for  European  dis-
ruption.

When,  indeed,  one  gets  behind  the  mechanical
arrangements  of  railways  and  telegraphs,  or  of  laws
and  treaties  and  elections,  what  are  the  real  forces
on  which  our  hopes  of  national  or  international
solidarity  depend  ?  One  remembers  afternoons  spent
in  canvassing  along  the  average  streets  of  a  modern
city,  and  the  words  and  looks  which  showed  how  weak
are  the  feelings  which  attach  the  citizen  to  a  society
whose  power  he  dimly  recognises,  but  which  he  often
seems  to  think  of  merely  with  distrust  and  dislike.

And  if,  once  more,  we  turn  away  from  Europe  and
the  United  States  to  the  beginnings  of  the  Great
Society  in  South  America  or  China,  the  question
whether  the  new  system  is  creating  sufficient  cohesive
force  to  ensure  its  own  permanence  becomes  even
more  difficult  to  answer  with  confident  hope.

But,  owing  to  the  very  complexity  of  the  relations
which  bind  us  to  the  Great  Society,  we  stand  to  lose
much  more  by  any  failure  in  its  cohesion  than  did
the  subjects  of  the  ancient  empires.  Up  till  our  own
time  the  vast  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  world
lived  in  little,  almost  self -supporting,  villages.  If
an  empire  broke  up,  some  of  these  villages  might  be
wasted  by  war,  but  the  rest,  like  the  cells  of  a  divided
rotifer,  grouped  themselves  easily  enough  as  part  of
a  new  body.  If,  at  the  capital  of  the  empire,  a  popula-


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  13

tion  had  been  brought  together  which  depended  on
a  more  intricate  form  of  social  organisation,  that
population  was  destroyed  or  scattered.  Some  day
the  Assyriologists  will  reconstruct  for  us  the  in-
dustrial and  financial  system,  which  enabled  the
inhabitants  of  Nineveh  or  Babylon  to  be  fed  and
employed,  and  we  shall  then  be  able  to  imagine  the
sufferings  which  left  those  cities  mere  piles  of  ruins
surrounded  by  a  few  peasants'  huts.  When  the  corn-
ships  of  Egypt  and  the  tribute-money  of  Gaul  and
Spain  ceased  to  come  to  Rome,  the  population  of  the
city  sank  from  about  a  million  to  perhaps  a  third  of
that  number.  But  now,  thirty-five  out  of  the  forty-
five  million  inhabitants  of  the  United  Kingdom  depend
for  their  food  upon  a  system  of  world-relations  far
more  complex  than  that  which  was  built  up  by
Assyria  or  Rome  for  the  supply  of  their  capitals.
Let  a  European  war  break  out — the  war,  perhaps,
between  the  Triple  Alliance  and  the  Triple  Entente,
which  so  many  journalists  and  politicians  in  England
and  Germany  contemplate  with  criminal  levity.  If
the  combatants  prove  to  be  equally  balanced,  it  may,
after  the  first  battles,  smoulder  on  for  thirty  years.
What  will  be  the  population  of  London,  or  Man-
chester, or  Chemnitz,  or  Bremen,  or  Milan,  at  the  end
of  it  ?  Or  what  would  be  the  condition  of  New  York
if  a  social  war  in  Nevada  between  Trade  Unionists
and  mine-owners  should  slowly  spread  over  the  Union
and  should  last  for  a  generation  of  recurrent  fighting  ?
The  writers  who  are  most  fond  of  calling  attention
to  the  possibility  of  England  becoming  a  thinly


14  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

populated  agricultural  country  like  Denmark,  or  of
New  York  being  ruined  by  social  unrest,  generally
do  so  in  order  to  support  some  proposal  for  increased
national  armaments  or  for  increased  internal  coercive
authority  in  the  hands  of  an  undemocratic  executive.
England,  for  instance,  is  to  enact  compulsory  service,
build  an  ever  vaster  fleet,  and  challenge  Germany  by
a  more  vigorous  foreign  and  imperial  policy.  But  if
the  problem  is  that  of  increasing  the  cohesive  forces
in  the  vaguely  defined  economic  and  political  organisa-
tion of  which  both  Germany  and  ourselves  are  part,
we  shall  not  solve  it  either  by  piling  up  armaments  or
by  strengthening  our  police.  World-wide  coercion,
like  Archimedes'  lever,  requires  a  fulcrum,  and  the
believers  in  "  strong  government "  never  tell  us  where
that  fulcrum  is  to  be  found.

It  is  by  imagining  the  effect  of  an  actual  dissolution
of  the  Great  Society  that  we  can  make  most  clear  to
ourselves  the  nature  of  our  fears  for  its  future.  But
even  if  the  forces  of  cohesion  and  dissolution  remain
as  evenly  balanced  as  they  are  now,  our  prospects  are
dark  enough.  The  human  material  of  our  social
machinery  will  continue  to  disintegrate  just  at  the
points  where  strength  is  most  urgently  required.
Men  whom  we  are  compelled  to  trust  will  continue
to  prefer  the  smaller  to  the  larger  good.  The  director
will  sacrifice  the  interest  of  his  shareholders  to  his  own
or  that  of  his  family,  the  statesman  will  sacrifice  his
country  to  his  party  or  his  constituency  or  his  Church,
the  Concert  of  Europe  will  remain  helpless  because
each  of  its  constituent  nations  refuses  to  work  for  the


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  15

good  of  the  whole.  And  the  results  of  a  system  which
we  are  not  strong  enough  either  to  remodel  or  to  con-
trol will  continue  to  be  seen  in  the  slum  and  the
sweating  shop,  the  barracks  and  the  base-hospital.

Throughout  the  politics  and  literature  of  the
twentieth  century  one  traces  this  fear,  conscious  or
half -conscious,  lest  the  civilisation  which  we  have
adopted  so  rapidly  and  with  so  little  forethought
may  prove  unable  to  secure  either  a  harmonious  life
for  its  members  or  even  its  own  stability.  The  old
delight  in  the  "  manifest  finger  of  destiny  "  and  "  the
tide  of  progress,"  even  the  newer  belief  in  the  effort-
less "  evolution  "  of  social  institutions  are  gone.  We
are  afraid  of  the  blind  forces  to  which  we  used  so
willingly  to  surrender  ourselves.  We  feel  that  we
must  reconsider  the  basis  of  our  organised  life  because,
without  reconsideration,  we  have  no  chance  of  con-
trolling it.  And  so  behind  the  momentary  ingenuities
and  party  phrases  of  our  statesmen  we  can  detect  the
straining  effort  to  comprehend  while  there  is  yet  time.
Our  philosophers  are  toiling  to  refashion  for  the
purposes  of  social  life  the  systems  which  used  so
confidently  to  offer  guidance  for  individual  conduct.
Our  poets  and  playwrights  and  novelists  are  revolu-
tionising their  art  in  the  attempt  to  bring  the  essential
facts  of  the  Great  Society  within  its  range.

All  these  efforts  run  counter  to  the  intellectual
habits  in  which  our  generation  was  brought  up.  On
its  intellectual  side  the  Great  Society  was  the  work
of  specialists.  During  its  formation  we  and  our
fathers  learnt  to  admire,  without  a  trace  of  that  scorn


16  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

which  Jesus  ben  Sirach  caught  from  his  Greek  masters,
the  leaders  of  specialised  science — the  chemists  who
are  "  wakeful  to  make  clean  the  furnace,"  and  the
biologists  "  whose  discourse  is  of  the  stock  of  bulls."
Each  of  them  became  "  wise  in  his  own  work."
'  Without  them,"  we  said,  "  shall  not  a  city  be  in-
habited, and  we  shall  not  sojourn  nor  walk  up  and
down  therein.  .  .  .  They  will  maintain  the  fabric
of  the  world  ;  and  in  the  handy-work  of  their  craft
is  their  prayer."  If  we  added  :  :<  They  shall  not  be
sought  for  in  the  council  of  the  people,  and  in  the
assembly  they  shall  not  mount  on  high,"  1  our  scorn
was  meant,  not  for  them,  but  for  the  politician  and
the  generaliser.

We  are  forced,  however,  now  to  recognise  that  a
society  whose  intellectual  direction  consists  only  of
unrelated  specialisms  must  drift,  and  that  we  dare
not  drift  any  longer.  We  stand,  as  the  Greek  thinkers
stood,  in  a  new  world.  And  because  that  world  is
new,  we  feel  that  neither  the  sectional  observations
of  the  special  student,  nor  the  ever -accumulating
records  of  the  past,  nor  the  narrow  experience  of  the
practical  man  can  suffice  us.  We  must  let  our  minds
play  freely  over  all  the  conditions  of  life  till  we  can
either  justify  our  civilisation  or  change  it.

The  Greek  thinkers,  with  all  their  magnificent
courage  and  comprehensiveness,  failed  in  the  end
either  to  understand  or  to  guide  the  actual  social
forces  of  their  time.  Our  own  brains  are  less  acute,
our  memories  less  retentive  than  those  of  the  Greeks,

1  Ecclesiasticus,  chap,  xxxviii.  (R.V.).


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  17

while  the  body  of  relevant  fact  which  we  must  survey
has  been  increased  ten- thousand-fold.  How  are  we
to  have  any  chance  of  success  ?  I  shall  discuss  in  a
later  chapter  the  detailed  expedients  by  which  the
peculiar  knowledge  of  each  among  an  organised  body
of  men  can  be  used  to  control  their  common  action.1
But  the  efficiency  of  such  expedients  is  limited.  In
laboratories  and  universities  and  Government  offices
we  can  test  hypotheses  and  compare  results  by  means
of  the  subdivided  labour  of  hundreds  of  observers
to  whom  each  other's  knowledge  is  unknown.  But
the  formation  of  the  original  hypothesis,  the  inventive
moment  on  which  successful  action  depends,  must
take  place  in  an  individual  brain.  If  we  wish  to
estimate  the  real  possibility  of  using  the  ever-growing
mass  of  recorded  fact  for  the  guidance  of  organised
social  action,  we  must  think,  not  of  the  long  rows  of
tables  and  microscopes  in  a  scientific  laboratory,  nor  of
the  numbered  stacks  of  books  and  maps  in  the  British
Museum  or  the  Library  of  Congress,  but  of  a  minister
or  responsible  official  when  he  has  put  back  his  books
on  their  shelves,  has  said  good-bye  to  his  last  expert
adviser,  and  sits  with  shut  eyes  at  his  desk,  hoping
that  if  he  can  maintain  long  enough  the  effort  of  strain-
ing expectancy  some  new  idea  will  come  into  his
mind.  Can  the  conclusions  of  the  specialist  then
reach  him  ?  In  the  case  of  the  natural  sciences  we
can  see  that  they  do,  and  we  can  watch  the  process
by  which  this  has  been  made  possible.  Between  the
original  specialist  and  the  man  who  applies  his

1  See  Chapter  XI.

0


18  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  H.I

results  to  the  organised  conduct  of  life  there  exists
a  whole  hierarchy  of  intellectual  workers,  turning
out  a  series  of  text -books  and  Encyclopaedia
articles,  each  covering  a  wider  field  with  less  intensive
treatment  and  fitting  together  isolated  fragments  of
knowledge  into  subordinate  groups,  as  children  do
when  they  arrange  the  pieces  of  a  picture  puzzle.
Their  work  is  put  out  of  date  by  every  advance  in
the  knowledge  gained  by  original  research,  but  while
it  lasts  it  makes  that  knowledge  part  of  the  effective
intellectual  machinery  of  each  generation.  A  states-
man, however  little  of  a  scientific  specialist  he  may  be,
is  not  now  likely  to  spend  time  or  energy  in  speculation
about  engines  driven  by  perpetual  motion,  or  armies
paid  with  gold  produced  by  the  formulas  of  the
alchemists.  Nor  will  he,  like  Pericles,  plan  a  system
of  national  defence  which  involves  the  bringing,  year
by  year,  of  the  population  of  a  whole  country-side  to
spend  their  summers  in  an  undrained  and  already
crowded  city.

But  in  one  important  field  extraordinarily  little  has
been  done  to  make  the  results  of  research  available
for  the  guidance  of  social  action.  During  the  last
twenty  years  psychology  has  been  applying  new  and
more  exact  methods  to  the  examination  of  the  human
mind.  Throughout  that  time  there  has  also  been  an
immense  output  of  books  dealing  with  the  general
conditions  of  social  organisation,  many  of  them  being
based  upon  the  opinions  of  the  writers  as  to  psycho-
logical facts.  Much  of  the  speaking  and  writing  even
of  practical  politicians  has  taken  the  form  of  psycho-


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  19

logical  generalisations  as  to  "  human  nature  "  and
the  rest.  The  influence,  however,  of  the  professed
psychologists  upon  either  the  sociological  writers  or
the  practical  politicians  has  been  curiously  small.

Colonel  A.  C.  Yate,  M.P.,  for  instance,  wrote  not
long  ago,  from  the  Athenaeum  Club,  to  the  Times,  to
complain  that  Mr.  Carnegie  had  called  War  a  degrad-
ing evil.  "  Does  Mr.  Carnegie,"  he  asked,  "  really
understand  human  nature  and  the  immutable  laws
which  govern  and  guide  it  ?  Is  the  grand  law  of  the
'  selection  of  the  fittest '  to  give  way  to  the  miserable
mediocrity  of  compromise  fostered  by  charity  ?  "  *
Colonel  Yate  might  perhaps  find  it  more  difficult  than
he  would  expect  to  put  his  "  immutable  laws  "  into
explicit  language.  But  if  he  did  so,  I  am  sure  that
they  would  not  be  found  in  any  treatise  by  a  com-
petent psychologist.

If  he,  or  any  other  member  of  the  Athenaeum,  had
written  to  the  Times  to  ask  whether  Mr.  Carnegie
really  understood  the  immutable  laws  which  govern
and  guide  electric  dynamos,  either  he  would  have  been
referring  to  laws  set  out  in  accepted  text-books,  or,
if  he  claimed  to  have  discovered  new  laws,  he  would
have  set  out  his  claim  with  a  full  sense  of  responsi-
bility and  have  started  an  immediate  and  well-
informed  discussion.  But  though  the  laws  which
govern  human  nature  are  at  least  as  important  as
those  which  govern  dynamos,  no  one  wrote  to  the
Times  to  ask  Colonel  Yate  what  they  were,  and  no
other  member  of  the  Athenaeum  Club  probably  ex-

1  Times,  December  27,  1910.


20  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY

pressed  any  curiosity  about  them.  Looseness  of
thought  and  language  on  the  .subject  is  taken  for
granted.

This  book,  therefore,  like  its  predecessor,1  is
written  with  the  practical  purpose  of  bringing  the
knowledge  which  has  been  accumulated  by  psycho-
logists into  touch  with  the  actual  problems  of
present  civilised  life.  My  earlier  book  dealt  in  the
main  with  the  problem  of  representative  government.
This  will  deal  with  general  social  organisation,  con-
sidered with  special  reference  to  the  difficulties  created
by  the  formation  of  what  I  have  called  the  Great
Society.  I  offer  it  to  my  readers  in  the  hope  that  it
may  soon  be  superseded  both  by  the  discovery  of
new  psychological  facts  and  by  the  suggestion  of  more
fertile  applications.

1  Human  Nature  in  Politics,  Constable,  1908.


CHAPTER  II

SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY

BEFORE  indicating  the  lines  on  which  the  science  of
social  psychology  may,  in  my  judgment,  be  made
most  useful  for  the  organisation  of  the  Great  Society,
I  shall  attempt  in  the  two  following  chapters  to  give  a
rough  indication  of  the  subject-matter  and  terminology
of  the  science  itself.

The  human  species,  like  all  other  species  of  living
things,  consists  of  individuals  no  one  of  whom  is
exactly  like  any  other,  but  all  of  whom  conform  more
or  less  nearly  to  a  common  type.  The  science  of
social  psychology  aims  at  discovering  and  arranging
the  knowledge  which  will  enable  us  to  forecast,  and
therefore  to  influence,  the  conduct  of  large  numbers
of  human  beings  organised  in  societies.  It  is  ac-
cordingly concerned  mainly  with  the  type,  and  treats
individual  variations  from  it  rather  as  instances  of  a
general  tendency  to  vary  than  as  isolated  facts.

Psychology,  however,  does  not  deal  with  all  the
human  type-facts,  and  the  first  difficulty,  both  of
general  and  of  social  psychology,  is  to  limit  in  that
respect  its  subject-matter,  and  to  distinguish  it  from

the  subject-matter  of  physiology  and  anatomy.

21


22  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

There  is  no  human  type-fact  which  may  not  at
some  time  or  other  influence  the  history  of  societies,
from  the  liability  of  man  to  sunburn  and  frost-bite,
or  his  fitness  for  animal  and  vegetable  food,  to
his  highest  intellectual  and  emotional  faculties.  A
general  science  of  social  anthropology  might  indeed
be  undertaken  which  should  survey  all  the  facts  of
human  anatomy,  physiology,  and  psychology  as  they
bear  on  social  organisation.  Social  psychology  is  not,
however,  that  science.  It  deals,  within  limits  which
are  felt  by  all  psychologists  to  exist  although  there
is  little  agreement  on  their  details,  only  with  the
higher  and  more  conscious  facts  of  human  behaviour.

Social  psychology,  like  all  other  sciences,  attempts
to  connect  the  events  which  it  observes  with  ante-
cedent causes.  When  these  causes  are  facts  of  the
human  type,  psychologists  now  tend  to  call  them  by
the  general  term  "  disposition."  When  we  observe
that  human  beings  are  normally  liable  to  fall  in  love,
or  to  feel  hunger  or  curiosity,  we  say  that  man  has
cejiaiEL_!l  dispositions "  which  cause  these  results.
It  is  further  convenient  to  use  the  term  "  human
nature "  as  meaning  the  sum-total  of  the  human
"  dispositions."

A  "  disposition  "  is  sometimes  obviously  connected
with  a  material  fact  in  human  anatomy.  A  visible
injury,  for  instance,  to  a  particular  region  of  the
brain  is  found  to  impair  a  particular  intellectual
faculty  or  to  distort  the  normal  action  of  some
instinct.  More  often  no  such  material  relation  can
be  demonstrated,  and  therefore  most  psychologists


SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  23

prefer  not  to  dogmatise  as  to  whether  an  infinitely
strong  microscope  would  reveal  a  material  "  cause  "
of  all  psychological  dispositions,  or  whether  indeed,
in  the  ultimate  analysis  of  the  universe,  there  is  such
a  thing  as  "  matter  "  at  all.1

The  next  difficulty  is  one  of  terminology.  At  any
given  moment  every  human  being  has  innumerable
psychological  tendencies.  Some  of  these  are  inherited
and  some  are  acquired  ;  or,  to  be  more  exact,  all  our^x
jnherited  tendencies  are  modified  by  acquired  ex-
perience. Shall  the  terms  "  disposition "  and
"  nature  "  include  the  acquired  as  well  as  the  in-
herited elements  ?  I  propose  to  use  them  so  as  to
exclude  the  acquired  elements.  It  follows,  of  course,
that  at  no  period  of  his  life  does  a  man's  "  nature  "
(as  I  shall  use  the  term)  actually  exist.  Inherited
psychological  dispositions  reveal  themselves,  not  all
at  birth,  but  gradually  during  life  and  growth.  The
man  has  already  been  changed  by  experience  before
most  of  his  dispositions  appear,  and  after  its  appear-
ance each  disposition  is  constantly  influenced  by
further  experience.  A  man's  nature,  that  is  to  say,
or  any  one  of  his  dispositions,  is  an  imaginary  point,
from  which  the  effects  of  experience  are  assumed  to
start.  The  man,  at  any  given  moment,  is  the  result
of  the  action  of  his  experience  on  his  nature.

This  use  of  words  has  the  advantage  of  enabling
the  social  psychologist  to  project,  so  to  speak,  all  his
facts  on  to  one  terminological  plane.  Both  the  habits

1  Mr.  McDougall,  in  his  Social  Psychology  (e.g.  p.  29),  in  order  to  emphasise
his  refusal  to  dogmatise  on  the  point  whether  all  psychological  dispositions
have  a  material  basis,  calls  them  "  psycho-physical  dispositions."


24  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.X

of  ordinary  speech  and  the  traditional  presentation  of
their  subject  by  writers  on  psychology  has  made  it
unnecessarily  difficult  to  combine  and  compare  such
facts  as  that  men  feel  pain,  make  calculations,  and  act
in  obedience  to  the  impulse  of  anger.  Pain  is  gener-
ally examined  by  close  introspective  attention  to  its
momentary  character,  and  is  therefore  generally
spoken  of  as  a  fact  injconsciousness.  Rational  cal-
culation is  generally  approached  by  the  "  logical "
method  of  testing  the  validity  of  its  various  forms.
It  is  therefore  spoken  of  as  a  process.  Anger  is  one  of
those  instincts  which  have  been  "  explained  "  during
the  last  fifty  years  by  reference  to  the  course  of  human
evolution.  It  is  therefore  spoken  of  as  a  fact  in
human  or  animal  inherited  structure.  It  is  only  when
we  project  all  three  facts  on  the  single  plane  of
structure,  and  speak  of  the  three  dispositions  to  feel
pain,  to  reason,  and  to  become  angry  that  the  com-
bination and  comparison  of  such  factors  in  any  given
social  problem  becomes  easy.1

The  statement,  however,  that  psychological  events

1  A  corresponding  difficulty  of  language  caused  endless  confusion  during
that  "  age  of  faith,"  between  1820  and  1870,  when  men  really  attempted  to
-apply  Political  Economy  to  the  conduct  of  social  life.  Payment  for  the  use
of  land  had  been  habitually  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  landlord,
who  reckons  his  possessions  in  units  of  area,  and  was  called  "  rent."  Pay-
ment for  the  use  of  "  capital,"  of  a  railway,  for  instance,  had  been  habitually
considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  investor,  who  reckons  his  savings
in  units  of  value,  and  was  called  "  interest."  It  was  therefore  extraordinarily
difficult  for  the  practical  man,  who  "  believed  in  political  economy,"  to  treat
"  rent  "  and  "  interest  "  as  comparable  things,  unless  he  forced  himself  to
realise  that  the  income  derived  from  ownership  of  a  railway  could  be  calcu-
lated as  rent  per  acre  of  track,  and  the  income  from  land  as  interest  per
hundred  pounds  invested.  Only  within  the  last  few  years  have  American
reformers,  after  wandering  for  a  generation  between  Henry  Georgism  and
Marxism,  begun  to  use  phrases  like  "  the  physical  valuation  of  railways,"
which  make  it  possible  to  project  statements  about  "  land  "  and  "  capital  "
on  to  one  plane.


SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  25

are  the  result  of  the  relation  between  our  experience
and  our  nature  raises  the  metaphysical  and  ethical
objection  that  those  who  make  it  seem  to  deny  free
will  and  therefore  to  paralyse  human  energy.  An
able  and  temperate  writer,  for  instance,  in  the  Man-
chester Guardian,  when  reviewing  a  treatise  on  social
psychology,  urged  :  "  It  is  apt  to  take  us  perilously
near  to  the  sort  of  determinism  which  sets  out  an
array  of  independent  warring  motives,  each  fighting
on  its  own  account,  with  the  ego  or  self  keeping  the
ring  and  registering  the  victory  of  the  stronger."  *
And  a  clerical  speaker  in  the  Cambridge  Senate  House
strongly  opposed  the  establishment  of  a  special
examination  in  Psychology,  on  the  ground  that
Psychology  was  "  immoral  and  mischievous,  a  blind-
ing of  man  to  the  responsibility  of  his  actions."  2

This  objection  has  always  been  brought  against
any  intrusion  of  cause  and  effect  into  regions  hitherto
assigned  to  the  free  activity  of  human  or  superhuman
will.  Aristophanes  attacked  Socrates  for  impiety  and
materialism  in  teaching  that  the  clouds  were
mechanical  emanations  and  not  divine  persons.
Socrates  himself,  in  Plato's  Phaedo,  attacks  the
physiological  studies  of  Anaxagoras  on  the  same
ground.  He  is  explaining  to  his  disciples  why  he
refused  to  take  the  hint  conveyed  to  him  by  the
Athenian  Government  that  his  escape  would  be
connived  at.  Anaxagoras,  he  says,  would  argue

.  .  .  that  I  am  sitting  here  because  my  body  is  composed

1  Manchester  Guardian,  Dec.  14, 1908. 2  Westminster  Gazette,  Nov.  3, 1910-


26  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

of  bones  and  muscles,  and  that  the  bones  are  hard  and  separ-
ated by  joints,  while  the  muscles  can  be  tightened  and  loosened.
.  .  .  But  he  would  quite  forget  to  mention  the  real  cause,
which  is  that,  since  the  Athenians  thought  it  right  to  con-
demn me,  I  have  thought  it  right  and  just  to  sit  here  and  to
submit  to  whatever  sentence  they  may  think  fit  to  impose.
For,  by  the  dog  of  Egypt,  I  think  that  these  muscles  and  bones
would  long  ago  have  been  in  Megara  or  Boeotia,  prompted
by  their  opinion  of  what  is  best,  if  I  had  not  thought  it  better
and  more  honourable  to  submit  to  whatever  penalty  the
State  inflicts  rather  than  escape  by  flight.1

The  philosophical  answer  to  this  objection  may  be
left  to  the  philosophers,  with  the  proviso  that  they
shall  give  us  a  conception  of  the  relation  between
freedom  and  determinism  which  shall  apply  to  the
whole  living  universe,  and  that  they  shall  not  draw
an  arbitrary  line,  as  some  of  them  seem  inclined  to
do,  dividing  certain  facts  of  psychology,  which  are
legitimate  subjects  of  scientific  enquiry,  from  others
which  are  not.  It  may  be  sufficient  here  to  urge  the
empirical  consideration  that,  throughout  the  history
of  mankind  and  in  every  branch  of  science,  those
who  have  really  advanced  our  knowledge  of  causes
and  effects  have  felt  their  energy,  and  even  their
sense  of  "  freedom "  to  be  increased  rather  than
paralysed  by  what  they  have  learnt.

When  these  philosophical  and  terminological  diffi-
culties have  been  overcome  or  avoided,  we  are  in  a
position  to  consider  what  should  be  the  actual  choice
and  arrangement  of  human  psychological  dispositions
in  that  working  "  projection  "  (to  use  again  the  map-
makers'  term)  of  human  nature,  which  is  most  con-

1  Phaedo  (p.  179,  Golden  Treasury  Series).


SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  27

venient  for  the  special  applied  science  of  social
psychology.  The  facts  when  chosen  will,  of  course,
include  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  our  recorded
knowledge  as  to  the  human  type.  Not  only  will  a
vast  number  of  facts  be  excluded  as  more  appropriate
to  the  sciences  of  anatomy  and  physiology,  but  a
large  proportion  even  of  known  psychological  facts
will  be  left  to  the  general  science  of  psychology.
Each  social  psychologist  will,  that  is  to  say,  place  on
his  working  projection  only  those  facts  which  he
believes  to  be  relevant  to  the  social  problems  of  his
age,  although  he  will,  from  time  to  time,  dip,  and
urge  others  to  dip,  into  the  sea  of  hitherto  irrelevant
facts,  with  the  hope  of  discovering  new  causal  re-
lationships between  some  of  them  and  the  subject
matter  of  his  own  work.  Speaking  generally,  he  will
find  that,  while  certain  broad  facts  of  human  psy-
chology are  relevant  to  all  the  applied  psychological
sciences — pedagogic,  or  pathological,  or  social — each
of  the  applied  sciences  must  make  its  own  choice  of
details.

But  as  soon  as  he  begins  his  provisional  selection  of
facts,  the  social  psychologist  will  meet  with  a  further
question  of  arrangement.  Shall  he  separate  his
psychological  facts  as  far  as  possible  into  their  ulti-
mate elements,  or  gather  them  into  the  largest  groups
which  can  be  shown  to  have  a  causal  connection  with
each  other  ?  If  I  let  a  drop  of  hot  sealing-wax  fall
on  my  ringer,  I  feel  a  momentary  sensation  of  touch
followed  by  a  prolonged  sensation  of  pain.  I  jerk
my  hand  off  the  table,  shake  it,  and  put  my  finger  to


28  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

my  mouth.  Then  I  look  round  the  room,  with  a  vague
hope  of  finding  something  to  cure  the  pain  and  prevent
bad  results.  I  open  perhaps  a  drawer  in  which  I
keep  odds  and  ends.  As  I  do  so  I  remember  being
told  that  boracic  powder  is  good  for  a  burn,  and
that  there  is  some  in  a  room  upstairs,  to  which  I
accordingly  go.  Any  other  normal  human  being  will
act  more  or  less  in  the  same  way,  and  the  whole  pro-
cess may  be  conceived  of  as  the  result  of  the  nearer
environmental  fact  of  the  hot  sealing-wax,  and  of  the
more  distant  environmental  facts  stored  in  my  memory,
acting  on  the  inherited  dispositions  which  make  up
my  "  nature."  But  it  is  clear  that  my  "  nature "
may  be  divided  either  into  such  "  elementary  "  disposi-
tions as  those  which  make  me  successively  feel  pain,
start,  jerk  my  hand,  etc.,  or  into  more  "complex"
dispositions  producing  connected  series  of  such  events.
If  we  confine  ourselves,  for  instance,  to  the  series  of
events  beginning  with  the  dropping  of  the  sealing-
wax  and  ending  with  the  bringing  of  the  finger  to  the
mouth,  they  may  all  be  referred  to  one  complex  dis-
position which  inclines  me  to  bring  any  part  of  my
body  that  feels  a  burning  pain  to  my  mouth.

The  same  is  true  of  my  later  action.  It  may  be
treated  either  as  the  result  of  many  elementary  dis-
positions to  perceive,  to  remember,  to  decide,  etc. ;
or  as  the  one  result  of  a  single  complex  disposition  to
search,  with  the  help  both  of  the  senses  and  of  the
memory,  for  means  of  relieving  pain.

The  series  of  events  chosen  might  have  been  even
more  complex  than  those  which  normally  follow  an


SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  29

accidental  burn,  and  the  same  statement  would  have
been  true.  The  behaviour  of  mothers  in  bringing  up
children,  or  of  men  in  the  long  process  of  making
fortunes,  or  of  astronomers  discovering  planets,  may
be  treated  as  instances  either  of  innumerable  ele-
mentary dispositions,  or  of  the  three  complex  dis-
positions of  mother-love,  acquisitiveness,  and  curiosity.

In  dealing  with  particular  problems  the  social
psychologist  will  of  course  use  whichever  method  is
most  convenient  for  his  particular  purpose.  I  shall,
for  instance,  mainly  use  the  complex  analysis  in  the
first  part  of  this  book,  and  a  particular  elementary
analysis  is  in  the  second  part.  But  for  that  pre-
liminary view  of  his  subject  matter,  which  he  will
carry  half-consciously  in  his  mind  and  use  for  his
wider  speculations,  the  social  psychologist  will,  I
believe,  be  wise  to  explain  human  conduct  rather  by
the  complex  dispositions,  which  are  the  Greatest
Common  Measures  of  human  nature,  than  by  the
elementary  dispositions,  which  are  its  Least  Common
Measures.

With  regard,  therefore,  to  our  elementary  dis-
positions I  do  not  propose  to  do  more  here  than
indicate  the  character  of  the  most  important  of
them.  They  are  described  at  length  in  all  the
text-books  of  psychology,  and  include  the  senses,  and
such  measurable  facts  as  memory  and  association,
habit  and  fatigue.  They  may  be  arranged  on  several
schemes  of  classification,  either,  for  instance,  as  physio-
logical facts  observed  from  outside,  or  (in  the  scheme
which  I  shall  use  in  the  second  part  of  this  book)  as


30  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

forms  of  consciousness,  such  as  cognition,  conation
(or  "  Will "),  and  feeling,  observed  from  within.
The  social  psychologist  must  know  about  them,  but
he  will  often  get  his  knowledge  most  conveniently
from  books  written  without  any  special  reference  to
social  organisation.  For  the  special  needs  of  his
science  he  will  find  that  the  most  important  point  for
him  to  realise  about  these  elementary  dispositions  is
the  quantitative  limitations  of  them  all,  the  fact,  for
instance,  that  we  cannot  see  or  hear  or  remember
much  more  than  was  required  by  our  earliest  human
ancestors,  or  endure  much  more  exertion  than  was
necessary  for  them  in  gathering  food.

The  complex  dispositions  with  which  the  social
psychologists  have  mainly  to  deal  may  be  roughly
grouped  as  Instinct  and  Intelligence,  and  one  of  the
reasons  why  social  psychology  has  had  so  little
influence  on  social  organisation  is  that  it  is  extremely
difficult  to  apply  to  the  study  of  Instinct  and  Intelli-
gence the  exact  methods  of  modern  natural  science.
Certain  elementary  dispositions — the  senses,  the  re-
flexes, memory,  and  so  on — have  been  examined
during  the  last  thirty  years  by  trained  experimen-
talists, using  mechanical  apparatus  in  specially
equipped  laboratories.  These  men  have  been  able
to  arrange  innumerable  tests  under  identical  condi-
tions, and  therefore  to  compare  results  with  confid-
ence and  to  compile  exact  statistical  records.  Their
success  has  been  unmistakable  and  progressive.  They
have  made  scores  of  well-established  discoveries  on
such  points  as  the  limitations  and  illusions  of  sight


SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  31

and  hearing  and  touch,  or  of  those  newly  observed
"  ampullar  "  and  "  vestibular  "  senses  which  guide
some  of  our  subconscious  movements.  Elementary
mental  processes,  like  association  or  memory,  which
we  are  apt  to  take  for  granted,  have  been  also  shown
to  be  capable  of  precise  measurements.1  The  ex-
perimentalists have  been  assisted  by  the  immense
progress  which  has  recently  taken  place  in  the  general
physiology  of  the  nervous  system,  and  indeed  their
greatest  successes  have  been  made  in  the  frontier
region  between  physiology  and  psychology.  Many  of
these  discoveries  are  being  applied,  or  soon  will  be
applied,  to  practical  purposes.  The  schoolmaster  is
already  arranging  his  lessons  with  a  view  to  economy
of  effort,  and  will  soon  use  immensely  more  effective
means  in  testing  the  fitness  of  each  pupil  for  any
particular  course.2  The  nerve-doctor  no  longer  gives
his  advice  wholly  in  the  dark.  It  is  becoming  possible
for  the  men  who  have  to  handle  machines  or  choose
and  employ  others  to  do  so — the  aviator,  the  type-
writer, the  factory  manager — to  acquire  a  working
knowledge,  not  only  of  wheels  and  bands  and  valves,
but  also  of  the  nervous  systems  which  are  to  co-
operate with  them.  The  advertisement  manager  is
learning  how  to  secure  that  his  placards  shall  be
both  noticed  and  remembered.3

1  See,  e.g.,  C.  S.  Myers,  Text-book  of  Experimental  Psychology,  and  E.  B.
Titchener,  Text-book  of  Psychology.

*  See,  e.g.,  Cyril  Burt,  "  Experimental  Tests  of  General  Intelligence,"
British  Journal  of  Psychology,  December  1909.

3  See,  e.g.,  many  ingenious  suggestions  for  the  practical  application  of
psychology  to  business  in  Professor  Muensterberg's  American  Problems  and
Psychology  and  Industrial  Efficiency.


32  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  n.i

The  social  psychologist,  when  he  is  dealing  with
those  facts  in  human  nature  on  which  the  experimen-
talists have  worked,  receives  invaluable  guidance
both  from  their  results  and  from  their  method  and
spirit.  He  can  now  use  words  like  pain  or  pleasure
or  habit  in  a  clearer  sense  than  that  given  by  the
loose  associations  of  ordinary  speech.  Human  in-
stincts have  been  made  much  more  intelligible  by
recent  experimental  work  on  the  instinctive  behaviour
of  other  animals.  Even  when  he  deals  with  reason
he  finds  that  the  still  more  recent  experimental
enquiries  into  the  forms  of  consciousness  which  ac-
company thought  are  rich  in  both  positive  and  nega-
tive suggestions.

But  the  facts  of  human  nature  which  are  of  the
greatest  importance  to  the  social  psychologist  are
just  those  to  which  laboratory  methods  are  least
applicable.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  arrange  a
series  of  identical  experiments  to  illustrate  the  work-
ing of  patriotism  or  ambition  or  the  property  instinct
or  artistic  and  intellectual  creativeness.  In  such
matters  the  social  psychologist  must  be  content  with
the  instances  which  arise  in  ordinary  life,  and  must
examine  them  by  the  older  methods  of  introspection,
personal  evidence,  and  analogy.  In  so  doing  he
knowingly  lays  himself  open  to  the  contempt  of  the
experimentalist.  Professor  E.  B.  Titchener  of  Cor-
nell, for  instance,  who  is  one  of  the  most  fruitful  and
devoted  of  experimental  psychologists,  says  :

For  the  past  two  thousand  years  psychology  has  been
resting  upon  plausibilities  and  probabilities.  Now  that  we


SOCIAL  PSYCHOLOGY  33

are  beginning  to  have  a  psychology  of  facts,  it  is  both  honesty
and  policy  to  state  where  the  facts  end  and  speculative  con-
struction begins.1

Contempt  of  this  kind  will  do  the  social  psycholo-
gist no  harm,  and  may  help  to  guard  him  against  that
facility  in  ad  hoc  psychological  generalisation,  of
which  current  sociological  literature  is  full.  Much
indeed  that  is  now  written  by  sociologists  on  such
psychological  points  as  "  Imitation,"  or  "  Sympathy,"
or  "  The  Psychology  of  the  Crowd,"  2  gives  Professor
Titchener  ample  justification  for  the  statement  that —

So  far  is  applied  psychology  from  reliance  upon  the  parent
discipline,  that  some  of  its  most  widely  used  and  most  strongly
emphasised  ideas  contravene  established  scientific  principle.3

But  the  purpose  of  social  psychology  is  to  guide
human  action ;  and  human  action  takes  place  in  a
world  which  pays  little  attention  to  the  exact  degrees
of  our  knowledge  and  our  ignorance.  It  is  clear  that
we  do  possess  the  more  complex  dispositions,  and  that
they  do  exercise  an  important  influence  on  our  social
conduct ;  and  important  causes  will,  in  every  social
problem,  remain  important,  however  inadequate  our
means  of  examining  them  may  be,  while  unimportant
causes  will  remain  unimportant,  however  accurately
we  observe  and  measure  them.

1  Titchener,  Text-book  of  Psychology,  p.  457.
*  See  infra,  Chapter  VIII.

8  Titchener,  "  The  Past  Decade  in  Experimental  Psychology,"  American
Journal  of  Psychology,  1910,  xxi.  pp.  404-421.


CHAPTEK  III

INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE

IN  approaching  the  complex  dispositions  into  which
the  facts  of  human  nature  can  be  divided  for  the
purposes  of  social  psychology,  it  is  convenient  to
begin  with  the  Instincts.  Every  treatise  on  psycho-
logy has  its  list  of  human  instincts,  and  every  list
varies  somewhat  from  the  others.  Most  of  them,
however,  include  hunger,  parental  affection,  play,
pugnacity,  sex,  hunting,  curiosity,  fear,  gregarious-
ness,  shyness,  cleanliness,  acquisitiveness,  display,
and  constructiveness.  To  such  a  list  each  applied
psychological  science  will  make  its  own  additions.
The  future  science,  for  instance,  of  architectural
psychology  will  add  the  aesthetic  sense  of  symmetry,
and  the  queer  little  instinct  which  makes  us  desire
to  sleep  with  our  feet  towards  the  light ;  while  the
psychology  of  baby-minding  will  emphasise  the  in-
stinct which  inclines  a  baby  to  put  any  small  newly
observed  object  into  its  mouth.  Social  psychology
for  its  part  will  add  certain  instincts  which  are
developed  at  rather  late  periods  of  our  growth.
Among  these,  for  instance,  will  be  what  the  Germans
call  Wanderlust — the  desire  which  comes  on  the

34


CH.  in INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 35

growing  boy  to  leave  the  family  and  set  up  for  himself
—and  the  two  instincts  which  Mr.  McDougall  calls
negative  and  positive  "  self-feeling,"  but  which  I
prefer  to  call  the  conflicting  instincts  (both  of  them
being  necessary  in  a  gregarious  or  semi-gregarious
society)  to  "  give  a  lead  "  to  others,  and  "  to  take  a
lead  "  from  others.  It  will  also  include  a  number  of
extremely  intricate  facts,  which  I  shall  deal  with  in
a  later  chapter,1  and  which  are  usually  ascribed  to
instincts  of  "  Imitation  "  and  "  Sympathy."

The  best  definition  which  I  know  of  the  whole  class
of  instincts  is  that  given  by  Mr.  McDougall  in  his
Social  Psychology  :

We  may,  then,  define  an  instinct  as  an  inherited  or  innate
psycho-physical  disposition  which  determines  its  possessor  to
perceive  and  to  pay  attention  to  objects  of  a  certain  class,  to
experience  an  emotional  excitement  of  a  particular  quality
upon  perceiving  such  an  object,  and  to  act  in  regard  to  it  in
a  particular  manner,  or  at  least  to  experience  an  impulse  to
such  action.2

As  this  definition  indicates,  the  normal  course  by
which  an  instinctive  disposition  reveals  itself  is  the
impact  on  our  nervous  system  of  some  appropriate
external  or  internal  physical  occurrence  (called  the

1  Infra,  Chapter  VIII.

*  W.  McDougall,  Social  Psychology,  p.  29.  There  are  two  dictionary
meanings  of  the  words  "  instinct,"  "  instinctive,"  "  instinctively,"  etc.
in  both  of  which  they  may  be  correctly  used.  The  first  meaning  follows
from  the  definition  of  innate  instinct  which  I  have  quoted  above.  The
second  meaning  is  "  like  an  innate  instinct "  (in  respect  of  prerational
impulse,  etc.),  as  in  the  statement,  quoted  by  Mr.  McDougall,  that  a  drunkard
fed  on  fruit  "  becomes  instinctively  a  teetotaler  "  (Social  Psychology,  p.  21).
The  two  meanings  are,  as  he  points  out,  often  confused  ;  and  therefore,
though  I  think  that  he  is  wrong  in  holding  the  second  to  be  illegitimate,  it
is  best  in  psychological  writing  to  confine  oneself,  as  I  shall  do,  strictly  to
the  first.


36  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY

"  stimulus  ")  followed,  either  simultaneously,  or  in
succession  to  each  other,  by  conscious  feeling  and  mus-
cular movement.  A  full  psychological  terminology
ought  (as  Mr.  McDougall  also  points  out)  to  contain,
in  the  case  of  each  instinct,  separate  names  for  the
disposition  itself  and  for  both  the  feeling  and  the
action  which  result  from  its  stimulation.  Ordinary
language,  however,  is  not  so  exact.  We  name  the
Hunger  instinct  from  the  feeling,  the  Play  instinct
from  the  action,  and  Pugnacity  or  Acquisitiveness
from  the  disposition  itself.

If  we  look  at  the  phenomena  of  Instinct  through-
out the  whole  animal  world,  we  find  that  they  fall  into
two  main  groups  :  one  group  being  best  illustrated  by
the  behaviour  of  insects  and  certain  other  animals
which  have  their  hard  tissues  on  the  surface  of  the
body,  and  the  other  group  apparently  diverging  at
the  point  in  evolution  represented  by  the  appearance
of  an  internal  skeleton,  and  best  illustrated  by  the
behaviour  of  man  and  the  other  higher  mammals.1
A  solitary  wasp  will  seize  a  caterpillar  of  one  particular
species,  will  sting  it  in  a  particular  way,  lay  her  egg
on  it,  and  carry  it  to  her  nest  to  be  walled  in  in  a
particular  manner.  She  will  do  this  only  once,  and
after  her  death  the  wasp  hatched  from  her  egg  will

1  "  Zoologists  divide  the  animal  kingdom  into  two  great  groups,  whose
lines  of  descent  are  distinct  as  far  down  as  the  flat-worms.  The  one  of  these
leads  through  the  unsegmented  and  segmented  worms  to  the  insects,  spiders,
and  crustaceans  ;  the  other  leads  through  various  invertebrate  forms,  largely
extinct,  to  the  vertebrates,  and  so  finally  to  men.  Students  of  animal
behaviour  also  divide  the  animals  into  two  great  groups,  those  that  are
markedly  plastic  in  their  responses  to  stimulation,  and  those  that  are
markedly  fixed.  The  interesting  point  to  us  is  that  these  groupings  coincide  "
(Titchener,  Text-book  of  Psychology,  1910,  p.  457).


CH.  in INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 37

go  through  the  same  ritual.  Her  action  is  not
"  mechanical "  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,
because  it  is  characterised  by  a  rapid  and  successful
adaptation  to  such  details  as  the  position  of  the  cater-
pillar, the  obstacles  to  be  surmounted,  and  the  char-
acter of  the  soil  in  which  the  burrow  is  formed.  We
have  no  evidence  as  to  the  conscious  feeling  which
may  accompany  it.  It  may  be  one  of  conscious
adaptation  while  acting  and  of  delight  in  success.
But  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  wasp's  action,
performed  as  it  is  once  for  all  by  an  animal  which  has
never  seen  it  done  before,  can  be  accompanied  by
any  conscious  elements  of  memory  or  association  or
imaginative  forecasting  of  the  result.

Vertebrate  animals  perform  in  early  youth  actions
which  are  analogous  to  the  instinctive  performances
of  the  wasp.  Chickens,  newly  hatched  from  the  shell,
all  peck  at  seeds  in  the  same  way.  Children,  who
have  never  seen  other  children  crawling,  will,  at  the
appropriate  age,  begin  to  crawl  by  making  pre-
ordained movements  of  the  legs  and  arms.  Later
on,  a  carefully -brought -up  child,  who  has  perhaps
never  been  really  afraid  before,  or  seen  any  one  really
afraid,  will  in  the  presence  of  a  runaway  horse  or  of
the  blood  from  a  wound,  perform  the  purely  instinctive
acts  of  running  away,  screaming,  hiding,  etc.  When
such  instinctive  acts  are  gone  through  for  the  first
time  by  a  child  (and,  if  we  may  argue  from  analogy,
when  they  are  gone  through  for  the  first  time  by
any  one  of  the  higher  vertebrates)  the  performer
is  fully  aware  of  what  he  is  doing,  and  even  of  his


38  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

effort  to  adapt  his  action  to  the  details  of  his  sur-
roundings, though  he  has  no  knowledge  of  what  he
will  do  next.

But  in  the  normal  course  of  vertebrate  life  the
chief  instinctive  actions  are  performed,  not  once  for
all,  as  in  the  case  of  the  wasp,  but  repeatedly.  At
each  repetition,  even  in  the  case  of  birds  and  non-
human  mammals,  memory  and  acquired  habit  must
enter  as  forces  modifying  both  the  action  itself  and
the  forms  of  consciousness  which  accompany  the
action.  Not  long,  therefore,  after  birth,  men,  and
apparently  the  other  higher  vertebrates,  begin  to  live
in  an  atmosphere  of  organised  ideas,  of  memory,  that
is  to  say,  association  and  imagination.  An  Esqui-
maux or  Indian  hunter,  and,  to  a  less  degree,  perhaps,
an  experienced  old  wolf,  follows,  it  is  true,  an  im-
perious instinct  in  seeking  game,  but  he  does  so  with
an  ever-growing  memory  of  earlier  hunts,  with  an
exact  conception  of  what  he  is  going  to  do  next,  and
with  some  prevision  of  the  probable  result.

In  the  case  of  man,  this  irradiation  of  instinctive
action  by  intelligence  shades  into  processes  in  which
intelligence  acts  as  an  independent  directing  force.
Instead,  for  instance,  of  a  purely  instinctive  impulse
to  hunt  being  made  more  effective  by  intelligence,
our  decision  to  hunt  may  itself  be  due  to  a  preliminary
process  of  reflection  upon  our  future  wants  and  the
possible  ways  of  satisfying  them.

This  independent  action  of  Intelligence  is,  I  believe,
in  its  simplest  forms  as  "  natural "  to  us,  as  much
due  to  inherited  disposition,  as  is  the  working  of  any


OH.  m INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 39

one  of  the  usual  list  of  instincts.  The  traditional
terminology,  however,  of  the  moral  sciences  makes
it  extraordinarily  difficult  either  to  recognise  this  fact
or  even  to  state  it  clearly.

A  hundred  years  ago  professors  and  schoolmasters
taught  that  men  were  completely  "  rational,"  and  that
the  other  animals  were  completely  "  instinctive."
Men,  and  men  alone,  were  born  with  the  power  of
learning  from  experience  ;  and  the  power  of  learning
from  experience  was  at  birth  their  whole  psychological
equipment.  If  different  men  tended  to  behave  in
the  same  way  under  the  same  circumstances,  it  was
not  because  they  were  born  with  the  same  instincts,
but  because  they  had  gone  through  the  same  ex-
periences, and,  through  association  and  inference,
had  formed  the  same  habits.  Animals  were  as  com-
pletely instinctive  as  men  were  rational.  Some
theologians  and  philosophers  declared  that  all  animals
were  unconscious  automata.  Even  those  who  allowed
them  a  degree  of  consciousness  were  apt  to  state  or
imply  that  their  conduct  under  any  given  circum-
stances was  absolutely  fixed  by  instincts  on  whose
perfection  and  independence  of  experience  the  de-
fenders of  Final  Causes  were  never  tired  of  dwelling.
A  boy  who  had  been  brought  up  among  dogs  and
ferrets,  or  a  girl  who  had  helped  to  manage  her  baby
brothers  and  sisters,  would  never  have  dared  to  intro-
duce their  knowledge  either  of  animal  intelligence  or
of  human  instincts  into  an  essay  on  "  Instinct  and
Reason."

It  did  not  occur,  therefore,  to  any  one  except  the


40  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

eccentric  Lord  Monboddo,  or  Erasmus  Darwin,  the
precursor  of  evolution,  that  a  student  of  human
psychology  could  learn  anything  from  the  psychology
of  animals.  Jeremy  Bentham  troubled  himself  as
little  about  the  relation  between  animal  instinct  and
human  intelligence  as  he  did  about  the  relation
between  eighteenth-century  institutions  and  medieval
history.  The  word  "  instinct  "  does  not  occur  in  the
enormous  index  to  his  collected  works.  If,  however,
one  translates  Bentham  into  the  terms  of  modern
psychology,  one  may  say  that  he  divided  the  whole
nature  of  man  into  two  parts:  an  irresistible  instinctive
disposition  to  seek  pleasure  and  avoid  pain,  and  a
passionless  faculty  of  ascertaining  through  reason  the
means  by  which  that  disposition  can  be  satisfied.
William  Godwin,  in  a  passage  in  his  diary,  written
possibly  after  he  had  been  reading  Bentham,  puts  this
position  quite  clearly  :

Reason,  accurately  speaking,  has  not  the  smallest  degree
of  power  to  put  any  one  limb  or  articulation  of  our  bodies
into  motion.  Its  province  in  a  practical  view  is  wholly  con-
fined to  adjusting  the  comparison  between  different  objects  of
desire,  and  investigating  the  most  successful  mode  of  attain-
ing those  objects.  It  proceeds  upon  the  assumption  of  their
desirableness  or  the  contrary,  and  neither  accelerates  nor
retards  the  vehemence  of  their  pursuit,  but  merely  regulates
its  direction  and  points  the  road  by  which  we  shall  proceed
to  our  goal.1

But  Bentham  and  Godwin,  while  thus  apparently
disparaging  Reason  by  denying  it  any  power  over
human  conduct,  were  really  exaggerating  its  functions.

1  Life  of  Godwin  (C.  K.  Paul),  vol.  i.  p.  294,  under  date  1798.


OH.HX INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 41

If  so  general  a  thing  as  Happiness  is  taken  as  the  sole
end  of  action,  and  if  Keason  alone  chooses  the  means
of  reaching  that  end,  Keason  becomes  all-important.
The  utilitarians  are  therefore  rightly  called  "  in-
tellectualists,"  and  their  "  intellectualism  "  was  the
more  misleading  because  they  sometimes  argued  as
if  Reason  always  drew  conclusions  from  its  premisses
with  mechanical  perfection,  and  as  if  those  premisses
as  they  stood  in  the  mind  of  any  reasoning  being  were
identical  with  the  objective  facts  in  the  world  outside
him.

Since  Darwin,  however,  the  study  of  human  nature
on  lines  suggested  by  comparative  psychology  has
shown  that  we  have  many  different  instincts,  and  that
they  dispose  us  not  merely  to  search  through  reason
for  the  means  of  satisfying  them,  but  directly  to  per-
form certain  appropriate  actions.  We  have  learnt  that
if  we  see  a  man  run  away  or  burst  into  tears,  we  are
not  bound  to  infer  that  he  does  so  because  his  reason
has  selected  that  action  for  him  as  the  best  way  of
securing  pleasure  or  avoiding  pain.

But  in  criticising  the  Intellectualism  of  the  Utili-
tarians, modern  social  psychologists  are  apt  to  fall
into  a  kind  of  anti-intellectualism  which  involves  a
curiously  similar  fallacy.  Mr.  McDougall,  for  instance,
in  his  Social  Psychology,  gives  a  list  of  "  the  principal
human  instincts."  It  consists  (pp.  45-89)  of  Flight,
Repulsion,  Curiosity,  Pugnacity,  Self-abasement,
Self-assertion,  the  Parental  Instinct,  Reproduction,
the  Gregarious  Instinct,  Acquisitiveness,  Constructive-
ness.


42  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

With  regard  to  the  whole  list  he  writes,  in  an
eloquent  passage :

We  may  say,  then,  that,  directly  or  indirectly,  the  irtstincts
are  the  prime  movers  of  all  human  activity  ;  by  the  conative
or  impulsive  force  of  some  instinct  (or  of  some  habit  derived
from  an  instinct)  every  train  of  thought,  however  cold  and
passionless  it  may  seem,  is  borne  along  towards  its  end,  and
every  bodily  activity  is  initiated  and  sustained.  The  instinc-
tive impulses  determine  the  end  of  all  activities,  and  supply
the  driving  power  by  which  all  mental  activities  are  sustained  ;
and  all  the  complex  intellectual  apparatus  of  the  most  highly
developed  mind  is  but  a  means  towards  these  ends,  is  but  the
instrument  by  which  those  impulses  seek  their  satisfactions,
while  pleasure  and  pain  do  but  serve  to  guide  them  in  their
choice  of  the  means.

Take  away  these  instinctive  dispositions  with  their  power-
ful impulses,  and  the  organism  would  become  incapable  of
activity  of  any  kind ;  it  would  lie  inert  and  motionless  like
a  wonderful  clockwork  whose  mainspring  had  been  removed,
or  a  steam-engine  whose  fires  had  been  drawn.1

The  first  defect,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  this  state-
ment is  that  Mr.  McDougall  does  not  project  his
facts  as  to  Reason  and  Instinct  on  to  one  plane.  He
distinguishes  between  "  instinctive  impulses "  and
"  intellectual  apparatus."  Fear,  for  instance,  he
would  apparently  say,  is  "  impulse,"  and  Thought  is
"  apparatus."  But  Fear  and  Thought,  if  we  project
our  dispositions  on  to  the  plane  of  consciousness,  are
both  impulses ;  and  if  we  project  them  on  to  the
plane  of  structure  they  are  both  of  them  "  apparatus."
Both,  that  is  to  say,  to  quote  again  Mr.  McDougall's
own  definition  of  Instinct,  are  "  psycho-physical
dispositions,  which  determine  their  possessors  to

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  44.


OK,  m INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 43

.  .  .  pay  attention  to  objects  of  a  certain  class  .  .  .
and  to  act  in  regard  to  them  in  a  particular  manner."  l
Mr.  McDougall  indeed  himself  includes  Curiosity  in  his
list  of  Instincts,  although  he  would  find  it  difficult  to
say  that  the  "  particular  manner  "  in  which  Curiosity
inclines  us  to  "  act "  does  not  involve  "  mental
activity  "  and  the  use  of  "  intellectual  apparatus."
But  behind  this  (as  it  seems  to  me)  formal  fallacy  lies,
I  believe,  a  real  difference  between  Mr.  McDougall
and  myself.  Mr.  McDougall  does  not  hold,  as  I  hold,
that  we  are  born  with  a  tendency,  under  appropriate
conditions,  to  think,  which  is  as  original  and  inde-
pendent as  our  tendency,  under  appropriate  conditions,
to  run  away.

The  anti-intellectualism  of  M.  Kibot's  Psycho-
l°9y  of  the  Emotions  does  not  involve  the  same
formal  fallacy  as  that  which  appears  to  me  to  be  con-
tained in  the  passage  which  I  have  quoted  from  Mr.
McDougall.  He  dwells  on  a  true  and  regrettable
fact  of  human  nature,  that  the  physiological  and
instinctive  dispositions  have  more  compelling  force
than  the  intelligent  dispositions  ;  although  he  seri-
ously exaggerates  its  truth.  "  Who  does  not  know,"
he  says,  "  that  intellectual  passions  are  mere  phantoms
which  a  real  passion  sweeps  away  like  a  gust  of
wind  ?  " 2  And  again,  "  What  is  fundamental  in
the  character  is  the  instincts,  tendencies,  impulses,
desires,  and  feelings,  all  these  and  nothing  else."  3

But  when  Mr.  Leslie  Stephen  wrote : "  Men  are

1  Ante,  p.  35.
2  Psychology  of  the  Emotions  (Eng.  trans.),  p.  393.  3  Ibid.  p.  390.


44  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

not  governed  by  their  abstract  principles,  but  by  their
passions  and  emotions," l  one  recognises  that  his
distrust  of  rationalism  again  uses  the  fallacy  of  the
two  planes  to  give  itself  an  apparent  logical  cogency,
as  when  a  farmer's  distrust  of  book-learning  makes
him  say  :  "  Lads  get  on  in  the  world  not  by  algebra,
but  by  hard  work."

Professor  E.  Ray  Lankester  rightly  told  the  Biolo-
gical Society  of  Paris  in  1899,  that  "the  mechanisms
of  intelligence "  are  "  later  in  the  history  of  the
development  of  the  brain  "  than  "  the  mechanisms  of
instinct,"  but  I  know  of  no  evidence  to  justify  his
further  statement  that  the  latter  "  can  only  develop
in  proportion  as  the  former  become  feeble  and
defective." 2

1  The  English  Utilitarians,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.  I  turned,  when  writing  the
passage  above,  somewhat  anxiously  to  the  pages  of  my  Human  Nature  in
Politics,  in  which  I  myself  attacked  the  intellectualism  of  Bentham  and  his
followers,  to  see  whether  I  there  fell  into  the  same  kind  of  anti-intellectualism
which  I  here  criticise.  I  find  there  little  or  nothing  which  I  should  like  to
withdraw.  I  should,  however,  for  my  present  purpose,  write  with  a  some-
what different  emphasis.  And  there  is  one  sentence  which  I  should  wish
to  modify,  that  in  which  I  say :  "  Impulse,  it  is  now  agreed,  has  an  evolu-
tionary history  of  its  own  earlier  than  the  history  of  those  intellectual
processes  by  which  it  is  often  directed  and  modified  "  (p.  25).  This  dis-
tinction between  instinctive  "  impulse  "  and  intellectual  "  process  "  seems
to  me  to  be  open  to  the  same  accusation  of  projection  on  two  planes  which
I  have  made  above  against  Mr.  McDougall's  statement.  I  should  now  write
it :  "  Instinctive  impulses,  it  is  now  agreed,  have  an  evolutionary  history
of  their  own  earlier  than  the  history  of  those  intellectual  impulses  by  which
they  are  often  directed  and  modified."  I  am  the  more  inclined  to  make  this
correction  after  reading  the  headlines  of  a  review  of  my  Human  Nature  in
Politics  in  the  New  York  City  Mail,  where  it  is  described  as  a  "  Startling
analysis  "  of  "  a  field  of  action  into  which  reason  seldom  enters."

*  Nature,  April  26,  1900,  pp.  624,  625. — The  present  position  of  the  con-
troversy as  to  the  relation  between  Instinct  and  Reason  is  admirably
illustrated  by  a  symposium  held  in  July  1910,  at  a  joint  meeting  of  the
Aristotelian  Society  and  the  British  Psychological  Association,  and  reported
in  the  British  Journal  of  Psychology  for  October  1910.  Professor  C.  S.
Myers,  who  opened  the  discussion,  took,  as  I  read  him,  essentially  the
position  which  I  have  adopted  in  this  chapter,  i.e.  that  the  various  types  of
"  instinctive "  and  "  intelligent  "  behaviour  all  involve  a  "  conscious


CH.III INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 45

All  social  historians  who  treat  of  the  nineteenth
century  are  agreed  as  to  the  practical  evils  which
resulted  from  the  intellectualist  bias  of  utilitarian
politics  and  economics.  The  horrors  of  the  early
factory  system  were  prolonged  by  the  authoritative
doctrine  that  both  parties  in  any  industrial  contract
might  be  trusted  to  secure  their  own  "  interest " ;
while  those  who  "  believed  in  Political  Economy  "
tended  to  inhibit  their  own  disposition  towards  pity
for  the  victims  of  industrial  processes,  because  of  a
confused  theory  that  disinterested  pity  either  did  not
exist,  or  existed  without  any  scientific  right  to  do  so.
Electoral  systems  both  in  England  and  America  were

awareness  of  end,"  and  all  are  plastic  under  the  influence  of  experience  and
effort,  but  that  "  instincts  "  are  relatively  more  fixed  and  less  conscious,
and  the  intelligent  dispositions  relatively  more  conscious  and  less  fixed.
"  In  what,"  he  says,  "  is  ordinarily  called  instinctive  behaviour,  the  innate
mechanism  is  relatively  fixed  and  given ;  in  what  is  ordinarily  called
intelligent  behaviour  the  mechanism  is  relatively  plastic  and  acquired  "
(p.  270).  And  again  :  "  Thus  the  psychology  and  physiology  of  instinct
are  inseparable  from  the  psychology  and  physiology  of  intelligence.  There
is  not  one  nervous  apparatus  for  instinct  and  another  for  intelligence.  We
ought  to  speak,  not  of  instinct  and  intelligence,  but  of  instinct-intelligence,
treating  the  two  as  one  indivisible  mental  function,  which,  in  the  course  of
evolution,  has  approached  now  nearer  to  so-called  instinct,  now  nearer  to
so-called  intelligence  "  (p.  267).  He  suggests  that  the  word  "  Instinct "
might  be  used,  as  I  use  the  word  "  disposition,"  for  the  whole  Instinct-
Intelligence  series.  "  In  one  book,"  he  says  (Kirkpatrick,  Fundamentals
of  Child  Study),  "  I  find  enumerated  the  instincts  of  imitation,  curiosity,  and
play ;  the  expressive,  aesthetic,  moral,  and  religious  instincts  ;  the  parental
and  social  instincts ;  the  collecting,  constructive,  destructive,  and  fight-
ing instincts.  May  we  not  complete  the  list  by  adding  the  instincts  of
thought,  reason,  intelligence  ?  "  (p.  215).

But  he  suddenly,  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  quite  unnecessarily,  falls  into
what  I  have  called  the  "  two  planes  fallacy."  Having  carefully  explained
that  the  difference  between  the  instinctive  and  intelligent  dispositions  is  a
quantitative  one,  i.e.  consists  in  tho  relative  importance  of  certain  factors
in  each,  he  goes  on  to  say  :  "  These  two  terms  (Instinct  and  Intelligence)
we  must  recognise  as  pure  abstractions  relating  to  different  aspects  of  the
same  mental  processes,  not  to  different  mental  processes  "  (ibid.  p.  268) ;  and
(p.  218),  "  Instinct  regarded  from  within  becomes  intelligence  ;  intelligence
regarded  from  without  becomes  instinct."

A  difference  of  aspect  is  for  the  purpose  of  his  argument  no  difference
at  all.


46  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

during  the  nineteenth  century  often  constructed  on
the  assumption  that  any  voter  would  certainly  choose,
among  a  long  and  complicated  list  of  candidates,  or
in  a  chaos  of  overlapping  authorities,  the  representa-
tive who  would  bring  about  his  greatest  happiness
—and  the  slums  of  London  and  New  York  are  in  part
the  consequence.  One  of  the  reasons  of  the  failure
of  the  revolutionary  martyrs  of  1848,  and  of  two
generations  of  Russian  reformers,  was  that  many  of
them  assumed  that,  as  soon  as  they  issued  a  pro-
clamation, it  would  be  known,  understood,  and  acted
upon  by  every  one  concerned.

But  the  loose  anti-intellectualism  which  now
threatens  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  intellectualism
may  prove  to  be  infinitely  more  dangerous  in  the
twentieth  century.  An  internecine  European  war
is  the  one  enormous  disaster  which  overhangs  our
time ;  and  such  a  war  is  made  more  possible  when-
ever thought  is  represented  as  the  mere  servant  of
the  lower  passions,  and  a  cynical  struggle  for  life  as
the  only  condition  which  answers  to  the  deeper  facts
of  our  nature.  The  French  syndicalist  writers,  as
I  shall  show  in  a  later  chapter,1  have  constructed  a
whole  philosophy  of  anarchism  on  ananti-intellectualist
basis.  In  England,  perhaps  the  most  obvious  effect
of  the  new  trend  of  thought  is  seen  in  current  ecclesi-
astical apologetic.  An  able  reviewer,  for  instance,
in  the  Church  Times  of  September  9,  1910,  writes :

On  the  whole,  it  is  true  to  say  that  in  the  great  decisions
of  life,  when  we  have  to  choose  between  Christianity  and

i  Chapter  XII.


OH.  in INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 47

infidelity  ;  between  Anglicanism  and  Romanism ;  between
Conservatism  and  Socialism — the  decision  is  only  made  super-
ficially on  intellectual  grounds,  and  would  be  made  all  the
same  however  much  weaker  the  evidence  was.  With  the  increase
in  our  knowledge  of  psychology,  which  is  to  be  anticipated
in  the  next  few  years,  this  will  probably  become  much  clearer.1

Dr.  A.  W.  Robinson  spoke  even  more  clearly  to
the  Church  Congress  in  1909  :

The  function  of  the  intellect  is  to  find  reasons  for  a  course
of  action  which,  on  other  than  intellectual  grounds,  we  are
inclined  to  desire  or  approve.2

One  is  curiously  reminded  of  certain  advice  which
that  old  fox,  King  Leopold  I.  of  Belgium,  gave  to  his
niece  Victoria  on  her  accession  to  the  English  throne  :

A  rule  which  you  may  thus  early  impress  on  your  mind
is,  that  people  are  far  from  acting  generally  according  to  the
dictation  of  their  interest,  but  oftener  in  consequence  of  their
passions.

And

The  Established  Church  I  also  recommend  strongly.  You
cannot,  without  pledging  yourself  to  anything  in  particular,
say  too  much  on  the  subject.3

The  philosophy  of  syndicalism  constitutes,  I  believe,
a  very  real  danger  to  Trade  Unionism  in  France.  An
anti-intellectualist  apologetic  may  in  the  end  prove  to
be  an  equally  real  danger  to  the  Church  in  England.
Thought  may  be  late  in  evolution,  it  may  be  deplorably
weak  in  driving  power,  but  without  its  guidance  no
man  or  organisation  can  find  a  safe  path  amid  the

1  Church  Times,  September  9,  1910. The  italics  are  my  own.

2  Ibid.  October  8,  1909.
3  Queen  Victoria's  Letters,  February  3,  1837,  and  June  23,  1837.


48  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

vast  impersonal  complexities  of  the  universe  as  we
have  learnt  to  see  it.

But  even  if,  as  I  believe,  Intelligence  is  as  truly  a
part  of  our  inherited  nature,  and  as  independent  a
cause  of  human  action  as  any  of  the  traditional  list
of  instincts,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  analysis  of  the  facts
merely  to  add  a  single  disposition  to  the  rest  and  call
it  Intelligence.  There  are  at  least  two  dispositions,
Curiosity  and  "  Trial  and  Error,"  which  sometimes
cause  action  which  is  rather  instinctive  than  intelligent,
and  sometimes  action  which  is  rather  intelligent  than
instinctive.  And  there  are  two  other  dispositions
(which  I  shall  call  Thought  and  Language)  whose
action  is  normally,  if  not  invariably,  intelligent.

Curiosity  may  be  placed  almost  exactly  on  the
doubtful  line  which  divides  Instinct  from  Intelligence.
In  its  simplest  form  this  disposition  was  apparently
evolved  as  a  means  of  enabling  living  beings  to  avoid
danger,  or  gain  advantage,  from  objects  which  were
too  unusual  to  excite,  at  their  first  appearance,  any
one  of  the  more  specific  instincts,  but  which  might
do  so  on  nearer  inspection.  Under  its  influence  a
human  being  or  other  higher  animal  experiences  a
strong  impulse  to  go  cautiously  up  to  the  unusual
object,  and  to  examine  it  by  touch,  smell,  etc.,  as  well
as  by  the  sense  (usually  sight  or  hearing)  by  which  it
was  first  observed.  During  the  approach  and  ex-
amination, the  larger  muscles  are  tightened,  so  as  to
be  ready  for  instantaneous  reaction  when  the  more
specific  instinct  (fear,  for  instance,  or  hunger,  or  the
hunting  instinct)  shall  have  been  stimulated.  In  so


cam INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 49

far  as  these  bodily  movements  constitute  the  essence
of  the  process  there  is  nothing  to  distinguish  Curiosity
from  any  one  of  the  ordinary  list  of  instincts.

But  the  behaviour  characteristic  of  Curiosity  is
normally  (and  not  merely  as  the  result  of  acquired
habit)  accompanied  by  certain  activities  of  our  in-
tellectual powers.  We  are,  when  curious,  conscious
of  a  strong  effort  of  attention,  which  increases  the
fertility  both  of  memory  and  association ;  and  both
in  the  child  and  in  the  adult  Curiosity  may  be  stimu-
lated by  an  idea  presented  by  memory  or  association
as  well  as  by  an  external  fact.  Sometimes  the
astronomer  who  sits  at  his  telescope  watching,  in  a
passion  of  Curiosity,  a  newly  flaming  star,  finds  that
all  that  is  left  of  the  impulse  towards  cautious  ap-
proach with  a  view  to  the  stimulation  of  some  bodily
act,  is  a  quickened  pulse  or  a  slight  and  rather  trouble-
some trembling  of  his  hand.  The  heightening  of
attention  and  memory  acting  on  his  organised  system
of  ideas  and  experience  becomes  the  essential  element
of  the  whole  process.  If,  therefore,  a  distinction  is
to  be  drawn  between  Instinct  and  Intelligence,  the
disposition  of  Curiosity  may  in  his  case  be  classed  as
almost  purely  intelligent.

The  disposition  again,  which  students  of  animal
behaviour  call  "  Trial  and  Error,"  provides  a  process
by  which  an  animal  can  find  a  means  of  satisfying
some  strong  instinctive  desire,  when  the  bodily  acts
characteristic  of  the  simpler  instincts  have  failed  to
do  so.  Under  such  circumstances  the  animal  .Begins
a  succession  of  random  movements,  accoi

.'

•'-"•*


60  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

apparently,  by  intense  and  often  distressing  nervous
excitement.  One  of  these  movements  may  succeed
in  producing  a  useful  result.  If  so,  and  if  the  same
difficulty  recurs  again,  the  process  will  be  gone  through
in  a  shortened  form.  Finally,  the  successful  act  will
be  repeated  with  no  preliminary  random  movements,
and  a  useful  habit  will  have  been  formed.

The  Trial  and  Error  process  may  take  place,  even
among  mankind,  with  little  or  no  accompaniment  of
intelligence.  An  absent-minded  man,  with  a  new
pocket  for  his  railway-ticket,  may  go  through  the
whole  ritual  of  random  search  every  morning  for  a
fortnight  while  he  is  reading  his  newspaper,  and  may
finally  acquire  a  new  and  useful  habit  of  which  he  is
completely  unconscious.  A  stupid  cook  will  attack
the  handles  and  valves  of  a  new  stove  with  no  more
intelligence  than  is  used  by  a  goldfish  darting  about  a
new  tank.  But  normally  the  nervous  excitement
characteristic  of  Trial  and  Error  brings  memory  and
association  into  vigorous  play,  and  the  bodily  acts  are
accompanied  and  in  part  controlled  by  a  stream  of
more  or  less  conscious  recollections  and  inferences.1


1  Comparative  psychologists  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  extent  to  which
mental  association  accompanies  or  controls  the  "  Trial  and  Error  "  process
among  animals.  Professor  Hobhouse  in  his  Mind  in  Evolution  (1901),
chap,  vii.,  explains  clearly  the  difference  existing  at  that  time  between  his
own  conclusions  and  those  of  Professor  Thorndyke.  But  Thorndyke  in  his
Animal  Intelligence  (1911),  especially  in  chap,  v.,  seems  to  come  nearer  to
Hobhouse' s  position.  In  any  case  the  experimental  evidence  shows  a
marked  distinction  between  the  processes  of  learning  in  the  monkeys  and
apes  and  those  in  other  mammals,  the  primates  in  that  respect  approaching
very  much  more  closely  to  the  human  type.  Gregarious  hunting  animals,
as  every  one  knows  who  has  watched  a  pack  of  hounds  at  work,  go  through
a  process  which  may  be  called  Collective  Trial  and  Error.  The  whole  pack
are  then  in  the  characteristic  state  of  restless  excitement,  and  all  follow  the
lead  of  any  one  of  them  who  hits  on  the  scent.


CH.  in INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 51

Many  uneducated  people,  indeed,  can  only  do  in-
tellectual work  in  the  mental  attitude  of  Trial  and
Error,  though  the  random  muscular  movements  which
accompany  their  efforts  are  worse  than  useless  to
them.  I  remember  that  a  railway  porter  once  said
to  me,  "  Jim  Brown  is  working  to  pass  his  examina-
tion as  a  signalman,  and  it  has  got  so  on  his  mind
that  he  jumped  up  in  bed  last  night  and  blacked
his  wife's  eye."

In  the  case  of  Thought  the  essential  functions  of
the  disposition  are  clearly  intellectual.  The  word
"  thought  "  is  used  in  many  senses.  Sometimes,  for
instance,  it  means  the  whole  content  of  consciousness,
sometimes  the  act  of  logical  inference.  I  mean  here
by  the  disposition  of  Thought  our  tendency  to  carry
out  the  process  of  reflection  or  "  thinking  " — the
process  to  which  we  refer  when  we  say  that  we  stopped
what  we  were  doing  in  order  to  "  think."

The  chief  external  sign  of  Thought  in  this  sense
is  a  bodily  inertia,  which  contrasts  sharply  with  the
tightened  muscles  of  Curiosity,  or  the  random  move-
ments of  Trial  and  Error.  The  thinker  is  either
perfectly  still  or  performs  unconsciously  some  mono-
tonous and  instinctive  movement  like  walking.  Mr.
H.  P.  Robinson  describes  this  characteristic  bodily
condition  in  a  book  written  after  observing  the
behaviour  of  the  apes  and  monkeys  in  the  Zoological
Gardens.  "  What  is  it  that  they  think  about  so
hard  ?  "  he  asks.  "  That  their  thoughts  have  no
relation  to  their  actions  is  obvious ;  for  not  one  of
them  but  will  sit  for  half  an  hour,  graver  than  Con-


52  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

fucius,  only  to  break  off  suddenly  to  pick  with  in-
tensity of  concentration  a  straw  to  pieces."  l  Here
we  obviously  see  a  transference  from  a  condition  of
Thought  to  the  completely  different  and  less  purely
intellectual  condition  of  Curiosity.  Most  people  who
have  watched  a  good  sheep-dog  on  a  warm  afternoon,
as  he  lies  motionless  but  open-eyed  with  his  nose
between  his  paws,  will  believe  that  he  too  falls  from
time  to  time  into  the  state  of  Thought.

In  the  case  of  man,  where  alone  we  can  get  evidence
by  introspection,  this  bodily  condition  is  strictly
subordinate  to  a  mental  activity,  consisting,  in  its
simplest  form,  of  an  automatic  succession  of  ideas
and  feelings,  which,  by  a  process  not  yet  differentiated
as  memory,  or  imagination,  or  reasoning,  arrange  them-
selves into  organised  relations.  When  once  started,
the  process  may  sink  below  the  level  of  consciousness,
and  may  continue  during  sleep,  or  when  we  are  en-
gaged in  some  other  occupation,  provided  that  that
occupation  makes  no  urgent  call  on  our  attention.
If  that  which  happens  to  us  during  such  a  state  of
Thought  happens  also  to  the  sheep-dog,  his  memory,
when  the  moment  of  action  comes,  will  in  consequence
be  better  arranged  and  more  available,  his  inferences
more  rapid,  his  "  wits,"  as  we  say,  "  more  about
him  "  than  if  it  had  never  occurred.

Thought  is  normally  accompanied  by  a  general
feeling  of  quiet  pleasantness,  which  is  also  in  sharp
contrast  to  the  "  excitement "  of  Curiosity  or  the
"  worry  "  of  Trial  and  Error.

1  Of  Distinguished  Animals,  H.  Perry  Robinson  (1910),  p.  155.


OH.  in INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 53

Of  these  three  potentially  or  definitely  intellectual
dispositions  it  may  have  been  Thought  which  was
most  helpful  to  primitive  man  in  taking  the  first
steps  from  a  mainly  instinctive  to  a  largely  intelligent
life.  Early  man  must  have  shared  to  the  full  the
proverbial  Curiosity  of  the  monkey.  His  mobile
hands  and  restless  nervous  system  must  have  made
the  process  of  Trial  and  Error  more  effective  in  him
than  in  any  other  animal.  But  he  may  have  learnt
most  when,  in  periods  of  waking  or  dreaming  reverie,
he  wove  his  random  memories  and  associations  into
a  more  or  less  organised  whole.

One  may  suppose  that  in  the  higher  non-human
animals  Thought  is  always  a  quasi-automatic  process.
It  comes  on,  that  is  to  say,  under  favourable  circum-
stances without  an  effort,  and  as  long  as  it  lasts  is
uncontrolled  by  any  conscious  purpose.  It  may  be
that  in  man,  as  far  as  his  purely  inherited  nature  is
concerned,  the  same  is  true,  and  that  the  only  con-
tinued and  independent  Thought  "  natural "  to  him
is  the  deep,  undirected  meditation  of  the  shepherd
or  the  fisherman.  If  so,  the  essential  fact  which  has
made  the  Great  Society  possible  is  the  discovery,
handed  down  by  tradition  and  instruction,  that
Thought  can  be  fed  by  deliberately  collected  material,
and  stimulated,  sustained,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,
controlled  by  an  effort  of  the  will.  The  "  natural "
boy  begins  to  turn  into  the  civilised  man  when  the
schoolmaster  tells  him  to  stop  "  dreaming  "  and  to
"  think,"  though  it  is  often  only  after  a  period  of
painful  confusion  and  misunderstanding  that  he


54  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY  H.  i

discovers  that  the  thinking  which  he  is  told  to  attempt
is  a  kind  of  controlled  dreaming.1  Shepherds  and
fishermen  make  no  such  effort,  and  sometimes  acquire
thereby  a  quality  of  mind  which  the  townsman,  with
his  handier,  more  controlled  and,  for  most  purposes,
more  effective  cleverness  finds  himself  envying.

But  man  would  not  have  been  able  to  create  the
enormous  intellectual  gap  between  himself  and  the
other  animals  if  he  had  not  also  evolved  the  disposition
of  Language.  By  Language  I  here  mean  our  inherited
inclination  to  express  and  to  receive  ideas  by  symbols,
i.e.  not  only  by  speech  and  writing,  but  also  by  drawing
and  significant  gestures.  It  is  indeed  only  the  fear
of  neologism  which  prevents  me  from  using  some  more
inclusive  term  such  as  "  symbolism."  This  disposi-
tion is  apparently  peculiar  to  man.  Other  animals
like  dogs,  wolves,  and  certain  species  of  birds,  com-
municate to  each  other  by  means  of  sounds  and
movements,  or  even  by  the  secretion  of  strong  odours,
the  fact  that  their  instincts  of  fear,  or  hunger,  or  sex,
or  hunting  have  been  excited  by  some  appropriate
stimulus.  But  the  difference  between  such  a  com-
munication of  emotional  states  and  the  communica-
tion by  man  of  ideas  which  may  be  almost  passionless
is  so  great  as  to  be  qualitative  rather  than  quantitative.

The  absence,  indeed,  of  a  close  analogy  in  that
respect  between  man  and  any  of  the  other  higher
animals  might  create  a  presumption  that  Language
(like  the  use  of  any  one  of  the  languages)  is  a  habit,
newly  learnt  by  each  generation,  rather  than  a  true

1  See  later,  Chapter  X.


OH.  m INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 55

inherited  disposition.1  The  evidence,  however,  in
favour  of  inheritance  seems  clear.  It  consists  partly
in  the  well-known  physiological  discovery  of  definite
"  speech  "  and  "  word-deafness  "  areas  in  the  normal
human  brain,  and  partly  in  the  behaviour  of  children
and  savages.  No  one  who  has  closely  watched  a
child  "  learning  to  speak  "  in  his  second  year  will
doubt  that,  while  his  actual  vocabulary  is  acquired,
the  inclination  to  use  significant  vocables  is  inherited.
Even  in  drawing  there  is  apparently  a  greater  simi-
larity in  the  way  in  which,  for  instance,  children  or
savages  symbolise  the  human  figure  than  can  be
explained  by  the  learning  of  a  purely  conventional  art.
But  it  is  worth  while  noting  that  the  problems
raised  by  the  inclusion  of  Language  as  a  true  dis-
position offer  a  useful  reminder  that  my  distinctions,
both  between  "  simple  "  and  "  complex  "  dispositions,
and  between  "  inherited  "  dispositions  and  "  acquired"
powers,  are  apt,  like  almost  all  classifications,  to
produce  conceptions  rather  more  definite  than  are
the  facts  at  the  limits  of  each  class.  I  might,  for

1  Mr.  McDougall,  e.g.,  in  his  Social  Psychology,  p.  49,  lays  down  the  rule
that :  "  If  a  similar  emotion  and  impulse  are  clearly  displayed  in  the
instinctive  activities  of  the  higher  animals,  that  fact  will  afford  a  strong
presumption  that  the  emotion  and  impulse  are  primary  and  simple  ;  on  the
other  hand,  if  no  such  instinctive  activity  occurs  among  the  higher  animals,
we  must  suspect  the  affective  state  in  question  of  being  either  a  complex
composite  emotion  or  no  true  emotion."  This  rule  should  not,  however,
be  adhered  to  as  against  actual  evidence  indicating  the  existence  of  a  dis-
position in  man  which  has  not  yet  been  demonstrated  in  other  animals.
Biologists  now  tell  us  that  anthropoid  apes  are  not  very  near  collateral
relations  of  man.  The  nearer  types  have  died  out.  If  the  anthropoid  apes
had  themselves  died  out,  man  would  have  had  many  dispositions  peculiar
to  himself.

Mr.  F.  E.  Beddard  tells  me,  e.g.,  that  experiments  at  the  Zoological
Gardens  show  that  the  instinctive  fear  of  reptiles  as  such  is  confined  to  the
young  of  man  and  of  the  higher  apes,  who  perhaps  shared  with  early  man
ancestors  that  were  once  nearly  exterminated  by  tree-climbing  snakes.


56  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY  w.  x

instance,  have  classified  Language  as  a  "  simple  "
disposition,  on  the  ground  that  the  utterance  of  words
is  a  much  less  prolonged  process  than  is  the  behaviour,
e.g.,  characteristic  of  Mother-Love  or  Curiosity.  And,
again,  the  evolution  (whether  through  Natural  Selec-
tion or  a  succession  of  "  sports  ")  of  our  inherited
disposition  to  use  language  must  have  needed  (one
might  almost  say,  must  have  been  parasitic  upon)
the  simultaneous  existence  of  a  growing  body  of
conventional  forms  of  expression  newly  "  acquired  "
by  each  generation.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  conclude  the  argu-
ment of  the  last  two  chapters.  Man,  I  have  said,
inherits  a  nature,  whether  "  material "  or  "  vital,"
or  "  spiritual,"  containing  many  thousands  of  dis-
positions which  incline  him  to  react  in  various  ways
to  appropriate  stimuli.  Many  of  these  dispositions
should  be  left  rather  to  anatomy  and  physiology  than
to  psychology.  The  psychological  dispositions  may
be  divided  roughly  into  comparatively  simple  facts
like  the  senses,  memory,  fatigue,  etc.,  and  the  more
complex  facts  of  Instinct  and  Intelligence.

The  instinctive  and  intelligent  dispositions  do  not
form  a  single  continuum.  Fear  is  a  different  thing
from  Curiosity,  and  Trial  and  Error  from  Thought.
But  they  do  form  a  series  across  which  it  is  very
difficult  to  draw  broad  lines  of  demarcation.  We
may  arrange  that  series  in  order  of  apparent  evolu-
tionary origin,  beginning  at  the  bottom  with  such
facts  as  hunger  and  sex,  which  we  share  with  the


CH.  m INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 57

whole  of  the  vertebrate,  and  almost  the  whole  of  the
animal  kingdom,  and  ending  at  the  top  with  those
intellectual  faculties  which  are  either  peculiar  to  man,
or  shared,  in  a  more  rudimentary  form,  by  only  a  few
of  the  higher  mammals.  That  series  will,  if  followed
from  bottom  to  top,  be  marked  on  the  whole  by  in-
creasing consciousness,  and  by  decreasing  fixity  and
driving  power,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  increasing
plasticity.  Our  thinking  is  more  easily  modified  by
our  environment  than  our  appetite,  just  as  our
appetite  is  more  easily  modified  than  the  way  in
which  we  walk  or  breathe.

If  we  look  at  the  Instinctive  and  Intelligent  dis-
positions as  one  series,  we  can  also  see  that  the  various
dispositions  do  not  act  in  isolation,  but  that  many  of
them  are  normally  connected  with  each  other.  Ob-
structed Sex-Love,  for  instance,  normally  produces  a
violent  outbreak  of  Pugnacity,  and  Fear  is  still  more
closely  connected  with  Mother-Love.  Sometimes  two
dispositions  like  Fear  and  Curiosity  are,  so  to  speak,
rivals.  They  are  normally  set  in  action  by  closely
similar  stimuli  and  may  be  observed  to  alternate
rapidly.  Self -Assertion  and  Humility  (the  "  Give
a  Lead  "  and  "  Take  a  Lead  "  instincts)  alternate  in
the  same  way.  Facts  like  these  may,  indeed,  indicate
that  with  increased  knowledge  we  may  ultimately
come  to  look  upon  the  separate  human  dispositions
less  as  isolated  facts  ascertained  by  empirical  observa-
tion than  as  the  results  of  a  wider  causal  relationship.

My  two  chapters,  of  course,  give  only  the  barest
outline  of  the  human  psychological  dispositions.


58  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.  i

They  are  rather  a  diagram  than  even  a  sketch.
I  shall  describe  in  later  chapters  with  more  detail
certain  dispositions  which  are  of  special  importance
to  the  social  psychologist.  But  I  shall  not  hope
even  to  indicate  all  those  inherited  psychological
factors  which,  with  individual  variations,  go  to
make  up  the  human  moral  type,  the  factors  which
justify  us  in  saying  that  a  man's  "  character  "  is
like  that  of  his  mother  or  of  his  grandfather,1  or
that  the  "  psychology  "  of  a  novel  or  play  is  "  all
wrong,"  in  that  a  character  who  did  or  said  one  thing
would  not  have  done  or  said  another.  Such  a  dia-
gram, however,  while  it  will  not  enable  any  one  to
dispense  with  the  help  of  experience  and  insight,  may
at  least  be  useful  in  affording  centres  of  crystallisa-
tion for  experience,  and  in  warning  us  of  certain  gross
errors  in  social  calculation.

Finally,  it  must  always  be  remembered  that  social
psychology  is  a  specialised  science,  dealing  only  with
a  special  group  of  the  causes  of  human  actions.  The
statesman  who  wishes  to  organise  mankind  wisely,
or  even  the  social  psychologist  when  he  takes  it  upon
himself  to  give  direct  advice  to  the  statesman,  must
know  or  estimate  the  results  of  many  other  sciences.
Before  we  know  how  any  particular  body  of  people  will
be  affected  by  any  particular  measure  we  must  know
not  only  their  nature  but  the  environment,  intellectual
and  physical,  which  results  from  their  history  and  their
surroundings.

1  See,  for  instance,  the  persistence  (greater,  apparently,  than  would  be
due  to  family  tradition)  with  which  a  certain  type  of  dry  conservative  learn-
ing appeared  among  the  nephews  and  great-nephews  of  Wordsworth.


OH.  in INSTINCT  AND  INTELLIGENCE 59

And  social  psychology  can  never  lead  men  to  wise
practical  conclusions  unless  it  keeps  in  view  its
relation  to  that  science  of  human  breeding  which  Sir
Francis  Galton  named  Eugenics.  Every  change  in
social  organisation  affects  not  only  the  harmony
between  the  existing  generation  and  its  surroundings,
but  the  conditions  which  affect  the  physical  and  mental
inheritance  of  succeeding  generations.  I  remember,
during  a  debate  at  the  London  County  Council  Educa-
tion Committee,  hearing  it  seriously  proposed  by  an
experienced  representative  that  we  should  attempt  to
prevent  more  than  one  child  in  any  family  from  re-
ceiving a  scholarship.  The  proposer  of  this  regulation
pointed  out  that  there  were  certain  families  in  which
practically  all  the  children  got  scholarships  and  that
this  was  "  unfair."  It  never  occurred  to  him  that  he
was  trying  to  penalise  the  begetting  of  children  in
those  few  but  all-important  cases  in  which  general
mental  ability  appears  as  what  the  Mendelians  call  a
"  prepotent  "  biological  factor.  On  the  other  hand,
when  Professor  Bourne  argues  that  "  Hygiene,  educa-
tion, social  institutions  may  improve  the  lot  of  the
individual,  but  they  cannot  produce  any  permanent
effect  on  the  race," x  one  finds  oneself  wondering
whether  he  seriously  expects  that  eugenic  science  will
progress,  or  eugenic  motives  and  methods  be  effective
in  a  society  unhygienic,  uneducated,  and  unorganised.

1  GUbert  C.  Bourne,  The  Herbert  Spencer  Lecture  (1900),  p.  36.


CHAPTER  IV

DISPOSITION  AND ENVIRONMENT

IN  the  last  two  chapters  I  have  referred  only  incident-
ally to  those  facts  in  our  environment  which  consti-
tute the  "  appropriate  stimuli "  of  our  dispositions.
I  have  assumed  that  not  only  do  we  inherit  the  dis-
positions of  Love  and  Fear  and  Curiosity,  but  that
women  and  children  also  exist  for  men  to  love,
dangerous  things  for  men  to  fear,  and  unusual  things
for  men  to  be  curious  about.

In  this  chapter  I  shall  examine  the  general  relation
between  our  dispositions  and  the  environment  which
stimulates  them.

The  first  point  brought  out  by  such  an  examination
is  that  dispositions  which  seem,  when  considered  by
themselves,  to  be  homogeneous,  are  found,  when
examined  in  relation  to  their  stimuli,  to  consist  of
many  independently  varying  tendencies.  Fear,  for
instance,  if  its  manifestations  in  the  consciousness  and
bodily  movements  of  different  men  are  alone  thought
of,  will  appear  to  vary  only  in  the  degree  of  its  in-
tensity. But  when  the  external  causes  which  excite
fear  are  examined  it  will  be  found  that  different  men
are  not  only  afraid  in  different  degrees,  but  are  afraid

60


CH.  iv DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIKONMENT 61

of  different  things.  Some  men  have  an  instinctive
fear  of  precipitous  heights,  others  of  the  sea  or  of  a
crowd,  and  a  well-known  British  general  is  said  to
have  a  fear  of  cats.  Nerve-doctors  have  invented
a  number  of  Greek  or  semi-Greek  words  such  as
agoraphobia,  ochlophobia,  claustrophobia  to  designate
such  special  fears  when  they  reach  a  pathological
intensity.1

Hunger,  again,  may  be  excited  (apart  from  the
effects  of  habit  and  training)  in  different  men  by  very
different  stimuli.  The  same  is  true  of  the  intellectual
dispositions.  In  the  case  of  "  born  "  artists  or  "  born"
musicians  or  scientists,  Curiosity  and  Thought  are
stimulated  in  one  child  by  objects  which  leave  another
child  entirely  uninterested.

The  second  point  concerns  that  process  of  recog-
nition (of  "  perception  " — to  use  the  technical  psycho-
logical term)  on  which  the  stimulation  of  a  disposition
in  any  given  case  depends.  We  do  not  desire  to  eat
an  apple  until  we  recognise  (to  use  a  somewhat
intellectualist  term)  it  as  an  apple.  But  this  faculty
of  recognition  is  (apart  from  experience)  to  a  certain
extent  elastic.  All  the  apples  in  the  world,  or  all  the
snakes,  differ  in  some  respects  from  each  other ;  so
that  if  a  man  is  born  with  a  taste  for  "  apples,"  or  a
fear  of  "  snakes,"  his  taste  or  fear  are  stimulated  by
any  one  of  a  number  of  somewhat  different  objects.
It  would  be  extremely  useful  if  an  experimental

1  See  the  admirable  analysis  of  various  types  of  Fear  (based  upon
thousands  of  answers  to  a  questionnaire)  by  Professor  G.  Stanley  Hall  in
the  American  Journal  of  Psychology  (1897).  See  also  Note  A  on  p.  72.


62  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

psychologist  would  test  this  elasticity  in  the  case  of  a
strongly  marked  human  instinct,  and  would  check  his
results  by  experiments  of  the  same  kind  on  one  of  the
higher  animals.  Some  one  perhaps  who  is  fortunate
enough  to  possess  a  highly  specialised  instinct  of  a
kind  not  easily  modified  by  experience,  might  submit
himself  to  such  a  series  of  experiments.  The  test
stimuli  might,  in  a  case  of  cat-fear,  include  a  series
of  feline  animals,  more  or  less  nearly  related  to  the
common  cat,  an  animal  which  looks  like  a  cat  but
belongs  to  a  different  genus,  a  recently  dead  cat,  a
living  cat  in  a  glass  box,  a  stuffed  cat  unscented,  a
stuffed  cat  scented,  the  same  with  a  mechanical  purr,
and  finally  a  series  of  mental  images  of  a  cat,  which
might  range  from  a  strong  induced  belief  that  a  cat
was  in  the  room  (when,  in  fact,  no  cat  was  there)  to
the  image  produced  by  talking  or  thinking  or  dreaming
(in  a  hypnotic  trance)  about  a  cat.  Corresponding
experiments  might  be  made  in  a  case  of  specialised
animal  fear,  such  as  that  which  horses  are  said  to  have
for  camels.

One  supposes  that  the  process  of  recognition  in
these  cases  would  not  be  found  to  be  like  a  gun-lock,
which  delivers  the  same  blow  whether  the  pull  on  the
trigger,  provided  that  it  is  enough  to  release  the
spring,  is  heavy  or  light ;  but  that  its  effect  would  be
stronger  or  weaker  according  to  the  nearness  of  the
particular  stimulus  to  some  type  which  would  con-
stitute the  apex  of  a  "  polygon  of  variation,"  of  which
the  ordinate  was  the  degree  of  fear  and  the  abscissa
the  degree  of  variation  from  that  type.  In  the  case


c*  iv DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIRONMENT 63

of  cat-fear,  the  most  intense  fear  might  be  found  to  be
created,  not  by  the  domestic  cat,  but  by  some  feline
from  that  part  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  in  which  the
remains  of  Pithecanthropus  have  been  found.  The
domestic  cat  might  be  discovered  to  produce  the  same
amount  of  fear  (measured  by  pulse  disturbance)  as  a
carefully  stuffed  and  scented  specimen  of  the  Malay-
sian animal.  The  fact  that  we  in  England  never  see
that  special  kind  of  cat  would  not  prevent,  for  hun-
dreds of  generations,  men  being  born  with  that
special  kind  of  fear.  A  Londoner  may  be  born  with
an  abnormal  fear  of  snakes,  and  may  die  an  old  man
without  discovering  that  fact.  The  whole  human
race,  indeed,  may  still  inherit  a  special  fear  of  some
extinct  species  of  saurian  or  woolly  elephant.1

But  while  the  strength  of  the  stimulation  of  any
instinct  in  man  or  other  animals  may  depend  through-
out on  the  degree  of  the  external  likeness  of  the
stimulus  to  a  mean  type,  the  usefulness  of  the  re-
sulting action  depends,  not  on  the  degree,  but  on  the
character  of  that  likeness,  whether,  that  is  to  say,  it
is  relevant  to  the  original  advantage  or  danger  which
the  disposition  was  evolved  to  secure  or  avoid.  If  a
gull  has  a  highly  specialised  instinct  which  enables  it
to  catch  pilchards,  and  if  herrings  take  the  place  of
pilchards  in  the  seas  to  which  the  gulls  of  that  species
resort,  the  pilchard  -  instinct  will  still  be  useful,
although  it  may  be  somewhat  weakened  and  confused,

1  A  letter  to  the  Times  of  March  25,  1914,  describes  a  man  with  a
special  fear  of  a  certain  species  of  Australian  spiders,  large  enough  to  be
dangerous  to  a  baby  monkey.  It  is  interesting  that  an  imitation  spider
(used  in  a  practical  joke)  did  not  affect  him.


64  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

and  although  every  now  and  then  a  bird  may  choke
itself  by  swallowing  too  large  a  fish.  But  the  pil-
chard-instinct will  be  worse  than  useless  to  the  gull
if  it  is  stimulated  by  a  fisherman's  bait  made  to  look
like  a  pilchard,  or  by  the  reflected  light  from  a  bit  of
wet  seaweed.

Throughout  the  whole  process  of  evolution  there
has  indeed  been  a  constant  and  enormous  waste  of
life  and  effort  due  to  the  laying  of  eggs  in  the  wrong
places  because  they  look  rather  like  the  right  places,
and  the  capture  of  uneatable  things  because  they  are
of  the  same  size  or  colour  as  some  eatable  things.
The  process  by  which  animals  recognise  harmful  or
useful  objects  has  always  been  rough  and  inaccurate,
and  the  queer  ingenuity  of  natural  selection  has  pro-
vided all  sorts  of  means  by  which  one  living  thing  takes
advantage  of  the  mistakes  of  another.  Flowers  are
fertilised  because  they  smell  like  carrion,  insects
escape  because  they  look  like  twigs  or  wasps,  and  a
cruel  little  South  American  weasel  has  become  almost
exactly  like  the  squirrels  on  which  he  preys.

But  it  is  in  civilised  man  that  the  relation  between
disposition  and  stimulus  is  most  complex.  Man  is
born  with  a  set  of  dispositions  related,  clumsily
enough  but  still  intelligibly,  to  the  world  of  tropical
or  sub-tropical  wood  and  cave  which  he  inhabited
during  millions  of  years  of  slow  evolution,  and  whose
main  characteristics  changed  little  over  vast  periods
of  time.  The  story  of  civilisation  begins  when  he
was  driven  by  hunger  or  by  insect-borne  disease  to  go
North  and  South  into  new  climates.  There  his  com-


CH.  iv DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIRONMENT 65

paratively  plastic  intelligence  enabled  him  to  sustain
life  under  new  conditions,  not  in  the  main  by  evolving
new  dispositions,  but  by  acquiring  new  habits,  and
by  making  clothes,  houses,  and  other  modifications  of
his  material  surroundings.

At  no  period  was  he,  apparently,  either  in  the  old
environment  or  the  new,  very  successful  in  creating  a
harmony  between  himself  and  his  world.  Students  of
pre -history  tell  us,  for  instance,  that  the  disposition  of
Fear,  which  originally  gave  man  and  his  animal  pre-
decessors a  rather  inefficient  protection  from  being
killed  by  carnivorous  beasts,  tormented  him  all
through  the  Stone  Ages  because  it  was  stimulated  by
dreams  and  omens  and  by  the  belief  in  malevolent
supernatural  beings.  There  is  evidence  that  perver-
sions of  the  sex  instinct  by  inappropriate  stimuli  may
have  begun  among  our  ancestors  before  they  could  be
called  men.

In  our  time  the  coming  of  the  Great  Society  has
created  an  environment  in  which,  for  most  of  us,
neither  our  instinctive  nor  our  intelligent  dispositions
find  it  easy  to  discover  their  most  useful  stimuli.
Any  one  who  desires  to  appreciate  this  should  visit
one  of  those  "  casual  labour  "  quarters  in  London,
where  modern  civilisation  has  so  disastrously  failed,
and  where  the  facts  of  life  are  hidden  neither  by
conventional  manners  nor  by  the  privacy  which  is
possible  in  the  great  half-empty  houses  of  the  well-
to-do.  Stay  there,  walking  and  watching,  from  the
afternoon  closing  of  the  schools  till  the  return  home  of
the  men.  Look  at  the  windows  of  the  newsagents

F


66  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

and  tobacconists,  and  the  frank  display  in  the  dingy
little  chemists'  shops.  Listen  to  the  women  coming
out  of  the  "  off-licence  "  grocery,  and  the  girls  who
are  waiting  to  enter  the  music-halls  and  the  cine-
matograph theatres.  Notice  what  part  of  the  even-
ing paper  the  men  are  reading.

The  people  round  you  are  of  all  ages  from  infancy
to  dotage  ;  and  you  can  see  what  it  is  that  here  stimu-
lates the  instincts  which  one  by  one  appear  in  the
growth  of  a  human  being.  The  babies  are  tugging  at
dirty  indiarubber  teats.  The  sweet-shops  are  selling
hundredweights  of  bright-coloured  stuff,  which  ex-
cites the  appetite  of  the  children  without  nourishing
their  bodies.  That  pale-faced  boy  first  knew  love,
not  when  he  looked  at  a  girl  whom  later  he  might
marry,  but  when  a  dirty  picture  post-card  caught  his
eye  or  he  watched  a  suggestive  film.  His  dreams
of  heroism  are  satisfied  by  halfpenny  romances,
half  criminal  and  half  absurd.  Loyalty  and  com-
radeship means  sticking  to  his  street  gang ;  and
the  joy  of  constructive  work  means  the  money  which
he  can  get  for  riding  behind  a  van  or  running
messages.

The  men  are  never  far  removed  from  the  two  great
social  forces  of  gambling  and  alcohol.  If  the  desire
of  change,  of  risk,  of  achievement,  comes  on,  then  the
bookmaker  is  always  round  the  corner ;  and  the
publican  will  give  at  any  moment,  for  a  few  pence,
that  dreaming  reverie,  that  sense  of  the  tremendous
significance  of  the  world,  which  led  their  ancestors,
sitting  at  the  tent  door  or  among  the  mountain  sheep,


CH.  iv DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIKONMENT 67

to  the  beginnings  of  philosophy  and  science.  And
because  the  new  facts  by  which  our  dispositions  are
now  stimulated  are  only  inexact  substitutes  for  the
old  facts  by  which  they  were  stimulated  during  the
long  process  of  evolution,  the  stimulation  itself  is
weak  and  capricious.  Even  the  enthusiasm  of  the
group  at  the  public-house  door,  who  are  discussing  a
glove-fight,  seems,  as  you  watch  them,  to  be  thin  and
half-hearted.

A  little  farther  on  the  street  widens,  because  a
hundred  years  ago  it  used  to  cross  a  village  green.
You  hear  a  tired  and  springless  hymn-tune,  and  stop
while  a  Salvation  Army  preacher  shouts  a  quotation
from  St.  Paul :

If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  ;  but  if  ye  through
the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live.

He  is  imploring  his  scanty  following  of  women  and
children,  and  the  few  inattentive  passers-by,  to  strive
and  pray  till  all  those  instincts  which  can  be  put
to  such  evil  use  have  been  killed  out  of  their  souls.
You  remember  as  you  listen  that  in  the  tall  tenement-
building  behind  you,  or  in  the  new  brick  suburb  a
mile  or  two  away,  there  are  thousands  of  men  and
women  who  are  making  perhaps  the  most  heroic  effort
to  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body  "  that  ever  has
been  attempted.  They  are  mainly  impelled,  not  by
the  theology  of  Blood  and  Fire,  but  by  an  intense
longing  to  be  "  respectable,"  to  have  some  meaning
and  dignity  in  their  own  lives  and  those  of  their
children,  to  be  rid  of  the  hopeless  yielding  to  tempta-


68  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

tion,  the  weak  shame,  the  squalor  and  disease  of  the
life  from  which  they  have  so  hardly  escaped.  Neither
father  nor  mother  spend  a  halfpenny  or  a  half  hour
without  calculation,  the  children  are  carefully  dressed
in  clothes  which  they  dare  not  spoil,  and  are  strictly
confined,  except  for  occasional  holidays,  to  house  or
school.  And  yet  in  a  poor  district  the  school  medical
officer  may  report  that  the  children  of  the  more
respectable  families  are  physically  and  nervously  in
a  worse  condition  than  the  rest.1

For  we  cannot  in  St.  Paul's  sense  "  mortify  "  our
dispositions.  If  they  are  not  stimulated,  they  do  not
therefore  die,  nor  is  the  human  being  what  he  would
be  if  they  had  never  existed.  If  we  leave  unstimu-
lated,  or,  to  use  a  shorter  term,  if  we  "  baulk  "  any
one  of  our  main  dispositions,  Curiosity,  Property,
Trial  and  Error,  Sex,  and  the  rest,  we  produce  in
ourselves  a  state  of  nervous  strain.  It  may  be
desirable  in  any  particular  case  of  conduct  that  we
should  do  so,  but  we  ought  to  know  what  we  are
doing.

The  baulking  of  each  disposition  produces  its
own  type  of  strain ;  but  the  distinctions  between
the  types  are,  so  far,  unnamed  and  unrecognised,
and  a  trained  psychologist  would  do  a  real  service

1  See,  e.g.,  Dr.  Bishop  Harman,  quoted  in  the  Report  of  the  Medical  Officer
to  the  London  School  Board  for  1903,  p.  14.  "  The  children  are  of  a  respect-
able class.  They  are  well  fed  and  well  clothed,  but  are  altogether  a  flabby
and  pappy  lot.  .  .  .  The  children  are  too  respectable  to  play  in  the  street.
They  have  no  near  park  or  fields ;  their  back  gardens  or  house  rooms  are
small,  so  that  they  do  not  compare  favourably  (save  in  cleanliness)  with
children  in  poorer  quarters  who  play  freely  in  the  open  air."  On  the  whole
question  see  Miss  Jane  Addams'  admirable  book,  The  Spirit  of  Youth  in  the
City  Streets.


OK.  rr DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIRONMENT 69

to  civilised  life  if  he  would  carefully  observe  and
describe  them.

One  peculiarity  of  the  state  of  "  baulked  disposi-
tion "  is  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  for  the  sufferer
to  find  his  own  way  out  of  it.  The  stimulus  must
come  from  outside.  When  once  he  is  "  dull "  or
"  flat "  or  "  sick  of  things  "  or  whatever  the  name
may  be  which  he  gives  to  his  feelings,  he  cannot,
unless  he  is  a  man  of  quite  exceptional  resource
and  nervous  elasticity,  invent  anything  to  do  which
will  "  stimulate  "  him.  Now,  for  instance,  that  the
European  nations  keep  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men
under  arms  in  time  of  peace,  the  colonels  of  regiments
and  the  captains  of  war-ships  know  by  experience  that
their  men  become  "  fidgety  "  or  "  fed  up  "  by  a  life
which  gives  play  only  to  a  few  dispositions  ;  and  when
that  occurs  they  prescribe  in  a  haphazard  way  a
smoking  concert,  or  a  route  march,  or  a  football  match,
or,  on  board  ship,  a  dance,  or  clothes-mending,  or  gun
drill,  for  them  all  alike.  A  skilled  London  hostess  is
more  successful  when  she  goes  round  a  room  full  of
bored  celebrities,  applying  to  each  an  appropriate
stimulus  :  "  Miss  Jones  so  wants  to  know  about  your
last  voyage,"  or,  "  Here  is  a  friend  of  Mr.  Brown  "
(a  scientific  opponent),  or,  more  simply,  "  I  want  to
introduce  you  to  that  girl  with  the  beautiful  hair,"
until  each  is  roused  to  that  "  energy  of  the  soul "
which  is  Aristotle's  definition  of  happiness.  If  one
looks  at  a  respectable  crowd  in  a  London  park  on  the
afternoon  of  a  Bank  holiday,  one  feels  an  intense
longing  for  the  appearance  of  a  thousand  such  hostesses


70  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

and  of  a  social  system  which  would  enable  them  to  get
to  work.1

This  want  of  harmony,  in  great  things  and  in
small,  between  our  race  and  its  environment  has  been
noticed  ever  since  men,  at  the  beginning  of  civilisation,
began  consciously  to  reflect  upon  their  way  of  living.
They  dimly  felt  that  their  earliest  instincts  were
related  to  an  open-air  life  in  which  their  ancestors
had  supported  themselves  on  the  gifts  of  the  untilled
land.  Such  a  life  was  "  natural,"  and  poets,  for

1  If,  however,  we  are  to  learn  how  by  deliberate  contrivance  to  relax  the
nervous  strain  of  "  baulked  disposition,"  we  must  first  get  an  agreed  answer
to  the  question  whether,  or  to  what  degree,  the  baulking  of  one  disposition
can  be  alleviated  by  the  satisfaction  of  another.  There  is,  for  instance,  a
traditional  body  of  ethical  teaching  (forming  the  staple  material  of  religious
addresses  "  to  men  only  ")  which  assumes  that  the  strain  of  the  sex  instinct
can  be  relaxed  or  abolished  by  any  form  of  vigorous  bodily  and  mental
exercise.  This  assumption  is  rejected  by  some  psychologists,  and  is  probably
not  true  in  the  absolute  form  in  which  it  is  often  stated.  Freud,  again,  and
the  other  members  of  the  new  school  of  "  psycho-analysts  "  use  the  term
"  sublimation  "  for  "  the  deviation  of  the  sexual  motive-powers  from  sexual
aims  to  new  aims  "  (Freud,  Three  Contributions  to  Sexual  Theory,  translated
by  J.  J.  Putnam,  p.  39).  To  this  "  sublimation  "  of  the  sexual  motive
they  ascribe  many  of  the  higher  activities  of  civilised  man.  But  Freud
himself  does  not  seem  to  argue  that  the  "  sublimated  "  functions  of  the  sex-
instinct  serve  as  a  satisfaction  of  the  instinct  in  its  original  form.

Very  little  has  been  written  on  the  question  of  the  vicarious  satisfaction
of  other  dispositions  than  that  of  sex.  William  James,  however,  raises  that
question  in  relation  to  the  fighting  instinct  in  the  paper  on  "  A  Moral
Equivalent  for  War,"  in  his  Memories  and  Studies,  1911.  See  also
Chapter  IX.  pp.  179-184  of  this  book.

An  extraordinarily  interesting  experimental  approach  to  the  physiological
side  of  the  whole  problem  has  been  made  by  Professor  W.  B.  Cannon  of
the  Harvard  Medical  School  in  two  papers  on  "  The  Emotional  Stimulation
of  Adrenal  Secretion"  (American  Journal  of  Physiology,  April  1911),  and
"  Emotional  Glycosuria  "  (ibid.,  December  1,  1911),  which  are  to  form  part
of  a  forthcoming  book.  His  work  suggests  to  me  that  some  of  the  obscure
conditions  of  "Taaulked  disposition"  (owing,  e.g.,  to  the  absence  of  stimula-
tion of  such  dispositions  as  anger  and  fear)  may  be  due  physiologically
to  the  non-discharge  of  its  normal  secretion  by  the  adrenal  or  some  other
gland.  If  so,  a  new  and  more  precise  meaning  will  be  seen  in  the  celebrated
passage  (Poetics,  vi.  2)  in  which  Aristotle  states  that  tragedy  "  achieves  by
pity  and  terror  the  purging  of  the  passions  of  that  kind  "  (rty  rdv  roiovriav
•7ra07)fj.dTwi>  Kadapffiv),  and  the  less-known  passage  (Politics,  vii.  6)  in  which
he  refers  to  the  psychologically  "  cathartic  "  effects  of  certain  kinds  of
music.


OH.  iv DISPOSITION  AND  ENVIRONMENT 71

thousands  of  years,  have  longed  to  return  to  it,  to
recall  the  "  golden  age  "  before  the  invention  of  fire,
or  the  Garden  of  Eden  whose  inhabitants  knew  neither
clothing  nor  agriculture.

It  was  the  supreme  achievement  of  the  Greek  in-
tellect to  substitute  for  this  vain  longing  a  new  con-
ception of  nature.  To  Aristotle,  as  to  Hobbes,  it  was
evident  that  the  old  life  in  which  man,  without  the
powers  which  civilisation  gave  him,  faced  an  untamed
world,  must  have  been  "  poor,  nasty,  brutish  and
short." x  It  was  true  that  man's  nature  and  his  environ-
ment were  at  war,  but  the  remedy  was  not  to  go  back
to  the  forests  of  the  past,  but  to  invent  the  city  of  the
future,  the  material  and  social  organisation  which
should  contrive  a  new  harmony,  higher  because  it
was  deliberate.  When  Aristotle  said  :  "  Man  is  an
animal  adapted  for  living  in  a  city-state," 2  he  meant,
not  that  man  was  living  in  such  a  state  when  Zeus
was  born,  but  that  the  city-state  stimulated  his  nature
to  its  noblest  expression.  "  For  what  every  being  is
in  its  perfect  condition,  that  certainly  is  the  nature
of  that  being." 3  Even  for  Zeno's  less  confident
philosophy  "  Follow  Nature  "  meant  not  "  Go  back
to  the  past  "  but  "  Examine  the  conditions  of  a  good
life  in  the  present."

This  is  the  master -task  of  civilised  mankind.
They  will  fail  in  it  again  and  again,  partly  for  lack  of
inventive  power,  partly  from  sheer  ignorance  of  the
less  obvious  facts  of  their  material  surroundings  and

1  Hobbes,  Leviathan  (edition  of  1839,  p.  112).
2  Politics,  bk.  i.  chap.  ii.  a  Ibid.  bk.  i.  chap.  ii.


72  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.  i

mental  structure.  But  it  is  hardly  possible  for  any
one  to  endure  life  who  does  not  believe  that  they  will
succeed  in  producing  a  harmony  between  themselves
and  their  environment  far  deeper  and  wider  than
anything  which  we  can  see  to-day.

NOTE  A  (see  ante,  p.  61  ra.). — There  are  two  types  of  special  "  fears."
The  first  is  the  inherited  instinctive  type,  which  I  discuss  on  pp.  61-63,  and
which  may  be  illustrated  by  the  special  fear  of  snakes  found  among  human
beings  and  the  apes.  The  second  type  is  the  life-long  "  phobia  "  which
may  result  from  a  "  forgotten  experience  "  (usually  some  event  in  early
childhood).  See,  e.g.,  the  description  of  a  case  of  acquired  cat-fear  (due  to
a  forgotten  fright  at  five  years  of  age,  afterwards  revealed  under  hypnotism)
in  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  book  on  The  Unconscious  (1914),  p.  17.  Further
enquiry  may  show  the  proportion  in  which  the  two  types  occur  in  actual
life.  Many  of  the  facts  collected  by  Dr.  Prince,  by  Freud  and  his  followers,
and  by  others,  as  to  "  forgotten  experiences,"  "  co-consciousness,"  "  dis-
sociated personality,"  etc.,  though  they  have  so  far  only  been  brought  into
the  service  of  individual  pathological  psychology,  may  be  ultimately  found
to  be  of  importance  in  the  study  of  social  psychology.


CHAPTER  V

HABIT

IN  the  last  three  chapters  I  have  given  a  rough  out-
line, from  the  point  of  view  of  sociology,  of  the  main
human  psychological  dispositions,  and  a  general  dis-
cussion of  their  relation  to  those  facts  of  our  environ-
ment by  which  they  are  stimulated  into  activity.

In  the  next  five  chapters  I  shall  discuss  in  greater
detail  certain  dispositions,  both  "  simple  "  and  "  com-
plex," which  are  of  special  sociological  importance.
Those  which  I  have  selected  are  Habit,  Fear,
Pleasure-Pain,  Thought,  and  the  intricate  psycho-
logical facts  covered  by  the  terms  Imitation,  Sym-
pathy, and  Love  and  Hatred.

Not  only  are  these  dispositions  important  in  them-
selves, but  each  of  them  has  been  made  the  foundation
of  a  complete  sociological  scheme  by  some  school  of
thinkers.  Indeed  the  few  great  writers  who,  mainly
in  England  and  France,  dealt  during  the  last  two
centuries  with  social  psychology,  advanced  in  their
methods  little  beyond  the  point  reached  by  the  early
Greek  natural  philosophers.  The  first  Greek  thinkers
had  neither  the  vocabulary  nor  the  logical  or  mathe-
matical apparatus  which  would  have  enabled  them  to

73


74  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.:

treat  material  events  as  the  resultant  of  a  number
of  independently  varying  causes.  Each  philosopher
therefore  ascribed  all  events  to  one  cause,  Water,  or
Fire,  or  Number,  or  Flux.  In  modern  Europe,  while
the  progress  of  logic  and  mathematics  was  transform-
ing the  methods  of  the  natural  sciences,  the  classical
sociologists  were  still  attempting,  either  by  distortion
of  the  evidence,  or  by  a  vague  and  metaphorical  use
of  language,  to  ascribe  all  social  effects  to  some  one
psychological  cause.  Just  as  Thales  took  Water  as
his  single  all-sufficient  cause,  and  Anaximenes  took
Air ;  so  Hobbes  took  Fear  ;  Bentham,  Pleasure-Pain ;
Comte,  Love  ;  and  Tarde,  Imitation.

In  order  to  guard  against  this  traditional  tendency
it  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  warn  my  readers,  once
for  all,  that  I  shall  be  dealing  in  each  of  the  follow-
ing chapters  with  one  only  of  a  number  of  causes,
which,  in  any  practical  problem,  interact  with  each
other.  And  in  order  to  avoid  the  vague  use  of  lan-
guage which  makes  that  tendency  possible,  I  shall
attempt  to  define  each  disposition  with  sufficient
strictness  to  prevent  its  meaning  from  being  pushed
beyond  its  own  province.

In  this  chapter  I  shall  deal  with  Habit.  It  has  not
been  made  the  basis  of  a  complete  scheme  by  any
among  the  greater  sociologists  ;  but  if  one  examines
the  arguments  of  that  numerous  class  of  writers  who
plead  for  "  scientific  "  government  in  the  monthly
and  quarterly  reviews,  one  finds  that  they  constantly
assume  its  universal  efficacy.

The  "  Habit-Philosophers  "  are  generally  men  who


CH.V  HABIT  75

have  spent  a  great  part  of  their  life  in  the  exercise  of
autocratic  discipline  or  the  application  of  fixed  rules,
soldiers,  retired  Anglo-Indians,  lawyers,  or  those  pro-
fessors and  schoolmasters  whose  pedagogic  training
has  not  involved  any  acquaintance  with  modern
psychological  enquiry.

Sir  Henry  Maine  was  a  lawyer,  a  professor,  and  an
Anglo-Indian,  and  his  work  on  Popular  Government
(1885)  may  be  taken  as  a  good  example  of  this  point
of  view.  He  says  :

Obedience  is  rendered  by  the  great  bulk  of  civilised  societies
without  an  effort  and  quite  unconsciously.  But  that  is  only
because,  in  the  course  of  countless  ages,  the  stern  discharge  of
their  chief  duty  by  States  has  created  habits  and  sentiments
which  save  the  necessity  of  penal  interference  because  nearly
everybody  shares  them.1

The  reference  to  "  countless  ages "  indicates  that
Sir  Henry  Maine  was  a  Lamarckian,  who  assumed
that  acquired  characteristics  are  inherited.  But  the
same  position  is  held  by  men  who  would  admit  that
social  habits  must  be  reacquired  by  each  generation
of  mankind.  When  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  the
greatest  of  Anglo-Indian  soldiers,  said :  "  Habit  a
second  nature  !  Habit  is  ten  times  nature," 2  he  was
referring  to  a  process  requiring  not  "  countless  ages  "
but  only  the  military  lifetime  of  a  sepoy.

To  a  consistent  "  Habit- Philosopher,"  change,
merely  because  it  is  change,  must  necessarily  be
dangerous.  The  Duke  of  Wellington  strongly  opposed
in  1851  the  substitution  of  rifles  for  smooth-bore

1  H.  Maine,  Popular  Government,  p.  63.
1  Quoted,  W.  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  120.


76  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  w.  i

muskets  in  the  British  Army.1  He  would  probably
have  argued  that  if  the  habits  of  the  Army  had  been
formed  by  drill  with  a  rifle,  the  rifle  would  have  been
better  than  the  musket,  but  that  the  advantage  of  the
better  weapon  was  less  than  the  disadvantage  of
breaking  what  Walter  Bagehot  used  to  call  "the  cake
of  custom." 2  Some  of  the  "  Die-Hards  "  in  the  English
constitutional  struggle  of  1910  would  have  admitted
that  a  second  chamber  on  a  non- hereditary  basis
might  have  been  quite  as  good  as  the  English  House  of
Lords  ;  but  the  essence  of  their  case  was  that  the
English  people  had  formed  the  habit  of  obedience  to
the  House  of  Lords  and  not  to  some  different  chamber.

The  supreme  danger,  in  the  view  of  this  type  of
thinker,  arises  when  change  is  brought  about,  not  by
the  deliberate  action  of  a  sovereign  body  which  can
in  part  carry  over  the  habit  of  obedience  in  its  subjects
from  the  old  to  the  new  conditions,  but  through
sporadic  breaches  of  custom  by  individual  citizens.

"  If  a  democracy,"  says  Maine,  "  were  to  allow  a
portion  of  the  multitude  of  which  it  consists  to  set
some  law  at  defiance  which  it  happens  to  dislike,  it
would  be  guilty  of  a  crime  which  hardly  any  other
virtue  could  redeem,  and  which  century  upon  century
might  fail  to  repair.''' 3

Before  discussing  to  what  degree  the  Habit-
Philosophers  are  right,  it  is  necessary  to  define  Habit
in  terms  which  would  be  accepted  by  those  experi-
mental psychologists  who  have  done  so  much  to  give

1  Biddulph,  Lord  Cardwett  at  the  War  Office,  p.  47.
2  Physics  and  Politics,  p.  53.  a  Popular  Government,  p.  64.


CH.  v  HABIT  77

it  precise  meaning.  Habit,  then,  is  constituted  by  the
fact  that  if  our  nervous  system  is  stimulated  along
certain  lines  of  discharge,  leading  either  to  action  or
feeling  or  thought,  the  next  stimulus  of  the  same  kind
finds  the  nervous  system  to  a  certain  extent  prepared.
The  resulting  act  or  feeling  or  thought  then  follows
more  certainly  and  requires  a  weaker  stimulation.
Finally  the  habit  becomes  a  definite  tendency,  which
may  be  started  with  little  or  no  external  stimulus.

There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  habits  are
transmitted  by  biological  inheritance,  but  the  dis-
position of  Habit  varies  enormously  in  individuals,
and  such  variations  may  be  transmitted.  Different
individuals  may  be  born  with  a  disposition  to  form
habits  in  general,  or  particular  habits,  easily  or  with
difficulty,  and  to  lose  them  quickly  or  slowly.  One
man,  for  instance,  may  be  born  with,  and  transmit  to
his  descendants,  a  marked  facility  in  forming  habits
in  respect  of  music,  and  another  in  respect  of  language.

The  power  of  forming  habits  varies  also  greatly
with  age  ;  children  and  young  people  finding  it  more
easy  both  to  form  and  to  drop  habits  than  their
elders.  It  also  varies  with  race.  The  Greeks,  for
instance,  had  little  power  of  habituation,  and  were
surprised  to  find  that  the  North  European  people
whom  they  called  Kelts  reached,  when  they  were
trained  to  fighting  or  sea-faring,  an  absolute  indiffer-
ence to  danger  which  seemed  to  themselves  to  be  a
kind  of  insanity.1

1  Aristotle,  Ethics,  bk.  iii.  ch.  vii. :  "  He  would  be  a  madman  or  in-
accessible to  pain  if  he  feared  nothing,  neither  earthquake  nor  the  billows,
as  they  tell  of  the  Kelts."


78  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Habit,  I  have  said,  may  influence  our  bodily
actions,  or  our  feelings,  or  our  trains  of  thought.
But  a  habit  of  feeling  or  thought  does  not  necessarily
produce  a  habit  of  action,  as  moralists  from  Aristotle
to  William  James  have  pointed  out.1

Habit  is  perhaps  the  most  important  of  the  psycho-
logical causes  which  have  made  the  organisation  of  the
Great  Society  possible.  The  population  of  London
would  be  starved  in  a  week  if  the  fly-wheel  of  Habit
were  removed,  if  no  signalman  or  clerk  or  policeman
ever  did  anything  which  was  not  suggested  by  a
first-hand  impulse,  or  if  no  one  were  more  honest  or
punctual  or  industrious  than  he  was  led  to  be  by
his  conscious  love,  on  that  particular  day,  for  his
master  or  his  work,  or  by  his  religion,  or  by  a  con-
viction of  danger  from  the  criminal  law.

It  is  not,  therefore,  a  mere  accident  that  the  Great
Society  has  been  developed  with  most  success  among
those  North  European  races  whose  power  of  blind
habituation  excited  the  contempt  of  the  Greeks.  If
Aristotle  could  stand  on  London  Bridge  or  at  Liver-
pool Street  Station  on  any  week-day  at  8.45  A.M.,  he
would  think  that  the  "  Kelts  "  were  more  insane  than
ever.

Mr.  McDougall,  in  accordance  with  his  unwilling-
ness to  admit  the  independent  action  of  our  intellectual
dispositions,  says :  "  Habits  are  formed  only  in  the
service  of  the  instincts." 2  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
it  is  through  habit  that  the  influence  of  intelligence

1  See  on  this  point  the  beautiful  chapter  on  Habit  in  James's  Principles
of  Psychology.  2  Social  Psychology,  p.  43.


CH.  v


HABIT  79


has  most  control  over  the  lives  of  the  majority  of
civilised  men.  Our  instincts  as  compared  with  those
of  other  animals  are  weak  and  plastic.  From  the
beginning  of  our  lives  our  own  intelligence  or  that  of
others  directs  a  process  of  habit-education,  by  which
some  instincts  are  more  or  less  successfully  inhibited,
and  others,  like  hunting,  or  music,  or  curiosity,  which,
without  the  aid  of  deliberate  purpose,  might  have
died  out  in  the  course  of  growth,  become  the  master-
passions  of  specialised  lives.

Why,  therefore,  should  not  all  those  who  desire  the
continued  existence  of  the  Great  Society  become
"  Habit-Philosophers  "  of  Sir  Henry  Maine's  type  ?
If  Habit  is  truly  "  second  nature,"  if  it  "  becomes  in
a  manner  part  of  our  organisation," l  so  that  it  is
indistinguishable  from  the  facts  which  were  there
from  birth,  the  adaptation  of  man's  nature  to  his
new  environment  is  easy  enough.  All  we  have  to  do
is  to  discover  what  is  wanting  in  our  inherited  dis-
positions and  to  supply  it  by  education.  Education
costs  time  and  effort,  and  so  we  should  have  to
economise  it,  choosing  the  most  necessary  habits,
and  perhaps  modifying  those  environmental  facts
which  make  an  excessive  demand  on  habituation.
But  complete  adaptation  between  man  and  his
environment  would,  on  that  assumption,  be  well
within  sight.

Habit,  however,  is  not  second  nature.  In  the
first  place,  the  facts  in  any  man's  nervous  structure
which  are  there  by  habituation  are  less  stable  than

1  Huxley,  Elementary  Physiology  (2nd  ed.,  1885),  p.  286.


80  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

those  which  are  there  by  inheritance.  A  nervous
shock,  for  instance,  or  any  intense  nervous  excite-
ment, seems  to  have  the  power  of  abolishing  settled
habits,  while  inherited  dispositions  remain  unchanged.
We  may  believe  that  the  "  nature  "  of  a  race  has  been
transformed  by  custom  and  education.  We  may
point  out  that  the  deliberate  infliction  of  torture  on
human  beings  has  become  almost  unthinkable  to  men
whose  ancestors,  ten  generations  ago,  took  it  as  a
matter  of  course.  But  when  civilised  American
soldiers  were  submitted  to  the  strain  of  guerilla
warfare  in  the  Philippines,  many  of  them,  who  had
inherited  apparently  no  worse  natures  than  their
comrades,  inflicted  day  after  day  the  most  abominable
tortures  on  the  prisoners.1  In  the  fury  of  the  Refor-
mation at  Muenster,  or  the  Revolution  at  Paris,  the
moral  habits  of  whole  populations  disappeared.

Habit,  again,  lacks  that  breadth  of  stimulation
which  I  have  noted  in  the  case  of  the  inherited  dis-
positions.2 Fear  or  Hunger  are  excited  by  a  large
variety  of  dangerous  or  edible  things,  but  the  habit  of
military  obedience  may  attach  itself  merely  to  the
sound  of  a  particular  word  of  command,  or  to  the
sight  of  a  particular  uniform,  and  the  habit  of  punc-
tuality in  business  to  the  performance  of  a  particular
task.  The  moral  catastrophes  and  confusions  in-
deed, in  revolutions  or  among  religious  converts,  are
due  perhaps  even  more  to  the  removal  of  the  habitual
stimuli  of  rites  and  ceremonies,  old  acquaintances,  or

1  See  documents  quoted  by  Mr. Ralph  Norman  Angell  Lane  in  his
Patriotism  under  Three  Flags,  pp.  99-112.
z  See  Chapter  IV.  pp.  61-63.


OH.  v  HABIT  81

the  daily  surroundings  of  life  than  to  the  actual
nervous  effect  of  excitement  and  shock.  To  an
English  private  soldier  who  finds  himself  "  East  of
Suez,"  says  Rudyard  Kipling,  "  there  ain't  no  ten
commandments."

If  a  habit  is  to  have  sufficient  permanence  to  re-
establish itself  after  a  nervous  shock,  or  sufficient
generality  to  adapt  itself  to  variations  in  its  external
stimuli,  it  must  be  combined  with  and  supported  by
some  organised  body  of  ideas.  On  this  point,  if  one
turns  from  the  mechanical  treatment  of  Habit  by
the  modern  psychologists  back  to  Plato  and  Aris-
totle, it  is  astonishing  to  see  how  much  more  deeply
the  Greek  moralists  entered  into  the  real  problems
which  the  limitations  of  Habit  present  in  times  of
change  like  our  own.  Men  who  lived  in  the  city-
states  of  Hellas  between  430  and  330  B.C.  knew  well
how  urgent  was  the  danger  involved  in  the  relation
between  Habit  and  motive  in  a  new  environment.
When  Plato  wishes  to  describe  the  most  unfortunate
of  all  human  beings,  he  pictures  a  man,  who,  "  having
spent  his  former  life  in  a  well-disciplined  state,  had
become  virtuous  by  habit  without  philosophy," l  and
who,  in  the  under- world,  was  set  to  choose  his  own  lot
for  a  second  life.  He  chose  "  the  most  absolute
despotism  he  could  find  "  and  "  failed  to  remark  that
he  was  fated  therein,  among  other  calamities,  to
devour  his  own  children."

'  We  can  only," says  Aristotle,  "  call  a  man's

1  Republic,  619  tv  TtTa.yfj.tvv  iro\i.Ttlq.  tv  T$  irpoT^py  fitt?  fiffiiuK&Ta  tOei  Avtv


82  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

actions  just  or  virtuous  when  the  man  who  does
them  knows  what  he  is  doing ;  when  he  acts  with
deliberate  choice,  and  his  choice  is  based  on  the  real
nature  of  his  action ;  and  thirdly,  when  his  tendency
so  to  act  is  steady  and  not  easily  changed."  l  The
relation  between  Habit  and  Thought  in  conduct
could  not  be  better  expressed.  Virtue,  for  Aristotle,
is  not  mere  Habit,  but  a  "  condition  of  settled  moral
choice,"  which,  while  it  includes  Habit,  also  includes
what  Plato  calls  philosophy.

The  lines  indeed  on  which  the  Great  Society  is  now
developing  make  the  need  of  "  philosophy "  as  a
support  of  Habit  greater  every  year.  The  history  of
all  wars  since  the  introduction  of  magazine  rifles  and
quick-firing  guns  shows  that,  while  discipline  is  still
important,  "  philosophy "  has  become  more  im-
portant. The  soldier  in  South  Africa,  or  Manchuria,
or  Tripoli,  or  Thrace  had  to  fight,  ten  feet  from  his
nearest  comrade,  an  individual  battle,  which  was
part  of  a  vast  engagement  on  a  front,  perhaps,  of  a
hundred  miles.  Under  these  conditions  the  side  which
believed  itself  to  represent  some  moral  ideal,  of
freedom  or  self-defence,  fought  incomparably  better
than  the  side  which  carried  on,  from  the  habit  of
obedience,  a  campaign  of  policy  or  conquest.  Each
man  of  the  "  philosophic  "  army  "  knew  what  he  was
doing,  and  acted  with  a  deliberate  choice  .  .  .  based
on  the  real  nature  of  his  action."

1  Ethics,  bk.  ii.  chap.  iv.  TO.  Si  Kara  rds  dptrds  yivbueva,  owe  tdi>  oirrd  TWS
#XUi  SiKalut  ft  <TW<jip6v<j)s  irpdrTerai,  d\\d  Kal  4dv  6  irpdrruv  TTWS  lxu"  'fpdrr-g,
irpurov  fj.lv  lav  et'Siis,  £TT«T'  4av  Trpoatpoti/nevos,  Kal  irpoaipovfievot  di  avrd,  rb
dt  rplrov  Kal  (dv  J3e[3alus  Kal  d/j.eTa.KivffTW  fxuv


OH.  v  HABIT  83

And  the  same  is  true  of  the  recruit  who  enters  the
wide  complexities  of  modern  industry.  A  member  of
the  London  County  Council  Education  Committee  was
once  explaining  to  me  the  truth  about  the  education
of  the  working  classes.  I  said,  "  You  seem  to  desire
that  popular  education  should  consist  solely  of  manual
training  and  elementary  Bible  lessons."  "  That,"  I
was  answered,  "  is  exactly  what  I  do  want."  A  boy
equipped  with  such  an  education  would  be  as  helpless
in  a  modern  industrial  community  as  was  Plato's
unhappy  ghost  before  the  heap  of  untried  lots.

But  there  is  a  further  cause  which  makes  it  unsafe
to  treat  Habit  as  second  nature  or  as  a  self-sufficient
basis  for  social  life.  Not  only  are  habits  when  pro-
duced more  unstable  than  our  inherited  dispositions,
but  the  process  of  producing  habits  by  mere  repetition
is  uncertain  in  its  results.  The  stimulation  of  our
nervous  system  along  any  given  line  of  discharge
makes,  as  I  have  already  said,  a  further  stimulation
along  the  same  line  more  easy.  It  also  "  uses  up  "
something  in  the  nervous  structure  which  requires
time  to  repair.  Every  teacher  knows  that  if  a  boy
has  to  spend  two  hours  in  doing  a  succession  of  ele-
mentary sums  of  the  same  kind,  he  will  do  them  with
growing  ease  qua  habit  and  growing  difficulty  qua
fatigue.1  After  a  period  of  rest  the  fatigue  wears  off
and  the  habit  remains  ;  so  that  a  boy  may  then  prove
to  have  been  making  most  progress  towards  accuracy

1  Cp.,  e.g.,  Binet,  La  Fatigue  intellectuelle,  pt.  ii.  ch.  vi.,  where  it  is  shown
on  experimental  evidence  that  in  each  successive  period  of  a  long  morning's
work  at  elementary  arithmetic  the  scholars  do  more  sums,  but  do  them  less
accurately.


84  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

in  sum-working  when  he  was  too  tired  to  work  his
sums  accurately.  This  is  what  James  meant  when
he  quoted  the  saying,  "  We  learn  to  swim  during  the
winter  and  to  skate  during  the  summer."  1

The  effects,  however,  of  fatigue  are  not  completely
done  with  when  they  have,  for  the  moment,  been  over-
come by  rest.  If  an  habitual  action  is  often  repeated
up  to  the  point  of  fatigue,  the  nervous  system  is  apt
to  lose  its  power  of  recovery.  Just  when  the  violin
student  or  the  typist  is  bringing  her  technique  to
absolute  completion,  violinist's  or  typist's  "  cramp  "
may  come  on,  and  the  nervous  system  may  refuse  to
repeat  the  habitual  act.  Something  of  the  same  kind
seems  to  happen  from  time  to  time  in  the  process  of
forming  intellectual  or  emotional  habits.  When  the
monk  has,  by  intense  and  continued  effort,  made  him-
self able  to  realise  at  will  the  object  of  his  adoration,
something  snaps,  and  he  can  do  so  no  more.  The
English  "  public  school "  system  constitutes  one  of
the  most  tremendous  instruments  of  habituation  that
have  ever  existed ;  but  at  the  moment  when  a  lad  of
eighteen  seems  on  the  point  of  becoming  a  perfect
Etonian,  he  has  been  known  to  turn  suddenly  and
unaccountably  into  something  worse  or  better.

It  is  this  fact,  in  combination  with  the  nervous
strain  which  inevitably  results  when  important  in-
stincts are  left  unstimulated,2  that  explains  why
systems  of  social  organisation  founded  on  pure  Habit
are  apt  to  decay  from  within,  even  when  they  are  not
overthrown  from  without.  "  Drive  out  Nature  with

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  110.  *  Cp.  ante,  pp.  68,  69.


CH.  v  HABIT  85

a  pitchfork  and  she  will  always  come  back  "  is  a
proverb  whose  truth  was  learnt  by  the  Spartans  in
the  fourth  century  B.C.,  and  by  the  successors  of  John
Knox  in  Scotland  or  of  Frederick  William  I.  in
Prussia  more  than  two  thousand  years  later.

The  problem,  therefore,  of  the  adaptation  of  our
nature  to  our  environment  cannot  be  solved  by
merely  enforcing  those  habits  which  are  most  con-
venient under  existing  circumstances.  A  habit  can
neither  be  formed  without  risk  of  failure  in  the  pro-
cess, nor  permanently  retained,  when  formed,  unless
it  is  adapted,  not  only  to  the  facts  of  the  outer  world,
but  also  to  the  whole  of  our  inner  nature.  The
teachers  of  the  arts  have  always,  in  their  own  way,
known  this.  The  trainer  of  a  racing  crew  may  make
mistakes.  He  may  teach  his  men  movements  which,
when  they  have  acquired  them,  they  will  find  to  be
"  unnatural  "  and  therefore  destructive  of  nervous
ease.  He  may  work  them  for  too  long  hours,  or  may
keep  intelligent  young  men  too  long  in  an  atmosphere
of  stupid  rowing  "  shop."  But  he,  like  a  teacher  of
painting  or  music,  knows  that  there  are  certain  bodily
and  mental  habits  which  give  good  results  because
they  are  "  natural,"  and  others,  perhaps  less  difficult
to  acquire  at  first,  which  fail  because  they  are  "  un-
natural." And  he  knows  that  neither  the  process  of
habituation  nor  the  life  of  formed  habit  is  tolerable
unless  it  is  accompanied  by  a  certain  amount  of  varia-
tion. The  violinist,  even  when  he  has  acquired  the
best  technique  that  is  possible,  must  not  always  play
the  same  piece.  The  oarsman  must  not  always


86  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

row  over  the  same  course  or  at  the  same  rate  of
striking.

Habits  which  are  "  natural  "  in  themselves  and  are
carried  out  with  a  sufficient  element  of  variety  are
accompanied  by  a  feeling  of  energy  and  freedom.
''  Unnatural "  habits  are  accompanied,  long  before
the  actual  breaking-point  is  reached,  by  a  feeling  of
unreality  and  dissatisfaction.  It  may  however  take
many  years  in  the  life  of  an  individual  before  dis-
satisfaction even  begins  ;  or  a  habit  may  only  become
"  unnatural "  when  some  unobserved  change  in  the
conditions  of  its  action  has  taken  place.  The  disci-
pline of  the  French  army  in  1814  may  have  seemed  in
all  externals  the  same  as  it  was  in  1796,  the  Franciscan
Rule  at  the  death  of  Savonarola  may  have  seemed
the  same  as  it  was  at  the  death  of  St.  Francis,  and  yet
that  free  activity,  which  gave  to  "  custom,  law,  and
statute,"  in  the  mind  of  the  young  Wordsworth,  "  the
attraction  of  a  country  of  romance,"  was  present  in
each  case  under  the  earlier,  and  wanting  under  the
later  conditions.

The  enlargement  of  scale,  therefore,  which  makes
Habit  increasingly  necessary  in  the  Great  Society,
increases  also  the  necessity  of  criticising  and,  from
time  to  time,  abandoning  existing  habits.  Just  as
modern  horticulturists,  who  propagate  millions  of
fruit  trees  or  potatoes  from  cuttings,  require  the
periodical  production  of  new  varieties  from  actual
seeding,  so  in  the  modern  world  of  habit  and  repeti-
tion we  have  learnt  to  attach  a  new  value  to  the  man
who  goes  back  to  his  first-hand  impulses.  The  con-


CH.  v  HABIT  87

trollers  of  the  Great  Industry  are  always  on  the  look-
out for  that  type  of  man  whom  Americans  call  "  a
live  wire."  For  such  a  man  secretaries  and  typists
and  foremen  carry  on  all  that  punctual  performance  of
habitual  acts  which  took  up  so  much  of  the  time  and
labour  of  a  merchant  or  manufacturer  even  fifty  years
ago.  He  is  set  to  form  a  habit  of  non-habituation,
of  picking  up  and  acting  on  his  mental  suggestions  at
the  point  when  they  first  appear  as  an  uncomfortable
and  perhaps  almost  subconscious  interference  with
an  easy  train  of  thought.  It  is  this  habit  of  over-
riding habit  which  was  meant  by  Oliver  Cromwell
when  he  said,  "  He  goes  furthest  who  knows  not
whither  he  is  going  "  ;  by  Napoleon  when  he  raged
against  those  who  allowed  their  minds  to  form
"  pictures  "  ;  even  by  Mr.  Spofforth,  the  cricketer,
when  he  said,  "  Show  me  the  man  who  knows  how
he  is  going  to  play  the  next  ball  and  I  will  show  you
a  man  whom  I  can  bowl  out."  As  Professor  E.  A.
Ross  of  Wisconsin  says  :

In  a  dynamic  society  so  many  readjustments  are  necessary,
such  far-reaching  transformations  are  experienced  in  half  a
lifetime,  that  the  past  is  discredited.  One  forms  a  habit  of
breaking  habits.1

In  every  art  the  power  and  responsibility  of  the
man  who  acquires,  and  by  ever  new  efforts  retains,
the  habit  of  origination  is  now  increasing.  With  eyes
tired  by  thousands  of  perfect  mechanical  reproduc-
tions, we  stand  before  the  pictures  of  Raphael,  and
wonder  how  our  fathers  could  have  been  stirred  to

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  79.


88  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  *r.  x

enthusiasm  by  the  facile  habitual  lines  of  that  prince
among  drawing-masters.  It  is  in  Rembrandt,  with
the  infinity  of  surprise  which  vibrates  along  every
scratch  of  his  etching-needle  or  stroke  of  his  brush,
that  we  find  refreshment  and  harmony.

In  music,  in  literature,  in  the  conduct  of  life,  our
fathers  used  to  build  the  tombs  of  the  prophets
whom  their  fathers  had  stoned.  Now,  even  if  a
stone  is  picked  up,  it  drops  from  the  half-hearted
fingers  of  the  critic,  who  does  not  know  whether  in  a
few  days  he  will  not  have  become  a  disciple.  The
originator  is  made  to  feel  that  for  him  that  crystal-
lisation of  past  habits  and  current  opinions,  which
we  call  duty,  does  not  exist.  His  business  is  to  be
perpetually  and  ever-freshly  himself.

But  Plato's  warning  against  Habit  without  philo-
sophy has  perhaps  its  deepest  meaning  when  applied
to  the  habit  of  origination.  Napoleon  on  the  Imperial
throne,  the  financial  genius  when  he  has  overcome
his  rivals,  the  leader  of  young  opinion  when  his  books
are  read  and  his  plays  acted  in  twenty  languages,
may  create  nothing  but  confusion  and  weakness  un-
less his  power  is  related  to  some  greater  purpose,  in
whose  service  is  liberty.


CHAPTER  VI

FEAR

HABIT  results  from  repetition,  whether  of  acts  or
thoughts  or  feelings.  But  repetition  must  have  a
beginning,  and  the  beginning  must  be  due  to  some-
thing else  than  Habit.  If,  therefore,  the  subjects  of
any  state  obey  a  repeated  order  through  Habit,  there
still  remains  the  question  why  they  obeyed  the
original  order.  A  believer  in  "  scientific  govern-
ment "  of  the  Anglo-Indian  type,  if  he  is  asked  that
question,  will  generally  answer  that  the  original
obedience  was  due  to  Fear.

This  view  is  supported  by  the  high  authority  of
Hobbes,  the  first,  the  ablest,  and  the  most  courageous
of  the  English  writers  who  have  attempted  to  create
a  theory  of  society  by  means  of  introspective  psycho-
logy. "  He  that  is  to  govern  a  whole  nation,"  he
says,  "  must  read  in  himself,  not  this  or  that  particular
man,  but  mankind."  l

His  Leviathan  was  written  between  1641  and  1651,
while  he  was  a  Royalist  exile  in  Paris ;  and  those
who,  like  Hobbes  or  Marx,  write  and  think  in  exile,
while  they  often  gain  in  a  fierce  concentration  of

1  Leviathan  (edition  of  1839),  p.  xii.
89


90  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  w.  i

purpose,  lose  by  the  absence  of  those  daily  and  hourly
hints  of  the  working  of  other  men's  minds,  which  are
necessary  if  analysis  of  motive  is  not  to  become  over-
simplified and  distorted.  Though,  therefore,  the
publication  both  of  Marx's  Kapital  and  of  Hobbes's
Leviathan  was  an  important  event  in  the  history  of
the  world,  yet  each  book  produced  a  reaction  which
made  it  doubtful  whether  its  main  effect  was  to
forward  or  to  hinder  the  cause  which  it  advocated.
The  Kapital  has  gone  far  to  divide  modern  Germany
into  two  mutually  intolerant  camps,  unable  to  under-
stand each  other's  thoughts  and  even  the  vocabulary
in  which  those  thoughts  are  expressed  ;  and  it  is  the
camp  of  Bismarck  and  not  that  of  Marx  which
has  so  far  gained  thereby.  The  Leviathan  encouraged
the  restored  Stuarts  and  their  advisers  to  attempt
to  found  a  personal  monarchy  by  military  force.
That  attempt  not  only  brought  about  the  Revolution
of  1688,  but  created  the  reasoned  opposition  to
sovereign  power,  either  executive  or  legislative,
which  was  developed  by  Locke  and  Montesquieu  and
helped  to  give  the  United  States  of  America  a  con-
stitution equally  difficult  to  administer  and  to  reform.
To  this  day  the  eloquence  and  lucidity  of  Hobbes—
"  the  old  hard-hearted  fellow,  the  father  of  them  all,"
as  Francis  Place  called  him * — are  a  real  danger  to
those  few  Englishmen  who  are  prepared  to  follow
science  in  politics.  Hobbes  seems  to  make  "  hard-
ness "  a  necessary  condition  of  accuracy  in  social
thought,  and  requires  us  to  ignore  or  inhibit  those

1  Letter  to  James  Mill,  October  20,  1816.


CH.  VI


FEAK  91


vague  feelings  of  human  kindness  which  do  not  fit
into  his  system.  Huxley,  who  wrote,  "  Eead  Hobbes
if  you  want  to  get  hard  sense  in  good  English,"  *
might  have  founded  a  modern  school  of  scientific
politics,  if  he  had  not  submitted  himself  to  a  tradition
which  made  the  main  political  forces  of  his  own  time
unintelligible  to  him.

Hobbes,  like  his  fellow-exiles  in  Paris,  lived  among
exaggerated  rumours  of  the  social  confusion  which
the  doctrines  of  Natural  Equality  and  Natural
Benevolence  had  produced  in  England.  The  guiding
impulse  of  his  life  was  at  that  time  the  hope  that
Charles  the  Second  might  return  and  reintroduce
order  by  the  wholesome  discipline  of  Fear.  Again
and  again  he  argues  that  to  rely  on  any  other  motive
is  to  trust  to  mere  words  in  a  world  of  hard  realities.

Men  have  no  pleasure,  but  on  the  contrary  a  great  deal
of  grief,  in  keeping  company  where  there  is  no  power  able  to
overawe  them  all ; 2

and

No  man  obeys  them  whom  they  think  have  no  power  to
help  or  hurt  them.3

If  it  is  objected  that  the  existence  in  other  animals
of  instinctive  social  affection  creates  a  presumption
that  such  affection  will  also  be  found  in  man,  Hobbes
replies  by  denying  the  analogy  :  "  The  agreement  of
these  creatures  is  natural ;  that  of  men  is  by  covenant
only,  which  is  artificial."  4  The  only  natural  human
affection  which  he  allowed  was  that  which  arises

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  74.  *  Leviathan  (edition  of  1839),  p.  112.

3  Ibid.  p.  76.  «  Ibid.  p.  157.


92  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

from  sex-love  and  parenthood,  the  family  concord
which  "  dependeth  on  natural  lust."  *

He  got  over  the  psychological  facts  which  told
against  him  either  by  treating  them  as  exceptional,
or  by  classifying  every  disposition  which  can  restrain
men  from  unsocial  conduct  as  a  form  of  Fear.  "  Pity
.  .  .  ariseth  from  the  imagination  that  the  like
calamity  may  befall  himself,"  2  the  "  fear  of  things
invisible  is  the  natural  seed  of  that  which  every  man
in  himself  calleth  religion,  and  in  them  that  worship,
or  fear  that  power  otherwise  than  they  do,  super-
stition." 3

He  is  the  more  easily  able  to  do  this  because  he
constantly  "  intellectualises  "  all  the  human  passions
by  treating  them  as  the  result  of  a  calculation  of
interest.  "  Both  to  love  and  to  fear  is  to  value."  4
But  if  he  bases  passion  on  calculation  he  also  makes
calculation  passionate.  Whenever  a  man,  after  think-
ing out  the  probable  results  of  any  proposed  act,
decides  not  to  do  it,  Hobbes  assumes  that  his  motive
is  Fear,  and  he  is  helped  in  this  by  his  own  magnificent
power  of  imagining  and  presenting  the  case  in  which
Fear  does  accompany  calculation.

That  man  which  looks  too  far  before  him  in  the  care  of
future  time  hath  his  heart  all  the  day  long  gnawed  on  by  fear
of  death,  poverty,  or  other  calamity  ;  and  has  no  repose,  no
pause  of  his  anxiety,  but  in  sleep.5

Modern  social  psychologists  cannot  hope  to  equal
Hobbes's  eloquence  and  force.  But  they  can  avoid

1  Leviathan  (edition  of  1839),  p.  114.J  *  Ibid.  p.  47.

8  Ibid.  p.  93.  *  Ibid.  p.  77.  •  Ibid.  p.  95.


CH.  vi  FEAK  93

some  of  his  mistakes  by  adopting  a  definition  of  Fear
which  will  at  least  distinguish  it  from  other  dissuasive
motives.  Such  a  definition  might  describe  Fear  as
an  instinct  which,  when  excited  by  one  of  its  appro-
priate stimuli,  inclines  us  to  experience  a  nervous
shock  extending  from  a  slight  thrill  up  to  convulsions
and  insensibility.  This  shock  is  accompanied  or  pre-
ceded by  an  impulse  either  to  remain  perfectly  still  or
to  run  away  and  hide.

In  its  origin  Fear  tended  to  preserve  life  by  pre-
venting animals  from  doing  certain  dangerous  things.
It  varies  greatly  among  individuals  and  races,  but
must  always  have  been  a  rather  clumsy  instinct.  It
protected  each  species  against  a  few  of  its  most
frequent  dangers  and  left  it  unprotected  against
others.  Its  symptoms  not  infrequently  are  a  cause
of  death,  even  among  the  lower  animals.  Snakes,  for
instance,  exploit  the  paralysing  terror  which  protects
small  birds  from  being  seen  by  hawks.

From  a  very  early  stage,  therefore,  in  his  social
development  man  has  learnt  the  necessity  of  recog-
nising and,  if  possible,  controlling  Fear.  Every
savage  would  understand  the  point  of  the  story  about
the  officer  at  Waterloo  who  said,  "  Yes,  I  am  afraid,
and  if  you  had  been  half  as  much  afraid  as  I  am,  you
would  have  run  away  an  hour  ago."

In  modern  civilisation  many  of  the  original  stimuli
of  Fear  have  disappeared  l  or  have  been  so  modified
that  they  are  no  longer  dangerous,  while  we  have
become  intellectually  aware  of  new  dangers  of  which

1  See  ante,  p.  63.


94  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

we  have  no  instinctive  dread.  A  man  will  turn
dizzy  as  he  looks  down,  in  perfect  safety,  from  the
leaning  tower  at  Pisa,  or  moves  a  vote  of  thanks  at
a  charity  dinner  ;  and  will  find  the  greatest  difficulty
in  making  himself  afraid  to  drink  water  in  his  hotel
bedroom,  which  he  believes  to  be  very  probably  in-
fected with  typhoid.  Indeed,  if  an  intelligent  married
citizen  were  now  to  find  himself  as  completely  divested
of  the  disposition  of  Fear  as  was  the  boy  who  married
the  princess  in  Grimm's  fairy  tale,  that  fact  would  in
all  probability  make  little  change  in  his  way  of  life.
Affection  for  his  family,  public  spirit,  religion,  and  the
reasonable  expectation  of  personal  happiness  would
still  be  sufficient  to  create  and  maintain  the  habit  of
avoiding  unnecessary  danger  to  health  and  life.

But  the  mere  absence  of  the  original  stimuli,  in-
stead of  destroying  the  disposition  of  Fear  among  the
sedentary  inhabitants  of  a  commercial  city,  merely
leaves  it  existing  but  unstimulated,  and  so  creates
a  condition  of  "  baulked  disposition,"  l  in  which  a
limited  but  not  inconsiderable  degree  of  Fear  may  be
desired  for  its  own  sake.  Small  boys  in  city  streets
run  in  front  of  motor-cars  to  enjoy  the  resulting
sensation.  Hundreds  of  people  may  be  seen  at  any
great  Exhibition,  waiting  in  long  lines  to  be  allowed
to  pay  sixpence  each  for  a  few  moments  of  Fear  on
the  "  wiggle-woggle  "  or  the  "  aerial-railway  "  ;  and
some  of  the  best  and  ablest  individuals  among  the
urban  brain-workers  of  England  and  Germany  take
infinite  pains  year  after  year  to  spend  weeks  or  months

1  See  ante,  p.  68.


OH.  vi  FEAR  95

upon  the  Alps  in  pursuits  whose  most  valued  product
is  in  their  case  the  sensation  of  Fear.  Perhaps,  indeed,
it  is  this  desire  for  Fear  rather  than  the  impulse  of
Curiosity  which  has  been  the  most  important  single
cause  of  those  dangerous  journeys  of  discovery,  by
which  the  whole  earth  has  been  mapped  out  during  the
last  four  hundred  years.

The  clumsiness  and  uncertainty  of  Fear,  its  im-
perfect adaptation  even  to  the  environment  of
aboriginal  life,  and  its  constant  irrelevance  to  the
environment  of  civilisation,  make  it,  of  all  human
dispositions,  the  least  suitable  as  a  general  basis
for  modern  government  and  education.  Not  many
decades  ago  the  schoolmaster  who  deliberately  aimed
at  producing  and  maintaining  a  state  of  terror  among
his  scholars  was  still  common.  But  as  men  began,
under  the  influence  of  Rousseau  and  his  successors,
to  think  of  the  psychology  of  education,  they  recog-
nised both  that  insensitive  children  were  not  terrified
by  their  methods,  and  that  terror  brought  to  the  point
of  "  breaking  the  will "  had  a  peculiarly  injurious
effect  upon  the  brains  of  sensitive  children.  In  the
English  "  public  "  and  "  preparatory  "  schools  the
"  bracing  "  effect  of  a  mild  degree  of  Fear  is  aimed  at
in  compulsory  cricket  and  football.  Certain  flogging
customs  still  survive,  which  are  only  intelligible  as
relics  of  a  period  when  education  by  extreme  Fear
was  attempted  in  earnest.  But  there  is  now  a  general
understanding  among  masters  and  boys  that  Fear  is
to  have  no  part  in  that  process,  and  that  discipline
is  to  be  maintained  by  a  cool  calculation  of  the


96  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

advantages  and  disadvantages  of  disobedience  and
punishment.  If,  once  in  a  while,  a  severe  flogging
helps  to  silence  for  life  a  lad  who  might  have  been
a  poet,  the  sufferer  and  not  the  system  is  apt  to  be
blamed.

I  can  remember,  when  I  was  seven  or  eight  years
old,  that  a  deservedly  respected  churchwarden  joined
my  father  and  myself,  as  we  walked  by  a  point  in  the
street  which  I  could  still  identify,  and  told,  for  my
benefit,  how  a  friend  of  his,  who  had  heard  his  son
swear,  lit  a  bundle  of  matches  and  put  them,  as  a
foretaste  of  hell -fire,  on  the  boy's  tongue.  Such
actions,  as  well  as  books  like  a  certain  Persuasives  to
Early  Piety,  which  aimed  at  producing  the  same  result
upon  me  by  cold  print,  must  now  be  rare,  and  one  of
the  chief  reasons  for  their  disuse  was  practical  ex-
perience of  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  their  effect
both  upon  conduct  and  belief.

Even  in  the  punishment  of  criminals  we  have  (if
one  ignores  occasional  panics)  reached  a  point  where
Sir  William  Dyott's  statement  from  the  bench  during
the  era  of  the  Reform  Bill  that  "  nothing  but  the
terror  of  human  suffering  can  avail  to  prevent  crime  "  l
sounds  old-fashioned  and  ineffective  ;  and  to  most  of
us  it  seemed  that  the  leaders  of  the  militant  suffragists
in  England  made  a  serious  mistake  in  psychological
tactics  when  they  attempted  to  substitute  real  Fear
for  the  advertisement  and  annoyance  which  resulted
from  their  earlier  methods.

The  attempt  to  govern  whole  populations  by  the

1  Quoted  by  J.  L.  and  B.  Hammond,  The  Village  Labourer,  p.  201.


OH.  vi  FEAR  97

political  use  of  Fear  is  not  yet  abandoned.  But
evidence  is  accumulating  that  the  measures  adopted
with  that  purpose,  torture,  flogging,  massacres,
pillage,  public  executions,  blowing  from  guns,  etc.,
are  apt  to  produce,  not  only  widespread  Fear,  but
dogged  obstinacy  among  some  of  the  older  members
of  the  populations  concerned,  and  a  positive  delight
in  danger  among  some  of  the  younger ;  while  the
blind  panic  which  prevents  efficient  action  may  at  any
moment  strike  the  ruling  minority  instead  of  the
subject  majority.  In  the  past  indeed,  the  govern-
ments which  used  such  means  have  fallen,  or  have
adopted  a  new  policy  either  of  conciliation  or  of
extermination.

The  tradition  of  government  by  Fear  still  hangs
about  some  of  the  details  of  Prussian  administration.
In  Berlin  one  may  hear  a  policeman  addressing  a
group  at  a  street  corner  in  that  "  schnarrend  "  tone
which  is  intended  to  produce  a  physical  thrill.  But
the  great  majority  of  the  Berliners  apparently  con-
sider the  tradition  a  little  absurd,  and  in  the  stern
calculation  of  the  Social-Democrats  as  to  whether  a
general  strike,  or  even  a  civil  war,  may  not  some  day
be  worth  while,  the  element  of  actual  Fear  seems  to
have  little  part.

The  Turks  no  longer  rule  in  Europe,  though  a
policy  of  government  by  Fear  survives,  with  appro-
priate results,  in  Russia.  But  it  is  outside  Europe,
where  the  representatives  of  the  Great  Powers  exercise
military  control  over  alien  races,  that  government
by  Fear  is  habitually  defended  as  a  necessary  and

H


98  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

permanent  condition.  Lieutenant -Colonel  G.  de  S.
Barrow,  for  instance,  in  a  lecture  reported  in  the
Journal  of  the  United  Service  Institution  of  India,  says  :

Fear  is  an  elemental,  perhaps  the  most  elemental,  of  the
factors  which  go  to  make  up  our  moral  nature.  ...  It  is
with  us  now  just  as  strong  and  ruling  an  influence  in  our  lives,
whether  as  individuals  or  nations,  as  ever  it  was  in  the  days
of  primeval  man.  .  .  .  The  crude  desire  of  fighting  for  food
becomes  developed  into  the  virtues  of  patriotism,  love  of  liberty,
and  country,  but  always  with  the  same  origin — Fear.1

The  form  of  this  may  be  due  to  Hobbes's  eloquence,
filtered  through  eight  generations  of  smoking-room
talk,  but  the  spirit  of  it,  daily  repeated  in  half-a-dozen
languages,  runs  through  many  of  the  reported  utter-
ances of  the  representatives  of  European  civilisation
in  Africa,  Persia,  and  the  islands  and  peninsulas  of
the  East.

1  September  1912.  I  owe  my  introduction  to  this  interesting  lecture
to  an  article  in  the  Daily  News  by  my  friend  Mr.  William  Archer.  It  is
noteworthy  that  Colonel  Barrow,  like  Hobbes,  combines  an  exaggerated
statement  of  the  instinctive  nature  of  fear  with  "  intellectualism  "  in  his
explanation  of  its  working.  "  Fear,"  he  says,  "  springs  from  the  desire  of
life."


CHAPTER  VII

PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS

FOR  more  than  a  century  after  the  publication  of  the
Leviathan,  the  English  defenders  of  constitutional
liberty  opposed  Hobbes's  psychological  plea  for  ab-
solutism with  arguments  drawn  not  from  psychology
but  from  the  metaphysical  conception  of  Natural
Right.  By  1776,  however — the  "Annus  Mirabilis"
in  which  Bentham's  Fragment  on  Government,  Adam
Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations,  and  the  American  Declara-
tion of  Independence  all  appeared, — a  new  psycho-
logical theory  of  society,  based,  not  on  Fear,  but  on
the  attractive  and  repulsive  influence  of  Pleasure  and
Pain,  was  already  becoming  influential.

The  Declaration  of  Independence  includes  "  the
pursuit  of  happiness  "  among  the  "  inalienable  rights  "
of  mankind,  but  Jefferson  must  have  found  the  chief
evidence  for  the  existence  of  men's  metaphysical
right  to  pursue  happiness  in  the  psychological  fact
that  they  did  pursue  it.  From  Bentham's  mind  the
conception  of  Natural  Right  had  already  disappeared.
His  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and
Legislation  (1789)  opens  with  the  strictly  psycho-
logical statement,  "  Nature  has  placed  mankind  under

99


100  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

the  governance  of  two  sovereign  masters,  pain  and
pleasure."  *  Two  years  later  he  tells  the  revolutionists
in  France  that  "  Natural  Rights  is  simple  nonsense,
natural  and  imprescriptable  Rights  rhetorical  non-
sense— nonsense  upon  stilts." 2

Bentham  did  not  die  till  1832,  and  before  he  died
his  doctrines,  partly  through  their  direct  influence
upon  the  few  readers  of  his  manuscripts  and  printed
works,  but  more  generally  through  their  effect  on
Paley's  theology,  Whately's  ethics  and  economics,
Romilly's  legal  reforms,  and  the  economic  and
political  theories  of  Ricardo  and  James  Mill,  had
attained  an  authority  over  English  thought  which
increased  during  the  next  thirty  years  and  has  not
yet  quite  disappeared.  The  conscious  intellectual
life  of  the  average  Englishman  is  still  often  spent
among  the  ruins  of  Utilitarianism.  His  favourite
journalists  still  use  phrases  like  "  the  laws  of  political
economy,"  and  "  the  facts  of  human  nature,"  in  senses
which  assume  the  whole  Benthamite  psychology ;
though  they  do  so  with  that  slightly  irritable  emphasis
which  results  from  a  feeling  that  criticism  in  a  slip-
shod and  sentimental  age  has  weakened  the  authority
of  principle.

Bentham's  psychology  was  based  upon  three  pro-
positions, asserted  or  implied.  The  first  was  the
"  intellectualist "  assumption  that  all  human  action
was  the  result  of  a  conscious  search  for  the  means  of


1  Bentham,  Works.  The  sentence,  as  M.  Halevy  points  out  in  his
masterly  treatise,  is  taken  almost  unchanged  from  Helvetius  (Halevy,  La
Formation  du  Radicalisme  Philosophique,  vol.  i.  p.  298).

1  Bentham,  "  Anarchical  Fallacies"  (1791),  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  501.


CH.VH PLEASUKE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 101

attaining  some  "  end  "  or  "  good  "  other  than  the
action  itself.  The  second  was  "  Hedonism  " — the
proposition  that  all  human  goods  could  be  shown  to
consist  of  the  one  good  of  Pleasure  (or  Happiness,
which  was  treated  as  the  sum  of  Pleasures),  and  the
avoidance  of  Pain.  The  third  was  the  Greatest
Happiness  Principle,  the  proposition  that  the  end  of
all  action  by  men  in  society  was  the  production  of  the
greatest  quantity  of  Pleasure  for  the  greatest  number
of  the  members  of  the  society  concerned.

With  Utilitarian  Intellectualism  I  have  already
dealt.1  With  the  difficulties  and  contradictions  of
Bentham's  Greatest  Happiness  Principle  I  shall  deal
later  in  this  chapter.  For  the  moment  I  confine
myself  to  his  Hedonism.

The  Hedonist  doctrine  itself,  as  stated  or  assumed
by  Bentham,  involves  three  separate  propositions  :
that  the  only  effective  human  motive  is  the  desire  for
Pleasure  and  for  the  avoidance  of  Pain  ;  that  Pain  and
Pleasure  are  the  negative  and  positive  ends  of  a
simple  gradation  of  feeling ;  and  that  the  state  of
consciousness  called  Happiness  is  the  same  as  that
called  Pleasure.2

On  the  first  of  these  propositions — that  ideas  of
Pleasure-Pain  are  the  universal  and  only  motive — I
shall  not  spend  much  time.  In  order  to  arrive  at  it
Bentham  had  to  strain  the  meaning  of  words  almost
as  seriously  as  did  Hobbes.  If  Hobbes  defined  pity

1  See  ante,  p.  40,  and  my  Human  Nature  in  Politics,  pt.  i.  ch.  i.

*  Bentham,  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  214  ("  Pannomian  Fragments").  " Happiness
is  a  word  employed  to  denote  the  sum  of  the  pleasures  experienced  during
that  quantity  of  time  which  is  under  consideration,  deduction  made  or  not
made  of  the  quantity  of  pain  experienced  during  the  same  quantity  of  time."


102  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

as  a  kind  of  fear,  Bentham  declared  that  men  are
moved  not  directly  by  curiosity,  but  indirectly  by
the  pleasure  of  curiosity,  not  directly  by  anger  but
indirectly  by  a  calculation  as  to  the  means  of  avoiding
the  "  pains  of  unsatisfied  vindictiveness."  l  Even  in
the  eighteenth  century  a  man  of  Bentham' s  genius
and  sincerity  could  hardly  have  adhered  to  this
position  if  he  had  not  been  a  shy  and  sedentary
bachelor,  living  among  ideas  of  action  and  ideas  of
pleasure  rather  than  real  acts  and  real  pleasures.

The  second  and  third  Hedonist  propositions —
that  Pain  is  the  negation  of  Pleasure,  and  Happiness
the  extension  of  Pleasure  in  time — the  propositions
which  Bentham  summed  up  in  the  statement,  "  What
happiness  is  every  man  knows,  because  what  pleasure
is  every  man  knows,  and  what  pain  is  every  man
knows," 2  present  greater  difficulties.  Against  them
I  shall  argue,  firstly  that  the  sensations  called  Pains
are  not  the  mere  negation  of  the  sensations  called
Pleasures,  secondly  that  the  "  feeling  -  tones "  of
Pleasantness  and  Unpleasantness  are  not  the  same
as  the  sensations  called  Pains  and  Pleasures,  and
thirdly  that  these  feeling-tones  of  Pleasantness  and
Unpleasantness  are  not  the  same  as  the  states  of
consciousness  called  Happiness  and  Unhappiness.

There  is  perhaps  no  point  on  which  modern  ex-
perimental psychology  has  been  more  successful  than
in  the  examination  of  the  "  Pain  "  sensations,  and
the  differentiation  of  them  from  the  feeling-tone  of

1  Works,  vol.  i.,  "  Table  of  the  Springs  of  Action,"  pp.  197-205.
2  Ibid.  vol.  ix.  p.  123.


CH.VII PLEASUKE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 103

Unpleasantness.  It  has  been  shown  that  mankind,
like  many  other  animals,  possess  a  system  of  nerves
ending  in  those  "  pain-spots  "  which  He  scattered,
sometimes  closely  and  sometimes  widely,  among  the
"  cold-spots,"  "  heat-spots,"  and  "  touch-spots  "  on
our  skin.  The  stimulation  of  these  nerves  produces
the  "  pain  "  sensations  of  pricking,  smarting,  burning,
and  the  like.  Other  nerves  situated  more  deeply  in
our  tissues  produce  on  stimulation  the  "  pain "
sensation  of  aching.1  A  doctor  may  find  it  advisable
to  distinguish  carefully  between  the  smarting  and
aching  sensations,  but  a  social  psychologist  may  be
allowed  to  speak  of  both  as  instances  of  the  one
sensation  of  Pain.

The  evolutionary  origin  of  both  the  superficial  and
the  deeper  pain-nerves  is  obviously  to  be  found  in  the
fact  that  they,  by  giving  rise  to  their  appropriate
sensations,  inclined  animals  to  avoid  certain  conditions
dangerous  to  life.

In  the  same  way,  we  and  other  animals  have  in
certain  parts  of  our  bodies  other  nerves  producing
"  Pleasure "  sensations,  whose  evolutionary  origin
obviously  was  the  useful  fact  that  those  who  felt
them  were  inclined  to  seek  for  their  continuance  by
performing  acts  likely  to  preserve  the  species.  These
nerves  are  particularly  connected  with  the  functions
of  nutrition  (including  tasting  and  smelling)  and  sex.
A  Pain  sensation  can  coexist  with  a  Pleasure  sensa-
tion, and  is  obviously  not  its  mere  opposite.

1  See,  e.g.,  Myers'  Text-Book  of  Experimental  Psychology,  pp.  14-16  (Bib-
liography, p.  19),  and  Titchener,  Text-Book  of  Psychology,  pp.  152-159
(Bibliography,  p.  159),  and  pp.  183-193  (Bibliography,  p.  193).


104  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

These  special  Pain  or  Pleasure  sensations  are  found
by  almost  all  modern  psychologists  to  be  different
from  the  feeling-tones  of  Pleasantness  and  Unpleasant-
ness. As  Professor  Titchener  (who  has  done  much
experimental  work  on  the  subject)  says :  "  Pain  .  .  .
is  a  sensation,  and  it  is  a  sensation  which  at  different
times  and  under  different  circumstances  may  be
pleasant,  indifferent,  or  unpleasant."  l  And  in  the
same  way  some  of  the  Pleasure  sensations  may,  under
certain  circumstances,  be  indifferent  or  unpleasant  in
feeling-tone.

Professor  Max  Meyer  says,  "  Pleasantness  and  un-
pleasantness are  the  highest  product  of  mental
evolution."  2  Feeling-tone,  that  is  to  say,  is  a  more
highly  evolved  form  of  consciousness  than  mere
sensation,  and  must  from  its  beginning  have  been
a  much  safer  guide  than  mere  sensation  to  the  pre-
servation of  life  and  health.  It  was,  for  instance,
a  useful  fact  in  the  psychology  of  our  ape-ancestors
that  the  not  inconsiderable  amount  of  pain  involved
in  scratching  parasites  off  one's  skin  was  pleasant,
and  that  eating  the  most  delicious  food  to  absolute
repletion  was  unpleasant.  Feeling-tone  indicated
not  the  mere  stimulation  of  certain  special  sensations,
but  excess  or  defect  in  the  stimulation,  not  only  of
those  sensations,  but  of  any  of  our  dispositions.3

1  Text-Book  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  227. See  Bibliography  on  pp.  263-264.
Max  Meyer,  Psychological  Review  (New  York),  July  1908,  pp.  202-216,  gives
a  long  list  of  psychological  opinions  on  the  subject,  most  of  which  agree
more  or  less  closely  with  the  view  taken  by  me  above. By  exception,
Professors  H.  R.  Marshall  and  Lagerborg  "  fail  to  distinguish  between  un-
pleasantness and  the  sensation  of  pain"  (p.  204),  and  Stumpf  "regards
pleasantness  and  unpleasantness  as  sensations  "  (p.  205).

2  Psychological  Review  (New  York),  July  1908,  p.  320,

8  Professor  Bawdon,  Psychological  Review  (New  York),  September  1910,


on.  vii PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 105

The  aesthetic  feelings  of  Beauty  and  Ugliness  con-
stitute a  special  case  of  Pleasant  or  Unpleasant
feeling-tone,  due  to  the  fact  that  the  simple  intellec-
tual disposition  of  Perception  (or  Recognition)  has
been  stimulated  normally  or  abnormally.  The  whole
existence  of  self-directed  living  beings  depends  on
their  power  of  recognising  objects  in  the  world  around
them  as  identical  with,  or  belonging  to  the  same  class
as,  objects  seen  or  heard  before  ;  and,  in  the  higher
animals,  Pleasantness  results  from  the  normal  and
unimpeded  performance  of  that  intellectual  function.
In  man  Pleasantness  increases  up  to  a  certain  point
with  the  repetition  of  recognition,  provided  that
that  repetition  has  the  slight  degree  of  variation
which  prevents  the  fatigue  of  absolute  monotony.
A  whole  audience  at  a  farce  will  yell  with  delight
when  they  recognise  that  a  comedian  is  for  the
twentieth  time,  under  slightly  varied  circumstances,
saying  "  Do  you  know-w  ?  "  A  dog  is  apparently
affected  in  the  same  way  by  picking  up  the  lost  scent
of  a  fox,  or  by  recognising  his  master's  step.  It  is
not  only  the  prospect  of  catching  the  fox  or  meeting
his  master,  but  also  the  process  of  recognition  itself
which  seems  to  delight  him.

Certain  pure  colours  and  harmonious  sounds  are
in  nature  sometimes  precisely  reproduced,  and  there-
fore can  be  precisely  and  without  effort  recognised.


p.  337,  puts  this  fact  into  the  very  specialised  language  of  technical  psycho-
logy :  "  Agreeable  emotion  is  connected  with  such  massing  of  stimuli  as
leads  to  a  response  within  the  normal  limits  of  the  functional  capacity  of
the  organism,  while  pain  accompanies  the  piling  up  of  stimuli  and  the  sub-
sequent discharge  when  these  exceed  the  limits  of  such  normal  functioning."


106  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Man,  for  instance,  and  some  birds  have  apparently  an
aesthetic  delight  in  seeing  or  collecting  objects  of  pure
colour,1  or  in  hearing  or  producing  pure  sounds.

Form  as  well  as  colour  and  sound  may  be  recog-
nised, and  man  finds  a  very  high  degree  of  pleasant-
ness in  following,  consciously  or  subconsciously,  the
rhythm  of  that  unbroken  but  unmonotonous  form-
relation  which  constitutes  "  pattern."  If  one  offers
a  child  or  savage  the  choice  of  two  necklaces,  both
composed  of  shells  of  various  sizes  belonging  to  the
same  species  ;  and  if  one  necklace  is  arranged  in  a
graded  pattern  of  ascending  and  descending  size,  and
the  other  consists  of  shells  threaded  haphazard,  he
will  always  choose  the  first.  The  pattern,  he  will
say,  is  "  pretty."  And  if  the  pattern  is  made  more
complex,  so  as  to  involve  a  double  rhythm  of  form
and  form,  or  of  colour  and  form,  he  will  probably
find  it  (provided  it  is  not  too  elaborate  for  his  recog-
nition) even  more  pretty.  The  civilised  man,  whose
power  of  recognition  has  been  specially  trained,  ex-
periences a  more  subtle  and  more  intense  delight  in
the  intricate  pattern  of  a  chorus  of  Aeschylus,  or  of  an
overture  of  Wagner,  or  of  the  nave  of  a  Gothic  cathe-
dral, where  perspective  turns  monotony  into  rhythm.

And,  by  one  of  the  few  splendid  accidents  of
evolution,  this  complex  rhythm  of  unmonotonous
repetition  corresponds,  not  only  to  the  specific
resemblances  among  things  immediately  useful  or
hurtful  to  man,  but  to  the  ultimate  pattern  which  the

1  Cf.  the  behaviour  of  the  gardener  bower-bird  (Lloyd  Morgan,  Animal
Behaviour,  1900,  p.  273).


CH.VII PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 107

finest  effort  of  man's  mind  is  able  to  detect  in  the
universe  as  a  whole.  Kosmos,  the  name  which  the
early  Greek  philosophers  gave  to  the  universe,  means
simply  "  pattern,"  and  the  intellectual  lives  of  Plato
or  Dante  or  Spinoza  or  Newton  were  largely  guided
and  sustained  by  their  delight  in  the  sheer  beauty  of
the  rhythmic  relation  between  law  and  instance,
species  and  individual,  or  cause  and  effect.1

In  the  complex  and  "  unnatural  "  world  of  modern
civilisation  a  felt  contrast  between  the  feeling-tone  of
Pleasantness  and  Unpleasantness  and  the  Pain  and
Pleasure  sensations  is  extremely  common,  especially
when  the  pain-nerves  have  been  for  a  long  time  un-
stimulated,  and  the  condition  of  "  baulked  disposi-
tion "  has  arisen.  A  man  or  boy,  living  a  sheltered
life,  may  find  a  rather  high  degree  of  the  sensation  of
pain  (as  he  also  may  find  the  sensation  of  fear)  actu-
ally pleasant.  I  can  myself  remember  being  one  of  a
group  of  boys,  who,  one  evening,  varied  the  intoler-
able monotony  of  boarding-school  "  prep  "  by  running
needles  through  the  lobes  of  our  ears  in  order  to  enjoy
the  sensation  ;  and  most  people  can  understand  how
monks  and  nuns  come  to  long  for  the  smart  of  the
scourge.

In  the  civilised  world,  Feeling-Tone,  though  it  is

1  I  confine  myself  above  to  the  special  aesthetic  feeling  of  "  pattern  "
beauty.  There  are,  of  course,  other  "  pleasant  "  feelings  which  are  closely
allied  to  it,  but  of  different  origin.  Our  delight,  for  instance,  in  a  beautiful
woman's  form  is  largely  the  result  of  the  valuable  evolutionary  fact  that  the
instincts  of  sex  are  most  strongly  stimulated  by  indications  of  perfect  health  ;
though  the  "  pattern  "  feeling  often  enters  into  it  as  well.  A  climber's
delight,  again,  at  the  prospect  from  a  Swiss  summit  may  include  very  little
of  the  "  pattern  feeling,"  and  may  be  caused  almost  entirely  by  the  sense
of  achievement  and  novelty.


108  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

a  better  guide  than  Sensation,  may  still  be  mislead-
ing. The  man  who,  while  resisting  the  gross  tempta-
tions of  his  uncontrolled  senses,  spends  his  days  in  a
carefully  measured  epicureanism,  in  which  art,  science,
bodily  exercise,  and  social  intercourse  are  all  pursued
up  to  and  not  beyond  the  point  of  greatest  pleasant-
ness, is  apt  to  find,  as  the  years  go  on,  that  some  of
the  deeper  and  more  permanent  needs  of  his  nature
are  unsatisfied.  And  if  an  epicurean  loses  to  the
slightest  degree  his  own  nervous  health,  exquisite
pleasantness  may  attach  itself  to  actions  and  states
of  mind  which  are  obviously  dangerous.  James,  for
instance,  quotes  Saint  Pierre,  who  says  :  "  For  my-
self I  find  that  the  feelings  of  melancholy  are  the  most
voluptuous  of  all  sensations,"  and  Marie  Bashkirtseff  :
"  I  enjoy  weeping,  I  enjoy  my  despair."  1

Now  the  testimony  of  language  indicates  that  there
are  a  third  pair  of  states  of  consciousness,  Happiness
and  Unhappiness,  which  stand  in  something  like  the
same  relation  to  the  Feeling-Tones  of  Pleasantness
and  Unpleasantness  as  those  do  to  the  "  Pleasure  "
and  "  Pain  "  Sensations.  The  word  for  Happiness
is  different  from  that  for  Pleasantness,  or  for  any
pleasure,  in  Greek  and  Latin,  in  the  modern  European
languages,  and,  I  am  told,  in  Sanscrit  and  Hebrew.

Is  this  indication  psychologically  sound  ?  I  am
myself  inclined  to  answer,  Yes.  It  is  very  difficult
in  such  matters  to  be  sure  that  one  is  not  confusing
a  difference  in  degree  with  one  of  kind,  but  the  dif-
ference between  Happiness  and  Pleasantness,  and

1  James,  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience,  p.  83  (note).


CH.VH PLEASUEE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 109

between  Unhappiness  and  Unpleasantness  does  seem
to  me  to  be  best  described  as  one  of  kind.  One  may
illustrate  it  by  the  story  in  Punch  (probably  a  tran-
script from  fact),  in  which  a  little  boy,  listening  to
a  regimental  band,  says  :  "  Mother,  how  is  it  that
soldiers'  music  always  makes  me  feel  so  much  happier
than  I  really  am  ?  "  1

Man,  from  the  commencement  of  fully-conscious
childhood,  lives  not  only  consciously  but  subcon-
sciously in  the  past  of  memory  and  the  future  of
expectation,  as  well  as  in  the  experience  of  the  present.
He  can  therefore  often  choose  to  spend  any  moment,
either  in  the  mere  consciousness  of  that  moment,  or  in
the  more  solid,  and,  as  he  feels,  more  permanent,  type
of  consciousness  which  represents,  as  the  little  boy
said,  what  he  really  is.  If  he  chooses  always  to  live  in
the  pleasantness  of  the  moment  he  will  become  half
aware  of  the  dissatisfaction  of  his  more  permanent  self.
This  is  a  situation  with  which  modern  psychological
novelists  often  deal.  The  heroine  of  Mrs.  Edith
Wharton's  House  of  Mirth,  and  the  hero  of  Turgenev's
Spring  Floods  are  aware  of  the  pleasantness  of  refined
luxury  and  clever  talk,  and  resolutely  live  in  that
pleasantness  till  they  can  no  longer  ignore  the  dis-
satisfaction beneath  it.  If  they  had  been  "  happy  "
their  consciousness  and  their  subconsciousness,  the
novelist  preaches,  would  have  been  at  one.

"  Happiness  "  in  this  sense  is  the  subject  matter  of
Aristotle's  Ethics,  and  the  foundation  of  his  whole
social  philosophy.  He  believed  that  it  could  only

1  Punch,  March  24,  1909.


110  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  n.i

be  attained  by  the  ever-fresh  activity  of  a  will  trained
in  the  tradition  of  virtue,  and  acting  in  a  duly  ordered
material  environment.1  To  him  therefore  Happiness
was  not  only  good  in  itself  but  an  absolutely  safe
guide  for  social  life.  The  course  of  individual  con-
duct, or  the  form  of  civic  organisation  which  made
Happiness  most  possible  must  be  the  best.

If  Bentham  had  drawn  this  distinction  between
Pleasantness  and  Happiness,  between  the  conscious-
ness of  the  moment  and  the  consciousness  which,
even  during  the  moment,  includes  the  past  and  the
future,  not  only  would  Carlyle's  criticism  of  the  "  pig-
philosophy  "  have  been  turned  aside,  but  the  best  of
Bentham's  disciples  would  have  been  spared  much  of
that  bewilderment  and  disappointment  which  shows
itself  in  their  letters  and  autobiographies.  John
Stuart  Mill  would  have  had  words  by  which  he  could
have  explained  the  relation  of  the  deeper  purposes  of
his  life  to  the  weary  discomfort  which  followed  the
overwork  of  his  boyhood.  And  Francis  Place  need
not  have  felt,  as  he  felt  in  the  months  after  his  wife's
death,  that  life  without  a  resolute  attempt  to  escape
from  grief  involved  an  abandonment  of  his  principles.2

But  the  world  is  not,  it  would  seem,  so  made  that
even  the  state  of  Happiness  must  necessarily  coincide


tvtpyeia  KO.T aperty  iv  ply  re\ei<f  (Ethics,  bk.  i.  ch.  viL).

2  The  distinction  would,  I  think,  also  have  helped  Professor  Titchener
in  the  difficulty  which  he  obviously  feels  in  the  following  passage  :  "  Is  it
really  true  that  the  pleasure  of  a  good  dinner  is  identical  with  the  pleasure
of  a  good  action  ?

"  Well  !  remember  always  that  affective  psychology  is  hi  the  trial  stage,
and  that  no  one  can  dogmatise  on  the  question.  But  in  the  writer's  belief
it  is  true.  A  good  dinner  and  a  good  action  seem  to  him  to  differ  —  not  in
their  pleasantness  :  that  is  precisely  where  they  are  alike  ;  but  hi  practically
everything  else  "  (Text-Book  of  Psychology,  1910,  p.  257).


CH.VH PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 111

with  that  "  judgment  of  the  wise  "  on  the  whole  facts
of  social  life  which  was  Aristotle's  final  Court  of  Appeal.
The  identity  of  the  world  as  it  is  and  the  world  as  we
would  wish  it  to  be  does  not  go  so  far.  Aristotle,
indeed,  himself,  when  he  tried  to  realise  what  Happi-
ness meant  to  him  without  reference  to  its  causes  or
consequences,  found  it,  not  in  that  vigorous  combina-
tion of  civic  and  intellectual  activity  towards  which
the  main  body  of  his  teaching  tended,  but  in  the
state  of  Contemplation  which  alone,  he  says,  is
"  desired  for  its  own  sake,  since  nothing  results  from
it  but  the  fact  of  having  contemplated."  *

Aristotle's  distinction  between  Pleasure  and  Happi-
ness, and  his  belief  that  Happiness  could  only  exist  in
a  man  whose  will  had  been  trained  by  the  environ-
ment of  a  well-ordered  state,  made  his  identification
of  Happiness  and  Social  Good  at  least  arguable.  But
as  soon  as  the  Utilitarians  identified  Pleasure  and
Happiness  they  created  a  logical  gulf,  which  they  never
succeeded  in  filling,  between  their  rigid  psychological
Hedonism  and  their  adoption  of  the  "  principle  "  of
"  The  Greatest  Happiness  of  the  Greatest  Number  "  as
the  basis  of  social  organisation.  Individual  Pleasure
has  no  obvious  dependence  on  social  good.  If,
therefore,  one  accepts  the  propositions  that  Happi-
ness is  Pleasure,  and  Pleasure  the  only  good,  the
Greatest  Happiness  Principle  immediately  raises  the
question  whether  we  have  any  right  to  expect  that
every  man  will  be  guided  in  his  social  action  by  a
desire  for  the  good  of  the  majority  of  his  fellows.

1  QvStv  ykp  dir"  avrrjs  ylverai  irapd.  rb  Ofwprjffai  (Ethics,  bk.  x.  chap.  vii.).


112  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Bentham  himself,  in  the  course  of  his  long  life,
solved  this  problem  in  several,  sometimes  inconsistent,
ways,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  draw  from  the  mass  of
his  writings  and  rewritings  a  perfectly  clear  account
even  of  the  successive  changes  in  his  position.  At
first  he  seems  to  have  been  unconscious  of  the  exist-
ence of  any  difficulty.  The  discovery  that  Pleasure
was  the  only  human  good,  and  the  passionate  desire
to  spread  the  knowledge  of  his  discovery,  and  so  to
increase  the  amount  of  Pleasure  in  the  world,  all
seemed  to  him  part  of  one  revelation.  Looking
back,  in  1822,  at  the  age  of  seventy-four,  upon  his
childhood  and  youth,  he  wrote  :

The  reader  cannot  have  gone  through  the  first  sentence
in  the  Fragment  [on  Government,  1776]  without  having  seen
the  passion  that  gave  rise  to  it,  the  passion  for  improvement
...  in  every  line,  but  particularly  in  the  line  of  government.
At  an  age  a  few  months  before  or  after  seven  years  the  first
embers  of  it  were  kindled  by  Telemachus  [Fenelon's  Telemaque,
1699].  By  an  early  pamphlet  of  Priestley's1  .  .  .  light  was
added  to  the  warmth.  In  the  phrase  "  the  greatest  happiness
of  the  greatest  number,"  I  then  saw  delineated  for  the  first
time  a  plain  as  well  as  a  true  standard  for  whatever  is  right
or  wrong,  useful,  useless  or  mischievous  in  human  conduct
whether  in  the  field  of  morals  or  of  politics.  ...  No  sooner
had  my  candle  been  taken  out  of  the  bushel  than  I  looked  for
the  descent  of  torches  to  it  from  the  highest  regions.2

As  long  as  Bentham  thought  and  felt  in  this  way,
it  was  possible  for  him  to  hold  that  no  one  could  act
without  regard  to  the  sum  of  happiness  resulting  from
his  action  unless  he  were  stupid  or  perverted.

1  Priestley,  An  Essay  on  the  First  Principles  of  Government  (1768).
2  Works,  vol.  x.  p.  79.


CH.VH PLEASUKE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 113

In  other  moods  Bentham  used,  like  Plato,  the
analogy  of  the  arts.  The  statesman  and  the  school-
master were  artists  who  practised  "  the  art  of  direct-
ing men's  actions  to  the  production  of  the  greatest
possible  quantity  of  happiness."  l  It  might  be  taken
for  granted  that  the  true  artist  would  desire  to  do
his  work  well.  Just  as  Plato  says,  "  Have  the  arts
any  other  interest  than  their  own  highest  perfection," 2
so  Bentham  held  to  the  end  of  his  life  that

...  in  the  eyes  of  every  impartial  arbiter,  writing  in  the
character  of  legislator,  and  having  exactly  the  same  regard  for
the  happiness  of  every  member  of  the  community  in  question
as  for  that  of  every  other,  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number  of  the  members  of  that  same  community  cannot  but
be  recognised  in  the  character  of  the  right  and  proper  and  sole
right  and  proper  end  of  government.3

But  experience  of  the  English  statesmen  of  his  day
slowly  convinced  Bentham  both  that  an  imperfect
devotion  to  the  Greatest  Happiness  of  the  Greatest
Number  was  not  an  abnormal  fact  in  human  nature,
and  that  a  man  might  be  skilled  and  successful  in
government  without  making  the  interest  of  those
whom  he  governed  his  sole  object.

When  the  Fragment  on  Government  appeared  in
1776,  somebody  asked  Sir  Alexander  Wedderburn,

1  Introduction,  Works,  vol.  i.  p.  142. Cf.  Halevy,  vol.  i.  note  124,  p.  298.

2  Republic (Golden Treasury  Series, p. 21). The  essence of  Plato's
argument  from  the  arts  sometimes  reappears  in  the  modern  use  of  the  word
"  science." For  instance,  my  friend,  Professor  Gustaf  Steffen  of  Gotenburg,
in  his  Lebensbedingungen  Moderner  Kultur  (pp.  6  and  7),  speaks  of  the
"  slavery  of  the  will  and  the  intellect  to  the  separate  interests  of  Nation,
Districts,  Professions,  Classes,  Families,  and  Individuals,"  as  "  this  un-
scientific treatment  of  a  purely  scientific  problem."

'  Works,  vol.  ix.  p.  6,  Introduction  to  the  "  Constitutional  Code,"  written
apparently  between  1820  and  1830  (see  notes  to  pp.  2  and  3  of  the
Introduction).

I


114  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

the  Solicitor  -  General,  what  he  thought  of  "  the
principle  of  utility."  He  answered,  Bentham  was
told,  "It  is  a  dangerous  one."  :'  Till  within  a  few
years,"  wrote  Bentham  in  a  passage  first  published
in  1828,  "  I  am  ashamed  to  think  how  few,  did  this
same  response  remain  a  mystery  to  me.  The  principle
of  utility  a  dangerous  principle !  Dangerous  to  en-
deavour to  do  what  is  most  useful !  The  proposition
(said  I  to  myself)  is  a  self -contradictory  one.  Con-
fusion of  ideas  on  his  part  (for  I  could  find  no  other
cause)  was  the  cause  to  which  I  attributed  it.  The
confusion  was  in  mine.  The  man  was  a  shrewd  man,
and  knew  well  enough  what  he  meant,  though  at  that
time  I  did  not."  *

Bentham  was  deeply  affected  by  John  Howard's
discovery  of  the  horrors  of  the  English  prisons,  and
later  by  the  reports  of  new  horrors  in  the  hulks  and
the  Australian  penal  settlements.  He  attempted  to
introduce  a  system  of  scientific  prison  management,  and
was  encouraged  both  by  Government  promises  and
the  passage  of  an  enabling  Act  of  Parliament.  After
his  father's  death  in  1792  he  sank  practically  the
whole  of  his  fortune  in  purchasing  a  site  for  a  new
model  Prison  on  his  "  Panopticon  "  plan.  But  the
Government  grew  tired  of  him ;  the  prison  was  not
built,  nor  Bentham's  expenditure,  till  1813,  repaid.
Wearied,  apparently  ruined  and  almost  heart-broken,
but  still  industrious,  he  met  James  Mill  in  1808.

Bentham,  who  in  1808  was  sixty  years  of  age,  had

1  Works,  vol.  i.  (Historical  Preface  to  the  Fragment  on  Government),
pp.  245,  246.


CH.VII PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 115

hitherto  been,  if  anything,  a  Tory.  Mill  was  a  Whig,
who  was  soon  drawn  by  Francis  Place  into  the  Radical
group  which  had  won^the  Westminster  election  of  1807.
The  policy  of  Place  and  Mill  was  based  upon  a  belief
in  the  complete  selfishness  of  the  English  governing
minority,  and  a  determination  to  oppose  to  it  the
organised  selfishness  of  the  governed  majority.  In  a
few  years'  time  Bentham  had  adopted  whole-heartedly
both  their  belief  and  the  policy  of  radical  democracy
which  followed  from  it.  "  Now,"  he  writes  in  1822,
"  for  some  years  past  all  inconsistencies,  all  surprises,
have  vanished.  ...  A  clue  to  the  interior  of  the
labyrinth  has  been  found  ;  it  is  the  principle  of  self-
preference.  Man,  from  the  very  constitution  of  his
nature,  prefers  his  own  happiness  to  that  of  all  other
sensitive  beings  put  together."  x

Henceforward,  for  Bentham,  representative  demo-
cracy was  an  ingenious  machine  for  extracting,  as
was  afterwards  said,  "  golden  conduct  from  leaden
instincts."  The  voter,  like  the  flea  which  a  showman
harnesses  to  a  tiny  carriage,  is,  while  struggling  to  go
his  own  way,  to  achieve  a  result  which  he  does  not
necessarily  contemplate  or  desire.

Sometimes,  at  this  period  of  his  life,  it  even  seemed
to  Bentham  an  actual  advantage  that  the  citizens
of  a  democracy  should  neither  profess  nor  feel  any
regard  for  the  general  good.  In  a  passage  which

1  Works,  vol.  x.  p.  80.  He  put  the  self-preference  principle  in  another
passage  with  even  greater  precision  :  "  On  the  occasion  of  every  act  he
exercises,  every  human  being  is  led  to  pursue  that  line  of  conduct  which,
according  to  his  view  of  the  case,  taken  by  him  at  the  moment,  will  be  in  the
highest  degree  contributory  to  his  own  greatest  happiness."  Introduction
to  the  "  Constitutional  Code,"  Works,  vol.  ix.  p.  6.


116  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.i

reads  rather  grimly  now,  he  rejoices  over  the  descrip-
tion which  his  friends  gave  him  of  the  hard  material-
ism which  was  then  showing  itself  in  the  politics  of
the  United  States  :

As  to  professions  and  boasts  of  purity  of  motives  ;  in  the
debates  and  discussions  that  have  taken  place  in  the  United
States,  little  or  nothing  of  this  sort  of  talk  is  heard.  Why  ?
Because,  in  the  first  place,  there  is  no  such  demand  for  it ;  in
the  next  place,  there  would  be  no  use  for  it,  for  there  would
be  no  prospect  of  its  gaining  credence.1

The  defects  of  such  a  view  did  not  fully  show
themselves  as  long  as  Benthamism  was  confined  to
Bentham  and  his  first  friends.  He  never,  till  his
extreme  old  age,  admitted  to  his  intimacy  a  man  he
did  not  believe  to  share  his  own  "  passion  for  improve-
ment," or  retained  any  one  as  a  friend  after  he  thought
him  to  have  lost  it.  His  correspondence,  for  instance,
shows  him  upbraiding  Brougham  because  huge  fees
for  legal  work  were  choking  the  passion  which  should
have  led  him  to  the  unpaid  service  of  law  reform.2

James  Mill  and  his  son,  Romilly,  Place,  Grote,  and
Parkes  were  possessed  by  a  determination  to  lessen
the  misery  of  the  world,  which  was  not  seriously
diminished  even  when  they  believed  that  it  was  a
kind  of  selfishness.  But  as  time  went  on,  the  "  prin-

1  "Constitutional  Code"  (Works,  vol.  ix.  p.  63).

2  e.g.,  Bentham  writes  (in  the  little-known  collection  of  his  letters  in  the
British  Museum)  to  Brougham  signing  himself  "  your  still  loving  though
so  badly  offended  Grandpapa." "  I  hear  you,  screaming  like  mad  in  the
middle  of  the  nursery,  throat  hoarse,  eyes  running. Pray  Nurse,  dear  Nurse  !
Fees  for  Henry — More  Fees — More  Fees. These  words  you  can  speak  plain
enough  already. When  will  you  have  learnt  your  Primer  ? When  will  you
be  able  to  spell  '  Greatest  Happiness Principle '  ? Non-Disappointment
Principle  ? Ends of Justice . . .  avoidance of delay expense and
vexation  ?  " March  30,  1830. (British  Museum,  Add.  MS.,  33,546  f.  386).


OH.  vii PLEASURE-PAIN  AND  HAPPINESS 117

ciple  of  self -preference  "  was  adopted  as  a  speculative
opinion  by  men  who  had  no  real  share  in  the  passion
of  its  founder.  When  Macaulay,  for  instance,  pub-
lished his  Edinburgh  Revieiv  attacks  on  Utilitarianism
in  1829,  the  only  reply  was  Bowring's  editorial
statement  in  the  Westminster  Review  that  honesty  was
the  best  policy,  and  that  utilitarianism  meant  nothing
but  the  "  plain  imperative  proposition — Pursue  the
rule  which  is  best  for  the  general  happiness  ;  because,
in  the  long  run  and  taking  all  the  chances  that  are
before  you  together,  it  is  the  most  likely  to  increase
your  own." *  In  1849  Bowring  went  to  China,
and  soon  illustrated  the  doctrine  of  the  "  greatest
happiness  of  the  greatest  number "  by  levying  a
particularly  scandalous  war  upon  one-fifth  of  the
human  race.

When  Benthamism  became  popularised,  the  theory
that  society  was,  or  could  be,  so  constructed,  either  by
divine  purpose  or  human  contrivance,  that  every  one
by  following  his  own  interest  best  served  the  interest
of  the  whole,  had  hardly  any  results  which  were  not
evil.  Bentham's  true  followers  in  that  respect  were
not  John  Mill  and  the  Neo-Utilitarians  but  the  philis-
tine  political  economists,  who  found  their  flea-carriage
not  in  the  machinery  of  democracy  but  in  that  of
commercial  exchange.  In  1831,  the  year  before
Bentham's  death,  Whately  was  professor  of  political
economy  at  Oxford,  and  in  his  lectures  for  that  year
he  says,  with  reference  to  the  action  of  corn-dealers
in  raising  prices  during  a  scarcity :

1  Westminster  Review,  October  1829,  p.  535.


118  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Various  parts  of  man's  conduct  as  a  member  of  society
are  often  attributed  to  human  forethought  and  design,  which
might  with  greater  truth  be  referred  to  a  kind  of  instinct,
or  something  analogous  to  it ;  which  leads  him,  while  pursuing
some  immediate  personal  gratification,  to  further  an  object
not  contemplated  by  him.  In  many  cases  we  are  liable  to
mistake  for  the  wisdom  of  Man  what  is  in  truth  the  wisdom
of  God.1

Factory  owners,  whom  Whately's  teaching  reached
at  third-hand  through  the  newspapers  and  magazines,
did,  in  fact,  try  to  ignore  any  kindness  which  they
might  feel  for  their  operatives,  because  they  honestly
believed  that  such  feelings  were  "  against  the  laws  of
political  economy."

And  Whately  did  not  confine  his  teaching  to  the
rich.  With  no  prescience  of  Marx,  he  urged  the  same
doctrine  on  the  poor.  The  British  Museum  has  a
copy  of  the  sixth  edition  (1842)  of  his  Easy  Letters  on
Money  Matters  for  the  use  of  young  people,  published
by  the  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Christian  Know-
ledge, and  used  largely  in  the  National  Society's
schools  at  the  time.  In  it  (p.  62)  Whately  says  to
boys  who  would  soon  be  working  men  :

It  is  curious  to  observe  how  through  the  wise  and  beneficent
arrangement  of  Providence  men  thus  do  the  greatest  service
to  the  public  when  they  are  thinking  of  nothing  but  their
own  gain.

Perhaps  some  of  the  Sheffield  saw-grinders,  whose
"  rattening  "  was  exposed  in  1867,  had  used  this  book
at  school,  and  had  applied  its  lessons  in  the  interest  of
their  own,  and  not  of  the  archbishop's  class.

1  Introductory  Lectures  on  Political  Economy  (1831),  pp.  100-101.


CH.VII PLEASUEE-PAIN  AM)  HAPPINESS 119

When  the  last  third  of  the  nineteenth  century
began,  John  Mill  was  still  alive,  and  in  economics  and
sociology  was  the  accepted  leader  both  of  the  univer-
sities and  of  the  newspapers.  But  Utilitarianism  was
plainly  dying,  and  dying  because  its  central  problem
of  human  motive  was  still  unsolved.  The  pathetic
candour  of  Henry  Sidgwick  shows  us  Mill's  best
disciple  at  the  stage  of  thought  when  he  could  only
reconcile  Hedonism  and  the  Greatest  Happiness
principle  by  assuming  an  effort  of  will  which  had  no
relation  to  his  psychological  scheme  :

My  first  adhesion  to  a  definite  ethical  system  was  to  the
Utilitarianism  of  Mill.  .  .  .  The  two  elements  of  Mill's  view
which  I  am  accustomed  to  distinguish  as  Psychological  Hedon-
ism (that  each  man  does  seek  his  own  happiness)  and  Ethical
Hedonism  (that  each  man  ought  to  seek  the  general  happiness)
both  attracted  me,  and  I  did  not  at  first  perceive  their
incoherence.

Psychological  Hedonism — the  law  of  universal  pleasure-
seeking —  attracted  me  by  its  frank  naturalness.  Ethical
Hedonism,  as  expounded  by  Mill,  was  morally  inspiring  by
its  dictate  of  readiness  for  absolute  self-sacrifice.  They
appealed  to  different  elements  of  my  nature,  but  they  brought
these  into  apparent  harmony  :  they  both  used  the  same  words
"  pleasure,"  and  "  happiness,"  and  the  persuasiveness  of  Mill's
exposition  veiled  for  a  time  the  profound  discrepancy  between
the  natural  end  of  action — private  happiness,  and  the  end  of
duty — general  happiness.  Or  if  a  doubt  assailed  me  as  to
the  coincidence  of  private  and  general  happiness,  I  was
inclined  to  hold  that  it  ought  to  be  cast  to  the  winds  by  a
generous  resolution.1

1  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  6th  ed.  p.  xv.


CHAPTER  VIII

THE PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE CROWD

WHEN  Bentham's  psychology,  like  that  of  Hobbes,
proved  to  be  an  insufficient  basis  for  social  theory,
the  main  current  of  English  thought  turned  once  more
to  metaphysics.  It  was  the  Catholic  Revival  in
religion,  and  the  Idealism  of  Hegel,  as  expounded  by
Caird  and  Green,  which  mainly  profited  by  the  failure
of  Utilitarianism.

But  there  are  always  a  few  thinkers  who,  even  in
times  of  disappointment,  feel  the  need  of  a  positive
science  of  man  and  society  ;  and  when,  in  1845,
Auguste  Comte's  writings  first  reached  England  it
seemed  for  a  moment  that  this  need  might  be  satisfied
by  his  system.

For  English  readers  of  that  generation  the  main
significance  of  Comte's  Positivism  was  its  denial  of
Bentham's  psychological  principle  that  "  man  from
the  very  structure  of  his  nature  prefers  his  own
happiness  to  that  of  all  sensitive  beings  put  together."  1
The  most  important  fact  of  man's  nature  was,  accord-
ing to  Comte,  not  his  indifference  to  the  good  of  other
men,  but  his  disinterested  love  for  them.  Comte,  like

1  Ante,  p.  115.
120


CH.VIH PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CEO WD 121

Bentham,  was  an  "  intellectualist  "  in  the  sense  that
he  made  every  human  action  result  from  an  intel-
lectual enquiry  as  to  the  means  of  satisfying  some  end.
But  the  choice  of  the  social  end,  the  original  driving
force,  which  Bentham  ascribed  to  the  desire  for
Pleasure,  Comte  ascribed  to  Love.  "  The  necessity,"
he  said,  "  of  assigning  with  exact  truth  the  place
occupied  by  the  intellect  and  by  the  heart  in  the
organisation  of  human  nature  and  of  society,  leads  to
the  decision  that  Affection  must  be  the  central  point
of  the  synthesis.  .  .  .  The  only  position  for  which  the
intellect  is  permanently  adapted  is  to  be  the  servant
of  the  social  sympathies."  l  "  It  is  for  the  heart  to
suggest  our  problems,  it  is  for  the  intellect  to  solve
them."  2

George  Eliot  and  Harriet  Martineau,  for  instance,
had  known  in  their  own  personal  experience  the
intense  moral  discomfort  involved  in  the  choice  be-
tween Benthamism,  which  seemed  to  leave  no  scien-
tific justification  for  Love,  and  Supernaturalism,
which  only  restored  Love  by  rejecting  science.  To
them  Comte's  doctrine  that  the  reality  of  instinctive
Love  could  be  established  by  the  most  rigorously
scientific  examination,  either  of  the  history  of  civilisa-
tion or  of  individual  psychology,  came  like  water
into  a  thirsty  land.

Positivism,  however,  never  succeeded  in  gaining
anything  like  the  influence  which  Utilitarianism  had
exercised.  Its  weakness  was  chiefly  due  to  the
thoroughly  unpositive  character  of  Comte's  own  mind.

1  Positive  Polity  (Eng.  trans.,  1875),  vol.  i.  p.  11.  2  Ibid.  p.  14.


122  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

When  lie  is  historical  one  is  never  sure  whether  his
"  laws  "  are  generalisations  from  recorded  facts  or
statements  of  assumed  moral  necessities.  What,  for
instance,  does  he  exactly  mean  when  he  says  :  "  The
social  instinct  had  to  be  [dut  etre]  purely  civic  in
antiquity,  collective  in  the  Middle  Age,  and  universal  in
the  Final  State,  as  its  modern  aspirations  indicate  "  ? l
When  he  is  psychological  one  also  feels  that  he  never
sufficiently  distinguishes  between  that  which  ought
to  be  and  that  which  is.  He  says,  for  instance,  "  We
tire  of  thinking  and  even  of  acting  ;  we  never  tire  of
loving."  2  It  would  be  pleasant  if  it  were  so,  but
most  candidates,  when  they  creep  away  for  a  few  days'
rest  after  an  election,  would  say  that  they  are  more
tired  of  loving  than  either  of  thinking  or  of  acting.

Comte  died  the  year  before  Darwin  published  his
theory  of  evolution,  and  his  own  biology  is  based  on
the  Lamarckian  doctrine  of  the  inheritance  of  acquired
characteristics,  pushed  to  a  point  where  it  almost
avowedly  represents  rather  an  ideal  principle  than  a
statement  of  fact.  '  We  can,"  he  says,  "  even  con-
ceive that,  on  the  biological  principles  of  inheritance,
a  few  generations  would  succeed  in  modifying  the  cere-
bral organisation  itself  in  a  society  so  constituted,  the
volume  of  the  organs  of  feeling  becoming  augmented
or  diminished  by  continual  exercise  or  disuse."  3

1  Positive  Polity  (Eng.  trans.,  1876),  vol.  iii.  (Social  Dynamics)  p.  57.

2  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  1.

3  Ibid.  (Eng.  trans.)  vol.  ii.  p.  123. The  same  confusion  of  ideal  and
fact  is  seen  even  more  clearly  when  Comte treats of  the  anatomy  of
the  brain. "  The  principles  on  which  we  have  been  proceeding  would
seem  to  leave  little  doubt,  ha  minds  penetrated  with  the  true  spirit  of  our
subjective  theory,  as  to  where  [the  instinct  of  self-preservation]  should  be
placed. The  nutritive  instinct  would  occupy  the  lowest  portion  in  the  brain,


CH.  vm PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 123

In  1859  the  Origin  of  Species  appeared,  and  within
a  few  years  the  Positivist  as  well  as  the  Utilitarian
view  of  human  nature  seemed  old-fashioned.  The
proved  continuity  of  human  and  non-human  life
demanded  a  biological  outlook  which  should  study
mankind,  not  in  isolation,  but  as  one  of  a  number  of
related  species.

The  first  effect,  however,  of  Darwinism  upon  social
science  was  curiously  unsatisfactory.  The  early  evolu-
tionary sociologists  knew  very  little  about  the  psy-
chology of  even  the  highest  non-human  animals,  and
were  tempted  to  adopt  superficial  and  mechanical
explanations  of  animal  conduct,  which  in  turn  reacted
upon  their  conceptions  of  human  conduct.  To  observe
from  outside  (as  one  observes  an  ants'  nest  through
a  magnifying  glass)  the  "  struggle  for  life  "  or  the
working  of  the  "  gregarious  instincts "  in  human
society  seemed  to  the  contemporaries  of  Darwin  to
be  a  much  more  "  scientific  "  method  than  to  analyse
the  minutiae  of  one's  own  feelings.

Walter  Bagehot  brought  out  his  Physics  and
Politics  in  1873,  and  it  was  at  once  widely  accepted,
both  in  England  and  abroad,  as  indicating  the  course
which  sociology  was  likely  to  take  under  the  influence
of  the  Darwinian  discoveries.  He  treats  man  through-
out as  a  gregarious  animal,  to  be  examined  (as  the

as  near  as  possible  to  the  motor  apparatus  and  to  the  vegetative  viscera.
I  would  place  it,  therefore,  in  the  median  portion  of  the  cerebellum.  .  .  ."
Loc.  cit.  vol.  i.  pp.  661,  562.  Comte's  brain-anatomy  was  much  influenced
by  Gall  (1758-1828),  the  founder  of  phrenology.  I  refer  above,  not  to  its
accuracy  or  inaccuracy,  but  to  Comte's  vague  use  of  "  would  occupy  "
[doit  ainsi  occuper]  and  "  I  would  place  it  therefore."  He  clearly  draws,
in  this  case  again,  no  sharp  distinction  between  what  is  and  what  ought
to  be.


124  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  ».i

title  of  his  book  implies)  by  the  method  of  the  phy-
sical sciences.  Now,  gregarious  species  only  survive
because  in  certain  emergencies  each  individual  can  be
trusted  to  act  much  in  the  same  way  as  the  rest.
The  shortest  and  easiest  way  to  explain  this  fact  was  to
infer  the  existence  of  a  general  instinct  of  Imitation,
which  inclines  any  animal  possessed  of  that  instinct
to  copy  all  those  actions  by  members  of  its  own
species  which  catch  its  attention.  The  assumption  of
such  an  instinct  made  it  easy  to  apply  the  methods  of
"  Physics  "  to  "  Politics,"  and  to  measure  imitative
attraction  as  the  physicist  measures  gravitation.  It
is  accordingly  on  Imitation  that  Bagehot  bases  the
greater  part  of  his  social  analysis.  :'  The  propensity,"
he  says,  "  of  man  to  imitate  what  is  before  him  is
one  of  the  strongest  parts  of  his  nature." 1  This
analogy  between  man  and  the  other  animals  can  be
made  to  appear  complete  if  we  hide  the  fact  that  we
are  ignorant  of  the  degree  to  which  animal  conscious-
ness resembles  human  consciousness,  by  assuming,  as
Bagehot  assumes  in  the  teeth  of  all  the  evidence,  that
Imitation  is  always  unconscious.  :'  This  unconscious
imitation,"  he  says,  "  and  encouragement  of  ap-
preciated character,  and  this  equally  unconscious
shrinking  from  and  persecution  of  disliked  character
is  the  main  force  which  moulds  and  fashions  men  in
society  as  we  now  see  it." 2

1  Physics  and  Politics  (edition  of  1906),  p.  92.

2  Loc.  cit.  p.  97. Bagehot's  derivation  of  social  organisation  from  in-
stinctive imitation  is  helped  by  the  fact  that  he,  like  Comte  and  Maine,
accepted  the  Lamarckian  doctrine  of  the  biological  inheritance  of  acquired
characteristics. What  was  at  first  a  "  cake  of  custom  "  becomes  an  in-
herited instinct. "  The  frame  "  of  man's  "  morals  is  set  by  long  ages  of
transmitted  discipline  "  (p.  40).


cH.vm PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 125

In  1896  Gabriel  Tarde  brought  out  Les  Lois  de
limitation,  a  book  whose  influence  on  sociological
speculation  in  Europe,  and  still  more  in  America,  has
been  extremely  important.  Tarde  held  that  "  the
general  laws  governing  imitative  repetition  .  .  .  are
to  sociology  what  the  laws  of  habit  and  heredity  are
to  biology,  the  laws  of  gravitation  to  astronomy  and
the  laws  of  vibration  to  physics,"  l  and  again :  "  Any
act  of  any  one  of  our  fellows  inspires  us  who  are
lookers-on  with  the  more  or  less  irrational  idea  of
imitation." 2  I  myself  find  it  difficult  to  understand
how  Tarde's  book,  even  with  the  advantage  of  its  air
of  scientific  modernity,  ever  acquired  so  great  an
influence.  He  is  not  content  with  treating  every
case  where  the  sight  or  hearing  of  any  action  results  in
the  performance  of  a  similar  action  as  an  instance  of
a  general  instinct  of  Imitation,  but  groups,  under  the
name  of  Imitation,  acts  which  are  in  no  sense  results
of  the  observation  of  similar  acts.  Two  men  who
have  never  seen  each  other  may  walk  in  much  the
same  way  because,  being  men,  they  have  legs  of  much
the  same  shape,  or  they  may  both  use  safety  matches
because  they  each  find  them  the  most  convenient
way  of  getting  fire,  and  in  either  case  Tarde  ascribes
their  action  to  Imitation.  Even  if  a  woman  buys  a
hat  at  the  same  shop  where  she  herself  bought  one
before,  he  declares  that  she  acts  from  Memory  and
that  Memory  is  a  kind  of  Imitation.  Tarde  uses
indeed  the  word  Imitation  in  so  many  different

1  Social  Laws  (trans.  Warren),  p.  61.
*  Laws  of  Imitation  (Eng.  trans,  by  Parsons),  p.  79.


126  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

senses,  and  so  runs  the  various  senses  into  each  other
that  I  have  found  the  Lois  de  limitation  one  of  the
most  baffling  and  unsatisfactory  books  that  I  have
ever  read.  As  Durkheim  says,  the  idea  of  Imitation
becomes  in  Tarde  "  d'une  ambiguite  qui  dene  la
discussion."  l

Tarde's  views  have  been  widely  popularised,  especi-
ally by  M.  Le  Bon  in  his  well-known  Psychologic  de  la
foule  and  other  books,  and  by  Professor  E.  A.  Ross
in  his  Social  Psychology,  so  that  the  "  Psychology  of  the
Crowd  "  now  enjoys  in  the  social  philosophy  of  the
newspapers  some  of  the  old  authority  of  the  Laws
of  Political  Economy.

The  late  Professor  William  James  was,  in  tempera-
ment and  method,  far  removed  both  from  the  ex-
ternalism  and  from  the  hasty  psychological  assump-
tions which  are  characteristic  of  Tarde  and  the  other
"  Crowd-Psychologists,"  but  I  have  before  me  a  letter
from  him,  written  in  1908,  in  which  he  says,  "  I  my-
self see  things  a  la  Tarde,  perhaps  too  exclusively  "  ;
and  in  his  great  Principles  of  Psychology  (1890)  he
had  already  adopted  from  Bagehot  that  view  of
instinctive  Imitation  which  Tarde  systematised  in
1896.  "  From  childhood  onward,"  says  James,
"  man  is  essentially  the  imitative  animal.  His  whole
educability,  and  in  fact  the  whole  history  of  civilisa-
tion depend  on  this  trait.  .  .  ." 2

On  the  other  hand,  during  the  last  five  or  six  years
the  very  existence  of  such  an  "  instinct  of  Imita-

1  Le  Suicide,  chap.  iv.  p.  108.  See  also  an  admirable  monograph  on  Tarde
in  Psychological  Interpretations  of  Society,  by  Michael  M.  Davis  (Longmans,
1909).  2  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  408.


en.  vin PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 127

tion  "  has  been  denied  by  leading  psychologists.  Mr.
McDougall,  for  instance,  says,  "  Careful  consideration
of  the  nature  of  imitative  actions  shows  that  they  are
of  many  kinds,  that  they  issue  from  mental  processes
of  a  number  of  different  types,  and  that  none  are
attributable  to  a  specific  instinct  of  imitation.  .  .  ."  1
And  Professor  Pillsbury  of  Michigan  says,  "  Imita-
tion does  not  play  the  important  part  in  social  selec-
tion or  in  any  other  form  of  learning  that  has  been
supposed."  2

The  facts  which  underlie  this  contradiction  are
very  complex,  and  to  explain  my  view  of  them  I  must
begin  by  referring  back  to  the  statement  of  the
relation  between  our  dispositions  and  their  environ-
ment contained  in  Chapter  IV.  I  there  argued  that
the  occurrence  of  such  external  events  as  were,  in
the  long  evolutionary  period  which  preceded  civilisa-
tion, frequent,  important,  and  recognisable,  tends  to
stimulate  us  to  those  actions  which  were  then,  on  the
whole,  likely  to  preserve  the  species.  A  child,  on
seeing  a  snake  or  a  lion,  goes  through  the  actions-
running  away,  screaming,  or  cowering — appropriate
to  the  Fear  instinct,  though  because  his  distant
ancestors  had  not  invented  firearms,  he  does  not
instinctively  fear  a  revolver.

Now,  under  certain  circumstances  and  with  regard
to  certain  instincts,  it  was  an  advantage  to  our
ancestors  that  the  instinct  in  question  should  be
stimulated  by  the  perception  that  other  members  of

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  91.

*  Popular  Science  Monthly,  March  1906. Article  on  "  Trial  and  Error
as  a  Factor  in  Evolution,"  p.  279.


128  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.i

the  species  were  already  acting  in  the  manner  ap-
propriate to  it.  If,  for  instance,  a  group  of  animals
were  constantly  being  attacked  by  beasts  of  prey,
those  individuals  would  be  most  likely  to  survive  who
did  not  wait  to  see  the  enemy  themselves,  but  tried  to
escape  as  soon  as  they  saw  one  of  their  fellows  running
away  or  heard  it  screaming ;  and  it  would  probably
be  an  advantage  to  the  whole  group  that  their  flight
should  take  the  form  of  a  simultaneous  stampede.
In  the  same  way  it  would  be  an  advantage  to  the  whole
group  that  any  individual  who  noticed  conduct  among
his  fellows  which  indicated  danger  should  warn  the
rest  by  screaming.

Bagehot  or  Tarde  would  simplify  all  this  by  saying,
not  that  the  perception  of  the  stimulation  of  the
Fear  instinct  in  others  may  be  an  appropriate  stimulus
of  the  Fear  instinct  in  the  perceiver,  but  that,  owing
to  a  general  instinct  of  Imitation,  the  sight  of  running
causes  the  desire  to  run  and  the  sound  of  screaming
the  desire  to  scream — in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the
sight  of  running  may  equally  cause  a  desire  to  scream,
or  the  sound  of  screaming  a  desire  to  run.

Other  instincts  among  gregarious  or  semi -gre-
garious animals  whose  appropriate  stimulation  may,
under  certain  circumstances,  look  like  evidence  of  a
general  instinct  of  Imitation,  are  those  of  "  Collective
Defence,"  and  "  Following  a  Lead."  In  case  of
danger,  for  instance,  men  and,  after  a  more  elaborate
fashion,  horned  cattle,  gather  together  for  mutual
protection.  This  instinct  may  be  stimulated  by  the
sight  of  an  enemy,  in  which  case  no  one  would  call  it


cn.vin PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 129

Imitation ;  or  it  may  be  stimulated  by  the  sight  of
other  animals  gathering  together,  in  which  case  it
looks  like  Imitation  but  is  not.

The  behaviour  of  a  flock  of  sheep  is  constantly
adduced  as  proving  that  sheep  are  "  imitative "
animals.  When  it  is  necessary  to  change  pasture  or
to  escape  from  danger,  they  instinctively  "  follow  the
lead  "  of  any  of  their  number  who  "  takes  the  lead."
But  if  a  sheep,  being  bitten  by  a  fly,  scratches  its  ear
with  one  foot,  the  sheep  feeding  beside  it  does  not  do
the  same,  as  it  would  if  sheep  had  a  general  instinct
to  imitate  each  other's  actions.

The  imitation  by  children  of  their  elders  in  the
process  of  learning  to  speak  is  an  instance  of  a  special
instinct  whose  normal  function  may  involve  acts  of
real  imitation,  but  which  still  does  not  constitute
evidence  of  a  general  instinct  to  imitate.  And  if  we
exclude  all  these  types  of  specific  stimulation,  nothing  is
left  of  the  alleged  general  instinct  of  Imitation  except  a
few  instances  of  physiological  reflexes  such  as  yawning,
laughing,  and  hiccoughing,  which  affect,  in  a  way  still
little  understood,  certain  special  lower  nerve  centres.

The  second  main  element  in  "  Crowd-Psychology  "
is  an  alleged  general  instinct  of  Sympathy — in  the
literal  sense  of  a  mechanical  reproduction  in  the
observer  of  emotions  manifested  by  any  other
member  of  his  species.  There  is  more  evidence  for
this  than  for  a  general  instinct  of  Imitation.  Though,
for  instance,  the  indication  of  Fear  given  by  the  act  of
running  away  may  or  may  not  stimulate  in  the  observer

E


130  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY  «.i

a  desire  to  run  away,  it  does  normally  stimulate  in
him  the  whole  fear-process,  of  which  (while  running
away  is  only  one  of  its  possible  manifestations)  the
emotion  of  Fear  is  a  constant  element.

Psychologists  have,  indeed,  had  considerable  diffi-
culty in  distinguishing  between  Imitation  and  Sym-
pathy, since  instinctive  processes  generally  involve
both  action  and  emotion.  The  phenomena  of  panic
are  given  by  them  as  an  instance  sometimes  of  Imita-
tion and  sometimes  of  Sympathy.  If  the  writer
thinks  of  the  reproduction  of  the  act  of  running  away,
it  is  Imitation  ;  if  he  thinks  of  the  reproduction  of  the
emotion  of  Fear,  it  is  Sympathy.1

And  yet,  here  too,  it  is  important  to  distinguish
between  the  statement  that  indications  of  some
particular  emotion  are,  under  circumstances  fixed  by
the  history  of  our  evolution,  a  normal  stimulus  to  the
experience  of  the  same  emotion  in  the  observer,  and
the  statement  that  all  emotions  tend  so  to  reproduce
themselves  under  all  circumstances.  It  may  be  just
as  normal  for  indications  of  any  emotion  to  stimulate,
under  other  appropriate  circumstances,  a  quite  different
emotion  in  the  observer.  Indications  of  sex-love  in
the  male  may  stimulate  sex-love  in  the  female,  but
they  may,  under  other  circumstances,  stimulate  fear
or  disgust.

1  McDougall  (Social  Psychology,  p.  92)  gives  "  the  spread  of  fear  and  the
flight  impulse  "  as  "  one  of  the  clearest  and  commonest  examples  "  of
"  sympathetic  induction  of  emotion."  Ross  (Social  Psychology,  p.  126)
gives  "  the  rapid  spread  of  ...  terror "  as  an  instance  of  Imitation.
James  (Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  408)  ascribes  "  panics  "  to  "  the
imitative  tendency."  Ribot  (Psychology  of  the  Emotions,  p.  231)  says  that
"  sympathy  everywhere  marks  the  passive  receptive  side  of  the  pheno-
menon, imitation  its  active  and  motor  side."


CH.VIH PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 131

Pain  is  not  an  emotion,  but  Sympathy  is  often
denned  by  the  psychologists  so  as  to  include  the  re-
production of  sensation  and  feeling-tone  as  well  as  of
emotion,  and  the  effect  on  the  observer  of  indications
of  pain  in  another  human  being  is  often  given  as  an
instance  of  the  general  instinct  of  Sympathy.  Indica-
tions of  pain  in  others  undoubtedly  do  almost  invari-
ably produce  important  effects  on  the  observer.  But
there  is  no  simple  law  that  the  effect  produced  is  the
mere  reproduction  of  the  pain.  The  effect  may  be
fear,  or  anger,  or  an  impulse  to  help,  or  all  three.
Nor  is  there  a  simple  law  that  induced  painful  feelings
are  normally  due  to  indications  of  pain.  The  sight
of  a  mutilated  dead,  and  therefore  painless,  body
may  produce  results  indistinguishable  from  those
arising  from  the  sight  of  a  mutilated  living  body.
In  any  Parliamentary  assembly  the  sight  or  sound  of
a  genuinely  angry  man — of  Mr.  Plimsoll,  for  instance,
during  the  debate  on  the  Merchant  Shipping  Bill
in  1876 — always  produces  a  marked  emotional  effect,
but  here,  again,  the  effect  is  not  a  mere  reproduction
of  his  anger  among  the  other  members.  It  may
be  a  vague  shock  akin  to  fear,  or  a  sort  of  "  follow
the  lead"  feeling,  which  expresses  itself  in  shouts  of
"Hear!  hear!"

Mr.  McDougall,  therefore,  seems  to  me  to  over-
simplify a  complex  body  of  fact  when,  in  spite  of  his
denial  of  a  general  instinct  of  Imitation,  he  affirms
the  existence  of  a  general  instinct  of  Sympathy.
"  By  '  sympathy  '  we  mean,"  he  says,  "  the  tendency
to  experience,  in  face  of  the  same  object,  the  same


132  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

emotions  and  impulses  that  are  revealed  by  the
behaviour  of  our  fellows."  l  And  he  seems  to  go  still
further  from  the  evidence  in  the  boldly  anatomical
statement :  "I  think  the  facts  compel  us  to  assume
that  in  the  gregarious  animals  each  of  the  principal
instincts  has  a  special  perceptual  inlet  (or  recipient
afferent  part)  that  is  adapted  to  receive  and  to
elaborate  the  sense -impressions  made  by  the  ex-
pression of  the  same  instinct  in  other  animals  of  the
same  species." 2  An  instance  which  he  gives  is
derived  from  his  own  experience  while  watching  a
thunderstorm  with  a  child  in  his  arms  :

The  child  .  .  .  screamed  in  terror ;  immediately  on  hear-
ing the  scream  I  experienced,  during  a  fraction  of  a  second,
a  pang  of  fear  that  could  not  have  been  more  horrible  had  I
been  threatened  with  all  the  terrors  of  hell.3

Here  undoubtedly  the  signs  of  fear  in  the  child
immediately  stimulated  fear  in  the  father.  But  the
father's  fear  might  have  been  also  normally  stimu-
lated by  the  sight  of  danger  to  the  child  of  which  the
child  itself  was  unconscious,  and  the  sight  of  the
child's  fear  might  have  normally  stimulated  a  rush
of  affection  in  the  father  instead  of  fear.

The  third  main  element  in  the  "  Psychology  of  the
Crowd "  is  Suggestion.  This  term  is,  as  a  rule,
defined  by  psychologists  in  rather  loose  descriptive
phrases.  Mr.  McDougall  calls  it  "  a  process  of  com-
munication resulting  in  the  acceptance  with  convic-
tion of  the  communicated  proposition  in  the  absence

1  Psychology  (Home  University  Library),  p.  235.
*  Social  Psychology,  p.  93.  s  Ibid.  p.  95.


OH.  vni PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CEOWD 133

of  logically  adequate  grounds  for  its  acceptance  " ; 1
Professor  Baldwin  — "  the  abrupt  entrance  from
without  into  consciousness  of  an  idea  or  image  which
becomes  part  of  the  stream  of  thought,  and  tends  to
produce  the  muscular  and  volitional  effects  which
ordinarily  follow  upon  its  presence "  ; 2  Professor
James  -  - "  that  mental  susceptibility  which  we  all
to  some  degree  possess  of  yielding  assent  to  outward
suggestion,  of  affirming  what  we  strongly  conceive,
and  of  acting  in  accordance  with  what  we  are  made
to  expect." 3  Professor  Titchener  so  defines  it  as  to
include  almost  any  case  of  the  appropriate  stimula-
tion of  any  instinctive  disposition.  "  A  suggestion,"
he  says,  "is  any  stimulus,  external  or  internal,  ac-
companied or  unaccompanied  by  consciousness,  which
touches  off  a  determining  tendency."  4

If  one  seeks  for  the  meaning  of  Suggestion  by
examining  the  instances  which  are  given  to  illustrate
these  definitions,  one  finds  that  they  include  the
causation  of  acts,  beliefs,  or  feelings  by  many  different
processes,  which  are  alike  only  in  the  negative  fact
that  they  are  not  fully  conscious.  Now,  almost  any
relation  between  a  stimulus  and  its  resulting  act  or
emotion  or  thought  may  be  unconscious,  incompletely
conscious,  or  fully  conscious.  An  unconscious  or
partially  conscious  relation  may  be  one  of  Habit,  as
when  the  fact  that  we  are  in  our  bedroom  uncon-
sciously stimulates  us  to  the  acts  of  undressing  and
going  to  bed,  normally  with  convenient  but  occasion-

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  97.  2  Handbook  of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  297.

3  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  598.
«  Text-Book  of  Psychology  (edition  of  1910),  p.  450.


134  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

ally  (if  we  have  gone  into  the  bedroom  to  dress  for
dinner)  with  inconvenient  results.  Or  the  fact  that
we  have  heard  some  one  ask  a  riddle  may  arouse
Curiosity  without  our  being  aware  of  it,  and  may
cause  us  to  go  through  an  elaborate  though  uncon-
scious mental  search  ending  in  our  suddenly  guessing
the  answer  during  family  prayers.  At  a  late  general
election  I  received  a  card  asking  for  my  vote.  It
represented  a  Yorkshire  manufacturer  in  the  uniform
of  a  Territorial  Colonel,  and  was  surrounded  by  a
border  of  red,  blue,  and  white  lines  which  accurately
represented  the  "  aura  "  which  might  surround  one's
visual  memory  of  a  man  intimately  associated  with
the  British  Flag.  This  card  undoubtedly  had  some
influence  on  the  motives  of  many  voters.  If  they
were  fully  conscious  of  that  influence  it  apparently
would  not,  and  if  they  were  unconscious  or  only
partially  conscious  of  it,  it  would  be  called  Suggestion.
Every  newspaper  and  magazine  now  contains
evidence  that  advertisement -writing  has  become  a
profession  suitable  (as  a  Standard  advertisement  put
it)  for  the  "  sons  of  gentlemen."  Young  men  of  good
education,  naturally  warm  feelings,  and  that  delicate
sense  of  the  emotional  effect  of  words,  which,  under
different  circumstances,  might  have  made  them  poets,
are  now  being  trained  as  convincing  liars,  as  makers,
that  is  to  say,  of  statements,  to  whose  truth  they  are
indifferent,  in  such  a  form  that  readers  shall  subcon-
sciously assume  the  personal  sincerity  of  the  writer.
According  to  the  Daily  News  of  January  29,  1913,
all  employees  of  a  well-known  firm  of  drapers  are


OH.  vin PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 135

instructed  in  "  voice-magnetism."  Voice-magnetism
apparently  means  the  art  of  producing,  apart  from
any  personal  belief  in  the  salesman  as  to  the  excellence
of  the  goods  offered,  the  tone  which  the  customers
consciously  or  unconsciously  associate  with  sincerity.
It  is  the  oral  form  of  lying,  as  advertisement-writing
is  the  written  form.

Now  if,  after  reading  a  "  heart-to-heart "  adver-
tisement, or  listening  to  one  of  the  young  "voice-
magnetisers,"  I  should  buy  a  box  of  tooth-powder
solely  on  the  conscious  calculation  that  no  one  would
spend  so  much  money  and  ingenuity  on  advertising
or  selling  it  if  it  were  very  bad,  a  pyschologist
would  say  that  my  action  is  not  due  to  Suggestion.
If  I  am  unconsciously  influenced  to  the  least  degree
by  the  advertisement  or  the  voice,  I  so  far  act
according  to  the  current  definition,  from  Suggestion.
But  there  is  no  difference,  except  in  degree  of  con-
sciousness, between  my  unconscious  inference  and  the
quite  conscious,  though  silly,  inference  drawn  by  the
lady  in  Punch  who  said  that  she  was  going  to  buy
Jones's  soap  "  because  it  was  so  well  spoken  of  in
the  advertisements."

It  pays  people  to  spend  thousands  a  year  on  such
placards  as  that  which  urges  me  to  buy  "  Double
Diamond "  port  because  the  passage  in  Nicholas
Nickleby  from  which  the  title  is  borrowed  proves  it
to  have  been  "  The  Favourite  Wine  of  the  Brothers
Cheeryble."  The  inference  here  is  so  obviously
fallacious  that  one  is  inclined  to  assume  it  can  only
affect  readers  who  are  unconscious  that  they  are


136  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  n.i

drawing  any  inference  at  all.  But  a  Free  Trader  or  a
Protectionist  might  contend  that  it  is  no  more  falla-
cious than  the  inference  which  may  be  quite  consciously
drawn  from  a  poster  with  the  words  "  Protect  your
Home  and  your  Trade,"  or  from  another  with  the
words  "  A  Free  Nation  must  have  Free  Trade."
And  even  if  the  mental  process  which  is  set  in  action
be  as  strictly  logical  as  that  which  occurs  when  we
correctly  solve  a  mathematical  problem  during  sleep,
it  would  still  apparently,  if  it  is  unconscious,  be
ascribed  to  Suggestion.

It  would,  therefore,  I  am  convinced,  tend  to  clear-
ness in  psychological  statement  if  the  use  of  the  sub-
stantive "  Suggestion  "  were  abandoned,  and  if  the
adjectives  "  unconscious,"  "  subconscious,"  or  "  in-
completely conscious  "  took  its  place.

Just  as  it  has  been  found  almost  impossible  to
distinguish  between  the  current  definitions  of  Imita-
tion (the  alleged  general  reproduction  of  action)
and  Sympathy  (the  alleged  general  reproduction  of
emotion),  so  it  has  been  equally  difficult  to  distinguish
either  of  them  from  Suggestion.  Professor  E.  A.  Ross,
for  instance,  says :  "  Suggestion  and  imitation  are
merely  two  aspects  of  the  same  thing,  the  one
being  cause,  the  other  effect."  1  Tarde,  who  uses  the
term  Hypnotism  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the
others  use  Suggestion,  says  :  "  Society  is  imitation  and
imitation  is  a  kind  of  hypnotism."  2

In  these  passages,  as  in  so  much  of  what  is  written  on

1  Social  Psychology  (1908),  p.  13.

2  Laws  of  Imitation  (trans.),  p.  87  ;  the  passage  is  printed  by  Tarde  him-
self in  italics.


cH.vni PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CKOWD 137

the  "  Psychology  of  the  Crowd,"  both  Ross  and  Tarde
seem  to  fall  into  the  fallacy  of  the  "  undistributed
middle."  They  state  particular  propositions  in  such
a  way  that  they  can,  and  do,  afterwards  use  them
as  universals.  Ross  gives  evidence  tending  to  show
that  some  actions  may  be  unconsciously  stimulated
by  the  sight  of  the  same  action  performed  by  others
(we  may,  for  instance,  go  to  bed  at  3  P.M.  because  we
are,  without  knowing  it,  in  a  "  rest-cure  "  hotel,  and
are  unconsciously  affected  by  the  sight  of  our  fellow-
guests  going  sleepily  to  their  rooms),  and  then  argues
as  if  he  had  proved  that  "  All  actions  performed
by  others  unconsciously  stimulate  the  same  action  in
the  observer."  And  yet,  curiously  enough,  the  very
instance  which  he  gives  of  his  statement  that  "  sug-
gestion and  imitation  are  merely  two  aspects  of  the
same  thing  "  is  not  even  a  case  of  stimulation  by
similar  action.  After  describing  the  quasi-hypnotic
condition  which  the  Malays  call  Idtah,  he  quotes  Sir
F.  A.  Swettenham  :  "  Once  you  have  the  attention
of  latah-struck  persons,  by  merely  looking  them  hard
in  the  face,  they  will  fall  helpless  into  the  hands  of  the
operator,  instantly  lose  all  self-control,  and  go  pas-
sively through  any  performance,  whether  verbally
imposed  or  merely  suggested  by  a  sign."  *  Obviously
the  "  performance  "  is  not  an  imitation  of  the  verbal
or  other  "  sign."

Tarde's  proposition  is  even  looser  and  wider.
His  statement  that  "  Society  is  imitation  and  imita-
tion is  a  kind  of  hypnotism  "  means,  in  plain  lan-

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  13.


138  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

guage,  that  every  co-operative  act  done  by  any  human
being  is  always  due  to  Imitation  and  is  always  un-
conscious.

The  phenomena  loosely  grouped  under  the  term
Suggestion  may  be  found  to  include  the  communica-
tion of  thought  by  that  process  of  "  telepathy,"  of
whose  existence  much  evidence  is  being  accumulated,
but  of  whose  origin  and  limitations  we  are  still
ignorant.  Telepathy,  however,  as  such,  contains,
apparently,  no  element  akin  to  "  Imitation "  or
"  Sympathy,"  and  none  of  the  peculiar  emotional
qualities  ascribed  to  Suggestion  by  the  Crowd-
Psychologists.  It  may  be  found  to  play  a  very
important  part  in  the  collective  action  and  thought
of  mankind,  but  it  will  probably  be  classified  as  a
new  sense  rather  than  a  new  instinct.

The  Crowd  -  Psychologists  often  imply  that  in
modern  civilised  society  the  unconscious  causation  of
action,  feeling,  and  thought,  through  fashion,  prestige,
party  spirit,  and  other  forms  of  Suggestion,  plays  a
much  larger  part  than  in  simpler  and  earlier  forms  of
social  organisation.  On  the  whole  I  believe  that  this
is  not  true.  The  inhabitant  of  a  modern  city  is  more
fully  conscious,  "  has  his  wits  about  him "  for  a
larger  proportion  of  the  twenty-four  hours  than  the
peasant,  and  acts  much  less  under  the  subconscious
influence  of  routine.  What  the  Crowd-Psychologists
see  is  that  the  defects  and  the  limitations  of  all  human
consciousness  are  much  better  understood  and  more
cleverly  exploited  in  the  city.

Perhaps  the  nervous  fatigue  caused  by  an  "  un-


OH.™ PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CKOWD 139

natural "  and  constantly  changing  environment,  and
the  state  of  "  baulked  disposition  "  x  due  to  the  want  of
satisfaction  for  important  inherited  dispositions,  may
be  more  common  in  the  city  than  in  the  village.
The  villager  has  his  own  outbursts  and  his  own
revolts.  But  the  bored  "  society  "  man  and  woman,
the  factory  hand  who  has  just  finished  a  long  day
of  well-paid  but  monotonous  labour,  or  the  artisan's
childless  wife  in  a  new  suburb,  are  liable  to  sudden
breaks  of  habit  after  either  conscious  or  unconscious
contact  with  some  new  idea,  which  seem  to  those  who
watch  them  from  without  to  be  due,  more  obviously
than  the  villagers'  "  sprees,"  to  the  blind  and  in-
explicable mentality  of  "  the  Crowd."

The  whole  subject-matter,  indeed,  of  the  "  Psy-
chology of  the  Crowd  "  requires  restatement  and  re-
examination.  We  must  first  get  rid  of  the  verbal
ambiguities  which  are  due  merely  to  the  employment
of  collective  terms.  Nothing  is  more  annoying  or
useless  than  the  constant  implication  in  books  and
articles  about  "  Crowds  "  and  "  Groups  "  that  such
a  statement  as  "  Crowds  display  a  singularly  inferior
mentality " 2  means  anything  different  from  the
statement  that  individual  human  beings  when
brought  into  close  relation  to  numerous  other  in-
dividual human  beings  display  such  a  mentality.
Sometimes  the  use  of  collective  terms  results  in
statements  loosely  made  in  one  sense  being  after-
wards used  as  part  of  an  argument  in  another  sense.

1  See  Chapter  IV.  p.  68.  »  Le  Bon,  The  Crowd  (Eng.  trans.),  p.  9.


140  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.x

M.  Le  Bon,  for  instance,  whose  book  on  The  Crowd
has  had,  perhaps,  a  larger  circulation  than  any  other
professedly  psychological  treatise  of  our  time,  says,
"  Crowds  doubtless  are  always  unconscious,"  without
apparently  being  himself  clear  whether  he  means  that
crowds  have  no  collective  consciousness,  or  that  every
individual  in  a  crowd  is  always  completely  uncon-
scious, and  then  goes  on  to  use  his  own  statement  as
an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  "  The  part  played  by
the  unconscious  in  all  our  [sc.  individual]  acts  is
immense,  and  that  played  by  reason  is  very  small."  1

After  getting  rid  of  merely  verbal  difficulties,
we  can  then  attempt  to  sum  up  as  a  whole  those
facts  as  to  human  nature  which  the  Crowd-Psycho-
logists noticed,  and  tried  to  explain  by  the  terms
Imitation,  Sympathy,  and  Suggestion.

Broadly  speaking,  they  were  dealing  with  the  ways
(excluding  the  simple  facts  of  sex  and  parenthood)
in  which  man  instinctively  reacts  to  the  presence  of
his  fellows.  Nothing  which  man  perceives  his  fellows
to  be  doing  or  feeling  is,  as  Terence  long  ago  pointed
out,  indifferent  to  him.  But,  as  I  have  argued  in  the
earlier  pages  of  this  chapter,  his  perception  does  not
result  in  a  uniform  and  mechanical  impulse  either  to
imitate  the  perceived  action,  or  reproduce  in  himself
the  perceived  emotion.  The  acts  or  feelings  of  his
fellows  affect  the  whole  of  his  nature,  and  produce  in
each  case  (apart  from  the  influence  of  the  habits  and
knowledge  of  civilisation)  the  varied  results — Fear,
and  Love,  and  Jealousy,  and  Thought,  and  a  hundred

1  The  Crowd,  pp.  9,  10.


cH.vm PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 141

others — which  were  advantageous  in  such  cases  to  the
race  in  the  long  process  of  evolution,  and  are  felt  to  be
"  natural "  now.

Even  when  the  effect  on  us  of  what  we  perceive  in
our  fellows  is  unconscious,  it  is  not  due  to  simple  imita-
tion or  reproduction.  Unconsciousness  may  be  that  of
the  whole  person,  as  in  hypnotism  or  sleep,  or  partial,
as  when  a  man  intently  occupied  in  thought  reacts  to
the  stimulus  of  his  environment  in  dressing  or  eating.
But  in  each  case  the  reaction  is  that  of  his  pre-exist-
ing dispositions,  although  the  "  narrowing  "  of  re-
action characteristic  of  unconsciousness  may  bring
only  one  or  a  few  of  them  into  play.  If  a  hypnotised
man  acts  as  the  hypnotist  orders  him,  or  accepts
without  hesitation  the  hypnotist's  statements  of  fact,
it  is  because  he  has  a  disposition  (the  Follow  the  Lead
instinct)  which  inclines  him  to  obey  an  authoritative
command.  If  he  wrinkles  his  face  in  disgust  on  being
told  that  his  hand  is  dirty,  or  kneels  in  adoration  on
being  told  that  he  is  in  the  presence  of  divine  power,
he  does  so  because  such  reactions  are  "  natural "  to
him.

The  question  which  is  really  raised  by  the  Crowd-
Psychologists  is  how  far  these  reactions,  conscious  or
unconscious,  to  the  stimulus  of  our  fellow-men  are
different  in  character  when  those  who  affect  us  are
numerous,  from  what  they  are  when  we  are  affected
by  a  few  or  by  single  individuals.  The  answer  to
that  question  I  believe  to  be  that,  in  some  cases,
where  we  are  in  immediate  contact  through  our
senses  with  large  numbers  of  our  fellows  engaged  in


142  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY  n.  i

the  same  action  or  influenced  by  the  same  emotion  as
ourselves,  the  difference  in  degree  of  stimulation  is
so  great  as  to  approach  a  difference  of  kind.  If  a
thousand  men  are  close  together  in  the  presence  of
danger  (as  in  a  theatre  fire)  and  some  of  them  show
signs  of  fear,  the  others  are  apt  to  be  more  afraid
than  they  would  be  if  each  of  them  had  to  face  the
danger  alone  or  with  two  or  three  others.  The  same
is  perhaps  true  in  the  case  of  anger  and  the  instincts
of  Giving  and  Taking  the  Lead.  The  nervous  "  ex-
altation "  so  produced  may  be  the  effect  of  the  rapid
repetition  of  the  stimulus,  acting  as  repetition  acts,
for  instance,  when  it  produces  sea-sickness  or  tickling.
It  may  be  due  to  a  specialised  "  herd  instinct "
because  of  which  a  vague  excitement  is  stimulated,  I
have  sometimes  thought,  through  some  ill-analysed
sense  akin  to  smell.  If  the  exaltation  is  extreme,
conscious  control  of  feeling  and  action  is  diminished,
reaction  is  "  narrowed,"  and  men  may  behave,  as
they  behave  in  dreams,  less  rationally  and  morally
than  they  do  if  the  whole  of  their  nature  is  brought
into  play.

In  the  Great  Society,  however,  the  collection  of
large  masses  of  excited  men  in  physical  contact  with
each  other  is  (except  during  war)  comparatively  rare,
and  in  any  case  the  number  of  persons  in  the  largest
crowd  is  insignificant  as  compared  with  the  number
of  members  of  a  great  nation  or  inhabitants  of  a
great  city.  The  most  important  point,  therefore,  for
us  in  the  Crowd  problem  is  whether  the  peculiar
exaltation  of  feeling  and  action  which  is  caused  by


OH.  vin PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  CROWD 143

the  sensible  presence  of  large  numbers  of  our  fellows,
is  also  caused  by  the  existence  of  the  still  larger
numbers  of  whom  we  read  and  are  told,  but  who  do
not  directly  stimulate  us  through  our  senses.  M.  Le
Bon  throughout  his  book  assumes  that  this  is  the
case.  He  constantly  identifies  the  "  Crowd  "  with  the
"  Masses  "  of  a  modern  nation  or  the  voters  in  a
modern  democratic  election.1  M.  Tarde  saw  the
difficulty  and  distinguishes  (in  U  Opinion  et  la  Foule)
between  the  Crowd  and  what  he  calls  the  Public.
My  own  conclusion  from  the  available  evidence  is
that  in  times  of  great  general  excitement,  or  in  the
case  of  individuals  who  are  very  easily  influenced  or
have  unusual  powers  of  visual  imagination,  the
picture  formed  in  our  mind  (with  the  help  of  descrip-
tive reporting  and  newspaper  photographs)  of  our
distant  fellows  may  produce  to  a  considerable  degree
the  same  effects  of  exaltation  as  would  be  produced  by
their  presence.  But  the  degree  to  which  this  actually
occurs  is,  I  believe,  habitually  and  grossly  exaggerated
by  the  Crowd-Psychologists.

Bagehot  was  a  Whig  who  took  a  very  pessimistic
view  of  the  great  step  towards  democracy  made  by
the  English  Reform  Act  of  1867.  Tarde  and  Le  Bon
were  Frenchmen  brought  up  on  vivid  descriptions  of
the  Revolution  and  themselves  apprehensive  of  the
spread  of  Socialism.  Political  movements  which  were
in  fact  carried  out,  in  large  part,  by  men  conscious
and  thoughtful  though  necessarily  ill-informed,
seemed  therefore  to  them,  as  they  watched  them

1  See,  e.g.,  pp.  15,  35,  and  42.


144  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY  PT.  i

from  outside,  to  be  due  to  the  blind  and  unconscious
impulses  of  masses  "  incapable  both  of  reflection  and
reasoning."  *

The  inhabitants  of  a  modern  state,  whether  they
are  officials  or  journalists  or  working  men,  are  indeed
ignorant  of  much  which  it  would  be  well  for  them  to
know,  and  unmoved  by  much  which  it  would  be  well
for  them  to  feel.  That  they  are  so  is  due  not  to  the
fact  that  "  individually  "  they  are  thoughtful  and
temperate  and  "  collectively  "  blind  and  ferocious,
but  to  the  fact  that  they  are  human  beings,  whose
intellectual  and  emotional  nature  was  evolved  in
contact  with  the  restricted  environment  of  the  primi-
tive world,  and  who  have  not  yet  learnt,  if  ever  they
will,  either  to  educate  in  each  generation  their  faculties
to  fit  their  environment,  or  to  change  their  environ-
ment so  as  to  fit  their  faculties.

1  The  Crowd,  p.  75.


CHAPTEK  IX

LOVE  AND  HATRED

IN  the  preceding  chapter  I  argued  that  the  co-opera-
tive action  of  men  in  society  is  due,  not  (as  the  early
Darwinian  sociologists  supposed)  to  simple  and
mechanical  instincts  of  Imitation,  or  Sympathy,  or
Suggestion,  but  to  the  stimulation  in  each  human  being
by  his  relation  to  his  fellow-men,  of  many  varied  and
interacting  dispositions,  for  the  observation  of  which
introspection  as  well  as  external  evidence  is  required.
If  this  is  true,  we  are  brought  back  at  once  to  the
problem  which  tormented  Sidgwick  and  the  later
Utilitarians,  and  for  which  Comte's  Positivism  was
offered  as  a  solution.  Was  Bentham  right  in  saying
that  each  "  man  from  the  very  structure  of  his
nature  "  prefers  his  own  good  (whether  it  be  happiness
or  something  else)  to  that  of  all  other  men  ?  Or  was
Bishop  Butler  right  (if  we  ignore  the  teleological
form  in  which  he  put  it)  when  he  said,  "  There  are
as  real  and  the  same  kind  of  indications  in  human
nature,  that  we  were  made  for  society  and  to  do  good  to
our  fellow-creatures,  as  that  we  were  intended  to  take
care  of  our  own  life  and  health  and  private  good  "  ?  1

1  "Upon  Human  Nature,"  Sermon  I.  (Cassell,  1887,  p.  12).
145  L


146  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

The  answer  to  a  question  on  which  able  men  have
for  so  long  disputed  is  not  likely  to  be  either  easy  or
simple  ;  and  it  is  best,  in  seeking  it,  to  proceed  from
the  known  to  the  unknown,  or  rather  from  the  agreed
to  the  doubtful.

Every  one  admits  that  when  the  young,  either  of
man  or  of  any  of  the  other  higher  mammals,  are  still
unable  to  protect  themselves,  the  mother  normally
attempts,  even  at  serious  risk  to  herself,  to  protect
and  cherish  them.  The  evidence  of  big-game  hunters
all  over  the  world,  or  the  records  in  a  London  police
court  of  the  behaviour  of  women  with  babies  and
drunken  husbands,  or,  still  better,  the  observation  of
an  average  day  spent  by  a  decent  working  -  class
mother  with  four  or  five  young  children,  will  establish
this.  Introspective  evidence  shows  further  that  this
behaviour  is  accompanied  by  the  warm  emotion  of
Love,  and  by  waves  of  an  intense  and  fully  conscious,
though  sometimes  an  ill-informed,  desire  for  the
health,  the  happiness,  the  "  good  "  in  every  sense,  of
the  child.

Some  modern  psychologists,  being  determined  to
claim  nothing  as  a  human  disposition  for  whose
existence  both  in  man  and  in  other  related  species
there  is  not  the  clearest  and  most  ample  proof,  have
affirmed  that  this  Mother-Love  is  the  only  true
altruistic  disposition.  Mr.  McDougall,  for  instance,
uses  the  term  "  The  Tender  Emotion  "  for  the  "  affec-
tive aspect "  of  that  "  Parental  Instinct,"  which  he
identifies  with  the  "  Maternal  Instinct."  x  He  says  :

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  66.


OH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATRED  147

From  this  emotion  and  its  impulse  to  cherish  and  protect
spring  generosity,  gratitude,  love,  pity,  true  benevolence,
and  altruistic  conduct  of  every  kind ;  in  it  they  have  their
main  and  absolutely  essential  root,  without  which  they  would
not  be.  Any  seemingly  altruistic  action  in  which  it  plays
no  part  is  but  a  sham,  the  issue  of  cold  calculation  or  of  habits
formed  under  the  influence  of  rewards  or  punishments.1

But  such  a  simplification  of  a  complex  problem  has
its  own  dangers.  Just  as  Hobbes  and  Bentham  first
explained  all  social  impulses  as  cases  of  tbe  single
disposition  of  Fear  or  Pain,  and  then  found  them-
selves compelled,  in  order  to  account  for  the  facts,
to  extend  their  own  definition  by  using  words  in  a
strained  and  non-natural  sense,  so  Mr.  McDougall  has
to  twist  his  definition  of  Mother-Love  in  order  to
make  it  cover  facts  which  he  himself  admits.  Fathers
have,  he  acknowledges,  a  disinterested  love  for  their
children,  though  it  is  not  as  strong  as  that  felt  by
mothers.  He  therefore  declares  that  Father-Love  is  a
kind  of  Mother-Love.  "  How  can  we  account,"  he
says,  "  for  the  fact  that  men  are  at  all  capable  of  this
emotion  and  of  this  disinterested  protective  impulse  ?
For  in  its  racial  origin  the  instinct  was  undoubtedly
primarily  maternal.  The  answer  is  that  it  is  very
common  to  see  a  character  acquired  by  one  sex  to
meet  its  special  needs,  transmitted,  generally  im-
perfectly and  with  large  individual  variations,  to  the
members  of  the  other  sex.  Familiar  examples  of  such
transmission  of  sexual  characters  are  afforded  by  the
horns  and  antlers  of  some  species  of  sheep  and  deer." a

1  Social  Psychology,  p.  71.

2  Ibid. p. 69. In  the  same  way  some  members  of the  new  school
of psychologists founded on Freud's  "  Psycho  -  analysis "  say that all


148  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

To  myself  it  seems  more  satisfactory  to  begin  with
a  complex  statement  than  to  introduce  complexity  in
the  application  of  a  simple  statement.  The  evidence,
then,  seems  to  me  to  indicate  that  in  the  loosely
organised  groups  to  which  our  ancestors  —  human
and  prehuman — belonged,  several  dispositions  were
evolved,  each  of  which,  in  varying  degrees,  produced
disinterested  Love  as  part  of  its  normal  process.
The  Love  which  accompanied  Motherhood  was  by  far
the  strongest,  but  Love  and  a  conscious  desire  for  the
safety  and  good  of  the  loved  person  also  arose,  though
to  a  less  degree,  from  the  sex-relation  between  men
and  women,  the  relation  during  youth  of  brotherhood
and  sisterhood,  and  that  between  the  adult  males  and
the  children  (whether  they  were  the  result  of  mono-
gamous, polygamous,  or  group  intercourse)  in  whose
defence  the  males  fought  and  to  whom  they  brought
food.1  It  is  largely  a  point  of  convenience  whether
Love  in  each  of  those  cases  be  spoken  of  as  part  of
a  separate  disposition,  or  whether  it  be  spoken  of
as  a  single  disposition,  brought  into  action  in  each
case  by  a  different  stimulus.

Much  less  clear,  but  of  vital  importance  in  the
analysis  of  the  Great  Society,  is  the  question  whether
disinterested  Love  was  also  evolved  in  the  relation


Love  between  human  beings  is  sex-feeling.  Ferenczi,  for  instance,  states,
"  Everything  points  to  the  conclusion  that  an  unconscious  sexual  element
is  the  basis  of  every  sympathetic  emotion  "  (dass  jedem  Sympathiegefuhl
eine  unbewusste  sexuelle  Stellungnahme  zugrunde  liegt)  (Intrqjektion  und
Vbertragung,  p.  451,  quoted  by  Ernest  Jones,  Papers  on  Psycho- Analysis,
p.  280).

1  See  Malinowski,  The  Family  among  the  Australian  Aborigines  (University
of  London  Press,  1913),  p.  191  et  seq.,  for  "  the  emotional  characteristics  of
kinship."


CH.IX  LOVE  AND  HATRED  149

between  fellow-members  of  the  tribe  or  species.
Aristotle  thought  that  such  Love  existed  "  not  only
among  men  but  among  birds  and  most  of  the  animals," x
and  Prince  Kropotkin  has  collected  many  facts  indi-
cating the  existence,  among  non-human  animals,  of  a
desire  to  help  other  members  of  the  same  species.2
In  the  case  of  man,  the  evidence  still  awaits  further
collection  and  analysis,  but  my  opinion  is  that  a
certain  degree  of  Love  is  stimulated  by  our  perception
of  other  human  beings,  both  generally,  and  particu-
larly when  we  feel  that  it  is  in  our  power  to  injure  or
benefit  them.  In  its  origin  such  Love  may  have  been
one  factor  in  a  disposition  inclining  us  to  aid  our
tribal  comrades  in  hunting  or  fighting  or  flight.
Introspectively  it  presents  itself  as  an  emotion  which
may  either  be  so  weak  and  vague  as  only  just  to
reach  consciousness,  or  so  intense  as  to  create  an
almost  intoxicating  exaltation,  and  it  is  accompanied
by  a  conscious  desire  for  the  good,  either  of  mankind
or  a  nation  or  class,  or  of  some  individual  whose  only
relation  to  us  is  that  of  membership  of  our  species.
In  the  last  case  Love  shades  into  the  deep  personal
emotion  of  Friendship.

Love  for  our  fellow-man  may  take  the  negative
form  of  disinterested  Pity  for  suffering  and  an  un-
willingness to  inflict  harm.  Mr.  McDougall  says  that
this  negative  form  of  Love  exists,  and  that  "  the
distress  of  any  adult  (towards  whom  we  harbour  no
hostile  sentiment)  evokes  the  emotion," 3  though  his

1  Ethics,  bk.  viii.  chap.  iii.

1  Mutual  Aid,  a  Factor  of  Evolution  (1902).

3  Social  Psychology,  p.  74.


150  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

theory  makes  it  necessary  for  him  to  point  out  that
this  is  another  instance  of  "  the  vast  extension  of  the
field  of  application  of  the  maternal  instinct."  l

Of  Pity  for  a  fellow  human  being  as  such,  the  best
account  I  know  is  that  given  by  Professor  Gilbert
Murray  (whose  evidence  is  the  more  valuable  because
he  is  rather  a  first-hand  student  of  literature  and  life
than  a  systematic  psychologist)  in  his  Rise  of  the
Greek  Epic.  He  calls  it  by  the  Greek  name  Aidos.
I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting  part  of  his  description  :

If  you  take  people  .  .  .  who  have  broken  away  from  all
their  old  sanctions,  and  select  among  them  some  strong  and
turbulent  chief  who  fears  no  one,  you  will  first  think  that
such  a  man  is  free  to  do  whatever  enters  his  head.  And
then,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  you  find  that  among  his  lawlessness
there  will  crop  up  some  possible  action  which  somehow  makes
him  feel  uncomfortable.  If  he  has  done  it  he  "  rues  "  the
deed  and  is  haunted  by  it.  If  he  has  not  done  it  he  refrains
from  doing  it.  And  this  not  because  any  one  forces  him,  nor
yet  because  any  particular  result  will  accrue  to  him  afterwards.
But  simply  because  he  feels  Aidos.  No  one  can  tell  where
the  exact  point  of  honour  will  arise.  When  Achilles  fought
against  EStion's  city,  "  he  sacked  all  the  happy  city  of  the
Cilician  men,  high-gated  Thebe,  and  slew  Eetion  ;  but  he
spoiled  him  not  of  his  armour.  He  had  Aidos  in  his  heart
for  that ;  but  he  burned  him  there  as  he  lay  in  his  rich-
wrought  armour,  and  heaped  a  mound  above  him.  And  all
around  him  there  grew  elm-trees  planted  by  the  mountain
spirits,  daughters  of  Aegis-bearing  Zeus."  That  is  Aidos
pure  and  clean,  and  the  later  lines  ring  with  the  peculiar
tenderness  of  it.  Achilles  had  nothing  to  gain,  nothing  to
lose.  Nobody  would  have  said  a  word  if  he  had  taken  Eetion's
richly  wrought  armour.  It  would  have  been  quite  the  natural
thing  to  do.  But  he  happened  to  feel  Aidos  about  it.2

1  Loc.  cit.  p.  73.
*  Rise  of  the  Greek  Epic,  p.  80.


OH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATRED  151

Later  on  Professor  Murray  shows  how  easily  such  a
primitive  and  incalculable  disposition  may  be  ignored
or  rejected  by  the  systematic  philosophers  who
analyse  a  highly  organised  society.  "  If  you  look,"
he  says,  "  at  the  history  of  later  Greek  ethics,  it  is
rather  a  surprise  to  find  how  small  a  place  is  occupied
by  Aidos.  .  .  .  Plato  and  Aristotle  are  both  perhaps
too  much  inclined  to  despise  those  emotions  which
appeal  to  men's  simplest  instincts  and  have  a  touch
of  the  animal  about  them."  1

The  disposition  of  Philanthropy  (if  one  may  use  the
term  in  its  original  sense  of  the  Love  of  one's  fellows
as  such)  varies  very  widely  among  individuals.  In
each  individual  it  is  apt  to  vary  with  age,  and  perhaps,
in  its  simplest  form,  to  be  strongest  during  the  years
of  early  manhood  and  womanhood  between  eighteen
and  twenty-five.  Different  races  of  mankind  possess
the  disposition  in  varying  degrees,  and  also  vary  in  the
degree  in  which  they  stimulate  it  among  other  races.
Its  weakness  and  uncertainty  suggest  that  it  is  a
late  and  half -finished  product  of  evolution,  and  those
who  have  to  use  the  dispositions  of  men  for  their
own  purposes  constantly  tend  to  rely,  as  a  substitute
for,  or  aid  to  it,  on  the  stronger  and  earlier  instincts
of  Loyalty  (Following  the  Lead)  for  a  party  or  a
chief,  or  the  still  earlier  affections  of  sex  or  parent-
hood. The  English  Trade  Unionists  who  were  engaged
during  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  in  the
long  agitation  for  the  reduction  of  the  hours  of  factory
labour,  knew  that  the  "  Aidos "  of  the  average

1  Rise  of  the  Greek  Epic,  p.  87.


152  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

member  of  Parliament  and  the  vague  sense  of  human
solidarity  in  their  fellow  working-men  counted  for
something.  But  they  knew  also  that  it  was  only  by
constantly  emphasising  the  fact  that  children  and
women  were  concerned  that  the  cupidity  of  some
employers  and  the  confidence  of  others  in  the  theory
of  economic  individualism  could  be  overcome.  The
Ten  Hours  Bill  was  carried  in  the  name  of  the  children,
and  the  "  battle  of  the  Nine  Hours  Bill "  was,  as
one  of  their  own  leaders  declared  in  1878,  fought
"  from  behind  the  women's  petticoats."  l  Even  in
the  manifesto  of  the  South  African  Uitlanders  in
1895,  it  was  not  so  much  for  the  many  male  owners
and  brokers  of  mining  shares  as  for  the  few  women
and  children  on  the  Rand  that  invasion  was  urged,2
and  it  was  of  the  "  girls  in  the  Gold-Reef  City  "  that
the  Poet  Laureate  sang.

But  there  is  one  extremely  important  type  of  our
Love  for  our  fellows  in  which  I  believe  the  sub-
stituted action  of  Parent-Love  or  Loyalty  plays  little
or  no  part.  The  very  existence  of  the  Great  Society
requires  that  there  should  be  found  in  each  generation
a  certain  number  of  men  and  women  whose  desire  for
the  good  of  others  is  sufficiently  reliable  and  continu-
ous to  ensure  that  they  will  carry  out  the  duty  of
originating  leadership  (mere  dexterous  self-advance-
ment does  not  originate)  either  in  administration  or
thought.

Whoever  has  known  any  such  men  will  accept  the

1  Webb,  History  of  Trade  Unionism,  p.  297.
2  Times,  January  1,  1896.


CH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATKED  153

statement,  which  they  themselves  constantly  make,
that  no  ambition,  however  lofty,  would  be  sufficient  to
carry  them  through  the  unexciting  toil,  the  constant
disappointments,  the  ever-present  uncertainty  of
result,  which  is  involved  in  the  intellectual  organisa-
tion of  a  modern  community.  Peel,  the  greatest  of
English  political  leaders,  was  expressing  his  most
intimate  conviction  when  he  wrote,  '  You  will
believe  .  .  .  that  office  and  power  may  be  anything
but  an  object  of  ambition,  and  that  I  must  be  insane
if  I  could  have  been  induced  by  anything  but  a  sense
of  public  duty  to  undertake  what  I  have  undertaken
this  session."  l

"  Public  Spirit  "  is  perhaps  a  better  (because  a  less
intellectualised)  name  for  that  which  Peel  recognised
in  himself  than  his  own  phrase  "  a  sense  of  public
duty."

It  is  of  course  impossible  to  draw  a  clear  line  be-
tween the  Public  Spirit  of  Peel  or  Stein,  and  the
lesser  altruism  which  makes  a  dull  citizen  just  willing
to  vote  on  a  question  in  which  he  is  not  personally
concerned.  But  the  study  of  the  exceptional  cases
will  help  us  to  understand  the  cases  which  are  more
common  and  less  clear.  If  one  asked  a  dozen  of
these  modern  leaders  for  an  introspective  account  of
the  emotion  of  Public  Spirit,  most  of  them  (if  they
were  able  accurately  to  observe  their  own  conscious-
ness) would,  I  believe,  come  back  to  that  original
Love  and  Pity  for  their  fellow  human  beings  as  such

1  Sir  R.  Peel  to  Richard  Cobden,  June  24, 1846  (Morley'a  Life  of  Cobden,
edition  of  1906,  p.  397).


154  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.i

which  I  have  just  been  attempting,  without  either
exaggerating  its  efficiency  or  denying  its  existence,
to  describe.

In  enquiring  how  anything  so  primitive,  so  weak,
so  intermittent,  so  "  touched  with  the  animal "  as
instinctive  Philanthropy  can  have  such  a  strong
and  continuous  result  as  the  more  important  mani-
festations of  Public  Spirit,  I  find  myself  helped  by  an
analogy  which  I  heard  used  in  an  Oxford  discussion
club.  One  of  the  speakers  pointed  out  that  the  whole
system  of  modern  music,  all  the  overwhelming  course
of  feeling  and  thought  which  is  roused  by  a  Beethoven
Sonata,  depends  upon  the  existence  in  mankind  of
that  primitive  and  simple  preference  for  rhythmically
related  sounds  which  may  be  observed  in  some  of  the
higher  non-human  animals,  and  which  is  directly
appealed  to  by  the  crooning  chants  or  throbbing
drums  of  a  West  African  tribe.  Without  that
"  touch  of  the  animal "  a  modern  concert  would  be
as  unintelligible  to  us  as  a  picture  gallery  to  a  blind
man.  But  the  original  rhythmic  instinct  is  made
astonishingly  wider,  more  powerful,  and  more  lasting
by  training,  by  many-sided  intellectual  and  emotional
associations,  and  by  our  general  aesthetic  interest  in
elaborated  form.

On  the  same  lines  one  can  attempt  to  separate  out
the  psychological  elements  which  enable  our  inter-
mittent natural  interest  in  our  fellow-men  to  become
the  Public  Spirit  of  a  life-long  servant  of  society.

In  the  first  place,  just  as  a  professed  musician  will
normally  require  an  unusually  good  "  ear  "  to  start


OH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATRED  155

with,  so  a  man  conspicuous  for  Public  Spirit  will
normally  start  with  an  unusually  sensitive  disposition
of  Love.  Bentham  was  perhaps  the  most  typically
"  public-spirited  "  man  of  his  time,  though  his  work
consisted  not  in  administration  but  in  the  direction
and  inspiration  of  a  school  of  thinkers  and  reformers.
He,  writing  at  the  age  of  eighty-two,  said  :

Never  has  it  happened  to  me  to  witness  suffering  on  the
part  of  any  creature,  whether  of  my  own  species  or  any  other,
without  experiencing,  in  some  degree  or  other,  a  sensation  of
the  like  nature  in  my  own  nerves.1

If  Bentham  had  been  a  modern  psychologist  he
would  probably  have  recognised  that  the  effect  caused
in  him  by  the  sight  of  suffering  was  rather  the  stimu-
lation of  Pity  than  a  mere  reproduction  of  the  suffer-
ing itself.  But  the  description  of  an  unusual  degree
of  original  sensitiveness  is  unmistakable.

It  will  be  observed  that  Bentham  speaks  of  the
effect  on  him  of  the  suffering  of  creatures  not  belong-
ing to  his  own  species.  If  our  examination  of  the
stronger  and  more  continuous  types  of  Philanthropy
included  the  saints  and  the  great  exemplars  of  personal
morality,  a  fact  would  become  clear  which  I  think  is
often  overlaid  by  the  specialised  activity  of  modern
public-spirited  men  and  women.  The  love  for  man-
kind felt  by  Gautama  or  St.  Francis  clearly  extended
itself  into  love  for  non-human  forms  of  life.2  This

1  Bentham,  "Official  Aptitude  maximised  "  (Preface  written  1830,  aetat
82),  Works,  vol.  v.  p.  266.

2  "  I  once  saw  a  botanist  most  tenderly  replace  a  plant  which  he  had
inadvertently  uprooted,  though  we  were  on  a  bleak  hillside  in  Tibet  where
no  human  being  was  likely  to  see  the  flower  again  "  (Sir  Francis  Young-
husband,  Within,  p.  103).


156  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

extension  of  Love  beyond  the  human  species  may  of
course  be  due  merely  to  acquired  intellectual  associa-
tions ;  but  it  may  also  be  due  (as  I  am  inclined  to
think  it  is)  to  a  true  disposition,  even  if  its  origin  is
not  yet  explained  by  what  we  know  of  our  own  past
evolution.  Perhaps,  indeed,  the  most  important  mis-
take made  by  Comte  when  he  founded  the  Religion
of  Humanity,  was  his  failure  to  realise  that  for  one,
and  perhaps  the  highest  type  of  religious  genius,
man  as  part  of  a  living  universe  may  excite  more
Love  and  Reverence  than  Man  as  an  isolated
species.

Next  to  a  high  degree  of  original  Love,  the  most
important  of  the  factors  by  which  our  primitive
Philanthropy  becomes  effective  Public  Spirit  is  an
Imagination,  presenting  to  its  possessor  the  existence
of  his  fellow-men  with  sufficient  vividness.  No  one
can  love  that  which  is  not  real  to  him.  Now  the
simplest  form  of  reality  is  that  which  results  from  the
direct  testimony  of  our  senses,  and  many  sociologists
have  contended  that  outside  the  range  of  our  senses
strong  social  emotion  is  impossible.  "  Love,"  says
Mr.  Warner  Fite  in  his  interesting  book  on  Individual-
ism, "  may  be  quite  real  within  a  relatively  narrow
circle ;  and  toward  our  fellow-men  in  the  world  at
large  we  may  cultivate  an  attitude  of  open-mindedness
and  goodwill.  We  may,  and  ought,  to  find  a  generous
pleasure  in  every  enlargement  of  our  sympathies.
But  to  claim  that  we  love  our  fellow-man  simply
as  our  fellow-man  is  to  assert  a  measure  of  actual
sympathy  and  comprehension  which  is  absurdly  far


LOVE  AND  HATRED  157

from  real." x  "  It  is  impossible,"  said  Leslie  Stephen,
"  that  men  should  be  moral  simply  by  a  desire  for  the
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number.  What
does  and  always  must  guide  men  is  their  personal
relation  to  the  little  circle  which  they  actually  in-
fluence." 2

This  is  clearly  a  mistake.  It  is  true  that  the  first-
hand testimony  of  our  senses  has  a  peculiar  quality
in  its  power  of  psychological  stimulus  which  is  not
shared  by  the  second-hand  testimony  of  imagination
or  memory ;  but  nevertheless  Love  for  those  whose
existence  is  presented  to  us  only  through  our  Imagina-
tion may  act  with  enormous  force.  When  Schiller
wrote  :

Seid  umschlungen,  Millionen  !
Diesen  Kuss  der  ganzen  Welt !  3

he  was  certainly  not  making-believe.

This  imaginative  reality  of  our  neighbours  whom
we  have  not  seen  may  take  one  of  two  forms.  When
Schiller  made  his  "  Hymn  to  Joy,"  he  was  twenty-
five  years  old.  His  experience  of  his  fellow-men  out-
side the  Military  Academy  and  the  barracks  was
mainly  confined  to  the  reading  of  much  bad  eighteenth-
century  poetry  and  worse  eighteenth-century  romance.
The  "  Millions  "  whom  he  so  vividly  conceived  were
the  romantic  figures  at  which  we  smile  in  the  German
drawings  of  that  period,  and  they  were  thought  of  as
one  step  in  a  glorious  ladder  of  life  stretching  from
the  "  worm  "  to  the  "  cherub."

1  Individualism,  p.  205.
1  The  English  Utilitarians,  vol.  ii.  p.  329.

3  "  Be  ye  embraced,  ye  Millions. I  send  this  kiss  to  the  whole  world  "
("Hymn  to  Joy,"  1785).


158  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Few  people,  however,  of  active  public  spirit  retain
after  their  adolescence  that  kind  of  conception  of
mankind  which  inspires  Schiller's  poem.  The  picture
by  which  experience  soon  explains  their  instinctive
recognition  of  their  species  l  is  a  generalisation  largely
subconscious,  drawn  not  from  books  and  drawings,
but  from  the  individuals  and  classes  for  whom  public
men  work,  and  whom  they  can  only  help  if  they  see
them  without  illusion.  Has  this  realist  conception
the  same  power  of  stimulating  Love  as  Schiller's
romantic  conception  ? 2  I  am  inclined  to  answer  that
as  soon  as  our  conception  of  mankind  starts  on  the
path  from  romance  to  realism,  its  power  of  stimulat-
ing Love  depends  on  the  completion  of  its  journey.
Cynicism  is  often  the  result  of  half-knowledge.  Most
of  the  great  artistic  interpreters  of  mankind  have
added  to  the  permanent  sum  of  human  goodwill  just
in  proportion  to  the  force  and  detachment  with  which
they  have  told  the  truth.  It  is  largely  due  to  Sir
Walter  Scott  that  Englishmen  can  love  Scotchmen
much  more  easily  than,  for  instance,  they  can  love
Irishmen.  But  if  we  now  think  with  affection  of
the  Scotch  national  type,  it  is  because  we  remember,
not  the  heroes  and  heroines  whom  Sir  Walter
deliberately  tried  to  make  sympathetic,  but  the  dour

1  See  later,  Chapter  X.  pp.  231  et  seqq.,  for  the  intellectual  implications
of  instinctive  recognition.

2  I  have  dealt  in  another  book  (Human  Nature  in  Politics,  p.  155)  with
the  destruction  by  experience,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  Wordsworth,  of  a  romantic
and  over-simplified  conception  of  mankind. I  was  there,  however,  dealing
with  the  question  of  the  conditions  under  which  new  and  more  complex
conceptions  could  be  made  the  material  of  effective  thought. Here  I  am
dealing  with  the  cognate  but  different  question  of  the  conditions  under
which  the  more  complex  conception  can  stimulate  emotion.


CH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATKED  159

Cameronians,  the  canny  peasants,  the  unashamed
lads  and  maidens,  in  describing  whom  he  had  no
purpose  except  to  make  a  recognisable  picture.  The
least  touch  of  romantic  idealisation  would  have  made
so  typical  and  lovable  a  Greek  as  Homer's  Odysseus
into  a  figure  as  detestable  as  Tennyson's  Lancelot.
Modern  reproductions  of  Rembrandt  and  Millet  have
enabled  thousands  of  young  people  to  look  with
genuine  kindliness  upon  the  quiet  self-satisfaction  of
an  unintellectual  old  woman,  or  the  heavy  walk  of  a
sweat-drenched  labourer.  But  Rembrandt  and  Millet
worked  with  such  detachment  that  they  were  de-
nounced by  their  contemporaries  as  libellers  of  the
human  race.  The  people  of  the  United  States  have
before  them  the  task  of  creating  an  emotional  soli-
darity between  the  descendants  of  the  original
settlers  and  the  South  European  immigrants  who  join
them  at  the  rate  of  a  million  a  year.  The  best  work
in  their  admirable  magazines  is  aimed  at  making  this
solidarity  possible  by  describing  twenty  races  to  each
other.  But  one  feels  that  it  will  only  succeed  in  so
far  as  the  interpreters  forget  their  aim  in  the  one
purpose  of  austere  truth.

And  in  this  respect  that  which  is  true  of  the  few
leaders  is  true  also  in  its  degree  of  the  weaker  and
more  limited  Love  which  guides  ordinary  men.  I
have  already  said  that  permanent  and  elastic  social
Habits  are  not  likely  to  be  created  among  an  industrial
population  without  so  much  "  philosophy "  as  is
given  by  school-instruction  in  such  elements  of  the
Humanities  as  history  and  geography — that  a  curri-


160  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

culum  of  "  Cowper  -  Temple  religion  and  manual
training  "  would  make  citizens  whose  moral  habits
could  not  be  relied  on.1  In  the  same  way  the  mini-
mum of  Love  which  is  necessary  to  hold  together  the
cities  and  nations  of  the  Great  Society  may  be  found
to  require  that  what  school -children  learn  of  the
unseen  millions  of  their  fellows  shall  be,  as  far  as  the
writers  of  books  and  the  trainers  of  teachers  can  make
it,  the  truth.  In  Prussia  the  avowed  use  of  the
schools,  not  for  the  spread  of  truth  but  for  the  "  War
against  social-democracy,"  may  be  in  part  responsible
for  that  absence  of  Love  between  members  of  different
classes,  that  class-war  of  which  the  growth  of  social-
democracy  is  only  one  symptom.  And  as  the  scale
and  complexity  of  social  organisation  extends,  the
need  of  clear-sighted  Love  will  extend  with  it.  If  a
hereditary  monarchy  with  the  power  of  dismissing
professors  or  censoring  plays,  or  a  church  whose
property  is  secured  to  the  holders  of  an  unchanging
creed,  or  an  endowed  and  entrenched  party  system,
is  found  to  require  for  its  continued  existence  a
deliberate  make-believe  as  to  the  human  type,  that
fact  must  be  considered  in  the  light  of  its  probable
effects,  not  only  on  the  progress  of  social  science,  but
also  on  the  emotional  coherence  of  society.

Psychology  has  the  same  detached  purpose  as
literature,  though  it  is  the  inherited  human  type,
rather  than  that  type  overlaid  with  all  the  variations
of  individuality  and  place  and  tradition,  with  which  it
is  mainly  concerned ;  and  I  find  myself  sometimes

1  See  ante,  p.  83.


OH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATRED  161

wondering  what  may  be  the  effect  of  the  growth  of
Psychology  on  the  efficiency  of  Love.  In  the  past
those  psychological  generalisations  which  called  them-
selves the  Science  of  Political  Economy  undoubtedly
stood  in  the  way  of  Love.  The  employer  saw  his
operatives  with  their  weary  eyes  and  half-open  mouths
at  the  end  of  a  twelve  hours'  day  only  as  "  free  agents,"
and  their  poverty  only  as  the  "  stimulus  of  competi-
tion." But  the  more  complex  and,  as  one  hopes,  the
truer  description  of  mankind  which  the  psychology  of
the  twentieth  century  is  slowly  building  up  may  help
Love  rather  than  hinder  it.  If,  after  a  period  of
psychological  reading,  one  stands  on  a  railway  plat-
form or  at  a  window,  looking  at  that  unknown  crowd
which  makes  the  solitude  of  London,  the  faces  which
one  will  never  see  again  seem  less  indifferent  than  they
did  before.  Those  men  who  are  innocent  of  psycho-
logy, but  have  an  exceptional  gift  of  reading  physiog-
nomy, may  see  more  than  the  less  gifted  in  spite  of
their  book-learning.  But  book-learning  and  the  habit
of  attention  which  it  produces  does  seem  to  make  it
easier  to  interpret  the  less  obvious  signs  of  psycho-
logical states,  and  more  probable  that  those  states
will  stimulate  a  certain  degree  of  Love.  The  tired
mother  snapping  at  her  tired  child,  the  weak  smile
of  the  dreamy  youth,  the  intense  self-consciousness  of
the  two  talkers  who  are  "  showing  off  "  to  the  other
inmates  of  the  omnibus,  all  seem  intelligible  and
kindly.  And  if  formal  psychology  lends  a  measure
of  reality  to  those  whom  one  sees  only  for  a  moment,
it  can  also  sharpen  and  make  more  poignant  the

M


162  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

mental  picture,  which  every  member  of  the  Great
Society  forms,  of  that  larger  multitude  of  his  contem-
poraries whom  he  will  never  see,  but  whose  lives  he
must  necessarily  influence.

The  majority,  however,  of  those  who  will  be
affected  by  the  action  of  any  inhabitant  of  a  Great
City  or  State  are  separated  from  him,  not  by  space
and  multitude  only,  but  also  by  time.  Every  ton  of
coal  that  we  burn,  every  scar  on  the  face  of  nature
that  we  help  to  make,  every  new  custom  which  we
start  or  old  custom  which  we  modify,  above  all  every
act  or  refusal  to  act  which  affects  the  procreation  of
children,  will  influence  the  uncounted  millions  who
do  not  yet  exist.  And  perhaps  the  most  important
emotional  effect  of  the  growth  and  spread  of  psycho-
logical science  may  consist  in  such  an  extension  of
our  imagination  as  may  make  more  real  to  our  feel-
ings those  in  whom  our  type,  with  slow  developments,
must  persist,  even  though  nearly  everything  which
now  influences  us  after  birth  may  change  beyond  our
power  of  prophecy.

And  since  psychology  aims  at  the  discovery  of
causal  relationships  as  well  as  the  true  description
of  isolated  facts,  it  may  increase  Public  Spirit,  not
only  by  creating  a  sharper  and  more  stimulating
vision  of  the  human  type,  but  by  enabling  the  public-
spirited  man  to  realise  more  clearly  those  effects  on
human  consciousness  which  he  desires  to  produce,
and  to  believe  more  firmly  that  he  can  play  his  part  in
producing  them.  "  We  cannot,"  said  Aristotle,  "  form
a  purpose  the  fulfilment  of  which  we  believe  to  be


OH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATKED  163

impossible  .  .  .  however  strong  our  desire  for  it
may  be."  x

Again,  besides  the  original  sensitiveness  of  his
Love  and  that  sharpening  of  its  stimulation  which  is
due  to  Imagination  and  Knowledge,  the  exceptionally
public-spirited  man  will  generally  find  that  his  motive
power  is  increased  by  the  satisfaction  which  his  daily
work  may  give  to  the  "  intellectual "  or  semi-intel-
lectual dispositions  of  Curiosity,  Craftmanship,  and
the  Aesthetic  Instinct.2  In  the  intervals  when  the
conscious  desire  for  the  good  of  his  fellows  grows
cold,  his  work  may  be  carried  on  for  its  own  sake ;
or  work  commenced  under  the  impulse  of  intellectual
interest  may  be  carried  on  under  the  impulse  of  Love  ;
or  all  three  motives  may  be  intermingled  at  the
same  time.

John  Stuart  Mill,  for  instance,  gives  in  his  Auto-
biography a  description  of  his  feelings  at  the  moment
when,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  he  ceased  to  be  a  mere
student  of  Benthamism  and  became  its  devotee.
The  early  vividness  of  his  passion  for  knowledge,  his
intoxicating  sense  of  the  beauty  of  an  ordered  uni-
verse, and  his  dawning  love  for  mankind  all  crowd
into  his  memory  :

When  I  laid  down  the  last  volume  of  the  Traite  [de  Legisla-

1  Ethics,  bk.  iii.  2.  7,  irpoaiptffis  fj^v  -yip  ofl/c  tori  ruv  ddwdruv  .  .  .
/SotfX^ns  5'  fffrl  rCiv  dSvvdruv,  olov  dGavacrias.

An  English  cabinet  minister  once  told  me  that  he  could  separate  the
statesmen  whom  he  had  known  into  those  whose  vision  of  the  future  con-
sisted of  themselves  and  their  "  careers,"  and  those  whose  vision  consisted
of  the  results  on  their  fellow-men  of  the  policy  for  which  they  were  working.
It  is  this  second  type  of  mind  which  would  be  normally  characteristic  of
"  Public  Spirit."

1  Cf.  ante,  Chapter  III.  p.  48,  and  Chapter  VII.  p.  107.


164  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

tiori],  I  had  become  a  different  being.  The  "  principle  of
utility "...  fell  exactly  into  its  place  as  the  keystone
which  held  together  the  detached  and  fragmentary  com-
ponent parts  of  my  knowledge  and  beliefs.  It  gave  unity
to  my  conceptions  of  things.  I  now  had  opinions  ;  a  creed,
a  doctrine,  a  philosophy  ;  in  one  of  the  best  senses  of  the
word,  a  religion  ;  the  inculcation  and  diffusion  of  which  could
be  made  the  principal  outward  purpose  of  a  life.  And  I  had
a  grand  conception  laid  before  me  of  changes  to  be  effected
in  the  condition  of  mankind  through  that  doctrine.1

Intellectual  interest  and  the  love  of  physical  and
intellectual  beauty  may  of  course  co-exist  with  an
exceptionally  cold  and  self-centred  character.  But  I
believe  that  Mr.  Shaw  stated  a  real  though  not  a
universal  truth  when  he  contended  that  neither  Art
for  Art's  sake  nor  Art  for  the  Artist's  sake  is  normally
sufficient  to  ensure  the  greatest  even  of  purely  artistic
achievements.  "  Great  Art  is  never  produced  for  its
own  sake.  It  is  too  difficult  to  be  worth  the  effort.
All  the  great  artists  enter  into  a  terrible  struggle  with
the  public,  often  involving  bitter  poverty  and  personal
humiliation,  and  always  involving  calumny  and  perse-
cution, because  they  believe  they  are  apostles  doing
what  used  to  be  called  the  Will  of  God,  and  is  now
called  by  many  prosaic  names,  of  which  '  public
work  '  is  the  least  controversial."  2

In  some  happy  instances  the  aesthetic  emotion  of
the  artist  is  especially  stimulated  by  the  beauty  of  a
particular  kind  of  human  excellence,  and  the  passion
for  beauty  is  almost  indistinguishable  from  the
passion  for  that  excellence.  This  was  peculiarly  the

1  J.  S.  Mill,  Autobiography,  p.  66.
2  Three  Plays,  by  Brieux ; Preface,  pp.  xxi  and  xxii.


CH.IX  LOVE  AND  HATRED  165

case  with  William  Morris,  both  in  his  own  whole  life
and  talk,  and  in  such  a  passage  as  this  from  his  Dream
of  John  Ball :

One  [of  the  girls]  came  straight  up  to  Will  Green,  and  I
could  see  at  once  that  she  was  his  daughter.  She  was  tall
and  strongly  made,  with  black  hair  like  her  father,  somewhat
comely  though  no  great  beauty  ;  but  as  they  met,  her  eyes
smiled  even  more  than  her  mouth,  and  made  her  face  look
very  sweet  and  kind,  and  the  smile  was  answered  back  in  a
way  so  quaintly  like  on  her  father's  face  that  I  too  smiled
for  goodwill  and  pleasure.1

Morris  does  not  stop  to  analyse,  and  never  stopped
to  analyse,  the  relation  between  his  "  goodwill  "  and
his  "  pleasure."  When,  in  his  last  social  romance,  he
tried  to  describe  the  form  which  his  own  deepest
motives  took  in  consciousness,  he  wrote  again  of  the
"  vague  hope,  that  was  now  become  a  pleasure,  for
days  of  peace  and  rest,  and  clearness  and  smiling
goodwill."  2

Mr.  McDougall,  in  the  passage  which  I  have
already  quoted,  speaks  of  the  "  sham "  altruism,
which  is  "  the  issue  of  cold  calculation,  or  of  habits
formed  under  the  influence  of  rewards  and  punish-
ments." 3  This  sham  altruism  so  far  exists  that  even
the  most  public-spirited  of  men  may  be  carried  through
work  which  he  would  otherwise  have  abandoned,  by
mere  habit,  or  by  the  calculation  of  the  effect  of
failure  upon  his  career  or  his  livelihood.  But  the
habits  which  are  most  useful  to  him  are  not  those
which  are  formed  "  under  the  influence  of  rewards

1  A  Dream  of  John  Ball  (Reeves  and  Turner,  1890),  p.  55.

z  Morris,  News  from  Nowhere  (Longmans,  1912),  p.  3.

3  Ante,  p.  147.


166  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

and  punishments  "  ;  they  are  rather  habits  of  answer-
ing, both  in  feeling  and  action,  to  stimuli  whose
original  force  would  otherwise  only  be  effective  in
moments  of  exceptionally  vivid  imagination  or
exceptionally  exalted  feeling.  The  ideally  trained
servant  of  the  community. is  the  man  who,  when
during  the  indifferent  reading  of  a  Blue-book  his
eye  is  attracted  by  some  numerical  total  of  disease
or  unemployment,  is  in  a  moment  both  alive  to
its  significance  and  already  started  on  the  work
of  remedy.1

If  the  various  dispositions,  parental,  sexual,  and
general,  which  have  disinterested  Love  as  their

1  Mr.  G.  M.  Trevelyan,  in  his  admirable  Life  of  John  Bright,  quotes  several
passages  in  which  Bright  tries  to  set  out  truthfully  his  own  motives.  Writing,
for  instance,  in  1853  to  Cobden,  who  was  hanging  back  from  a  meeting  on
Parliamentary  Reform,  he  says  :

"  Personally  I  would  wish  to  have  no  meeting  ;  but  personally  I  would
not  be  in  public  life.  I  would  rather  see  more  after  my  own  interests  and
the  interests  of  my  children.  But  we  are  on  the  rails  and  must  move  on.
We  have  work  and  must  do  it "  (Bright  to  Cobden,  January  14,  1853.
Trevelyan,  Life  of  Bright,  p.  211).

And  four  years  later  he  writes  in  his  diary  :

"  I  have  worked  in  earnest  in  the  political  field,  and  if  any  meaner  motive
has  ever  stimulated  or  guided  me,  if  ambition,  or  any  love  of  display  or  of
popularity  has  at  any  time  led  me  on,  of  which  I  am  little  conscious,  I  think
I  can  honestly  say  that  a  love  of  what  I  have  believed  to  be  the  truth,  a
strong  desire  for  the  good  and  true  greatness  of  my  country,  and  an  un-
changeable hostility  to  the  selfishness  and  fraud  which  distinguish  the
government  of  the  English  oligarchy,  have  been  the  mainspring  of  my
public  and  political  conduct "  (entry  in  diary,  January  28,  1857.  G.  M.
Trevelyan's  Life  of  John  Bright,  p.  256).

These  passages  might  be  quoted  as  showing  that  Bright  was  influenced
by  habit,  by  the  love  of  truth,  by  loyalty  to  his  country  and  hatred  of  his
opponents,  but  not  by  what  I  have  called  Love.  And  yet,  in  some  intro-
spective passages,  Love  makes  itself  clear.  In  writing,  for  instance,  to
Sumner  during  the  danger  of  war  between  England  and  America  he  says  :

"  You  know  that  I  write  to  you  with  as  much  earnest  wish  for  your
national  welfare  as  if  I  were  a  native  and  citizen  of  your  country.  I  dread
the  consequences  of  war  quite  as  much  for  your  sakes  as  for  our  own.  So
great  will  be  my  horror  of  such  a  strife  that  I  believe  I  shall  retire  from
public  life  entirely  .  .  .  should  war  take  place  between  your  country  and
mine  "  (p.  314,  Letter  to  Sumner,  December  5,  1861).


OH.  ix  LOVE  AND  HATRED  167

common  factor  were  opposed  by  no  contrary  dis-
positions, they  would  necessarily  direct  the  whole
conduct  of  society.

But  men,  from  the  first  beginning  of  their  reflec-
tion upon  their  own  nature,  have  noticed  in  them-
selves a  recurring  conflict  between  Love  and  Hatred,
in  which  Love  sometimes  wins  and  is  sometimes
defeated.  Under  appropriate  stimuli,  that  is  to  say,
we  are  naturally  inclined  not  only  to  love  but  also  to
hate  each  other,  and  to  desire  not  only  the  safety  and
happiness  of  our  fellows  but  their  suffering  and  death.

That  conflict  is  often  spoken  of  as  one  between
Altruism  and  Egoism,  or  between  the  Selfish  and
Unselfish  groups  of  instincts.  This  distinction  seems
to  me  to  be  misleadingly  "  intellectual."  A  mother
dashes  into  the  fire  to  save  her  child's  life,  a  lover
gives  his  dearest  possession  to  his  mistress,  or  a
statesman  struggles  all  night  against  sleep  while
striving  to  make  more  effectual  the  clauses  of  a  Bill,
not  because  in  each  case  they  prefer  the  "  interests  "
of  others  to  their  own  but  because  they  love.  And
in  the  same  way  men  try  to  slay  one  another  in  battle,
or  to  injure  a  rival  wooer,  or  to  destroy  those  of
another  race  or  religion,  not  because  they  prefer
"  their  own  interest "  to  that  of  others,  but  simply
because  they  hate  ;  because,  that  is  to  say,  a  dis-
position has  been  stimulated  in  them  of  which  the
emotion  of  hatred  and  the  doing  of  injurious  acts  are
normal  manifestations.

Egoism  and  Altruism  or  "  Selfishness  "  and  "  Un-
selfishness "  have,  it  is  true,  real  meanings,  as


168  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

descriptions  either  of  the  characters  of  individual  men
in  whom  certain  dispositions  normally  leading  to
Love  or  Hatred  are  strong  or  weak,  or  of  the  ideals
which  are  inculcated  by  different  types  of  moral  or
religious  discipline.  But  they  do  not  fit  the  original
dispositions  themselves.  A  man  who  has  just  com-
mitted murder  in  a  passion  of  jealousy,  or  saved  life
in  a  passion  of  pity,  is  puzzled  if  he  is  told  that  his
motives  were  "  selfish  "  or  "  unselfish."

Instead,  therefore,  of  the  terms  Egoism  or  Selfish-
ness, with  their  intellectualist  associations,  I  shall  use
the  word  Hatred  for  the  common  conscious  factor  in
those  dispositions  which  incline  us  under  appropriate
stimuli  to  hate  and  injure,  just  as  I  have  used  the
word  Love  for  the  common  factor  in  those  which
incline  us  to  love  and  benefit,  our  fellows.

The  normal  stimulation  of  Hatred  is  less  simple
than  that  of  Love.  I  have  already  argued  that  the
bare  fact  that  the  mother  perceives  the  existence  of
her  child,  or  the  husband  the  existence  of  his  wife,
or  even  any  one  human  being  the  existence  of  another,
tends  to  excite  a  stronger  or  weaker  degree  of  Love.
But  the  normal  cause  of  Hatred  is  the  fact  that  our
perception  of  some  other  human  being  indicates,  not
his  bare  existence,  but  the  fact  that  some  strong
desire  of  ours  is  about  to  be  obstructed  by  him,  that
he  is  preventing  us  or  about  to  prevent  us  from
acquiring  or  keeping  or  consuming  something  which
we  value,  from  seeing  something  as  to  which  we  are
curious,  from  meeting  our  beloved  or  cherishing  our
child,  or  from  leading  our  fellows.  It  is  in  such  cases


LOVE  AND  HATRED  169

of  obstructed  instinct  that  Anger,  Jealousy,  Eivalry,
and  the  other  states  whose  common  quality  is  Hatred
most  commonly  arise.

Hatred  like  Love  can  be  made  more  continuous  by
Habit  and  by  intellectual  associations.  It  can  be
buttressed  by  the  instincts  of  Giving  or  Taking  the
Lead  (Ambition  or  Loyalty).  It  may,  like  Love,  extend
to  non-human  objects,  so  that  the  angry  or  disappointed
man  hates  his  home  or  the  whole  world.

In  its  evolutionary  origin  Hatred  helped  men  to
survive  because  it  was  a  means  of  securing  that  the
useful  acts  of  acquisition,  nutrition,  sex,  leadership,
and  the  rest  should  take  place.  If  any  member
of  the  tribe  obstructed  any  other  in  that  respect,
friction  and  discomfort  arose  until  the  obstruction
was  removed.

And  Hatred  had  also  a  more  direct  biological  ad-
vantage. When  two  males  fought  for  a  female,  the
fittest  to  win  became  the  father  of  her  child.  The
stronger  tribe  in  a  quarrel  about  property  might  kill
out  the  weaker,  or  by  appropriating  the  safest  cave
or  the  best  hunting-ground  might  become  more
numerous.

At  the  dawn,  therefore,  of  civilisation  those  races  of
mankind  seem  to  have  been  coming  to  the  front  among
whom  both  Love  and  Hatred  were  most  easily  and
intensely  excited  ;  who  loved  their  wives,  rejoiced  in
the  number  and  health  and  beauty  of  their  children,
and  were  warm  and  devoted  friends  and  comrades  ;
but  who  were  also  quickly  moved  to  implacable  anger,
and  gave  and  received  death  with  equal  readiness.


170  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

This  temper,  and  the  traditional  customs  and
ideals  which  naturally  sprang  from  it,  can  be  traced
in  those  North  European  tribes  who,  from  the  Dorian
invasion  onwards,  have  worshipped  the  fighting  gods
of  Valhalla  and  Olympus,  have  turned  the  cross  into
a  sword,  and  have  conquered  other  races  with  a
greater  natural  interest  in  ideas  or  beauty,  or  with
a  greater  natural  liking  for  peace  and  goodwill.  It
was  the  possession  of  this  temper  which  enabled  a
handful  of  imported  Barbadian  negroes  the  other
day  to  exterminate  with  untiring  gusto  five-sixths  of
the  gentle  Putumayo  Indians.

This  quality  of  being  "  a  good  hater  "  has,  in  the
modern  civilised  world,  no  longer  so  high  a  survival
value  as  it  had  two  or  three  thousand  years  ago,  and
perhaps,  by  the  ordinary  biological  process  of  de-
generation, it  is  tending  to  lose  among  us  some  of  its
original  keenness.  But  it  exists,  and  has  to  be
allowed  for  at  every  point  of  social  organisation.
The  degree  of  collectivism  which  is  possible  in  any
community,  the  practicability  of  Federal  Govern-
ment, the  laws  which  regulate  marriage  and  family
life,  the  very  way  in  which  our  houses  should  be  built
and  our  gardens  fenced,  are  all  necessarily  influenced
by  the  fact  that  the  Great  Society  has  nowhere  been
formed  by  the  descendants  of  men  as  peaceful  as  the
Putumayo  Indians.

But  while  the  psychological  question  of  the  relative
strength  of  Love  and  Hatred  enters  into  every  social
problem,  there  is  one  problem  which  is  dominated  by
it,  and  whose  importance  at  this  moment  of  the  world's


LOVE  AND  HATRED  171

history  overshadows  all  others.  Every  frontier  dis-
pute between  the  Great  Powers  or  their  dependents,
every  new  proposal  to  add  to  expenditure  on  armies
and  navies,  renews  the  controversy  whether  the  policy
of  the  Powers  should  be  directed  to  the  settling  of
international  disputes  by  such  machinery  as  that
of  The  Hague  Court  or  the  European  Concert,  or
whether  wars,  on  the  tremendous  scale  which  is  now
inevitable,  should  be  taken  as  a  normal  incident  of
civilisation.  In  this  controversy,  the  War  Party  (if
I  may  use  the  term  without  offence  for  those  who  do
not  think  it  advisable  for  any  nation  to  allow  its
present  policy  to  be  influenced  by  a  belief  in  the
possibility  of  permanent  peace)  occupy  a  position  of
great  authority.  Probably  many  more  than  half  of
the  professed  historians  and  psychologists  in  Europe
support  it,  and  they  base  their  arguments  upon
imposing  biological  and  psychological  generalisations.
These  are  in  the  main  three  :  first,  the  biological
statement  that  War  is  necessary  for  the  improvement
of  the  race  by  the  survival  of  the  fit,  and  for  the
prevention  of  regression  by  the  extinction  of  the
unfit :  second,  the  psychological  statement  that  War
is,  owing  to  the  existence  in  man  of  the  warlike
dispositions,  inevitable,  and  that  wise  nations  should
concentrate  all  their  resources  on  preparing  for  it :
and  third,  the  further  psychological  statement  that
peace,  even  if  it  could  be  secured,  would  leave  the
warlike  dispositions  permanently  unstimulated,  and
would  therefore  produce  the  nervous  condition  which
I  have  called  baulked  disposition,  and  that  man  in


172  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY

such  a  condition  cannot  live  a  life  which  any  one  would
call  good.

The  first  argument  possesses,  I  believe,  little
validity  when  it  is  applied  to  wars  between  the  ex-
isting Great  Powers.  Nations  do  not  adopt  those
ways  of  fighting  that  are  most  likely  to  improve  the
human  race,  but  those  which  are  most  likely  to
secure  success;  and  modern  methods  of  warfare
neither  kill  out  the  obviously  unfit  (who  are  excused
from  conscription  and  are  not  slaughtered  after  a
victory)  nor  select  the  less  fit  fighting  men  for  death.
Where  missile  weapons  have  superseded  thrusting
or  cutting  weapons  this  has  always  been  the  case.
The  Spartan  prisoner  from  Sphakteria  protested  that
his  own  survival  was  no  indication  of  his  personal
fitness  nor  unfitness.  The  arrow,  as  he  said,  "  selects  "
neither  the  brave  man  nor  the  coward.1  Shrapnel
fired  from  behind  a  hill  five  miles  off  is  even  more
indiscriminating.

Nor,  if  one  of  the  existing  Great  Powers  conquers
another,  is  there  any  reason  to  expect  that  after  the
war  is  over  the  conquering  population  will  increase
faster  than  the  conquered.  A  decisive  victory  in
South  Eastern  Europe  of  the  Germans  and  Magyars
over  the  Slavs  would  not  mean  that  a  hundred  years
hence  there  would  be  more  Germans  alive  and  fewer
Slavs  than  if  the  war  had  not  taken  place.  It  only
means  that  the  Slavs  would  be  less  free  and  less  self-
respecting.

There  would  seem  therefore  to  be  no  biological

1  Thucydides,  iv.  40.


LOVE  AND  HATRED  173

advantage  in  that  kind  of  war  for  which  the  Great
Society  is  now  organised,  to  set  against  the  clear
biological  disadvantage  involved  in  the  slaughter  of
so  many  of  the  "  fittest "  males,  and  the  clear  biological
dangers  resulting  from  the  spread  of  disease  and  the
waste  of  that  capital  which  might  have  produced
permanently  healthier  conditions.  If  we  merely
desire  to  improve  our  breeding-stock  it  is  obviously
better  to  do  so  directly  by  the  adoption  of  some  form
of  "  eugenic "  policy  rather  than  indirectly  by
making  war.  Lamb's  Chinaman,  when  he  burnt  his
house  down  as  an  indirect  method  of  roasting  a  pig,
did  at  least  get  the  pig  roasted,  whereas  a  thirty-
years'  war  between  the  Triple  Alliance  and  the  Triple
Entente,  waged  for  the  purpose  of  improving  the
European  type,  would  leave  that  type  worse  and  not
better.

As  an  instance  of  the  second  argument,  that  War
is  psychologically  inevitable  unless  a  revolution  is
brought  about  by  means  not  yet  invented,  either  in
human  nature  or  the  structure  of  world-society,  I
propose  to  quote,  not  General  Bernhardi  or  any  other
professional  soldier,  but  the  serious  and  careful  little
book  (A  New  Way  of  Life)  published  in  1909  by
Mr.  St.  Loe  Strachey,  the  editor  of  the  Spectator.  The
book  is  written  to  induce  his  countrymen  "  to  face
the  real  facts  "  instead  of  living  "in  an  unreal  world
of  sentiment  and  emotion  "  (p.  34),  to  see  "  that  War
is  the  law  of  the  civilised  world  quite  as  much  as  of
the  uncivilised,  and  that  mankind  has  as  yet  found
no  other  way  of  settling  which  will  is  to  prevail,


174  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

when  what  we  have  termed  a  clash  of  wills  takes
place  between  communities  who  believe  themselves
to  be  equal  in  physical  force.  Such  clash  of  nations
is  as  certain  to  take  place  from  time  to  time  in  the
future  as  in  the  past "  (pp.  47-48).  "  We  have  got,"  he
says,  "  in  future  to  face  the  world,  not  as  we  should
like  it  to  be,  but  as  it  is — the  world  of  blood  and  iron
controlled  by  men  who  are  not  humanitarians  and
philanthropists  .  .  .,  who  do  not  take  what  they
would  call  a  Sunday-school  view  of  the  world,  but
rather  the  view  that  man  is  still  a  wild  beast,  that  the
race  is  to  the  strong  and  not  to  the  well-intentioned  "
(p.  12).

To  preparation  therefore  for  war  it  is  the  duty  of
all  states  to  devote  the  enormous  powers,  both  over
the  production  of  wealth  and  over  the  training  of  the
individual  citizens,  which  have  been  developed  by
modern  civilisation.  In  particular,  it  is  the  duty  of
the  British  nation  "  with  a  single  heart "  to  "  deter-
mine "  that  "  no  matter  what  the  sacrifice,  she  will
retain  the  command  of  the  sea  "  (p.  3).  It  is,  one
gathers,  equally  the  duty  of  the  Germans  to  challenge
that  command,  "  to  make  Britain  feel  supremely
uncomfortable  on  the  score  of  invasion."  "  Indeed,
it  may  be  said  that  a  part  of  our  determination  to
maintain  the  command  of  the  sea  resides  in  these  very
[German]  arguments  reversed  or  applied  to  our  own
case"  (p.  122).  Mr.  Strachey  therefore  sketches,
with  prim  satisfaction,  a  conversation  (in  the  style  of
Touchstone)  between  two  European  nations ;  from
the  Retort  Courteous,  "  We  desire  that  you  will


LOVE  AND  HATEED  175

refrain  from  taking  such  and  such  a  course  of  action  "  ;
to  the  Countercheck  Quarrelsome,  '  We  have  a
right  to  take  it  and  mean  to  take  it,"  and  the  con-
clusion :  "  There  is  no  way  but  War,  and  may  God
defend  the  right."

It  is  true  that  the  sacrifice  which  Mr.  Strachey
proposes  for  the  moment  (the  introduction  of  the
Swiss  system  of  military  training  into  Great  Britain
and  possibly  Ireland)  is  not  a  very  severe  one  ;  but
I  am  dealing  with  his  arguments  and  not  with  his
proposals,  and  his  arguments  require  that  a  nation
which  has  determined  to  carry  out  a  certain  policy,
"  no  matter  what  the  sacrifice,"  must  be  willing  to
go  beyond  the  Swiss  and  even  beyond  the  German
system  of  compulsory  service.  Nor  of  course  do  his
arguments  lead  only  to  service  for  home  defence.
While  pointing  out  that  we  have  created  in  India
a  Pax  Britannica,  which  he  himself  gives  as  an
instance  of  a  method  of  government  "  which  the  free-
men of  Europe  reject  instinctively  as  bringing  greater
evils  in  its  train  even  than  the  reign  of  war  "  (pp.
39,  41),  he  says  that  "  If  we  were  faced  with  another

*  i  *  ^

Indian  Mutiny,  we  might  have  to  ask  for  half  a  million
volunteers  "  (p.  23) ;  and  here,  too,  we  must,  if  we  are
to  be  consistent,  adopt  the  principle  of  "no  matter
what  sacrifice,"  and  be  ready  to  send,  if  the  military
position  requires  it,  our  whole  conscript  army  to
India.  The  words  "  no  matter  what  sacrifice  "  are
easy  to  write,  but  they  lead  straight  to  that  state  of
social  organisation  of  which  Professor  Carman  says
that:


176  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

A  world  composed  of  territorial  socialist  societies  in  which
the  whole  surplus  income  over  bare  necessaries  was  spent  in
war  and  preparations  for  war,  would  obviously  be  a  more
miserable  place  than  the  world  as  we  know  it.1

Many  men  keep  in  their  minds  some  particular
piece  of  possible  expenditure  which  they  think  to  be
needed,  and  against  which  as  a  "  margin  "  they  balance
alternative  expenditure.  I  sometimes  use  for  this
purpose  the  5000  children  who,  in  the  poorer  parts
of  London,  are  at  any  given  moment  kept  away  from
school  and  confined  to  their  frowsy  living-rooms  by
ringworm.  If  the  State  were  willing  to  incur  the
necessary  expense  ringworm  could  be  completely
stamped  out  in  England,  and  the  present  reason  why
it  is  not  stamped  out  is  that  we  have  preferred  to
spend  on  Dreadnoughts  the  money  which  might  have
been  given  in  subsidies  for  local  medical  treatment.
Other  men  may  use  as  instances  of  such  "  marginal  "
expenditure  the  number  of  babies  who  could  be
saved  in  any  year  from  lifelong  disease,  the  number
of  girls  who  are  working  overtime  in  badly  paid  trades,
or  the  possible  provision  of  skilled  nurses  in  work-
house infirmaries.  If  we  and  the  Germans  both  adopt
Mr.  Strachey's  psychological  generalisations,  and  both
draw  from  them  the  principle  of  "no  matter  what
sacrifice,"  then,  in  these  and  a  thousand  other  re-
spects, the  "  standard  of  comfort,"  both  in  England
and  in  Germany,  must  not  only  be  prevented  from
rising  but  must  actually  be  lowered.

That  does  not  of  course  prove  that  Mr.  Strachey's

1  The  Economic  Outlook,  pp.  292-293.


LOVE  AND  HATRED  177

generalisation  is  wrong  ;  but  it  does  make  it  desirable
that  we  should  examine  the  evidence  for  and  against
it  with  some  care.  It  is,  for  instance,  often  contended
by  members  of  the  Peace  party  that  the  fact  that
individuals  in  several  European  countries  now  habitu-
ally use  the  law-courts  instead  of  the  duel  as  a  means
of  settling  disputes,  indicates  that  a  corresponding
practice  among  nations  is  at  least  not  psychologically
impossible.  To  this  Mr.  Strachey  answers  :  "  Why
do  men  have  recourse  to  a  Court  of  Law  in  private
quarrels,  however  heated  they  become  and  however
convinced  each  may  be,  that  he  is  morally  and  legally
in  the  right  ?  Because  they  are  forced  to  do  so  and
are  allowed  to  use  no  other  arbitrament "  (p.  38).
He  then  argues  that  such  an  irresistible  power  to
enforce  the  decisions  of  a  European  Court  cannot  and
ought  not  to  be  set  up.

But,  as  a  matter  of  historical  fact,  the  irresistible
force  by  which  men  are  now  compelled  to  resort  to
the  law-courts  in  their  private  quarrels  is  the  result  of
custom  arising  from  thousands  of  free  decisions  to  do
so.  In  the  growth  of  every  European  nation  there
was  a  stage  when  each  head  of  a  free  family  was  in
the  position  of  a  modern  state.  He  could  choose
either  to  bring  his  quarrel  to  an  assembly  of  heads  of
families  or  to  levy  private  war  ;  and  if  he  appealed  to
the  assembly  and  the  decision  went  against  him,  he
could  still  ignore  that  decision  and  take  his  chance  in
a  fight.

The  Icelandic  Family  Sagas  may  be  taken,  for
instance,  as  a  laboratory  experiment  on  Mr.  Strachey's

N


178  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  H.I

proposition,  tried  under  conditions  as  favourable  as
possible  to  Mr.  Strachey.  The  free  Icelandic  families
formed  of  course  a  community  incredibly  smaller
than  a  modern  nation.  But  Mr.  Strachey  does  not
rely  on  that  exaggerated  "  Crowd-Psychology,"  which
contends  that  the  larger  a  nation  is  the  more  irrational
must  be  the  behaviour  of  its  individual  citizens.  He
argues  that  individuals,  whether  in  small  or  large
communities,,  will  not  settle  their  disputes  by  law
unless  they  are  irresistibly  compelled  to  do  so ;  and
in  the  Sagas  we  can  watch  men  gradually  forming  the
custom  of  resort  to  the  law  when  they  were  just  as
free  as  are  modern  European  nations  to  fight  instead.

Njal  and  Gunnar,  the  heroes  of  the  Njals  Saga,1
were  certainly  men  with  fighting  instincts  not  less
originally  strong  or  more  weakened  by  education  and
habit  than  those  of  an  average  modern  European
voter  or  statesman.  Yet  both  of  them,  again  and
again,  after  some  undeniable  casus  belli  committed
by  their  relations,  go  of  their  own  choice  to  the  Ting
and  accept  the  judgment  of  their  neighbours.  Gunnar,
the  fiercer  of  the  two,  does  so  largely  because  he  is
not  ashamed  to  recognise  in  himself  that  primitive
indisposition  to  inflict  suffering  wantonly  which  the
Greeks  called  Aidos.  "  I  would  like  to  know,"  said
he,  "  whether  I  am  so  much  the  less  brisk  and  bold
than  other  men  because  I  think  more  of  killing  men
than  they."  2

But  they  are  also  influenced  by  the  danger  to  the

1  Translated  by  G.  W.  Dasent  (1861),  now  republished,  in  Dent's  Every-
man Series,  as  The  Story  of  Burnt  Njal.
1  Ibid.  p.  98.


LOVE  AND  HATRED  179

whole  community,  the  incalculable  element  of  what
Aristotle  calls  "  infinity  "  involved  in  feuds  carried
out  on  Mr.  Strachey's  principle  of  "no  matter  what
sacrifice."  "  For  with  law,"  says  Njal,  "  shall  our
land  be  built  up  and  settled,  and  with  lawlessness
wasted  and  spoiled."  x

Their  wives,  Bergthora  and  Hallgerda,  play  Mr.
Strachey's  part  in  the  story,  and  are  always  urging
that  the  world  is  ruled  by  blood  and  iron,  and  not  by
Sunday-school  maxims,  and  that  fighting  is  much
more  logical  and  satisfactory  than  negotiating.  But
Njal  and  Gunnar  held  on  to  their  purpose  of  showing
that  private  resort  to  law  without  compulsion  is
psychologically  possible  sufficiently  long  to  help  in
building  up  a  custom  which  has  since  acquired  the
irresistible  sanction  of  the  modern  state.

The  third  argument,  that  permanent  peace,  even
though  it  may  be  psychologically  possible,  is  incon-
sistent with  a  good  life,  has,  I  believe,  in  spite  of  its
apparent  paradox,  more  stuff  in  it  than  either  of  the
other  two  arguments,  that  war  is  now  required  to
improve  our  breeding-stock,  and  that  peace  is  psycho-
logically impossible.

This  third  argument  is  often  combined  with  a
statement  of  extreme  Lamarckianism.  Mankind,  it
is  said,  will  "  degenerate  "  during  "  the  long  canker  of
peace,"  not  because  the  unfit  survive,  but  because
peace  is  a  bad  habit  and  bad  habits  are  biologically
transmitted.  Mr.  Strachey  seems  to  mean  some-
thing of  this  kind  when  he  says  :

1  The  Story  of  Burnt  Njal,  p.  123.


180  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

Again,  take  Italy  from  1715  to  the  outbreak  of  the
Napoleonic  Wars.  The  peninsula  was  lapped  in  peace,  but
men  degenerated  instead  of  improved.  ...  In  truth  universal
peace  .  .  .  does  not  breed  worthier  men  and  women.
This  is  not  a  pleasant  fact.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  very
sad  fact,  but  it  is  one  which  we  are  bound  to  face,  for  if  we
do  not  face  it  we  shall  delude  ourselves  with  shams  and  shadows
(pp.  45-46).

If  a  few  generations  of  peace  would  really  bring  it
about  that  we  were  born  peaceful,  most  men  would
consider  that  an  important  argument  in  favour  of
resort  to  The  Hague  Court  for  the  settlement  of  inter-
national disputes.  But  Mr.  Strachey's  argument  is
really  stronger  without  its  Lamarckian  support.  It
would  then  run  that  since  acquired  habits  are  not
transmitted,  each  generation  will  be  born  with  fight-
ing instincts  which  must  be  kept  under  by  Habit.
But  a  Habit  which  ignores  a  strong  instinct  produces,
as  I  have  said,  the  condition  of  "  baulked  disposi-
tion," and  the  character  and  nervous  system  of  a  man
in  that  condition  is  apt  to  degenerate.  Mr.  Strachey's
meaning  is  quite  clear  when  he  says  :

If  men  are  once  taught  that  come  what  may  they  can  eat,
drink,  and  be  merry,  and  go  about  the  world  in  swinish
equanimity,  secure  that  their  sty  will  never  be  disturbed,
they  will  become  the  most  hateful  and  demoralised  of  human
beings  (p.  82).

A  man  of  independent  fortune,  who  is  uninter-
ruptedly prosperous  in  his  affairs,  and  whose  wife  and
children  and  servants  never  oppose  his  will,  misses
the  normal  stimuli  of  anger.  He  will  be  for  a  time,
perhaps  for  some  years,  the  happier  for  it.  But


LOVE  AND  HATRED  181

sooner  or  later  he  will  become  restless,  unreliable,
and  probably  unhappy.  If  he  is  a  reservist  and  is
called  upon  to  serve  in  an  actual  campaign  he  may,
in  the  Aristotelian  sense,  be  "  purged,"  he  may  fight
with  exhilaration  and  inner  contentment,  and  come
back  to  his  home  an  immensely  better  man.  Military
and  naval  professional  officers  always  feel  the  truth
of  this.  They  see  their  men  "  running  to  seed  "  in
the  endless  preparations  for  a  war  which  never  takes
place,  and  suspect  perhaps  that  they  themselves  are
suffering  in  the  same  way.  A  little  of  "  the  real
thing,"  they  are  quite  sure,  leaves  every  one  who  is
not  killed  the  better  for  it.

The  argument  is  perhaps  complicated  by  the  fact
that  modern  war  may  provide  a  very  insufficient
satisfaction  to  the  fighting  instincts.  Battle-fury  and
blood-lust  were  evolved  among  our  ancestors  under
conditions  where  you  felt  and  saw  the  wounds  you
inflicted.  Under  modern  conditions  a  man  may
come  back  from  a  campaign  in  much  the  same  state
of  "  baulked  disposition  "  as  that  in  which  he  entered
on  it.  "  I  was  right  through  the  Afridi  War,"  an
officer  once  said  wearily  to  me,  "  but  I  never  saw  a
dead  Afridi."  The  gods  in  Valhalla  would  hardly
choose  the  organisation  of  modern  lines  of  military
communication,  as  they  chose  the  play  of  sword
and  spear,  to  be  the  most  exquisite  employment  of
eternity.

Hate,  again,  like  Love,  requires  for  its  full  stimu-
lation a  vivid  realisation  of  its  object,  and  in  the  sort
of  European  wars  which  threaten  nowadays  that


182  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

realisation  may  be  difficult  to  create.  In  the  days
when  the  great  Macdermott  sang  that  "  the  Russians
shall  not  have  Constantin-o-o-ple  "  we  all  had  a  clear
though  mendacious  picture  both  of  the  Russians  and
of  Constantinople  in  our  minds.  As  I  now  write  all
good  Europeans  are  watching  the  controversy  about
Servia's  "  window  on  the  Adriatic  "  with  the  same
feeling  of  helpless  apprehension  with  which  a  man
lying  bound  in  a  hay-barn  might  watch  a  child  in  the
opposite  corner  playing  with  matches.  If  war  takes
place  we  shall  certainly  make  some  entity  to  hate,  but
for  the  moment  the  cry  that  "  the  Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy  shall  not  have  Durazzo  "  leaves  even  the
Music  Halls  cold  and  puzzled.  We  should  get  much
more  satisfaction  per  thousand  of  violent  deaths  out
of  a  war  between  Manchester  and  Liverpool.

But  the  fact  does  remain  that  a  rather  large  pro-
portion of  the  members  of  the  Great  Society  honestly
feel  from  time  to  time  that  they  would  be  improved
by  a  war,  and  are  only  restrained  by  the  fear  of  "  the
infinite  " — by  the  strong  probability  that  they  may
get  more  war  than  is  necessary  to  improve  their
digestions.  It  is  not  merely  the  fighting  instinct
which,  they  feel,  will  be  purged  by  a  campaign,  but
the  desire  for  change,  for  fear  nobly  resisted,  for  the
intense  stimulation  of  those  instincts  which  tell  us  to
lead  and  follow.  Tennyson  in  March  1854  stood  on
the  "  giant  deck  "  of  one  of  Admiral  Napier's  ships
(before  they  started  on  their  most  unsatisfying  ex-
pedition to  the  Baltic)  and  "  mixed  his  breath  with  a
loyal  people  shouting  a  battle-cry."


CH.IX  LOVE  AND  HATRED  183

"  Many  a  darkness,"  he  wrote,  "  into  the  light  shall  leap,
And  shine  in  the  sudden  making  of  splendid  names,
And  noble  thought  be  freer  under  the  sun,
And  the  heart  of  a  people  beat  with  one  desire."

If  the  life  of  men  is  not  to  lose  its  savour  their
powers  must  be  exercised,  and  the  secrets  of  their
nature  searched  by  a  way  of  living  more  varied,  more
coloured,  more  exhilarating  than  that  which  most  of
the  present  English  governing  class  seems  to  con-
template in  its  legislative  plans  for  improving  the
condition  of  the  governed.  It  may  be  that  this  may
involve  arrangements  which  shall  require,  in  Mr.
Strachey's  words,  that  "  Every  man  should  some  time
in  his  life  make  a  definite  renunciation  of  ease  and
comfort  for  his  country's  good  .  .  .  "  (p.  5),  and  that
"  the  young  barbarians  of  the  residential  quarters  "
should  get  some  of  the  "  wholesome  discipline  "  now
enjoyed  by  "  the  superior  artisans  and  the  clerks  "
(pp.  74-75).

But  meanwhile  I  would  plead  that  it  would  be  not
only  more  effective  but  more  economical  if  we  aimed
at  these  results  directly,  instead  of  trusting  that  we
may  find  them  among  the  accidents  and  uncertainties,
the  fatigue  and  monotony  of  modern  warfare.

;<  The  custom  of  firing  houses  continued,"  says  the
"  Dissertation  on  Roast  Pig,"  "  till,  in  process  of  time,
a  sage  arose,  like  our  Locke,  who  made  a  discovery,
that  the  flesh  of  swine  might  be  cooked  without  the
necessity  of  consuming  a  whole  house  to  dress  it.
Then  first  began  the  rude  form  of  a  gridiron.  Roast-
ing by  the  string  or  spit  came  in  a  century  or  two
later,  I  forget  in  whose  dynasty.  By  such  slow


184  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

degrees,  concludes  the  manuscript,  do  the  most  use-
ful and  seemingly  the  most  obvious  arts  make  their
way  among  mankind."

We  have  now  made  our  national  houses  so  vast
and  complex  that  the  custom  of  firing  them  in  order
to  warm  our  souls  is  yearly  becoming  more  dangerous
and  expensive,  and  the  necessity  of  inventing  some
other  nervous  tonic  more  urgent.


CHAPTER  X

THOUGHT

IN  each  of  the  preceding  five  chapters  I  have  tried  to
keep  the  practical  purpose  of  my  analysis  constantly
before  me.  I  have  asked,  not  only  what  is  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge  about  Habit,  Fear,  Pleasure,
Love,  and  the  rest,  but  whether  an  art  exists  which
enables  us  to  use  that  knowledge  for  improving  the
conditions  of  life  in  the  Great  Society.

I  now  propose  to  consider  Thought  with  the  same
practical  end  in  view.

In  Chapter  III.  I  argued  that  Thought  is  a  true
natural  disposition.  Under  appropriate  conditions,
that  is  to  say,  we  are  naturally  disposed  to  enter  into
a  state  of  reverie,  during  which  our  ideas  are  so
combined  and  arranged  as  to  produce  new  mental
results.  I  there  also  argued  that  Thought  may  be
independently  stimulated,  and  that  it  is  not,  as  Mr.
McDougall  says,  a  merely  subordinate  mechanism
acting  only  in  obedience  to  the  previous  stimulation
of  one  of  the  simpler  instincts.

In  this  chapter  I  shall  ask  whether  there  is  an  art
by  which  the  efficiency  of  Thought  can  be  improved.

Five  hundred  years  ago  no  one  would  have  had  any

185


186  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

hesitation  in  answering,  "  Yes,  such  an  art  of  Thought
exists  ;  its  name  is  Logic  ;  it  was  invented  by  Aris-
totle ;  and  it  is  the  most  important  element  in  the
curriculum  of  the  schools  and  Universities."  This
belief  in  formal  Aristotelian  Logic  as  an  art  of  thought
died  hard.  During  the  years  of  the  American  and
the  French  Revolution  Oxford  students  were  still  re-
quired, in  order  to  receive  their  official  certificates  as
trained  thinkers,  to  repeat  long  Latin  "  strings  "  of
syllogistic  affirmations  and  denials  on  some  question
in  moral  or  natural  philosophy.  Here  is  a  transla-
tion of  part  of  such  a  "  string  "  :

Opponent.  What  think  you  of  this  question,  whether
universal  ideas  are  formed  by  abstraction  ?

Respondent.  I  affirm  it.

Opponent.  Universal  ideas  are  not  formed  by  abstraction  :
therefore  you  are  deceived.

Respondent.  I  deny  the  antecedent.

Opponent.  I  prove  the  antecedent.  Whatever  is  formed
by  sensation  alone,  is  not  formed  by  abstraction  :  but  universal
ideas  are  formed  by  sensation  alone  :  therefore  universal
ideas  are  not  formed  by  abstraction.

Respondent.  I  deny  the  minor.

Opponent.  I  prove  the  minor.  The  idea  of  solidity  is  a
universal  idea :  but  the  idea  of  solidity  is  formed  by  sensa-
tion alone  :  therefore  universal  ideas  are  formed  by  sensation
alone,  etc.  etc.1

It  was  the  custom  by  that  time  for  the  under-
graduate to  read  his  "  strings  "  from  a  written  paper
hidden  in  his  square  cap,  and  it  is  safe  to  assert  that
Gibbon  and  Bentham  left  Oxford  better  prepared,  if
they  followed  that  custom,  to  think  about  History  or

1  Godley,  Oxford  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  p.  177.


THOUGHT  187

Law,  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  they  had
attempted,  as  students  in  the  Middle  Ages  did  seriously
attempt,  to  learn  from  Aristotle's  rules  how  to  acquire
Aristotle's  intellectual  fertility.

Nowadays,  the  majority,  perhaps,  of  educated  men,
if  asked  whether  an  art  of  Thought  exists,  would
answer,  "  No  :  thoughts  come  of  themselves  by  a
process  of  whose  character  we  are  ignorant,  and  of
which  we  are  always  unconscious  at  the  time.  No
drilling  either  in  Aristotle's  syllogism  or  in  any  other
logical  method  ever  gave  a  man  a  new  thought  which
he  would  not  have  had  without  it.  All  that  we  know
is  that  some  men  think  abundantly  and  consecutively,
and  other  men  scantily  and  at  haphazard."

Some  of  the  statements  made  by  important
modern  psychologists  would  seem  to  support  this
view.  They  insist  that  the  primary  and  essential
process  of  Thought  is  unconscious,  and  therefore,
at  the  moment  of  thinking,  involuntary.  Professor
James  said  :

From  the  guessing  of  newspaper  enigmas  to  the  plotting
of  the  policy  of  an  empire  there  is  no  other  process  than  this.
We  trust  to  the  laws  of  cerebral  nature  to  present  us  spon-
taneously with  the  appropriate  idea.1

Many  of  the  newer  psychologists  also  declare  that
this  process  is  in  essence  identical  in  ways  of  think-
ing which  ordinary  language  suggests  to  be  entirely
separate.  The  "  spontaneous  presentation  of  the
appropriate  idea  "  (to  repeat  James's  phrase)  is,  they
say,  the  same  thing  whether  we  are  remembering,  or

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  589.


188  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

imagining,  or  reasoning.  Professor  Pillsbury  says  :
"  Neither  the  materials  nor  medium  of  reasoning,  nor
the  laws  of  connection,  are  distinctive  of  reasoning  as
opposed  to  recall  or  imagination,"  l  and  again,  "  If  one
will  but  follow  through  a  chain  of  reasoning,  it  will  be
observed  that  the  elements  are  connected  by  the  same
laws  of  association  that  are  operative  in  the  simplest
recall." 2  If  it  is  objected  that  Memory  reproduces
impressions  in  the  accidental  order  and  form  in  which
they  reach  us  from  outside,  while  Imagination  or
Reasoning  arranges  them  in  an  order  chosen  by  the
mind  itself,  and  transforms  them  into  something
different  from  the  original,  some  of  the  experi-
mentalists answer  that  Memory  does  in  fact  rearrange
and  transform  the  results  of  experience,  and  Imagina-
tion and  Reasoning  do  no  more.

The  real  differences  between  Memory,  and  Imagina-
tion, and  Reasoning  are  to  be  found,  they  say,  not  in
the  primary  process  of  thinking,  but  in  our  subsequent
attitude  towards  our  thoughts.  If  "  the  result  is
regarded  as  untrue  to  reality,"  the  process  is  Imagina-

1  Psychology  of  Reasoning,  by  Professor  W.  B.  Pillsbury  of  Michigan
(1910),  p.  4.  The  analysis  of  the  thought -process  by  systematic  intro-
spective experiments  carried  on  mainly  within  special  laboratories  is  a  branch
of  scientific  enquiry  in  which,  as  in  astronomy,  the  Americans  have  taken
the  lead.  Any  one  who  wishes  to  follow  their  work  can  do  so  in  the  specialist
psychological  journals,  or  may  begin  with  the  book  just  quoted  and  go  on
with  How  We  think  (1901),  and  Studies  in  Logical  Theory  (1903),  by  Professor
Dewey  of  Chicago,  and  The  Experimental  Psychology  of  the  Thought  Process,
by  Professor  E.  B.  Titchener  of  Cornell  (1909).  In  this  last  book  there  is
summed  up  much  recent  work  by  American  and  German  experimentalists
at  Wurzburg  and  elsewhere.  The  records  of  that  work  are  a  pattern  of
scientific  patience  and  candour,  and  have  produced  a  conviction  in  at  least
one  inexpert  reader  that  from  it  will  ultimately  develop  a  great  and  fertile
art  of  thinking.  But  the  work  itself  is  still  confessedly  tentative,  and  there
seems  as  yet  to  be  very  incomplete  agreement  among  the  students  in  different
laboratories  as  to  many  details  both  of  terminology  and  of  results.

*  Ibid.  p.  3.  Professor  Pillsbury  uses  the  word  "  recall  "  as  equivalent
to  Memory.


CH.X  THOUGHT  189

tion  ;  "  if  it  be  regarded  as  a  true  combination  even
when  new,"  it  is  Reasoning.  "  What  is  recognised  is
said  to  be  remembered  ;  what  is  not  recognised  is
said  to  be  the  result  of  reasoning  or  imagination." 1
When  I  try  to  realise  this  I  find  myself  recalling  an
afternoon  in  the  early  eighteen  nineties  when  the  late
Lord  Russell  of  Killowen  (before  his  peerage)  was
parliamentary  candidate  for  Hackney.  He  asked  me
one  Saturday  to  do  a  round  of  open-air  speaking  with
him.  We  drove  from  "  pitch  "  to  "  pitch,"  climbed
at  each  on  to  a  waiting  cart,  and  drew  verbal  pictures
of  the  results  of  a  victory  for  our  side,  which,  at  each
repetition,  grew  more  splendid  and  more  convincing.
When  it  was  all  over  we  stepped  back  into  our  cab,
and  the  great  man  stretched  his  broad  shoulders,  took
a  long  breath,  and  suddenly  said  in  a  new  voice  :
"  Do  you  know,  I  daresay  a  good  deal  could  be
done."  In  an  instant  our  afternoon's  work,  which
might  perhaps  up  to  that  point  have  been  classed  as
creative  Imagination,  became  for  him  part  of  a
process  of  Reasoning.

The  view  that  Thought,  even  in  its  most  complex
form,  bloweth  as  it  listeth,  and  that  no  effort  of  ours
can  hope  to  control  or  improve  it,  might  also  be  sup-
ported by  the  records  of  actual  intellectual  achieve-
ment. Thought-processes  of  astonishing  length  and
complexity  can,  these  show,  take  place  with  almost
complete  unconsciousness.  Wagner,  for  instance,
describes  how,  after  a  sleepless  night  followed  by
an  uninteresting  walk :

1  Pillsbury,  Psychology  of  Reasoning,  p.  4.


190  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

I  stretched  myself  dead  tired  on  a  hard  couch  awaiting
the  long-desired  hour  of  sleep.  It  did  not  come ;  but  I  fell
into  a  kind  of  somnolent  state  in  which  I  suddenly  felt  as
though  I  were  sinking  in  swiftly  flowing  water.  The  rushing
sound  formed  itself  in  my  brain  into  a  musical  sound,  the
chord  of  E  flat  major,  which  continually  re-echoed  in  broken
forms ;  these  broken  chords  seemed  to  be  melodic  passages
of  increasing  motion,  yet  the  pure  triad  of  E  flat  major  never
changed,  but  seemed  by  its  continuance  to  impart  infinite
significance  to  the  element  in  which  I  was  sinking.  I  awoke
in  sudden  terror  from  my  doze,  feeling  as  though  the  waves
were  rushing  high  above  my  head.  I  at  once  recognised  that
the  orchestral  overture  to  the  Rheingold,  which  must  long
have  lain  latent  within  me,  though  it  had  been  unable  to  find
definite  form,  had  at  last  been  revealed  to  me.1

Dickens  once  told  Forster :  "  As  to  the  way  in
which  these  characters  [in  Martin  Chuzzlewit]  have
opened  out,  that  is,  to  me,  one  of  the  most  surprising
processes  of  the  mind  in  this  sort  of  invention.  Given
what  one  knows,  what  one  does  not  know  springs
up  "  ; 2  and  again,  "  I  don't  invent  it — really  do  not—
but  see  it  and  write  it  down."  3

The  great  French  mathematician  Henri  Poincare
was  once  working  at  a  difficult  problem  about  Fuchsian
functions.  "  Somehow  or  other  he  found  that  these
investigations  were  leading  to  nothing,  went  off:  for
a  few  days  to  the  seaside  and  banished  mathematics,
as  he  supposed,  from  his  thoughts.  But  suddenly
one  day  when  walking  on  the  beach,  he  was  '  stung
by  the  splendour  of  a  sudden  thought '  that  the
arithmetical  transformations  of  indefinite  ternary

1  My  Life,  Wagner  (Eng.  trans.),  vol.  ii.  p.  603.

*  Forster' s  Life  of  Dickens,  vol.  ii.  p.  68.

8  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  308.


THOUGHT  191

quadratic  forms  are  identical  with  those  of  non-
Euclidean  Geometry."  1

If  this  were  all,  if  we  could  never  hope  to  know
anything  about  Thought  except  that  it  is  unconscious
and  therefore  involuntary,  and  if  no  means  could  be
discovered  of  increasing  the  efficacy  of  Thought,  then
the  outlook  for  the  Great  Society  would  be  dark
indeed.  The  whole  of  our  analysis  up  to  this  point
goes  to  prove  that  as  the  scale  ^)fjsocial  organisation
extends,  the_  merely  instinctive  guidance  of  Fear,
or  Love,  or  Pleasure,  or  Habit,  becomes  more  and
more  unsafe  ;  and  that  not  only  is  a  clearer  conscious-
ness of  his  actions  and  a  stronger  habit  of  forecasting
their  result  needed  by  the  ordinary  man,  but  Thought
injthe  great  sense,  the  long-continued  concentration
of  the  professed  thinker  in  which  new  knowledge  is
made  available  for  the  guidance  of  human  life,  is
required  as  it  has  never  been  required  before.  -

Fortunately  for  us,  there  are  certain  conditions
accompanying  or  influencing  the  unconscious  and
involuntary  processes  of  Thought  which  can  be
brought  under  our  conscious  control,  and  improve-
ments in  which  do  produce  improvements  in  our
thinking.  These  conditions,  if  we  take  the  natural
powers  of  any  individual  thinker  for  granted,  may
be  classified  as  his  material  circumstances  at  the
moment  of  Thought ;  the  general  mental  "  attitude  "
which  more  or  less  consciously  accompanies  his
Thought ;  and  his  relation  to  the  particular  subject-

1  From  an  admirable  article  on  Poincare  in  the  Westminster  Gazette  of
July  22,  1912.


L92  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY  n.  i

latter  of  his  Thought.  This  last  relation  can  again
be  divided  into  the  content  and  arrangement  of  his
Memory  or  of  the  external  Record  which  takes  its
place,  and  his  "  Logic  "  in  the  stricter  sense,  that  is
to  say,  any  system  of  methodically  directing  attention
and  criticising  results  which  he  may  have  adopted,
either  deliberately  or  in  the  process  of  acquiring
language,  and  which  he  may  use  either  consciously  or
by  unconscious  habit.

Let  us  begin  with  the  material  circumstances  of
the  thinker.  I  have  already  said  (in  Chapter  III.)
that,  although  the  satisfaction  of  Curiosity  or  the
adaptation  of  means  to  ends  by  the  process  of  Trial
and  Error  may  take  place  while  the  subject  is  in  a
condition  of  restless  excitement  and  movement,  the
reverie  in  which  our  ideas  arrange  themselves  for
higher  intellectual  purposes  normally  requires  that
the  thinker  should  be  free  from  external  interference
and  should  be  either  at  rest  or  in  a  state  of  mono-
tonous and  unconscious  movement.  No  man  is  likely
to  produce  creative  thoughts  (either  consciously  or
subconsciously)  if  he  is  constantly  interrupted  by
irregular  noises,  or  if  he  is  very  cold  or  hot,  or  very
hungry.

Perhaps  when  we  know  more  exactly  than  we  do
now  the  history  of  the  beginnings  of  European
civilisation,  we  shall  be  able  to  trace  the  slow  shifting
of  the  external  conditions  most  favourable  to  Thought
from  the  climate  of  the  southern  Mediterranean  to
that  of  North- West  Europe.  At  first  men  seem  to
have  thought  most  successfully  in  the  open  air,


THOUGHT  193

during  the  cool  hours  which  follow  sunset  in  a  hot
climate,  when  they  could  escape  from  the  noise  of
children  and  dogs  in  the  crowded  cave  or  tent.
Thousands  of  years  later,  and  a  little  farther  north,
permanent  shaded  places,  temple  porticoes,  or  still
later  the  Academe  or  the  Stoa,  were  built  and  kept
quiet.  Here  men  could  fall  into  a  condition  of
absorbed  Thought  by  daylight  without  the  risk  of
sunstroke.  Then  came  the  monastery  cell  of  North
Europe,  dry  and  quiet,  but  in  winter  abominably
cold.1  The  monasteries  were  followed  by  the  pleasant
rooms  with  their  big  glazed  windows  and  open
fireplaces  which  Erasmus  found  in  the  Tudor  country
houses  and  Cambridge  colleges.  Jane  Austen's
Mansfield  Park  marks  the  later  point  when  the
physical  possibility  of  Thought  was  just  beginning
to  be  extended,  even  in  winter,  to  the  housekeeping
sex,  and  when  a  girl  below  the  rank  of  a  noblewoman
might  here  and  there  hope  for  solitude  and  "  a  fire  in
the  East  Room."  Now  the  claim  for  the  material
possibility  of  Thought  is  moving  farther  down  the
social  scale,  and  the  Inspectors  of  the  Board  of
Education  point  out  as  a  case  of  genuine  hardship
that  an  artisan  student  of  the  Workers'  Education
Association  "  in  order  to  get  a  time  when  the  house
was  quiet  for  working  in,  went  to  bed  at  seven,  got

1  Ordericus  Vitalia  (Bohn's  Antiquarian  Library,  vol.  iii.  pp.  40-45)
describes  the  controversy  at  the  Benedictine  Monastery  of  MolSme  at  the
end  of  the  eleventh  century  between  the  Abbot,  who  wished  to  require  all
monks  to  dress  and  live  like  the  primitive  Egyptian  anchorites,  and  the
monks,  who  argued  that  "  the  French,  who  often  shudder  in  the  frosts  of
winter,"  required  special  privileges  if  they  were  to  do  their  work  of  reading
and  meditation.

O


194  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

up  at  midnight,  worked  for  two  hours,  and  then  went
to  bed  again."  x

In  the  Great  Society,  however,  side  by  side  with
the  growing  recognition  of  the  need  for  a  larger
proportion  of  the  population  of  thinking-places  kept
quiet  and  at  a  fairly  even  temperature,  has  come
the  growing  impossibility  of  thinking  outside  them.
The  modern  Londoner  cannot  stroll  in  obedience  to
his  mood  into  the  fields  on  a  summer  evening.  He
must  first  take  a  tram  or  railway  journey,  during
which  the  mood  of  Thought  will  probably  evaporate.
The  London  or  Manchester  schoolmaster  cannot,  like
Eugene  Aram,  sit  in  a  field  and  brood  "  remote  from
all."  If  the  London  County  Council  desires  that  its
schoolmasters  and  mistresses  should  think,  it  has
to  place  "  teachers'  rooms  "  on  the  original  plans  of
those  great  school  buildings  which  take  years  to
build  ;  and  the  Progressives  on  the  old  School  Board
never  felt  more  near  to  the  actual  problem  of  the
intellectual  vitality  of  education  than  when  we  were
pleading  that  it  was  a  wise  economy  to  provide  two
separate  rooms  in  every  new  school  for  the  head-
teacher  and  his  or  her  assistants.

Thought  again  requires  not  only  quiet  and  an  even
temperature,  but  food,  and,  in  our  climate,  boots  and
woollen  clothing.  Another  history  of  civilisation
might  be  written  showing  the  changes  in  the  means
by  which  thinkers  have  been  so  provided.  A  man

1  Special  Report  on  certain  Tutorial  Classes  (Board  of  Education
Special  Reports,  No.  2).  Tolstoy  can  hardly  have  realised  how  completely
he  abandoned  his  ideal  of  living  a  peasant's  life  when  he  said,  "  There  is
one  thing  I  cannot  do  without :  I  must  have  a  quiet  room  to  work  in  "
(Life  of  Tolstoy,  by  A.  Maude,  vol.  ii.  p.  528).


THOUGHT  195

who  gives  the  best  strength  of  each  day  to  dreaming
about  the  nature  of  God  or  of  the  State,  or  the  shape
of  the  earth,  or  the  relation  of  the  sides  of  a  triangle
to  its  hypotenuse,  produces  nothing  which  at  the  end
of  the  day  he  can  easily  sell.  Since  the  actual  process
of  inference  is  unconscious,  and  his  voluntary  control
over  it  indirect  and  uncertain,  he  is  not  even  sure  that
he  will  produce  any  result  at  all,  whether  saleable  or
unsaleable,  by  months  of  effort.  How  then  shall  he
live?

Perhaps  most  of  the  severe  and  continued  thinking
that  has  been  done  during  the  last  ten  thousand  years
has  been  a  bye-product  of  magic  or  religion.  The
medicine  man  or  the  priest  did  not  spend  his  whole
time  in  rain-making  or  sacrificing,  and  during  his  leisure
was  rather  expected  to  fall  into  fits  of  abstraction.

In  climates,  again,  where  neither  thick  clothing
nor  artificial  heat  nor  animal  food  is  absolutely
necessary,  a  thinker  has  sometimes  been  able  to  keep
himself  alive  by  begging  from  door  to  door,  especially
if,  though  not  a  priest,  he  is  a  holy  man,  giving  alms
to  whom  is  a  religious  duty.  Wagner's  way  of  life,
like  Erasmus',  was  a  modern  adaptation  of  this
system,  in  which  begging  letters  are  substituted  for
the  begging  bowl,  and  which  is  apt  to  involve  a  good
deal  of  wasted  effort  and  impaired  morale.

Sometimes  Thought  has  been  a  bye -product  of
government.  Kings  and  statesmen  have  almost
everywhere  except  in  modern  America1  been  per-

1  "  All  previous  records  at  hand-shaking  were  broken  by  Governor  and
Mrs.  Draper  yesterday  during  the  first  hour  of  the  Washingtons'  birthday
reception  at  the  State  House.  They  exchanged  hand-clasps  with  49


196  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

mitted  to  live  under  conditions  which  made  leisure  for
reflection  possible.

Sometimes  a  thinker  like  St.  Paul  or  Spinoza  has
determined  to  live  by  the  practice  of  a  manual  art,
tent-making  or  lens-grinding.  But  St.  Paul  must
have  found  small  time  for  making  tents  when  the
churches  founded  by  him  began  to  grow,  and  Spinoza
died  of  the  effects  of  privation  at  forty-five.

More  often  the  thinker  has  lived  by  teaching,  and
modern  University  organisation  is  deliberately  aimed
at  creating  such  a  relation  between  teacher  and
student  as  shall  both  stimulate  the  teacher  and  train
the  student.  In  the  moral  sciences  this  arrangement
is  the  main  source  of  modern  Thought.  But  it  is
not  wholly  successful.  There  are  hundreds  of  cases
in  which  a  professor's  teaching  spoils  his  thinking,
and  these  are  balanced  by  hundreds  of  others  in  which
his  thinking  spoils  his  teaching.

Sometimes  the  thinker  has  supported  himself  as
an  artist.  He  has  put  part  of  his  thoughts  into  accept-
able artistic  form  and  has  sold  the  result.  If  in
ancient  times  he  was  a  musician,  he  made  poems  and
chanted  them  to  those  who  would  pay  for  the  right
to  listen.  A  thinker  who  is  also  an  orator  could  in
Greece  recite,  like  Herodotus,  prose  compositions
to  the  crowd  at  Olympia,  and  in  modern  Europe  he
can  become  a  popular  lecturer.  The  invention  of
printing  and  copyright  has  made  it  possible  for  an

persons  a  minute  from  10.30  o'clock  until  11.30  o'clock"  (Boston  Herald,
Feb.  23,  1910).  One  of  the  most  valuable  services  done  by  President  Wilson
to  the  cause  of  political  thought  in  America  is  his  recent  abandonment  of
such  heroic  attempts  to  ignore  the  change  of  scale  in  American  life  since  1783.


THOUGHT  197

unusually  fertile  thinker  in  some  cases  to  support
himself  by  writing,  though  it  may  be  doubted  whether
the  life  of  the  professional  writer  without  other
resources  has  not  destroyed  as  much  thought  as  it
has  produced.  For  the  thinker  requires  not  only
food  and  clothing  and  quiet,  but  leisure,  in  the  sense
of  absence  of  extreme  nervous  fatigue.  His  working
day  must  in  most  cases  be  shorter  than  that  of  the
manual  worker  or  routine  organiser,  but  the  hours
during  which  he  is  not  thinking  cannot  be  spent  in
other  forms  of  hard  intellectual  labour.  Hardly  any
man,  for  instance,  can  give  six  hours  a  day  to
journalism  and  follow  it  with  four  hours  of  con-
centrated thinking.

In  modern  times,  as  Mr.  Lester  F.  Ward  showed,
a  large  proportion  of  the  most  important  intel-
lectual achievements  have  been  the  bye -product
of  the  institution  of  private  property.  He  con-
cluded, for  instance,  from  the  facts  collected  by
Odin  (Genbse  des  grands  hommes,  1895),  that  about
a  third  of  the  European  writers  of  acknowledged
genius  have  sprung  from  the  small  class  of  the  land-
owning nobility.1  In  England,  Cavendish  was  a

1  Applied  Sociology,  pp.  207  and  210.  Ward  complains  that  it  is
extremely  difficult  to  find  out  Ihe  economic  position  of  great  men  from  their
biographies.  "  If  a  great  discoverer  or  inventor  works  ten  years  unin-
terruptedly and  at  last  succeeds  and  astonishes  the  world,  all  this  will  be
told  in  minutest  detail  without  a  word  as  to  how  he  was  fed,  housed,  and
clothed  during  all  this  time  that  he  was  earning  nothing.  If  a  great  author
writes  a  book  that  costs  him  many  years  of  patient  unremunerative  research,
nothing  will  be  said  about  how  he  was  enabled  to  devote  all  these  years  to  such
a  subject.  The  fact  is  that  in  every  such  case  there  must  have  been  some
kind  of  a  fortune  behind  it  all,  or  something  equivalent  to  a  fortune,  such  as
a  state  annuity,  emoluments  granted  to  the  nobility  or  the  clergy,  or  some
sinecure  official  position,  or  at  least  a  well-paid  position  that  did  not  exhaust
all  of  the  man's  energies  "  (Applied  Sociology,  pp.  198-199).


198  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.  x

millionaire,  and  Bentham  and  Darwin  men  of  con-
siderable wealth.  But  it  is  becoming  increasingly
difficult  to  trust  to  this  source  of  leisure  as  sufficient
for  the  intellectual  guidance  of  the  Great  Society.
Not  only  does  the  small  percentage  of  rich  men
provide  a  too  restricted  gathering-ground  for  ability,
but  the  fact  that  they  all  belong  to  one  social  class
is  a  very  serious  hindrance  to  effective  thinking  on
those  subjects  on  which  Thought  is  now  most  urgently
required.

The  Great  Society  will,  therefore,  I  believe,  be
forced  to  undertake  the  deliberate  provision  of  the
material  conditions  of  thinking,  instead  of  trusting
to  the  appearance  of  Thought  as  a  bye-product  of
religion,  or  teaching,  or  copyright,  or  administration,
or  private  wealth.  Throughout  history  money  has
been  occasionally  given  with  the  direct  purpose  of
enabling  men  to  live  lives  of  disinterested  Thought.
Kings  have  had  learned  men  about  their  court,  and
rich  nobles  have  supported  poor  scholars.  But  it  is
only  in  the  last  two  generations  that  the  endowment
of  Thought  for  its  own  sake  has  become  one  of  the
acknowledged  duties  of  all  governments,  and  as  yet
little  progress  has  been  made  in  discovering  the  most
effective  methods  of  doing  it.  It  is  easy  enough  to
choose  a  dozen  clever  young  men  or  women  and  give
them  yearly  payments  sufficient  to  provide  food  and
clothing  and  quiet ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  secure  that
they  shall  use  those  opportunities  with  effect.  In  that
respect  the  Norwegian  custom  of  giving  travelling
"  stipendiums "  to  young  writers  who  have  already


THOUGHT  199

achieved  something  seems  to  produce  better  results
from  a  given  amount  of  money  than  the  Oxford  and
Cambridge  custom  of  giving  all  their  scholarships,
and  nearly  all  their  fellowships,  to  promising  pupils
who  have  achieved  nothing.

It  is  convenient  to  treat  warmth  and  quiet  and
food  as  material  facts  which  aid  Thought.  They  do
so,  however,  by  making  possible  certain  physiological
and  psychological  states  favourable  to  Thought,  and
sometimes  it  is  more  convenient  to  classify  such
states  rather  than  their  material  conditions.  This
is  particularly  the  case  when  we  are  dealing  with  the
more  complex  among  those  states  of  consciousness
which  the  introspective  experimentalists  in  psycho-
logical laboratories  have  observed  to  accompany
Thought,  and  which  they  call  "  mental  attitudes."

Because  the  primary  process  of  Thought  is  un-
conscious we  cannot  direct  it  as  the  painter  directs
the  movement  of  his  hand.  There  will  always  be  an
element  of  surprise  in  what  actually  happens  or
refuses  to  happen  in  our  minds.  William  James
quotes  Hodgson :

Volition  has  no  power  of  calling  up  images,  but  only  of
rejecting  and  selecting  from  those  offered  by  spontaneous
association.  .  .  .  There  is  no  seeing  them  before  they  are
offered  ;  there  is  no  summoning  them  before  they  are  seen.1

But  we  can,  to  a  certain  extent,  control  our  "  mental

1  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  589.  James  suggests  the  substitution,
which  I  have  made,  of  the  term  "  association  "  for  "  redintegration,"  which
Hodgson  here  uses  in  that  sense.


200  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

attitudes,"  and  thereby,  though  indirectly,  the  course
of  our  Thought.

Some  of  these  attitudes,  such  as  "  attention,"
"  inhibition,"  the  "  feeling  of  the  problem,"  etc.,
will  be  more  conveniently  dealt  with  when  I  examine
the  relation  of  the  thinker  to  his  subject-matter.
But  there  are  others  which  are  better  treated  as
general  conditions  of  thinking  than  as  part  of  any
method  of  approaching  the  material  of  Thought.
Some  of  these  more  general  "  attitudes  "  are  on  the
line  which  divides  physiology  from  psychology.
Take,  for  instance,  the  "  warmth  of  the  blood,"  the
sense  of  mental  vigour  and  fertility  which  indicates
that  Thought  will  go  easily.  Some  men  do  not  sit
down  to  work  unless  this  feeling  has  appeared  of
itself.  Others  struggle,  as  I  believe  most  men  with
experience  of  connected  thinking  would  advise,
morning  after  morning  against  their  first  feelings  of
discomfort  and  distraction  until,  after  perhaps  an
hour's  unsatisfactory  work,  they  get  their  "  second
wind."  x  The  output  of  Thought,  again,  is  not  only
slow  to  begin,  but  also,  like  the  revolutions  of  a  heavy
fly-wheel,  slow  to  cease.  A  man,  who  is  reading  in
order  to  stimulate  his  thinking,  finds  it  useful  to
remain  passive  for  a  short  time  at  the  end  of  each
chapter,  and  still  more  at  the  end  of  each  book,  in
order  to  allow  his  thoughts  to  continue  of  themselves.

1  As  Sir  Henry  Miers  points  out  in  his  address  on  The  Revival  of  Learning
(p.  6),  a  great  deal  more  academic  consideration  has  been  given  to  the
psychology  of  athletics  than  to  the  psychology  of  intellectual  effort.  Any
handbook  on  golf  for  beginners  contains  hints  on  the  subconscious  tricks  of
attention  which  would  be  of  real  value  to  a  beginner  in  mathematics  or
moral  philosophy.


OH.  x  THOUGHT  201

The  householder  who  works  at  home  finds  that  it
pays  to  stop  writing  twenty  minutes  before  lunch,  so
as  to  harvest  the  last  gleanings  of  his  Thought,  instead
of  allowing  them  to  present  themselves  during  the
meal,  and  then,  having  injured  both  his  digestion
and  his  manners,  be  finally  (like  95  per  cent  of
most  men's  intellectual  output)  lost  through  forget-
fulness.  Hobbes,  the  father  of  modern  social  psycho-
logy, took  his  own  intellectual  processes  in  this  matter
with  scientific  seriousness.  "  He  walked  much,"
says  his  friend  Aubrey,  "  and  contemplated,  and  he
had  in  the  head  of  his  staffe  a  pen  and  inke  home,
carried  always  a  note-book  in  his  pocket,  and  as  soon
as  a  thought  darted,  he  presently  entered  it  into  his
book,  or  otherwise  he  might  perhaps  have  lost  it."  l

Sometimes  efficiency  in  thinking  seems  to  be
connected  with  our  choice  of  some  particular  tract
of  the  brain  in  which  Thought  shall  take  place.  The
records  of  brain  injury  show  that  a  man  who,  owing
to  the  fact  that  some  region  of  his  brain  has  been
injured  by  disease  and  accident,  has,  e.g.,  lost  the
power  of  understanding  and  applying,  though  not
of  hearing  and  repeating,  spoken  words,  may  yet
teach  himself  to  do  his  thinking  by  turning  his  atten-
tion to  the  movements  made  by  his  mouth  in  the  act
of  oral  repetition.  We  apparently  can,  that  is  to
say,  voluntarily  use  within  certain  limits  different

1  Quoted  by  Pogson  Smith  in  the  Introduction  (p.  xxii)  to  his  edition  of
Hobbes's  Leviathan.  Pogson  Smith  also  quotes  from  Aubrey  a  passage  (p.  xxv)
which  shows  that  Hobbes  had  no  patience  with  those  who  toil  to  make  broad
their  bibliographies  until  they  see  men  as  books  walking.  "  He  was  wont
to  say  that  if  he  had  read  as  much  as  other  men,  he  should  have  known  no
more  than  other  men."


202  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY

nerves  and  ganglia  for  the  same  purposes  of  Thought.
For  some  men,  owing  either  to  inheritance  or  habit,
there  is  a  definite  and  permanent  advantage  in
thinking  through  visual  or  through  audile  mental
images,  or,  like  the  boy  whose  button  Sir  Walter
Scott  cut  off,  through  "  kinetic"  images  of  muscular
movement.  A  born  or  trained  speaker  must  talk  if
he  is  to  think  effectively,  a  writer  must  write.  Cardinal
Newman,  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  says  :

I  think  best  when  I  write.  I  cannot  in  the  same  way
think  while  I  speak.  Some  men  are  brilliant  in  conversation,
others  in  public  speaking — others  find  their  minds  work  best
when  they  have  a  pen  in  their  hands.  But  then,  if  it  is  a
bad  pen  ?  a  steel  pen  ? — that  is  my  case  just  now,  and  thus
I  find  my  brain  won't  work — much  as  I  wish  it.1

Sometimes  a  man  may  suffer  all  through  his  life
from  the  fact  that  his  habits  in  that  respect  conflict
with  his  inherited  nature — as  happens  when  a  very
left-handed  boy  is  brought  up  right-handed.  Friedrich
Froebel  and  his  followers  have,  I  believe,  done  an
immense  amount  of  injury  to  modern  European
Thought  by  causing  a  large  number  of  naturally
"  visual  "  children  to  be  taught  to  think  almost  solely
through  images  of  spoken  sounds,  and  perhaps  the
followers  of  Madame  Montessori  may  do  as  much
harm  by  forcing  all  kinds  of  children  to  use  "  kinetic  "
thought-images.

But  in  less  extreme  cases  it  would  appear  that  a
man  may  gain  in  intellectual  fertility  by  a  change  of
mental  attitude  which  feels  like  the  transference  of

1  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  315.


CH.  x  THOUGHT  203

work  from  a  tired  to  an  untired  brain-tract.  An
artist,  by  looking  backward  through  his  legs,  can  see
a  landscape  with  a  sense  of  creative  novelty  which
was  denied  to  him  when  he  looked  at  it  in  the  ordinary
position.  Zola,  I  have  read,  used  to  stimulate  his
slow  and  over-worked  imagination  by  writing  long
confidential  letters  to  himself  about  the  characters  of
his  next  book,  until  the  characters  began  to  live  of
themselves.  He  apparently  found  that  he  used  a
slightly  different  tract  of  his  brain  in  writing  such
letters  from  that  which  he  used  in  literary  composition.
If  a  lawyer  desires  that  a  client  shall  appreciate  the
full  significance  of  a  document,  he  makes  him  first
read  it  in  silence  and  then  aloud.  A  business  man
who  has  sat  at  his  desk  for  a  weary  hour  holding  his
attention  on  a  single  problem  without  the  least  result,
will  often  find  his  mind  full  of  suggestion  the  moment
he  tries  to  explain  his  difficulty  by  word  of  mouth  to
a  fellow  human  being ;  and  one  of  the  ways  by  which
a  solitary  thinker  can  set  his  mind  working  is  to
picture  to  himself  the  arrival  of  an  intimate  friend
with  the  cheery  question  :  "  Now  then,  what  is  it
that  you  really  want  to  say  ?  "

T'ie  extension  of  association  produced  by  the  search
fo v  the  right  word  in  which  to  express  a  thought  may
often  result  in  stimulating  a  new  and  better  thought.
Theophile  Gautier  said  :  "  Expression  is  Thought."
And  when  an  American  Professor  told  me  :  "  Men
of  Science  over  here  do  not  write  books,"  I  felt  that
perhaps  he  had  given  one  of  the  causes  of  a  certain
disappointment  which  other  professors  had  sometimes


204  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

described  to  me  with  the  output  of  original  thinking
from  some  of  their  ablest  and  most  devoted  enquirers.

Brain-physiology  is  still  largely  guess-work,  and  it
may  be  that  many  of  these  facts  represent  rather  the
addition  of  new  associations  by  the  extension  of  the
tract  employed,  than  the  substitution  of  one  tract
for  another,  or  that  the  two  processes  may  shade
into  each  other.  An  extension  of  the  range  of  associa-
tion does  seem  to  be  one  of  the  effects  aimed  at  by
modern  painters  and  writers  when  they  take  large
doses  of  alcohol,  or  of  coffee,  tobacco,  absinthe  and
other  vegetable  alkaloids  ;  or  by  the  mediums  attached
to  the  ancient  oracles  when  they  sought  inspiration
from  the  hypnotic  trance ;  or  by  the  Germans
described  by  Tacitus  who  found  that  they  thought
more  fruitfully  on  any  question  when  they  considered
it  first  drunk  and  then  sober.

All  such  expedients,  good  or  bad,  lead  of  course
to  an  attitude  of  "  self  -consciousness,"  the  self-
consciousness  of  the  artist  as  contrasted  with  that
gentlemanly  unconsciousness  of  one's  own  mental
processes  which  we  English  so  admire  in  our  govc  rning
class.  M.  Paul  Blouet  tells  how,  when  he  was  a  public-
school  master  in  England,  he  said  to  the  head-mas\ter
(who,  like  so  many  others,  had  extended  his  puKiic-
school  boyhood  unchanged  into  middle  age) :  "  You
have  a  boy  there  who  ought  to  speak  French  very
well  ...  his  pronunciation  is  capital,"  and  was
answered,  "Oh,  I  do  not  doubt  it,  he  is  fu? I  of
affectation."  x

1  John  Bull  and  His  Island,  by  "  Max  O'Rell,"  pp.  151-152.


OH.X  THOUGHT  205

And  self-consciousness  may  have  to  extend  from
the  mental attitudes  which  are  mainly  concerned
with  the  physiology  of  the  brain  to  those  which  are
concerned  with  deeper  moral  states. Just  as  it  is
impossible  to  sing,  or  to  speak  a  foreign  language,  well,
with  one's  mouth  and  throat  in  a  "  gentlemanly  "
position,  so  it  may  prove  to  be  the  case  that  one
cannot  think  effectively  if  one's  main  purpose  in  life
is  to  be  a  gentleman. "  Truth,"  I  heard  Mr.  G.  B.
Shaw  say  some  thirty  years  ago,  "  comes,  not  from
an  avoidance  of  the  vulgar  vice  of  lying,  but  from
the  agony  and  sweat  in  which  the  professional  critic
has  to  approach  his  work." It  may  even  be  that
modern  thinkers  may,  at  the  risk  of  priggishness,
have  to  teach  and  learn  the  old  Greek  conception  of
moral  goodness  in  the  conduct  of  the  intellect. In
the  book  in  which  Miss  Jane  Addams  explains  the
origin  of  her  own  splendid  output  of  original  Thought,
she  says  : "As  our  boarding-school  days  neared  the
end,  in  the  consciousness  of  approaching  separation,
we  vowed  eternal  allegiance  to  our  '  early  ideals,'
and  promised  each  other  we  would  '  never  abandon
them  without  conscious  justification,'  and  we often
warned  each  other  of  '  the  perils  of  self -tradition.'  "  l
Miss  Addams  can  smile  at  this  now,  but  if  we  are  to
trust  to  Thought  as  the  main  guiding  force  of  our
society,  the  priggishness  of  Rockford  College,  Illinois,
in  the  eighteen  seventies  may  be  a  better  stimulus
than  the  silent  suppression  of  all  serious  interest
which one guesses at in the atmosphere of an

1  Twenty  Years  at  Hull  House,  p.  63.


206  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

English  twentieth  -  century  hockey  -  playing  girls'
school.

And  if  we  really  desire  to  increase  the  national
production  of  Thought,  we  must  give  organised
attention  to  the  question  whether  the  moral  atmo-
sphere not  only  of  our  schools  and  colleges,  but  of  our
social  and  political  institutions  is  one  favourable  to
the  stimulation  of  the  thought  process.

Historians  tell  us  that  the  great  periods  of  intel-
lectual activity  are  apt  to  follow  the  coincidence  of
the  discovery  of  important  new  facts  with  the  wide
extension  of  a  sense  of  personal  liberty.  It  has  been
asked  what  has  social  or  political  liberty  to  do  with
the  success  or  failure  of  the  unconscious  process  of
individual  Thought  ?  Most  men  can  provide  an
answer  from  their  own  personal  experience.  There
are  some  emotional  states  in  which  creative  Thought
is  impossible,  and  the  chief  of  these  is  the  sense  of
helpless  humiliation  and  anger  which  is  produced  in
a  sensitive  nature  by  conscious  inability  to  oppose
or  avoid  the  "  insolence  of  office."  Let  any  man
who  doubts  it  sit  down  for  a  day's  work  at  the  British
Museum  after  being  grossly  insulted  by  some  one
whom  he  is  not  in  a  position  to  resist.

Mr.  M'Kenna's  training  has  been  that  of  a
barrister  and  not  that  of  a  thinker  or  writer.  His
parliamentary  treatment  of  the  Court  Censorship  of
Plays  as  Home  Secretary  in  1911  would  probably
have  been  different  if  he  had  realised  that  the  question
was  not  whether  the  Censor  was  likely  to  cut  out  this
or  that  percentage  of  the  words  in  any  play  submitted


OH.  X  THOUGHT  207

to  him,  but  whether,  when  a  serious  dramatist  knows
that  what  he  writes  will  be  submitted  to  the  blue
pencil  of  the  author,  say,  of  "  Dear  Old  Charlie,"  the
spontaneous  presentation  of  creative  Thought  may
not  refuse  to  take  place  in  his  mind.  Tolstoy  once
wrote  :  "  You  would  not  believe  how,  from  the  very
commencement  of  my  activity,  that  horrible  Censor
question  has  tormented  me  !  I  wanted  to  write  what
I  felt ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  occurred  to  me  that
what  I  wrote  would  not  be  permitted,  and  involun-
tarily I  had  to  abandon  the  work.  I  abandoned,
and  went  on  abandoning,  and  meanwhile  the  years
passed  away."  l

A  man,  again,  who  is  dominated  by  the  common-
sense  intellectualism  of  ordinary  speech  may  fail  to
see  any  "  reason  "  why  an  elementary  school  teacher
or  a  second-division  clerk  cannot  do  his  work  properly
after  he  has  been  "  put  in  his  place  "  by  some  official
who  happens  to  combine  personal  callousness  with
social  superiority.  But  no  statesman  who  did  so
could  create  an  effective  educational  or  clerical
service.

This  is  one  of  the  considerations  which  trouble
some  Englishmen  who  hope  that,  on  the  whole,  our
empire  in  India  makes  for  good.  The  thousand
members  of  the  covenanted  Civil  Service  obviously
cannot  do  all  the  thinking  required  by  a  population  of
three  hundred  millions  living  under  rapidly  changing
social  and  industrial  conditions.  If  India  is  to  fight
successfully  against  the  plague  which  ships  and

1  Life  of  Tolstoy,  by  A.  Maude,  vol.  ii.  p.  378.


208  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

railways  spread,  if  she  is  to  revive  the  arts  and
industries  which  have  been  killed  by  Manchester  and
Birmingham,  above  all,  if  she  is  to  contribute  her  fair
share  to  the  world's  literature  and  science,  a  much
larger  number  of  creative  thinkers  must  appear
among  her  native  inhabitants.  But  Anglo-Indian
officials  do  not,  one  fears,  often  produce  or  per-
haps often  desire  to  produce  an  emotional  con-
dition favourable  to  the  growth  of  creative  Thought
in  the  natives  with  whom  they  are  brought  into
contact.  Athens  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.  was  not  well  governed ;  and  if  the
British  Empire  had  then  existed,  and  if  Athens  had
been  brought  within  it,  the  administration  of  the
city  would  undoubtedly  have  been  improved  in  some
important  respects.  But  one  does  not  like  to  imagine
the  effect  on  the  intellectual  output  of  the  fifth
century  B.C.  if  even  the  best  of  Mr.  Rudyard  Kipling's
public-school  subalterns  had  stalked  daily  through
the  agora,  snubbing,  as  he  passed,  that  intolerable
bounder  Euripides,  or  clearing  out  of  his  way  the
probably  seditious  group  that  were  gathered  round
Socrates.

We  now  come  to  the  third  of  the  three  conditions
of  effective  thinking  which  are  more  or  less  completely
under  our  control,  and  therefore  part  of  the  Art  of
Thought  in  the  broadest  sense,  viz.  our  relation  to
the  subject-matter  of  our  Thought.

I  have  already  said  that  that  relation  may  be
divided  into  Memory  and  Record  on  the  one  hand,


THOUGHT  209

and  Logic  on  the  other,  and  I  shall  now  deal  with
Memory  and  Record.  We  think,  not  in  a  mental
vacuum,  but  about  something,  and  that  something  is
not  the  world  as  it  really  exists,  of  which  we  are
necessarily  ignorant,  nor  the  world  as  we  should  see
it  if  we  could  examine  every  detail  of  it  at  short  range
and  in  a  good  light,  nor  even  the  piecemeal  world  as
it  originally  reached  us  through  our  senses,  but  an
"  environment "  composed  partly  of  Memory  and
partly  of  our  direct  perceptions  at  the  moment  of
Thought.

Memory  transforms  our  perceptions.  Millions  of
individual  "  percepts  "  appear  in  Memory  as  a  com-
paratively few  "  concepts "  or  "  ideas."  If,  for
instance,  we  recall  a  pile  of  bricks  or  a  train  of  railway
carriages,  the  memory  of  the  individual  bricks  and
carriages  is  merged  in  general  ideas  of  "  brick  "  and
"  carriage."  Most  of  our  words  are  the  names  of
such  ideas,  and  ever  since  men  have  begun  to  examine
their  use  of  language,  they  have  disputed  as  to  the
relation  between  these  ideas  and  the  individual  facts
of  the  external  world.  Is  the  idea  of  a  carriage  prior
to  the  existence  of  real  carriages,  or  at  any  rate  to  the
sight  of  a  carriage  by  the  man  in  whose  brain  the  idea
is  found  ?  Or  does  each  man  independently  form
the  carriage-idea  by  generalisation  from  carriages
which  he  has  himself  seen  ?

As  long  as  this  question  was  argued  on  exclusively
philosophical  grounds  it  was  possible  for  any  one  to
adopt  any  answer  to  it  which  happened  to  please  him.
But  experimental  psychology  is  beginning  now  to


210  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

give  us  a  little* outside  light  on  the  subject.  We  can,
for  instance,  watch  the  process  by  which  a  general
idea  may  be  actually  formed  by  the  automatic  drawing
together  in  our  memory  of  a  large  number  of  individual
sense-impressions  into  a  smaller  number  of  groups.
If  a  man  is  shown  repeatedly  a  hundred  different
shades  of  grey,  it  is  found  that  the  hundred  shades
will  crystallise  in  his  memory  into  perhaps  seven  or
ten  groups,  the  number  of  groups  being  very  likely
fixed  by  the  number  of  names  for  shades  of  grey
which  he  happens  to  know  or  to  be  able  to  invent.
The  "  idea  "  of  each  group  will  represent  something
near  the  middle  one  of  those  shades  which  go  to  form
the  group,  and  the  other  shades  within  each  group
will  be  remembered  as  more  like  that  "  idea  "  and
more  different  from  the  shades  in  the  adjoining
groups  than  they  really  are.  If,  again,  a  man  is  told
to  learn  by  heart  a  long  list  of  numbers  he  tends
automatically  to  form  them  also  into  groups,  and
the  numbers  in  each  group  are  "  displaced  in  memory
towards  the  average  "  of  each  group.1

In  these  cases,  therefore,  of  colours  and  numbers,
the  answer  to  the  old  question  of  priority  between
the  individual  fact  of  experience  and  the  general  idea
is  that  the  fact  is  prior  to  the  idea,  and  that  the  idea
arises  from  the  grouping  of  the  facts  in  memory ;
the  points  round  which  the  grouping  takes  place
depending  on  the  circumstances  of  each  case.  It  will
be  convenient  to  call  ideas  so  formed  "  artificial."

1  See  Lehmann,  Leuba,  Xillier,  etc.,  quoted  by  Pillsbury,  The  Psychology
of  Reasoning,  pp.  73,  78.


CH.X  THOUGHT  211

But  in  other  cases  an  idea  crystallises  round  a
point  which  is  fixed  beforehand  by  some  inherited
disposition,  and  then  it  may  be  convenient  to  call  the
idea  "  natural."  There  are,  for  instance,  in  the  world
many  species  of  animals  and  plants  which,  in  the
long  course  of  human  evolution,  have  been  of  direct
importance  to  us.  Any  sense  -  impression  which
indicates  the  presence  of  an  object  belonging  to
one  of  these  species  directly  stimulates  the  ap-
propriate disposition.  In  Chapter  IV.  I  argued
that  this  stimulation  has  a  quality  of  elasticity  and
generality.  A  man  born  with  the  instinct  of  cat-fear
will  be  frightened,  or  a  dog  born  with  the  instinct  to
fight  cats  will  be  excited,  not  by  one  particular  cat
only,  but  by  any  one  of  many  cats  and  cat-like  animals,
all  rather  unlike  each  other ;  because  if  any  action
(grasping,  hunting,  spitting  out,  running  away,  etc.,
etc.)  was  originally  useful  when  stimulated  by  any
one  individual  of  the  species,  the  same  action,  with
minor  adjustments,  was  useful  when  stimulated  by
any  other.

When  our  instincts  are  first  stimulated  we  are
normally  unconscious  of  this  general  quality  in  the
stimulation.  A  boy  who  sees  and  smells  an  apple
for  the  first  time  and  instinctively  desires  it,  has  no
preliminary  idea  of  "  apple."  He  desires  it  sim-
plidter,  and  not  because  he  consciously  classifies  it
as  belonging  to  the  species  of  "  apples  in  general,"
any  more  than  a  youth  feels  when  first  he  falls  in  love
that  he  does  so  because  the  girl  who  attracts  him
belongs  to  the  species  of  "  girls  in  general."  When,


212  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

however,  a  boy  has  seen  a  large  number  of  apples,
and  especially  when  he  has  learnt  to  use  the  word
"  apple,"  he  acquires  a  natural  idea  of  "  apple  "  in-
distinguishable in  memory  from  the  artificial  ideas  of
greys  and  numbers  which  are  formed  by  deliberate
experiment.

The  "  natural  "  idea,  however,  of  "  apple  "  and
the  "  artificial  "  idea,  say,  of  "  nearly- white  grey  "
have  two  important  differences.

It  is,  in  the  first  place,  an  "  accident  "  whether  we
put  any  one  of  the  ten  whitest  shades  among  the
hundred  shades  of  grey  into  a  class  of  ten  "  nearly-
white  "  or  a  class  of  twenty  "  rather- white."  It  is
not  an  "  accident "  whether  the  boy  classes  the
greenish  apple  on  the  tree  with  an  apple  somewhat
redder  than  itself  or  with  leaves  somewhat  greener
than  itself.  The  limits  of  the  idea  of  apple  were
fixed,  before  our  individual  experience,  by  the  fact
that  we  have  a  disposition  to  desire  apples  and  no
disposition  to  desire  leaves,  and  that  therefore  our
instinct  draws  a  line  of  separation  between  the  green
sensation  which  means  apple  and  the  other  green
sensation  which  means  leaf.1

1  It  is  this  fact  which  was  at  the  back  of  the  insistent  medieval  belief
that  things  have  "  essential "  as  well  as  "  accidental "  qualities.  The
essential  qualities  of  those  species  which  formed  important  parts  of  our
primitive  environment  are  those  which  originally  constituted  its  importance
to  us,  and  the  recognition  of  which  constituted  the  stimulus  to  our  senses.
The  medieval  thinkers  were  right  in  saying  that  the  terribleness  and  teeth
of  a  lion  and  the  lovableness  and  sucking  mouth  of  a  baby  were  "  essential
attributes,"  and  that  the  fact  that  a  baby  was  liable  to  catch  measles  and
a  lion  to  catch  mange,  were  "  accidents,"  even  although  they  were  "  in-
separable accidents."  Where  they  were  wrong  was  in  failing  to  see  that
things  which  were  not  important  parts  of  our  primitive  environment
(churches,  for  instance,  or  laws  or  carpets)  had  no  "  natural "  or  "  essential  "
attributes  at  all.


THOUGHT  213

Sometimes  our  ideas  may  be  most  conveniently
described  as  drawn  not  from  individual  percepts  but
from  relations — the  relation  between  the  south  wind,
for  instance,  and  the  rain,  the  path  and  its  destination,
theft  and  punishment,  the  cobra  and  death.  The
point  round  which  such  relation  ideas  crystallise  may
also  be  "  artificial "  and  due  to  accident  as  in  the
.case  of  the  path,  or  "  natural  "  and  due  to  instinct  as
in  the  case  of  the  cobra.  It  is  indeed  only  a  question
of  convenience  whether  we  think  of  them  as  ideas  of
relations  between  two  things  or  as  ideas  of  qualities
of  a  single  thing — the  quality  of  leading  somewhere
in  the  case  of  the  path,  and  the  quality  of  deadliness
in  the  case  of  the  cobra.

The  second  respect  in  which  "  natural "  and
"  artificial  "  ideas  differ  is  that  the  particular  kind
of  grouping  which  our  memory  mistakenly  imposes
upon  the  "  artificial  "  species  corresponds  to  a  real
fact  in  the  "  natural "  species.  Our  memory  is
wrong  in  "  displacing  "  the  shades  of  grey  in  each
group,  or  the  numbers  in  each  list,  "  towards  the
average."  It  is  not  wrong  in  supposing  that  most
apples  will  be  more  like  the  middle  apple  of  the
species  than  like  the  exceptional  apples  near  the  limit
of  the  species.

Memory,  therefore,  which  provides  us  with  the
main  material  of  our  Thought,  was  built  up  when
the  things  which  chiefly  concerned  us  belonged  to
certain  primitive  biological  species,  and  tends  to  treat
all  other  facts  in  our  environment  as  if  they  belonged
to  such  species.  And  not  only  the  way  in  which


214  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Memory  arranges  its  contents,  but  the  quantitative
limits  of  its  recording  powers  were  fixed  by  the
conditions  of  man's  primitive  life.  Primitive  man
had  neither  the  eagle's  flight  nor  the  wolf's  speed.
He  moved  slowly  over  the  earth's  surface  within  a
radius  of  a  few  score  miles,  and  could  therefore  only
see  and  hear  things  that  mattered  to  him  within  a
few  hundred  yards  and  smell  them  within  a  few  yards
or  feet.  His  memory,  after  twenty  or  thirty  years  of
active  life,  was,  even  when  helped  by  the  use  of
language,  only  retentive  enough  to  enable  him  to
recognise  a  few  thousand  familiar  objects,  to  assign
unfamiliar  objects  to  a  few  thousand  classes,  or  to
forecast  results  by  the  help  of  his  knowledge  of  a  few
thousand  relations.  It  is  with  this  limited  and
misleading  Memory  that  a  twentieth-century  states-
man or  economist  or  industrial  organiser  has  to  face
the  tremendous  task  of  thinking  out  decisions  affect-
ing scores  of  millions  of  people,  of  whose  individual
characteristics  he  knows  nothing,  scattered  over
continents  which  he  will  never  see.

One  of  the  most  urgently  necessary  duties,  there-
fore, of  the  art  of  Thought  is  the  management  and
correction  of  Memory.  It  has  long  been  known  by
teachers  that  Memory,  both  of  "  natural "  and  of
"  artificial "  species,  can  be  enormously  improved  in
range  and  accuracy  by  conscious  attention,  abstrac-
tion, and  inhibition.  Let  us  take  first,  for  the  sake
of  simplicity,  an  ordinary  case  of  an  attempt  to
increase  by  education  the  range  and  accuracy  of
Memory  in  dealing  with  a  biological  species.  Take,


THOUGHT  215

for  instance,  the  way  in  which  a  boy  may  be  trained
to  remember  and  distinguish  various  kinds  of  moths.
From  early  childhood  moths  and  butterflies  have
naturally  distinguished  themselves  to  him  from  the
flowers  on  which  they  settle  by  the  fact  that  he  wants
to  catch  them,  and  a  rough  idea  of  moth  has  sprung
up  in  his  mind  arising  out  of  that  fact  and  his  hearing
the  word  "  moth  "  used.  His  teacher  now  tells  him
to  look  carefully  at  all  the  moths  which  he  sees  in  the
course  of  a  series  of  walks,  and  to  listen  while  he  is
told  their  specific  names.  The  boy  finds  that,  as  a
result  of  this  effort  of  attention,  he  has  acquired  new
"  artificial  "  ideas  which  enable  him  to  recognise  and
name,  say,  fifty  different  species  of  moths.  He  is
then  taught  to  practise  "  abstraction."  He  con-
centrates, that  is  to  say,  his  attention  on  particular
points  distinctive  of  each  species,  and  finds  that,  in
consequence,  he  can  both  remember  species  more
easily  and  assign  newly  observed  individuals  to  them
more  quickly.  He  can  now  "  learn "  perhaps  a
hundred  species  with  the  same  effort  of  attention
with  which  before  he  could  learn  fifty.  Later  on  he  is
told  to  notice  the  causal  relations  of  these  distinctive
points,  the  connection,  for  instance,  between  the
usual  habitat  of  each  species  and  its  colour,  or  between
its  food  and  the  shape  of  its  proboscis.  Then,  still
with  the  same  effort,  he  can  remember  and  distinguish
perhaps  two  hundred  species.

After  some  years  the  boy  becomes  a  serious  student
of  entomology  and  determines  to  do  a  piece  of  original
work.  He  suspects,  owing  perhaps  to  a  vague  sense


216  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  w.  i

of  discomfort  of  which  he  is  conscious  in  applying
some  of  his  type-ideas,  that  the  smaller  nocturnal
dark-brown  moths  have  been  inaccurately  classified,
and  he  determines  to  reclassify  them  after  observing
at  least  a  thousand  specimens.  At  once  he  has  to
make  a  new  effort,  that  of  inhibition.  He  is  told  to
keep  out  of  his  mind  the  ideas  which  he  tends  auto-
matically to  form,  and  to  prevent  himself  for  a  time
from  forming  new  ideas  of  the  same  kind,  or,  if  he
forms  them,  to  treat  them  as  merely  shadowy  hypo-
theses which  must  not  be  allowed  to  modify  the  sharp
individuality  of  his  memory  of  individual  moths.

At  this  point  he  will  come  definitely  against  the
limitations  of  his  powers.  If  the  course  of  human
evolution  had  been  different,  he  might  have  been  able
to  carry  in  his  memory  a  separate  clear  impression  of
each  one  of  a  thousand  very  slightly  differing  moths
and  to  prevent  those  impressions  from  "  drawing
together  "  into  types.  But  as  it  is  he  finds  that  he
cannot.  He  either  forgets  his  impressions  or  crystal-
lises them  into  groups  more  homogeneous  than  are
the  facts.  He  has  come  to  the  end  of  the  powers  of
Memory.  He  therefore  proceeds  to  create  an  external
Record  which  will  neither  forget  nor  modify  what  is
entrusted  to  it ;  and  for  that  purpose  he  forms  a
collection  of  a  thousand  specimens  of  moths,  or  of  as
many  drawings  or  photographs,  or  of  written  figures
which  record  perhaps  twenty  thousand  measure-
ments, or  written  words  which  record  twenty  thousand
observations.  If  he  had  been  dealing  with  things
belonging  to  "  artificial "  species,  fragments  of  rock,


CH.X  THOUGHT  217

stories  of  savage  customs,  the  imports  and  exports  of
commercial  harbours,  etc.,  the  need  for  such  a  Record
would  have  made  itself  felt  much  sooner.

Now  it  is  upon  Record,  consisting  for  the  most
part  of  sheets  of  white  paper,  with  black  ink-marks  on
it,  and  called  maps,  drawings,  statistics,  returns,  etc.,
that  the  organising  Thought  of  the  Great  Society  is
mainly  based.  The  advantages  of  these  paper  sheets
as  compared  with  the  living  tissues  of  the  human
brain  are  obvious.  They  permit  of  an  immense
system  of  division  of  labour.  Twenty  assistants  can
fill  their  master's  notebook  while  the  thinker  occupies
himself  with  something  else.  The  Record,  when  once
made,  waits,  without  the  effort  of  recollection  or  the
possibility  of  change,  until  he  wants  it,  and  meanwhile
can  be  reproduced  and  used  with  confidence  by  a
thousand  other  thinkers  up  and  down  the  world.  A
few  young  Australian  civil  engineers  made  the  other
day  the  map  on  which  architects  in  America  and
Germany  and  England  based  their  plans  for  a  new
Commonwealth  capital.  If  the  architects  themselves
had  visited  the  site  and  had  trusted  to  their  memory
for  its  characteristics,  that  which  Napoleon  used  to
call  the  "  picture  -  making  "  tendency  would  have
inevitably  come  into  operation.  Memory  would  have
made  the  facts  more  simple  and  more  picturesque
than  they  actually  were,  and  their  plans  would  have
failed  when  they  were  applied  to  the  real  site.

Professor  Pickering  once  showed  me  in  the  Harvard
Observatory  photographs  of  regions  in  the  sky,  taken
at  short  intervals  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the


218  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

existence  of  variable  stars.  One  could  see  on  each
plate  perhaps  a  hundred  thousand  stars.  A  being
might  have  been  evolved,  and  possibly  has  been
evolved  on  the  planet  Mars,  who  could  look  at  that
region  of  the  sky,  impress  a  clear  picture  of  it  on  his
Memory,  retain  that  picture  unchanged  for  a  week,
look  then  at  the  same  stars  again,  and  notice  by
direct  comparison  whether  any  of  them  had  become
larger  or  smaller.  No  human  being  who  has  ever
been  born  could  do  so,  and  as  I  looked  at  the  plates  I
felt  that  the  modern  astronomer's  artificial  eye  with
its  telescopic  lens  three  feet  across  and  its  photographic
retina  of  superhuman  delicacy  was  a  small  thing  as
an  aid  towards  Thought  about  the  universe  when
compared  with  the  artificial  memory  of  warehoused
plates  which  I  saw  around  me,  whose  capacity  was  a
thousand  million  times  greater  than  that  of  the  human
brain,  and  which  never  forgot  and  never  transformed.
Sometimes  Eecord  can  be  at  once  used  for  the
answering  of  a  scientific  problem  by  a  process  of
Thought  which  is  so  simple  that  it  may  almost  be
taken  for  granted.  Professor  Pickering,  for  instance,
was  able  by  printing  positive  and  negative  versions
of  successive  plates  over  each  other,  to  show,  in  the
form  of  unmistakable  white  rings,  those  stars  whose
light  had  varied  in  any  given  period.  But  even  in
astronomy  there  is  as  a  rule  a  long  interval  of  hard
work  before  the  daily  photographs  and  measurements
can  be  made  available  for  the  searcher  after  new
truth.  The  entomologist's  collection  of  moths  or
moth-measurements  must  be  arranged  and  rearranged


OH.Z  THOUGHT  219

in  graded  order  before  they  can  be  made  to  mean
anything.  Before  raw  statistics,  say  as  to  the
relation  between  overcrowding  and  illiteracy,  can  be
helpful  to  the  statesman  who  is  preparing  new  legisla-
tion, the  individual  cases  of  an  overcrowded  room  here
and  a  backward  child  there  must  be  "  drawn  to-
gether "  into  curves  and  percentages.  The  process
by  which  this  is  done  looks  at  first  curiously  like  the
automatic  "  drawing  together  "  of  perceptions  into
ideas  in  Memory.  But  it  is  essentially  different.
The  grouping  of  Kecord  adds  nothing  to  and  takes
nothing  from  the  original  facts.  It  is  mechanical  and
exact,  while  the  grouping-process  in  Memory  is  vital
and  inexact.

Eecord  has,  however,  for  the  purposes  of  Thought,
great  disadvantages  as  well  as  great  advantages  when
compared  with  Memory.  It  is  necessarily  abstract.
If  our  history  of  the  past  were  as  full  of  detail  as
the  past  itself,  the  whole  world  would  not  contain
it.  The  boy's  moth  collection  tells  him  nothing  of
the  movements  of  the  living  insects.  Statistics  of
ignorance  and  overcrowding  tell  the  official  before
whom  they  are  laid  nothing  of  those  indications,  for
instance,  of  accompanying  congenital  defect,  which
might  have  automatically  formed  themselves  into  an
inexact  but  significant  idea  if  he  had  looked  closely
at  a  hundred  cases  for  himself  and  had  trusted  to
Memory  for  the  result.  The  European  architect,
planning  an  Australian  capital  on  the  careful  contours
of  a  map,  may  miss  just  those  hints  from  concrete
nature  which  would  have  made  the  difference  between


220  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

inspiration  and  journey-work  in  his  drawings ;  the
colours,  perhaps,  and  outlines  of  the  distant  hills,  the
hard  glare  of  the  December  sun,  and  the  reflections  of
the  river.

Record,  again,  provides  material  which  is  only
useful  to  some  one  who  is  seeking  an  answer  to  a
problem  akin  to  that  which  was  in  the  mind  of  the
man  who  originally  selected  the  quality  to  be  isolated.
The  really  important  and  seminal  idea  may  have
preceded  that  selection,  and  may  have  been  one  out
of  a  thousand  ideas  which  automatically  presented
themselves,  during  a  period  of  concentrated  inward
attention,  to  a  fertile  mind  enriched  by  varied  concrete
experience.  Even  when  a  man  is  using  abstract
Record,  the  real  success  of  his  thinking  may  depend
on  the  fact  that  it  is  not  really  abstract  to  him,  that
the  figures  of  backwardness  do  bring  up  pictures  of
faces  that  are  not  only  ill-nurtured  but  ill-born,  and
that  the  infantile  death-rate  suggests  those  who  are
injured  by  disease  as  well  as  those  who  are  killed.
This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why,  in  a  government
office,  the  ultimate  decision  of  great  questions  is  left
to  the  practical  statesman  with  experience  of  the
outside  world,  rather  than  to  the  trained  official.
The  ideas  which  the  statesman  brings  as  his  own
contribution  to  each  problem  are  founded  upon  fewer
instances  and  are  much  less  well-arranged  than  those
of  the  official,  but  they  are  the  result  of  concrete
experience.  And  this  too  is  one  of  the  reasons  why
some  of  us  desire  that  officials  also  shall  have  some
concrete  experience  and  shall  not,  for  instance,  spend


THOUGHT  221

their  lives  in  administering  the  Poor  Law  without
ever  having  seen  or  smelt  the  inside  of  a  work-
house.

Whoever,  therefore,  is  to  think  with  success  about
the  Great  Society  must  use  both  Record  and  Memory.
He  requires  Record  because  he  deals  with  facts  too
numerous  and  too  distant  to  be  covered  by  his
inherited  powers,  and  because  he  must  have  exactly
quantitative  evidence  as  a  basis  for  exactly  quan-
titative results.  He  also  requires  a  well -stored
Memory  because  Record  by  itself  is  abstract  and
unfertile.

So  far  I  have  taken  the  problem  of  increasing  the
range  and  exactness  and  fertility  of  our  ideas  as  to
moths  and  stars  and  children — things  which  we
cannot  change  in  order  to  make  them  more  easy  to
think  about.  But  in  many  cases  Thought  can  be
made  more  easy  by  changes  in  the  facts  them-
selves. A  chemist  can  abstract  by  analysis  the
common  qualities  of  various  specimens  of  water  and
thereby  obtain  a  more  useful  working  idea  of
water ;  but  he  can  also  practise  what  one  may  call
"  real  "  abstraction  by  producing  and  employing  for
his  experiments  actual  water,  which  possesses  those
common  qualities  and  no  others,  and  any  ounce  of
which  may  be  trusted  to  behave  under  the  same
circumstances  exactly  like  any  other  ounce.

We  so  treat  many  material  things  which  are
essential  to  human  organisation  on  a  large  scale.
The  great  achievement  of  our  race  in  that  respect


222  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

has  been  the  invention  of  money.  World-commerce,
on  a  scale  larger  than  the  exchange  of  canoes  or  lumps
of  jade,  only  became  possible  when  metallurgists  had
reduced  certain  metal  ores  to  standard  metal,  and
governments  had  minted  coins  every  one  of  which
was  practically  identical  with  every  other.  And  on
this  "  real  abstraction  "  has  been  founded  that  vast
mental  abstraction  of  money -value  which  alone
enables  the  modern  financier  to  find  his  way  in  an
otherwise  unintelligible  world.

Every  year  new  "  currencies  "  are  being  created
by  the  "  standardisation "  of  iron,  or  sugar,  or
rubber,  or  of  any  new  commodity  which  enters  the
world  market.  If  one  looks  from  the  terrace  of  the
Alexandra  Palace  south  and  east  over  the  vast  new
working-class  quarters  which  speculative  firms  have
erected  for  the  artisans  of  North  London,  one  can
watch  the  standardisation  of  homes,  and  in  a  later
chapter  1  I  shall  discuss  the  relation  of  that  process
to  the  happiness  of  their  inmates.

Indeed,  the  dominant  intellectual  problem  of  the
Great  Society  (a  problem  whose  solution  may  form
the  basis  of  a  new  science  of  Jurisprudence)  may  be
summed  up  in  the  statement  that  he  who  thinks
about  the  civilised  world  is  now  compelled  either  to
standardise  it  in  shifting  Memory  and  abstract  Kecord,
and  so  think  erroneously  about  it,  or  to  attempt  to
standardise  it  in  fact,  and  so,  perhaps,  destroy  the
only  conditions  of  life  in  which  man  is  fitted  to  find
the  satisfaction  of  his  nature.

1  Chapter  XIII.  p.  354.


OH.  x  THOUGHT  223

In  enquiring  whether  an  art  of  Thought  exists,
whether,  that  is  to  say,  we  can  by  deliberate  effort
increase  the  range  and  efficiency  of  our  thinking,  I
have  dealt  up  to  this  point  only  with  those  factors —
material  surroundings  ;  mental  attitude  ;  and  know-
ledge (stored  either  in  Memory  or  Record) — which
the  old  formal  Logic  often  took  for  granted  and
therefore  ignored.

Now  I  come  to  Logic  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the
term,  the  processes  by  which  new  inferences  arise  out
of  our  perceptions  and  ideas.  Is  there  an  Art  here
too  ?  Can  those  processes,  that  is  to  say,  be  made
more  effective  by  conscious  effort?  Or  must  our
analysis  of  them  merely  aim  at  an  explanation  of  facts
which  we  cannot  change  ?

In  answering  this  question  I  must  begin  with  the
"  mental  attitudes "  of  Attention,  Inhibition,  and
Problem,  to  which  I  have  already  referred  as  being
rather  part  of  the  Thought-Process  than  preliminary
conditions  of  its  success.  In  describing  the  means
by  which  the  capacity  of  Memory  may  be  increased
I  dealt  with  Attention  and  Inhibition.  But  we  can
attend  and  inhibit,  not  only  when  we  desire  to  re-
member what  we  should  otherwise  forget,  but  when
we  desire  to  draw  inferences  which  would  otherwise
not  occur  to  us.

If  while  thinking  we  attend  to  some  particular
point,  presented  to  us  either  by  Memory  or  by  those
sense-impressions  which,  as  we  attend  to  them,  be-
come memories,  our  Thought  is  likely  to  be  concerned
with  that  point.  If  our  attention  is  turned  to  a


224  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

geometrical  figure,  we  may,  it  is  true,  discover  in  our
minds  the  answer  to  a  riddle  which  we  were  asked  a
week  ago,  but  we  are  more  likely  to  discover  a  geo-
metrical conclusion  of  some  sort.  The  effectiveness
of  this  voluntary  control  of  Attention  is  enormously
increased  by  habits  formed  in  education,  and,  still
more,  by  the  use  of  language.  The  verbal  sounds
and  images  which  all  experimenters  describe  as
normally  accompanying  the  more  unconscious  pro-
cesses of  thought,  act  as  a  constant  directing  and
limiting  influence  on  the  associations  and  inferences
which  we  form.

Or  our  attitude  while  thinking  may  be  one  of
Inhibition.  We  can  fight  with  some  prospect  of
success  against  associations  and  inferences  along  one
line,  and,  with  less  certainty,  in  favour  of  those  along
another  line.  Or  (in  the  attitude  of  consciously
"  suspended "  judgment)  we  can  sometimes  pre-
vent our  Thought  from  reaching  an  expected  con-
clusion.

But  at  the  actual  moment  of  Thought  the  most
important  mental  attitude  is  that  which  the  experi-
mentalists call  "  Problem  "  ("  Aufgabe  "),  the  feeling
that  we  have  to  find  an  answer  to  some  question.  It
is  the  presence,  conscious  or  semi-conscious,  of  this
"  attitude  "  during,  as  well  as  after,  the  moment
of  thinking  which  distinguishes  Keasoning  from
other  forms  of  Thought.  "  What  transforms,"  says
Watt,  "  into  judgments  the  mere  sequences  of
experiences  that  we  discover  when  we  analyse  the
processes  of  judgment,  and  what  distinguishes  a


THOUGHT  225

judgment  from  a  mere  sequence  of  experiences,  is
the  problem."  *

I  have  already  told  how  Lord  Russell  of  Killowen
turned  into  Reasoning  all  the  imaginative  work  we
had  done  during  a  certain  afternoon,  by  suddenly
treating  what  he  found  in  his  mind  as  "  problem-
material."  Watt's  experiments  show,  as  is  clear  enough
in  any  case,  that  Lord  Russell  might  have  voluntarily
adopted  this  attitude  early  in  the  afternoon  and
have  held  to  it  throughout  the  afternoon.  In  that
case  the  total  process  of  his  Reasoning  would  have
been  different  from  what  it  was,  less  fertile  perhaps,
but  probably  in  closer  contact  with  the  facts.

Now  by  combining  the  attitudes  of  Attention  and
Problem  we  can  acquire  the  power  of  compelling,
with  more  or  less  certainty,  our  mind  to  attack  any
succession  of  questions  which  we  put  to  it ;  and  it  is
with  the  form  and  order  in  which  such  questions
should  be  put,  and  the  methods  by  which  the  answers
to  them  should  be  tested,  that  the  rules  of  Logic  deal.

The  original  invention  of  logical  rules  must  have
been  the  result  of  conscious  effort,  and  the  training
of  any  individual  in  the  use  of  them  may  be  equally
conscious,  although,  like  other  rules  of  art,  they  may
be  "  picked  up  "  by  our  half -conscious  observation
of  our  fellows,  or,  if  attained  by  conscious  training,
may  become  (like  the  rules  of  composition  which

1  H.  J.  Watt,  "  Experimentelle  Beitrage  zu  einer  Theorie  des  Denkons,"
Archiv  f.  d.  ges.  Psych,  iv.  (1905)  p.  413  (quoted  by  Titchener,  Experimental
Psychology  of  the  Thought  Processes,  p.  120).  W.  B.  Pillsbury  (The  Psychology
of  Reasoning,  p.  69)  uses  the  word  "  purpose  "  in  this  sense  :  "  the  purpose
or  momentary  mental  set  that  controls  the  course  of  association  at  any
moment."

Q


226  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

underlay  Wagner's  subconscious  musical  production)
a  matter  of  unconscious  habit.

It  is  a  historical  fact  that  human  thinking  has  been
enormously  improved  by  the  invention  of  logical  rules
in  the  past.  Aristotle's  formal  syllogistic  scheme
seems  to  us  now  so  poor  and  clumsy  that  any  insistence
upon  it  is  a  hindrance  rather  than  a  furtherance  to
Thought.  But  that  is  because  we  have  already
absorbed  its  main  results  into  the  words  and  implica-
tions of  our  ordinary  speech.  How  could  we  think
to  any  effect  about  the  complexities  of  modern  life
if  we  had  no  words  like  "  principle  "  and  "  instance  "
or  "  proof  "  and  "  disproof  "  ?  The  repetition  of
such  formulas  as  "All  A  is  B  "  wearies  us  now,  but
they  stood  at  one  time  for  a  passionate  new  con-
viction that  nature  is  uniform,  and  that  the  same
conditions  might  always  be  trusted  to  produce  the
same  results.  To  understand  what  the  invention  of
the  syllogism  gave  to  mankind  we  must  compare  it
with  that  world  of  thought  which  it  helped  to  super-
sede, the  incalculable  divinities,  the  contradictory
maxims  and  proverbs,  the  disconnected  fragments
of  observation  and  experience  which  make  the
apparatus  of  the  primitive  mind.  Bacon's  Organon
itself,  and  even  the  Four  Methods  of  Experimental
Enquiry  in  Mill's  Logic,  seem  inadequate  and  almost
irrelevant  to  a  modern  man  of  science,  simply  because
he  takes  the  need  of  testing  hypotheses  by  experiment
for  granted.

The  fact  that  we  do  not  realise  how  greatly  science
has  been  helped  by  logical  discoveries  later  than


THOUGHT  227

Bacon  is  mainly  due  to  that  arbitrary  distinction
between  Logic  and  Mathematics  which  has  always
been  a  hindrance  to  clear  thinking  about  scientific
method.  The  engineer  or  the  actuary  or  the
astronomer  is  not  now  told  that  he  will  require  for
his  work  a  more  complex  Logic  than  Aristotle's  or
Bacon's,  but  that  he  must  learn  certain  branches  of
Mathematics.  The  making  of  bridges  and  electrical
installations,  the  calculation  of  eclipses,  or  the  draw-
ing of  contracts  for  life  assurance  is  now  done  by
men  whose  logical  methods  are  neither  the  Barbara
and  Celarent  of  the  schoolmen  nor  the  rules  of  Bacon
or  Mill,  but  such  formulas  as
E


Formulas  of  this  degree  of  complexity  require,
of  course,  that  the  material  to  which  they  are  applied
should  consist  of  exact  Record  and  not  of  inexact
Memory,  and  it  is  the  vast  and  constantly  growing
accumulation  of  recorded  observations  which  has
made  their  use  possible.  And  though  the  actual  use
of  the  formulas  is  now  left  to  technical  experts,  it  has
become  necessary  to  invent  non-technical  or  half-
technical  terms  by  which  the  conclusions  of  the
experts  can  be  made  clear  to  lay  thinkers.

The  same  tendency  is  to  be  observed  in  the  moral
sciences,  Sociology,  Economics,  Psychology,  and  the
rest.  A  special  branch  of  mathematical  method  has
been  developed  for  each.  When  Professor  Bowley,
for  instance,  published  an  enquiry  into  the  probable


228  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

effect  of  increased  mobility  of  labour  upon  the  rate
of  wages,  he  occupied  a  page  and  a  half  of  his  article
with  mathematical  formulas  of  which  one  of  the
shorter  specimens  is  :

The  increase  in  average  wage  in  A  is y^_-y  =  hf^x'-^  -

W^(x\-ej,)=tf\x\  +  ^{\x\  +  e'h),  where  6'  is  a  proper

2>  &

fraction,  and  where  x\=x1-h.  This  is  positive  unless  the
cost  curve  is  rapidly  concave.1

And  we  can  already  watch  the  beginnings  of  such  a
development  of  language  and  mental  habits  as  shall
enable  these  methods  or  something  like  them  to
control  in  large  part  the  ordinary  intellectual  work
of  social  organisation.  Already  the  economic  student,
when  he  uses  the  word  "  marginal "  instead  of
"  average,"  or  the  merchant  when  he  speaks  of  a
"  flattening  price  curve,"  implies  the  application  of
the  Differential  Calculus  to  economics;  and  a  few
generations  hence  social  theorists  may  be  using,  and
newspaper  readers  may  be  following,  forms  of  thought
whose  essential  principles  are  now  understood  only
by  Professor  Bowley  and  his  mathematical  colleagues.
But  if  the  gap  between  the  trained  thinker  and  the
layman  in  these  sciences  is  not  to  widen,  the  present
rate  of  the  invention  of  terms  which  can  be  transferred
from  the  technical  to  the  non-technical  vocabulary  of
the  Moral  Sciences  must  considerably  be  quickened.
The  Permanent  Secretary,  for  instance,  to  the  Irish
Local  Government  Board  told  the  Royal  Commission
on  the  Civil  Service  :

1  Professor  A.  L.  Bowley  in  the  Economic  Journal,  March  1912,  p.  52.


CH.X  THOUGHT  229

I  don't  say  there  are  not  second-class  clerks  [who  are
recruited  at  18]  equal  to  first-class  [who  are  recruited  at  23],
nor  do  I  say  that  all  first-class  clerks  are  on  the  same  footing
as  regards  ability  ;  but  there  is  undoubtedly  a  line  of  demarca-
tion, which  any  one  dealing  with  administration  easily  detects,
between  first-  and  second-class  clerks.1

His  phraseology  is  obviously  unsatisfactory,  but  if
he  had  merely  said  that  "  on  the  average  "  first-class
clerks  are  abler  than  second-class  clerks,  he  would
not  have  told  the  Commission  that  which  he  wanted
to  say,  viz.  that,  if  the  ability  of  the  members  of  the
first  and  of  the  second  class  were  plotted  on  "  polygons
of  variation  in  respect  to  ability,"  the  two  polygons
would  be  similar,  but  that  the  first-class  polygon
would  be  superior  to,  though  overlapped  by,  the
second-class.  This  is  the  kind  of  statement  which  we
all  want  to  make  a  dozen  times  a  day  about  sections
of  every  biological  species  from  human  beings  to
cabbages,  and  I  know  of  no  existing  words  in  which
it  can  be  said  which  are  both  short  and  clear.2

In  the  physical  sciences  there  is  no  sign  of  any  re-
action against  the  substitution  of  Record  for  Memory,
or  against  the  consequent  invention  and  applica-

1  Sir  James  Dougherty  before  the  Royal  Commission  on  the  Civil  Service,
February  17,  1913  (Qu.  26,769).

*  Perhaps  some  such  phraseology  as  this  may  become  possible  in  the
future.  "  I  estimate  that  the  second  class  is  naturally  two-thirds  below
the  first  class,  and  nurturally  three-quarters."  This  would  mean  that  in
respect  of  natural  ability  two-thirds  of  the  members  of  the  second  class
are  below  the  mean  of  the  first  class;  and  that,  when  the  effects  of  a
shorter  education,  less  stimulating  work,  etc.,  are  allowed  for,  three-
quarters  of  them  are,  in  fact,  below  that  mean.  On  the  same  lines,  in  a
"feminist  "  discussion,  an  actual  clash  of  different  estimates,  e.g.,  as  to  the
relative  physical  or  mental  powers  of  men  and  women,  might  take  the
place  of  much  beating  of  the  air  by  arguments  about  "  equality  "  and
"  inequality  "  that  never  meet.


230  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

tion  of  new  and  more  complex  logical  rules  and  terms.
The  most  intransigeant  Pragmatist  does  not  propose
to  drop  Mathematics  from  the  training  of  an  engineer
or  a  chemist,  or  to  encourage  astronomers  to  rely  on
Memory  rather  than  Record.  But  in  the  moral
sciences,  side  by  side  with  the  growth  of  the  new
quasi-mathematical  Logic,  there  has  been  noticeable
during  the  last  ten  years  an  important  revolt  against
all  Logic,  old  or  new,  and  in  favour  of  "  instinct "
or  "  divination."

This  revolt  is  in  part  due  to  the  defects  of  Record
when  applied  to  mankind.  Record,  as  I  have  already
said,  is  abstract  and  incomplete  unless  it  rests  upon
that  artificial  uniformity  which  I  called  "  real  ab-
straction," and  the  "  real  abstraction "  of  men  is
impossible.  In  the  case  of  steel  billets  supplied  to  the
same  specification  it  is  very  nearly  true  that  two
and  two  make  four ;  in  the  case  of  men  it  is  very
gravely  untrue.  We  are  apt,  therefore,  to  feel  that
we  are  given  a  choice,  in  the  Logic  of  the  moral
sciences,  between  the  mathematical  treatment  of
misleading  statistics  and  the  syllogistic  treatment  of
casual  generalisations.

But  a  more  important  cause  of  the  revolt  is  a
general  spread  of  Anti-Intellectualism.  The  absence
of  a  satisfactory  Logic  has  helped  to  discredit  not
only  the  conscious  rules  of  Thought,  but  the  Thought-
Process  itself.

Of  one  form  of  modern  Anti-Intellectualism  I  have
already  spoken,  that  represented  by  Mr.  McDougall
and,  less  definitely,  by  M.  Ribot.  According  to  Mr.


THOUGHT  231

McDougall,  Thought  is  not  (as  I  believe)  an  inde-
pendently stimulated  Disposition,  but  an  "  apparatus  "
which  can  only  be  set  in  motion  by  one  of  the
"  instincts."  1

Another  more  common  and  more  subtle  form  of
Anti-Intellectualism  is  the  view  that  Thought,  though
it  can  act  independently  of  Instinct,  is  less  efficient
than  Instinct  as  a  means  of  drawing  valid  conclusions
about  the  world  in  which  we  live.  Professor  James
wrote  in  one  of  his  last  books  :

All  philosophies  are  hypotheses,  to  which  all  our  faculties,
emotional  as  well  as  logical,  help  us,  and  the  truest  of  which
will  at  the  final  integration  of  things  be  found  in  possession
of  the  men  whose  faculties  on  the  whole  had  the  best  divining
power.2

Some  of  his  followers  go  further  and  say  or  imply
that  our  "  emotional "  faculties  should  be  trusted
to  the  actual  exclusion  of  our  "  logical  "  faculties.

Now  in  what  does  this  "  divining "  power  of
Instinct  consist,  and  in  what  way  does  it  differ  from
Thought  ?  In  order  to  answer  this  I  must  repeat
what  I  have  already  said  more  than  once,3  that  when
any  one  of  our  instinctive  dispositions  is  stimulated
by  our  environment  the  process  of  stimulation  in-
volves something  equivalent  to  an  estimation  of  the
fact  which  stimulates.  I  have  just  described  the
simplest  form  of  that  estimation,  the  "  instinctive
classification  "  by  which  the  fact  that  we  desire  to
eat  an  apple  is  equivalent  to  a  decision  that  the  thing

1  Ante,  p.  42.

2  Essays  on  Radical  Empiricism,  p.  279.
3  See  ante,  pp.  211,  212.


232  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

before  us  belongs  to  the  class  of  edible  things.  Now
this  instinctive  estimation  in  its  more  complex  forms
is  equivalent,  not  merely  to  an  act  of  classification,
but  to  the  drawing  of  elaborate  inferences  as  to
future  occurrences.  If,  that  is  to  say,  we  use  the
term  "  Instinctive  Classification "  for  the  decision
implied  in  the  fact  that  a  kitten  seeing  a  bird  for  the
first  time  desires  to  eat  it  and  thereby  classes  it  as
edible,  we  are  entitled  to  use  the  term  "  Instinctive
Inference  "  for  that  which  is  implied  in  the  fact  that
the  kitten  goes  through  a  number  of  complex  (and
apparently  fully  conscious)  hunting  movements  in
anticipation  of  the  probable  actions  of  a  frightened
bird.

Now  it  is  this  "  Instinctive  Inference "  which
James  calls  "  divination "  and  which  others  treat
as  an  alternative  to  logical  Thought.  A  man  sitting
on  a  mountain  slope  sees  a  rock  above  him  move,
and  leaps  aside.  If  he  acts  by  Instinctive  In-
ference the  first  thing  that  reaches  his  consciousness
will  be  a  shock  of  fear  accompanying  the  movement
of  his  muscles  in  leaping.  The  inference  that  danger
exists  may  be  as  implicit  as  that  which  takes  place
when  a  flash  of  lightning  stops  the  beating  of  our
heart,  or  when  a  newly  born  infant,  held  over  a  bath,
clings  to  the  nurse's  hand.

On  the  other  hand,  the  climber's  experience  may
begin  with  Thought.  He  may  notice  that  a  distant
tree  which  he  saw  a  few  moments  ago  is  now  invisible,
and  may  sit  still  for  perhaps  a  second  vaguely  wonder-
ing what  has  happened  and  subconsciously  arranging


THOUGHT  233

his  ideas  on  the  subject.  He  may  carry  his  Thought
to  its  full  conclusion,  and  may  infer  that  the  rock  is
moving,  and  that,  being  in  the  line  of  its  fall,  he  is
in  danger,  before  the  instinct  of  Fear  "  values  "  his
inference  for  him.  Or  he  may  only  carry  the  process
of  Thought  to  the  point  of  forming  a  clear  mental
image  of  a  moving  rock,  and  Fear  may  then  interrupt
his  thinking  with  an  instinctive  "  decision  "  to  leap.
If  one  of  two  men  sitting  together  goes  through  the
purely  instinctive  process  and  the  other  the  full
Thought-Process,  an  onlooker  will  see  them  both
stare  at  the  rock  and  both  leap  aside,  but  may  notice
that  the  man  who  reached  his  conclusion  by  Thought
was  rather  slower  to  act,  and  that  his  face  bore  for  an
instant  a  puzzled  and  vacant  rather  than  a  frightened
expression.

At  the  moment  of  action  a  man  will  in  such  a  case
probably  have  no  choice  as  to  whether  he  shall  act
by  Thought  or  Instinctive  Inference.  But  in  forming
his  mental  habits  he  has  a  real  choice.  An  experi-
enced climber  may,  for  instance,  advise  a  novice  either
to  trust  Instinct  always,  and  to  leap  before  he  gives
himself  time  to  think,  or  to  train  himself  to  keep  a
constant  look-out  for  little  signs  of  danger,  which  do
not  excite  Instinct,  but  can  be  interpreted  by  Thought,
and  then  if  Fear  comes  on  him  before  Thought,  to
inhibit,  until  Thought  has  had  time  to  take  place,
the  impulse  towards  instinctive  action.  Even  when
dealing  with  much  more  complex  affairs,  a  man  may
be  aware  of  this  distinction.  Bismarck,  for  instance,
in  one  of  his  rare  moods  of  introspection,  said,  "  I


234  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

have  often  noticed  that  my  will  has  decided  before
my  thinking  was  finished."  x

Now  the  fact  that  it  is  still  possible  to  argue  that
Instinctive  Inference  is  superior  to  Reasoning  in  the
Moral  Sciences,  and  that  it  is  not  possible  to  do  so  in
the  case  of  the  Physical  Sciences,  has  come  about,  not
only  because  of  the  inexactness  of  the  picture  of
mankind  given  us  by  Record  as  compared  with  the
exactness  of  the  picture  which  Record  gives  us  of
dead  matter,  but  also  because  our  perception  of  our
fellow-men  stimulates  in  us  many  more  instinctive
dispositions  and  stimulates  them  much  more  intensely
than  does  our  perception  of  the  inorganic  world.

The  number  of  dispositions,  other  than  the  "  intel-
lectual "  dispositions  of  Curiosity  and  Thought,
which  are  stimulated  by  inanimate  objects  is  small.
A  moving  rock,  by  exception,  does  look  terrible  the
moment  we  see  it,  but  the  chemicals  in  a  test-tube
are  not  likely  to  produce  any  immediate  emotional
effect  on  us.  At  the  most  the  chemist  may  find  that
the  beauty  of  colouring  in  some  mixture  of  reagents
is  starting  in  him  an  irrelevant  access  of  aesthetic
feeling.

Non- human  animals  constitute  the  appropriate
stimulus  to  a  greater  number  of  instincts.  A  physio-
logist who  is  about  to  inoculate  a  dog  will  hardly  do

1  Quoted  by  Lord  Morley  at  Manchester  University,  June  28,  1912.
Note  that  I  do  not  here  dogmatise  as  to  whether  Thought  and  Instinctive
Inference  may  not  have  been  developed  out  of  the  same  facts  inherited  from
our  pre-vertebrate  ancestors,  but  merely  claim  that,  at  the  present  point  of
human  evolution,  the  disposition  to  go  through  the  process  of  Thought  may
be  stimulated  as  an  alternative  to  the  stimulation  of  the  simpler  disposition
leading  to  "  instinctive  "  behaviour.


CH.X  THOUGHT  235

so  without  some  intrusive  painful  emotion.1  But  by
far  the  most  important  and  extensive  group  of  instincts
are  those  whose  appropriate  stimulus  is  the  presence
or  the  idea  of  our  fellow  human  beings.  The  juryman
who  tries  to  concentrate  his  attention  on  the  evidence
as  to  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  a  prisoner  before  him
finds  that  his  thinking  is  constantly  accompanied
or  interrupted  by  pity  or  dislike  or  dread.  The
orator  answering  difficult  questions  before  an  excited
audience,  the  general  sending  a  favourite  regiment  to
certain  destruction  as  part  of  his  plan  of  battle,  find
it  difficult  merely  to  compare  facts  and  draw  con-
clusions. Bentham,  in  that  sarcastic  commentary
on  French  revolutionary  thought  which  he  called
"  Anarchical  Fallacies,"  compares  the  cool  logic  of
the  great  French  eighteenth -century  chemists  with
the  welter  of  feeling  and  instinctive  emotion  in  which
Sieyes  and  the  other  French  political  thinkers  of  that
time  did  their  intellectual  work.  "  In  chemistry,"
he  says,  "  there  is  no  room  for  passion  to  step  in  and
to  confound  the  understanding  —  to  lead  men  into
error,  and  to  shut  their  eyes  against  knowledge ;  in
legislation  the  circumstances  are  opposite  and  vastly
different."  2

The  question  whether  we  ought  to  train  ourselves
to  accept  or  reject  the  Instinctive  Inferences  offered
us  by  such  emotions  is,  of  course,  one  of  morals  as
well  as  of  science.  The  crowds  who  gathered  in  1912

1  A  writer  in  the  Times  (March  13,  1914),  describing  the  process  by
which  a  starving  plague  -  infected  flea  infects its  host,  speaks  of  "  the
wretched  flea."

2  Bentham,  "  Anarchical  Fallacies,"  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  522.


236  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

to  hear  Professor  Bergson  lecture  in  London  did  so
mainly  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  moral  guidance.
They  may  not  have  accepted  M.  Bergson's  full
doctrine  of  the  separation  between  the  worlds  of
action  and  reason,  but  most  of  them  left  the  room
after  each  of  M.  Bergson's  brilliant  lectures,  inclined
to  think  that  they  might  let  themselves  go,  in  accept-
ing the  evidence  of  feeling  in  Ethics  and  Theology,
beyond  the  point  which  they  had  hitherto  thought
justifiable.

Reliance  on  Instinct  against  Reason  has  been
the  characteristic  of  conservative  thinkers  from
the  time  when  Aristophanes  attacked  Socrates  and
Euripides  in  The  Clouds;  and  since  the  French
Revolution,  that  characteristic  has  dominated
throughout  Europe  the  opposition  to  "  logical "
democracy.  It  was  this  tradition  which  Seeley  was
carrying  on  when  he  said  in  1891  :

I  treat  government  not  as  a  conscious  contrivance,  but  as
a  half-instinctive  product  of  the  effort  which  human  beings
make  to  ward  off  from  themselves  certain  evils  to  which  they
are  exposed.1

Lord  Morley,  on  the  other  hand,  was  following  in
the  steps  of  his  favourite  pre-revolutionary  thinkers
of  eighteenth  -  century  France  when  he  quoted
Spinoza's  statement :

When  I  have  applied  my  mind  to  politics  so  that  I  might
examine  what  belongs  to  politics  with  the  same  freedom  of
mind  as  we  use  for  mathematics,  I  have  taken  my  best  pains
not  to  laugh  at  the  actions  of  mankind,  not  to  groan  over
them,  not  to  be  angry  with  them,  but  to  understand  them.2

1  Political  Science,  1896,  p.  129  n.
2  "Address  to  Manchester  University,"  Times,  November  23,  1911.


THOUGHT  237

In  the  end  it  is  the  psychological  question  of  fact
which  will  have  to  settle  the  ethical  question  of
conduct.  Does  history  show  that  Instinct  or  Reason
is  the  better  guide  ?  It  is  easy  enough  to  make  out
a  strong  case  for  Instinct.  In  the  strange  world
which  is  revealed  to  us  in  Dr.  J.  G.  Frazer's  Golden
Bough  that  which  shocks  us  most  is  often  the  victory
of  Reason  over  Instinct,  the  killing  and  eating  of  a
well -loved  king  because  Reason  indicated  that  in
that  way  alone  could  the  strength  of  the  tribe  be
preserved,  or  the  execution  by  an  affectionate  husband
of  a  wife  who  brought  forth  twins.  The  history  of
later  times  is  full  of  the  tragic  failures  of  those  who,
like  Calvin  and  Torquemada,  or  Lilburne  and  Robes-
pierre, or  Joseph  II.,  were  willing  "to  follow  Reason
whithersoever  she  should  lead,"  even  in  despite  of
natural  feeling.

And  yet  if  Reason  has  slain  its  thousands,  the
acceptance  of  Instinct  as  evidence  has  slain  its  tens
of  thousands.  Day  by  day,  in  the  ordinary  direction
of  their  lives,  men  have  learnt  during  hundreds  of
generations  how  untrustworthy  is  the  interpretation
of  fact  which  Instinct  offers,  and  how  bitter  is  the
truth  contained  in  such  proverbs  as  "  Anger  is  a  bad
counsellor  "  or  "  Love  is  blind."  The  proprietors
of  the  tables  at  Monte  Carlo  and  the  organisers  of
State  lotteries  have  learnt  to  calculate  with  quanti-
tative exactness  the  degree  to  which  the  gambler's
hope  will  distort  his  estimation  of  his  actual  chances.
At  the  end  of  a  year's  work  in  the  Law  Courts  one  can
ask  the  barristers  how  often  they  have  been  engaged


238  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

on  the  right  and  how  often  on  the  wrong  side.  The
two  totals  should  obviously  be  equal,  but  those  whom
I  have  asked  have  always  told  me  that  they  believed
60  or  70  per  cent  of  their  clients  had  been  in  the
right,  and  have  admitted  at  once  that  their  con-
clusion has  been  influenced  by  their  instincts  of
goodwill  or  of  combat.

And  in  greater  matters  than  litigation  or  gambling
the  distortion  of  evidence  by  the  process  of  Instinctive
Inference  is  responsible  for  an  appalling  proportion
of  the  weary  sum  of  human  misery.  Wars  are  often
started  and  maintained,  neither  from  mere  blind
anger  nor  because  those  on  either  side  find  that  they
desire  the  results  which  a  cool  calculation  of  the
conditions  make  them  regard  as  probable,  but  largely
because  men  insist  on  treating  their  feelings  as  evi-
dence of  fact,  and  refuse  to  believe  that  they  can
be  so  angry  without  sufficient  cause.

In  the  Great  Society  both  the  danger  of  Instinctive
Inference  and  the  comparative  reliability  of  Reason
yearly  increase.  The  mere  growth  of  the  scale  of
our  social  organisation  has  destroyed,  in  the  case
of  popular  decisions  on  national  policy,  the  main
advantage  which  Instinctive  Inference  could  claim,
that  it  was  stimulated,  not  by  abstract  generalisa-
tions, but  by  a  direct  perception  of  our  concrete
environment.  Those  things  which  during  a  war-
fever  or  an  election  now  stimulate  our  instincts,
the  caricatures  and  posters,  the  flags  and  tunes,  the
cunningly  constructed  entities  of  "  foreigner "  and
"  landlord  "  and  "  agitator,"  even  the  personalities


THOUGHT  239

of  the  Kaiser  or  Mr.  Lloyd  George,  make  up  a
world  at  least  as  far  removed  from  concrete  reality
as  the  world  of  Nature  and  Liberty,  Republican
Rome  and  the  Social  Contract  in  the  mind  of  Robes-
pierre. There  always  seems  to  me,  for  instance,
something  grimly  ironical  in  Mr.  Garvin's  constantly
implied  exhortation  to  his  readers  that  they  should
trust  to  their  plain  unsophisticated  feelings  to  guide
their  action  with  regard  to  that  "  Germany  "  whose
every  feature  is  the  work  of  Mr.  Garvin's  own  well-
practised  pen.

I  have  already  said  that  Instinctive  Inference  is
implied  in,  is  indeed  identical  with,  all  our  impulses
towards  instinctive  action.  But  in  the  Great  Society
instinctive  action  on  a  great  scale  is  impossible.  A
hundred  thousand  men  cannot  surge  passionately
into  Hyde  Park.  However  completely  they  may  be
under  the  sway  of  Instinct,  they  will  not  get  through
the  gates  unless  some  one  with  a  map  and  a  list  of
marshals  before  him  has  worked  out  a  route  and  a
time-table.  The  vague  impulses  of  modern  nations
can  only  result  in  corporate  action  on  lines  which
some  one,  whether  wise  or  foolish,  has  deliberately  laid
down.  If  in  America  to-day  the  ablest  men  should
take  Seeley's  implied  advice  and  stand  by  to  watch
passively  the  results  of  the  "  half -instinctive  "  political
efforts  of  a  population  of  a  hundred  million  souls,
those  efforts  would  express  themselves  in  the  creation
of  new  political  machinery  deliberately  invented  by  less
able  men.  Between  1832  and  1870  many  Englishmen
felt  a  "  half -instinctive  "  anger  with  the  local  institu-


240  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

tions  that  had  been  developed  during  the  eighteenth
century.  But  the  only  men  who  then  seriously  thought
about  the  structure  of  British  Local  Government
were  a  rather  slow-witted  disciple  of  Bentham  called
Chadwick,  and  an  ex-lecturer  on  phrenology  called
Toulmin  Smith,  and  the  plan  actually  adopted  was  an
unworkable  compromise  between  their  two  schemes.
And  both  the  development  of  more  delicate  logical
methods  and  the  accumulation  of  recorded  observa-
tions are,  in  fact,  now  making  deliberate  Thought
about  mankind  less  inexact  and  misleading  than  at
any  other  point  in  history.  A  doctor  now  may
honestly  believe,  what  a  doctor  in  the  Middle  Ages
must  often  have  doubted,  that  the  conclusion  to
which  he  comes  by  observing  symptoms  and  com-
paring them,  in  the  attitude  of  suspended  judgment,
with  the  statements  in  his  books,  is  more  trustworthy
than  the  first  unsophisticated  emotion  of  fear  or  hope
that  is  excited  by  his  patient's  general  appearance.1
The  linen -covered  files  of  papers  which  help  the
statesman  to  form  his  decisions,  though  they  are  still
abstract  and  incomplete,  yet  come  every  year  into
a  more  real  connection  with  the  complex  human
beings  whom  his  decisions  will  affect.

If,  therefore,  we  are  now  forced  to  choose  between
Instinctive  Inference  and  Thought  in  the  direction

1  In  medicine  a  certain  amount  even  of  "  real  abstraction  "  is  now
possible.  The  tuberculosis  bacillus  which  a  general  practitioner  sends  to
the  analytical  laboratory  is  much  the  same  whether  it  comes  from  one  patient
or  another,  And  the  letters  which  many  consultants  daily  receive  from  less
experienced  practitioners  would  show,  I  believe,  that  the  medieval  rule
(invaluable  in  its  time)  that  no  man  should  prescribe  for  a  patient  whom  he
has  not  seen  is  now  constantly  and  wisely  broken  through.


THOUGHT  241

of  the  Great  Society,  we  must  choose  Thought.  In
fact,  however,  the  problem  before  us  is  not  to  be
settled  by  a  single  choice.  At  any  one  moment  we
can  reject  the  evidence  of  feeling  on  a  question  of  fact,
or  we  may  even  form  a  habit  of  being  on  the  watch
to  prevent  "  our  will  deciding  before  our  thinking  is
finished."  But  our  Thought  must  still  go  on  in  the
presence  of  a  constant  accompaniment  of  Feeling,
and  the  relation  between  them  will  be  of  vital  import-
ance to  the  social  efficiency  of  both  Thought  and
Feeling.  At  present  that  relation,  even  in  the  most
conscientious  thinker,  is  apt  to  be  confused  and
accidental.  Let  any  one  who  has  ever  seriously  tried
to  "  think  out "  a  sociological  problem  for  himself
try  to  remember  what  actually  occurred  to  him.
Let  us  suppose  that  in  1903,  when  the  problem  of
Free  Trade  and  Protection  suddenly  became  actual
in  England,  he  recognised  with  shame  that  his  own
opinions  on  the  subject  were  merely  the  result  of  habit
or  family  tradition.  He  rearranged  his  household
customs  so  as  to  enable  him  to  read  with  concentration
on  two  evenings  a  week  and  to  have  a  fire  in  his  study
on  Sunday  mornings  in  winter.  He  honestly  tried
to  keep  himself  in  the  mental  attitude  of  "  suspended
judgment."  He  subscribed  to  a  second  daily  paper
which  opposed  his  own  party,  read  perhaps  half-a-dozen
books  on  the  fiscal  question,  and  three  times  as  many
pamphlets  and  magazine  articles,  and  argued  daily
with  a  friend  in  the  morning  train.

He  voted  on  one  side  or  the  other  at  the  election
of  1906. What  really  happened  to  him  during  the

R


242  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

intervening  three  years  ?  He  probably  followed  up
from  time  to  time  arguments  which  were  as  purely
logical  as  Professor  Bowley's  mathematical  analysis
of  the  wages  problem,  though  less  technical  in  form.
His  previous  opinions  may  have  been  confirmed  or
shaken  by  them.  He  may  have  thought  that  some
particular  statement  of  the  problem  left  out  an
important  factor  or  that  some  argument  involved  a
logical  fallacy.  He  probably  had  reason  to  be  thank-
ful that  a  good  deal  of  fragmentary  thinking  got
itself  arranged  and  filled  out  during  sleep  or  in  periods
of  wordless  reverie.

But,  unless  he  was  a  very  unusual  man,  it  is  not
likely  that  he  could  honestly  say  that  he  reached  his
final  conclusion  by  the  sole  process  of  combining  a
series  of  logical  steps  into  one  demonstration.  The
"telling"  arguments  on  one  side  or  the  other  prob-
ably left  in  his  memory,  not  so  much  a  series  of
premisses  to  be  used  as  the  basis  of  future  conclusions,
but  a  slightly  increased  sense  of  discomfort  or  re-
assurance. The  decisive  moments  in  the  "  making
up  of  his  mind  "  were  not  when  a  calculation  of  his
own  was  confirmed  or  disproved  by  the  Board  of
Trade  returns,  but  when  he  felt  with  a  flash  of  hot
conviction  that  he  hated  the  typical  Cobdenite  or  the
typical  Tariff  Reformer.  He  knew  what  his  decision
was  when  he  heard  himself  saying,  "  I  can't  and
won't  vote  for  a  set  of  men  like  that."

The  fact  that,  at  the  end  of  the  three  years  of
reconsideration,  so  enormously  large  a  proportion  of
thoughtful  Conservatives  found  that  they  were


THOUGHT  243

convinced  Protectionists,  and  of  thoughtful  Liberals
that  they  were  convinced  Free  Traders,  does  not
speak  very  highly  for  the  efficiency  of  the  whole
process.  Even  Mr.  Sidney  Webb  (whose  name
would  first  occur  to  many  English  politicians  in
search  of  a  type  of  passionless  intellectuality)  acknow-
ledges in  a  tone  of  regret  that  "  We  are  almost
irresistibly  tempted  to  judge,  as  between  different
schemes,  according  to  our  own  liking  for  them,"  1
whether  that  "  liking  "  is  due  to  a  careful  valuation
by  feeling  of  purely  intellectual  conclusions,  or  merely
to  a  preference,  due  to  habit,  or  loyalty,  or  friendship,
for  certain  lines  of  argument.

If  we  are  to  do  better  than  this  we  must  under-
take a  systematic  enquiry  into  the  relation  between
Feeling  and  Thought.  Such  an  enquiry  will  need
the  time  and  patience  and  personal  evidence  of  many
students,  but  it  will  lead,  I  think,  to  the  conclusion
that  we  can  consciously  substitute  some  measure  of
order  for  mere  accident  in  the  emotional  side  of  our
intellectual  life.

I  have  already,  for  instance,  spoken  of  the  relation
between  Instinctive  Feeling  and  Thought  in  the
valuation  of  our  intellectual  conclusions.  When  we
have  decided  what  the  result  of  any  course  of  action
will  be,  it  is  our  whole  nature,  and  not  merely  one
intellectual  disposition,  which  must  be  called  in  to
decide  whether  that  result  is  good  or  bad  for  us.

Any  one  of  our  Instincts  can  again  serve  as  the
motive  which  impels  us  to  undertake  and  continue  the

1  Sidney  Webb  in  the  Crusade  for  August  1912,  p.  151.


244  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  i

toil  of  Thought,  without,  if  we  see  clearly  the  facts
of  our  nature,  distorting  either  the  methods  or  the
conclusions  of  our  Thought.  A  Moltke  when  he  is
preparing  mobilisation  plans,  or  a  cancer-student
when  he  conies  from  the  hospital  to  sit,  tired  but
determined,  at  his  microscope,  may  learn  to  make
patriotism  or  pity  the  driving  force  in  his  long  search
for  truth.  Perhaps  some  day  religion  may  so  far
escape  from  its  present  bewildering  confusion  between
emotion  and  belief  that  the  passionate  love  excited
by  contemplation  of  the  universe  may  be,  for  those
born  with  the  religious  genius,  not  evidence  for  the
supernatural  authority  of  this  creed  or  that,  but  the
motive  which  sustains  them  in  a  lifelong  search  for
that  which  lies  behind  all  the  creeds.

Sometimes  the  conclusions  of  Instinctive  Inference
may  be  made  the  material  of  unbiased  Thought.
When  a  man  of  affairs  finds  himself  saying  :  "I
don't  see  Smith  doing  that,"  or,  while  interviewing
candidates  for  office,  deliberately  jots  down  some  sign
indicating  his  first  impression,  he  may  fairly  (if  he
knows  exactly  what  he  is  doing)  treat  the  instinctive
conclusions  of  real  or  remembered  "  physiognomy  "
as  being  part  of  the  evidence  for  a  final  reasoned
conclusion.  And  a  woman  may  fairly  use  in  Thought
the  greater  natural  skill  in  that  respect  which  is
apparently  one  of  the  "  secondary  characteristics  "
of  sex.

Instinct  again  helps  Thought  by  increasing  the
range  of  our  associations  and  inferences.  The  first
connection  between  the  idea  already  in  our  mind  and


THOUGHT  245

the  other  ideas  which  it  calls  up  is  often  provided  by
one  of  our  simpler  dispositions.  Every  thinker,  like
every  poet,  knows  the  truth  of  that  which  Wuhdt,
after  much  introspection,  declared,  that  "  Feeling  is
the  pioneer  of  Knowledge,"  and  it  is  often  the  case
that  "  a  novel  thought  may  come  to  consciousness
first  of  all  in  the  form  of  a  feeling  "  * — however
rigorous  may  be  the  logical  test  to  which  we  afterwards
submit  it.

But  the  most  essential  factor  in  the  relation  be-
tween Emotion  and  Thought  is  to  be  found  in  the
Emotion  of  Thought  itself.  So  far,  in  this  section
of  my  argument,  I  have  followed  the  usage  of  ordinary
speech  in  distinguishing  between  the  Instincts  (i.e.
all  our  dispositions  other  than  Thought  and  its  allies)
and  Thought.  But  since,  as  I  argued  in  Chapter  III.,
Thought  is  a  true  disposition,  it,  like  all  the  other
dispositions,  has  not  only  its  appropriate  group  of
stimuli  and  its  appropriate  course  of  action,  but  also
its  appropriate  emotion — an  emotion  which  may  be
heightened  into  passion  and  harmonised  by  the  sense
of  ordered  beauty.

It  is  the  passion,  not  of  Love  or  Fame,  but  of
Thought  itself  which  controls  the  noblest  moments  of
Dante's  Paradiso  or  Lucretius'  De  Rerum  Natura.
Milton,  in  1644,  drew  for  all  time  a  picture  of  a  whole
nation  inspired  by  that  passion.  He  notes  both  the
sworn  lovers  of  philosophy,  the  "  pens  and  heads  .  .  .
sitting  by  their  studious  lamps,  musing,  searching,

1  Wundt,  Principles  of  Physiological  Psychology,  ii.  (1893)  pp.  501,  521  ;
iii.  121  f.,  625,  quoted  by  Titchener,  Psychology  of  Thought  Processes,  p.  103,


246  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

revolving  new  notions  and  ideas,"  and  also  the
"  cheerfulness  of  the  people  ...  as  in  a  body  when
the  blood  is  fresh,  the  spirits  pure  and  vigorous,  not
only  to  the  vital  but  to  the  rational  faculties,"  so
that "  our  hearts  are  now  more  capacious,  our  thoughts
more  erected  to  the  search  and  expectation  of  greatest
and  exactest  things."  x

'"'  The  search  and  expectation  of  greatest  and
exactest  things  "  is  the  passion  of  Thought  itself,
unhelped  and  uncoloured  by  any  lower  Instinct.

1  Areopagitica,  pp.  92,  96,  98.


PART  II


CHAPTER  XI

THE ORGANISATION  OP  THOUGHT

IN  the  following  three  chapters  I  shall  approach  my
problem  from  a  new  point  of  view.  So  far  I  have  been
examining  facts  of  human  psychology  with  the  pur-
pose of  discovering  how  they  can  be  adapted  to  the
needs  of  the  Great  Society.  Now  I  shall  examine
existing  forms  of  organisation  in  the  Great  Society
with  the  purpose  of  discovering  how  far  they  can  be
improved  by  a  closer  adaptation  to  the  facts  of
human  psychology.

I  shall  not  hope  to  succeed  in  inventing  any  new
social  system,  and  even  in  the  tentative  suggestions
which  I  shall  put  forward  I  shall  run  the  risk  of  dis-
crediting a  method  of  enquiry  which  may  be  right  by
connecting  it  with  practical  proposals  which  may  be
wrong.  My  treatment  will  be  "insular,"  for  my
instances  will  be  mainly  drawn  from  those  English
facts  with  which  alone  I  have  any  real  familiarity.
But  at  least  I  shall  not  have  left  my  analysis  in  the
air.

At  the  first  approach  to  this  side  of  my  subject  I
must  deal  with  a  verbal  difficulty  which  has  been  the
cause  of  constant  misunderstanding.  Most  of  the

249


250  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

terms  used  to  express  the  general  idea  of  organised
association  between  human  beings  have  been  taken
either  from  collocations  of  inanimate  things,  as  in  the
case  of  "  mechanism,"  or  "  system,"  or  from  single
animate  things,  as  in  the  case  of  "  body  "  or  "or-
ganism." If  we  use  the  inanimate  terms  we  are  apt
to  imply  either  that  the  associated  human  beings  do
not  influence  each  other  at  all,  or  that  they  only
influence  each  other  in  the  simple  way  in  which  one
piece  of  inanimate  matter  influences  another  by
impinging  upon  it.  If  we  use  the  animate  terms  we
are  apt  to  imply,  not  merely  that  the  associated
human  beings  influence  each  other  vitally  and  con-
sciously, but  that  their  association  itself  has  a  conscious
life  of  its  own,  apart  from  the  many  lives  of  the
individuals  who  constitute  it — that  a  community  is
an  "  organism  "  or  "  body  "  in  the  same  sense  in
which  a  man  is.

In  order  to  avoid  both  these  implications  I  shall
use  the  word  "  organisation."  By  a  happy  accident
of  speech  "  organisation  "  suggests  an  arrangement
the  constituent  parts  of  which  are  alive,  without
suggesting,  as  "  organism  "  does,  that  the  arrange-
ment itself  has  a  "  super-life  "  or  a  "  super-conscious-
ness "  of  its  own.  Such  a  "  super  -  consciousness  "
may  of  course  exist,  and  conscious  men  may  be
related  to  a  conscious  society  as  individually  conscious
blood-corpuscles  would  be  related  to  the  man  of  whom
they  were  part.  But  if  any  one  believes  that  this  is
the  case,  he  should  say  so  with  the  utmost  definite-
ness,  instead  of  vaguely  implying  it  by  the  use  of  such


CH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 251

terms  as  "  social  organism,"  "  social  consciousness,"
or  "  social  will."  I  myself  believe  that  there  is
in  fact  no  evidence  whatever  that  a  self-conscious
society  in  that  sense  does  exist.

I  shall  group  the  Organisations  which  I  am  con-
sidering by  reference  to  the  psychological  facts  with
which  they  are  mainly  concerned.  For  this  purpose
I  shall  need  a  different  psychological  scheme  from  that
which  I  have  hitherto  used.  In  Chapter  II.  I  made
a  classification  on  the  plane  of  "  structure,"  and  on
that  plane  divided  the  relevant  facts  of  human  psy-
chology into  "  Complex  Dispositions,"  Instinctive  or
Intelligent.1  Now,  as  I  there  indicated,  I  shall  cross-
classify  the  same  facts  by  dealing  with  them  on  the
plane  of  consciousness,  and  dividing  them  into  the
"  elementary "  classes  of  Cognition,  Feeling,  and
Conation.

Every  conscious  psychological  event  is,  according
to  a  well-known  analysis,  "at  once"  (I  quote  Mr.
McDougall's  excellent  little  Psychology  in  the  Home
University  Series)  "  a  knowing,  a  being  affected,  and
a  striving ;  or,  in  technical  terms,  a  cognition,  an
affection  .  .  .  and  a  conation"  (p.  61).  Cognition,
Affection,  and  Conation,  as  Mr.  McDougall  points  out,
do  not  exist  apart  from  each  other.  "  The  affection
and  the  striving,"  he  says,  are  "  consequential  upon
the  knowing,  and  the  character  of  the  striving  "  is
"  in  some  degree  determined  by  the  affection,"  and
"  in  turn  the  striving  reacts  upon  the  knowing  and
leads  to  modification  of  the  feeling  "  (p.  61).  But  he

1  See  p.  29.


252  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

adds  that,  although  "  every  mental  process  is  at  once
a  knowing,  an  affection,  and  a  striving,"  one  of  the
aspects  may  be  dominant,  and  we  may  legitimately
call  a  mental  process  by  the  name  of  its  dominant
aspect ;  "  thus  we  speak  of  acts  of  perception,  recog-
nition, recollection,  reasoning,  when  we  are  pre-
dominantly cognitive ;  of  states  of  emotion,  or  feeling,
when  affection  is  dominant ;  of  volition,  resolution,
deciding,  desiring,  when  we  are  vividly  conscious  of
striving  towards  an  end  "  (p.  63).

The  same  is  true  of  Organisations.  A  conscious
human  being  in  carrying  out  the  functions  appropriate
to  membership  of  any  Organisation  is  always  simul-
taneously knowing  and  feeling  and  willing,  and  his
knowledge  and  feeling  and  will  not  only  interact  on
each  other  but  are,  perhaps,  in  the  ultimate  analysis,
merely  different  conscious  aspects  of  one  vital  process.
And  yet  a  particular  Organisation  may  be  pre-
dominantly concerned  with  one  aspect  only,  and  may
therefore  be  rightly  classified  by  a  reference  to  that
one.  A  Royal  Commission,  for  instance,  is  an  Organ-
isation predominantly  concerned  with  knowing.  The
Commissioners  are  directed  to  collect  evidence  and
to  assist  each  other  to  draw  conclusions  from  that
evidence.  But  the  conclusions  of  individual  Com-
missioners will  differ,  not  only  according  to  their
industry  in  studying  the  evidence  and  their  acuteness
in  thinking  about  it,  but  also  according  to  variations
in  their  desires.  Every  Royal  Commission  is  there-
fore, to  a  certain  extent,  a  Will-Organisation,  a
machine  by  which  persons  of  different  desires  are


CH.XI  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 253

enabled  to  form  compromises  and  act  by  the  votes  of
the  majority ;  and  some  Royal  Commissions  prove,
when  they  get  to  work,  to  be  almost  exclusively  Will-
Organisations,  and  hardly  Thought-Organisations  at
all.  A  Trade  Union  is  predominantly  a  Will-Organ-
isation, concerned  with  collecting,  welding,  and  en-
forcing the  desires  of  its  members.  But  the  pro-
ceedings, both  of  its  executive  and  of  its  branches,
consist  very  largely,  and  sometimes  predominantly,
in  the  organisation  of  concerted  Thought.  The
Organisation  created  by  a  Shop  Hours  Regulation
Bill  aims  primarily  at  securing  a  feeling  of  comfort
among  those  employed  in  retail  trades.  It  is  there-
fore predominantly  a  Feeling-Organisation  or,  as  I
shall  call  it  to  avoid  ambiguity,  a  Happiness-Organisa-
tion. But  all  legislation  which  shortens  the  hours  of
regular  work,  not  only  makes  effective  political  think-
ing by  the  wage-earners  more  possible,  and  is  so  far
part  of  the  national  Thought-Organisation,  but  may
be  intended  to  enable  them  to  form  and  manage
associations  for  carrying  out  their  political  desires,
and  may  therefore  be  part  of  the  national  Will-
Organisation.

While  following  this  general  classification  on  the
plane  of  consciousness,  I  shall,  of  course,  at  the
same  time  have  in  my  mind  my  earlier  and  more
detailed  classification  on  the  plane  of  structure.  In
fact  without  the  simultaneous  use  of  the  two  classi-
fications it  is  extremely  difficult  to  get  and  retain
that  concrete  conception  of  psychological  fact,
which,  like  binocular  vision,  is  required  by  any  one


254  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

who  is  to  see  the  real  world  in  its  true  perspective.
The  three  chapters  will  deal  therefore  with  "  Thought-
Organisation,  "  Will-Organisation,"  and  "  Happiness-
Organisation."

The  problems  with  which  I  shall  have  to  deal  in
each  of  the  three  chapters  will  be  alike  in  that  they
arise  from  the  change  of  social  scale  which  has  created
the  Great  Society.  If  the  fact  that  our  present
society  is  larger  than  any  that  has  existed  before
merely  meant  that  it  contained  the  same  number  of
individuals  magnified  as  in  the  field  of  a  microscope,
no  new  problem  of  organisation  would  result.  But
it  means  that  our  society  contains  a  larger  number  of
individuals  of  the  same  size  as  before,  and  that
therefore  the  relation  of  those  individuals  to  each
other  is  changed.  The  average  citizen  of  twentieth-
century  London  is  of  nearly  the  same  height  as  the
average  citizen  of  modern  Andorra  or  medieval
Florence.  His  eyes  see  no  further,  his  memory  holds
no  more.  If  he  is  tested  in  a  psychological  laboratory,
the  "  reaction-time  "  intervening  between  his  sensa-
tions and  his  conceptions  is  the  same.  And  in  more
conscious  and  less  easily  measurable  respects,  such  as
fertility  of  mental  association,  or  strength  and  range
of  affection,  the  Londoner  and  the  Andorrist  are  both
subject  to  similar  inherited  limitations,  which  are  none
the  less  real  because  they  are  sometimes  better  repre-
sented by  a  curve  of  decreasing  efficiency  in  learning
to  carry  out  increased  functions  than  by  a  hard  line
separating  what  a  man  can  from  what  he  cannot  do.

The  fact,  therefore,  that  any  particular  institution


OH.  X1 THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 255

works  well  in  Andorra,  or  worked  well  in  medieval
Florence,  creates  no  presumption  that  it  will  work
well  in  London.  If,  in  London,  we  retain  a  medieval
governing  body  unchanged  in  form  and  numbers,  its
working  will  be  changed,  because  brains  and  wills  of
the  same  size  will  have  to  deal  with  enormously  more
numerous  and  more  complex  questions.  If  the
governing  body  itself  is  merely  increased  in  numbers
to  meet  the  increased  work,  the  relation  of  its  members
to  each  other  will  be  by  that  fact  changed,  so  that  the
larger  body  may  be  able  to  do  less,  instead  of  more,
than  the  smaller.  A  change  of  scale  in  the  functions
of  any  organisation  may  indeed  require,  not  merely
its  modification,  but  the  invention  of  a  new  organisa-
tion on  a  totally  different  plan.

For  the  rest,  therefore,  of  this  chapter  I  shall  be
dealing  with  those  institutions  in  the  Great  Society
whose  main  function  is  the  Organisation  of  Thought.

For  this  purpose  I  will  first  try  to  make  clear
what  I  mean  by  Organised  as  distinguished  from
Individual  Thought.  Before  the  invention  of  writ-
ing, that  distinction  must  have  been  easy.  A  man
who  engaged  in  serious  and  continued  Thought  did  so
either  while  dealing,  in  solitude  and  silence,  with
material  provided  by  his  own  memory  and  imagina-
tion, or  while  forming  one  of  an  arguing  group  who
constantly  provided  each  other  with  new  facts  and
diverted  in  new  directions  the  course  of  each  other's
mental  associations.  The  only  type  of  Thought  as
to  which  any  difficulty  in  deciding  whether  it  was


256  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Individual  or  Organised  could  occur,  was  that  which
took  place  during  a  "  one-sided  "  oral  communication  ;
when  a  disciple,  for  instance,  listened  in  silence  to  his
teacher,  or  the  members  of  a  crowd  too  large  for
argument  were  addressed  by  an  orator  or  prophet.

As  soon,  however,  as  writing  was  invented,  it  was
possible  for  intercommunication  of  Thought  to  take
place  without  bodily  presence.  A  thinker  could  then
write  in  solitude  arguments  addressed  to  unknown
readers,  or  read  in  solitude  the  arguments  of  others.
In  such  a  case  Thought  is  "  Individual  "  if  the  moment
at  which  it  takes  place  is  alone  considered,  and
"  Organised  "  if  the  whole  process  from  the  original
writing  to  the  final  reading  is  considered  together.
In  the  Great  Society,  owing  to  the  enormous  distribu-
tion of  printed  and  written  matter,  this  last  form  of
Organised  Thought  has  become  typical.  We  do  the
main  body  of  that  intellectual  work  which  depends
upon  organised  communication  with  our  fellows,
rather  while  reading  books  and  letters  in  studies  and
at  office  desks  than  while  hearing  and  uttering  spoken
words  in  monastery  cloisters,  or  university  halls,  or
political  hustings,  or  at  the  meetings  of  "  Merchant
Adventurers."

It  will  be  convenient  to  call  this  newer  type
of  Thought-Organisation  "  impersonal."  The  older
"  personal  "  forms  of  Thought- Organisation  in  groups
and  committees  and  assemblies  still,  however,  survive
among  us,  owing  partly  to  traditional  habit,  and
partly  to  the  more  permanent  fact  that  our  psycho-
logical nature  was  evolved  under  conditions  of  personal


on.  xi THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 257

intercourse,  and  that  impersonal  intercourse  leaves
some  of  our  powers  unused,  and,  therefore,  some  of
our  needs  unsatisfied.

Of  these  older  forms  of  organisation,  the  simplest
and  oldest  is  that  which  is  constituted  by  a  small
number  of  persons — from  two  to  perhaps  seven  or
eight — who  meet  together  for  the  purpose  of  sustained
oral  discussion.  This  form  may  be  studied  at  its
finest  point  of  development  in  the  dialogues  of  Plato.
It  is,  as  the  Greeks  knew,  extraordinarily  difficult.
At  first  sight  it  might  appear  that  the  main  condition
of  its  success  is  that  it  should  be  as  little  "  organised  "
as  possible,  that  the  group  should  meet  by  accident,
and  that  each  member  of  the  group  should  freely  obey
his  casual  impulses  both  in  speaking  and  in  remaining
silent.  But  a  closer  examination  shows  that  the  full
efficiency  of  argument  carried  on  even  by  the  most
informal  body  of  friends,  requires  not  only  that  each
should  be  master  of  the  most  delicate  shades  of  the
same  language,  and  that  each  should  be  accustomed
to  make  use  of  similar  rules  of  Thought,  but  that
they  should  have  a  large  body  of  knowledge  in  com-
mon, that  each  should  be  familiar  with  the  peculiar
strength  and  weakness  of  each  of  the  others,  and,
above  all,  that  each  should  be  influenced  by  the  same
desire  to  follow  truth  "  whithersoever  the  argument
may  lead."  All  this  requires  that  the  group  should
consist,  not  of  men  of  average  powers  who  have
come  accidentally  together,  but  of  men  selected  (as
Socrates,  for  instance,  selected  his  disciples)  in  some
way  which  should  secure  that  the  worst  of  them

s


258  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

should  possess  a  rather  unusual  share  of  natural
ability,  acquired  training,  and  interest  in  ideas.  And
normally,  the  necessary  discipline  and  concentration
cannot  be  secured  unless  some  one  of  the  party  is
accepted  by  the  others  as  a  leader,  and  does  not
abuse  his  position.

Philosophy,  in  the  widest  sense  of  that  term,
began  in  such  group-discussions.  But  the  elastic
art  of  "  dialectic  "  by  which  they  were  regulated
became  fixed  and  unprogressive,  and  its  system  of
question  and  answer  became,  in  the  hands  of  the
medieval  schoolmen,  as  I  have  already  said,  a  very
inefficient  code  of  directions  for  individual  thinking.

In  the  modern  world,  and  especially  during  the
last  two  generations,  the  "  dialectic  "  art  has,  outside
the  law  courts,  been  greatly  neglected  ;  and  nothing
would  perhaps  more  startle  a  disciple  of  Socrates  who
should  return  to  life  among  us,  than  to  listen  to  the
futile  attempts  of  three  or  four  exceptionally  able
English  professional  men  to  thrash  out  after  dinner
some  philosophical  or  political  question.  Many  men
who  now  do  hard  intellectual  work  with  some  success
have,  like  the  late  Duke  of  Devonshire,  never  acquired
the  power  of  following  a  verbal  argument  at  all.1

Philosophers  and  scientists,  whether  men  or  women,
generally  live  now  a  long  way  from  each  other  in
great  cities ;  and  they  are  mostly  married  and  take

1  B.  Holland,  Life  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  vol.  ii.  p.  241.  "  It  was  no
doubt  a  difficulty  for  him  in  Cabinet  Council  that  a  decision  was  usually
arrived  at  by  swifter  intellects  before  he  had  been  able  to  formulate  even  to
himself  his  own  position."  In  any  case,  men  of  the  "  audile  "  type  of
mind  have  a  natural  advantage,  apart  from  training,  over  the  "  visualisers  "
(of  whom  the  Duke  was  probably  one)  in  oral  argument.


CH.  xi THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 259

more  seriously  than  did  the  Greeks  the  duty  of  social
intercourse  with  their  families.  At  the  same  time,
even  in  the  case  of  the  more  abstract  forms  of  pro-
fessed Thought,  the  decay  of  dialectic  is  largely  due
to  the  quantitative  pressure  of  modern  knowledge
and  modern  needs.  Philosophers  and  scientists,  like
other  men,  have  now  to  economise  time.  Reading  is
quicker  than  listening,  and  concentrated  individual
Thought  than  the  verbal  exposition  and  counter-
exposition  of  arguments,  while  the  printing-press
enables  a  man  who  has  anything  important  to  say  to
address  the  eyes  of  those  interested  in  his  subject  in
a  whole  nation  or  the  whole  civilised  world  rather
than  the  ears  of  a  few  friends.

The  modern  scientist,  again,  does  much  of  his
thinking  while  he  is  closely  observing  concrete  facts
with  microscope  or  balance,  and  we  have  not  yet
developed  a  system  of  oral  dialectic  suitable  for  more
than  two  persons  so  occupied.  When  a  group  of  men
argue  personally  about  some  point  of  natural  science,
the  actual  material  before  them  has  generally  to  be
provided,  not  by  the  sharp  evidence  of  Record  or  of
concrete  observation,  but  by  that  Memory  which  the
modern  man  of  science  is  trained  to  mistrust.

No  one  desires  to  return  to  the  old  belief  that  oral
dialectic  is  a  sufficient  guide  to  truth  without  direct
observation  and  solitary  Thought.  But  I  myself
believe  that  the  degree  to  which  we  have  abandoned
it  is  unfortunate.  Dialectic  is  slow  and  inexact,  but
in  many  sciences,  and  particularly  in  those  whose
subject-matter  is  human  action  and  feeling,  it  has


260  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.n

magnificent  possibilities  of  fertility.  Here  and  there,
indeed,  a  few  among  those  Englishmen  who  attempt
the  task  of  Thought  are  enabled  for  a  few  months  or
years  to  supplement  their  individual  work  by  dis-
cussion carried  on  under  something  like  Athenian
conditions.  Some  physical  defect  may  have  prevented
them  when  undergraduates  from  devoting  to  organised
athletics  all  the  energy  they  could  spare  from  their
books,  or  some  accident  of  career  or  of  temperament
may  have,  a  few  years  later,  prevented  them  from
being  entirely  absorbed  by  their  several  professions.
If  so  they  probably  remember  the  hours  so  spent  as
the  most  fruitful  in  their  whole  intellectual  life.

But  if  the  art  of  dialectic  is  to  be  revived,  it  must
make  such  use  of  the  economies  of  the  printing-press
as  is  not  inconsistent  with  its  essential  advantages,
and  must  bring  into  conscious  recognition  a  number
of  psychological  considerations  which  Aristotle,  in
framing  his  rules  of  Logic,  could  take  for  granted.

For  the  mere  purpose  of  giving  information,  speak-
ing has  no  advantage  over  reading.  A  dialectical
group  will,  therefore,  be  generally  wise  to  read  some
agreed  book  before  meeting,  or  to  deal  with  some
subject  with  the  facts  of  which  they  are  familiar  in
their  individual  work.  They  will  find  that  the  real
advantages  of  group-dialectic  are  those  which  books
cannot  give.  One  of  them  is  a  great  extension  of  the
range  of  immediate  mental  "association."  In  indi-
vidual Thought  the  thinker  waits  (in  the  Problem-
Attitude)  till  some  promising  idea  comes  into  his  mind
and  then  dwells  on  it  till  further  ideas  spring  from  it.


CH.XI  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 261

A  group  of  people,  however,  engaged  in  dialectic  can,
like  a  pack  of  hounds,  follow  up  the  most  promising
idea  which  occurs  to  any  one  of  them.  This  means
that  a  rule,  for  instance,  requiring  the  members  of
such  a  group  to  speak  in  regular  order  is  wrong,  as  it
prevents  ideas  being  brought  forward  at  the  moment
of  their  greatest  relevance.  But  if  free  interjection  is
allowed,  it  must  be  so  managed  as  to  prevent  any
member  of  the  group  causing  what  Socrates,  in  The
Clouds,  called  the  "  miscarriage  "  of  ideas  amongst
the  rest.  Here  the  art  of  dialectic  can  learn  from
the  introspective  evidence  of  individual  thinking.
Students  who  write  down  their  conscious  experiences
while  answering  problems  in  psychological  labora-
tories describe  the  verbal  form  of  the  ideas  which
successively  present  themselves  and  are  rejected
before  the  most  relevant  one  is  chosen  for  prolonged
consideration,  as  being  curiously  bare  and  curt.1  A
member  of  an  arguing  group  should  generally  put  his
first  claim  on  the  attention  of  his  fellows  into  the
same  curt  form,  which  takes  the  minimum  of  time,
can  be  forgotten  in  an  instant,  and  if  rejected  does  not
interfere  with  the  subconscious  process  of  association
in  the  rest.

But  the  relevance  of  an  idea  is  not  always  im-

1  See,  e.g.,  the  instances  given  by  Kakise  in  his  paper  on  "  The  Conscious
Concomitants  of  Understanding  "  (The  American  Journal  of  Psychology,
January  1911,  pp.  15-64).  Even  when  the  visual  and  kinetic  images
accompanying  Understanding  are  described  as  full  and  complex  the  words
accompanying  them  were  apparently  few  and  simple.  "  Isolated  words,"
he  says  (loc.  cit.  p.  58),  "  as  a  rule  awoke  richer  content-feeling  than  those
given  in  phrases.  A  single  noun  awoke  frequently  a  richer  content-feeling
than  did  a  short  phrase."  See  also  Marbe,  Experimentell-psychologische
Untersuchungen  iiber  das  Urteil  (Leipzig,  1901).


262  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

mediately  apparent,  and  therefore,  in  a  well-chosen
group  of  joint  thinkers,  if  any  one  is  impelled,  as  was
Thrasymachus  in  Plato's  Republic,  to  "  leap  like  a
wild  beast  "  into  the  discussion,  he  should  be  allowed
to  do  so,  and  to  indicate  the  intensity  of  his  impulse
by  the  heightening  of  his  voice.  If  his  conviction  of
the  supreme,  though  unapparent,  relevance  of  his
ideas  proves  generally  to  be  unfounded,  the  group  can
be  reorganised  without  him.  We  are  none  of  us,
indeed,  "  unbribed  judges "  of  our  own  thoughts,
and  a  man  who  really  tries  to  make  use  of  oral  dis-
cussion would  do  well  to  aim  at  taking,  in  a  series  of
evenings,  not  much  more  than  his  equal  arithmetical
fraction  of  the  common  time.

Perhaps  the  greatest  advantage  of  oral  dialectic
arises,  however,  from  the  relation,  which  I  described
in  Chapter  X.,  between  Instinctive  Inference  and
Thought.  When  friends  meet  together,  that  which  is
most  valuable,  even  as  intellectual  stimulus,  may  be
found  in  those  things,  too  delicate  for  our  clumsy
words,  which  were  present  when  Socrates  sat  in  the
inner  court  of  Cephalus's  house  at  the  Piraeus,  and
which  are  absent  when  a  modern  thinker  sits  down
alone  to  review  a  new  book  or  to  test  a  colleague's
experiment ;  the  ripples  of  laughter,  the  unuttered
kindnesses,  the  suggestion  that  the  effort  of  Thought
is  supremely  worth  while  and  its  successes  supremely
delightful,  even  the  occasional  silences,  unembarrassed
and  almost  unnoticed.  M.  Maeterlinck  revealed  a
deep  experience  of  personal  intercourse  when  he  wrote
with  deliberate  paradox  :


CH.XI  THE  OKGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 263

It  is  idle  to  think  that,  by  means  of  words,  any  real  com-
munication can  ever  pass  from  one  man  to  another.  The
lips  or  the  tongue  may  represent  the  soul,  even  as  a  cypher  or
a  number  may  represent  a  picture  of  Memling,  but  from  the
moment  that  we  have  something  to  say  to  each  other  we  are
compelled  to  hold  our  peace.1

While,  therefore,  the  logical  requirements  of  the
art  of  oral  dialectic  in  its  finest  form  would  include
the  common  acceptance  of  recognised  rules  of  Thought,
its  psychological  requirements  may  be  found  to  in-
clude the  common  acceptance  of  a  code  of  manners,
French  or  Italian  perhaps  rather  than  English,  which
will  allow  Feeling  to  play  without  shame  round  the
whole  process  of  Thinking.

And,  finally,  it  must  be  remembered  that  while
personal  dialectic  is,  for  certain  purposes,  still  one  of
the  best  means  of  discovering  new  truth,  it  is  no
longer  of  importance  as  a  means  of  disseminating
truth  when  discovered.  Just  as  its  subject-matter
must  be  now  drawn  in  the  main,  not  from  the  personal
knowledge  of  a  group  of  friends,  but  from  the  larger
world  of  books,  so  its  results,  if  they  are  to  influence
modern  life,  must  be  returned  to  that  larger  world
for  distribution.

It  is  singular  that  we  English,  who  neglect  more
than  other  nations  the  personal  dialectic  of  small
groups  as  a  means  of  arriving  at  general  truths,
trust  much  more  than  do  other  nations  the  conduct  of
our  municipal  and  national  affairs  to  the  oral  delibera-
tions of  larger  and  more  formal  Councils  and  Com-

1  The  Treasure  of  the  Humble  (trans.),  p 4.


264  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

mittees.  This  is,  perhaps,  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that
such  bodies  are  often  more  efficient  as  Will-Organ-
isations than  as  Thought- Organisations.  Men  who
could  not  invent  new  truths  by  verbal  discussion  can
yet  find  a  way  on  such  bodies  to  working  compromises
between  different  interests.  The  distinction  between
Will  and  Thought  may  be  difficult  to  draw  at  any
moment  in  the  complex  consciousness  of  an  individual
councillor  engaged  in  "  making  up  his  mind  "  how  to
vote.  But  in  the  procedure  of  a  deliberative  assembly
it  is  unmistakable.  An  experienced  listener  can  always
distinguish  between  the  speaker  (often,  unfortunately,
looked  on  by  the  rest  as  a  bore)  who  is  consciously
engaged  in  the  eliciting  of  truth  by  argument,  and
the  "  practical  man "  who  has  done  any  thinking
that  he  permits  himself  beforehand,  and  is  now  only
anxious  to  make  his  decision  prevail.

The  "  intellectualist "  Whigs  who  passed  the
Municipal  Reform  Act  of  1835  (on  which  our  present
city  government  is  based)  drew,  of  course,  no  dis-
tinction between  Will  and  Thought  at  all.  They
assumed  that  the  members  of  a  council  of  sixty  or  a
hundred  members  would  be  actuated  by  the  one
desire  of  Happiness,  and  would  attempt  by  pure  logic
in  full  session  to  persuade  each  other  that  that  desire
would  best  be  satisfied  by  this  or  the  other  expendi-
ture ;  just  as  the  same  statesmen,  when  they  passed
the  Limited  Liability  Acts  a  few  years  later,  assumed
that  the  six  thousand  shareholders  of  a  great  Railway
Company  would  settle  the  policy  of  the  Company  by*
logical  discussion  at  their  annual  meetings.


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 265

In  a  large  English  municipality  most  of  the  actual
invention  by  Thought  of  means  for  carrying  out
desired  ends  is  in  fact  done  in  solitude,  either  by  the
officials  or  by  some  one  among  the  more  energetic
councillors.  In  so  far  as  that  Thought  is  not  indi-
vidual, it  is  in  such  cases  the  result  either  of  the
world-wide  organisation  of  books  and  newspapers,  or
of  that  smaller  but  still  impersonal  local  organisation
which  consists  of  written  minutes  and  reports  read  by
the  official  at  his  desk  or  the  member  at  home.  A
new  idea  is  sometimes  invented  or  elaborated  during
the  discussions  of  a  few  leaders  in  the  "  Mayor's
Parlour,"  and,  less  often,  in  the  meetings  of  com-
mittees and  sub-committees  which  deal  with  informa-
tion, and  mostly  with  actual  proposals,  submitted
by  the  officials  or  the  chairman.  But,  even  in
committee,  no  real  "  dialectic  "  may  take  place  on
the  questions  of  greatest  importance.  When  a
council  is  divided  (as  of  late  years  the  London  County
Council  has  been)  between  parties  the  members  of
which  are  pledged  or  expected  to  vote  in  accordance
with  the  decisions  of  a  party  caucus,  real  organised
Thought  on  the  main  lines  of  municipal  policy  is
avowedly  transferred  to  the  caucus  or  to  a  party
executive.  Useful  committee  discussion  on  detail
may  still  go  on,  but  when  a  point  has  once  been
decided  by  the  party,  no  loyal  member  considers
himself  open  to  conviction,  or  utters,  for  the  possible
use  of  his  opponents,  his  most  relevant  ideas  or
doubts.  If  a  committee  meets  in  public,  the  speeches
are  then  either  appeals  to  public  feeling  or  at  best


266  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.n

contributions  to  the  impersonal  discussion  carried  on
by  the  newspapers.  If,  as  generally  happens,  the
committee  meets  in  private,  argument  on  "  party "
questions  may  be  merely  a  deliberate  wasting  of
time  until  a  fellow  partisan  arrives  to  vote  or  an
opponent,  who  is  believed  to  have  an  important
engagement,  goes.  The  best  result  that  can  be  hoped
for  from  such  discussions  is  a  slow  change  of  feeling
among  the  members  of  one  or  both  parties  resulting
from  a  gradual  habituation  to  the  opposing  point  of
view.

In  a  great  modern  city,  again,  a  scheme  of  educa-
tion or  main  drainage  or  water  supply  may  cost
millions  of  pounds  and  take  perhaps  ten  years  to
work  out.  Unless  its  results  are  foreseen  with  a
clearness  of  which  few  men  are  capable  of  acquiring
during  odd  hours  taken  from  their  daily  business,
and  unless  all  the  detailed  steps  are  kept  subordinate
to  the  general  idea  with  more  consistency  than  is  to
be  expected  from  a  varying  committee  of  average
minds,  that  money  and  time  will  be  largely  wasted.
The  mere  sense,  therefore,  of  the  danger  of  inter-
ference with  complex  but  coherent  plans  is,  in  many
English  towns,  already  reducing  the  ordinary  members
of  the  Council,  even  when  sitting  in  committee,  to
the  position,  either  of  obedient  shadows,  or  of  in-
triguers, on  behalf  of  their  constituents  or  themselves,
for  small  concessions  from  the  holders  of  real  power.
If  a  Mayor  or  committee  -  chairman  or  an  official
has  the  exceptional  imaginative  range  and  nervous
energy  which  makes  him  what  the  Americans  call


CH.  XI


THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 267


an  "  executive  "  or  "  big  "  man,  he  is  apt  to  find
that  his  plans  are  unintelligible  to  the  majority  of  his
colleagues,  and  that  he  had  better  trust  rather  to
his  personal  influence  than  to  his  skill  in  argument
to  carry  them  into  effect.

This  discrepancy  between  the  form  of  a  Thought-
Organisation  using  personal  oral  communication,  and
the  fact  of  a  Will-Organisation  using  for  its  intel-
lectual work  the  vast  modern  system  of  impersonal
communication,  is  even  more  clear  to  any  one  who
attends  a  session  of  the  English  House  of  Commons.
It  was  my  duty  not  long  ago  to  sit  "  under  the
gallery  "  of  that  House  throughout  a  debate  which
was  described  by  several  speakers  as  exceptionally
"  interesting  "  and  "  informing."  It  was  a  "  private
members'  day  "  and  there  was  no  sign  either  of  party
spirit  or  of  obstruction  until  the  end,  when  the
motion  was  "  talked  out."  Every  one  of  the  forty
or  fifty  members  present  was,  for  nearly  all  the
time,  honestly  attempting  to  discuss  a  difficult
question  which  had  not  yet  become  a  matter  of  party
policy.  But  favourable  as  the  conditions  were,  I
had,  as  the  hours  went  on,  a  maddening  sense  of  the
utter  futility  of  the  ostensible  proceedings.  When
any  member  sat  down  after  speaking,  ten  or  a  dozen
others  sprang  up  to  "  catch  the  Speaker's  eye."
Whoever  succeeded,  delivered  a  speech  which  might
have  been  relevant  at  the  beginning  of  the  debate,
but  every  point  of  which  had  by  that  time  usually
been  made  by  some  one  else.  The  speeches  them-


268  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

selves  with  their  mixture  of  vague  declamation,
commonplace  facts,  and  the  tags  by  which  a  practised
orator  fills  up  gaps  in  the  sequence  of  his  thought,
would  never  have  been  recognised  by  Socrates  as
belonging  to  the  art  of  dialectic.  One  man  obviously
felt  something  strongly  which  had  no  relation  to  the
typescript  (prepared  perhaps  a  month  earlier)  which
he  read  with  vibrating  emphasis.  Another,  an  ex-
perienced open-air  agitator  who  spoke  without  notes,
rambled  on  in  that  loose  manner  of  trusting  that
every  sentence  will  suggest  another  which  con-
stitutes the  special  disease  of  working-class  rhetoric.
Another  spoke,  it  seemed  to  me,  both  well  and  to
the  point,  but  his  arguments  had  absolutely  no  effect
upon  the  prepared  speeches  that  followed.  The
formal  question  of  debate  was,  for  most  of  the  time,
an  amendment  moved  (as  I  was  told  across  the  rail
which  divided  me  from  the  House)  by  a  member
who  had  to  catch  a  train,  and  who  thereby  secured
priority  for  a  speech  which  itself  had  nothing  to  do
with  it.

There  was  perhaps  no  one  there  who  did  not  belong
to  the  most  earnest  20  per  cent  of  the  House,  but
the  way  in  which  their  discussion  was  organised  pro-
duced a  general  atmosphere  of  intellectual  slackness.
Most  of  the  members  seemed  frankly  to  give  way  to
it.  The  wigged  clerk  at  the  table,  who  reveals  under
more  favourable  circumstances  as  keen  an  intelligence
and  as  fresh  a  public  interest  as  any  man  in  England,
sat  asleep  in  his  chair  with  his  head  at  a  startlingly
ironic  angle.  The  members  present  were  scattered  in


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 269

little  groups  about  the  seats,  waiting  for  their  turn,
and  listening  good-humouredly,  but  with  no  pretence
of  concentrated  attention,  for  signs  that  the  speaker
was  about  to  perorate  for  really  the  last  time.  The
three  Labour  members  were,  if  I  interpreted  their
feelings  accurately,  in  a  truly  pathetic  situation.
The  debate  dealt  with  a  question  concerning  the  pre-
vention of  poverty,  and  at  the  preceding  general
election  they  had  denounced  the  indifference  and
dilettantism  of  both  the  "  capitalist "  parties  when
such  matters  are  being  discussed.  They  were  them-
selves therefore  fiercely  determined  not  to  be  indiffer-
ent, and  sat  there,  like  the  deacons  at  an  exception-
ally dull  nonconformist  service,  overcoming  boredom
by  a  sheer  effort  of  will.1

At  the  far  end  of  the  House,  in  a  dark  recess  under
the  Press  Gallery,  sat  three  or  four  officials  from  the
department  concerned,  turning  over  papers  under
shaded  electric  lights.  I  remembered  that  a  Labour
member  had,  not  long  before,  publicly  complained
that  one  of  his  colleagues  had  asked  a  high  official
sitting  in  that  recess  what  he  thought  of  the  House
and  had  been  answered,  "  I  have  seen  squirrels  run
round  in  a  cage  before." 2

I  strove  to  say  to  myself  the  best  I  could  about
the  British  Parliament  as  a  place  of  concerted  Thought.
I  remembered  a  few  great  occasions  when  the  crowded
house  had  received  a  real  intellectual  stimulus  from

1  The  endurance  of  the  most  earnest  of  the  three  has  since  given  way,
and he has announced himself to be  a disbeliever in Parliamentary
democracy.

2  F.  W.  Goldstone,  M.P.,  in  the  Schoolmaster  for  May  20,  1911.


270  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

the  eloquence  of  a  full-dress  debate. I  thought  of  the
excellent  acoustic  qualities  of  the  chamber,  and  the
tradition  of  tolerance  and  good  manners  among  the
members. I  compared  the  scene  before  me  with  that
which  I  had  watched  from  the  huge  gallery  of  the
House  of  Representatives  at  Washington,  the  rustling
newspapers,  the  hurrying  page-boys, the  speakers
droning  inaudibly  from  their  manuscripts. I  said
that  the  forty  or  fifty  members  before  me  were  at
least  being  compelled  to  half -listen  to  opinions  unlike
their  own,  that  they  were  not  allowed  to  read  any-
thing but  the  Orders  of  the  Day,  and  so  must  be  at
least  half -thinking  about  the  subject  of  the  debate.
I  thought  of  the  absence  of  that  uproar  of  which  I
read  in  some  foreign  parliaments  and  of  the  freely
whispered  accusation  of  personal  corruption  in  others.
But  I  always  returned  to  the  point  that  the  House  of
Commons  was  sitting  for  the  purpose  of  organised
discussion,  and  that  organised  discussion  was  not,  in
any  real  sense  of  the  term,  taking  place.

Now  in  the  extreme  pressure  of  modern  public  life,
with  its  scores  of  competing  claims  on  every  waking
hour,  that  which  is  not  from  day  to  day  felt  to  be
worth  while  ceases  to  be  done  long  before  it  ceases  to
be  thought  of  as  a  duty.  A  busy  country  gentleman
will  think  it  his  duty  to  go  to  church,  will  tell  you,
indeed,  that  he  does  go  to  church,  although,  in  fact,
he  has  decided  to  do  something  else  every  Sunday  for
the  last  two  years.  So  it  is  with  participation  in  the
debates  of  the  House  of  Commons.  Members  work
now,  I  believe,  very  much  harder  than  they  have  ever


CH.XI  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 271

worked  before  in  the  history  of  Parliament.  But
they  spend  a  much  smaller  proportion  of  their  time
and  energy  than  ever  before  in  attempting  to  con-
vince their  fellow-members  by  means  of  speeches  in
the  House  itself.  They  carry  on  an  enormous  corre-
spondence ;  they  make,  even  during  the  session,  a
very  large  number  of  platform  speeches  ;  they  talk
informally  among  themselves  in  the  smoking-rooms,
the  tea-rooms,  on  the  Terrace,  and  in  the  clubs  and
places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  House  from  which
the  Whips,  by  an  elaborate  system  of  electric  "  divi-
sion-bells," can  summon  them  to  vote.  The  House
sits  for  an  unprecedented  number  of  hours,  but
seldom  fills  except  for  a  division,  and  the  speeches
are,  to  an  ever-increasing  extent,  avowedly  or  tacitly
obstructive,  intended  not  to  convince  any  one,  but
to  prevent  the  passing  of  the  measure  discussed,  or,
more  often,  the  introduction  at  a  later  stage  of  some
other  measure.

And,  as  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  larger  municipal
councils,  so,  to  an  even  greater  extent  in  the  House
of  Commons,  the  party  system  has  helped  to  deprive
most  of  the  public  discussions  of  any  kind  of  reality.
All  the  members  are  supposed  to  hear  all  the  argu-
ments, and  the  decision  of  the  House  on  each  question
is  supposed  to  represent  a  majority  of  the  decisions
of  individual  members.  In  fact,  though  on  unim-
portant details  a  free  vote  may  sometimes  be  given
by  the  few  members  who  happen  to  be  in  the  House,
on  all  matters  of  importance  the  decision  is  made  by
the  Whips  (after  consultation  with  the  Minister  con-


272  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

cerned)  and  enforced  by  the  votes  of  members  the
overwhelming  majority  of  whom  have  not  listened  to
any  of  the  arguments.  Every  year  the  number  of
divisions  in  which  any  appreciable  percentage  of  those
who  vote  do  so  independently  of  party  allegiance
steadily  diminishes.1

Mr.  M'Curdy  (Liberal  Member  for  Northampton),
speaking  in  1911  on  the  question  of  Women's  Suffrage,
which  cut  across  the  platforms  of  both  the  great
parties  and  was  therefore  being  left  to  the  unfettered
decision  of  the  House,  said  (to  the  accompaniment  of
"  laughter  "  and  "  cheers  ")  that :

Probably  for  the  first  time  within  the  Parliamentary  life-
time of  any  one  present  members  were  called  upon  to  give
their  votes  in  respect  to  a  measure  of  first-class  constitutional
and  political  importance  free  from  party  pressure.  No  wonder
they  felt  embarrassed.  It  was  so  long  since  they  had  used
them  that  their  faculties  of  free  judgment  were  atrophied.  At
last  they  might  speak  the  truth,  and  they  found  their  powers  of
truthful  utterance  were  paralysed  by  long  disuse.2

This  system,  of  course,  produces  better  results
than  would  follow  from  the  free  but  inconsistent
voting  of  changing  fractions  of  the  House  on  all
questions.  It  provides  for  a  rough  division  of  labour,
by  which  the  Ministry  deal  with  principles  and  the
members  are  sometimes  allowed  to  deal  with  details.
But  because  it  is  founded  on  pretence,  it  has  all  the
intellectual  faults  of  pretence.  An  ordinary  member
is  rather  ashamed  of  the  fact  that  in  five  divisions  out
of  six  he  votes  without  thought  or  knowledge  of  the

1  See Mr. A. Lawrence Lowell's admirable statistical treatise, The
Influence  of  Party  upon  Legislation  in  England  and  America.
2 Times,  January  25,  1911.


CH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 273

questions  at  issue,  and  his  shame  makes  him  less  keen
to  think  about  any  new  question.

The  real  business  of  the  House  in  full  session  is
not  therefore  argument,  but  a  conflict  of  Will,  either
between  the  parties  or  between  the  sections  of  the
governing  party.  This  last,  I  could  see,  was  taking
place  on  the  Friday  of  which  I  write.  Liberal  and
Labour  members  were  whispering  to  each  other.
Would  the  Minister  oppose  or  the  Speaker  grant  the
closure  ?  If  a  division  took  place,  would  enough
members  vote  for  the  original  motion  to  warn  the
Minister  that  he  must  introduce  a  Bill  ?  And  the
"talking  out"  of  the  motion  at  the  end,  with  the
consent  of  the  Speaker,  was  felt  to  be  the  decision
of  that  conflict.

An  able  member  of  the  party  in  power,  who  has
learnt  how  to  think  with  concentration  under  the
most  unfavourable  conditions,  and  who,  though  not
a  Minister  himself,  has  access  to  Ministers  and  officials,
can,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  exercise  a  real  influence
on  the  details  of  legislation.  An  equally  able  and
industrious  member  of  the  Opposition  can  damage
the  Government,  and  can  help  to  construct  the  argu-
ments and  the  legislative  programme  which  may
carry  the  next  election.  But  both  will  work  mainly
by  correspondence  and  personal  interviews,  and  will
succeed  in  spite  of,  rather  than  by  means  of,  the
organised  discussions  of  the  House  itself.  And  the
members  who  go  behind  forms  to  realities,  who  con-
sciously treat  the  House  as  a  Will-Organisation,  who
concentrate  their  efforts  on  schemes  for  gaining  the

T


274  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  w.n

private  ear  of  the  Minister  or  the  Whip,  and  who
thereby  influence  divisions,  are  not  always  those  whose
intellectual  processes  are  the  most  trustworthy.

As  in  the  case  of  the  Municipal  Councils,  a  system
of  Committees  has  grown  up  in  the  House  of  Commons,
and  provides  better  opportunities  of  Organised  Thought
than  do  the  full  sessions.  But  the  relation  of  these
bodies  to  the  civil  servants  who  prepare  their  work
(though  they  can  take  no  part  in  their  discussions)
is  still  undefined  and  unsatisfactory  ;  and  strict  party
discipline,  with  its  consequences  of  obstruction  on  the
part  of  the  minority  and  refusal  to  argue  on  the  part
of  the  majority,  has  already  invaded  most  of  those
Committees  which  are  not  engaged  on  that  purely
judicial  work  of  decision  on  "  Private  Bills,"  which
ought  not  to  be  entrusted  to  a  representative  body
of  any  kind.

In  the  United  States,  behind  the  Capitol  at
Washington,  where  members  of  the  House  and  Senate
are  supposed  to  legislate  by  oral  discussion,  stand  the
new  and  singularly  beautiful  office  buildings  where
they  spend  most  of  their  time.  There  each  member
has  a  study  in  which  he  sits  with  his  secretary,  doing
hour  by  hour  that  which  seems  to  him  to  be  most
worth  doing.  His  constituents  still  demand  that  he
should  make  speeches  in  Congress,  just  as  the  clients
of  a  country  doctor  still  demand  that  he  should  give
them  bottles  containing  coloured  solutions.  And  so
he  or  his  secretary,  from  time  to  time,  writes  a  speech,
which  he  either  reads  to  the  official  reporter  lounging
on  the  seat  in  front  of  him,  or  has  printed  in  the


CH.XI  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 275

Congressional  Record  as  if  it  had  been  delivered,  and
then  circulated  post-free  among  his  constituents.
Voting  in  Congress  remains  as  important  as  ever,  but
members  decide  how  they  will  vote  by  correspond-
ence, by  informal  talks  or  private  caucuses,  by
interviews,  in  person  or  on  the  telephone,  with
constituents  or  others  interested  in  special  legisla-
tion, by  the  reading  of  innumerable  newspapers,  and
by  occasional  visits,  in  the  case  of  the  more  con-
scientious and  intellectual  members,  to  the  splendidly
organised  Congressional  Library.

But  because  the  new  facts  are  still  una vowed,  the
time  spent  at  Washington,  both  on  the  old  debates
and  on  the  new  "  business  "  methods,  is  largely  lost.
Pretence,  there  too,  is  a  bad  basis  for  intellectual
efficiency.  A  representative  from  Indiana  or  Oregon
begins  his  afternoon  by  leading  a  party  of  awestruck
constituents  past  the  dead  statues  of  dead  orators  in
the  entrance  halls  of  the  Capitol,  and  depositing  them
in  the  gallery  to  watch  the  Congress  of  the  United
States  at  work.  He  then  hurries  back  to  his  study,
and  dictates  his  letters  or  corrects  a  draft  memo-
randum by  his  secretary.  But  he  settles  down  into
his  armchair  with  less  concentration  of  purpose  and
less  simplicity  of  motive,  and  therefore  with  less
efficiency  in  result,  than  he  would  have  reached  if  the
difference  between  the  ostensible  and  the  actual
organisation  of  Congress  had  not  given  him  a  half-
conscious  feeling  that  the  whole  game  of  politics  is
insincere.

In  the  British  House  of  Commons  the  evolution  of


276  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

legislative  architecture  has  not  advanced  as  far  as
in  Washington.  An  unofficial  member  of  Parliament
who  wishes  to  write  a  letter  or  read  a  book  has  neither
a  study  nor  a  desk  of  his  own,  but  must  take  his
chance  of  finding  that  one-eighth  part  of  a  library
table  is  free,  and  if  he  leaves  his  place,  must  huddle
his  papers  together  and  carry  them  away.  Even
when  he  sits  at  the  table  the  whole  custom  and  tradi-
tion of  the  House  make  it  as  difficult  as  possible  for
him  to  secure  any  period  of  real  concentration.  A
distinguished  statesman  and  philosopher  said  to  a
newly  elected  friend  of  mine,  "  You  have  come  to
a  place  where  you  can  neither  work  nor  rest."

In  the  case  of  the  British  Cabinet,  oral  discussion
is  still  a  reality,  and  every  possible  effort  is  made  to
keep  it  so.  Upon  the  degree  to  which  the  twenty  or
so  Ministers  who  sit  round  the  Cabinet  table  can,  by
spoken  words,  discover  truth  may  depend  the  ad-
ministration and  finance  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the
making  of  peace  and  war,  and  the  whole  initiative  in
Parliamentary  legislation.

The  success  of  the  Cabinet  in  concentrating  into  its
own  hands  the  power,  not  only  of  all  the  other  organs
of  executive  government  (the  Monarchy,  the  Privy
Council,  etc.),  but  also,  to  a  large  extent,  that  of
Parliament,  indicates  that  its  makers  must  have
contrived,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  to  satisfy
many  of  the  psychological  conditions  of  success.  Of
these  conditions  the  most  important  is,  I  believe,  the
tacit  recognition  of  the  fact  that,  as  I  have  already


CH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 277

said,  Thought  itself,  from  one  aspect,  is  an  effort  of
Will,  and  that  a  certain  degree  of  preliminary  Will-
Organisation  is  sometimes  a  necessary  condition  for
the  finer  work  of  any  Thought-Organisation.  Party
solidarity  in  the  Cabinet,  instead  of  making  discussion
unreal,  is  the  main  force  which  makes  it  real.  Ministers
will  not  effectively  put  their  minds  together  unless,
to  adapt  the  late  Duke  of  Devonshire's  phrase  when
he  refused  to  join  Mr.  Gladstone's  Cabinet  in  1886,
they  "  mean  the  same  thing." 1  The  real  beginning,
therefore,  of  the  modern  Cabinet  system  came  when
Sir  Robert  Walpole  introduced  the  practice  of  con-
fining the  Cabinet  to  members  of  one  party,  who  had
agreed  to  be  jointly  and  severally  responsible  for  the
party  action,  and  therefore  had  every  motive  to  think
closely  and  speak  frankly  as  to  the  probable  results
of  any  proposed  policy.  Most  Ministers  now  have  a
disinterested  love  for  their  party  as  a  living  entity
which,  by  the  wisdom  or  unwisdom  of  their  decisions,
they  may  destroy  or  preserve.  But  if  a  Minister  is
personally  ambitious,  his  individual  career,  and  if  he
is  absorbed  in  departmental  work,  his  individual
schemes,  may  be  cut  short  in  a  moment  by  a  Cabinet
defeat.

Party  solidarity  alone  is  not,  however,  sufficient  to
explain  the  advantage  which  the  Cabinet,  as  a  Thought-
Organisation,  has  gained  over  the  House  of  Commons
and  its  other  rivals.  Another  cause  is  the  fact  that
Cabinet  Ministers  are  chosen  neither  by  the  accident
of  heredity  nor  by  the  rough  indication  of  popular

1  Life  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  (B.  Holland),  vol.  ii.  p.  147.


278  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

election,  but  by  a  Premier  who  has  full  experience  of
their  powers  and  training  and  knows  exactly  the  duties
which  they  will  have  to  perform.  In  order  that
Cabinet  deliberations  shall  proceed  without  friction
or  confusion,  Prime  Ministers  have  also  been  known
to  consider  points  of  detail  which  might  seem  absurd
to  any  one  but  a  psychologist  or  a  born  organiser.
Gladstone,  when  he  tried  to  describe  British  Cabinet
Government  in  a  Church  magazine,  emphasised  this
point.  In  his  sonorous  Parliamentary  manner  he
declared  that :

Every  trade  has  its  secrets.  The  baker  and  the  brewer,
the  carpenter  and  the  mason,  all  the  fraternity  of  handicraft
and  production,  have,  where  they  understand  their  business,
certain  nice  minutiae  of  action  neither  intelligible  to  nor  seen
by  the  observer  from  without,  but  upon  which  niceties  the
whole  efficiency  of  their  work  and  the  just  balances  of  its
parts  depend.1

Gladstone  himself,  like  a  London  hostess  who  is
preparing  a  dinner  party  of  professed  talkers,  used  to
draw  up  "  a  plan  .  .  .  showing  the  position  of  the
table  and  how  his  cabinet  was  to  be  arranged  around
it."2  Even  the  table,  he  thought,  might  interfere
with  the  mental  attitude  most  suitable  for  concerted
thought.  Henry  Sidgwick  in  1885  described  him  as
saying  that  "  the  Cabinet  now  sit  round  a  table,
whereas  they  used  to  sit  on  chairs  in  a  circle  ;  he
thinks  the  change  a  mistake,  as  leading  to  a  less
steady  concentration  of  attention." 3  Apparently  on

1  Church  of  England  Quarterly  Review,  January  1877.  Reprinted  in
Qleanings  of  Past  Tears,  vol.  i.  p.  87.

1  Cornhill  Magazine,  January  1904,  p.  50,  "  No.  10  Downing  Street,"
by  Sir  Algernon  West.  *  Life  of  Henry  Sidgwick,  p.  425.


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 279

the  same  ground,  refreshments,  during  Cabinet  meet-
ings, are,  we  are  told,  confined  to  "  Captain's  biscuits
and  a  carafe  of  water." 1

That  Cabinet  Government  has  worked  better  in
England  than  elsewhere  may  be  due  in  part  to  the
traditional  form  of  speech,  which  even  those  members
of  the  English  "  governing  class  "  use  among  them-
selves who,  in  public,  adopt  the  flowing  rhetorical
style  of  the  early  Victorian  decades.  That  speech —
short,  colourless,  and  almost  brutally  unemotional—
is  exactly  that  which  would  be  chosen  by  a  psy-
chologist who  desired  that  a  dozen  brains  should
search  in  concert  for  the  means  of  attaining  ends  on
which  all  are  agreed.2  At  the  same  time  some  of  the
defects  of  British  policy  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that
this  manner  of  speech  is  an  unsuitable  medium  for
the  suggestion  of  the  finer  humanitarian  feelings  and
values.  Japanese  generals  and  staff  officers  must,
one  supposes,  have  by  this  time  invented  some  such
form  of  speech  for  councils  of  war  or  for  the  stern
military  administration  of  Korea  or  Formosa,  in  place
of  the  courteous  periphrases  of  their  normal  social
intercourse.  Nothing,  for  instance,  could  be  more
exactly  typical  of  the  raw  material  of  thinking  as  it
comes  into  the  mind  of  an  able  and  unsentimental
man  than  the  saying  attributed  to  Lord  Melbourne,
after  his  tired  Cabinet  in  1841  had  at  last  decided  to
go  to  the  country  with  a  proposal  for  a  fixed  duty
instead  of  a  sliding  scale  in  the  taxation  of  corn.
He  called,  we  are  told,  after  his  departing  colleagues,

1  Sir  Algernon  West,  loc.  cit.  p.  60.  2  See  ante,  p.  261.


280  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  n.  n

"  Stop  a  bit !  Is  it  to  lower  the  price  of  bread,  or
isn't  it  ?  It  doesn't  much  matter  which,  but  we  must
all  say  the  same  thing."

But  no  observer  of  the  effect  on  the  British  con-
stitution of  the  development  of  the  Great  Society  can
feel  sure  that  the  Cabinet  will  long  retain,  without
serious  modifications  in  its  form  and  methods,  its
efficiency  as  a  Thought-Organisation.  The  enormous
increase  in  the  work  of  the  State,  the  multiplication
by  perhaps  a  score  during  the  last  fifty  years  of  the
number  of  administrative,  legislative,  or  quasi-legis-
lative decisions  which  come  every  month  before  the
Executive,  has  vitally  changed  the  conditions  of  the
problem  which  Walpole's  invention  of  the  Party
Cabinet  originally  solved.  Already  in  1878  Gladstone
complained  that :

A  protracted  experience  of  public  affairs,  not  unattended
with  a  high  estimate  of  the  general  diligence,  devotion  and
ability  of  the  Parliamentary  as  well  as  the  civil  servants  of
the  Crown,  has  long  convinced  me  that,  of  the  more  difficult
descriptions  of  the  public  business,  apart  from  simple  routine,
it  is  only  a  small  part  that  is  transacted  with  the  requisite
knowledge,  care  and  thoroughness.  We  have  undertaken  in
the  matter  of  Government  far  more  than  ever  in  the  history
of  the  world  has  been  previously  attempted  by  the  children
of  men.1

In  1875,  when  discussing  the  suggestion  that  an
English  king  might  resume  the  practice  of  presiding
at  Cabinet  meetings,  he  wrote  :

Now  such  is  the  mass,  detail,  and  technical  difficulty  of
public  affairs  in  this  great  Empire,  that  it  would  be  an

1  "  England's  Mission,"  W.  E.  Gladstone,  Nineteenth  Century  for  Sep-
tember 1878.


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 281

absolute  cruelty  to  the  Sovereign  to  put  him  through  these
agonies ;  for  it  is  no  trifling  work  and  pain  to  hammer  into
form  the  measures  and  decisions  which  are,  when  promulgated,
to  endure  the  myriad-minded,  myriad-pointed  criticism  of  the
Parliament,  the  press,  and  the  country.1

Since  Gladstone  wrote,  the  work  to  be  done  by  or  in
the  name  of  the  Cabinet  may  have  been  multiplied  by
ten.  From  time  to  time  Prime  Ministers  have  been
tempted  to  meet  the  new  demand  by  increasing  the
Cabinet  far  beyond  the  number  of  ten  or  twelve  at
which  organised  oral  discussion  is  most  efficient.
The  Cabinet  of  1858  had  thirteen  members,  that  of
1868  sixteen,  that  of  1900  twenty,  and  the  present
Cabinet  (1914)  twenty-two.

And  the  fact  that  of  late  years,  owing  to  the  exten-
sion of  democracy  in  England,  Cabinets  are  no  longer
composed  only  of  members  of  a  small  governing  class,
with  one  habit  of  speech  and  one  social  tradition,
must  mean  that  Cabinet  discussions,  though  they  may
cover  a  wider  range  of  reality,  require  for  full  efficiency
a  longer  time  and  a  greater  expenditure  of  nervous
energy.

Different  Cabinets,  of  course,  and  even  the  same
Cabinet  in  different  years,  vary  greatly,  and  Ministers
are  bound  in  honour  not  to  tell  the  outside  world
whether  their  own  Cabinet  is  working  well  or  not.
But  it  is  clear  that  Cabinets  do  often  fail  in  the
difficult  task  of  discussing  by  methods,  both  informal
and  orderly,  the  questions  brought  before  them.
Walter  Bagehot,  several  of  whose  intimate  friends

1  "  Review  of  Prince  Consort's  Life,"  Gleanings  of  Past  Years,  vol.  i.  p.  85.


282  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  PT.H

were  members  of  Palmerston's  last  Cabinet,  wrote  in
1867  that  Cabinets  were  often  "  like  a  rather  dis-
orderly Board  of  Directors  where  many  speak  and
few  listen."1  In  1899  Lord  Rosebery,  who  had
himself  been  Prime  Minister  four  years  before,
described  Cabinet  meetings  as  "  the  collection  of  the
heads  of  departments  at  sparse  intervals  to  discuss
hurriedly  topics  for  which  they  are  often  unpre-
pared." 2  The  revelations  resulting  from  Mr.  Cham-
berlain's resignation  in  1903  seemed  to  show  that
members  sitting  at  one  end  of  the  table  did  not  know
that  the  resignations  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  and
Mr.  Chamberlain  were  being  discussed  at  the  other  end.3
Administration  must  be  carried  on,  and  therefore  if
for  any  reason  oral  argument  in  the  Cabinet  is  in-
efficient, and  if  the  unco-ordinated  individualism  of
the  Departments  breaks  down,  some  other  instrument
of  discussion,  or  at  least  of  decision,  must  inevitably
be  used.  That  instrument  may  be,  and  has  often  been
in  the  past,  the  written  correspondence  of  Ministers
among  themselves.  The  sincere  and  heart-searching
letters,  for  instance,  exchanged  by  the  members  of
Peel's  and  Palmerston's  Cabinets  are  admirable  organs
of  thought.  But  such  correspondence  is  even  slower
than  oral  discussion,  and  when  letter-writing  fails  to
produce  enough  concerted  thought,  the  Cabinet  may
practically  surrender  to  the  personal  power  of  the  Prime
Minister.  Pitt,  in  his  best  days,  reduced  his  Cabinet
colleagues  to  nonentities,  and  Lord  Morley  declares

1  English  Constitution,  p.  14.  2  Rosebery,  Peel,  p.  36.

3  Sidney  Low,  The  Governance  of  England,  p.  40.


CH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 283

that  "  Walpole  was  undoubtedly  an  example  of  the
important  political  truth  .  .  .  that  no  administrations
are  so  successful  as  those  where  the  distance  in  Par-
liamentary authority,  party  influence,  and  popular
position  between  the  Prime  Minister  and  his  col-
leagues is  wide,  recognised,  and  decisive." *

If  Britain  were  now  to  engage  in  a  great  war,  either
under  a  Premier  whose  energy  was  not  diminished  by
age  or  under  a  weaker  Premier  dominated  by  some
vigorous  and  popular  Secretary  of  State,  it  is  safe  to
say  that  the  Cabinet  would  soon  be  in  all  important
matters  that  which  the  American  Cabinet  has  always
been,  a  body  of  officials  advising  a  single  chief.

If  the  war  took  place  fifty  years  hence,  Britain
might  fight  merely  as  the  most  important  member  of  a
group  of  states,  less  than  half  whose  white  population
lived  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  that  case  the  rapid
and  intimate  negotiation  on  which  Imperial  military
organisation  would  depend  could  hardly  be  carried  on
by  a  body  as  large  or,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
Dominions,  as  irresponsible  as  the  present  Cabinet.
Its  place,  for  the  things  that  mattered,  would  be  taken
by  the  Prime  Minister  sitting  in  the  Imperial  Com-
mittee of  Defence.

And  even  if  the  threatened  world-war  does  not  take
place,  and  the  Powers  settle  down  to  a  period  of  pro-
longed sanity,  there  are  causes  already  active  in  home
politics  which  may  make  it  difficult  for  the  Cabinet
to  retain  its  present  authority.  The  two-party  system
may,  for  instance,  come  to  an  end,  and  it  may  become

1  J.  Morley,  Walpole,  p.  164.


284  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

exceptional  for  any  one  organised  party  to  control  an
actual  majority  of  the  House  of  Commons.  If  so,  the
Prime  Minister  (through  the  Chief  Whip  who  serves
him  personally)  will  be  the  single  official  link  which
holds  together  the  coalition  on  which  the  retention  of
office  by  the  Cabinet  must  depend.  The  really  im-
portant decisions  which  make  and  unmake  govern-
ments will  then  tend  to  be  taken  by  him,  or  by  some
one  who  controls  him,  after  receiving  confidential
advice,  not  only  from  the  members  of  the  Cabinet,
but  from  the  chiefs  of  the  supporting  groups.  Under
such  circumstances  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to
retain  at  its  full  strength  the  present  Cabinet  tradition
of  solidarity  and  candour.  An  ambitious  minister
would  no  longer  feel  that  his  whole  future  depended
upon  the  coherence  and  success  of  his  party.  A
Cabinet  defeat,  leading  not  to  a  General  Election  but
a  regrouping  of  forces  in  the  Commons,  might  give
him  his  best  chance,  and  at  any  moment  of  strain  he
might  begin  unofficial  advances  to  those  who  would  be
his  future  colleagues.

In  any  of  those  cases  the  Cabinet,  as  an  organisa-
tion for  concerted  and  responsible  thought,  might  sink
into  insignificance,  although  no  change  whatever  had
taken  place  in  the  legal  structure  of  the  British  con-
stitution, and  no  intentional  and  foreseen  change  had
taken  place  in  any  of  its  functions.

But  even  among  Prime  Ministers  men  with  the
driving  power  of  Peel  and  Gladstone  are  rare  ;  and
under  most  circumstances  a  decline  in  the  intellectual


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 285

efficiency  of  Cabinet  discussion  would  transfer  the
real  work  of  systematically  organised  national  thought
neither  to  the  Premier  nor  to  the  politicians  in  the
House  of  Commons,  but  to  the  high  officials  in  the
Whitehall  offices.  The  number  of  "first -class"
British  officials  is  about  the  same  as  the  number  of
members  of  Parliament,  and  the  two  bodies  discuss
much  the  same  questions.  From  the  point  of  view
of  economy  in  time  and  effort,  the  official  organisa-
tion is  immeasurably  superior  to  the  Parliamentary.
The  six  or  seven  hundred  officials,  instead  of  all
thinking,  as  members  of  Parliament  are  supposed  to
think,  of  only  one  question  at  a  time,  think  of  six  or
seven  hundred  different  questions  at  a  time.  In  a
well-organised  office  every  responsible  administrative
officer  is,  at  any  given  moment,  attacking  some  one
problem  with  complete  concentration.  He  collects
his  material,  spends  whatever  time  may  be  necessary
for  making  up  his  mind,  and  then  records  his  con-
clusions in  writing.  He  can  always  stop,  as  an  orator
in  the  Commons  or  a  minister  at  the  Cabinet  table
cannot,  to  find  the  best  instead  of  the  second  best
phrase ;  he  can  correct  what  he  has  written  if,  as  he
writes,  he  alters  his  views,  and  he  can  carefully  check
all  his  statements  of  fact.  When  he  has  finished,  his
minute  will  go  before  some  other  and  higher  official
who  will  consider  it  with  equally  concentrated  atten-
tion, not  at  a  time  fixed  by  ballot  or  by  the  accident
of  the  "  Speaker's  eye,"  but  when,  having  been  con-
sidering other  questions  of  the  same  class,  he  is  best
prepared  to  think  fruitfully  on  the  subject.


286  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

In  the  Government  offices  that  division  of  responsi-
bility for  principles  and  for  details  which  is  the
accidental  result  of  party  organisation  in  the  House
of  Commons,  is  openly  and  deliberately  provided  for.
Small  questions  are  dealt  with  by  one,  or  perhaps  two,
minor  officials.  Large  matters  go  up  the  hierarchy
to  men  chosen  because,  by  natural  endowment  or
acquired  training,  they  are  most  capable  of  taking
wide  and  long  views,  and  are  finally  decided  by  them
in  consultation  with  the  political  chiefs  who  have  the
widest  experience  and  bear  the  public  responsibility.

Yet  a  Government  office  has  serious  intellectual
defects  of  its  own.  If  the  House  of  Commons  suffers
because  its  ostensible  organisation  does  not  correspond
to  the  real  motives  at  work,  a  Government  office
suffers  because  the  motives  at  work  in  it  are  often
poor  and  inadequate.  Not  only  is  the  training  and
experience  of  the  official  apt  to  be  narrow  and
"  bookish,"  1  but  the  problems  which,  consciously  or
subconsciously,  he  sets  himself  to  solve  may  be
less  comprehensive  than  those  raised  in  a  search  for
the  public  good.  He  may  consciously  avoid,  or  half-
consciously  flinch  from,  the  tormenting  effort  of  new
thought.  He  may  be  influenced  by  a  desire  to  snub
a  pushing  subordinate  or  a  rival  office,  or  be  guided  by
the  probable  effect  of  the  proposal  before  him  on  his
own  accumulated  skill  or  his  future  career.  The
written  debate  which  goes  on  in  a  Government  office
does  not  put  such  a  strain  upon  the  temper  as  does
the  spoken  debate  of  Parliament  or  a  committee.  A

1  See  p.  220.


man  whose  "  unclubbableness  "  would  make  him  im-
possible if  he  were  sitting  at  a  committee  table  may
be  a  very  fair  official  if  he  spends  his  day  at  a  desk.
But  this  very  absence  of  strain  may  prevent  an  un-
clubbable  official  from  acquiring  that  minimum
degree  of  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  others  which
oral  intercourse  produces  in  all  but  the  most  thick-
skinned.  The  total  effect,  therefore,  of  a  modern
official  organisation  based  solely  on  writing,  is  the
combination  of  great  efficiency  in  the  handling  of
detail  on  established  lines  with  the  existence  of  an
"  official  atmosphere  "  which  may  be  incompatible
with  some  of  the  finer  intellectual  requirements  of
government,  and  has,  in  fact,  often  produced  a  general
dislike  of  official  methods  among  the  outside  public.

I  do  not  propose  to  discuss  here  whether  the  main
outlines  of  representative  democracy  in  central  and
local  government  are  likely  to  survive  the  increasing
intellectual  pressure  of  the  Great  Society.

But  it  is  clear  that  a  conscious  psychological
analysis  of  our  social  institutions,  if  it  is  at  all  widely
undertaken,  must  ultimately  lead  to  changes  both  in
the  details  of  our  representative  and  official  Thought-
Organisations  and  in  the  spirit  in  which  those  organ-
isations are  worked.  The  first  and  most  obvious  of
these  changes  would  follow  a  consideration  of  the
purely  quantitative  question  as  to  the  best  size  of
deliberative  assemblies.  Any  final  decision  in  that
respect  must,  as  I  have  pointed  out  elsewhere,  be  the
resultant  of  many  independently  varying  conditions.1

1  Human  Nature  in  Politics,  pp.  144-145.


288  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

But  in  almost  every  case  I  believe  that  the  size  of
those  bodies  ought  to  be  so  reduced  as  to  secure  more
efficient  deliberations,  and  that  all  duties  which  the
reduced  body  cannot  carry  out  without  make-believe
should  be  abandoned.  In  the  House  of  Commons  the
resultant  number  would  probably  be  still  too  large  to
permit  of  the  effective  oral  discussion  of  the  detailed
clauses  of  a  Bill  in  full  session.  If  so,  the  "  Com-
mittee of  the  whole  House "  should  be  at  once
abolished.  The  House  as  a  body  might  meet  perhaps
twice  a  week  for  the  discussion  of  the  "  second  read-
ing "  of  important  Bills,  or  of  what  the  French  call
"  orders  of  the  day  "  affecting  the  policy  and  existence
of  Ministers.  The  rest  of  its  business  might  be  done
in  committees,  varied  in  size  and  composition  accord-
ing to  the  work  to  be  done  ;  using  standing  orders  l
which  frankly  recognised  the  existence  of  printing
presses  and  voting  machines  ;  and  attended  from
time  to  time  by  professional  officials  with  the  right
both  to  submit  written  memoranda  and  to  speak.
Under  such  conditions  the  House  might  be  able  to
deal  with  some  of  those  arrears  of  urgently  needed
legislation  which  every  one  admits  and  every  one
laments.

If  the  methods  of  the  House  of  Commons  require
reconsideration,  still  more  do  those  of  the  present  or
any  future,  and  smaller,  House  of  Lords.  A  priori  it
would  seem  certain  that  the  procedure  of  a  chamber
whose  functions  are  mainly  revisory,  that  is  to  say,

1  A  comparative  psychological  study  of  the  "  rules  of  public  business  "
used  in  different  countries  and  for  different  purposes,  is  urgently  needed  as
a  basis  of  invention  in  that  respect.


OH.  xi THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 289

quasi-scientific  and  quasi- judicial,  should  be  different
from  that  of  a  chamber  whose  functions  are  mainly
original.  The  procedure,  therefore,  of  the  Lords
should  be  less  of  the  nature  of  a  public  meeting  than
that  of  the  Commons,  and  more  of  the  nature  of  a
public  enquiry.  One  conceives  of  a  possible  "  Second
Chamber  "  as  a  sort  of  panel  of  Royal  Commissions,
with  sections  sitting  as  often  out  of  London  as  in
London,  and  developing  methods  of  enquiry  as  unlike
as  possible  to  the  stereotyped  system  of  question  and
answer  by  which  most  of  the  Royal  Commissions  of
to-day  save  themselves  the  trouble  of  thinking  about
method  at  all.

In  both  Houses  every  facility  should  be  given  for
individual  members  to  work  with  their  books  and
papers  and  private  secretaries,  and  to  argue  in  private
and  informal  groups.

There  is  less  make-believe  about  the  present
organisation  of  the  Cabinet  than  about  the  organisa-
tion of  the  Houses  of  Parliament.  But  Mr.  Sidney
Low,  in  his  admirable  analysis  of  Cabinet  Govern-
ment,1 points  out  several  respects  in  which  the  Cabinet
has  failed  to  make  use  of  modern  aids  to  concerted
thought,  and  particularly  that  it  has  no  efficient  record
of  its  proceedings.  The  distinction  which  he  draws
between  the  present  "  secret  "  meetings  of  the  Cabinet
and  the  "  private  "  meetings  which  might  take  their
place,2  is  illustrated  by  the  existence  of  those  Cabinet
Committees  which  have  already  been  developed  in
order  to  deal  with  the  ever-increasing  work,  and  which

1  The  Governance  of  England  (1904).  2  Ibid.  chap.  ii.

U


290  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

keep  careful  minutes  and  provide  an  opportunity  for
real  dialectic,  not  only  to  Ministers  but  also  to  the
high  officials  and  outside  experts  who  attend.

More  important  is  the  fact  that,  while  every  other
Minister  is  served  by  an  organised  official  department,
the  Premier,  by  a  curious  historical  accident,  has  only
an  unrecognised  and  insufficient  body  of  private
secretaries  to  assist  him  in  exercising  such  a  general
oversight  over  the  work  of  government  as  would
enable  him  effectively  to  guide  the  deliberations  of
the  whole  Cabinet.1  If  the  Premier  had  a  small
department  of  his  own,  consisting  of  officials
"  seconded  "  in  early  middle  life  from  other  depart-
ments and  including  the  Government  draftsman  and
his  assistants,  the  gain  in  the  intellectual  concentra-
tion and  efficiency  of  the  Cabinet  work  would  be
immense.

In  the  case  of  the  Government  offices,  most  of
those  who  have  had  dealings  with  them  would  say
that  they  need  to  be  "  humanised."  The  official
should  be  a  man,  should  be  known  as  a  man,  and
should  be  expected  to  behave  as  a  man.  From  the
beginning  he  should  do  part  of  his  work  by  oral
methods.  If,  however,  half  a  dozen  clerks  are  merely
placed  round  an  office  table  and  then  told  that  they
are  to  think  with  the  same  kind  of  effort  that  would
be  made  by  a  newly  elected  Town  Councillor,  or  a
Cabinet  Minister  faced  with  the  opportunity  of  his
lifetime,  disappointment  will  inevitably  follow.  Civil

1  The  Premier  is  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  but  the  Treasury  has  now
become  mainly  the  department  of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.


OH.  xi THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 291

servants  require  not  only  opportunities  but  motives
for  Thought.

Even  an  official  Board  meeting  in  a  Whitehall
back  room  can,  it  is  true,  be  sometimes  kept  in  the
mental  attitude  of  effortful  Thought  by  an  appropriate
use  of  official  discipline.  Sir  John  Briggs,  in  his
delightful  book  on  Naval  Administration,  describes
Sir  James  Graham's  way  of  doing  this  when  he  sat,
as  First  Lord,  at  the  head  of  the  Board  of  Admiralty :

It  is  no  easy  matter  for  a  First  Lord  to  keep  the  attention
of  the  various  members  directed  to  the  particular  subject
under  discussion.  This  can  only  be  accomplished  by  occasion-
ally putting  questions  to  them,  which,  if  they  were  not  paying
due  attention  to  what  was  passing,  it  would  be  impossible
for  them  to  answer.  Sir  James  did  this  with  such  adroitness
as  to  excite  the  admiration  of  those  who  were  silent  listeners,
and  could  plainly  perceive  the  force  and  object  of  the  inter-
ruptions when  attention  and  interest  were  beginning  to
wane.1

But  a  much  better  stimulus  than  mere  discipline
would  be  provided  if  the  public  and  personal  re-
sponsibility of  civil  servants  were  from  time  to  time
secured  by  sending  administrative  officials,  who  now
spend  all  their  time  in  Whitehall,  to  hold  public
"  enquiries  "  into  questions  of  local  administration,
or  to  do  local  work  themselves,  or  by  requiring  them
to  make  oral  statements  before  Parliamentary  or
Cabinet  Committees.  In  the  process  by  which
Samuel  Pepys,  the  son  of  a  tailor  and  the  hanger-on
of  a  nobleman,  the  amateur  of  undignified  tempta-
tions, became  perhaps  the  most  wide-minded  and

1  Naval  Administrations  (1827-1892),  p.  42.


292  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

self-respecting  of  all  British  officials,  an  important
incident  was  his  being  summoned  as  Secretary  of  the
Navy  Board  to  defend  the  action  of  his  Board  before
the  House  of  Commons  on  March  5, 1667-68.  When
he  had  delivered  his  four  hours'  speech,  "  with  full
scope  and  all  my  reason  free  about  me,"  and  had  been
congratulated  by  every  one  from  the  King  to  "  Progers
of  the  Bedchamber,"  he  wrote  in  the  diary  which  he
meant  no  one  but  himself  to  see,  "  for  which  the  Lord
God  make  me  thankful !  and  that  I  may  make  use  of
it  not  to  pride  and  vainglory,  but  that  now  I  have
this  esteem  I  may  do  nothing  that  may  lessen  it."  x

The  mere  published  signature  from  time  to  time
of  an  official  Report  by  its  actual  author  might  do
something  to  dispel  the  "  official  atmosphere,"  and
to  diminish  the  authority  of  the  official  tradition
represented  by  the  phrase,  "  I  shall  be  blamed  if  it
goes  wrong  and  shan't  be  praised  if  it  goes  right."

Any  improvement  of  the  Thought- Organisation  of
English  municipal  bodies  would  involve  the  reduction
of  the  size  of  each  body,  the  adoption  of  methods  of
work  which  corresponded  to  the  real  fact  that  the
members  do  not  now  directly  administer,  but  criticise
the  proposals  of  professional  officials,  and,  above  all,
a  complete  change  in  the  way  in  which  those  officials
are  appointed,  their  professional  organisation,  and
their  responsibility  to  the  Council.

It  may  not  perhaps  be  fanciful  to  suppose  that  a
wider  extension  of  psychological  self-consciousness
may  also  ultimately  affect  the  personal  mental  atti-

1  Wheatley,  Diary  of  Samuel  Pepys,  vol.  vii.  pp.  350-353.


OH.  XI  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 293

tude  of  elected  persons,  whether  in  Parliament  or  on
the  municipal  bodies.  I  have  myself,  during  the
last  twenty-five  years,  sat  through  perhaps  three
thousand  meetings  of  municipal  committees  of  different
sizes  and  for  different  purposes,  and  I  am  sure  that  at
least  half  of  the  men  and  women  with  whom  I  have
sat,  were  entirely  unaware  that  any  conscious  mental
effort  on  their  part  was  called  for.  They  attended  in
almost  exactly  the  same  mental  attitude  in  which
some  of  them  went  to  church — with  a  vague  sense,
that  is  to  say,  that  they  were  doing  their  duty  and
that  good  must  come  of  it.  If  they  became  interested
in  the  business  it  was  an  accident.  Of  the  remaining
half,  perhaps  two-thirds  had  come  with  one  or  two
points  which  they  wanted  to  "  get  through,"  and
meanwhile  let  the  rest  of  the  business  drift  past  them,
unless  some  phrase  in  the  discussion  roused  them  to
a  more  or  less  irrelevant  interruption.

Those  committees  were  by  far  the  most  successful
as  Thought-Organisations  which  were  attended  by
three,  or  at  the  utmost,  four  persons  dealing  with
some  isolated  "  non-party  "  question  on  which  their
decision  was  likely  to  be  final,  and  where  the  auto-
matic and  half -conscious  stimulation  of  "  interest  "
could  be  trusted  to  take  the  place  of  the  deliberate
effort  of  "  attention."  Here,  if  the  members  were
fairly  experienced  and  good-tempered,  it  happened
not  seldom  that  they  each  ceased  to  think  of  the
rest  as  constituting  a  committee.  Their  colleagues
became  and  remained  individuals — Brown,  or  Smith,
or  Miss  Jones.  Personal  goodwill  half  -  consciously


294  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

asserted  itself,  and  was  helped  by  the  habits  acquired
in  social  intercourse.  Brown  would  say  afterwards,
not  "  I  attended  a  meeting  of  the  sub -committee
yesterday,"  but  "  Smith  and  Miss  Jones  and  I  had
quite  a  nice  time  yesterday  afternoon  arranging
about  the  new  North  Ward  school."

Fifty  years  hence,  when  the  language  and  con-
clusions of  psychology  have  penetrated  into  the
education  of  the  ordinary  man  and  the  books  and
newspapers  which  he  reads,  both  members  of  Parlia-
ment and  Town  Councillors  may  consider  a  definite
effort  of  attention  (in  the  absence  of  such  automatic
"interest")  an  obvious  condition  of  effective  de-
liberation.

Any  serious  psychological  enquiry  into  the  form
and  methods  of  political  Thought-Organisations  would
soon  be  extended  to  the  quasi-political,  quasi-philan-
thropic voluntary  Boards  and  Committees  of  which
we  English  make  such  large  use,  and  must  ultimately
affect  the  still  larger  question  of  the  intellectual  organ-
isation of  industrial  and  commercial  business.

A  student  of  sociology  on  the  look-out  for  a  Thesis
subject  could  hardly  do  better  than  to  examine,  from
the  point  of  view  of  intellectual  efficiency  (even  if  he
left  the  great  worlds  of  business  and  politics  untouched)
the  constitutions  and  standing  orders  by  which  the
Hospitals,  the  Charities,  the  Clubs,  the  "  governing
bodies  "  of  schools  and  colleges,  the  associations  of
party  politicians,  and  the  various  religious  organisa-
tions of  a  large  provincial  town  are  managed.

He  would  have  to  remember  that  such  bodies  are


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 295

Will-Organisations  as  well  as  Thought-Organisations,
and  that  a  committee  whose  constitution  was  ab-
surdly ill-adapted  to  enable  its  members  to  think  in
concert  may  be  admirably  adapted  to  secure  that  the
policy  of  those  who  manage  it  should  prevail.  But,
even  after  making  that  allowance,  he  would,  I  am
convinced,  discover  at  once  that  able  and  public-
spirited  men  and  women  will  often  involve  themselves
in  an  almost  incredible  waste  of  time  and  temper  from
mere  indifference  as  to  the  machinery  of  discussion.
Some  of  them  have  unworkable  standing  orders.
Others  recognise  no  standing  orders  at  all,  and  do
their  work  by  "  conversational "  methods  which
prevent  any  question  from  being  either  closely  dis-
cussed or  finally  decided.  And  if  he  found  that
some  committee  with  a  constitution  outraging  all  his
preconceived  ideas  of  efficiency  nevertheless  worked
well,  or  another  with  an  apparently  excellent  con-
stitution worked  badly,  he  might  find  himself  on  the
track  of  a  genuine  social  invention.

Sometimes  the  mere  asking  of  the  question  as  to
the  intellectual  relation  of  the  ordinary  members  of  an
organisation  to  the  discussions  by  which  its  policy  is
directed  would  at  once  reveal  the  fact  that  no  such
relation  exists.  I  was  in  America  during  the  spring
of  1910,  when  the  Republican  party  throughout  the
Eastern  States  was,  with  very  good  reason,  anxious
about  its  political  health.  In  Massachusetts  a  public
dinner  was  given  to  the  Republican  legislators  as  a
sort  of  tonic.  After  dinner  Speaker  Walker  1  said  :

1  In  American  Legislatures  the  Speaker  is  a  political  leader.


296  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

"  The  party  should  get  together  and  squarely  face  the
situation  which  confronts  it."  '  The  candidates,"  he
said,  "  and  the  policies  of  the  party  must  be  discussed
and  decided  upon  in  the  open.  Every  Republican
must  be  made  to  feel  that  he  is  wanted  and  is  welcome,
that  he  is  free  to  speak  and  free  to  exercise  such
influence  as  he  may  have  in  the  councils  of  the  party."
His  advice  was  cheered,  but,  popular  as  it  was,  it  did
not  help  much  in  the  process  of  "  squarely  facing  "
the  situation  of  a  body  containing  some  hundreds  of
thousands  of  nominal  members  distributed  over  a
whole  State.  Later  in  the  same  evening,  Chairman
Hatfield,  whose  management  of  the  party  committee
was  apparently  considered  to  have  been  reflected
upon  by  Speaker  Walker's  address,  is  reported  to
have  "  outlined  a  few  of  the  troubles  which  always
confront  the  men  charged  with  guiding  the  destinies
of  any  organised  and  scattered  body  of  men." 1

The  ordinary  members  of  a  political  party  cannot
"  get  together."  The  real  party  organisation  must
consist  of  a  few  men,  whose  work  it  is  to  issue  appeals
to  the  others  and  to  calculate  as  closely  as  they  can
the  chances  of  their  appeals  being  successful  at  the
polls.

The  Thought  -  Organisation  of  business  requires
a  special  study  of  its  own,  and  a  large  body  of  able,
though  empirical,  literature  exists  on  the  subject.

The  intellectual  relation  between  the  shareholders
and  the  directors  in  those  Joint  Stock  Companies

1  Boston  Herald,  February  15,  1910.


CH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 297

which  are  the  typical  forms  of  the  Great  Industry
and  the  Great  Commerce  is  obviously  in  a  state  of
transition,  and  no  one  would  attempt  seriously  to
defend  its  existing  phase.  The  relation  between  the
Directors  and  Managers  of  big  businesses  is  often
equally  inefficient.  The  Thought  -  Organisation,  on
the  other  hand,  which  is  composed  of  the  manager
of  a  big  business  and  his  salaried  subordinates  is
much  more  efficient.  In  its  economy  of  effort,  in
its  rejection  of  oral  discussion  among  more  than  two
persons,  and  in  the  practice  of  throwing  the  responsi-
bility for  Thought  on  each  question  upon  a  single
mind,  it  is  the  very  antithesis  of  a  typical  organisation
in  politics  and  philanthropy.  But,  though  no  one
would  desire  to  introduce  Parliamentary  methods  into
a  London  Bank  or  Railway  office,  and  to  settle  the
day's  business  by  motion  and  amendment  with  the
manager  in  the  chair,  yet  my  impression  is  that
business  organisation  might  often  gain  on  its  intel-
lectual side  by  the  wider  adoption  of  means  for
concerted  discussion,  and  by  a  closer  examination  of
the  methods  by  which  those  who  work  in  a  small
section  of  a  business  can  be  induced  or  empowered  to
think  about  the  business  as  a  whole.1

1  Professor  Marshall  dealt  incidentally  with  this  point  in  an  address  to
the  Royal  Economic  Society  hi  1907,  and  gave  as  an  instance  of  invention
in  that  respect  "  the  congresses  "  and  other  opportunities  for  submitting
their  ideas  to  the  judgment  of  brother  experts,  "which  are  organised  by
the  chief  owners  of  the  trusts  "  for  their  superior  officials.  But  he  ended
(like  President  Wilson  in  his  New  Freedom)  with  the  conclusion  that
nothing  effectual  could  be  done  unless  the  more  extended  forms  of  this
Great  Industry  itself  were  broken  up,  and  we  returned  to  the  system  of
email  independent  businesses  and  "  the  bracing  fresh  air  which  a  strong  man
with  a  chivalrous  yearning  for  leadership  draws  into  his  lungs  when  he
sets  out  on  a  business  experiment  at  his  own  risk  "  (Economic  Journal,
March  1907,  pp.  16-17).


298  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

So  far  in  this  chapter  I  have  dealt  with  those  forms
of  Thought-Organisation — Councils  and  Committees
and  Offices  and  Parties — which  consist  of  a  limited
number  of  persons,  brought  into  relations  with  each
other  for  the  sole  or  main  purpose  of  concerted
Thought.  But  only  a  small  part  of  the  Thought  of
the  Great  Society  is  done  in  these  specialised  personal
Organisations.  The  really  typical  Thought  of  our
time  is  that  which,  as  I  have  already  said,  must
either  be  classed  as  Individual  Thought,  or  as  part  of
that  vast  impersonal  Thought-Organisation  which  has
been  created  by  modern  means  of  communication,  and
to  which  almost  every  adult  member  of  the  Great
Society  in  some  degree  belongs.  That  our  more
personal  Thought-Organisations  work  even  tolerably
well  is  indeed  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  members
of  Parliament,  Municipal  Councillors,  Government
Officials,  and  Company  Directors  bring  to  their  meet-
ings minds  already  saturated  by  those  statements
and  arguments  about  the  world  beyond  the  reach  of
their  senses,  which  reach  them  through  newspapers
and  books.

We  are  apt  to  confuse  this  impersonal  Organisation
with  the  personal  communication  which  takes  place
when  men  who  live  in  the  same  street  or  travel  in  the
same  conveyance  converse  with  each  other  ;  and  to
speak,  for  instance,  of  the  "  public  opinion  "  of  a  new
suburb,  where  no  one  knows  his  neighbour  and  each
season-ticket  holder  reads  his  newspaper  in  silence  in
the  morning  train,  as  if  it  were  due  to  the  same
process  as  the  "  public  opinion  "  of  an  agricultural


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 299

village  on  the  day  after  some  event  which  every
householder  has  discussed  with  every  other.  But,  in
fact,  one  of  the  most  important  results  of  modern
urban  industrial  conditions  is  a  far-reaching  change  in
the  conditions  under  which  most  men  can  directly
exchange  ideas  with  their  fellows  during  the  hours
either  of  work  or  recreation.  It  would  indeed  be  an
admirable  thing  if  some  student  applied  the  methods
of  Mr.  Charles  Booth  or  Mr.  Rowntree  to  an  examina-
tion of  the  actual  extent  to  which  the  serious  oral
discussion  of  public  questions  now  takes  place  in  an
industrial  population.  My  own  impression  formed
after  questioning  a  good  many  people  in  different
parts  of  England,  is  that,  in  our  country,  the  quantity
of  such  discussion  which  takes  place  varies  enormously
in  different  occupations,  that  it  takes  place  rather  out
of  than  during  the  working  hours,  and  that,  on  the
whole,  it  is  diminishing.  The  essentially  political
trades  used,  in  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,
to  be  tailoring  and  shoemaking,  where  men  worked
in  indoor  workshops  in  small  groups  of  half  a  dozen
up  to  twenty,  without  the  noise  of  machinery  or
the  presence  of  an  employer.  Next  to  them  came
the  compositors,  working  under  much  the  same
conditions,  and  the  cabinet  makers,  whose  work,
though  not  silent,  was  not  so  noisy  as  to  prevent
conversation.  Now  all  boots  and  nearly  all  clothes,
except  those  worn  by  a  small  rich  class,  are  made
in  factories,  under  conditions  which  render  dis-
cussion during  working  hours  impossible.  The
proportion  of  working  men  who  can  now  talk


300  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

freely  at  their  work,  in  convenient  groups,  meeting
day  after  day,  must  be  almost  negligible.  All  the
metal  trades  are  too  noisy,  the  agricultural  labourers
work  at  a  too  great  distance  from  each  other,
and  modern  business  premises  are  now,  as  a  rule,
deliberately  constructed  so  as  to  secure  that  those
engaged  in  clerical  work  shall  always  be  under  the
eye  of  a  superior,  and  shall  be  prevented  from  any
kind  of  conversation  about  anything  but  their  duty.
The  working  day  itself  is  shorter,  but  many,  if  not
most,  of  the  hours  saved  from  work  are  now  spent  in
travelling  by  crowded  trains  and  trams  between  the
place  of  business  and  the  widely  spread  homes  of  the
present  day.

The  urban  working  class,  which  already  form  a  large
majority  of  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom,
and  will  soon,  apparently,  form  a  majority  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  civilised  world,  is  therefore  becom-
ing more  and  more  dependent  for  its  whole  relation  to
the  Thought  of  our  time  upon  the  passive  reading  of
many  newspapers  and  newspaper  placards,  and  of  a
much  smaller  number  of  magazines  and  books.  The
newspaper  is  taking  to  a  large  extent  the  place  of
conversation,  and  often  copies  the  discontinuity  and
familiarity  of  conversation  without  securing  that
which  is  its  essential  value  as  an  intellectual  instru-
ment, the  stimulus  of  one  mind  by  free  association
with  another  in  the  process  of  following  up  a  train  of
ideas.

But  just  because  a  vast  quantity  of  passive  reading
is  inevitable  in  the  Great  Society  as  we  know  it  now,


OH.  xi  THE  ORGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 301

or  as  we  can  conceive  of  it  in  the  near  future,  it  is  of
the  first  importance  to  consider  how  the  large  ill-
organised  system  which  supplies  it  can  be  made  more
effective. No  one  now  knows  whose  interests  direct
the  avowed  or  suggested  policy  of  newspapers,  whose
shares  are  for  sale  in  the  open  market,  and  which
cannot  exist  for  a  week  except  by  the  favour  of  great
advertisers. Books,  being  signed,  are  less  dangerous
in  that  respect,  and  perhaps  a  larger  extension  of  the
practice  of  signing  articles  may  introduce  a  larger
element  of  responsibility  into  journalism. The  life  of
a  writer  of  "  best-selling  "  books  is  indeed  short,  and
this  temptations  and  disillusionments  are  many,  but,
at  any  rate,  fractions  of  the  influence  which  his  writ-
ings have  created  cannot  be  bought  as  a  matter  of
daily  business  on  the  Stock  Exchange. And  an  able
journalist  with  a  reputation  for  independence,  who
signs  his  articles,  can,  provided  he  is  at  first  content
with  perhaps  a  third  of  the  salary  which  he  could
otherwise  earn,  even  now  get  an  opportunity  for
responsible  utterance  ;  just  as  a  dramatist  with  some-
thing to  say  can  get  some  sort  of  a  hearing  even  in  the
syndicated  theatres. That  deepest  form  of  sincerity,
which  requires  long  consideration  before  the  declara-
tion of  opinion,  is,  of  course,  almost  impossible  for  a
writer  who  has  to  comment  each  evening  on  news
which  may  be  only  half  an  hour  old  ;  and  one  already
sees  that  signed  daily  journalism  may  become  the
special province of the neurotic partisan whose
emotions  can  be  trusted  to  react  immediately  to  the
weakest  stimulus. But  the  practice  of  considered


302  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

signed  writing  on  the  events  of  a  week  or  a  month
rather  than  on  those  of  a  few  hours  may  become,  as
it  is  becoming  in  the  press  of  the  United  States  and
France,  more  common  than  it  is  now  in  England.

More  permanent  in  its  influence  is  the  enormous
cheapening  of  the  production  and  distribution  of
books  in  which  writers  with  a  reputation  to  lose  give
their  estimate  of  the  main  tendencies  of  their  time.
Among  all  the  rawness  and  disorganisation  of  life  in
the  straggling  mining  villages  of  the  Rhondda  or  Don
valleys,  one  feels  one's  feet  for  a  moment  on  something
like  a  firm  foundation  when  one  sees  in  the  windows
and  doorways  of  the  little  tobacconist-newsagents'
shops,  piles  of  Home  University  and  Cambridge
Scientific  treatises  at  a  shilling,  resting  against  rows
of  serious  and  penetrating  criticisms  of  society  in  the
form  of  fourpenny  or  sevenpenny  novels.  An  old
pitman  once  said  to  me :  "It  makes  me  groan  to
think  o'  the  thousands  of  hours  I've  spent  i'  reading
the  wrong  books  "  ;  but  the  authority  of  the  editors
of  the  new  cheap  series,  the  widespread  knowledge
of  the  names  of  important  writers,  even  the  advice  of
officials  in  Free  Libraries  (though,  in  that  respect,
England  is  far  behind  the  United  States)  gives  the
working-class  student  an  enormously  better  chance  in
that  respect  than  he  had  when  he  was  forced  to  trust
to  the  titles  on  a  barrow-load  of  second-hand  volumes.

All  this,  however,  still  remains  passive  reading.
If  non-official  Thought  is  to  become  effective  it  must
also  use  the  oral  interchange  of  ideas.  And  since,
in  our  urban  communities,  nothing  can  be  done


CH.XI  THE  OKGANISATION  OF  THOUGHT 303

effectively  which  is  not  done  deliberately,  we  must
provide  at  least  as  carefully  for  the  Organised  Thought
of  the  ordinary  citizen  as  we  are  now  beginning  to
provide  for  his  Individual  Thought.  Now  that  the
streets  are  cut  off  from  the  fields,  we  are  coming  to
understand  that  for  the  "  working  man,"  as  well  as
for  the  schoolmaster  or  professor  and  his  pupils,  silent
Reading  Rooms,  intelligently  arranged  museums,
shorter  hours  of  Labour,  better  housing,  and  even
seats  in  public  parks,  are  necessities  of  intellectual
life.  And  much  more  complex  material  and  social
arrangements  will  be  needed  if  we  intend  that  working
men  and  women  shall  form  effective  dialectical  groups.
Some  of  the  lines  on  which  such  arrangements  may  be
made  are  already  beginning  to  reveal  themselves.
Educationists  are  claiming  that  the  working-class
child  shall  learn  in  school,  not  only  the  power  to  read
and  write,  but  the  power  to  express  his  own  thoughts
in  intelligible  words.  The  scholarship  systems  are
beginning  to  enable  those  who  are  naturally  fitted  for
a  life  in  which  Thought  plays  a  real  part  to  discover
their  own  powers  and  to  come  into  touch  with  their
equals.  The  rise  of  local  universities  unhampered  by
the  social  traditions  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  and
able  to  resist  the  tremendous  centralising  force  of
London,  has  made,  at  any  rate,  a  beginning  of  intel-
lectual self-respect  in  our  provincial  cities.  Univer-
sity teachers  and  organisations  like  the  Workers'
Educational  Association,  or  the  Adult  School  Associa-
tion, are  discussing  with  a  new  note  of  seriousness  the
methods  by  which,  in  Seminar  or  discussion-class,


304  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

dialectic  may  be  an  aid  to  or  a  substitute  for  the
passive  process  of  learning  from  lectures.1  Local
repertory  theatres  and  provincial  coteries  of  young
writers  and  artists  seem  no  longer  an  impossible  hope
either  in  England  or  in  America.  The  United  King-
dom has  a  population  of  forty-five  millions  and  the
United  States  one  of  a  hundred  millions.  The
Norway  of  Bjornsen  and  Ibsen  and  Grieg  had  a
population  of  two  millions,  and  the  Italy  of  Dante
and  Petrarch  one  of  perhaps  four  millions.  No  one
even  dreams  that  the  first-rate  intellectual  output  of
the  English-speaking  world  of  the  twentieth  century
will  be  twenty-five  times  that  of  nineteenth  century
Norway  together  with  fourteenth  century  Italy.
But  our  wealth  and  knowledge  and  organising  power
may  perhaps  make  us  together  equal  to  one  of  them.

1  See,  for  instance,  an  interesting  article  on  Adult  Schools  in  the  Man-
chester Guardian  of  September  26,  1912,  which  describes  more  exactly  than
any  book  which  I  have  read,  not  only  the  conditions  of  effective  dialectic,
"  the  sense  of  freedom,"  the  "  facing  the  real  problems  with  which  men  of
the  day  are  wrestling,"  "  the  confidential  friendship  between  the  classes  and
their  leaders,"  but  also  its  dangers — the  possible  presence  of  the  undialectical
"  man  of  one  idea,"  and  the  possible  failure  of  the  leader  to  "  guide  and
inspire  "  the  class  like  Socrates,  "  by  sheer  weight  of  superior  knowledge
and  force  of  character."


CHAPTER  XII

THE ORGANISATION  OF  WILL

IN  this  chapter  I  shall  deal  with  the  Organisation  of
Will  in  the  Great  Society.

Again,  I  must  begin  with  a  warning  against  our
tendency  to  ignore  the  difference  between  a  human
society  and  an  individual  human  being.  We  con-
stantly speak  as  if  nations  and  cities  "  will,"  or
"  desire  "  or  "  intend  "  or  "  decide  "  to  carry  out  cor-
porate action  by  the  same  simple  process  as  that  which
in  a  single  human  being  precedes  his  individual  action.

But  the  Organised  Will  of  a  modern  society  only
comes  into  existence  as  a  result  of  the  formation  of
difficult  and  always  imperfect  social  machinery.
When  we  say  that  "  Russia  intends  to  make  war  on
Austria,"  we  form  in  our  mind  a  picture  either  of  a
single  Russian  with  a  conscious  intention  to  make
war,  or  of  a  vaguely  enormous  number  of  identical
Russians,  all  having  the  same  conscious  intention.1
Neither  picture  of  course  corresponds  to  the  facts.
It  may  be  "  true  "  that  Russia  intends  war,  when  a
dozen  statesmen  have  agreed  among  themselves  upon
an  aggressive  policy,  and  when  they  have  reason  to

1  See  my  Human  Nature  in  Politics,  p.  139.

305  X


306  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

believe  that  their  policy  will  be  supported  by  the
organised  force  of  the  nation.  Only  two  per  cent  of
the  Russian  population  may  in  that  case  consciously
dislike  and  fear  the  policy  of  Austria,  but  the  states-
man may  know  that  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the
population  can  be  made  to  hate  Austria  as  soon  as  an
open  quarrel  occurs,  and  that  the  army  has  been
trained  to  obedience  of  almost  any  orders  from
above.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  be  "  untrue  "  that
Russia  intends  war  even  although  an  actual  majority
of  the  population  desires  it,  if  a  majority  of  the  persons
who  are  in  a  position  to  control  the  national  policy
are  opposed  to  it.  Or  Russia  may  be  in  such  a  state
of  political  disorganisation  that  no  Organised  Will  on
the  subject  can  be  said  to  exist,  and  the  nation  may
drift  into  a  war  which  no  one  intends.

The  events  indeed  which  we  ascribe  to  the  corpor-
ate decisions  of  communities  are  usually  the  re-
sultants of  a  number  of  interacting  causes — the  Wills
of  those  persons  whom  the  machinery  of  the  com-
munity has  brought  into  organised  relation  with  each
other,  the  unorganised  Wills  of  individuals,  and  the
circumstances  of  the  case,  which  no  one  may  have
realised  and  whose  effects  no  one  may  have  expected.
When  a  thousand  individuals  run  to  the  side  of  an
overcrowded  ferry-boat,  their  Wills  are  entirely  un-
,  organised  and  the  result  of  their  action  entirely
unintended.  When  a  million  families  migrate  from
the  country  to  the  town,  the  action  of  each  family  is
probably  due  to  a  more  or  less  organised  relation
between  the  Wills  of  the  members  of  that  family,  but


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 307

the  action  of  the  whole  body  of  migrants  is  un-
organised. If  a  general  war  should  break  out  in
Europe,  the  action  of  each  nation  in  the  proceedings
leading  to  war  would  probably  be  due  to  the  rather
highly  organised  Wills  of  its  politically  important
members,  but  the  outbreak  itself  might  (owing  to
the  absence  of  a  European  Will  -  Organisation)  be
undesired  by  any  nation.  And  even  when  the
action  taken  by  a  large  community  is  directed  by  an
Organised  Will  in  that  community,  yet,  owing  to
the  imperfection  of  human  knowledge  and  of  the
Thought  -  Organisations  of  human  societies,  the
unintended  results  of  that  action  may  prove  to  be
more  important  than  its  intended  results.

Yet,  however  carefully  we  try  to  remember  this,
the  false  analogy  between  a  community  and  an
individual  still  persists,  and  often  creates  in  us  a
feeling  of  personal  resentment  against  any  community
which  seems  wantonly  to  refuse  to  direct  all  its  actions
by  a  definite  purpose.  When  we  read  Mr.  Wells's
complaint,  "  A  world  that  had  a  collective  plan  and
knew  what  it  meant  to  be  doing  would  do  a  sight
better  anyhow,"  we  are  apt  to  blame  "  the  world  "  as
we  would  blame  an  individual  man,  who  can  always,
if  only  he  will  take  the  trouble,  form  a  plan  and  know
what  he  means  by  it ;  and  who  does  not  require  first
to  provide  himself  with  new  eyes,  or  ears,  or  new
lobes  to  his  brain.  We  forget,  that  is  to  say,  that
"  the  world  "  can  only  have  a  "  collective  plan  "  or
collectively  "  mean  "  anything  in  so  far  as  machinery
exists  enabling  certain  definite  persons,  whether  many


308  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  r-r.n

or  few,  to  consciously  formulate  their  desires  on  some
point  with  the  expectation  that  "  the  world  "  will
carry  those  desires  into  effect.

If  we  are  to  blame  mankind,  we  should  blame  them,
not  for  being  without  a  collective  plan,  but  for  being
without  the  machinery  which  would  make  a  collective
plan  possible.  When  Sir  Valentine  Chirol  writes  from
India  to  the  Times,  "  Over  and  over  again,  reflecting
Civil  Servants  have  said  to  me,  '  What  are  we  here
for  ?  '  If  only  I  knew  that,  I  should  know  how  to
order  my  life  and  my  duty,"  x  we  blame  ourselves
or  "  the  Government "  without  asking  whether  any
constitutional  machinery  exists  by  which  the  in-
habitants of  the  United  Kingdom  can  form  any
purpose  with  the  expectation  that  it  will  guide  the
action  of  the  officials  and  soldiers  whom  they  send  to
India.  It  may  well  be  that  the  Civil  Servants  are
sent  there  "  for  "  no  purpose  at  all,  and  that  without
important  changes  in  the  constitution  of  the  British
Empire  that  must  remain  the  case.

In  the  Great  Society,  however,  men  are  continu-
ously compelled,  if  they  are  to  enjoy  the  advantages  of
civilisation,  or  indeed  to  exist  in  anything  like  their
present  numbers,  to  act  in  ever  larger  units,  industrial
and  political,  national  and  international ;  and  ex-
perience daily  shows  that  the  action  of  these  units
should  as  far  as  possible  be  the  intended  result  of
an  Organised  Will.

Almost  the  whole  of  what  we  call  "  the  social
question,"  for  instance,  consists  in  the  controversy  as

1  Times,  June  28,  1909.


CH.  xii THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 309

to  what  Organised  Will  should  direct  the  enormous
industrial  units  of  our  time.  The  three  chief  Will-
Organisations  whose  claims  are  put  forward  for  that
direction  are  Private  Property,  the  State  (organised
at  present  on  the  basis  of  locality),  and  Non-Local
Associations  (mainly  on  the  basis  of  common  occupa-
tion). The  exclusive  fitness  of  each  of  these  to  be  the
main  or  sole  Industrial  Will- Organisation  suited  to  the
Great  Society  is  advocated  by  a  special  group  of
thinkers,  the  claims  of  Property  by  those  who  call
themselves  Individualists,  of  the  Localised  State  by
those  who  call  themselves  Socialists  or  Collectivists,
and  of  the  Non-Local  Associations  by  those  whom  I
will  call,  though  some  of  them  would  reject  the  name,
Syndicalists.

The  Individualists,  in  claiming  that  the  general
interest  of  the  community  is  best  secured  when  the
Great  Industry  is  directed  by  the  Will- Organisation  of
Property,  have  on  their  side  the  great  advantage  that
the  institution  of  Property  is  based  upon  a  true
human  instinct.

The  details  of  the  Property  Instinct  vary  rather
widely  both  among  individuals  and  races,  partly,  per-
haps, because  a  single  line  of  our  ancestors  went
through  several  evolutionary  phases  in  that  respect,
and  partly  because  different  human  stocks  (which  are
now  interbred)  had  evolved  somewhat  different
instincts.  But  the  main  outlines  of  the  instinct  are
clear  enough.  From  a  point  in  his  evolution  long
before  he  became  human,  man  has  not  lived,  as  most
of  the  fishes  live,  by  consuming  every  day  food  which


310  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

he  finds  that  day  in  an  environment  which  he  makes
no  attempt  to  change.  He  has  always  to  a  certain
degree  accumulated  food,  and  later  on  tools,  and
weapons,  and  clothing ;  and  has  constructed  or
adapted  shelters  against  enemies  or  the  weather  for
himself  and  for  the  women  and  children  of  some  kind  of
family  group.  Intrusion  into  the  chosen  shelter,  or
consumption  of  the  accumulated  goods  by  persons  not
in  the  family  group,  is  instinctively  resented.  Within
the  group,  co-operation  in  the  production  and  accumu-
lation of  possessions  is  instinctively  undertaken  by
the  male  and  female  adults  and  the  younger  children.
On  adolescence  the  young  males,  and  to  a  lesser  degree
the  young  females,  develop  an  individual  impulse  to
produce  and  accumulate,  which  is  absorbed  a  little
later  in  a  new  family  impulse.1

It  is  this  body  of  facts  which  has  led  almost  every
critic  of  society  during  the  last  two  thousand  years  to
think  of  agricultural  "  peasant  proprietorship,"  where
a  definite  piece  of  land  is  tilled  and  its  fruits  stored
by  the  labour  of  a  family  group,  as  the  most "  natural  "
form  of  industrial  organisation.  Both  production  and
accumulation  seem  to  organise  themselves  automatic-
ally in  such  a  group  :  since  the  father  and  the  mother
toil  without  external  compulsion  both  to  support
their  children  in  infancy  and  to  make  provision  for
their  future,  while  the  children,  with  little  or  no  com-

1  For  certain  purposes,  e.g.  common  defence,  men  seem  also  instinctively
to  co-operate  in  the  larger  unit  of  the  tribe.  But  tribal  co-operation  is  not
instinctively  "  economic,"  i.e.  aimed  at  the  production  and  accumulation
of  the  necessaries  of  life.  In  this  respect  human  instincts  differ  from  those
of  the  ants  and  other  social  insects,  among  whom  in  this  sense  the  family  and
the  tribe  are  one.


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 311

pulsion,  help,  until  the  Wanderlust  comes  upon  them,
in  the  work  of  their  parents.

When,  a  hundred  or  more  years  ago,  economists
began  to  discuss  the  first  beginnings  of  the  Great
Industry,  they  still  thought  of  unrestricted  Private
Property  as  the  most  effective  form  of  industrial
organisation,  and  of  family  accumulation  as  the  main
impulse  by  which  it  should  be  directed.  But  as  soon
as  the  "  factory  system "  took  the  place  of  the
"  domestic  system  "  in  those  textile  trades  which  so
greatly  influenced  economic  thought,  it  was  seen  that
in  a  highly  organised  industry  family  accumulation
is  inevitably  separated  from  family  co-operation.  It
was  still  assumed  that  the  main  motive  of  the  employer
as  "  economic  man  "  would  be  to  accumulate  wealth
for  himself  and  his  family.  But  it  was  no  longer
assumed  that  that  wealth  would  normally  be  produced
by  the  co-operative  labour  of  himself  and  his  family.
The  modern  capitalist  would,  it  was  recognised,
normally  direct  the  labour  of  large  bodies  of  hired
servants.  But  the  most  efficient  capitalist,  it  was
argued,  would  direct  the  largest  body  of  workmen,
and  his  efficiency  would  consist  in  offering  to  the
general  body  of  consumers  the  most  valuable  com-
modities and  services.

Pure  Individualism  now  represents,  however,  a
rapidly  shrinking  body  of  opinion.  The  substitution  of
concentration  for  competition  has  destroyed  in  the
largest  and  most  characteristic  modern  industrial  units
the  old  presumption  (never  very  sound)  of  identity  of
interest  between  producer  and  consumer.  When  Sir


312  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Edgar  Speyer  (the  organiser  of  the  great  industrial
combination  called  "  The  Underground  Electric  Rail-
ways Company  of  London ")  was  reported  in  the
Times  as  saying :  :'  The  fear  had  been  expressed  in
some  quarters  that  a  concentration  of  traffic  facilities
would  tend  towards  an  increase  of  fares,  but  he  main-
tained that  the  true  safeguard  against  any  possible
abuse  was  that  the  interests  of  the  shareholders  and  of
the  travelling  public  were  identical,"  x  his  statement
sounded  to  us  merely  absurd.

The  separation  of  family  accumulation  from  family
co-operation  has  also  brought  about  an  enormous  and
growing  hereditary  inequality  in  the  ownership  of
wealth,  and  few  economists  think  with  satisfaction  of
the  degree  to  which  the  less  urgent  desires  of  the
minority  who  have  inherited  wealth  are  now  satisfied
before  the  more  urgent  desires  of  the  majority  who
have  not  inherited  it.

As  the  second  and  third  generations  of  "  captains  of
industry  "  grow  up,  the  presumption  also  that  the
accumulation  of  private  property  from  family  motives
would  necessarily  lead  to  industrial  management  by
the  ablest  and  most  energetic  members  of  the  com-
munity, is  seen  to  be  no  longer  well  founded.  A  great
capitalist  may  leave  the  management  as  well  as  the
profits  of  his  business  to  a  stupid  son,  or  the  stupid
son  may  choose  a  stupid  or  dishonest  manager.

Accumulation  and  co  -  operation  are  even  more
clearly  separated  in  the  joint -stock  system,  whose
Will- Organisation  is  as  incoherent  as  its  Thought-

i  Times,  February  25,  1913,


on.xn THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 313

Organisation.  The  inheritor  of  shares  in  a  large
joint-stock  business  has  normally  little  or  nothing
to  do  with  its  management.  It  is  easier  for  a  share-
holder in  Sir  Edgar  Speyer's  company  to  prevent
fares  being  raised  by  agitating  politically  for  a  general
Minimum  Fare  Bill  than  by  attending  the  annual
meeting  of  his  Company ;  and  a  clerical  holder  of
brewery  shares  can  vote  more  effectively  for  Sunday
Closing  as  an  elector  than  he  can  as  a  shareholder.
But  the  present  complete  legal  responsibility  and
actual  irresponsibility  of  the  shareholder  is,  in  some
of  the  largest  and  most  important  forms  of  in-
dustrial organisation,  not  likely  to  remain  unchanged.
Either  the  main  capital  value  of  those  companies
which  are  intimately  concerned  with  the  public
interest  will  come  (as  in  America)  to  be  represented
by  non-voting  bonds  and  debentures,  while  voting
power  is  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  a  "  boss "
who  can  negotiate  with  the  holders  of  political  power,
or  control  by  the  State  will  so  extend  that  the  share-
holder will  become,  as  the  East  India  stockholders
became  towards  the  close  of  the  East  India  Com-
pany's existence,  in  fact  the  receiver  of  fixed  interest
on  a  State  debt.

And,  finally,  even  if  the  desire  to  accumulate  for
oneself  and  one's  family  were  sufficient  to  secure  both
the  maximum  energy  of  the  owners  of  modern  capital
and  the  direction  of  that  energy  towards  the  maximum
good  of  the  community,  most  men  now  have  an  un-
comfortable feeling  that  that  desire  is  not  under
present  conditions  sufficient  to  secure  the  best  results


314  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

from  the  working  employee,  who  is  no  longer  either  a
son  of  the  employer  or  an  apprentice  adopted  into
the  employer's  family  and  expecting  to  become  an
employer  himself.  In  so  far  as  the  lifelong  working-
man  in  a  large  industrial  unit  is  identical  with  Arch-
bishop Whately's  economic  man,  concerned  only  with
his  own  pecuniary  advantage  and  that  of  his  own
family,  it  seems  difficult  now  to  find  arguments  which
would  convince  him  of  the  unwisdom  of  the  deliberate
restriction  of  output,  or  even  of  deliberate  injury  to
his  employer  by  "  sabotage  "  or  "  ca'  canny."

In  fact  the  institution  of  Private  Property  only
now  works  tolerably  as  the  main  organising  force  of
the  Great  Industry  because  it  gives  scope  for  other
impulses  besides  that  of  personal  or  family  accumula-
tion, and  because  it  is  constantly  checked  and  modified
by  other  forms  of  Will-Organisation.  Rich  men  now
continue  to  make  money  after  they  have  provided  for
the  future  both  of  themselves  and  their  children,  not
only  because  the  instinct  of  accumulation  has  no
clearly  defined  limits,  but  because  they  are  influenced
by  the  desire  for  admiration  and  power  (the  Give  a
Lead  instinct),  or  by  the  need  of  outlet  for  their
energy,  or  by  Love  for  human  beings  outside
their  family.  If  Sir  Edgar  Speyer  were  to  submit
himself  to  cross-examination  in  a  psychological
laboratory  as  to  his  motives  for  not  immediately
raising  fares  on  the  London  Electric  Railways,  it
would  probably  appear  that  he  was  influenced,  not
by  a  simple  calculation  that  in  a  purely  individualist
society  he  would  make  more  money  for  himself  and


CH.  xii THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 315

his  family  by  adhering  to  the  existing  fares,  but  rather
by  a  very  lively  sense  of  the  possible  interference  of
Parliament  or  the  Railway  Commissioners,  by  the
realisation  that  he  might  need  the  support  of  public
opinion  in  a  future  struggle  with  the  Railwayman's
Union,  and  perhaps  by  a  vague  and  half-ashamed
feeling  (which  Professor  Murray  would  call  Aidos)
that  he  would  like  to  behave  decently  to  those  who
use  his  railways.

If  we  assume,  therefore,  that  the  growth  of  the
Great  Industry  in  Europe  during  the  nineteenth
century  was  inevitable,  the  reaction  from  the  Indi-
vidualism of  the  beginning  of  that  century  to  the
Collectivist  Socialism,  which  became  the  most  im-
portant political  movement  at  the  end  of  it,  was
equally  inevitable.  Given  that  the  choice  was  be-
tween a  Will-Organisation  based  solely  upon  Property
and  one  based  solely  upon  Representative  Govern-
ment, the  argument  in  favour  of  Collectivism  in  the
Great  Industry  seemed  irresistible.  Collectivism  sub-
stituted a  direct  aiming  at  the  public  good  for  a  very
hypothetical  calculation  that  the  public  good  might
indirectly  result  from  individual  and  family  accumu-
lation. It  encouraged  and  depended  on  conscious
public  spirit,  instead  of  a  blind  property  -  instinct
distorted  by  the  disappearance  of  its  original  environ-
ment. Above  all  it  seemed  that  a  democratic  govern-
ment would  necessarily  use  the  enormous  wealth-
producing  power  of  the  Great  Industry  so  as  to  lessen
instead  of  increasing  economic  inequality.

Wherever,  therefore,  during  the  last  fifty  years,


316  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

the  Great  Industry  has  developed  among  a  nation  of
European  origin,  it  has  been  followed  by  an  insistent
demand  both  for  representative  democracy  and  for
the  State  control  of  production  ;  and  that  demand  has
already  resulted  in  a  transformation  towards  demo-
cracy of  the  majority  of  European  governments,  and
in  the  enactment  of  a  growing  and  generally  accepted
mass  of  "  socialistic  "  legislation.

But  the  continued  growth  of  Collectivism  depends
on  the  continued  efficiency  and  acceptability  of  the
machinery  by  which  the  collective  Will  is  ascertained
and  enforced  ;  and  the  dissatisfaction  with  the  actual
methods  of  democratic  representation  which  I  dis-
cussed in  my  last  book 1  seems  also  to  be  growing.

In  particular  the  methods  by  which  the  less  eager
working-class  voter  is  induced  to  go  to  the  poll  are
felt  to  an  increasing  extent  to  offend  against  a  vague
but  deep-seated  sense  of  the  terms  on  which  alone
men  can  live  permanently  together.  A  proportion  of
the  electors  sufficiently  large  to  turn  any  election  will,
if  they  are  left  to  themselves  or  to  the  spontaneous
exhortation  of  their  neighbours,  stay  at  home.  It  is
therefore  necessary  that  they  should  be  visited  on
some  organised  system,  both  during  the  campaign  and
on  the  day  of  the  election.  In  America  the  system
adopted  consists  of  an  elaborate  arrangement  by
which  some  one,  who  in  social  or  industrial  life  has
acquired  influence  over  the  voter,  calls  on  him  and
tries  to  use  that  influence  by  making  him  vote.  Sir

1  Human  Nature  in  Politics  (1908),  e.g.,  Introduction,  and  pt.  ii.  chaps,
i.  and  ii.


OH.  xn THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 317

Edwin  Cornwall,  M.P.,  in  a  lecture  at  the  National
Liberal  Club  (reported  in  the  Daily  Mail  of  October
17,  1908),  proposed  that  this  (which  was  the  rule  in
eighteenth-century  England)  should  again  become
general  among  us.  "  The  confusion,"  he  is  reported
to  have  said,  "  which  generally  prevailed  at  elections
was  unwarrantable  and  unjustifiable.  What  was  the
good  of  sending  a  violent  Nonconformist  to  canvass
a  violent  Churchman  ?  Send  a  Nonconformist  to
canvass  a  Nonconformist ;  a  Churchman  to  a  Church-
man. If  a  man  were  influenced  by  his  landlord,
send  the  landlord  to  him.  If  a  man  never  went
to  Church  on  Sunday,  but  took  his  dog  for  a  walk
instead,  let  him  be  interviewed  by  the  man  who
went  for  walks  with  him."

But  most  men,  if  they  are  asked  to  use  systematic-
ally the  influence  gained  in  religion  or  business  or
personal  friendship  to  make  neighbours,  who  do  not
like  to  refuse,  promise  that  they  will  vote  for  or
against,  say,  Imperial  Preference,  are  likely  to  feel
that  the  process  is  not  quite  "  fair,"  and  that  feeling
will  probably  be  shared  even  more  strongly  by  those
whom  they  visit.

In  the  English  cities,  since  the  great  Reform  Acts
of  1867  and  1884,  "  canvassing  "  has  normally  taken
the  form  of  the  house-to-house  visitation  of  whole
streets  by  persons  who  are  strangers  to  those  whom
they  visit.  This  is  not  felt  to  be  unfair,  but  it  is  felt
to  be  unpleasant.  One  of  the  most  necessary  duties
of  the  professional  ward-agent  at  an  English  election
is  to  go  from  time  to  time  from  the  inner  to  the  outer


318  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

committee-room,  and  to  tell  the  politicians  whom  he
will  find  there,  engaged  in  a  natural  and  pleasant
discussion  of  their  candidate's  chances,  that  they  must
each  go  out  with  a  bundle  of  canvassing  cards.  The
men  and  women  whose  public  spirit  compels  them  to
obey  do  so  with  a  conscious  shrinking,  not  so  much
from  muddy  pavements  and  sore  feet,  or  from  the
reading,  with  matches  that  continually  go  out,  of  door-
numbers  in  dark  "  model  -  dwellings,"  as  from  the
sense  that  they  are  somehow  offending  against  good
manners.  The  last  time  I  went  canvassing  I  spent
half  an  hour  trying  to  teach  an  old  street-hawker  to
fill  up  a  specimen  voting-paper.  Every  few  minutes
he  implored  me  to  let  him  alone.  "  I  have  been  wet
through  three  times  to-day,"  he  said,  "  I  am  tired
and  angry."  (The  phrase  pleased  him,  and  he  re-
peated it  half  a  dozen  times.)  "  This  sort  of  thing
ought  to  be  left  to  them  that  is  apprenticed  to  it."
I  felt  that  I  was  outraging  every  possible  social  code.
The  political  canvasser  can  indeed  see  himself  as  in  a
glass  when  a  week  or  two  after  the  election  he  is
called  on  by  a  commercial  canvasser  of  books  or  milk.
The  creature  before  you,  with  his  nervous  smile  and
his  hurried  anxiety  to  get  into  any  kind  of  conversa-
tion before  you  shut  the  door  in  his  face,  seems  to
have  lost  some  of  the  proper  dignity  of  a  man.

Though  the  political  leader  ignores  all  this,  the
working-class  voter  sees  it  at  first  hand.  He  or  his
wife  is  canvassed  perhaps  a  dozen  times  during  the
election,  and  if  a  speech  or  a  newspaper  article  rouses
his  public  spirit  and  sends  him  to  the  committee-


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 319

room  of  his  party,  there  is  nothing  for  him  to  do  except
to  go  canvassing  himself.  No  wonder  that,  in  a  work-
ing-class district,  "  politics  "  are  often  looked  upon  as
rather  a  disreputable  fad,  which  the  best  kind  of  man,
the  man  who  "  keeps  himself  to  himself,"  will  not
touch,  and  that  the  burden  of  organisation  is  so  largely
left  to  the  professional  agents  who  enjoy  their  own
professional  skill,  and  boast,  like  the  secretary  of  the
Budget  Protest  League,  that  they  "  have  succeeded
beyond  all  expectations  in  introducing  the  true
twentieth-century  note  into  the  ever-fascinating  art
of  political  propaganda." l  And  no  wonder  that  the
questions  which  really  interest  politicians  so  seldom
really  interest  the  majority  of  their  constituents.

The  candidate  himself,  though,  if  he  is  sufficiently
important,  he  may  be  allowed  to  confine  himself  to
the  wholesale  Organisation  of  Will,  and  may  leave  the
retail  work  to  others,  yet  often  looks  back  on  the
election  as  a  period  of  intense  moral  discomfort.  All
his  instincts  were  adapted  ages  ago  to  life  on  a  smaller
scale,  and  to  a  more  spontaneous  and  less  mechanical
contact  with  his  fellows.  He  hates,  in  his  moments  of
fatigue  or  depression,  to  thrust  himself  on  the  atten-
tion of  thousands  of  men  who  despise  him  for  doing  so.
He  would  like  to  be  silent  or  to  speak  his  own  thoughts
in  his  own  way.2

1  Daily  News,  August  7,  1909.

1  The  social  life  of  American  University  undergraduates  is  often  very
largely  based  upon  a  system  of  election  to  various  clubs  and  societies.  A
very  clever  novel,  Stover  at  Yale,  by  Owen  Johnson,  lately  described  with
great  vividness  a  feeling  among  certain  undergraduates,  with  which  every
politician  will  sometimes  sympathise,  that  it  is  better  to  be  and  to  do,
than  perpetually,  in  order  to  win  "  popularity  "  and  ultimately  votes,  to
seem  to  be  and  to  seem  to  do.


320  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  w.  n

But  if  he  is  to  stimulate  and  to  express  the  feelings
of  a  large  constituency,  an  ordinary  man  can  no  more
be  "  natural  "  than  can  an  actor  on  the  stage.  Some
few  men,  it  is  true,  find  an  exalted  sense  of  reality  in
the  whole  process  of  electioneering.  Gladstone  could
step  on  to  the  platform  of  a  great  meeting  with  the
same  sense  of  consecration  to  the  purposes  of  Provi-
dence with  which  he  had  knelt  that  morning  at  the
eucharist.  The  management  of  his  splendid  voice,
the  well-graced  movement  of  his  body  and  features,
the  skill  with  which  the  "  old  Parliamentary  hand  "
(as  he  was  proud  to  call  himself)  made  twenty  thousand
people  feel  that  his  sonorous  phrases  expressed  their
varying  aspirations,  while  he  yet  left  himself  free — in
these  things  Gladstone  had  no  more  sense  of  unreality
than  had  Disraeli  in  his  calculated  audacities,  or
Lassalle  in  the  gestures  which  he  used  to  rehearse
before  his  mirror.

But  all  men  are  not  so  tempered,  nor  perhaps  any
man  in  all  his  moods.  Lord  Rosebery  told  the  Liver-
pool students  in  1910  that  "  Politics  at  best  are  a
gruesome  study.  We  like  them  much  better  at
eighteen  than  at  fifty-eight." 1  And  Huxley,  when  at
a  Royal  Society  Dinner  it  was  suggested  that  he
should  enter  Parliament,  replied  "  that  all  his  life  he
had  been  consumed  by  a  passion  for  the  discovery  of
truth,  and  not  for  its  obscuration ;  hence  he  had
never  had  any  ambition  to  enter  on  a  political
career." 2

I  have  tried,  so  far,  to  take  instances  where  the

1  Daily  Chronicle,  November  15,  1910.
8  Article  by  Edward  Clodd  in  T.  P.'s  Magazine,  October  1910.


cn.xn THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 321

feeling  of  unreality  and  discomfort  in  politics  arises
from  the  difficulties  of  honest  men  trying  to  create
and  organise  a  common  purpose  among  their  fellows.
But  the  graver  dangers  of  representative  government
arise  from  the  fact  that  the  manipulation  of  other
men's  wills  for  ends  believed  to  be  good  for  them  may
shade  imperceptibly  into  practices  whose  end  is  the
advantage  of  the  manipulator.  This  danger  is  always
near  in  a  country  where  democracy  co-exists  with
great  social  inequality.  Political  organisation  is  ex-
pensive, and  it  is  impossible  to  induce  poor  men  to
subscribe  small  sums  to  electioneering  funds  as  long
as  they  know  that  rich  men  can  give  great  sums
without  a  sense  of  loss.  On  both  sides  in  any  contest
those  who  pay  for  the  Organisation  of  Will  are  likely
to  influence  its  direction  in  accordance  with  their  own
opinions.  But  when  a  rich  class  feels  itself  attacked
as  a  class,  it  is  apt  to  go  further.  There  are  always
plenty  of  counsellors  who  tell  them  that  they  should
subscribe  to  the  propagation  of  opinions  which  they
do  not  hold,  that  they  are  not  using  "  their  enormous
money  power  in  a  scientific  way," l  and  that  "  what-
ever policy  may  be  best  designed  to  enable  "  their
party  "  to  keep  and  to  gain  seats  .  .  .  must  be
adopted  without  hesitation." 2  They  were  urged,  for
instance,  in  the  Observer  of  November  13,  1910,  to
subscribe  to  the  Tariff  Reform  League.  "  Tariff
Reform  is  what  the  masses  understand.  .  .  .  The  Tariff
Reform  League  is  the  agency  by  which  the  masses

1  A.  A.  Baumann,  Fortnightly  Review,  October  1909.
1  Observer,  November  13,  1910.

Y


322  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  pr.n

can  be  most  effectually  moved."  The  Tariff  Reform
League  had  "  learnt  by  experience  to  make  a  con-
summate use  of  money."  Mr.  T.  W.  A.  Bagley,  the
Secretary  of  the  League,  after  "  an  adventurous  life
in  West  Africa  and  elsewhere,"  had  organised  a  body
of  men  whom,  with  a  recollection  of  West  Africa,  he
called  Missionaries  :  "  These  men  move  through  the
constituencies,  live  in  the  villages,  engage  individuals
in  casual  conversation.  ..."  The  boundaries  of
what  would  be  considered  mere  common  honesty  in
ordinary  life  are  here,  most  men  would  say,  definitely
overstepped.

And  there  is  another  danger  which  does  not  depend
upon  social  inequality.  The  progress  of  Collectivism,
by  extending  the  functions  of  Government,  has  in-
creased the  payment  by  Government  for  work  done,
and  such  payment  may  become  a  source  of  corruption.
When  I  heard  an  Irish  policeman  in  Boston  say  to  a
friend  with  whom  he  was  discussing  a  personal
grievance,  "  Man,  I  tell  you  it's  dhurrty  politics,"  he
was  using  the  word  in  a  sense  that  would  be  under-
stood right  across  the  United  States.  In  France
elected  representatives  are  said  to  be  overwhelmed
with  correspondence  arising  out  of  political  patronage.
In  the  central  executive  service  of  the  United  King-
dom we  are,  for  the  moment,  more  fortunate,  but
there  are  few  workmen  in  a  provincial  town  who  do
not  know  of  cases  where  men  have  interested  them-
selves in  elections  for  Guardians  or  Borough  Council
with  the  expectation  of  a  job  if  their  candidate
gets  in.


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 323

Socialism  began  to  be  preached  in  England  in  1884,
a  generation  after  the  death  of  Robert  Owen's  move-
ment under  that  name.  In  1888  the  Fabian  Essays
in  Socialism  were  written.  The  article  on  the  relation
of  Representative  Government  to  Industry  was  en-
trusted to  Mrs.  Besant,  and  I  have  re-read  it,  in  order
to  see  what  we  then  considered  to  be  the  collectivist
position.  Mr.  Ritchie  had  in  that  year  passed  the  Act
creating  County  Councils,  and  Mrs.  Besant  wrote
that :

In  perfect  unconsciousness  of  the  nature  of  his  act,  Mr.
Ritchie  has  established  the  Commune.  He  has  divided
England  into  districts  ruled  by  County  Councils,  and  has  thus
created  the  machinery  without  which  Socialism  was  impractic-
able. ...  It  remains  to  give  every  adult  a  vote  in  the
election  of  Councillors,  to  shorten  their  term  of  office  to  a
year ;  to  pay  the  Councillors,  so  that  the  public  may  have
a  right  to  the  whole  of  their  working  time  ;  .  .  .  and  to
remove  all  legal  restrictions,  so  as  to  leave  them  as  free  to
act  corporately  as  an  individualist  is  to  act  individually.1

After  this  is  done,  argued  Mrs.  Besant,  the  universal
adoption  of  Socialism  will  be  certain.  "  No  one  will
care  to  face  the  worries,  the  harassments,  the  anxieties
of  individual  struggling  for  livelihood,  when  ease,
freedom,  and  security  can  be  enjoyed  in  the  communal
service." 2

No  member  of  the  Fabian  Society,  when  this  essay
was  first  read,  expressed,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,
any  doubt  of  Mrs.  Besant's  orthodoxy  in  this  respect.
But  now,  after  a  quarter  of  a  century's  further  ex-
perience of  representative  government,  it  is  probable

1  Fabian  Essays,  p.  152.  *  Ibid.  p.  158.


324  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

that  no  present  member  of  the  Society  would  take  it
for  granted  that  "  worry  "  and  "  anxiety  "  would  be
completely  absent  from  a  community  where  every
man's  wages  and  employment  and  the  whole  condi-
tions of  his  life  depended  upon  the  absolutely  uncon-
trolled discretion  of  a  local  council,  elected  annually
after  a  contest  the  preparation  for  which  would  occupy
at  least  eleven  out  of  every  twelve  months.1

In  England,  during  the  forty  or  fifty  years  since
English  democracy  began,  any  working  man  who  has
become  disappointed  with  the  machinery  of  repre-
sentation has  usually  voted  Conservative,  owing
largely  to  a  feeling  that  the  established  order  of
employer  and  employed  ran  itself  without  humbug.
But  of  late  years  in  France  and  America  and,  to  a  less
extent,  in  England  working  men  have  been  offered,
under  the  name  of  Syndicalism,  a  revolutionary  move-
ment which,  like  Collectivism,  promises  equality  and
"the  abolition  of  the  wage  system,"  but  which  acknow-
ledges and  indeed  exaggerates  every  charge  that  can
be  brought  against  the  present  organisation  of  repre-
sentative democracy.

The  Syndicalists  ascribe  many  of  the  evils  of
Parliamentary  government  to  the  fact  that  it  is
"  geographical,"  that  the  constituencies,  that  is  to
say,  consist  of  voters  merely  related  to  each  other  as
inhabitants  of  local  areas.  Even  if  men  so  related

1  One  gets  an  exhilarating  sense  of  a  really  enormous  advance  in  the
accumulation  and  analysis  of  economic  knowledge,  from  a  comparison
between  the  admirable  Report  of  a  Fabian  Committee  on  the  Organisation
of  Industry,  published  by  The  New  Statesman  in  1914,  with  the  corre-
sponding sections  of  the  Fabian  Essays  written  in  1888.


cH.xn THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 325

belong  to  one  party,  their  appearance  of  solidarity
is,  they  say,  superficial.  M.  Challaye  sums  up  many
syndicalist  criticisms  on  this  point  in  the  words :
"  A  political  party  is  an  aggregation  of  heterogeneous
elements  held  together  by  the  artificial  bond  of
similarity  in  opinion.  In  such  a  party  men  from  all
the  social  strata  elbow  each  other,  exchange  vague
and  sterile  platitudes,  and  attempt  to  harmonise  by
insincere  compromises  their  essentially  antagonistic
interests." 1

The  Syndicalists  therefore  look  for  a  Will-Organisa-
tion which  has  behind  it  some  stronger  emotion  than
that  produced  by  the  accidental  residence  in  a  few
score  of  adjoining  streets  of  a  few  thousand  men  who
have  adopted  a  common  party  name  for  their  opinions.
This  Will-Organisation  they  find  in  the  fact  of  common
industrial  employment.  The  Trade  Unionist,  they
argue,  is  joined  to  his  fellow- workmen  by  a  bond  of
things  and  deeds  not  of  words,  and  one  for  which
experience  shows  that  he  is  always  ready  to  risk  his
own  livelihood  and  that  of  his  children.  '  Whereas,"
says  a  writer  in  the  Syndicalist  of  April  1912,  "  it  is
a  comparatively  easy  thing  to  get  men  to  go  out  on
strike  for  the  success  of  their  unions,  ...  it  is
paradoxically  almost  impossible  to  get  them  to  vote
for  a  revolutionary  candidate,  to  give  a  vote  which
costs  them  neither  trouble  nor  pain,  merely  thought."

Some  of  the  more  systematic  Syndicalist  thinkers
have  worked  out  a  full  scheme  for  a  Syndicalist  State,
whose  electoral  constituencies  and  administrative

1  Challaye,  Le  Syndicalisme  revolutionnaire  et  le  Syndicalisme  reformiste,
p.  14.


326  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

units  are  Trade  or  Industrial  Unions,  and  whose
Parliament  is  a  National  Committee  of  Union  dele-
gates.

Others  refuse  to  look  further  into  the  future
than  the  prophecy  of  a  general  revolutionary  strike.
Indeed,  throughout  the  Syndicalist  literature,  one
continually  comes  upon  denunciations  of  systematic
constructive  thought,  and  references  to  the  elan
vital  and  the  other  terms  of  M.  Bergson's  anti-intel-
lectualist  philosophy.  "  If  one  reflects  too  much
one  never  does  anything,"  *  one  should  trust  the
"  philosophic  de  Faction  qui  donne  la  premiere  place
a  1'intuition."  2

The  intellectualist  logic  by  which  the  rise  of
European  democracy  was  directed  assumed  that  all
votes  (like  all  golden  sovereigns,  or  all  quarters  of
No.  1  Northern  Manitoba  Wheat)  are  equal  to  each
other,  and  that  therefore  the  addition  and  subtraction
and  comparison  of  them  must  produce  exact  results.
The  Syndicalists  insist  that  feelings  and  actions  are
more  real  than  votes,  and  that  feelings  and  actions
are  not  equal.  An  energetic  and  passionate  minority
have,  they  say,  both  the  power  and  the  right  to
coerce  by  violence'  an  inert  and  indifferent  majority.
They  advocate,  therefore,  and  justify  frequent  strikes
among  those  classes  of  workmen,  like  the  transport-
workers,  or  the  electricians,  or  the  coal-miners,  who,
though  they  are  themselves  in  a  minority,  can,  they
believe,  cause  such  general  inconvenience  as  to  compel

1  Griffuelhes,  BibliotKkque  du  mouvement  social,  i.  p.  57.
2  Lagardelle,  ibid.  i.  p.  8.


CH.XII THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 327

the  rest  of  the  community  unwillingly  to  interfere
on  their  side.

Though  the  combination  of  the  Syndicalist  pro-
gramme with  modern  "  anti-intellectualism  "  is  new,
there  is  nothing  new  about  the  programme  itself
except  its  name.  The  "  Socialism  "  of  Robert  Owen
in  1834,  Louis  Blanc's  plan  for  the  "  Organisation
of  Labour  "  in  1848,  and  even  many  of  the  ideas
of  Lassalle  and  Marx  and  "William  Morris  were
Syndicalist,  in  the  sense  that  they  proposed  to  create
a  community,  the  industrial  or  political  basis  of  which
should  be  the  "  self -governed "  workshop  or  the
"  self -governed  "  craft.

Many  cities  in  medieval  Europe  even  passed  through
a  stage  of  actual  Syndicalism,  the  last  remains  of
which  were  not  abolished  in  industry  till  the  French
Revolution,  and  still  survive  in  the  privileges  and
discipline  of  some  of  the  learned  professions.

The  history  indeed  of  the  late-medieval  gilds
shows  both  the  strength  and  the  weakness  of  the
Syndicalist  form  of  Will-Organisation.  The  gild-
brother,  whether  painter  or  weaver  or  lawyer,  lived
a  vigorous  and  interesting  life,  and  his  close  associa-
tion with  his  fellows  tended  to  maintain  a  high
technical  standard  in  the  use,  and  sometimes,  perhaps,
the  development  of  traditional  methods.  But  even  in
the  organisation  of  industry  the  Gilds  proved  unable
to  adapt  themselves  to  radically  new  methods,  or
to  arrange  effective  compromises  between  the  various
crafts,  or,  where  the  two  became  distinct,  between
the  craftsman  and  the  merchants.  They  constantly


328  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  PT.H

tended,  in  accordance  with  a  narrow  interpretation  of
the  pecuniary  interest  of  their  existing  members,  to
restrict  the  entrance  into  the  gild  of  "  strangers,"  and
even  of  their  own  skilled  assistants,  and  to  make
themselves  into  a  body  of  hereditary  monopolists,
enjoying  as  employers  the  "  rent  "  of  the  harbour  or
trading  centre  in  which  they  were  situated.

And  even  in  the  medieval  city  the  management  of
Industry  was  not  the  sole  function  of  the  Organised
Will  of  the  community.  Police,  public  health,  and
above  all  the  management  of  the  external  relations  of
the  city,  had  to  be  provided  for.  If  in  such  matters
the  citizens  avoided  or  neglected  as  unreal  the  process
of  compromise  by  which  alone  the  inhabitants  of  a
ward  could  elect  a  common  representative  on  the
city  council,  they  only  created  the  more  difficult  task
of  arranging  compromises  later  on  between  organised
and  hostile  interests.  Cities  which  could  enter  into
no  binding  agreement  that  did  not  bear  the  seals  of
twenty  jealous  gilds,  and  which  could  not  keep  order
in  their  own  streets  during  a  trade  dispute,  proved
too  weak  to  stand  against  the  more  highly  organised
national  states  which  began  to  appear  during  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  It  proved  to
be  more  important  that  under  Syndicalism  men  loved
each  other  less  as  citizens  than  that  they  loved  each
other  more  as  Gild-brothers.

If  Syndicalism  ever  became  the  sole  basis  of
organisation  in  the  Great  Society  all  these  difficulties
would  remain,  and  other  difficulties  would  arise  from
the  change  of  scale  which  has  taken  place  since  the


cn.xn THE  OKGANISATION  OF  WILL 329

Middle  Ages.  If  the  whole  management,  not  only  of
manufacture  and  trade,  but  of  foreign  affairs,  religion,
education,  health,  and  the  thousand  functions  of  a
modern  State,  depended  upon  elections  in  constitu-
encies consisting  of  whole  industries,  those  elections
would  soon  become  as  much  a  matter  of  specialised
skill  as  the  present  local  contests,  while  the  successful
candidates  would  be  equally  liable  to  acquire  the
insincerities  of  the  platform.  And  however  insistently
the  Syndicalist  agitators  had  preached  intuition,  the
nature  of  things  in  a  modern  Syndicalist  state  would
throw  all  real  power  into  the  hands  of  the  men  of
calculation.

Neither  Individualism,  therefore,  nor  Socialism,
nor  Syndicalism,  afford  by  themselves  a  single
sufficient  basis  for  the  Will-Organisation  of  the  Great
Society.  It  may  be  that  no  satisfactory  Will-Organisa-
tion of  human  beings  with  their  present  limitations,
in  a  society  on  so  vast  a  scale,  is  possible,  and  that  we
must  ultimately  choose  either  to  live  on  a  smaller
scale,  or  to  pay  for  the  advantages  of  the  larger  scale
by  constant  dissatisfaction  with  our  relations  to  each
other.  But  the  effort  of  inventing  a  better  Will-
Organisation  than  now  exists  is  at  least  worth  while.

That  invention  will  require  the  co-operation  of
many  minds  and  the  experience  of  many  years.  It  is
clear,  however,  that  it  will  have  to  contain  all  the
three  elements  which  I  have  just  discussed.  Socialist
thinkers  both  in  Germany  and  in  England  seem  to
me  to  be  realising  this.  They  seem  ready  to  allow


330  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  w.n

scope  both  for  the  instinct  of  Property  in  its  original
and  simplest  form,  and  for  the  co-operation  of  men
and  women,  whether  as  consumers  or  producers,  on
different  bases  from  that  of  local  residence,  and  they
seem  anxious  to  invent  machinery  which  need  not
involve  complicated  plans  of  "  Proportional  Repre-
sentation," but  which  should  weigh  votes  as  well  as
count  them,  would  allow,  that  is  to  say,  greater
proportionate  influence  to  the  strong  desires  of
minorities  (whether  local,  or  racial,  or  religious,  or
consisting  of  a  smaller  body  of  producers  opposed  to
a  larger  body  of  consumers)  than  to  the  weak  desires
of  merely  numerical  majorities.

The  Syndicalists  themselves,  whether  they  use
that  name,  or  are  merely  "  Old  Trade  Unionists,"  or
ultra-loyal  members  of  such  bodies  as  the  British
Medical  Association  or  the  National  Union  of  Teachers,
seem  to  me  to  find  it  more  difficult  to  realise  the
limitations  of  their  own  special  formula.  Perhaps
some  of  them  would  be  more  likely  to  do  so  if  they
could  accustom  themselves  to  discuss  the  rights
arising  out  of  common  employment  in  relation  to
other  occupations  than  their  own.  It  is  probable,
for  instance,  that  during  the  spring  of  1912  two  out
of  three  of  the  Fellows  and  Tutors  at  Oxford  would
have  signed  with  equal  readiness  a  petition  in  favour
of  the  forcible  suppression  of  Syndicalist  action,  and
one  in  favour  of  the  unrestricted  ownership  and
control  of  the  Colleges  and  University  by  those  who
taught  in  them.  If  Dr.  Charles  Wray  had  carefully
considered  the  ethics  of  "  ca'  canny  "  in  the  case  of


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 331

the  railwaymen  in  1911,  he  would  perhaps  have  been
less  willing  to  write  to  the  Lancet  in  January  1912 :
;<  The  doctors  if  defeated  (over  the  Insurance  Act)
may  treat  patients,  but  they  will  be  under  no  obliga-
tion to  prevent  malingering  nor  the  prescription  of
good  drugs  if  expensive.  Those  under  the  whip  must
retaliate  according  to  their  power.  .  .  ."  *  Even  the
Conservative  Press  itself  may  begin  to  find  it  difficult
with  equal  whole-heartedness  to  denounce  Syndicalism
and  support  Professionalism.

It  is  still  harder  for  those  who  are  trained  to  think
of  social  relations  in  terms  of  Property  to  realise  the
limitations  of  their  instrument.  Since  the  Roman
and  Byzantine  jurists  worked  out  the  details  of  the
convention  of  property,  those  who  deal  with  it,
whether  as  owners  or  business  men  or  lawyers,  have
come  to  think  of  it,  not  as  an  expedient  to  be  adapted
to  varying  human  needs,  but  as  an  indefeasible  and
unchangeable  "  right."  The  advantages  of  that
habit  of  thought  have  been  great.  Nothing,  not
even  the  convention  of  money,  has  done  more  to
make  the  high  organisation  of  modern  industry  and
commerce  possible  than  the  rigid  convention  of
property.  But  at  present  its  disadvantages  are,  I
believe,  still  greater.  As  soon  as  an  ordinary  well-
to-do  man  begins  to  talk  about  the  "  rights  of  pro-
perty," he  removes  himself  into  an  atmosphere
where  it  is  impossible  for  him  either  to  understand
the  habits  of  thought  of  the  majority  of  his  fellow-

1  Letter  signed  Charles  Wray  in  Lancet  of  January  6,  1912,  p.  53.


332  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY  «.  n

countrymen  or  the  necessary  conditions  of  any  great
improvement  in  social  machinery.  The  present
Archbishop  of  York,  for  instance,  is  a  man  of  unusual
force  and  elasticity  of  mind.  In  the  autumn  of  1912
he  had  the  splendid  opportunity  of  addressing  (at  a
meeting  which  preceded  the  Church  Congress  of  that
year)  a  great  audience  of  working  men.  He  told
them  that  the  industrial  unrest  of  the  day  included
an  "  honest  desire  to  open  a  wider  chance  of  a  decent
human  life  to  a  larger  number  of  the  people  of  this
country.  In  that  business  he  wanted  to  be  their
comrade."  He  then  proceeded  to  define  social  justice.
:<  There  were  rights  of  property,  and  they  must  be
defended,  whether  the  property  was  that  of  the
landlord,  the  manufacturer,  the  investor  in  the
co-operative  societies,  or  even  that  of  an  ancient  and
venerable  church.  Those  rights  were  things  which
should  be  defended,  but  they  were  co-related  to  their
duties,  and  it  was  the  business  of  the  Church  of  Christ
to  say  to  the  landlord,  the  manufacturer,  the  investor,
or  the  building  society,  and  to  any  branch  of  Christ's
Church,  '  You  are  bound  to  discharge  the  obligations
to  the  public  good  which  the  ownership  of  property
imposes  upon  you.'  .  .  .  The  rights  of  labour  had
also  to  be  defended.  He  had  been  a  lifelong  adherent
of  their  great  Trade  Unions,  but  the  Church  of  Christ
was  not  worthy  of  its  name  if  it  was  to  be  afraid  at
any  time,  at  the  cost  of  any  popularity,  to  stand  up
before  honest  men  and  to  say  that  labour  had  its
duties.  If  it  was  the  right  of  labour  to  seek  for
shorter  hours  and  higher  wages,  then  the  more  was  it


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 333

the  duty  of  labour  to  see  that  it  worked  harder  during
the  shorter  hours  and  honestly  earned  the  higher
wage."  1

As  long  as  Dr.  Lang  assumes  the  identity  and  equal
indefeasibility  of  the  property  rights  of  a  landlord,
a  manufacturer,  a  religious  corporation,  and  a  co-
operative society,  and  the  consequent  injustice  of
any  readjustment  of  wages  or  hours  which  alters
the  distribution  of  the  existing  product  to  the  dis-
advantage of  any  receiver  either  of  rent  or  profits,
so  long  will  he  be  intellectually  incapable  of  "  com-
radeship "  with  the  average  working  man.  Even  the
Syndicalists  find  themselves  in  a  hopeless  confusion
of  mind  as  soon  as  they  borrow  the  convention  of
property,  and  claim  that  the  miners  should  "  own "
the  mines  or  the  railwaymen  the  railways.

It  may  be  argued  that  in  all  modern  democratic
communities  this  breaking-up  and  re-combination  of
the  simpler  forms  of  Will  -  Organisation  is  already,
both  in  conception  and  in  fact,  rapidly  taking  place.
Not  only  do  Parliamentary  Governments  interfere
freely  with  "  the  rights  of  property,"  but  they  them-
selves are  checked  and  guided  by  a  Civil  Service  and
a  Judiciary  which  are  not  elected  and  which  hardly
any  one  now  proposes  to  elect.  Although  the  French
Revolution  identified  the  idea  of  democracy  with  the
abolition  of  professional  privileges,  yet  of  late  years
every  profession  except  the  Church  has,  in  the  most
democratic  countries,  received  increasing  statutory

i  Times,  October  1,  1912.


334  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  ».n

powers.  The  "  recognition,"  both  by  the  State  and
by  organised  property,  of  Trade  Unions  and  other
voluntary,  but  in  practice  coercive,  associations  of
employees  steadily  grows.  Above  all,  the  electoral
system  itself  is,  it  may  be  argued,  so  elastic  that  it
can  and  does  constantly  adapt  itself  to  meet  new
social  developments.  If  Joint-stock  Companies,  or
Trade  Unions,  or  Co-operative  Societies,  or  Profes-
sional and  Official  Associations  come  to  represent  a
more  important  body  of  Organised  Will,  that  fact
automatically  influences  the  choice  of  candidates,  and
the  success  or  failure  of  policies,  at  every  election.

And  yet  it  is  this  "  automatic  "  process  which
creates  the  most  urgent  need  for  a  deliberate  analysis
of  the  situation,  leading  to  the  invention  of  new
forms  of  Will-Organisation.  Democratic  Government
is  sure  to  degenerate  if  we  drift  into  a  position  in
which  the  only,  or  the  most  effective,  means  by
which  the  servants  of  the  State  can  get  their  special
ideas,  or  their  special  prospects,  attended  to  is  by
canvassing  indifferent  electors  ;  or  if  the  privileges  of
large  property-organisations  are  permitted  to  exist,
but  are  exposed  in  every  session  of  the  legislature  to
ignorant  or  interested  attacks,  and  are  allowed  to  de-
fend themselves  by  huge  subscriptions  to  party  funds.
All  States,  again,  now  employ  a  growing  number  of
professional  lawyers  and  doctors  and  engineers,  but
in  every  section  of  the  State  service  one  may  find
friction  arising  from  the  fact  that  no  one  has  thought
out  the  relation  between  the  professional  "  expert,"
who  is  influenced  by  the  traditions  and  discipline  of


OH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 335

a  great  outside  association,  and  the  "  administrator,"
whose  training  and  corporate  feeling  is  bounded  by
the  service.

For  this  work  of  invention  there  exists  a  vast  mass
of  history  on  the  various  forms  of  association,  which
at  least  indicates  certain  preliminary  conclusions.  It
seems  clear,  for  instance,  that  some  of  the  privileges
enjoyed  by  those  older  professional  organisations,
whose  traditions  date  from  the  Middle  Ages,  should  be
transferred  to  authorities  directly  or  indirectly  repre-
sentative of  the  community  at  large.  Of  these  the
most  important  is  admission  to,  or  dismissal  from,
the  right  of  employment.  In  England,  for  instance,
the  General  Medical  Council,  a  body  in  effect  repre-
sentative of  the  doctors,  has  the  legal  right  to  remove
without  appeal  names  from  the  medical  register  on  the
ground  of  "  infamous  conduct  in  a  professional  sense."
Of  late  there  have  been  cases  of  this  penalty  being
inflicted  on  persons  whose  conduct  no  layman  would
dream  of  calling  infamous,  but  who  were  held  to  have
acted  in  a  way  inconsistent  with  the  interests  of
the  present  body  of  registered  practitioners.1  The
Benchers  of  the  Inns  of  Court  have  in  England
the  unchecked  power  of  refusing  admission  to  the
profession  of  barrister;  and  in  1909  two  Indian
candidates  were  refused  admission  and  one  expelled,
avowedly  on  the  ground  that  their  political  opinions
and  actions  were  displeasing  to  the  Benchers.

1  See,  for  instance,  the  cases  of  Mr.  Axham  and  Mr.  Wallis,  who  were
removed  from  the  Register  for  administering  anaesthetics  to  the  patients
of  Mr.  H.  A.  Barker,  an  admittedly  skilled,  but  unregistered  manipulator
of  joint  injuries  (Times,  December  4,  1911,  and  elsewhere).


336  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

Perhaps  these  privileges  would  be  more  easily
abandoned  if  their  supporters  were  required  to  argue
in  Parliament  that  it  would  also  accord  with  the
permanent  interest  of  the  community  and  the  per-
manent efficiency  of  the  teaching,  or  railway,  or
postal  service,  that  the  National  Union  of  Teachers,
or  the  Unions  of  the  Railwaymen  or  Postmen,  should
have  both  a  statutory  monopoly  of  employment  and
the  right  through  their  Executive  to  dismiss  any  of
their  members  for  any  reason  which  seemed  good  to
them.

The  case  of  the  relation  between  the  Organisations
representing  property  or  common  employment  and
the  actual  process  of  electioneering  is  more  difficult,
but  one  can  watch  the  emergence  of  certain  principles
from  experiments  tried  in  France,  the  British  Colonies,
and  elsewhere,  in  delegating  both  the  details  of  pay
and  discipline  of  any  classes  of  public  servants  large
enough  to  have  an  important  effect  upon  elections,
and  the  details  of  pecuniary  arrangements  with
important  financial  interests,  to  bodies  which,  while
under  the  ultimate  control  of  a  democratic  govern-
ment, are  yet  in  a  position  enabling  them  to  adhere
to  a  considered  policy  against  the  pressure  of
individual  legislators.

In  Europe,  it  is  true,  for  the  moment  all  industrial
politics  are  overshadowed  by  the  struggle  between
the  vague  and  easily  confused  economic  aspirations
of  the  newly  enfranchised  masses,  and  the  vigorous
and  conscious  self-defence  of  those  property-owning
classes  which  have  hitherto  considered  themselves  to


CH.XH THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 337

constitute  the  community.  Until  the  fact  of  greater
social  equality  has  led  to  a  relaxation  of  this  social
tension,  other  advantages  of  political  structure  may
often  have  to  be  postponed,  in  order  to  secure  the
clearest  statement  and  most  rigorous  enforcement  of
majority  rule.  But  even  in  England,  where  the
process  of  social  adjustment  is  now  most  actual,  and
the  need  of  majority  rule  most  obvious,  one  can  watch
instances  (mainly  as  yet  in  the  less  exciting  regions
of  public  administration)  where  machinery  has  been
invented  to  secure  a  combination  of  ultimate  public
control  with  the  discouragement  of  any  undue
interference,  either  of  the  politician  as  such  with  the
details  of  administration,  or  of  the  official  as  such
with  the  work  of  politics.

Some,  for  instance,  of  the  most  interesting  of  these
experiments  have  taken  place  in  the  reorganisation
of  English  "  Secondary  "  and  "  Higher  "  education,
which  followed  the  Education  Act  of  1902.  No
attempt  has  been  made  to  create  bodies  which  in  the
last  resort  are  independent  of  the  central  and  local
control  of  Parliament  and  the  Municipal  Councils.
Every  grant  out  of  the  taxes  must  be  approved  by  a
majority  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  any  rate
must  be  levied  by  a  majority  of  some  Municipal
Council.  But  in  the  case,  for  instance,  of  the  new
provincial  Universities,  instead  of  the  School  Boards
of  1870  (directly  elected  by  an  electoral  system  which
encouraged  the  conflict  of  organised  interests  under
the  form  of  local  representation),  a  large  permanent
body  is  generally  created,  on  which  the  majority  of


338  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

/

seats  are  filled  by  the  State  or  by  county  or  city
councils,  and  a  minority  by  professional  organisations
and  the  teachers  in  the  University.  This  body  elects
the  Principal,  and  gives  the  final  decision,  unless
Parliament  or  the  Law  Courts  interfere,  on  all  im-
portant questions  which  may  be  submitted  to  it.  At
the  same  time  the  teachers  themselves  (acting  either
through  their  Faculty  organisation,  or  through  a
"  Senate  "  or  "  Academic  Council  ")  are  mainly  re-
sponsible to  the  Court  both  for  the  direction  of
the  teaching  and  for  the  development  of  the  various
sciences  which  are  taught.

Less  complex,  but  perhaps  even  more  informing
(as  bringing  in  the  problem  of  private  property)  is
the  process  by  which  a  secondary  school,  founded
and  controlled  by  a  Joint  Stock  Company,  secures
"  recognition  "  and  aid  from  the  State.  The  original
shareholders  become  receivers  of  a  fixed  annual  sum ;
but,  if  the  purpose  of  their  association  was  in  fact
public-spirited,  they  are  sometimes  given  a  temporary
right  to  a  minority  of  seats  on  a  new  "  governing
body."

If  ever  the  "  nationalisation "  of  Railways  or
Mines  takes  place,  it  may  be  that  schemes  of  this
kind,  while  apparently  more  complex,  may  prove  in
the  end  to  correspond  more  closely  to  the  needs  of
the  Great  Society  than  direct  administration  either
by  Parliamentary  Committees,  or  by  nationally
elected  Boards,  or  even  by  an  ordinary  Government
department  under  the  uncontrolled  direction  of  a
Parliamentary  Minister.


THE  ORGANISATION  OF  WILL 339

And  if  ever  the  problem  of  a  "  Second  Chamber  "
is  satisfactorily  settled,  it  may  be  found  that  as  long
as  finance  and  the  power  of  dismissing  that  executive
Government  which  can  alone  use  force  is  reserved
to  the  "  geographically  "  elected  Chamber,  the  repre-
sentation of  other  forms  of  Will-Organisation  may
play  a  useful  though  subordinate  part  in  the  work  of
legislation.

A  similar  analysis  might  be  extended  to  the
inchoate  but  all-important  Will-Organisations  which
now  occasionally  make  possible  the  co-operative
action  of  the  whole  civilised  world.  There  are,
indeed,  few  books  which  are  more  needed  than  a
description  and  classification  of  the  forms  of  "  ecu-
menical "  co  -  operation  which  already  take  place.
The  writer  of  such  a  book  would  have  to  go  behind
the  simple  conceptions  of  majority  rule  and  the  legal
rights  of  professions  and  property  -  owners.  He
might  begin  by  considering  the  conditions  under
which  nations  have  been  successful  in  arranging
among  themselves  for  the  voluntary  mapping  of  the
heavens,  for  the  voluntary  introduction  of  uniformity
into  scientific  terminology,  and  for  the  international
distribution  of  scientific  honours.  He  then  might
examine  the  cases  where  the  coercive  action  of  States
over  individuals  is  required  for  international  pur-
poses (whether  that  coercion  is  exercised  by  State
officials  or  by  delegation  to  professional  or  mixed
bodies)  for  "  the  rule  of  the  road  "  at  sea,  the  enforce-
ment of  quarantine,  or  the  preservation  of  threatened


340  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

animal  species.  Finally  lie  might  approach  the
cases  where  the  whole  body  of  States  coerces  or
threatens  to  coerce  one  or  more  of  its  constituent
members ;  the  Concert  of  Europe,  for  instance,  or
the  tendency  of  late  years  to  bring  diplomatic  pressure
to  bear  in  order  to  secure  the  reference  of  irritating
but  not  vital  questions  to  The  Hague  Court.  In
all  these  matters  he  would  find  material  which  would
lead  him,  not  only  towards  a  clearer  conception  of
the  complex  conditions  of  international  co-operation,
but  also  towards  the  invention  of  means  of  organising
the  conflicting  Wills  of  individuals  and  classes  within
each  nation  more  effective  than  reliance  upon  any
single  "principle,"  whether  Representation,  or  Pro-
perty, or  Professionalism.


CHAPTER  XIII

THE  ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS

IN  considering  how  the  Great  Society  can  be  so
organised  as  to  produce  the  maximum  amount  of
Happiness,  I  must  begin  by  referring  back  to  Chapter
VII.  I  there  argued  that  Happiness  is  not  identical
either  with  the  sensation  of  Pleasure  or  with  the
feeling -tone  of  Pleasantness.  A  happy  life  will
normally  contain  many  Pleasures  and  much  Pleasant-
ness ;  but  the  state  of  consciousness  which  we  call
Happiness  is  distinguished  from  either  sensation  or
feeling-tone  by  the  fact  that  it  contains  (though  they
are  not  always  consciously  recognised)  Memory  of
the  past  and  Imagination  of  the  future.

Happiness,  I  further  argued,  is  a  much  better
indication  than  either  Pleasure  or  Pleasantness  that
a  man  is  living  a  life  which  would  be  declared  by
Aristotle's  imaginary  jury  of  "  the  wise "  to  be
socially  good.  And  yet  we  cannot,  I  regretted,  be
sure  that  by  aiming  at  Happiness,  "  like  archers  with
their  mark  before  them," 1  we  shall  attain  social  good.
Conduct,  merely  passive  contemplation  for  instance,

1  Aristotle's  Ethics,  i.  1  (2).
341


342  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  pr.n

may  produce  real  Happiness  without  leading  to  the
ultimate  good  either  of  society  or  the  race.

The  question,  however,  whether  the  Great  Society
is  efficient  as  an  Organisation  for  producing  Happiness,
though  it  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  a  final  judgment
as  to  whether  the  Great  Society  ought  to  exist,  yet
does  lead  to  a  more  complete  survey  of  the  problem
than  the  questions  whether  the  Great  Society  is  an
efficient  Organisation  for  the  improvement  of  Thought,
or  for  the  carrying  out  of  Will.  I  can  remember  that,
a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  while  I  was  reading  at
Woolwich,  with  a  small  class  of  working  men,  Mill's
chapters  on  "  The  Three  Elements  in  Wealth  Produc-
tion, Land,  Capital,  and  Labour,"  the  lesson  suddenly
turned  into  a  discussion  of  the  wisdom  or  unwisdom
of  one  of  our  number  who  had  thrown  up  an  easy  and
well-paid  job  in  the  Arsenal  because  it  was  too  easy
and  therefore  intolerably  monotonous.  We  seemed
to  be  using  a  much  wider  and  more  fruitful  method
when  we  discussed  his  production  of  Happiness  than
when  we  confined  ourselves  to  his  production  of
Wealth.  Two  types  of  industrial  organisation  might,
it  became  clear,  be  equally  efficient  in  the  production
of  wealth,  and  yet  life  under  one  might  be  happy
and  under  another  unhappy.

And  formulas  like  the  current  definitions  of
Socialism  or  Individualism,  though  they  go  behind
the  mere  production  of  commodities,  may  yet  fail
to  indicate  essential  factors  in  the  production  of
Happiness.  At  about  the  same  date  as  my  Woolwich
class,  I  was  talking  to  a  middle-aged  artisan  who  had


<K.zm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 343

fought  for  the  Paris  Commune.  He  said  to  me,
'*  There  can  be  good  socialisms  and  bad  socialisms."
He  explained  that  he  could  imagine  himself  very
happy  and  very  unhappy  in  two  countries,  in  both
of  which  the  means  of  production,  distribution,  and
exchange  had  been  nationalised.

Before  criticising  the  Great  Society  as  a  Happiness-
Organisation,  or  trying  to  get  at  a  point  of  view  from
which  improvements  in  that  respect  can  be  invented,
I  must  also  repeat  that  one  must  be  careful  not  to
exaggerate  the  Unhappiness  involved  in  the  present
facts.1  The  Great  Society  has  resulted  in  a  degree
of  discomfort  and  uncertainty  which  was  unexpected
by  those  who  helped  to  make  it.  Its  successes  have
rather  been  in  the  removal  of  certain  specific  causes
of  Unhappiness  than  in  the  production  of  positive
Happiness.  But  those  successes  have  not  been
unimportant,  particularly  to  those  who  live  in  the
unfriendly  natural  environment  of  a  Northern  climate.
Life  is  much  longer  than  it  was,  and  disease  less
terrible.  Poverty  no  longer  means  the  Hunger
which  Langland  describes  in  Piers  Plowman,  that
made  a  man  "  look  like  a  lantern  all  his  life  after."  *
However  clumsy  and  mechanical  the  organisation
of  the  Great  Industry  may  be,  it  does  not  involve
chattel  slavery  or  predial  serfdom.  We  have  escaped,
also,  from  that  evil  which  the  Hebrew  prophets  were
never  tired  of  denouncing,  and  which  modern  observers
sometimes  describe  as  the  main  curse  of  Eastern  village
life,  the  oppression  of  the  weak  man  by  the  strong

1  See  ante,  p.  6.  »  Passus,  ix.  1.  174.


344  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

neighbour  from  whom  he  cannot  escape.  Those
of  our  dispositions,  like  Craftsmanship  or  Love,
whose  normal  stimulus  is  close  association  with
familiar  objects,  are  often  confused  and  tired  by  our
present  environment.  But  other  dispositions,  like
Curiosity  and  Ambition,  find  a  richer  satisfaction
than  before.  When  I  was  once  asked  by  a  Norwegian
lad  in  the  Romsdal  whether  he  ought  to  stay  and
inherit  his  father's  land,  shut  in,  as  he  complained,
"  by  the  mountains,  always  the  mountains,"  or
venture  landless  into  the  new  world  of  America  or
England,  I  did  not  dare  to  tell  him  to  stay.

That,  indeed,  which  chiefly  angers  and  excites  us
now,  as  we  contemplate  the  society  in  which  we  live,
is  not  a  conviction  that  the  world  is  a  worse  place
than  it  has  ever  been,  but  the  feeling  that  we  have
lost  grip  over  the  course  of  events,  and  are  stupidly
wasting  the  power  over  nature  which  might  make  the
world  infinitely  better.

The  most  obviously  and  immediately  important
instance  of  the  relation  between  the  Great  Society
and  human  Happiness  is  to  be  found  in  the  working
day  of  men  engaged  in  the  mechanical  and  subdivided
Great  Industry.  Are  they  normally  happy,  or  at
any  rate  in  a  state  of  pleasant  feeling-tone,  during
their  actual  hours  of  work  ?  The  general  impression
which  I  have  formed  on  this  point  is  confirmed,  as
far  as  the  evidence  goes,  by  the  answers  which,  at
my  suggestion,  were  given  a  year  or  two  ago  by  the
working-class  students  of  Ruskin  College,  Oxford.


CH.XIII ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 345

These,  as  summarised  by  the  Principal  of  the  College,
were  :

With  regard  to  pleasure  in  work.  Engineers  say  generally
it  is  all  toil.  They  admit  there  is  a  certain  pleasure  in  a  job
well  done,  but  they  say  the  bad  conditions  knock  the  pleasure
out.  Coal-miners  generally  say  the  work  is  all  toil.  But  one
man  said  he  would  sooner  be  at  work  than  be  idle,  another
that  he  can  take  pleasure  in  the  work  for  half-a-day  when  he
knows  he  is  going  to  have  a  half-holiday.  A  third  says  that
there  is  a  certain  pleasure  in  digging  out  the  coal  when  you
have  a  good  place,  but  that  pleasure  is  just  in  the  expectation
of  making  a  good  wage.  Factory  workers,  i.e.  textile,  boot-
making,  etc.,  agree  that  the  work  is  all  toil.  One  man  re-
marks that  he  has  known  girls  of  good  position  work  ten  hours
a  day  for  nine  shillings  a  week,  but  he  believes  that  the  attrac-
tion is  purely  the  independence  thus  obtained.  Ashby,  our
agricultural  labourer,  was  very  emphatic  with  regard  to  the
pleasure  to  be  obtained  from  agricultural  work.

I  shall  refer  later  to  what  is  here  said  about  the
feelings  of  working  girls.  For  the  rest,  this  piece
of  evidence  amounts  to  the  statement  that  there  is
less  pleasantness  or  happiness  in  work  the  nearer  it
approaches  to  the  fully  organised  Great  Industry.
The  work  of  which  Mr.  Ashby  (who  had  been  an
agricultural  labourer  and  was  incidentally  a  writer  on
country  life)  had  experience,  did  not,  of  course,  belong
to  the  Great  Industry  at  all.

Compare  this  with  any  account  of  skilled  craft-
work  done  either  before  the  Great  Industry  had  been
invented,  or  in  conscious  reaction  from  it.

Mr.  Coomaraswamy  published  in  1906  a  translation
from  the  Sinhalese  of  an  ancient  traditional  song
describing  the  potter's  art.  The  song  obviously  had


346  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

the  practical  purpose  of  enabling  apprentices,  in  the
absence  of  text-books  and  written  directions,  to
remember  certain  operations  in  their  due  order.  But
throughout  the  detailed  rules  there  runs  an  indescrib-
able sense  of  delight  in  the  work.  Here  are  a  few
extracts  :

Waking  before  the  dawn,  carrying  the  basket,  he  fares  to
the  place-of-clay ;

After  cleaning  the  basket  and  clearing  the  place-of-clay,
he  worships  his  guardian  god  ;

Wearing  only  a  loin-cloth,  and  gladly  taking  the  basket
in  hand  he  goes  down  into  the  pit ;

Not  breaking  down  the  two  sides  of  the  pit  he  digs  the
clay  from  the  middle  and  fills  the  basket.

******

The  next  day,  waking  at  dawn,  he  sweeps  and  tidies  the
workshop,

And  having  all  the  balls  of  clay  close  at  hand,  sits  before
the  wheel.

He  takes  with  the  right  hand  the  balls  of  clay  one  by  one
and  sets  them  on  the  wheel,

With  the  left  hand  he  turns  the  wheel,  with  the  right  hand
he  moulds  the  vessel,

Knowing  the  size  and  shape  required  he  presses  down
the  hand ;

Then  when  the  right  shape  appears,  he  stays  the  form  and
moulds  the  rim.

Having  stayed  the  form  and  turned  the  rim,  he  turns  the
wheel  very  fast,

And  looking  now  and  then  to  see  if  it  is  smooth,  he  amends
with  the  finger  tip  any  unevenness,

Sprinkling  a  little  water  he  polishes  the  pot,  then  takes
it  carefully  with  open  hand,

Duly  keeps  it  standing  by,  and  takes  it  up  again  after
thirty  hours  from  the  time  of  making  thus.

******


OH.  an ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 347

Having  drawn  round  it  lines,  flower-petals,  cocks,  parrots,
pigeons,  selalihini.  .  .  .

Swimming  cranes,  flying  lihini,  fair  kindu.ro,  and  honey-bees,

Great  boas,  fierce  serpents  not  a  few,  sharks,  tortoises,
and  golden  peacocks.

Beautiful  damsels  whose  ever-swelling  breasts  are  like
golden  swans,

Nor  does  he  forget  to  draw  dear  delightful  children.1
*  *  *  *  *  *

Or  take  this  from  William  Morris  :

How  nice  it  will  be  when  I  get  back  to  my  little  patterns
and  dyeing,  and  the  dear  warp  and  weft  at  Hammersmith.2

And:

Indeed  I  have  been  ashamed  when  I  have  thought  of  the
contrast  between  my  happy  working  hours  and  the  unpraised,
unrewarded,  monotonous  drudgery  which  most  men  are
condemned  to.3

It  is  true  that  Morris,  for  all  his  greatness,  never
faced  the  fact  that  we  cannot  both  eat  our  cake  and
have  it,  cannot  use  slow  methods  of  production  and
also  turn  out  without  overwork  large  quantities  of
consumable  wealth.  Once,  while  I  listened  to  him
lecturing,  I  made  a  rough  calculation  that  the  citizens
of  his  commonwealth,  in  order  to  produce  by  the
methods  he  advocated  the  quantity  of  beautiful  and
delicious  things  which  they  were  to  enjoy,  would
have  to  work  about  two  hundred  hours  a  week.  It
was  only  the  same  fact  looked  at  from  another  point
of  view  which  made  it  impossible  for  any  of  Morris's
workmen,  or  indeed  for  any  one  at  all  whose  income

1  Spolia  Zeylanica,  vol.  iv.  pts.  xiv.  and  xv.,  December  1906.
1  Quoted  in  Fabian  Tract  167,  p.  8.

8  Letter  to  Manchester  Examiner,  March  1883,  quoted  in  Fabian  Tract
167,  p.  12.


348  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  «.n

was  near  the  present  English  average,  to  buy  the
products  either  of  Morris's  workshop  at  Merton  or
of  his  Kelmscott  Press.  There  is  no  more  pitiful
tragedy  than  that  of  the  many  followers  of  Tolstoy,
who,  without  Tolstoy's  genius  or  inherited  wealth,
were  slowly  worn  down  by  sheer  want  in  the  struggle
to  live  the  peasant-life  which  he  preached.

But  allowing  for  all  this,  and  for  the  fact  that
the  society  to  which  the  old  Sinhalese  potter-poet  be-
longed contained  a  large  proportion  of  men  who  were
too  stupid,  or  too  crippled,  or  too  hungry,  or  too
oppressed,  to  take  any  joy  in  their  work,  yet  the
fact  that  the  working-day  in  our  most  successful  in-
dustries was  not,  according  to  the  Ruskin  College
students,  anything  but  a  dull  toil  for  any  one  of  an
exceptionally  healthy,  intelligent,  and  energetic  body
of  young  men,  must  be  seriously  considered  if  we  are
to  judge  the  Great  Industry  by  the  criterion  of
Happiness.

And  that  serious  consideration  is  the  more  necessary
because  it  is  as  certain  as  any  sociological  prophecy
can  be,  that,  largely  owing  to  the  growth  of  psycho-
logical science,  those  characteristics  of  the  Great
Industry  against  which  Morris  and  Tolstoy  specially
protested  will  be.  enormously  developed.  A  group
of  extremely  able  thinkers,  mainly  Americans,  have
set  themselves  during  the  last  three  or  four  years  to
work  out,  on  lines  to  which  they  have  given  the  name
"  Scientific  Management,"  the  conditions  of  maximum
productive  efficiency  in  highly  organised  industry.
Their  thinking  is  based  on  conditions  which  we  are


CH.ZIH ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 349

beginning  to  take  for  granted,  but  which,  in  fact  have
only  come  into  existence  during  the  last  generation.
They  assume  that  a  large  body  of  workmen  are  dealing
with  material — iron,  cotton,  etc. — so  exactly  assimilated
or  graded  that  any  portion  of  it  labelled  in  a  particular
way  is  equivalent  to  any  other  portion  so  labelled.
They  also  assume  that  it  is  easy  to  make  large  numbers
of  tools  and  machines  which,  however  complicated,
are  exactly  identical  with  each  other.  The  workmen
cannot  be  so  assimilated,  but  they  assume  that  it  is
possible  to  classify  with  considerable  accuracy  their
natural  and  acquired  characters,  and  to  ascertain  by
experiment  the  "  curve  "  of  the  behaviour  of  each
class  under  varying  conditions.  The  most  important
curves  for  their  purpose  represent  the  increase  of
fatigue  in  the  workman  while  performing  different
series  of  bodily  movements.

The  "  scientific  manager  "  then  sets  himself  the
problem  of  ascertaining  the  maximum  output  of  this
body  of  workmen,  the  necessary  arithmetical  calcu-
lations being  done  by  an  elaborate  "  slide  rule,"  by
which  the  relation  between  the  recorded  curves  of
increasing  and  decreasing  efficiency  due  to  changes
in  the  raw  material,  in  the  shape,  size,  and  speed
of  every  part  of  the  machines,  in  the  character  and
speed  of  the  manual  movements  of  the  workmen,
and  even  in  rates  of  wages,  is  ascertained.  Some-
times the  conditions  of  a  particular  industry  are
sufficiently  simple  for  the  result  to  be  arrived  at  by
exhaustive  mathematical  methods.  More  often  the
number  of  independently  variable  factors  is  so  great,


350  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

and  the  labour  of  discovering  by  experiment  all  their
possible  curves  so  enormous,  that  a  good  deal  of  the
thought  of  the  scientific  organiser  must  consist  in  the
invention,  by  skilled  guess-work,  of  probable  hypo-
theses to  be  tested  afterwards  by  quantitative
experiments.  The  whole  method  of  enquiry  requires
indeed  so  much  experience  and  ability  that  it  has
been  mainly  applied  hitherto,  not  by  works-managers,
but  by  experts  specially  called  in  to  help  them.

The  economic  effect  already  produced  by  Scientific
Management  has  been  so  remarkable  (the  output  per
employee  having  in  some  businesses  been  trebled)
that  its  wide  extension  in  the  near  future  is,  as  I  have
said,  certain.  But  its  main  defect  will  probably  be
found  to  be  that  which  it  shares  with  the  classical
political  economy,  the  over  -  simplification  of  the
problem  by  using  the  subordinate  end  of  maximum
output  in  dealing  with  factors  where  the  more  ultimate
end  of  maximum  human  happiness  or  human  good
would  be  more  appropriate. *

The  element  of  Happiness  and  Unhappiness,  or
at  least  of  immediate  Pleasantness  and  Unpleasant-
ness, does,  it  is  true,  enter  into  the  rather  unreliable
figures  which  Mr.  F.  W.  Taylor  and  the  other
"  scientific  managers  "  present  to  show  the  percentage
of  increased  wages  which  is  said  to  be  found  necessary
in  order  to  induce  workmen  to  submit  to  the  un-
pleasant processes  of  a  diminution  of  personal  liberty,
the  formation  of  new  habits,  and  the  putting  out  of

1  See  an  admirable  article  on  Scientific  Management  by  Mr.  J.  A.  Hobson
in  the  Sociological  Review  for  July  1913.


OH.ZHI ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 351

increased  effort.1  But  the  most  important  economic
effects  of  a  diminution  of  the  Happiness  of  a  whole
class  take  long  to  reveal  themselves,  and  cannot
easily  be  balanced  against  an  increase  of  wages.  If,
as  Mr.  Taylor  seems  to  assume,  the  proportion  of  the
total  product  which  falls  to  the  owner  and  employer
is  (in  spite  of  the  moderate  rise  of  wages  which  he
advocates)  to  be  increased,  and  if  the  effort  of  the
working  day  is  made  markedly  more  severe,  it  will
require  the  exchange  of  impressions  and  thoughts  for
some  years  before  that  fact  is  consciously  appreciated
by  organised  working-class  opinion.  When  that  has
happened  the  result  may  be  a  greatly  increased
impatience  with  "  the  wage  system  "  as  a  whole,  and
such  a  growth  of  the  spirit  of  "  ca'  canny  "  and
"  sabotage  "  as  may  be  inconsistent  even  with  the
maintenance  of  the  increased  production  of  wealth.
Such  results,  whether  they  are  good  or  bad,  are  too
serious  to  be  incurred  merely  for  the  sake  of  experi-
ment, and  those  who  wish  to  avoid  them  must  form
hypotheses  about  more  distant  effects  than  the
profits  of  a  single  business  for  a  few  months  or  years,
and  must  make  some  use  of  the  more  or  less  a  priori
methods  of  general  psychology  and  sociology.

In  such  a  sociological  investigation  of  the  probable
ultimate  effect  of  Scientific  Management  either  upon
social  good  or  upon  the  narrower  problem  of  the
Happiness  or  the  Pleasantness  of  the  working  day,
some  help  may,  as  I  have  already  urged  in  my  chapter

1  F.  W.  Taylor,  Shop  Management,  1911,  pp.  25-27,  and  his  Principles
of  Scientific  Management  (special  edition  for  the  Society  of  Mechanical
Engineers,  1911),  p.  43.


352  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

on  Habit,  be  gained  from  the  history  of  the  arts.
In  so  far  as  the  organisation  of  the  Great  Industry
involves  for  each  worker  a  complex  series  of  ordered
manual  acts  based  upon  the  experience  of  others,  and
only  acquired  by  him  with  difficulty,  it  does  not
necessarily  differ  in  principle  from  the  older  crafts  or
create  a  new  cause  of  permanent  discomfort.  The
Sinhalese  potter  owed  much  of  his  happiness  in  his
work  to  the  fact  that  he  had  painfully  acquired  the
"right"  methods  of  turning  the  wheel  and  "  throw-
ing "  the  clay.  The  violinist,  during  the  act  of
playing,  is  (even  if  we  put  aside  such  factors  as  his
prospects  of  applause  or  money)  in  a  more  desirable
state  of  consciousness  if  he  has  been  rigidly  taught  the
"  right "  use  of  his  bow  than  if  he  has  been  left  to
please  himself  in  his  technique.  The  cause  of  this  is
that  the  arts  of  pottery  and  violin-playing  have  been
slowly  adapted  to  a  number  of  nervous  and  muscular
conditions  which  make  for  permanent  as  well  as
immediate  efficiency.  If,  therefore,  any  one  discovers
the  series  of  movements  by  which  a  bricklayer  work-
ing for  a  month  can  lay  most  bricks,  there  is  no
necessary  presumption  that  the  adoption  of  that
series,  instead  of  those  now  traditional  in  the  trade,
may  not,  without  any  permanent  increase  of  painful
effort,  increase  his  output  during  twenty  years,  or
may  not  actually  increase  his  sense  of  comfort  while
at  work.

The  painful  effects  of  monotony  come  not  from  the
repetition,  but  from  the  exact  repetition  of  series  of
movements.  In  the  traditional  arts,  although  the


en.  xni ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 353

artist  constantly  carried  out  his  purpose  by  repeating
the  same  pre-ordained  series  of  actions,  repetition  was
never  exact.  No  touch  of  the  "  thrower's  "  hand  on
the  revolving  clay,  no  sweep  of  the  violinist's  arm
was  precisely  like  any  other,  and  they  obtained  larger
possibilities  of  variation  by  playing  different  tunes
and  making  different  classes  of  pots.  Such  an
avoidance  of  exact  repetition  is  also  a  possible  con-
dition of  highly  organised  machine  industry.  The
machine-tender  need  not  be  merely  a  part  of  his
machine.  Eighty  years  ago  men  used  to  write  of
mechanical  cotton-spinning  as  being,  owing  to  its
complete  monotony,  the  most  destructive  among  all
occupations  of  the  worth  and  happiness  of  life.  But
the  "  minder  "  of  a  large  modern  cotton  -  spinning
or  lace -making  machine  never  intends  any  of  his
customary  actions  to  be  precisely  like  the  last.  He
has  to  correct  minute  variations  in  the  running  of
his  machine  and  not  to  imitate  its  uniformity.

If,  therefore,  the  day's  work  of  the  textile  or  boot-
making  machine-tenders  at  Ruskin  College  was  "  all
toil,"  it  was  not  necessarily  unimprovable  toil.  A
scientific  organiser  who  considered  the  Happiness  as
well  as  the  "  efficiency "  of  the  workman  would
consider  carefully  how  to  retain  this  element  of
intelligent  variation  in  machine  industry  by  leaving
all  exactly  uniform  movements  to  the  machine.  If
in  any  particular  operation  he  failed  to  do  so,  he
would  be  wise,  even  at  a  certain  loss  of  immediate
efficiency,  to  vary  from  time  to  time  the  character  of
the  machines  used  by  a  particular  workman  or  the

2A


354  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

grade  of  material  which  he  handles.  If,  as  is  said,
rail-lifters  work  best  when  their  rhythmic  movements
are  adjusted  to  a  musical  tune,  care  should  at  least
be  taken  to  vary  the  tune.  If  unavoidable  work  is
still  exceptionally  monotonous,  it  may  be  found
worth  while  to  alternate  it  with  other  work.  At
present  one  often  has  the  impression  that,  even  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  most  economical  production
of  the  most  desirable  commodities,  subdivision  of
labour  is  carried  (often  by  mere  inertia)  to  a  degree
inconsistent  with  full  efficiency.  Streets  would  be
pleasanter  to  live  in  if  architects  allowed  more
initiative  to  their  assistants,  and  furniture  would  be
pleasanter  to  use  if  skilled  workmen  were  encouraged,
at  perhaps  a  slight  increase  of  expense,  to  develop
such  opportunities  of  invention  as  are  consistent  with
the  use  of  machinery.

But  during  the  working  day  a  man's  direct  relation
to  his  work  does  not  occupy  all  his  consciousness.
His  comfort,  for  instance,  largely  depends  on  his
relation  to  his  fellow-workmen  and  to  the  system  by
which  his  work  is  tested  and  judged.

In  his  relation  to  his  fellow-workmen,  the  most
important  factor  to  be  allowed  for  is  the  quantitative
limitation  of  our  powers  of  forming  that  kind  of
subconscious  and  complete  acquaintance  with  other
human  beings  upon  which  ease  of  intercourse  depends.
A  man  may  "  love  "  his  whole  species,  but  he  only
"  likes  "  those  whose  names  and  faces  and  characters
he  can  recall  without  conscious  effort.  If  he  is  em-
ployed in  a  business  with  two  thousand  other  hands,


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 355

and  if  his  relation  to  no  one  of  them  is  more  permanent
and  particular  than  his  relation  to  any  other,  there
will  be  no  one  whom  he  can  "  like."  The  number
of  his  fellows  with  whom  a  man  can  maintain  easy
personal  intercourse  varies  with  individual  variations,
with  the  conditions  of  work,  and  with  the  time  which
any  body  of  workmen  spend  together.  Perhaps  it
does  not  often  exceed  eighty,  and  is  normally  about
twenty  or  thirty.  I  do  not  know  of  any  important
attempt  to  organise  mechanical  work  in  relation  to
that  fact,  though  sometimes  the  success  of  a  "  gang
system  "  may  accidentally  depend  on  it.  An  Ameri-
can engineer  said,  I  was  once  told,  that  the  only
piece  of  work  which  he  had  thoroughly  enjoyed  was
the  making  of  the  Key  West  Railway,  where  each  pier
was  placed  upon  a  separate  rock  in  the  sea,  and  was
erected  by  a  small  and  separate  group  of  men  who  came
to  know  each  other  thoroughly.  In  armies  it  is  found
necessary,  if  any  measure  of  comfort  and  contentment
is  to  be  secured,  that  the  officers  in  each  regiment  and
the  men  in  each  company  or  platoon  should  be
deliberately  formed  into  groups,  generally  number-
ing about  twenty-five  ;  and  one  of  the  responsible
organisers  of  a  great  Insurance  Company  told  me  that
he  consciously  aims  at  bringing  groups  of  twenty  or
thirty  officials  into  regular  social  intercourse.  Those
Universities  are  most  successful  where,  by  an  arrange-
ment of  "  colleges  "  or  "  dormitories,"  the  students
are  divided  into  somewhat  larger  groups  ;  and  if  no
arrangement  of  the  kind  has  been  made  by  the
authorities,  clubs  or  cliques,  in  forms  sometimes


356  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

inconsistent  with  other  conditions  of  desirable  social
life,  spontaneously  make  their  appearance.1

The  same  quantitative  limitations  which  fix  the
possibility  of  informal  social  intercourse  among  a
body  of  men  engaged  in  a  common  occupation  also
affect  their  comfort  while  their  work  is  being  inspected,
and  indirectly  the  comfort  and  efficiency  of  the
inspector.  If  one  enquires,  as  I  from  time  to  time
have  done,  into  the  happiness  or  unhappiness  of  the
employees  in  a  big  commercial  business  or  government
office,  perhaps  the  most  frequent  complaints  turn  on
this  point.  A  man  who  has  to  inspect  the  work  of
five  hundred,  or  even  a  hundred,  others,  must  do  so
superficially.  He  knows  nothing  of  the  life  and
character  of  the  man  before  him,  and  must  judge  by
unimportant  or  accidental  details  observed  at  the
moment  of  inspection  (in  a  superficially  organised
army,  for  instance,  mainly  by  the  condition  of  a  man's
clothes  or  by  his  look  of  "  smartness  "  on  parade).
Under  such  conditions,  as  a  school  teacher  com-
plained to  me,  "  only  the  coarser  and  more  obvious
forms  of  success  pay."  Work  (to  use  only  words
which  I  have  written  down  after  actual  conversations)
becomes  "  mechanical,"  "  inhuman,"  "  red-tapish,"
and  those  who  have  to  do  it  become  "  system-sick  "
and  suffer  from  "  Potterers'  Rot."

1  This  limitation  of  the  possibility  of  effortless  intercourse  is  one  of  the  con-
siderations which  make  advisable  that  occasional  transference  of  officials  from
centralised  to  decentralised  work  which  I  have  already  advocated  (p.  291).
The  number  of  persons  whom  an  official  deals  with  in  decentralised  work  is
not  too  large  for  unforced  personal  acquaintance.  An  ex-official  of  the
State  of  Victoria  said  to  me  :  "  I  have  heard  several  men  now  promoted  to
the  Melbourne  Offices  speak  of  their  time  in  country  towns,  when  in  daily
contact  with  settlers,  as  the  part  of  their  work  in  which  they  had  taken
most  interest."


OH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 357

What  is  worse  is  that  the  defects  of  any  system
of  inspection  which  ignores  the  quantitative  limita-
tions of  personal  intercourse  can  be  "  played  up  to  "
by  the  baser  kind  of  employee.  A  Washington  civil
servant  was,  I  believe,  typical  of  many  thousand
others  when  he  complained  to  me :  "  The  low-class
man  who  cares  only  to  draw  his  pay  and  intrigue  for
promotion  is  happy.  The  man  of  public  spirit  or
with  the  craftsman's  love  of  his  work  is  unhappy."
"  If  one  tries  to  succeed,"  said  an  English  municipal
official  to  me,  "  one  is  ashamed  of  doing  so."

But  the  discomfort  of  an  attempt  to  produce  a
good  impression  by  other  means  than  good  work
may  exist  independently  either  of  the  baseness  or
nobility  of  the  official  concerned.  I  remember  once
in  Washington  visiting,  in  company  with  one  of  the
Assistant  Secretaries  to  the  Treasury,  a  department
under  Treasury  control.  The  Assistant  Secretary
had  been,  in  the  American  fashion,  only  some  ten
months  in  his  post,  and  was  not  likely  to  remain  there
more  than  twenty  months  longer.  He  was  an
exceptionally  able  man,  given  power  over  a  much
larger  body  of  officials  than  he  could  possibly  know,
and  unprovided  with  that  trusted  hierarchy  of  high
permanent  officials  by  which  he  would  have  been
assisted  in  Europe.  This  was  his  first  visit,  and
would  perhaps  be  his  last,  to  the  department.  The
Head  of  the  department  was  also,  I  judged,  an  able
official.  But  the  agony  of  his  efforts  to  produce  a
good  impression  in  the  hour  or  so  of  his  intercourse
with  the  Under-Secretary  was  almost  unbearable  to


358  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  PT.  n

myself,  who  had  watched  the  same  sufferings  in
English  elementary  teachers  on  the  occasion  of  the
old  set  annual  visit  of  a  Government  Inspector.  If
a  man's  success  in  life  is  really  to  depend  upon  an
hour's  "  window-dressing  "  talk,  it  is  clear  that  the
faithful  performance  of  his  duties  is  not  the  only  or
the  best  way  to  prepare  himself  for  that  ordeal.

Much  has  been  done  in  almost  all  great  businesses
and  services  to  prevent  the  more  obvious  faults  of
superficial  inspection.  The  head  of  a  great  business
is  often  warned  that  he  must  neither  blame  nor  praise
an  individual  workman  for  what  he  happens  to  see
in  a  visit  to  the  works.  Confidential  "  dossiers "
are  sometimes  kept  of  a  man's  whole  career,  which
are  consulted  before  any  step  is  taken  to  promote  or
degrade  him.  But  success  in  the  art  of  "  human  "
as  compared  to  "  mechanical  "  direction  is,  I  believe,
still  largely  a  matter  of  accident.  The  best  output,
both  of  Happiness  in  the  producers,  and  of  the  com-
modities and  services  which  they  produce,  apparently
now  takes  place  when,  perhaps,  from  ten  to  thirty
of  them  are  responsible  to  a  higher  officer,1  who
knows  his  men  without  the  effort  of  remembering

1  The  number  of  subordinates  with  whom  an  official  can  maintain  that
complete  and  subconscious  ease  of  acquaintance  which  is  necessary  for
"  human  "  (or  "  humane  ")  direction,  varies,  like  the  range  of  acquaintance
of  a  workman  with  his  fellows,  greatly  with  the  conditions  of  the  service
and  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  superior  official.  Mr.  Phipps  of  the  English
Board  of  Education,  in  giving  evidence  before  the  Royal  Commission  on  the
Civil  Service  (question  9384)  refers  to  "  heads  of  clerical  sections  "  in  his
office  who  are  "  kept  in  close  touch  from  day  to  day  with  the  Chief  Clerk,"
and  says,  "  there  are  eleven  of  these  heads  of  sections — not  more  than  the
Chief  Clerk  can  keep  in  touch  with."  Another  very  successful  and  humane
directing  official  whom  I  know,  is  by  exception  able  to  keep  in  touch,  in
Mr.  Phipps'  sense,  with  a  much  larger  number,  perhaps  thirty,  direct  sub-
ordinates, and  to  have  a  real  knowledge  of  some  hundreds  of  their  sub-


OH.  sm OKGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 359

them,  who  inspires  loyalty,  and  even  affection,  among
them,  because,  rather  than  "  give  away "  a  sub-
ordinate by  allowing  him  to  be  punished  for  a  fault
which  was  not  one  of  character,  he  will  take  the  blame
on  himself,  and  who  in  turn  is  known  and  trusted
by  those  above  him  who  are  responsible  for  the  general
organisation  of  the  whole  business.

In  this  difficult  task  of  adjusting  the  vastness  of
the  Great  Society  to  the  smallness  of  individual  man,
one  of  the  most  useful  ideas  to  be  kept  before  the
inventor  of  an  organisation  is  the  "  self-respect "  of
those  who  are  to  be  organised.  An  important  means
of  preserving  that  self-respect  is,  as  I  have  just  said,
such  a  system  of  inspection  and  control  as  shall
secure  that  a  man  is  judged  on  his  whole  character
and  by  his  best  work.  Another,  in  the  case  of  the
more  important  public  officials,  is  that  degree  of
recognition  of  their  personal  work  and  responsibility
for  which  I  pleaded  while  considering  the  Organisation
of  Thought.1  But  even  in  the  case  of  the  ordinary
journeyman  or  clerk  or  teacher,  more  could  be  done
than  is  now  done  to  bring  him  into  conscious  contact
with  the  service  which  he  does  to  the  community,  and
therefore  into  conscious  recognition  of  his  own  social
worth.  Each  particular  point  in  that  process  might
seem  small,  and  yet  the  total  effect  on  Happiness
might  be  large.  Boys  and  girls  at  school  might  learn

ordinates.  The  limit  of  men's  powers  in  this  respect  depends,  to  a  quite
important  degree,  upon  their  natural  "  memory  for  faces,"  and,  if  Professor
Muensterberg's  plan  of  psychological  tests  for  office  is  ever  generally  adopted,
a  test  of  that  type  of  memory  might  well  be  applied  to  candidates  for  certain
kinds  of  directing  work.  I,  myself,  if  I  were  submitted  to  such  a  test,  would
be  certainly  rejected.  1  See  ante,  pp.  291-292.


360  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY  pr.n

the  history  and  wider  aspects  of  the  staple  industry
of  their  district,  technical  education  might  aim  at
breadth  of  social  outlook  as  well  as  preparation  for
more  varied  processes,  Trade  Unions  might  attain
to  something  of  the  medieval  craft-pride,  while
escaping  the  monopolist  narrowness  of  the  Medieval
Gild.  The  English  National  Union  of  Teachers  is  not
a  perfect  body,  but  I  have  watched  for  thirty  years  the
process  (still  grievously  incomplete)  by  which  it  has
made  self-respect  possible  in  the  profession  of  ele-
mentary teaching.  An  English  bishop  once  related
that  when  he  was  inspecting  schools  in  the  late
eighteen-fifties,  and  was  staying  with  a  clergyman,  he
said,  "  That  was  a  nice-looking  lad  who  brought  me
my  boots  this  morning,"  and  was  answered,  "  Yes,
he  is  my  schoolmaster."  Even  the  most  autocratic
clerical  "  manager  "  of  a  country  school  would  not  say
that  now,  and  the  change  involves  an  enormous
increase  of  Happiness.  Perhaps  a  corresponding
change  may  take  place  during  the  coming  generation
in  the  position  of  those  employed  in  organised  retail
trade.  Professor  Muensterberg's  treatment  of  the
psychological  problem  of  retail  shopkeeping  seems
indeed  to  me  to  be  a  marked  instance  of  the  danger,
even  in  a  purely  economic  calculation,  of  ignoring  all
factors  except  the  pecuniary  profit  of  the  employer.
The  same  increased  psychological  self-consciousness
that  would  bring  about,  according  to  his  calculations,
an  increase  in  compulsory  lying  1  might  easily  also

1  "  The  effects  which  we  have  studied  so  far  were  produced  by  inanimate
objects,  posters,  or  displays,  advertisements  or  labels  and  packings.  The
economic  psycho-technics  of  the  future  will  surely  study  with  similar  methods


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 361

help  to  produce  a  strong  Shop  Assistants'  Union,  the
members  of  which  would  be  able  to  resist  orders  to
lie  with  unction,  just  as  a  member  of  the  National
Union  of  Teachers  is  now  able  to  resist  an  order  to
black  the  clergyman's  boots.

The  percentage  of  men  who  are  not  the  better
for  some  measure  of  self-respect  and  for  some  sense
of  origination  and  responsibility  in  their  work  is,  I
believe,  extremely  small.  Mr.  F.  W.  Taylor  assumes
that  men  can  be  found  to  handle  pig-iron,  each  of
whom  "  more  nearly  resembles  in  his  mental  make-up
the  ox  than  any  other  type."  *  But  the  Chinese
experiment  of  building  the  Great  Wall  by  the  labour
of  six  hundred  thousand  prisoners,  who  had  been
surgically  reduced  to  the  condition  of  oxen,  has  not
been  repeated.

When  one  turns  from  the  position  of  the  men  at
present  employed  in  the  Great  Industry  to  that  of
the  women,  one  is  immediately  conscious  that  the
whole  problem  is  changed,  and  changed  in  a  way
which  is  unintelligible  unless  one  substitutes  Happiness
for  Wealth-Production  as  the  criterion.  The  wages
paid  to  women  even  for  work  of  the  same  grade  are
generally  smaller  than  those  paid  to  men,  the  grade
of  work  is,  as  a  rule,  less  interesting  and  more  mono-
tonous, discipline  is  often  more  mechanical  and

the  effects  of  the  living  commercial  agencies.  The  point  is  to  enhance  the
impulse  to  buy  and  to  suppress  the  opposing  ideas.  .  .  .  The  voice  may  win
or  destroy  confidence,  the  statement  may  by  its  firmness  overcome  counter-
motives,  or  by  its  uncertainty  reinforce  them  "  (Muensterberg,  Psychology
and  Industrial  Efficiency,  pp.  294  and  296).  See  ante,  my  Chapter  VIII.
p.  134.  l  The  Principles  of  Scientific  Management,  p.  59.


362  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

"  trying."  But  women  and  girls  seem  to  judge  their
working  lives  by  reference,  not  to  these  things,  but  to
other  and  "  non-economic  "  considerations.

I  have  already  quoted  the  Ruskin  College  student,
who  had  "  known  girls  of  good  position  work  ten
hours  a  day  for  nine  shillings  a  week,"  and  who
believed  "  that  the  attraction  is  purely  the  independ-
ence thus  gained."  Wage-labour,  that  is  to  say,  in
the  Great  Industry  is  felt  by  many,  if  not  most,  of
the  women  and  girls  engaged  in  it  to  represent  a
deliberate  choice  of  "  independence  "  as  against  the
dependence  of  an  unpaid  member  of  a  family.  And
even  for  those  who  come  from  homes  where  the
men  receive  high  wages  the  alternative  of  dependence
is  now  becoming  more  consciously  intolerable.

The  very  existence  of  the  Great  Industry  means
that  most  of  the  commodities  and  services  which  used
to  be  produced  by  the  unpaid  and  unorganised  work
of  the  female  members  of  the  average  household  are
now  produced,  with  an  enormously  increased  economy
of  labour,  by  the  paid  and  organised  work  of  men  and
women  in  factories,  laundries,  schools,  offices,  and
hospitals.  In  the  four-roomed  tenements  which  are
the  typical  homes  of  the  new  industrial  cities  x  there
is  nothing  for  the  girl  to  do  who  has  left  school  and
has  not  gone  to  work,  which  she  feels,  or  her  mother
feels,  to  be  really  worth  doing,  and  therefore  com-
patible with  self-respect.  Everything  that  was  inter-
esting, even  though  it  was  laborious,  in  the  women's

1  The  British  Census  of  1911  showed  that  a  larger  number  of  families
(almost  exactly  two  million)  lived  in  four-roomed  tenements  than  in  tene-
ments with  any  other  number  of  rooms.


OH.XIH ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 363

arts  of  the  old  village  is  gone.  Clothes  are  bought
ready-made  ;  food  is  bought  either  ready-cooked,
like  bread,  and  jam,  and  fish,  or  only  requiring  the
simplest  kind  of  cooking.  There  is  no  room  for  more
than  one  pair  of  hands  at  the  little  stove,  and  nothing
is  left  for  the  unmarried  daughter  but  darning  and
sweeping.  Above  all,  in  the  noisy  living-room  there
is  no  possibility  either  of  privacy  or  of  free  and
intimate  companionship.  There  results,  therefore,
a  mass  of  inarticulate  unhappiness,  whose  existence
has  hardly  been  indicated  by  our  present  methods  of
sociological  enquiry.1

When  I  was  in  Boston,  U.S.A.,  in  1910,  a  lady,  who
collected  the  stamps  which  represent  the  elementary
savings  of  girls  and  women  in  the  Boston  laundries
and  poorer  kind  of  factories,  most  kindly  consented,
at  my  request,  to  ask  those  of  them  whose  confidence
she  had  gained  whether  they  were  happy.  The
answers  at  the  time  surprised  me  greatly.  I  expected
to  hear  those  complaints  about  bad  wages,  hard
conditions,  and  arbitrary  discipline,  which  a  body  of
men  working  at  the  same  grade  of  labour  would
certainly  have  put  forward.  But  it  was  obvious  that
the  question,  "  Are  you  happy  ?  "  meant  to  the  girls
"  Are  you  happier  than  you  would  have  been  if  you
had  stayed  at  home  instead  of  going  to  work  ?  "
And  almost  every  one  of  them  answered  "  Yes."

At  - -  Laundry,  "  dismal  and  murky,  but  fair

1  The  same  causes,  combined  with  a  rising  standard  of  self-respect,  have
made  working-class  girls  in  America,  and  to  a  less  degree  in  England,  prefer
factory-labour  to  the  domestic  service  where  the  dependence  of  their  home
is  largely  repeated.


364  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

in  management,"  six  Irish  girls,1  between  sixteen  and
thirty  years  old,  were  asked  if  they  were  happy  and
why.  "  They  answered  emphatically — Yes."  "  One
said  that  work  '  took  up  her  mind/  she  had  been
awfully  discontented."  Another  that  "  you  were  of
some  use."  Another  "  thought  it  was  because  the
hours  went  so  much  faster.  At  home  one  could  read,
but  only  for  a  short  time.  Then  there  was  the  awful
lonesome  afternoon  ahead  of  you."  "  Asked  a  little
girl  with  dyed  hair  but  a  good  little  heart.  She
enjoyed  her  work.  It  made  her  feel  she  was  worth
something."

At Laundry  the  first  six  girls  asked  all  gave

as  their  first  reason  for  happiness  that  the  work
"  takes  up  your  mind,"  and  generally  as  the  second
reason,  "  It's  awful  lonesome  at  home,"  or  "  There  is
an  awful  emptiness  at  home."  On  the  other  hand,
a  girl  with  nine  brothers  and  sisters  was  happy  in  the
collar-packing  room  just  because  "  it  was  so  awful
lonesome,"  and  she  could  enjoy  her  own  thoughts.
"  So  far  only  one  girl  has  said  that  she  was  happy  at
work  because  of  the  money."

At  the  Laundry  an  Irishwoman,  who  had

married  an  Italian,  said,  "  Sure  I  am  always  happy.
It  leaves  me  no  time  to  think."

At  the Laundry  one  girl  was  weeping  quietly.

Her  father  had  sold  the  house,  and  was  moving,
apparently  into  a  better  position  in  another  city.
"  She  would  not  work  now,  but  would  stay  at  home
with  her  mother,  where  it  would  be  so  awful  lone-

1  The  word  "  girl "  is  used  in  America  for  a  larger  proportion  of  the
female  sex  than  in  England.


CH.XIII ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 365

some."  "  I  was  awful  happy  in  the  laundry  and  I
knew  so  many  girls,  but  now  I  won't  know  no  one."
'  Two  little  Italian  girls  told  me  they  were  happy,
but  they  would  be  happier  if  their  mother  let  them
go  out  evenings  now  and  then.  They  never  go  out
except  to  work.  Italian  girls  are  so  strictly  kept."

At  the  -  -  Hosiery  three  girls  said  they  were  very
happy  at  work.  ;'  The  reasons  they  gave  were  the
usual  ones."  "  It  took  up  one's  mind — doing  nothing
made  one  nervous  "  (i.e.  produced  the  condition  which,
in  Chapter  IV.,  I  called  "  baulked  disposition ").
"  Another  girl  said  that  '  when  she  didn't  work,  she
was  always  thinking  of  dead  people,  but  work  always
made  her  cheer  up  directly.'  '

The  reasons  given  by  the  comparatively  few  girls
and  women  who  said  that  they  were  not  happy  were
nearly  as  informing  as  the  "  usual  "  answers.  Some
of  the  older  women,  most  of  them  apparently  married,
had  "  trouble  at  home  "  so  serious  that  they  were
unable  to  forget  it  at  work.  At  one  extremely  rough
laundry  "  a  dear  little  Englishwoman "  said  that
she  was  not  happy  "  because  the  place  was  so  narsty
and  the  girls  were  all  loose  (which  is  true)  and  none
of  them  'ad  deep  feelin's.  I'm  just  by  meself."
One  "  fat  and  lazy  Jewess,"  by  exception,  hated
the  physical  exertion :  "Me  happy  ?  No.  How
could  I  be  happy  and  work  so  hard  ?  "  But  the  most
important  exceptions  were  two  girls  who  had  imagina-
tion enough  to  conceive  of  a  life  which  was  neither
that  of  the  home  as  they  knew  it  nor  that  of  the
factory.  "  A  nice  girl  in  -  —  Hosiery  said  she  was


366  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

not  always  happy.  '  I'd  like  to  be  away  some  day.
I  don't  mean  home  alone,  but  I  could  have  a  com-
panion and  go  off  in  the  country  some  day.  I'd  like
it  better  than  working.'  '  "A  Russian  girl  from
the  power-machine  room  at  the  -  -  Factory  came  to
see  me  last  night.  I  asked  her,  and  she  said  No.
At  first  she  could  not  tell  why.  I  asked  her  if  she
would  like  to  do  nothing.  She  said, '  Oh,  no ;  I  am  not
happy  idle.'  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  I
mentioned  the  phrase  '  ladies  and  gentlemen,'  and  she
said,  '  Now  I  can  tell  you  why  I  am  not  at  work
happy.  I  am  not  among  ladies  and  gentlemen.'
She  was  afraid  she  was  not  hearing  the  best  English,
and  they  did  not  know  how  she  felt."

I  believe  that  in  England,  or  any  other  industrial
country,  an  enquirer  with  the  same  genius  as  my
Boston  informant  for  inspiring  confidence,  and  the
same  patience  in  eliciting  truthful  descriptions  of
complex  states  of  feeling  from  those  whose  psycho-
logical vocabulary  consists  perhaps  of  twenty  or
thirty  words,  would  obtain  much  the  same  results.

The  problem  which  such  evidence  raises  has  two
different  sides.  In  the  first  place,  women  are  clearly
now  entering,  to  an  increasing  degree,  into  the  organ-
ised paid  work  of  the  Great  Industry,  and  the  Great
Industry  must  be  judged  by  its  effects  on  working
women  as  well  as  working  men.  Though  women
see  the  bad  conditions  of  their  work — low  wages,
monotonous  occupation,  and  the  rest — against  the
background  of  worse  conditions  at  home,  yet  those
bad  conditions  exist,  and  must  be  improved.


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 367

And  in  the  second  place,  the  background  itself,
the  domestic  environment  of  the  Great  Society,  must
be  submitted  to  a  new  analysis.  Part  of  that  analysis
will  involve  the  whole  tremendous  problem  of  sex-
relation.  Our  confused  sexual  instincts  seem  to
correspond  to  a  confused  history  of  the  evolution
of  various  instinctive  or  conventional  sexual  arrange-
ments in  the  distant  past,  which  only  had  in
common  the  fact  that  sexual  intercourse  was  fre-
quent, and  that  the  majority  of  human  children,
like  the  majority  of  the  offspring  of  other  animals,
died  young.  From  the  beginning  of  civilisation
philosophers  and  legislators  have  attempted  to  con-
trive schemes  which  should  secure  that  the  sex-relation
should  be  regularly  and  rationally  organised,  and
that  all  children  should  be  both  well-born  and  safely
brought  to  maturity.  Those  schemes  have  either
never  been  adopted  or  have  failed.  At  the  end  of
life  most  men  have  looked  back  upon  their  own
sexual  history  with  shame,  and  many  women  upon
theirs  with  anger.  It  was  when  the  Athenian  Greeks
were  at  the  height  of  an  experiment  in  social  organisa-
tion, which  in  other  respects  was  one  of  the  most
brilliantly  successful  ever  known,  that  Euripides,
who  understood  better  than  any  other  man  of  his,
or,  perhaps,  of  any  succeeding  time,  the  woman's
point  of  view,  makes  Medea  say,  "  Of  all  beings
born  to  life  and  intelligence  we  women  are  the  most
unhappy."  x  If  we  are  to  succeed  at  a  point  where
the  Athenians  failed,  we  shall  require  not  only  all  the

1  Euripides,  Medea,  231.


368  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

knowledge  which  is  being  accumulated  by  the  physio-
logists and  psychologists,  but  all  the  courage  and
flexibility  of  Plato's  imagination,  and  more  than
Plato's  sympathy  with  the  hard-pressed  and  dis-
inherited of  both  sexes.

Both  the  fact  that  an  increasing  number  of  women
are  now  in  the  paid  service  either  of  the  Great  In-
dustry or  the  State  itself,  and  therefore  find  that
their  economic  prospects  depend  on  State  policy,
and  the  increasing  urgency  of  the  political  problems
affecting  marriage  and  the  family,  make,  I  believe,
Women's  Suffrage  one  of  the  necessary  conditions  of
any  successful  adaptation  of  the  Great  Society  to  our
inherited  nature.  The  immediate  effects  of  Women's
Suffrage  will  not  be  wholly  good.  If  as  large  a
proportion  of  women  are  enfranchised  as  of  men,  it
will  mean  the  instant  doubling  of  the  constituencies
by  the  addition  of  millions  of  voters  without  experi-
ence, largely  indifferent,  and  of  whom,  at  present  in
England,  a  greater  proportion  than  of  the  present
male  voters  cannot  be  brought  to  the  poll  except  by
the  sort  of  "  whirlwind  campaign "  which  is  so
expensive  that  it  can  only  be  organised  by  the  great
capitalist  "  interests."  If  not  more  than  a  fraction
of  the  women  are  to  be  immediately  enfranchised,
the  only  proposals  which  seem  to  have  any  chance  of
acceptance  would  confine  that  fraction  to  the  com-
paratively small  body  of  unmarried  or  widowed
householders  who  now  enjoy  the  Municipal  vote.
I  have  fought  as  candidate  five  London  Municipal
elections  under  the  existing  law,  and  I  know  that  in


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 369

a  poor  district  that  body  of  women  includes  a  serious
proportion  who  are  more  bitterly  anti-social  than  any
other  class,  who  hate  the  very  idea  of  the  central
or  local  State,  of  rates  or  taxes,  and  of  paying  for
the  education  of  "  other  people's  children "  or  the
improvement  of  "  other  people's  houses."  Many  of
the  differences  between  men  and  women  voters  are
due  to  circumstances  and  education.  Some  of  them
(though  the  secondary  psychology  of  sex  has  received
very  little  serious  attention)  may  be  found  to  be  due
to  a  difference,  showing  itself  rather  by  the  average
of  large  groups  than  by  the  comparison  of  individuals,
in  their  inherited  type.  Common  speech  suggests,  and
my  own  limited  experience  of  women  in  public  life
goes  to  confirm  it,  that  an  able  woman  is  more  likely
to  be  influenced  by  that  tendency  to  substitute  feeling
for  calculation  in  what  I  have  called  "  instinctive
inference "  l  than  an  equally  able  man,  that  she
feels  more  keenly  on  personal  questions,  and  that
"  principles  "  are  apt  to  be  for  her  solid  entities
adhered  to  without  exception  and  with  passionate
loyalty,  rather  than  working  indications  of  conduct  in
a  world  where  every  instance  differs  from  every  other.
The  women  followers  of  Marx  or  Kropotkin  in  social
agitation,  or  of  Froebel  in  education,  are  apt  to  be
more  intransigeant  than  the  men.2  One  sometimes

1  Pp.  231  et  seq.

*  One's  judgment  in  this  respect  is  due,  of  course,  to  a  vague  estimation
of  many  hundred  instances.  But  it  may  be  illustrated  by  the  position  held
by  Frau  Rosa  Luxemburg  ("  die  rote  Rosa  ")  in  the  German  Social  Demo-
cratic Party ;  or  by  that  of  Miss  Emma  Goldman  among  the  American
revolutionists ;  or  by  the  part  played  by  Saint  Theresa  in  the  Counter
Reformation.  Mr.  Keir  Hardie  puts  the  feeling  about  women,  which  I  have
tried  to  express  above,  in  a  more  optimistic  form  when  he  says,  "  Whilst

2B


370  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY  PT.  n

fears  their  influence  in  the  adjustment  of  the  relations
between  Church  and  State,  and  in  the  ever-pressing
danger  of  European  War.  But  when  the  question  is
the  simple  one  of  Vote  or  No  Vote,  these  considera-
tions, important  as  they  are,  seem  to  me  to  be  less
important  than  the  need  both  of  the  consent  and  of
the  active  assistance  of  half  the  human  race  in  the
task  of  organising  human  Happiness.

The  same  difficulties  are  involved  in  the  possession
by  women  of  the  powers  arising  from  private  property
as  of  the  powers  arising  from  the  vote,  and  in  most
civilised  states  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  as-
similate the  position  of  the  two  sexes  in  that  respect.
The  fact  that  many  women  now  hold  railway  shares
in  their  own  name  may  ultimately  alter  in  some
degree,  not  the  position  of  women  shareholders  as
compared  to  those  of  men  shareholders,  but  the
position  of  all  shareholders,  men  or  women,  in  relation
to  the  professional  railway  managers  or  the  associa-
tions of  railway  servants.  And  it  may  also  ultimately
happen  that  the  possession  of  the  vote  by  women
may  alter,  not  the  relation  of  women  voters  to  men
voters,  but  the  relation  of  all  voters  to  the  other
factors  in  the  national  Will-Organisation.  If,  for
instance,  the  joint  constituency  of  men  and  women
proves  to  be  more  bound  by  abstract  formulas  and
less  ready  to  allow  for  the  imperfection  of  human


her  influence  in  politics  will  be  humanising,  it  will  also  be  strengthening,
and  much  of  the  chicanery  and  knavery  of  political  life  will  go  down  before
her  direct  march  upon  the  actual "  (The  Case  for  Women's  Suffrage,  1907,
p.  83).  In  a  vast  and  complex  society  that  which  is  instinctively  felt  to  be
"  actual  "  may  in  fact  be  very  abstract.


CH.XIH ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 371

nature  than  was  the  constituency  of  men  only,  that
may  be  an  added  reason  against  the  direct  election  of
judges,  or  against  the  direct  responsibility  of  members
of  representative  bodies  for  the  administration  of  such
nationalised  industries  as  the  Post  Office  or  the
Railway  system.

But  while  in  such  matters  as  the  ownership  of
land  or  railway  stock,  or  the  bare  act  of  electing  a
candidate,  the  woman  is  merely  a  substitute  for  a
man  who  would  otherwise  exercise  the  same  rights,
in  many  important  respects  the  entry  of  women
into  the  larger  life  of  the  Great  Society  constitutes
an  addition  and  not  a  substitution  of  social  force.
Women  are  fed  and  housed  and  clothed  already,  and
no  one  proposes  that  they  should  either  be  exter-
minated or  should  consume  less  wealth  than  they  do
at  present.  If  they  do  more  work,  think  more
thoughts,  and  offer  a  larger  contribution  of  skilled
organisers  than  they  do  at  present  to  the  grievously
insufficient  personnel  by  which  the  Great  Society  is
held  together,  we  shall  be  drawing  a  larger  dividend
from  the  same  body  of  human  capital.

But  the  position  of  men  and  women  in  the  Great
Industry  is  only  one  of  a  multitude  of  problems  in
the  Great  Society  whose  solution  is  best  approached
by  the  criterion  of  Happiness.  In  applying  that
criterion  it  is  often  convenient  to  use  Aristotle's
quantitative  conception  of  the  Mean.  Although
particular  Pleasure-sensations  are  caused  by  the
stimulation,  whether  weak  or  strong,  of  particular


372  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

dispositions,  the  feeling-tone  of  Pleasantness,  and  still
more  the  state  of  consciousness  called  Happiness,
may  accompany  the  stimulation  of  all  or  any  of  our
dispositions,  provided  that  that  stimulation  takes
place  neither  in  excess  nor  defect  but  to  the  right  or
"  Mean  "  degree.  If  we  use  this  formula,  it  becomes
easy  to  see,  for  instance,  that,  outside  as  well  as  inside
the  hours  of  industrial  employment,  failures  in  the
organised  production  of  Happiness  are  often  due  to
the  fact  that  "  Division  of  Labour  "  has  been  carried
to  a  point  where,  in  respect  of  some  particular  function,
the  mass  of  mankind  have  too  little  given  them  to
do  for  Happiness,  and  a  few  responsible  persons  too
much.  The  old  objection  to  the  "  dull  uniformity  "
of  Socialism,  which  has  always  seemed  so  absurd  to
the  Socialists,  and  which  nevertheless  so  constantly
reappears,  is  due  to  a  half-conscious  generalisation
in  the  ordinary  man's  mind  from  innumerable  cases
where,  under  public  or  philanthropic  management,
the  function  of  Thought  has  been  loaded  on  to  a
single  overworked  brain  and  denied  to  the  many
who  in  that  respect  are  underworked.  One  sees  the
girls  from  an  orphanage  file  along  the  street.  Each
girl  walks  by  a  companion,  not  chosen  by  herself
with  all  the  painful-delightful  scheming  of  girlhood,
but  by  the  tired  mistress  who  gives  a  general  order
that  the  girls  nearest  to  each  other  in  height  should
walk  together.  They  all  wear  clothes  and  boots  and
carry  umbrellas  of  the  same  pattern.  A  uniform
hat-ribbon  may  be  necessary  for  recognition  and
discipline  ;  but  one  feels  that  if  each  girl  had  chosen


CH.XIH ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 373

her  necktie  and  umbrella,  even  from  a  dozen  equally
cheap  patterns,  both  the  choosing  and  the  wearing
would  have  been  a  source  of  positive  Happiness.
If  a  committee  of  each  class  in  such  an  institution
chose  dinner  daily  from  the  list  of  possible  dishes,
six  girls  would  spend  ten  minutes  each  in  the  effort
of  Thought  instead  of  one  matron  spending  ten
seconds.  But  the  girls  would  enjoy  their  effort  and
the  matron  does  not.

The  fact,  again,  that  there  is  a  Mean  in  our  powers
of  forming  intimate  acquaintance,  that  it  is  a  joy  to
know  enough  people  and  a  weariness  to  know  too
many,  affects  not  only  the  group-organisation  of  the
Great  Industry,  but  also  the  life  of  the  industrial
worker  during  the  now  slowly  lengthening  interval
between  his  work  and  his  sleep.  The  young  unmarried
artisan,  or  shopman,  or  clerk  generally  lives  either
in  a  one-roomed  lodging  with  a  defect  of  intimate
association  or  in  a  great  boarding-house  with  an
excess  of  it.  Outside  his  factory  or  office,  he  may
either  know  no  one  to  speak  to  or  have  a  hundred
nodding  acquaintances  and  no  friend.

Many  opponents  of  the  socialistic  tendency  in
modern  politics  are  honestly  convinced  that  this
departure  from  the  Mean  in  the  use  of  human  faculties
is  a  necessary  result,  both  of  the  collectivist  type
of  organisation,  and  of  dependence  upon  exceptional
public  spirit  as  a  directing  social  force.  The  repre-
sentative or  the  philanthropist  is,  they  believe,
compelled  by  the  nature  of  his  being  to  do  his  fellow-
men's  thinking  for  them,  and  to  think  of  them  as  if


374  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

they  were  all  alike.  It  is  only  when  you  leave  man-
kind as  far  as  possible  "  free  "  to  direct  their  own
lives  that  they  will,  it  is  argued,  each  for  himself,
contrive  a  working  approximation  to  the  Mean.  At
this  point  the  anarchist-communist  and  the  indi-
vidualist defender  of  property  are  often  in  very
real  sympathy.  Hodgskin  and  Proudhon  were
perhaps  the  two  ablest  leaders  in  the  nineteenth-
century  revolt  against  property  as  the  enemy  of
freedom.  But  both  of  them  ended  in  believing  that
their  ideal  would  be  best  attained  by  the  defence  of
property  against  the  State.  In  England  to-day  Mr.
Belloc  and  Mr.  Chesterton,  while  attempting  to
re-create  the  ideal  of  Catholic  peasant  proprietorship
in  a  world  of  railways  and  factories,  often  find  them-
selves in  alliance  with  those  interests  which  have  no
ideals  beyond  the  rapid  making  of  large  fortunes.

The  present  form  of  the  doctrine  that  Happiness  is
better  attained  by  Laissez-Faire  (secured  either  by
the  existing  rights  of  property  or  by  some  kind  of
anarchism,  or  by  such  a  combination  of  the  two  as
the  "  Associative  "  or  "  Distributive  "  State)  than
by  either  the  Representative  State  or  organised
philanthropy,  may  perhaps  be  put  most  effectively  if
it  is  divided  into  two  arguments.  The  first  would  be
that  which  I  have  just  indicated,  that  new  social
arrangements  to  meet  the  needs  of  a  new  environment
cannot  be  invented  for  the  mass  of  mankind  by  a  few
professed  thinkers  and  politicians,  but  must  be  the
result  of  innumerable  experiments  in  which  as  many
individuals  as  possible  have  freely  taken  part.  The


CH.  xin OKGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 375

second  argument  would  be  that  no  new  arrangements
which  are  invented  can  work  well  unless  they  are
based  upon  the  permanent  freedom  of  each  individual
to  manage  his  own  life  and  to  use  or  abuse  his  own
property.

Both  arguments  include  a  real  and  important
element  of  truth.  With  regard  to  the  first,  it  is  true
that  Happiness  depends  upon  so  subtle  and  complex
a  harmony  of  innumerable  factors  that  the  mind  of
the  single  thinker  is  a  poor  substitute  for  the  intimate
experiences  of  the  many  minds  for  whom  he  thinks.
But  yet  the  very  complexity  and  interconnection  of
all  modern  social  problems  make  it  almost  impossible
for  social  invention  to  proceed  by  individual  experi-
ments, founded  upon  the  individual  needs  of  the
inventor  and  his  family,  and  imitated  by  their  neigh-
bours. If  any  large  proportion  of  the  young  clerks
and  apprentices  in  a  great  modern  city  are  to  form
the  right  kind  of  friendships,  it  is  not  enough,  though
it  is  important,  that  boys  or  parents  should  look  out
for  chances.  Some  one  possessed  of  special  power
or  knowledge  or  devotion  must  also  cause  "  overtime  "
to  be  so  regulated  and  restricted  that  the  lads  can
make  and  keep  appointments  with  each  other  after
work.  And  now  that  the  streets  are  nearly  as
noisy  and  as  full  of  moving  machinery  as  a  factory,
some  one  must  arrange  the  provision  of  quiet  places
(class-rooms  out  of  school  hours,  clubs,  gymnasiums,
or  parks)  where  lads  can  talk  and  play  together ;
or  tram-committees  or  railway  companies  must  grant
new  facilities  for  carrying  them  to  the  spots  from


376  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

which  country  walks  can  begin.  We  now  take  the
continuous  discovery  and  immediate  spread  of
mechanical  inventions  for  granted,  because  we  grant
patents  for  them,  and  a  patentee  can  make  a  fortune
by  pushing  his  ideas.  But  no  patents  are  granted,
because  no  monopoly  is  possible,  for  inventions  in
social  organisation.  Though  it  may  occasionally  pay
a  railway  company  to  advertise  the  general  notion,
say,  of  country  walking,  the  inventors  of  the  Boy
Scouts  had  to  spend  unrewarded  years  in  laborious
propaganda,  and  in  the  still  more  laborious  collection
of  subscriptions,  before  their  ideas  could  be  made
effective.

While,  therefore,  it  is  true  that  social  (as  distin-
guished from  mechanical)  inventions  are  not  likely
to  be  made  at  all  in  the  Great  Society  unless  the
feelings  and  experience  of  many  individuals  are
brought  to  bear  upon  them,  it  is  not  true  that  such
social  inventions  will  often  be  effectively  made  unless
that  experience  is  interpreted  by  organised  effort,
inspired  by  "  non-economic "  motives.  And  those
motives  are  not  now  likely  to  be  sufficiently  strong
and  lasting  unless  they  are  made  either  by  individuals
of  exceptional  public  spirit  or  by  a  government  whose
direct  purpose,  however  imperfectly  carried  out,  is
the  general  good.  It  is  this  fact  which  renders  every
increase  in  the  articulateness  of  working  men  and
women,  in  the  power,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  more
public-spirited  among  them  to  bring  their  feelings
and  experience  and  ideas  into  the  common  stock,
so  important.  I  believe,  to  take  one  instance,  that  no


OH.  xni ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 377

more  fruitful  field  of  social  invention  now  exists  than
that  which  concerns  the  customs  of  average  family
life  in  the  new  industrial  districts.  Ought  the  sitting
and  cooking  room  of  a  family  of  six  persons,  with  an
income  of  thirty-five  shillings  a  week,  to  be  combined  ?
If  a  separate  sitting-room  exists,  should  it  be  used
and  if  necessary  warmed  every  day,  or  be  kept  tidy
and  unused  for  special  occasions  ?  Should  neighbours
"  call "  on  each  other,  or  should  a  respectable  girl
(like  the  Boston  laundry-worker  whom  I  quoted)
have  reason  to  fear  that  in  a  new  city  she  "  won't,"
except  by  chance  accident,  "  know  no  one  "  ?  If
calling  customs  exist,  should  the  social  intercourse
of  youths  and  maidens  approach  the  system  current
in  the  American  middle  class,  where  the  young  men
call  on  the  girls,  or  the  English  and  Scottish  tradition
that  the  call  must  be  ostensibly  on  the  parents  ?
How,  in  the  typical  tenement,  is  a  certain  measure
of  privacy  to  be  secured  for  an  unmarried  daughter,
either  spending  the  day  at  home  or  coming  home
after  her  work  ?  If  she  is  engaged  in  paid  outside
work,  what  proportion  of  her  wages  should  she  give
to  her  mother  ?  and  if  she  stays  at  home  to  help  her
mother  with  housework  and  the  care  of  the  younger
children,  what  pocket-money  or  dress-money  should
she  have  ?  The  circumstances  of  every  family  differ,
of  course,  from  those  of  every  other,  and  vary  them-
selves from  month  to  month.  But  the  main  outlines
of  the  problem  are  at  least  as  uniform  in  an  industrial
city  dependent  upon  one  or  two  standard  trades,  as
in  a  country  village,  or  in  the  "  residential  districts  "


378  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

inhabited  by  the  payers  of  income  tax.  The  rural
villagers  had  a  generation  ago  their  own  social  customs,
adapted  to  conditions  which  have  now  disappeared.
Handbooks  containing  the  social  customs  of  the
well-to-do  can  be  bought  for  a  shilling  by  those  who
have  lately  joined  that  class,  and  the  deliberate
reform  of  those  customs  is  discussed  with  extra-
ordinary concentration  and  skill  in  scores  of  "  problem
novels  "  and  plays.  But  in  spite  of  the  admirable
writings  of  Miss  Jane  Addams  and  Lady  Bell,1  one
feels  that  thought  about  social  customs  in  the  average
street  has  not  yet  either  been  directed  by  sufficient
knowledge  and  ability,  or  so  recorded  and  compared
as  to  prevent  the  best  ideas  being  forgotten  before
they  become  effective.

The  problem  of  inventing  new  social  customs  in
working-class  homes  involves,  indeed,  like  the  problem
of  inventing  social  opportunities  for  the  young  inde-
pendent worker,  a  much  more  complex  and  difficult
series  of  factors  than  does  the  corresponding  problem
under  middle-class  conditions.  A  well-to-do  family
can  live  where  they  like,  and  in  a  house,  within  wide
limits,  of  any  shape  or  size  that  they  choose.  The
working-man  has  to  live  near  his  work  in  a  house
built  by  a  great  company,  according  to  plans  narrowly
controlled  by  local  bye-laws.  An  annual  fortnight's
holiday  for  any  large  number  of  families  may  require
an  elaborate  agreement  between  the  local  education
authority  who  teach  the  children  and  the  manu-
facturing firms  who  employ  the  parents.  The  question

1  Cf.  Jane  Addams,  The  Spirit  of  Youth  and  the  City  Streets,  and  Lady
Bell,  At  the  Works.


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 379

whether  it  ought  to  be  the  custom  for  daughters  to
go  for  evening  walks,  depends  upon  the  opening  and
shutting  and  lighting  and  policing  of  the  nearest
public  park.

If,  therefore,  a  branch  of  the  Workers'  Educational
Association,  or  of  the  Co-operative  Union,  consisting
about  equally  of  men  and  women  of  the  working-
class,  would  work  on  this  problem  with  a  trained
woman  sociologist  who  had  access  to  the  customs  of
other  countries,  a  philanthropic  employer,  and  a
member  of  the  local  municipal  council,  the  best
conditions  of  invention  might  be  attained  ;  and  they
might  even  find  themselves  making  an  important
beginning  in  the  invention  of  social  customs  for  that
possible  English  society  of  the  future,  where,  as
now  in  New  Zealand  or  parts  of  Switzerland,
almost  the  whole  population  would  belong  to  one
"  class."  1

Such  an  enquiry  would  enable  those  who  took
part  in  it,  not  only  to  think  with  effect  upon  the
customs  of  the  average  home,  but  to  remember  that
which  it  is  so  easy  to  forget,  the  quantitative  relation
between  a  city  and  its  inhabitants.

1  The  working  population  of  the  great  American  cities,  consisting  as  it
does  so  largely  of  recent  immigrants,  is  far  less  articulate  and  self-directed
than  the  corresponding  population  in  an  English  city.  The  middle-class
members  of  the  hundreds  of  American  "  settlements  "  undertake,  therefore,
the  task  of  thinking  out  many  problems  which  English  settlement-workers
would  leave  alone.  The  book,  for  instance,  on  Young  Working  Oirls
(Houghton  Mifflin  Co.,  1913),  written  by  R.  A.  Woods  and  A.  J.  Kennedy,
from  the  results  of  an  enquiry  undertaken  by  two  thousand  "  social  workers,"
contains  curiously  minute  suggestions  for  the  invention  of  games  that
parents  can  play  with  their  children  (p.  71),  exhibitions  of  craftsmanship
by  immigrant  mothers  so  that  their  American-born  children  may  respect
them  (p.  73),  the  relation  between  fathers  and  daughters  (p.  78),  the  pocket-
money  of  girls,  and  tho  exhibition  of  "  model  tenements  "  with  model  house-
hold arrangements  (p.  158).


380  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY  FT.  n

Convenient  city  quarters  cannot  be  created  by
each  family  choosing  a  site  for  itself,  any  more
than  healthy  city  houses  can  be  built  without  bye-
laws.  The  width  and  direction  of  streets,  the
size  and  position  of  the  public  buildings  and  parks,
as  well  as  the  height  and  material  of  the  buildings,
must  be  finally  fixed  by  some  one  acting  on  behalf
of  the  whole  community.  The  science  of  City-
Planning  is  therefore  rapidly  developing  into  the
Master-science  of  the  material  conditions  of  modern
life.  But  when  one  looks,  for  instance,  at  the
beautiful  drawings  which  have  been  lately  prepared
by  a  body  of  citizens  for  a  new  Chicago,  one  feels
that  they  are  suited  to  giants  and  not  men,  or  at
least  only  to  the  gigantic  qualities  of  mankind.  It
is  a  good  thing  that  every  citizen's  heart  should  be
occasionally  stirred  by  seeing  the  tower  of  a  tall
municipal  office  against  the  sky-line,  or  by  standing
beneath  the  enormous  dome  of  a  museum.  But  ten
parks,  which  the  inhabitants  of  ten  quarters  can
reach  in  a  twenty  minutes'  walk,  are  better  than
one  park  ten  times  as  large  which  few  can  reach
without  losing  a  day's  work  ;  and  if  a  working-man's
wife  is  to  buy  the  family  supplies  in  comfort  shopping
streets  must  be  neither  too  distant  for  her  feet  nor
too  broad  for  her  eyes.

The  second  problem,  however,  in  the  relation
between  Freedom  and  social  invention  is  the  more
important.  Ought  all  social  enquiries  to  be  based
on  the  assumption  that  Freedom  is  the  absolutely
essential  condition  of  human  Happiness,  and  if  so,


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 381

what  does  Freedom  exactly  mean  ? In  considering
this  second  problem,  it  will  be  convenient  to  project
Freedom  on  to  the  same  plane  as  Happiness,  to  think
of  Freedom,  that  is  to  say,  not  as  an  external  social
arrangement,  but  as  the  state  of  consciousness  which
is  expected  to  result  from  certain  arrangements,  and
which  can  be  studied  in  relation  to  the  state  of
consciousness called Happiness. Common speech
has  always  insisted  on  the  close  connection  between
Freedom,  in  this  sense,  and  Happiness  or  Pleasantness.
A  man  feels  "  free  "  when  he  acts  at  his  "  pleasure."
And  those  who  agree  with  Tolstoy  and  Ibsen  and
Mr.  Shaw  that  Freedom  is  a  necessary  condition,  not
only  of  Happiness  but  of  Goodness,  sometimes  express
that  opinion  in  terms  of  "pleasure." When  I  was
in  America  in  1910,  a  quarrel  took  place  between
Mr. Conners of the  New  York  State  Democratic
organisation  and  Mr.  Charles  Murphy  of  Tammany
Hall. Mr.  Conners  issued  a  short  apologia  pro  vita
sua  in  the form of a newspaper interview. In
the  course  of  it  he  gave  as  the  main  justification
for his claim to be a better citizen than Mr.
Murphy :  "I  am  just  a  natural  man.  .  .  .  Murphy
is a politician for profit,  and I am a  politician
for  pleasure ;  and  I  propose  to  have  my  fun  out
of  it."  l

A  man  feels  "  free  "  when  his  acts  and  sayings
and  thoughts  seem  to  him  to  be  the  expression  of  his
most  real  and  spontaneous  motives.  It  is  true  that
some  men  will  never  in  that  sense  be  "  free,"  never

1  Boston  Evening  Transcript,  February  23,  1910.


382  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

enjoy  what  Mr.  Conners  calls  their  "  pleasure,"  even
though  they  are  as  completely  released  from  external
compulsion  as  a  modern  dividend-receiver  with
three  thousand  a  year  and  a  motor-car.  They  may
remain  the  slaves  of  convention  ;  their  minds  may  be
"  the  disused  rabbit-warrens  of  other  people's  opinions
and  prejudices."  l  Or  they  may  be  (as  Mr.  Conners
accused  Mr.  Murphy  of  being)  the  slaves  of  money,
unable  to  distinguish  the  getting  of  money  for  its  own
sake  from  that  free  activity  to  which  money  is  only  a
means.  Or  they  may  be  the  slaves  of  animal  passions
which  they  feel  not  to  be  their  real  selves.  Other
men,  as  the  later  Stoics  were  never  tired  of  pointing
out,  may  feel  as  "  free "  as  Epictetus,  even  though
they  are  in  a  state  of  economic  slavery  almost  as
complete  as  that  of  Epictetus.  Marcus  Aurelius
would  say  that  such  men  "  follow  nature,"  and  Mr.
Conners  that  they  are  "  natural  men."

But,  even  if  such  Freedom  is  possible  in  every
form  of  society,  the  actual  organisation  of  a  society
where  Freedom  is  held  to  be  all-important  will  be
different  from  that  of  a  society  in  which  Freedom  is
held  to  be  only  one  element  among  the  conditions  of
Happiness.  The  most  critical  point  in  that  difference
will  be  found  in  the  use  of  force  to  regulate  social
organisation.  The  man  against  whom  force  is  used—
who  is  arrested  by  a  policeman,  or  sentenced  by  a
judge,  or  shot  by  a  soldier — can,  at  the  moment,  be
only  called  free  by  the  most  paradoxical  of  Stoics.
And  not  even  a  Stoic  can  call  the  policeman,  or  judge,

1  Jane  Harrison,  Homo  Sum,  p.  25.


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 383

or  soldier  who  uses  violence  in  obedience  to  orders
and  without  inner  impulse  free  in  any  sense  of  the
word.  In  a  society,  it  is  therefore  sometimes  argued,
where  the  relation  of  Freedom  to  Happiness,  and  there-
fore to  social  good,  is  rightly  understood,  no  one  will
consent  or  be  asked  to  put  himself  in  such  a  position.
Violence  will  only  be  used  by  those  who  at  the  moment
feel  a  personal  impulse  to  punish  or  defend.  And
the  whole  cold-blooded  machinery  which  makes  men
alternately  inflict  and  suffer  violence  in  the  support
of  wars  which  they  do  not  desire,  or  property  rights
in  which  they  do  not  believe,  would  come  to  an  end.
It  is  this  that  Mr.  Shaw  means  when  his  Caesar  says,
after  Rufio  has  killed  a  murderess,  "  Had  you  set
yourself  in  the  seat  of  the  judge,  and  with  hateful
ceremonies  and  appeals  to  the  gods  handed  that
woman  over  to  some  hired  executioner  to  be  slain
before  the  people  in  the  name  of  justice,  never  again
would  I  have  touched  your  hand  without  a  shudder.
But  this  was  natural  slaying."  l

This  point  of  view  makes  Mr.  Shaw  an  admirable
influence,  both  destructive  and  constructive,  in  a
society  whose  main  task  is  to  adapt  a  new  intellectual
and  material  environment  to  the  permanent  facts  of
human  nature.  He  asks  us  in  effect,  "  Do  you,  as
the  world  now  is,  really  want  to  go  to  church,  or  keep
the  ten  commandments,  or  whip  your  children,  or
return  fifty  calls  a  month,  or  send  this  thief  to  prison  ?
And  if  not,  why  do  you  do  these  things  ?  "  There  is
no  one  who  is  not  the  better  for  being  required,  on

1  Three  Plays  for  Puritans,  p.  198.


384  THE  GKEAT  SOCIETY

pain  of  feeling  himself  to  be  ridiculous,  to  answer  such
questions.  But  the  formula  of  the  Mean  covers,  I
believe,  even  the  feeling  of  Freedom  ;  and  that  feeling
must  be  measured  against  other  conditions  of  Happi-
ness. If  we  treat  it  as  the  one  absolute  and  limitless
condition,  we  are  soon  driven  back  upon  the  ancient
fact  that  we  are  not  happy  if  we  always  do  what  we
want,  however  really  we  may  want  it.  The  most
"  natural "  and  independent  peasant  proprietor  on
a  fine  day  in  August  knows  that  the  brutal  conditions
of  the  material  world  will  compel  him  to  gather  in  his
crop,  although  he  desires  with  his  whole  soul  to  go
fishing ;  and  his  feelings  are  not  essentially  different
from  those  of  the  railwayman  who  goes  to  work
because  he  must  obey  his  foreman,  or  of  the  foreman
who  must  obey  his  manager.  Even  in  the  use  of
actual  violence  the  want  of  inner  impulse  may  some-
times be  compensated  for  by  other  factors  of  the
problem.  A  good-tempered  and  disciplined  policeman
is  a  dangerous  thing,  and  Mr.  Shaw  does  well  to
remind  us  of  that  fact.  He  may  obey  orders  as
cheerfully  in  a  bad  cause  as  in  a  good.  His  head-
breaking  is  not  "  natural."  But  the  justification
of  his  existence  under  proper  political  control  is  that
he  breaks  so  few  heads.  A  soldier  who  is  bleeding
to  death  may  draw  comfort  from  the  knowledge
that  the  man  who  shot  him  was  really  angry,  and
that  his  was  a  "  natural  slaying,"  yet  he  may,  on  the
balance  of  advantage,  prefer  not  to  be  shot  at  all.
And  if  he  is  a  man  of  exceptional  intelligence,  he
may  know  that  the  "  natural "  anger  of  his  opponent


CH.  nn OKGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 385

was  created  by  the  "  artificial "  calculations  of  his
opponent's  prime  minister.

In  the  Balkans,  during  1912  and  1913,  Europe  had
an  excellent  object  lesson  on  the  whole  problem.
There  was  much  slaying,  and  nearly  all  of  it  was
"  natural."  The  Bulgarians  when  fighting  the  Turks,
and,  later  on,  the  Greeks  and  Bulgarians  after  their
quarrel,  genuinely  hated  each  other.  Future  his-
torians may  declare  that  that  fact  lent  a  reality  to
their  actions  which  was  wanting  in  the  cold  and
impotent  compromises  of  the  European  Concert,
just  as  the  fact  that  they  were  intellectually  sure  of
what  they  were  fighting  for  greatly  increased  their
military  efficiency.1  And  yet  to  me  the  most  hopeful
event  of  the  year  was  the  appearance  at  Scutari,  in
1912,  of  a  small  but  well  -  equipped  international
force  of  good-tempered  blue- jackets,  who  turned  the
Montenegrin  garrison  out  with  a  maximum  of  com-
pulsive power  and  a  minimum  both  of  anger  and
of  casualties.

In  applying  Aristotle's  formula  of  the  Mean,  we
must,  however,  remember  that  Aristotle  himself
inevitably  over-simplified  it.  He  proposed  with
regard  to  each  human  disposition  in  each  relation  of
life  a  single  type  of  "  mean  "  conduct  which  all  men
should  aim  at.  He  further  taught  that  the  single
environment  in  which  men  could  reach  the  Mean
was  that  of  the  Greek  city-state.  To  us,  however,  in
our  complex  and  changing  world,  there  are,  in  the
use  of  each  of  our  dispositions,  innumerable  different

1  See  ante,  p.  82.

2c


386  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Means  adapted  to  different  individuals  and  different
circumstances.  The  differences  between  individuals
may  be  due  either  to  inheritance  or  training  ;  either,
as  the  Eugenists  say,  to  "  nature  "  or  to  "  nurture."
To  every  man  as  he  is  born  the  personal  conditions  of
a  happy  life  are  different,  and  they  are  changed  by
everything  that  happens  to  him  from  without.  What-
ever his  upbringing  may  be,  the  man  of  poetic  genius
will  be  unhappy  as  a  manual  labourer  ;  and,  whatever
his  natural  tastes  may  have  been,  the  trained  student
(however  unhappy  he  may  be  as  a  student)  will  be
also  unhappy  for  years,  if  not  for  life,  if  he  is  made
a  manual  labourer.  If,  indeed,  a  man's  "  nurture  "
has  not  corresponded  to  his  "  nature,"  the  possibility
of  anything  like  complete  Happiness  may  have  been
destroyed  for  him  before  he  is  thirty.

Already,  therefore,  throughout  the  Great  Society,
the  organisation  of  public  education  is  being  steadily,
though  slowly  and  insufficiently,  turned,  with  the
help  of  such  psychological  knowledge  as  is  now
available,  to  discover  in  time  the  special  faculties  of
children,  and  to  start  them  on  that  course  of  life  for
which  they  are  best  fitted.  All  social  reformers  are
also  aiming  at  such  a  manipulation  of  the  taxation
of  accumulated  wealth  (through  death-duties  and  the
like),  that  no  man  shall  be  made  extremely  unhappy
either  by  a  sudden  alteration  of  lifelong  habit  or  by
such  initial  poverty  as  shall  prevent  him  from  develop-
ing his  powers.  And  meanwhile  we  are  a  little
ashamed  of  the  insistence,  for  instance,  of  the  average
sedentary  journalist,  that  what  is  the  mean  for  him


OH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 387

must  be  the  mean  for  every  one  else,  and  that  a
working  man  who  finishes  on  Saturdays  at  1  P.M.
a  fifty  hours'  week  of  hard  manual  toil,  ought  to  play
football,  instead  of  looking  on  at  it,  from  3  P.M.  to
4-30  P.M.

Not  only,  again,  is  the  Mean  different  for  different
men  according  to  their*  nature  and  nurture,  but  for
each  man  the  Mean  consists,  not  in  uniformity,  but  in
variety.  The  dinner  which  was  my  Mean  yesterday
will  not  be  my  Mean  to-day,  simply  because  I  had
it  yesterday.  When  men  at  different  times  in  their
lives  seek  Happiness  in  different  types  of  good  conduct,
they  may  not  be  "  inconsistent."  If  they  would
realise  this,  many  men  would  be  saved  a  great  deal
of  unavailing  regret  for  their  own  past,  and  of  useless
censure  of  those  who  do  not  for  the  moment  accept
their  present  ideals.  Lord  Rosebery,  when  in  1912
he  unveiled  the  statue  of  a  public-spirited  county
councillor,  said  :  "  Any  reflecting  mind  could  point
out  the  enormous  advantage  that  there  was  in  local
service,  where  one  could  live  at  home  and  enjoy  one's
own  neighbourhood  and  the  company  of  one's  lifelong
friends  in  working  for  results  which  one  saw  immedi-
ately fulfilled  all  round  one,  as  compared  with  political
service,  which  occupied  one  in  a  close  and  often
intolerable  metropolis,  co-operating  nominally  with
many  with  whom  one  politically  differed,  for  purposes
which  one  was  not  likely  to  see  realised  in  one's  life-
time, and  which  it  was  not  always  certain  that  one
particularly  wished  to  see  fulfilled.  .  .  .  There  were
daring  and  ambitious  spirits  wishing  to  mix  in  the


388  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

turmoil  of  the  world  and  raise  themselves  high  above
the  common  herd  who  would  always  prefer  the  last,
but  the  tranquil  and  contented  philosopher  would,
like  Sir  Robert  Dundas,  always  prefer  the  first."  l
Lord  Rosebery  probably  remembered  that  in  his
own  youth  he  would  have  shrunk  from  the  idea  of
lifelong  service  as  a  Mid-Lothian  county  councillor.
And  yet  both  he,  in  preferring  national  politics  in  his
youth  and  local  politics  in  his  late  middle  age,  and  a
county  councillor  who  had  preferred  local  politics  in
youth  and  national  politics  later,  may  have  been
consistent  in  aiming  at  the  Mean.  And  not  only  in
the  arrangement  of  our  whole  lives,  but  also  in  the
choice  of  work  and  recreation  for  each  week  or  year,
we  approach  nearest  the  Mean  when  we  can  enjoy
such  a  degree  of  variation  as  is  consistent  with  the
use  of  our  new  powers  over  nature.  As  Mr.  Wells  says  :
"  The  human  spirit  has  never  quite  subdued  itself
to  the  laborious  and  established  life ;  it  achieves  its
best  with  variety  and  occasional  vigorous  exertion
under  the  stimulus  of  novelty  rather  than  by  constant
toil." 2  The  "  Sabbatical  year,"  for  instance,  of
the  American  professor  may  slowly  extend  (perhaps
as  more  frequent  Sabbatical  half-  or  quarter-years)
to  many  other  occupations.

Sometimes,  however,  one  seems  to  be  brought
nearer  to  the  quantitative  conditions  of  human
Happiness  by  the  conception  of  Economy  than  by

1  Times,  January  18,  1912.

*  Daily  Mail,  December  20,  1910.  See  also  Mr.  Roosevelt  (American
Ideals)  with  respect  to  political  duties.  "  Accordingly  we  ought,  as  far  as
possible,  to  have  a  system  requiring  on  the  average  citizen's  part  intermit-
tent and  not  sustained  action."


OH.  xni ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 389

that  of  the  Mean.  Few  of  us  can  now  conceive  of  a
social  organisation  which  will  be  so  successful  in
attaining  the  Mean  that  it  will  not  be  necessary  for
men  and  women  to  work  harder  and  more  continu-
ously, and  to  think  more  painfully,  than  is  consistent
with  the  complete  Pleasantness  of  the  moment,  or
with  the  complete  Happiness  of  a  whole  life.  We  are
so  placed  in  the  world  that,  even  under  the  best
social  arrangements  which  we  can  invent,  it  will  only
be  by  a  painful  excess  of  effort  in  our  production  of
wealth  that  we  shall  avoid  a  still  more  painful  defect
in  our  consumption  of  wealth.  Our  aim,  therefore,
must  be  the  Economy  of  that  excess  of  effort  rather
than  its  abolition.  The  most  obvious  and  most
urgent  form  of  that  Economy  is  a  nearer  approach  to
equality.  In  a  community  whose  members  started
life  with  approximately  equal  opportunities  of  satisfy-
ing their  desires,  the  severity  of  the  average  working
day  would  be  a  fair  measure  of  the  average  desire  for
wealth.  It  may  be  that  we  should  find  ourselves  in
such  a  community  working  harder  on  the  average
and  producing  more  than  at  present,  but  my  own
expectation  is  that  we  should  work  somewhat  less
hard,  even  if,  in  consequence,  we  produced  rather
less.

Another  Economy  would  result  from  that  better
adaptation  of  individual  natural  and  trained  faculty
to  individual  function  for  which  I  have  just  argued.
The  man  whose  work  fits  him  will  do  many  times  as
much  of  it  without  painful  excess  of  effort  as  the
man  who  is,  by  temperament  or  training,  or  both,


390  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY  PT.  H

unfitted  for  it.  The  particular  form  of  effort  of  which
this  is  most  true  is,  perhaps,  that  kind  of  organising
Thought  which  is  the  special  need  of  the  Great
Industry  and  the  Great  Society.  To  be  a  "  good
man  of  business,"  a  man  must  be  able  to  interpret
written  or  printed  documents  as  easily  as  concrete
persons  and  things,  to  think  intensely  on  a  series  of
unconnected  and  superficially  presented  problems,
not  because  they  interest  him,  but  because  they  must
be  immediately  dealt  with  ;  and  to  inhibit  his  thinking
on  each  point  the  instant  that  it  is  time  to  deal  with
some  other  point.  Some  men  will  do  such  work  for
four  or  five  hours  every  day  with  a  sense  of  mastery
and  delight,  even  although  they  find  it  necessary  to
work  another  three  or  four  hours  daily  against
the  grain.  To  others  even  the  shortest  spell  of
it  is  an  agony.  This  is  often  the  case  with  the
men  of  artistic  temperament  and  training,  who  are
accustomed  to  get  their  results  by  waiting,  in  the
attitude  of  creative  effort,  upon  their  subconscious
intellectual  processes.1  Liszt,  who  did  more  creative
work  in  a  day  than  would,  if  it  had  been  spread
over  a  week,  have  been  sufficient  to  kill  an  average
stockbroker,  used  to  say :  "  Art  is  easy ;  Life  is
difficult." 2

1  See  ante,  Chapter  X.

1  I  have  read  that  in  some  parts  of  India  the  natives  call  this  type  of
Thought  "  bunderbust,"  and,  being  themselves  incapable  of  it,  are  amazed
that  the  sahibs  can  endure  so  much  of  it  without  suicide.  But  the  evidence,
as  in  JEsop's  fable,  comes  from  the  "hunter"  and  not  from  the  "lion,"
and  one  is  left  even  in  this  case  with  a  doubt  whether  there  an  increased
economy  of  effort  would  not  result  in  India  from  an  arrangement  by  which
a  larger  proportion  of  "  bunderbust "  were  left  to  those  natives  who  are
specially  fitted  for  it,  and  a  less  proportion  to  the  admittedly  overworked
sahibs.


CH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 391

If  we  more  often  used  Happiness  instead  of
efficiency  as  our  social  criterion,  it  might  be  easier
than  it  is  now  for  specialised  business-men  to  realise,
in  this  respect,  the  limitation  of  their  ordinary  fellow-
citizens.  The  English  National  Health  Insurance
Act  of  1911  and  the  regulations  founded  upon  it,  have
resulted  in  the  issue  to  the  general  public  of  a  series
of  printed  papers  which  a  trained  official  working  at
full  speed  would  master  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and
the  creation  of  a  number  of  recurring  duties  to  which
he  would  give  two  or  three  minutes  a  week.  But
the  mass  of  helpless  irritation  and  suffering  which
these  requirements  have  created  in  the  untrained
public  is  so  large  as  to  make  it  possible  that  the
whole  course  of  English  political  development  may
be  diverted  by  it  for  a  generation.

The  National  Insurance  Act  is  only  one  instance
of  a  danger  which  continually  attends  the  present
socialistic  trend  of  the  Great  Society,  and  of  which
those  who  believe  that  that  trend  is  both  necessary
and  good  must  take  careful  heed.  As  long  as  the
Great  Society  continues,  even  under  the  most  care-
fully reformed  conditions,  and,  still  more,  as  long  as
we  are  engaged  in  the  process  of  its  reformation,  we
must  submit  to  the  Division  of  Labour ;  and  the
Division  of  Labour  will  involve,  if  it  is  to  be  effective,
a  certain  degree  of  compulsion.  That  compulsion
may  be  direct,  as  when  we  compel  all  parents  to  send
their  children  to  school,  or  all  landlords  to  keep  their
houses  in  a  sanitary  condition,  or  all  youths  to  serve
in  the  army ;  or  indirect,  as  when  the  Poor  Law


392  THE  GREAT  SOCIETY

Guardians  offer  work  to  unemployed  persons,  or
secondary  schools  offer  education  to  qualified  children,
under  stated  conditions,  or  when  an  election  or
referendum  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  every
citizen  will  think  and  vote.  In  either  case  the  man
who  draws  up  the  necessary  regulations  is  a  trained
and  specialised  enthusiast,  a  keen  "  educationist,"
or  doctor,  or  military  officer,  or  politician.  They
all  believe  that  the  efforts  which  they  require,  and
which  are  so  easy  to  themselves,  will  make  those
from  whom  they  require  them  both  better  and
happier.  But  all  their  requirements  converge  on  to
the  unspeciahsed  child  or  citizen  to  whom  none  of
them  is  easy.  A  spread  of  the  spirit  of  Economy
in  this  respect,  a  common  sense  which  shall  prevent
each  specialist  from  asking  or  obtaining  more  than
his  fair  share  of  his  neighbour's  painful  effort,  is  a
very  real  necessity  at  our  present  stage  of  democratic
evolution.

Yet  the  conceptions  both  of  the  Mean  and  of
Economy,  necessary  as  they  are  for  every  Organisation
which  regulates  our  relation  to  our  neighbours,  still
leave  something  undescribed  which  we  feel  to  be  an
essential  condition  of  the  good  life.  Aristotle,  in  one
of  those  conversational  flashes  which  lie  in  wait  for
his  readers  on  almost  every  page  of  the  Ethics,  says  :
'  Virtue  is  rightly  defined  as  a  Mean,  and  yet  in  so
far  as  it  aims  at  the  highest  excellence,  it  is  an
Extreme."  *  No  social  Organisation  is,  we  feel,  good

1  Ethics,  bk.  ii.  6. 17,  KOTO,  fi^v  rty  ovcriav  KO.I  TOI>  \6yov  rbv  ri  rjv  eivai
\£yovra  neffbrr)?  ivrlv  17  apenfi,  Kara  8£  TO  apiarov  Kal  rb  e5  dx-pir^s.


OH.  xm ORGANISATION  OF  HAPPINESS 393

which  does  not  contain  that  element  which  Aristotle
here  calls  the  Extreme.

If  I  try  to  make  for  myself  a  visual  picture  of  the
social  system  which  I  should  desire  for  England  and
America,  there  comes  before  me  a  recollection  of
those  Norwegian  towns  and  villages  where  every  one,
the  shopkeepers  and  the  artisans,  the  schoolmaster,
the  boy  who  drove  the  post-ponies,  and  the  student
daughter  of  the  innkeeper  who  took  round  the
potatoes,  seemed  to  respect  themselves,  to  be  capable
of  Happiness  as  well  as  of  pleasure  and  excitement,
because  they  were  near  the  Mean  in  the  employment
of  all  their  faculties.  I  can  imagine  such  people
learning  to  exploit  the  electric  power  from  their
waterfalls,  and  the  minerals  in  their  mountains,
without  dividing  themselves  into  dehumanised  em-
ployers or  officials,  and  equally  dehumanised  "  hands."
But  I  recollect  also  that  the  very  salt  and  savour  of
Norwegian  life  depends  on  the  fact  that  poets,  and
artists,  and  statesmen  have  worked  in  Norway  with
a  devotion  which  was  not  directed  by  any  formula  of
moderation.  When  I  talk  to  a  New  Zealander  about
the  future  of  his  country,  and  about  the  example
which  she  is  creating  of  a  society  based  upon  the
avoidance  both  of  destitution  and  superfluity,  I
sometimes  feel  that  she  may  have  still  to  learn  that
the  Extreme  as  a  personal  ideal  for  those  who  are
called  by  it,  is  a  necessary  complement  of  the  Mean
in  public  policy.

But  here  we  reach  the  point  where  our  examination
of  the  conditions  of  Happiness,  and,  indeed,  the  whole


394  THE  GEEAT  SOCIETY

method  of  psychological  analysis,  ceases  to  be  a
sufficient  guide  to  life.  It  is  rather  through  Philo-
sophy than  Psychology,  rather  through  a  general
interpretation  of  the  universe,  than  through  a
detailed  study  of  so  small  a  part  of  it  as  our  own
minds,  that  the  call  of  the  Extreme  makes  itself  most
clearly  heard.


INDEX


Addams  (Jane),  evolution  of  thought

of,  205
on  respectability  (Spirit  of  Youth

in  City  Streets),  68
on  social  customs  (ibid.),  378
Adult  School  Association,  303
Adult  schools  (Manchester  Guardian),

304
Advertisement,  psychology  of,  134-

136

Aesthetic  feelings,  105
Agricultural  peasant  proprietorship,

310

"  Aidos,"  178
Altruism,  sham,  165
America, racial feelings of immi-
grants, 10

Declaration  of  Independence,  99
Anaxagoras, physiological theories

attacked  by  Socrates,  25,  26
Anaximenes'  philosophy,  74
Angell (R. N.), war and habit
(Patriotism  under  Three  Flags),
80
Animal  instinct,  37

psychology  formerly  ignored,  39
Animals,  "  trial  and  error  "  process,

48  et  seq.
Anti  -  intellectualism. See Intel-

lectualism

Aram  (Eugene),  194
Arbitration,  international,  177
Aristophanes' attack on Socrates,

25

Art,  Bernard  Shaw  on,  164
Aristotelian  Society  on  instinct  and

reason,  44

Aristotle,  "  Court  of  Appeal,"  111
Kthics,  341

happiness  defined,  69
happiness  in  Ethics,  109
Logic,  260
logic,  rules  of,  186
logic,  scheme  of,  226
on  civilisation,  71


Aristotle  on  habit,  81
on  love  (Ethics),  149
on  mean,  385
on  purpose,  162
on  the  Kelts  (Ethics),  77
on  the  passions,  70
on  virtue  (Ethics),  82,  392
referred  to  by  Professor  Murray,

151
Association, extended in dialectic,

260

Associations, non-local, as will-
organisation,  309
non-local,  as  will-power,  335
Assyrian  Empire,  organisation,  9
Athens  and  British-Indian  Govern-
ment, 208

Attitude  of  mind,  200
Aubrey,  and  Hobbes  on  reading  and

thinking,  201

Austen  (Jane),  Mansfield  Park  and
thought,  193

Bacon's  Novum  Organon,  226
Bagehot (W.), on British Cabinet

(English  Constitution),  281
on  custom,  76
on  imitation,  126
and  Reform  Act,  143
sociology  of  (Physics  and  Politics),

123
Baldwin  (Professor),  on  suggestion,

133

Balkan  war,  and  hatred,  385
Barrow  (L.-Col.  G.  de  S.),  on  fear,

98

Bashkirtseff  (Marie),  on  despair,  107
Baumann (A. A.), quoted (Fort-
nightly Review),  321
Bawdon  (Prof.),  on  pain,  104
Beddard  (F.  E.),  on  fear  of  reptiles,

55
Bell  (Lady),  cited  (At  the Works),

378
Benevolence,  doctrine  of  natural,  91


395


396


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


Bentham  (J.),  and  Lord  Brougham,

116

attitude  towards  pleasure,  112
explanation  of  social  impulses,  147
his  opinions  and  influence,  100
John  Stuart  Mill  and,  163
on  "  Anarchical  Fallacies,"  235
on greatest happiness principle,

113

on  personal  and  public  good,  145
on  prison  management,  114
on  the  arts,  113
philosophy  of,  74
pity  as  stimulant  to  public  duty
(Official Aptitude maximised),
155

politics  of,  115
position  as  psychologist,  40
wealth  of,  198
Benthamism,  116,  117
Bergson  (H.),  lectures  of,  236

reference  to,  326

Berlin,  and  government  by  fear,  97
Bernhardi  (General),  173
Besant (Mrs. A.), and county

councils  (Fabian  Essays),  323
Binet,  on  habit  (La  Fatigue  intel-

lectuelle),  83
Biology,  of  hatred,  169
Bismarck,  influence,  90

on  will  and  thought,  234
Blanc  (L.),  Organisation  of  Labour,

327
Blouet  (Paul),  on  learning  French,

anecdote,  204
Bourne  (G.  C.),  on  eugenic  principles,

59
Bowley  (A. L.), and  mathematics

and  sociology,  228
Bowring,  and  "greatest  happiness,"

117

Boy  Scouts,  376
Brain,  Comte  on  the,  123

physiology,  204
Briggs  (Sir  J.),  on  official  discipline

(Naval  Administration),  291
Bright (John), and public work,

166
British  Psychological  Association  on

instinct  and  reason,  44
Brougham  (Henry,  Lord),  and  Ben-
tham, 116

Buddha,  love  for  all  life,  155
Budget  Protest  League,  319
Burt  (Cyril),  on  Experimental  Tests

of  General  Intelligence,  31
Business  and  psychological  method,

31

thought-organisation  of,  296
will-organisation  of,  312


Butler  (Bishop),  on  personal  or
public  good  (Upon  Human
Nature),  145

Cabinet,  British,  276  et  seq.
and  party  system,  283
and  Pitt,  282

as  thought-organisation,  280
Bagehot  on,  281

discussion  by  correspondence,  282
during  war,  283
Gladstone  on,  278,  280
Low  on,  282,  289
oral  method,  276
psychology  of,  279
reconstruction  of  methods,  289
Bosebery  on,  282
Sidgwick  on,  278
Walpole  and,  277,  280
West  on,  278,  279
Calvin,  and  reason,  237
Cannan  (E.),  on  war  (Economic  Out-
look), 176
Cannon  (W.  B.),  on  physiology  of

emotion,  70

Capitalist  organisation,  311
Carlyle (Thomas),  on "  pig  -  philo-
sophy," 110

Carnegie  (A.),  opinion  of  war,  19
Cavendish,  wealth  of,  197
Censorship  question,  206
Challaye, on political parties (Le

Syndicalisme),  325
Chamberlain  (J.),  resignation  from

Cabinet,  282

Children,  habit  among,  77
China,  Bowring  and  war  in,  117
Chirol (Sir V.), on Indian Civil

Service  (Times),  308
Church  of  England,  danger  of  anti-

intellectualism,  47
Civil Service and Parliament,
thought-organisation  compared,
285

and  Pepys,  291
attendance  of  officials  in  House  of

Commons  proposed,  288,  291
effect  of  "  official  "  methods,  286
reconstruction of methods, 290

et  seq.

relation  to  government,  274,  333
Sir  J.  Briggs  on  official  discipline,

291
Civilisation,  71

and  thought-fostering,  194
influence  of  love  and  hatred  on,  170
modification  of  fear,  93
Civilised  life,  change  in  conditions,  3
Clodd (E.), Huxley on politics
(T.  .P.'s  Magazine),  320


INDEX


397


Collectivism,  growth  of,  316
Collectivists  and  organised  will,  309
Commerce,  thought -organisation  of,

297

Committee  system,  House  of  Com-
mons, 274
advocated,  288
local  government,  293
Communication (means of) and

thought-organisation,  298
Communication  of  thought,  varieties,

256

personal  and  impersonal,  298
Communities,  will  of,  305  el  seq.
Comte  (A.),  on  the  brain,  122
on  love,  121
philosophy  of,  74
Positivism,  145
positivism  in  England,  120
Religion  of  Humanity,  156
Conservative  thinkers,  characteristic

of,  236

Contemplation,  111
Coomaraswamy (A. K.), quoted

(Spolia  Zeylanica),  345
Co-operation,  international,  339
Cornwall  (Sir  E.),  on  electioneering

(Daily  Mail),  317
County councils, Mrs. Besant on,

323

Cowper-Temple,  16D
Cracroft, on mercantile prosperity

(Essays  on  Reform),  6
Cromwell  (0.),  on  originating,  87
Crowd,  psychology  of  the,  120

theory  of  the,  143
Curiosity  as  a  disposition,  48  et  seq.
Custom,  76

Dante,  and  thought,  245
Darwin (C.), effect of Origin of
Species,  123

on  evolution,  122

wealth  of,  198
Darwin  (E.),  40

Davis  (M.  M.),  work  on  Tarde,  126
Democracy  and  Great  Industry,  315
Determinism  and  free-will,  25,  26
Devonshire,  Duke  of,  cited,  277

reasoning  power,  258

resignation  from  Cabinet,  282
Dewey  (Prof.  J.),  on  thinking,  188
Dialectic,  258  et  seq.

advantages  of,  260

and  industrial  workers,  299

decline  in,  258

fostered  by  communal  means,  303

lacking  in  House  of  Commons,  270

method  of,  261

requirements  of  oral,  263


Dickens  (Charles),  and  unconscious
thought,  190

Disposition  and  environment,  127
baulked,  181
control  of,  68

division  for  social  psychology,  34
elementary  versus  complex,  29
stimulation  of,  60,  64,  69
term  explained,  22

Disraeli  as  public  speaker,  320

Divination,  232

Division  of  labour,  391

Dougherty (Sir James), on civil
servants'  ability,  229

Dreaming  and  thinking,  54

Durkheim,  on  imitation,  126

Dyott  (Sir William), terror and
crime,  96

Ecclesiasticus,  16
Economy  of  effort,  389
Education  and  habit,  79

of  working  classes,  83

organisation  of  higher,  337

psychology  of  fear  in,  95
Education  Act,  1902,  337
Efficiency,  industrial,  348  et  seq.
Electoral  system,  and  property  or-
ganisations, 336

as  will-organisation,  316  et  seq.

Sir  E.  Cornwall  on,  317
Eliot  (George)  and  Positivism,  121
Emotion  of  thought,  245
England,  trend  of  anti-intellectual-
ism in, 47. See also United
Kingdom, and names of in-
dividual institutions
English  trade  unionists,  feelings  on

which  they  worked,  151
Environment,  and  stimulus,  65

social,  and  industry,  354
Epicureanism,  108
Equality,  doctrine  of,  91
Erasmus's  way  of  life,  195
Eugenics,  386

and  social  psychology,  59
Euripides  on  woman  (Medea),  367
European  war,  the  present  menace,  46
Expression  and  thought,  203
Extreme  and  mean,  393
Events,  psychological, defined by
McDougall,  251

Fabian Society and Essays in

Socialism,  323
Factory system horrors, theory

prolonging,  45

Faculties  and  Environment,  144
Family,  organisation  of  the,  377
Famine,  lessening  fear  of,  6


398


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


Fatigue  and  habit,  84
Fear,  definition  of,  93
impulse,  anecdote,  132
instinct,  and  imitation,  128
types  of,  61,  71
Federal  government,  170
Feeling  and  sensation,  104

process  and  thought,  241,  243
Ferenczi, on "  psycho-analysis,"

quoted  in  footnote,  148
Fite  (Warner),  quotation  on  Love

(Individualism),  156
France,  danger  of  syndicalist  philo-
sophy in,  47
political  solidarity,  10
Franciscan  order,  change  in  disci-
pline, 86
Frazer  (J.  G.),  Golden  Bough  cited,

237

Free  will  and  determinism,  25,  26
Freedom  and  happiness,  381  et  seq.

defined,  381
French  army,  change  in  discipline,

86

Revolution,  effect  on  habit,  80
syndicalists'  philosophy,  46
Freud,  on  sexual  theory,  70

on  forgotten  experiences,  etc.,  72
"psycho-analysis"  quoted  in  note,

147-148
Froebel,  system,  202

Gall,  and  phrenology,  123

Galton  (Sir  Francis),  eugenics  and

social  psychology,  59
Gang  system,  355
Garvin  (J.  L.),  and  Germany,  239
Gautama. See  Buddha.
Gautier (Theophile),  on  expression,

203

General  Medical  Council,  335
Germany, influence of Marx and

Bismarck,  90
Gild  system  as  will-organisation,  327

et  seq.

Gladstone,  as  public  speaker,  320
on British  Cabinet ("  England's
Mission." Gleanings of Past
Years),  278,  280
power  as  Prime  Minister,  284
Godwin  (William),  on  reason,  40
Goldstone  (F.  W.),  anecdote,  269
Government,  administration,  recon-
struction of  methods,  338
and  aid  to  thought,  195
and  national  will,  305,  339
by  fear,  97

changes  in  will-organisation,  334
influence  of  form  of  speech,  279
oral  methods  of  English,  263


Government,  Parliamentary,  "  geo-
graphical "  characteristics,  324
Graham  (Sir  J.),  and  control  of  dis-
cussion, 291

Great  Commerce,  typical  forms,  297
Great Industry and organising

thought,  390

during  nineteenth  century,  315
private  property  and,  309,  314
representative  government  and,

315

term  defined,  3
typical  forms,  297
Great  Society,  and  aids  to  thought,

194

and  environment,  65
and  happiness,  9
and  inclination  f  or  war,  182
and organisation of happiness,

342  et  seq.

and  organising  thought,  390
and  standardisation,  222
and  war  problem,  173
crowds  in,  142
danger of instinctive inference,

238

factor  of  hatred  in,  170
fears  for  continuing  stability,  15
future  will-organisation,  329
imagined  effect  of  dissolution,  14
importance  of  habit,  78
instinctive  action impossible in,

239

intellectually  formed  by  special-
ists, 15

made possible by thought dis-
covery, 53

necessity  of  habit,  86
need  of  philosophy,  82
organisation  by  social  psychology,

21

provision  for  thinkers,  198
purpose  of  education  in,  386
purpose  of  present  book,  20
requirements  for  thought  on,  221
signs  of  inward  tension,  10
socialistic  trend,  391
Syndicalist  organisation,  328
term  defined,  3

thought  against  intuition  in,  240
thought  and  outlook  in,  191
thought-organisation,  249  et  seq.
use  of  knowledge  in,  185
will-organisation,  Chapter  XII.
women  in,  361  et  seq.
Greatest happiness principle, 101,

111

Greece,  disunion  in  early  times,  10
Greek  moralists  on  habit,  81
natural  philosophers,  73


INDEX


399


Greek  thinkers'  failure  to  under-
stand social  forces,  16

Greeks,  power  of  habituation,  77

Griffuelhes,  quoted  (Bibliotheque  du
mouvement  social),  326

Grote  (G.),  and  general  good,  116

Guild. See  Gild.

Habit  and "  baulked disposition,"

180

and  disposition,  80
and  education,  79
and  fatigue,  84
and  thought,  82
breaking,  87
character  of,  77
increasingly  necessary,  86
insufficiency  of,  83
philosophy,  75
Hague peace tribunal, 171, 180,

340
Halevy (E.), on Helvetius and

Bentham,  100

Hall  (G.  S.),  analysis  of  fears,  61
Happiness,  7

and  freedom,  381  et  seq.

and  pleasure-pain,  99

and  scientific  management,  350

and  work,  344  et  seq.

assumed  as  aim of  government,

264

organisation  of,  Chapter  XIII.
and  industry,  342  et  seq.
and  personal  thought,  374
and  sex,  367
and  socialism,  343
and  women's  suffrage,  368  el  seq.
"  mean  "  degree,  372
versus  production  of  wealth,  342
women  in  industry,  361  et  seq.
Hardie (K.), Case for Women's

Suffrage,  quoted,  369
Harman  (Dr.  Bishop),  on  respecta-
bility, 68

Harmony  in  life,  70,  72
Harrison (J.),  Homo  Sum,  quoted,

382

Hatfield  (Chairman),  quoted,  296
Hatred,  natural,  385
Hearn (Lafcadio),  changing  condi-
tions in  Japan,  8
Hedonism,  101,  111
Sidgwick  on,  119
Hegel  (G.),  120
Helvetius  and  Bentham,  100
Herodotus'  means  of  living,  196
Hobbes  (T.),  advantages  of  civilisa-
tion, 71

doctrine  of  fear  (Leviathan),  89
91,  92,  98


rlobbes  (T.),  explanation  of social

impulses,  147
influence as political scientist,

90

intellectual  processes  of,  201
philosophy,  74

Hobhouse  (L.  T.),  "  trial  and  error  "
process (Mind in Evolution),
50
Hobson ( J. A. ) on "  Scientific

management,"  cited,  350
Hodgson,  on  thought  and  volition,

199

Holland  (B.),  Life  of  Duke  of  Devon-
shire, 258,  277
House  of  Commons  and  House  of
Representatives (U.S.) con-
trasted, 270,  276
committee  system,  274
F.  W.  Goldstone  on,  269
individual  will  in,  273
lack  of  dialectic  in,  270
procedure, thought- versus  will-

organisation,  267
reconstruction  of  methods,  288
House  of  Lords,  76

reconstruction  of  methods,  288
House  of  Representatives  (U.S.)  and
House  of  Commons  contrasted,
270,  276
procedure,  274
Howard  (John),  horrors  of  English

prisons,  114
Huxley  (T.  H.),  on  habit  (Elementary

Physiology),  79
on  politics,  320
political  beliefs,  91
Hypnotism,  136

Icelandic  Sagas,  178
Ideas  and  memory,  209

natural  and  artificial,  212

Socrates  on  miscarriage  of,  261
Imagination  a  factor  in  public  spirit,
156

and  memory,  188

and  public  spirit,  166

forms  of  stimuli,  203
Imitation,  35

and  sympathy,  130

Bagehot  on,  124

disbelief  in,  127

instinct  of,  128,  129

psychology  of,  137

Tarde  on,  125

India,  need  of  native  thinkers,  208,
390

Pax  Britannica  in,  175
Individualists and organised will,
309,  311


400


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


Industrial  workers,  dialectic,  299
Industry  and  happiness  organisation,
342  et  seq.

and human psychology, 356 et
seq.

"  scientific  management," 348  et
seq.

Syndicalism  and,  325

thought-organisation  of,  297

will,  organisation  of,  312

women  in,  361  et  seq.
Inference. See under Instinctive

Inference

Inheritance,  Comte  on,  122,  124
Inhibition,  224
Inns  of  Court,  Benchers,  335
Instinct,  30

and  intelligence,  Chapter  III.

assisting  thought,  244

definition  of  word,  35

divining  power,  231

in  animal  kingdom,  37

phenomena  of,  36

versus  reason,  237
Instinctive  inference,  232

danger  of,  238

Intellectual work, hours of per-
formance, 197

Intellectualism and present anti-
intellectualism,  44,  46,  230

Dr.  A.  W.  Robinson  on  contrary
trend,  47

evils  of  utilitarian,  45

of  Utilitarians,  41
Intelligence,  30

independent  action  of,  38
International  arbitration,  177

co-operation,  339
Inter-racial  conciliation,  159
Italy,  effect  of  peace  in,  180

James (W.), and "  crowd-psycho-
logy," 126

and  imitative  tendency,  130
on  dispositions,  70
on  fatigue  (Principles),  84
on  habit  (Psychology),  78
on  laws  of  thought  (Principles),

187

on  philosophies  (Radical  Empiri-
cism), 231
on  suggestion,  133
on  thought  and  volition,  199
Jefferson  (Thomas),  and  Declaration

of  Independence,  99
Johnson  (0.),  Stover  at  Yale,  319
Jones  (Ernest),  Papers  on  Psycho

Analysis,  in  footnote,  148
Joseph  II.,  and  reason,  237
Journalism  and  public  opinion,  300


Judiciary,  relation  to  Government,
333


Kakise on Conscious Concomitants

of  Understanding,  261
Kelts,  indifference  to  danger,  77
Kennedy  (A.  J. ) . See  Woods  (R.  A. )
Kipling  (Rudyard),  81

public-school  types  of,  208
Knowledge,  co-ordination  of,  18
Kosmos,  107
Kropotkin (Prince  Pierre),  Mutual

Aid,  149

Labour,  division  of,  391

Labour. See  also  Industry,  Trade

Unions,  etc.
Lagardelle  quoted  (Bibliotheque  du

mouvement  social),  326
Lagerborg  (Professor),  on  pain,  104
Lamarck,  75

doctrine  of  inheritance,  122,  124
peace  and  degeneration,  179
Lamb  (Charles),  quoted,  183
Lane  (R.  N.  A. ). See  Angell  (R.  N. )
Lang  (C.  G.),  Archbishop  of  York,  on

property  (Times),  332
Langland,  Piers  Plowman,  quoted,

343
Language,  examined  as  a  disposition,

54-56

inheritance  of,  55

Lankester  (Sir  E.  Ray),  on  intelli-
gence and  instinct,  44
Lassalle  as  public  speaker,  320

and  Syndicalism,  327
Le  Bon  (G.),  Crowd  mentality  (The

Crowd),  139

on  crowds  and  the  "  Masses,"  143
on  imitation,  126
Leopold  I.,  advice  to  Queen  Victoria,

47
Liberty and intellectual activity,

206
Libraries,  public,  and  public  opinion,

302

Limited  Liability  Acts,  264
Liszt,  on  Art  and  Life,  390
Local  government  and  conduct  of

thought,  265
and Socialism, Mrs. Besant  on,

323

British,  240
gild  system,  328
psychology  of,  266
reconstruction  of  methods,  292
thought organisation criticised,

293
Local  Government  Act,  1888,  323


INDEX


401


Locke  (John),  opposition  to  absolut-
ism, 90
Logic,  186

and  memory,  223

London,  difficulty  of  thought  in,  194
Love  and  hatred,  145  et  seq.

and  political  economy,  161

Comte  on,  121

of  mankind,  163

Low  (S. ),  on  British  Cabinet  (Govern-
ance of  England),  282,  289
Lowell  (A.  L.),  Influence  of  Party  on

Legislation,  272
Loyalty,  sentiment  of,  149
Lucretius,  and  thought,  245

Macaulay  (T.  B.,  Lord),  attacks  on

utilitarianism,  117
M'Curdy  (C.  A.),  on  party  system,

272
McDougall(W.)>  definition  of  instinct

(Social  Psychology),  35
disbelief  in  imitation,  127
links  between  man  and  animals

(Social  Psychology),  55
love  instinct  (Social  Psychology),

146-147,  149
on  chief  human  instincts  (Social

Psychology),  41
on  conscious  psychological  events

(Psychology),  251
on  habit  (Social  Psychology),  78
on  sham  altruism,  165
on  Social  Psychology,  23
on  suggestion,  132  et  seq.
on  sympathy,  130,  131
on  thought,  185,  231
M'Kenna (Mr.), and censorship,

206
Maeterlinck  on  limitations  of  speech

(Treasures  of  the  Humble),  262
Maine  (Sir  Henry),  on  habit  (Popular

Government),  75
on  law,  76
Majorities  and  national  will,  306

rule  of,  337

Malinowski  (B.),  Family  among  the
Australian  Aborigines,  footnote,
148

Marbe,  Experimentell  -  psychologische
Untersuchungen  uber  das  Urteil,
261

Marshall  (A.),  on  thought  organisa-
tion in  industry,  297
Marshall  (H.  R.),  on  pain,  104
Martineau  (Harriet),  and  Positivism,

121
Marx  (K.),  and  Syndicalism,  327

work  of,  89
"  Masses,"  and  crowd  idea,  143


Mathematical  formulae and social

problems,  229

Mathematics  and  logic,  227,  230
Matter,  23

Mean,  and  social  happiness,  372,  393
Mean,  Aristotle  on,  385

examples  of,  387
Mechanical work and happiness,

352  et  seq.

Medical  Council,  General,  335
Medicine,  modern  conditions,  240
Melbourne (William Lamb, Vis-
count), cited,  279
Memory  and  imagination,  188
and  Record  contrasted,  209,  219
development  of,  214
limitations  of,  218
origin  of,  213
Mental  attitudes,  200
Method  in  industry,  348
Meyer  (Max),  on  pain  (Psychological

Review),  104

Miers  (Sir  Henry),  on  psychology  of
athletics  (Revival  of  Learning),
200

Mill  (James),  and  general  good,  116
influence  of  Bentham  on,  100
politics  of,  115
Mill  (John  Stuart),  and  Benthamism

(Autobiography),  163
and  Henry  Sidgwick,  119
dissatisfaction  of,  110
four  methods  (Logic),  226
Millet,  character  of  work,  159
Milton, on thought (Areopagitica),

245
Minorities,  rights  of  (Syndicalism),

326

Monasteries  and  thought,  193
Monboddo (Lord), early psycho-
logist, 40

Money,  psychological  value  of,  223
Montesquieu,  opposition  to  absolut-
ism, 90

Montessori  method,  202
Moral  sciences,  230,  234
Morgan  (L.),  birds  and  aesthetics

(Animal  Behaviour),  106
Morley (John, Lord), on political

study,  236

on  position  of  Prime  Minister,  283
Morris  (W.),  and  beauty  and  excel-
lence, 165

and  Syndicalism,  327
on  work  and  happiness  (Fabian

Tract),  347
Mother-love,  146

Muenster,  Reformation  and  habit,  80
Muensterberg  (Prof.  H.),  Psychology
and  Industrial  Efficiency,  360

2D


402


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


Mucnsterberg  (Prof.  H.),  on  psycho-
logy and '  business  (American
Problems,  and  Psychology  and
Industrial  Efficiency),  31

Municipal  bodies.  See  Local  Govern  -
raent

Municipal  Reform  Act,  1835,  264

Miinsterberg  (H.).  See  Muenster-
berg

Murray  (Gilbert),  "  Aidos  "  senti-
ment (Rise  of  the  Greek  Epic),
150

Music,  appeal  of,  154

Myers (C. S.), on Experimental

Psychology,  31
on  pain  (Experimental  Psychology),

103

opinion regarding instinct and
reason,  44

Napoleon,  on  originating,  87
National  Insurance  scheme  of  1911,

effect  of,  391

National  Union  of  Teachers,  336,  360
Nature  and  nurture,  386
Newman  (Cardinal),  aids  to  thinking

of,  203

Newspapers  and  public  opinion,  300
Nine  Hours  Bill,  152
Njals  Saga,  178

Obedience,  76

Odin,  on  Genese  des  grands  hommes,

197

Officials. See  Civil  Service
Opinion,  public,  formation,  298
Oral  method  hi  British  Cabinet,  276

English  government,  263
Ordericus  Vitalis,  on  aids  to  thought,

193

Organisation, existing forms ex-
amined, 249  et  seq.
of  happiness,  Chapter  XIII.
of  industry,  "  scientific  manage-
ment," 348  et  seq.
of  thought,  Chapter  XI.
of  will,  Chapter  XII.
term  defined,  250
Originality,  87
Owen  (R.),  and  Socialism,  323,  327

Paul  and  sympathy,  131

Paley's  theology,  Bentham's  influ-
ence on,  100

Palmerston's  Cabinet,  282

discussion  by  correspondence,  282

Parkes,  and  general  good,  116

Parliament.  See  Government ;
House  of  Commons ;  House  of
Lords ;  Politics,  etc.


Party  system,  271  et  seq.

and  Cabinet,  283

and  will-organisation,  321

Challaye  on,  325

M'Curdy  on,  272

thought  in,  265

Pattern,  psychology  of,  106,  107
Pax  Britannica  in  India,  175
Peace,  universal,  171,  177,  179
Peasant  proprietorship,  310
Peel  (Sir  Robert),  on  public  duty,
153

power  as  Prime  Minister,  284
Peel's  Cabinet,  discussion  by  corre-
spondence, 282
Pepys  (S.),  as  Civil  Servant  (Diary),

291
Pericles'  system  of  national  defence,

18

Persian  Empire,  organisation,  9
Philanthropy,  sentiment  of,  151
Philippine  war,  80
Philosophy,  beginnings  of,  258
Physical  sciences,  230,  234
Physiognomy  and  psychology,  161
Physiology and psychological
method,  31

and  psychology,  200
Pillsbury (Professor W. B.), on
imitation,  127

Psychology  of  Reasoning,  189

on  purpose,  225

on  reasoning,  188
Pitt  and  British  Cabinet,  282
Pity,  sentiment  of,  150
Place  (Francis),  and  general  good,
116

grief  and  principle,  110

on  Hobbes,  90

politics  of,  115
Plato,  dialogues,  257

on  habit  (Republic),  81

on  habit  and  philosophy,  88

on  the  arts,  113

Phaedo,  Socrates  against  Anaxa-
goras,  25

reference  by  Professor  Murray,  151

Republic,  262
Plimsoll  (Samuel),  effect  of  anger,

131

Poincare  (Henri),  mathematical  in-
spiration of,  190

Political  economy  and  human  love,
161

and  repression  of  kindness,  118

terminology,  24
Political  effort  in  America,  240
Political  methods  and  will-organisa-
tion, 316  et  seq.

corruption  in,  322


INDEX


403


Political  parties  as  thought-organisa-
tions, 295

as  will-organisation,  309  et  seq.
Politics,  Huxley  on,  320

Rosebery  on,  320
Positivism,  121
Priestley, influence on Bentham,

112
Prime  Minister,  Morley  on  position

of,  283

personal  power  of,  282  et  seq.
Prince, Dr. Morton (The Uncon-
scious), 72
Prison management, Bentham's

ideas,  114

Prisons,  John  Howard  and,  114
Problem,  224

Property  and  Great  Industry,  314
as  will-organisation,  309,  311,  331
distribution  of,  311
Dr.  Lang  on,  332
instinct,  309,  336
organisations  and  electoral  system,

336

women  and,  370

Prussian schools, antisocial -demo-
cratic policy,  160
"  Psycho-analysis,"  147,  148
Psychological analysis, effect on

social  institutions,  287
dispositions,  resume,  56-57
processes  practically  applied,  28,

31

terminology,  23
terminology,  requirements,  36
Psychology  and  human  life,  161
and  physiology.  200
human, adaptation of forms of

organisation  to,  249  et  seq.
human,  facts  classified,  251
human,  in  industry,  356  et  seq.
of  animals  formerly  ignored,  39
same  purpose  as  literature,  160
Public-school  system,  84
Public  spirit,  162,  163
and  imagination,  166
defined,  153

Purpose,  Aristotle  on,  162
Putumayo Indians, extermination
of,  170

Raphael's  drawing,  87
Reason  versus  instinct,  237
Recognition,  psychology  of,  105
Record  and  memory,  209,  216,  219
Religion,  future  of,  244
Rembrandt,  character  of  work,  88,

159
Repetition,  89

psychology  of,  106


Representation  of  the  people  acts,
143,  317

Representative  Government  and  the

Great  Industry,  315
Mrs.  Besant  on,  323
and  organised  will,  321

Respectability,  68

Revolution  of  1688,  90

of  1848,  mistake  of  promoters,  46

Ribot  (Th.),  anti-intellectualism  of

Psychology  of  the  Emotions,  43
on  sympathy  (Emotions),  130

Ricardo's  political  economy,  in-
fluence of  Bentham,  100

Ritchie  (C.  T.),  and  Local  Govern-
ment Act,  1888,  323

Robespierre  and  reason,  237

Robinson  (Dr.  A.  W.),  anti-intel-
lectualism, 47

Robinson  (H.  P.),  on  thought  in
monkeys  (Of  Distinguished
Animals),  51

Roman  Empire,  organisation  of,  9

Romilly  and  general  good,  116
legal  reforms,  Bentham's  influence
on,  100

Roosevelt  (Theodore),  on  advantages
of  variety,  388

Rosebery  (A.  P.  Primrose,  Earl  of),

on  British  Cabinet  (Peel),  282
on local and national service,

387
on  politics  (Daily  Chronicle),  320

Ross  (Prof.  E.  A.),  on  habit -breaking

(Social  Psychology),  87
on  imitation  (Social  Psychology),

126,  130
on  suggestion,  136

Rousseau,  and  psychology  of  educa-
tion, 95

Ruskin  College,  Oxford,  344

Russell  (Lord),  of  KUlowen,  and
reasoning  (anecdote),  189

Russia,  government  by  fear,  97

Russian  reformers,  reason  for  failure,
46

"  Sabbatical  Year,"  388

"  Sabotage,"  10,  351

Sagas,  Icelandic,  178

St.  Francis,  love  for  all  life,  155

St  Paul,  manual  labour  and  thought,

196

on  "  mortification,"  68
Saint  Pierre,  on  melancholy,  108
Schiller  (J.  C.  F.),  on  universal  love,

157

Schools,  and  thought,  194
Sciences,  moral  and  physical,  230

234

2D2


404


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


"  Scientific management " in in-
dustry, 348  et  seq.

Hobson  on,  cited,  350

Taylor  on,  351
Scientists,  reasoning  of,  259
Scott  (Sir  Walter)/ 158

intellectual  process  of,  202
Scouts,  Boy,  376

Seeley  (Prof.),  on  Government,  236
Self -consciousness,  205
Senate  (U.S.),  procedure,  274
Sensation  and  feeling-tone,  104
Sex  and  happiness  organisation,  367

psychology,  70
Shaw  (G.  B.)  on  art,  164

on  truth,  205

Three  Plays  for  Puritans,  quoted,

383

Sheep-dog's  thought  process,  52
Sheffield  saw-grinders'  "  rattening,"

118

Sidgwick (H.), and problem of
personal  or  public  good,  145

on  Gladstone  (Life),  278

on psychological hedonism

(Methods  of  Ethics),  119
Sieyes,  and  emotion,  235
Social  customs,  377
Social  psychology,  arrangements  of
facts,  27

and  eugenics,  59

definition  of  aim,  21

limitations  of  experiment,  33
Socialism,  and  happiness,  343

apprehensions  of,  143

rise  of,  323

Socialists  and  organised  will,  309
.Society,  Tarde's  definition,  136
JSocrates  and  nuances  of  dialectic,  262

attacks  theory  of  Anaxagoras,  25

on miscarriage of ideas (The
Clouds),  261

selection  of  disciples,  257

why  attacked  by  Aristophanes,  25
Specialism  and  economy  of  effort,
392

in  social  organisation,  16
Speech,  form  of,  in  governing  classes,
279

Maeterlinck  on  limitations  of,  263
Spencer (Herbert), influence on

thought,  8

Speyer  (Sir  E.),  quoted  (Times),  312
Spinoza,  manual  labour  and  thought,
196

on  political  study,  236
Spofforth  (Mr.),  on  bowling,  87
Standardisation  in  modern  life,  222
Standing orders and control of
thought,  294


State  as  will-organisation,  309
Stein's  sense  of  "  public  spirit,"  153
Stephen  (Sir  Leslie),  English  Utili-
tarians,on  intellectual  processes,
44

men's  guiding  influence,  157
Stimulation,  psychology  of,  61,  64
Strachey  (J.  St.  L.),  on  war  in  A  New

Way  of  Life,  173  et  seq.
Stumpf,  on  pain,  104
Suffrage, Women's,  and happiness
organisation,  368  et  seq.

Hardie  on,  369
Suggestion,  opinions  on,  132

term  inexact,  136
Sympathy,  35,  129

and  imitation,  130

and  pain,  131
Syndicalism,  11,  324
Syndicalist  philosophy,  46,  47
Syndicalists  and  organised -will,  309

Tacitus, on thought among the

Germans,  204
Tarde (Gabriel), distrust of the

"  masses,"  143
on  imitation,  125
on  society,  136
philosophy  of,  74
views  of,  126

Tariff  Reform  League,  321
Taylor (F. W.), on "Scientific
Management " (Shop  Manage-
ment, Principles of Scientific
Management),  351,  361
Telepathy,  138
Ten  Hours  Bill,  152
Tennyson,  and  war  feeling,  183
Terence,  on  fellow  feeling,  140
Thales's  philosophy,  74
Thorndyke  (Prof.),  "  trial  and  error  "
process  (Animal  Intelligence),  50
Thought,  organised  and  individual,

255

Thought-organisation,  249,  256,  298
and  literature,  300
and  working  classes,  303
in  business,  296
Parliamentary  and  official,  285
Titchener  (E.  B.),  Psychology  quoted
animal  descent,  36
on  pain,  103
on  pleasure,  110
on psychological measurements,

31,  32-33
on  thinking,  188
Psychology of  Thought-Processes,

245

Tolstoy  (L.),  and  peasant  life,  348
on  censorship,  207


INDEX


405


Tolstoy  (L.),  on  quietude,  194
Torquemada,  and  reason,  237
Trade  unions  as  will-organisations,

309,  325
Trevelyan  (G.  M.) on  John  Bright,

166
"  Trial and Error " process, 48

et  seq.
Turgenev (Ivan), on happiness

(Spring  Floods),  109

Universities,  local,  303

provincial,  337
University  organisation  and  thought,

196
Utilitarianism,  evils  of  intellectualist

bias  of,  45

lingering  influence,  100
Utilitarians,  arguments  of,  41
confusion  of  pleasure  and  happi-
ness, 111
Utility,  Sir  A.  Wedderburn  on,  114

"  Voice  magnetism,"  135
Volition,  199

Wages and "  scientific manage-
ment," 351
Wagner (Richard), unconscious

musical  production,  190,  226
way  of  life,  195
Walker  (Speaker),  quoted,  295
Walpole,  Sir  Robert,  and  Cabinet

system,  277,  280,  283
"  Wanderlust,"  34
War,  alternatives  necessary,  183
and  race-improvement,  172
cabinet  control,  283
expenditure,  alternative  benefits,

176

in  Europe,  present  danger,  46
Mr.  Carnegie  and  Colonel  Yate  on,

19

St.  Loe  Strachey  on,  175
Ward  (Lester  F.),  on  assistance  to
thought  (Applied  Sociology),  197
Watt  (H.  J.),  on  thought,  225
Wealth,  and  happiness  organisation,

342

and  will-organisation,  321
as  aid  to  thought,  198
distribution,  312
Webb  (Sidney),  intellectualism  and

feeling,  243
Wedderburn (Sir Alexander), on

utility,  114
Wellington (Arthur, Duke of), on

habit,  75

Wells  (H.  G.),  on  corporate  will,  307
on  variety,  388


West  (Sir  A.),  on  Gladstone  (No.  10

Downing  Street),  278,  279
Wharton (Edith), on happiness

(House  of  Mirth),  109
Whately (R., Archbishop), "  Eco-
nomic Man,"  314
on unconscious good action,

118
opinions, influence of Bentham,

100

Will,  30
Will  and  thought,  264,  277

conflict  of,  in  House  of  Commons,

273

national,  305

personal  and  corporate,  305
Will-organisation,  305
and  electoral  system,  316
and  great  industry,  310
and  Gild  system,  327
and international co-operation,

339

and  political  parties,  309
and  property,  309,  311,  331
and  Syndicalism,  324
and  Trade  unionism,  325
changes  in,  333
future  in  Great  Society,  329
Wilson (President Woodrow), and

aid  to  thought,  196
on thought-organisation in in-
dustry, 297

relationships  of men  (New  Free-
dom), 3

Women  and  property,  370
in  Great  Society,  361
in  industry, happiness  organisa-
tion, 361
Women's suffrage and happiness

organisation,  368

Woods  (R.  A.)  and  Kennedy  (A.  J.),
Young  Working  Girls  cited,
379

Wordsworth  (William),  effect  of  ex-
perience on,  158
on  freedom,  86
Wordsworth  family,  persistence  of

certain  type  of  learning,  58
Work  and  capacity,  390

scientific  management,  350
Work  and  happiness,  344,  392

Morris  on,  347
Workers' Educational  Association,

303

Working  classes,  dialectic,  299
means for thought-organisation,

303

and  happiness,  344
Wray  (C.),  quoted  (Lancet),  331
Writing,  function  of,  256


406


THE  GREAT  SOCIETY


Wundt, on feeling (Physiological
Psychology),  245

Yate  (Colonel),  on  Mr.  Carnegie  and

war,  19
York (Archbishop of). See Lang

(C.  G.)


Younghusband  (Sir  Francis),  anec-
dote (Within),  155


Zeno,  nature  philosophy,  71
Zola  (Emile),  imaginative  stimulus
of,  203


THE END


