The Origin of Human Races and the Antiquity of Man Deduced from the Theory of 'Natural Selection' (Alfred Russel Wallace, 1864)
===============================================================================================================================
Wallace's 1864 paper — the first application of natural selection to human races and antiquity, and his first step toward the break with Darwin. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (s777id13692520) — Journal of the Anthropological Society of London, vol. 2.


clviii


JOURNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY.


The  Origin  of  Human  Races  and  the  Antiquity  of  Man  deduced  from
the  theory  of  ‘‘  Natural  Selection^  By  Alfred  R.  Wallace,
Esq.,  F.Z.S.

Among  the  most  advanced  students  of  man,  there  exists  a  wide
difference  of  opinion  on  some  of  the  most  vital  questions  respecting
his  nature  and  origin.  Anthropologists  are  now,  indeed,  pretty  well
agreed  that  man  is  not  a  recent  introduction  into  the  earth.  All  who
have  studied  the  question  now  admit  that  his  antiquity  is  very  great ;
and  that,  though  we  have  to  some  extent  ascertained  the  minimum  of
time  during  which  he  must  have  existed,  we  have  made  no  approxi¬
mation  towards  determining  that  far  greater  period  during  which  he
may  have,  and  probably  has,  existed.  We  can  with  tolerable
certainty  affirm  that  man  must  have  inhabited  the  earth  a  thousand
centuries  ago,  but  we  cannot  assert  that  he  positively  did  not  exist,
or  that  there  is  any  good  evidence  against  his  having  existed,  for  a
period  of  a  hundred  thousand  centuries.  We  know  positively  that
he  was  contemporaneous  with  many  now  extinct  animals,  and  has
survived  changes  of  the  earth’s  surface  fifty  or  a  hundred  times
greater  than  any  that  have  occurred  during  the  historical  period  ;  but
we  cannot  place  any  definite  limit  to  the  number  of  species  he  may  have
outlived,  or  to  the  amount  of  terrestrial  change  he  may  have  witnessed.

But  while  on  this  question  of  man’s  antiquity  there  is  a  very
general  agreement, — and  all  are  waiting  eagerly  for  fresh  evidence  to
clear  up  those  points  which  all  admit  to  be  full  of  doubt, — on  other
and  not  less  obscure  and  difficult  questions  a  considerable  amount  of
dogmatism  is  exhibited ;  doctrines  are  put  forward  as  established
truth,  no  doubt  or  hesitation  is  admitted,  and  it  seems  to  be  supposed
that  no  further  evidence  is  required,  or  that  any  new  facts  can  modify
our  convictions.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  we  inquire.  Are
the  various  forms  under  which  man  now  exists  primitive,  or  derived
from  preexisting  forms  ;  in  other  words,  is  man  of  one  or  many  species  f
To  this  question  we  immediately  obtain  distinct  answers  diametrically
opposed  to  each  other  :  the  one  party  positively  maintaining  that
man  is  a  species  and  is  essentially  one — that  all  differences  are  but
local  and  temporary  variations,  produced  by  the  different  physical  and
moral  conditions  by  which  he  is  surrounded ;  the  other  party  main¬
taining  with  equal  confidence  that  man  is  a  genus  of  many  species,
each  of  which  is  practically  unchangeable,  and  has  ever  been  as  dis¬
tinct,  or  even  more  distinct,  than  we  now  behold  them.  This  differ¬
ence  of  opinion  is  somewhat  remarkable,  when  we  consider  that  both
parties  are  well  acquainted  with  the  subject ;  both  use  the  same  vast
accumulation  of  facts ;  both  reject  those  early  traditions  of  mankind
which  profess  to  give  an  account  of  his  origin  ;  and  both  declare  that
they  are  seeking  fearlessly  after  truth  alone.  I  believe,  however,  it
will  be  found  to  be  the  old  story  over  again  of  the  shield — gold  on
one  side  and  silver  on  the  other — about  which  the  knights  disputed ;
each  party  will  persist  in  looking  only  at  the  portion  of  truth  on  his
own  side  of  the  question,  and  at  the  error  which  is  mingled  with  his
opponent’s  doctrine.  It  is  my  wish  to  show  how  the  two  opposing


WALLACE  ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  HUMAN  RACES.  clix

views  can  be  combined  so  as  to  eliminate  the  error  and  retain  the
truth  in  each,  and  it  is  by  means  of  Mr.  Darwin’s  celebrated  theory
of  Natural  Selection”  that  I  hope  to  do  this,  and  thus  to  harmonise
the  conflicting  theories  of  modern  anthropologists.

Let  us  flrst  see  what  each  party  has  to  say  for  itself.  In  favour  of
the  unity  of  mankind  it  is  argued  that  there  are  no  races  without
transitions  to  others ;  that  every  race  exhibits  within  itself  variations
of  colour,  of  hair,  of  feature,  and  of  form,  to  such  a  degree  as  to
bridge  over  to  a  large  extent  the  gap  that  separates  it  from  other
races.  It  is  asserted  that  no  race  is  homogeneous ;  that  there  is  a
tendency  to  vary ;  that  climate,  food,  and  habits  produce  and  render
permanent  physical  peculiarities,  which;  though  slight  in  the  limited
periods  allowed  to  our  observation,  would,  in  the  long  ages  during
which  the  human  race  has  existed,  have  sufficed  to  produce  all  the
difl’erences  that  now  appear.  It  is  further  asserted  that  the  advocates
of  the  opposite  theory  do  not  agree  among  themselves  ;  that  some
would  make  three,  some  five,  some  fifty  or  a  hundred  and  fifty  species
of  man  ;  some  would  have  had  each  species  created  in  pairs,  while
others  require  nations  to  have  at  once  sprung  into  existence,  and  that
there  is  no  stability  or  consistency  in  any  doctrine  but  that  of  one
primitive  stock.

The  advocates  of  the  original  diversity  of  man,  on  the  other  hand,
have  much  to  say  for  themselves.  They  argue  that  proofs  of  change
in  man  have  never  been  brought  forward  except  to  the  most  triflino-
amount,  while  evidence  of  his  permanence  meets  us  everywhere.
The  Portuguese  and  Spaniards,  settled  for  two  or  three  centuries  in
South  America,  retain  their  chief  physical,  mental,  and  moral  charac-
teiistics  j  the  Dutch  boers  at  the  Cape,  and  the  descendants  of  the
early  Dutch  settlers  in  the  Moluccas,  have  not  lost  the  features  or  the
colour  of  the  Germanic  races  ;  the  Jews,  scattered  over  the  world  in
the  most  diverse  climates,  retain  the  same  characteristic  lineaments
everywhere ;  the  Egyptian  sculptures  and  paintings  show  us  that,  for
at  least  4000  or  5000  years,  the  strongly  contrasted  features  of  the
Negro  and  the  Semitic  races  have  remained  altogether  unchanged  j
while  more  recent  discoveries  prove  that,  in  the  case  at  least  of  the
American  aborigines,  the  mound-builders  of  the  Mississippi  valley,
and  the  dwellers  on  Brazilian  mountains,  had  still  in  the  very  infancy
of  the  human  race  the  same  characteristic  type  of  cranial  formation
that  now  distinguishes  them.

If  we  endeavour  to  decide  impartially  on  the  merits  of  this  difiicult
controversy,  judging  solely  by  the  evidence  that  each  party  has
brought  forward,  it  certainly  seems  that  the  best  of  the  argument  is
on  the  side  of  those  who  maintain  the  primitive  diversity  of  man.

I  heir  opponents  have  not  been  able  to  refute  the  permanence  of  ex¬
isting  races  as  far  back  as  we  can  trace  them,  and  have  failed  to
show,  in  a  single  case,  that  at  any  former  epoch  the  well  marked
varieties  of  mankind  approximated  more  closely  than  they  do  at  the
piesent  day.  At  the  same  time  this  is  but  negative  evidence.  A
condition  of  immobility  for  four  or  five  thousand  years,  does  not  pre¬
clude  an  advance  at  an  earlier  epoch,  and — if  we  can  show  that  there


clx


JOURNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY.


are  causes  in  nature  which  would  check  any  further  physical  change
when  certain  conditions  were  fulfilled — does  not  even  render  such  an
advance  improbable,  if  there  are  any  general  arguments  to  be  adduced
in  its  favour.  Such  a  cause,  I  believe,  does  exist,  an^  I  shall  now
endeavour  to  point  out  its  nature  and  its  mode  of  operation.

In  order  to  make  my  argument  intelligible,  it  is  necessary  for  me
to  explain  very  briefly  the  theory  of  “  Natural  Selection”  promulgated
by  Mr.  Darwin,  and  the  power  which  it  possesses  of  modifying  the
forms  of  animals  and  plants.  The  grand  feature  in  the  multiplication
of  organic  life  is  that  of  close  general  resemblance,  combined  with  more
or  less  individual  variation.  The  child  resembles  its  parents  or  an¬
cestors  more  or  less  closely  in  all  its  peculiarities,  deformities,  or
beauties  ;  it  resembles  them  in  general  more  than  it  does  any  other
individuals  ;  yet  children  of  the  same  parents  are  not  all  alike,  and  it
often  happens  that  they  differ  ver)^  considerably  from  their  parents
and  from  each  other.  This  is  equally  true  of  man,  of  all  animals,  and
of  all  plants.  Moreover,  it  is  found  that  individuals  do  not  differ  from
their  parents  in  certain  particulars  only,  while  in  all  others  they  are
exact  duplicates  of  them.  They  differ  from  them  and  from  each  other
in  every  particular  :  in  form,  in  size,  in  colour,  in  the  structure  of
internal  as  well  as  of  external  organs  ;  in  those  subtle  peculiarities
which  produce  differences  of  constitution,  as  well  as  in  those  still
more  subtle  ones  which  lead  to  modifications  of  mind  and  character.
In  other  words,  in  every  possible  way,  in  every  organ  and  in  every
function,  individuals  of  the  same  stock  vary.

Now,  health,  strength,  and  long  life  are  the  results  of  a  harmony
between  the  individual  and  the  universe  that  surrounds  it.  Let  us
suppose  that  at  any  given  moment  this  harmony  is  perfect.  A  certain
animal  is  exactly  fitted  to  secure  its  prey,  to  escape  from  its  enemies,
to  resist  the  inclemencies  of  the  seasons,  and  to  rear  a  numerous  and
healthy  offspring.  But  a  change  now  takes  place.  A  series  of  cold
winters,  for  instance,  come  on,  making  food  scarce,  and  bringing  an
immigration  of  some  other  animals  to  compete  with  the  former  in¬
habitants  of  the  district.  The  new  immigrant  is  swift  of  foot,  and
surpasses  its  rivals  in  the  pursuit  of  game ;  the  winter  nights  are
colder,  and  require  a  thicker  fur  as  a  protection,  and  more  nourishing
food  to  keep  up  the  heat  of  the  system.  Our  supposed  perfect  animal
is  no  longer  in  harmony  with  its  universe  ;  it  is  in  danger  of  dying  of
cold  or  of  starvation.  But  the  animal  varies  in  its  offspring.  Some
of  these  are  swifter  than  others — they  still  manage  to  catch  food
enough ;  some  are  hardier  and  more  thickly  furred — they  manage  in
the  cold  nights  to  keep  warm  enough ;  the  slow,  the  weak,  and  the
thinly  clad  soon  die  off.  Again  and  again,  in  each  succeeding  gene¬
ration,  the  same  thing  takes  place.  By  this  natural  process,  which
is  so  inevitable  that  it  cannot  be  conceived  not  to  act,  those  best
adapted  to  live,  live ;  those  least  adapted,  die.  It  is  sometimes  said
that  we  have  no  direct  evidence  of  the  action  of  this  selecting  power
in  nature.  But  it  seems  to  me  we  have  better  evidence  than  even
direct  observation  would  be,  because  it  is  more  universal,  viz.,  the
evidence  of  necessity.  It  must  be  so ;  for,  as  all  wild  animals  in-


WALLACE  ON  TME  ORIGIN  OF  HUMAN  RACES.  clxi

crease  in  a  geometrical  ratio,  while  their  actual  numbers  remain  on
the  average  stationary,  it  follows  that  as  many  die  annually  as  are
born.  ^  If  therefore,  we  deny  natural  selection,  it  can  only  be  by
asserting  that  in  such  a  case  as  I  have  supposed,  the  strong,  the
health)',  the  swift,  the  well  clad,  the  well  organised  animals  in  every
lespect,  have  no  advantage  over, — do  not  on  the  average  live  longer
than  the  weak,  the  unhealthy,  the  slow,  the  ill-clad,  and  the  imper¬
fectly  organised  individuals  ;  and  this  no  sane  man  has  yet  been  found
hardy  enough  to  assert.  But  this  is  not  all;  for  the  offspring  on  the
average  resemble  their  parents,  and  the  selected  portion  of  each  suc¬
ceeding  generation  will  therefore  be  stronger,  swifter,  and  more  thickly
furied  than  the  last ;  and  if  this  process  goes  on  for  thousands  of  gene¬
rations,  our  animal  will  have  again  become  thoroughly  in  harmony  with
the  new  conditions  in  which  he  is  placed.  But  he  will  now  be  a  different
creature.  He  will  be  not  only  swifter  and  stronger,  and  more  furry,
he  will  also  probably  have  changed  in  colour,  in  form,  perhaps  have
acquired  a  longer  tail,  or  differently  shaped  ears  ;  for  it  is  an  ascer¬
tained  fact,  that  when  one  part  of  an  animal  is  modified,  some  other
parts  almost  always  change  as  it  were  in  sympathy  with  it.  Mr.
Darwin  calls  this  ^^correlation  of  growth^''  and  gives  as  instances  that
hairless  dogs  have  imperfect  teeth;  blue  eyed  cats  are  deaf;  small

feet  accompany  short  beaks  in  pigeons  :  and  other  equally  interesting
cases.  °

Grant,  therefore,  the  premises:  1st.  That  peculiarities  of  every
kind  are  more  or  less  hereditary.  2nd.  That  the  offspring  of  every
animal  vary  more  or  less  in  all  parts  of  their  organisation.  3rd.
That  the  universe  in  Ayhich  these  amimals  live,  is  not  absolutely  in¬
variable  ; — none  of  which  propositions  can  be  denied ;  and  then  con  ¬
sider  that  the  animals  in  any  country  (those  at  least  which  are  not
dying  out)  must  at  each  successive  period  be  brought  into  harmony
with  the  surrounding  conditions;  and  we  have  all  the  elements  for  a
change  of  form  and  structure  in  the  animals,  keeping  exact  pace  with
changes  of  whatever  nature  in  the  surrounding  universe.  Such
changes  must  be  slow,  for  the  changes  in  the  universe  are  very  slow ;
but  just  as  these  slow  changes  become  important,  when  we  look  at
results^  after  long  periods  of  action,  as  we  do  when  we  perceive  the
alterations  of  the  earth’s  surface  during  geological  epochs ;  so  the
parallel  changes  in  animal  form  become  more  and  more  striking
according  as  the  time  they  have  been  going  on  is  great,  as  we  see
when  we  compare  our  living  animals  with  those  which  we  disentomb
from  each  successively  older  geological  formation.

This  is  briefly  the  theory  of  ‘‘natural  selection,”  which  explains
the  changes  in  the  organic  world  as  being  parallel  with,  and  in  part
dependent  on  those  in  the  inorganic.  What  we  now  have  to  inquire
is.  Can  this  theory  be  applied  in  any  way  to  the  question  of  the  origin
OT  the  races  of  man?  or  is  there  anything  in  human  nature  that  takes
him  out  of  the  category  of  those  organic  existences,  over  whose  suc¬
cessive  mutations  it  has  had  such  powerful  sway  ?

In  order  to  answer  these  questions,  we  must  consider  why  it  is  that

“natural  selection”  acts  so  powerfully  Upon  animals,  and  we  shall  I

VOL.  II.— -NO.  V.  ^  ^


clxii


JOUllNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY.


believe,  find  that  its  effect  depends  mainly  upon  tbeir  self-dependence
and  individual  isolation.  A  slight  injury,  a  temporary  illness,  will  often
end  in  death,  because  it  leaves  the  individual  powerless  against  its
enemies.  If  a  herbivorous  animal  is  a  little  sick  and  has  not  fed  well
for  a  day  or  two,  and  the  herd  is  then  pursued  by  a  beast  of  prey,
our  poor  invalid  inevitably  falls  a  victim.  So  in  a  carnivorous  animal
the  least  deficiency  of  vigour  prevents  its  capturing  food,  and  it  soon
dies  of  starvation.  There  is,  as  a  general  rule,  no  mutual  assistance
between  adults,  which  enables  them  to  tide  over  a  period  of  sickness.
Neither  is  there  any  division  of  labour;  each  must  fulfil  all  the  con¬
ditions  of  its  existence,  and,  therefore,  natural  selection  ”  keeps
all  up  to  a  pretty  uniform  standard.

But  in  man,  as  we  no\v  behold  him,  this  is  different.  He  is  social
and  sympathetic.  In  the  rudest  tribes  the  sick  are  assisted  at  least
with  food  ;  less  robust  health  and  vigour  than  the  average  does  not
entail  death.  Neither  does  the  want  of  perfect  limbs  or  other  organs
produce  the  same  effects  as  among  animals.  Some  division  of  labour
takes  place ;  the  swiftest  hunt,  the  less  active  fish,  or  gather  fruits ;
food  is  to  some  extent  exchanged  or  divided.  The  action  of  natural
selection  is  therefore  checked  ;  the  weaker,  the  dwarfish,  those  of  less
active  limbs,  or  less  piercing  eyesight,  do  not  suffer  the  extreme
penalty  which  falls  upon  animals  so  defective.

In  proportion  as  these  physical  characteristics  become  of  less  im¬
portance,  mental  and  moral  qualities  will  have  increasing  influence  on
the  well-being  of  the  race.  Capacity  for  acting  in  concert,  for  pro¬
tection  and  for  the  acquisition  of  food  and  shelter ;  sympathy,  which
leads  all  in  turn  to  assist  each  other;  the  sense  of  right,' which  checks
depredations  upon  our  fellows  ;  the  decrease  of  the  combative  and
destructive  propensities ;  self-restraint  in  present  appetites  ;  and  that
intelligent  foresight  which  prepares  for  the  future,  are  all  qualities
that  from  their  earliest  appearance  must  have  been  for  the  benefit  of
each  community,  and  would,  therefore,  have  become  the  subjects  of
‘^natural  selection.’'  For  it  is  evident  that  such  qualities  would  be
for  the  well-being  of  man;  would  guard  him  against  external  enemies,
against  internal  dissensions,  and  against  the  effects  of  inclement  seasons
and  impending  famine,  more  surely  than  could  any  merely  physical  mo¬
dification.  Tribes  in  which  such  mental  and  moral  qualities  were  pre¬
dominant,  would  therefore  have  an  advantage  in  the  struggle  for
existence  over  other  tribes  in  which  they  were  less  developed,  would
live  and  maintain  their  numbers,  while  the  others  would  decrease  and
finally  succumb.

Again,  when  any  slow  changes  of  physical  geography,  or  of  climate,
make  it  necessary  for  an  animal  to  alter  its  food,  its  clothing,  or  its
weapons,  it  can  only  do  so  by  a  corresponding  change  in  its  own
bodily  structure  and  internal  organisation.  If  a  larger  or  more
powerful  beast  is  to  be  captured  and  devoured,  as  when  a  carni¬
vorous  animal  which  has  hitherto  preyed  on  sheep  is  obliged  from
their  decreasing  numbers  to  attack  buffaloes,  it  is  only  the  strongest
who  can  hold, — those  with  most  powerful  claws,  and  formidable  canine
teeth,  that  can  struggle  with  and  overcome  such  an  animal.  Natural


WALLACE  ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  HUMAN  RACES.  clxiii

selection  immediately  comes  into  play,  and  by  its  action  these  organs
gradually  become  adapted  to  their  new  requirements.  But  man,  under
similar  circumstances,  does  not  require  longer  nails  or  teeth,  greater
bodily  strength  or  swiftness.  He  makes  sharper  spears,  or  a  better  bow,
or  he  constructs  a  cunning  pitfall,  or  combines  in  a  hunting  party  to
circumvent  his  new  prey.  The  capacities  which  enable  him  to  do
this  are  what  he  requires  to  be  strengthened,  and  these  will,  there¬
fore,  be  gradually  modified  by  natural  selection,”  while  the  form
and  structure  of  his  body  will  remain  unchanged.  So  when  a  glacial
epoch  comes  on,  some  animals  must  acquire  warmer  fur,  or  a  coverino-
of  fat,  or  else  die  of  cold.  Those  best  clothed  by  nature  are,  there¬
fore,  preserved  by  natural  selection.  Man,  under  the  same  circum¬
stances,  will  make  himself  warmer  clothing,  and  build  better  houses;
and  the  necessity  of  doing  this  will  react  upon  his  mental  organ¬
isation  and  social  condition— will  advance  them  while  his  natural  body
remains  naked  as  before.

When  the  accustomed  food  of  some  animal  becomes  scarce  or
totally  fails,  it  can  only  exist  by  becoming  adapted  to  a  new  kind  of
food,  a  food  perhaps  less  nourishing  and  less  digestible.  ‘‘Natural
selecfion  ”  will  now  act  upon  the  stomach  and  intestines,  and  all  their
individual  variations  will  be  taken  advantage  of  to  modify  the  race
into  harmony  with  its  new  food.  In  many  cases,  howev^er,  it  is  pro¬
bable  that  this  cannot  be  done.  The  internal  organs  ma}’^  not  vary
quick  enough,  and  then  the  animal  will  decrease  in  numbers,  and
finally  become  extinct.  But  man  guards  himself  from  such  accidents
by  superintending  and  guiding  the  operations  of  nature.  He  plants
the  seed  of  his  most  agreeable  food,  and  thus  procures  a  supply  in¬
dependent  of  the  accidents  of  varying  seasons  or  natural  extinction.
He  domesticates  animals  which  serve  him  either  to  capture  food  or
for  food  itself,  and  thus  changes  of  any  great  extent  in  his  teeth  or
digestive  organs  are  rendered  unnecessary.  Man,  too,  has  everywhere
the  use  of  fire,  and  by  its  means  can  render  palatable  a  variety  of
animal  and  vegetable  substances,  which  he  could  hardly  otherwise
make  use  of,  and  thus  obtains  for  himself  a  supply  of  food  far  more
vaiied  and  abundant  than  that  which  3.ny  animal  can  command.

Thus  man,  by  the  mere  capacity  of  clothing  himself,  and  making
weapons  and  tools,  has  taken  away  from  nature  that  power  of  changing
the  external  form  and  structure  which  she  exercises  over  all  odicr
animals.  As  the  competing  races  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  the
climate,  the  vegetation,  or  the  animals  which  serve  them  for  food,  are
slowly  changing,  they  must  undergo  a  corresponding  change  in  their
structure,  habits,  and  constitution,  to  keep  them  in  harmony  with  the
new  conditions — to  enable  them  to  live  and  maintain  their  numbers.
But  man  does  this  by  means  of  his  intellect  alone  ;  which  enables
him  with  an  unchanged  body  still  to  keep  in  harmony  with  the
changing  universe.

hrom  the  time,  therefore,  when  the  social  and  sympathetic  feelings
came  into  active  operation,  and  the  intellectual  and  moral  faculties
became  fairly  developed,  man  would  cease  to  be  influenced  by
“natural  selection”  in  his  physical  form  and  structure;  as  an

m  2


clxiv


JOURNAL  OE  TI-IE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY.


animal  lie  would  remain  almost  stationary ;  the  changes  of  the  sur¬
rounding  universe  would  cease  to  have  upon  him  that  j^owerful  modi¬
fying  effect  which  it  exercises  over  other  parts  of  the  organic  world.
But  from  the  moment  that  his  body  became  stationary,  his  mind
would  become  subject  to  those  very  influences  from  which  his  body
had  escaped  ;  every  slight  variation  in  his  mental  and  moral  nature
which  should  enable  him  better  to  guard  against  adverse  circum¬
stances,  and  combine  for  mutual  comfort  and  protection,  would  be
preserved  and  accumulated ;  the  better  and  higher  specimens  of  our
race  would  therefore  increase  and  spread,  the  lower  and  more  brutal
would  give  way  and  successively  die  out,  and  that  rapid  advancement
of  mental  organisation  would  occur,  which  has  raised  the  very  lowest
races  of  man  so  far  above  the  brutes,  (although  differing  so  little  from
some  of  them  in  physical  structure),  and,  in  conjunction  with  scarcely
perceptible  modifications  of  form,  has  developed  the  wonderful  in¬
tellect  of  the  Germanic  races.

But  from  the  time  when  this  mental  and  moral  advance  commenced,
and  man’s  physical  character  became  fixed  and  immutable,  a  new
series  of  causes  would  come  into  action,  and  take  part  in  his  mental
growth.  The  diverse  aspects  of  nature  would  now  make  themselves
felt,  and  profoundly  influence  the  character  of  the  primitive  man.^'

When  the  power  that  had  hitherto  modified  the  body,  transferred
its  action  to  the  mind,  then  races  would  advance  and  become  improved
merely  by  the  harsh  discipline  of  a  sterile  soil  and  inclement  seasons.
Under  their  influence,  a  hardier,  a  more  provident,  and  a  more
social  race  would  be  developed,  than  in  those  regions  where  the
earth  produces  a  perennial  supply  of  vegetable  food,  and  where
neither  foresight  nor  ingenuity  are  required  to  prepare  for  the  rigours
of  winter.  And  is  it  not  the  fact  that  in  all  ages,  and  in  every  quar¬
ter  of  the  globe,  the  inhabitants  of  temperate  have  been  superior  to
those  of  tropical  countries  ?  All  the  great  invasions  and  displace¬
ments  of  races  have  been  from  North  to  South,  rather  than  the
reverse  ;  and  we  have  no  record  of  there  ever  having  existed,  any  more
than  there  exists  to-day,  a  solitary  instance  of  an  indigenous  inter-
tropical  civilisation.  The  Mexican  civilisation  and  government  came
from  the  North,  and,  as  well  as  the  Peruvian,  was  established,  not  in
the  rich  tropical  plains,  but  on  the  lofty  and  sterile  plateaux  of  the
Andes.  The  religion  and  civilisation  of  Ceylon  were  introduced  from
North  India;  the  successive  conquerors  of  the  Indian  peninsula  came
from  the  North-west,  and  it  was  the  bold  and  adventurous  tribes  of
the  North  that  overran  and  infused  new  life  into  Southern  Europe.

It  is  the  same  great  law  of  “  the  preservation  of  favoured  races  in
the  struggle  for  lifef  which  leads  to  the  inevitable  extinction  of  all

*  M.  Guizot  says:  “If  we  regard  the  immediate  influence  of  climate  upon
men,  perhaps  it  is  not  so  extensive  as  has  been  supposed.  But  the  indirect
influence  of  climate,  that  which,  for  example,  results  from  the  fact  that,  in  a
warm  country,  men  live  in  the  open  air,  while  in  a  cold  country  they  shut  them¬
selves  up  in  their  houses  ;  that  in  the  one  case  they  nourish  themselves  in  one
manner,  in  the  other  in  another ; — these  are  facts  of  great  importance,  facts
which,  by  the  simple  difference  of  material  life,  act  powerfully  upon  civilisation.”
{Hist,  of  Civilisation  in  Europe.)


WALLACE  ON  THE  OEIGIN  OP  HITMAN  RACES.  clxV

those  low  and  mentally  undeveloped  populations  with  which  Euro¬
peans  come  in  contact.  The  red  Indian  in  North  America,  and  in
Brazil ;  the  Tasmanian,  Australian  and  New  Zealander  in  the  southern
hemisphere,  die  out,  not  from  any  one  special  cause,  but  from  the
inevitable  effects  of  an  unequal  mental  and  physical  struggle.  The
intellectual  and  moral,  as  well  as  the  physical  qualities  of  the  European
are  superior ;  the  same  powers  and  capacities  which  have  made  him
rise  in  a  few  centuries  from  the  condition  of  the  wandering  savage*^
with  a  scanty  and  stationary  population  to  his  present  state  of  culture
and  advancement,  with  a  greater  average  longevity,  a  greater  average
strength,  and  a  cajiacity  of  more  rapid  increase, — enable  him  when  in
contact  with  the  savage  man,  to  conquer  in  the  struggle  for  existence,
and  to  increase  at  his  expense,  just  as  the  more  favourable  increase
at  the  expense  of  the  less  favourable  varieties  in  the  animal  and
vegetable  kingdoms,  just  as  the  weeds  of  Europe  overrun  North
America  and  Australia,  extinguishing  native  productions  by  the
inherent  vigour  of  their  organisation,  and  by  their  greater  capacity
for  existence  and  multiplication.

If  these  views  are  correct ;  if  in  proportion  as  man’s  social,  moral
^-Tid  intellectual  faculties  became  developed,  his  physical  structure
would  cease  to  be  affected  by  the  operation  of  ^‘natural  selection,”
we  have  a  most  important  clue  to  the  origin  of  races.  For  it  will
follow,  that  those  striking  and  constant  peculiarities  which  mark  the
great  divisions  of  mankind,  could  not  have  been  produced  and
rendered  permanent  after  the  action  of  this  power  had  become
transferred  from  physical  to  mental  variations.  They  must,  there¬
fore,  have  existed  since  the  very  infancy  of  the  race;  they  must  have
originated  at  a  period  when  man  was  gregarious,  but  scarcely  social,
with  a  mind  perceptive  but  not  reflective,  ere  any  sense  of  right  or
feelings  of  sympathy  had  been  developed  in  him.

By  a  powerful  effort  of  the  imagination,  it  is  just  possible  to  per¬
ceive  him  at  that  early  epoch  existing  as  a  single  homogeneous  race
without  the  faculty  of  speech,  and  probably  inhabiting  some  tropical
region.  He  would  be  still  subject,  like  the  rest  of  the  organic
world,  to  the  action  of  ‘‘natural  selection,”  which  would  retain  his
physical  form  and  constitution  in  harmony  with  the  surrounding
universe.  He  must  have  been  even  then  a  dominant  race,  spreading
widely  over  the  warmer  regions  of  the  earth  as  it  then  existed,  and'^
in  agreement  with  what  we  see  in  the  case  of  other  dominant  species,
gradually  becoming  modified  in  accordance  with  local  conditions.
As  he  ranged  farther  from  his  original  home,  and  became  exposed  to
greater  extremes  of  climate,  to  greater  changes  of  food,  and  had  to
contend  with  new  enemies,  organic  and  inorganic,  useful  variations
in  his  constitution  would  be  selected  and  rendered  permanent,  and
would,  on  the  principle  of  “  correlation  of  growth”,  be  accompanied

*  “  It  is  probable  that  the  present  state  and  condition  of  New  Zealand  exhibit
more  nearly  than  any  other  the  condition  of  Britain  when  the  Romans  entered
it.”  (Turner, ^  Tliat.  of  Anglo-Saxons,  i,  p.  09.)  “When  the  Romans  first  became
acquainted  with  Germany,  the  natives  had  advanced  but  a  few  steps  bevond  the
savage  state.”  (Encyc.  Brit.,  art.  Germany.)


clxvi


JOURNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY-


by  corresponding  external  physical  changes.  Thus  arose  those  strik¬
ing  characteristics  and  special  modifications  which  still  distinguish  the
chief  races  of  mankind.  The  red,  black,  yellow,  or  blushing  white
skin;  the  straight,  the  curly,  the  woolly  hair;  the  scanty  or  abundant
beard  ;  the  straight  or  oblique  eyes ;  the  various  forms  of  the  pelvis,
the  cranium,  and  other  parts  of  the  skeleton.

But  while  these  changes  had  been  going  on,  his  mental  develop¬
ment  had  correspondingly  advanced,  and  had  now  reached  that  con¬
dition  in  which  it  began  powerfully  to  influence  his  whole  existence,
and  would  therefore,  become  subject  to  the  irresistible  action  of
“  natural  selection.”  This  action  would  rapidly  give  the  ascendancy
to  mind  :  speech  would  probably  now  be  first  developed,  leading  to  a
still  further  advance  of  the  mental  faculties,  and  from  that  moment
man  as  regards  his  physical  form  would  remain  almost  stationary.
The  art  of  making  weapons,  division  of  labour,  anticipation  of  the
future,  restraint  of  the  appetites,  moral,  social  and  sympathetic
feelings,  would  now  have  a  preponderating  influence  on  his  well
being,  and  would  therefore  be  that  part  of  his  nature  on  which
‘‘  natural  selection  ”  would  most  powerfully  act;  and  we  should  thus
have  explained  that  wonderful  persistence  of  mere  physical  character¬
istics,  which  is  the  stumbling-block  of  those  who  advocate  the  unity  of
mankind.

We  are  now,  therefore,  enabled  to  harmonise  the  conflicting  views
of  anthropologists  on  this  subject.  Man  may  have  been,  indeed
I  believe  must  have  been,  once  a  homogeneous  race  ;  but  it  was  at  a
period  of  which  we  have  as  yet  discovered  no  remains,  at  a  period  so
remote  in  his  history,  that  he  had  not  yet  acquired  that  wonderfully
developed  brain,  the  organ  of  the  mind,  which  now,  even  in  his  lowest
examples,  raises  him  far  above  the  highest  brutes ; — at  a  period  when
he  had  the  form  but  hardly  the  nature  of  man,  when  he  neither
possessed  human  speech,  nor  those  sympathetic  and  moral  feelings
which  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  everywhere  now  distinguish  the
race.  Just  in  proportion  as  these  truly  human  faculties  became
developed  in  him  would  his  physical  features  become  fixed  and  per¬
manent,  because  the  latter  would  be  of  less  importance  to  his  well
being ;  he  would  be  kept  in  harmony  with  the  slowly  changing  uni¬
verse  around  him,  by  an  advance  in  mind,  rather  than  by  a  change  in
body.  If,  therefore,  we  are  of  opinion  that  he  was  not  really  man  till
these  higher  faculties  were  developed,  we  may  fairly  assert  that  there
were  many  originally  distinct  races  of  men  ;  while,  if  we  think  that  a
being  like  us  in  form  and  structure,  but  with  mental  faculties  scarcely
raised  above  the  brute,  must  still  be  considered  to  have  been  human,
we  are  fully  entitled  to  maintain  the  common  origin  of  all  mankind.

These  considerations,  it  will  be  seen,  enable  us  to  place  the  origin
of  man  at  a  much  more  remote  geological  epoch  than  has  yet  been
thought  possible.  He  may  even  have  lived  in  the  Eocene  or  Miocene
period,  when  not  a  single  mammal  possessed  the  same  form  as  any
existing  species.  For,  in  the  long  series  of  ages  during  which  the  forms
of  these  primeval  mammals  were  being  slowly  specialised  into  those
now  inhabiting  the  earth,  the  power  which  acted  to  modify  them  would


WALLACE  ON  THE  OKIGIN  OF  HUMAN  RACES.


clxvii


only  affect  the  mental  organisation  of  man.  His  brain  alone  would
have  increased  in  size  and  complexity  and  his  cranium  have  under¬
gone  corresponding  changes  of  form,  while  the  whole  structure  of
lower  animals  was  being  changed.  This  will  enable  us  to  understand
how  the  fossil  crania  of  Denise  and  Engis  agree  so  closely  with  exist¬
ing  forms,  although  they  undoubtedly  existed  in  company  with  large
mammalia  now  extinct.  The  Neanderthal  skull  may  be  a  specimen
of  one  of  the  lowest  races  then  existing,  just  as  the  Australians  are
the  lowest  of  our  modern  epoch.  We  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that
mind  and  brain  and  skull-modification,  could  go  on  quicker  than  that
of  the  other  parts  of  the  organisation,  and  we  must,  therefore,  look
back  very  far  in  the  past  to  find  man  in  that  early  condition  in  which
his  mind  was  not  sufficiently  developed  to  remove  his  body  from  the
modifying  influence  of  external  conditions,  and  the  cumulative  action
of  “  natural  selection.”  I  believe,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  d  priori
reason  against  our  finding  the  remains  of  man  or  his  works,  in  the
middle  or  later  tertiary  deposits.  The  absence  of  all  such  remains  in
the  European  beds  of  this  age  has  little  weight,  because  as  we  go
further  back  in  time,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  man’s  distribution
over  the  surface  of  the  earth  was  less  universal  than  at  present.
Besides,  Europe  was  in  a  great  measure  submerged  during  the
tertiary  epoch,  and  though  its  scattered  islands  may  have  been  un¬
inhabited  by  man,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  he  did  not  at  the  same
time  exist  in  warm  or  tropical  continents.  If  geologists  can  point
out  to  us  the  most  extensive  land  in  the  warmer  regions  of  the  earth,
which  has  not  been  submerged  since  eocene  or  miocene  times,  it  is
there  that  we  may  expect  to  find  some  traces  of  the  very  early  pro¬
genitors  of  man.  It  is  there  that  we  may  trace  back  the  gradually
decreasing  brain  of  former  races,  till  we  come  to  a  time  when  the  body
also  begins  materially  to  differ.  Then  we  shall  have  reached  the
starting  point  of  the  human  family.  Before  that  period,  he  had  not
mind  enough  to  preserve  his  body  from  change,  and  would,  therefore,
have  been  subject  to  the  same  comparatively  rapid  modifications  of
form  as  the  other  mammals.

If  the  views  I  have  here  endeavoured  to  sustain  have  any  founda¬
tion,  they  give  us  a  new  argument  for  placing  man  apart,  as  not  only
the  head  and  culminating  point  of  the  grand  series  of  organic  nature,
but  as  in  some  degree  anew  and  distinct  order  of  being.  From  those
infinitely  remote  ages,  when  the  first  rudiments  of  organic  life
appeared  upon  the  earth,  every  plant,  and  every  animal  has  been
subject  to  one  great  law  of  physical  change.  As  the  earth  has  gone
though  its  grand  cycles  of  geological,  climatal  and  organic  progress,
every  form  of  life  has  been  subject  to  its  irresistible  action,  and  has
been  continually,  but  imperceptibly  moulded  into  such  new  shapes  as
would  preserve  their  harmony  with  the  ever  changing  universe.  No
living  thing  could  escape  this  law  of  its  being ;  none  could  remain
unchanged  and  live,  amid  the  universal  change  around  it.

At  length,  however,  there  came  into  existence  a  being  in  whom
that  subtle  force  we  term  mind,  became  of  greater  importance  than
his  mere  bodily  structure.  Though  with  a  naked  and  unprotected


clxviii


JOURNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY.


body,  this  gave  him  clothing  against  the  varying  inclemencies  of  the
seasons.  Though  unable  to  compete  with  the  deer  in  swiftness,  or
with  the  wild  bull  in  strength,  this  gave  him  "^veapons  with  which  to
capture  or  overcome  both.  Though  less  capable  than  most  other
animals  of  living  on  the  herbs  and  the  fruits  that  unaided  nature
supplies,  this  wonderful  faculty  taught  him  to  govern  and  direct
nature  to  his  own  benefit,  and  make  her  produce  food  for  him  when
and  where  he  pleased.  From  the  moment  when  the  first  skin  was
used  as  a  covering,  when  the  first  rude  spear  was  formed  to  assist  in
the  chase,  the  first  seed  sown  or  shoot  planted,  a  grand  revolution
was  effected  in  nature,  a  revolution  which  in  all  the  previous  ages  of  the
earth’s  history  had  had  no  parallel,  for  a  being  had  arisen  who  was  no
longer  necessarily  subject  to  change  with  the  changing  universe — a
being  who  was  in  some  degree  superior  to  nature,  inasmuch,  as  he
knew  how  to  control  and  regulate  her  action,  and  could  keep  himself
in  harmony  with  her,  not  by  a  change  in  body,  but  by  an  advance  of
niind.

Here,  then,  we  see  the  true  grandeur  and  dignity  of  man.  On
this  view  of  his  special  attributes,  we  may  admit  that  even  those  who
claim  for  him  a  position  as  an  order,  a  class,  or  a  sub-kingdom  by
himself,  have  some  reason  on  their  side.  He  is,  indeed,  a  being
apart,  since  he  is  not  influenced  by  the  great  laws  which  irresistibly
modify  all  other  organic  beings.  Nay  more  ;  this  victory  which  he
has  gained  for  himself  gives  him  a  directing  influence  over  other  exist¬
ences.  Man  has  not  only  escaped  ‘^natural  selection”  himself,  but
he  actually  is  able  to  take  away  some  of  that  power  from  nature  which,
before  his  appearance,  she  universally  exercised.  We  can  anticipate  the
time  when  the  earth  will  produce  only  cultivated  plants  and  domestic
animals  ;  when  man’s  selection  shall  have  supplanted  natural  selec¬
tion”;  and  when  the  ocean  will  be  the  only  domain  in  which  that
power  can  be  exerted,  which  for  countless  cycles  of  ages  ruled  supreme
over  all  the  earth.

Briefly  to  recapitulate  the  argument; — in  two  distinct  ways  has
man  escaped  the  influence  of  those  laws  which  have  produced  un-
ceasirig  change  in  the  animal  world.  By  his  superior  intellect  he  is
enabled  to  provide  himself  with  clothing  and  weapons,  and  by  culti¬
vating  th^  soil  to  obtain  a  constant  supply  of  congenial  food.  This
renders  it  punepessary  for  his  body,  like  those  of  the  lower  animals,
to  be  modified  in  accordance  with  changing  conditions — ’to  gain  a
warmer  natural  covering,  to  acquire  more  powerful  teeth  or  claws,  or
to  become  adapted  to  obtain  and  digest  new  kinds  of  food,  as  circum¬
stances  may  require.  By  his  superior  sympathetic  and  moral  feelings,
he  becomes  fitted  for  the  social  state ;  he  ceases  to  plunder  the  weak
and  helpless  of  his  tribe ;  he  shares  the  game  which  he  has  caught
with  less  active  or  less  fortunate  hunters,  or  exchanges  it  for  weapons
which  even  the  sick  or  the  deformed  can  fashion ;  he  saves  the  sick
and  wounded  from  death  ;  and  thus  tfle  power  which  leads  to  the
rigid  destruction  of  all  animals  who  cannot  in  every  respect  help
themselves,  is  prevented  from  acting  on  him.

This  power  is  ‘‘  natural  selection”;  and,  as  by  no  other  means  can


WALLACE  ON  THE  ORIGIN  OF  HUMAN  RACES.


clxix


it  be  shewn  that  individual  variations  can  ever  become  accumulated
and  rendered  permanent  so  as  to  form  well-marked  races,  it  follows
that  the  differences  we  now  behold  in  mankind  must  have  been  pro¬
duced  before  he  became  possessed  of  a  human  intellect  or  human
sympathies.  This  view  also  renders  possible,  or  even  requires,  .the
existence  of  man  at  a  comparatively  remote  geological  epoch.  For,
during  the  long  periods  in  which  other  animals  have  been  undergoing
modification  in  their  whole  structure  to  such  an  amount  as  to  consti¬
tute  distinct  genera  and  families,  man’s  body  will  have  remained
generically,  or  even  specifically,  the  same,  while  his  head  and  brain
alone  will  have  undergone  modification  equal  to  theirs.  We  can  thus
understand  how  it  is  that,  judging  from  the  head  and  brain.  Professor
Owen  places  man  in  a  distinct  sub-class  of  mammalia,  while,  as  re¬
gards  the  rest  of  his  body,  there  is  the  closest  anatomical  resemblance
to  that  of  the  anthropoid  apes,  every  tooth,  every  bone,  strictly
homologous — which  makes  the  determination  of  the  difference  be¬
tween  Homo  and  Pitheciis  the  anatomist’s  difficulty.”  The  present
theory  fully  recognises  and  accounts  for  these  facts;  and  we  may
perhaps  claim  as  corroborative  of  its  truth,  that  it  neither  requires  us
to  depreciate  the  intellectual  chasm  which  separates  man  from  the
apes,  nor  refuses  full  recognition  of  the  striking  resemblances  to  them
which  exist  in  other  parts  of  its  structure.

Ill  concluding  this  brief  sketch  of  a  great  subject,  I  would  point
out  its  bearing  upon  the  future  of  the  human  race.  If  my  conclusions
are  just,  it  must  inevitably  follow  that  the  higher — the  more  intellectual
and  moral — must  displace  the  lower  and  more  degraded  races  ;  and  the
power  of  natural  selection”,  still  acting  on  his  mental  organisation,
must  ever  lead  to  the  more  perfect  adaptation  of  man’s  higher  faculties
to  the  conditions  of  surrounding  nature,  and  to  the  exigencies  of  the
social  state. While  his  external  form  will  probably  ever  remain  un¬
changed,  except  in  the  development  of  that  perfect  beauty  which
results  from  a  healthy  and  well  organised  body,  refined  and  ennobled
by  the  highest  intellectual  faculties  and  sympathetic  emotions,  his
mental  constitution  may  continue  to  advance  and  improve  till  the
world  is  again  inhabited  by  a  single  homogeneous  race,  no  individual
of  which  will  be  inferior  to  the  noblest  specimens  of  existing  humanity.
Each  one  will  then  work  out  his  own  happiness  in  relation  to  that  of
his  fellows ;  perfect  freedom  of  action  will  be  maintained,  since  the
well  balanced  moral  faculties  will  never  permit  any  one  to  transgress
on  the  equal  freedom  of  others  ;  restrictive  laws  will  not  be  wanted,  for
each  man  will  be  guided  by  the  best  of  laws ;  a  thorough  apprecia¬
tion  of  the  rights,  and  a  perfect  sympathy  with  the  feelings,  of  all  about
him ;  compulsory  government  will  have  died  away  as  unnecessary  ffor
every  man  will  know  how  to  govern  himself),  and  will  be  replaced' by
voluntary  associations  for  all  beneficial  public  purposes ;  the  passions
and  animal  propensities  will  be  restrained  within  those  limits  which
most  conduce  to  happiness;  and  mankind  will  have  at  length  discovered

*  M.  Guizot  says:  ‘‘For  myself,  [  am  convinced  that  there  is  a  destiny  of
humanity,  a  transmission  of  the  aggregate  of  civilisation.”  (Civilisation  in
Europe.)  •


clxx


JOURNAL  OF  THE  ANTHROPOLOGICAL  SOCIETY.


that  it  was  only  required  of  them  to  develope  the  capacities  of  their
higher  nature,  in  order  to  convert  this  earth,  which  had  so  long  been
the  theatre  of  their  unbridled  passions,  and  the  scene  of  unimaginable
misery,  into  as  bright  a  paradise  as  ever  haunted  the  dreams  of  seer
or  poet.^
