My Life: A Record of Events and Opinions (Alfred Russel Wallace, 1908)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1908 Chapman & Hall edition (https://archive.org/details/myliferecordofev00wall). Wallace's autobiography — the co-discoverer of natural selection on the Malay Archipelago, spiritualism, and socialism.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

\m 


'•  !n:  III ':; V'iW 


THE  LIBRARY  OF  THE 

UNIVERSITY  OF 

NORTH  CAROLINA 


ENDOWED  BY  THE 

DIALECTIC  AND  PHILANTHROPIC 

SOCIETIES 


QH31 

.W2 

A3 


UNIVERSITY  OF  N.C.  AT  CHAPEL  HILL 


10002182406 

This  book  is  due  at  the  LOUIS  R.  WILSON  LIBRARY  on  the 
last  date  stamped  under  "Date  Due."  If  not  on  hold  it  may  be 
renewed  by  bringing  it  to  the  library. 


DATE 
DUE 


RET. 


DATE 
DUE 


RET. 


,aPR3  0  7|; 


W^ 


rfec^a'BO 


19  19^6  i 


^ 


'0(?r^' 


^;i^ 


WTTT^W 


1^ 


snj: 


8  2009 


^rsr 


iLum 


"^tt. 


MY   LIFE 


* 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

University  of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill 


http://www.archive.org/details/myliferecordofevOOwall 


MY   LIFE''"^ 


A  RECORD  OF  EVENTS  AND  OPINIONS 

CO 


BY 

ALFRED    RUSSEL  WALLACE 

AUTHOR   OF 

'man's    place   in   the   universe,"    "the    MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO,"    "DARWINISM, 

"geographical   distribution    of   ANIMALS,"    "NATURAL 

SELECTION    AND   TROPICAL   NATURE,"    ETC. 


NEW   EDITION 
CONDENSED  AND  REVISED  <^ 


> 


WITH  FACSIMILE  LETTERS,   ILLUSTRATIONS  .*; 

AND  PORTRAITS 


LONDON 

CHAPMAN    &    HALL,    Ltd. 

1908 


PREFACE  TO  THE  NEW 
EDITION 

Among  the  numerous  kind  and  even  flattering  notices 
of  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  there  were  a  con- 
siderable number  in  which  objection  was  made  to  its 
great  bulk,  caused  in  part  by  the  inclusion  in  it  of 
subjects  only  indirectly  related  to  myself,  as  well  as 
of  some  of  my  early  writings  which  were  of  no  special 
interest. 

Recognizing  as  I  do  the  justice  of  this  criticism,  I 
gladly  agreed  to  the  suggestion  of  my  publishers  that 
I  should  prepare  a  new  edition  in  one  volume,  by 
omitting  all  such  superfluous  matter  as  is  above 
referred  to. 

Feeling  that  I  was  not  myself  the  best  judge  of 
what  to  omit,  I  asked  my  son,  Mr.  William  G.  Wallace, 
to  undertake  this  task,  after  agreeing  with  him,  and 
with  my  publishers,  on  several  entire  chapters  which 
must  certainly  be  omitted.  In  order  to  represent  the 
general  reader  he  asked  a  friend  of  his  own,  who  had 
not  read  the  book  before,  to  assist  him  in  forming  an 
opinion  in  doubtful  cases.  I  have  also  myself  con- 
densed some  diffuse  portions,  and  have  added  a  few 
additional  facts,  bringing  the  story  of  "My  Life" 
down  to  the  present  time. 

a  2 


VI 


PREFACE 


All  the  illustrations  have  been  retained  which  are 
in  any  way  referred  to  in  the  present  work,  and  I 
trust  that  the  result  will  be  to  render  it  acceptable  to 
a  new  body  of  readers. 

Broadstone, 

October  i,  1908. 


PREFACE  TO  THE   ORIGINAL 
EDITION 

The  present  volumes  would  not  have  been  written 
had  not  the  representatives  of  my  English  and 
American  publishers  assured  me  that  they  would 
probably  interest  a  large  number  of  readers. 

I  had  indeed  promised  to  write  some  account  of 
my  early  life  for  the  information  of  my  son  and 
daughter,  but  this  would  have  been  of  very  limited 
scope,  and  would  probably  not  have  been  printed. 

Having  never  kept  a  diary,  except  when  abroad, 
nor  preserved  any  of  the  earlier  letters  of  my  friends, 
I  at  first  thought  that  I  had  no  materials  for  any  full 
record  of  my  life  and  experiences.  But  when  I  set 
to  work  in  earnest  to  get  together  whatever  scattered 
memoranda  I  could  find,  the  numerous  letters  I 
possessed  from  men  of  considerable  eminence,  dating 
from  my  return  home  in  1862,  together  with  a  few  of 
my  own  returned  to  me  by  some  of  my  correspondents, 
I  began  to  see  that  I  had  a  fair  amount  of  material, 
though  I  was  very  doubtful  how  far  it  would  interest 
any  considerable  number  of  readers. 

As  several  of  my  friends  have  assured  me  that  a 
true  record  of  a  life,  especially  if  sufficiently  full  as  to 
illustrate  development  of  character  so  far  as  that  is 


VllI 


PREFACE 


due  to  environment,  would  be  extremely  interesting, 
I  have  kept  this  in  mind,  perhaps  unduly,  though  I 
am  not  at  all  sure  that  my  own  conclusions  on  this 
point  are  correct. 

It  is  difficult  to  write  such  a  record  as  mine 
(extending  to  the  memories  of  nearly  eighty  years) 
without  subjecting  one's  self  to  the  charge  of  diffuse- 
ness  or  egotism,  and  I  cannot  hope  to  escape  this 
altogether.  But  as  my  experiences  have  been  cer- 
tainly varied,  if  not  exciting,  I  trust  that  the  frequent 
change  of  scene  and  of  occupation,  together  with  the 
diversity  of  my  interests  and  of  the  persons  with 
whom  I  have  been  associated,  may  render  this  story 
of  my  life  less  tedious  than  might  have  been 
anticipated. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  those  friends  who  have 
assisted  me  with  facts  or  illustrations,  and  especially 
to  Mrs.  Arthur  Waugh,  who  has  been  so  kind  as  to 
make  the  very  full  Index  to  my  book. 

Old  Orchard,  Broadstone, 
September^  190  5- 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.    My  Relatives  and  Ancestors      .       .       .  i 

II.    My  Earliest  Memories,  Usk  and  Hert- 
ford          13 

III.  My  School  Life  at  Hertford     ...  26 

IV.  London      Workers,      Secularists      and 

OWENITES 43 

V.    Land  Surveying  in  Bedfordshire      .       .  58 

VI.    Radnorshire 74 

VII.    Residence  in  South  Wales  :  Brecknock- 
shire AND  Glamorganshire      ...  87 

VIII.    Self-education   in   Science  and  Litera- 
ture           lOI 

IX.    Life  at  Leicester  and  Neath     .       .       .121 

X.    Four  Years  in  the  Amazon  Valley  .       .  143 

XL    London,  and  Voyage  to  the  East      .       .  163 

XII.    In  the  Malay  Archipelago  (1854-1858)     .  175 

XIII.  In  the  Malay  Archipelago  (1S58-1862)     .  189 

XIV.  Life    in    London,    1862-1871  —  Scientific 

AND  Literary  Work 203 


X  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XV.    Sir  Charles  Lyell  and  Charles  Darwin 

(1863-1881) 220 

XVI.    Herbert   Spencer,    Huxley,   and   Other 

Friends 239 

XVII.    Home  Life  and  Work  (1870-1885)       .        .  260 

XVIII.    A  Lecture  Tour  in  America  (1886-1887)  .  272 

XIX.    Friends  and   Occupations  of   my  Later 

Years  (i  888-1 908) 294 

XX.    Land  Nationalization  to  Socialism  .       .  319 

XXI.    Mesmerism  to  Spiritualism  ....  334 

XXII.    A  Chapter  on  Money  Matters— Earnings 

and  Losses— Speculations  and  Law-suits  357 

XXIII.    My  Character— New  Ideas  ....  379 

■  XXIV.    Predictions  fulfilled  :  Latest  Honours  390 

Index 399 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Alfred  R.  Wallace Frontispiece 

Thomas  Vere  Wallace.    Aged  36    Between  pages  10&  11 

(At  the  time  of  his  marriage) 

Mary  Anne  Wallace.    Aged  18  .  „  „ 

(At  the  time  of  her  marriage) 

Birthplace  of  A.  R.  Wallace,  Usk,  Mon- 
mouthshire      .... 

The  Grammar  School,  Hertford 

The  Beacons,  looking  South 

Plan  of  Top  of  Beacons 

Section  of  Top  of  Beacons 

Maen  Llia 

A  Sketch  in  Derbyshire     . 

A  Village  in  Leicestershire 

Porth-yr-Ogof,  Vale  of  Neath  . 

Maen  Madoc — Latin  Inscription 

A.  R.  Wallace.    Aged  24 

(From  a  Daguerrotype) 

A.  R.  Wallace.    Aged  30 
Native  House  in  Aru  Islands   . 


Facing  p 

•  13 

J) 

28 

)) 

88 

>' 

90 

)) 

90 

»> 

92 

» 

129 

5) 

129 

)) 

137 

)) 

138 

)) 

143 

163 


xn  ILLUSTRATIONS 

A.  R.  Wallace.    Aged  46      ...        .    Facing  p.  ii'j 

[^Publication  of  Malay  Archipelago) 

A  Letter  from  Dr.  Purland      ...  „  253 

My  First  Letter  from  Dr.  Purland       .  ,,  253 

Envelope  of  Second  Letter      ...  „  253 

My  Last  Letter  from  Dr.  Purland         .  „  255 

The  Dell,  Grays ,,261 

[Built  for  A.  R.Wallace) 

A.  R.  Wallace.    Aged  55      .       .       .        .  ,,  265 

Nutwood  Cottage^  Godalming    ...  „  269 

The  Moorish  Tent,  Louray  Cavern.       .  ,,  276 

Old  Orchard,  Broadstone  ....  „  307 

[Built  by  A.  R.   IV.,  1902) 


MY    LIFE 

A  RECORD  OF  EVENTS  AND  OPINIONS 
CHAPTER   I 

MY  RELATIVES  AND  ANCESTORS  * 

Our  family  had  but  few  relations,  and  I  myself  never 
saw  a  grandfather  or  grandmother,  nor  a  true  uncle, 
and  but  one  aunt — my  mother's  only  sister.  The 
only  cousins  we  ever  had,  so  far  as  I  know,  were  that 
sister's  family  of  eight  or  nine,  all  but  two  of  whom 
emigrated  to  South  Australia  in  1838.  Of  the  two 
who  remained  in  England,  the  daughter  had  married 
Mr.  Burningham,  and  had  only  one  child,  a  daughter, 
who  has  never  married.  The  son,  the  Rev.  Percy 
Wilson,  had  a  family,  none  of  whom,  however,  I  have 
ever  met,  though  I  have  recently  had  a  visit  from  a 
son  of  another  cousin,  Algernon,  with  whom  I  had  a 
considerable  correspondence. 

My  father  was  practically  an  only  son,  an  elder 
boy  dying  when  three  months  old  ;  and  as  his  father 
died  when  he  was  a  boy  of  twelve,  and  his  mother 
when  he  was  an  infant,  he  had  not  much  opportunity 
of  hearing  about  the  family  history.  I  myself  left 
home  before  I  was  fourteen,  and  only  rarely  visited 
my  parents  for  short  holidays,  except  once  during  my 

B 


2  MY   LIFE 

recovery  from  a  dangerous  illness,  so  that  I  also  had 
little  opportunity  of  learning  anything  of  our  ances- 
tors on  the  paternal  side,  more  especially  as  my  father 
seldom  spoke  of  his  youth,  and  I  as  a  boy  felt  no 
interest  in  his  genealogy.  Neither  did  my  eldest 
brother  William — with  whom  I  lived  till  I  was  of  age 
— ever  speak  on  the  subject.  The  little  I  have  gleaned 
was  from  my  sister  Fanny  and  from  a  recent  ex- 
amination of  tombstones  and  parish  registers,  and 
especially  from  an  old  Prayer-book  {1723)  which 
belonged  to  my  grandfather  Wallace,  who  had 
registered  in  it  the  dates  of  the  births  and  baptisms 
of  his  two  sons,  while  my  father  had  continued  the 
register  to  include  his  own  family  of  nine  children,  of 
whom  I  am  the  only  survivor. 

My  paternal  grandfather  was  married  at  Hanworth, 
Middlesex,  in  1765,  and  the  parish  register  describes 
him  as  William  Wallace,  of  Hanworth,  bachelor,  and 
his  wife  as  Elizabeth  Dilke,  of  Laleham,  widow.  Both 
are  buried  in  Laleham  churchyard,  where  I  presum.e 
the  former  Mrs.  Dilke  had  some  family  burial  rights, 
as  my  grandfather's  brother,  George  Wallace,  is  also 
buried  there.  The  register  at  Hanworth  contains  no 
record  of  my  father's  birth,  but  the  church  itself  shows 
that  quite  a  small  colony  of  Wallaces  lived  at  Han- 
worth. On  a  long  stone  in  the  floor  of  the  chancel 
is  the  name  of  James  Wallace,  Esq.,  who  died 
February  7,  1778,  aged  8y  years.  He  was  therefore 
thirty-five  years  older  than  my  grandfather,  and  may 
have  been  his  uncle.  Then  follows  Admiral  Sir 
James  Wallace,  who  died  on  March  6,  1803,  aged 
69  years  ;  and  Frances  Sleigh,  daughter  of  the 
above  James  Wallace,  Esq.,  who  died  December  12, 
1820,  aged  69  years. 


MY   RELATIVES  AND   ANCESTORS       3 

How  or  why  my  grandfather  came  to  live  at  Han- 
worth  (probably  with  his  brother  George,  who  is  also 
buried  at  Laleham),  I  can  only  conjecture  from  the 
following  facts.  Baron  Vere  of  Hanworth  is  one  of 
the  titles  of  the  Dukes  of  St.  Albans  since  1750,  when 
Vere  Beauclerc,  third  son  of  the  first  Duke,  was 
created  Baron,  and  his  son  became  fifth  Duke  of 
St.  Albans  in  1787.  It  is  to  be  presumed  that  the 
village  and  a  good  deal  of  the  land  was  at  that  time 
the  property  of  this  family,  though  they  appear  to 
have  parted  with  it  not  long  afterwards,  as  a  Mr.  Per- 
kins owned  the  park  and  rebuilt  the  church  in  18 12. 
The  St.  Albans  family  have  a  tomb  in  the  church. 
Now,  my  father's  name  was  Thomas  Vere  Wallace, 
and  it  therefore  seems  probable  that  his  father  was  a 
tenant  of  the  first  Baron  Vere,  and  in  his  will  he  is 
styled  "  Victualler."  He  probably  kept  the  inn  on 
the  estate. 

The  only  further  scrap  of  information  as  to  my 
father's  family  is  derived  from  a  remark  he  once 
made  in  my  hearing,  that  his  uncles  at  Stirling  (I 
think  he  said)  were  very  tall  men.  I  myself  was  six 
feet  in  height  when  I  was  sixteen,  and  my  eldest 
brother  William  was  an  inch  taller,  while  my  brother 
John  and  sister  Fanny  were  both  rather  tall.  My 
father  and  mother,  however,  were  under  rather  than 
over  middle  height,  and  the  remark  about  his  tall 
uncles  was  to  account  for  this  abnormal  height  by 
showing  that  it  was  in  the  family.  As  all  the  Wal- 
laces of  Scotland  are  held  to  be  various  branches  of 
the  one  family  of  the  hero  Sir  William  Wallace,  we 
have  always  considered  ourselves  to  be  descended 
from  that  famous  stock ;  and  this  view  is  supported 
by  the  fact  that  our  family  crest  was  said  to  be  an 


4  MY   LIFE 

ostrich's  head  with  a  horseshoe  in  its  mouth,  and  this 
crest  belongs,  according  to  Burke's  "  Peerage,"  to 
Craigie- Wallace,  one  of  the  branches  of  the  patriot's 
family. 

Of  my  mother's  family  I  have  somewhat  fuller 
details,  though  not  going  any  further  back.  Her 
father  was  John  Greenell,  of  Hertford,  who  died  there 
in  1824,  at  the  age  of  79.  He  had  two  daughters, 
Martha  and  Mary  Anne,  my  mother.  Their  mother 
died  when  the  two  girls  were  two  and  three  years 
old.  Mr.  Greenell  married  a  second  time,  and  his 
widow  lived  till  1828.  My  mother's  grandfather,  who 
died  in  1797,  aged  80,  was  for  many  years  an  alder- 
man, and  twice  Mayor  of  Hertford  (in  1773  and  1779), 
as  stated  in  the  records  of  the  borough.  He  was 
buried  in  St.  Andrew's  churchyard. 

There  is  also  in  the  same  churchyard  a  family 
tomb,  in  which  my  father  and  my  sister  Eliza  are 
buried,  but  which  belonged  to  a  brother  of  my 
mother's  grandfather,  William  Greenell,  as  shown  by 
the  inscription. 

I  will  now  say  a  few  words  about  my  father's  early 
life,  and  the  various  family  troubles  which,  though 
apparently  very  disadvantageous  to  his  children,  may 
yet  have  been  on  the  whole,  as  is  so  often  the  case, 
benefits  in  disguise. 

My  father,  Thomas  Vere  Wallace,  was  twelve 
years  old  when  his  father  died,  but  his  stepmother 
lived  twenty-one  years  after  her  husband,  and  I  think 
it  not  improbable  that  she  may  have  resided  in  Mary- 
lebone  near  William  Greenell  the  architect,  and  that 
my  father  went  to  school  there.  The  only  thing  I 
remember  his  telling  us  about  his  school  was  that  his 


MY   RELATIVES  AND  ANCESTORS      5 

master  dressed  in  the  old  fashion,  and  that  he  had  a 
best  suit  entirely  of  yellow  velvet. 

When  my  father  left  school  he  was  articled  to  a 
firm  of  solicitors— Messrs,  Ewington  and  Chilcot, 
Bond  Court,  Walbrook,  I  think,  as  I  find  this  name 
in  an  old  note-book  of  my  father's — and  in  1792, 
when  he  had  just  come  of  age,  he  was  duly  sworn  in 
as  an  Attorney-at-Law  of  the  Court  of  King's  Bench. 
He  is  described  in  the  deed  of  admittance  as  of 
Lamb's  Conduit  Street,  where  he  probably  lodged 
while  pursuing  his  legal  studies,  it  being  near  the 
Inns  of  Court  and  at  the  same  time  almost  in  the 
country.  He  seems,  however,  never  to  have  practised 
law,  since  he  came  into  property  which  gave  him  an 
income  of  about  ;^500  a  year. 

From  this  time  till  he  married,  fifteen  years  later, 
he  appears  to  have  lived  quite  idly,  so  far  as  being 
without  any  systematic  occupation,  often  going  to 
Bath  in  the  season,  where,  he  used  to  tell  us,  he 
had  met  the  celebrated  Beau  Brummell  and  other 
characters  of  the  early  years  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

My  sister  told  me  that  while  he  remained  a 
bachelor  my  father  lived  up  to  his  income  or  very 
nearly  so ;  and  from  what  we  know  of  his  after  life 
this  did  not  imply  any  extravagance  or  luxurious 
habits,  but  simply  that  he  enjoyed  himself  in  London 
and  the  country,  living  at  the  best  inns  or  boarding- 
houses,  and  taking  part  in  the  amusements  of  the 
period,  as  a  fairly  well-to-do,  middle-class  gentleman. 

After  his  marriage  in  1807  he  lived  in  Marylebone, 
and  his  ordinary  household  expenses,  of  course,  in- 
creased ;  and  as  by  18 10  he  had  two  children  and  the 
prospect  of  a  large  family,  he  appears  to  have  felt  the 
necessity  of  increasing  his  income.  Having  neglected 
the  law  so  long,  and  probably  having  a  distaste  for 


6  MY  LIFE 

it,  he  apparently  thought  it  quite  hopeless  to  begin 
to  practise  as  a  solicitor,  and  being  entirely  devoid  of 
business  habits,  allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded  into 
undertaking  one  of  the  most  risky  of  literary  specula- 
tions, the  starting  a  new  illustrated  magazine,  devoted 
apparently  to  art,  antiquities,  and  general  literature. 
After  a  very  few  numbers  were  issued  the  whole 
thing  came  to  grief,  partly,  it  was  said,  by  the 
defalcations  of  a  manager  or  book-keeper,  who 
appropriated  the  money  advanced  by  my  father  to 
pay  for  work  and  materials,  and  partly,  no  doubt, 
from  the  affair  being  in  the  hands  of  persons  without 
the  necessary  business  experience  and  literary  capacity 
to  make  it  a  success. 

The  result  was  that  my  father  had  to  bear  almost 
the  whole  loss,  and  this  considerably  reduced  his 
already  too  scanty  income.  Whether  he  made  any 
other  efforts  to  earn  money  I  do  not  know,  but  he 
continued  to  live  in  Marylebone  till  1816,  a  daughter 
Emma  having  been  born  there  in  that  year  ;  but  soon 
after  he  appears  to  have  removed  to  St.  George's, 
Southwark,  in  which  parish  my  brother  John  was 
born  in  1818.  Shortly  afterwards  his  affairs  must 
have  been  getting  worse,  and  he  determined  to  move 
with  his  family  of  six  children  to  some  place  where 
living  was  as  cheap  as  possible  ;  and,  probably  from 
having  introductions  to  some  residents  there,  fixed 
upon  Usk,  in  Monmouthshire,  where  a  sufficiently 
roomy  cottage  with  a  large  garden  was  obtained,  and 
where  I  was  born  on  January  8,  1823. 

In  the  year  1828  my  mother's  step-mother,  Mrs. 
Rebecca  Greenell,  died  at  Hertford,  and  I  presume 
it  was  in  consequence  of  this  event  that  the  family 
left  Usk  in  that  year,  and  lived  at  Hertford  for 
the  next  nine  or  ten  years,  removing  to  Hoddesdon 


MY  RELATIVES  AND  ANCESTORS      7 

in  1837  or  1838,  where  my  father  died  in  1843. 
These  last  fifteen  years  of  his  life  were  a  period  of 
great  trouble  and  anxiety,  his  affairs  becoming  more 
and  more  involved,  till  at  last  the  family  became 
almost  wholly  dependent  on  my  mother's  small 
marriage  settlement  of  less  than  a  hundred  a  year, 
supplemented  by  his  taking  a  few  pupils  and  by 
a  small  salary  which  he  received  as  librarian  to  a 
subscription  library. 

During  the  latter  part  of  the  time  we  lived  at 
Hertford  his  troubles  were  great.  He  appears  to 
have  allowed  a  solicitor  and  friend  whom  he  trusted 
to  realize  what  remained  of  his  property  and  invest 
it  in  ground-rents  which  would  bring  in  a  larger 
income,  and  at  the  same  time  be  perfectly  secure. 
For  a  few  years  the  income  from  this  property  was 
duly  paid  him,  then  it  was  partially  and  afterwards 
wholly  stopped.  It  appeared  that  the  solicitor  was 
himself  engaged  in  a  large  building  speculation  in 
London,  which  was  certain  to  be  ultimately  of  great 
value,  but  which  he  had  not  capital  enough  to  com- 
plete. He  therefore  had  to  raise  money,  and  did  so 
by  using  funds  entrusted  to  him  for  other  purposes, 
among  them  my  father's  small  capital.  But,  unfortu- 
nately, other  creditors  pressed  upon  him,  and  he  was 
obliged  to  sacrifice  the  whole  of  the  building  estate  at 
almost  a  nominal  price.  Out  of  the  wreck  of  the 
solicitor's  fortune  my  father  obtained  a  small  portion 
of  the  money  due,  with  promises  to  pay  all  at  some 
future  time.  Among  the  property  thus  lost  were 
some  legacies  from  my  mother's  relations  to  her 
children,  and  the  whole  affair  got  into  the  hands  of 
the  lawyers,  from  whom  small  amounts  were  periodi- 
cally received  which  helped  to  provide  us  with  bare 
necessaries. 


8  MY  LIFE 

As  a  result  of  this  series  of  misfortunes  the  children 
who  reached  their  majority  had  little  or  nothing  to 
start  with  in  earning  their  own  living,  except  a  very 
ordinary  education,  and  a  more  or  less  efficient  training. 
The  eldest  son,  William,  was  first  articled  to  a  firm  of 
surveyors  at  Kington,  Herefordshire,  probably  during 
the  time  we  resided  at  Usk.  He  then  spent  a  year 
or  two  in  the  office  of  an  architect  at  Hertford,  and 
finally  a  year  in  London  with  a  large  builder  named 
Martin  then  engaged  in  the  erection  of  King's  College, 
in  order  to  became  familiar  with  the  practical  details 
of  building.  He  may  be  said,  therefore,  to  have  had 
a  really  good  professional  education.  At  first  he  got 
into  general  land-surveying  work,  which  was  at  that 
time  rather  abundant,  owing  to  the  surveys  and 
valuations  required  for  carrying  out  the  Commutation 
of  Tithes  Act  of  1836,  and  also  for  the  enclosures  of 
commons  which  were  then  very  frequent.  During  the 
time  I  was  with  him  we  were  largely  engaged  in  this 
kind  of  work  in  various  parts  of  England  and  Wales, 
as  will  be  seen  later  on  ;  but  the  payment  for  such 
work  was  by  no  means  liberal,  and  owing  to  the 
frequent  periods  of  idleness  between  one  job  and 
another,  it  was  about  as  much  as  my  brother  could 
do  to  earn  our  living  and  travelling  expenses. 

About  the  time  I  went  to  live  with  my  brother 
(1837)  ^y  sister  Fanny  entered  a  French  school  at 
Lille  to  learn  the  language  and  to  teach  English,  and 
I  think  she  was  a  year  there.  On  her  return  she 
started  the  school  at  Hoddesdon,  but  after  my  father's 
death  in  1843,  she  obtained  a  position  as  a  teacher 
in  Columbia  College,  Georgia,  U.S.A.,  then  just 
established  under  the  Bishop  of  Georgia;  and  she 
only  returned  after  my  brother  William's  death  in 
1846,  when  the  surviving  members  of  the  family  in 


MY  RELATIVES  AND  ANCESTORS   9 

England  were  reunited,  and  lived  together  for  two 
years  in  a  cottage  near  Neath,  in  Glamorganshire. 

My  brother  John,  at  the  age  of  fourteen  or  fifteen, 
was  apprenticed,  first  to  Mr.  Martin  and  then  to  Mr. 
Webster,  a  Londer  builder  living  in  Albany  Street, 
Regent  Park,  where  he  became  a  thorough  joiner 
and  carpenter.  He  afterwards  worked  for  a  time  for 
Cubitt  and  other  large  builders  ;  then,  when  he  came 
to  live  with  me  at  Neath,  he  learnt  surveying  and 
a  little  architecture.  When  I  went  to  the  Amazon, 
he  took  a  small  dairy-farm  at  too  high  a  rent,  and 
not  making  this  pay,  in  1849  he  emigrated  to 
California  at  the  height  of  the  first  rush  for  gold, 
joined  several  mining  camps,  and  was  moderately 
successful.  About  five  years  later  he  came  home, 
married  Miss  Webster,  and  returning  to  California, 
settled  for  some  years  at  Columbia,  a  small  mining 
town  in  Tuolumne  County.  He  afterwards  removed 
to  Stockton,  where  he  practised  as  surveyor  and  water 
engineer  till  his  death  in  1895. 

My  younger  brother,  ^Herbert,  was  first  placed 
with  a  trunk  maker  in  Regent  Street,  but  not  liking 
this  business,  afterwards  came  to  Neath  and  entered 
the  pattern-shops  of  the  Neath  Ironworks.  After  his 
brother  John  went  to  California  he  came  out  to  me 
at  Para,  and  after  a  year  spent  on  the  Amazon  as  far 
as  Barra  on  the  Rio  Negro,  he  returned  to  Para  on 
his  way  home,  where  he  caught  yellow  fever,  and 
died  in  a  few  days  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-two. 
He  was  the  only  member  of  our  family  who  had  a 
considerable  gift  of  poesy,  and  was  probably  more 
fitted  for  a  literary  career  than  for  any  mechanical  or 
professional  occupation. 

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  we  were  all  of  us  very 
much  thrown  on  our  own  resources  to  make  our  way 


10  MY   LIFE 

in  life ;  and  as  we  all,  I  think,  inherited  from  my 
father  a  certain  amount  of  constitutional  inactivity  or 
laziness,  the  necessity  for  work  that  our  circumstances 
entailed  was  certainly  beneficial  in  developing  what- 
ever powers  were  latent  in  us  ;  and  this  is  what  I 
implied  when  I  remarked  that  our  father's  loss  of  his 
property  was  perhaps  a  blessing  in  disguise. 

Of  the  five  daughters,  the  first-born  died  when 
five  months  old  ;  the  next,  Eliza,  died  of  consumption 
at  Hertford,  aged  twenty-two.  Two  others,  Mary 
Anne  and  Emma,  died  at  Usk  at  the  ages  of  eight 
and  six  respectively ;  while  Frances  married  Mr. 
Thomas  Sims,  a  photographer,  and  died  in  London, 
aged  eighty-one. 

On  the  whole,  both  the  Wallaces  and  the  Greenells 
seem  to  have  been  rather  long-lived  when  they  reached 
manhood  or  womanhood.  The  five  ancestral  Wallaces 
of  whom  I  have  records  had  an  average  age  of  seventy 
years,  while  the  five  Greenells  had  an  average  of 
seventy-six.  Of  our  own  family,  my  brother  John 
reached  seventy-seven,  and  my  sister  Fanny  eighty- 
one.  My  brother  William  owed  his  death  to  a  railway 
journey  by  night  in  winter,  from  London  to  South 
Wales  in  the  miserable  accommodation  then  afforded 
to  third-class  passengers,  which,  increased  by  a  damp 
bed  at  Bristol,  brought  on  severe  congestion  of  the 
lungs,  from  which  he  never  recovered. 

I  will  now  give  a  short  account  of  my  father's 
appearance  and  character.  In  a  miniature,  painted 
just  before  his  marriage,  when  he  was  thirty-five  years 
old,  he  is  represented  in  a  blue  coat  with  gilt  buttons, 
a  white  waistcoat,  a  thick  white  neck-cloth  coming  up 
to  the  chin  and  showing  no  collar,  and  a  frilled  shirt- 
front.     This  was  probably  his  wedding-coat,  and  his 


THOMAS    VERE    WALLACE.        AGED 
(At  time  of  his  marriage.) 


MARY   ANNE   WALLACE.       AGED    1 8. 

{.4i  time  of  her  maiTtage.) 


MY   RELATIVES  AND  ANCESTORS     ii        4i 

usual  costume,  indicating  the  transition  from  the  richly 
coloured  semi-court  dress  of  the  earlier  Georgian 
period  to  the  plain  black  of  our  own  day.  He  is 
shown  as  having  a  ruddy  complexion,  blue  eyes,  and 
carefully  dressed  and  curled  hair,  which  I  think  must 
have  been  powdered,  or  else  in  the  transition  from 
light  brown  to  pure  white.  As  I  remember  him  from 
the  age  of  fifty-five  onwards,  his  hair  was  rather  thin 
and  quite  white,  and  he  was  always  clean-shaved  as 
in  the  miniature. 

In  figure  he  was  somewhat  below  the  middle 
height.  He  was  fairly  active  and  fond  of  gardening 
and  other  country  occupations,  such  as  brewing  beer 
and  making  grape  or  elder  wine  whenever  he  had 
the  opportunity  ;  and  during  some  years  at  Hertford 
he  rented  a  garden  about  half  a  mile  away,  in  order 
to  grow  vegetables  and  have  some  wholesome  exercise. 

He  was  rather  precise  and  regular  in  his  habits, 
quiet  and  rather  dignified  in  manners,  and  what 
would  be  termed  a  gentleman  of  the  old  school.  Of 
course,  he  always  wore  a  top-hat — a  beaver  hat  as  it 
was  then  called,  before  silk  hats  were  invented — the 
only  other  headgear  being  sometimes  a  straw  hat  for 
use  in  the  garden  in  summer. 

In  character  he  was  quiet  and  even-tempered,  very 
religious  in  the  orthodox  Church-of-England  way,  and 
with  such  a  reliance  on  Providence  as  almost  to 
amount  to  fatalism.  He  was  fond  of  reading,  and 
through  reading-clubs  or  lending-libraries  we  usually 
had  some  of  the  best  books  of  travel  or  biography  in 
the  house.  Some  of  these  my  father  would  read  to 
us  in  the  evening,  and  when  Bowdler's  edition  of 
Shakespeare  came  out  he  obtained  it,  and  often  read 
a  play  to  the  assembled  family. 

At  one  time  my  father  wrote  a  good  deal,  and  we 


12  MY  LIFE 

were  told  it  was  a  history  of  Hertford,  or  at  other 
times  some  religious  work ;  but  they  were  never 
finished,  and  I  do  not  think  they  would  ever  have 
been  worth  publishing,  his  character  not  leading  him 
to  do  any  such  work  with  sufficient  thoroughness. 
He  dabbled  a  little  in  antiquities  and  in  heraldry,  but 
did  nothing  systematic ;  and  though  he  had  fair  mental 
ability  he  possessed  no  special  talent,  either  literary, 
artistic,  or  scientific.  He  sketched  a  little,  but  with 
a  very  weak  and  uncertain  touch,  and  among  his  few 
scrap-  and  note-books  that  have  been  preserved,  there 
is  hardly  anything  original  except  one  or  two  short 
poems  in  the  usual  didactic  style  of  the  period,  but  of 
no  special  merit. 


CHAPTER   II 

MY  EARLIEST  MEMORIES,   USK  AND  HERTFORD 

My  earliest  recollections  of  myself  are  as  a  little  boy 
in  short  frocks  and  with  bare  arms  and  legs,  playing 
with  my  brother  and  sisters,  or  sitting  in  my  mother's 
lap  or  on  a  footstool  listening  to  stories,  of  which 
some  fairy-tales,  especially  "Jack  the  Giant-Killer," 
"  Little  Red  Riding  Hood,"  and  "  Jack  and  the  Bean- 
stalk," seem  to  live  in  my  memory ;  and  of  a  more 
realistic  kind,  "  Sandford  and  Merton,"  which  perhaps 
impressed  me  even  more  deeply  than  any.  I  clearly 
remember  the  little  house  and  the  room  we  chiefly 
occupied,  with  a  French  window  opening  to  the 
garden,  a  steep  wooded  bank  on  the  right,  the  road, 
river,  and  distant  low  hills  to  the  left.  The  house 
itself  was  built  close  under  this  bank,  which  was  quite 
rocky  in  places. 

The  river  in  front  of  our  house  was  the  Usk,  a  fine 
stream  on  which  we  often  saw  men  fishing  in  coracles, 
the  ancient  form  of  boat  made  of  strong  wicker-work, 
somewhat  the  shape  of  the  deeper  half  of  a  cockle- 
shell, and  covered  with  bullock's  hide.  Each  coracle 
held  one  man,  and  it  could  be  easily  carried  to  and 
from  the  river  on  the  owner's  back.  In  those  days  of 
scanty  population  and  abundant  fish  the  river  was  not 
preserved,  and  a  number  of  men  got  their  living,  or 
part  of  it,  by  supplying  the  towns  with  salmon  and 


14  MY   LIFE 

trout  in  their  season.  It  is  very  interesting  that  this 
extremely  ancient  boat,  which  has  been  in  use  from 
pre-Roman  times,  and  perhaps  even  from  the  Neolithic 
Age,  should  continue  to  be  used  on  several  of  the 
Welsh  rivers  down  to  the  present  day.  There  is 
probably  no  other  type  of  vessel  now  in  existence 
which  has  remained  unchanged  for  so  long  a  period. 

The  chief  attraction  of  the  river  to  us  children 
was  the  opportunity  it  afforded  us  for  catching  small 
fish,  especially  lampreys.  A  short  distance  from  our 
house,  towards  the  little  village  of  Llanbadock,  the 
rocky  bank  came  close  to  the  road,  and  a  stone  quarry 
had  been  opened  to  obtain  stone,  both  for  building 
and  road-mending  purposes.  Here,  occasionally,  the 
rock  was  blasted,  and  sometimes  we  had  the  fearful 
delight  of  watching  the  explosion  from  a  safe  distance, 
and  seeing  a  cloud  of  the  smaller  stones  shoot  up  into 
the  air.  At  some  earlier  period  very  large  charges  of 
powder  must  have  been  used,  hurling  great  slabs  of 
rock  across  the  road  into  the  river,  where  they  lay, 
forming  convenient  piers  and  standing-places  on  its 
margin.  Some  of  these  slabs  were  eight  or  ten  feet 
long  and  nearly  as  wide  ;  and  it  was  these  that  formed 
our  favourite  fishing-stations,  where  we  sometimes 
found  shoals  of  small  lampreys,  which  could  be  scooped 
up  in  basins  or  old  saucepans,  and  were  then  fried  for 
our  dinner  or  supper,  to  our  great  enjoyment.  I  think 
what  we  caught  must  have  been  the  young  fish,  as 
my  recollection  of  them  is  that  they  were  like  little 
eels,  and  not  more  than  six  or  eight  inches  long, 
whereas  the  full-grown  lampreys  are  from  a  foot  and 
a  half  to  nearly  three  feet  long. 

At  this  time  I  must  have  been  about  four  years 
old,  as  we  left  Usk  when  I  was  about  five,  or  less. 
My  brother  John  was  four  and  a  half  years  older,  and 


MY   EARLIEST   MEMORIES  15 

I  expect  was  the  leader  in  most  of  our  games  and 
explorations.  My  two  sisters  were  five  and  seven 
years  older  than  John,  so  that  they  would  have  been 
about  thirteen  and  fifteen,  which  would  appear  to  me 
quite  grown  up ;  and  this  makes  me  think  that  my 
recollections  must  go  back  to  the  time  when  I  was 
just  over  three,  as  I  quite  distinctly  remember  two,  if 
not  three,  besides  myself,  standing  on  the  flat  stones 
and  catching  lampreys. 

There  is  an  incident  in  which  I  remember  that  my 
brother  and  at  least  one,  if  not  two,  of  my  sisters  took 
part.  Among  the  books  read  to  us  was  "  Sandford 
and  Merton,"  the  only  part  of  which  that  I  distinctly 
remember  is  when  the  two  boys  got  lost  in  a  wood 
after  dark,  and  while  Merton  could  do  nothing  but 
cry  at  the  idea  of  having  to  pass  the  night  without 
supper  or  bed,  the  resourceful  Sandford  comforted 
him  by  promising  that  he  should  have  both,  and  set 
him  to  gather  sticks  for  a  fire,  which  he  lit  with  a 
tinder-box  and  match  from  his  pocket.  Then,  when 
a  large  fire  had  been  made,  he  produced  some  potatoes 
which  he  had  picked  up  in  a  field  on  the  way,  and 
which  he  then  roasted  beautifully  in  the  embers,  and 
even  produced  from  another  pocket  a  pinch  of  salt  in 
a  screw  of  paper,  so  that  the  two  boys  had  a  very 
good  supper.  Then,  collecting  fern  and  dead  leaves 
for  a  bed,  and  I  think  making  a  coverlet  by  taking 
off  their  two  jackets,  which  made  them  quite  comfort- 
able while  lying  as  close  together  as  possible,  they 
enjoyed  a  good  night's  sleep  till  daybreak,  when  they 
easily  found  their  way  home. 

This  seemed  so  delightful  that  one  day  John 
provided  himself  with  the  matchbox,  salt,  and  pota- 
toes, and  having  climbed  up  the  steep  bank  behind 
our  house,  as  we  often  did,  and  passed  over  a  field  or 


i6  MY   LIFE 

two  to  the  woods  beyond,  to  my  great  delight  a  fire 
was  made,  and  we  also  feasted  on  potatoes  with  salt, 
as  Sandford  and  Merton  had  done.  Of  course  we 
did  not  complete  the  imitation  of  the  story  by  sleep- 
ing in  the  wood,  which  would  have  been  too  bold  and 
dangerous  an  undertaking  for  our  sisters  to  join  in, 
even  if  my  brother  and  I  had  wished  to  do  so. 

I  may  here  mention  a  psychological  peculiarity, 
no  doubt  common  to  many  children  of  the  same  age, 
that,  during  the  whole  period  of  my  residence  at  Usk, 
I  have  no  clear  recollection,  and  can  form  no  distinct 
mental  image,  of  either  my  father  or  mother,  brothers 
or  sisters.  I  simply  recollect  that  they  existed,  but 
my  recollection  is  only  a  blurred  image,  and  does  not 
extend  to  any  peculiarities  of  feature,  form,  or  even 
of  dress  or  habits.  It  is  only  at  a  considerably  later 
period  that  I  begin  to  recollect  them  as  distinct  and 
well-marked  individuals  whose  form  and  features 
could  not  be  mistaken — as,  in  fact,  being  my  father 
and  mother,  my  brothers  and  sisters  ;  and  the  house 
and  surroundings  in  which  I  can  thus  first  recollect, 
and  in  some  degree  visualize  them,  enable  me  to  say 
that  I  must  have  been  then  at  least  eight  years  old. 

What  makes  this  deficiency  the  more  curious  is 
that,  during  the  very  same  period  at  which  I  cannot 
recall  the  personal  appearance  of  the  individuals  with 
whom  my  life  was  most  closely  associated,  I  can  recall 
all  the  main  features  and  many  of  the  details  of  my 
outdoor,  and,  to  a  less  degree,  of  my  indoor,  sur- 
roundings. The  form  and  colour  of  the  house,  the 
road,  the  river  close  below  it,  the  bridge  with  the 
cottage  near  its  foot,  the  narrow  fields  between  us 
and  the  bridge,  the  steep  wooded  bank  at  the  back, 
the  stone  quarry  and  the  very  shape  and  position  of 
the  flat  slabs  on  which  we  stood  fishing,  the  cottages 


MY  EARLIEST  MEMORIES  17 

a  little  further  on  the  road,  the  little  church  of  Llan- 
badock  and  the  stone  stile  into  the  churchyard,  the 
fishermen  and  their  coracles,  the  ruined  castle,  its 
winding  stair  and  the  delightful  walk  round  its  top — 
all  come  before  me  as  I  recall  these  earlier  days  with 
a  distinctness  strangely  contrasted  with  the  vague 
shadowy  figures  of  the  human  beings  who  were  my 
constant  associates  in  all  these  scenes.  In  the  house 
I  recollect  the  arrangement  of  the  rooms,  the  French 
window  to  the  garden,  and  the  blue-papered  room  n 
which  I  slept,  but  of  the  people  always  with  me  in 
those  rooms,  and  even  of  the  daily  routine  of  our 
life,  I  remember  nothing  at  all. 

I  cannot  find  any  clear  explanation  of  these  facts 
in  modern  psychology,  whereas  they  all  become  intel- 
ligible from  the  phrenological  point  of  view.  The 
shape  of  my  head  shows  that  I  have  form  and  indi- 
vidtiality  but  moderately  developed,  while  locality^ 
ideality,  colour,  and  comparison  are  decidedly  stronger. 
Deficiency  in  the  first  two  caused  me  to  take  little 
notice  of  the  characteristic  form  and  features  of  the 
separate  individualities  which  were  most  familiar  to 
me,  and  from  that  very  cause  attracted  less  close 
attention  ;  while  the  greater  activity  of  the  latter 
group  gave  interest  and  attractiveness  to  the  ever- 
changing  combinations  in  outdoor  scenery,  while  the 
varied  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  the  physical 
activities,  and  the  delight  in  the  endless  variety  of 
nature  which  are  so  strong  in  early  childhood,  im- 
pressed these  outdoor  scenes  and  interests  upon  my 
memory.  And  throughout  life  the  same  limitations 
of  observation  and  memory  have  been  manifest.  In 
a  new  locality  it  takes  me  a  considerable  time  before 
I  learn  to  recognize  my  various  new  acquaintances 
individually ;  and  looking  back  on  the  varied  scenes 


18  MY   LIFE 

amid  which  I  have  lived  at  home  and  abroad,  while 
numerous  objects,  localities,  and  events  are  recalled 
with  some  distinctness,  the  people  I  met,  or,  with  few 
exceptions,  those  with  whom  I  became  fairly  well 
acquainted,  seem  but  blurred  and  indistinct  images. 

In  the  year  1883,  when  for  the  first  time  since  my 
childhood  I  revisited,  with  my  wife  and  two  children, 
the  scenes  of  my  infancy,  I  obtained  a  striking  proof 
of  the  accuracy  of  my  memory  of  those  scenes  and 
objects.  Although  the  town  of  Usk  had  grown  con- 
siderably on  the  north  side  towards  the  railway,  yet, 
to  my  surprise  and  delight,  I  found  that  no  change 
whatever  had  occurred  on  our  side  of  the  river,  where, 
between  the  bridge  and  Llanbadock,  not  a  new  house 
had  been  built,  and  our  cottage  and  garden,  the  path 
up  to  the  front  door,  and  the  steep  woody  bank 
behind  it,  remained  exactly  as  pictured  in  my  memory. 
Even  the  quarry  appeared  to  have  been  very  little 
enlarged,  and  the  great  flat  stones  were  still  in  the 
river  exactly  as  when  I  had  stood  upon  them  with  my 
brothers  and  sisters  sixty  years  before.  The  one 
change  I  noted  here  was  that  the  well-remembered 
stone  stile  into  the  village  churchyard  had  been  re- 
placed by  a  wooden  one.  We  also  visited  the  ruined 
castle,  ascended  the  winding  stair,  and  walked  round 
the  top  wall,  and  everything  seemed  to  me  exactly 
as  I  knew  it  of  old,  and  neither  smaller  nor  larger 
than  my  memory  had  so  long  pictured  it.  The  view 
of  the  Abergavenny  mountains  pleased  and  interested 
me  as  in  childhood,  and  the  clear-flowing  Usk  seemed 
just  as  broad  and  as  pleasant  to  the  eye  as  my 
memory  had  always  pictured  it. 

So  far  as  I  can  remember  or  have  heard  I  had  no 
illness  of  any  kind  at  Usk,  which  was  no  doubt  due 
to  the  free  outdoor  life  we  lived  there,  spending  a  great 


MY   EARLIEST   MEMORIES  19 

part  of  the  day  in  the  large  garden  or  by  the  riverside, 
or  in  the  fields  and  woods  around  us.  As  will  be 
seen  later  on,  this  immunity  ceased  as  soon  as  we 
went  to  live  in  a  town.  I  remember  only  one  childish 
accident.  The  cook  was  taking  away  a  frying-pan 
with  a  good  deal  of  boiling  fat  in  it,  which  for  some 
reason  I  wanted  to  see,  and,  stretching  out  my  arm 
over  it,  I  suppose  to  show  that  I  wanted  it  lowered 
down,  my  fore-arm  went  into  the  fat  and  was  badly 
scalded.  I  mention  this  only  for  the  purpose  of  call- 
ing attention  to  the  fact  that,  although  I  vividly 
remember  the  incident,  I  cannot  recall  that  I  suffered 
the  least  pain,  though  I  was  told  afterwards  that  it 
was  really  a  severe  burn.  This,  and  other  facts  of  a 
similar  kind,  make  me  think  that  young  children 
suffer  far  less  pain  than  adults  from  the  same  injuries. 
And  this  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  purpose  for 
which  pain  exists,  which  is  to  guard  the  body  against 
injuries  dangerous  to  life,  and  to  give  us  the  impulse 
to  escape  rapidly  from  any  danger.  But  as  infants 
cannot  escape  from  fatal  dangers,  and  do  not  even 
know  what  things  are  dangerous  and  what  not,  only 
very  slight  sensations  of  pain  are  at  first  required,  and 
such  only  are  therefore  developed,  and  these  increase 
in  intensity  just  in  proportion  as  command  over  the 
muscles  giving  the  power  of  rapid  automatic  move- 
ments becomes  possible.  The  sensation  of  pain  does 
not,  probably,  reach  its  maximum  till  the  whole 
organism  is  fully  developed  in  the  adult  individual. 
This  is  rather  a  comforting  conclusion  in  view  of  the 
sufferings  of  so  many  infants  needlessly  massacred 
through  the  terrible  defects  of  our  vicious  social 
system. 

I  may  add  here  a  note  as  to  my  personal  appear- 
ance at  this  age.    I  was  exceedingly  fair,  and  my  long 


20  MY  LIFE 

hair  was  of  a  very  light  flaxen  tint,  so  that  I  was 
generally  spoken  of  among  the  Welsh-speaking  country 
people  as  the  "  little  Saxon." 

My  recollections  of  our  leaving  Usk  and  of  the 
journey  to  London  are  very  faint,  only  one  incident 
of  it  being  clearly  visualized — the  crossing  the  Severn 
at  the  Old  Passage  in  an  open  ferry-boat.  This  is 
very  clear  to  me,  possibly  because  it  was  the  first 
time  I  had  ever  been  in  a  boat.  I  remember  sitting 
with  my  mother  and  sisters  on  a  seat  at  one  side  of 
the  boat,  which  seemed  to  me  about  as  wide  as  a 
small  room,  of  its  leaning  over  so  that  we  were  close 
to  the  water,  and  especially  of  the  great  boom  of  the 
mainsail,  when  our  course  was  changed,  requiring  us 
all  to  stoop  our  heads  for  it  to  swing  over  us.  It  was 
a  little  awful  to  me,  and  I  think  we  were  all  glad 
when  it  was  over  and  we  were  safe  on  land  again. 
We  must  have  travelled  all  day  by  coach  from  Usk 
to  the  Severn,  then  on  to  Bristol,  then  from  Bristol 
to  London,  where  we  stayed  at  an  inn  in  Holborn. 

Of  the  next  few  months  of  my  life  I  have  also  but 
slight  recollections,  confined  to  some  isolated  facts  or 
incidents.  On  leaving  the  inn  we  went  to  my  aunt's 
at  Dulwich.  I  remember  being  much  impressed  with 
the  large  house,  and  especially  with  the  beautiful 
grounds,  with  lawns,  trees,  and  shrubs  such  as  I  had 
never  seen  before.  There  was  here  also  a  family  of 
cousins,  some  about  my  own  age,  and  the  few  days 
we  stayed  were  very  bright  and  enjoyable.  Thence 
I  was  sent  to  a  school  in  Essex,  with  some  ladies  who 
had  about  half  a  dozen  boys  and  girls  of  my  own  age. 

My  next  recollections  are  of  the  town  of  Hertford, 
where  we  lived  for  eight  or  nine  years,  and  where  I 
received  the  whole  of  my  school  education.  We  had 
a  small  house,  the  first  of  a   row   of  four  at   the 


MY  EARLIEST  MEMORIES  21 

beginning  of  St.  Andrew's  Street ;  and  I  must  have 
been  a  little  more  than  six  years  old  when  I  first 
remember  myself  in  this  house,  which  had  a  very 
narrow  yard  at  the  back,  and  a  dwarf  wall,  perhaps 
five  feet  high,  between  us  and  the  adjoining  house. 
The  very  first  incident  I  remember,  which  happened, 
I  think,  on  the  morning  after  my  arrival,  was  of  a 
boy  about  my  own  age  looking  over  this  wall,  who  at 
once  inquired,  "  Hullo  !  who  are  you  }  "  I  told  him 
that  I  had  just  come,  and  what  my  name  was,  and 
we  at  once  made  friends.  The  stand  of  a  water-butt 
enabled  me  to  get  up  and  sit  upon  the  wall,  and  by 
means  of  some  similar  convenience  he  could  do  the 
same,  and  we  were  thus  able  to  sit  side  by  side  and 
talk,  or  get  over  the  wall  and  play  together  when  we 
liked.  Thus  began  the  friendship  of  George  Silk  and 
Alfred  Wallace,  which,  with  long  intervals  of  absence 
at  various  periods,  has  continued  to  this  day. 

The  old  town  of  Hertford,  in  which  I  passed  the 
most  impressionable  years  of  my  life,  and  where  I 
first  obtained  a  rudimentary  acquaintance  with  my 
fellow-creatures  and  with  nature,  is,  perhaps,  on  the 
whole,  one  of  the  most  pleasantly  situated  county 
towns  in  England,  although  as  a  boy  I  did  not  know 
this,  and  did  not  appreciate  the  many  advantages  I 
enjoyed.  Among  its  most  delightful  features  are 
numerous  rivers  and  streams  in  the  immediately  sur- 
rounding country,  affording  pleasant  walks  through 
flowery  meads,  many  picturesque  old  mills,  and  a 
great  variety  of  landscape.  The  river  Lea,  coming 
from  the  south-west,  passes  through  the  middle  of  the 
town,  where  the  old  town-mill  was  situated  in  an 
open  space  called  the  Wash,  which  was  no  doubt 
liable  to  be  flooded  in  early  times.  The  miller  was 
reputed  to  be  one  of  the  richest  men  in  the  town,  yet 


22  MY   LIFE 

we  often  saw  him  standing  at  the  mill  doors  in  his 
dusty  miller's  clothes  as  we  passed  on  our  way  from 
school.  He  was  a  cousin  of  my  mother's  by  marriage, 
and  we  children  sometimes  went  to  tea  at  his  house, 
and  then,  as  a  great  treat,  were  shown  all  over  the 
mill  with  all  its  strange  wheels  and  whirling  mill- 
stones, its  queer  little  pockets,  on  moving  leather 
belts,  carrying  the  wheat  up  to  the  stones  in  a 
continual  stream,  the  ever-rattling  sieves  and  cloths 
which  sifted  out  the  bran  and  pollard,  and  the  weird 
peep  into  the  dark  cavern  where  the  great  dripping 
water-wheel  went  on  its  perpetual  round.  Where  the 
river  passed  under  the  bridge  close  by,  we  could 
clamber  up  and  look  over  the  parapet  into  the  deep, 
clear  water  rushing  over  a  dam,  and  also  see  where 
the  stream  that  turned  the  wheel  passed  swiftly  under 
a  low  arch,  and  this  was  a  sight  that  never  palled 
upon  us,  so  that  almost  every  fine  day,  as  we  passed 
this  way  home  from  school,  we  gave  a  few  moments 
to  gazing  into  this  dark,  deep  water,  almost  always  in 
shadow  owing  to  high  buildings  on  both  sides  of  it, 
but  affording  a  pleasant  peep  to  fields  and  gardens 
beyond. 

Here,  too,  in  the  river  Beane,  which  had  a  gentle 
stream  with  alternate  deep  holes  and  sandy  shallows, 
suitable  for  boys  of  all  ages,  was  our  favourite  bathing- 
place,  where,  not  long  after  our  coming  to  Hertford, 
I  was  very  nearly  drowned.  It  was  at  a  place  called 
Willowhole,  where  those  who  could  swim  a  little 
would  jump  in,  and  in  a  few  strokes  in  any  direction 
reach  shallower  water.  I  and  my  brother  John  and 
several  schoolfellows  were  going  to  bathe,  and  I,  who 
had  undressed  first,  was  standing  on  the  brink,  when 
one  of  my  companions  gave  me  a  sudden  push  from 
behind,  £tnd    I    tumbled   in   and   went  under  water 


MY    EARLIEST   MEMORIES  23 

immediately.  Coming  to  the  surface  half  dazed,  I 
splashed  about  and  went  under  again,  when  my 
brother,  who  was  four  and  a  half  years  older,  jumped 
in  and  pulled  me  out.  I  do  not  think  I  had  actually 
lost  consciousness,  but  I  had  swallowed  a  good  deal 
of  water,  and  I  lay  on  the  grass  for  some  time  before 
I  got  strength  to  dress,  and  by  the  time  I  got  home  I 
was  quite  well.  It  was,  I  think,  the  first  year,  if  not 
the  first  time,  I  had  ever  bathed,  and  if  my  brother 
had  not  been  there  it  is  quite  possible  that  I  might 
have  been  drowned.  This  gave  me  such  a  fright  that 
though  I  often  bathed  here  afterwards,  I  always  went 
in  where  the  water  was  shallow,  and  did  not  learn  to 
swim,  however  little,  till  several  years  later. 

Few  small  towns  (it  had  then  less  than  six 
thousand  inhabitants)  have  a  more  agreeable  public 
playground  than  the  fine  open  space  called  Hartham 
with  the  level  valley  of  the  Lea  stretching  away  to 
Ware  on  the  east,  the  town  itself  just  over  the  river 
on  the  south,  while  on  the  north,  just  across  the  river 
Beane,  was  a  steep  slope  covered  with  scattered  fir 
trees,  and  called  the  Warren,  at  the  foot  of  which  was 
a  footpath  leading  to  the  picturesque  little  village  and 
old  church  of  Bengeo.  This  path  along  the  Warren 
was  a  favourite  walk  of  mine  either  alone  or  with  a 
playmate,  where  we  could  scramble  up  the  bank, 
climb  up  some  of  the  old  trees,  or  sit  comfortably 
upon  one  or  two  old  stumpy  yews,  which  had  such 
twisted  branches  and  stiff  spreading  foliage  as  to 
form  delightful  seats.  This  place  was  very  little 
frequented,  and  our  wanderings  in  it  were  never 
interfered  with. 

About  three-quarters  of  a  mile  from  the  centre  of 
the  town,  going  along  West  Street,  was  a  mill  called 
Horn's  Mill,  which  was  a  great  attraction  to  me.     It 


24  MY  LIFE 

was  an  old-fashioned  mill  for  grinding  linseed,  ex- 
pressing the  oil,  and  making  oil-cake.  The  mill  stood 
close  by  the  roadside,  and  there  were  small  low 
windows  always  open,  through  which  we  could  look 
in  at  the  fascinating  processes  as  long  as  we  liked. 
First,  there  were  two  great  vertical  millstones  of  very 
smooth  red  granite,  which  shone  beautifully  from  the 
oil  of  the  ground  seeds.  These  were  fixed  on  each 
side  of  a  massive  vertical  wooden  axis  on  a  central 
iron  axle,  revolving  slowly  and  silently,  and  crushing 
the  linseed  into  a  fine  oily  meal. 

But  this  was  only  one  part  of  this  delightful  kind 
of  peepshow.  A  little  way  off  an  equally  novel  and 
still  more  complex  operation  was  always  going  on, 
accompanied  by  strange  noises  always  dear  to  the 
young.  Looking  in  at  other  windows  we  saw 
numbers  of  workmen  engaged  in  strange  operations 
amid  strange  machinery,  with  its  hum  and  whirl  and 
reverberating  noises.  Close  before  us  were  long 
erections  like  shop  counters,  but  not  quite  so  high. 
Immediately  above  these,  at  a  height  of  perhaps  ten 
or  twelve  feet,  a  long  cylindrical  beam  was  continually 
revolving  with  fixed  beams  on  each  side  of  it,  both 
higher  up  and  lower  down.  At  regular  intervals 
along  the  counter  were  great  upright  wooden  stampers 
shod  with  iron  at  the  bottom.  When  not  in  action 
these  were  supported  so  that  they  were  about  two 
feet  above  the  counter,  and  just  below  them  was  a 
square  hole.  As  we  looked  on  a  man  would  take  a 
small  canvas  sack  about  two  feet  long,  fill  it  full  of 
linseed  meal  from  a  large  box  by  his  side,  place  this 
bag  in  a  strong  cover  of  a  kind  of  floorcloth  with 
flaps  going  over  the  top  and  down  each  side.  The 
sack  of  meal  thus  prepared  would  then  be  dropped 
into  the  hole,  which  it  entered  easily.     Then  a  thin 


MY   EARLIEST  MEMORIES  25 

board  of  hard  wood,  tapered  to  the  lower^  edge,  was 
pushed  down  on  one  side  of  it,  and  outside  this  again 
another  wedge-shaped  piece  was  inserted.  The  top 
of  this  was  now  just  under  the  iron  cap  of  the  heavy 
pile  or  rammer,  and  on  pulling  a  rope,  this  was  freed 
and  dropped  on  the  top  of  the  wedge,  which  it  forced 
halfway  down.  In  a  few  seconds  it  was  raised  up 
again,  and  fell  upon  the  wedge,  driving  it  in  a  good 
deal  further,  and  the  third  blow  would  send  it  down 
level  with  the  top  of  the  counter.  Then  when  the 
rammer  rose  up,  another  rope  was  pulled,  and  it 
remained  suspended  ;  a  turn  of  a  handle  enabled  the 
first  wedge  to  be  drawn  out  and  a  much  thicker  one 
inserted,  when,  after  two  or  three  blows,  this  became 
so  hard  to  drive  that  the  rammer  falling  upon  it  made 
a  dull  sound  and  rebounded  a  little  ;  and  as  the 
process  went  on  the  blows  became  sharper,  and  the 
pile  would  rebound  two  or  three  times  like  a  billiard 
ball  rebounding  again  and  again  from  a  stone  floor, 
but  in  more  rapid  succession.  This  went  on  for 
hours,  and  when  the  process  was  finished,  the  meal  in 
the  sack  had  become  so  highly  compressed  that  when 
taken  out  it  was  found  to  be  converted  into  a  compact 
oilcake. 


CHAPTER  III 

MY  SCHOOL  LIFE  AT  HERTFORD 

My  recollections  of  life  at  our  first  house  in  St. 
Andrew's  Street  are  very  scanty.  My  father  had 
about  half  a  dozen  small  boys  to  teach,  and  we  used 
to  play  together ;  but  I  think  that  when  we  had  been 
there  about  a  year  or  two,  I  went  to  the  Grammar 
School  with  my  brother  John,  and  was  at  once  set 
upon  that  most  wearisome  of  tasks,  the  Latin 
grammar.  It  was  soon  after  this  that  I  had  the  first 
of  the  three  serious  illnesses  which  at  different  periods 
brought  me  within  a  few  hours  of  death  in  the  opinion 
of  those  around  me. 

It  was  a  severe  attack  of  scarlet  fever,  and  I 
remember  little  but  heat  and  horrid  dreams  till  one 
evening  when  all  the  family  came  to  look  at  me,  and 
I  had  something  given  me  to  drink  all  night.  I  was 
told  afterwards  that  the  doctor  said  this  was  the  crisis, 
that  I  was  to  have  port  wine  in  tea-spoonfuls  at  short 
intervals,  and  that  if  I  was  not  dead  before  morning 
I  might  recover.  For  some  weeks  after  this  I  lived 
a  very  enjoyable  life  in  bed,  having  tea  and  toast, 
puddings,  grapes,  and  other  luxuries  till  I  was  well 
again. 

It  may  be  well  here  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  my 
school  life  at  Hertford  and  of  the  schoolmaster  who 
taught  me.     The  school  itself  was  built  in  the  year 


MY   SCHOOL   LIFE   AT   HERTFORD     27 

1617,  when  the  school  was  founded.  It  consisted  of 
one  large  room,  with  a  large  square  window  at  each 
end  and  two  on  each  side.  In  the  centre  of  one  side 
was  a  roomy  porch,  and  opposite  to  it  a  projecting 
portion,  with  a  staircase  leading  to  two  rooms  above 
the  schoolroom  and  partly  in  the  roof.  The  school- 
room was  fairly  lofty.  Along  the  sides  were  what 
were  termed  porches — desks  and  seats  against  the 
wall  with  very  solid,  roughly  carved  ends  of  black 
oak,  much  cut  with  the  initials  or  names  of  many 
generations  of  schoolboys.  In  the  central  space  were 
two  rows  of  desks  with  forms  on  each  side.  There 
was  a  master's  desk  at  each  end,  and  two  others  on 
the  sides,  and  two  open  fireplaces  equidistant  from 
the  ends.  Every  boy  had  a  desk  the  sloping  lid  of 
which  opened,  to  keep  his  school-books  and  anything 
else  he  liked,  and  between  each  pair  of  desks  at  the 
top  was  a  leaden  ink-pot,  sunk  in  a  hole  in  the  middle 
rail  of  the  desks.  As  we  went  to  school  even  in 
winter  at  seven  in  the  morning,  and  three  days  a 
week  remained  till  five  in  the  afternoon,  some  artificial 
lighting  was  necessary,  and  this  was  effected  by  the 
primitive  method  of  every  boy  bringing  his  own 
candles  or  candle-ends  with  any  kind  of  candlestick 
he  liked.  An  empty  ink-bottle  was  often  used,  or  the 
candle  was  even  stuck  on  to  the  desk  with  a  little  of 
its  own  grease.  So  that  it  enabled  us  to  learn  our 
lessons  or  do  our  sums,  no  one  seemed  to  trouble 
about  how  we  provided  the  light. 

The  school  was  reached  by  a  path  along  the 
bottom  of  All  Saints'  Churchyard,  and  entered  by  a 
door  in  the  wall  which  entirely  surrounded  the  school 
playground  and  master's  garden.  Over  this  door  was 
a  Latin  motto — 

"  Inter  umbras  Academi  studere  delectat." 


28  MY  LIFE 

This  was  appropriate,  as  the  grounds  were  surrounded 
by  trees,  and  at  the  north  end  of  the  main  playground 
there  were  two  very  fine  elms,  shown  in  the  old 
engraving  of  the  school  here  reproduced. 

The  headmaster  in  my  time  was  a  rather  irascible 
little  man  named  Clement  Henry  Crutwell.  He  was 
usually  called  by  the  boys  Old  Cruttle  or  Old 
Clemmy,  and  when  he  overheard  these  names  used, 
which  was  not  often,  he  would  give  us  a  short  lecture 
on  the  impropriety  and  impoliteness  of  miscalling 
those  in  authority  over  us.  He  was  a  good  master, 
inasmuch  as  he  kept  order  in  the  school,  and  carried 
on  the  work  of  teaching  about  eighty  boys  by  four 
masters,  all  in  one  room,  with  great  regularity  and 
with  no  marked  inconvenience.  Whatever  might  be 
the  noise  and  games  going  on  when  he  was  absent, 
the  moment  his  step  was  heard  in  the  porch  silence 
and  order  at  once  reigned. 

Flogging  with  a  cane  was  not  uncommon  for  more 
serious  offences,  while  for  slighter  ones  he  would  box 
the  ears  severely.  Caning  was  performed  in  the 
usual  old-fashioned  way  by  laying  the  boy  across  the 
desk,  his  hands  being  held  on  one  side  and  his  feet 
on  the  other,  while  the  master,  pulling  the  boy's 
trousers  tight  with  one  hand,  laid  on  the  cane  with 
great  vigour  with  the  other.  Mr.  Crutwell  always 
caned  the  boys  himself,  but  the  other  masters 
administered  minor  punishments,  such  as  slight  ear- 
boxes,  slapping  the  palm  with  a  flat  ruler,  or  rapping 
the  knuckles  with  a  round  one.  These  punishments 
were  usually  deserved,  though  not  always.  A  stupid 
boy,  or  one  who  had  a  bad  verbal  memory,  was  often 
punished  for  what  was  called  invincible  idleness  when 
it  was  really  congenital  incapacity  to  learn  what  he  took 
no  interest  in,  or  what  often  had  no  meaning  for  him. 


■<^ 


MY  SCHOOL  LIFE  AT  HERTFORD    29 

Mr.  Crutwell  was,  I  suppose,  a  fairly  good  classical 
scholar,  as  he  took  the  higher  classes  in  Latin  and 
Greek.  I  left  school  too  young  even  to  begin  Greek, 
but  the  last  year  or  two  I  was  in  the  Latin  class 
which  was  going  through  Virgil's  "^neid"  with  him. 
The  system  was  very  bad.  The  eight  or  ten  boys  in 
the  class  had  an  hour  to  prepare  the  translation,  and 
they  all  sat  together  in  a  group  opposite  each  other 
and  close  to  Mr.  Crutwell's  desk,  but  under  pretence 
of  work  there  were  always  two  or  three  of  the  boys 
who  were  full  of  talk  and  gossip  and  school  stories, 
which  kept  us  all  employed  and  amused  till  within 
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  the  time  for  being  called 
up,  when  some  one  would  remark,  "  I  say,  let's  do  our 
translation  ;  I  don't  know  a  word  of  it."  Then  the 
cleverest  boy,  or  one  who  had  already  been  through 
the  book,  would  begin  to  translate,  two  or  three  others 
would  have  their  dictionaries  ready  when  he  did  not 
know  the  meaning  of  a  word,  and  so  we  blundered 
through  our  forty  or  fifty  lines.  When  we  were  called 
up,  it  was  all  a  matter  of  chance  whether  we  got 
through  well  or  otherwise.  If  the  master  was  in  a 
good  humour  and  the  part  we  had  to  translate  was 
specially  interesting,  he  would  help  us  on  whenever 
we  hesitated  or  blundered,  and  when  we  had  got 
through  the  lesson,  he  would  make  a  few  remarks  on 
the  subject,  and  say,  "  Now  I  will  read  you  the  whole 
incident."  He  would  then  take  out  a  translation  of 
the  "  iEneid  "  in  verse  by  a  relative  of  his  own — an 
uncle,  I  think — and,  beginning  perhaps  a  page  or  two 
back,  read  us  several  pages,  so  that  we  could  better 
appreciate  what  we  had  been  trying  to  translate.  I, 
for  one,  always  enjoyed  these  readings,  as  the  verse 
was  clear  and  melodious,  and  gave  an  excellent  idea 
of  the  poetry  of  the   Latin  writer.     Sometimes  our 


30  MY   LIFE 

laziness  and  ignorance  were  found  out,  and  we  either 
had  to  stay  in  an  hour  and  go  over  it  again,  or 
copy  it  out  a  dozen  times,  or  some  other  stupid 
imposition.  But  as  this  only  occurred  now  and 
then,  of  course  it  did  not  in  the  least  affect  our 
general  mode  of  procedure  when  supposed  to  be 
learning  our  lesson.  Mr.  Crutwell  read  well,  with 
a  good  emphasis  and  intonation,  and  I  obtained  a 
better  idea  of  what  Virgil  really  was  from  his  read- 
ings than  from  the  fragmentary  translations  we 
scrambled  through. 

Next  to  Latin  grammar  the  most  painful  subject 
I  learnt  was  geography,  which  ought  to  have  been 
the  most  interesting.  It  consisted  almost  entirely 
in  learning  by  heart  the  names  of  the  chief  towns, 
rivers,  and  mountains  of  the  various  countries  from, 
I  think,  Pinnock's  "School  Geography,"  which  gave 
the  minimum  of  useful  or  interesting  information. 
It  was  something  like  learning  the  multiplication 
table  both  in  the  painfulness  of  the  process  and  the 
permanence  of  the  results.  The  incessant  grinding 
in  both,  week  after  week  and  year  after  year,  resulted 
in  my  knowing  both  the  product  of  any  two  numbers 
up  to  twelve,  and  the  chief  towns  of  any  English 
county  so  thoroughly,  that  the  result  was  automatic, 
and  the  name  of  Staffordshire  brought  into  my  mind 
Stafford,  Litchfield,  Leek,  as  surely  and  rapidly  as 
eight  times  seven  brought  fifty-six.  The  labour  and 
mental  effort  to  one  who  like  myself  had  little  verbal 
memory  was  very  painful,  and  though  the  result  has 
been  a  somewhat  useful  acquisition  during  life,  I 
cannot  but  think  that  the  same  amount  of  mental 
exertion  wisely  directed  might  have  produced  far 
greater  and  more  generally  useful  results. 

History  was   very   little   better,  being  largely  a 


MY  SCHOOL   LIFE  AT   HERTFORD     31 

matter  of  learning  by  heart  names  and  dates,  and 
reading  the  very  baldest  account  of  the  doings  of 
kings  and  queens,  of  wars,  rebellions,  and  conquests. 
Whatever  little  knowledge  of  history  I  have  ever 
acquired  has  been  derived  more  from  Shakespeare's 
plays  and  from  good  historical  novels  than  from  any- 
thing I  learnt  at  school. 

At  one  period  when  the  family  was  temporarily 
broken  up,  for  some  reason  I  do  not  remember,  I  was 
for  about  half  a  year  a  boarder  in  Mr.  Crutwell's 
house,  in  company  with  twenty  or  thirty  other  boys  ; 
and  I  will  here  give  the  routine  of  a  moderately  good 
boarding-school  at  that  period. 

Our  breakfast  at  eight  consisted  of  a  mug  of  milk- 
and-water  and  a  large  and  very  thick  slice  of  bread- 
and-butter.  For  the  average  boy  this  was  as  much 
as  he  could  eat,  a  few  could  not  eat  so  much,  a  few 
wanted  more,  and  the  former  often  gave  their  surplus 
to  the  latter.  Any  boy  could  have  an  egg  or  a  slice  of 
bacon  cooked  if  he  bought  it  himself  or  had  it  sent  from 
home,  but  comparatively  very  few  had  such  luxuries. 

For  dinner  at  one  o'clock  we  had  hot  joints  of 
meat  and  vegetables  for  five  days  and  hot  meat-pies 
on  Saturdays.  On  Sundays  we  had  a  cold  joint  of 
meat,  with  hot  fruit-pies  in  the  summer  and  plum- 
pudding  in  the  winter,  with  usually  some  extra 
delicacy  as  custard  or  a  salad.  Every  boy  had  half 
a  pint  of  fairly  good  beer  to  drink,  and  any  one  who 
wished  could  have  a  second  helping  of  meat. 

At  half-past  five,  I  think,  we  had  milk-and-water 
and  bread-and-butter  as  at  breakfast,  from  seven  to 
eight  we  prepared  lessons  for  the  next  day,  and  at 
eight  o'clock  we  had  supper,  consisting  of  bread-and- 
cheese  and,  I  think,  another  mug  of  beer. 


32  MY  LIFE 

Our  regular  games  were  cricket,  baseball,  leapfrog, 
high  and  long  jumps,  and,  in  the  winter,  turnpikes 
with  hoops.  This  latter  was  a  means  of  enabling 
those  who  had  no  hoops  to  get  the  use  of  them.  They 
kept  turnpikes,  formed  by  two  bricks  or  stones  placed 
the  width  of  the  foot  apart,  and  the  hoop-driver  had 
to  pass  through  without  touching.  If  the  hoop 
touched  he  gave  it  up,  and  kept  the  turnpike  in  his 
place.  When  there  were  turnpikes  every  five  or  ten 
yards  all  round  the  playground  and  a  dozen  or  more 
hoops  following  each  other  pretty  closely,  the  game 
was  not  devoid  of  its  little  excitements.  We  never 
played  football  (so  far  as  I  remember),  which  at  that 
time  was  by  no  means  such  a  common  game  as  it  is 
now.  Among  the  smaller  amusements  which  were 
always  much  liked  were  marbles  and  pegtops.  The 
individuality  of  tops  was  rather  curious,  as  some 
could  only  be  made  to  spin  by  holding  them  with  the 
peg  upwards,  others  with  it  downwards,  while  others 
would  spin  when  held  in  either  position,  and  thrown 
almost  anyhow.  When  tops  were  in  fashion  they 
might  have  been  made  the  vehicle  for  very  interest- 
ing teaching  of  mechanics,  but  that  was  quite  beyond 
the  range  of  the  ordinary  schoolmaster  of  the  early 
part  of  the  nineteenth  century. 

During  my  last  year's  residence  at  Hertford  an 
arrangement  was  made  by  which,  I  suppose,  the  fees 
paid  for  my  schooling  were  remitted  on  condition 
that  I  assisted  in  the  school.  I  was  a  good  writer 
and  reader,  and  while  continuing  my  regular  classes 
in  Latin  and  algebra,  I  took  the  younger  boys 
in  reading  and  dictation,  arithmetic  and  writing. 
Although  I  had  no  objection  whatever  to  the  work 
itself,  the   anomalous  position    it  gave   me   in  the 


MY  SCHOOL  LIFE  AT   HERTFORD     33 

school— there  being  a  score  of  boys  older  than  myself 
who  were  scholars  only— was  exceedingly  distasteful. 
Another  thing  hurt  me  dreadfully  at  the  time, 
because  it  exposed  me  to  what  I  thought  was  the 
ridicule  or  contempt  of  the  whole  school.  Like  most 
other  boys,  I  was  reckless  about  my  clothes,  leaning 
my  elbows  on  the  desk  till  a  hole  was  worn  in  my 
jacket,  and,  worse  still,  when  cleaning  my  slate  using 
my  cuff  to  rub  it  dry.  Slate  sponges  attached  by  a 
string  were  unknown  to  our  school  in  those  days. 
As  new  clothes  were  too  costly  to  be  had  very  often, 
my  mother  determined  to  save  a  jacket  just  taken 
for  school  wear  by  making  covers  for  the  sleeves, 
which  I  was  to  wear  in  school.  These  were  made  of 
black  calico,  reaching  from  the  cuff  to  the  elbow,  and 
though  I  protested  that  I  could  not  wear  them,  that 
I  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  guy,  and  other  equally 
valid  reasons,  they  were  one  day  put  in  my  pocket, 
and  I  was  told  to  put  them  on  just  before  I  entered 
the  school.  Of  course  I  could  not  do  it ;  so  I  brought 
them  back  and  told  my  mother.  Then  after  another 
day  or  two  of  trial,  one  morning  the  dreaded  thunder- 
bolt fell  upon  me.  On  entering  school  I  was  called 
up  to  the  master's  desk,  he  produced  the  dreaded 
calico  sleeves,  and  told  me  that  my  mother  wished  me 
to  wear  them  to  save  my  jacket,  and  told  me  to  put 
them  on.  Of  course  I  had  to  do  so.  They  fitted 
very  well,  and  felt  quite  comfortable,  and  I  dare  say 
did  not  look  so  very  strange.  I  have  no  doubt  also 
that  most  of  the  boys  had  a  fellow-feeling  for  me,  and 
thought  it  a  shame  to  thus  make  me  an  exception  to  all 
the  school.  But  to  me  it  seemed  a  cruel  disgrace,  and 
I  was  miserable  so  long  as  I  wore  them.  How  long 
that  was  I  cannot  remember,  but  while  it  lasted  it 
was,  perhaps,  the  severest  punishment  I  ever  endured. 

D 


34  MY   LIFE 

In  an  article  on  the  civilizations  of  China  and 
Japan  in  The  Independent  Revieiv  (April,  1904),  it  is 
pointed  out  that  the  universal  practice  of  "  saving  the 
face  "  of  any  kind  of  opponent  rests  upon  the  funda- 
mental idea  of  the  right  of  every  individual  to  be 
treated  with  personal  respect.  With  them  this  prin- 
ciple is  taught  from  childhood,  and  pervades  every 
class  of  society,  while  with  us  it  is  only  recognized  by 
the  higher  classes,  and  by  them  is  rarely  extended 
to  inferiors  or  to  children.  The  feeling  that  demands 
this  recognition  is  certainly  strong  in  many  children, 
and  those  who  have  suffered  under  the  failure  of  their 
elders  to  respect  it,  can  well  appreciate  the  agony  of 
shame  endured  by  the  more  civilized  Eastern  peoples, 
whose  feelings  are  so  often  outraged  by  the  total 
absence  of  all  respect  shown  them  by  their  European 
masters  or  conquerors.  In  thus  recognizing  the 
sanctity  of  this  deepest  of  human  feelings  these 
people  manifest  a  truer  phase  of  civilization  than  we 
have  attained  to.  Even  savages  often  surpass  us 
in  this  respect.  They  will  often  refuse  to  enter  an 
empty  house  during  the  absence  of  the  owner,  even 
though  something  belonging  to  themselves  may  have 
been  left  in  it ;  and  when  asked  to  call  one  of  their 
sleeping  companions  to  start  on  a  journey,  they  will 
be  careful  not  to  touch  him,  and  will  positively  refuse 
to  shake  him  rudely,  as  an  Englishman  would  have 
no  scruple  in  doing. 

As  the  period  from  the  age  of  six  to  fourteen 
which  I  spent  at  Hertford  was  that  of  my  whole 
home-life  till  I  had  a  home  of  my  own  twenty-eight 
years  later,  and  because  it  was  in  many  ways  more 
educational  than  the  time  I  spent  at  school,  I  think  it 
well  to  give  a  short  account  of  it. 

During  the  year  or  two  spent  at  the  first  house  we 


MY   SCHOOL   LIFE   AT   HERTFORD     35 

occupied  in  St.  Andrew's  Street  very  little  occurred 
to  impress  itself  upon  my  memory,  partly,  I  think, 
because  I  was  too  young  and  had  several  playfellows 
of  my  own  age,  and  partly,  perhaps,  because  the  very 
small  house  and  yard  at  the  back  offered  few  facilities 
for  home  amusements.  There  was  also  at  that  time 
too  much  inequality  between  myself  and  my  brother 
John  for  us  to  become  such  constant  companions  as 
we  were  a  little  later. 

When  we  moved  to  the  house  beyond  the  Old 
Cross,  nearly  opposite  the  lane  leading  to  Hartham, 
the  conditions  were  altogether  more  favourable.  The 
house  itself  was  a  more  commodious  one,  and  besides 
a  yard  at  one  side,  it  had  a  small  garden  at  the  back 
with  a  flower  border  at  each  side,  where  I  first  became 
acquainted  with  some  of  our  common  garden  flowers. 
The  gable  end  of  the  house  in  the  yard,  facing  nearly 
south,  had  few  windows,  and  was  covered  over  with 
an  old  vine  which  not  only  produced  abundance  of 
grapes,  but  enabled  my  father  to  make  some  gallons 
of  wine  from  the  thinnings.  But  the  most  interesting 
feature  of  the  premises  to  us  two  boys  was  a  small 
stable  with  a  loft  over  it,  which,  not  being  used  except 
to  store  garden-tools  and  odd  lumber,  we  had  practi- 
cally to  ourselves.  The  loft  especially  was  most 
delightful  to  us.  It  was  reached  by  steps  formed  by 
nailing  battens  across  the  upright  framing  of  the 
stable,  with  a  square  opening  in  the  floor  above.  It 
thus  required  a  little  practice  to  climb  up  and  down 
easily  and  to  get  a  safe  landing  at  top,  and  doing  this 
became  so  familiar  to  us  that  we  ran  up  and  down 
it  as  quickly  as  sailors  run  up  the  shrouds  of  a  vessel. 
Then  the  loft  itself,  under  the  slooping  roof,  gloomy 
and  nearly  dark  in  the  remote  corners,  was  almost 
like  a  robbers'  cave ;  while  a  door  opening  to  the 


36  MY   LIFE 

outside  by  which  hay  could  be  pitched  up  out  of  a 
cart,  afforded  us  plenty  of  light  when  we  required  it, 
together  with  the  novel  sensation  and  spice  of  danger 
afforded  by  an  opening  down  to  the  floor,  yet  eight 
or  nine  feet  above  the  ground. 

This  place  was  our  greatest  delight,  and  almost 
all  the  hours  of  daylight  we  could  spare  from  school 
and  meals  were  spent  in  it.  Here  we  accumulated 
all  kinds  of  odds  and  ends  that  might  be  useful  for 
our  various  games  or  occupations,  and  here  we  were 
able  to  hide  many  forbidden  treasures  such  as  gun- 
powder, with  which  we  used  to  make  wild-fires  as 
well  as  more  elaborate  fireworks.  John  was  of  a  more 
mechanical  turn  than  myself,  and  he  used  to  excel  in 
making  all  the  little  toys  and  playthings  in  which 
boys  then  used  to  delight.  I,  of  course,  looked  on 
admiringly,  and  helped  him  in  any  way  I  could.  I 
also  tried  to  imitate  him,  but  only  succeeded  in  some 
of  the  simpler  operations.  Our  most  valuable  guide 
was  the  "Boy's  Own  Book,"  which  told  us  how  to 
make  numbers  of  things  boys  never  think  of  making 
now,  partly  because  everything  is  made  for  them,  and 
also  because  children  get  so  many  presents  of  elabo- 
rate or  highly  ornamented  toys  when  very  young, 
that  by  the  time  they  are  old  enough  to  make  any- 
thing for  themselves  they  are  quite  blas^^  and  can 
only  be  satisfied  by  still  more  elaborate  and  expensive 
playthings. 

After  my  brother  John  went  to  London,  and  I 
was  left  alone  at  home,  my  younger  brother  being 
still  too  young  for  a  playmate,  I  gave  up  most  of 
these  occupations,  and  began  to  develop  a  taste 
for  reading.  I  still  had  one  or  two  favourite  com- 
panions with  whom  I  used  to  go  for  long  walks  in  the 
country,  amusing  ourselves  in  gravel  or  chalk  pits, 


MY   SCHOOL   LIFE   AT   HERTFORD     37 

jumping  over  streams,  and  cutting  fantastic  walking- 
sticks  out  of  the  woods ;  but  nothing  afterwards 
seemed  to  make  up  for  the  quiet  hours  spent  with 
my  brother  in  the  delightful  privacy  of  the  loft. 

It  was  during  our  residence  at  this  house  near  the 
Old  Cross  that,  I  think,  my  father  enjoyed  his  life 
more  than  anywhere  else  at  Hertford.  Not  only  had 
he  a  small  piece  of  garden  and  the  fine  grape-vine 
already  mentioned,  but  there  was  a  roomy  brew-house 
with  a  large  copper,  which  enabled  him  to  brew  a 
barrel  of  beer  as  well  as  make  elder  wine  and  grape- 
wine,  bottle  gooseberries,  and  oth^r  such  work  as  he 
took  great  pleasure  in  doing.  When  here  also,  I 
think,  he  hired  a  small  garden  about  half  a  mile  off, 
where  he  could  grow  vegetables  and  small  fruit,  and 
where  he  spent  a  few  hours  of  every  fine  day.  And 
these  various  occupations  were  an  additional  source 
of  interest  and  instruction  to  us  boys.  It  was  here, 
however,  that  our  elder  sister  died  of  consumption  in 
the  year  1832,  a  little  before  she  attained  her  twenty- 
second  year.  This  was  a  severe  loss  to  my  father  and 
mother,  though  I  was  not  of  an  age  to  feel  it  much. 

In  the  year  1834,  a  misfortune  occurred  that  still 
further  reduced  the  family  income.  Mr.  Wilson,  who 
had  married  my  mother's  only  sister,  was  one  of  the 
executors  of  her  father's  will,  and  as  he  was  a  lawyer 
(the  other  executor  being  a  clergyman),  and  his  own 
wife  and  her  sister  were  the  only  legatees,  he  naturally 
had  the  sole  management  of  the  property.  Owing  to 
a  series  of  events  with  which  we  were  only  very 
imperfectly  acquainted,  he  became  bankrupt  in  this 
year,  and  his  own  wife  and  large  family  were  at  once 
reduced  from  a  condition  of  comfort  and  even  afflu- 
ence to  poverty  almost  as  great  as  our  own.  But  we 
children  also  suffered,  for  legacies  of  £100  each  to 


38  MY   LIFE 

my  father's  family,  to  be  paid  to  us  as  we  came  of  age, 
together  with  a  considerable  sum  that  had  reverted 
to  my  mother  on  the  death  of  her  stepmother  in  1828, 
had  remained  in  Mr.  Wilson's  hands  as  trustee,  and 
were  all  involved  in  the  bankruptcy.  He  did  all  he 
possibly  could  for  us,  and  ultimately,  I  believe,  repaid 
a  considerable  part  of  the  money,  but  while  the  legal 
proceedings  were  in  progress,  and  they  lasted  fully 
three  years,  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  reduce  expenses 
as  much  as  possible.  We  had  to  leave  our  comfort- 
able house  and  garden,  and  for  a  time  had  the  use  of 
half  a  rambling  old  house  near  All  Saints'  Church. 

Before  this,  I  think,  my  brother  John  had  gone  to 
London  to  be  apprenticed,  and  the  family  at  home 
consisted  only  of  myself  and  my  younger  brother 
Herbert  till  my  sister  returned  from  France,  where 
she  had  gone  to  study  the  language.  It  must  have 
been  about  this  time  that  I  was  sent  for  a  few 
months  as  a  boarder  at  the  Grammar  School,  as 
already  stated  ;  but  this  whole  period  of  my  life  is 
very  indistinct.  I  am  sure,  however,  that  we  moved 
to  the  next  house  in  St.  Andrew's  Street  early  in 
1836,  because  on  May  15  of  that  year  an  annular 
eclipse  of  the  sun  occurred,  visible  in  England,  and  I 
well  remember  the  whole  family  coming  out  with 
smoked  glasses  into  the  narrow  yard  at  the  side  of 
the  house  in  order  to  see  it.  I  was  rather  disap- 
pointed, as  it  only  produced  a  peculiar  gloom  such  as 
often  occurs  before  a  thunderstorm. 

At  midsummer,  I  think,  we  again  moved  to  a  part 
of  a  house  next  to  St.  Andrew's  Church,  where  we 
had  the  Silk  family  for  neighbours  in  the  larger  half 
of  the  house.  They  also  had  most  of  the  garden,  on 
the  lawn  of  which  was  a  fine  old  mulberry  tree,  which 
in  the  late  summer  was  so  laden  with  fruit  that  the 


MY   SCHOOL   LIFE   AT   HERTFORD     3Q 

ground  was  covered  beneath  it,  and  I  and  my  friend 
George  used  to  climb  up  into  the  tree,  where  we  could 
gather  the  largest  and  ripest  fruit  and  feast  luxuriously. 
This  was  the  last  house  we  occupied  in  Hertford, 
the  family  moving  to  Hoddesdon  some  time  in  1837, 
to  a  pretty  but  very  small  red-brick  house  called 
Rawdon  Cottage,  while  I  went  to  London  and  stayed 
at  Mr.  Webster's  with  my  brother  John,  preparatory 
to  going  with  my  eldest  brother  William  to  learn 
land-surveying. 

During  the  time  I  lived  at  Hertford  I  was  subject 
to  influences  which  did  more  for  my  real  education 
than  the  mere  verbal  training  I  received  at  school. 
My  father  belonged  to  a  book  club,  through  which 
we  had  a  constant  stream  of  interesting  books, 
many  of  which  he  used  to  read  aloud  in  the  evening. 
Among  these  I  remember  Mungo  Park's  travels  and 
those  of  Denham  and  Clapperton  in  West  Africa. 
We  also  had  Hood's  Comic  Annual  for  successive 
years,  and  I  well  remember  my  delight  with  "The 
Pugsley  Papers  "  and  "  A  Tale  of  the  Great  Plague," 
while,  as  we  lived  first  at  a  No.  i ,  I  associated  Hood's 
"  Number  One  "  with  our  house,  and  learnt  the  verses 
by  heart  when  I  was  about  seven  years  old.  Ever 
since  those  early  experiences  I  have  been  an  admirer 
of  Hood  in  all  his  various  moods,  from  his  inimitable 
mixture  of  pun  and  pathos  in  his  "  Sea  Spell,"  to  the 
exquisite  poetry  of  "The  Haunted  House,"  "The 
Elm  Tree,"  and  "  The  Bridge  of  Sighs." 

We  also  had  some  good  old  standard  works  in  the 
house,  "  Fairy  Tales,"  "  Gulliver's  Travels,"  "  Robinson 
Crusoe,"  and  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  all  of  which 
I  read  over  again  and  again  with  constant  pleasure. 
We  also  had  the  «  Lady  of  the  Lake,"  "  The  Vicar 


40  MY  LIFE 

of  Wakefield,"  and  some  others ;  and  among  the 
books  from  the  club  I  well  remember  my  father  read- 
ing to  us  Defoe's  wonderful  "  History  of  the  Great 
Plague." 

I  think  it  was  soon  after  we  went  to  the  Old 
Cross  house  that  my  father  became  librarian  to  a 
fairly  good   proprietary   town   library,   to  which  he 
went  for  three  or  four  hours  every  afternoon  to  give 
out  and  receive  books  and  keep  everything  in  order. 
After  my  brother  John  left  home  and  I  lost  my  chief 
playmate   and   instructor,   this   library  was   a  great 
resource  for  me,  as  it  contained  a  large  collection  of 
all    the    standard    novels   of    the   day.      Every  wet 
Saturday  afternoon  I  spent  there  ;  and  on  Tuesdays 
and  Thursdays,  which  were  our  four-o'clock  days,  I 
usually  spent  an  hour  there  instead  of  stopping  to 
play  or  going  straight  home.     Sometimes  I  helped 
my  father  a  little  in  arranging  or  getting  down  books, 
but  I  had  most  of  the  time   for  reading,  squatting 
down  on  the  floor  in  a  corner,  where  I  was  quite  out 
of  the  way.     It  was  here  that  I  read  all  Fenimore 
Cooper's   novels,    a    great    many    of    James's,    and 
Harrison   Ainsworth's   "  Rookwood,"  that  fine  high- 
wayman's story  containing  a  vivid  account  of  Dick 
Turpin's  Ride  to  York.     It  was  here,  too,  I  read  the 
earlier    stories    of    Marryat    and    Bulwer,    Godwin's 
"  Caleb  Williams,"  Warren's  "  Diary  of  a  Physician," 
and  such  older  works  as  "  Don  Quixote,"  Smollett's 
"  Roderick  Random,"  "  Peregrine  Pickle,"  and  "  Hum- 
phry   Clinker,"    Fielding's   "  Tom  Jones,"   and  Miss 
Burney's  "  Evelina."     I  also  read,  partially  or  com- 
pletely, Milton's    "Paradise    Lost,"    Pope's    "Iliad," 
Spenser's  "Faerie  Queene,"  and  Dante's  "Inferno," 
a  good  deal  of  Byron  and  Scott,  some  of  the  Spectator 
and  Rambler,  Southey's  "  Curse  of  Kehama,"  and,  in 


MY  SCHOOL  LIFE  AT   HERTFORD    41 

fact,  almost  any  book  that  I  heard  spoken  of  as 
celebrated  or  interesting.  Walton's  "  Angler  "  was  a 
favourite  of  my  father's,  and  I  well  remember  a  wood- 
cut illustration  of  Dove  Dale  with  greatly  exaggerated 
rocks  and  pinnacles,  which  made  me  long  to  see  such 
a  strange  and  picturesque  spot — a  longing  which  I 
only  gratified  about  a  dozen  years  ago,  finding  it 
more  exquisitely  beautiful  than  I  had  imagined  it  to 
be,  even  if  not  quite  so  fantastic. 

My  father  and  mother  were  old-fashioned  religious 
people  belonging  to  the  Church  of  England,  and,  as 
a  rule,  we  all  went  to  church  twice  on  Sundays,  usually 
in  the  morning  and  evening.  We  also  had  to  learn 
a  collect  every  Sunday  morning,  and  were  periodically 
examined  in  our  Catechism.  On  very  wet  evenings 
my  father  read  us  a  chapter  from  the  Bible  and  a 
sermon  instead  of  the  usual  service.  Among  our 
friends,  however,  were  some  Dissenters,  and  a  good 
many  Quakers,  who  were  very  numerous  in  Hertford  ; 
and  on  rare  occasions  we  were  taken  to  one  of  their 
chapels  .instead  of  to  church,  and  the  variety  alone 
made  this  quite  a  treat.  We  were  generally  advised 
when  some  "  friend  "  was  expected  to  speak,  and  it 
was  on  such  occasions  that  we  visited  the  Friends' 
Meeting  House,  though  I  remember  one  occasion 
when,  during  the  whole  time  of  the  meeting,  there 
was  complete  silence.  And  when  any  brother  or 
sister  was  "  moved  to  speak,"  it  was  usually  very  dull 
and  wearisome  ;  and  after  having  attended  two  or 
three  times,  and  witnessed  the  novelty  of  the  men 
and  women  sitting  on  opposite  sides  of  the  room,  and 
there  being  no  pulpit  and  no  clergyman  and  no  sing- 
ing, we  did  not  care  to  go  again.  But  the  Dissenters' 
chapel  was  always  a  welcome  change,  and  we  went 
there  not  unfrequently  to  the  evening  service.     The 


42  MY   LIFE 

extempore  prayers,  the  frequent  singing,  and  the 
usually  more  vigorous  and  exciting  style  of  preaching 
was  to  me  far  preferable  to  the  monotony  of  the 
Church  service  ;  and  it  was  there  only  that,  at  one 
period  of  my  life,  I  felt  something  of  religious  fervour, 
derived  chiefly  from  the  more  picturesque  and  im- 
passioned of  the  hymns.  As,  however,  there  was  no 
sufficient  basis  of  intelligible  fact  or  connected  reason- 
ing to  satisfy  my  intellect,  this  feeling  soon  left  me, 
and  has  never  returned. 


CHAPTER   IV 

LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS  AND  OWENITES 

Having  finally  left  school  at  Christmas,  1836  (before 
I  had  completed  my  fourteenth  year),  I  think  it  was 
early  in  1837  that  I  was  sent  to  London  to  live  at 
Mr.  Webster's  in  Robert  Street,  Hampstead  Road, 
where  my  brother  John  was  apprenticed.  My  father 
and  mother  were  then  about  to  move  to  the  small 
cottage  at  Hoddesdon,  and  it  was  convenient  for  me 
to  be  out  of  the  way  till  my  brother  William  could 
arrange  to  have  me  with  him  to  learn  land-surveying. 
Mr.  Webster  was  a  small  master  builder,  who  had 
a  work-shop  in  a  yard  about  five  minutes'  walk  from 
the  house,  where  he  constantly  employed  eight  or  ten 
men  preparing  all  the  joinery  work  for  the  houses  he 
built.  At  that  time  there  were  no  great  steam- 
factories  for  making  doors  and  windows,  working 
mouldings,  etc.,  everything  being  done  by  hand, 
except  in  the  case  of  the  large  builders  and  con- 
tractors, who  had  planing  and  sawing-mills  of  their 
own.  Here  in  the  yard  was  a  sawpit  in  which  two 
men,  the  top-  and  bottom-sawyers,  were  always  at 
work  cutting  up  imported  balks  of  timber  into  the 
sizes  required,  while  another  oldish  man  was  at  work 
day  after  day  planing  up  floor-boards.  In  the  shop 
itself  windows  and  doors,  cupboards,  staircases,  and 
other  joiner's  work  was  always  going  on,  and  the  men 


44  MY   LIFE 

employed  all  lived  in  the  small  streets  surrounding 
the  shop.  The  working  hours  were  from  six  to  half- 
past  five,  with  one  and  a  half  hours  out  for  meals, 
leaving  a  working  day  of  ten  hours. 

Having  nothing  else  to  do,  I  used  to  spend  the 
greater  part  of  my  time  in  the  shop,  seeing  the  men 
work,  doing  little  jobs  occasionally,  and  listening  to 
their  conversation.  These  were  no  doubt  an  average 
sample  of  London  mechanics,  and  they  were  on  the 
whole  quite  as  respectable  a  set  of  men  as  any  in  a 
similar  position  to-day.  I  soon  became  quite  at  home 
in  the  shop,  and  got  to  know  the  peculiarities  of  each 
of  the  men.  I  heard  their  talk  together,  their  jokes 
and  chaff,  their  wishes  and  their  ideas,  and  all  those 
little  touches  of  character  which  come  out  in  the 
familiar  intercourse  of  the  workshop.  My  general 
impression  is  that  there  was  very  little  swearing 
among  them,  much  less  than  became  common  thirty 
years  later,  and  perhaps  about  as  much  as  among  a 
similar  class  of  men  to-day.  Neither  was  there  much 
coarseness  or  indecency  in  their  talk,  far  less  indeed 
than  I  met  with  among  professional  young  men  a  few 
years  afterwards.  One  of  the  best  of  the  workmen 
was  a  very  loose  character — a  kind  of  Lothario  or  Don 
Juan  by  his  own  account — who  would  often  talk  about 
his  adventures,  and  boast  of  them  as  the  very  essence 
of  his  life.  He  was  a  very  good  and  amusing  talker, 
and  helped  to  make  the  time  pass  in  the  monotony  of 
the  shop ;  but  occasionally,  when  he  became  too 
explicit  or  too  boastful,  the  foreman,  who  was  a  rather 
serious  though  very  agreeable  man,  would  gently  call 
him  to  order,  and  repudiate  altogether  his  praises  of 
the  joys  of  immorality. 

As  my  brother  was,  at  the  time  I  am  now  speak- 
ing of,  nearly  nineteen  and  a  very  good  workman,  he 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  45 

had  complete  liberty  in  the  evenings  after  seven 
o'clock,  the  only  limitation  being  that  he  had  to  be 
back  about  ten  ;  while  on  special  occasions  he  was 
allowed  to  take  the  door-key.  He  often  took  me  with 
him  on  fine  evenings  to  some  of  the  best  business 
streets  in  London  to  enjoy  the  shops,  and  especially 
to  see  anything  of  particular  interest  exhibited  in 
them.  But  our  evenings  were  most  frequently  spent 
at  what  was  then  termed  a  "  Hall  of  Science,"  situated 
in  John  Street,  Tottenham  Court  Road  (now  altered 
to  Whitfield  Street).  It  was  really  a  kind  of  club  or 
mechanics'  institute  for  advanced  thinkers  among 
workmen,  and  especially  for  the  followers  of  Robert 
Owen,  the  founder  of  the  Socialist  movement  in 
England.  Here  we  sometimes  heard  lectures  on 
Owen's  doctrines,  or  on  the  principles  of  secularism 
or  agnosticism,  as  it  is  now  called  ;  at  other  times  we 
read  papers  or  books,  or  played  draughts,  dominoes, 
or  bagatelle,  and  coffee  was  also  supplied  to  any  who 
wished  for  it.  It  was  here  that  I  first  made  acquaint- 
ance with  some  of  Owen's  writings,  and  especially 
with  the  wonderful  and  beneficent  work  he  had 
carried  on  for  many  years  at  New  Lanark.  I  also 
received  my  first  knowledge  of  the  arguments  of 
sceptics,  and  read  among  other  books  Paine's  "Age 
of  Reason." 

It  must  have  been  in  one  of  the  books  or  papers 
I  read  here  that  I  met  with  what  I  dare  say  is  a  very 
old  dilemma  as  to  the  origin  of  evil.  It  runs  thus : 
"  Is  God  able  to  prevent  evil  but  not  willing  ?  Then 
he  is  not  benevolent.  Is  he  willing  but  not  able  ? 
Then  he  is  not  omnipotent.  Is  he  both  able  and 
willing  ?  Whence  then  is  evil  ? "  This  struck  me 
very  much,  and  it  seemed  quite  unanswerable,  and 
when  at  home  a  year  or  two  afterwards,  I  took  the 


46  MY   LIFE 

opportunity  one  day  to  repeat  it  to  my  father,  rather 
expecting  he  would  be  very  much  shocked  at  my 
acquaintance  with  any  such  infidel  literature.  But 
he  merely  remarked  that  such  problems  were  mysteries 
which  the  wisest  cannot  understand,  and  seemed  dis- 
inclined to  any  discussion  of  the  subject.  This,  of 
course,  did  not  satisfy  me,  and  if  the  argument  did 
not  really  touch  the  question  of  the  existence  of  God, 
it  did  seem  to  prove  that  the  orthodox  ideas  as  to 
His  nature  and  powers  cannot  be  accepted. 

I  was  also  greatly  impressed  by  a  tract  on 
"  Consistency,"  written  by  Robert  Dale  Owen,  the 
eldest  son  of  Robert  Owen,  and  as  a  writer  superior 
in  style  and  ability  to  his  father.  The  chief  object  of 
it  was  to  exhibit  the  horrible  doctrine  of  eternal 
punishment  as  then  commonly  taught  from  thousands 
of  pulpits  by  both  the  Church  of  England  and 
Dissenters,  and  to  argue  that  if  those  who  taught 
and  those  who  accepted  such  dogmas  thoroughly 
believed  them  and  realized  their  horror,  all  worldly 
pleasures  and  occupations  would  give  way  to  the 
continual  and  strenuous  effort  to  escape  such  a  fate. 
I  thoroughly  agreed  with  Mr.  Dale  Owen's  conclusion, 
that  the  orthodox  religion  of  the  day  was  degrading 
and  hideous,  and  that  the  only  true  and  wholly 
beneficial  religion  was  that  which  inculcated  the 
service  of  humanity,  and  whose  only  dogma  was  the 
brotherhood  of  man.  Thus  was  laid  the  foundation 
of  my  religious  scepticism. 

Similarly,  my  introduction  to  advanced  political 
views,  founded  on  the  philosophy  of  human  nature, 
was  due  to  the  writings  and  teachings  of  Robert 
Owen  and  some  of  his  disciples.  His  great  funda- 
mental principle,  on  which  all  his  teaching  and  all  his 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  47 

practice  were  founded,  was  that  the  character  of  every 
individual  is  formed  for  and  not  by  himself,  first  by 
heredity,  which  gives  him  his  natural  disposition  with 
all  its  powers  and  tendencies,  its  good  and  bad 
qualities;  and,  secondly,  by  environment,  including 
education  and  surroundings  from  earliest  infancy, 
which  always  modifies  the  original  character  for 
better  or  for  worse.  Of  course,  this  was  a  theory  of 
pure  determinism,  and  was  wholly  opposed  to  the 
ordinary  views,  both  of  religious  teachers  and  of 
governments,  that,  whatever  the  natural  character, 
whatever  the  environment  during  childhood  and 
youth,  whatever  the  direct  teaching,  all  men  could  be 
good  if  they  liked,  all  could  act  virtuously,  all  cotdd 
obey  the  laws,  and  if  they  wilfully  transgressed  any 
of  these  laws  or  customs  of  their  rulers  and  teachers, 
the  only  way  to  deal  with  them  was  to  punish  them, 
again  and  again,  under  the  idea  that  they  could  thus 
be  deterred  from  future  transgression.  The  utter 
failure  of  this  doctrine,  which  has  been  followed  in 
practice  during  the  whole  period  of  human  history, 
seems  to  have  produced  hardly  any  effect  on  our 
systems  of  criminal  law  or  of  general  education  ;  and 
though  other  writers  have  exposed  the  error,  and  are 
still  exposing  it,  yet  no  one  saw  so  clearly  as  Owen 
how  to  put  his  views  into  practice  ;  no  one,  perhaps, 
in  private  life  has  ever  had  such  opportunities  of 
carrying  out  his  principles ;  no  one  has  ever  shown 
so  much  ingenuity,  so  much  insight  into  character,  so 
much  organizing  power ;  and  no  one  has  ever  pro- 
duced such  striking  results  in  the  face  of  enormous 
difficulties  as  he  produced  during  the  twenty-six 
years  of  his  management  of  New  Lanark. 

Of  course,  it  was  objected  that  Owen's  principles 
were   erroneous   and   immoral  because  they  wholly 


48  MY   LIFE 

denied  free-will,  because  he  advocated  the  abolition 
of  rewards  and  punishments  as  both  unjust  and 
unnecessary,  and  because  (it  was  argued)  to  act  on 
such  a  system  would  lead  to  a  pandemonium  of  vice 
and  crime.  The  reply  to  this  is  that,  acting  on  the 
principle  of  absolute  free-will,  every  government  has 
alike  failed  to  abolish,  or  even  to  any  considerable 
degree  to  diminish,  discontent,  misery,  disease,  vice, 
and  crime  ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  Owen  did, 
by  acting  on  his  own  principle  of  the  formation  of 
character,  transform  a  discontented,  unhealthy,  vicious, 
and  wholly  antagonistic  population  of  2500  persons 
to  an  enthusiastically  favourable,  contented,  happy, 
healthy,  and  comparatively  moral  community,  without 
ever  having  recourse  to  any  legal  punishment  what- 
ever, and  without,  so  far  as  appears,  discharging  any 
individual  for  robbery,  idleness,  or  neglect  of  duty ; 
and  all  this  was  effected  while  increasing  the  efficiency 
of  the  whole  manufacturing  establishment,  paying  a 
liberal  interest  on  the  capital  invested,  and  even 
producing  a  large  annual  surplus  of  profits  which, 
in  the  four  years  1809-13,  averaged  ;^4o,ooo  a  year, 
and  only  in  the  succeeding  period,  when  the  new 
shareholders  agreed  to  limit  their  interest  to  5  per 
cent,  per  annum,  was  this  surplus  devoted  to  education 
and  the  general  well-being  of  the  community. 

Although  most  people  have  heard  of  New  Lanark, 
few  have  any  idea  of  Owen's  work  there  or  of  the 
means  by  which  he  gradually  overcame  opposition 
and  achieved  the  most  remarkable  results.  It  will, 
therefore,  not  be  out  of  place  to  give  a  short  account 
of  his  methods  as  explained  in  his  autobiography, 
which  I  only  had  the  opportunity  of  reading  a  few 
years  ago. 

In  the   year   1800,  he  became  partner  and  sole 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  49 

manager  of  the  New  Lanark  cotton-mills,  and 
married  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Dale,  the  former 
proprietor.  Gradually,  for  many  years,  he  had  been 
elaborating  his  theory  of  human  nature,  and  longing 
for  an  opportunity  of  putting  his  ideas  in  practice. 
And  now  he  had  got  his  opportunity.  He  had  an 
extensive  factory  and  workshops,  with  a  village  of 
about  two  thousand  inhabitants  all  employed  in  the 
works,  which,  with  about  two  hundred  acres  of  sur- 
rounding land,  belonged  to  the  company.  The 
character  of  the  workers  at  New  Lanark  is  thus 
described  by  Mr.  W.  L.  Sargant,  in  his  work  "  Robert 
Owen  and  his  Social  Philosophy,"  when  describing 
the  establishment  of  the  mills  about  fifteeen  years 
before  Owen  acquired  them  :  "  To  obtain  a  supply  of 
adult  labourers  a  village  was  built  round  the  works, 
and  the  houses  were  let  at  a  low  rent ;  but  the 
business  was  so  unpopular  that  few,  except  the  bad, 
the  unemployed,  and  the  destitute,  would  settle  there. 
Even  of  such  ragged  labourers  the  numbers  were 
insufficient ;  and  these,  when  they  had  learned  their 
trade  and  become  valuable,  were  self-willed  and  in- 
subordinate." Besides  these,  there  were  about  five 
hundred  children,  chiefly  obtained  from  the  work- 
houses of  Edinburgh  and  other  large  towns,  who 
were  apprenticed  for  seven  years  from  the  age  of  six 
to  eight,  and  were  lodged  and  boarded  in  a  large 
building  erected  for  the  purpose  by  the  former  owner, 
Mr.  Dale,  and  were  well  attended  to.  But  these  poor 
children  had  to  work  from  six  in  the  morning  to  seven 
in  the  evening  (with  an  hour  and  three-quarters  for 
meals)  ;  and  it  was  only  after  this  task  was  over  that 
instruction  began.  The  children  hated  their  slavery  ; 
many  absconded ;  some  were  stunted,  and  even 
dwarfed  in  stature  ;   and  when   their  apprenticeship 

E 


so  MY   LIFE 

expired  at  the  ages  of  thirteen  to  fifteen,  they 
commonly  went  off  to  Glasgow  or  Edinburgh,  with 
no  natural  guardians,  and  serving  to  swell  the  mass 
of  vice  and  misery  in  the  towns.  "  The  condition  of 
the  families  who  had  immigrated  to  the  village  was 
also  very  lamentable.  The  people  lived  almost  with- 
out control  in  habits  of  vice,  idleness,  poverty,  debt, 
and  destitution.  Some  were  drunk  for  weeks  together. 
Thieving  was  general,  and  went  on  to  a  ruinous 
extent.  .  .  .  There  was  also  a  considerable  drawback 
to  the  comfort  of  the  people  in  the  high  price  and  bad 
quality  of  the  commodities  supplied  in  the  village." 

When  Owen  told  his  intimate  friends  who  knew 
all  these  facts  that  he  hoped  to  reform  these  people 
by  a  system  of  justice  and  kindness,  and  gradually  to 
discontinue  all  punishment,  they  naturally  laughed  at 
him  for  a  wild  enthusiast ;  yet  he  ultimately  succeeded 
to  such  an  extent  that  hardly  any  one  credited  the 
accounts  of  it  without  personal  inspection,  and  its 
fame  spread  over  the  whole  civilized  world.  He  had, 
besides  the  conditions  already  stated,  two  other  great 
difficulties  to  overcome.  The  whole  of  the  workers 
and  overseers  were  strongly  antagonistic  to  him  as 
being  an  Englishman,  whose  speech  they  could  hardly 
understand,  and  who,  they  believed,  was  sent  to  get 
more  money  for  the  owners  and  more  work  out  of 
themselves.  They,  therefore,  opposed  all  he  did  by 
every  means  that  ingenuity  could  devise,  and  though 
he  soon  introduced  more  order  and  regularity  in  the 
work  and  improved  the  quality  of  the  yarn  produced, 
they  saw  in  all  this  nothing  but  the  acts  of  a  tool  of 
the  mill-owners  somewhat  cleverer,  and  therefore 
more  to  be  dreaded,  than  those  who  had  preceded 
him.  An  equally  fierce  opposition  was  made  to  any 
improvement  in  the  condition  of  the  houses  and  streets 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  51 

as  to  dirt,  ventilation,  drainage,  etc.  He  vainly  tried 
to  assure  the  more  intelligent  of  the  overseers  and 
workmen  that  his  object  was  to  improve  their  con- 
dition, to  make  them  more  healthy  and  happier  and 
better  off  than  they  were.  This  was  incredible  to 
them,  and  for  two  years  he  made  very  little  progress. 

One  thing,  however,  he  did  for  the  benefit  of  the 
workers  which  had  some  effect  in  disarming  their 
enmity  and  suspicions.  Instead  of  the  retail  shops 
where  inferior  articles  were  sold  at  credit  for  very 
high  prices,  he  established  stores  and  shops  where 
every  article  of  daily  consumption  was  supplied  at 
wholesale  prices,  adding  only  the  cost  of  management. 
The  result  was  that  by  paying  ready  money  the 
people  got  far  better  quality  at  full  25  per  cent,  less 
than  before  ;  and  the  result  soon  became  visible  in 
their  superior  dress,  improved  health,  and  in  the 
general  comfort  of  their  houses. 

But  what  at  length  satisfied  them  that  their 
manager  was  really  their  friend  was  his  conduct  when 
a  great  temporary  scarcity  of  cotton  and  its  rapid  rise 
in  price  caused  most  of  the  mills  to  be  shut,  and 
reduced  the  workers  to  the  greatest  distress.  But 
though  Owen  shut  up  the  mills  he  continued  to  pay 
every  worker  full  wages  for  the  whole  of  the  four 
months  during  which  the  scarcity  lasted,  employing 
them  in  thoroughly  cleaning  the  mills  and  machinery, 
repairing  the  houses,  etc.  This  cost  £7000,  which  he 
paid  on  his  own  responsibility  ;  but  it  so  completely 
gained  the  confidence  of  the  people  that  he  was 
afterwards  able  to  carry  out  improvements  without 
serious  obstruction.  Being  wholly  opposed  to  infant 
labour,  he  allowed  all  arrangements  with  the  guardians 
to  expire,  built  a  number  of  better  houses,  and.  thus 
obtained  families  of  workers  to  take  the  place  of  the 


52  MY   LIFE 

children  ;  but  difficulties  with  the  partners  arose,  the 
property  was  sold  to  a  fresh  set  of  partners,  Owen 
being  still  the  largest  shareholder  and  manager,  and 
a  few  years  later  again  sold  to  Owen  and  a  few  of  his 
personal  friends,  who  agreed  to  allow  him  to  manage 
the  property,  and  to  expend  all  profits  above  5  per 
cent,  for  the  benefit  of  the  workers.  Among  his  co- 
shareholders  were  Jeremy  Bentham,  with  Joseph 
Foster  and  William  Allen,  well-known  Quakers.  It 
may  be  here  stated  that  the  property  was  purchased 
of  Mr.  Dale  for  i^6o,ooo,  and  was  sold  to  Owen  and 
his  friends  in  1814  for  ;^i  14,100.  This  great  increase 
of  value  was  due  in  part  to  the  large  profits  made  by 
cotton  mills  generally  at  this  period,  and  partly  to 
Owen's  skilful  management  and  judicious  expenditure. 
He  was  now  at  last  able  to  carry  out  his  plans  for 
the  education  of  the  children,  none  of  whom  he  would 
allow  to  enter  the  mills  as  workers  till  they  were  ten 
years  old.  He  built  handsome  and  roomy  schools, 
playrooms  and  lecture-rooms  for  infants  from  two  to 
six,  and  for  the  older  children  from  six  to  ten  years 
old  ;  and  he  obtained  the  best  masters  for  the  latter. 
The  infant  schools  were  superintended  by  himself, 
and  managed  by  teachers  he  himself  selected  for  their 
manifest  love  of  children.  His  instructions  to  them 
were  "  that  they  were  on  no  account  ever  to  beat  any 
one  of  the  children,  or  to  threaten  them  in  any  manner 
in  word  or  action,  or  to  use  abusive  terms,  but  were 
always  to  speak  to  them  with  a  pleasant  countenance, 
and  in  a  kind  manner  and  tone  of  voice  ;  that  they 
should  tell  the  infants  and  children  that  they  must  on 
all  occasions  do  all  they  could  to  make  their  play- 
fellows happy  ;  and  that  the  older  ones,  from  five  to 
six  years  of  age,  should  take  especial  care  of  the 
younger  ones,  and  should  assist  to  teach  them   to 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  53 

make  each  other  happy."  And  these  instructions,  he 
assures  us,  were  strictly  followed  by  the  man  and 
woman  he  chose  as  infant-schoolmaster  and  mistress. 

No  books  were  to  be  used  ;  but  the  children  "  were 
to  be  taught  the  uses  and  nature  or  qualities  of  the 
common  things  around  them,  by  familiar  conversation 
when  the  children's  curiosity  was  excited  so  as  to 
induce  them  to  ask  questions  respecting  them."  The 
schoolrooms  were  furnished  with  paintings  of  natural 
objects,  and  the  children  were  also  taught  dancing, 
singing,  and  military  evolutions,  which  they  greatly 
enjoyed.  The  children  were  never  kept  at  any  one 
occupation  or  amusement  till  they  were  fatigued  and 
were  taken  much  into  the  open  air  and  into  the  sur- 
rounding country,  where  they  were  taught  something 
about  every  natural  object.  Here  we  see  all  the  essen- 
tial features  of  the  educational  systems  of  Pestalozzi 
and  Frcebel,  worked  out  by  his  own  observations  of 
child-nature  from  his  own  childhood  onward,  and  put 
into  practice  on  the  first  opportunity  with  a  complete- 
ness and  success  that  were  most  remarkable. 

The  effect  of  his  system  on  the  adult  workers  was 
hardly  less  remarkable.  To  stop  the  continued  pil- 
fering of  bobbins  and  other  small  articles  in  the  mills, 
he  invented  a  system  (unfortunately  not  explained) 
by  which  the  many  thousands  of  these  articles  which 
passed  from  hand  to  hand  daily  were  so  recorded 
automatically  that  the  loss  of  one  by  any  particular 
worker  could  be  always  detected.  In  this  way  robbery 
large  or  small,  was  always  discovered,  but  no  one  was 
ever  punished  for  it.  The  certainty  of  discovery,  how- 
ever, prevented  its  being  attempted,  and  it  very  soon 
ceased  altogether. 

Equally  novel  and  ingenious  was  his  method  of 
avoiding  the  necessity  for  punishment,  or  even  for  3, 


54  MY   LIFE 

word  of  censure,  for  the  many  petty  offences  or 
infractions  of  rules  that  are  inevitable  in  every  large 
establishment.  Owen  calls  it  "  the  silent  monitor," 
but  the  workers  called  it  the  "telegraph."  Each 
superintendent  of  a  department  had  a  character-book, 
in  which  the  daily  conduct  of  every  worker  was  set 
down  by  marks  for  each  of  the  ordinary  offences, 
neglect  of  work,  swearing,  etc.,  which  when  summed 
up  gave  a  result  in  four  degrees — bad,  indifferent, 
good,  excellent.  For  every  individual  there  was 
a  small  wooden,  four-sided  tally,  the  sides  being 
coloured  black,  blue,  yellow,  and  white,  corresponding 
to  the  above  degrees  of  conduct.  This  tally  was  fixed 
at  each  one's  work-place,  with  the  indicative  colour 
only  visible,  so  that  as  Owen  or  his  representative 
passed  down  the  shops  at  any  time  during  the  day, 
he  could  note  at  a  glance  the  conduct  of  each 
one  during  the  preceding  day,  and  thus  get  both 
a  general  and  a  detailed  view  of  the  behaviour  of 
the  workers.  If  any  thought  they  were  unfairly 
treated  they  could  complain  to  him,  but  in  hardly 
any  cases  did  this  happen.  He  tells  us,  "As  I 
passed  through  all  the  rooms,  the  workers  always 
observed  me  look  at  these  telegraphs,  and  when 
black  I  merely  looked  at  the  person,  and  then  at 
the  colour,  but  never  said  a  word  to  one  of  them 
by  way  of  blame.  At  first,"  he  says,  "a  large  pro- 
portion daily  were  black  and  blue,  few  yellow,  and 
scarcely  any  white.  Gradually  the  blacks  were  changed 
for  blue,  the  blues  for  yellow,  and  the  yellows  for  white. 
Soon  after  the  adoption  of  this  telegraph  I  could  at 
once  see  by  the  expression  of  countenance  what  was 
the  colour  which  was  shown.  As  there  were  four 
colours  there  were  four  different  expressions  of  counte- 
nance, most  evident  to  me  as  I  passed  along  the  rooms. 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  55 

.  .  .  Never  perhaps  in  the  history  of  the  human  race 
has  so  simple  a  device  created  in  so  short  a  period 
so  much  order,  virtue,  goodness,  and  happiness,  out  of 
so  much  ignorance,  error,  and  misery.  And  for  many 
years  the  permanent  daily  conduct  of  a  very  large 
majority  of  those  who  were  employed  deserved,  and 
had,  No.  I  placed  as  their  character  on  the  books  of 
the  company." 

Every  visitor  to  New  Lanark  who  published  any 
account  of  his  observations  seems  to  have  agreed  as 
to  the  exceptional  health,  good  conduct,  and  well- 
being  of  the  entire  population  ;  while  residents  in  the 
vicinity,  as  well  as  the  ruling  authorities  of  the  dis- 
trict, bore  witness  that  vice  and  crime  were  almost 
wholly  unknown.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that 
this  was  all  effected  upon  the  chance  population  found 
there,  which  was  certainly  no  better  if  no  worse  than 
the  usual  lowest  class  of  manufacturing  operatives  at 
that  period.  There  appears  to  have  been  not  a  single 
case  of  an  individual  or  a  family  being  expelled  for 
bad  conduct ;  so  that  we  are  compelled  to  trace  the 
marvellous  improvement  that  occurred  entirely  to  the 
partial  application  of  Owen's  principles  of  human 
nature,  most  patiently  and  skilfully  applied  by  him- 
self. They  were  necessarily  only  a  partial  application, 
because  a  large  number  of  the  adults  had  not  received 
the  education  and  training  from  infancy  which  was 
essential  for  producing  their  full  beneficial  results. 
Again,  the  whole  establishment  was  a  manufactory, 
the  property  of  private  capitalists,  and  the  adult 
population  suffered  all  the  disadvantages  of  having 
to  work  for  long  hours  at  a  monotonous  employment 
and  at  low  rates  of  wages,  circumstances  wholly 
antagonistic  to  any  full  and  healthy  and  elevated 
existence.     Owen   used   always  to   declare  that  the 


56  MY   LIFE 

beneficial  results  at  which  all  visitors  were  so  much 
astonished  were  only  one-tenth  part  of  what  could  and 
would  be  produced  if  his  principles  were  fully  applied- 
If  the  labour  of  such  a  community,  or  of  groups  of 
such  communities,  had  been  directed  with  equal  skill 
to  produce  primarily  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of 
life  for  its  own  inhabitants,  with  a  surplus  of  such 
goods  as  they  could  produce  most  economically,  in 
order  by  their  sale  in  the  surrounding  district  to  be 
able  to  supply  themselves  with  such  native  or  foreign 
products  as  they  required,  then  each  worker  would 
have  been  able  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  change  of 
occupation,  always  having  some  alternation  of  out- 
door as  well  as  indoor  work  ;  the  hours  of  labour 
might  be  greatly  reduced,  and  all  the  refinements 
of  life  might  have  been  procured  and  enjoyed  by 
them. 

The  one  great  error  Owen  committed  was  giving 
up  the  New  Lanark  property  and  management,  and 
spending  his  large  fortune  in  the  endeavour  to  found 
communities  in  various  countries  of  chance  assem- 
blages of  adults,  which  his  own  principles  should  have 
shown  him  were  doomed  to  failure.  He  always  main- 
tained that  a  true  system  of  education  from  infancy 
to  manhood  was  essential  to  the  best  formation  of 
character.  His  infant  schools  had  only  been  about 
ten  years  in  existence,  when,  owing  to  some  diffi- 
culties with  his  Quaker  partners,  who  had  always 
objected  to  the  dancing  and  drill,  he  gave  up  the 
management  into  their  hands. 

Notwithstanding  this  one  fatal  error,  an  error  due 
to  the  sensitive  nobility  of  his  character  and  to  his 
optimistic  belief  in  the  power  of  truth  to  make  its  way 
against  all  adverse  forces,  Robert  Owen  will  be  re- 
membered as  one  of  the  wisest,  noblest,  and  most 


LONDON  WORKERS,  SECULARISTS,  ETC.  57 

practical  of  philanthropists,  as  well  as  one  of  the  best 
and  most  lovable  of  men. 

I  have  a  recollection  of  having  once  heard  him  give 
a  short  address  at  this  "  Hall  of  Science,"  and  that  I 
was  struck  by  his  tall  spare  figure,  very  lofty  head, 
and  highly  benevolent  countenance  and  mode  of 
speaking.  Although  later  in  life  my  very  scanty 
knowledge  of  his  work  was  not  sufficient  to  prevent 
my  adopting  the  individualist  views  of  Herbert 
Spencer  and  of  the  political  economists,  I  have  always 
looked  upon  Owen  as  my  first  teacher  in  the  philo- 
sophy of  human  nature  and  my  first  guide  through 
the  labyrinth  of  social  science.  He  influenced  my 
character  more  than  I  then  knew,  and  now  that  I 
have  read  his  life  and  most  of  his  works,  I  am  fully 
convinced  that  he  was  the  greatest  of  social  reformers 
and  the  real  founder  of  modern  Socialism.  For  these 
reasons  I  trust  that  my  readers  will  not  consider  the 
space  I  have  here  devoted  to  an  outline  of  his  great 
work  at  New  Lanark  is  more  than  the  subject 
deserves. 

The  preceding  sketch  of  his  work  is  founded  upon 
his  "  Life  "  written  by  himself,  and  accompanied  by 
such  a  mass  of  confirmatory  reports  and  correspon- 
dence as  to  show  that  it  can  be  thoroughly  relied  on. 
It  has,  however,  long  been  out  of  print,  and  very  few 
people  have  read  it  or  even  heard  of  it,  and  it  is  for 
this  reason  that  I  have  given  this  brief  outline. 


CHAPTER  V 

SURVEYING  IN   BEDFORDSHIRE 

It  was,  I  think,  early  in  the  summer  of  1837  that  I 
went  with  my  brother  William  into  Bedfordshire  to 
begin  my  education  as  a  land-surveyor.  The  first 
work  we  had  was  to  survey  the  parish  of  Higham 
Gobion  for  the  commutation  of  the  tithes.  It  was  a 
small  parish  of  about  a  thousand  acres,  with  the 
church,  vicarage,  and  a  good  farmhouse  on  the  highest 
ground,  and  a  few  labourers'  cottages  scattered  about, 
but  nothing  that  could  be  called  a  village.  The 
whole  parish  was  one  large  farm  ;  the  land  was  almost 
all  arable  and  the  fields  very  large,  so  that  it  was  a 
simple  piece  of  work.  We  took  up  our  quarters  at 
the  Coach  and  Horses  public-house  in  the  village  of 
Barton-in-the-Clay,  six  miles  north  of  Luton,  on  the 
coach-road  to  Bedford.  We  were  nearly  a  mile  from 
the  nearest  part  of  the  parish,  but  it  was  the  most 
convenient  place  we  could  get. 

An  intelligent  young  labourer  was  hired  to  draw 
the  chain  in  measuring,  while  I  carried  a  flag  or 
measuring-rod  and  stuck  in  pegs  or  cut  triangular 
holes  in  the  grass,  where  required,  to  form  marks  for 
future  reference.  We  carried  bill-hooks  for  cutting 
rods  and  pegs,  as  well  as  for  clearing  away  branches 
that  obstructed  the  view,  and  for  cutting  gaps  in  the 
hedges  on  the  main  lines  of  the  survey,  in  order  to 


SURVEYING   IN   BEDFORDSHIRE       59 

lay  them  out  perfectly  straight.  We  started  work 
after  an  early  breakfast,  and  usually  took  with  us  a 
good  supply  of  bread-and-cheese  and  half  a  gallon 
of  beer,  and  about  one  o'clock  sat  down  under  the 
shelter  of  a  hedge  to  enjoy  our  lunch.  My  brother 
was  a  great  smoker,  and  always  had  his  pipe  after 
lunch  (and  often  before  breakfast),  and,  of  course,  the 
chain-bearer  smoked  too.  It  therefore  occurred  to 
me  that  I  might  as  well  learn  the  art,  and  for  some 
days  I  tried  a  few  whiffs.  Then,  going  a  little  too  far, 
I  had  such  a  violent  attack  of  headache  and  vomiting 
that  I  was  cured  once  and  for  ever  from  any  desire 
to  smoke,  and  although  I  afterwards  lived  for  some 
years  among  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  almost  all  of 
whom  are  smokers,  I  never  felt  any  inclination  to  try 
again. 

It  was  while  living  at  Barton  that  I  obtained  my 
first  information  that  there  was  such  a  science  as 
geology,  and  that  chalk  was  not  everywhere  found 
under  the  surface,  as  I  had  hitherto  supposed.  My 
brother,  like  most  land-surveyors,  was  something  of  a 
geologist,  and  he  showed  me  the  fossil  oysters  of  the 
genus  Gryphaea  and  the  Belemnites,  which  we  had 
hitherto  called  "thunderbolts,"  and  several  other 
fossils  which  were  abundant  in  the  chalk  and  gravel 
around  Barton.  While  here  I  acquired  the  rudiments 
of  surveying  and  mapping,  as  well  as  calculating  areas 
on  the  map  by  the  rules  of  trigonometry.  This  I 
found  very  interesting  work,  and  it  was  rendered 
more  so  by  a  large  volume  belonging  to  my  brother 
giving  an  account  of  the  great  Trigonometrical  Survey 
of  England,  with  all  the  angles  and  the  calculated 
lengths  of  the  sides  of  the  triangles  formed  by  the 
different  stations  on  hilltops,  and  by  the  various 
church  spires  and  other  conspicuous  objects.     The 


6o  MY   LIFE 

church  spires  of  Barton  and  Higham  Gobion  had 
been  thus  used,  and  the  distance  between  them  accu- 
rately given  ;  and  as  the  line  from  one  to  the  other 
ran  diagonally  across  the  middle  of  the  parish  we 
were  surveying,  this  was  made  our  chief  base-line, 
and  the  distance  as  measured  found  to  agree  very 
closely  with  that  given  in  the  survey.  This  volume 
was  eagerly  read  by  me,  as  it  gave  an  account  of  all 
the  instruments  used,  including  the  great  theodolite 
three  feet  in  diameter  for  measuring  the  angles  of  the 
larger  triangles  formed  by  distant  mountain  tops  often 
twenty  or  thirty  miles  apart,  and  in  a  few  cases  more 
than  a  hundred  miles ;  the  accurate  measurement  of 
the  base-lines  by  steel  chains  laid  in  wooden  troughs, 
and  carefully  tightened  by  exactly  the  same  weight 
passing  over  a  pulley,  while  the  ends  were  adjusted 
by  means  of  microscopes ;  the  exact  temperature 
being  also  taken  by  several  thermometers  in  order  to 
allow  for  contraction  or  expansion  of  the  chains  ;  and 
by  all  these  refinements  several  base-lines  of  seven 
or  eight  miles  in  length  were  measured  with  extreme 
accuracy  in  distant  parts  of  the  country.  These 
base-lines  were  tested  by  repeated  measurements  in 
opposite  directions,  which  were  found  to  differ  only 
by  about  an  inch,  so  that  the  mean  of  all  the  measure- 
ments was  probably  correct  to  less  than  half  that 
amount. 

These  bases  were  connected  by  the  system  of  tri- 
angulation  already  referred  to,  the  angles  at  all  the 
stations  being  taken  with  the  best  available  instru- 
ments and  often  repeated  by  different  observers, 
while  allowance  had  also  to  be  made  for  height  above 
the  sea-level,  to  which  all  the  distances  had  to  be 
reduced.  In  this  way,  starting  from  any  one  base, 
the  lengths  of  the   sides  of  all   the  triangles  were 


SURVEYING   IN   BEDFORDSHIRE      6i 

calculated,  and  ultimately  the  length  of  the  other 
bases  ;  and  if  there  had  been  absolutely  no  error  in 
any  of  the  measurements  of  base-lines  or  of  angles, 
the  length  of  a  base  obtained  by  calculation  would  be 
the  same  as  that  by  direct  measurement.  The  results 
obtained  showed  a  quite  marvellous  accuracy.  Start- 
ing from  the  base  measured  on  Salisbury  Plain,  the 
length  of  another  base  on  the  shore  of  Lough  Foyle  in 
the  north  of  Ireland  was  calculated  through  the  whole 
series  of  triangles  connecting  them,  and  this  calculated 
length  was  found  to  differ  from  the  measured  length 
by  only  five  inches  and  a  fraction.  The  distance 
between  these  two  base-lines  is  about  three  hundred 
and  sixty  miles. 

It  was  here,  too,  that  during  my  solitary  rambles 
I  first  began  to  feel  the  influence  of  nature  and  to 
wish  to  know  more  of  the  various  flowers,  shrubs,  and 
trees  I  daily  met  with,  but  of  which  for  the  most  part 
I  did  not  even  know  the  English  names.  At  that 
time  I  hardly  realized  that  there  was  such  a  science 
as  systematic  botany,  that  every  flower  and  every 
meanest  and  most  insignificant  weed  had  been  accu- 
rately described  and  classified,  and  that  there  was 
any  kind  of  system  or  order  in  the  endless  variety  of 
plants  and  animals  which  I  knew  existed. 

Barton  was  a  rather  large  straggling  village  of  the 
old-fashioned,  self-contained  type,  with  a  variety  of 
small  tradesmen  and  mechanics,  many  of  whom  lived 
in  their  own  freehold  or  leasehold  houses  with  fair- 
sized  gardens.  Our  landlord  was  a  Radical,  and  took 
a  newspaper  called  The  Constitutional^  which  was 
published  at  Birmingham,  and  contained  a  great  deal 
of  very  interesting  matter.  This  was  about  the  time 
the  dean  and  chapter  refused  to  allow  a  monument  to 
be  erected  to  Byron  in  Westminster  Abbey,  which 


62  MY   LIFE 

excited  much  indignation  among  his  admirers.  One 
of  these  wrote  some  lines  on  the  subject  which  struck 
me  as  being  so  worthy  of  the  occasion  that  I  learnt 
them  by  heart,  and  by  constant  repetition  (on  sleep- 
less nights)  have  never  forgotten  them.  They  were 
printed  in  the  newspaper  without  a  signature,  and  I 
have  never  been  able  to  learn  who  was  the  author  of 
them.  I  give  them  here  to  show  the  kind  of  poetry 
I  admired  then  and  still  enjoy — 

"Away  with  epitaph  and  sculptured  bust ! 
Leave  these  to  decorate  the  mouldering  dust 
Of  him  who  needs  such  substitutes  for  fame — 
The  chisel's  pomp  to  deck  a  worthless  name. 
Away  with  these  !    A  Byron  needs  them  not ; 
Nature  herself  selects  a  deathless  spot, 
A  nation's  heart :  the  Poet  cannot  die, 
His  epitaph  is  Immortality. 
What  are  earth's  mansions  to  a  tomb  like  this  ? 
When  time  hath  swept  into  forgetfulness 
Wealth-blazoned  halls  and  gorgeous  cemeteries. 
The  mouldering  Abbey  with  its  sculptured  lies, 
His  name,  emblazoned  in  the  wild,  the  free, 
The  deep,  the  beautiful  of  earth,  shall  be 
A  household  word  with  millions.     Dark  and  wild 
His  song  at  times,  his  spirit  was  the  child 
Of  burning  passion.     Yet  when  he  awoke 
From  his  dark  hours  of  bondage,  when  he  broke 
His  cage  and  seized  his  harp,  did  he  not  make 
A  peal  of  matchless  melody  and  shake 
The  very  earth  with  joy  ?     Still  thrills  the  heart 
Of  man  at  those  sweet  notes  ;  sacred  despots  start 
To  curse  them  from  their  thrones  ;  they  pierce  the  cell 
And  cheer  the  captive  in  his  chains  ;  they  tell 
Lessons  of  life  to  struggling  liberty. 
Death  mars  the  man  but  spares  his  memory. 
Nor  tears  one  laurel  from  his  wreath  of  fame. 
How  many  glorious  thoughts  of  his  we  claim 
Our  heritage  for  ever  ;  beacon  lights 
To  guide  the  barque  of  freedom  through  the  nights 
Of  tyranny  and  woe,  when  not  a  star 
Of  hope  looks  down  to  glad  the  mariner  : 
Thoughts  which  must  ever  haunt  us,  like  some  dream 
Of  childhood  which  we  ne'er  forget,  a  gleam 
Of  sunshine  flashing  o'er  life's  troubled  stream  !  " 


SURVEYING   IN   BEDFORDSHIRE      63 

Those  who  only  know  Byron  by  his  more  romantic 
or  pathetic  poems,  and  who  may  think  the  panegyric 
of  the  anonymous  writer  in  The  Constitutional*  to  be 
overdrawn,  should  read  "  The  Age  of  Bronze,"  which 
is  pervaded  throughout  with  the  detestation  of  war, 
with  admiration  of  those  who  fought  only  for  freedom, 
and  with  scorn  and  contempt  for  the  majority  of 
English  landlords,  who  subordinated  all  ideas  of 
justice  or  humanity  to  the  keeping  up  of  their  rents. 
Even  if  it  stood  alone,  this  one  poem  would  justify 
the  poet  as  an  upholder  of  the  rights  of  man  and  as  a 
truly  ethical  teacher. 

As  there  was  no  work  of  importance  after  the 
maps  and  reference  books  of  the  parish  we  had  been 
surveying  were  completed  and  delivered,  and  winter 
was  approaching,  I  went  home  for  a  short  holiday. 
My  father  and  mother  and  my  younger  brother  were 
then  living  in  Hoddesdon,  and  as  there  was  no  direct 
conveyance  I  made  the  journey  on  foot.  It  was,  I 
think,  the  end  of  November,  and  as  the  distance  was 
about  thirty  miles,  and  I  was  not  very  strong,  I  took 
two  days,  sleeping  on  the  way  at  a  roadside  public- 
house.  I  went  through  Hitchin  and  Stevenage,  and 
near  the  former  place  passed  a  quarry  of  a  reddish 
chalk  almost  as  hard  as  marble,  which  was  used  for 
building.  This  surprised  me,  as  I  had  hitherto  only 
seen  the  soft  varieties  of  chalk,  and  had  been  accus- 
tomed to  look  upon  it  as  more  earth  than  stone.  The 
only  other  thing  that  greatly  interested  me  was  a 
little  beyond  Stevenage,  where,  on  a  grassy  strip  by 

*  This  newspaper — The  Constitutional — appears  to  have  existed 
only  two  years.  The  Daily  News,  referring  to  a  sale  of  Thackeray 
rarities  last  year,  states  that  he  contributed  several  articles  to  that  paper 
as  Paris  correspondent,  and  that,  in  consequence,  a  set  of  the  paper 
sold  in  1899  for  two  hundred  guineas.  A  friend  informs  me  that  it 
does  not  exist  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 


64  MY   LIFE 

the  roadside,  were  six  ancient  barrows  or  tumuli, 
which  I  carefully  inspected  ;  and  whenever  I  have 
since  travelled  by  the  Great  Northern  Railway,  I 
have  looked  out  for  these  six  tumuli,  near  which  the 
line  passes. 

After  a  few  weeks  at  home  at  Hoddesdon,  I  went 
back  to  Barton,  where  we  had  some  work  till  after 
Christmas.  On  New  Year's  Day,  1838,  the  first 
section  of  the  London  and  Birmingham  Railway  was 
opened  to  Tring,  and  I  and  my  brother  took  advan- 
tage of  it  to  go  up  to  London,  where  he  had  some 
business,  and  the  next  day  I  walked  to  Hoddesdon 
for  a  short  holiday.  My  brother  while  in  London 
obtained  the  survey  for  tithe  commutation  of  a  parish 
in  Bedfordshire,  where  I  was  to  meet  him  on  the  14th 
or  15th  of  January,  at  the  village  of  Turvey,  eight 
miles  beyond  Bedford. 

I  had  first  to  go  back  to  Barton  to  pay  a  few  bills 
and  pack  up  the  books,  instruments,  etc.,  we  had  left 
there  to  be  sent  by  carrier's  waggon.  I  therefore  left 
home  on  the  12th,  and  I  think  walked  back  to 
Barton,  and  the  next  day  did  what  was  required,  took 
leave  of  my  friends  there,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
14th,  after  an  early  breakfast,  started  to  walk  to 
Turvey  through  Bedford,  a  distance  of  about  twenty 
miles.  I  dined  at  Bedford,  and  reached  Turvey  before 
dark. 

For  the  next  six  days  we  were  at  work  laying  out 
the  main  lines  for  the  survey  of  the  parish,  cutting 
hedges,  ranging  flags,  ascertaining  boundaries,  and 
beginning  the  actual  measurements. 

A  curious  incident  may  here  be  noted.  One  day 
I  was  out  on  the  frozen  meadows  across  the  river 
Ouse,  assisting  in  marking  out  one  of  our  main  lines 
which  had  to  cross  the  windings  of  the  river,  when  I 


SURVEYING   IN   BEDFORDSHIRE      65 

saw  a  pleasant-looking  young  man  coming  towards 
me  carrying  a  double-barrelled  gun.  When  he  was 
a  few  yards  off,  two  very  large  birds,  looking  like  wild 
geese,  came  flying  towards  us,  and  as  they  passed  over- 
head at  a  moderate  height,  he  threw  up  his  gun,  fired 
both  barrels,  and  brought  them  both  to  the  ground. 
Of  course  I  went  up  to  look  at  them,  and  found  they 
were  a  fine  pair  of  wild  swans,  the  male  being  about 
five  feet  long  from  beak  to  end  of  tail.  "  That  was  a 
good  shot,"  I  remarked  ;  to  which  he  replied,  "  Oh ! 
you  can't  miss  them,  they  are  as  big  as  a  barn  door." 
Afterwards  I  found  that  this  was  young  Mr.  H.  H. 
Higgins,  of  Turvey  Abbey,  his  father  being  one  of 
the  principal  landowners  in  the  parish. 

More  than  half  a  century  later  (in  November, 
1889),  I  was  invited  to  Liverpool  to  give  some 
lectures,  and  some  time  before  the  date  fixed  upon 
I  received  a  very  kind  letter  from  the  Rev.  H.  H. 
Higgins,  inviting  me  to  dine  with  him  on  my  arrival, 
and  offering  to  assist  me  in  every  way  he  could.  I 
declined  the  invitation,  but  told  him  what  hotel  I  was 
going  to,  and  said  that  I  should  be  glad  to  see  him. 
His  letter  recalled  to  me  my  acquaintance  at  Turvey, 
but  I  did  not  see  how  a  Liverpool  clergyman  could 
have  any  close  relationship  to  a  wealthy  Bedfordshire 
landowner.  I  found  Mr.  Higgins  at  the  station  with 
a  carriage  ready,  and  he  told  me  that,  as  I  did  not 
wish  to  go  out  to  dinner,  he  and  some  friends  had 
taken  the  liberty  of  ordering  a  dinner  at  my  hotel, 
and  hoped  I  would  dine  with  them.  He  was  as 
pleasant  as  an  old  friend,  and  of  course  I  accepted. 

When  his  friends  left  about  an  hour  after  dinner, 
I  asked  him,  if  he  had  no  engagement,  to  stay  a  little 
longer,  as  I  wished  to  find  out  the  mystery.  I  then 
asked   him    if  he   knew   a   place   called   Turvey,  in 

F 


66  MY   LIFE 

Bedfordshire,  to  which  he  reph'ed,  "  I  ought  to  know 
it,  for  I  was  born  there,  and  my  father  owned  the 
estate  there  to  which  I  am  heir."  I  then  felt  pretty 
sure  of  my  man,  and  asked  him  if  he  remembered, 
during  a  very  hard  frost  about  fifty  years  ago,  shoot- 
ing a  pair  of  wild  swans  at  Turvey.  "  Why,  of  course 
I  do,"  said  he.  "  But  how  do  you  know  it  ? " 
*'  Because  I  was  there  at  the  time  and  saw  you  shoot 
them.  Do  not  you  remember  a  thin  tall  lad  who 
came  up  to  you  and  said,  'That  was  a  good  shot/ 
and  you  replied,  *  Oh  !  you  can't  miss  them,  they  are 
as  big  as  a  barn  door ' }  "  "  No,"  he  said,  "  I  don't 
remember  you  at  all,  but  that  is  just  what  I  should 
have  said."  His  delight  was  great,  for  his  story  of 
how  he  shot  the  two  wild  swans  was  not  credited 
even  by  his  own  family,  and  he  made  me  promise 
to  go  to  his  house  after  the  lecture  on  the  next  night, 
and  prove  to  them  that  he  had  not  been  romancing. 
When  I  went,  I  was  duly  introduced  to  his  grown-up 
sons  and  daughters  as  one  who  had  been  present 
at  the  shooting  of  the  swans,  which  I  had  been 
the  first  to  mention.  That  was  a  proud  moment  for 
the  Rev.  H.  H.  Higgins,  and  a  very  pleasant  one  to 
myself. 

Soon  after  we  came  to  Turvey  a  young  gentleman 
from  Bedford  came  to  us  to  learn  a  little  surveying. 
He  was,  I  think,  the  son  of  an  auctioneer  or  estate 
agent,  and  was  about  eighteen  or  twenty  years  old. 
As  my  brother  was  occasionally  away  for  several 
days  at  a  time  when  we  sometimes  had  nothing  to 
go  on  with,  he  would  amuse  himself  fishing,  of  which 
he  was  very  fond.  Sometimes  I  went  with  him,  but 
I  usually  preferred  walking  about  the  country,  though 
I  cannot  remember  that  I  had  at  this  time  any  special 
interest  in  doing  so.     He  often  caught  some  large 


SURVEYING   IN    BEDFORDSHIRE      67 

coarse  fish,  such  as  bream  or  pike,  which  were  the 
commonest  fish  in  the  river,  but  were  hardly  worth 
eating.  Towards  the  latter  part  of  our  survey  in  the 
spring  months,  my  brother  left  us  a  portion  of  the 
work  to  do  by  ourselves  when  he  was  away  for  a 
week  or  two.  I  was  therefore  left  mostly  to  the  com- 
panionship of  our  temporary  pupil,  and  he,  like  the 
majority  of  the  young  men  I  met  at  this  period  of 
my  life,  was  by  no  means  an  edifying  acquaintance. 

But,  notwithstanding  that  I  was  continually  thrown 
into  such  society  from  the  time  I  left  school,  I  do  not 
think  it  produced  the  least  bad  effect  upon  my 
character  or  habits  in  after-life.  This  was  partly 
owing  to  natural  disposition,  which  was  reflective  and 
imaginative,  but  more  perhaps  to  the  quiet  and  order 
of  my  home,  where  I  never  heard  a  rude  word  or  an 
offensive  expression.  The  effect  of  this  was  intensified 
by  my  extreme  shyness,  which  made  it  impossible  for 
me  to  use  words  or  discuss  subjects  which  were 
altogether  foreign  to  my  home-life,  as  a  result  of 
which  I  have  never  been  able  to  use  an  oath,  although 
I  have  frequently  felt  those  impulses  and  passions 
which  in  many  people  can  only  find  adequate  expres- 
sion in  such  language.  This,  I  think,  is  a  rather 
striking  example  of  the  effects  of  home  influence 
during  childhood,  and  of  that  kind  of  education  on 
which  Robert  Owen  depended  for  the  general  improve- 
ment of  character  and  habits. 

It  was  some  time  in  May  or  June  of  1838  that 
we  left  Turvey  for  Silsoe,  where  my  brother  had 
some  temporary  work.  This  very  small  village  is  an 
appanage  of  Wrest  Park,  the  seat  of  Earl  de  Grey, 
and  is  about  halfway  between  Luton  and  Bedford. 
It  consisted  of  a  large  inn  with  a  considerable  posting 
business,  a  few   small  houses,  cottages,  and  one  or 


68  •  MY    LIFE 

two  shops,  and,  like  most  such  villages,  it  is  no  larger 
to-day  than  it  was  then. 

Our  work  here  was  mainly  copying  maps  or 
making  surveys  connected  with  the  estate,  and  for 
this  purpose  we  had  the  use  of  a  small  empty  house 
nearly  opposite  the  inn,  where  a  large  drawing-table 
and  a  few  chairs  and  stools  were  all  the  furniture  we 
required.  Here  we  used  sometimes  to  sit  of  a 
summer's  evening  with  one  or  two  friends  for  privacy 
and  quiet  conversation. 

One  day,  having  to  drive  over  to  Dunstable  on 
some  business,  my  brother  took  me  with  him.  When 
there,  we  walked  out  to  a  deep  cutting  through  the 
chalk  about  a  mile  to  the  north-west,  where  the  road 
was  being  improved  by  further  excavation  to  make 
the  ascent  easier.  This  was  the  great  mail-coach 
road  to  Birmingham  and  Holyhead,  and  although 
the  railway  from  London  to  Birmingham  was  then 
making  and  partly  finished,  nobody  seemed  to 
imagine  that  in  twelve  years  more  a  railway  would 
be  opened  the  whole  distance,  and,  so  far  as  the  mails 
and  all  through  traffic  were  concerned,  all  such  costly 
improvement  on  the  high-roads  would  be  quite 
unnecessary. 

My  brother  had  some  conversation  with  the 
engineer  who  was  inspecting  the  work,  and  took  a 
lump  of  chalk  home  with  him  to  ascertain  its  specific 
gravity,  as  to  which  there  was  some  difference  of 
opinion.  While  taking  luncheon  at  the  hotel  we  met 
a  gentleman  named  Matthews  about  my  brother's  age, 
who  turned  out  to  be  a  surveyor,  and  who  was  also  in- 
terested in  engineering  generally  ;  and  after  luncheon 
they  borrowed  a  small  pair  of  scales  and  a  large  jug 
of  water,  and  by  suspending  the  chalk  by  a  thread 
below  the  scale-pan,  they  weighed  it  in  water,  having 


SURVEYING   IN   BEDFORDSHIRE      69 

first  weighed  it  dry  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  the 
weight  in  air,  divided  by  the  difference  between  the 
weights  in  air  and  water,  gives  the  specific  gravity 
sufficiently  near  for  ordinary  purposes.  This  little 
experiment  interested  me  greatly,  and  made  me  wish 
to  know  something  about  mechanics  and  physics. 
Mr.  Matthews  lived  at  Leighton  Buzzard,  where  he 
carried  on  the  business  of  watch  and  clock  maker  as 
well  as  that  of  engineer  and  surveyor.  He  had  under- 
taken the  survey  of  the  parish  of  Soulbury,  but 
having  too  much  other  work  to  attend  to,  he  was 
looking  out  for  some  one  to  take  it  off  his  hands. 
This  matter  was  soon  agreed  upon,  and  a  few  weeks 
afterwards  we  left  Silsoe  to  begin  the  work. 

The  village  of  Soulbury  is  a  very  small  one, 
though  the  parish  is  rather  large.  It  is  only  three 
miles  from  Leighton,  and  we  obtained  accommodation 
in  the  school-house. 

The  district  was  rather  an  interesting  one.  The 
parish  was  crossed  about  its  centre  by  the  small  river 
Ouzel,  a  tributary  of  the  Ouse,  bordered  by  flat 
verdant  meadows,  beyond  which  the  ground  rose  on 
both  sides  into  low  hills,  which  to  the  north-east 
reached  five  hundred  feet  above  the  sea,  and  being 
of  a  sand  formation,  were  covered  with  heaths  and 
woods  of  fir  trees.  Parallel  with  the  river  was  the 
Grand  Junction  Canal,  which  at  that  time  carried  all 
the  heavy  goods  from  the  manufacturing  districts  of 
the  Midlands  to  London.  Following  the  same  general 
direction,  but  about  half  a  mile  west  on  higher 
ground,  the  London  and  Birmingham  Railway  was 
in  course  of  construction,  a  good  deal  of  the  earth- 
work being  completed,  most  of  the  bridges  built 
or  building,  and  the  whole  country  enlivened  by  the 
work  going  on. 


70  MY   LIFE 

At  the  same  time  the  canal  had  been  improved  at 
great  cost  to  enable  it  to  carry  the  increased  trade 
that  had  been  caused  by  the  rapid  growth  of  London 
and  the  prosperity  of  agriculture  during  the  early 
portion  of  the  nineteenth  century.  About  thirty 
miles  further  on  the  watershed  between  the  river- 
basins  of  the  Ouse  and  Severn  had  to  be  crossed,  a 
district  of  small  rainfall  and  scanty  streams,  from 
which  the  whole  supply  of  the  canal,  both  for  its  locks 
as  well  as  for  evaporation  and  leakage,  had  to  be 
drawn.  Whenever  there  was  a  deficiency  of  water 
here  to  float  the  barges  and  fill  the  locks,  trafific  was 
checked  till  the  canal  filled  again ;  and  this  had 
become  so  serious  that,  for  a  considerable  portion  of 
the  canal,  it  had  been  found  necessary  to  erect  steam-  ' 
engines  to  pump  up  the  water  at  every  lock  from  the 
lower  to  the  higher  level.  Sometimes  there  were  two, 
three,  or  more  locks  close  together,  and  in  these  cases 
a  more  powerful  engine  was  erected  to  pump  the 
water  the  greater  height.  Up  to  this  time  I  had 
never  seen  a  steam-engine,  and  therefore  took  the 
greatest  interest  in  examining  these  both  at  rest  and 
at  work.  They  had  been  erected  by  the  celebrated 
firm  of  Boulton  and  Watt,  and  were  all  of  the  low- 
pressure  type  then  in  use,  with  large  cylinders,  over- 
head beam,  and  parallel  motion,  but  each  one  having 
its  special  features,  the  purport  of  which  was  explained 
to  me  by  my  brother,  and  gave  me  my  first  insight 
into  some  of  the  more  important  applications  of  the 
sciences  of  mechanics  and  physics. 

Of  course  at  that  time  nobody  foresaw  the  rapid 
development  of  railways  all  over  the  country,  or 
imagined  that  they  could  ever  compete  with  canals 
in  carrying  heavy  goods.  Yet  within  two  years  after 
the  completion  of  the  line  to  Birmingham,  the  traffic 


SURVEYING   IN   BEDFORDSHIRE      71 

of  the  canal  had  decreased  to  1,000,000  tons,  while  it 
was  1,100,000  tons  in  1837.  Afterwards  it  began 
slowly  to  rise  again,  and  had  reached  1,627,000  tons 
in  1900,  an  exceedingly  small  increase  as  compared 
with  that  of  the  railway.  And  this  increase  is  wholly 
due  to  local  traffic  between  places  adjacent  to  the 
canal. 

In  the  northern  part  of  the  parish,  which  extended 
nearly  to  the  village  of  Great   Brickhill,  were   some 
curious  dry  valleys  with  flat  bottoms,  and  sides  clothed 
with  fir  woods,  a  kind  of  country  I  had  not  yet  seen, 
and  which  impressed  me  as  showing  some  connection 
between  the  geological  formation  of  the  country  and 
its  physical  features,  though  it  was  many  years  later 
when,  by  reading  Lyell's  "  Principles  of  Geology,"  I 
first  understood  why  it  should  be  so.    Another  interest- 
ing feature  of  the  place,  of  which  no  one  then  saw  the 
significance,  was  a  large  mass  of  hard  conglomerate 
rock,  or  pudding-stone,  which  lay  in  the  centre  of  the 
spot  where  the  three  roads  met  in  front  of  the  house 
where  we  lodged.     It   was  roughly  about  a  yard  in 
diameter  and  about  the  same  height,  and  had  probably 
at  some  remote  period  determined  the  position  of  the 
village   and   the   meeting-point   of  the  three   roads. 
Being  a  kind  of  rock  quite  different  from  any  found 
in  that  part  of  England,  it  was  probably  associated 
with  some  legend  in  early  time,  but  it  is  in  all  pro- 
bability a  relic  of  the  Ice  Age,  and  was  brought  by  the 
glacier  or  ice-sheet  that   at  one  time  extended  over 
all   midland  England   as  far  as   the  Thames  valley. 
But  at  this  time  not  a  single  British  geologist  knew 
anything  about   a  glacial   epoch,  it  being  two  years 
later,    in    1840,   when    Louis    Agassiz    showed   Dr. 
Buckland  such  striking  indications  of  ice-action  in 
Scotland  as  to  convince  him  of  the  reality  of  such 


72^  MY   LIFE 

a  development  of  glaciers  in  our  own  country  at  a 
very  recent  period. 

Having  finished  our  plans  of  Soulbury,  and  made 
the  three  copies  needed  with  their  books  of  reference, 
with  some  other  odd  work,  my  brother  took  me  up  to 
London  on  Christmas  Eve,  travelling  by  coach  to 
Berkhampstead  and  thence  on  to  London  by  the 
railway,  which  had  been  just  opened.  We  went  third 
class  for  economy,  in  open  trucks  identical  with 
modern  goods  trucks,  except  that  they  had  hinged 
doors,  but  with  no  seats  whatever,  so  that  any  one 
tired  of  standing  must  sit  upon  the  floor.  Luckily  it 
was  mild  weather,  and  the  train  did  not  go  more  than 
fifteen  or  twenty  miles  an  hour,  yet  even  at  that  pace 
the  wind  was  very  disagreeable.  The  next  day  we 
went  home  to  Hoddesdon  for  a  holiday.  It  had  been 
settled  that,  as  no  more  surveying  work  was  in  view, 
I  should  go  back  to  Leighton  to  Mr.  Matthews  for  a 
few  months  to  see  if  I  should  like  to  learn  the  watch 
and  clock  making  business  as  well  as  surveying  and 
general  engineering ;  and  as  there  seemed  to  be 
nothing  else  available,  I  did  so. 

Mr.  William  Matthews  was  a  man  of  about  thirty. 
He  had  been  married  two  years,  and  had  a  little  girl 
under  a  year  old.  Both  he  and  Mrs.  Matthews  were 
pleasant  people,  and  I  felt  that  I  should  be  comfort- 
able with  them,  Mr,  Matthews  had  also  charge  of 
the  town  gas-works,  which  involved  some  knowledge 
of  practical  chemistry,  and  a  good  deal  of  mechanical 
work.  I  spent  about  nine  months  in  his  house,  and 
during  that  time  learnt  to  take  an  ordinary  watch  to 
pieces,  clean  it  properly,  and  put  it  together  again, 
and  the  same  with  a  clock ;  to  do  small  repairs  to 
jewellery ;  and  to  make  some  attempts  at  engraving 


SURVEYING  IN   BEDFORDSHIRE      73 

initials  on  silver.  I  also  saw  the  general  routine  of 
gas  manufacture ;  but  hardly  any  surveying,  which 
was  the  work  I  liked  best.  I  was,  therefore,  very 
glad  when  circumstances,  not  connected  with  myself, 
put  an  end  to  the  arrangement.  Mr.  Matthews 
accepted  the  offer  of  a  partnership  in  an  old-estab- 
lished wholesale  watchmaking  firm  in  the  city  of 
London,  and  gave  up  his  Leighton  business. 

This  may  be  considered  the  first  of  several  turning- 
points  of  my  life,  at  which,  by  circumstances  beyond 
my  own  control,  I  have  been  insensibly  directed  into 
the  course  best  adapted  to  develop  my  special  mental 
and  physical  activities.  If  I  had  been  apprenticed  to 
Mr.  Matthews  I  should  have  become  a  mechanical 
tradesman  in  a  country  town,  by  which  my  life  would 
almost  certainly  have  been  shortened  and  my  mental 
development  stunted  by  the  monotony  of  my  occu- 
pation. 


CHAPTER  VI 

RADNORSHIRE 

In  the  autumn  of  1839  my  brother  came  to  Leighton 
to  take  me  away,  and  in  a  day  or  two  we  started  for 
Herefordshire,  going  by  the  recently  opened  railroad 
to  Birmingham,  where  we  visited  an  old  friend  of  my 
brother's,  a  schoolmaster,  whose  name  I  forget,  and 
who  I  remember  showed  us  with  some  pride  how  his 
school  was  warmed  by  hot-water  pipes,  then  some- 
what unusual.  We  then  went  on  by  coach  through 
Worcester  to  Kington,  a  small  town  of  about  two 
thousand  inhabitants,  only  two  miles  from  the 
boundary  of  Radnorshire.  It  is  pleasantly  situated 
in  a  hilly  country,  and  has  a  small  stream  flowing 
through  it.  Just  beyond  the  county  boundary,  on 
the  road  to  Old  and  New  Radnor,  there  is  an  isolated 
craggy  hill  called  the  Stanner  Rocks,  which,  being  a 
hard  kind  of  basalt  very  good  for  road-metal,  was 
being  continually  cut  away  for  that  purpose.  It  was 
covered  with  scrubby  wood,  and  was  the  most 
picturesque  object  in  the  immediately  surrounding 
country. 

In  a  solitary  letter,  accidentally  preserved,  written 
at  this  time  to  my  earliest  friend,  George  Silk,  I  find 
the  following  passage  which  well  expresses  the  pleasure 
I  felt  in  getting  back  to  land-surveying : — 

"I  think  you  would   like   land-surveying,  about 


RADNORSHIRE  75 

half  indoors  and  half  outdoors  work.  It  is  delightful 
on  a  fine  summer's  day  to  be  (literally)  '  cutting '  all 
over  the  country,  following  the  chain  and  admiring 
the  beauties  of  nature,  breathing  the  fresh  and  pure 
air  on  the  hills,  or  in  the  noontide  heat  enjoying  our 
luncheon  of  bread-and-cheese  in  a  pleasant  valley  by 
the  side  of  a  rippling  brook.  Sometimes,  indeed,  it 
is  not  quite  so  pleasant  on  a  cold  winter's  day  to  find 
yourself  on  the  top  of  a  bare  hill,  not  a  house  within 
a  mile,  and  the  wind  and  sleet  chilling  you  to  the 
bone.  But  it  is  all  made  up  for  in  the  evening  ;  and 
those  who  are  in  the  house  all  day  can  have  no  idea 
of  the  pleasure  there  is  in  sitting  down  to  a  good 
dinner  and  feeling  hungry  enough  to  eat  plates, 
dishes,  and  all." 

Some  time  during  the  winter  I  went  alone  to 
correct  an  old  map  of  the  parish  of  New  Radnor. 
This  required  no  regular  surveying,  but  only  the 
insertion  of  any  new  roads,  buildings,  or  divisions  of 
fields,  and  taking  out  any  that  had  been  cleared 
away.  As  these  changes  were  not  numerous  and  the 
new  fences  were  almost  always  straight  lines,  it  was 
easy  to  mark  on  the  map  the  two  ends  of  such  fences 
by  measuring  from  the  nearest  fixed  point  with  a  ten 
or  fifteen-link  measuring-rod,  and  then  drawing  them 
in  upon  the  plan.  Sometimes  the  direction  was 
checked  by  taking  an  angle  with  the  pocket  sextant 
at  one  or  both  ends,  where  one  of  these  could  not  be 
seen  from  the  other.  As  the  whole  plan  was  far  too 
large  to  be  taken  into  the  field,  tracings  were  made 
of  portions  about  half  a  mile  square,  which  were 
mounted  on  stiff  paper  or  linen,  and  folded  up  in  a 
loose  cover  for  easy  reference.  In  this  way  a  whole 
parish  of  several  thousand  acres  could  be  examined 
and  corrected  in  a  week  or  two,  especially  in  a  country 


76  MY  LIFE 

like  Wales,  where,  from  a  few  elevated  points,  large 
tracts  could  be  distinctly  seen  spread  out  below,  and 
any  difference  from  the  old  map  be  easily  detected. 
I  liked  this  kind  of  work  very  much,  as  I  have 
always  been  partial  to  a  certain  amount  of  solitude, 
and  am  especially  fond  of  rambling  over  a  country 
new  to  me. 

New  Radnor,  though  formerly  a  town  of  some 
importance,  was  then,  and  I  believe  is  still,  a  mere 
village,  and  a  poor  one,  Presteign  being  the  county 
town.  It  is  situated  on  the  southern  border  of  Radnor 
Forest,  a  tract  of  bare  mountains  about  twenty  square 
miles  in  extent,  the  highest  point  being  a  little  over 
two  thousand  feet  above  the  sea.  Over  a  good  deal 
of  this  country  I  wandered  for  about  a  week,  and 
enjoyed  my  work  very  much. 

Early  the  next  year,  I  think  about  February,  my 
brother  and  I  went  to  do  some  surveying  at  Rhaidr- 
Gwy  (now  commonly  called  Rhayader),  a  small  town 
in  Radnorshire  on  the  Upper  Wye,  and  only  fifteen 
miles  from  its  source  in  the  Plynlymmon  range.  A 
young  man  from  Carmarthenshire  came  to  us  here  to 
learn  surveying,  and  to  him  I  probably  owe  my  life. 
One  day,  I  think  on  a  Sunday  afternoon,  we  were 
walking  together  up  a  rocky  and  boggy  valley  which 
extended  some  miles  to  the  west  of  the  town.  As 
we  were  strolling  along,  picking  our  way  among  the 
rocks  and  bog,  I  inadvertently  stepped  upon  one  of 
those  small  bog  eyeholes  which  abound  in  such 
places,  and  are  very  dangerous,  being  often  deep 
enough  to  swallow  up  a  man,  or  even  a  horse.  One 
leg  went  in  suddenly  up  to  the  hip,  and  I  fell  down, 
but  fortunately  with  my  other  leg  stretched  out  upon 
the  surface.  I  was,  however,  in  such  a  position  that  I 
could  not  rise,  and  had  I  been  alone  my  efforts  to 


RADNORSHIRE  -j-; 

extricate  myself  might  easily  have  drawn  my  whole 
body  into  the  bog,  as  I  could  feel  no  bottom  to  it. 
But  my  companion  easily  pulled  me  out,  and  we 
walked  home,  and  thought  little  of  it.  It  had,  how- 
ever, been  a  hard  frost  for  some  time,  and  the  mud 
was  ice-cold,  and  after  a  few  days  I  developed  a  bad 
cough  with  loss  of  appetite  and  weakness.  The  local 
doctor  was  a  friend  of  ours,  and  he  gave  me  some 
medicine,  but  it  did  no  good,  and  I  got  worse  and 
worse,  with  no  special  pain,  but  with  a  disgust  of  food, 
and  for  more  than  a  week  I  ate  nothing  but  perhaps 
a  small  biscuit  each  day  soaked  in  tea  without  milk, 
though  always  before  and  since  I  greatly  disliked  tea 
without  milk.  At  length  the  doctor  became  frightened, 
and  told  my  brother  that  he  could  do  nothing  for  me, 
and  that  he  could  not  be  answerable  for  my  life.  He 
added  that  he  knew  but  one  man  who  could  save  me, 
a  former  teacher  of  his,  Dr.  Ramage,  who  was  the  only 
man  who  could  cure  serious  lung  disease,  though  he 
was  considered  a  quack  by  his  fellow-practitioners. 

As  I  got  no  better,  a  few  days  later  we  started  for 
London,  I  think  sleeping  at  Birmingham  on  the  way. 
On  going  to  Dr.  Ramage,  who  tested  my  lungs,  etc., 
he  told  my  brother  that  he  was  just  in  time,  for  that 
in  a  week  more  he  could  probably  not  have  saved 
me,  as  I  had  an  extensive  abscess  of  the  lungs.  His 
treatment  was  very  simple  but  most  effective,  and 
was  the  forerunner  of  that  rational  treatment  by 
which  it  is  now  known  that  most  lung  diseases  are 
curable.  He  ordered  me  to  go  home  to  Hoddesdon 
immediately,  to  apply  half  a  dozen  leeches  to  my 
chest  at  a  place  he  marked  with  ink,  and  to  take  a 
bitter  medicine  he  prescribed  to  give  me  an  appetite ; 
but  these  were  only  preliminaries.  The  essential 
thing  was  the  use  of  a  small  bone  breathing-tube, 


78  MY   LIFE 

which  he  told  us  where  to  buy,  and  which  I  was  to 
use  three  times  a  day  for  as  many  minutes  as  I  could 
without  fatigue  ;  that  I  was  to  eat  and  drink  anything 
I  fancied,  be  kept  warm,  but  when  the  weather  was 
mild  sit  out-of-doors.  I  was  to  come  back  to  him  in 
a  week. 

The  effect  of  his  treatment  was  immediate.  I  at 
once  began  to  eat,  and  though  I  could  not  breathe 
through  the  tube  for  more  than  a  minute  at  first,  I 
was  soon  enabled  to  increase  it  to  three  and  then  to 
five  minutes.  It  was  constructed  with  a  valve  so  that 
the  air  entered  freely,  but  passed  out  slowly  so  that 
it  was  kept  in  the  lungs  for  a  few  seconds  at  each 
inspiration.  When  I  paid  my  second  visit  to  Dr. 
Ramage,  he  told  me  that  I  was  getting  on  well,  and 
need  not  come  to  him  again,  that  I  was  to  continue 
using  the  breathing-tube  for  five  minutes  three  or  four 
times  a  day.  He  also  strongly  advised  me,  now  I  saw 
the  effect  of  deep  and  regular  breathing,  to  practise 
breathing  in  the  same  way  without  the  tube,  and 
especially  to  do  so  when  at  leisure,  when  lying  down, 
or  leaning  back  in  an  easy-chair,  and  to  be  sure  to  fill 
my  lungs  well  and  breathe  out  slowly.  "  The  natural 
food  of  the  lungs,"  he  said,  "  is  fresh  air.  If  people 
knew  this,  and  acted  upon  it,  there  would  be  no  con- 
sumption, no  lung  disease."  I  have  never  forgotten 
this.  I  have  practised  it  all  my  life  (at  intervals),  and 
do  so  still,  and  I  am  sure  that  I  owe  my  life  to  Dr. 
Ramage's  treatment  and  advice. 

In  about  two  months  I  was  well  again,  and  went 
back  to  Kington,  and  after  a  little  office-work  my 
brother  and  I  went  to  the  little  village  of  Llanbister, 
near  the  middle  of  Radnorshire,  the  nearest  towns 
being    Builth,  in    Brecknockshire,  and   Newtown  in 


RADNORSHIRE  79 

Montgomeryshire,  both  more  than  twelve  miles  distant. 
This  was  a  very  large  parish,  being  fifteen  miles  long, 
but  I  think  we  could  only  have  corrected  the  old  map 
or  we  should  have  been  longer  there  than  we  really 
were.  Here,  also,  we  had  a  young  gentleman  with  us 
for  a  month  or  two  to  practise  surveying.  He  was,  I 
think,  a  Welshman,  and  a  pleasant  and  tolerably 
respectable  young  man,  but  he  had  one  dreadful 
habit — excessive  smoking.  I  have  never  met  a 
person  so  much  a  slave  to  the  habit,  and  even  if  I 
had  had  any  inclination  to  try  it  again  after  my  first 
failure,  his  example  would  have  cured  me. 

He  prided  himself  on  being  a  kind  of  champion 
smoker,  and  assured  us  that  he  had  once,  for  a  wager, 
smoked  a  good-sized  china  teapot  full  of  tobacco 
through  the  spout. 

When  we  had  finished  at  Llanbister,  we  went 
about  ten  miles  south  to  a  piece  of  work  that  was 
new  to  me — the  making  of  a  survey  and  plans  for  the 
inclosure  of  common  lands.  This  was  at  Llandrindod 
Wells,  where  there  was  then  a  large  extent  of  moor 
and  mountain  surrounded  by  scattered  cottages  with 
their  gardens  and  small  fields,  which,  with  their  rights 
of  common,  enabled  the  occupants  to  keep  a  horse, 
cow,  or  a  few  sheep,  and  thus  make  a  living.  All  this 
was  now  to  be  taken  away  from  them,  and  the  whole 
of  this  open  land  divided  among  the  landowners  of 
the  parish  or  manor  in  proportion  to  the  size  or  value 
of  their  estates.  To  those  that  had  much,  much  was 
to  be  given,  while  from  the  poor  their  rights  were 
taken  away ;  for  though  nominally  those  that  owned 
a  little  land  had  some  compensation,  it  was  so  small 
as  to  be  of  no  use  to  them  in  comparison  with 
the  grazing  rights  they  before  possessed.  In  the  case 
of  all  cottagers  who  were  tenants  or  leaseholders,  it 


8o  MY  LIFE 

was  simple  robbery,  as  they  had  no  compensation 
whatever,  and  were  left  wholly  dependent  on  farmers 
for  employment.  And  this  was  all  done — as  similar 
inclosures  are  almost  always  done — under  false  pre- 
tences. The  "  General  Inclosure  Act "  states  in  its 
preamble,  "  Whereas  it  is  expedient  to  facilitate  the 
inclosure  and  improvement  of  commons  and  other 
lands  now  subject  to  the  rights  of  property  which 
obstruct  cultivation  and  the  productive  employment 
of  labour,  be  it  enacted,"  etc.  But  in  hundreds  of 
cases,  when  the  commons,  heaths,  and  mountains 
have  been  partitioned  out  among  the  landowners,  the 
land  remains  as  little  cultivated  as  before.  It  is  either 
thrown  into  adjacent  farms  as  rough  pasture  at  a 
nominal  rent,  or  is  used  for  game-coverts,  and  often 
continues  in  this  waste  and  unproductive  state  for 
half  a  century  or  more,  till  any  portions  of  it  are 
required  for  railroads,  or  for  building  upon,  when  a 
price  equal  to  that  of  the  best  land  in  the  district  is 
often  demanded  and  obtained.  I  know  of  thousands 
of  acres  in  many  parts  of  the  south  of  England  to 
which  these  remarks  will  apply,  and  if  this  is  not 
obtaining  land  under  false  pretences — a  legalized 
robbery  of  the  poor  for  the  aggrandizement  of  the 
rich,  who  were  the  law-makers  —  words  have  no 
meaning. 

In  this  particular  case  the  same  course  has  been 
pursued.  While  I  was  writing  these  pages  a  friend 
was  staying  at  Llandrindod,  and  I  took  the  oppor- 
tunity of  asking  him  what  was  the  present  condition 
of  the  land  more  than  sixty  years  after  its  inclosure. 
He  informs  me  that,  by  inquiries  among  old  inhabit- 
ants, he  finds  that  at  the  time  nothing  was  done 
except  to  inclose  the  portions  allotted  to  each  land- 
lord with  turf  banks  or  other  rough  fencing ;  and  that 


RADNORSHIRE  8i 

to  this  day  almost  all  the  great  boggy  moor,  with  the 
mountain  slopes  and  summits,  has  not  been  improved 
in  any  way,  either  by  draining,  cultivation,  or  plant- 
ing, but  is  still  wild,  rough  pasture.  But  about  thirty 
years  after  the  inclosure  the  railway  from  Shrewsbury 
through  South  Wales  passed  through  the  place,  and 
immediately  afterwards  a  few  villas  and  boarding- 
houses  were  built,  and  some  of  the  inclosed  land  was 
sold  at  building  prices.  This  has  gone  on  year  by 
year,  and  though  the  resident  population  is  still  only 
about  2000,  it  is  said  that  10,000  visitors  (more  or 
less)  come  every  summer,  and  the  chief  increase  of 
houses  has  been  for  their  accommodation.  My  friend 
tells  me  that,  except  close  to  the  village  and  railway, 
the  whole  country  which  was  inclosed — many  hun- 
dreds of  acres — is  still  bare  and  uncultivated,  with 
hardly  any  animals  to  be  seen  upon  it.  Milk  is  scanty 
and  poor,  and  the  only  butter  is  Cornish  or  Australian, 
so  that  the  inclosure  has  not  led  to  the  supply  of  the 
simplest  agricultural  needs  of  the  population.  Even 
the  piece  of  common  that  was  reserved  for  the  use  of 
the  inhabitants  is  now  used  for  golf-links  ! 

Here,  then,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  the  express 
purpose  for  which  alone  the  legislature  permitted  the  in- 
closure has  not  been  fulfilled,  and  in  equity  the  whole 
of  the  land,  and  the  whole  money  proceeds  of  the  sale 
of  such  portions  as  have  been  built  upon,  should  revert 
to  the  public.  The  prices  now  realized  by  this  almost 
worthless  land,  agriculturally,  are  enormous.  In  or 
near  the  village  it  sells  for  ;^I500  an  acre,  or  even 
more,  while  quite  outside  these  limits  it  is  from  ;^300 
to  ;^400. 

In  regard  to  this  fundamental  question  of  land 
ownership  people  are  so  blinded  by  custom  and  by 
the  fact  that  it  is  sanctioned  by  the  law,  that  it  may 

G 


82  MY   LIFE 

be  well  for  a  moment  to  set  these  entirely  on  one 
side,  and  consider  what  would  have  been  the  proper, 
the  equitable,  and  the  most  beneficial  mode  of  dealing 
with  our  common  and  waste  lands  at  the  time  of  the 
last  general  Inclosure  Act  in  the  early  years  of  the 
reign  of  Queen  Victoria.  Considering,  then,  that 
these  uninclosed  wastes  were  the  last  remnant  of  our 
country's  land  over  which  we,  the  public,  had  any 
opportunity  of  free  passage  to  breathe  pure  air  and 
enjoy  the  beauties  of  nature  ;  considering  that  these 
wastes,  although  almost  worthless  agriculturally,  were 
of  especial  value  to  the  poor  of  the  parishes  or  manors 
in  which  they  were  situated,  not  only  giving  them 
pasture  for  their  few  domestic  animals,  but  in  some 
cases  peat  for  fuel  and  loppings  of  trees  for  fences  or 
garden  sticks  ;  considering  that  an  acre  or  two  of 
such  land,  when  inclosed  and  cultivated,  would  give 
them,  in  return  for  the  labour  of  themselves  and  their 
families  during  spare  hours,  a  considerable  portion 
of  their  subsistence,  would  enable  them  to  create  a 
home  from  which  they  could  not  be  ejected  by  the 
will  of  any  landlord  or  employer,  and  would  thus 
raise  them  at  once  to  a  condition  of  comparative 
independence  and  security,  abolishing  the  terrible 
spectre  of  the  workhouse  for  their  old  age,  which  now 
haunts  the  peasant  or  labourer  throughout  life,  and 
is  the  fundamental  cause  of  that  exodus  to  the  towns 
about  which  so  much  nonsense  is  talked  ;  considering, 
further,  that  just  in  proportion  as  men  rise  in  the 
social  scale,  these  various  uses  of  the  waste  lands 
become  less  and  less  vitally  important,  till,  when  we 
arrive  at  the  country  squire  and  great  landowner,  the 
only  use  of  the  inclosed  common  or  moor  is  either  to 
be  used  as  a  breeding-ground  for  game,  or  to  add  to 
some  of  his  farms  a  few  acres  of  land  at  an  almost 


RADNORSHIRE  83 

nominal  rent ; — considering  all  these  circumstances, 
and  further,  that  those  who  perform  what  is  funda- 
mentally the  most  important  and  the  most  beneficial 
of  all  work,  the  production  of  food,  should  be  able  to 
obtain  at  least  the  necessaries  of  life  by  that  work,  and 
secure  a  comfortable  old  age  by  their  own  fireside, — 
how  would  any  lover  of  his  country  think  that  such 
lands  ought  to  be  dealt  with  in  the  best  interests  of 
the  whole  community  ? 

Surely,  that  the  very  first  thing  to  be  done  should 
be  to  provide  that  all  workers  upon  the  land,  either 
directly  or  indirectly,  should  have  plots  of  from  one 
to  five  acres,  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  such 
waste  and  the  needs  of  the  inhabitants.  The  land 
thus  allotted  to  be  held  by  them  in  perpetuity,  from 
the  local  authority,  at  a  low  rent  such  as  any  farmer 
would  give  for  it  as  an  addition  to  his  farm.  In  cases 
where  the  amount  of  common  land  was  very  great  in 
proportion  to  the  population,  some  of  the  most  suit- 
able land  might  be  reserved  for  a  common  pasture, 
for  wood  or  fuel,  or  for  recreation,  and  the  remainder 
allotted  to  applicants  from  adjacent  parishes  where 
there  was  no  common  land. 

Another  thing  that  should  be  attended  to  in  all 
such  inclosures  of  waste  land  is  the  preservation  for 
the  people  at  large  of  rights  of  way  over  it  in  various 
directions,  both  to  afford  ample  means  of  enjoying 
the  beauties  of  nature  and  also  to  give  pedestrians 
short  cuts  to  villages,  hamlets,  or  railway  stations. 
One  of  the  greatest  blessings  that  might  be  easily 
attained  if  the  land  were  resumed  by  the  people  to 
be  held  for  the  common  good,  would  be  the  estab- 
lishment of  ample  footpaths  along  every  railway  in 
the  kingdom,  with  sufficient  bridges  or  subways  for 
safe  crossing  ;  and  also  (and  more  especially)  along 


84  MY   LIFE 

the  banks  of  every  river  or  brook,  such  paths  to  be 
diverted  around  any  dwelling-house  that  may  have 
gardens  extending  to  the  water's  edge,  all  such  paths 
to  be  made  and  kept  in  repair  by  the  District  Councils. 
Under  the  present  system  old  paths  are  often  closed, 
but  we  never  hear  of  new  ones  being  made,  yet  such 
are  now  more  than  ever  necessary  when  most  of  our 
roads  are  rendered  dangerous  by  motor-cars  and 
cycles,  and  exceedingly  disagreeable  and  unhealthy 
to  pedestrians  by  the  clouds  of  gritty  dust  continually 
raised  by  these  vehicles. 

This  all-embracing  system  of  land-robbery,  for 
which  nothing  is  too  great  and  nothing  too  small  ; 
which  has  absorbed  meadow  and  forest,  moor  and 
mountain,  which  has  appropriated  most  of  our  rivers 
and  lakes  and  the  fish  that  live  in  them  ;  which  often 
claims  the  very  seashore  and  rocky  coasts  of  our 
island  home,  fencing  them  off  from  the  wayfarer  who 
seeks  the  solace  of  their  health-giving  air  and  wild 
beauty,  while  making  the  peasant  pay  for  his  seaweed 
manure  and  the  fisherman  for  his  bait  of  shell-fish ; 
which  has  desolated  whole  counties  to  replace  men 
by  sheep  or  cattle,  and  has  destroyed  fields  and  cot- 
tages to  make  a  wilderness  for  deer  and  grouse  ; 
which  has  stolen  the  commons  and  filched  the  road- 
side wastes  ;  which  has  driven  the  labouring  poor  into 
the  cities,  and  has  thus  been  the  primary  and  chief 
cause  of  the  lifelong  misery,  disease,  and  early  death 
of  thousands  who  might  have  lived  lives  of  honest 
toil  and  comparative  well-being  had  they  been  per- 
mitted free  access  to  land  in  their  native  villages  ; — 
it  is  the  advocates  and  beneficiaries  of  this  inhuman 
system  who,  when  a  partial  restitution  of  their  unholy 
gains  is  proposed,  are  the  loudest  in  their  cries  of 
"  robbery  "  I 


RADNORSHIRE  85 

But  all  the  robbery,  all  the  spoliation,  all  the  legal 
and  illegal  filching,  has  been  on  their  side,  and  they 
still  hold  the  stolen  property.  They  made  laws  to 
legalize  their  actions,  and,  some  day,  we,  the  people, 
will  make  laws  which  will  not  only  legalize  but  justify 
our  process  of  restitution.  It  will  justify  it,  because, 
unlike  their  laws,  which  always  took  from  the  poor  to 
give  to  the  rich — to  the  very  class  which  made  the 
laws — ours  will  only  take  from  the  superfluity  of  the 
rich,  not  to  give  to  the  poor  or  to  any  individuals,  but 
to  be  so  administered  as  to  enable  every  man  to  live 
by  honest  work,  to  restore  to  the  whole  people  their 
birthright  in  their  native  soil,  and  to  relieve  all  alike 
from  a  heavy  burden  of  unnecessary  and  unjust 
taxation.  This  will  be  the  true  statesmanship  of  the 
future,  and  it  will  be  justified  alike  by  equity,  by 
ethics,  and  by  religion. 

In  the  preceding  pages  I  have  expressed  the 
opinions  which  have  been  gradually  formed  as  the 
result  of  the  experience  and  study  of  my  whole  life. 
My  first  work  on  the  subject  was  entitled  "  Land 
Nationalization  :  its  Necessity  and  its  Aims,"  and 
was  published  in  the  year  1882  ;  and  this,  together 
with  the  various  essays  in  the  second  volume  of  my 
"Studies  Scientific  and  Social,"  published  in  1900, 
may  be  taken  as  expressing  the  views  I  now  hold, 
and  as  pointing  out  some  of  the  fundamental  con- 
ditions which  I  believe  to  be  essential  for  the  well- 
being  of  society. 

But  at  the  time  of  which  I  am  now  writing  such 
ideas  never  entered  my  head.  I  certainly  thought  it 
a  pity  to  inclose  a  wild,  picturesque,  boggy,  and 
barren  moor,  but  I  took  it  for  granted  that  there  was 
some  right  and  reason   in  it,  instead  of  being,  as  it 


86  MY   LIFE 

certainly  was,  both  unjust,  unwise,  and  cruel.  But 
the  surveying  was  interesting  work,  as  every  trickling 
stream,  every  tree,  every  mass  of  rock  or  boggy 
waterhole,  had  to  be  marked  on  the  map  in  its  true 
relative  position,  as  well  as  the  various  footpaths  or 
roucfh  cart-roads  that  crossed  the  common  in  various 
directions. 

At  that  time  the  medicinal  springs,  though  they 
had  been  used  from  the  time  of  the  Romans,  were 
only  visited  by  a  few  Welsh  or  West  of  England 
people,  and  there  was  little  accommodation  for 
visitors,  except  in  the  small  hotel  where  we  lodged. 
One  of  our  great  luxuries  here  was  the  Welsh  mutton 
fed  on  the  neighbouring  mountains,  so  small  that  a 
hind-quarter  weighed  only  seven  or  eight  pounds,  but 
which,  when  hung  a  few  days  or  a  week,  was  most 
delicious  eating.  I  agree  with  George  Borrow  in  his 
praise  of  this  dish.  In  his  "  Wild  Wales "  he  says, 
"  As  for  the  leg  of  mutton  it  was  truly  wonderful  ; 
nothing  so  good  had  I  ever  tasted  in  the  shape  of  a 
leg  of  mutton.  The  leg  of  mutton  of  Wales  beats 
the  leg  of  mutton  of  any  other  country,  and  I  had 
never  tasted  a  Welsh  leg  of  mutton  before.  Cer- 
tainly I  shall  never  forget  that  first  Welsh  leg  of 
mutton  which  I  tasted,  rich  but  delicate,  replete  with 
juices  derived  from  the  aromatic  herbs  of  the  noble 
Berwyn  mountain,  cooked  to  a  turn,  and  weighing 
just  four  pounds."  Well  done,  George  Borrow !  You 
had  a  good  taste  in  ale  and  mutton,  and  were  not 
afraid  to  acknowledge  it. 


CHAPTER   VII 

RESIDENCE  IN   SOUTH  WALES  :  BRECKNOCKSHIRE 
AND  GLAMORGANSHIRE 

It  was  in  the  summer  or  early  autumn  of  1841  that 
we  left  Kington  for  the  tiny  village  of  Trallong,  a 
few  miles  beyond  the  town  of  Brecon,  the  parish  we 
had  to  survey,  and  obtained  lodgings  in  the  house  of 
a  shoemaker,  where  we  were  very  comfortable  for 
some  months.  The  house  was  pleasantly  situated 
about  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the  river, 
with  an  uninterrupted  view  to  the  south-east  over 
woody  hills  of  moderate  height  to  the  fine  range  of  the 
Great  Forest,  culminating  in  the  double  peaks  of  the 
Beacons,  which  were  seen  here  fully  separated  with 
the  narrow  ridge  connecting  them.  At  sunset  they 
were  often  beautifully  tinted,  and  my  brother  made  a 
charming  little  water-colour  sketch  of  them,  which, 
with  most  of  his  best  sketches,  were  placed  in  an 
album  by  my  sister,  and  this  was  stolen  or  lost  while 
she  was  moving  in  London. 

I  looked  daily  at  the  Beacons  with  longing  eyes, 
and  on  a  fine  autumn  day  one  of  the  shoemaker's 
sons  with  a  friend  or  two  and  myself  started  oft"  to 
make  the  ascent.  Though  less  than  six  miles  from 
us  in  a  straight  line,  we  had  to  take  a  rather  cir- 
cuitous course  over  a  range  of  hills,  and  then  up  to 
the  head  of  a  broad  valley,  which  took  us  within  a 


88  MY   LIFE 

mile  of  the  summit,  making  the  distance  about  ten 
miles.  But  the  day  was  gloriously  fine,  the  country 
beautiful,  and  the  view  from  the  top  very  grand; 
while  the  summit  itself  was  so  curious  as  greatly  to 
surprise  me,  though  I  did  not  fully  appreciate  its  very 
instructive  teaching  till  some  years  later,  after  I  had 
ascended  many  other  mountains,  had  studied  Lyell's 
"  Principles  of  Geology,"  and  had  fully  grasped  the 
modern  views  on  sub-aerial  denudation.  As  Breck- 
nockshire is  comparatively  little  known,  and  few 
English  tourists  make  the  ascent  of  the  Beacons,  a 
short  account  of  them  will  be  both  interesting  and 
instructive. 

The  northern  face  of  the  mountain  is  very  rocky 
and  precipitous,  while  on  the  southern  and  western 
sides  easy  slopes  reach  almost  to  the  summit.  The 
last  few  yards  is,  however,  rather  steep,  and  at  the 
very  top  there  is  a  thick  layer  of  peat,  which  over- 
hangs the  rock  a  little.  On  surmounting  this  on  the 
west  side  the  visitor  finds  himself  in  a  nearly  flat 
triangular  space,  perhaps  three  or  four  acres  in  extent, 
bounded  on  the  north  by  a  very  steep  rocky  slope, 
and  on  the  other  sides  by  steep  but  not  difficult  grass 
slopes.  To  the  north-east  he  sees  the  chief  summit 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant  and  nearly  fifty  feet 
higher,  while  connecting  the  two  is  a  narrow  ridge  or 
saddle-back,  which  descends  about  a  hundred  feet  in 
a  regular  curve,  and  then  rises  again,  giving  an  easy 
access  to  the  higher  peak.  The  top  of  this  ridge  is 
only  a  foot  or  two  wide  and  very  steep  on  the 
northern  slope,  but  the  southern  slope  is  less  precipi- 
tous, and  about  a  hundred  yards  down  it  there  is  a 
small  spring  where  the  visitor  can  get  deliciously 
cool  and  pure  water.  The  north-eastern  summit  is 
also  triangular,  a   little   larger  than  the  other,  and 


THE    BEACONS,    LOOKING   SOUTH. 


\Toface  p. 


RESIDENCE   IN   SOUTH   WALES       89 

bounded  by  a  very  dangerous  precipice  on  the  side 
towards  Brecon,  where  there  is  a  nearly  vertical 
slope  of  craggy  rock  for  three  or  four  hundred  feet 
and  a  very  steep  rocky  slope  for  a  thousand,  so  that 
a  fall  is  almost  certainly  fatal,  and  several  such  acci- 
dents have  occurred,  especially  when  parties  of  young 
men  from  Brecon  make  a  holiday  picnic  to  the 
summit. 

What  strikes  the  observant  eye  as  especially 
interesting  is  the  circumstance  that  these  two  tri- 
angular patches,  forming  the  culminating  points  of 
South  Wales,  both  slope  to  the  south-west,  and  by 
stooping  down  on  either  of  them,  and  looking  towards 
the  other,  we  find  that  their  surfaces  correspond  so 
closely  in  direction  and  amount  of  slope,  that  they 
impress  one  at  once  as  being  really  portions  of  one 
continuous  mountain  summit.  This  becomes  more 
certain  when  we  look  at  the  whole  mountain  mass,  of 
which  they  form  a  part,  known  as  the  "  Fforest  Fawr," 
or  great  forest  of  Brecknock.  This  extends  about 
twenty  miles  from  east  to  west  and  ten  or  twelve 
miles  from  north  to  south  ;  and  in  every  part  of  it 
the  chief  summits  are  from  2000  to  2500  feet  high, 
while  near  its  western  end,  about  twelve  miles  from 
the  Beacons,  is  the  second  highest  summit.  Van  Voel, 
reaching  2632  feet.  Most  of  these  mountains  have 
rounded  summits  which  are  smooth  and  covered  with 
grassy  or  sedgy  vegetation,  but  many  of  them  have 
some  craggy  slopes  or  precipices  on  their  northern 
faces. 

Almost  the  whole  of  this  region  is  of  the  Old  Red 
Sandstone  formation,  which  here  consists  of  nearly 
horizontal  strata  with  a  moderate  dip  to  the  south  ; 
and  the  whole  of  the  very  numerous  valleys  with 
generally  smooth  and  gradually  sloping  sides  which 


90  MY   LIFE 

everywhere  intersect  it,  must  be  all  due  to  sub-aerial 
denudation — that  is,  to  rain,  frost,  and  snow — the 
dibris  due  to  which  is  carried  away  by  the  brooks 
and  rivers.  The  geologist  looks  upon  the  rounded 
summits  of  these  mountains  as  indications  of  an 
extensive  gently  undulating  plateau,  which  had  been 
slowly  raised  above  the  surface  of  the  lakes  or  inland 
seas  in  which  they  had  been  deposited,  and  subjected 
to  so  little  disturbance  that  the  strata  remain  in  a 
nearly  horizontal  position.  When  from  the  summit 
of  any  of  these  higher  mountains  we  look  over  the 
wide  parallel  or  radiating  valleys  with  the  rounded 
grassy  ridges,  and  consider  that  the  whole  of  the 
material  that  once  filled  all  these  valleys  to  the  level 
of  the  mountain-top  has  been  washed  away  day  by 
day  and  year  by  year,  by  the  very  same  agencies 
that  after  heavy  rain  now  render  turbid  every  brooklet, 
stream,  and  river,  usually  so  clear  and  limpid,  we 
obtain  an  excellent  illustration  of  how  Nature  works 
in  moulding  the  earth's  surface  by  a  process  so  slow 
as  to  be  to  us  almost  imperceptible. 

This  process  of  denudation  is  rendered  especially 
clear  to  us  by  the  singular  formation  of  the  twin 
summits  of  the  Brecon  Beacons.  Here  we  are  able, 
as  it  were,  to  catch  Nature  at  work.  Owing  to  the 
rare  occurrence  of  a  nearly  equal  rate  of  denudation 
in  four  or  five  directions  around  this  highest  part 
of  the  original  plateau,  we  have  remaining  for  our 
inspection  two  little  triangular  patches  of  the  original 
peat-covered  surface  joined  together  by  the  narrow 
saddle,  as  shown  in  the  sketches  opposite,  giving  a 
plan  of  the  summits  and  a  section  through  them  to 
explain  how  accurately  the  two  coincide  in  their 
slope  with  that  of  the  original  plateau.  Every  year 
the  frost  loosens  the  rock  on  the  northern  precipices, 


PLAN  OF  TOP  OF  BEACONS. 


SECTION  OF  TOP  OF  BEACONS. 


\  To  face  p.   90. 


RESIDENCE    IN   SOUTH    WALES       91 

every  heavy  rain  washes  down  earth  from  the  ridge, 
while  the  gentler  showers  and  mists  penetrate  the  soil 
to  the  rock  surface,  which  they  slowly  decompose. 
Thus,  year  by  year,  the  flat  portion  of  the  summits 
becomes  smaller,  and  a  few  thousand  years  will  prob- 
ably suffice  to  eat  them  away  altogether,  and  leave 
rocky  peaks  more  like  that  of  Snowdon.  The  forma- 
tion, as  we  now  find  it,  is,  in  my  experience,  unique — 
that  is,  a  mountain-top  presenting  two  small  patches 
of  almost  level  ground,  evidently  being  the  last  rem- 
nant of  the  great  rolling  plateau,  out  of  which  the 
whole  range  has  been  excavated.  Double-headed 
mountains  are  by  no  means  uncommon,  but  they  are 
usually  peaked  or  irregular,  and  carved  out  of  inclined 
or  twisted  strata.  The  peculiarity  of  the  Beacons 
consists  in  the  strata  being  nearly  horizontal  and 
undisturbed,  while  the  rock  formation  is  not  such  as 
usually  to  break  away  into  vertical  precipices.  The 
original  surface  must  have  had  a  very  easy  slope, 
while  there  were  no  meteorological  conditions  leading 
to  great  inequalities  of  weathering.  The  thick  cover- 
ing of  peat  has  also  aided  in  the  result  by  preserving 
the  original  surface  from  being  scored  into  gullies,  and 
thus  more  rapidly  denuded. 

After  we  had  completed  most  of  our  work  at 
Trallong  we  had  to  go  further  up  the  valley  to 
Devynock.  This  is  an  enormous  parish  of  more  than 
twenty  thousand  acres,  divided  into  four  townships  or 
chapelries,  the  two  eastern  of  which,  Maescar  and 
Senni,  we  had  to  survey.  In  these  mountain  districts, 
however,  we  only  surveyed  those  small  portions  where 
the  new  roads  or  new  inclosures  had  been  made,  the 
older  maps  being  accepted  as  sufficiently  accurate  for 
the  large  uninclosed  areas  of  mountain   land.     We 


92  MY   LIFE 

first  went  to  Senni  Bridge,  where  both  districts 
terminate  in  the  Usk  valley  ;  but  after  a  short  time 
I  went  to  stay  in  a  little  public-house  at  Senni  in  the 
midst  of  my  work,  while  my  brother  stayed  at  Devy- 
nock  or  at  Trallong,  which  latter  was  quite  as  near 
for  half  the  work. 

When  I  went  up  to  Senni  Street  (Heol  Senni,  as 
it  is  called  in  Welsh)  I  greatly  enjoyed  wandering 
over  the  pretty  valley  which  extended  a  long  way 
into  the  mountains,  flowing  over  nearly  level  meadows 
and  with  an  unusually  twisted  course.  This  I  found 
was  so  erroneously  mapped,  the  numerous  bends 
having  been  inserted  at  random  as  if  of  no  importance, 
that  I  had  to  survey  its  course  afresh.  Above  the 
village  there  were  several  lateral  tributaries  descend- 
ing in  deep  woody  dingles,  often  very  picturesque, 
and  these  had  usually  one  or  more  waterfalls  in  their 
course,  or  deep  rocky  chasms  ;  and  as  these  came  upon 
me  unexpectedly,  and  I  had  seen  very  few  like  them 
in  Radnorshire,  they  were  more  especially  attractive 
to  me. 

One  Sunday  afternoon  I  walked  up  the  valley  and 
over  a  mountain-ridge  to  the  head  waters  of  the  Llia 
river,  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  river  Neath,  to  see 
an  ancient  stone,  named  Maen  Llia  on  the  ordnance 
map.  I  was  much  pleased  to  find  a  huge  erect  slab  of 
Old  Red  Sandstone  nearly  twelve  feet  high,  a  photo- 
graph of  which  I  am  able  to  give  through  the  kindness 
of  Miss  Florence  Neale  of  Penarth.  These  strange 
relics  of  antiquity  have  always  greatly  interested  me, 
and  this,  being  the  first  I  had  ever  seen,  produced  an 
impression  which  is  still  clear  and  vivid. 

The  people  here  were  all  thoroughly  Welsh,  but 
the  landlord  of  the  inn,  and  a  young  man  who  lived 
with  him,  spoke  English  fairly  well. 


MAEN    LLIA. 


[To  face  p.  92. 


RESIDENCE    IN   SOUTH   WALES       93 

Among  the  numerous  Englishmen  who  visit 
Wales  for  business  or  pleasure,  few  are  aware  to 
what  an  extent  this  ancient  British  form  of  speech 
is  still  in  use  among  the  people,  how  many  are  still 
unable  to  speak  English,  and  what  an  amount  of 
poetry  and  legend  their  language  contains.  Some 
account  of  this  literature  is  to  be  found  in  that  very 
interesting  book,  George  Borrow's  "  Wild  Wales,"  and 
he  claims  for  Dafydd  ap  Gwilym,  a  contemporary  of 
our  Chaucer,  the  position  of  "the  greatest  poetical 
genius  that  has  appeared  in  Europe  since  the  revival 
of  literature."  At  the  present  day  there  are  no  less 
than  twenty  weekly  newspapers  and  about  the  same 
number  of  monthly  magazines  published  in  the 
Welsh  language,  besides  one  quarterly  and  two 
bi-monthly  reviews.  Abstracts  of  the  principal  Acts 
of  Parliament  and  Parliamentary  papers  are  translated 
into  Welsh,  and  one  firm  of  booksellers,  Messrs. 
Hughes  and  Son,  of  Wrexham,  issue  a  list  of  more 
than  three  hundred  Welsh  books  mostly  published 
by  themselves.  Another  indication  of  the  wide  use 
of  the  Welsh  language  and  of  the  general  education 
of  the  people,  is  the  fact  that  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Society  now  sell  annually  about  18,000  Bibles, 
22,000  Testaments,  and  10,000  special  portions  (as 
the  Psalms,  the  Gospels,  etc.) ;  while  the  total  sale  of 
the  Welsh  Scriptures  during  the  last  century  has  been 
3i  millions.  Considering  that  the  total  population  of 
Wales  is  only  about  i^  millions,  that  two  counties, 
Pembrokeshire  and  Radnorshire,  do  not  speak  Welsh, 
and  that  the  great  seaports  and  the  mining  districts 
contain  large  numbers  of  English  and  foreign  work- 
men, we  have  ample  proof  that  the  Welsh  are  still  a 
distinct  nation,  with  a  peculiar  language,  literature, 
and  history,  and  that  the  claim  which  they  are  now 


94  MY   LIFE 

making  for  home  rule,  along  with  the  other  great  sub- 
divisions of  the  British  Islands,  is  thoroughly  justified. 

It  was  late  in  the  autumn  of  1841  that  we  returned 
to  Kington,  and  shortly  after  bade  adieu  to  the  wild 
but  not  very  picturesque  Radnorshire  mountains  for 
the  more  varied  and  interesting  county  of  Glamorgan. 
I  have  no  distinct  recollection  of  our  journey,  but  I 
believe  it  was  by  coach  through  Hay  and  Brecon  to 
Merthyr  Tydvil,  and  thence  by  chaise  to  Neath. 
One  solitary  example  of  the  rhyming  letters  I  used 
to  write  has  been  preserved,  giving  my  younger 
brother  Herbert  an  account  of  our  journey,  of  the 
country,  and  of  our  work,  of  which,  though  very  poor 
doggerel,  a  sample  may  be  given.  After  a  few 
references  to  family  matters,  I  proceed  to  description. 

"  From  Kington  to  this  place  we  came 
By  many  a  spot  of  ancient  fame, 

But  now  of  small  renown, 
O'er  many  a  mountain  dark  and  drear, 
And  vales  whose  groves  the  parting  year 

Had  tinged  with  mellow  brown  ; 
And  as  the  morning  sun  arose 
New  beauties  round  us  to  disclose, 

We  reached  fair  Brecon  town ; 
Then  crossed  the  Usk,  my  native  stream, 

A  river  clear  and  bright, 
Which  showed  a  fair  and  much-lov'd  scene 

Unto  my  lingering  sight." 

We  had  to  go  to  Glamorganshire  to  partially 
survey  and  make  a  corrected  map  of  the  parish  of 
Cadoxton-juxta-Neath,  which  occupies  the  whole 
northern  side  of  the  Neath  valley  from  opposite  the 
town  of  Neath  to  the  boundary  of  the  county  at  Pont- 
Nedd-Fychan,  a  distance  of  nearly  fifteen  miles,  with 
a  width  varying  from  two  to  three  miles,  the  boundary 
running  for  the  most  part   along   the   crest   of  the 


RESIDENCE   IN   SOUTH   WALES       95 

mountains  that  bound  the  valley  on  the  north-west. 
We  lodged  and  boarded  at  a  farmhouse  called  Bryn- 
coch  (Red  Hill),  situated  on  a  rising  ground  about 
two  miles  north  of  the  town.  Here  we  stayed  more 
than  a  year,  living  plainly  but  very  well,  and  enjoying 
the  luxuries  of  home-made  bread,  fresh  butter  and 
eggs,  unlimited  milk  and  cream,  with  cheese  made 
from  a  mixture  of  cow's  and  sheep's  milk,  having  a 
special  flavour  which  I  soon  got  very  fond  of.  In 
this  part  of  Wales  it  is  the  custom  to  milk  the  ewes 
chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  making  this  cheese,  which 
is  very  much  esteemed. 

A  little  rocky  stream  bordered  by  trees  and  bushes 
ran  through  the  farm,  and  was  one  of  my  favourite 
haunts.  There  was  one  little  sequestered  pool  about 
twenty  feet  long  into  which  the  water  fell  over  a 
ledge  about  a  foot  high.  This  pool  was  seven  or 
eight  feet  deep,  but  shallowed  at  the  further  end,  and 
thus  formed  a  delightful  bathing-place.  Ever  since 
my  early  escape  from  drowning  at  Hertford,  I  had 
been  rather  shy  of  the  water,  and  had  not  learned  to 
swim  ;  but  here  the  distance  was  so  short  that  I 
determined  to  try,  and  soon  got  to  enjoy  it  so  much 
that  every  fine  warm  day  I  used  to  go  and  plunge 
head  first  off  my  ledge  and  swim  in  five  or  six  strokes 
to  the  shallow  water.  In  this  very  limited  sphere  of 
action  I  gained  some  amount  of  confidence  in  the 
water,  and  afterwards  should  probably  have  been  able 
to  swim  a  dozen  or  twenty  yards,  so  as  to  reach  the 
bank  of  a  moderate-sized  river,  or  sustain  myself  till 
some  neighbouring  boat  came  to  my  assistance.  But 
I  have  never  needed  even  this  moderate  amount  of 
effort  to  save  my  life,  and  have  never  had  either  the 
opportunity  or  inclination  to  become  a  practised 
swimmer.      This     was    partly    due    to    a    physical 


96  MY   LIFE 

deficiency  which  I  was  unable  to  overcome.  My 
legs  are  unusually  long  for  my  height,  and  the  bones 
are  unusually  large.  The  result  is  that  they  per- 
sistently sink  in  the  water,  bringing  me  into  a  nearly 
vertical  position,  and  their  weight  renders  it  almost 
impossible  to  keep  my  mouth  above  water.  This  is 
the  case  even  in  salt  water,  and  being  also  rather 
deficient  in  strength  of  muscle,  I  became  disinclined 
to  practise  what  I  felt  to  be  beyond  my  powers. 

The  parish  being  so  extensive  we  had  to  stay  at 
many  different  points  for  convenience  of  the  survey, 
and  one  of  these  was  about  five  miles  up  the  Dulais 
valley,  where  we  stayed  at  a  small  beershop  in  the 
hamlet  of  Crynant.  I  was  often  here  alone  for  weeks 
together,  and  saw  a  good  deal  of  the  labourers  and 
farmers,  few  of  whom  could  speak  any  English.  The 
landlady  here  brewed  her  own  beer  in  very  primitive 
fashion  in  a  large  iron  pot  or  cauldron  in  the  wash- 
house,  and  had  it  ready  for  sale  in  a  few  days — a 
rather  thick  and  sweetish  liquor,  but  very  palatable. 
The  malt  and  hops  were  bought  in  small  quantities 
as  wanted,  and  brewing  took  place  weekly,  or  even 
oftener,  when  there  was  a  brisk  demand. 

After  living  about  a  year  at  Bryn-coch  we  moved 
a  little  nearer  the  town  to  the  other  side  of  the  Clydach 
river,  and  lodged  with  an  old  colliery  surveyor,  Samuel 
Osgood,  in  the  employment  of  Mr.  Price,  of  the  Neath 
Abbey  Iron  Works.  The  house  was  an  old  but  roomy 
cottage,  and  we  had  a  large  bedroom  and  a  room 
downstairs  for  an  oiifice  and  living  room,  while  Mr. 
Osgood  had  another,  and  there  was  also  a  roomy 
kitchen.  A  tramway  from  some  collieries  to  the 
works  ran  in  front  of  the  house  at  a  little  distance, 
and  we  had  a  good  view  of  the  town  and  up  the  vale 
of  Neath.     Behind  us  rose  the  Drymau  Mountain, 


RESIDENCE   IN   SOUTH   WALES       97 

nearly  seven  hundred  feet  above  us,  the  level  top  of 
which  was  frequented  by  peewits,  and  whose  steep 
slopes  were  covered  with  trees  and  bushes.  Here  we 
lived  till  I  left  Neath  a  year  later,  and  were  on  the 
whole  very  comfortable,  though  our  first  experience 
was  a  rather  trying  one.  The  bedroom  we  occupied 
had  been  unused  for  years,  and  though  it  had  been 
cleaned  for  our  use  we  found  that  every  part  of  it, 
bedstead,  floor,  and  walls,  in  every  crack  and  cranny, 
harboured  the  Cimex  lectularius,  or  bedbug,  which 
attacked  us  by  hundreds,  and  altogether  banished 
sleep.  This  required  prompt  and  thorough  measures, 
and  my  brother  at  once  took  them.  I  was  sent  to 
the  town  for  some  ounces  of  corrosive  sublimate  ;  the 
old  wooden  bedstead  was  taken  to  pieces,  and,  with 
the  chairs,  tables,  drawers,  etc.,  carried  outside.  The 
poison  was  dissolved  in  a  large  pailful  of  water,  and 
with  this  solution  by  means  of  a  whitewasher's  brush 
the  whole  of  the  floor  was  thoroughly  soaked,  so  that 
the  poison  might  penetrate  every  crevice,  while  the 
walls  and  ceiling  were  also  washed  over.  The  bed- 
stead and  furniture  were  all  treated  in  the  same  way, 
and  everything  put  back  in  its  place  by  the  evening. 
We  did  all  the  work  ourselves,  with  the  assistance  of 
Mrs.  Osgood  and  a  servant-girl,  and  so  effectual  was 
the  treatment  that  for  nearly  a  year  that  we  lived 
there  we  were  wholly  unmolested  by  insect  enemies. 

About  that  time  the  method  of  measuring  the 
acreage  of  fields  on  maps  by  means  of  tracing-paper 
divided  into  squares  of  one  chain  each,  with  a  beam- 
compass  to  sum  up  each  line  of  squares,  had  recently 
come  into  use  by  surveyors  ;  and  Mr.  Osgood  amused 
himself  by  making  a  number  of  these  compasses  of 
various  kinds  of  wood  nicely  finished  and  well 
polished,   rather  as   examples  of  his   skill  than   for 

H 


98  MY  LIFE 

any  use  he  had  for  them,  though  he  occasionally  sold 
them  to  some  of  the  local  surveyors.  He  had  these 
all  suspended  vertically  on  the  wall  instead  of  horizon- 
tally, as  they  are  usually  placed,  and  as  they  look 
best.  While  we  were  one  day  admiring  the  work- 
manship of  an  addition  to  the  series,  he  remarked,  "  I 
dare  say  you  don't  know  why  I  hang  them  up  that 
way  ;  very  few  people  do."  Of  course,  we  acknow- 
ledged we  did  not  know.  '*  Well,"  said  he,  "  it  is  very 
important.  The  air  presses  with  a  weight  of  fifteen 
pounds  on  every  square  inch,  and  if  I  hung  them  up 
level  the  pressure  in  the  middle  would  very  soon  bend 
them,  and  they  would  be  spoilt."  My  brother  knew 
it  was  no  good  to  try  to  show  him  his  error,  so  he 
merely  said,  "  Yes,  that's  a  very  good  idea  of  yours," 
and  left  the  old  man  in  the  happy  belief  that  he  was 
quite  scientific  in  his  methods. 

After  we  had  completed  the  survey  and  maps  of 
Cadoxton,  which  occupied  us  about  six  months,  we 
had  not  much  to  do  except  small  pieces  of  work  of 
various  kinds.  One  of  these  was  to  make  a  survey 
and  take  soundings  of  the  river  between  the  bridge 
and  the  sea,  a  distance  of  three  or  four  miles, 
for  a  proposed  scheme  of  improving  the  navigation, 
making  docks,  etc.,  which  was  partly  carried  out  some 
years  later.  We  also  had  a  little  architectural  and 
engineering  work,  in  designing  and  superintending 
the  erection  of  warehouses  with  powerful  cranes, 
which  gave  me  some  insight  into  practical  building. 
To  assist  in  making  working  drawings  and  specifica- 
tions, my  brother  had  purchased  a  well-known  work, 
Bartholomew's  "  Specifications  for  Practical  Archi- 
tecture." This  book,  though  mainly  on  a  very  dry 
and  technical  subject,  contained  an  introduction  on 


RESIDENCE   IN    SOUTH    WALES       99 

the  principles  of  Gothic  architecture  which  gave  me 
ideas  upon  the  subject  of  the  greatest  interest  and 
value,  and  which  have  enabled  me  to  form  an  inde- 
pendent judgment  on  modern  imitations  of  Gothic  or 
of  any  other  styles.  Bartholomew  was  an  enthusiast 
for  Gothic,  which  he  maintained  was  the  only  true 
and  scientific  system  of  architectural  construction  in 
existence.  He  showed  how  all  the  most  striking  and 
ornamental  features  of  Gothic  architecture  are  essential 
to  the  stability  of  a  large  stone-built  structure — the 
lofty  nave  with  its  clerestory  windows  and  arched  roof ; 
the  lateral  aisles  at  a  lower  level,  also  with  arched 
roofs  ;  the  outer  thrust  of  these  arches  supported  by 
deep  buttresses  on  the  ground,  with  arched  or  flying 
buttresses  above ;  and  these  again  rendered  more 
secure  by  being  weighted  down  with  rows  of  pinnacles, 
which  add  so  much  to  the  beauty  of  Gothic  buildings. 
He  rendered  his  argument  more  clear  by  giving  a 
generalized  cross-section  of  a  cathedral,  and  drawing 
within  the  buttresses  the  figure  of  a  man  with  out- 
stretched arms  pushing  against  the  upper  arches  to 
resist  their  outward  thrust,  and  being  kept  more 
steady  by  a  heavy  load  upon  his  head  and  shoulders 
representing  the  pinnacle.  This  section  and  figure 
illuminated  the  whole  construction  of  the  master- 
pieces of  the  old  architects  so  clearly  and  forcibly, 
that  though  I  have  not  seen  the  book  since,  I  have 
never  forgotten  it.  It  has  furnished  me  with  a  stand- 
ard by  which  to  judge  all  architecture,  and  has  guided 
my  taste  in  such  a  small  matter  as  the  use  of  stone 
slabs  over  window  openings  in  brick  buildings,  thus 
concealing  the  structural  brick  arch,  and  using  stone 
as  a  beam,  a  purpose  for  which  iron  or  wood  is  better 
suited.  It  also  made  me  a  very  severe  critic  of  modern 
imitations  of  Gothic  in  which  we  often  see  buttresses 


lOO  MY   LIFE 

and  pinnacles  for  ornament  alone,  when  the  roof  is 
wholly  of  wood  and  there  is  no  outward  thrust  to  be 
guarded  against ;  while  in  some  cases  we  see  useless 
gargoyles,  which  in  the  old  buildings  stretched  out  to 
carry  the  water  clear  of  the  walls,  but  which  are  still 
sometimes  imitated  when  the  water  is  carried  into 
drains  by  iron  gutters  and  water-pipes.  I  also  learnt 
to  appreciate  the  beautiful  tracery  of  the  large  cir- 
cular or  pointed  windows,  whose  harmonies  and  well- 
balanced  curves  and  infinitely  varied  designs  are  a 
delight  to  the  eye  ;  while  in  most  modern  structures 
the  attempts  at  imitating  them  are  deplorable  failures, 
being  usually  clumsy,  unbalanced,  and  monotonous. 
One  of  the  very  few  modern  Gothic  buildings  in 
which  the  architect  has  caught  the  spirit  of  the  old 
work  is  Barry's  Houses  of  Parliament,  which,  whether 
in  general  effect  or  in  its  beautifully  designed  details, 
is  a  delight  to  the  true  lover  of  Gothic  architecture. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

SELF-EDUCATION   IN   SCIENCE  AND   LITERATURE 

During  the  larger  portion  of  my  residence  at  Neath 
we  had  very  little  to  do,  and  my  brother  was  often  away, 
either  seeking  employment  or  engaged  upon  small 
matters  of  business  in  various  parts  of  the  country. 
I  was  thus  left  a  good  deal  to  my  own  devices,  and, 
having  no  friends  of  my  own  age,  I  occupied  myself 
with  various  pursuits  in  which  I  had  begun  to  take 
an  interest.  Having  learnt  the  use  of  the  sextant  in 
surveying,  and  my  brother  having  a  book  on  Nautical 
Astronomy,  I  practised  a  few  of  the  simpler  observa- 
tions. Among  these  were  determining  the  meridian 
by  equal  altitudes  of  the  sun,  and  also  by  the  pole- 
star  at  its  upper  or  lower  culmination  ;  finding  the 
latitude  by  the  meridian  altitude  of  the  sun,  or  of 
some  of  the  principal  stars  ;  and  making  a  rude  sun- 
dial by  erecting  a  gnomon  towards  the  pole.  For 
these  simple  calculations  I  had  Hannay  and  Dietrich- 
sen's  Almanac,  a  copious  publication  which  gave  all 
the  important  data  in  the  Nautical  Almanac,  besides 
much  other  interesting  matter,  useful  for  the  astro- 
nomical amateur  or  the  ordinary  navigator.  I  also 
tried  to  make  a  telescope  by  purchasing  a  lens  of 
about  two  feet  focus  at  an  optician's  in  Swansea,  fixing 
it  in  a  paper  tube  and  using  the  eye-piece  of  a  small 
opera-glass.     With  it  I  was  able  to  observe  the  moon 


102  MY   LIFE 

and  Jupiter's  satellites,  and  some  of  the  larger  star- 
clusters  ;  but,  of  course,  very  imperfectly.  Yet  it 
served  to  increase  my  interest  in  astronomy,  and  to 
induce  me  to  study  with  some  care  the  various 
methods  of  construction  of  the  more  important  astro- 
nomical instruments  ;  and  it  also  led  me  throughout 
my  life  to  be  deeply  interested  in  the  grand  onward 
march  of  astronomical  discovery. 

But  what  occupied  me  chiefly  and  became  more 
and  more  the  solace  and  delight  of  my  lonely  rambles 
among  the  moors  and  mountains,  was  my  first  intro- 
duction to  the  variety,  the  beauty,  and  the  mystery  of 
Nature  as  manifested  in  the  vegetable  kingdom. 

I  obtained  a  shilling  paper-covered  book  published 
by  the  Society  for  the  Diffusion  of  Useful  Knowledge, 
the  title  of  which  I  forget,  but  which  contained  an 
outline  of  the  structure  of  plants  and  a  short  descrip- 
tion of  their  various  parts  and  organs  ;  and  also  a 
good  description  of  about  a  dozen  of  the  most  common 
of  the  natural  orders  of  British  plants.  This  little 
book  was  a  revelation  to  me,  and  for  a  year  was  my 
constant  companion.  On  Sundays  I  would  stroll  in 
the  fields  and  woods,  learning  the  various  parts  and 
organs  of  any  flowers  I  could  gather,  and  then  trying 
how  many  of  them  belonged  to  any  of  the  orders 
described  in  my  book.  Great  was  my  delight  when 
I  found  that  I  could  identify  a  Crucifer,  an  Umbellifer, 
and  a  Labiate  ;  and  as  one  after  another  the  different 
orders  were  recognized,  I  began  to  realize  for  the  first 
time  the  system  that  underlay  all  the  variety  of 
nature.  When  my  brother  was  away  and  there  was 
no  work  to  do,  I  would  spend  the  greater  part  of  the 
day  wandering  over  the  hills  or  by  the  streams 
gathering  flowers,  and  either  determining  their  position 
from  my  book,  or  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  they 


SELF-EDUCATION   IN   SCIENCE,  ETC.     103 

belonged  to  other  orders  of  which  I  knew  nothing, 
and  as  time  went  on  I  found  that  there  were  a  very- 
large  number  of  these,  including  many  of  our  most 
beautiful  and  curious  flowers,  and  I  felt  that  I  must 
get  some  other  book  by  which  I  could  learn  something 
about  these  also. 

At  length  I  obtained  Lindley's  "Elements  of 
Botany,"  which  to  my  disappointment  did  not  contain 
references  to  British  plants,  and  did  not  state  which 
orders  contained  British  species.  The  woodcuts 
and  descriptions  of  all  the  natural  orders  were,  how- 
ever, very  useful,  and  on  the  broad  margins  of  the 
pages,  I  copied  the  characters  of  the  British  species 
from  Loudon's  "  Encyclopaedia  of  Plants,"  which  I 
borrowed  from  a  friend.  I  was  thus  able  to  identify 
most  of  the  plants  I  met  with. 

But  I  soon  found  that  by  merely  identifying  the 
plants  I  gathered  in  my  walks  I  lost  much  time  in 
examining  the  same  species  several  times,  and  even 
then  not  being  always  quite  sure  that  I  had  found  the 
same  plant  before.  I  therefore  began  to  form  a 
herbarium,  collecting  good  specimens  and  drying 
them  carefully  between  drying  papers  and  a  couple 
of  boards  weighted  with  books  or  stones.  My  brother, 
however,  did  not  approve  of  my  devotion  to  this  study, 
even  though  I  had  absolutely  nothing  else  to  do,  nor 
did  he  suggest  any  way  in  which  I  could  employ  my 
leisure  more  profitably.  He  said  very  little  to  me  on 
the  subject  beyond  a  casual  remark,  but  a  letter  from 
my  mother  showed  me  that  he  thought  I  was  wasting 
my  time.  Neither  he  nor  I  could  foresee  that  it  would 
have  any  effect  on  my  future  life,  and  I  myself  only 
looked  upon  it  as  an  intensely  interesting  occupation 
for  time  that  would  otherwise  be  wasted.  Even  when 
we  were  busy  I  had  Sundays  perfectly  free,  and  used 


104  MY   LIFE 

then  to  take  long  walks  over  the  mountains  with  my 
collecting-box,  which  I  brought  home  full  of  treasures. 
I  first  named  the  species  as  nearly  as  I  could  do  so, 
and  then  laid  them  out  to  be  pressed  and  dried.  At 
such  times  I  experienced  the  joy  which  every  discovery 
of  a  new  form  of  life  gives  to  the  lover  of  nature,  almost 
equal  to  those  raptures  which  I  afterwards  felt  at  every 
capture  of  new  butterflies  on  the  Amazon,  or  at  the  con- 
stant stream  of  new  species  of  birds,  beetles,  and  butter- 
flies in  Borneo,  the  Moluccas,  and  the  Aru  Islands. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  my  ignorance  of  plants 
at  this  time  was  extreme.  I  knew  the  wild  rose, 
bramble,  hawthorn,  buttercup,  poppy,  daisy,  and  fox- 
glove, and  a  very  few  others  equally  common  and 
popular,  and  this  was  all.  I  knew  nothing  whatever 
as  to  genera  and  species,  nor  of  the  large  numbers  of 
distinct  forms  related  to  each  other  and  grouped  into 
natural  orders.  My  delight,  therefore,  was  great  when 
I  was  now  able  to  identify  the  charming  little  eye- 
bright,  the  strange-looking  cow-wheat  and  louse-wort, 
the  handsome  mullein  and  the  pretty  creeping  toad- 
flax, and  to  find  that  all  of  them,  as  well  as  the  lordly 
foxglove,  formed  parts  of  one  great  natural  order,  and 
that  under  all  their  superficial  diversity  of  form  there 
was  a  similarity  of  structure  which,  when  once  clearly 
understood,  enabled  me  to  locate  each  fresh  species 
with  greater  ease.  The  Crucifers,  the  Pea  tribe,  the 
Umbelliferae,  the  Compositae,  and  the  Labiates  offered 
great  difficulties,  and  it  was  only  after  repeated  efforts 
that  I  was  able  to  name  with  certainty  a  few  of  the 
species,  after  which  each  additional  discovery  became 
a  little  less  difficult,  though  the  time  I  gave  to  the 
study  before  I  left  England  was  not  sufficient  for  me 
to  acquaint  myself  with  more  than  a  moderate  pro- 
portion of  the  names  of  the  species  I  collected. 


SELF-EDUCATION   IN   SCIENCE,  ETC.     105 

Now,  I  have  some  reason  to  believe  that  this  was 
the. turning-point  of  my  life^  the  tide  that  carried  me 
on,  not  to  fortune  but  to  whatever  reputation  I  have 
acquired,  and  which  has  certainly  been  to  me  a  never- 
failing  source  of  much  health  of  body  and  supreme 
mental  enjoyment.  If  my  brother  had  had  constant 
work  for  me  so  that  I  never  had  an  idle  day,  and  if  I 
had  continued  to  be  similarly  employed  after  I  became 
of  age,  I  should  most  probably  have  become  entirely 
absorbed  in  my  profession,  which,  in  its  various 
departments,  I  always  found  extremely  interesting, 
and  should  therefore  not  have  felt  the  need  of  any 
other  occupation  or  study. 

I  know  now,  though  I  was  ignorant  of  it  at  the 
time,  that  my  brother's  life  was  a  very  anxious  one, 
that  the  difficulty  of  finding  remunerative  work  was 
very  great,  and  that  he  was  often  hard  pressed  to  earn 
enough  to  keep  us  both  in  the  very  humble  way  in 
which  we  lived.  He  never  alluded  to  this  that  I  can 
remember,  nor  did  I  ever  hear  how  much  our  board 
and  lodging  cost  him,  nor  ever  saw  him  make  the 
weekly  or  monthly  payments.  During  the  seven 
years  I  was  with  him  I  hardly  ever  had  more  than  a 
few  shillings  for  personal  expenses  ;  but  every  year  or 
two,  when  I  went  home,  what  new  clothes  were 
absolutely  necessary  were  provided  for  me,  with 
perhaps  ten  shillings  or  a  pound  as  pocket-money  till 
my  next  visit,  and  this,  I  think,  was  partly  or  wholly 
paid  out  of  the  small  legacy  left  me  by  my  grand- 
father. This  seemed  very  hard  at  the  time,  but  I  now 
see  clearly  that  even  this  was  useful  to  me,  and  was 
really  an  important  factor  in  moulding  my  character 
and  determining  my  work  in  life.  Had  my  father 
been  a  moderately  rich  man  and  had  supplied  me  with 
a  good  wardrobe  and  ample  pocket-money ;  had  my 


I06  MY   LIFE 

brother  obtained  a  partnership  in  some  firm  in  a 
populous  town  or  city,  or  had  established  himself  in 
his  profession,  I  might  never  have  turned  to  nature 
as  the  solace  and  enjoyment  of  my  solitary  hours, 
my  whole  life  would  have  been  differently  shaped, 
and  though  I  should,  no  doubt,  have  given  some 
attention  to  science,  it  seems  very  unlikely  that  I 
should  have  ever  undertaken  what  at  that  time  seemed 
rather  a  wild  scheme,  a  journey  to  the  almost  unknown 
forests  of  the  Amazon  in  order  to  observe  nature  and 
make  a  living  by  collecting.  All  this  may  have  been 
pure  chance,  as  I  long  thought  it  was,  but  of  late  years 
I  am  more  inclined  to  Hamlet's  belief  when  he  said — 

"  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Rough-hew  them  how  we  will." 

Of  course,  I  do  not  adopt  the  view  that  each  man's 
life,  in  all  its  details,  is  guided  by  the  Deity  for  His 
special  ends.  That  would  be,  indeed,  to  make  us  all 
conscious  automata,  puppets  in  the  hands  of  an  all- 
powerful  destiny.  But  I  have  good  reasons  for  the 
belief  that  we  are  surrounded  by  a  host  of  unseen 
friends  and  relatives  who  have  gone  before  us,  and 
who  have  certain  limited  powers  of  influencing,  and 
even,  in  particular  cases,  almost  of  determining,  the 
actions  of  living  persons,  and  may  thus  in  a  great 
variety  of  indirect  ways  modify  the  circumstances  and 
character  of  any  one  or  more  individuals  in  whom 
they  are  specially  interested.  But  a  great  number  of 
these  occurrences  in  every  one's  life  are  apparently 
what  we  term  chance,  and  even  if  all  are  so,  the 
conclusion  I  wish  to  lay  stress  upon  is  not  affected. 
It  is,  that  many  of  the  conditions  and  circumstances 
that  constitute  our  environment,  though  at  the  time 
they  may  seem  unfortunate  or  even  unjust,  yet  are 


SELF-EDUCATION   IN   SCIENCE,  ETC.     107 

often    more    truly   beneficial    than    those   which   we 

should   consider  more   favourable.     Sometimes  they 

only  aid  in  the  formation  of  character  ;  sometimes 

they  also  lead  to  action  which  gives  scope  for  the  use 

of  what  might  have  been  dormant  or  unused  faculties 

(as,  I  think,  has  occurred  in  my  own  case)  ;  but  much 

more  frequently  they  seem  to  us  wholly  injurious, 

leading  to  a  life  of  misery  or  crime,  and  turning  what 

in   themselves   are   good  faculties  to  evil  purposes. 

When  this  occurs  in   any  large  number  of  cases,  as 

it  certainly  does  with  us  now,  we  may  be  sure  that 

it  is  the  system  of  society  that  is  at   fault,  and  the 

most  strenuous  efforts  of  all  who  see  this  should  be 

devoted,  not  to  the  mere  temporary  alleviation  of  the 

evils  due  to  it,  but  to  the  gradual  modification  of  the 

system  itself.     This  is  my  present  view.     At  the  time 

of  which  I  am  now  writing,  I  had  not  begun  even  to 

think  of  these  matters,  although  facts  which  I  now 

see  to  be  of  great  importance  in  connection  with  them 

were  being  slowly  accumulated  for  use  in  after-years. 

It  was  during  the  time  that  I  was  most  occupied 

out  of  doors  with  the  observation  and  collection  of 

plants   that    I   began  to  write    down,  more   or   less 

systematically,    my   ideas   on   various   subjects    that 

interested  me.     Three  of  these  early  attempts  have 

been  preserved   and  are  now  before  me.     They  all 

bear  dates  of  the  autumn  or  winter  of  1843,  when  I 

was  between  nineteen  and  twenty  years  of  age. 

One  of  these  is  a  rough  sketch  of  a  popular  lecture 
on  Botany,  addressed  to  an  audience  supposed  to  be 
as  ignorant  as  I  was  myself  when  I  began  to  observe 
our  native  flowers.  I  was  led  to  write  it,  partly  on 
account  of  the  difficulties  I  myself  had  felt  in  obtain- 
ing the  kind  of  information  I  required,  but  chiefly  on 
account  of  a  lecture  I  had  attended  at  Neath  by  a 


io8  MY   LIFE 

local  botanist  of  some  repute,  which  seemed  to  me  so 
meagre,  so  uninteresting,  and  so  utterly  unlike  what 
such  a  lecture  ought  to  be,  that  I  wanted  to  try  if  I 
could  not  do  something  better.  The  lecture  in 
question  consisted  in  an  enumeration  of  the  whole 
series  of  the  "  Linnaean  Classes  and  Orders,"  stating 
their  characters  and  naming  a  few  of  the  plants 
comprised  in  each.  It  was  illustrated  by  a  series  of 
coloured  figures  on  cards  about  the  size  of  ordinary 
playing  cards,  which  the  lecturer  held  up  one  after 
the  other  to  show  what  he  was  talking  about.  The 
Linnaean  system  was  upheld  as  being  far  the  most 
useful  as  a  means  of  determining  the  names  of  plants, 
and  the  natural  system  was  treated  as  quite  useless 
for  beginners,  and  only  suited  for  experienced 
botanists. 

All  this  was  so  entirely  opposed  to  views  I  had 
already  formed,  that  I  devoted  a  large  portion  of  my 
lecture  to  the  question  of  classification  in  general, 
showed  that  any  classification,  however  artificial,  was 
better  than  none,  and  that  Linnaeus  made  a  great 
advance  when  he  substituted  generic  and  specific 
names  for  the  short  Latin  descriptions  of  species 
before  used,  and  by  classifying  all  known  plants  by 
means  of  a  few  well-marked  and  easily  observed 
characters.  I  then  showed  how  and  why  this  classifica- 
tion was  only  occasionally,  and  as  it  were  accidentally, 
a  natural  one  ;  that  in  a  vast  number  of  cases  it 
grouped  together  plants  which  were  essentially  unlike 
each  other  ;  and  that  for  all  purposes,  except  the 
naming  of  species,  it  was  both  useless  and  incon- 
venient. I  then  showed  what  the  natural  system  of 
classification  really  was,  what  it  aimed  at,  and  the  much 
greater  interest  it  gave  to  the  study  of  botany.  I 
explained  the  principles  on  which  the  various  natural 


SELF-EDUCATION    IN   SCIENCE,  ETC.     109 

orders  were  founded,  and  showed  how  often  they  gave 
us  a  clue  to  the  properties  of  large  groups  of  species, 
and  enabled  us  to  detect  real  affinities  under  very 
diverse  external  forms. 

I  concluded  by  passing  in  review  some  of  the  best 
marked  orders  as  illustrating  these  various  features. 
Although  crudely  written  and  containing  some  errors, 
I  still  think  it  would  serve  as  a  useful  lecture  to  an 
audience  generally  ignorant  of  the  whole  subject,  such 
as  the  young  mechanics  of  a  manufacturing  town. 
Its  chief  interest  to  me  now  is  that  it  shows  my  early 
bent  towards  classification,  not  the  highly  elaborate 
type  that  seeks  to  divide  and  subdivide  under 
different  headings  with  technical  names,  rendering  the 
whole  scheme  difficult  to  comprehend,  and  being  in 
most  cases  a  hindrance  rather  than  an  aid  to  the 
learner,  but  a  simple  and  intelligible  classification 
which  recognizes  and  defines  all  great  natural  groups, 
and  does  not  needlessly  multiply  them  on  account  of 
minute  technical  differences.  It  has  always  seemed 
to  me  that  the  natural  orders  of  flowering  plants 
afford  one  of  the  best,  if  not  the  very  best,  example 
of  such  a  classification. 

It  is  this  attraction  to  classification,  not  as  a 
metaphysically  complete  system,  but  as  an  aid  to  the 
comprehension  of  a  subject,  which  is,  I  think,  one  of 
the  chief  causes  of  the  success  of  my  books,  in  almost 
all  of  which  I  have  aimed  at  a  simple  and  intelligible 
rather  than  a  strictly  logical  arrangement  of  the 
subject-matter. 

Another  lecture,  the  draft  for  which  I  prepared 
pretty  fully,  was  on  a  rather  wider  subject — "The 
Advantages  of  Varied  Knowledge  " — in  opposition 
to  the  idea  that  it  was  better  to  learn  one  subject 


no  MY   LIFE 

thoroughly  than  to  know  something  of  many  subjects. 
In  the  case  of  a  business  or  profession,  something 
may  be  said  for  the  latter  view,  but  I  treated  it  as  a 
purely  personal  matter  which  led  to  the  cultivation 
of  a  variety  of  faculties,  and  gave  pleasurable  occu- 
pation throughout  life.  A  few  extracts  may,  perhaps, 
be  permitted  from  this  early  attempt.  Speaking  of 
a  general  acquaintance  with  history,  biography,  art, 
and  science,  I  say,  "  There  is  an  intrinsic  value  to 
ourselves  in  these  varied  branches  of  knowledge,  so 
much  indescribable  pleasure  in  their  possession,  so 
much  do  they  add  to  the  enjoyment  of  every  moment 
of  our  existence,  that  it  is  impossible  to  estimate 
their  value,  and  we  would  hardly  accept  boundless 
wealth,  at  the  cost,  if  it  were  possible,  of  their  irre- 
coverable loss.  And  if  it  is  thus  we  feel  as  to  our 
general  store  of  mental  acquirements,  still  more  do 
we  appreciate  the  value  of  any  particular  branch  of 
study  we  may  ardently  pursue.  What  pleasure  would 
remain  for  the  enthusiastic  artist,  were  he  forbidden 
to  gaze  upon  the  face  of  Nature,  and  transfer  her 
loveliest  scenes  to  his  canvas  ?  or  for  the  poet,  were 
the  means  denied  him  to  rescue  from  oblivion  the 
passing  visions  of  his  imagination  ?  or  to  the  chemist, 
were  he  snatched  from  his  laboratory  ere  some  novel 
experiment  were  concluded,  or  some  ardently  pursued 
theory  confirmed  ?  or  to  any  of  us,  were  we  compelled 
to  forego  some  intellectual  pursuit  that  was  bound 
up  with  our  every  thought .'  And  here  we  see  the 
advantage  possessed  by  him  whose  studies  have  been 
in  various  directions,  and  who  at  different  times  has 
had  many  different  pursuits,  for  whatever  may  happen, 
he  will  always  find  something  in  his  surroundings  to 
interest  and  instruct  him." 

And  further  on,  as  illustrations  of  the  interest  in 


SELF-EDUCATION   IN    SCIENCE,  ETC.     in 

common  things  conferred  by  a  knowledge  of  the 
elementary  laws  of  physical  science,  I  remark — 

**Many  who  marvel  at  the  rolling  thunder  care 
not  to  inquire  what  causes  the  sound  which  is  heard 
when  a  tightly-fitting  cork  is  quickly  drawn  from  a 
bottle,  or  when  a  whip  is  cracked  or  a  pistol  fired  ; 
and  while  they  are  struck  with  awe  and  admiration 
at  the  dazzling  lightning,  look  upon  the  sparks  drawn 
from  a  cat's  back  on  a  frosty  evening  and  the  slight 
crackle  that  accompanies  them  as  being  only  fit  to 
amuse  a  child  ;  yet  in  each  case  the  cause  of  the 
trifling  and  of  the  grand  phenomena  is  the  same.  He 
who  has  extended  his  inquiries  into  the  varied  pheno- 
mena of  nature  learns  to  despise  no  fact,  however 
small,  and  to  consider  the  most  apparently  insignifi- 
cant and  common  occurrences  as  much  in  need  of 
explanation  as  those  of  a  grander  and  more  imposing 
character.  He  sees  in  every  dewdrop  trembling  on 
the  grass  causes  at  work  analogous  to  those  which 
have  produced  the  spherical  figure  of  the  earth  and 
planets ;  and  in  the  beautiful  forms  of  crystallization 
on  his  window-panes  on  a  frosty  morning  he  recog- 
nizes the  action  of  laws  which  may  also  have  a  part 
in  the  production  of  the  similar  forms  of  plants  and 
of  many  of  the  lower  animal  types.  Thus  the  simplest 
facts  of  everyday  life  have  to  him  an  inner  meaning, 
and  he  sees  that  they  depend  upon  the  same  general 
laws  as  those  that  are  at  work  in  the  grandest  phe- 
nomena of  nature." 

I  then  pass  in  review  the  chief  arts  and  sciences, 
showing  their  inter-relations  and  unsolved  problems  ; 
and  in  remarking  on  the  Daguerrotype,  then  the  only 
mode  of  photographic  portraiture,  I  make  a  sugges- 
tion that,  though  very  simple,  has  not  yet  been  carried 
out.     It  is  as  follows : — 


112  MY   LIFE 

"  It  would  be  a  curious  and  interesting  thing  to 
have  a  series  of  portraits  taken  of  a  person  each 
successive  year.  These  would  show  the  gradual 
changes  from  childhood  to  old  age  in  a  very  striking 
manner  ;  and  if  a  number  of  such  series  from  different 
individuals  were  obtained,  and  a  brief  outline  given 
of  their  lives  during  each  preceding  year,  we  should 
have  materials  not  merely  for  the  curious  to  gaze  at, 
but  which  might  elucidate  the  problem  of  how  far  the 
mind  reacts  upon  the  countenance.  We  should  see 
the  effects  of  pain  or  pleasure,  of  idleness  or  activity, 
of  dissipation  or  study,  and  thus  watch  the  action  of 
the  various  passions  of  the  mind  in  modifying  the 
form  of  the  body,  and  particularly  the  expression  of 
the  features." 

Now  that  photography  is  so  widespread  and  so 
greatly  improved,  it  is  rather  curious  that  nothing  of 
this  kind  has  been  done.  Some  of  our  numerous 
scientific  societies  might  offer  to  take  such  photo- 
graphs of  any  of  their  members  who  would  agree  to 
be  taken  regularly,  and  would  undertake  to  have  one 
or  two  of  their  children  similarly  taken  till  they  came 
of  age,  and  also  to  prepare  a  very  short  record  each 
year  of  the  main  events  or  occupations  of  their  lives. 
If  this  were  widely  done  in  every  part  of  the  country, 
a  most  interesting  and  instructive  collection  of  those 
series  which  were  most  complete  would  be  obtained. 
I  have  given  the  concluding  passage  of  the  lecture 
as  it  appears  in  the  rough  draft,  which  was  never 
rewritten. 

"  Can  we  believe  that  we  are  fulfilling  the  purpose 
of  our  existence  while  so  many  of  the  wonders  and 
beauties  of  the  creation  remain  unnoticed  around  us  } 
While  so  much  of  the  mystery  which  man  has  been 
able  to  penetrate,  however  imperfectly,  is  still  all  dark 


SELF-EDUCATION    IN    SCIENCE,  ETC.     113 

to  us  ?  While  so  many  of  the  laws  which  govern  the 
universe  and  which  influence  our  lives  are,  by  us, 
unknown  and  uncared  for  ?  And  this  not  because  we 
want  the  power,  but  the  will,  to  acquaint  ourselves 
with  them.  Can  we  think  it  right  that,  with  the  key 
to  so  much  that  we  ought  to  know,  and  that  we  should 
be  the  better  for  knowing,  in  our  possession,  we  seek 
not  to  open  the  door,  but  allow  this  great  store  of 
mental  wealth  to  lie  unused,  producing  no  return  to 
us,  while  our  highest  powers  and  capacities  rust  for 
want  of  use  ? 

"  It  is  true  that  man  is  still,  as  he  always  has  been, 
subject  to  error ;  his  judgments  are  often  incorrect, 
his  beliefs  false,  his  opinions  changeable  from  age  to 
age.  But  experience  of  error  is  the  best  guide  to 
truth,  often  dearly  bought,  and,  therefore,  the  more 
to  be  relied  upon.  And  what  is  it  but  the  accumu- 
lated experience  of  past  ages  that  serves  us  as  a 
beacon  light  to  warn  us  from  error,  to  guide  us  in  the 
way  of  truth  ?  How  little  should  we  know  had  the 
knowledge  acquired  by  each  preceding  age  died  with 
it !  How  blindly  should  we  grope  our  way  in  the 
same  obscurity  as  did  our  ancestors,  pursue  the  same 
phantoms,  make  the  same  fatal  blunders,  encounter 
the  same  perils,  in  order  to  purchase  the  same  truths 
which  had  been  already  acquired  by  the  same  process, 
and  lost  again  and  again  in  bygone  ages !  But  the 
wonder-working  press  prevents  this  loss  ;  truths  once 
acquired  are  treasured  up  by  it  for  posterity,  and  each 
succeeding  generation  adds  something  to  the  stock  of 
acquired  knowledge,  so  that  our  acquaintance  with 
the  works  of  nature  is  ever  increasing,  the  range  of 
our  inquiries  is  extended  each  age,  the  power  of  mind 
over  matter  becomes,  year  by  year,  more  complete. 
Yet  our  horizon  ever  widens,  the  limits  to  our  advance 

I 


114  MY   LIFE 

seem  more  distant  than  ever,  and  there  seems  nothing 
too  noble,  too  exalted,  too  marvellous,  for  the  ever- 
increasing  knowledge  of  future  generations  to  attain  to. 

"  Is  it  not  fitting  that,  as  intellectual  beings  with 
such  high  powers,  we  should  each  of  us  acquire  a 
knowledge  of  what  past  generations  have  taught  us, 
so  that,  should  the  opportunity  occur,  we  may  be  able 
to  add  somewhat,  however  small,  to  the  fund  of 
instruction  for  posterity  ?  Shall  we  not,  then,  feel  the 
satisfaction  of  having  done  all  in  our  power  to  improve 
by  culture  those  higher  faculties  that  distinguish  us 
from  the  brutes,  that  none  of  the  talents  with  which 
we  may  have  been  gifted  have  been  suffered  to  lie 
altogether  idle  ?  And,  lastly,  can  any  reflecting  mind 
have  a  doubt  that,  by  improving  to  the  utmost  the 
nobler  faculties  of  our  nature  in  this  world,  we  shall 
be  the  better  fitted  to  enter  upon  and  enjoy  whatever 
new  state  of  being  the  future  may  have  in  store 
for  us?" 

These  platitudes  are  of  no  particular  interest, 
except  as  showing  the  bent  of  my  mind  at  that  period, 
and  as  indicating  a  disposition  for  discursive  reading 
and  study,  which  has  been  a  great  advantage  to 
myself,  and  which  has  enabled  me  to  write  on  a 
variety  of  subjects  without  committing  any  very 
grievous  blunders  (so  far  as  my  critics  have  pointed 
out),  and  with,  I  hope,  some  little  profit  to  my  readers. 

In  April,  1843,  my  father  died  at  Hoddesdon,  at 
the  age  of  seventy-two,  and  was  buried  in  the  family 
vault  in  St.  Andrew's  Churchyard,  Hertford.  As  my 
sister's  school  was  not  paying  very  well,  and  it  was 
necessary  to  economize  as  much  as  possible,  the 
house  was  given  up  early  the  following  year,  my 
mother  took  an    engagement   as  housekeeper  in    a 


SELF-EDUCATION   IN   SCIENCE,  ETC.     115 

gentleman's  family  at  Isleworth,  and  my  sister 
obtained  a  post  as  teacher  at  an  Episcopal  College, 
then  just  founded  by  the  Bishop  of  Georgia  (Dr. 
Elliott),  at  Montpelier  Springs,  seventeen  miles  from 
Macon,  and  left  England  in  August,  1844. 

Shortly  before  I  came  of  age  in  January,  1844, 
my  brother  told  me  that  as  he  had  no  work  in  prospect 
it  was  necessary  that  I  should  leave  him  and  look 
out  for  myself ;  so  I  determined  to  go  up  to  London 
and  endeavour  to  obtain  some  employment. 

As  the  period  of  my  home  and  school  life  and 
subsequent  tutelage  under  my  brother  now  came  to 
an  end,  and  I  had  for  the  future  to  make  my  own 
way  in  the  world,  this  affords  a  suitable  occasion  for 
a  brief  review  of  the  chief  points  in  my  character, 
which  may  now  be  considered  to  have  been  fairly 
determined,  although  some  portions  of  it  had  not  yet 
had  opportunity  for  full  development. 

I  do  not  think  that  at  this  time  I  could  be  said  to 
have  shown  special  superiority  in  any  of  the  higher 
mental  faculties,  but  I  possessed  a  strong  desire  to 
know  the  causes  of  things,  a  great  love  of  beauty  in 
form  and  colour,  and  a  considerable  but  not  excessive 
desire  for  order  and  arrangement  in  whatever  I  had 
to  do.  If  I  had  one  distinct  mental  faculty  more 
prominent  than  another,  it  was  the  power  of  correct 
reasoning  from  a  review  of  the  known  facts  in  any 
case  to  the  causes  or  laws  which  produced  them,  and 
also  in  detecting  fallacies  in  the  reasoning  of  other 
persons.  This  power  has  greatly  helped  me  in  all 
my  writings,  especially  those  on  natural  history  and 
sociology.  The  determination  of  the  direction  in 
which  I  should  use  these  powers  was  due  to  my 
possession  in  a  high  degree  of  the  two  mental  quali- 
ties usually  termed  emotional  or  moral,  an  intense 


Il6  MY   LIFE 

appreciation  of  the  beauty,  harmony,  and  variety  in 
nature  and  in  all  natural  phenomena,  and  an  equally 
strong  passion  for  justice  as  between  man  and  man — 
an  abhorrence  of  all  tyranny,  all  compulsion,  all  un- 
necessary interference  with  the  liberty  of  others. 
These  characteristics,  combined  with  certain  favour- 
able conditions,  some  of  which  have  already  been  re- 
ferred to,  have  determined  the  direction  of  the  pursuits 
and  inquiries  in  which  I  have  spent  a  large  portion  of 
my  life. 

It  will  be  well  to  state  here  certain  marked  defi- 
ciencies in  my  mental  equipment  which  have  also 
had  a  share  in  determining  the  direction  of  my  special 
activities.  My  greatest,  though  not  perhaps  most 
important,  defect  is  my  inability  to  perceive  the 
niceties  of  melody  and  harmony  in  music  ;  in  common 
language,  I  have  no  ear  for  music.  But  as  I  have  a 
fair  appreciation  of  time,  expression,  and  general 
harmony,  I  am  deeply  affected  by  grand,  pathetic,  or 
religious  music,  and  can  at  once  tell  when  the  heart 
and  soul  of  the  musician  is  in  his  performance,  though 
any  number  of  technical  errors,  false  notes,  or  harsh 
discords  would  pass  unnoticed.  Another  and  more 
serious  defect  is  in  verbal  memory,  which,  combined 
with  the  inability  to  reproduce  vocal  sounds,  has 
rendered  the  acquirement  of  all  foreign  languages 
very  difficult  and  distasteful.  This,  with  my  very 
imperfect  school  training,  added  to  my  shyness  and 
want  of  confidence,  must  have  caused  me  to  appear  a 
very  dull,  ignorant,  and  uneducated  person  to  numbers 
of  chance  acquaintances.  This  deficiency  has  also 
put  me  at  a  great  disadvantage  as  a  public  speaker. 
I  can  rarely  find  the  right  word  or  expression  to 
enforce  or  illustrate  my  argument,  and  constantly  feel 
the  same  difficulty  in  private  conversation.    In  writing 


SELF-EDUCATION    IN    SCIENCE,  ETC.     117 

it  is  not  so  injurious,  for  when  I  have  time  for 
deliberate  thought  I  can  generally  express  myself 
with  tolerable  clearness  and  accuracy.  I  think,  too, 
that  the  absence  of  the  flow  of  words  which  so  many 
writers  possess  has  caused  me  to  avoid  that  extreme 
diffuseness  and  verbosity  which  is  so  great  a  fault  in 
many  scientific  and  philosophical  works. 

Another  important  defect  is  in  the  power  of 
rapidly  seeing  analogies  or  hidden  resemblances  and 
incongruities,  a  deficiency  which,  in  combination  with 
that  of  language,  has  produced  the  total  absence  of 
wit  or  humour,  paradox  or  brilliancy,  in  my  writings, 
although  no  one  can  enjoy  and  admire  these  qualities 
more  than  I  do.  The  rhythm  and  pathos,  as  well  as 
the  inimitable  puns  of  Hood,  were  the  delight  of  my 
youth,  as  are  the  more  recondite  and  fantastic  humour 
of  Mark  Twain  and  Lewis  Carroll  in  my  old  age.  The 
faculty  which  gives  to  its  possessor  wit  or  humour  is 
also  essential  to  the  high  mathematician,  who  is 
almost  always  witty  or  poetical  as  well ;  and  I  was 
therefore  debarred  from  any  hope  of  success  in  this 
direction  ;  while  my  very  limited  power  of  drawing  or 
perception  of  the  intricacies  of  form  were  equally 
antagonistic  to  much  progress  as  an  artist  or  a 
geometrician. 

Other  deficiencies  of  great  influence  in  my  life 
have  been  my  want  of  assertiveness  and  of  physical 
courage,  which,  combined  with  delicacy  of  the  nervous 
system  and  of  bodily  constitution,  and  a  general  dis- 
inclination to  much  exertion,  physical  or  mental,  have 
caused  that  shyness,  reticence,  and  love  of  solitude 
which,  though  often  misunderstood  and  leading  to 
unpleasant  results,  have,  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  been 
beneficial  to  me.  They  have  helped  to  give  me  those 
long  periods,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  when,  alone  and 


ii8  MY    LIFE 

surrounded  only  by  wild  nature  and  uncultured  man, 
I  could  ponder  at  leisure  on  the  various  matters  that 
interested  me.  Thus  was  induced  a  receptiveness  of 
mind  which  enabled  me  at  various  times  to  utilize 
what  appeared  to  me  as  sudden  intuitions — flashes  of 
light  leading  to  a  solution  of  some  problem  which 
was  then  before  me  ;  and  these  flashes  would  often 
come  to  me  when,  pen  in  hand,  I  was  engaged  in 
writing  on  a  subject  on  which  I  had  no  intention  or 
expectation  of  saying  anything  new. 

Before  leaving  this  sketch  of  my  mental  nature  at 
the  threshold  of  my  uncontrolled  life,  I  may  properly 
say  a  few  words  on  the  position  I  had  arrived  at  in 
regard  to  the  great  question  of  religious  belief.  I 
have  already  shown  that  my  early  home  training  was 
in  a  thoroughly  religious  but  by  no  means  rigid 
family,  where,  however,  no  religious  doubts  were  ever 
expressed,  and  where  the  word  "  atheist "  was  used 
with  bated  breath  as  pertaining  to  a  being  too  debased 
almost  for  human  society.  The  only  regular  teaching 
I  received  was  to  say  or  hear  a  formal  prayer  before 
going  to  bed,  hearing  grace  before  and  after  dinner, 
and  learning  a  collect  every  Sunday  morning,  the 
latter  certainly  one  of  the  most  stupid  ways  of 
inculcating  religion  ever  conceived.  On  Sunday 
evenings,  if  we  did  not  go  to  church  or  chapel,  my 
father  would  read  some  old  sermon,  and  when  we  did 
go  we  were  asked  on  our  return  what  was  the  text. 
The  only  books  allowed  to  be  read  on  Sundays  were 
the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  or  "  Paradise  Lost,"  or  some 
religious  tracts  or  moral  tales,  or  the  more  interesting 
parts  of  the  Bible  were  read  by  my  mother,  or  we 
read  ourselves  about  Esther  and  Mordecai  or  Bel  and 
the  Dragon,  which  were  as  good  as  any  story-book. 
Put  all  this  made  little  impression  upon  me,  as  it 


SELF-EDUCATION   IN  SCIENCE,  ETC.     119 

never  dealt  sufficiently  with  the  mystery,  the  great- 
ness, the  ideal  and  emotional  aspects  of  religion, 
which  only  appealed  to  me  occasionally  in  some  of 
the  grander  psalms  and  hymns,  or  through  the  words 
of  some  preacher  more  impassioned  than  usual. 

As  might  have  been  expected,  therefore,  what 
little  religious  belief  I  had  very  quickly  vanished 
under  the  influence  of  philosophical  or  scientific 
scepticism.  This  came  first  upon  me  when  I  spent 
a  month  or  two  in  London  with  my  brother  John,  as 
already  related  ;  and  during  the  seven  years  I  lived 
with  my  brother  William,  though  the  subject  of 
religion  was  not  often  mentioned,  there  was  a  per- 
vading spirit  of  scepticism,  or  free-thought  as  it  was 
then  called,  which  strengthened  and  confirmed  my 
doubts  as  to  the  truth  or  value  of  all  ordinary  religious 
teaching. 

He  occasionally  borrowed  interesting  books  which 
I  usually  read.  One  of  these  was  an  old  edition  of 
Rabelais'  works,  which  both  interested  and  greatly 
amused  me  ;  but  that  which  bears  most  upon  the 
present  subject  was  a  reprint  of  lectures  on  Strauss' 
"  Life  of  Jesus,"  which  had  not  then  been  translated 
into  English.  These  lectures  were,  I  think,  delivered 
by  some  Unitarian  minister  or  writer,  and  they  gave 
an  admirable  and  most  interesting  summary  of  the 
whole  work.  The  now  well-known  argument,  that  all 
the  miracles  related  in  the  Gospels  were  mere  myths, 
which  in  periods  of  ignorance  and  credulity  always 
grow  up  around  all  great  men,  and  especially  around 
all  great  moral  teachers  when  the  actual  witnesses  of 
his  career  are  gone  and  his  disciples  begin  to  write 
about  him,  was  set  forth  with  great  skill.  This  argu- 
ment appeared  conclusive  to  my  brother  and  some  of 
his  friends  with  whom  he  discussed  it,  and,  of  course, 


120  MY   LIFE 

in  my  then  frame  of  mind  it  seemed  equally  con- 
clusive to  me,  and  helped  to  complete  the  destruction 
of  whatever  religious  beliefs  still  lingered  in  my  mind. 
It  was  not  till  many  years  afterwards  that  I  saw 
reason  to  doubt  this  whole  argument,  and  to  perceive 
that  it  was  based  upon  pure  assumptions  which  were 
not  in  accordance  with  admitted  historical  facts. 

My  brother  never  went  to  church  himself,  but  for 
the  first  few  years  I  was  with  him  he  sent  me  once 
every  Sunday  ;  but,  of  course,  the  only  effect  of  this 
was  to  deepen  my  spirit  of  scepticism,  as  I  found  no 
attempt  in  any  of  the  clergymen  to  reason  on  any  of 
the  fundamental  questions  at  the  root  of  the  Christian 
and  every  other  religion.  Many  of  our  acquaintances 
were  either  church-  or  chapel-goers,  but  usually  as  a 
matter  of  form  and  convention,  and,  on  the  whole, 
religion  seemed  to  have  no  influence  whatever  on 
their  conduct  or  conversation.  The  majority,  especially 
of  the  younger  men,  were  either  professors  of  religion 
who  thought  or  cared  nothing  about  it,  or  were  open 
sceptics  and  scorners. 

In  addition  to  these  influences  my  growing  taste 
for  various  branches  of  physical  science  and  my  in- 
creasing love  of  nature  disinclined  me  more  and  more 
for  either  the  observances  or  the  doctrines  of  orthodox 
religion,  so  that  by  the  time  I  came  of  age  I  was 
absolutely  non-religious,  I  cared  and  thought  nothing 
about  it,  and  could  be  best  described  by  the  modern 
term  "  agnostic." 

The  next  four  years  of  my  life  were  also  of  great 
importance  both  in  determining  the  direction  of  my 
activity,  and  in  laying  the  foundation  for  my  study  of 
special  subjects  through  which  I  have  obtained  most 
admiration  or  notoriety.  These  will  form  the  subject 
of  the  following  chapter. 


CHAPTER  IX 

LIFE  AT  LEICESTER  AND  NEATH 

As  I  came  of  age  in  January,  1844,  ^^^  there  was 
nothing  doing  at  Neath,  I  left  my  brother  about  the 
middle  of  December  so  as  to  spend  the  Christmas 
with  my  mother  and  sister  at  Hoddesdon,  after  which 
I  returned  to  London,  sharing  my  brother  John's 
lodging  till  I  could  find  some  employment.  At  that 
time  the  tithe-commutation  surveys  were  nearly  all 
completed,  and  the  rush  of  railway  work  had  not 
begun :  surveying  was  consequently  very  slack.  As 
my  brother  William,  who  had  a  large  acquaintance 
among  surveyors  and  engineers  all  over  the  south  of 
England,  could  not  find  employment,  except  some 
very  small  local  business,  I  felt  it  to  be  quite  useless 
for  me  to  seek  for  similar  work.  I  therefore  deter- 
mined to  try  for  some  post  in  a  school  to  teach 
English,  surveying,  elementary  drawing,  etc.  Through 
some  school  agency  I  heard  of  two  vacancies  that 
might  possibly  suit.  The  first  required,  in  addition 
to  English,  junior  Latin  and  algebra.  I  applied  for 
this,  but  failed  to  obtain  the  appointment,  as  neither 
my  Latin  nor  my  algebra  was  up  to  the  required 
standard. 

My  next  attempt  was  more  hopeful,  as  drawing, 
surveying,  and  mapping  were  required.  On  this  occa- 
sion   I  met   a   clergyman,   a  young   man,   easy   and 


122  MY   LIFE 

friendly  in  his  manner.  I  had  taken  with  me  a  small 
coloured  map  I  had  made  at  Neath  to  serve  as  a 
specimen,  and  also  one  or  two  pencil  sketches.  These 
seemed  to  satisfy  him,  and  as  I  was  only  wanted  to 
take  the  junior  classes  in  English  reading,  writing, 
and  arithmetic,  teach  a  very  few  boys  surveying,  and 
beginners  in  drawing,  he  agreed  to  engage  me.  I 
was  to  live  in  the  house,  preside  over  the  evening 
preparation  of  the  boarders  (about  twenty  in  number), 
and  to  have,  I  think,  thirty  or  forty  pounds  a  year, 
with  which  I  was  quite  satisfied.  My  employer  was 
the  Rev.  Abraham  Hill,  Headmaster  of  the  Collegiate 
School  at  Leicester. 

I  commenced  work  in  about  a  fortnight.  After  a 
few  weeks,  finding  I  knew  a  little  Latin,  Mr.  Hill 
asked  me  to  take  the  lowest  class,  and  even  that 
required  some  preparation  in  the  evening.  Mr.  Hill 
was  a  good  mathematician,  and  finding  I  was  desirous 
of  learning  a  little  more  algebra,  offered  to  assist  me. 
He  lent  me  Hind's  Algebra,  which  I  worked  all 
through  successfully,  and  this  was  followed  by  the 
same  author's  Trigonometry,  which  I  also  went  through, 
with  occasional  struggles.  Then  I  attacked  the 
Differential  Calculus,  and  worked  through  that ;  but 
I  could  never  fully  grasp  the  essential  principle  of  it. 
Finally,  I  began  the  Integral  Calculus,  and  here  I 
found  myself  at  the  end  of  my  tether.  I  learnt  some 
of  the  simpler  processes,  but  very  soon  got  baffled, 
and  felt  that  I  wanted  some  faculty  necessary  for 
seeing  my  way  through  what  seemed  to  me  an  almost 
trackless  labyrinth.  Whether,  under  Mr.  Hill's  in- 
struction, I  should  ultimately  have  been  able  to  over- 
come these  difficulties  I  cannot  positively  say,  but  I 
have  good  reason  to  believe  that  I  never  should  have 
done  so.     Briefly  stated,  just  as  no  amount  of  teaching 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND   NEATH     123 

or  practice  would  ever  have  made  me  a  good  musician, 
so,  however  much  time  and  study  I  gave  to  the  subject, 
I  could  never  have  become  a  good  mathematician. 
Whether  all  this  work  did  me  any  good  or  not,  I  am 
rather  doubtful.  My  after-life  being  directed  to 
altogether  different  studies,  I  never  had  occasion  to 
use  my  newly  acquired  knowledge,  and  soon  forgot 
most  of  the  processes.  But  it  gave  me  an  interest  in 
mathematics  which  I  have  never  lost ;  and  I  rarely 
come  across  a  mathematical  investigation  without 
looking  through  it  and  trying  to  follow  the  reason- 
ing, though  I  soon  get  lost  in  the  formulae.  Still, 
the  ever-growing  complexity  of  the  higher  mathe- 
matics has  a  kind  of  fascination  for  me  as  exhibiting 
powers  of  the  human  mind  so  very  far  above  my 
own. 

There  was  in  Leicester  a  very  good  town  library, 
to  which  I  had  access  on  paying  a  small  subscription, 
and  as  I  had  time  for  several  hours'  reading  daily,  I 
took  full  advantage  of  it.  Among  the  works  I  read 
here,  which  influenced  my  future,  were  Humboldt's 
"  Personal  Narrative  of  Travels  in  South  America," 
which  was,  I  think,  the  first  book  that  gave  me  a  desire 
to  visit  the  tropics.  I  also  read  here  Prescott's 
"  History  of  the  Conquests  of  Mexico  and  Peru," 
Robertson's  "  History  of  Charles  V."  and  his  "  History 
of  America,"  and  a  number  of  other  standard  works. 
But  perhaps  the  most  important  book  I  read  was 
Malthus's  "  Principles  of  Population,"  which  I  greatly 
admired  for  its  masterly  summary  of  facts  and  logical 
induction  to  conclusions.  It  was  the  first  work  I  had 
yet  read  treating  of  any  of  the  problems  of  philo- 
sophical biology,  and  its  main  principles  remained 
with  me  as  a  permanent  possession,  and  twenty  years 


124  MY   LIFE 

later   gave  me  the  long-sought   clue  to  the  effective 
agent  in  the  evolution  of  organic  species. 

It  was  at  Leicester  that  I  was  first  introduced  to 
a  subject  which  I  had  at  that  time  never  heard  of,  but 
which  has  played  an  important  part  in  my  mental 
growth — psychical  research,  as  it  is  now  termed. 
Some  time  in  1844  Mr.  Spencer  Hall  gave  some 
lectures  on  mesmerism  illustrated  by  experiments, 
which  I,  as  well  as  a  few  of  the  older  boys,  attended. 
I  was  greatly  interested  and  astonished  at  the  pheno- 
mena exhibited,  in  some  cases  with  persons  who 
volunteered  from  the  audience ;  and  I  was  also  im- 
pressed by  the  manner  of  the  lecturer,  which  was  not 
at  all  that  of  the  showman  or  the  conjurer.  At  the 
conclusion  of  the  course  he  assured  us  that  most 
persons  possessed  in  some  degree  the  power  of  mes- 
merising others,  and  that  by  trying  with  a  few  of  our 
younger  friends  or  acquaintances,  and  simply  doing 
what  we  had  seen  him  do,  we  should  probably  suc- 
ceed. He  also  showed  us  how  to  distinguish  between 
the  genuine  mesmeric  trance,  and  any  attempt  to 
imitate  it. 

In  consequence  of  this  statement,  one  or  two  of  the 
elder  boys  tried  to  mesmerise  some  of  the  younger 
ones,  and  in  a  short  time  succeeded  ;  and  they  asked 
me  to  see  their  experiments.  I  found  that  they  could 
produce  the  trance  state,  which  had  all  the  appearance 
of  being  genuine,  and  also  a  cataleptic  rigidity  of  the 
limbs  by  passes  and  by  suggestion,  both  in  the  trance 
and  afterwards  in  the  normal  waking  state.  This  led 
me  to  try  myself  in  the  privacy  of  my  own  room,  and 
I  succeeded  after  one  or  two  attempts  in  mesmerising 
three  boys  from  twelve  to  sixteen  years  of  age,  while 
on  others  within  the  same  ages  I  could   produce  no 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND    NEATH     125 

effect,  or  an  exceedingly  slight  one.  During  the 
trance  they  seemed  in  a  state  of  semi-torpor,  with 
apparently  no  volition.  They  would  remain  perfectly 
quiescent  so  long  as  I  did  not  notice  them,  but  would 
at  once  answer  any  questions  or  do  anything  I  told 
them.  On  the  two  boys  with  whom  I  continued  to 
experiment  for  some  time,  I  could  produce  catalepsy 
of  any  limb  or  of  the  whole  body,  and  in  this  state 
they  could  do  things  which  they  could  not,  and 
certainly  would  not  have  done  in  their  normal  state. 
For  example,  on  the  rigid  outstretched  arm  I  would 
hang  at  the  wrist  an  ordinary  bedroom  chair,  and  the 
boy  would  hold  it  there  for  several  minutes,  while  I 
sat  down  and  wrote  a  short  letter  for  instance,  without 
any  complaint,  or  making  any  remark  when  I  took  it 
off.  I  never  left  it  more  than  five  minutes,  because  I 
was  afraid  that  some  injury  might  be  caused  by  it. 
I  soon  found  that  this  rigidity  could  be  produced  in 
those  who  had  been  mesmerised  by  suggestion  only, 
and  in  this  way  often  fixed  them  in  any  position, 
notwithstanding  their  efforts  to  change  it.  One 
experiment  was  to  place  a  shilling  on  the  table  in 
front  of  a  boy,  and  then  say  to  him,  "  Now,  you  can't 
touch  that  shilling."  He  would  at  once  move  his 
hand  towards  it,  but  when  half-way  it  would  seem  to 
stick  fast,  and  all  his  efforts  could  not  bring  it  nearer, 
though  he  was  promised  the  shilling  if  he  could 
take  it. 

But  perhaps  the  most  interesting  group  of  pheno- 
mena to  me  were  those  termed  phreno-mesmerism. 
I  had  read,  when  with  my  brother,  George  Combe's 
"  Constitution  of  Man,"  with  which  I  had  been  greatly 
interested,  and  afterwards  one  of  the  writer's  works 
on  Phrenology,  and  at  the  lecture  I  had  seen  some  of 
the  effects  of  exciting  the  phrenological  organs  by 


126  MY  LIFE 

touching  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  patient's 
head.  But  as  I  had  no  book  containing  a  chart  of 
the  organs,  I  bought  a  small  phrenological  bust  to 
help  me  in  determining  the  positions. 

Having  my  patient  in  the  trance,  and  standing 
close  to  him,  with  the  bust  on  my  table  behind  him, 
I  touched  successively  several  of  the  organs,  the 
position  of  which  it  was  easy  to  determine.  After  a 
few  seconds  he  would  change  his  attitude  and  the 
expression  of  his  face  in  correspondence  with  the 
organ  excited.  In  most  cases  the  effect  was  unmis- 
takable, and  superior  to  that  which  the  most  finished 
actor  could  give  to  a  character  exhibiting  the  same 
passion  or  emotion. 

At  this  very  time  the  interest  excited  by  painless 
surgical  operations  during  the  mesmeric  trance  was 
at  its  height,  as  I  have  described  in  my  "  Wonderful 
Century  "  (chap,  xxi.),  and  I  had  read  a  good  deal 
about  these,  and  also  about  the  supposed  excitement 
of  the  phrenological  organs,  and  the  theory  that  these 
latter  were  caused  by  mental  suggestion  from  the 
operator  to  the  patient,  or  what  is  now  termed  tele- 
pathy. But  as  the  manifestations  often  occurred  in 
a  different  form  from  what  I  expected,  I  felt  sure  that 
this  theory  was  not  correct.  One  day  I  intended  to 
touch  a  particular  organ,  and  the  effect  on  the  patient 
was  quite  different  from  what  I  expected,  and  looking 
at  the  bust  while  my  finger  was  still  on  the  boy's 
head,  I  found  that  I  was  not  touching  the  part  I 
supposed,  but  an  adjacent  part,  and  that  the  effect 
exactly  corresponded  to  the  organ  touched  and  not  to 
the  organ  I  thought  I  had  touched,  completely  dis- 
proving the  theory  of  suggestion.  I  then  tried  several 
experiments  by  looking  away  from  the  boy's  head 
while  I  put  my  finger  on  it  at  random,  when  I  always 


LIFE    AT   LEICESTER  AND   NEATH     127 

found  that  the  effect  produced  corresponded  to  that 
indicated  by  the  bust.  I  thus  established,  to  my  own 
satisfaction,  the  fact  that  a  real  effect  was  produced 
on  the  actions  and  speech  of  a  mesmeric  patient  by 
the  operator  touching  various  parts  of  the  head  ;  that 
the  effect  corresponded  with  the  natural  expression  of 
the  emotion  due  to  the  phrenological  organ  situated 
at  that  part — as  combativeness,  acquisitiveness,  fear, 
veneration,  wonder,  tune,  and  many  others  ;  and  that 
it  was  in  no  way  caused  by  the  will  or  suggestion  of 
the  operator. 

As  soon  as  I  found  that  these  experiments  were 
successful,  I  informed  Mr.  Hill,  who  made  no  objec- 
tion to  my  continuing  them,  and  several  times  came 
to  see  them.  He  was  so  much  impressed  that  one 
evening  he  invited  two  or  three  friends  who  were 
interested  in  the  subject,  and  with  my  best  patient  I 
showed  most  of  the  phenomena. 

The  importance  of  these  experiments  to  me  was 
that  they  convinced  me,  once  for  all,  that  the  ante- 
cedently incredible  may  nevertheless  be  true  ;  and, 
further,  that  the  accusations  of  imposture  by  scientific 
men  should  have  no  weight  whatever  against  the 
detailed  observations  and  statements  of  other  men, 
presumably  as  sane  and  sensible  as  their  opponents, 
who  had  witnessed  and  tested  the  phenomena,  as  I 
had  done  myself  in  the  case  of  some  of  them. 

While  living  at  Leicester  I  first  met  Henry  Walter 
Bates.  How  I  was  introduced  to  him  I  do  not  exactly 
remember,  but  I  rather  think  I  heard  him  mentioned 
as  an  enthusiastic  entomologist,  and  met  him  at  the 
library.  I  found  that  his  specialty  was  beetle  col- 
lecting, though  he  also  had  a  good  set  of  British 
butterflies.  Of  the  former  I  knew  nothing,  but  as  I 
already  knew  the  fascinations  of  plant  life  I  was  quite 


128  MY   LIFE 

prepared  to  take  an  interest  in  any  other  department 
of  nature.  He  asked  me  to  see  his  collection,  and  I 
was  amazed  to  find  the  great  number  and  variety  of 
beetles,  their  many  strange  forms  and  often  beautiful 
markings  or  colouring,  and  was  even  more  surprised 
when  I  found  that  almost  all  I  saw  had  been  collected 
around  Leicester,  and  that  there  were  still  many  more 
to  be  discovered.  If  I  had  been  asked  before  how 
many  different  kinds  of  beetles  were  to  be  found  in 
any  small  district  near  a  town,  I  should  probably 
have  guessed  fifty  or  at  the  outside  a  hundred,  and 
thought  that  a  very  liberal  allowance.  But  I  now 
learnt  that  many  hundreds  could  easily  be  collected, 
and  that  there  were  probably  a  thousand  different 
kinds  within  ten  miles  of  the  town  ;  and  he  showed  me 
a  thick  volume  containing  descriptions  of  more  than 
three  thousand  species  inhabiting  the  British  Isles. 
I  also  learnt  from  him  in  what  an  infinite  variety  of 
places  beetles  may  be  found,  while  some  may  be 
collected  all  the  year  round,  so  I  at  once  determined 
to  begin  collecting,  as  I  did  not  find  a  great  many 
new  plants  near  Leicester.  I  therefore  obtained  a 
collecting  bottle,  pins,  and  a  store-box  ;  and  in  order 
to  learn  their  names  and  classification  I  obtained, 
at  wholesale  price  through  Mr.  Hill's  bookseller, 
Stephen's  "  Manual  of  British  Coleoptera,"  which 
henceforth  for  some  years  gave  me  almost  as  much 
pleasure  as  Lindley's  "  Botany,"  with  my  MSS.  de- 
scriptions, had  already  done. 

This  new  pursuit  gave  a  fresh  interest  to  my 
Wednesday  and  Saturday  afternoon  walks  into  the 
country,  when  two  or  three  of  the  boys  often  accom- 
panied me.  The  most  delightful  of  all  our  walks  was 
to  Bradgate  Park,  about  five  miles  from  the  town,  a 
wild,  neglected  park  with  the  ruins  of  a  mansion,  and 


IN    DERBYSHIRE. 


[To  face  p.  129. 


IN    LEICESTERSHIRE. 


[To  face  p.  129. 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND   NEATH     129 

many  fine  trees  and  woods  and  ferny  or  bushy  slopes. 
Sometimes  the  whole  school  went  for  a  picnic,  the 
park  at  that  time  being  quite  open,  and  we  hardly 
ever  met  any  one.  After  we  got  out  of  the  town 
there  was  a  wide  grassy  lane  that  led  to  it,  which 
itself  was  a  delightful  walk  and  was  a  good  collecting 
ground  for  both  plants  and  insects.  For  variety  we 
had  the  meadows  along  the  course  of  the  little  river 
Soar,  which  were  very  pleasant  in  spring  and  summer. 
Twice  during  the  summer  the  whole  of  the  boarders 
were  taken  for  a  long  day's  excursion.  The  first 
time  we  went  to  Kenilworth  Castle,  about  thirty  miles 
distant,  driving  in  coaches  by  pleasant  country  roads, 
and  passing  through  Coventry.  Towards  the  autumn 
we  had  a  much  longer  excursion,  partly  by  coach  and 
partly  by  canal  boat,  to  a  very  picturesque  country 
with  wooded  hills  and  limestone  cliffs,  rural  villages, 
and  an  isolated  hill,  from  the  top  of  which  we  had  a 
very  fine  and  extensive  view.  I  think  it  must  have 
been  in  Derbyshire,  near  Wirksworth,  as  there  is  a 
long  canal  tunnel  on  the  way  there.  One  of  the 
rough  out-of-door  sketches  made  on  this  occasion  is 
reproduced  here  on  a  reduced  scale,  as  well  as  a 
more  finished  drawing  of  some  village,  perhaps  near 
Leicester,  as  they  may  possibly  enable  some  reader 
to  recognize  the  localities,  and  also  serve  to  show  the 
limits  of  my  power  as  an  artist. 

Early  in  the  year  1846  I  received  the  totally 
unexpected  news  of  the  death  of  my  brother  William 
at  Neath.  He  had  been  in  London  to  give  evidence 
before  a  committee  on  the  South  Wales  Railway  Bill, 
and  returning  at  night  caught  a  severe  cold  by  being 
chilled  in  a  wretched  third-class  carriage,  succeeded 
by  a  damp  bed  at  Bristol.  This  brought  on  congestion 
of  the  lungs,  to  which  he  speedily  succumbed.     I  and 

K 


I30  MY   LIFE 

my  brother  John  went  down  to  Neath  to  the  funeral, 
and  as  William  had  died  without  a  will,  we  had  to 
take  out  letters  of  administration.  Finding  from  my 
brother's  papers  that  he  had  obtained  a  small  local 
business,  and  that  there  was  railway  work  in  prospect, 
I  determined  to  take  his  place,  and  at  once  asked 
permission  of  Mr.  Hill  to  be  allowed  to  leave  at 
Easter. 

My  two  years  spent  at  Leicester  had  been  in  many 
ways  useful  to  me,  and  had  also  a  determining  in- 
fluence on  my  whole  future  life.  It  satisfied  me  that 
I  had  no  vocation  for  teaching,  for  though  I  performed 
my  duties  I  believe  quite  to  Mr.  Hill's  satisfaction,  I 
felt  myself  out  of  place,  partly  because  I  knew  no 
subject — with  the  one  exception  of  surveying — 
sufficiently  well  to  be  able  to  teach  it  properly,  but 
mainly  because  a  completely  subordinate  position 
was  distasteful  to  me,  although  I  could  not  have  had 
a  more  considerate  employer  than  Mr.  Hill.  The 
time  and  opportunity  I  had  for  reading  was  a  great 
advantage,  and  gave  me  an  enduring  love  of  good 
literature.  The  events  which  formed  a  turning-point 
in  my  life  were,  first,  my  acquaintance  with  Bates, 
and  through  him  deriving  a  taste  for  the  wonders  of 
insect-life,  opening  to  me  a  new  aspect  of  nature,  and 
later  on  finding  in  him  a  companion  without  whom  I 
might  never  have  ventured  on  my  journey  to  the 
Amazon.  The  other  and  equally  important  circum- 
stance was  my  reading  Malthus,  without  which  work 
I  should  probably  not  have  hit  upon  the  theory  of 
natural  selection  and  obtained  full  credit  for  its 
independent  discovery.  My  two  years  spent  at 
Leicester  must,  therefore,  be  considered  as  perhaps 
the  most  important  in  my  early  life. 

At  Easter  I  bade  farewell  to  Leicester  and  went 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND   NEATH      131 

to  Neath  with  my  brother  John,  in  order  to  wind  up 
our  brother  William's  affairs.  We  found  from  his 
books  that  a  considerable  amount  was  owing  to  him 
for  work  done  during  the  past  year  or  two,  and  we 
duly  made  out  accounts  of  all  these  and  sent  them  in 
to  the  respective  parties.  Some  were  paid  at  once, 
others  we  had  to  write  again  for  and  had  some  trouble 
to  get  paid. 

When  we  had  wound  up  William's  affairs  as  well 
as  we  could,  my  brother  John  returned  to  London, 
and  I  was  left  to  see  if  any  work  was  to  be  had,  and 
in  the  mean  time  devoted  myself  to  collecting  butter- 
flies and  beetles.  While  at  Leicester  I  had  been 
altogether  out  of  the  business  world  and  do  not 
remember  even  looking  at  a  newspaper,  or  I  might 
have  heard  something  of  the  great  railway  mania 
which  that  year  reached  its  culmination.  I  now  first 
heard  rumours  of  it,  and  some  one  told  me  of  a  civil 
engineer  in  Swansea  who  wanted  all  the  surveyors  he 
could  get,  and  that  they  all  had  two  guineas  a  day, 
and  often  more.  This  I  could  hardly  credit,  but  I 
wrote  to  the  gentleman,  who  soon  after  called  on  me 
and  asked  me  if  I  could  do  levelling.  I  told  him  I 
could,  and  had  a  very  good  level  and  levelling  staves. 
After  some  little  conversation  he  told  me  he  wanted 
a  line  of  levels  up  the  Vale  of  Neath  to  Merthyr 
Tydfil  for  a  proposed  railway,  with  cross  levels  at 
frequent  intervals,  and  that  he  would  give  me  two 
guineas  a  day,  and  all  expenses  of  chain  and  staff 
men,  hotels,  etc.  He  gave  me  all  necessary  in- 
structions, and  said  he  would  send  a  surveyor  to  map 
the  route  at  the  same  time.  This  was,  I  think,  about 
midsummer,  and  I  was  hard  at  work  till  the  autumn, 
and  enjoyed  myself  immensely.  It  took  me  up  the 
south-east  side  of  the  valley,  of  which  I  knew  very 


132  MY   LIFE 

little,  along  pleasant  lanes  and  paths  through  woods 
and  by  streams,  and  up  one  of  the  wildest  and  most 
picturesque  little  glens  I  have  ever  explored.  Here 
we  had  to  climb  over  huge  rocks  as  big  as  houses, 
ascend  cascades,  and  take  cross-levels  up  steep  banks 
and  precipices  all  densely  wooded.  It  was  surveying 
under  difficulties,  and  excessively  interesting.  After 
the  first  rough  levels  were  taken  and  the  survey 
made,  the  engineers  were  able  to  mark  out  the  line 
provisionally,  and  I  then  went  over  the  actual  line  to 
enable  the  sections  to  be  drawn  as  required  by  the 
Parliamentary  Standing  Orders. 

In  this  year  of  wild  speculation  it  is  said  that 

plans  and  sections  for  1263  new  railways  were  duly 

deposited,  having  a  proposed  capital  of  ;^ 5 63,000,000, 

and  the  sum  required  to  be  deposited  at  the  Board  of 

Tr  ide  was  so  much  larger  than  the  total  amount  of 

gold  in  the  Bank  of  England  and  notes  in  circulation 

at  the  time,  that  the  public  got  frightened,  a  panic 

ensued,  shares  in  the  new  lines  which  had  been  at  a 

high  premium  fell  almost  to  nothing,  and  even  the 

established  lines  were  greatly  depreciated.     Many  of 

the  lines  were  proposed  merely  for  speculation,  or  to 

be  bought  off  by  opposing  lines  which  had  a  better 

chance  of  success.     The  line  we  were  at  work  on  was 

a  branch  of  the  Great  Western  and  South  Wales 

Railway  then  making,  and  was  for  the  purpose  of 

bringing  the  coal  and  iron  of  Merthyr  Tydfil  and  the 

surrounding  district  to  Swansea,  then  the  chief  port 

of  South  Wales.     But  we  had  a  competitor  along  the 

whole  of  our  route  in  a  great  line  from  Swansea  to 

Yarmouth,  by  way  of  Merthyr,  Hereford,  Worcester, 

and  across  the  midland  agricultural  counties,  called, 

I  think,  the  East  and  West  Junction  Railway,  which 

sounded  grand,  but  which  had  no  chance  of  passing. 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND    NEATH     133 

It  competed,  however,  with  several  other  lines,  and  I 
heard  that  many  of  these  agreed  to  make  up  a  sum 
to  buy  off  its  opposition.  Not  one-tenth  of  the  lines 
proposed  that  year  were  ever  made,  and  the  money 
wasted  upon  surveyors,  engineers,  and  law  expenses 
must  have  amounted  to  millions. 

Finding  it  rather  dull  at  Neath  living  by  myself,  I 
persuaded  my  brother  to  give  up  his  work  in  London 
as  a  journeyman  carpenter  and  join  me,  thinking  that 
with  his  practical  experience  and  my  general  know- 
ledge, we  might  be  able  to  do  architectural,  building, 
and  engineering  work,  as  well  as  surveying,  and  in 
time  get  up  a  profitable  business.  We  returned 
together  early  in  January,  and  continued  to  board 
and  lodge  with  Mr.  Sims  in  the  main  street,  where 
I  had  been  very  comfortable,  till  the  autumn,  when, 
hearing  that  my  sister  would  probably  be  home  from 
America  the  following  summer,  and  my  mother 
wishing  to  live  with  us,  we  took  a  small  cottage  close 
to  Llantwit  Church,  and  less  than  a  mile  from  the 
middle  of  the  town.  It  had  a  nice  little  garden  and 
yard,  with  fowl-house,  shed,  etc.,  going  down  to  the 
Neath  Canal,  immediately  beyond  which  was  the 
river  Neath,  with  a  pretty  view  across  the  valley  to 
Cadoxton  and  the  fine  Drumau  mountain. 

Having  the  canal  close  at  hand  and  the  river 
beyond,  and  then  another  canal  to  Swansea,  made  us 
long  for  a  small  boat,  and  not  having  much  to  do,  my 
brother  determined  to  build  one,  so  light  that  it  could 
be  easily  drawn  or  carried  from  the  canal  to  the  river, 
and  so  give  access  to  Swansea.  It  was  made  as  small 
and  light  as  possible  to  carry  two  or,  at  most,  three 
persons.  When  finished,  we  tried  it  with  much 
anxiety,  and  found  it  rather  unstable,  but  with  a 
little  ballast  at  the  bottom  and  care  in  moving,  it  did 


134  MY   LIFE 

very  well,  and  was  very  easy  to  row.  One  day  I 
persuaded  my  mother  to  let  me  row  her  to  Swansea, 
where  we  made  a  few  purchases  ;  and  then  came  back 
quite  safely  till  within  about  a  mile  of  home,  when, 
passing  under  a  bridge,  my  mother  put  her  hand  out 
to  keep  the  boat  from  touching,  and  leaning  over  a 
little  too  much,  the  side  went  under  water,  and  upset 
us  both.  As  the  water  was  only  about  two  or  three  feet 
deep  we  escaped  with  a  thorough  wetting.  The  boat 
was  soon^baled  dry,  and  then  I  rowed  on  to  Neath 
Bridge,  where  my  mother  got  out  and  walked  home, 
and  did  not  trust  herself  in  our  boat  again,  though  I 
and  my  brother  had  many  pleasant  excursions. 

My  chief  work  in  1846  had  been  the  survey  of  the 
parish  of  Llantwit-juxta-Neath.  The  agent  of  the 
GnoU  Estate  had  undertaken  the  valuation  for 
the  tithe  commutation,  and  arranged  with  me  to  do 
the  survey  and  make  the  map  and  the  necessary 
copies.  When  all  was  finished  and  the  valuation 
made,  I  was  told  that  I  must  collect  the  payment 
from  the  various  farmers  in  the  parish,  who  would 
afterwards  deduct  it  from  their  rent.  This  was 
a  disagreeable  business,  as  many  of  the  farmers 
were  very  poor  ;  some  could  not  speak  English,  and 
could  not  be  made  to  understand  what  it  was  all 
about ;  others  positively  refused  to  pay ;  and  the 
separate  amounts  were  often  so  small  that  it  was  not 
worth  going  to  law  about  them,  so  that  several  were 
never  paid  at  all,  and  others  not  for  a  year  afterwards. 
This  was  one  of  the  things  that  disgusted  me  with 
business,  and  made  me  more  than  ever  disposed  to 
give  it  all  up  if  I  could  get  anything  else  to  do. 

My  brother  John  and  I  also  obtained  a  little 
building  and  architectural  work,  and  amongst  other 
structures  we  designed  and  supervised  the  erection  of 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND   NEATH     135 

the  Mechanics'  Institute  at  Neath.  It  was  before  the 
members  of  this  institute  that  I  made  my  first  essay 
as  a  lecturer,  having  been  persuaded  to  give  a  series 
of  lectures  on  physics  during  two  winters.  I  also 
gave  a  lecture  describing  a  short  visit  I  had  made  to 
Paris.i 

During  the  two  summers  that  I  and  my  brother 
John  lived  at  Neath  we  spent  a  good  deal  of  our 
leisure  time  in  wandering  about  this  beautiful  district, 
on  my  part  in  search  of  insects,  while  my  brother 
always  had  his  eyes  open  for  any  uncommon  bird  or 
reptile. 

Though  I  have  by  no  means  a  very  wide  ac- 
quaintance with  the  mountain  districts  of  Britain,  yet 
I  know  Wales  pretty  well  ;  have  visited  the  best  parts 
of  the  lake  district  ;  in  Scotland  have  been  to  Loch 
Lomond,  Loch  Katrine,  and  Loch  Tay  ;  have  climbed 
Ben  Lawers,  and  roamed  through  Glen  Clova  in  search 
for  rare  plants ; — but  I  cannot  call  to  mind  a  single 
valley  that  in  the  same  extent  of  country  comprises  so 
much  beautiful  and  picturesque  scenery,  and  so  many 
interesting  special  features,  as  the  Vale  of  Neath. 
The  town  itself  is  beautifully  situated,  with  the  fine 
wooded  and  rock-girt  Drumau  Mountain  to  the  west, 
while  immediately  to  the  east  are  well-wooded  heights 
crowned  by  Gnoll  House,  and  to  the  south-east,  three 
miles  away,  a  high  rounded  hill,  up  which  a  chimney 
has  been  carried  from  the  Cwm  Avon  copperworks  in 

'  In  1895  ^  received  a  letter  from  Cardiff,  from  one  of  the  workmen 
who  attended  the  Neath  Mechanics'  Institution,  asking  if  the  author  of 
"  Island  Life,"  the  "  Malay  Archipelago,"  and  other  books  is  the  same 
Mr.  Alfred  Wallace  who  taught  in  the  evening  science  classes  to  the 
Neath  Abbey  artificers.  He  writes — "I  have  often  had  a  desire  to 
know,  as  I  benefited  more  while  in  your  class — if  you  are  the  same 
Mr,  A.  Wallace — than  I  ever  was  taught  at  school.  I  have  often 
wished  I  knew  how  to  thank  you  for  the  good  I  and  others  received 
from  your  teaching. — (Signed)  Matthew  Jones." 


136  MY   LIFE 

the  valley  beyond,  the  smoke  from  which  gives  the 
hill  much  the  appearance  of  an  active  volcano.  To 
the  south-west  the  view  extends  down  the  valley  to 
Swansea  Bay,  while  to  the  north-east  stretches  the 
Vale  of  Neath  itself,  nearly  straight  for  twelve  miles, 
the  river  winding  in  a  level  fertile  valley  about  a 
quarter  to  half  a  mile  wide,  bounded  on  each  side  by 
abrupt  hills,  whose  lower  slopes  are  finely  wooded, 
and  backed  by  mountains  from  fifteen  hundred  to 
eighteen  hundred  feet  high.  The  view  up  this  valley 
is  delightful,  its  sides  being  varied  with  a  few  houses 
peeping  out  from  the  woods,  abundance  of  lateral 
valleys  and  ravines,  with  here  and  there  the  glint  of 
falling  water,  while  its  generally  straight  direction 
affords  fine  perspective  effects,  sometimes  fading  in 
the  distance  into  a  warm  yellow  haze,  at  others 
affording  a  view  of  the  distant  mountain  ranges 
beyond. 

At  twelve  miles  from  the  town  we  come  to  the 
little  village  of  Pont-nedd-fychan  (the  bridge  of  the 
little  Neath  river),  where  we  enter  upon  a  quite 
distinct  type  of  scenery,  dependent  on  our  passing 
out  of  the  South  Wales  coal  basin,  crossing  the  hard 
rock-belt  of  the  millstone  grit,  succeeded  by  the 
picturesque  crags  of  the  mountain  limestone,  and 
then  entering  on  the  extensive  formation  of  the  Old 
Red  Sandstone. 

Within  a  mile  of  Pont-nedd-fychan  is  the  Dinas 
rock,  a  tongue  of  mountain  limestone  jutting  out 
across  the  millstone  grit,  and  forming  fine  precipices, 
one  of  which  was  called  the  Bwa-maen  or  bow  rock, 
from  its  being  apparently  bent  double.  Lower  down 
there  are  also  some  curious  waving  lines  of  apparent 
stratification,  but  on  a  recent  examination  I  am 
inclined    to    think    that     these    are    really    glacial 


lORTH-YR-OGuF,    VALE   OF    NEATH. 


\Tofacef.  137. 


LIFE  AT   LEICESTER   AND   NEATH     137 

groovings  caused  by  the  ice  coming  down  from 
Hirwain,  right  against  these  ravines  and  precipices, 
and  being  thus  heaped  up  and  obliged  to  flow  away 
at  right  angles  to  its  former  course. 

But  the  most  remarkable  and  interesting  of  the 
natural  phenomena  of  the  upper  valley  is  Porth-yr- 
Ogof  (the  gateway  of  the  cavern),  where  the  river 
Mellte  runs  for  a  quarter  of  a  mile  underground. 
The  entrance  is  under  a  fine  arch  of  limestone  rock 
overhung  with  trees,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying 
photograph.  The  outlet  is  more  irregular  and  less 
lofty,  and  is  also  less  easily  accessible  ;  but  the  valley 
just  below  has  wooded  banks,  open  glades,  and  fan- 
tastic rocks  near  the  cave,  forming  one  of  the  most 
charmingly  picturesque  spots  imaginable. 

I  have  already  described  one  of  the  curious 
"  standing  stones  "  near  the  source  of  the  Llia  river, 
but  there  is  a  still  more  interesting  example  about  a 
mile  and  a  half  north-west  of  Ystrad-fellte,  where  the 
old  Roman  road — the  Sarn  Helen — crosses  over  the 
ridge  between  the  Nedd  and  the  Llia  valleys.  This 
is  a  tall,  narrow  stone,  roughly  quadrilateral,  on  one 
of  the  faces  of  which  there  is  a  rudely  inscribed  Latin 
inscription,  as  seen  in  the  photograph,  and  in  a  copy 
of  the  letters  given.     It  reads  as  follows  : — 

DERVACI  FILIUS  JUSTI   IC  lACIT 

meaning  "  [The  body]  of  Dervacus  the  son  of  Justus 
lies  here."  It  will  be  seen  that  the  letters  D,  A,  and  I 
in  Dervaci,  and  the  T  and  I  in  Justi  are  inverted  or 
reversed,  probably  indicating  that  the  cutting  was 
done  by  an  illiterate  workman,  who  placed  them  as 
most  convenient  when  working  on  an  erect  stone. 
The  stone  itself  is  probably  British,  and  was  utilized 


138  MY   LIFE 

as  a  memorial  of  a  Roman  soldier  who  died  near  the 
place. 

One  of  our  most  memorable  excursions  was  in 
June,  1846,  when  I  and  my  brother  spent  the  night 
in  the  water-cave.  I  wanted  to  go  again  to  the  top 
of  the  Beacons  to  see  if  I  could  find  any  rare  beetles 
there,  and  also  to  show  my  brother  the  waterfalls  and 
other  beauties  of  the  upper  valley.  Starting  after  an 
early  breakfast  we  walked  to  Pont-nedd-fychan,  and 
then  turned  up  the  western  branch  to  the  Rocking 
Stone,  a  large  boulder  of  millstone-grit  resting  on  a 
nearly  level  surface,  but  which  by  a  succession  of 
pushes  with  one  hand  can  be  made  to  rock  consider- 
ably. It  was  here  I  obtained  one  of  the  most  beauti- 
ful British  beetles,  Trichms  fasciatus,  the  only  time  I 
ever  captured  it.  We  then  went  on  to  the  Gladys  and 
Einon  Gam  falls  ;  then,  turning  back,  followed  up  the 
river  Nedd  for  some  miles,  crossed  over  to  the  cavern, 
and  then  on  to  Ystrad-fellte,  where  we  had  supper 
and  spent  the  night,  having  walked  leisurely  about 
eighteen  or  twenty  miles. 

The  next  morning  early  we  proceeded  up  the 
valley  to  the  highest  farm  on  the  Dringarth,  then 
struck  across  the  mountain  to  the  road  from  Hirwain 
to  Brecon,  which  we  followed  to  the  bridge  over  the 
Taff,  and  then  turned  off  towards  the  Beacons,  the 
weather  being  perfect.  It  was  a  delightful  walk,  on 
a  gradual  slope  of  fifteen  hundred  feet  in  a  mile  and 
a  half,  with  a  little  steeper  bit  at  the  end,  and  the 
small  overhanging  cap  of  peat  at  the  summit,  as 
already  described.  I  searched  over  it  for  beetles, 
which  were,  however,  v^ry  scarce,  and  we  then  walked 
a  little  way  down  the  southern  slope  to  where  a  tiny 
spring  trickles  out — the  highest  source  of  the  river 
Taff — and   there,   lying   on   the   soft   mountain  turf, 


5^ 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER   AND   NEATH     139 

enjoyed  our  lunch  and  the  distant  view  over  valley 
and  mountain  to  the  faint  haze  of  the  Bristol 
Channel. 

We  took  nearly  the  same  route  back,  had  a 
substantial  tea  at  the  little  inn  at  Ystrad-fellte,  and 
then,  about  seven  o'clock,  walked  down  to  the  cave 
to  prepare  our  quarters  for  the  night.  I  think  we  had 
both  of  us  at  this  time  determined,  if  possible,  to  go 
abroad  into  more  or  less  wild  countries,  and  we 
wanted  for  once  to  try  sleeping  out-of-doors,  with  no 
shelter  or  bed  but  what  nature  provided. 

Just  inside  the  entrance  of  the  cave  there  are 
slopes  of  water-worn  rock  and  quantities  of  large 
pebbles  and  boulders,  and  here  it  was  quite  dry,  while 
farther  in,  where  there  were  patches  of  smaller  stones 
and  sand,  it  was  much  colder  and  quite  damp,  so  our 
choice  of  a  bed  was  limited  to  rock  or  boulders.  We  first 
chose  a  place  for  a  fire,  and  then  searched  for  sufficient 
dead  or  dry  wood  to  last  us  the  night.  This  took  us 
a  good  while,  and  it  was  getting  dusk  before  we  lit 
our  fire.  We  then  sat  down,  enjoying  the  flicker  of 
the  flame  on  the  roof  of  the  cavern,  the  glimmer  of 
the  stars  through  the  trees  outside,  and  the  gentle 
murmur  of  the  little  river  beside  us.  After  a  scanty 
supper  we  tried  to  find  a  place  where  we  could  sleep 
with  the  minimum  of  discomfort,  but  with  very  little 
success.  I  found  it  almost  impossible  to  lie  still  for 
half  an  hour  without  seeking  a  more  comfortable 
position,  but  the  change  brought  little  relief.  I  think 
we  had  determined  purposely  to  make  no  preparation, 
but  to  camp  out  just  as  if  we  had  come  accidentally 
to  the  place  in  an  unknown  country,  and  had  been 
compelled  to  sleep  there.  But  very  little  sleep  was 
to  be  had,  and  while  in  health  I  have  never  passed  a 
more  uncomfortable  night.    Luckily  it  was  not  a  long 


I40  MY    LIFE 

one,  and  before  sunrise  we  left  our  gloomy  bedroom, 
walked  up  to  the  main  road  to  get  into  the  sunshine, 
descended  into  the  Nedd  valley  and  strolled  along, 
enjoying  the  fresh  morning  air  and  warm  sun  till  we 
neared  Pont-nedd-fychan,  when,  finding  a  suitable 
pool,  we  took  a  delightful  and  refreshing  bath,  dried 
our  bodies  in  the  sun,  and  then  walked  on  to  the 
little  inn,  where  we  enjoyed  our  ample  dish  of  eggs 
and  bacon,  with  tea,  and  brown  bread-and-butter. 

There  is  one  subject  on  which  I  obtained  con- 
clusive evidence  while  living  at  Neath,  which  may 
here  be  briefly  noticed.  I  have  already  described 
how  at  Leicester  I  became  convinced  of  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  and  was  able 
thoroughly  to  test  them  myself.  I  also  was  able 
to  make  experiments  which  satisfied  me  of  the  truth 
of  phrenology,  and  had  read  sufficient  to  enable  me 
to  understand  its  general  principles.  But  during  my 
early  residence  at  Neath  after  my  brother's  death,  I 
heard  two  lectures  on  the  subject,  and  in  both  cases 
I  had  my  character  delineated  with  such  accuracy  as 
to  render  it  certain  that  the  positions  of  all  the  mental 
organs  had  been  very  precisely  determined.  It  must 
be  understood  that  the  lecturers  were  both  strangers, 
and  that  they  each  gave  only  a  single  lecture  on  their 
way  to  more  important  centres. 

I  will  give  the  more  detailed  of  the  two  delinea- 
tions. It  is  as  follows,  only  omitting  a  few  words  at 
the  end  which  are  of  a  purely  personal  nature  : — 

"  (a)  There  is  some  delicacy  in  the  nervous  system, 
and  consequent  sensitiveness  which  unfits  it  for  any 
very  long-continued  exertion  ;  but  this  may  be  over- 
come by  a  strong  will.  There  is  some  tendency  to 
indigestion  ;  this  requires  air  and  exercise. 

"  (d)  The   power  of  fixing  the  attention   is  very 


LIFE   AT   LEICESTER    AND   NEATH     141 

good  indeed,  and  there  is  very  considerable  perceptive 
power,  so  that  this  gentleman  should  learn  easily  and 
remember  well,  notwithstanding  verbal  memory  is 
but  moderate.  Concentrativeness  is  the  chief  organ 
upon  which  all  the  memories  depend,  and  this  is 
undoubtedly  large. 

"  {c)  He  has  some  vanity,  and  more  ambition. 
He  may  occasionally  exhibit  a  want  of  self-confidence  ; 
but  general  opinion  ascribes  to  him  too  much.  In 
this,  opinion  is  wrong  :  he  knows  that  he  has  not 
enough  ;  he  may  assume  it,  but  it  will  sit  ill. 

"  {d)  If  Wit  were  larger  he  would  be  a  good  Mathe- 
matician ;  but  without  it,  however  clear  and  analytical 
the  mind  may  be,  it  wants  breadth  and  depth,  and  so 
I  do  not  put  down  his  mathematical  talents  as  first- 
rate,  although  Number  is  good.  The  same  must  be 
said  of  his  classical  abilities — good,  but  not  first- 
rate. 

"  {e)  He  has  some  love  for  music  from  his  Ideality, 
but  I  do  not  find  a  good  ear,  or  sufficient  time ;  he 
has,  however,  mechanical  ability  sufficient  to  produce 
enough  of  both,  especially  for  the  flute,  if  he  so 
choose. 

"  (/)  As  an  artist,  he  would  excel  if  his  vision 
were  perfect :  he  has  every  necessary  faculty,  even  to 
Imitation. 

"  {g)  He  is  fond  of  argument,  and  not  easily  con- 
vinced ;  he  would  exhibit  physical  courage  if  called 
upon  ;  and  although  he  loves  money — as  who  does 
not .? — so  far  from  there  being  any  evidence  of  greedi- 
ness, he  is  benevolent  and  liberal,  but  probably  not 
extravagant.  This  part  of  his  disposition  is,  however, 
so  evenly  balanced  that  there  is  not  likely  to  be 
much  peculiarity. 

"  {h)   His     domestic     affections     are     his     best. 


142  MY   LIFE 

Conscientiousness  ought  to  be  one  more,  but  I  do  not 
see  what  will  try  it. 

"J.  Q.  RUMBALL." 

This  delineation,  and  the  other,  which  though  not 
so  complete  agreed  with  it  in  nearly  every  particular, 
seem  to  me  wonderfully  accurate.  That  these  two 
expositions  of  my  character,  the  result  of  a  very  rapid 
examination  of  the  form  of  my  head  by  two  perfect 
strangers,  are  so  exact  in  many  distinct  points, 
demonstrates,  I  think,  a  large  amount  of  truth — both 
in  principle  and  in  the  details — of  the  method  by 
which  they  were  arrived  at. 


A.    R.    WALLACE.         AGED    24. 

(From  a  Daguerreotype.) 


[To/acep.  143. 


CHAPTER  X 

FOUR  YEARS  IN  THE  AMAZON  VALLEY 

During  my  residence  at  Neath  I  kept  up  some 
correspondence  with  H.  W.  Bates,  chiefly  on  insect 
collecting.  We  exchanged  specimens,  and,  I  think 
in  the  summer  of  1847,  he  came  on  a  week's  visit, 
which  we  spent  chiefly  in  beetle-collecting  and  in  dis- 
cussing various  matters,  and  it  must  have  been  at 
this  time  that  we  talked  over  a  proposed  collecting 
journey  to  the  tropics,  but  had  not  then  decided  where 
to  go.  Mr.  Bates'  widow  having  kindly  returned  to 
me  such  of  my  letters  as  he  had  preserved,  I  find  in 
them  some  references  to  the  subjects  in  which  I  was 
then  interested.  I  will,  therefore,  here  give  a  few 
extracts  from  them. 

I  had  recently  read  "Vestiges  of  the  Natural 
History  of  Creation,"  and  was  much  impressed  by  it, 
and  I  gave  my  views  concerning  it  in  several  of  my 
letters  to  Bates.  In  one  letter  I  wrote,  "  It  furnishes 
a  subject  for  every  observer  of  nature  to  attend  to ; 
every  fact  he  observes  will  make  either  for  or  against 
it,  and  it  thus  serves  both  as  an  incitement  to  the 
collection  of  facts,  and  an  object  to  which  they  can 
be  applied  when  collected.  Many  eminent  writers 
support  the  theory  of  the  progressive  development  of 
animals  and  plants." 

And  in  another  letter  : — "  I  was  much  pleased  to 


144  MY   LIFE 

find  that  you  so  well  appreciated  Lyell.  I  first  read 
Darwin's  '  Journal '  three  or  four  years  ago,  and  have 
lately  re-read  it.  As  the  Journal  of  a  scientific 
traveller,  it  is  second  only  to  Humboldt's  '  Personal 
Narrative ' — as  a  work  of  general  interest,  perhaps 
superior  to  it."  My  reference  to  Darwin's  "Journal  " 
and  to  Humboldt's  "  Personal  Narrative  "  indicate,  I 
believe,  the  two  works  to  whose  inspiration  I  owe  my 
determination  to  visit  the  tropics  as  a  collector. 

In  the  last  letter  to  Bates  before  our  South 
American  voyage  I  wrote : — "  I  begin  to  feel  rather 
dissatisfied  with  a  mere  local  collection,  little  is  to  be 
learned  by  it.  I  should  like  to  take  some  one  family 
to  study  thoroughly,  principally  with  a  view  to  the 
theory  of  the  origin  of  species.  By  that  means  I  am 
strongly  of  opinion  that  some  definite  results  might 
be  arrived  at."  And  at  the  very  end  of  the  letter  I 
say  : — "  There  is  a  work  published  by  the  Ray  Society 
I  should  much  like  to  see,  Oken's  '  Elements  of 
Physiophilosophy.'  There  is  a  review  of  it  in  the 
AthencBum.  It  contains  some  remarkable  views  on 
my  favourite  subject — the  variations,  arrangements, 
distribution,  etc.,  of  species." 

These  extracts  from  my  early  letters  to  Bates 
suffice  to  show  that  the  great  problem  of  the  origin 
of  species  was  already  distinctly  formulated  in  my 
mind  ;  that  I  was  not  satisfied  with  the  more  or  less 
vague  solutions  at  that  time  offered  ;  that  I  believed 
the  conception  of  evolution  through  natural  law  so 
clearly  formulated  in  the  "  Vestiges  "  to  be,  so  far  as 
it  went,  a  true  one ;  and  that  I  firmly  believed  that  a 
full  and  careful  study  of  the  facts  of  nature  would 
ultimately  lead  to  a  solution  of  the  mystery. 

What  decided  our  going  to  Para  and  the  Amazon 
rather  than  to  any  other  part  of  the  tropics  was  the 


IN   THE   AMAZON   VALLEY  145 

publication  in  1847  of  "A  Voyage  up  the  Amazon," 
by  Mr.  W.  H.  Edwards.  This  little  book  was  so 
clearly  and  brightly  written,  described  so  well  the 
beauty  and  the  grandeur  of  tropical  vegetation,  and 
gave  such  a  pleasing  account  of  the  people,  while 
showing  that  expenses  of  living  and  of  travelling  were 
both  very  moderate,  that  Bates  and  myself  at  once 
agreed  that  this  was  the  very  place  for  us  to  go  to  if 
there  was  any  chance  of  paying  our  expenses  by  the 
sale  of  our  duplicate  collections.  We  immediately 
communicated  with  Mr.  Edward  Doubleday,  who  had 
charge  of  the  butterflies  at  the  British  Museum,  for 
his  advice  upon  the  matter.  He  assured  us  that  the 
whole  of  Northern  Brazil  was  very  little  known,  and 
that  there  was  no  doubt  we  could  easily  pay  our 
expenses.  Thus  encouraged,  we  determined  to  go 
to  Para,  and  began  to  make  all  the  necessary 
arrangements. 

After  spending  some  time  in  London  studying 
the  insects  in  the  British  Museum,  purchasing  collect- 
ing apparatus  and  outfit,  we  set  sail  from  Liverpool 
on  April  20,  1848. 

At  this  time  there  were  very  few  steamships,  and 
most  of  the  ocean  trade  was  still  carried  on  in  sailing 
vessels.  Ours  was  one  of  the  smallest,  being  a 
barque  of  192  tons  named  the  Mischief,  and  said 
to  be  a  very  fast  sailer.  Bates  and  I  were  the  only 
passengers. 

We  encountered  violent  storms  in  the  Bay  of 
Biscay,  the  waves  flooded  our  decks,  washed  away 
part  of  our  bulwarks,  and  very  nearly  swamped  us 
altogether.  All  this  time  I  was  in  my  berth  prostrate 
with  sea-sickness.  After  the  first  six  days  the  weather 
became  fine,  and  the  remainder  of  the  voyage  was  very 
enjoyable. 


146  MY    LIFE 

We  landed  at  Para  on  May  19,  twenty-nine  days 
after  leaving  Liverpool. 

From  this  date  till  I  landed  at  Deal  in  October, 
1852,  my  adventures  are  narrated  in  my  book 
"  Travels  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro,"  and  I 
will  here,  therefore,  only  give  a  very  brief  outline  of 
my  wanderings. 

For  the  first  four  months  Bates  and  I  lived  and 
collected  together  in  and  around  Para,  but  on  our 
return  from  an  expedition  which  we  had  made  up  the 
Tocantins  river,  we  agreed  that  it  would  be  better  for 
many  reasons  to  travel  and  collect  independently  ; 
one  reason  being  that  the  country  was  so  vast  and  so 
rich  in  birds  and  insects  that  much  better  results 
would  be  obtained  if  we  each  explored  separate 
districts.  We  therefore  separated,  but  we  again  met 
at  Santarem  and  at  the  Barra.  Afterwards  Bates 
devoted  himself  to  the  Upper  Amazon,  while  I 
ascended  the  Rio  Negro  and  the  unknown  Uaupes. 

After  spending  about  nine  months  collecting  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Para,  I  went  on  an  expedition 
up  the  river  Guama,  on  my  return  from  which  in  July, 
1849,  my  younger  brother,  Herbert,  joined  me  with 
the  idea  of  becoming  a  collector.  We  spent  a  month 
together  in  Para,  and  then  went  to  Santarem,  where 
we  intended  to  stay  for  some  time.  Dr.  Richard 
Spruce,  the  now  well-known  traveller  and  botanist, 
had  come  out  in  the  same  ship  with  my  brother,  and 
we  much  enjoyed  his  society  during  the  short  time  he 
stayed  with  us  here. 

After  spending  three  months  at  Santarem  we 
went  to  the  city  of  Barra  at  the  mouth  of  the  Rio 
Negro,  but  here  we  found  the  scarcity  of  insects  and 
birds  a  great  contrast  to  the  abundance  at  Para, 
and  after  exploring  the  neighbouring  country  in  all 


IN   THE   AMAZON   VALLEY  147 

directions  with  poor  results  I  determined  to  make  a 
long  expedition  to  the  Upper  Rio  Negro,  whilst  my 
brother,  who  had  finally  decided  to  give  up  collecting, 
which  had  little  interest  for  him,  was  to  remain  a 
few  months  at  Barra,  and  then  return  to  Para  and 
England. 

When  he  arrived  at  Para,  and  while  waiting  for 
his  ship  to  sail,  he  was  seized  with  yellow  fever,  and 
died  in  a  few  days. 

The  remainder  of  my  South  American  travels 
consisted  of  two  voyages  up  the  Rio  Negro.  On  the 
first  I  went  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Brazil,  and 
crossed  by  a  road  in  the  forest  to  one  of  the  tribu- 
taries of  the  Orinoco.  Returning  thence  I  visited  a 
village  up  a  small  branch  of  the  Rio  Negro,  where 
there  is  an  isolated  rocky  mountain,  the  haunt  of  the 
beautiful  Cock  of  the  Rock  ;  afterwards  going  up  the 
Uaupes  as  far  as  the  second  cataract  at  Juaurite.  I 
then  returned  with  my  collections  to  Barra,  having 
determined  to  go  much  farther  up  the  Uaupes  in 
order  to  obtain,  if  possible,  the  white  umbrella  bird 
which  I  had  been  positively  assured  was  found  there ; 
and  also  in  the  hopes  of  finding  some  new  and  better 
collecting  ground  near  the  Andes.  These  journeys 
were  made,  but  the  second  was  cut  short  by  delays 
and  the  wet  season.  My  health  also  had  suffered  so 
much  by  a  succession  of  fevers  and  dysentery  that  I 
did  not  consider  it  prudent  to  stay  longer  in  the 
country. 

Although  during  the  last  two  journeys  in  the  Rio 
Negro  and  Orinoco  districts  I  had  made  rather  large 
miscellaneous  collections,  and  especially  of  articles  of 
native  workmanship,  I  never  found  any  locality  at  all 
comparable  with  Para  as  a  collecting  ground.  The 
numerous  places  I  visited  along  more  than  a  thousand 


148  MY   LIFE 

miles  of  river,  all  alike  had  that  poverty  of  insect  and 
bird-life  which  characterized  Barra  itself,  a  poverty 
which  is  not  altogether  explicable.  The  enormous 
difficulties  and  delays  of  travel  made  it  impossible  to 
be  at  the  right  place  at  the  right  season  ;  while  the 
excessive  wetness  of  the  climate  rendered  the  loss  of 
the  only  month  or  two  of  fine  weather  irreparable  for 
the  whole  year.  The  comparative  scantiness  of  native 
population  at  all  the  towns  of  the  Rio  Negro,  the  small 
amount  of  cultivation,  the  scarcity  of  roads  through 
the  forest,  and  the  want  of  any  guide  from  the 
experience  of  previous  collectors,  combined  to  render 
my  numerous  journeys  in  this  almost  totally  unknown 
region  comparatively  unproductive  in  birds  and  in- 
sects. As  it  happened  (owing  to  Custom  House 
formalities  at  Barra),  the  whole  of  my  collections 
during  the  last  two  voyages  were  with  me  on  the  ship 
that  was  burnt,  and  were  thus  totally  lost. 

One  letter  I  wrote  from  Guia  on  the  Upper  Rio 
Negro,  three  months  after  my  arrival  there,  has 
been  preserved,  and  from  it  I  extract  the  following 
passage : — 

"  I  have  been  spending  a  month  with  some  Indians 
three  days'  journey  up  a  narrow  stream  (called  the 
Cobati  River).  From  there  we  went  half  a  day's 
journey  through  the  forest  to  a  rocky  mountain  where 
the  celebrated  '  Gallos  de  Serra '  (Cocks  of  the  Rock) 
breed.  But  we  were  very  unfortunate,  for  though 
I  had  with  me  ten  hunters  and  we  remained  nine 
days  at  the  Serra,  suffering  many  inconveniences 
(having  only  taken  farinha  and  salt  with  us),  I  only 
got  a  dozen  gallos,  whereas  I  had  expected  in  less 
time  to  have  secured  fifty.  Insects  there  were  none 
at  all ;  and  other  good  birds  excessively  rare. 


IN   THE   AMAZON   VALLEY  149 

"  My  canoe  is  now  getting  ready  for  a  further 
journey  up  to  near  the  sources  of  the  Rio  Negro  in 
Venezuela,  where  I  have  reason  to  believe  I  shall 
find  insects  more  plentiful,  and  at  least  as  many  birds 
as  here.  On  my  return  from  there  I  shall  take  a 
voyage  up  the  great  River  Uaupes,  and  another  up 
the  Isanna,  not  so  much  for  my  collections,  which  I 
do  not  expect  to  be  very  profitable  there,  but  because 
I  am  so  much  interested  in  the  country  and  the 
people  that  I  am  determined  to  see  and  know  more 
of  it  and  them  than  any  other  European  traveller. 
If  I  do  not  get  profit,  I  hope  at  least  to  get  some 
credit  as  an  industrious  and  persevering  traveller." 

Looking  back  over  my  four  years'  wanderings  in 
the  Amazon  valley,  there  seem  to  me  to  be  three 
great  features  which  especially  impressed  me,  and 
which  fully  equalled  or  even  surpassed  my  expecta- 
tions of  them.  The  first  was  the  virgin  forest,  every- 
where grand,  often  beautiful  and  even  sublime.  Its 
wonderful  variety  with  a  more  general  uniformity  never 
palled.  Standing  under  one  of  its  great  buttressed 
trees — itself  a  marvel  of  nature — and  looking  care- 
fully around,  noting  the  various  columnar  trunks 
rising  like  lofty  pillars,  one  soon  perceives  that  hardly 
two  of  these  are  alike.  The  shape  of  the  trunks, 
their  colour  and  texture,  the  nature  of  their  bark, 
their  mode  of  branching  and  the  character  of  the 
foliage  far  overhead,  or  of  the  fruits  or  flowers  lying 
on  the  ground,  have  an  individuality  which  shows  that 
they  are  all  distinct  species  differing  from  one  another 
as  our  oak,  elm,  beech,  ash,  lime,  and  sycamore  differ. 
This  extraordinary  variety  of  the  species  is  a  general 
though  not  universal  characteristic  of  tropical  forests, 
but  seems  to  be  nowhere  so  marked  a  feature  as  in 
the  great  forest  regions  which  encircle  the  globe  for 


ISO  MY   LIFE 

a  few  degrees  on  each  side  of  the  equator.  An 
equatorial  forest  is  a  kind  of  natural  arboretum,  where 
specimens  of  an  immense  number  of  species  are 
brought  together  by  nature.  The  western  half  of  the 
island  of  Java  affords  an  example  of  such  a  forest- 
region  which  has  been  well  explored,  botanically  ; 
and  although  almost  all  the  fertile  plains  have  been 
cleared  for  cultivation,  and  the  forests  cover  only  a 
small  proportion  of  the  country,  the  number  of  distinct 
species  of  forest-trees  is  said  to  be  over  fifteen 
hundred. 

The  second  feature,  that  I  can  never  think  of 
without  delight,  is  the  wonderful  variety  and  exquisite 
beauty  of  the  butterflies  and  birds,  a  variety  and 
charm  which  grow  upon  one  month  after  month  and 
year  after  year,  as  ever  new  and  beautiful,  strange 
and  even  mysterious,  forms  are  continually  met  with. 
Even  now  I  can  hardly  recall  them  without  a  thrill 
of  admiration  and  wonder. 

The  third  and  most  unexpected  sensation  of 
surprise  and  delight  was  my  first  meeting  and  living 
with  man  in  a  state  of  nature — with  absolute  uncon- 
taminated  savages !  This  was  on  the  Uaup6s  River, 
and  the  surprise  of  it  was  that  I  did  not  in  the  least 
expect  to  be  so  surprised.  I  had  already  been  two 
years  in  the  country,  always  among  Indians  of  many 
tribes  ;  but  these  were  all  what  are  called  tame 
Indians,  they  wore  at  least  trousers  and  shirt ;  they 
had  been  (nominally)  converted  to  Christianity,  and 
were  under  the  government  of  the  nearest  authorities  ; 
and  all  of  them  spoke  either  Portuguese  or  the 
common  language,  called  "  Lingoa-Geral." 

But  these  true  wild  Indians  of  the  Uaupes  were 
at  once  seen  to  be  something  totally  different.  They 
had  nothing  that  we  call  clothes ;  they  had  peculiar 


IN   THE   AMAZON   VALLEY  151 

ornaments,  tribal  marks,  etc. ;  they  all  carried  weapons 
or  tools  of  their  own  manufacture  ;  they  were  living, 
for  the  most  part,  in  large  houses,  many  families 
together,,  quite  unlike  the  huts  of  the  tame  Indians  ; 
but,  more  than  all,  their  whole  aspect  and  manner 
were  different — they  were  all  going  about  their  own 
work  or  pleasure  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  white 
men  or  their  ways  ;  they  walked  with  the  free  step  of 
the  independent  forest-dweller,  and,  except  the  few 
that  were  known  to  my  companion,  paid  no  attention 
whatever  to  us,  mere  strangers  of  an  alien  race.  In 
every  detail  they  were  original  and  self-sustaining  as 
are  the  wild  animals  of  the  forests,  absolutely  in- 
dependent of  civilization,  and  who  could  and  did  live 
their  own  lives  in  their  own  way,  as  they  had  done 
for  countless  generations  before  America  was  dis- 
covered. I  could  not  have  believed  that  there  would 
be  so  much  difference  in  the  aspect  of  the  same 
people  in  their  native  state  and  when  living  under 
European  supervision.  The  true  denizen  of  the 
Amazonian  forests,  like  the  forest  itself,  is  unique 
and  not  to  be  forgotten. 

My  voyage  home  was  rather  adventurous.  I  will 
therefore  print  here  a  letter  written  to  Dr.  Spruce, 
which  has  not  before  been  made  public,  and  which 
describes  it. 

"  Brig  Jordesoti,  N.  Lat.  49°  30',  W.  Long.  20°. 

"Sunday,  September  19,  1852. 

"My  dear  Friend, 

"  Having  now  some  prospect  of  being  home 
in  a  week  or  ten  days,  I  will  commence  giving  you 
an  account  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  which  have 
already  kept  me  at  sea  seventy  days  on  a  voyage 
which  took  us  only  twenty-nine  days  on  our  passage 


152  MY   LIFE 

out.     I  hope  you  have  received  the  letter  sent  you 

from  Para,  dated  July  9  or  10,  in  which  I  informed 

you  that  I  had  taken  my  passage  in  a  vessel  bound 

for  London,  which  was  to  sail  in  a  few  days.     On 

Monday,  July  12,  I  went  on  board  with  all  my  cargo, 

and  some  articles  purchased  or  collected  on  my  way 

down,  with  the  remnant  (about  twenty)  of  my  live 

stock.^     After  being  at  sea  about  a  week  I  had  a 

slight  attack  of  fever,  and  at  first  thought  I  had  got 

the  yellow  fever  after  all.     However,  a  little  calomel 

set  me  right  in  a  few  days,  but  I  remained  rather 

weak,  and   spent  most  of  my  time  reading  in  the 

cabin,    which    was    very    comfortable.      On    Friday, 

August  6,  we  were  in  N.  Lat.  30°  30',  W.  Long.  52°, 

when,  about  nine  in  the  morning,  just  after  breakfast, 

Captain  Turner,  who  was  half-owner  of  the  vessel, 

came  into  the  cabin,  and  said,  '  I'm  afraid  the  ship's 

on  fire.     Come  and  see  what  you  think  of  it'     Going 

on  deck  I  found  a  thick  smoke  coming  out  of  the 

forecastle,  which  we  both  thought  more  like  the  steam 

from  heating  vegetable  matter  than  the  smoke  from 

a  fire.     The  fore  hatchway  was  immediately  opened 

to  try  and  ascertain  the  origin  of  the  smoke,  and  a 

quantity  of  cargo  was  thrown  out,  but  the  smoke 

continuing  without  any  perceptible  increase,  we  went 

to    the    after    hatchway,   and   after  throwing  out   a 

quantity  of  piassaba,  with  which  the  upper  part  of 

the  hold  was  filled,  the  smoke  became  so  dense  that 

the  men  could  not  stay  in   it.     Most  of  them  were 

then  set  to  work  throwing  in  buckets  of  water,  and 

the    rest    proceeded   to   the   cabin    and    opened   the 

lazaretto  or  store-place  beneath  its  floor,  and  found 

smoke  issuing  from  the  bulkhead  separating  it  from 

'  These  consisted  of  numerous  parrots  and  parrakeets,  and  several 
uncommon  monkeys,  a  forest  wild-dog,  etc. 


IN   THE   AMAZON   VALLEY  153 

the  hold,  which  extended  halfway  under  the  fore  part 
of  the  cabin.  Attempts  were  then  made  to  break 
down  this  bulkhead,  but  it  resisted  all  efforts,  the 
smoke  being  so  suffocating  as  to  prevent  any  one 
stopping  in  it  more  than  a  minute  at  a  time.  A  hole 
was  then  cut  in  the  cabin  floor,  and  while  the  carpenter 
was  doing  this,  the  rest  of  the  crew  were  employed 
getting  out  the  boats,  the  captain  looked  after  his 
chronometer,  sextant,  books,  charts  and  compasses, 
and  I  got  up  a  small  tin  box  containing  a  few  shirts, 
and  put  in  it  my  drawings  of  fishes  and  palms,  which 
were  luckily  at  hand  ;  also  my  watch  and  a  purse 
with  a  few  sovereigns.  Most  of  my  clothes  were 
scattered  about  the  cabin,  and  in  the  dense  suffocating 
smoke  it  was  impossible  to  look  about  after  them. 
There  were  two  boats,  the  long-boat  and  the  captain's 
gig,  and  it  took  a  good  deal  of  time  to  get  the  merest 
necessaries  collected  and  put  into  them,  and  to  lower 
them  into  the  water.  Two  casks  of  biscuit  and  a  cask 
of  water  were  got  in,  a  lot  of  raw  pork  and  some  ham, 
a  few  tins  of  preserved  meats  and  vegetables,  and 
some  wine.  Then  there  were  corks  to  stop  the  holes 
in  the  boats,  oars,  masts,  sails,  and  rudders  to  be 
looked  up,  spare  spars,  cordage,  twine,  canvas,  needles, 
carpenter's  tools,  nails,  etc.  The  crew  brought  up 
their  bags  of  clothes,  and  all  were  bundled  indis- 
criminately into  the  boats,  which,  having  been  so  long 
in  the  sun,  were  very  leaky,  and  soon  became  half 
full  of  water,  so  that  two  men  in  each  of  them  had 
to  be  constantly  baling  out  the  water  with  buckets. 
Blankets,  rugs,  pillows,  and  clothes  were  all  soaked, 
and  the  boats  seemed  overloaded,  though  there  was 
really  very  little  weight  in  them.  All  being  now 
prepared,  the  crew  were  again  employed  pouring 
water  in  the  cabin  and  hatchway. 


154  MY   LIFE 

"  The  cargo  of  the  ship  consisted  of  rubber,  cocoa, 
anatto,  balsam-capivi,  and  piassaba.  The  balsam  was 
in  small  casks,  twenty  stowed  in  sand,  and  twenty 
small  kegs  in  rice-chaff,  immediately  beneath  the 
cabin  floor,  where  the  fire  seemed  to  be.  For  some 
time  we  had  heard  this  bubbling  and  hissing  as  if 
boiling  furiously,  the  heat  in  the  cabin  was  very  great, 
flame  soon  broke  into  the  berths  and  through  the  cabin 
floor,  and  in  a  few  minutes  more  blazed  up  through 
the  skylight  on  deck.  All  hands  were  at  once 
ordered  into  the  boats,  which  were  astern  of  the  ship. 
It  was  now  about  twelve  o'clock,  only  three  hours 
from  the  time  the  smoke  was  first  discovered.  I  had 
to  let  myself  down  into  the  boat  by  a  rope,  and  being 
rather  weak  it  slipped  through  my  hands  and  took  the 
skin  off  all  my  fingers,  and  finding  the  boat  still  half 
full  of  water  I  set  to  baling,  which  made  my  hands 
smart  very  painfully.  We  lay  near  the  ship  all  the 
afternoon,  watching  the  progress  of  the  flames,  which 
soon  covered  the  hinder  part  of  the  vessel,  and  rushed 
up  the  shrouds  and  sails  in  a  most  magnificent  con- 
flagration. Soon  afterwards,  by  the  rolling  of  the 
ship,  the  masts  broke  off  and  fell  overboard,  the 
decks  soon  burnt  away,  the  ironwork  at  the  sides 
became  red-hot,  and  last  of  all  the  bowsprit,  being 
burnt  at  the  base,  fell  also.  No  one  had  thought  of 
being  hungry  till  darkness  came  on,  when  we  had  a 
meal  of  biscuit  and  raw  ham,  and  then  disposed  our- 
selves as  well  as  we  could  for  the  night,  which,  you 
may  be  sure,  was  by  no  means  a  pleasant  one.  Our 
boats  continued  very  leaky,  and  we  could  not  cease 
an  instant  from  baling  ;  there  was  a  considerable 
swell,  though  the  day  had  been  remarkably  fine,  and 
there  were  constantly  floating  around  us  pieces  of  the 
burnt  wreck,  masts,  etc,  which  might  have  stove  in 


IN   THE   AMAZON    VALLEY  155 

our  boats  had  we  not  kept  a  constant  look-out  to 
keep  clear  of  them.  We  remained  near  the  ship  all 
night,  in  order  that  we  might  have  the  benefit  of  its 
flames  attracting  any  vessel  that  might  pass  within 
sight  of  it. 

"  It  now  presented  a  magnificent  and  awful  sight 
as  it  rolled  over,  looking  like  a  huge  caldron  of  fire, 
the  whole  cargo  of  rubber,  etc.,  forming  a  liquid 
burning  mass  at  the  bottom.  In  the  morning  our 
little  masts  and  sails  were  got  up,  and  we  bade  adieu 
to  the  Helen,  now  burnt  down  to  the  water's  edge, 
and  proceeded  with  a  light  east  wind  towards  the 
Bermudas,  the  nearest  land,  but  which  were  more 
than  seven  hundred  miles  from  us.  As  we  were 
nearly  in  the  track  of  West  Indian  vessels,  we 
expected  to  fall  in  with  some  ship  in  a  few  days. 

"  I  cannot  attempt  to  describe  my  feelings  and 
thoughts  during  these  events.  I  was  surprised  to 
find  myself  very  cool  and  collected.  I  hardly  thought 
it  possible  we  should  escape,  and  I  remember  thinking 
it  almost  foolish  to  save  my  watch  and  the  little  money 
I  had  at  hand.  However,  after  being  in  the  boats 
some  days  I  began  to  have  more  hope,  and  regretted 
not  having  saved  some  new  shoes,  cloth  coat  and 
trousers,  hat,  etc.,  which  I  might  have  done  with  a 
little  trouble.  My  collections,  however,  were  in  the 
hold,  and  were  irretrievably  lost.  And  now  I  began 
to  think  that  almost  all  the  reward  of  my  four  years 
of  privation  and  danger  was  lost.  What  I  had  hitherto 
sent  home  had  little  more  than  paid  my  expenses,  and 
what  I  had  with  me  in  the  Helen  I  estimated  would 
have  realized  about  ;;^500.  But  even  all  this  might 
have  gone  with  little  regret  had  not  by  far  the  richest 
part  of  my  own  private  collection  gone  also.  All  my 
private   collection   of  insects  and  birds  since  I   left 


156  MY    LIFE 

Para  was  with  me,  and  comprised  hundreds  of  new 
and  beautiful  species,  which  would  have  rendered  (I 
had  fondly  hoped)  my  cabinet,  as  far  as  regards 
American  species,  one  of  the  finest  in  Europe. 
Fancy  your  regrets  had  you  lost  all  your  Pyrenean 
mosses  on  your  voyage  home,  or  should  you  now  lose 
all  your  South  American  collection,  and  you  will  have 
some  idea  of  what  I  sufifer.  But  besides  this,  I  have 
lost  a  number  of  sketches,  drawings,  notes,  and 
observations  on  natural  history,  besides  the  three 
most  interesting  years  of  my  journal,  the  whole  of 
which,  unlike  any  pecuniary  loss,  can  never  be  re- 
placed ;  so  you  will  see  that  I  have  some  need  of 
philosophic  resignation  to  bear  my  fate  with  patience 
and  equanimity. 

"  Day  after  day  we  continued  in  the  boats.  The 
winds  changed,  blowing  dead  from  the  point  to  which 
we  wanted  to  go.  We  were  scorched  by  the  sun,  my 
hands,  nose,  and  ears  being  completely  skinned,  and 
were  drenched  continually  by  the  seas  or  spray.  We 
were  therefore  almost  constantly  wet,  and  had  no 
comfort  and  little  sleep  at  night.  Our  meals  con- 
sisted of  raw  pork  and  biscuit,  with  a  little  preserved 
meat  or  carrots  once  a  day,  which  was  a  great  luxury, 
and  a  short  allowance  of  water,  which  left  us  as  thirsty 
as  before  directly  after  we  had  drunk  it.  Ten  days 
and  ten  nights  we  spent  in  this  manner.  We  were 
still  two  hundred  miles  from  Bermuda,  when  in  the 
afternoon  a  vessel  was  seen,  and  by  eight  in  the 
evening  we  were  on  board  her,  much  rejoiced  to 
have  escaped  a  death  on  the  wide  ocean,  whence  none 
would  have  come  to  tell  the  tale.  The  ship  was  the 
Jordesofi,  bound  for  London,  and  proves  to  be  one  of 
the  slowest  old  ships  going.  With  a  favourable  wind 
and  all  sail  set,  she  seldom  does  more  than  five  knots. 


IN   THE  AMAZON   VALLEY  157 

her  average  being  two  or  three,  so  that  we  have  had 
a  most  tedious  time  of  it,  and  even  now  cannot  calcu- 
late with  any  certainty  as  to  when  we  shall  arrive. 
Besides  this,  she  was  rather  short  of  provisions,  and 
as  our  arrival  exactly  doubled  her  crew,  we  were 
all  obliged  to  be  put  on  strict  allowance  of  bread, 
meat,  and  water.  A  little  ham  and  butter  of  the 
captain's  were  soon  used  up,  and  we  have  been  now 
for  some  time  on  the  poorest  of  fare.  We  have  no 
suet,  butter,  or  raisins  with  which  to  make  *  duff,'  or 
even  molasses,  and  barely  enough  sugar  to  sweeten 
our  tea  or  coffee,  which  we  take  with  dry,  coarse 
biscuit,  and  for  dinner,  beef  or  pork  of  the  very  worst 
quality  I  have  ever  eaten  or  even  imagined  to  exist. 
This,  repeated  day  after  day  without  any  variation, 
beats  even  Rio  Negro  fare,  rough  though  it  often  was. 
About  a  week  after  we  were  picked  up  we  spoke  and 
boarded  an  outward-bound  ship,  and  got  from  her 
some  biscuits,  a  few  potatoes,  and  some  salt  cod, 
which  were  a  great  improvement,  but  did  not  last 
long.  We  have  also  occasionally  caught  some  dolphin 
and  a  few  fish  resembling  the  acarras  of  the  Rio 
Negro ;  but  for  some  time  now  we  had  seen  none,  so 
that  I  am  looking  forward  to  the  *  flesh-pots  of  Egypt ' 
with  as  much  pleasure  as  when  we  were  luxuriating 
daily  on  farinha  and  *  fiel  amigo.'  ^  While  we  were  in 
the  boats  we  had  generally  fine  weather,  though  with 
a  few  days  and  nights  squally  and  with  a  heavy  sea, 
which  made  me  often  tremble  for  our  safety,  as  we 
heeled  over  till  the  water  poured  in  over  the  boat's 
side.  We  had  almost  despaired  of  seeing  any  vessel, 
our  circle  of  vision  being  so  limited  ;  but  we  had  great 

*  This  was  the  name  given  by  our  kind  host,  Seilor  Henrique,  at 
Barra  to  dried  pirarucu,  meaning  "  faithful  friend,"  always  at  hand 
when  other  food  failed. 


158  MY   LIFE 

hopes  of  reaching  Bermuda,  though  it  is  doubtful 
if  we  should  have  done  so,  the  neighbourhood  of 
those  islands  being  noted  for  sudden  squalls  and 
hurricanes,  and  it  was  the  time  of  year  when  the 
hurricanes  most  frequently  occur.  Having  never  seen 
a  great  gale  or  storm  at  sea,  I  had  some  desire  to 
witness  the  phenomenon,  and  have  now  been  com- 
pletely gratified.  The  first  we  had  about  a  fortnight 
ago.  In  the  morning  there  was  a  strong  breeze  and 
the  barometer  had  fallen  nearly  half  an  inch  during 
the  night  and  continued  sinking,  so  the  captain  com- 
menced taking  in  sail,  and  while  getting  in  the  royals 
and  studding-sails,  the  wind  increased  so  as  to  split 
the  mainsail,  fore-topsail,  fore-trysail,  and  jib,  and  it 
was  some  hours  before  they  could  be  got  off  her,  and 
the  main-topsail  and  fore-sail  double  reefed.  We 
then  went  flying  along,  the  whole  ocean  a  mass  of 
boiling  foam,  the  crests  of  the  waves  being  carried  in 
spray  over  our  decks.  The  sea  did  not  get  up 
immediately,  but  by  night  it  was  very  rough,  the  ship 
plunging  and  rolling  most  fearfully,  the  sea  pouring 
in  a  deluge  over  the  top  of  her  bulwarks,  and  some- 
times up  over  the  cabin  skylight.  The  next  morning 
the  wind  abated,  but  the  ship,  which  is  a  very  old 
one,  took  in  a  deal  of  water,  and  the  pumps  were 
kept  going  nearly  the  whole  day  to  keep  her  dry. 
During  this  gale  the  wind  went  completely  round  the 
compass,  and  then  settled  nearly  due  east,  where  it 
pertinaciously  continued  for  twelve  days,  keeping  us 
tacking  about,  and  making  less  than  forty  miles  a  day 
against  it.  Three  days  ago  we  had  another  gale, 
more  severe  than  the  former  one — a  regular  equinoc- 
tial, which  lasted  two  entire  days  and  nights,  and  split 
one  of  the  newest  and  strongest  sails  on  the  ship. 
The  rolling  and  plunging  were  fearful,  the  bowsprit 


IN   THE   AMAZON    VALLEY  159 

going  completely  under  water,  and  the  ship  being 
very  heavily  laden  with  mahogany,  fustic,  and  other 
heavy  woods  from  Cuba,  strained  and  creaked  tre- 
mendously, and  leaked  to  that  extent  that  the  pumps 
were  obliged  to  be  kept  constantly  going,  and  their 
continued  click-clack,  click-clack  all  through  the  night 
was  a  most  disagreeable  and  nervous  sound.  One 
day  no  fire  could  be  made  owing  to  the  sea  breaking 
continually  into  the  galley,  so  we  had  to  eat  a  biscuit 
for  our  dinner ;  and  not  a  moment's  rest  was  to  be 
had,  as  we  were  obliged  to  be  constantly  holding  on, 
whether  standing,  sitting,  or  lying,  to  prevent  being 
pitched  about  by  the  violent  plunges  and  lurches  of 
the  vessel.  The  gale,  however,  has  now  happily 
passed,  and  we  have  a  fine  breeze  from  the  north- 
west, which  is  taking  us  along  six  or  seven  knots — 
quicker  than  we  have  ever  gone  yet.  Among  our 
other  disagreeables  here  we  have  no  fresh  water  to 
spare  for  washing,  and  as  I  only  saved  a  couple  of 
shirts,  they  are  in  a  state  of  most  uncomfortable 
dirtiness,  but  I  console  myself  with  the  thoughts  of  a 
glorious  warm  bath  when  I  get  on  shore. 

^^  October  i.  Oh,  glorious  day!  Here  we  are  on 
shore  at  Deal,  where  the  ship  is  at  anchor.  Such  a 
dinner,  with  our  two  captains !  Oh,  beef-steaks  and 
damson  tart,  a  paradise  for  hungry  sinners. 

"  October  5,  London.  Here  I  am  laid  up  with 
swelled  ankles,  my  legs  not  being  able  to  stand  work 
after  such  a  long  rest  in  the  ship.  I  cannot  write 
now  at  any  length — I  have  too  much  to  think  about. 
We  had  a  narrow  escape  in  the  Channel.  Many 
vessels  were  lost  in  a  storm  on  the  night  of  Sep- 
tember 29,  but  we  escaped.     The  old  '  Iron  Duke '  is 


i6o  MY   LIFE 

dead.  The  Crystal  Palace  is  being  pulled  down,  and 
is  being  rebuilt  on  a  larger  and  improved  plan  by  a 
company.  Loddige's  collection  of  plants  has  been 
bought  entire  to  stock  it,  and  they  think  by  heating 
it  in  the  centre  to  get  a  gradation  of  climates,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  have  the  plants  of  different  countries, 
tropical  or  temperate,  in  one  undivided  building. 
This  is  Paxton's  plan. 

"  How  I  begin  to  envy  you  in  that  glorious  country 
where  '  the  sun  shines  for  ever  unchangeably  bright/ 
where  farinha  abounds,  and  of  bananas  and  plantains 
there  is  no  lack !  Fifty  times  since  I  left  Para  have 
I  vowed,  if  I  once  reached  England,  never  to  trust 
myself  more  on  the  ocean.  But  good  resolutions 
soon  fade,  and  I  am  already  only  doubtful  whether 
the  Andes  or  the  Philippines  are  to  be  the  scene  of 
my  next  wanderings.  However,  for  six  months  I  am 
a  fixture  here  in  London,  as  I  am  determined  to 
make  up  for  lost  time  by  enjoying  myself  as  much  as 
possible  for  awhile.  I  am  fortunate  in  having  about 
;^200  insured  by  Mr.  Stevens'  foresight,  so  I  must  be 
contented,  though  it  is  very  hard  to  have  nothing  to 
show  of  what  I  took  so  much  pains  to  procure. 

"  I  trust  you  are  well  and  successful.  Kind 
remembrances  to  everybody,  everywhere,  and  parti- 
cularly to  the  respectable  Senhor  Joao  de  Lima  of 
Sao  Joachim. 

"Your  very  sincere  friend, 

"Alfred  R.  Wallace." 

Some  of  the  most  alarming  incidents,  to  a  lands- 
man, are  not  mentioned  either  in  this  letter  or  in  my 
published  "Narrative."  The  captain  had  given  the 
only  berths  in  the  cabin  to  Captain  Turner  and 
myself,  he  sleeping  on  a  sofa  in  fine  weather,  and  on 


IN   THE   AMAZON   VALLEY  i6i 

a  mattress  on  the  floor  of  the  cabin  when  rough.  On 
the  worst  night  of  the  storm  I  saw  him,  to  my  sur- 
prise, bring  down  an  axe  and  lay  it  beside  him,  and 
on  asking  what  it  was  for,  he  replied,  "  To  cut  away 
the  masts  in  case  we  capsize  in  the  night."  In  the 
middle  of  the  night  a  great  sea  smashed  our  skylight 
and  poured  in  a  deluge  of  water,  soaking  the  poor 
captain,  and  then  slushing  from  side  to  side  with 
every  roll  of  the  ship.  Now,  I  thought,  our  time  is 
come  ;  and  I  expected  to  see  the  captain  rush  up  on 
deck  with  his  axe.  But  he  only  swore  a  good  deal, 
sought  out  a  dry  coat  and  blanket,  and  then  lay  down 
on  the  sofa  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  So  I  was  a 
little  reassured. 

Not  less  alarming  was  the  circumstance  of  the 
crew  coming  aft  in  a  body  to  say  that  the  forecastle 
was  uninhabitable  as  it  was  constantly  wet,  and  several 
of  them  brought  handfuls  of  wet  rotten  wood  which 
they  could  pull  out  in  many  places.  This  happened 
soon  after  the  first  gale  began  ;  so  the  two  captains 
and  I  went  to  look,  and  we  saw  sprays  and  squirts  of 
water  coming  in  at  the  joints  in  numerous  places, 
soaking  almost  all  the  men's  berths,  while  here  and 
there  we  could  see  the  places  where  they  had  pulled 
out  rotten  wood  with  their  fingers.  The  captain  then 
had  the  sail-room  amid-ships  cleared  out  for  the  men 
to  sleep  in  for  the  rest  of  the  voyage. 

One  day  in  the  height  of  the  storm,  when  we 
were  being  flooded  with  spray  and  enormous  waves 
were  coming  up  behind  us,  Captain  Turner  and  I  were 
sitting  on  the  poop  in  the  driest  place  we  could  find, 
and,  as  a  bigger  wave  than  usual  rolled  under  us 
and  dashed  over  our  sides,  he  said  quietly  to  me,  "  If 
we  are  pooped  by  one  of  those  waves  we  shall  go  to 
the  bottom  ; "  then  added,  "  We  were  not  very  safe  in 

M 


i62  MY    LIFE 

our  two  small  boats,  but  I  had  rather  be  back  in  them 
where  we  were  picked  up  than  in  this  rotten  old  tub." 
It  is,  therefore,  I  think,  quite  evident  that  we  did 
have  a  very  narrow  escape.  Yet  this  unseaworthy 
old  ship,  which  ought  to  have  been  condemned  years 
before,  had  actually  taken  Government  stores  out  to 
Halifax,  had  there  been  patched  up,  and  sent  to  Cuba 
for  a  cargo  of  heavy  timber,  which  we  were  bringing 
home. 


A.    R.    WALLACE.       AGED    30. 


{To  fact- p.  163. 


CHAPTER  XI 

LONDON,  AND  VOYAGE  TO  THE   EAST 

On  reaching  London  in  the  condition  described  in 
my  letter  to  Dr.  Spruce,  and  my  only  clothing  a  suit 
of  the  thinnest  calico,  I  was  met  by  my  kind  friend 
and  agent,  Mr.  Samuel  Stevens,  who  took  me  first  to 
the  nearest  ready-made  clothes  shop,  where  I  got  a 
warm  suit,  then  to  his  own  tailor,  where  I  was  measured 
for  what  clothes  I  required,  and  afterwards  to  a  haber- 
dasher's to  get  a  small  stock  of  other  necessaries. 
Having  at  that  time  no  relatives  in  London,  his 
mother,  with  whom  he  lived  in  the  south  of  London — 
I  think  in  Kennington — had  invited  me  to  stay  with 
her.  Here  I  lived  most  comfortably  for  a  week, 
enjoying  the  excellent  food  and  delicacies  Mrs. 
Stevens  provided  for  me,  which  quickly  restored  me 
to  my  usual  health  and  vigour. 

As  I  wished  to  be  with  my  sister  and  mother 
during  my  stay  in  England,  I  took  a  house  then 
vacant  in  Upper  Albany  Street  (No.  44),  so  that  we 
might  all  live  together.  While  it  was  getting  ready 
I  took  lodgings  next  door,  as  the  situation  was 
convenient,  being  close  to  the  Regent's  Park  and 
Zoological  Gardens,  and  also  near  the  Society's  offices 
in  Hanover  Square,  and  within  easy  access  to  Mr. 
Stevens's  office  close  to  the  old  British  Museum.  At 
Christmas  we  were  all  comfortably  settled,  and  I  was 


i64  MY   LIFE 

able  to  begin  the  work  which  I  had  determined  to  do 
before  again  leaving  England. 

In  the  small  tin  box  which  I  had  saved  from  the 
wreck  I  fortunately  had  a  set  of  careful  pencil  draw- 
ings of  all  the  different  species  of  palms  I  had  met 
with,  together  with  notes  as  to  their  distribution  and 
uses.  I  had  also  a  large  number  of  drawings  of  fish, 
as  already  stated,  carefully  made  to  scale,  with  notes 
of  their  colours,  their  dentition,  and  their  fin-rays, 
scales,  etc.  I  had  also  a  folio  Portuguese  note-book 
containing  my  diary  while  on  the  Rio  Negro,  and 
some  notes  and  observations  made  for  a  map  of  that 
river  and  the  Uaupes.  With  these  scanty  materials, 
helped  by  the  letters  I  had  sent  home,  I  now  set  to 
work  to  write  an  account  of  my  travels,  as  well  as  a 
few  scientific  papers  for  which  I  had  materials  in  the 
portion  of  my  collections  made  in  Para,  Santarem, 
and  the  Lower  Rio  Negro.  These  I  had  sent  off 
before  leaving  Barra  on  my  first  voyage  up  the  Rio 
Negro,  and  they  had  arrived  home  safely  ;  but  I  had 
reserved  all  my  private  collections  for  comparison 
with  future  discoveries,  and  though  I  left  these  to  be 
sent  home  before  starting  on  my  second  voyage  up 
the  Rio  Negro,  they  were  never  despatched,  owing  to 
the  Custom  House  authorities  at  Barra  insisting  on 
seeing  the  contents  before  allowing  them  to  go  away. 
I  therefore  found  them  at  Barra  on  my  way  home, 
and  they  were  all  lost  with  the  ship. 

As  my  collections  had  now  made  my  name  well 
known  to  the  authorities  of  the  Zoological  and  Ento- 
mological Societies,  I  received  a  ticket  from  the 
former,  giving  me  admission  to  their  gardens  while  I 
remained  in  England,  and  I  was  a  welcome  visitor 
at  the  scientific  meetings  of  both  societies,  which 
I    attended    very    regularly,   and    thus    made    the 


LONDON,  AND  VOYAGE  TO  THE  EAST  165 

acquaintance  of  most  of  the  London  zoologists  and 
entomologists.  I  also  went  frequently  to  examine 
the  insect  and  bird  collections  in  the  British  Museum 
(then  in  Great  Russell  Street),  and  also  to  the  Lin- 
nean  Society,  and  to  the  Kew  Herbarium  to  consult 
works  on  botany,  in  order  to  name  my  palms. 

After  discussing  the  matter  with  some  of  my 
friends,  I  determined  to  publish,  at  my  own  expense, 
a  small,  popular  volume  on  the  "  Palms  of  the  Amazon 
and  Rio  Negro,"  with  an  account  of  their  uses  and 
distribution,  and  figures  of  all  the  species  from  my 
sketches  and  specimens  of  fruits.  I  arranged  with 
Mr.  Walter  Fitch  of  Kew,  the  first  botanical  artist  of 
the  day,  to  draw  them  on  stone,  adding  some  artistic 
touches  to  give  them  life  and  variety,  and  in  a  few 
cases  some  botanical  details  from  species  living  in 
the  gardens.  In  one  of  the  drawings  a  large  native 
house  on  the  Uaupes  is  introduced,  with  some  figures 
which,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  are  as  unlike  the  natives  as 
are  the  inhabitants  of  a  London  slum.  I  arranged 
with  Mr.  Van  Voorst  to  publish  this  small  volume, 
and  it  was  not  thought  advisable  to  print  more  than 
250  copies,  the  sale  of  which  just  covered  all  expenses. 

At  the  same  time  I  was  preparing  my  "  Travels 
on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro  "  from  the  scanty 
materials  I  had  saved,  supplemented  by  the  letters  I 
had  written  home.  I  arranged  with  Mr.  Lovel  Reeve 
for  its  publication  on  an  agreement  for  "  half  profits." 
Only  750  copies  were  printed,  and  when  I  returned 
home  from  the  East  in  1862,  about  250  copies  were 
still  unsold,  and  there  were  consequently  no  profits  to 
divide.  We  agreed,  however,  to  share  the  remaining 
copies,  and  my  portion  was  disposed  of  by  my  new 
publisher,  Messrs.  Macmillan  &  Co.,  and  brought  me 
in  a  few  pounds. 


i66  MY   LIFE 

I  had  brought  with  me  vocabularies  of  about  a 
hundred  common  words  in  ten  different  Indian  lan- 
guages, and  as  the  great  philologist  at  that  time  was 
the  late  Dr.  R.  G.  Latham,  I  obtained  an  introduction 
to  him,  and  he  kindly  offered  to  write  some  "  Re- 
marks "  upon  the  vocabularies,  and  these  are  published 
in  the  first  edition  of  my  "  Travels." 

Dr.  Latham  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  fitting 
up  groups  of  figures  to  illustrate  the  family  life  and 
habits  of  the  various  races  of  mankind  at  the  new 
Crystal  Palace  at  Sydenham,  then  just  completed, 
and  he  asked  me  to  meet  him  there  and  see  whether 
any  alterations  were  required  in  a  group  of  natives, 
I  think,  of  Guiana. 

I  found  Dr.  Latham  among  a  number  of  workmen 
in  white  aprons,  several  life-size  clay  models  of 
Indians,  and  a  number  of  their  ornaments,  weapons, 
and  utensils.  The  head  modellers  were  Italians,  and 
Dr.  Latham  told  me  he  could  get  no  Englishmen  to 
do  the  work,  and  that  these  Italians,  although  clever 
modellers  of  the  human  figure  in  any  required  atti- 
tude, had  all  been  trained  in  the  schools  of  classical 
sculpture,  and  were  unable  to  get  away  from  this 
training.  The  result  was  very  curious,  and  often  even 
ludicrous,  a  brown  Indian  man  or  girl  being  given 
the  attitudes  and  expressions  of  an  Apollo  or  a 
Hercules,  a  Venus  or  a  Minerva.  In  those  days 
there  were  no  photographs,  and  the  ethnologist  had 
to  trust  to  paintings  or  drawings,  usually  exaggerated 
or  taken  from  individuals  of  exceptional  beauty  or 
ugliness.  Under  my  suggestion  alterations  were 
made  both  in  the  features  and  pose  of  one  or  two 
of  the  figures  just  completed,  so  as  to  give  them  a 
little  more  of  the  Indian  character,  and  serve  as  a 
guide  in  modelling  others,  in  which   the  same  type 


LONDON,  AND  VOYAGE  TO  THE  EAST  167 

of  physiognomy  was  to  be  preserved.  I  went  several 
times  during  the  work  on  the  groups  of  South 
American  origin,  but  though  when  completed,  with 
the  real  ornaments,  clothing,  weapons,  and  domestic 
implements,  the  groups  were  fairly  characteristic  and 
life-like,  yet  there  remained  occasionally  details  of 
attitude  or  expression  which  suggested  classic  Greece 
or  Italy  rather  than  the  South  American  savage. 

These  ethnological  figures,  although  instructive 
to  the  student,  were  never  very  popular,  and  soon 
became  the  subject  of  contempt  and  ridicule.  One 
reason  of  this  was  their  arrangement  in  the  open, 
quite  close  to  the  passing  visitor,  with  nothing  to 
isolate  them  from  altogether  incongruous  surroundings. 
Another  was,  that  they  were  not  carefully  attended 
to,  and  when  I  saw  them  after  my  return  from  the 
East,  they  had  a  shabby  and  dilapidated  appearance, 
and  the  figures  themselves  were  more  or  less  dusty, 
which  had  a  most  ludicrous  effect  in  what  were  in- 
tended to  represent  living  men  and  women,  being  so 
utterly  unlike  the  clear,  glossy,  living  skins  of  all 
savage  peoples.  To  be  successful  and  life-like,  such 
groups  should  be  each  completely  isolated  in  a  deep 
recess,  with  three  sides  representing  houses  or  huts, 
or  the  forest,  or  river-bank,  while  the  open  front 
should  be  enclosed  by  a  single  sheet  of  plate-glass, 
and  the  group  should  be  seen  at  a  distance  of  at 
least  ten  or  fifteen  feet.  In  this  way,  with  a  carefully 
arranged  illumination  from  above  and  an  artistic 
colouring  of  the  figures  and  accessories,  each  group 
might  be  made  to  appear  as  life-like  as  some  of  the 
best  figures  at  Madame  Tussaud's,  or  as  the  grand 
interiors  of  cathedrals,  which  were  then  exhibited  at 
the  Diorama.  In  the  museum  of  the  future,  such 
groups  will  find  their  place  in  due  succession  to  the 


i68  MY   LIFE 

groups  illustrating  the  life  histories  of  the  other 
mammalia ;  but  ample  space  and  a  very  careful 
attention  to  details  must  be  given  in  order  to  ensure 
a  successful  and  attractive  representation. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  I  first  saw  Huxley.  At 
one  of  the  evening  meetings  of  the  Zoological  Society 
(in  December,  1852)  he  gave  an  account  of  some 
Echinococci  found  in  the  liver  of  a  zebra  which  died 
in  the  gardens.  He  did  not  read  the  paper,  but, 
with  the  help  of  diagrams  and  sketches  on  the  black- 
board, showed  us  clearly  its  main  points  of  structure, 
its  mode  of  development,  and  the  strange  transfor- 
mations it  underwent  when  the  parent  worm  migrated 
from  the  intestine  to  other  parts  of  the  body  of  the 
animal.  I  was  particularly  struck  with  his  wonderful 
power  of  making  a  difficult  and  rather  complex 
subject  perfectly  intelligible  and  extremely  interest- 
ing to  persons  who,  like  myself,  were  absolutely 
ignorant  of  the  whole  group.  Although  he  was  two 
years  younger  than  myself,  Huxley  had  already 
made  a  considerable  reputation  as  a  comparative 
anatomist,  was  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society,  and 
a  few  months  later  was  appointed  Professor  of 
Natural  History  and  Palaeontology  at  the  Royal 
School  of  Mines.  I  was  amazed,  too,  at  his  com- 
plete mastery  of  the  subject,  and  his  great  amount 
of  technical  knowledge  of  a  kind  to  which  I  have 
never  given  any  attention,  the  structure  and  develop- 
ment of  the  lower  forms  of  animal  life.  From  that 
time  I  always  looked  up  to  Huxley  as  being  im- 
measurably superior  to  myself  in  scientific  knowledge, 
and  supposed  him  to  be  much  older  than  I  was. 
Many  years  afterwards  I  was  surprised  to  find  that 
he  was  really  younger. 


LONDON,  AND  VOYAGE  tO  THE  EAST  169 

During  my  constant  attendance  at  the  meetings 
of  the  Zoological  and  Entomological  Societies,  and 
visits  to  the  insect  and  bird  departments  of  the 
British  Museum,  I  had  obtained  sufficient  informa- 
tion to  satisfy  me  that  the  very  finest  field  for  an 
exploring  and  collecting  naturalist  was  to  be  found 
in  the  great  Malayan  Archipelago,  of  which  just 
sufficient  was  known  to  prove  its  wonderful  richness, 
while  no  part  of  it,  with  the  one  exception  of  the 
island  of  Java,  has  been  well  explored  as  regards 
its  natural  history.  Sir  James  Brooke  had  recently 
become  Rajah  of  Sarawak,  while  the  numerous 
Dutch  settlements  in  Celebes  and  the  Moluccas 
offered  great  facilities  for  a  traveller.  So  far  as 
known  also,  the  country  was  generally  healthy,  and 
I  determined  that  it  would  be  much  better  for  me 
to  go  to  such  a  new  country  than  to  return  to  the 
Amazon,  where  Bates  had  already  been  successfully 
collecting  for  five  years,  and  where  I  knew  there  was 
a  good  bird-collector  who  had  been  long  at  work  in 
the  upper  part  of  the  river  towards  the  Andes. 

As  the  journey  to  the  East  was  an  expensive  one, 
I  was  advised  to  try  to  get  a  free  passage  in  some 
Government  ship.  Through  my  paper  on  the  Rio 
Negro,  I  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  Sir  Roderick 
Murchison,  then  President  of  the  Royal  Geographical 
Society,  and  one  of  the  most  accessible  and  kindly 
of  men  of  science.  On  calling  upon  him  and  stating 
my  wishes,  he  at  once  agreed  to  make  an  application 
on  my  behalf  for  a  passage  to  some  Malayan  port, 
and  as  he  was  personally  known  to  many  members 
of  the  Government  and  had  great  influence  with 
them,  a  passage  was  promised  me  on  the  first  ship 
going  to  those  seas.  This  was,  I  think,  near  the  end 
of  the   year    1853,  when   I  had  published  my  two 


170  MY  LIFE 

books,  and  had  spent  much  of  my  spare  time  at  the 
British  Museum,  examining  the  collections,  and 
making  notes  and  sketches  of  the  rarer  and  more 
valuable  species  of  birds,  butterflies,  and  beetles  of 
the  various  Malay  islands. 

It  was,  I  believe,  in  the  latter  part  of  January,  1854, 
that  I  received  a  notification  from  the  Government 
that  a  passage  had  been  granted  me  to  Singapore 
in  the  brig  Frolic,  shortly  sailing  for  that  port,  and 
that  I  was  to  communicate  with  the  captain — 
Commander  Nolloth — as  to  when  I  should  go  on 
board.  I  think  it  was  about  the  middle  of  February 
that  I  went  to  Portsmouth  with  all  necessaries  for  the 
voyage,  my  heavy  baggage  having  been  sent  off  by 
a  merchant  ship  some  time  previously.  The  Frolic 
was  anchored  at  Spithead  and  I  went  on  board  at 
once.  I  was  kindly  received  by  the  captain  and 
officers  and  found  my  quarters  very  comfortable. 

Sailing  orders  were  expected  every  day,  as  the 
ship  was  quite  ready,  with  the  stores  she  was  taking  out 
to  the  East  all  on  board  ;  but  day  after  day  and  week 
after  week  passed,  signals  were  exchanged  with  the 
admiral,  but  we  seemed  no  nearer  sailing  than  when 
I  came  on  board.  Then  at  last,  one  day  the  captain 
informed  me  that  he  had  received  fresh  orders  to 
carry  stores  to  the  Crimea,  where  the  great  war  with 
Russia  was  about  to  commence.  He  said  I  had 
better  leave  the  next  morning,  and  that  no  doubt  the 
Government  would  provide  me  a  passage  in  some 
other  vessel.  So  I  bade  farewell  to  him  and  his 
officers,  none  of  whom  I  ever  met  again. 

On  returning  to  London,  I  at  once  called  on  Sir 
Roderick  Murchison,  and  through  his  representations 
I  received  in  a  few  days  a  first-class  ticket  to  Singapore 
by  the  next  Peninsular  and  Oriental  steamer,  which 


LONDON,  AND  VOYAGE  TO  THE  EAST  171 

sailed  in  about  a  week,  so  that  I  did  not  lose  much 
time.  The  voyage  was  a  very  interesting  one,  as  we 
stopped  a  few  hours  at  Gibraltar,  passed  within  sight 
of  the  grand  Sierra  Nevada  of  Spain,  stayed  a  day 
at  Malta,  where  the  town  and  the  tombs  of  the  knights 
were  inspected,  and  then  on  to  Alexandria.  Having 
by  me  a  long  letter  I  wrote  to  my  schoolfellow,  Mr. 
George  Silk,  I  will  here  quote  from  it  a  few  of  the 
impressions  of  my  journey  as  they  appeared  to  me  at 
the  time  they  occurred  : — 

"Steamer  Bcfigal,  Red  Sea,  March  26. 
"  Of  all  the  eventful  days  in  my  life  (so  far),  my 
first  in  Alexandria  was  (in  some  respects)  the  most 
exciting.     Imagine  my  feelings  when,  coming  out  of 
the   hotel   (to  which  we  had  been   conveyed  in   an 
omnibus)  with  the  intention  of  taking  a  quiet  stroll 
through  the  city,    I  suddenly   found   myself   in   the 
midst  of  a  vast  crowd  of  donkeys  and  their  drivers, 
all  thoroughly  determined  to  appropriate  my  person 
to  their  own  use  and  interest,  without  in   the   least 
consulting  my  inclinations.     In  vain  with  rapid  strides 
and  waving  arms  I  endeavoured  to  clear  a  way  and 
move  forward,  arms  and  legs  were  seized  upon,  and 
even  the  Christian  coat-tails  were  not  sacred  from 
the  profane  hands  of  the  Mahometan  crowd.     One 
would    hold    together    two    donkeys    by    their    tails 
whilst  I  was  struggling  between  them,  and  another, 
forcing  their  heads  together,  hoped  to  compel  me  to 
mount  one  or  both  of  them.     One  fellow,  more  im- 
pudent than  the  rest,  I  laid  flat  upon  the   ground, 
and,  sending  the  little  donkey  staggering  after  him, 
I  escaped  for  a  moment  midst  hideous  yells  and  most 
unearthly  cries.     I  now  beckoned  to  a  fellow  more 
sensible-looking   than  the  rest,  and  told  him  that  I 


172  MY   LIFE 

wished  to  walk,  and  would  take  him  as  a  guide,  and 
now  hoped  that  I  might  be  left  at  peace.     But  vain 
thought !     I  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  who, 
getting  me  up  against  a  wall,  formed  around  me  an 
impenetrable  phalanx  of  men  and  brutes,  thoroughly 
determined  that  I  should  only  escape  from  the  spot 
upon   the   four   legs   of  a   donkey.     So,    bethinking 
myself  that  donkey-riding  was  a  national  institution 
of  venerable   antiquity,   and    seeing   a   fat    Yankee 
already  mounted,  being  like  myself,  hopeless  of  any 
other   means   of  escape,  I   seized   upon  a  bridle   in 
hopes  that  I  should  then  be  left  by  the  remainder 
of  the  crowd.     But  seeing  that  I  was  at  last  going 
to   ride,   each   one    was   determined   that    he    alone 
should  profit  by  the  transaction,  and  a  dozen  animals 
were  forced  suddenly  upon  me,  and  a  dozen  pair  of 
hands  tried  to  lift  me  upon   their  respective  beasts. 
But   now  my  patience   was   exhausted,    so,   keeping 
firm  hold  of  the  bridle  I  had  first  taken  with  one 
hand,  I  hit  right  and  left  with  the  other,  and  calling 
upon   my  guide  to   do  the   same,  we  succeeded   in 
clearing  a  little  space  around  us.     Now,  then,  behold 
your  long-legged  friend  mounted  upon  a  jackass  in 
the  streets  of  Alexandria  ;  a  boy  behind,  holding  by 
his  tail  and  whipping  him  up  ;  Charles,  who  had  been 
lost  sight   of  in  the  crowd,  upon  another  ;   and  my 
guide  upon  a  third  ;  and  off  we  go  among  a  crowd 
of  Jews  and  Greeks,    Turks  and  Arabs,  and  veiled 
women   and   yelling   donkey-boys,   to   see  the   city. 
We  saw  the  bazaars,  and  the  slave  market  (where  I 
was  again  nearly  pulled  to  pieces  for  '  backsheesh '), 
the  mosques  with  their  graceful  minarets,  and  then 
the    pasha's    new    palace,  the    interior  of  which   is 
most  gorgeous.     We  passed  lots  of  Turkish  soldiers, 
walking  in  comfortable   irregularity ;   and   after  the 


LONDON,  AND  VOYAGE  TO  THE  EAST  173 

consciousness  of  being  dreadful  guys  for  two  crowded 
hours,  returned  to  the  hotel,  whence  we  are  to  start 
for  the  canal  boats.  You  may  think  this  little 
narrative  is  exaggerated,  but  it  is  not  so.  The 
pertinacity,  vigour,  and  screams  of  the  Alexandrian 
donkey-drivers  cannot  be  exaggerated.  On  our  way 
to  the  boats  we  passed  Pompey's  Pillar ;  for  a  day 
we  were  rowed  in  small  boats  on  a  canal,  then  on 
the  Nile  in  barges,  with  a  panorama  of  mud  villages, 
palm-trees,  camels,  and  irrigating  wheels  turned  by 
buffaloes, — a  perfectly  flat  country,  beautifully  green 
with  crops  of  corn  and  lentils  ;  endless  boats  with 
immense  triangular  sails.  Then  the  Pyramids  came 
in  sight,  looking  huge  and  solemn  ;  then  a  hand- 
some castellated  bridge  for  the  Alexandria  and  Cairo 
railway ;  and  then  Cairo — Grand  Cairo !  the  city  of 
romance,  which  we  reached  just  before  sunset.  We 
took  a  guide  and  walked  in  the  city,  very  picturesque 
and  very  dirty.  Then  to  a  quiet  English  hotel,  where 
a  Mussulman  waiter,  rejoicing  in  the  name  of  Ali- 
baba, gave  us  a  splendid  tea,  brown  bread  and  fresh 
butter.  One  or  two  French  and  English  travellers 
were  the  only  guests,  and  I  could  hardly  realize  my 
situation.  I  longed  for  you  to  enjoy  it  with  me. 
Thackeray's  'First  Day  in  the  East'  is  admirable. 
Read  it  again,  and  you  will  understand  just  how  I 
think  and  feel. 

"Next  morning  at  seven  we  started  for  Suez  in 
small  four-horsed  two-wheeled  omnibuses,  carrying 
six  passengers  each.  Horses  were  changed  every  five 
miles,  and  we  had  a  meal  every  three  hours  at  very 
comfortable  stations.  The  desert  is  undulating, 
mostly  covered  with  a  coarse,  volcanic-looking  gravel. 
The  road  is  excellent.  The  skeletons  of  camels — 
hundreds  of  them — lay  all  along  the  road  ;  vultures, 


174  MY  LIFE 

sand-grouse,  and  sand-larks  were  occasionally  seen. 
We  frequently  saw  the  mirage,  like  distant  trees  and 
water.  Near  the  middle  station  the  pasha  has  a 
hunting-lodge — a  perfect  palace.  The  Indian  and 
Australian  mails,  about  six  hundred  boxes,  as  well 
as  all  the  parcels,  goods,  and  passengers'  luggage, 
were  brought  by  endless  trains  of  camels,  which  we 
passed  on  the  way.  At  the  eating-places  I  took  a  little 
stroll,  gathering  some  of  the  curious  highly  odoriferous 
plants  that  grew  here  and  there  in  the  hollows,  which 
I  dried  in  my  pocket-books,  and  I  also  found  a  few 
land-shells.  We  enjoyed  the  ride  exceedingly,  and 
reached  Suez  about  midnight.  It  is  a  miserable 
little  town,  and  the  bazaar  is  small,  dark,  and  dirty. 
There  is  said  to  be  no  water  within  ten  miles.  The 
next  afternoon  we  went  on  board  our  ship,  a  splendid 
vessel  with  large  and  comfortable  cabins,  and  every- 
thing very  superior  to  the  Etixine.     Adieu." 

I  have  given  this  description  of  my  journey  from 
Alexandria  to  Suez,  over  the  route  established  by 
Lieutenant  Waghorn,  which  was  superseded  a  few 
years  later  by  the  railway,  and  afterwards  by  the 
canal,  because  few  persons  now  living  will  remember 
it,  or  know  that  it  ever  existed.  Of  the  rest  of  our 
journey  I  have  no  record.  We  stayed  a  day  at 
desolate,  volcanic  Aden,  and  thence  sailed  across  to 
Galle,  with  its  groves  of  cocoa-nut  palms,  and  crowds 
of  natives  offering  for  sale  the  precious  stones  of  the 
country ;  thence  across  to  Pulo  Penang,  with  its 
picturesque  mountain,  its  spice-trees,  and  its  waterfall, 
and  on  down  the  Straits  of  Malacca,  with  its  richly 
wooded  shores,  to  our  destination,  Singapore,  where  I 
was  to  begin  the  eight  years  of  wandering  throughout 
the  Malay  Archipelago,  which  constituted  the  central 
and  controlling  incident  of  my  life. 


CHAPTER   XII 

THE  MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO 
(1854-1858) 

My  wanderings  and  adventures  in  the  far  East  have 
been  recorded  in  my  book  "  The  Malay  Archipelago." 
I  will  therefore  give  here  but  a  brief  outline  with  a  few 
extracts  from  my  letters  and  references  to  subjects  of 
special  interest. 

I  remained  at  Singapore  for  several  months 
collecting  insects  and  birds  in  the  forests  around. 
In  a  letter  home  I  give  a  short  account  of  my  daily 
life  at  this  time : — "  I  will  tell  you  how  my  day  is 
now  occupied.  Get  up  at  half-past  five,  bath,  and 
coffee.  Sit  down  to  arrange  and  put  away  my  insects 
of  the  day  before,  and  set  them  in  a  safe  place  to  dry. 
Charles  mends  our  insect-nets,  fills  our  pin-cushions, 
and  gets  ready  for  the  day.  Breakfast  at  eight ;  out 
to  the  jungle  at  nine.  We  have  to  walk  about  a 
quarter  mile  up  a  steep  hill  to  reach  it,  and  arrive 
dripping  with  perspiration.  Then  we  wander  about 
in  the  delightful  shade  along  paths  made  by  the 
Chinese  wood-cutters  till  two  or  three  in  the  afternoon, 
generally  returning  with  fifty  or  sixty  beetles,  some 
very  rare  or  beautiful,  and  perhaps  a  few  butterflies. 
Change  clothes  and  sit  down  to  kill  and  pin  insects, 
Charles  doing  the  flies,  wasps,  and  bugs  ;  I  do  not 
trust  him  yet  with  beetles.     Dinner  at  four,  then  at 


176  MY   LIFE 

work  again  till  six :  coffee.  Then  read  or  talk,  or,  if 
insects  very  numerous,  work  again  till  eight  or  nine. 
Then  to  bed." 

Charles  was  a  boy  of  sixteen  whom  I  had  brought 
with  me  from  London  as  he  wished  to  become  a 
collector.  He  remained  with  me  about  a  year  and 
a  half  and  eventually  got  employment  on  some  of  the 
plantations  near  Singapore. 

I  next  made  an  expedition  to  Malacca  which 
I  describe  in  one  of  my  letters  as  follows : — "  I  have 
now  just  returned  to  Singapore  after  two  months' 
hard  work.  At  Malacca  I  had  a  strong  touch  of 
fever,  with  the  old  '  Rio  Negro '  symptoms,  but  the 
Government  doctor  made  me  take  large  doses  of 
quinine  every  day  for  a  week,  and  so  killed  it,  and  in 
less  than  a  fortnight  I  was  quite  well,  and  off  to  the 
jungle  again.  I  never  took  half  enough  quinine  in 
America  to  cure  me. 

"  Malacca  is  a  pretty  place.  Insects  are  not  very 
abundant  there,  still,  by  perseverance,  I  got  a  good 
number,  and  many  rare  ones.  Of  birds,  too,  I  made 
a  good  collection.  I  went  to  the  celebrated  Mount 
Ophir,  and  ascended  to  the  top,  sleeping  under  a  rock. 
The  walk  there  was  hard  work,  thirty  miles  through 
jungle  in  a  succession  of  mud-holes,  and  swarming 
with  leeches,  which  crawled  all  over  us,  and  sucked 
when  and  where  they  pleased.  We  lived  a  week  at 
the  foot  of  the  mountain,  in  a  Httle  hut  built  by  our 
men,  near  a  beautiful  rocky  stream.  I  got  some  fine 
new  butterflies  there,  and  hundreds  of  other  new  or 
rare  insects.  Huge  centipedes  and  scorpions,  some 
nearly  a  foot  long,  were  common,  but  we  none  of  us 
got  bitten  or  stung.  We  only  had  rice,  and  a  little  fish 
and  tea,  but  came  home  quite  well.  The  mountain 
is  over  four  thousand  feet  high.     Near  the  top  are 


THE  MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO        177 

beautiful  ferns  and  pitcher-plants,  of  which  I  made  a 
small  collection.  Elephants  and  rhinoceroses,  as  well 
as  tigers,  are  abundant  there,  but  we  had  our  usual 
bad  luck  in  seeing  only  their  tracks.  On  returning  to 
Malacca  I  found  the  accumulation  of  two  or  three 
posts — a  dozen  letters,  and  about  fifty  newspapers. 
...  I  am  glad  to  be  safe  in  Singapore  with  my 
collections,  as  from  here  they  can  be  insured.  I  have 
now  a  fortnight's  work  to  arrange,  examine,  and  pack 
them,  and  four  months  hence  there  will  be  work  for 
Mr.  Stevens.^ 

"  Sir  James  Brooke  is  here.  I  have  called  on  him. 
He  received  me  most  cordially,  and  offered  me  every 
assistance  at  Sarawak.  I  shall  go  there  next,  as  I 
shall  have  pleasant  society  at  Sarawak,  and  shall  get 
on  in  Malay,  which  is  very  easy ;  but  I  have  had  no 
practice  yet,  though  I  can  ask  for  most  common 
things." 

I  reached  Sarawak  early  in  November,  and 
remained  in  Borneo  fourteen  months,  seeing  a  good 
deal  of  the  country.  The  first  four  months  was  the 
wet  season,  during  which  I  made  journeys  up  and 
down  the  Sarawak  river,  but  obtained  very  scanty 
collections.  In  March  I  went  to  the  Sadong  river, 
where  coal  mines  were  being  opened  by  an  English 
mining  engineer,  Mr.  Coulson,  a  Yorkshireman,  and  I 
stayed  there  nearly  nine  months,  it  being  the  best 
locality  for  beetles  I  found  during  my  twelve  years' 
tropical  collecting,  and  very  good  for  other  groups. 

It  was  also  in  this  place  that  I  obtained  numerous 
skins  and  skeletons  of  the  orang-utan,  as  fully  described 
in  my  "  Malay  Archipelago." 

*  They  were  sent  by  sailing  ship  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
the  overland  route  being  too  costly  for  goods. 

N 


178  MY   LIFE 

In  another  letter  referring  to  the  Dyaks,  I  say : — 
"  The  old  men  here  relate  with  pride  how  many 
'  heads '  they  took  in  their  youth  ;  and  though  they 
all  acknowledge  the  goodness  of  the  present  rajah, 
yet  they  think  that  if  they  were  allowed  to  take  a  few 
heads,  as  of  old,  they  would  have  better  crops.  The 
more  I  see  of  uncivilized  people,  the  better  I  think  of 
human  nature  on  the  whole,  and  the  essential  differ- 
ences between  civilized  and  savage  man  seem  to 
disappear.  Here  we  are,  two  Europeans,  surrounded 
by  a  population  of  Chinese,  Malays,  and  Dyaks.  The 
Chinese  are  generally  considered,  and  with  some 
amount  of  truth,  to  be  thieves,  liars,  and  reckless  of 
human  life,  and  these  Chinese  are  coolies  of  the 
lowest  and  least  educated  class,  though  they  can  all 
read  and  write.  The  Malays  are  invariably  described 
as  being  barbarous  and  bloodthirsty  ;  and  the  Dyaks 
have  only  recently  ceased  to  think  head-taking  a 
necessity  of  their  existence.  We  are  two  days' 
journey  from  Sarawak,  where,  though  the  government 
is  nominally  European,  it  only  exists  with  the  consent 
and  by  the  support  of  the  native  population.  Yet  I 
can  safely  say  that  in  any  part  of  Europe  where  the 
same  opportunities  for  crime  and  disturbance  existed, 
things  would  not  go  so  smoothly  as  they  do  here. 
We  sleep  with  open  doors,  and  go  about  constantly 
unarmed  ;  one  or  two  petty  robberies  and  a  little 
fighting  have  occurred  among  the  Chinese,  but  the 
great  majority  of  them  are  quiet,  honest,  decent  sort 
of  people." 

In  my  next  letter,  a  month  later,  I  gave  the 
following  account  of  an  interesting  episode  : — 

"  I  must  now  tell  you  of  the  addition  to  my  house- 
hold of  an  orphan  baby,  a  curious  little  half-nigger 
baby,  which  I  have  nursed  now  more  than  a  month. 


THE   MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO         179 

I  will  tell  you  presently  how  I  came  to  get  it,  but 
must  first  relate  my  inventive  skill  as  a  nurse.  The 
little  innocent  was  not  weaned,  and  I  had  nothing 
proper  to  feed  it  with,  so  was  obliged  to  give  it  rice- 
water.  I  got  a  large-mouthed  bottle,  making  two 
holes  in  the  cork,  through  one  of  which  I  inserted  a 
large  quill  so  that  the  baby  could  suck.  I  fitted  up 
a  box  for  a  cradle  with  a  mat  for  it  to  lie  upon,  which 
I  had  washed  and  changed  every  day.  I  feed  it  four 
times  a  day,  and  wash  it  and  brush  its  hair  every  day, 
which  it  likes  very  much,  only  crying  when  it  is 
hungry  or  dirty.  In  about  a  week  I  gave  it  the  rice- 
water  a  little  thicker,  and  always  sweetened  it  to 
make  it  nice.  I  am  afraid  you  would  call  it  an  ugly 
baby,  for  it  has  a  dark  brown  skin  and  red  hair,  a 
very  large  mouth,  but  very  pretty  little  hands  and 
feet.  It  has  now  cut  its  two  lower  front  teeth,  and 
the  uppers  are  coming.  At  first  it  would  not  sleep 
alone  at  night,  but  cried  very  much ;  so  I  made  it  a 
pillow  of  an  old  stocking,  which  it  likes  to  hug,  and 
now  sleeps  very  soundly.  It  has  powerful  lungs,  and 
sometimes  screams  tremendously,  so  I  hope  it  will 
live. 

"But  I  must  now  tell  you  how  I  came  to  take 
charge  of  it.  Don't  be  alarmed  ;  I  was  the  cause  of 
its  mother's  death.  It  happened  as  follows : — I  was 
out  shooting  in  the  jungle  and  saw  something  up  a 
tree  which  I  thought  was  a  large  monkey  or  orang- 
utan, so  I  fired  at  it,  and  down  fell  this  little  baby — in 
its  mother's  arms.  What  she  did  up  in  the  tree  of 
course  I  can't  imagine,  but  as  she  ran  about  the 
branches  quite  easily,  I  presume  she  was  a  wild 
*  woman  of  the  woods  ; '  so  I  have  preserved  her  skin 
and  skeleton,  and  am  trying  to  bring  up  her  only 
daughter,  and  hope  some   day  to  introduce   her  to 


l8o  MY   LIFE 

fashionable  society  at  the  Zoological  Gardens.  When 
its  poor  mother  fell  mortally  wounded,  the  baby  was 
plunged  head  over  ears  in  a  swamp  about  the  con- 
sistence of  pea-soup,  and  when  I  got  it  out  looked 
very  pitiful.  It  clung  to  me  very  hard  when  I  carried 
it  home,  and  having  got  its  little  hands  unawares  into 
my  beard,  it  clutched  so  tight  that  I  had  great  difficulty 
in  extricating  myself  Its  mother,  poor  creature,  had 
very  long  hair,  and  while  she  was  running  about  the 
trees  like  a  mad  woman,  the  little  baby  had  to  hold 
fast  to  prevent  itself  from  falling,  which  accounts  for 
the  remarkable  strength  of  its  little  fingers  and  toes, 
which  catch  hold  of  anything  with  the  firmness  of  a 
vice.  About  a  week  ago  I  bought  a  little  monkey 
with  a  long  tail,  and  as  the  baby  was  very  lonely 
while  we  were  out  in  the  daytime,  I  put  the  little 
monkey  into  the  cradle  to  keep  it  warm.  Perhaps 
you  will  say  that  this  was  not  proper.  '  How  could 
you  do  such  a  thing  ? '  But,  I  assure  you,  the  baby 
likes  it  exceedingly,  and  they  are  excellent  friends. 
When  the  monkey  wants  to  run  away,  as  he  often 
does,  the  baby  clutches  him  by  the  tail  or  ears  and 
drags  him  back ;  and  if  the  monkey  does  succeed  in 
escaping,  screams  violently  till  he  is  brought  back 
again.  Of  course,  baby  cannot  walk  yet,  but  I  let  it 
crawl  about  on  the  floor  to  exercise  its  limbs  ;  but  it 
is  the  most  wonderful  baby  I  ever  saw,  and  has  such 
strength  in  its  arms  that  it  will  catch  hold  of  my 
trousers  as  I  sit  at  work,  and  hang  under  my  legs  for 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  a  time  without  being  the  least 
tired,  all  the  time  trying  to  suck,  thinking,  no  doubt, 
it  has  got  hold  of  its  poor  dear  mother.  When  it 
finds  no  milk  is  to  be  had,  there  comes  another 
scream,  and  I  have  to  put  it  back  in  its  cradle  and 
give  it   'Toby' — the   little    monkey — to   hug,  which 


THE   MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO         i8i 

quiets  it  immediately.  From  this  short  account  you 
will  see  that  my  baby  is  no  common  baby,  and  I  can 
safely  say,  what  so  many  have  said  before  with  much 
less  truth, '  There  never  was  such  a  baby  as  my  baby,' 
and  I  am  sure  nobody  ever  had  such  a  dear  little  duck 
of  a  darling  of  a  little  brown  hairy  baby  before." 

In  a  letter  dated  Christmas  Day,  1855,  I  gave  my 
impressions  of  the  Dyaks,  and  of  Sir  James  Brooke, 
as  follows : — 

"  I  have  now  lived  a  month  in  a  Dyak's  house, 
and  spent  a  day  or  two  in  several  others,  and  I  have 
been  very  much  pleased  with  them.  They  are  a  very 
kind,  simple,  hospitable  people,  and  I  do  no.t  wonder 
at  the  great  interest  Sir  James  Brooke  takes  in  them. 
They  are  more  communicative  and  more  cheerful  than 
the  American  Indians,  and  it  is  therefore  more  agree- 
able to  live  with  them.  In  moral  character  they  are 
far  superior  to  either  the  Malays  or  the  Chinese,  for 
though  head-taking  was  long  a  custom  among  them, 
it  was  only  as  a  trophy  of  war.  In  their  own  villages 
crimes  are  very  rare.  Ever  since  Sir  James  Brooke 
has  been  rajah,  more  than  twelve  years,  there  has  only 
been  one  case  of  murder  in  a  Dyak  tribe,  and  that  was 
committed  by  a  stranger  who  had  been  adopted  into 
the  tribe.  One  wet  day  I  produced  a  piece  of  string 
to  show  them  how  to  play  '  cat's  cradle,'  and  was 
quite  astonished  to  find  that  they  knew  it  much 
better  than  I  did,  and  could  make  all  sorts  of  new 
figures  I  had  never  seen.  They  were  also  very 
clever  at  tricks  with  string  on  their  fingers,  which 
seemed  to  be  a  favourite  amusement.  Many  of  the 
remoter  tribes  think  the  rajah  cannot  be  a  man. 
They  ask  all  sorts  of  curious  questions  about  him — 
Whether  he  is  not  as  old  as  the  mountains  ;  whether 


i82  MY   LIFE 

he  cannot  bring  the  dead  to  life ;  and  I  have  no 
doubt,  for  many  years  after  his  death,  he  will  be  held 
to  be  a  deity  and  expected  to  come  back  again. 

"  I  have  now  seen  a  good  deal  of  Sir  James,  and 
the  more  I  see  of  him  the  more  I  admire  him.  With 
the  highest  talents  for  government  he  combines  in  a 
high  degree  goodness  of  heart  and  gentleness  of 
manner.  At  the  same  time,  he  has  so  much  self- 
confidence  and  determination  that  he  has  put  down 
with  the  greatest  ease  the  conspiracies  of  one  or  two 
of  the  Malay  chiefs  against  him.  It  is  a  unique  case 
in  the  history  of  the  world  for  a  private  English 
gentleman  to  rule  over  two  conflicting  races — a 
superior  and  an  inferior — with  their  own  consent, 
without  any  means  of  coercion,  but  depending  solely 
upon  them  both  for  protection  and  support,  while  at 
the  same  time  he  introduces  some  of  the  best  customs 
of  civilization,  and  checks  all  crimes  and  barbarous 
practices  that  before  prevailed.  Under  his  govern- 
ment '  running-a-muck,'  so  frequent  in  other  Malay 
countries,  has  never  taken  place,  and  in  a  population 
of  about  30,000  Malays,  almost  all  of  whom  carry 
their  kris,  and  were  accustomed  to  revenge  an  insult 
with  a  stab,  murders  only  occur  once  in  several  years. 
The  people  are  never  taxed  except  with  their  own 
consent,  and  in  the  manner  most  congenial  to  them, 
while  almost  the  whole  of  the  rajah's  private  fortune 
has  been  spent  in  the  improvement  of  the  country  or 
for  its  benefit.  Yet  this  is  the  man  who  has  been 
accused  in  England  of  wholesale  murder  and  butchery 
of  unoffending  tribes  to  secure  his  own  power !  " 

In  my  next  letter  (from  Singapore  in  February, 
1856)  I  say — "I  have  now  left  Sarawak,  where  I 
began  to  feel  quite  at  home,  and  may  perhaps  never 
return  to  it  again,  but  I  shall  always  look  back  with 


THE   MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO         183 

pleasure  to  my  residence  there  and  to  my  acquaint- 
ance with  Sir  James  Brooke,  who  is  a  gentleman  and 
a  nobleman  in  the  truest  and  best  sense  of  those  words." 

While  in  Sarawak  I  wrote  an  article  which  formed 
my  first  contribution  to  the  question  of  the  origin  of 
species.  I  sent  it  to  The  Annals  and  Magazine  of 
Natural  History,  in  which  it  appeared  in  the  following 
September  (1855).  ^^^  title  was  "  On  the  Law  which 
has  regulated  the  Introduction  of  New  Species,"  which 
law  was  briefly  stated  (at  the  end)  as  follows  :  "  Every 
species  has  come  into  existence  coi^icident  both  in  space 
and  time  with  a  pre-existing  closely-allied  species T 
This  clearly  pointed  to  some  kind  of  evolution.  It 
suggested  the  when  and  the  zvhere  of  its  occurrence, 
and  that  it  could  only  be  through  natural  generation, 
as  was  also  suggested  in  the  "  Vestiges  "  ;  but  the 
how  was  still  a  secret  only  to  be  penetrated  some 
years  later. 

Soon  after  this  article  appeared,  Mr.  Stevens,  my 
agent,  wrote  me  that  he  had  heard  several  naturalists 
express  regret  that  I  was  "  theorizing,"  when  what  we 
had  to  do  was  to  collect  more  facts.  After  this,  I 
had  in  a  letter  to  Darwin  expressed  surprise  that  no 
notice  appeared  to  have  been  taken  of  my  paper,  to 
which  he  replied  that  both  Sir  Charles  Lyell  and 
Mr.  Edward  Blyth,  two  very  good  men,  specially 
called  his  attention  to  it.  I  was,  however,  rewarded 
later,  when  in  Huxley's  chapter,  "On  the  Reception 
of  the  Origin  of  Species,"  contributed  to  the  "Life 
and  Letters,"  he  referred  to  this  paper  as — "  his 
powerful  essay,"  adding — "  On  reading  it  afresh  I 
have  been  astonished  to  recollect  how  small  was  the 
impression  it  made"  (vol.  ii.  p.  185).  The  article  is 
reprinted  in  my  "  Natural  Selection  and  Tropical 
Nature." 


i84  MY   LIFE 

In  a  letter  to  Bates,  dated  January  4,  1858,  written 
on  board  the  Dutch  steamer  which  took  me  from 
Amboyna  to  Ternate,  I  wrote — "  To  persons  who 
have  not  thought  much  on  the  subject  I  fear  my 
paper  on  the  '  Succession  of  Species  '  will  not  appear 
so  clear  as  it  does  to  you.  That  paper  is,  of  course, 
merely  the  announcement  of  the  theory,  not  its 
development.  I  have  prepared  the  plan  and  written 
portions  of  a  work  embracing  the  whole  subject,  and 
have  endeavoured  to  prove  in  detail  what  I  have  as 
yet  only  indicated.  It  was  the  promulgation  of 
Forbes's  theory  of  *  polarity '  which  led  me  to  write 
and  publish,  for  I  was  annoyed  to  see  such  an  ideal 
absurdity  put  forth,  when  such  a  simple  hypothesis 
will  explain  all  the  facts.  I  have  been  much  gratified 
by  a  letter  from  Darwin,  in  which  he  says  that  he 
agrees  with  *  almost  every  word  '  of  my  paper.  He 
is  now  preparing  his  great  work  on  '  Species  and 
Varieties,'  for  which  he  has  been  collecting  materials 
twenty  years.  He  may  save  me  the  trouble  of 
writing  more  on  my  hypothesis,  by  proving  that  there 
is  no  difference  in  nature  between  the  origin  of  species 
and  of  varieties ;  or  he  may  give  me  trouble  by 
arriving  at  another  conclusion  ;  but,  at  all  events,  his 
facts  will  be  given  for  me  to  work  upon.  Your 
collections  and  my  own  will  furnish  most  valuable 
material  to  illustrate  and  prove  the  universal  applic- 
ability of  the  hypothesis.  The  connection  between 
the  succession  of  affinities  and  the  geographical  dis- 
tribution of  a  group,  worked  out  species  by  species, 
has  never  yet  been  shown  as  we  shall  be  able  to 
show  it. 

"  In  this  archipelago  there  are  two  distinct  faunas 
rigidly  circumscribed,  which  differ  as  much  as  do 
those  of  Africa  and   South  America,  and  more  than 


THE   MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO         185 

those  of  Europe  and  North  America,  yet  there  is 
nothing  on  the  map  or  on  the  face  of  the  islands  to 
mark  their  limits.  The  boundary  line  passes  between 
islands  closer  together  than  others  belonging  to  the 
same  group.  I  believe  the  western  part  to  be  a 
separated  portion  of  continental  Asia,  while  the 
eastern  is  a  fragmentary  prolongation  of  a  former 
west  Pacific  continent.  In  mammalia  and  birds  the 
distinction  is  marked  by  genera,  families,  and  even 
orders  confined  to  one  region  ;  in  insects  by  a  number 
of  genera,  and  little  groups  of  peculiar  species,  the 
families  of  insects  having  generally  a  very  wide  or 
universal  distribution." 

This  letter  proves  that  at  this  time  I  had  not  the 
least  idea  of  the  nature  of  Darwin's  proposed  work, 
nor  of  the  definite  conclusions  he  had  arrived  at,  nor 
had  I  myself  any  expectation  of  a  complete  solution 
of  the  great  problem  to  which  my  paper  was  merely 
the  prelude.  Yet  less  than  two  months  later  that 
solution  flashed  upon  me,  and  to  a  large  extent  marked 
out  a  dififerent  line  of  work  from  that  which  I  had  up 
to  this  time  anticipated. 

I  finished  the  letter  after  my  arrival  at  Tern  ate 
(January  25,  1858),  and  made  the  following  observa- 
tion :  "  If  you  go  to  the  Andes  I  think  you  will  be 
disappointed,  at  least  in  the  number  of  species^ 
especially  of  Coleoptera.  My  experience  here  is  that 
the  low  grounds  are  mitch  the  most  productive,  though 
the  mountains  generally  produce  a  few  striking  and 
brilliant  species."  This  rather  hasty  generalization 
is,  I  am  inclined  still  to  think,  a  correct  one,  at  all 
events  as  regards  the  individual  collector.  I  doubt  if 
there  is  any  mountain  station  in  the  world  where  so 
many  species  of  butterflies  can  be  collected  within 
a  walk  as  at  Para,  or  more  beetles  than  at  my  station 


1 86  MY  LIFE 

in  Borneo  and  Bates's  at  Ega.  Yet  it  may  be  the 
case  that  many  areas  of  about  a  hundred  miles  square 
in  the  Andes  and  in  the  Himalayas  actually  contain 
a  larger  number  of  species  than  any  similar  area  in 
the  lowlands  of  the  Amazon  or  of  Borneo.  In  other 
parts  of  this  letter  I  refer  to  the  work  I  hoped  to  do 
myself  in  describing,  cataloguing,  and  working  out 
the  distribution  of  my  insects.  I  had  in  fact  been 
qitten  by  the  passion  for  species  and  their  description, 
and  if  neither  Darwin  nor  myself  had  hit  upon 
"  Natural  Selection,"  I  might  have  spent  the  best 
years  of  my  life  in  this  comparatively  profitless  work. 
But  the  new  ideas  swept  all  this  away.  I  have  for 
the  most  part  left  others  to  describe  my  discoveries, 
and  have  devoted  myself  to  the  great  generalizations 
which  the  laborious  work  of  species-describers  had 
rendered  possible.  In  this  letter  to  Bates  I  enclosed 
a  memorandum  of  my  estimate  of  the  number  of 
distinct  species  of  insects  I  had  collected  up  to  the 
time  of  writing — three  years  and  a  half,  nearly  one 
year  of  which  had  been  lost  in  journeys,  illnesses,  and 
various  delays.     The  totals  were  as  follows : — 


Butterflies 

620 

species 

Moths 

2000 

Beetles 

3700 

Bees,  wasps,  etc. 

750 

Flies       

660 

Bugs,  cicadas,  etc. 

500 

Locusts,  etc. 

160 

Dragonflies,  etc. 

no 

Earwigs,  etc 

40 

Total 8540  species  of  Insects. 

Having  been  unable  to   find  a  vessel   direct  to 
Macassar,  I  took  passage  to  Lombok,  whence  I  was 


THE   MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO         187 

assured  I  should  easily  reach  my  destination.  By 
this  delay,  which  seemed  to  me  at  the  time  a  mis- 
fortune, I  was  enabled  to  make  some  very  interesting 
collections  in  Bali  and  Lombok,  two  islands  which  I 
should  otherwise  never  have  seen.  I  was  thus  enabled 
to  determine  the  exact  boundary  between  two  of 
the  primary  zoological  regions,  the  Oriental  and  the 
Australian,  and  also  to  see  the  only  existing  remnant 
of  the  Hindu  race  and  religion,  and  of  the  old  civiliza- 
tion which  had  erected  the  wonderful  ruined  temples 
in  Java  centuries  before  the  Mohammedan  invasion 
of  the  archipelago. 

After  two  months  and  a  half  in  Lombok,  I  found 
a  passage  to  Macassar,  which  I  reached  the  beginning 
of  September,  and  lived  there  nearly  three  months, 
when  I  left  for  the  Aru  Islands  in  a  native  prau.  The 
country  around  Macassar  greatly  disappointed  me,  as 
it  was  perfectly  flat  and  all  cultivated  as  rice  fields, 
the  only  sign  of  woods  being  the  palm  and  fruit  trees 
in  the  suburbs  of  Macassar  and  others  marking  the 
sites  of  native  villages.  I  had  letters  to  a  Dutch 
merchant  who  spoke  English  as  well  as  Malay  and 
the  Bugis  language  of  Celebes,  and  who  was  quite 
friendly  with  the  native  rajah  of  the  adjacent  territory. 
Through  his  good  offices  I  was  enabled  to  stay  at  a 
native  village  about  eight  miles  inland,  where  there 
were  some  patches  of  forest,  and  where  I  at  once 
obtained  some  of  the  rare  birds  and  insects  peculiar 
to  Celebes.  After  about  a  month  I  returned  to 
Macassar,  and  found  that  I  could  obtain  a  passage  to 
the  celebrated  Aru  Islands,  where  at  least  two  species 
of  birds  of  paradise  are  found,  and  which  had  never 
been  visited  by  an  English  collector.  This  was  a 
piece  of  good  fortune  I  had  not  expected,  and  it  was 
especially  so  because  the  next  six  months  would  be 


i88  MY  LIFE 

wet  in  Celebes,  while  it  would  be  the  dry  season  in 
the  Aru  Islands.  This  journey  was  the  most  success- 
ful of  any  that  I  undertook,  and  as  it  is  fully  described 
in  my  book  and  no  letters  referring  to  it  have  been 
preserved,  I  shall  say  no  more  about  it  here. 

The  illustration  opposite  is  from  a  photograph  of 
a  native  house  in  the  island  of  Wokan,  which  was 
given  me  by  the  late  Professor  Moseley  of  the 
Challenger  expedition.  It  so  closely  resembles  the 
hut  in  which  I  lived  for  a  fortnight,  and  where  I 
obtained  my  first  King  bird  of  paradise,  that  I  feel 
sure  it  must  be  the  same,  especially  as  I  saw  no  other 
like  it. 


^ 


^ 


CHAPTER   XIII 

THE  MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO 

(1858-1862) 

After  returning  to  Macassar,  where  I  spent  three 
months  collecting,  I  visited  Amboyna,  staying  there  a 
month,  and  arrived  at  Ternate,  January  8,  1858. 

It  was  while  waiting  at  Ternate  in  order  to  get 
ready  for  my  next  journey,  and  to  decide  where  I 
should  go,  that  the  idea  already  referred  to  occurred 
to  me.  It  has  been  shown  how,  for  the  preceding 
eight  or  nine  years,  the  great  problem  of  the  origin  of 
species  had  been  continually  pondered  over,  and  how 
my  varied  observations  and  study  had  been  made  use 
of  to  lay  down  the  foundation  for  its  full  discussion 
and  elucidation.  My  paper  written  at  Sarawak  ren- 
dered it  certain  to  my  mind  that  the  change  had 
taken  place  by  natural  succession  and  descent — one 
species  becoming  changed  either  slowly  or  rapidly 
into  another.  But  the  exact  process  of  the  change 
and  the  causes  which  led  to  it  were  absolutely  un- 
known and  appeared  almost  inconceivable.  The  great 
difficulty  was  to  understand  how,  if  one  species  was 
gradually  changed  into  another,  there  continued  to  be 
so  many  quite  distinct  species,  so  many  which  differed 
from  their  nearest  allies  by  slight  yet  perfectly  definite 
and  constant  characters. 

At  the  time  in  question   I  was  suffering  from  a 


190  MY   LIFE 

sharp  attack  of  intermittent  fever,  and  every  day 
during  the  cold  and  succeeding  hot  fits  had  to  lie 
down  for  several  hours,  during  which  time  I  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  think  over  any  subjects  then 
particularly  interesting  me.  One  day  something 
brought  to  my  recollection  Malthus's  "  Principles  of 
Population,"  which  I  had  read  about  twelve  years 
before.  I  thought  of  his  clear  exposition  of  "the 
positive  checks  to  increase  " — disease,  accidents,  war, 
and  famine — which  keep  down  the  population  of 
savage  races  to  so  much  lower  an  average  than  that 
of  more  civilized  peoples.  It  then  occurred  to  me 
that  these  causes  or  their  equivalents  are  continually 
acting  in  the  case  of  animals  also ;  and  as  animals 
usually  breed  much  more  rapidly  than  does  mankind, 
the  destruction  every  year  from  these  causes  must  be 
enormous  in  order  to  keep  down  the  numbers  of 
each  species,  since  they  evidently  do  not  increase 
regularly  from  year  to  year,  as  otherwise  the  world 
would  long  ago  have  been  densely  crowded  with 
those  that  breed  most  quickly.  Vaguely  thinking 
over  the  enormous  and  constant  destruction  which 
this  implied,  it  occurred  to  me  to  ask  the  question. 
Why  do  some  die  and  some  live  .''  And  the  answer 
was  clearly,  that  on  the  whole  the  best  fitted  live. 
From  the  effects  of  disease  the  most  healthy  escaped  ; 
from  enemies,  the  strongest,  the  swiftest,  or  the  most 
cunning  ;  from  famine,  the  best  hunters  or  those  with 
the  best  digestion  ;  and  so  on.  Then  it  suddenly 
flashed  upon  me  that  this  self-acting  process  would 
necessarily  improve  the  race,  because  in  every  genera- 
tion the  inferior  would  inevitably  be  killed  off  and  the 
superior  would  remain — that  is,  the  fittest  would  sur- 
vive. Then  at  once  I  seemed  to  see  the  whole  effect 
of  this,  that  when  changes  of  land  and  sea,  or  of 


THE   MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO         191 

climate,  or  of  food-supply,  or  of  enemies  occurred — and 
we  know  that  such  changes  have  always  been  taking 
place — in  conjunction  with  the  amount  of  individual 
variation  that  my  experience  as  a  collector  had  shown 
me  to  exist,  then  all  the  changes  necessary  for  the 
adaptation  of  the  species  to  the  changing  conditions 
would  be  brought  about ;  and  as  great  changes  in  the 
environment  are  always  slow,  there  would  be  ample 
time  for  the  change  to  be  effected  by  the  survival  of 
the  best  fitted  in  every  generation.  In  this  way  each 
part  of  an  animal's  organization  could  be  modified 
exactly  as  required,  and  in  the  very  process  of  this 
modification  the  unmodified  would  die  out,  and  thus 
the  definite  characters  and  the  clear  isolation  of  each 
new  species  would  be  explained.  The  more  I  thought 
over  it  the  more  I  became  convinced  that  I  had  at 
length  found  the  long-sought-for  law  of  nature  that 
solved  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  species.  For  the 
next  hour  I  thought  over  the  deficiencies  in  the 
theories  of  Lamarck  and  of  the  author  of  the  "  Ves- 
tiges," and  I  saw  that  my  new  theory  supplemented 
these  views  and  obviated  every  important  difficulty. 
I  waited  anxiously  for  the  termination  of  my  fit  so 
that  I  might  at  once  make  notes  for  a  paper  on  the 
subject.  The  same  evening  I  did  this  pretty  fully, 
and  on  the  two  succeeding  evenings  wrote  it  out 
carefully  in  order  to  send  it  to  Darwin  by  the  next 
post,  which  would  leave  in  a  day  or  two. 

I  wrote  a  letter  to  him  in  which  I  said  that  I 
hoped  the  idea  would  be  as  new  to  him  as  it  was  to 
me,  and  that  it  would  supply  the  missing  factor  to 
explain  the  origin  of  species.  I  asked  him,  if  he 
thought  it  sufficiently  important,  to  show  it  to  Sir 
Charles  Lyell,  who  had  thought  so  highly  of  my 
former  paper. 


192  MY  LIFE 

The  effect  of  my  paper  upon  Darwin  was  at  first 
almost  paralyzing.  He  had,  as  I  afterwards  learnt, 
hit  upon  the  same  idea  as  my  own  twenty  years 
earlier,  and  had  occupied  himself  during  the  whole  of 
that  long  period  in  study  and  experiment,  and  in 
sketching  out  and  partly  writing  a  great  work,  to 
show  how  the  new  principle  would  serve  to  explain 
almost  all  the  chief  phenomenon  and  characters  of 
living  things  in  their  relation  to  each  other. 

So  early  as  1844  he  had  shown  portions  of  this 
work  to  Sir  Charles  Lyell  and  Dr.  Joseph  Hooker, 
who  had  been  greatly  struck  by  it,  and  who  were 
thenceforth  his  only  confidants  in  the  secret  of  his 
new  idea,  which  from  the  analogy  of  the  breeder's 
selection  of  the  most  suitable  animals  or  plants  in 
order  to  produce  new  varieties,  he  termed  "natural 
selection."  Sir  Charles  Lyell  had  frequently  urged 
him  to  publish  an  outline  of  his  views,  saying — "  If 
you  don't,  some  one  else  will  hit  upon  it,  and  you  will 
be  forestalled."  On  receiving  my  paper  he  wrote  to 
Sir  Charles — "Your  words  have  come  true  with  a 
vengeance — that  I  should  be  forestalled.  I  never  saw 
a  more  striking  coincidence.  ...  So  all  my  origin- 
ality, whatever  it  may  amount  to,  will  be  smashed, 
though  my  book,  if  it  will  ever  have  any  value,  will 
not  be  deteriorated,  as  all  the  labour  consists  in  the 
application  of  the  theory "  ("  Life  and  Letters  of 
Charles  Darwin,"  ii.  p.  116). 

Darwin  was  naturally  much  troubled,  and  did 
not  know  how  to  act,  declaring  in  a  later  letter  to 
Sir  Charles  Lyell — "  I  would  far  rather  burn  my 
whole  book,  than  that  he  (Wallace)  or  any  other  man 
should  think  that  I  had  behaved  in  a  paltry  spirit." 
He  therefore  left  the  matter  in  the  hands  of  his 
two   friends,   and    they   determined    (on    their    own 


THE   MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO         193 

responsibilit}^)  that  my  essay,  together  with  extracts 
from  Darwin's  MSS.,  which  they  had  seen  many  years 
before,  should  be  read  before  the  Linnean  Society 
and  pubh'shed  in  its  "Journal."  The  joint  papers 
were  read  on  July  i,  1858,  Dr.  Hooker  and  Sir 
Charles  Lyell  being  present.  After  Darwin's  death 
the  former  wrote  a  short  account  of  this  event 
for  the  "Life  and  Letters,"  in  which  he  said:  "The 
interest  excited  was  intense,  but  the  subject  was  too 
novel  and  too  ominous  for  the  old  school  to  enter  the 
lists  before  armouring.  After  the  meeting  it  was 
talked  over  with  bated  breath  :  Lyell's  approval,  and 
perhaps  in  a  small  way  mine,  as  his  lieutenant  in  the 
affair,  rather  overawed  the  Fellows,  who  would  other- 
wise have  flown  out  against  the  doctrine  "  ("  Life  and 
Letters,"  ii.  p.  126). 

Both  Darwin  and  Dr.  Hooker  wrote  to  me  in  the 
most  kind  and  courteous  manner,  informing  me  of 
what  had  been  done,  of  which  they  hoped  I  would 
approve.  Of  course  I  not  only  approved,  but  felt 
that  they  had  given  me  more  honour  and  credit 
than  I  deserved,  by  putting  my  sudden  intuition — 
hastily  written  and  immediately  sent  off  for  the 
opinion  of  Darwin  and  Lyell — on  the  same  level 
with  the  prolonged  labours  of  Darwin,  who  had 
reached  the  same  point  twenty  years  before  me, 
and  had  worked  continuously  during  that  long 
period  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to  present 
the  theory  to  the  world  with  such  a  body  of  systema- 
tized facts  and  arguments  as  would  almost  compel 
conviction. 

In  a  later  letter,  Darwin  wrote  that  he  owed  much 
to  me  and  his  two  friends,  adding  :  "  I  almost  think 
that  Lyell  would  have  proved  right,  and  that  I  should 
never   have   completed  my  larger  work."      I    think, 

O 


194  MY   LIFE 

therefore,  that  I  may  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing 
that  by  writing  my  article  and  sending  it  to  Darwin, 
I  was  the  unconscious  means  of  leading  him  to  con- 
centrate himself  on  the  task  of  drawing  up  what  he 
termed  "  an  abstract "  of  the  great  work  he  had  in 
preparation,  but  which  was  really  a  large  and  care- 
fully written  volume  —  the  celebrated  "Origin  of 
Species,"  published  in  November,  1859.  The  re- 
mainder of  the  story  of  my  relations  with  Darwin 
will  be  found  in  later  chapters  of  this  book.  I  will 
now  continue  the  account  of  my  travels. 

During  the  first  months  of  my  residence  at 
Ternate  I  made  two  visits  to  different  parts  of  the 
large  island  of  Gilolo,  where  my  hunters  obtained  a 
number  of  very  fine  birds,  but  owing  to  the  absence 
of  good  virgin  forest  and  my  own  ill-health,  I  obtained 
very  few  insects.  At  length,  on  March  25,  I  obtained 
a  passage  to  Dorey  Harbour,  on  the  north  coast  of 
New  Guinea,  in  a  trading  schooner,  which  left  me 
there,  and  called  for  me  three  or  four  months  later  to 
bring  me  back  to  Ternate.  I  was  the  first  European 
who  had  lived  alone  on  this  great  island  ;  but  partly 
owing  to  an  accident  which  confined  me  to  the  house 
for  a  month,  and  partly  because  the  locality  was  not 
a  good  one,  I  did  not  get  the  rare  species  of  birds  of 
paradise  I  had  expected.  I  obtained,  however,  a 
number  of  new  and  rare  birds  and  a  fine  collection  of 
insects,  though  not  so  many  of  the  larger  and  finer 
kinds  as  I  expected.  The  weather  had  been  unusually 
wet,  and  the  place  was  unhealthy.  I  had  four  Malay 
servants  with  me,  three  of  whom  had  fever  as  well  as 
myself,  and  one  of  my  hunters  died,  and  though  I 
should  have  liked  to  stay  longer,  we  were  all  weak  or 
unwell,  and  were  very  glad  when  the  schooner  arrived 
and    took    us   back  to   Ternate.      Here   wholesome 


THE   MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO         195 

food  and  a  comfortable  house  soon  restored  us  to 
good  health, 

I  now  received  letters  informing  me  of  the  re- 
ception of  the  paper  on  "  The  Tendency  of  Varieties 
to  depart  indefinitely  from  the  Original  Type,"  which 
I  had  sent  to  Darwin,  and  in  a  letter  home  I  thus 
refer  to  it :  "I  have  received  letters  from  Mr.  Darwin 
and  Dr.  Hooker,  two  of  the  most  eminent  naturalists 
in  England,  which  have  highly  gratified  me.  I  sent 
Mr.  Darwin  an  essay  on  a  subject  upon  which  he  is 
now  writing  a  great  work.  He  showed  it  to  Dr. 
Hooker  and  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  who  thought  so  highly 
of  it  that  they  had  it  read  before  the  Linnean  Society. 
This  insures  me  the  acquaintance  of  these  eminent 
men  on  my  return  home." 

The  next  two  years  were  spent  principally  at 
Ternate,  Batchian,  Menado  in  Celebes,  and  Am- 
boyna. 

In  February,  i860,  I  left  the  last-named  place 
with  the  intention  of  again  visiting  the  Ke  Islands. 
After  immense  difificulties  I  reached  Coram,  about 
fifty  miles  beyond  the  east  end  of  Ceram,  where  I 
purchased  a  boat  and  started  for  Ke  ;  but  after  getting 
half-way,  the  weather  was  so  bad  and  the  winds  so 
adverse  that  I  was  obliged  to  return  to  the  Matabello 
Islands,  and  thence  by  way  of  Coram  and  the  north 
coast  of  Ceram  to  the  great  island  of  Waigiou.  This 
was  a  long  and  most  unfortunate  voyage.  I  found 
there,  however,  what  I  chiefly  went  for — the  rare  red 
bird  of  paradise  {Paradisea  rubra) ;  but  during  the 
three  months  I  lived  there,  often  with  very  little  food, 
I  obtained  only  about  seventy  species  of  birds,  mostly 
the  same  as  those  from  New  Cuinea,  though  a  few 
species  of  parrots,  pigeons,  kingfishers,  and  other 
birds  were  new.    Insects  were  never  abundant,  but  by 


196  MY   LIFE 

continued  perseverance  I  obtained  rather  more  species 
of  both  butterflies  and  beetles  than  at  New  Guinea, 
though  fewer,  I  think,  of  the  more  showy  kinds. 

The  voyage  from  Waigiou  back  to  Tern  ate  was 
again  most  tedious  and  unfortunate,  occupying  thirty- 
eight  days,  whereas  with  reasonably  favourable  weather 
it  should  not  have  required  more  than  ten  or  twelve. 
Taking  my  whole  voyage  in  this  canoe  from  Goram 
to  Waigiou  and  Ternate,  I  thus  summarize  my  account 
of  it  in  my  "  Malay  Archipelago  "  :  "  My  first  crew  ran 
away  in  a  body  ;  two  men  were  lost  on  a  desert  island, 
and  only  recovered  a  month  later  after  twice  sending 
in  search  of  them  ;  we  were  ten  times  run  aground  on 
coral  reefs ;  we  lost  four  anchors ;  our  sails  were 
devoured  by  rats  ;  our  small  boat  was  lost  astern  ; 
we  were  thirty-eight  days  on  a  voyage  which  should 
not  have  taken  twelve  ;  we  were  many  times  short  of 
food  and  water ;  we  had  no  compass-lamp  owing  to 
there  being  not  a  drop  of  oil  in  Waigiou  when  we 
left ;  and,  to  crown  all,  during  our  whole  voyage  from 
Goram  by  Ceram  to  Waigiou,  and  from  Waigiou  to 
Ternate,  occupying  in  all  seventy-eight  days  (or  only 
twelve  days  short  of  three  months),  all  in  what  was 
supposed  to  be  the  favourable  season,  we  had  not  one 
sijigle  day  of  fair  wind.  We  were  always  close 
braced  up,  always  struggling  against  wind,  currents, 
and  leeway,  and  in  a  vessel  that  would  scarcely  sail 
nearer  than  eight  points  from  the  wind!  Every 
seaman  will  admit  that  my  first  (and  last)  voyage  in 
a  boat  of  my  own  was  a  very  unfortunate  one." 

On  again  returning  to  Ternate  I  wrote  the  follow- 
ing letter  to  Bates,  giving  my  opinion  of  Darwin's 
"  Origin  of  Species,"  and  referring  to  the  subject  of 
the  geographical  distribution  of  animals  in  which  I 
was  much  interested : — 


THE   MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO         197 

"Ternate,  December  24,  i860, 

"Dear  Bates, 

"  Many  thanks  for  your  long  and  interesting 
letter.  I  have  myself  suffered  much  in  the  same  way 
as  you  describe,  and  I  think  more  severely.  The 
kind  of  tcsdmm  vitcB  you  mention  I  also  occasionally 
experience  here.  I  impute  it  to  a  too  monotonous 
existence. 

"  I  know  not  how,  or  to  whom,  to  express  fully 
my  admiration  of  Darwin's  book.  To  Jiim  it  would 
seem  flattery,  to  others  self-praise  ;  but  I  do  honestly 
believe  that  with  however  much  patience  I  had  worked 
and  experimented  on  the  subject,  I  could  never  have 
approacJied  the  completeness  of  his  book,  its  vast 
accumulation  of  evidence,  its  overwhelming  argument, 
and  its  admirable  tone  and  spirit.  I  really  feel 
thankful  that  it  has  not  been  left  to  me  to  give  the 
theory  to  the  world.  Mr.  Darwin  has  created  a  new 
science  and  a  new  philosophy ;  and  I  believe  that 
never  has  such  a  complete  illustration  of  a  new  branch 
of  human  knowledge  been  due  to  the  labours  and 
researches  of  a  single  man.  Never  have  such  vast 
masses  of  widely  scattered  and  hitherto  quite  uncon- 
nected facts  been  combined  into  a  system  and  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  establishment  of  such  a  grand  and 
new  and  simple  philosophy. 

"  I  am  surprised  at  your  joining  the  north  and 
south  banks  of  the  lower  Amazon  into  one  region. 
Did  you  not  find  a  sufificiency  of  distinct  species 
at  Obydos  and  Barra  to  separate  them  from  Villa 
Nova  and  Santarem  ?  I  am  now  convinced  that 
insects,  on  the  whole,  do  not  give  such  true  indica- 
tions of  zoological  geography  as  birds  and  mammals, 
because,  first,  they  have  such  immensely  greater 
means  of  dispersal  across   rivers   and   seas ;  second, 


198  MY   LIFE 

because  they  are  so  much  more  influenced  by  sur- 
rounding circumstances  ;  and  third,  because  the  species 
seem  to  change  more  quickly,  and  therefore  disguise 
a  comparatively  recent  identity.  Thus  the  insects 
of  adjacent  regions,  though  originally  distinct,  may 
become  rapidly  amalgamated,  or  portions  of  the  same 
region  may  come  to  be  inhabited  by  very  distinct 
insect-faunas  owing  to  differences  of  soil,  climate,  etc. 
This  is  strikingly  shown  here,  where  the  insect-fauna 
from  Malacca  to  New  Guinea  has  a  very  large  amount 
of  characteristic  uniformity,  while  Australia,  from  its 
distinct  climate  and  vegetation,  shows  a  wide  differ- 
ence. I  am  inclined  to  think,  therefore,  that  a  pre- 
liminary study  of,  first,  the  mammals,  and  then  the 
birds,  is  indispensable  to  a  correct  understanding  of 
the  geographical  and  physical  changes  on  which  the 
present  insect-distribution  depends,  .  .  . 

"  In  a  day  or  two  I  leave  for  Timor,  where,  if  I 
am  lucky  in  finding  a  good  locality,  I  expect  some 
fine  and  interesting  insects," 

My  last  two  letters  before  coming  home  were 
written  in  the  wilds  of  Sumatra  to  Bates  and  Silk, 

An  extract  from  the  letter  to  Bates  will  give  some 
idea  of  the  difficulty  I  had  in  finding  good  collecting 
places, 

"  I  am  here  making  what  I  intend  to  be  my  last 
collections,  but  am  doing  very  little  in  insects,  as  it 
is  the  wet  season  and  all  seems  dead.  I  find  in  those 
districts  where  the  seasons  are  strongly  contrasted 
the  good  collecting  time  is  very  limited — only  about 
a  month  or  two  at  the  beginning  of  the  dry,  and  a 
few  weeks  at  the  commencement  of  the  rains.  It  is 
now  two  years  since  I  have  been  able  to  get  any 
beetles,  owing  to  bad  localities  and  bad  weather,  so  I 
am  becoming  disgusted.     When  I   do   find  a  good 


THE   MALAY   ARCHIPELAGO         199 

place  it  is  generally  very  good,  but  such  are  dread- 
fully scarce.  In  Java  I  had  to  go  forty  miles  in  the 
eastern  part  and  sixty  miles  in  the  western  to  reach 
a  bit  of  forest,  and  then  I  got  scarcely  anything. 
Here  I  had  to  come  a  hundred  miles  inland,  by 
Palembang,  and  though  in  the  very  centre  of  Eastern 
Sumatra,  the  forest  is  only  in  patches,  and  it  is  the 
height  of  the  rains,  so  I  get  nothing.  A  longicorn  is 
a  rarity,  and  I  suppose  I  shall  not  have  as  many 
species  in  two  months  as  I  have  obtained  in  three  or 
four  days  in  a  really  good  locality.  I  am  getting, 
however,  some  sweet  little  blue  butterflies  {Lyccenidcs)^ 
which  is  the  only  thing  that  keeps  up  my  spirits." 

An  extract  from  my  letter  to  Silk  will  be  of  more 
interest  to  most  of  my  readers :  "  I  am  here  in  one  of 
the  places  unknown  to  the  Royal  Geographical  Society, 
situated  in  the  very  centre  of  East  Sumatra,  about 
one  hundred  miles  from  the  sea  in  three  directions. 
It  is  the  height  of  the  wet  season,  and  the  rain  pours 
down  strong  and  steady,  generally  all  night  and  half 
the  day.  Bad  times  for  me,  but  I  walk  out  regularly 
three  or  four  hours  every  day,  picking  up  what  I  can, 
and  generally  getting  some  little  new  or  rare  or 
beautiful  thing  to  reward  me.  This  is  the  land  of  the 
two-horned  rhinoceros,  the  elephant,  the  tiger,  and  the 
tapir  ;  but  they  all  make  themselves  very  scarce,  and 
beyond  their  tracks  and  their  dung,  and  once  hearing 
a  rhinoceros  bark  not  far  off,  I  am  not  aware  of  their 
existence.  This,  too,  is  the  very  land  of  monkeys  ; 
they  swarm  about  the  villages  and  plantations,  long- 
tailed  and  short-tailed,  and  with  no  tail  at  all,  white, 
black,  and  grey  ;  they  are  eternally  racing  about 
the  tree-tops,  and  gambolling  in  the  most  amusing 
manner.  The  way  they  jump  is  amazing.  They  throw 
themselves  recklessly  through  the  air,  apparently  sure, 


200  MY   LIFE 

with  one  or  other  of  their  four  hands,  to  catch  hold  of 
something.  I  estimated  one  jump  by  a  long-tailed 
white  monkey  at  thirty  feet  horizontal,  and  sixty  feet 
vertical,  from  a  high  tree  on  to  a  lower  one  ;  he  fell 
through,  however,  so  great  was  his  impetus,  on  to  a 
lower  branch,  and  then,  without  a  moment's  stop, 
scampered  away  from  tree  to  tree,  evidently  quite 
pleased  with  his  own  pluck.  When  I  startle  a  band, 
and  one  leader  takes  a  leap  like  this,  it  is  amusing  to 
watch  the  others — some  afraid  and  hesitating  on  the 
brink  till  at  last  they  pluck  up  courage,  take  a  run  at 
it,  and  often  roll  over  in  the  air  with  their  desperate 
efforts.  Then  there  are  the  long-armed  apes,  who 
never  walk  or  run  upon  the  trees,  but  travel  altogether 
by  their  long  arms,  swinging  themselves  from  bough 
to  bough  in  the  easiest  and  most  graceful  manner 
possible. 

"  But  I  must  leave  the  monkeys  and  turn  to  the 
men,  who  will  interest  you  more,  though  there  is 
nothing  very  remarkable  in  them.  They  are  Malays, 
speaking  a  curious,  half-unintelligible  Malay  dialect — 
Mohammedans,  but  retaining  many  pagan  customs 
and  superstitions.  They  are  very  ignorant,  very  lazy, 
and  live  almost  absolutely  on  rice  alone,  thriving 
upon  it,  however,  just  as  the  Irish  do,  or  did,  upon 
potatoes.  They  were  a  bad  lot  a  few  years  ago,  but 
the  Dutch  have  brought  them  into  order  by  their 
admirable  system  of  supervision  and  government. 
By-the-by,  I  hope  you  have  read  Mr.  Money's  book 
on  Java.  It  is  well  worth  while,  and  you  will  see 
that  I  had  come  to  the  same  conclusions  as  to  Dutch 
colonial  government  from  what  I  saw  in  Menado. 
Nothing  is  worse  and  more  absurd  than  the  sneering 
prejudiced  tone  in  which  almost  all  English  writers 
speak   of  the   Dutch   government    in   the   East.     It 


THE   MALAY  ARCHIPELAGO        201 

never  has  been  worse  than  ours  has  been,  and  it  is 
now  very  much  better  ;  and  what  is  greatly  to  their 
credit  and  not  generally  known,  they  take  nearly  the 
same  pains  to  establish  order  and  good  government 
in  those  islands  and  possessions  which  are  an  annual 
loss  to  them,  as  in  those  which  yield  them  a  revenue. 
I  am  convinced  that  their  system  is  right  in  principle, 
and  ours  wrong,  though,  of  course,  in  the  practical 
working  there  may  and  must  be  defects  ;  and  among 
the  Dutch  themselves,  both  in  Europe  and  the  Indies, 
there  is  a  strong  party  against  the  present  system, 
but  that  party  consists  mostly  of  merchants  and 
planters,  who  want  to  get  the  trade  and  commerce 
of  the  country  made  free,  which  in  my  opinion  would 
be  an  act  of  suicidal  madness,  and  would,  moreover, 
seriously  injure  instead  of  benefiting  the  natives. 

"  Personally,  I  do  not  much  like  the  Dutch  out 
here,  or  the  Dutch  officials  ;  but  I  cannot  help  bearing 
witness  to  the  excellence  of  their  government  of 
native  races,  gentle  yet  firm,  treating  their  manners, 
customs,  and  prejudices  with  respect,  yet  introducing 
everywhere  European  law,  order,  and  industry." 

"  Singapore,  January  20,  1862. 

"  I  cannot  write  more  now.  I  do  not  know  how 
long  I  shall  be  here  ;  perhaps  a  month.  Then,  ho  ! 
for  England ! " 

While  waiting  at  Singapore  for  the  steamer  to 
take  me  home  I  purchased  two  living  specimens  of 
the  smaller  bird  of  paradise.  They  were  in  a  large 
cage,  and  the  price  asked  was  enormous.  As  they 
had  never  been  seen  alive  in  Europe  I  at  once  secured 
them,  and  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  with  them  on  my 
journey  home,     I  had  first  to  make  an  arrangement 


202  MY   LIFE 

for  a  place  to  stand  the  large  cage  on  deck.  A  stock 
of  food  was  required,  which  consisted  chiefly  of 
bananas  ;  but  to  my  surprise  I  found  that  they  would 
eat  cockroaches  greedily,  and  as  these  abound  on 
every  ship  in  the  tropics,  I  hoped  to  be  able  to  obtain 
a  good  supply.  Every  evening  I  went  to  the  store- 
room in  the  fore  part  of  the  ship,  where  I  was  allowed 
to  brush  the  cockroaches  into  a  biscuit  tin. 

The  journey  to  Suez  offered  no  particular  incident, 
and  the  birds  continued  in  good  health  ;  as  did  two 
or  three  lories  I  had  brought.  But  with  the  railway 
journey  to  Alexandria  difficulties  began.  It  was  in 
February,  and  the  night  was  clear  and  almost  frosty. 
The  railway  officials  made  difficulties,  and  it  was  only 
by  representing  the  rarity  and  value  of  the  birds  that 
I  could  have  the  cage  placed  in  a  box-truck.  When 
we  got  into  the  Mediterranean  the  weather  became 
suddenly  cold,  and  worse  still,  I  found  that  the  ship 
was  free  from  cockroaches.  As  I  thought  that  animal 
food  was  perhaps  necessary  to  counteract  the  cold,  I 
felt  afraid  for  the  safety  of  my  charge,  and  determined 
to  stay  a  fortnight  at  Malta  in  order  to  reach  England 
a  little  later,  and  also  to  lay  in  a  store  of  the  necessary 
food.  I  accordingly  arranged  to  break  my  voyage 
there,  went  to  a  hotel,  and  found  that  I  could  get 
unlimited  cockroaches  at  a  baker's  close  by. 

At  Marseilles  I  again  had  trouble,  but  at  last 
succeeded  in  getting  them  placed  in  a  guard's  van, 
with  permission  to  enter  and  feed  them  en  route. 
Passing  through  France  it  was  a  sharp  frost,  but  they 
did  not  seem  to  suffisr ;  and  when  we  reached  London 
I  was  glad  to  transfer  them  into  the  care  of  Mr. 
Bartlett,  who  conveyed  them  to  the  Zoological 
Gardens. 

Thus  ended  my  Malayan  travels. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

LIFE   IN   LONDON,   1 862-1 8/ 1— SCIENTIFIC   AND 
LITERARY   WORK 

On  reaching  London  in  the  spring  of  1862  I  went 
to  live  with  my  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Thomas  Sims, 
who  had  a  photographic  business  in  Westbourne 
Grove.  Here,  in  a  large  empty  room  at  the  top  of 
the  house,  I  brought  together  all  the  collections  which 
I  had  reserved  for  myself  and  which  my  agent,  Mr. 
Stevens,  had  taken  care  of  for  me.  I  found  myself 
surrounded  by  a  quantity  of  packing-cases  and 
store-boxes,  the  contents  of  many  of  which  I  had  not 
seen  for  five  or  six  years,  and  to  the  examination 
and  study  of  which  I  looked  forward  with  intense 
interest. 

From  my  first  arrival  in  the  East  I  had  determined 
to  keep  a  complete  set  of  certain  groups  from  every 
island  or  distinct  locality  which  I  visited  for  my  own 
study  on  my  return  home,  as  I  felt  sure  they  would 
afford  me  very  valuable  materials  for  working  out  the 
geographical  distribution  of  animals  in  the  archipelago, 
and  also  throw  light  on  various  other  problems.  These 
various  sets  of  specimens  were  sent  home  regularly 
with  the  duplicates  for  sale,  but  either  packed 
separately  or  so  distinctly  marked  "  Private "  that 
they  could  be  easily  put  aside  till  my  return  home. 
The  groups  thus  reserved  were  the  birds,  butterflies, 


204  MY   LIFE 

beetles,  and  land-shells,  and  they  amounted  roughly 
to  about  three  thousand  bird  skins  of  about  a 
thousand  species,  and,  perhaps,  twenty  thousand 
beetles  and  butterflies  of  about  seven  thousand 
species. 

For  the  next  month  I  was  fully  occupied  in  the 
unpacking  and  arranging  of  my  collections,  whMe  I 
usually  attended  the  evening  meetings  of  the  Zoo- 
logical, Entomological,  and  Linnean  Societies,  where 
I  met  many  old  friends  and  made  several  new  ones, 
and  greatly  enjoyed  the  society  of  people  interested 
in  the  subjects  that  now  had  almost  become  the 
business  of  my  life. 

As  soon  as  I  began  to  study  my  birds  I  had  to 
pay  frequent  visits  to  the  bird-room  of  the  British 
Museum,  then  in  charge  of  Mr.  George  Robert  Gray, 
who  had  described  many  of  my  discoveries  as  I.  sent 
them  home,  and  also  to  the  library  of  the  Zoological 
Society  to  consult  the  works  of  the  older  ornitholo- 
gists. In  this  way  the  time  passed  rapidly,  and  I 
became  so  interested  in  my  various  occupations,  and 
saw  so  many  opportunities  for  useful  and  instructive 
papers  on  various  groups  of  my  birds  and  insects,  that 
I  came  to  the  conclusion  to  devote  myself  for  some 
years  to  this  work,  and  to  put  off  the  writing  of  a 
book  on  my  travels  till  I  could  embody  in  it  all  the 
more  generally  interesting  results  derived  from  the 
detailed  study  of  certain  portions  of  my  collections. 
This  delay  turned  out  very  well,  as  I  was  thereby 
enabled  to  make  my  book  not  merely  the  journal 
of  a  traveller,  but  also  a  fairly  complete  sketch  of 
the  whole  of  the  great  Malayan  Archipelago  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  philosophic  naturalist.  The 
result  has  been  that  it  long  continued  to  be  the 
most  popular  of  my  books,  and  that  even  now,  forty 


SCIENTIFIC   AND    LITERARY  WORK     205 

years  after  its  publication,  its  sale  is  equal  to  that  of 
any  of  the  others. 

During  the  succeeding  five  years  I  continued  the 
study  of  my  collections,  writing  many  papers,  of  which 
more  than  a  dozen  related  to  birds,  some  being  of 
considerable  length  and  involving  months  of  con- 
tinuous study.  But  I  also  wrote  several  on  physical 
and  zoological  geography,  six  on  various  questions  of 
anthropology,  and  five  or  six  on  special  applications 
of  the  theory  of  natural  selection.  I  also  began 
working  at  my  insect  collections,  on  which  I  wrote 
four  rather  elaborate  papers.  As  several  of  these 
papers  discussed  matters  of  considerable  interest  and 
novelty,  I  will  here  give  a  brief  summary  of  the 
more  important  of  them  in  the  order  in  which  they 
were  written. 

The  first  of  these,  read  in  January,  1863,  at  a 
meeting  of  the  Zoological  Society,  was  on  my  birds 
from  Bouru,  and  was  chiefly  important  as  showing 
that  this  island  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  Moluccan 
group,  every  bird  found  there  which  was  not  widely 
distributed  being  either  identical  with  or  closely  allied 
to  Moluccan  species,  while  none  had  special  affinities 
with  Celebes.  It  was  clear,  then,  that  this  island 
formed  the  most  westerly  outlier  of  the  Moluccan 
group. 

My  next  paper  of  importance,  read  before  the 
same  society  in  the  following  November,  was  on  the 
birds  of  the  chain  of  islands  extending  from  Lombok 
to  the  great  island  of  Timor.  I  gave  a  list  of  one 
hundred  and  eighty-six  species  of  birds,  of  which 
twenty-nine  were  altogether  new;  but  the  special 
importance  of  the  paper  was  that  it  enabled  me  to 
mark  out  precisely  the  boundary  line  between  the 
Indian  and  Australian  zoological  regions,  and  to  trace 


Lombok. 

Flores. 

Timor, 

•  34 
■     7 

28 

H 

17 
36 

206  MY   LIFE 

the  derivation  of  the  rather  peculiar  fauna  of  these 
islands,  partly  from  Australia  and  partly  from  the 
Moluccas,  but  with  a  strong  recent  migration  of 
Javanese  species  due  to  the  very  narrow  straits 
separating  most  of  the  islands  from  each  other.  The 
following  table  will  serve  to  illustrate  this  : — 

Species  derived  from  Java 
Species  derived  from  Australia 

This  table  shows  how  two  streams  of  immigration 
have  entered  these  islands,  the  one  from  Java 
diminishing  in  intensity  as  it  passed  on  farther  and 
farther  to  Timor;  the  other  from  Australia  entering 
Timor  and  diminishing  still  more  rapidly  towards 
Lombok.  This  indicates,  as  its  geological  structure 
shows,  that  Timor  is  the  older  island  and  that  it 
received  immigrants  from  Australia  at  a  period  when, 
probably,  Lombok  and  Flores  had  not  come  into 
existence  or  were  uninhabitable. 

Two  other  papers  dealt  with  the  parrots  and  the 
pigeons  of  the  whole  archipelago,  and  are  among  the 
most  important  of  my  studies  of  geographical  dis- 
tribution. That  on  parrots  was  written  in  1864,  and 
read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Zoological  Society  in  June. 

The  peculiarities  of  distribution  and  coloration  in 
two  such  very  diverse  groups  of  birds  interested  me 
greatly,  and  I  endeavoured  to  explain  them  in  accord- 
ance with  the  laws  of  natural  selection.  In  the  paper 
on  Pigeons  (published  in  Tke  Ibis  of  October,  1865) 
I  suggest  that  the  excessive  development  of  both 
these  groups  in  the  Moluccas  and  the  Papuan  islands 
has  been  due  primarily  to  the  total  absence  of  arboreal, 
carnivcous,  or  egg-destroying  mammals,  especially 
of  the  whole  monkey  tribe,  which  in  all  other  tropical 


SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY  WORK     207 

forest  regions  are  exceedingly  abundant,  and  are 
very  destructive  to  eggs  and  young  birds.  I  also 
point  out  that  there  are  here  comparatively  few  other 
groups  of  fruit-eating  birds  like  the  extensive  families 
of  chatterers,  tanagers,  and  toucans  of  America,  or 
the  barbets,  bulbuls,  finches,  starlings,  and  many  other 
groups  of  India  and  Africa,  while  in  all  those  countries 
monkeys,  squirrels,  and  other  arboreal  mammals  con- 
sume enormous  quantities  of  fruits.  It  is  clear,  there- 
fore, that  in  the  Australian  region,  especially  in  the 
forest-clad  portions  of  it,  both  parrots  and  pigeons 
have  fewer  enemies  and  fewer  competitors  for  food 
than  in  other  tropical  regions,  the  result  being  that 
they  have  had  freer  scope  for  development  in  various 
directions  leading  to  the  production  of  forms  and 
styles  of  colouring  unknown  elsewhere.  It  is  also 
very  suggestive  that  the  only  other  country  in  which 
black  pigeons  and  black  parrots  are  found  is  Mada- 
gascar, an  island  where  also  there  are  neither  monkeys 
nor  squirrels,  and  where  arboreal  carnivora  or  fruit- 
eating  birds  are  very  scarce.  The  satisfactory  solution 
of  these  curious  facts  of  distribution  gave  me  very 
great  pleasure,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  the  con- 
clusions I  arrived  at  have  been  seriously  objected  to. 

Before  I  had  written  these  two  papers  I  had 
begun  the  study  of  my  collection  of  butterflies,  and 
in  March,  1864,  I  read  before  the  Linnean  Society 
a  rather  elaborate  paper  on  "The  Malayan  Papilionidae, 
as  illustrating  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection," 

I  may  state  for  the  information  of  non-entomo- 
logical readers  that  the  Papilionidae  form  one  of  the 
most  extensive  families  of  butterflies,  and  from  their 
large  size,  elegant  forms,  and  splendid  colours  were 
considered  by  all  the  older  writers  to  be  the  princes 


208  MY   LIFE 

of  the  whole  lepidopterous  order.  In  coloration  they 
are  wonderfully  varied.  The  ground  colour  is  very 
frequently  black,  on  which  appear  bands,  spots,  or 
large  patches  of  brilliant  colours — pale  or  golden 
yellow,  rich  crimsons  or  gorgeous  metallic  blues  and 
greens,  which  colours  sometimes  spread  over  nearly 
the  whole  wing  surface.  Some  are  thickly  speckled 
with  golden  green  dots  and  adorned  with  large  patches 
of  intense  metallic  green  or  azure  blue,  others  are 
simply  black  and  white  in  a  great  variety  of  patterns, 
many  very  striking  and  beautiful,  while  others  again 
have  crimson  or  golden  patches,  which  when  viewed 
at  certain  angles  change  to  quite  different  opalescent 
hues,  unsurpassed  by  the  rarest  gems. 

But  it  is  not  this  grand  development  of  size  and 
colour  that  constitutes  the  attraction  of  these  insects 
to  the  student  of  evolution,  but  the  fact  that  they 
exhibit,  in  a  remarkable  degree,  almost  every  kind  of 
variation,  as  well  as  some  of  the  most  beautiful 
examples  of  polymorphism  and  of  mimicry.  Besides 
these  features,  the  family  presents  us  with  examples 
of  differences  of  size,  form,  and  colour,  characteristic 
of  certain  localities,  which  are  among  the  most  singular 
and  mysterious  phenomena  known  to  naturalists.  A 
short  statement  of  the  nature  of  these  phenomena 
will  be  useful  to  show  the  great  interest  of  the  subject. 

In  all  parts  of  the  world  there  are  certain  insects 
which,  from  a  disagreeable  smell  or  taste,  are  rarely 
attacked  or  devoured  by  enemies.  Such  groups  are 
said  to  be  "  protected,"  and  they  almost  always  have 
distinctive  and  conspicuous  colours.  In  the  Malay 
Archipelago  there  are  several  groups  of  butterflies 
which  have  this  kind  of  protection  ;  and  one  group 
— the  Euplseas — is  coloured  black,  with  rich  blue 
glosses  and  ornamented  with  white  bands  or  spots. 


SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY  WORK     209 

These  are  excessively  abundant,  and  having  few 
enemies  they  fly  slowly.  Now  there  are  also  several 
different  kinds  of  papilios,  which  in  colour  are  so 
exactly  like  these,  that  when  on  the  wing  they  cannot 
be  distinguished,  although  they  frequent  the  same 
places  and  are  often  found  intermingled.  Other 
protected  butterflies  are  of  paler  colours  with  dark 
stripes,  and  these  are  also  closely  imitated  by  other 
papilios.  Altogether  there  are  about  fifteen  species 
which  thus  closely  resemble  protected  butterflies 
externally,  although  in  structure  and  transformations 
they  have  no  affinity  with  them.  In  some  cases  both 
sexes  possess  this  resemblance,  or  "  mimicry,"  as  it  is 
termed,  but  most  frequently  it  is  the  female  only  that 
is  thus  modified,  especially  when  she  lays  her  eggs 
on  low-growing  plants ;  while  the  male,  whose  flight 
is  stronger  and  who  can  take  care  of  himself,  does  not 
possess  it,  and  is  often  so  different  from  his  mate  as 
to  have  been  considered  a  distinct  species. 

This  leads  us  to  the  phenomenon  of  dimorphism 
and  polymorphism,  in  which  the  females  of  one  species 
present  two  or  three  different  forms.  Several  such 
cases  occur  in  the  Malay  Archipelago,  in  which  there 
are  two  distinct  kinds  of  females,  sometimes  even 
three,  to  a  single  male,  which  differs  from  either  of 
them.  In  one  case  four  females  are  known  to  one 
male,  though  only  two  of  them  appear  to  occur  in  one 
locality.  These  have  been  almost  always  described 
as  distinct  species,  but  observation  has  now  proved 
them  to  be  one,  and  it  has  further  been  noticed  that 
each  of  the  females,  which  are  very  unlike  the  male, 
resembles  more  or  less  closely  some  "  protected " 
species.  It  has  also  been  proved  by  experimental 
breeding  that  eggs  laid  by  any  one  of  these  females 
are  capable  of  producing  butterflies  of  all  the  different 

P 


210  MY  LIFE 

forms,  which  in  the  few  cases  recorded  are  quite  distinct 
from  each  other,  without  intermediate  gradations. 

This  brief  outline  of  the  paper  will,  perhaps,  enable 
my  readers  to  understand  the  intense  interest  I  felt  in 
working  out  all  these  strange  phenomena,  and  showing 
how  they  could  almost  all  be  explained  by  that  law 
of  "  Natural  Selection  "  which  Darwin  had  discovered 
many  years  before,  and  which  I  had  also  been  so 
fortunate  as  to  hit  upon. 

The  series  of  papers  on  birds  and  insects  now 
described,  together  with  others  on  the  physical 
geography  of  the  archipelago  and  its  various  races 
of  man,  furnished  me  with  the  necessary  materials 
for  that  general  sketch  of  the  natural  history  of  the 
islands  and  of  the  various  interesting  problems  which 
arise  from  its  study,  which  has  made  my  "Malay 
Archipelago  "  the  most  popular  of  my  books.  At  the 
same  time  it  opened  up  so  many  fields  of  research  as 
to  render  me  indisposed  for  further  technical  work  in 
the  mere  description  of  my  collections,  which  I  should 
certainly  never  have  been  able  to  complete.  I  there- 
fore now  began  to  dispose  of  various  portions  of  my 
insects  to  students  of  special  groups,  who  undertook 
to  publish  lists  of  them  with  descriptions  of  the  new 
species,  reserving  for  myself  only  a  few  boxes  of 
duplicates  to  serve  as  mementoes  of  the  exquisite  or 
fantastic  organisms  which  I  had  procured  during  my 
eight  years'  wanderings. 

Having  thus  prepared  the  way  by  these  preliminary 
studies,  I  devoted  the  larger  portion  of  my  time  in  the 
years  1867  and  1868  to  writing  my  "Malay  Archi- 
pelago." I  had  previously  read  what  works  I  could 
procure  on  the  islands,  and  had  made  numerous 
extracts  from  the  old  voyagers  on  the  parts  I  myself 
was   acquainted   with.      These   added    much   to   the 


SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY  WORK     211 

interest  of  my  own  accounts  of  the  manners  and 
character  of  the  people,  and  by  means  of  a  tolerably 
full  journal  and  the  various  papers  I  had  written,  I 
had  no  difficulty  in  going  steadily  on  with  my  work. 
As  my  publishers  wished  the  book  to  be  well  illus- 
trated, I  had  to  spend  a  good  deal  of  time  in  deciding 
on  the  plates  and  getting  them  drawn,  either  from 
my  own  sketches,  from  photographs,  or  from  actual 
specimens,  and  having  obtained  the  services  of  the 
best  artists  and  wood  engravers  then  in  London,  the 
result  was,  on  the  whole,  satisfactory. 

The  book  was  published  in  1869,  but  during  its 
progress,  and  while  it  was  slowly  passing  through  the 
press,  I  wrote  several  important  papers,  among  which 
was  one  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  April,  1869,  on 
"  Geological  Climates  and  the  Origin  of  Species," 
which  was  in  large  part  a  review  and  eulogy  of  Sir 
Charles  Lyell's  great  work,  "The  Principles  of 
Geology,"  which  greatly  pleased  him  as  well  as 
Darwin.  A  considerable  part  of  this  article  was 
devoted  to  a  discussion  of  Mr.  Croll's  explanation  of 
the  glacial  epoch,  and,  by  a  combination  of  his  views 
with  those  of  Lyell  on  the  great  effect  of  changed 
distribution  of  sea  and  land,  or  of  differences  in 
altitude,  I  showed  how  we  might  arrive  at  a  better 
explanation  than  either  view  by  itself  could  give  us. 
As  the  article  was  too  long,  a  good  deal  of  it  had  to 
be  cut  out,  but  it  served  as  the  foundation  for  my 
more  detailed  examination  of  the  whole  question 
when  writing  my  "Island  Life,"  twelve  years 
later. 

As  soon  as  the  proofs  of  the  "  Malay  Archipelago  " 
were  out  of  my  hands,  I  began  the  preparation  of  a 
small  volume  of  my  scattered  articles  dealing  with 
various  aspects  of  the  theory  of  Natural  Selection. 


212  MY   LIFE 

Many  of  these  had  appeared  in  little-known  periodicals, 
and  were  now  carefully  revised,  or  partially  rewritten, 
while  two  new  ones  were  added.  The  longest  article, 
occupying  nearly  a  quarter  of  the  volume,  was  one 
which  I  had  written  in  1865-6,  but  which  was  not 
published  (in  the  Westminster  Review)  till  July,  1867, 
and  was  entitled  "Mimicry,  and  other  Protective 
Resemblances  among  Animals."  In  this  article  I 
endeavoured  to  give  a  general  account  of  the  whole 
subject  of  protective  resemblance,  of  which  theory, 
what  was  termed  by  Bates  "mimicry,"  is  a  very 
curious  special  case.  I  called  attention  to  the  wide 
extent  of  the  phenomenon,  and  showed  that  it 
pervades  animal  life  from  mammals  to  fishes  and 
through  every  grade  of  the  insect  tribes.  I  pointed 
out  that  the  whole  series  of  phenomena  depend  upon 
the  great  principle  of  the  utility  of  every  character, 
upon  the  need  of  protection  or  of  concealment  by 
almost  all  animals,  and  upon  the  known  fact  that  no 
character  is  so  variable  as  colour,  and  that  therefore 
concealment  has  been  most  easily  obtained  by  colour 
modification. 

Two  other  articles  which  may  be  just  mentioned 
are  those  entitled  "  A  Theory  of  Birds'  Nests  "  and 
"The  Limits  of  Natural  Selection  applied  to  Man." 
In  the  first  I  pointed  out  the  important  relation  that 
exists  between  concealed  nests  and  the  bright  colours 
of  female  birds,  leading  to  conclusions  adverse  to 
Mr.  Darwin's  theory  of  colours  and  ornaments  in  the 
males  being  the  result  of  female  choice.  In  the 
other  (the  last  in  the  volume)  I  apply  Darwin's 
principle  of  natural  selection,  acting  solely  by  means 
of  "  utilities,"  to  show  that  certain  physical  modifi- 
cations and  mental  faculties  in  man  could  not  have 
been   acquired    through    the    preservation   of    useful 


SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY  WORK     213 

variations,  because  there  is  some  direct  evidence  to 
show  that  they  were  not  and  are  not  useful  in  the 
ordinary  sense,  or,  as  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  well 
puts  it,  not  of  "  life-preserving  value,"  while  there  is 
absolutely  no  evidence  to  show  that  they  were  so. 
In  reply,  Darwin  appealed  to  the  effects  of  female 
choice  in  developing  these  characteristics,  of  which, 
however,  not  a  particle  of  evidence  is  to  be  found 
among  existing  savage  races. 

As  it  was  during  the  ten  years  of  which  I  have 
now  sketched  my  scientific  and  literary  work  that  I 
saw  most  of  my  various  scientific  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances, and  it  was  also  in  this  period  that  the  course  of 
my  future  life  and  work  was  mainly  determined,  I  will 
give  a  short  summary  of  my  more  personal  affairs, 
together  with  a  few  recollections  of  those  friends  with 
whom  I  became  most  familiar. 

In  the  spring  of  1865  I  took  a  small  house  for 
myself  and  my  mother,  in  St.  Mark's  Crescent, 
Regent's  Park,  quite  near  the  Zoological  Gardens, 
and  within  a  pleasant  walk  across  the  park  of  the 
society's  library  in  Hanover  Square,  where  I  had  to 
go  very  often  to  consult  books  of  reference.  Here  I 
lived  five  years,  having  Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter  for  a 
near  neighbour,  and  it  was  while  living  in  this  house 
that  I  saw  most  of  my  few  scientific  friends. 

About  this  time  my  dear  friend,  Dr.  Richard 
Spruce,  came  home  from  Peru  in  very  weak  health, 
and,  after  staying  a  short  time  in  London,  went  to  live 
at  Hurstpierpoint,  in  Sussex,  in  order  to  be  near  Mr. 
William  Mitten,  then  the  greatest  English  authority 
on  mosses,  who  had  undertaken  to  describe  his  great 
collections  from  South  America. 

During  the  summer  and  autumn  I  often  went  to 
Hurstpierpoint  to  enjoy  the  society  of  my  friend,  and 


214  MY   LIFE 

thus  became  intimate  with  Mr.  Mitten  and  his  family. 
Mr.  Mitten  was  an  enthusiastic  botanist  and  gardener, 
and  knew  every  wild  plant  in  the  very  rich  district 
which  surrounds  the  village,  and  all  his  family  were 
lovers  of  wild  flowers.  I  remember  my  delight,  on 
the  occasion  of  my  first  or  second  visit  there,  at  seeing 
a  vase  full  of  the  delicate  and  fantastic  flowers  of  the 
large  butterfly-orchis  and  the  curious  fly-orchis,  neither 
of  which  I  had  ever  seen  before,  and  which  I  was 
surprised  to  hear  were  abundant  in  the  woods  at  the 
foot  of  the  downs.  It  was  an  immense  delight  to  me 
to  be  taken  to  these  woods,  and  to  some  fields  on  the 
downs  where  the  bee-orchis  and  half  a  dozen  other 
species  grew  abundantly,  with  giant  cowslips  nearly 
two  feet  high,  the  dyers'  broom,  and  many  other 
interesting  plants.  The  richness  of  this  district  may 
be  judged  by  the  fact  that  within  a  walk  more  than 
twenty  species  of  orchises  have  been  found.  This 
similarity  of  taste  led  to  a  close  intimacy,  and  in  the 
spring  of  the  following  year  I  was  married  to  Mr. 
Mitten's  eldest  daughter,  then  about  eighteen  years 
old. 

After  a  week  at  Windsor  we  came  to  live  in 
London,  and  in  early  autumn  went  for  a  month  to 
North  Wales,  staying  at  Llanberris  and  Dolgelly.  I 
took  with  me  Sir  Andrew  Ramsay's  little  book  on 
"  The  Old  Glaciers  of  Switzerland  and  North  Wales," 
and  thoroughly  enjoyed  the  fine  examples  of  ice- 
groovings  and  striations,  smoothed  rock-surfaces, 
roches  viontonnees,  moraines,  perched  blocks,  and  rock- 
basins,  with  which  the  valleys  around  Snowdon  abound. 
Every  day  revealed  some  fresh  object  of  interest  as 
we  climbed  among  the  higher  cw7ns  of  Snowdon  ; 
and  from  what  I  saw  during  that  first  visit  the  Ice 
Age  became  almost  as  much  a  reality  to  me  as  any 


SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY  WORK     215 

fact  of  direct  observation.  Every  future  tour  to 
Scotland,  to  the  lake  district,  or  to  Switzerland 
became  doubled  in  interest.  I  read  a  good  deal  of 
the  literature  of  the  subject,  and  have,  I  believe, 
in  my  later  writings  been  able  to  set  forth  the 
evidence  in  favour  of  the  glacial  origin  of  lake- 
basins  more  forcibly  than  it  has  ever  been  done 
before. 

In  1867  I  spent  the  month  of  June  in  Switzer- 
land with  my  wife,  staying  at  Champery,  opposite 
the  beautiful  Dent  du  Midi,  where  at  first  we  were 
the  only  visitors  in  a  huge  new  hotel,  but  for  the 
second  week  had  the  company  of  an  English  clergy- 
man, his  wife,  and  son.  We  greatly  enjoyed  the 
beautiful  subalpine  flowers  then  in  perfection. 

We  then  went  by  Martigny  over  the  St.  Bernard, 
reaching  the  hospice  after  dark  through  deep  snow, 
and  next  day  walked  down  to  Aosta,  a  place  which 
had  been  recommended  to  me  by  Mr.  William 
Mathews,  a  well-known  Alpine  climber.  It  was  a 
very  hot  place,  and  its  chief  interest  to  us  was  an 
excursion  on  mules  to  the  Becca  de  Nona,  which  took 
us  a  long  day,  going,  up  by  the  easiest  and  descending 
the  most  precipitous  road — the  latter  a  mere  staircase 
of  rock.  The  last  thousand  feet  of  the  mountain  I 
walked  up  alone,  and  was  highly  delighted  with  the 
summit  and  the  wonderful  scene  of  fractured  rocks, 
ridges,  and  peaks  all  around,  but  more  especially  with 
the  summit  itself,  hardly  so  large  as  that  of  Snowdon 
and  exhibiting  far  grander  precipices  and  rock-masses, 
all  in  a  state  of  visible  degradation,  and  showing  how 
powerfully  the  atmospheric  forces  of  denudation  are 
in  constant  action  at  this  altitude  — 10,380  feet. 
Hardly  less  interesting  were  the  charming  little  alpine 
plants  in  the  patches  of  turf  and  the  crevices  in  the 


2i6  MY   LIFE 

rocks,  among  which  were  two  species  of  the  exquisite 
Androsaces,  the  true  gems  of  the  primrose  tribe.  I 
also  one  day  took  a  lonely  walk  up  a  wild  valley 
which  terminated  in  the  glacier  that  descends  from 
Mount  Emilius  ;  and  on  another  day  we  drove  up 
the  main  valley  to  Villeneuve,  and  then  walked  up 
a  little  way  into  the  Val  Savaranches.  This  is  one 
of  those  large  open  valleys  which  have  been  the 
outlet  of  a  great  glacier,  and  in  which  the  subglacial 
torrent  has  cut  a  deep  narrow  chasm  through  hard 
rocks  at  its  termination,  through  which  the  river  now 
empties  itself  into  the  main  stream  of  the  Dora 
Baltea,  This  was  the  first  of  the  kind  I  had  specially 
noticed,  though  I  had  seen  the  Gorge  of  the  Trient 
on  my  first  visit  to  Switzerland  at  a  time  when  I  had 
barely  heard  of  the  glacial  epoch. 

Returning  over  the  St.  Bernard  we  went  to  Inter- 
laken  and  Grindelwald,  saw  the  glaciers  there,  and 
then  went  over  the  Wengern  Alp,  staying  two  days  at 
the  hotel  to  see  the  avalanches  and  botanize  among 
the  pastures  and  moraines.  Then  down  to  Lauter- 
brunnen  to  see  the  Staubbach,  and  thence  home. 

As  I  had  found  that  amid  the  distractions  and 
excitement  of  London,  its  scientific  meetings,  dinner 
parties  and  sight-seeing,  I  could  not  settle  down  to 
work  at  the  more  scientific  chapters  of  my  "  Malay 
Archipelago,"  I  let  my  house  in  London  for  a  year, 
from  Midsummer,  1867,  and  went  to  live  with  my 
wife's  family  at  Hurstpierpoint.  There,  in  perfect 
quiet,  and  with  beautiful  fields  and  downs  around 
me,  I  was  able  to  work  steadily,  having  all  my 
materials  already  prepared.  Returning  to  London 
in  the  summer  of  1868,  I  was  fully  occupied  in 
arranging  for  the  illustrations  and  correcting  the 
proofs.      The  work  appeared  early  in  the  n6w  year, 


A.    R.    WALLACE.         AGED   46. 

{riiblkation  of  Malay  Arcliipelago. 


[To  face  p.  2 1 7. 


SCIENTIFIC    AND   LITERARY  WORK     217 

and  my  volume  on  "  Natural  Selection  "  in  the  follow- 
ing March. 

I  may  here  state  that  although  the  proceeds  of 
my  eight  years'  collecting  in  the  East  brought  me 
in  a  sufficient  income  to  live  quietly  as  a  single  man, 
I  was  always  on  the  look-out  for  some  permanent 
congenial  employment  which  would  yet  leave  time 
for  the  study  of  my  collections.  The  possibility  of 
ever  earning  anything  substantial  either  by  lecturing 
or  by  writing  never  occurred  to  me.  My  deficient 
organ  of  language  prevented  me  from  ever  becoming 
a  good  lecturer  or  having  any  taste  for  it,  while  the 
experience  of  my  first  work  on  "The  Amazon"  did 
not  encourage  me  to  think  that  I  could  write  anything 
that  would  much  more  than  pay  expenses.  The  first 
vacancy  that  occurred  was  the  assistant  secretaryship 
of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  for  which  Bates 
and  myself  were  candidates.  Bates  had  just  published 
his  "Naturalist  on  the  Amazon,"  and  was,  besides, 
much  better  qualified  than  myself  by  his  business 
experience  and  his  knowledge  of  German,  which  he 
had  taught  himself  when  abroad.  Besides,  the  con- 
finement and  the  London  life  would,  I  am  sure,  have 
soon  become  uncongenial  to  me,  and  would,  I  feel 
equally  certain,  have  greatly  shortened  my  life.  I 
am  therefore  glad  I  did  not  get  it,  and  I  do  not  think 
I  felt  any  disappointment  at  the  time.  Becoming 
tired  of  London  and  wishing  for  a  country  life,  I 
took  a  small  house  at  Barking  in  1870,  and  in  1871 
leased  four  acres  of  ground  at  Grays,  including  a 
very  picturesque  well-timbered  old  chalk-pit,  above 
which  I  built  a  house  having  a  very  fine  view  across 
to  the  hills  of  North  Kent  and  down  a  reach  of  the 
Thames  to  Gravesend. 


2i8  MY   LIFE 

Seven  years  later,  in  1878,  when  Epping  Forest  had 
been  acquired  by  the  Corporation  of  London,  a  super- 
intendent was  to  be  appointed  to  see  to  its  protection 
and  improvement  while  preserving  its  "  natural  aspect  " 
in  accordance  with  the  Act  of  Parliament  which 
restored  it  to  the  public.  This  position  would  have 
suited  me  exactly,  and  if  I  had  obtained  it  and  had 
been  allowed  to  utilize  the  large  extent  of  open 
unwooded  land  in  the  way  I  suggested  in  my  article 
in  the  Fortnightly  Review  ("Epping  Forest,  and  how 
best  to  deal  with  it "),  an  experiment  in  illustration  of 
the  geographical  distribution  of  plants  would  have 
been  made  which  would  have  been  both  unique  and 
educational,  as  well  as  generally  interesting.  I 
obtained  recommendations  and  testimonials  from  the 
presidents  of  all  the  natural  history  societies  in  London, 
from  numerous  residents  near  the  forest  and  in 
London,  from  many  eminent  men  and  members  of 
Parliament — seventy  in  all  ;  but  the  City  merchants 
and  tradesmen  with  whom  the  appointment  lay 
wanted  a  "  practical  man "  to  carry  out  their  own 
ideas,  which  were  to  utilize  all  the  open  spaces  for 
games  and  sports,  to  build  a  large  hotel  close  to  Queen 
Elizabeth's  hunting  lodge,  and  to  encourage  excursions 
and  school  treats,  allowing  swings,  round-abouts,  and 
other  such  amusements. 

My  failure  to  obtain  the  post  at  Epping  Forest 
was  certainly  a  disappointment  to  me,  but  I  am 
inclined  to  think  now  that  even  that  was  really  for 
the  best,  since  it  left  me  free  to  do  literary  work 
which  I  should  certainly  not  have  done  if  I  had  had 
permanent  employment  so  engrossing  and  interesting 
as  that  at  Epping.  In  that  case  I  should  not  have  gone 
to  lecture  in  America,  and  should  not  have  written 
"  Darwinism,"  perhaps  none  of  my  later  books,  and 


SCIENTIFIC   AND   LITERARY   WORK     219 

very  few  of  the  articles  contained  in  my  "  Studies." 
This  body  of  literary  and  popular  scientific  work  is, 
perhaps,  what  I  was  best  fitted  to  perform,  and  if  so, 
neither  I  nor  my  readers  have  any  reason  to  regret 
my  failure  to  obtain  the  post  of  superintendent  and 
guardian  of  Epping  Forest. 


CHAPTER   XV 

SIR  CHARLES   LYELL  AND  CHARLES  DARWIN 
(1863-1881) 

Among  the  eminent  men  of  science  with  whom  I 
became  more  or  less  intimate  during  the  period  of 
my  residence  in  London,  I  give  the  first  place  to  Sir 
Charles  Lyell,  not  only  on  account  of  his  great  abilities 
and  his  position  as  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments 
of  the  nineteenth  century,  but  because  I  saw  more  of 
him  than  of  any  other  man  at  all  approaching  him  as 
a  thinker  and  leader  in  the  world  of  science,  while 
my  correspondence  with  him  was  more  varied  in  the 
subjects  touched  upon,  and  in  some  respects  of  more 
general  interest,  than  my  more  extensive  correspond- 
ence with  Darwin. 

I  do  not  remember  when  I  first  saw  Sir  Charles 
Lyell,  but  I  probably  met  him  at  some  of  the  evening 
meetings  of  the  scientific  societies.  I  first  lunched 
with  him  in  the  summer  of  1863,  and  then  met,  for 
the  first  time,  Lady  Lyell  and  Miss  Arabella  B. 
Buckley.  Miss  Buckley  had  become  Sir  Charles's 
private  secretary  early  in  that  year,  and  she  informs 
me  that  she  remembers  this  visit  because  Lady  Lyell 
gave  her  impressions  of  me  afterwards — I  am  afraid 
not  very  favourable  ones,  as  I  was  shy,  awkward,  and 
quite  unused  to  good  society.  With  Sir  Charles  I 
soon   felt  at  home,  owing  to  his  refined  and  gentle 


LYELL  AND   DARWIN  221 

manners,  his  fund  of  quiet  humour,  and  his  intense 
love  and  extensive  knowledge  of  natural  science. 
His  great  liberality  of  thought  and  wide  general 
interests  were  also  attractive  to  me  ;  and  although 
when  he  had  once  arrived  at  a  definite  conclusion  he 
held  by  it  very  tenaciously  until  a  considerable  body 
of  well-ascertained  facts  could  be  adduced  against  it, 
yet  he  was  always  willing  to  listen  to  the  arguments 
of  his  opponents,  and  to  give  them  careful  and 
repeated  consideration. 

In  1867,  when  a  new  edition  of  the  "Principles 
of  Geology"  was  in  progress,  I  had  much  corre- 
spondence and  many  talks  with  Sir  Charles,  chiefly 
on  questions  relating  to  distribution  and  dispersal,  in 
which  he,  like  myself,  was  greatly  interested.  He 
was  by  nature  so  exceedingly  cautious  and  conserva- 
tive, and  always  gave  such  great  weight  to  difficulties 
that  occurred  to  himself  or  that  were  put  forth  by 
others,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  satisfy  him  on  any 
novel  view  upon  which  two  opinions  existed  or  were 
possible.  We  used  often  to  discuss  these  various 
points,  but  in  any  case  that  seemed  to  him  important 
he  usually  preferred  to  write  to  me,  stating  his  objec- 
tions, sometimes  at  great  length,  and  asking  me  to 
give  my  views. 

In  the  following  year,  when  I  was  living  at  Hurst- 
pierpoint,  I  wrote  a  letter  to  Sir  Charles  on  Darwin's 
new  theory  of  "Pangenesis,"  a  passage  from  which 
I  will  quote,  because  the  disproof  of  it,  which  I 
thought  would  not  be  given,  was  not  long  in  coming, 
and,  with  the  more  satisfactory  theory  of  Weismann, 
led  me  to  change  my  opinion  entirely.  I  wrote 
(February  20,  1868):  "I  am  reading  Darwin's  book 
('Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication'),  and 
have  read  the  '  Pangenesis '  chapter  first,  for  I  could 


222  MY   LIFE 

not  wait.  The  hypothesis  is  sublime  in  its  simplicity 
and  the  wonderful  manner  in  which  it  explains  the 
most  mysterious  of  the  phenomena  of  life.  To  me 
it  is  satisfying  in  the  extreme.  I  feel  I  can  never 
give  it  up,  unless  it  be  positively  disproved,  which  is 
impossible,  or  replaced  by  one  which  better  explains 
the  facts,  which  is  highly  improbable.  Darwin  has 
here  decidedly  gone  ahead  of  Spencer  in  generaliza- 
tion. I  consider  it  the  most  wonderful  thing  he  has 
given  us,  but  it  will  not  be  generally  appreciated." 

This  was  written  when  I  was  fresh  from  the  spell 
of  this  most  ingenious  hypothesis.  Galton's  experi- 
ments on  blood  transfusion  with  rabbits  first  staggered 
me,  as  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  the  very  disproof  I  had 
thought  impossible.  And  later  on,  when  Weismann 
adduced  his  views  on  the  continuity  of  the  germ- 
plasm,  and  the  consequent  non-heredity  of  acquired 
characters ;  and  further,  when  he  showed  that  the 
supposed  transmission  of  such  characters,  which 
Darwin  had  accepted  and  which  the  hypothesis  of 
pangenesis  was  constructed  to  account  for,  was  not 
really  proved  by  any  evidence  whatever ; — I  was 
compelled  to  discard  Darwin's  view  in  favour  of  that 
of  Weismann,  which  is  now  almost  everywhere 
accepted  as  being  the  most  probable,  as  well  as  being 
the  most  in  accordance  with  all  the  facts  and  pheno- 
mena of  heredity. 

The  subject  on  which  Sir  Charles  Lyell  and 
myself  had  the  longest  discussions  was  that  of  the 
effects  of  the  glacial  period  on  the  distribution  of 
plants  and  animals,  and  on  the  origin  of  lake  basins. 

On  the  question  of  the  ice-origin  of  Alpine  lakes 
I  could  never  get  him  to  accept  my  extreme  views. 
In  March,  1869,  I  received  from  him  a  letter  of 
thirteen  pages,  and  another  of  thirty  pages,  on  this 


LYELL   AND   DARWIN  223 

and  allied  questions,  setting  forth  the  reasons  why 
he  rejected  ice  action  as  having  ground  out  the  larger 
lakes,  much  as  he  states  them  in  the  fourth  edition 
of  "The  Antiquity  of  Man."  At  page  361  he  says 
that  "the  gravest  objection  to  the  hypothesis  of 
glacial  erosion  on  a  stupendous  scale  is  afforded  by 
the  entire  absence  of  lakes  of  the  first  magnitude 
in  several  areas  where  they  ought  to  exist,  if  the 
enormous  glaciers  which  once  occupied  those  spaces 
had  possessed  the  deep  excavating  power  ascribed 
to  them."  He  then  goes  on  to  adduce  numerous 
places  where  he  thinks  there  ought  to  have  been 
lakes  on  the  glacier  theory,  which  are  the  same  as 
he  adduced  in  letters  to  myself,  and  which  I  answered 
in  each  case,  and  sometimes  at  great  length,  by 
similar  arguments  to  those  I  have  adduced  in  vol.  i. 
chap.  V.  of  my  "Studies,  Scientific  and  Social."  If 
any  one  who  is  interested  in  these  questions,  after 
considering  Sir  Charles  Lyell's  difficulties  and  objec- 
tions in  his  "Antiquity  of  Man,"  will  read  the  above 
chapter,  giving  special  attention  to  the  sections 
headed  The  Conditions  that  favour  the  Production  of 
Lakes  by  Ice-erosion,  and  the  following  section  on 
Objections  of  Modern  Writers  considered,  I  think  he 
will,  if  he  had  paid  any  attention  to  the  phenomena 
in  glaciated  regions,  admit  that  I  show  the  theory 
of  ice-erosion  to  be  the  only  one  that  explains  all 
the  facts. 

In  a  letter  written  on  April  28,  1869,  after  refer- 
ring to  Darwin's  regret  at  the  concluding  passages  of 
my  Quarterly  Review  article  on  "Man,"  which  he 
"would  have  thought  written  by  some  one  else,"  I 
add  the  following  summary  on  my  position,  perhaps 
more  simply  and  forcibly  stated  than  in  any  of  my 
published  works  : — 


224  MY  LIFE 

"It  seems  to  me  that  if  we  once  admit  the 
necessity  of  any  action  beyond  '  natural  selection '  in 
developing  man,  we  have  no  reason  whatever  for 
confining  that  agency  to  his  brain.  On  the  mere 
doctrine  of  chances  it  seems  to  me  in  the  highest 
degree  improbable  that  so  many  points  of  structure, 
all  tending  to  favour  his  mental  development,  should 
concur  in  man  alone  of  all  animals.  If  the  erect 
posture,  the  freedom  of  the  anterior  limbs  from 
purposes  of  locomotion,  the  powerful  and  opposable 
thumb,  the  naked  skin,  the  great  symmetry  of  form, 
the  perfect  organs  of  speech,  and,  in  his  mental 
faculties,  calculation  of  numbers,  ideas  of  symmetry, 
of  justice,  of  abstract  reasoning,  of  the  infinite,  of  a 
future  state,  and  many  others,  cannot  be  shown  to  be 
each  and  all  useftil  to  man  in  the  very  lowest  state  of 
civilization — how  are  we  to  explain  their  co-existence 
in  him  alone  of  the  whole  series  of  organized  being  ? 
Years  ago  I  saw  in  London  a  bushman  boy  and  girl, 
and  the  girl  played  very  nicely  on  the  piano.  Blind 
Tom,  the  half-idiot  negro  slave,  had  a  '  musical  ear ' 
or  brain,  superior,  perhaps,  to  that  of  the  best  living 
musicians.  Unless  Darwin  can  show  me  how  this 
latent  musical  faculty  in  the  lowest  races  can  have 
been  developed  through  survival  of  the  fittest,  can 
have  been  of  use  to  the  individual  or  the  race,  so  as  to 
cause  those  who  possessed  it  in  a  fractionally  greater 
degree  than  others  to  win  in  the  struggle  for  life, 
I  must  believe  that  some  other  power  (than  natural 
selection)  caused  that  development.  It  seems  to  me 
that  the  onus probaiidi  will  lie  with  those  who  maintain 
that  man,  body  and  mind,  could  have  been  developed 
from  a  quadrumanous  animal  by  *  natural  selection.' " 

In  a  letter  to  Darwin,  written  a  week  later 
and   printed  in  the    "Life,    Letters,   and    Journals," 


LYELL   AND   DARWIN  225 

Sir  Charles  quotes  the  preceding  argument  entire, 
and  goes  on  to  express  his  general  agreement 
with  it. 

He  then  refers  to  the  glacial-lake  theory  as 
follows : — "  As  to  the  scooping  out  of  lake  basins  by- 
glaciers,  I  have  had  a  long,  amicable,  but  controversial 
correspondence  with  Wallace  on  that  subject,  and  I 
cannot  get  over  (as,  indeed,  I  have  admitted  in  print) 
an  intimate  connection  between  the  number  of  lakes 
of  modern  date  and  the  glaciation  of  the  regions  con- 
taining them.  But  as  we  do  not  know  how  ice  can 
scoop  out  Lago  Maggiore  to  a  depth  of  2600  feet,  of 
which  all  but  600  is  below  the  level  of  the  sea,  getting 
rid  of  the  rock  supposed  to  be  worn  away  as  if  it  was 
salt  that  had  melted,  I  feel  that  it  is  a  dangerous 
causation  to  admit  in  explanation  of  every  cavity 
which  we  have  to  account  for,  including  Lake 
Superior." 

This  passage  shows,  I  think,  that  he  was  some- 
what staggered  by  my  arguments,  but  could  not  take 
so  great  a  step  without  further  consideration  and 
examination  of  the  evidence.  I  feel  sure,  therefore, 
that  if  he  had  had  before  him  the  numerous  facts 
since  made  known,  of  erratic  blocks  carried  by  the  ice 
to  heights  far  above  their  place  of  origin  in  North 
America,  and  even  in  our  own  islands,  as  described  at 
p.  75  and  p.  90  of  my  "  Studies  "  (vol.  i.),  with  evidence 
of  such  action  now  occurring  in  Greenland  (p.  91),  of 
the  Moel  Tryfan  beds  having  been  forced  up  by  the 
glacier  that  filled  the  Irish  sea,  he  would  have  seen,  I 
feel  sure,  that  his  objections  were  all  answered  by 
actual  phenomena,  and  that  the  gradual  erosion  of 
Lago  Maggiore  was  far  within  the  powers  of  such 
enormous  accumulations  of  ice  as  must  have  existed 
over  its  site. 

Q 


226  MY  LIFE 

During  the  ten  years  1863-72,  I  saw  a  good  deal 
of  Sir  Charles.  If  he  had  any  special  subject  on 
which  he  wished  for  information,  he  would  sometimes 
walk  across  the  park  to  St.  Mark's  Crescent  for  an 
hour's  conversation  ;  at  other  times  he  would  ask  me 
to  lunch  with  him,  either  to  meet  some  interesting 
visitor  or  for  friendly  talk.  After  my  marriage  my 
wife  and  I  occasionally  dined  with  him  or  went  to 
his  evening  receptions.  These  latter  were  very 
interesting,  both  because  they  were  not  over- 
crowded and  on  account  of  the  number  of  scientific 
and  other  men  of  eminence  to  be  met  there.  Among 
these  were  Professor  Tyndall,  Sir  Charles  Wheatstone, 
Sir  Charles  Bunbury,  Mr.  Lecky,  and  a  great  many 
others.  The  Duke  of  Argyll  was  frequently  there, 
and  although  we  criticized  each  other's  theories  rather 
strongly,  he  was  always  very  friendly,  and  we  generally 
had  some  minutes'  conversation  whenever  I  met  him. 
Miss  Buckley  (now  Mrs.  Fisher)  was  a  very  constant 
guest,  and  would  point  out  to  me  the  various  celebrities 
who  happened  to  be  present,  and  thus  began  a  cordial 
friendship  which  has  continued  unbroken,  and  has 
been  a  mutual  pleasure  and  advantage.  I  therefore 
look  back  upon  my  friendship  with  Sir  Charles  Lyell 
with  unalloyed  satisfaction  as  one  of  the  most  in- 
structive and  enjoyable  episodes  in  my  life-experience. 

Soon  after  I  returned  home,  in  the  summer  of 
1862,  Mr.  Darwin  invited  me  to  come  to  Down  for  a 
night,  where  I  had  the  great  pleasure  of  seeing  him 
in  his  quiet  home,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  family.  A 
year  or  two  later  I  spent  a  week-end  with  him  in 
company  with  Bates,  Jenner  Weir,  and  a  few  other 
naturalists ;  but  my  most  frequent  interviews  with 
him  were  when  he  spent  a  few  weeks  with  his  brother. 
Dr.  Erasmus  Darwin,  in  Queen  Anne  Street,  which 


LYELL   AND   DARWIN  227 

he  usually  did  every  year  when  he  was  well  enough, 
in  order  to  see  his  friends  and  collect  information  for 
his  various  works.  On  these  occasions  I  usually 
lunched  with  him  and  his  brother,  and  sometimes  one 
other  visitor,  and  had  a  little  talk  on  some  of  the 
matters  specially  interesting  him.  He  also  some- 
times called  on  me  in  St.  Mark's  Crescent  for  a  quiet 
talk  or  to  see  some  of  my  collections. 

My  first  letter  from  him  dealing  with  scientific 
matters  was  in  August,  1862,  and  our  correspondence 
was  very  extensive  during  the  period  occupied  in 
writing  or  correcting  his  earlier  books  on  evolution, 
down  to  the  publication  of  "  The  Expression  of  the 
Emotions  in  Man  and  Animals,"  in  1872,  and  after- 
wards, at  longer  intervals,  to  within  less  than  a  year 
of  his  death.  A  considerable  selection  of  our  corre- 
spondence has  been  published  in  the  "Life  and 
Letters"  (1887),  and  especially  in  "More  Letters" 
(1903)  ;  while  several  of  the  more  interesting  of  these 
were  contained  in  the  one-volume  life,  entitled 
"Charles  Darwin,"  which  appeared  in  1892.  As 
many  of  my  readers,  however,  may  not  have  these 
works  to  refer  to,  I  will  here  give  a  few  of  his  letters 
to  myself  which  have  not  yet  been  published,  and 
also  occasional  extracts  from  some  that  have  already 
appeared,  in  order  to  make  clear  the  nature  of  our 
discussions. 

On  February  23,  1867,  he  wrote  to  me  asking  if 
I  could  solve  a  difificulty  for  him.  He  says :  "  On 
Monday  evening  I  called  on  Bates,  and  put  a  difficulty 
before  him  which  he  could  not  answer,  and,  as  on 
some  former  similar  occasion,  his  first  suggestion  was, 
*  You  had  better  ask  Wallace.'  My  difficulty  is,  Why 
are  caterpillars  sometimes  so  beautifully  and  artistic- 
ally coloured  ?     Seeing   that   many  are  coloured  to 


228  MY   LIFE 

escape  dangers,  I  can  hardly  attribute  their  bright 
colour  in  other  cases  to  mere  physical  conditions. 
Bates  says  the  most  gaudy  caterpillar  he  ever  saw  in 
Amazonia  was  conspicuous  at  the  distance  of  yards, 
from  its  black  and  red  colours,  whilst  feeding  on 
large,  green  leaves.  If  any  one  objected  to  male 
butterflies  having  been  made  beautiful  by  sexual 
selection,  and  asked  why  they  should  not  have  been 
made  beautiful  as  well  as  their  caterpillars,  what 
would  you  answer  ?  I  could  not  answer,  but  should 
maintain  my  ground.  Will  you  think  over  this,  and 
some  time,  either  by  letter  or  when  we  meet,  tell  me 
what  you  think  ?  " 

On  reading  this  letter,  I  almost  at  once  saw  what 
seemed  to  be  a  very  easy  and  probable  explanation 
of  the  facts.  I  had  then  just  been  preparing  for 
publication  (in  the  Westminster  Review)  my  rather 
elaborate  paper  on  "Mimicry  and  Protective  Colour- 
ing," and  the  numerous  cases  in  which  specially 
showy  and  slow-flying  butterflies  were  known  to  have 
a  peculiar  odour  and  taste  which  protected  them  from 
the  attacks  of  insect-eating  birds  and  other  animals, 
led  me  at  once  to  suppose  that  the  gaudily  coloured 
caterpillars  must  have  a  similar  protection.  I  had 
just  ascertained  from  Mr.  Jenner  Weir  that  one  of 
our  common  white  moths  {Spilosoma  menthrasti) 
would  not  be  eaten  by  most  of  the  small  birds  in  his 
aviary,  nor  by  young  turkeys.  Now,  as  a  white  moth 
is  as  conspicuous  in  the  diisk  as  a  coloured  caterpillar 
in  the  daylight^  this  case  seemed  to  me  so  much  on 
a  par  with  the  other  that  I  felt  almost  sure  my 
explanation  would  turn  out  correct.  I  at  once  wrote 
to  Mr.  Darwin  to  this  effect,  and  his  reply,  dated 
February  26,  is  as  follows  : — 


LYELL  AND   DARWIN  229 

"  My  dear  Wallace, 

"  Bates  was  quite  right ;  you  are  the  man 
to  apply  to  in  a  difficulty.  I  never  heard  anything 
more  ingenious  than  your  suggestion,  and  I  hope  you 
may  be  able  to  prove  it  true.  That  is  a  splendid  fact 
about  the  white  moths  ;  it  warms  one's  very  blood  to 
see  a  theory  thus  almost  proved  to  be  true." 

I  then  mentioned  the  subject  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Entomological  Society ;  and  in  the  following  year 
experiments  were  made  by  two  gentlemen  which 
proved  clearly  that  while  green  or  brown  caterpillars 
were  greedily  eaten  by  all  insect-eating  birds,  those 
which  were  gaudily  coloured  or  were  hairy,  and 
usually  exposed  themselves  on  the  plants  on  which 
they  fed  in  the  daytime,  were  rejected  by  almost 
all  the  birds  and  usually  by  lizards  as  well.  The 
principle  of  "  warning  coloration,"  as  it  is  termed,  is 
now  generally  admitted  as  being  widely  prevalent  in 
nature. 

In  the  year  1870  Mr.  A.  W.  Bennett  read  a  paper 
before  Section  D  of  the  British  Association  at  Liver- 
pool, entitled  "  The  Theory  of  Natural  Selection  from 
a  Mathematical  Point  of  View,"  and  this  paper  was 
printed  in  full  in  Nature  of  November  10,  1870.  To 
this  I  replied  on  November  17,  and  my  reply  so 
pleased  Mr.  Darwin  that  he  at  once  wrote  to  me  as 
follows : — 

"  Down,  November  22. 

"My  dear  Wallace, 

"  I  must  ease  myself  by  writing  a  few  words 
to  say  how  much  I  and  all  in  this  house  admire  your 
article  in  Nature.  You  are  certainly  an  unparalleled 
master  in    lucidly   stating    a  case    and   in   arguing. 


230  MY   LIFE 

Nothing  ever  was  better  done  than  your  argument 
about  the  term  Origin  of  Species,  and  about  much 
being  gained  if  we  know  nothing  about  precise  cause 
of  each  variation." 

At  the  end  of  the  letter  he  says  something  about 
the  progress  of  his  great  work,  "  The  Descent  of 
Man." 

"  I  have  finished  ist  vol.  and  am  half-way  through 
proofs  of  2nd  vol.  of  my  confounded  book,  which  half 
kills  me  by  fatigue,  and  which  I  fear  will  quite  kill 
me  in  your  good  estimation. 

"  If  you  have  leisure,  I  should  much  like  a  little 
news  of  you  and  your  doings  and  your  family, 
"  Ever  yours  very  sincerely, 

"Ch.  Darwin." 

The  above  remark,  "  kill  me  in  your  good  estima- 
tion," refers  to  his  views  on  the  mental  and  moral 
nature  of  man  being  very  different  from  mine,  this 
being  the  first  important  question  as  to  which  our 
views  had  diverged.  But  I  never  had  the  slightest 
feeling  of  the  kind  he  supposed,  looking  upon  the 
difference  as  one  which  did  not  at  all  affect  our 
general  agreement,  and  also  as  being  one  on  which 
no  one  could  dogmatize,  there  being  much  to  be  said 
on  both  sides.  The  last  paragraph  shows  the  extreme 
interest  he  took  in  the  personal  affairs  of  all  his 
friends. 

Soon  after  the  "  Descent  of  Man  "  appeared,  I 
wrote  to  Darwin,  giving  my  impressions  of  the  first 
volume,  to  which  he  replied  (January  30,  1871).  This 
letter  is  given  in  the  "Life  and  Letters"  (iii.  p.  134), 
but  I  will  quote  two  short  passages  expressing  his 
kind  feelings  towards  myself.  He  begins,  "Your 
note  has  given  me  very  great  pleasure,  chiefly  because 


LYELL   AND   DARWIN  231 

I  was  so  anxious  not  to  treat  you  with  the  least  dis- 
respect, and  it  is  so  difficult  to  speak  fairly  when 
differing  from  any  one.  If  I  had  offended  you,  it  would 
have  grieved  me  more  than  you  will  readily  believe." 
And  the  conclusion  is,  "  Forgive  me  for  scribbling  at 
such  length.  You  have  put  me  quite  in  good  spirits  ; 
I  did  so  dread  having  been  unintentionally  unfair 
towards  your  views.  I  hope  earnestly  the  second 
volume  will  escape  as  well.  I  care  now  very  little 
what  others  say.  As  for  our  not  agreeing,  really,  in 
such  complex  subjects,  it  is  almost  impossible  for  two 
men  who  arrive  independently  at  their  conclusions  to 
agree  fully  ;  it  would  be  unnatural  for  them  to  do  so." 

Again,  on  July  12,  he  writes  :  "  I  feel  very  doubt- 
ful how  far  I  shall  succeed  in  answering  Mivart.  It 
is  so  difficult  to  answer  objections  to  doubtful  points 
and  make  the  discussion  readable.  The  worst  of  it 
is,  that  I  cannot  possibly  hunt  through  all  my  refer- 
ences for  isolated  points — it  would  take  me  three 
weeks  of  intolerably  hard  work,  I  wish  I  had  your 
power  of  arguing  clearly.  At  present  I  feel  sick  of 
everything,  and  if  I  could  occupy  my  time  and  forget 
my  daily  discomforts,  or  rather  miseries,  I  would  never 
publish  another  word.  But  I  shall  cheer  up,  I  dare 
say,  soon,  having  only  just  got  over  a  bad  attack. 
Farewell.  God  knows  why  I  bother  you  about 
myself. 

"  I  can  say  nothing  more  about  missing  links  than 
I  have  said.  I  should  rely  much  on  pre-Silurian 
times ;  but  then  comes  Sir  W.  Thomson  like  an 
odious  spectre.     Farewell." 

This  last  remark  refers  to  the  limitation  of  the 
earth's  age  by  physicists,  so  as  not  to  leave  time 
enough  for  the  evolution  of  organisms. 

During  this  latter  period  of  his  life  I  had  but 


232  MY   LIFE 

little  correspondence  with  him,  as  I  had  no  knowledge 
whatever  of  the  subjects  he  was  then  working  on. 
But  he  still  continued  to  write  to  me  occasionally, 
either  referring  kindly  to  my  own  work  or  sending 
me  facts  or  suggestions  which  he  thought  would  be 
of  interest  to  me.  I  will  here  give  only  some  extracts 
from  a  few  of  the  latest  of  the  letters  I  received  from 
him. 

On  November  3,  1880,  he  wrote  me  the  following 
very  kind  letter  upon  my  "  Island  Life,"  on  which  I 
had  asked  for  his  criticism  : — 

"  I  have  now  read  your  book,  and  it  has  interested 
me  deeply.  It  is  quite  excellent,  and  seems  to  me 
the  best  book  which  you  have  ever  published  ;  but 
this  may  be  merely  because  I  have  read  it  last  As  I 
went  on  I  made  a  few  notes,  chiefly  where  I  differed 
slightly  from  you ;  but  God  knows  whether  they  are 
worth  your  reading.  You  will  be  disappointed  with 
many  of  them  ;  but  it  will  show  that  I  had  the  will, 
though  I  did  not  know  the  way  to  do  what  you 
wanted. 

"  I  have  said  nothing  on  the  infinitely  many 
passages  and  views,  which  I  admired  and  which  were 
new  to  me.  My  notes  are  badly  expressed,  but  I 
thought  that  you  would  excuse  my  taking  any  pains 
with  my  style.  I  wish  my  confounded  handwriting 
was  better.  I  had  a  note  the  other  day  from  Hooker, 
and  I  can  see  that  he  is  much  pleased  with  the 
dedication." 

With  this  came  seven  foolscap  pages  of  notes, 
many  giving  facts  from  his  extensive  reading  which 
I  had  not  seen. 

In  another  letter,  two  months  later,  he  recurs  to 
the  same  subject. 


LYELL   AND    DARWIN  233 

"  Down,  January  2,  1881. 

"My  dear  Wallace, 

"  The  case  which  you  give  is  a  very  striking 
one,  and  I  had  overlooked  it  in  Natiire  ;  ^  but  I  remain 
as  great  a  heretic  as  ever.  Any  supposition  seems  to 
me  more  probable  than  that  the  seeds  of  plants  should 
have  been  blown  from  the  mountains  of  Abyssinia,  or 
other  central  mountains  of  Africa,  to  the  mountains  of 
Madagascar.  It  seems  to  me  almost  infinitely  more 
probable  that  Madagascar  extended  far  to  the  south 
during  the  glacial  period,  and  that  the  S.  hemisphere 
was,  according  to  Croll,  then  more  temperate  ;  and 
that  the  whole  of  Africa  was  then  peopled  with  some 
temperate  forms,  which  crossed  chiefly  by  agency  of 
birds  and  sea-currents,  and  some  few  by  the  wind, 
from  the  shores  of  Africa  to  Madagascar  subsequently 
ascending  to  the  mountains. 

"  How  lamentable  it  is  that  two  men  should  take 
such  widely  different  views,  with  the  same  facts  before 
them ;  but  this  seems  to  be  almost  regularly  our  case, 
and  much  do  I  regret  it.  I  am  fairly  well,  but  always 
feel  half  dead  with  fatigue.  I  heard  but  an  indifferent 
account  of  your  health  some  time  ago,  but  trust  that 
you  are  now  somewhat  stronger. 

"  Believe  me,  my  dear  Wallace, 
"  Yours  very  sincerely, 

"Ch.  Darwin." 

It  is  really  quite  pathetic  how  much  he  felt 
difference  of  opinion  from  his  friends.  I,  of  course, 
should  have  liked  to  be  able  to  convert  him  to  my 
views,  but  I  did  not  feel  it  so  much  as  he  seemed  to 

*  Nature,  December  9,  1880.  The  substance  of  this  article  by  Mr. 
Baker,  of  Kew,  is  given  in  "  More  Letters,"  vol.  iii.  p.  25,  in  a  foot- 
note. 


234  MY  LIFE 

do.  In  letters  to  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  (in  February 
and  August,  1881)  he  again  states  his  view  as  against 
mine  very  strongly  ("More  Letters,"  iii.  pp.  25  and 
27) ;  and  this,  so  far  as  I  know,  is  the  last  reference 
he  made  to  the  subject.  The  last  letter  I  received 
from  him  was  entirely  on  literary  and  political  subjects, 
and,  as  usual,  very  kind  and  friendly.  As  it  makes 
no  reference  to  our  controversies,  and  touches  on 
questions  never  introduced  before  in  our  correspond- 
ence, I  think  it  will  be  interesting  to  give  it  entire. 

"Down,  July  12,  188 1. 

"My  dear  Wallace, 

"  I  have  been  heartily  glad  to  get  your  note 
and  hear  some  news  of  you.  I  will  certainly  order 
*  Progress  and  Poverty,'  for  the  subject  is  a  most 
interesting  one.  But  I  read  many  years  ago  some 
books  on  political  economy,  and  they  produced  a 
disastrous  effect  on  my  mind,  viz.,  utterly  to  distrust 
my  own  judgment  on  the  subject,  and  to  doubt  much 
every  one  else's  judgment !  So  I  feel  pretty  sure  that 
Mr.  George's  book  will  only  make  my  mind  worse 
confounded  than  it  is  at  present.  I  also  have  just 
finished  a  book  which  has  interested  me  greatly,  but 
whether  it  would  interest  any  one  else  I  know  not. 
It  is  the  *  Creed  of  Science,'  by  W.  Graham,  A.M. 
Who  or  what  he  is  I  know  not,  but  he  discusses  many 
great  subjects,  such  as  the  existence  of  God,  im- 
mortality, the  moral  sense,  the  progress  of  society, 
etc.  I  think  some  of  his  propositions  rest  on  very 
uncertain  foundations,  and  I  could  get  no  clear  idea 
of  his  notions  about  God.  Notwithstanding  this  and 
other  blemishes,  the  book  has  interested  me  extremely. 
Perhaps  I  have  been  to  some  extent  deluded,  as  he 
manifestly  ranks  too  high  what  I  have  done. 


LYELL   AND   DARWIN  235 

"  I  am  delighted  to  hear  that  you  spend  so  much 
time  out-of-doors  and  in  your  garden.  From  New- 
man's old  book  (I  forget  title)  about  the  country  near 
Godalming,  it  must  be  charming. 

"  We  have  just  returned  home  after  spending  five 
weeks  on  Ullswater.  The  scenery  is  quite  charming, 
but  I  cannot  walk,  and  everything  tires  me,  even 
seeing  scenery,  talking  with  any  one,  or  reading 
much.  What  I  shall  do  with  my  few  remaining 
years  of  life  I  can  hardly  tell.  I  have  everything  to 
make  me  happy  and  contented,  but  life  has  become 
very  wearysome  to  me.  I  heard  lately  from  Miss 
Buckley  in  relation  to  Lyell's  Life,  and  she  men- 
tioned that  you  were  thinking  of  Switzerland,  which 
I  should  think  and  hope  that  you  would  enjoy 
much. 

"  I  see  that  you  are  going  to  write  on  the  most 
difficult  political  question,  the  land.  Something  ought 
to  be  done,  but  what  is  the  rub.  I  hope  that  you  will 
(not)  turn  renegade  to  natural  history  ;  but  I  suppose 
that  politics  are  very  tempting. 

"  With  all  good  wishes  for  yourself  and  family, 
"  Believe  me,  my  dear  Wallace, 

"Yours  very  sincerely, 

"Charles  Darwin." 

This  letter  is,  to  me,  perhaps  the  most  interesting 
I  ever  received  from  Darwin,  since  it  shows  that  it 
was  only  the  engrossing  interests  of  his  scientific  and 
literary  work,  performed  under  the  drawback  of  almost 
constant  ill-health,  that  prevented  him  from  taking  a 
more  active  part  in  the  discussion  of  those  social  and 
political  questions  that  so  deeply  affect  the  lives  and 
happiness  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  people.  It  is  a 
great  satisfaction  that  his  last  letter  to  me,  written 


236  MY   LIFE 

within  nine  months  of  his  death,  and  terminating  a 
correspondence  which  had  extended  over  a  quarter  of 
a  century,  should  be  so  cordial,  so  sympathetic,  and 
broad-minded. 

In  1870  he  had  written  to  me,  "I  hope  it  is  a 
satisfaction  to  you  to  reflect — and  very  few  things  in 
my  life  have  been  more  satisfactory  to  me — that  we 
have  never  felt  any  jealousy  towards  each  other, 
though  in  some  sense  rivals.  I  believe  I  can  say 
this  of  myself  with  truth,  and  I  am  absolutely  sure 
that  it  is  true  of  you."  This  friendly  feeling  was 
retained  by  him  to  the  last,  and  to  have  thus  inspired 
and  retained  it,  notwithstanding  our  many  differences 
of  opinion,  I  feel  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  honours  of 
my  life. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  interest  my  readers  if  I  give 
briefly  the  four  chief  points  on  which  I  differed  from 
Darwin.     They  are  as  follows  : — 

(i)  Darwin  held  that  man  had  been  developed 
physically  and  intellectually  by  continuous  modifica- 
tion under  natural  selection  from  some  ancestral  form, 
whilst  I,  though  agreeing  with  him  with  regard  to 
man's  physical  form,  believed  that  some  agency  other 
than  natural  selection,  and  analogous  to  that  which 
first  produced  organic  life,  had  brought  into  being 
his  moral  and  intellectual  qualities. 

(2)  Darwin  believed  that  in  the  case  of  certain 
animals  the  males  had  obtained  their  bright  colours 
or  other  ornaments  by  selection  through  female 
choice.  I,  on  the  other  hand,  believed  that  natural 
selection  had  operated  independently  on  the  two 
sexes,  and  each  had  acquired  coloration  or  form 
according  to  its  need  for  protection.  The  females, 
being  often  more  exposed  to  danger  than  the  males 
(as  in  the  case  of  sitting  birds),  had  acquired  more 


LYELL   AND   DARWIN  237 

subdued  coloration  whilst  the  males  had  remained 
bright  and  comparatively  conspicuous, 

(3)  Darwin  thought  that  the  arctic  plants  found  on 
isolated  mountain  tops  within  the  tropics  could  only 
be  explained  by  the  spreading  of  the  arctic  flora  over 
the  tropics  during  the  glacial  period.  From  a  study 
of  the  floras  of  oceanic  islands,  I  had  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  mountain  flora  had  been  derived 
by  aerial  transmission  of  seeds  either  by  birds  or  by 
gales. 

(4)  Darwin  always  believed  in  the  inheritance  of 
acquired  characteristics,  such  as  the  results  of  use  or 
disuse  of  organs,  and  the  effects  of  climate,  food,  etc., 
on  the  individual.  I  also  accepted  this  theory  at  first, 
but  when  I  had  studied  Mr.  Galton's  experiments  and 
Dr.  Weismann's  theory  of  the  continuity  of  the  germ- 
plasm  I  had  to  change  my  views.  The  latter  theory 
really  simplifies  and  strengthens  the  fundamental 
doctrine  of  natural  selection. 

It  will  thus  appear  that  none  of  my  differences  of 
opinion  from  Darwin  imply  any  real  divergence  as  to 
the  overwhelming  importance  of  the  great  principle  of 
natural  selection,  while  in  several  directions  I  believe 
that  I  have  extended  and  strengthened  it.  The 
principle  of  "utility,"  which  is  one  of  its  chief 
foundation-stones,  I  have  always  advocated  unre- 
servedly ;  while  in  extending  this  principle  to  almost 
every  kind  and  degree  of  coloration,  and  in  maintain- 
ing the  power  of  natural  selection  to  increase  the  in- 
fertility of  hybrid  unions,  I  have  considerably  extended 
its  range.  Hence  it  is  that  some  of  my  critics  declare 
that  I  am  more  Darwinian  than  Darwin  himself,  and 
in  this,  I  admit,  they  are  not  far  wrong. 

When  Darwin  died  in  188 1  I  was  honoured  by  an 
invitation  to  his  funeral  in  Westminster  Abbey,  as  one 


238  MY   LIFE 

of  the  pall-bearers,  along  with  nine  of  his  most  distin- 
guished friends  or  admirers,  among  whom  was  J. 
Russell  Lowell,  as  the  representative  of  American 
science  and  literature.  Among  the  many  obituary- 
notices  of  Darwin,  that  by  Huxley  (in  NaUire,  of  April 
27)  is  one  of  the  shortest,  most  discriminating,  and 
most  beautiful.  It  is  published  also  in  the  second 
volume  of  his  "Collected  Essays."  For  those  who 
have  not  read  this  true  and  charming  estimate  of  his 
friend,  I  may  quote  one  passage  :  "  One  could  not 
converse  with  Darwin  without  being  reminded  of 
Socrates.  There  was  the  same  desire  to  find  some 
one  wiser  than  himself;  the  same  belief  in  the 
sovereignty  of  reason ;  the  same  ready  humour ;  the 
same  sympathetic  interest  in  all  the  ways  and  works 
of  men.  But  instead  of  turning  away  from  the 
problems  of  nature  as  wholly  insoluble,  our  modern 
philosopher  devoted  his  whole  life  to  attacking  them 
in  the  spirit  of  Heraclitus  and  Democritus,  with  results 
which  are  as  the  substance  of  which  their  speculations 
were  anticipatory  shadows." 


CHAPTER   XVI 

HERBERT   SPENCER,   HUXLEY,   AND  OTHER 
FRIENDS 

Soon  after  my  return  home,  in  1862,  Bates  and  I, 
having  both  read  "  First  Principles "  and  been  im- 
mensely impressed  by  it,  went  together  to  call  on 
Herbert  Spencer,  I  think  by  appointment.  Our 
thoughts  were  full  of  the  great  unsolved  problem  of 
the  origin  of  life — a  problem  which  Darwin's  "  Origin 
of  Species"  left  in  as  much  obscurity  as  ever — and 
we  looked  to  Spencer  as  the  one  man  living  who 
could  give  us  some  clue  to  it.  His  wonderful  exposi- 
tion of  the  fundamental  laws  and  conditions,  actions 
and  interactions  of  the  material  universe  seemed  to 
penetrate  so  deeply  into  that  "  nature  of  things " 
after  which  the  early  philosophers  searched  in  vain, 
and  whose  blind  gropings  are  so  finely  expressed  in 
the  grand  poem  of  Lucretius,  that  we  both  hoped  he 
could  throw  some  light  on  that  great  problem  of 
problems.  He  was  very  pleasant,  spoke  appreciatively 
of  what  we  had  both  done  for  the  practical  exposition 
of  evolution,  and  hoped  we  would  continue  to  work 
at  the  subject.  But  when  we  ventured  to  touch  upon 
the  great  problem,  and  whether  he  had  arrived  at 
even  one  of  the  first  steps  towards  its  solution,  our 
hopes  were  dashed  at  once.  That,  he  said,  was  too 
fundamental  a  problem  to  even  think  of  solving  at 


240  MY  LIFE 

present.  We  did  not  yet  know  enough  of  matter  in 
its  essential  constitution  nor  of  the  various  forces  of 
nature ;  and  all  he  could  say  was  that  everything 
pointed  to  life  having  been  a  development  out  of 
matter — a  phase  of  that  continuous  process  of  evolu- 
tion by  which  the  whole  universe  had  been  brought 
to  its  present  condition.  So  we  had  to  wait  and  work 
contentedly  at  minor  problems.  And  now,  after 
forty  years,  though  Spencer  and  Darwin  and  Weis- 
mann  have  thrown  floods  of  light  on  the  phenomena 
of  life,  its  essential  nature  and  its  origin  remain  as 
great  a  mystery  as  ever.  Whatever  light  we  do 
possess  is  from  a  source  which  Spencer  and  Darwin 
neglected  or  ignored. 

The  first  letter  I  received  from  Spencer  was  when 
I  sent  him  my  paper  on  "  The  Origin  of  Human 
Races  under  the  Law  of  Natural  Selection."  He  said 
that  he  had  read  it  with  great  interest,  and  added. 
"  Its  leading  idea  is,  I  think,  undoubtedly  true,"  con- 
cluding with  a  hope  that  I  would  pursue  the  inquiry. 

Soon  afterwards  he  invited  me  to  dine  with  him 
in  Bayswater,  where  he  lived  for  many  years  in  a 
boarding-house  with  rather  a  commonplace  set  of 
people  ;  and  I  visited  him  there  several  times. 

In  1872,  in  my  presidential  address  to  the  Ento- 
mological Society,  I  endeavoured  to  expound  Herbert 
Spencer's  theory  of  the  origin  of  insects,  on  the  view 
that  they  are  fundamentally  compound  animals,  each 
segment  representing  one  of  the  original  independent 
organisms.  On  sending  him  a  copy  of  the  address, 
he  wrote  to  me  as  follows  :  "  It  is  gratifying  to  me  to 
find  that  your  extended  knowledge  does  not  lead 
you  to  scepticism  respecting  the  speculation  of  mine 
which  you  quote,  but  rather  enables  you  to  cite 
further   facts   in   justification   of  it.     Possibly  your 


SPENCER,  HUXLEY,  AND   OTHERS     241 

exposition  will  lead  some  of  those,  in  whose  lines  of 
investigation  the  question  lies,  to  give  deliberate 
attention  to  it," 

In  1874,  when  writing  "The  Principles  of  Soci- 
ology," Herbert  Spencer  asked  me  to  look  over  the 
proofs  of  the  first  six  chapters,  and  give  him  the 
benefit  of  my  criticisms,  "  alike  as  naturalist,  anthro- 
pologist, and  traveller."  I  found  very  little  indeed 
requiring  emendation,  but  I  sent  him  a  couple  of 
pages  of  notes  with  suggestions  on  points  of  detail, 
which,  I  believe,  were  of  some  use  to  him. 

During  the  year  1881  I  had  several  letters  from 
him,  dealing  with  subjects  of  general  interest.  In 
consequence  of  an  article  I  wrote  on  "  How  to 
Nationalize  the  Land,"  especially  showing  how  to 
avoid  the  supposed  insuperable  objection  of  State 
management,  a  "  Land  Nationalization  Society  "  was 
formed,  of  which  I  was  chosen  president.  As  I  had 
been  induced  to  study  the  question  by  Herbert 
Spencer's  early  volume  on  "  Social  Statics,"  I  sent 
him  a  copy  of  our  programme  and  asked  if  he  would 
join  us.  His  reply  is  very  instructive,  as  showing 
how  nearly  he  agreed  with  us  at  that  time,  and  also 
how  slight  were  the  difificulties  he  suggested  as  the 
most  important. 

The  letter  is  as  follows : — 

"  38,  Queen's  Gardens,  Bayswater,  W., 
"April  25,  1881. 

"Dear  Mr.  Wallace, 

"As  you  may  suppose,  I  fully  sympathize  in 
the  general  aims  of  your  proposed  Land  Nationaliza- 
tion Society ;  but  for  sundry  reasons  I  hesitate  to 
commit  myself,  at  the  present  stage  of  the  question, 
to  a  programme  so  definite  as  that  which  you  send 

R 


242  MY   LIFE 

me.  It  seems  to  me  that  before  formulating  the  idea 
in  a  specific  shape,  it  is  needful  to  generate  a  body 
of  public  opinion  on  the  general  issue,  and  that  it 
must  be  some  time  before  there  can  be  produced 
such  recognition  of  the  general  principle  involved  as 
is  needful  before  definite  plans  can  be  set  forth  to 
any  purpose. 

"  It  seems  to  me  that  the  thing  to  be  done  at 
present  is  to  arouse  public  attention  to  (i)  the  abstract 
inequity  of  the  present  condition  of  things ;  (2)  to 
show  that  even  now  there  is  in  our  law  a  tacit  denial 
of  absolute  private  ownership,  since  the  State  reserves 
the  power  of  resuming  possession  of  land  on  making 
compensation  ;  (3)  that  this  tacitly  admitted  owner- 
ship ought  to  be  overtly  asserted  ;  (4)  and  that  having 
been  overtly  asserted,  the  landowner  should  be  dis- 
tinctly placed  in  the  position  of  a  tenant  of  the  State 
on  something  like  the  terms  proposed  in  your  scheme : 
namely,  that  while  the  land  itself  should  be  regarded 
as  public  property,  such  value  as  has  been  given  to 
it  should  vest  in  the  existing  so-called  owner. 

"  The  question  is  surrounded  with  such  difficulties 
that  I  fear  anything  like  a  specific  scheme  for  resump- 
tion by  the  State  will  tend,  by  the  objections  made, 
to  prevent  recognition  of  a  general  truth  which  might 
otherwise  be  admitted.  For  example,  in  definitely 
making  the  proposed  distinction  between  '  inherent 
value  as  dependent  on  natural  conditions,  etc.,'  and 
the  'increased  value  given  by  the  owner,'  there  is 
raised  the  questions — How  are  the  two  to  be  dis- 
tinguished ?  How  far  back  are  we  to  go  in  taking 
account  of  the  labour  and  money  expended  in  giving 
fertility  ?  In  respect  of  newly  enclosed  tracts,  some 
estimation  may  be  made ;  but  in  respect  of  the 
greater  part,  long  reduced  to  cultivation,  I  do  not 


SPENCER,   HUXLEY,  AND    OTHERS     243 

see  how  the  valuations,  differing  in  all  cases,  are  to 
be  made. 

*'  I  name  this  as  one  point ;  and  there  are  many- 
others  in  respect  of  which  I  do  not  see  my  way.     It 
appears  to  me  that  at  present  we  are  far  off  from  the 
time  at  which  action  may  advantageously  be  taken. 
"  Truly  yours, 

"  Herbert  Spencer." 

The  last  three  letters  I  received  from  Herbert 
Spencer  were  in  1894  and  1895,  all  on  the  subject  of 
what  he  termed  "the  absurdity  of  Lord  Salisbury's 
representation  of  the  process  of  natural  selection  "  in 
his  British  Association  address  at  Oxford,  wishing 
me  to  write  to  the  Times,  pointing  out  his  errors, 
which  were  influencing  many  persons  and  writers  in 
the  press,  and  suggesting  certain  points  I  should 
especially  deal  with.  He  concluded,  "  It  behoves  you 
of  all  men  to  take  up  the  gauntlet  he  has  thus  thrown 
down."  I  replied,  declining  the  task,  on  the  ground 
that  I  did  not  think  Lord  Salisbury's  influence  in  a 
matter  of  science  of  much  importance,  and  that  I 
thought  my  time  better  employed  in  writing  such 
articles  on  social  and  political,  as  well  as  general 
scientific  questions  which  then  interested  me.  To 
this  he  replied  that  he  did  not  at  all  agree  with  me, 
and  that  "articles  in  the  papers  show  that  Lord 
Salisbury's  argument  is  received  with  triumph,  and 
unless  it  is  disposed  of,  it  will  lead  to  a  public  reaction 
against  the  doctrine  of  evolution  at  large." 

As  I  still  declined  to  go  into  this  controversy, 
having  dealt  with  the  whole  matter  in  my  "  Dar- 
winism," and  still  being  sceptical  as  to  any  great 
effects  being  produced  by  the  address  in  question,  he 
wrote   me  a  month   later  as  follows :   "  As  I  cannot 


244  MY   LIFE 

get  you  to  deal  with  Lord  Salisbury,  I  have  decided 
to  do  it  myself,  having  been  finally  exasperated  into 
doing  it  by  this  honour  paid  to  his  address  in  France 
— the  presentation  of  a  translation  to  the  French 
Academy.  The  impression  produced  upon  some 
millions  of  people  in  England  cannot  be  allowed  to 
be  thus  further  confirmed  without  protest."  He  then 
asked  me  for  some  references,  which  I  sent  him,  and 
his  criticism  of  Lord  Salisbury  duly  appeared,  and 
was  thoroughly  well  done,  so  that  I  had  no  reason  to 
regret  not  having  undertaken  it  myself.  This  was 
the  latest  letter  I  received  from  him  ;  but  during  his 
last  illness  my  wife,  being  in  Brighton,  called  to  make 
inquiries  after  his  health,  and  left  our  cards,  and  I 
received  a  kindly  expressed  card  in  reply,  written  by 
his  amanuensis,  but  signed  with  his  own  initials.  It 
is  dated  November  28,  1903,  ten  days  before  his 
death. 

Among  his  intimate  friends,  Herbert  Spencer  was 
always  interesting  from  the  often  unexpected  way  in 
which  he  would  apply  the  principles  of  evolution  to 
the  commonest  topics  of  conversation,  and  he  was 
always  ready  to  take  part  in  any  social  amusement. 
He  once  or  twice  honoured  me  by  coming  to  informal 
meetings  of  friends  at  my  little  house  in  St.  Mark's 
Crescent,  and  I  also  met  him  at  Sir  John  Lubbock's 
very  pleasant  week-end  visits,  and  also  at  Huxley's, 
in  St.  John's  Wood.  Once  I  remember  dining  in- 
formally with  Huxley,  the  only  other  guests  being 
Tyndall  and  Herbert  Spencer.  The  latter  appeared 
in  a  dress-coat,  whereupon  Huxley  and  Tyndall 
chaffed  him,  as  setting  a  bad  example,  and  of  being 
untrue  to  his  principles,  quoting  his  Essay  on 
"  Manners  and  Fashion,"  but  all  with  the  most  good- 
humoured  banter.     Spencer  took  it  in  good  part,  and 


SPENCER,    HUXLEY,   AND   OTHERS     245 

defended  himself  well,  declaring  that  the  coat  was  a 
relic  of  his  early  unregenerate  days,  and  where  could 
he  wear  it  out  if  not  at  the  houses  of  his  best  friends  ? 
"  Besides,"  he  concluded,  "  you  will  please  to  observe 
that  I  am  true  to  principle  in  that  I  do  not  wear  a 
white  tie ! " 

Those  who  are  acquainted  only  with  the  volumes 
of  Herbert  Spencer's  "  Synthetic  Philosophy "  can 
have  no  idea  of  the  lightness,  the  energy,  and  the 
bright  satire  of  some  of  his  more  popular  writings. 
Such  are  many  of  his  earlier  Essays,  and  in  his 
volume  on  "The  Study  of  Sociology"  we  find 
abundant  examples  of  these  qualities. 

With  the  remainder  of  my  scientific  friends  I  had, 
for  the  most  part,  only  social  intercourse,  with  no 
correspondence  of  general  interest.  Those  I  saw 
most  of  during  my  residence  in  London,  and  with 
whom  I  became  most  intimate,  were  Huxley,  Tyndall, 
Sir  John  Lubbock,  Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  Sir  William 
Crookes,  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  Mr.  Francis  Galton, 
Professor  Alfred  Newton,  Dr.  P.  L.  Sclater,  Mr.  St. 
George  Mivart,  Sir  William  Flower,  Sir  Norman 
Lockyer,  Professor  R.  Meldola,  and  many  others 
whose  names  are  only  known  to  specialists.  All  these 
I  met  very  frequently  at  scientific  meetings,  or  at 
some  of  their  houses  at  which  I  was  occasionally  a 
guest.  To  all  of  them  I  have  been  more  or  less 
indebted  for  valuable  information  or  useful  suggestions 
in  the  course  of  my  work,  and  to  these  I  must  also 
add  Professor  E.  B.  Poulton,  of  Oxford  ;  F.  W.  H. 
Myers,  Professors  W.  F.  Barrett  and  Percival  Wright, 
of  Dublin,  with  Professors  Patrick  Geddes,  of  Edin- 
burgh, and  J.  A.  Thomson,  of  Aberdeen.  For  the 
last  quarter  of  a  century  I  have  lived  so  completely 
in  the  country  tha.t  I  have  ceased  to  have  personal* 


246  MY   LIFE 

intercourse  with  most  of  them  ;  and  of  those  still 
among  us,  I  can  only  say  here  that  I  hope  and  believe 
they  all  continue  to  be  my  very  good  friends.  I  may 
have  to  refer  to  some  of  them  again,  in  connection 
with  special  conditions  of  my  life.  Here  I  will  only 
give  a  few  indications  as  to  my  personal  relations 
with  some  of  them. 

Of  all  those  I  have  mentioned  I  became,  I  think, 
most  intimate  with  Huxley.  At  an  early  date  after 
my  return  home  he  asked  me  to  his  house  in 
Marlborough  Place,  where  I  soon  became  very 
friendly  with  his  children,  then  all  quite  young, 
all  very  animated,  and  not  at  all  shy.  Mrs.  Huxley 
was  also  exceedingly  kind  and  pleasant,  and  the 
whole  domestic  tone  of  the  house  was  such  as  to 
make  me  quite  at  my  ease,  which  happens  to  me 
with  only  a  few  persons.  I  used  often  to  go  there  on 
Sunday  afternoons,  or  to  spend  the  evening,  while  I 
was  several  times  asked  to  dine  to  meet  persons  of 
similar  pursuits  to  my  own. 

I  often  called  in  at  Jermyn  Street  if  I  had  any 
question  to  ask  Huxley,  and  he  was  always  ready  to 
give  me  all  the  information  in  his  power ;  while  I  am 
pretty  sure  I  owe  partly,  if  not  largely,  to  his  influence 
the  grant  of  the  royal  medal  of  the  Royal  Society, 
and  perhaps  also  of  the  Darwin  medal.  Once  only 
there  was  a  partial  disturbance  of  our  friendly  relations, 
of  the  exact  cause  of  which  I  have  no  record  or 
recollection.  I  had  published  some  paper  in  which, 
I  believe,  I  had  stated  some  view  which  he  had 
originated  without  mentioning  his  name,  and  in  such 
a  way  as  to  leave  the  impression  that  I  put  it  forth 
as  original.  This  I  had  no  notion  of  doing ;  but  I 
think  it  was  an  idea  which  had  become  so  familiar  to 
me  that  I  had  quite  forgotten  who  originated  it.     I 


SPENCER,    HUXLEY,   AND   OTHERS     247 

fancy  some  one  must  have  called  Huxley's  attention 
to  it,  and  when  I  next  met  him,  I  think  just  as  he 
was  leaving  Jermyn  Street  to  go  home,  he  was  much 
put  out,  and  said  something  intimating  that  after 
what  I  had  said  in  this  paper,  he  wondered  at  my 
speaking  to  him  again.  I  forget  what  more  was  said, 
but  on  going  home  I  looked  at  the  article,  and  found 
that  I  had  used  some  expression  that  might  be  in- 
terpreted as  a  slight  to  him.  I  immediately  wrote  a 
letter  of  explanation  and  regret,  and  I  here  give  his 
reply,  which  greatly  relieved  me,  and  our  relations  at 
once  resumed  their  usual  friendly  character. 

"My  dear  Wallace, 

"  Very  many  thanks  for  your  kind  letter. 
"  I  am  exceedingly  callous  to  the  proceedings  of 
my  enemies,  but  (I  suppose  by  way  of  compensation) 
I  am  very  sensitive  to  thpse  of  valued  friends,  and  I 
certainly  felt  rather  sore  when  I  read  your  paper. 
But  I  dare  say  I  should  have  'consumed  my  own 
smoke '  in  that  matter  as  I  do  in  most,  if  I  had  not 
been  very  tired,  very  hungry,  very  cold,  and  conse- 
quently very  irritable,  when  I  met  you  yesterday. 
Pray  forgive  me  if  I  was  too  plain  spoken, 
"  And  believe  me,  as  always, 

"  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"T.  H.  Huxley. 

"Jermyn  Street,  February  14,  1870." 

Although  Huxley  was  as  kind  and  genial  a  friend 
and  companion  as  Darwin  himself,  and  I  was  quite  at 
ease  with  him  in  his  family  circle,  or  in  after-dinner 
talk  with  a  few  of  his  intimates,  and  although  he  was 
two  years  younger  than  myself,  yet  I  never  got  over  a 
feeling  of  awe  and  inferiority  when  discussing  with 


248  MY   LIFE 

him  any  problem  in  evolution  or  allied  subjects — an 
inferiority  which  I  did  not  feel  either  with  Darwin  or 
Sir  Charles  Lyell.  This  was  due,  I  think,  to  the  fact 
that  an  enormous  amount  of  Huxley's  knowledge  was 
of  a  kind  of  which  I  possessed  only  an  irreducible 
minimum,  and  in  which  I  often  felt  my  deficiency. 
In  the  general  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  whole 
animal  kingdom,  living  and  extinct,  Huxley  was 
a  master,  the  equal — perhaps  the  superior — of  the 
greatest  authorities  on  these  subjects  in  the  scientific 
world  ;  whereas  I  had  never  had  an  hour's  instruction 
in  either  of  them,  had  never  seen  a  dissection  of  any 
kind,  and  never  had  any  inclination  to  practise  the  art 
myself.  Whenever  I  had  to  touch  upon  these  subjects, 
or  to  use  them  to  enforce  my  arguments,  I  had  to  get 
both  my  facts  and  my  arguments  at  second  hand,  and 
appeal  to  authority  both  for  facts  and  conclusions  from 
them.  And  because  I  was  thus  ignorant,  and  because 
I  had  a  positive  distaste  for  all  forms  of  anatomical 
and  physiological  experiment,  I  perhaps  over- 
estimated this  branch  of  knowledge  and  looked  up  to 
those  who  possessed  it  in  a  pre-eminent  degree  as 
altogether  above  myself. 

With  Darwin  and  Lyell,  on  the  other  hand, 
although  both  possessed  stores  of  knowledge  far 
beyond  my  own,  yet  I  did  possess  some  knowledge 
of  the  same  kind,  and  felt  myself  in  a  position  to 
make  use  of  their  facts  and  those  of  all  other  students 
in  the  same  fields  of  research  quite  as  well  as  the 
majority  of  those  who  had  observed  and  recorded  them. 
I  had,  however,  very  early  in  life  noticed,  that  men 
with  immense  knowledge  did  not  always  know  how  to 
draw  just  conclusions  from  that  knowledge,  and  that 
I  myself  was  quite  able  to  detect  their  errors  of 
reasoning-.     I   have   never   hesitated   to   differ   from 


SPENCER,   HUXLEY,  AND   OTHERS     249 

Lyell,  Darwin,  and  even  Spencer,  and,  so  far  as  I  can 
judge,  in  all  the  cases  in  which  I  have  so  differed,  the 
weight  of  scientific  opinion  is  gradually  turning  in 
my  direction.  In  reasoning  power  upon  the  general 
phenomena  of  nature  or  of  society,  I  feel  able  to  hold 
my  own  with  them  ;  my  inferiority  consists  in  my 
limited  knowledge,  and  perhaps  also  in  my  smaller 
power  of  concentration  for  long  periods  of  time. 

With  Huxley  also  I  felt  quite  on  an  equality  when 
dealing  with  problems  arising  out  of  facts  equally 
well  known  to  both  of  us  ;  but  wherever  the  structure 
or  functions  of  animals  were  concerned,  he  had  the 
command  of  a  body  of  facts  so  extensive  and  so 
complex  that  no  one  who  had  not  devoted  years  to 
their  practical  study  could  safely  attempt  to  make 
use  of  them.  I  therefore  never  ventured  to  infringe 
in  any  way  on  his  special  departments  of  study, 
though  I  occasionally  make  use  of  some  of  the  results 
which  he  so  lucidly  explained. 

Among  the  more  prominent  naturalists,  one  of 
my  chief  friends,  and  the  one  whose  society  I  most 
enjoyed,  was  Professor  St.  George  Mivart,  who  for 
some  years  lived  not  far  from  us  in  London.  He 
was  a  rather  singular  compound  mentally,  inasmuch 
as  he  was  a  sincere  but  thoroughly  liberal  Catholic, 
and  an  anti-Darwinian  evolutionist.  But  his  friendly 
geniality,  his  refined  manners,  his  interesting  conver- 
sation and  fund  of  anecdote  of  the  most  varied  kind, 
rendered  him  a  charming  companion.  His  most 
intimate  friends  seemed  to  be  priests,  one  or  two  of 
whom  were  almost  always  among  the  guests,  and 
often  the  only  ones,  when  I  dined  with  him.  And 
they,  too,  were  excellent  company,  full  of  humour 
and  anecdote  of  the  most  varied  kind,  though  also 
ready  for  serious  talk  or  discussion ;   but  in  either 


250  MY  LIFE 

case,  with  none  of  the  reserve   or   somewhat    rigid 
decorum  of  the  majority  of  our  clergy. 

Mivart  was  a  very  severe  and  often  an  unfair  critic 
of  Darwin,  and  I  never  concealed  my  opinion  that  he 
was  not  justified  in  going  so  far  as  he  did.  I  also 
criticized  some  of  his  own  writings,  but  he  took  it 
all  very  good-naturedly,  and  we  always  remained 
excellent  friends.  Besides  natural  history  we  had 
other  tastes  in  common.  He  enjoyed  country  life, 
and  for  some  time  had  a  small  country  house  in  the 
wilds  of  Sussex,  about  midway  between  Forest  Row 
and  Hayward's  Heath,  where  we  sometimes  spent  a 
few  days.  He  was  also  greatly  interested  in  psychical 
research  and  spiritualistic  phenomena ;  but  this  I 
shall  refer  to  again  when  I  come  to  my  own  experi- 
ences and  inquiries  on  this  intensely  interesting 
subject. 

About  a  year  or  two  after  I  had  returned  home, 
Sir  James  Brooke  had  also  returned  to  England,  and 
had  retired  to  a  small  estate  at  the  foot  of  Dartmoor, 
where  he  lived  in  a  comfortable  cottage-farmhouse 
amid  the  wild  scenery  in  which  he  delighted,  I  had 
met  him  once  or  twice  in  London,  and,  I  think  in  the 
summer  of  1863  or  1864,  he  invited  me  to  spend  a 
week  with  him  in  Devonshire,  to  meet  his  former 
private  secretary  and  my  old  friend  in  Sarawak,  Mr. 
(now  Sir  Spencer)  St.  John.  We  had  a  very  pleasant 
time,  strolling  about  the  district  or  taking  rides  over 
Dartmoor  ;  while  at  meals  we  had  old-time  events  to 
talk  over,  with  discussions  of  all  kinds  of  political  and 
social  problems  in  the  evening.  At  the  same  time 
Lady  Burdett-Coutts,  with  her  friend  Mrs.  Brown, 
were  staying  near,  and  often  drove  over  and  took  us 
all  for  some  more  distant  excursions. 

This  meeting  and  my  friendship  with  Sir  James 


SPENCER,    HUXLEY,  AND   OTHERS     251 

Brooke  led  to  my  receiving  several  invitations  to  dine 
in  Stratton  Street,  where  my  friend  George  Silk  was 
also  a  frequent  guest ;  but  my  unfortunate  habit  of 
speaking  my  thoughts  too  plainly  broke  off  the 
acquaintance.  The  rajah's  nephew,  Captain  Brooke, 
who  had  been  formerly  designated  as  Sir  James's 
successor  under  the  Malay  title  of  Tuan  Muda  (young 
lord),  had  done  or  written  something  (I  forget  what) 
to  which  Sir  James  objected,  and  a  disagreement 
ensued,  which  resulted  in  the  captain  being  deposed 
from  the  heirship,  and  his  younger  brother  Charles, 
the  present  rajah,  being  nominated  instead.  As  I  was 
equally  friendly  and  intimate  with  both  parties  and 
heard  both  sides,  I  thought  the  captain  had  been 
rather  hardly  treated,  and  one  day,  when  the  subject 
was  mentioned  at  Stratton  Street,  I  ventured  to  say 
so.  This  evidently  displeased  Lady  Burdett-Coutts, 
and  I  was  never  invited  again — a  matter  which  did 
not  at  all  disturb  me,  as  the  people  I  met  there  were 
not  very  interesting  to  me.  When  Sir  James  Brooke 
heard  of  my  indiscretion,  he  wrote  to  me  very  kindly, 
saying  that  he  knew  that  I  was  the  captain's  friend 
and  had  a  perfect  right  to  take  his  part,  and  that  my 
doing  so  did  not  in  the  least  offend  him  and  would 
make  no  difference  in  our  relations,  and  I  continued 
to  receive  friendly  letters  from  him  till  he  went  to 
Borneo  for  the  last  time,  in  1866.  Soon  after  his 
return  he  died  at  his  Devonshire  home,  in  June,  1868. 
I  have  given  my  estimate  of  his  character  and  of 
his  beneficent  work  at  Sarawak  in  my  "  Malay 
Archipelago." 

Among  the  dearest  of  my  friends,  the  one  towards 
whom  I  felt  more  like  a  brother  than  to  any  other 
person,  was  Dr.  Richard  Spruce,  one  of  the  most 
cultivated  and  charming  of  men,  as  well  as  one  of  the 


252  MY   LIFE 

most  enthusiastic  and  observing  of  botanists.  As  he 
lived  in  Yorkshire  after  1867,  I  only  saw  him  at 
rather  long  intervals,  but  I  generally  took  the  oppor- 
tunity of  lecture  engagements  in  the  north  to  pay 
him  a  few  days'  visit.  Our  correspondence  also 
was  scanty,  as  he  was  a  great  invalid  and  could 
not  write  much,  and  I  only  preserved  such  letters 
as  touched  upon  subjects  connected  with  my  own 
work. 

One  of  the  most  interesting,  amusing,  and  eccentric 
men  I  became  acquainted  with  during  my  residence 
in  London,  and  with  whom  I  soon  became  quite 
intimate,  was  Dr.  T.  Purland,  a  dentist,  living  in 
Mortimer  Street,  Cavendish  Square.  He  was  a 
stout,  dark,  middle-aged  man,  with  somewhat  Jewish 
features,  and  of  immense  energy  and  vitality — one  of 
those  men  whose  words  pour  out  in  a  torrent,  and 
who  have  always  something  wise  or  witty  to  say. 
He  had  been  a  great  coin-collector,  and  had  many 
anecdotes  to  tell  of  rarities  hit  upon  accidentally. 
He  had  an  unbounded  admiration  for  Greek  coins 
as  works  of  art,  and  would  dilate  upon  their  beauties 
as  compared  with  the  poor  and  inartistic  works  of 
our  day.  He  was  something  of  an  Egyptologist,  and 
had  many  odds  and  ends  of  antiquities,  including 
teeth  from  mummies  and  dentists'  instruments  found 
in  the  old  tombs  and  sarcophagi.  He  was  a  widower 
with  three  growing-up  children,  and  had  been  obliged 
to  part  with  all  the  more  valuable  parts  of  his  collec- 
tion to  educate  them. 

He  was  a  very  powerful  mesmerist,  and  helped, 
with  Dr.  Elliotson  and  others,  in  establishing  the 
mesmeric  hospital  then  in  existence,  and  could  succeed 
in  sending  patients  into  the  mesmeric  trance  when 
other  operators  failed.     He  was  one  of  the  few  meo 


^^^  0..^y^  / 


Uh/i7cA      '^ 


[To  face  p.  25: 


/m^  Cc^i  •Wr  ^  /^ '^^^  X^^ryuYC^ 


^1'  '  wimnii  III  !'»* 


^/Z-:. 


[7;<>^.'/.  253. 


s 
^ 


SPENCER,  HUXLEY,  AND   OTHERS     253 

at  that  ,time  who  had  been  up  in  a  balloon  (with 
Green,  the  celebrated  aeronaut,  I  think),  and  one 
evening  at  our  house  in  St.  Mark's  Crescent,  when 
Huxley  and  Tyndall  were  present,  he  made  some 
remarks  which  interested  Tyndall,  who  thereupon 
asked  him  many  questions  as  to  his  sensations,  the 
general  appearance  of  the  earth,  clouds,  etc.,  to  all  of 
which  Dr.  Purland  replied  with  such  promptitude  and 
intelligence  that  all  our  friends  were  soon  gathered 
round  to  hear  the  discussion,  which  went  on  a  long 
time. 

I  possess  about  a  dozen  of  his  letters — replies  to 
invitations,  remarks  on  reading  my  early  books,  or 
other  matters — all  so  amusing  and  so  well  illustrating 
the  character  and  individuality  of  the  man  that  I  will 
now  print  some  of  them,  and  give  a  few  in  facsimile 
to  show  his  style  of  caricature  illustration. 

The  letter  opposite  was,  I  think,  the  first  I  had 
from  him,  and  I  only  give  it  to  illustrate  two  of  his 
peculiarities — his  gastronomical  taste  indicated  by 
"  Beer  Month"  for  October,  and  the  "piece  of  plate" 
represented  by  half  a  beautiful  little  print  in  blue  of 
an  old  willow-pattern  plate  pasted  in  opposite  the 
signature. 

The  next  letter  is  in  answer  to  an  invitation  to 
tea.  He  had  been  reading  my  "  Malay  Archipelago," 
and  the  reference  on  the  envelope  (here  reproduced) 
is  to  the  description  of  the  king  bird  of  paradise. 
The  letter  itself  is  in  hieroglyphic  form,  intimating 
that  he  had  other  engagements,  indicating  himself 
by  his  large  nose  and  scrap-book  under  his  arm. 

The  next  I  shall  give  is  an  account  of  the  sad 
results  of  reading  one  of  my  books  aloud.  The 
heading  is  a  pseudonym  for  his  operating  room. 


254  MY   LIFE 

"  Fang  Castle,  June,  1870, 

"  Therm,  jyl. 

"Thanks  worthy  Signor  for  the  entertainment 
afforded  by  your  Boke  on  Natural  Selection.  But 
good  as  '  Natural  Selection '  is,  or  maybe :  I  like 
Mutual  Selection  much  better ;  and  to  my  thinking 
it  is  of  much  more  importance :  ex.  gr.  mutual  selec- 
tion is  this — A  Lady  asks  me  to  become  her  husband 
I  ax  her  to  become  my  wife — that's  Mutual  Selection 
— aint  it  'Natural'.?  The  question  of  the  'fittest' 
is  a  subsequent  affair :  as  is  the  Creation  by  birth, 
etc.,  etc. 

"  But  the  pleasure  was  sadly  and  suddenly  inter- 
rupted :  I  was  reading  aloud,  and  got  on  pretty  well 
through  p.  90-91.  At  92  Jaws  ached  terribly!  but  at 
p.  94  and  5,  even  vulcanite  could  not  stand  it ;  and 
to  my  horror  my  upper  set  of  teeth  gave  way  with  a 
crash !  divided  between  the  right  lateral  and  the 
canine.  I  was  helpless  ;  and  but  for  an  old  piece  in 
reserve,  my  enjoyment  of  a  succulent  Roast  Pig 
would  have  been  entirely  destroyed  :  it  cost  me  dear 
— quite  the  value  of  a  collection  :  I  must  give  up 
reading  scientific  {?)  names  aloud. 

"  I  picked  up  a  good  specimen  of  Lignum  ambulans 
for  a  shilling  a  week  ago :  and  it  now  forms  a  promi- 
nent feature  in  our  surgery,  We  are  promised  a 
Phyllium  in  a  few  days :  and  a  Kallima  paralekta. 
The  Rosa  Canina  is  a  puzzle  at  present :  I  never  saw 
a  Red  Canine  tooth  !  Speaking  of  teeth — Huxley 
in  his  Physiology  says  Bicuspids  never  have  more 
than  two  fangs — He  knows  nothing  about  it.  I  have 
them  with  three — Molars  with  4,  5,  and  6  !  In  my 
lecture  case,  now  before  me,  there  are  several  :  they 
are  not  as  common  as  dirt  or  earwigs  in  the  country  ! 
but  they  often  turn  up. 


77  ■<■*■<    *        *M*-*'^'xLsZI 


yz^^^ 


[Zo/fla-/.  255. 


SPENCER,  HUXLEY,  AND   OTHERS     255 

"  I  begin  the  second  reading  to-night — not  aloud 
— ok  no  ! 

"  With  our  best  Salaam  to  the  Lady,  I  remain 
"  Thine  in  amity, 

"Theodosius  Purland." 

The  last  I  have  was  an  anecdote  of  animal  sagacity, 
a  subject  then  being  discussed  in  the  papers,  and  of 
which  he  had  given  me  some  examples.  I  give  a 
print  of  it,  as  it  is  a  good  example  of  his  caricature 
drawing  and  of  one  of  his  fantastic  signatures. 

Our  pleasant  intimacy  came  to  an  end  in  a  most 
absurd  manner.  Dr.  Purland  was,  as  I  have  said,  a 
powerful  and  enthusiastic  mesmerist,  and  had  given 
his  services  for  many  surgical  operations.  Just  as 
the  opposition  of  the  chiefs  of  the  medical  profes- 
sion was  dying  away,  and  they  were  beginning  to 
acknowledge  the  great  value  of  the  mesmeric  sleep 
in  alleviating  pain  and  greatly  facilitating  serious 
operations,  the  discovery  of  anaesthetics  offered  a 
rival,  which,  though  much  more  dangerous,  was  more 
certain  and  more  easily  applied  in  emergencies,  and 
this  led  to  the  discontinuance  of  the  use  of  mesmerism 
as  a  remedial  agent.  This  naturally  disgusted  Dr. 
Purland,  who,  with  the  whole  energy  of  his  character, 
hated  chloroform,  ether,  and  nitrous-oxide  gas,  and 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them  in  his  profession. 
Besides,  he  despised  any  one  who  could  not  bear  the 
pain  of  tooth-drawing,  and  would  turn  away  any  patient 
who  required  the  gas  to  be  administered.  A  year 
or  two  after  the  date  of  his  last  letter  I  had  occasion 
to  approach  him  in  his  professional  capacity.  Entirely 
forgetting  his  objections,  which,  in  fact,  I  had  hardly 
believed  to  be  real,  after  making  an  appointment  I 
asked  him  to  get  a  doctor  to  administer.nitrous-oxide, 


256  MY   LIFE 

as  I  could  not  stand  the  pain  of  three  or  four  extrac- 
tions in  succession.  This  thoroughly  enraged  him. 
He  wrote  me  a  most  violent  letter,  saying  he  could 
not  continue  to  be  the  friend  of  a  man  who  could  ask 
him  to  do  such  a  thing,  and  gave  me  the  name  of  an 
acquaintance  of  his  who  had  no  such  scruples  and 
whose  work  was  thoroughly  good.  And  that  was  the 
last  communication  I  ever  had  from  Dr.  Purland. 

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  few  words 
about  those  meetings  of  the  British  Association  at 
which  I  was  present.  In  1862  I  was  invited  by  my 
kind  friend,  Professor  Alfred  Newton,  to  be  his  guest 
at  Magdalen  College  during  the  meeting,  in  company 
with  a  party  of  scientific  friends,  chiefly  ornithologists. 
This  was  my  first  visit  both  to  Cambridge  and  to  the 
Association,  and  under  such  pleasant  conditions  I 
thoroughly  enjoyed  both.  Besides  the  number  of 
eminent  men  of  science  I  had  the  opportunity  of 
hearing  or  seeing,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  spending  an 
evening  with  Charles  Kingsley  in  his  own  house,  and 
enjoying  his  stimulating  conversation.  There  was 
also  a  slight  recrudescence  of  the  evolution  controversy 
in  the  rather  painful  dispute  between  Professor  Richard 
Owen  and  Huxley,  supported  by  Flower,  on  certain 
alleged  differences  between  the  brains  of  man  and 
apes, 

I  so  much  enjoyed  the  meeting,  both  in  its 
scientific  and  social  aspects,  that  I  attended  the  next 
eleven  meetings,  and  generally  took  part  in  some  of 
the  discussions,  besides  occasionally  reading  short 
papers.  One  of  the  most  enjoyable  meetings  socially 
was  that  at  Exeter,  where  I  and  a  large  party  of 
scientific  men  were  hospitably  entertained  at  a  country 
mansion  eight  or  ten  miles  from  the  city,  into  which 
we  were  driven  and  brought  back  every  day.     Among 


SPENCER,   HUXLEY,   AND   OTHERS     257 

the  guests  there  was  Professor  Rankin,  who  entertained 
us  by  singing  some  of  his  own  descriptive  or  witty 
compositions,  especially  the  "  Song  of  the  Engine 
Driver,"  and  that  inimitable  Irish  descriptive  song  on 
"The  City  of  Mullingar."  On  this  occasion  there 
appeared  one  of  the  most  humorous  parodies  of  the 
work  of' the  Association  that  has  ever  been  written, 
called  "  Exeter  Change  for  British  Lions."  It  was  in 
the  form  of  a  small  magazine,  giving  reports  of  the 
meetings,  with  absurd  papers,  witty  verses,  and  clever 
parodies  of  the  leading  members,  all  worthy  of  Hood 
himself  in  his  most  humorous  vein. 

I  was  also  honoured  by  being  admitted  to  the 
fraternity  of  the  "  Red  Lions,"  who  fed  together 
during  each  meeting  of  the  Association  and  expressed 
applause  by  gentle  roars  and  wagging  of  (coat)  tails. 
On  these  occasions  all  kinds  of  jokes  were  permissible, 
and  speeches  were  made  and  songs  sung  by  the 
scientific  humourists  assembled.  At  Edinburgh,  in 
1 87 1,  Lord  Neaves,  a  well-known  wit  and  song-writer, 
was  a  guest,  and  gave  us  some  of  his  own  com- 
positions, especially  that  on  "  The  Origin  of  Species 
a  la  Darwin" — which  he  recited  standing  up  and 
with  very  fine  humour.  The  following  verses  are 
samples  : — 

"  A  very  tall  Pig  with  a  very  long  nose 
Sends  forth  a  proboscis  right  down  to  his  toes, 
And  then  by  the  name  of  an  Elephant  goes, 

Which  Nobody  can  Deny  ! 

"  An  Ape  with  a  pliable  thumb  and  big  brain, 
When  the  gift  of  the  gab  he  had  managed  to  gain. 
As  Lord  of  Creation  established  his  reign, 

Which  Nobody  can  Deny !  " 

And  so  on  for  twelve  verses,  amid  encouraging  roars 
and  great  final  tail-wagging. 

S 


258  MY   LIFE 

At  Glasgow,  in  1876,  I  was  President  of  the 
Biological  Section,  and  our  meeting  was  rendered 
rather  lively  by  the  announcement  of  a  paper  by  Pro- 
fessor W.  F.  Barrett  on  experiments  in  thought- 
reading.  The  reading  of  this  was  opposed  by  Dr.  W. 
B.  Carpenter  and  others,  but  as  it  had  been  accepted 
by  the  section,  it  was  read.  Then  followed  a  rather 
heated  discussion  ;  but  there  were  several  supporters 
of  the  paper,  among  whom  was  Lord  Rayleigh,  and 
the  public  evidently  took  the  greatest  interest  in  the 
subject,  the  hall  being  crowded.  After  having  studied 
the  matter  some  years  longer,  Professor  Barrett,  with 
the  assistance  of  the  late  Frederick  Myers,  Professor 
Sidgwick,  Edmund  Gurney,  and  a  few  other  friends, 
founded  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  which 
has  collected  a  very  large  amount  of  evidence  and  is 
still  actively  at  work. 

My  wife  and  I  were  entertained  at  Glasgow  by  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Mirlees,  and  at  one  of  their  dinner-parties  we 
enjoyed  thecompany  of  William  Pengelly,  of  Torquay, 
the  well-known  explorer  of  Kent's  Cavern,  whose 
acquaintance  I  had  made  some  years  before  while 
spending  a  few  days  at  Torquay  with  my  friend  and 
publisher,  Mr.  A.  Macmillan.  He  sat  on  one  side  of 
our  hostess,  and  my  wife  and  I  on  the  other,  and 
during  the  whole  dinner  he  kept  up  such  a  flow  of 
amusing  and  witty  conversation  that  the  entire  party 
(a  large  one)  looked  at  us  with  envy.  He  was  cer- 
tainly among  the  most  genial  and  witty  men  I  have 
ever  met,  and  could  make  even  dry  scientific  subjects 
attractive  by  his  humorous  way  of  narrating  them. 

After  this  year  I  felt  that  I  had  pretty  well 
exhausted  the  interests  of  the  Association  meetings, 
and  preferred  to  take  my  autumn  holiday,  with  my 
wife  and  two  children,  either  by  the  sea  or  among  the 


SPENCER,  HUXLEY,  AND    OTHERS     259 

mountains,  where  we  could  quietly  enjoy  the  beauties 
of  nature  in  aspects  somewhat  new  to  us ;  the  only 
exception  I  afterwards  made  being  the  jubilee  meet- 
ing at  York,  and  even  here  the  chief  attractions  were 
the  beautiful  Alpine  gardens  of  Mr.  Backhouse,  the 
excursion  to  Rievaulx  Abbey,  and  a  visit  afterwards 
to  my  friend  Dr.  Spruce  in  his  retirement  at  Welburn, 
near  Castle  Howard. 


CHAPTER   XVII 

HOME   LIFE   AND   WORK 
(187O-1885) 

In  March,  1870,  I  took  an  old  cottage  at  Barking, 
where  I  was  still  almost  in  London.  Though  Barking 
was  a  miserable  village,  surrounded  by  marshes  and 
ugly  factories,  there  were  yet  some  pleasant  walks 
along  the  Thames  and  among  the  meadows,  while 
within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  us  was  a  well-preserved 
tumulus  close  to  an  old  farmhouse.  Here,  too,  we 
had  some  very  pleasant  neighbours.  Sir  Antonis 
Brady  at  Stratford,  whom  I  had  often  visited  with  my 
friend  Silk,  and  who  had  a  fine  collection  of  fossils 
from  the  gravels  of  the  district ;  Mr.  C.  M.  Ingleby, 
the  Shakespearean  commentator,  who  was  interested 
in  spiritualism  ;  and  more  especially  Colonel  Hope, 
V.C.,  who  was  living  at  Parsloes,  an  old  manor  house 
within  an  easy  walk,  and  with  whose  amiable  and 
intellectual  family  we  spent  many  pleasant  Sunday 
afternoons. 

In  the  following  year  I  found  near  the  village  of 
Grays,  on  the  Thames,  twenty  miles  from  London,  a 
picturesque  old  chalk-pit  which  had  been  disused  so 
long  that  a  number  of  large  elms  and  a  few  other 
trees  had  grown  up  in  its  less  precipitous  portions. 
The  chalk  here  was  capped  by  about  twenty  feet  of 


^^ 


HOME    LIFE   AND   WORK  261 

Thanet  sand  and  pleistocene  gravel,  and  from  the 
fields  at  the  top  there  was  a  beautiful  view  over  Erith 
to  the  Kent  hills  and  down  a  reach  of  the  Thames  to 
Gravesend,  forming  a  most  attractive  site  for  a  house 
After  some  difficulty  I  obtained  a  lease  for  ninety- 
nine  years  of  four  acres,  comprising  the  pit  itself,  an 
acre  of  the  field  on  the  plateau  above,  and  about  an 
equal  amount  of  undulating  cultivable  ground  between 
the  pit  and  the  lane  which  gave  access  to  it.  I  had 
to  pay  seven  pounds  an  acre  rent,  as  the  owner  could 
not  sell  it,  and  though  I  thought  it  very  dear,  as  so 
much  of  it  was  unproductive,  the  site  was  so  pictur- 
esque, and  had  such  capabilities  of  improvement,  that 
I  thought  it  would  be  a  fair  investment. 

As  there  was  a  deep  bed  of  rough  gravel  on  my 
ground  and  there  were  large  cement  works  at  Grays, 
I  thought  it  would  be  economical  to  build  of  concrete, 
and  I  found  an  architect  of  experience,  who  made 
the  plans  and  specifications,  while  I  myself  saw  that 
the  gravel  was  properly  washed.  In  order  to  obtain 
water  in  ample  quantity  for  building  and  also  for 
garden  and  other  purposes,  I  had  a  well  sunk  about 
a  hundred  feet  into  a  water-bearing  stratum  of  the 
chalk,  and  purchased  a  small  iron  windmill  with  a 
two-inch  force  pump  to  obtain  the  water.  I  made 
two  small  concrete  ponds  in  the  garden — one  close 
to  the  windmill — and  a  large  tank  at  the  top  of  a  low 
tower  to  supply  house  water.  My  friend  Geach,  the 
mining  engineer  whom  I  had  met  in  Timor  and 
Singapore,  was  now  at  home,  and  took  an  immense 
interest  in  my  work.  He  helped  me  to  find  the 
windmill — the  only  one  that  we  could  discover  in  any 
of  the  engineering  shops  in  London — and  the  well 
being  completed,  he  and  I,  with  the  assistance  of  my 
gardener,  did  all  the  work  of  fitting  the  pump  at  the 


262  MY   LIFE 

bottom  of  the  well  with  connecting-rods  and  guides 
up  to  the  windmill,  which  also  we  erected  and  set  to 
work  ourselves.  As  the  windmill  had  no  regulating 
apparatus,  and,  when  the  wind  became  strong,  re- 
volved far  too  rapidly,  and  even  bent  the  connecting- 
rod,  I  attached  to  the  ends  of  the  iron  vanes  pieces 
of  plate  iron  about  a  foot  square,  fixed  at  right  angles 
to  the  line  of  motion.  These  acted  as  brakes  as  soon 
as  the  revolution  became  moderately  rapid,  but  had 
little  effect  when  it  was  slow  ;  and  the  arrangement 
worked  very  well. 

We  got  into  the  house  in  March,  1872,  and  I 
began  to  take  that  pleasure  in  gardening,  and  especi- 
ally in  growing  uncommon  and  interesting  as  well  as 
beautiful  plants,  which  in  various  places,  under  many 
difficulties  and  with  mingled  failures  and  successes, 
has  been  a  delight  and  solace  to  me  ever  since. 

At  this  time  I  was  somewhat  doubtful  in  what 
particular  direction  to  work,  as  I  found  that  I  could 
not  now  feel  sufficient  interest  in  any  branch  of 
systematic  zoology  to  devote  myself  to  the  minute 
study  required  for  the  classification  and  description 
of  any  important  portion  of  my  collections.  There 
were  many  other  men  who  could  do  that  better  than 
I  could,  while  my  special  tastes  led  me  to  some 
work  which  involved  a  good  deal  of  reasoning  and 
generalization.  It  was,  I  think,  my  two  friends. 
Professor  A.  Newton  and  Dr.  Sclater,  who  urged  me 
to  undertake  a  general  review  of  the  geographical 
distribution  of  animals,  and  after  a  little  discussion 
of  the  subject  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  might 
perhaps  be  able  to  do  it  ;  although,  if  I  had  been 
aware  of  the  difficulties  of  the  task,  I  should  probably 
not  have  undertaken  it. 

As  this  was  the  largest  and   perhaps  the  most 


l*» 


HOME   LIFE   AND   WORK  263 

important  scientific  work  I  have  done,  I  may  perhaps 
be  allowed  here  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  its  design 
and  execution.  I  had  already,  in  several  of  my 
papers  and  articles,  explained  my  general  views  of 
the  purport  and  scope  of  geographical  distribution  as 
a  distinct  branch  of  biological  science.  I  had  accepted 
and  supported  Dr.  P.  L.  Sclater's  division  of  the 
earth's  surface  into  six  great  zoological  regions, 
founded  upon  a  detailed  examination  of  the  distribu- 
tion of  birds,  but  equally  applicable  to  mammalia, 
reptiles,  and  several  other  great  divisions,  and  best 
serving  to  illustrate  and  explain  the  diversities  and 
apparent  contradictions  in  the  distribution  of  all  land 
animals  ;  and  I  may  now  add  that  the  additional 
facts  accumulated,  and  the  various  divisions  suggested 
during  the  thirty  years  that  have  since  elapsed,  have 
not  in  the  least  altered  my  opinions  on  this  matter. 

In  whatever  work  I  have  done  I  have  always 
aimed  at  systematic  arrangement  and  uniformity  of 
treatment  throughout.  But  here  the  immense  extent 
of  the  subject,  the  overwhelming  mass  of  detail,  and 
above  all  the  excessive  diversities  in  the  amount  of 
knowledge  of  the  different  classes  of  animals,  rendered 
it  quite  impossible  to  treat  all  alike.  My  preliminary 
studies  had  already  satisfied  me  that  it  was  quite 
useless  to  attempt  to  found  any  conclusions  on  those 
groups  which  were  comparatively  little  known,  either 
as  regards  the  proportion  of  species  collected  and 
described,  or  as  regards  their  systematic  classification. 
It  was  also  clear  that  as  the  present  distribution  of 
animals  is  necessarily  due  to  their  past  distribution, 
the  greatest  importance  must  be  given  to  those  groups 
whose  fossil  remains  in  the  more  recent  strata  are 
the  most  abundant  and  the  best  known.  These 
considerations  led  me  to  limit  my  work  in  its  detailed 


264  MY   LIFE 

systematic  groundwork,  and  study  of  the  principles 
and  laws  of  distribution,  to  the  mammalia  and  birds, 
and  to  apply  the  principles  thus  arrived  at  to  an 
explanation  of  the  distribution  of  other  groups,  such 
as  reptiles,  fresh-water  fishes,  land  and  fresh-water 
shells,  and  the  best-known  insect  orders.  The  work, 
entitled  "  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Animals," 
was  published  in  1876,  in  two  thick  volumes,  and  it 
occupied  a  good  deal  of  my  time  during  the  four 
years  I  lived  at  Grays. 

No  one  is  more  aware  than  myself  of  the  defects 
of  the  work,  a  considerable  portion  of  which  are  due 
to  the  fact  that  it  was  written  a  quarter  of  a  century 
too  soon — at  a  time  when  both  zoological  and  palaeon- 
tological  discovery  were  advancing  with  great  rapidity, 
while  new  and  improved  classifications  of  some  of 
the  great  classes  and  orders  were  in  constant  pro- 
gress. But  though  many  of  the  details  given  in  these 
volumes  would  now  require  alteration,  there  is  no 
reason  to  believe  that  the  great  features  of  the  work 
and  general  principles  established  by  it  will  require 
any  important  modification.  Its  most  severe  critics 
are  our  American  cousins,  who,  possessing  a  "  region  " 
of  their  own,  have  been  able  to  explore  it  very 
rapidly  ;  while  from  several  references  made  to  it,  I 
think  it  is  appreciated  on  the  European  continent 
more  than  it  is  in  our  own  country. 

While  this  work  was  in  progress  I  wrote  a  con- 
siderable number  of  reviews  and  articles,  published 
my  book  on  "  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism," 
and  wrote  the  articles  "  Acclimatization "  for  the 
"  Encyclopaedia  Britannica." 

In  1876  I  sold  the  house  at  Grays  and  removed  to 
Dorking,  where  we  lived  for  two  years.     But  finding 


^^^^^w^  ^jilH 

1 

■ 

1 

Si 

1    mmK^M    ~y^ 

1 

^ii?^ 

^■fe'.             .v^           VL^gggjijIjil^H 

I 

s^ 

l|i|l[^^^^^^^^^^^^^HH 

^^^^^^H 

A.    R.    WALLACE.      AGED   55. 


[Toface />.  265. 


HOME  LIFE  AND  WORK  265 

the  climate  relaxing,  we  moved  next  to  Croydon, 
chiefly  in  order  to  send  our  children  first  to  a  kinder- 
garten, and  then  to  a  high  school,  and  remained  there 
till  May,  1881. 

During  this  period,  besides  my  usual  reviews  and 
articles,  I  prepared  my  address  as  president  of  the 
Biological  Section  of  the  British  Association  at 
Glasgow,  wrote  the  article  on  "  Distribution  — 
Zoology"  for  the  "  Encyclopsedia  Britannica,"  and 
prepared  a  volume  on  "  Tropical  Nature,"  which  was 
published  in  1878.  In  this  work  I  gave  a  general 
sketch  of  the  climate,  vegetation,  and  animal  life  of  the 
equatorial  zone  of  the  tropics  from  my  own  obser- 
vations in  both  hemispheres. 

As  soon  as  we  were  settled  at  Croydon,  I  began 
to  work  at  a  volume  which  had  been  suggested  to 
me  by  the  necessary  limitations  of  my  "  Geographical 
Distribution  of  Animals."  In  that  work  I  had,  in  the 
first  place,  dealt  with  the  larger  groups,  coming  down 
to  families  and  genera,  but  taking  no  account  of  the 
various  problems  raised  by  the  distribution  of  par- 
ticular species.  In  the  next  place,  I  had  taken  little 
account  of  the  various  islands  of  the  globe,  except  as 
forming  subregions  or  parts  of  subregions.  But  I  had 
long  seen  the  great  interest  and  importance  of  these, 
and  especially  of  Darwin's  great  discovery  of  the  two 
classes  into  which  they  are  naturally  divided — oceanic 
and  continental  islands.  I  had  already  given  lectures 
on  this  subject,  and  had  become  aware  of  the  great 
interest  attaching  to  them,  and  the  great  light  they 
threw  upon  the  means  of  dispersal  of  animals 
and  plants,  as  well  as  upon  the  past  changes,  both 
physical  and  biological,  of  the  earth's  surface.  In 
the  third  place,  the  means  of  dispersal  and  coloni- 
zation  of  animals  is  so  connected  with,  and  often 


266  MY  LIFE 

dependent  on,  that  of  plants,  that  a  consideration 
of  the  latter  is  essential  to  any  broad  views  as  to  the 
distribution  of  life  upon  the  earth,  while  they  throw 
unexpected  light  upon  these  exceptional  means  of 
dispersal  which,  because  they  are  exceptional,  are 
often  of  paramount  importance  in  leading  to  the 
production  of  new  species  and  in  thus  determining 
the  nature  of  insular  floras  and  faunas. 

Having  no  knowledge  of  scientific  botany,  it 
needed  some  courage,  or,  as  some  may  think,  pre- 
sumption, to  deal  with  this  aspect  of  the  problem  ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  I  had  long  been  excessively 
fond  of  plants,  and  was  always  interested  in  their  dis- 
tribution. The  subject,  too,  was  easier  to  deal  with, 
on  account  of  the  much  more  complete  knowledge 
of  the  detailed  distribution  of  plants  than  of  animals, 
and  also  because  their  classification  was  in  a  more 
advanced  and  stable  condition.  Again,  some  of  the 
most  interesting  of  the  islands  of  the  globe  had  been 
carefully  studied  botanically  by  such  eminent 
botanists  as  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  for  the  Galapagos, 
New  Zealand,  Tasmania,  and  the  Antarctic  islands  ; 
Mr.  H.  C.  Watson  for  the  Azores ;  Mr.  J.  G.  Baker 
for  Mauritius  and  other  Mascarene  islands ;  while 
there  were  floras  by  competent  botanists  of  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  Bermuda,  and  St.  Helena.  With  such 
excellent  material,  and  with  the  further  assistance 
of  Sir  Joseph  Hooker's  invaluable  essays  on  the 
relations  of  the  southern  and  northern  floras,  I  felt 
that  my  work  would  be  mainly  of  a  statistical  nature, 
as  interpreted  by  those  general  principles  of  organic 
evolution  which  were  my  especial  study. 

But  I  also  found  it  necessary  to  deal  with  a  totally 
distinct  branch  of  science — recent  changes  of  climate 
as    dependent    on   changes  of   the    earth's  surface, 


HOME   LIFE  AND   WORK  267 

including  the  causes  and  effects  of  the  glacial  epoch, 
since  these  were  among  the  most  powerful  agents  in 
causing  the  dispersal  of  all  kinds  of  organisms,  and 
thus  bringing  about  the  actual  distribution  that  now 
prevails.  This  led  me  to  a  careful  study  of  Mr. 
James  Croll's  remarkable  works  on  the  subject  of  the 
astronomical  causes  of  glacial  and  interglacial  periods, 
and  I  had  much  correspondence  with  him  on  difficult 
points  of  his  theory.  While  differing  on  certain 
details,  I  adopted  the  main  features  of  his  theory, 
combining  with  it  the  effects  of  changes  in  height 
and  extent  of  land  which  form  an  important  adjunct 
to  the  meteorological  agents.  To  this  subject  I 
devoted  two  of  my  longest  and  most  argumentative 
chapters,  introducing  many  considerations  not  before 
taken  account  of,  and  leading,  I  still  think,  to  a  more 
satisfactory  explanation  of  the  causes  that  actually 
brought  about  the  glacial  epoch  than  any  which  have 
since  been  put  forth. 

Besides  this  partially  new  theory  of  the  causes  of 
glacial  epochs,  the  work  contained  a  fuller  statement 
of  the  various  kinds  of  evidence  proving  that  the 
great  oceanic  basins  are  permanent  features  of  the 
earth's  surface,  than  had  before  been  given  ;  also  a 
discussion  of  the  mode  of  estimating  the  duration  of 
geological  periods,  and  some  considerations  leading 
to  the  conclusion  that  organic  change  is  now  less 
rapid  than  the  average,  and  therefore  that  less  time 
is  required  for  this  change  than  has  hitherto  been 
thought  necessary.  I  was  also,  I  believe,  the  first  to 
point  out  the  great  differences  between  the  more 
ancient  continental  islands  and  those  of  more  recent 
origin,  with  the  interesting  conclusions  as  to  geo- 
graphical changes  afforded  by  both  ;  while  the  most 
important  novelty  is  the  theory  by  which  I  explained 


268  MY   LIFE 

the  occurrence  of  northern  groups  of  plants  in  all 
parts  of  the  southern  hemisphere — a  phenomenon 
which  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  had  pointed  out,  but  had 
then  no  means  of  explaining. 

This  volume,  on  "  Island  Life,"  involved  much 
detailed  work  as  regards  the  species  of  plants  and 
animals,  information  on  which  points  I  had  to  obtain 
from  numerous  specialists,  involving  a  great  amount 
of  correspondence  ;  while  it  was  illustrated  by  a  large 
number  of  maps  and  diagrams,  most  of  which  were 
drawn  by  myself.  The  preparation  and  writing  this 
book  occupied  me  for  about  three  years,  and  it  was 
published  in  1880.  It  has  gone  through  three 
editions,  which  have  involved  a  large  amount  of 
corrections  and  additions  ;  and  it  is  a  work  which 
seems  to  have  opened  up  a  new  world  of  interesting 
fact  and  theory  to  a  large  number  of  readers,  from 
several  of  whom  I  have  received  letters  expressing 
the  delight  and  instruction  it  has  given  them. 

In  1878  I  wrote  a  volume  on  Australasia  for 
Stanford's  "  Compendium  of  Geography  and  Travel," 
in  which  I  gave  a  fuller  account  than  usual  of  the 
physical  geography,  the  natural  history,  and  the 
geology  of  Australia.  In  a  later  edition  of  this  work, 
in  1893,  I  gave  a  much  fuller  account  of  the  natives 
of  Australia,  and  adduced  evidence  for  the  theory 
that  they  are  really  a  primitive  type  of  the  great 
Caucasian  family  of  mankind,  and  are  by  no  means 
so  low  in  intellect  as  has  been  usually  believed.  This 
view  seems  now  to  be  generally  accepted. 

In  1 881  a  society  was  formed  for  advocating  the 
nationalization  of  the  land,  of  which  I  was  elected 
president,  and  in  1882  I  published  a  volume,  entitled 
**  Land  Nationalization  :  its  Necessity  and  its  Aims." 
Some  account  of  this  movement  will  be  given  in  a 


HOME   LIFE   AND   WORK  269 

future  chapter.  Its  publication  brought  me  letters  of 
sympathy  and  general  agreement  from  Sir  David 
Wedderburn,  M.P.,  Lord  Mount-Temple,  and  many 
other  friends  and  correspondents. 

In  this  year,  on  June  29,  the  Dublin  University 
gave  me  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.D.  I  will  here 
give  the  very  short  but  flattering  Latin  speech  of  the 
public  orator  in  introducing  me,  with  a  translation  by 
my  friend  Mr.  Comerford  Casey — 

"Introduco  quoque  Alfredum  RusSEL  WAL- 
LACE, Darwinii  aemulum,  immo  Darwinium  alterum. 
Neque  hunc  neque  ilium  variae  eluserunt  species 
atque  ora  ferarum.  Darwinius  nempe  lauri  foetus 
auricomos  decerpsit  primus.     Sed  quid  querimur  ? 

"'  Primo  avulso  non  deficit  alter 

Aureus,  et  simili  frondescit  virga  metallo.'  " 

"  I  introduce  also  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  the 
friendly  rival  of  Darwin,  indeed,  a  second  Darwin. 
Equally  familiar  to  both  are  the  different  species  and 
varieties  of  animals.  Darwin,  indeed  was  the  first 
to  pluck  the  golden  laurel-branch.  Yet  through  this 
did  Wallace  suffer  no  eclipse  ;  for  as  Virgil  sang — 

" '  One  branch  removed,  another  was  to  hand  : 
Another,  bright  and  golden  as  the  first.' " 

In  the  year  1881  I  removed  to  Godalming,  where 
I  had  built  a  small  cottage  near  the  water-tower  and 
at  about  the  same  level  as  the  Charterhouse  School. 
We  had  been  partly  induced  to  come  here  to  be  near 
my  very  old  friend  Mr.  Charles  Hay  ward,  whom  I 
had  first  known  during  my  residence  at  Neath  about 
forty  years  before.  He  was  living  with  his  nephew, 
the  late  C.  F.  Hayward,  a  well-known  architect,  whose 
children  were  about  the  same  age  as  my  own,     We 


2/0  MY   LIFE 

found  here  some  very  pleasant  friends  among  the 
masters  at  Charterhouse  School,  as  well  as  among 
residents  who  had  come  to  the  place  for  its  general 
educational  advantages  or  for  the  charm  of  its  rural 
scenery.  We  had  here  about  half  an  acre  of  ground 
with  oak  trees  and  hazel  bushes  (from  which  I  named 
our  place  "  Nutwood  Cottage  "),  and  during  the  eight 
years  we  lived  there  I  thoroughly  enjoyed  making  a 
new  garden,  in  which,  and  a  small  greenhouse,  I 
cultivated  at  one  time  or  other  more  than  a  thousand 
species  of  plants.  The  soil  was  a  deep  bed  of  the 
Lower  Greensand  formation,  with  a  thin  surface  layer  of 
leaf-mould,  and  it  was  very  favourable  to  many  kinds 
of  bulbous  plants  as  well  as  half-hardy  shrubs,  several 
of  which  grew  there  more  freely  and  flowered  better 
than  in  any  of  my  other  gardens. 

In  1884  Messrs.  Pears  offered  a  prize  of  ;^IC)0  for 
the  best  essay  on  "The  Depression  of  Trade,"  and 
Professor  Leone  Levi  had  agreed  to  be  one  of  the 
judges.  As  I  had  been  for  some  time  disgusted  with 
the  utter  nonsense  of  many  of  the  articles  on  the 
subject  in  the  press,  while  what  seemed  to  me  the 
essential  and  fundamental  causes  were  never  so  much 
as  referred  to,  I  determined  to  compete,  though  with- 
out any  expectation  of  success.  The  essay  was  sent 
in  some  time  during  the  summer  of  1885,  and  in  July 
I  received  a  letter  from  Professor  Leone  Levi,  in 
which  he  writes :  "  My  colleague  and  myself  were 
greatly  pleased  with  the  essay  bearing  a  motto  from 
Goldsmith.  We,  however,  did  not  see  our  way  to 
recommend  it  for  the  prize,  especially  on  account  of 
disagreement  as  to  the  remedies  suggested.  But,  the 
essay  having  great  merit,  we  thought  it  proper  to  open 
the  envelope  in  order  to  correspond  with  the  author." 


HOME   LIFE   AND   WORK  271 

He  then  asked  me  if  I  would  allow  the  first  part 
of  my  essay,  upon  "  Conditions  and  Causes,"  to  be 
printed  with  the  other  essays. 

As  my  proposed  remedies  were  the  logical  con- 
clusion from  the  "  Conditions  and  Causes,"  which  I 
had  detailed,  and  of  which  the  validity  seemed  to  be 
admitted,  I  of  course  declined  this  offer,  and  Messrs. 
Macmillan  agreed  to  publish  it  under  the  title,  "  Bad 
Times  :  An  Essay  on  the  Present  Depression  of 
Trade,  tracing  it  to  its  Sources  in  enormous  Foreign 
Loans,  excessive  War  Expenditure,  the  Increase  of 
Speculation  and  of  Millionaires,  and  the  Depopulation 
of  the  Rural  Districts  ;  with  Suggested  Remedies." 

This  little  book  was  widely  noticed,  but  most  of 
the  reviewers  adverted  to  the  fact  that  I  was  an 
advocate  of  land-nationalization,  and  therefore  that 
my  proposed  remedies  were  unsound.  But  a  few  were 
more  open-minded,  and  the  Newcastle  Chronicle 
declared  it  to  be  "  the  weightiest  contribution  to  the 
subject  made  in  recent  times." 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

A  LECTURE  TOUR  IN   AMERICA 

(1886-1887) 

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1885  I  received  an 
invitation  from  the  Lowell  Institute  of  Boston,  U.S.A., 
to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  in  the  autumn  and 
winter  of  1886.  After  some  consideration  I  accepted 
this,  and  began  their  preparation,  taking  for  my 
subject  those  portions  of  the  theory  of  evolution  with 
which  I  was  most  familiar.  At  this  time  I  had  made 
the  acquaintance  of  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  the  well- 
known  writer  of  many  popular  works  on  natural 
history.  He  had  been  twice  on  lecturing  tours  to 
America,  and  gave  me  some  useful  information, 
besides  recommending  an  agent  he  had  employed 
and  who  had  arranged  lectures  for  him  at  various 
schools  and  colleges.  I  had  already  lectured  in  many 
English  towns  on  the  permanence  of  the  great  oceans, 
on  oceanic  and  continental  islands,  and  on  various 
problems  of  geographical  distribution.  To  these  sub- 
jects I  now  added  one  on  "  The  Darwinian  Theory," 
illustrated  by  a  set  of  original  diagrams  of  variation. 
I  also  wrote  three  lectures  on  the  "  Colours  of 
Animals  (and  Plants),"  dwelling  especially  on  pro- 
tective colours,  warning  colours,  and  mimicry,  and  for 
these  I  had  to  obtain  a  series  of  lantern  slides  coloured 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN   AMERICA     273 

from  nature,  so  as  to  exhibit  the  most  striking 
examples  of  these  curious  and  beautiful  phenomena. 

I  left  London  on  October  9  in  a  rather  slow 
steamer,  in  order  to  have  a  cabin  to  myself  at  a 
moderate  price,  and  landed  at  New  York  on  the 
23rd,  after  a  cold  and  disagreeable  passage. 

My  tour  in  America  lasted  about  ten  months,  and 
extended  from  New  York,  Boston,  and  Washington 
to  San  Francisco,  and  back  to  Montreal  and  Quebec. 
I  visited  and  lectured  at  many  of  the  great  cities,  and 
met  many  well-known  and  intellectual  people,  includ- 
ing amongst  others  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  James 
Russell  Lowell,  and  Edward  Waldo  Emerson,  son 
of  the  philosopher.  I  also  had  the  opportunity  o  " 
seeing  some  of  the  finest  scenery  and  most  interesting 
objects  in  North  America. 

Whilst  in  California  I  once  more  had  the  pleasure 
of  meeting  my  brother  John  and  his  wife,  neither  of 
whom  I  had  seen  for  nearly  forty  years. 

As  American  cities  have  been  so  frequently 
described,  I  will  here  only  give  an  account  of  a  few 
of  the  interesting  sights  or  natural  objects  which  most 
impressed  me,  with  some  remarks  on  my  general 
impression  of  the  country  and  people. 

The  first  excursion  I  made  in  America  was  a  trip 
up  the  Hudson  River  to  West  Point,  passing  the 
celebrated  "  Palisades  " — a  continuous  row  of  cHfifs 
about  two  hundred  feet  high,  and  extending  for 
nearly  twenty  miles  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river. 
They  look  exactly  like  a  huge  fence  of  enormous 
split  trees,  placed  vertically,  side  by  side,  but  are 
really  basaltic  columns  like  those  at  the  Giant's 
Causeway,  crowning  a  slope  of  fallen  rock.  In  places 
the  well-wooded  country  was  very  beautiful,  with  the 
autumnal   tints    of  bright  red,   purple,   and   yellow, 

T 


274  MY   LIFE 

though  we  were  a  little  late  to  see  them  in  perfection. 
Where  we  landed,  I  was  delighted  to  see  wild  vines 
clambering  over  the  trees,  as  well  as  the  Virginia 
creeper,  and  there  were  also  sumachs  and  other 
characteristic  American  plants.  The  situation  of  the 
great  American  Military  College  is  splendid,  on  an 
elevated  promontory  in  a  bend  of  the  Hudson,  sur- 
rounded by  rugged  wooded  hills,  and  with  magnificent 
views  up  and  down  the  river. 

In  March,  1887,  on  my  way  back  from  Toronto 
(where  I  had  been  to  lecture)  to  Washington,  I  spent 
four  days  at  Niagara,  living  at  the  old  hotel  on  the 
Canadian  side,  in  a  room  that  looked  out  on  the  great 
fall,  and  where  its  continuous  musical  roar  soothed 
me  to  sleep.  It  was  a  hard  frost,  and  the  American 
falls  had  great  ice-mounds  below  them,  and  ranges 
of  gigantic  icicles  near  the  margins.  At  night  the 
sound  was  like  that  of  a  strong,  steady  wind  at  sea, 
but  even  more  like  the  roar  of  the  London  streets 
heard  from  the  middle  of  Hyde  Park.  When  in  bed 
a  constant  vibration  was  felt.  I  spent  my  whole  time 
wandering  about  the  falls,  above  and  below,  on  the 
Canadian  and  the  American  sides,  roaming  over  Goat 
Island  and  the  Three  Sisters  Islands  far  in  the  rapids 
above  the  Horse-shoe  Fall,  which  are  almost  as 
impressive  as  the  fall  itself.  The  small  Luna  Island 
dividing  the  American  falls  was  a  lovely  sight ;  the 
arbor-vitae  trees  {Thuya  Americana),  with  which  it  is 
covered,  young  and  old,  some  torn  and  jagged,  but 
all  to  the  smallest  twigs  coated  with  glistening  ice 
from  the  frozen  spray,  looked  like  groves  of  gigantic 
tree  corals,  forming  the  most  magnificent  and  fairy- 
like scene  I  have  ever  beheld.  All  the  islands  are 
rocky  and  picturesque,  the  trees  draped  with  wild 
vines  and  Virginia  creepers,  and  afford  a  sample  of 


J 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN   AMERICA    275 

the  original  American  forest  vegetation  of  very  great 
interest.  During  these  four  days  I  was  almost 
entirely  alone,  and  was  glad  to  be  so,  I  was  never 
tired  of  the  ever-changing  aspects  of  this  grand  illus- 
tration of  natural  forces  engaged  in  modelling  the 
earth's  surface.  Usually  the  centre  of  the  great  falls, 
where  the  depth  and  force  of  the  water  are  greatest, 
is  hidden  by  the  great  column  of  spray  which  rises 
to  the  height  of  four  hundred  or  five  hundred  feet ; 
but  occasionally  the  wind  drifts  it  aside,  and  allows 
the  great  central  gulf  of  falling  water  to  be  seen 
nearly  from  top  to  bottom — a  most  impressive  sight. 

Before  I  left  Washington,  Judge  Hoi  man,  with 
whose  family  I  sat  at  meals,  took  me  one  morning  to 
call  upon  the  President,  Mr.  Cleveland.  The  judge 
told  him  I  was  going  to  visit  California,  and  that 
turned  the  conversation  on  wine,  raisins,  etc.,  which 
did  not  at  all  interest  me.  There  was  no  ceremony 
whatever,  but,  of  course,  I  had  nothing  special  to  say 
to  him,  and  he  had  nothing  special  to  say  to  me,  the 
result  being  that  we  were  both  rather  bored,  and  glad 
to  get  it  over  as  soon  as  we  could.  I  then  went  to 
see  the  White  House,  some  of  the  reception-rooms  of 
which  were  very  fine  ;  but  there  was  a  great  absence 
of  works  of  art,  the  only  paintings  I  saw  being 
portraits  of  Washington  and  his  wife. 

Washington  itself  is  a  fine  and  even  picturesque  city, 
owing  to  its  designer  having  departed  from  the  rigid 
rectangularity  of  most  American  cities  by  the  addition 
of  a  number  of  broad  diagonal  avenues  crossing  the 
rectangles  at  different  angles,  and  varying  from  one 
to  four  miles  long.  The  broadest  of  these  are  one 
hundred  and  sixty  feet  wide,  planted  with  two  double 
avenues  of  trees,  and  with  wide  grassy  spaces  between 
the    houses    and    the    pavements.     Wherever    these 


276  '      MY   LIFE 

diagonal  avenues  intersect  the  principal  streets,  there 
are  quadrangular  open  spaces  forming  gardens  or 
small  parks,  planted  with  shrubs  and  trees,  and  with 
numerous  seats. 

When  I  left  Washington  for  Cincinnati  I  broke  my 
journey  to  visit  the  caves  at  Louray,  which  had  been 
discovered  about  ten  years  before.  I  and  a  few  other 
visitors  walked  through  the  best  parts  (which  are  lit 
up  with  electric  lights)  for  about  two  hours,  through  a 
variety  of  passages,  galleries,  and  halls,  some  reaching 
a  hundred  feet  in  height,  some  having  streams  or 
pools  of  water,  and  some  chasms  of  unknown  depth, 
such  as  most  limestone  caves  possess.  Everywhere 
there  are  stalactites  of  the  most  varied  forms,  and 
often  of  the  most  wonderful  beauty.  Usually  they 
form  pillars  as  of  some  strange  architecture,  sometimes 
they  hang  down  like  gigantic  icicles,  one  of  these  over 
sixty  feet  long  being  with  its  dripping  apex  only  a 
few  inches  from  the  floor.  In  some  places  the 
stalactites  resemble  cascades,  in  others  organs,  and 
several  are  like  statues,  and  have  received  appropriate 
names.  Many  of  them  are  most  curiously  ribbed  ; 
others,  again,  have  branches  growing  out  of  them  at 
right  angles  a  few  inches  long — a  most  puzzling 
phenomenon.  There  is  a  Moorish  tent,  in  which  fine 
white  drapery  hangs  in  front  of  a  cave,  a  ballroom 
beautifully  ornamented  with  snow-white  stalactitic 
curtains,  etc.  Some  of  these,  when  struck,  give  out 
musical  notes,  and  a  tune  can  be  played  on  them. 
A  photograph  of  the  Moorish  tent  and  the  curious 
pillars  near  it  is  here  reproduced.  The  curtain  is  like 
alabaster,  and  when  a  lamp  is  held  behind  it,  the 
effect  is  most  beautiful.  In  many  places  there  are 
stalagmitic  floors,  beneath  which  is  clay  filled  with 
bones  of  bats,  etc.,  and  at  one  spot  human  bones  are 


THE   MOORISH    TENT,    LOURAY    CAVERN. 

\_Toface p.  276. 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN   AMERICA     277 

embedded  in  the  floor  under  a  chasm  opening  above. 
The  print  of  an  Indian  mocassin  is  also  shown  petrified 
by  the  stalagmite.  Rats  and  mice  are  found  with  very 
large  eyes ;  and  there  are  some  blind  insects  and 
centipedes,  as  in  the  Mammoth  Cave.  Several  miles 
of  caverns  and  passages  have  already  been  explored, 
but  other  wonders  may  still  be  hidden  in  its  deeper 
recesses. 

From  Cincinnati  I  continued  my  journey  west- 
ward, paying  short  visits  to  Kansas  City,  Denver,  and 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  then  on  to  San  Francisco,  where 
I  met  my  brother  John. 

A  few  days  after  my  arrival  in  San  Francisco  I 
was  taken  for  a  drive  by  a  friend,  Dr.  Gibbons,  into 
the  foothills  to  see  the  remains  of  the  Redwood  forest 
that  once  covered  them,  but  which  had  all  been 
ruthlessly  destroyed  to  supply  timber  for  the  city  and 
towns  around.  We  wound  about  among  the  hills 
and  valleys,  all  perfectly  dry,  till  we  reached  a 
height  of  fifteen  hundred  feet,  where  many  clumps  of 
young  redwoods  were  seen,  and,  stopping  at  one  of 
these,  Dr.  Gibbons  took  me  inside  a  circle  of  young 
trees  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet  high,  and  showed  me 
that  they  all  grew  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  huge 
charred  trunk  of  an  old  tree  that  had  been  burnt  down. 
This  stump  was  thirty-four  feet  in  diameter,  or  quite 
as  large  as  the  very  largest  of  the  more  celebrated 
Big  Trees,  the  Sequoia  gigantea.  The  doctor  had 
searched  all  over  these  hills,  and  this  was  the  largest 
stump  he  had  found,  though  there  were  numbers 
between  twenty  and  thirty  feet.  The  tree  derives 
its  botanical  name,  sempervirens  (ever-growing)  from 
the  peculiar  habit  of  producing  young  trees  from  the 
burnt  or  decayed  roots  of  the  old  trees.  These 
enormous   trees,   being  too  large  to  cut  down,  were 


2/8  MY   LIFE 

burnt  till  sufficiently  weakened  to  fall,  and  this  par- 
ticular tree  had  been  so  burnt  about  forty  years 
before. 

While  staying  with  my  brother  in  Stockton,  Cal., 
I  went  with  him  and  his  daughter  to  spend  a  few 
days  in  the  Yosemite  Valley.  The  journey  there — 
two  hours  by  rail  and  two  days  by  coach — was  very 
interesting,  but  often  terribly  dusty.  The  first  day 
we  were  driving  for  nine  hours  in  the  foothills,  among 
old  mining  camps  with  their  ruined  sheds  and 
reservoirs  and  great  gravel-heaps,  now  being  gradually 
overgrown  by  young  pines  and  shrubs.  Here  and 
there  we  passed  through  bits  of  forest  with  tall  pines 
and  shrubby  undergrowth,  but  generally  the  country 
was  bare  of  fine  trees,  scraggy,  but  burnt  up,  and  the 
roads  insufferably  dusty.  At  9  p.m.  we  reached 
Priest's  (two  thousand  five  hundred  feet  elevation), 
where  we  had  supper,  bed,  and  breakfast. 

Next  day  was  much  more  enjoyable.  The  road 
was  wonderfully  varied,  always  going  up  or  down, 
diving  into  deep  wooded  valleys  with  clear  and  rapid 
streams,  then  up  the  slope,  winding  round  spurs, 
crossing  ridges,  and  down  again  into  valleys,  but 
always  mounting  higher  and  higher.  And  as  we  got 
deeper  into  the  sierra,  the  vegetation  continually 
changed,  the  pines  became  finer  both  in  form,  size, 
and  beauty.  At  about  three  thousand  feet  we  first 
saw  the  beautiful  Douglas  fir,  and  the  cedar  {Libocedrtis 
decurrens),  both  common  in  our  gardens  ;  then  still 
higher  there  were  silver  firs  and  the  fine  Picea  nobilis, 
as  well  as  a  few  of  the  Big  Trees  {Sequoia  gigantea), 
the  road  being  cut  right  through  the  middle  of  one  of 
these  (at  about  five  thousand  eight  hundred  feet). 
From  the  summit  we  descended  towards  the  valley, 
and  then  down  a  steep  zigzag  road,  with  the  beautiful 


A  LECTURE-TOUR   IN  AMERICA     279 

Bridal  Veil  Fall  opposite,  and  the  grand  precipice  of 
El  Capitan  before  us,  then  into  the  valley  itself  with 
its  rushing  river,  to  the  hotel  in  the  dusk. 

As  both  hotel  and  excursions  were  here  very- 
costly,  we  only  stayed  two  clear  days,  and  went  one 
"excursion  "  to  the  Nevada  Fall,  the  grandest,  if  not 
the  most  beautiful,  in  the  valley.  My  brother  and 
niece  rode  up,  but  I  walked  to  enjoy  the  scenery,  and 
especially  the  flowers  and  ferns  and  the  fine  glaciated 
rocks  of  the  higher  valley.  The  rest  of  my  time  I 
spent  roaming  about  the  valley  itself  and  some  of  its 
lower  precipices,  looking  after  its  flowers,  and  ponder- 
ing over  its  strange,  wild,  majestic  beauty  and  the 
mode  of  its  formation.  On  the  latter  point  I  have 
given  my  views  in  an  article  on  "  Inaccessible  Valleys," 
reprinted  in  my  "  Studies."  The  hotel  dining-room 
looks  out  upon  the  Yosemite  Falls,  which,  seen  one 
behind  the  other,  have  the  appearance  of  a  single 
broken  cascade  of  more  than  two  thousand  five 
hundred  feet.  I  walked  up  about  a  thousand  feet  to 
get  a  nearer  view  of  the  upper  fall,  which,  in  its  ever- 
changing  vapour-streams  and  water-rockets,  is  won- 
derfully beautiful.  To  enjoy  this  valley  and  its 
surroundings  in  perfection,  a  small  party  should  come 
with  baggage-mules  and  tents,  as  early  in  the  season 
as  possible,  when  the  falls  are  at  their  grandest  and 
the  flowers  in  their  spring  beauty,  and  when,  by 
camping  at  different  stations  in  the  valley  and  in  the 
mountains  and  valleys  around  it,  all  its  wonderful 
scenes  of  grandeur  and  beauty  could  be  explored  and 
enjoyed.  It  is  one  of  the  regrets  of  my  American 
tour  that  I  was  unable  to  do  this. 

On  our  way  back  I  turned  off  at  the  foot  of  the 
hills  to  visit  the  Calaveras  Grove  of  big  trees  which 
my  brother  and  niece  had  seen  before,  and  I  had  to 


28o  MY   LIFE 

sleep  on  the  way.  I  stayed  three  days,  examining 
and  measuring  the  trees,  collecting  flowers,  and  walk- 
ing one  day  to  the  much  larger  south  grove  six  miles 
off,  where  there  are  said  to  be  over  a  thousand  full- 
grown  trees.  The  walk  was  very  interesting,  over  hill 
and  valley,  through  forest  all  the  way,  except  one 
small  clearing.  At  a  small  rocky  stream  I  found  the 
large  Saxifraga  pdtata  growing  in  crevices  of  rocks 
just  under  water,  and  I  passed  numbers  of  fine 
examples  of  all  the  chief  pines,  firs,  and  cypresses. 
At  the  grove  there  were  numbers  of  very  fine  trees, 
but  none  quite  so  large  as  the  largest  in  the  Calaveras 
Grove,  Many  of  them  have  names.  "Agassiz"  is 
thirty-three  feet  wide  at  base,  and  has  an  enormous 
hole  burnt  in  it  eighteen  feet  wide  and  the  same 
depth,  and  extending  upwards  ninety  feet  like  a  large 
cavern;  yet  the  tree  is  in  vigorous  growth.  The 
Sequoias  are  here  thickly  scattered  among  other  pines 
and  firs,  sometimes  singly,  sometimes  in  groups  of 
five  or  six  together.  There  are  many  twin  trees 
growing  as  a  single  stem  up  to  twenty  or  thirty  feet, 
and  then  dividing.  But  the  chief  feature  of  this 
grove  is  the  abundance  of  trees  to  be  seen  in  every 
direction,  of  large  or  moderate  size,  and  with  clean, 
straight  stems  showing  the  brilliant  orange-brown  tint 
and  silky  or  plush-like  glossy  surface,  characteristic 
of  the  bark  of  this  noble  tree  when  in  full  health  and 
vigorous  growth.  In  no  forest  that  I  am  acquainted 
with  is  there  any  tree  with  so  beautiful  a  bark  or  with 
one  so  thick  and  elastic. 

In  the  chapter  on  "  Flowers  and  Forests  of  the 
Far  West "  (in  my  "  Studies "),  I  have  given  a 
summary  of  the  chief  facts  known  about  these  trees, 
with  particulars  of  their  dimensions  and  probable  age. 
I   need  not,  therefore,   repeat  these  particulars  here. 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN   AMERICA     281 

But  of  all  the  natural  wonders  I  saw  in  America, 
nothing  impressed  me  so  much  as  these  glorious 
trees.  As  with  Niagara,  their  majesty  grows  upon 
one  by  living  among  them.  The  forests  of  which 
they  form  a  part  contain  a  number  of  the  finest  coni- 
fers in  the  world — trees  that  in  Europe  or  in  any 
other  Northern  forest  would  take  the  very  first  rank. 
These  grand  pines  are  often  from  two  hundred  to  two 
hundred  and  fifty  feet  high,  and  seven  or  eight  feet  in 
diameter  at  five  feet  above  the  ground,  where  they 
spread  out  to  about  ten  feet.  Looked  at  alone,  these, 
are  noble  trees,  and  there  is  every  gradation  of  size 
up  to  these.  But  the  Sequoias  take  a  sudden  leap, 
the  average  full-grown  trees  being  twice  this  diameter, 
and  the  largest  three  times  the  diameter  of  these 
largest  pines  ;  so  that  when  they  were  first  found  the 
accounts  of  the  discoveries  were  disbelieved.  My 
brother  told  me  an  interesting  story  of  this  discovery. 
The  early  miners  used  to  keep  a  hunter  in  each  camp 
to  procure  game  for  them,  venison,  and  especially 
bear's  meat,  being  highly  esteemed.  These  men  used 
to  search  the  forests  for  ten  or  twenty  miles  round 
the  camps  while  hunting.  The  hunter  of  the  highest 
camp  on  the  Stanislaus  river  came  home  one  evening, 
and  after  supper  told  them  of  a  big  tree  he  had 
found  that  beat  all  he  had  ever  seen  before.  It  had 
three  times  as  big  a  trunk  as  any  tree  within  ten 
miles  round.  Of  course  they  all  laughed  at  him,  told 
him  they  were  not  fools :  they  knew  what  trees  were 
as  well  as  he  did  ;  and  so  on.  Then  he  offered  to 
show  it  them,  but  none  would  go  ;  they  would  not 
tramp  ten  or  twelve  miles  to  be  made  fools  of.  So 
the  hunter  had  to  bide  his  time.  A  week  or  two 
afterwards  he  came  home  one  Saturday  night  with  a 
small  bag  of  game  ;  but  he  excused  himself  by  saying 


282  MY   LIFE 

that  he  had  got  the  finest  and  fattest  bear  he  had 
ever  killed,  and  as  next  day  was  Sunday  he  thought 
that  six  or  eight  of  them  would  come  with  him  and 
bring  the  meat  home. 

The  next  morning  a  large  party  started  early,  and 
after  a  long  walk  the  hunter  brought  them  suddenly 
up  to  the  big  tree,  and,  clapping  his  hand  on  it,  said, 
"  Here's  my  fat  bear.  When  I  called  it  a  tree,  you 
wouldn't  believe  me.  Who's  the  fool  now  ? "  This 
was  the  great  pavilion  tree  of  the  Calaveras  Grove, 
twenty-six  feet  in  diameter  at  five  feet  from  the 
ground — over  eighty  feet  in  circumference,  so  that  it 
would  require  fourteen  tall  men  with  arms  out- 
stretched to  go  round  it.  This  tree  was  afterwards 
cut  down  by  boring  into  the  trunk  at  six  feet  from  the 
ground  with  long  pump-augers  from  each  side,  so  as 
to  meet  in  the  centre.  The  first  fourteen  feet  was 
then  cut  into  sections,  and  one  supplied  to  each  of 
the  older  States.  The  rest  remains  as  it  fell,  and  can 
be  walked  on  to  a  distance  of  about  two  hundred  and 
ten  feet  from  the  stump,  and  here  it  is  still  six  feet  in 
diameter.  To  examine  this  wonderful  wreck  of  the 
grandest  tree  then  living  on  our  globe  is  most 
impressive.  The  rings  on  the  stump  of  this  tree  have 
been  very  carefully  counted  by  Professor  Bradley,  of 
the  University  of  California,  and  were  found  to  be 
1240,  which  no  doubt  gives  the  age  of  the  tree  very 
accurately,  as  the  winters  are  here  severe,  and  the 
season  of  growth  very  well  marked. 

On  my  return  journey  I  crossed  the  Rocky 
Mountains  by  the  Denver  and  Rio  Grande  Railway, 
passing-  through  some  of  the  wildest  and  most 
magnificent  country.  In  places  there  were  precipices 
about  a  thousand  feet  high,  side  canons  like  narrow 
slits  or  winding  majestic  ravines,  often  with  vertical 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN  AMERICA    283 

walls,  and  the  river  roaring  and  raging  in  a  tumultuous 
flood  close  alongside  of  us. 

I  broke  my  journey  at  Denver,  where  I  made  an 
excursion  to  Gray's  Peak,  one  of  the  highest  in  the 
range.  I  also  paid  a  visit  to  the  celebrated  "  Garden 
of  the  Gods"  with  its  fantastic  weather-worn  and 
brilliantly  coloured  rocks. 

I  next  went  on  to  Chicago,  where  I  spent  only  a 
few  hours  while  waiting  for  my  train  to  Montreal  and 
Quebec  whence  I  set  sail  for  England. 

Before  closing  this  brief  account  of  my  tour  in 
America,  it  may  be  interesting  to  record  my  general 
impressions  as  to  the  country  and  people.  In  my 
journal  I  find  this  note :  "  During  more  than  ten 
months  in  America,  taking  every  opportunity  of 
exploring  woods  and  forests,  plains  and  mountains, 
deserts  and  gardens,  between  the  Atlantic  and 
Pacific  coasts,  and  extending  over  ten  degrees  of 
latitude,  I  never  once  saw  either  a  humming-bird  or  a 
rattlesnake,  or  even  any  living  snake  of  any  kind.  In 
many  places  I  was  told  that  humming-birds  were 
usually  common  in  their  gardens,  but  they  hadn't 
seen  any  this  year !  This  was  my  luck.  And  as  to 
the  rattlesnakes,  I  was  always  on  the  look  out  in 
likely  places,  and  there  are  plenty  still,  but  they  are 
local.  I  was  told  of  a  considerable  tract  of  land  not  far 
from  Niagara  which  is  so  infested  with  them  that  it 
is  absolutely  useless.  The  reason  is  that  it  is  very 
rocky,  with  so  many  large  masses  lying  about  over- 
grown with  shrubs  and  briars  as  to  afford  them 
unlimited  hiding-places,  and  the  labour  of  thoroughly 
clearing  it  would  be  more  costly  than  the  land  would 
be  worth." 

The  general  impression  left  upon  my  mind  as  to  1 
the  country  itself  is  the  almost  total  absence  of  that 


284  MY   LIFE 

simple  rural  beauty  which  has  resulted,  in  our  own 
country  and  in  some  other  parts  of  Europe,  from  the 
very  gradual  occupation  of  the  land  as  it  was  required 
to  supply  food  for  the  inhabitants,  together  with  our 
mild  winters  allowing  of  continuous  cultivation,  and 
the  use  in  building  of  local  materials  adapted  to  the 
purposes  required  by  handwork,  instead  of  those 
fashioned  by  machinery.  This  slow  development  of 
agriculture  and  of  settlement  has  produced  almost 
every  feature  which  renders  our  country  picturesque 
or  beautiful :  the  narrow  winding  lanes,  following  the 
contours  of  the  ground ;  the  ever-varying  size  of  the 
enclosures,  and  their  naturally  curved  boundaries ; 
the  ditch  and  bank  and  the  surmounting  hedgerow, 
with  its  rows  of  elm,  ash  or  oak,  giving  variety  and 
sylvan  beauty  to  the  surroundings  of  almost  every 
village  or  hamlet,  most  of  which  go  back  to  Saxon 
times  ;  the  farms  or  cottages  built  of  brick,  or  stone, 
or  clay,  or  of  rude  but  strong  oak  framework  filled  in 
with  clay  or  lath  and  roughcast,  and  with  thatched  or 
tiled  roofs,  varying  according  to  the  natural  conditions, 
and  in  all  showing  the  slight  curves  and  irregularities 
due  to  the  materials  used  and  the  hand  of  the 
worker ; — the  whole,  worn  and  coloured  by  age  and 
surrounded  by  nature's  grandest  adornment  of  self- 
sown  trees  in  hedgerow  or  pasture,  combine  together 
to  produce  that  charming  and  indescribable  effect  we 
term  picturesque.  And  when  we  add  to  these  the 
numerous  footpaths  which  enable  us  to  escape  the 
dust  of  high-roads  and  to  enjoy  the  glory  of  wild 
flowers  which  the  innumerable  hedgerows  and  moist 
ditches  have  preserved  for  us,  the  breezy  downs,  the 
gorse-clad  commons  and  the  heath-clad  moors  still 
unenclosed,  we  are,  in  some  favoured  districts  at  least, 
still  able  thoroughly  to  enjoy  all  the  varied  aspects  of 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN   AMERICA     285 

beauty  which  our  country  affords  us,  but  which  are, 
alas !  under  the  combined  influences  of  capitalism  and 
landlordism,  fast  disappearing. 

But  in  America,  except  in  a  few  parts  of  the  north- 
eastern States,  none  of  these  favourable  conditions 
have  prevailed.  Over  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the 
country  there  has  been  no  natural  development  of 
lanes  and  tracks  and  roads  as  they  were  needed  for 
communication  between  villages  and  towns  that  had 
grown  up  in  places  best  adapted  for  early  settlement ; 
but  the  whole  country  has  been  marked  out  into 
sections  and  quarter-sections  (of  a  mile,  and  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  square),  with  a  right  of  way  of  a  certain 
width  along  each  section-line  to  give  access  to  every 
quarter-section  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres,  to  one 
of  which,  under  the  homestead  law,  every  citizen  had, 
or  was  supposed  to  have,  a  right  of  cultivation  and 
possession.  Hence,  in  all  the  newer  States  there  are 
no  roads  or  paths  whatever  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
townships,  and  the  only  lines  of  communication  for 
foot  or  horsemen  or  vehicles  of  any  kind  are  along 
these  rectangular  section-lines,  often  going  up  and 
down  hill,  over  bog  or  stream,  and  almost  always 
compelling  the  traveller  to  go  a  much  greater  distance 
than  the  form  of  the  surface  rendered  necessary. 

Then  again,  owing  to  the  necessity  for  rapidly  and 
securely  fencing  in  these  quarter-sections,  and  to  the 
fact  that  the  greater  part  of  the  States  first  settled  were 
largely  forest-clad,  it  became  the  custom  to  build 
rough,  strong  fences  of  split-trees,  which  utilized  the 
timber  as  it  was  cut  and  involved  no  expenditure  of 
cash  by  the  settler.  To  avoid  the  labour  of  putting 
posts  in  the  ground  the  fence  was  at  first  usually 
built  of  rails  or  logs  laid  zigzag  on  each  other  to  the 
height  required,  so  as  to  be  self-supporting,  the  upper 


286  MY   LIFE 

pairs  only  being  fastened  together  by  a  spike  through 
them,  the  waste  of  material  in  such  a  fence  being 
compensated  by  the  reduction  of  the  labour,  since  the 
timber  itself  was  often  looked  upon  as  a  nuisance  to 
be  got  rid  of  before  cultivation  was  possible.  This 
fact  of  timber  being  in  the  way  of  cultivation  and  of 
no  use  till  cut  down,  led  to  the  very  general  clearing 
away  of  all  the  trees  from  about  the  house,  so  that  it  is 
a  comparatively  rare  thing,  except  in  the  eastern 
towns  and  villages,  to  find  any  old  trees  that  have 
been  left  standing  for  shade  or  for  beauty. 

For  these  and  for  similar  causes  acting  through 
the  greater  part  of  North  America,  there  results  a 
monotonous  and  unnatural  ruggedness,  a  want  of 
harmony  between  man  and  nature,  the  absence  of  all 
those  softening  effects  of  human  labour  and  human 
occupation  carried  on  for  generation  after  generation 
in  the  same  simple  way,  and  in  its  slow  and  gradual 
utilization  of  natural  forces  allowing  the  renovating 
agency  of  vegetable  and  animal  life  to  conceal  all 
harshness  of  colour  or  form,  and  clothe  the  whole 
landscape  in  a  garment  of  perennial  beauty. 

Over  the  larger  part  of  America  everything  is  raw 
and  bare  and  ugly,  with  the  same  kind  of  ugliness 
with  which  we  also  are  defacing  our  land  and  destroy- 
ing its  rural  beauty.  The  ugliness  of  new  rows  of 
cottages  built  to  let  to  the  poor,  the  ugliness  of  the 
mean  streets  of  our  towns,  the  ugliness  of  our  "  black 
countries  "  and  our  polluted  streams.  Both  countries 
are  creating  ugliness,  both  are  destroying  beauty  ;  but 
in  America  it  is  done  on  a  larger  scale  and  with  a 
more  hideous  monotony.  The  more  refined  among 
the  Americans  see  this  themselves  as  clearly  as  we 
see  it.  One  of  them  has  said,  "A  whole  huge  con- 
tinent has  been  so  touched  by  human  hands  that, 


A  LECTURE-TOUR  IN   AMERICA     287 

over  a  large  part  of  its  surface  it  has  been  reduced 
to  a  state  of  unkempt,  sordid  ugliness ;  and  it  can 
be  brought  back  into  a  state  of  beauty  only  by 
further  touches  of  the  same  hands  more  intelligently 
applied."  ^ 

Turning  now  from  the  land  to  the  people,  what 
can  we  say  of  our  American  cousins  as  a  race  and  as 
a  nation  ?  The  great  thing  to  keep  in  mind  is,  that 
they  are,  largely  and  primarily,  of  the  same  blood  and 
of  the  same  nature  as  ourselves,  with  characters  and 
habits  formed  in  part  by  the  evil  traditions  inherited 
from  us,  in  part  by  the  influence  of  the  new  environ- 
ment to  which  they  have  been  exposed.  Just  as  we 
owe  our  good  and  bad  qualities  to  the  intermixture  and 
struggle  of  somewhat  dissimilar  peoples,  so  do  they. 
Briton  and  Roman,  Saxon  and  Dane,  Norsemen  and 
Norman-French,  Scotch  and  Irish  Celts — all  have 
intermingled  in  various  proportions,  and  helped  to 
create  that  energetic  amalgam  known  the  world  over 
as  Englishmen.  So  North  America  has  been  largely 
settled  by  the  English,  partly  by  Dutch,  French, 
and  Spanish,  whose  territories  were  soon  absorbed 
by  conquest  or  purchase ;  while,  during  the  last 
century,  a  continuous  stream  of  immigrants — Ger- 
mans, Irish,  Highland  and  Lowland  Scotch,  Scandi- 
navians, Italians,  Russians — has  flowed  in,  and  is 
slowly  but  surely  becoming  amalgamated  into  one 
great  Anglo-American  people. 

Most  of  the  evil  influences  under  which  the 
United  States  have  grown  to  their  present  condition 
of  leaders  in  civilization,  and  a  great  power  among 
the  nations  of  the  world,  they  received  from  us.  We 
gave  them  the  example  of  religious  intolerance  and 

»  The  Century,  June,  1887. 


288  MY   LIFE 

priestly  rule,  which  they  have  now  happily  thrown  off 
more  completely  than  we  have  done.  We  gave  them 
slavery,  both  white  and  black — a  curse  from  the  effects 
of  which  they  still  suffer,  and  out  of  which  a  wholly 
satisfactory  escape  seems  as  remote  as  ever.  But 
even  more  insidious  and  more  widespread  in  its  evil 
results  than  both  of  these,  we  gave  them  our  bad  and 
iniquitous  feudal  land  system ;  first  by  enormous 
grants  from  the  Crown  to  individuals  or  to  com- 
panies, but  also — what  has  produced  even  worse 
effects — the  ingrained  belief  that  land — the  first 
essential  of  life,  the  source  of  all  things  necessary 
or  useful  to  mankind,  by  labour  upon  which  all  wealth 
arises — may  yet,  justly  and  equitably,  be  owned  by 
individuals,  be  monopolized  by  capitalists  or  by 
companies,  leaving  the  great  bulk  of  the  people  as 
absolutely  dependent  on  these  monopolists  for  per- 
mission to  work  and  to  live  as  ever  were  the  negro 
slaves  of  the  South  before  emancipation. 

The  result  of  acting  upon  this  false  conception  is, 
that  the  Government  has  already  parted  with  the 
whole  of  the  accessible  and  cultivable  land,  and 
though  large  areas  still  remain  for  any  citizen  who 
will  settle  upon  it,  by  the  mere  payment  of  very 
moderate  fees,  this  privilege  is  absolutely  worthless 
to  those  who  most  want  it — the  very  poor.  And 
throughout  the  western  half  of  the  Union  one  sees 
everywhere  the  strange  anomaly  of  building  lots  in 
small  remote  towns,  surrounded  by  thousands  of 
uncultivated  acres  (and  perhaps  ten  years  before  sold 
for  eight  or  ten  shillings  an  acre),  now  selling  at  the 
rate  of  from  ;^iooo  to  ;^20,ooo  an  acre  !  It  is  not  an 
uncommon  thing  for  town  lots  in  new  places  to  double 
their  value  in  a  month,  while  a  fourfold  increase  in  a 
year  is  quite  common.     Hence  land  speculation  has 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN    AMERICA     289 

become  a  vast  organized  business  over  all  the  Western 
States,  and  is  considered  to  be  a  proper  and  natural 
mode  of  getting  rich.  It  is  what  the  Stock  Exchange 
is  to  the  great  cities.  And  this  wealth,  thus  gained  by 
individuals,  initiates  that  process  which  culminates  in 
railroad  and  mining  kings,  in  oil  and  beef  trusts,  and 
in  the  thousand  millionaires  and  multi-millionaires 
whose  vast  accumulated  incomes  are,  every  penny  of 
them,  paid  by  the  toiling  workers,  including  the  five 
million  of  farmers  whose  lives  of  constan  toil  only 
result  for  the  most  part  in  a  bare  livelihood,  while  the 
railroad  magnates  and  corn  speculators  absorb  the 
larger  portion  of  the  produce  of  their  labour. 

What  a  terrible  object-lesson  is  this  as  to  the 
fundamental  wrong  in  modern  societies  which  leads 
to  such  a  result !  Here  is  a  country  more  than 
twenty-five  times  the  area  of  the  British  Islands, 
with  a  vast  extent  of  fertile  soil,  grand  navigable 
waterways,  enormous  forests,  a  superabounding 
wealth  of  minerals — everything  necessary  for  the 
support  of  a  population  twenty-five  times  that  of 
ours — about  fifteen  hundred  millions — which  has  yet, 
in  little  more  than  a  century,  destroyed  nearly  all 
its  forests,  is  rapidly  exhausting  its  marvellous 
stores  of  natural  oil  and  gas,  as  well  as  those  of  the 
precious  metals ;  and  as  the  result  of  all  this  reck- 
less exploiting  of  nature's  accumulated  treasures 
has  brought  about  overcrowded  cities  reeking  with 
disease  and  vice,  and  a  population  which,  though 
only  one-half  greater  than  our  own,  exhibits  all  the 
pitiable  phenomena  of  women  and  children  working 
long  hours  in  factories  and  workshops,  garrets  and 
cellars,  for  a  wage  which  will  not  give  them  the 
essentials  of  mere  healthy  animal  existence  ;  while 
about  the  same  proportion  of  its   workers,   as   with 

u 


290  MY   LIFE 

us,  endure  lives  of  excessive  labour  for  a  bare 
livelihood,  or  constitute  that  crying  disgrace  of 
modern  civilization — willing  men  seeking  in  vain  for 
honest  work,  and  forming  a  great  army  of  the 
unemployed. 

What  a  demonstration  is  this  of  the  utter  folly 
and  stupidity  of  those  blind  leaders  of  the  blind  who 
impute  all  the  evils  of  our  social  system,  all  our 
poverty  and  starvation,  to  over-population !  Ireland, 
with  half  the  population  of  fifty  years  ago,  is  still 
poor  to  the  verge  of  famine,  and  is  therefore  still 
over-peopled.  And  for  England  and  Scotland  as 
well,  the  cry  is  still  "  Emigrate  !  emigrate !  We  are 
over-peopled  !  "  But  what  of  America,  with  twenty- 
five  times  as  much  land  as  we  have,  and  with  even 
greater  natural  resources,  and  with  a  population 
even  more  ingenious,  more  energetic,  and  more 
hard-working  than  ours  }  Are  they  over-populated 
with  only  twenty  people  to  the  square  mile  ?  There 
is  only  one  rational  solution  of  this  terrible  problem. 
The  system  that  allows  the  land  and  the  minerals, 
the  means  of  communication,  and  all  other  public 
services,  to  be  monopolized  for  the  aggrandisement  of 
the  few — for  the  creation  of  millionaires — necessarily 
leads  to  the  poverty,  the  degradation,  the  misery  of 
the  many. 

There  never  has  been,  in  the  whole  history  of  the 
human  race,  a  people  with  such  grand  opportunities 
for  establishing  a  society  and  a  nation  in  which  the 
products  of  the  general  labour  should  be  so  dis- 
tributed as  to  produce  general  well-being.  It  wanted 
but  a  recognition  of  the  fundamental  principle  of 
"equality  of  opportunity,"  tacitly  implied  in  the 
Declaration  of  Independence.  It  wanted  but  such 
social  arrangements  as  would  ensure  to  every  child 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN    AMERICA     291 

the  best  nurture,  the  best  training  of  all  its  faculties, 
and  the  fullest  opportunity  for  utilizing  those  faculties 
for  its  own  happiness  and  for  the  common  benefit. 
Not  only  equality  before  the  law,  but  equality  of 
opportunity,  is  the  great  fundamental  principle  of 
social  justice.  This  is  the  teaching  of  Herbert 
Spencer,  but  he  did  not  carry  it  out  to  its  logical 
consequence — the  inequity,  and  therefore  the  social 
immorality  of  wealth-inheritance.  To  secure  equality 
of  opportunity  there  must  be  no  inequality  of  initial 
wealth.  To  allow  one  child  to  be  born  a  millionaire 
and  another  a  pauper  is  a  crime  against  humanity, 
and,  for  those  who  believe  in  a  deity,  a  crime  against 
God.^ 

It  is  the  misfortune  of  the  Americans  that  they 
had  such  a  vast  continent  to  occupy.  Had  it  ended  at 
the  line  of  the  Mississippi,  agricultural  development 
might  have  gone  on  more  slowly  and  naturally,  from 
east  to  west,  as  increase  of  population  required.  So 
again,  if  they  had  had  another  century  for  development 
before  railways  were  invented,  expansion  would  neces- 
sarily have  gone  on  more  slowly,  the  need  for  good 
roads  would  have  shown  that  the  rectangular  system 
of  dividing  up  new  lands  was  a  mistake,  and  some  of 
that  charm  of  rural  scenery  which  we  possess  would 
probably  have  arisen. 

But  with  the  conditions  that  actually  existed  we 
can  hardly  wonder  at  the  result.  A  nation  formed 
by  emigrants  from  several  of  the  most  energetic  and 
intellectual  nations  of  the  old  world,  for  the  most 
part  driven  from  their  homes  by  religious  persecution 
or  political  oppression,  including  from  the  very  first  all 
ranks  and  conditions  of  life — farmers  and  mechanics, 
traders    and    manufacturers,  students   and   teachers, 

1  I  have  discussed  this  subject  in  my  "  Studies,"  vol.  ii.  chap,  xxviii. 


292  MY   LIFE 

rich  and  poor — the  very  circumstances  which  drove 
them  to  emigrate  led  to  a  natural  selection  of  the  most 
energetic,  the  most  independent,  in  many  respects  the 
best  of  their  several  nations.  Such  a  people,  further 
tried  and  hardened  by  two  centuries  of  struggle 
against  the  forces  of  nature  and  a  savage  population, 
and  finally  by  a  war  of  emancipation  from  the  tyranny 
of  the  mother  country,  would  almost  necessarily 
develop  both  the  virtues,  the  prejudices,  and  even  the 
vices  of  the  parent  stock  in  an  exceptionally  high 
degree.  Hence,  when  the  march  of  invention  and  of 
science  (to  which  they  contributed  their  share)  gave 
them  the  steamship  and  the  railroad  ;  when  California 
gave  them  gold  and  Nevada  silver,  with  the  prospect 
of  wealth  to  the  lucky  beyond  the  dreams  of  avarice  ; 
when  the  great  prairies  of  the  West  gave  them  illimit- 
able acres  of  marvellously  fertile  soil  ; — it  is  not 
surprising  that  these  conditions  with  such  a  people 
should  have  resulted  in  that  mad  race  for  wealth  in 
which  they  have  beaten  the  record,  and  have  pro- 
duced a  greater  number  of  multi-millionaires  than 
all  the  rest  of  the  world  combined,  with  the  disastrous 
results  already  briefly  indicated. 

But  this  is  only  one  side  of  the  American  cha- 
racter. Everywhere  there  are  indications  of  a  deep 
love  of  nature,  a  devotion  to  science  and  to  literature 
fully  proportionate  to  that  of  the  older  countries  ; 
while  in  inventiveness  and  in  the  applications  of 
science  to  human  needs  they  have  long  been  in  the 
first  rank.  But  what  is  more  important,  there  is  also 
rapidly  developing  among  them  a  full  recognition  of 
the  failings  of  our  common  social  system,  and  a  deter- 
mination to  remedy  it.  As  in  Germany,  in  France, 
and  in  England,  the  socialists  are  becoming  a  power 
in  America.     They  already  influence  public  opinion. 


A   LECTURE-TOUR   IN   AMERICA    293 

and  will  soon  influence  the  legislatures.  The  glaring 
fact  is  now  being  widely  recognized  that  with  them, 
as  with  all  the  old  nations  of  Europe,  an  increase  in 
wealth  and  in  command  over  the  powers  of  nature 
such  as  the  world  has  never  before  seen,  has  not 
added  to  the  true  well-being  of  any  part  of  society. 
It  is  also  indisputable  that,  as  regards  the  enormous 
masses  of  the  labouring  and  industrial  population,  it 
has  greatly  increased  the  numbers  of  those  whose 
lives  are  "below  the  margin  of  poverty,"  while,  as 
John  Stuart  Mill  declared  many  years  ago,  it  has  not 
reduced  the  labour  of  any  human  being. 

An  American  (Mr.  Bellamy)  gave  us  the  books 
that  first  opened  the  eyes  of  great  numbers  of 
educated  readers  to  the  practicability,  the  simplicity, 
and  the  beauty  of  Socialism.  It  is  to  America  that 
the  world  looks  to  lead  the  way  towards  a  just  and 
peaceful  modification  of  the  social  organism,  based 
upon  a  recognition  of  the  principle  of  Equality  of 
Opportunity,  and  by  means  of  the  Organization  of 
the  Labour  of  all  for  the  Equal  Good  of  all. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

FRIENDS  AND  OCCUPATIONS  OF  MY  LATER  YEARS 
(1888-I908) 

After  my  return  from  America  in  August,  1887,  the 
remainder  of  the  year  was  occupied  at  home  in 
overtaking  my  correspondence,  looking  after  my 
garden,  and  making  up  for  lost  time  in  scientific  and 
literary  reading,  and  in  considering  what  work  I 
should  next  occupy  myself  with.  Many  of  my  corre- 
spondents, as  well  as  persons  I  met  in  America,  told 
me  that  they  could  not  understand  Darwin's  "  Origin 
of  Species,"  but  they  did  understand  my  lecture 
on  "  Darwinism  "  ;  and  it  therefore  occurred  to  me 
that  a  popular  exposition  of  the  subject  might  be 
useful,  not  only  as  enabling  the  general  reader  to 
understand  Darwin,  but  also  to  serve  as  an  answer 
to  the  many  articles  and  books  professing  to  disprove 
the  theory  of  natural  selection.  During  the  whole  of 
the  year  1888  I  was  engaged  in  writing  this  book, 
which,  though  largely  following  the  lines  of  Darwin's 
work,  contained  a  great  many  new  features,  and 
dealt  especially  with  those  parts  of  the  subject  which 
had  been  most  generally  misunderstood. 

The  spring  of  1889  was  occupied  in  passing  it 
through  the  press,  and  it  was  published  in  May,  while 
a  few  corrections  were  made  for  a  second  edition  in 
the  following  October.     During  this  time,  however, 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       295 

I  gave  several  of  my  American  lectures  in  various 
parts  of  the  country — at  Newcastle  and  Darlington  in 
the  spring  of  1888  ;  in  the  autumn  at  Altrincham  and 
Darwen  ;  and  in  1889  at  Newcastle,  York,  Darlington, 
and  Liverpool. 

In  the  autumn  of  this  year  the  University  of 
Oxford  did  me  the  honour  of  giving  me  the 
honorary  degree  of  D.C.L.,  which  I  went  to  receive 
in  November,  when  I  enjoyed  the  hospitality  of  my 
friend  Professor  E.  B.  Poulton. 

While  residing  at  Godalming,  I  made  the  acquain- 
tance of  William  Allingham  and  his  wife — the  poet 
and  the  artist — who  then  lived  at  Witley — I  think  it 
was  about  the  year  1886  or  1887.  Mr.  Allingham 
told  me  that  Tennyson  wished  to  see  me,  and  would 
be  glad  if  I  would  come  some  day  and  lunch  with 
him.  A  day  was  fixed,  and  I  accompanied  Mr. 
Allingham  to  the  beautifully  situated  house  on  Black- 
down,  near  Haslemere,  where  the  poet  lived  during 
the  summer.  Lord  Tennyson  did  not  appear  till 
luncheon  was  on  the  table,  but  in  the  mean  time  we 
had  seen  Lady  Tennyson  and  her  son  and  daughter- 
in-law,  and  been  shown  round  the  grounds.  After 
luncheon  we  four  men  retired  to  the  study,  with 
its  three  great  windows  looking  south-east  over  the 
grand  expanse  of  the  finely  wooded  Weald.  Here 
Tennyson  lit  his  pipe,  and  we  sat  round  the  fire  and 
soon  got  on  the  subject  of  spiritualism,  which  was 
evidently  what  he  had  wished  to  talk  to  me  about.  I 
told  him  some  of  my  experiences,  and  replied  to 
some  of  his  difficulties — the  usual  difficulties  of  those 
who,  though  inclined  to  believe,  have  seen  nothing, 
and  find  the  phenomena  as  described  so  different 
from  what  they  think  they  ought  to  be.  He  was 
evidently  greatly   impressed  by  the   evidence,   and 


296  MY   LIFE 

wished  to  see  something.  I  gave  him  the  names  of 
one  or  two  mediums  whom  I  believed  to  be  quite 
trustworthy,  but  whether  he  ever  had  any  sittings 
with  them  I  did  not  hear. 

Then  we  talked  a  little  about  the  tropics  and  of 
the  scenery  of  the  Eastern  islands  ;  and,  taking  down 
a  volume  he  read,  in  his  fine,  deep,  chanting  voice, 
his  description  of  Enoch  Arden's  island — 

"  The  mountain  wooded  to  the  peak,  the  lawns 
And  winding  glades  high  up  like  ways  to  heaven, 
The  slender  coco's  drooping  crown  of  plumes, 
The  lightning  flash  of  insect  or  of  bird, 
The  lustre  of  the  long  convolvuluses 
That  coiled  around  the  stately  stems,  and  ran 
Ev'n  to  the  limit  of  the  land,  the  glows 
And  glories  of  the  broad  belt  of  the  world, — 
All  these  he  saw  ;  but  what  he  fain  had  seen 
He  could  not  see,  the  kindly  human  face, 
Nor  ever  hear  a  kindly  voice,  but  heard 
The  myriad  shriek  of  wheeling  ocean  fowl. 
The  league-long  roller  thundering  on  the  beach. 
The  moving  whisper  of  huge  trees  that  branch'd 
And  blossom'd  to  the  zenith,  or  the  sweep 
Of  some  precipitous  rivulet  to  the  wave. 
As  down  the  shore  he  ranged,  or  all  day  long 
Sat  often  in  the  seaward-gazing  gorge, 
A  shipwreck'd  sailor  waiting  for  a  sail : 
No  sail  from  day  to  day,  but  every  day 
The  sunrise  broken  into  scarlet  shafts 
Among  the  palms  and  ferns  and  precipices  ; 
The  blaze  upon  the  waters  to  the  east  ; 
The  blaze  upon  his  island  overhead  ; 
The  blaze  upon  the  waters  to  the  west ; 
Then  the  great  stars  that  globed  themselves  in  heaven. 
The  hoUower-bellowing  ocean,  and  again 
The  scarlet  shafts  of  sunrise — but  no  sail." 

Then  he  closed  the  book  and  asked  me  if  that 
description  was  in  any  way  untrue  to  nature.  I  told 
him  that  so  far  as  I  knew  from  the  islands  I  had  seen 
on  the  western  borders  of  the  Pacific,  it  gave  a 
strikingly  true  general  description  of  the   vegetation 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       297 

and  the  aspects  of  nature  among  those  islands,  at 
which  he  seemed  pleased.  Of  course,  it  avoids  much 
detail,  but  the  amount  of  detail  it  gives  is  correct,  and 
it  is  just  about  as  much  as  a  rather  superior  sailor 
would  observe  and  remember. 

We  then  bade  him  good-bye,  went  downstairs 
and  had  tea  with  the  ladies,  and  walked  back  to 
Haslemere  station.  I  was  much  pleased  to  have  met 
and  had  friendly  converse  with  the  most  thoughtful, 
refined,  broad-minded,  and  harmonious  of  our  poets 
of  the  nineteenth  century. 

Finding  my  house  at  Godalming  in  an  unsatis- 
factory situation,  with  a  view  almost  confined  to  the 
small  garden,  the  south  sun  shut  off  by  a  house  and 
by  several  oak  trees,  while  exposed  to  north  and  east 
winds,  and  wishing  for  a  generally  milder  climate,  I 
spent  some  weeks  in  exploring  the  country  between 
Godalming  and  Portsmouth,  and  then  westward  to 
Bournemouth  and  Poole.  We  were  directed  by  some 
friends  to  Parkstone  as  a  very  pretty  and  sheltered 
place,  and  here  we  found  a  small  house  to  be  let, 
which  suited  us  tolerably  well,  with  the  option  of 
purchase  at  a  moderate  price.  The  place  attracted 
us  because  we  saw  abundance  of  great  bushes  of  the 
evergreen  purple  veronicas,  which  must  have  been  a 
dozen  or  twenty  years  old,  and  also  large  specimens 
of  eucalyptus  ;  while  we  were  told  that  there  had  been 
no  skating  there  for  twenty  years.  We  accordingly 
took  the  house,  and  purchased  it  in  the  following 
year;  and  by  adding  later  a  new  kitchen  and  bed- 
room, and  enlarging  the  drawing-room,  converted  it 
from  a  cramped,  though  very  pretty  cottage,  into  a 
convenient,  though  still  small  house.  The  garden  on 
the  south  side  was  in  a  hollow  on  the  level  of  the 
basement,  while  on  the  north   it   was  from   ten   to 


298  MY   LIFE 

thirty  feet  higher,  there  being  on  the  east  a  high 
bank,  with  oak  trees  and  pines,  producing  a  very 
pretty  effect.  This  bank,  as  well  as  the  lower  part 
of  the  garden,  was  peat  or  peaty  sand,  and  as  I  knew 
this  was  good  for  rhododendrons  and  heaths,  I  was 
much  pleased  to  be  able  to  grow  these  plants.  I  did 
not  then  know,  however,  that  this  peaty  soil  was  quite 
unsuited  to  a  great  many  other  plants,  and  only  learnt 
this  by  the  long  experience  which  every  gardener  has 
to  go  through. 

It  was  in  the  early  part  of  my  residence  at  Park- 
stone  that  I  received  a  visit  from  the  great  French 
Geographer,  Elisee  Reclus,  who  had,  I  think,  come  to 
England  to  receive  the  gold  medal  of  the  Royal 
Geographical  Society.  He  was  a  rather  small  and 
very  delicate-looking  man,  highly  intellectual,  but  very 
quiet  in  speech  and  manner.  I  really  did  not  know 
that  it  was  he  with  whose  name  I  had  been  familiar 
for  twenty  years  as  the  greatest  of  geographers,  think- 
ing it  must  have  been  his  father  or  elder  brother;  and  I 
was  surprised  when,  on  asking  him,  he  said  that  it  was 
himself.  However,  we  did  not  talk  of  geography  during 
the  afternoon  we  spent  together,  but  of  Anarchism,  of 
which  he  was  one  of  the  most  convinced  advocates,  and 
I  was  very  anxious  to  ascertain  his  exact  views,  which 
I  found  were  really  not  very  different  from  my  own. 
We  agreed  that  almost  all  social  evils — all  poverty, 
misery,  and  crime — were  the  creation  of  governments 
and  of  bad  social  systems  ;  and  that  under  a  law  of 
absolute  justice,  involving  equality  of  opportunity  and 
the  best  training  for  all,  each  local  community  would 
organize  itself  for  mutual  aid,  and  no  great  central 
governments  would  be  needed,  except  as  they  grew 
up  from  the  voluntary  association  of  their  parts  for 
general  and  national  purposes. 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       299 

During  the  first  half  of  my  residence  at  Parkstone 
(1889-96),  I  did  not  write  any  new  books,  having,  as 
I  thought,  said  all  that  I  had  to  say  on  the  great 
subjects  that  chiefly  interested  me  ;  but  I  contributed 
a  number  of  articles  to  reviews,  wrote  many  notices  of 
books,  with  letters  to  Nature  on  various  matters  of 
scientific  interest.  A  short  account  of  the  more 
important  of  these  will  show  that  I  was  not  altogether 
inactive  as  regards  literary  work. 

In  the  spring  of  1890  I  lectured  at  Sheffield  and 
at  Liverpool,  and  have  since  declined  all  invitations 
to  lecture,  partly  from  disinclination  and  considerations 
of  health,  but  also  because  I  believed  that  I  could  do 
more  good  with  my  pen  than  with  my  voice.  During 
the  year  I  prepared  a  new  edition  of  my  "  Malay 
Archipelago,"  bringing  the  parts  dealing  with  natural 
history  up  to  date. 

In  the  same  year  I  contributed  to  the  Fortnightly 
Review  an  article  on  "  Human  Selection,"  which  is,  I 
consider,  though  very  short,  the  most  important  con- 
tribution I  have  made  to  the  science  of  sociology  and 
the  cause  of  human  progress.  The  article  v/as  written 
with  two  objects  in  view.  The  first  and  most  im- 
portant was  to  show  that  the  various  proposals  of 
Grant  Allen,  Mr.  Francis  Galton,  and  some  American 
writers,  to  attempt  the  direct  improvement  of  the 
human  race  by  forms  of  artificial  elimination  and 
selection,  are  both  unscientific  and  unnecessary ;  I 
also  wished  to  show  that  the  great  bugbear  of  the 
opponents  of  social  reform — too  rapid  increase  of 
population — is  entirely  imaginary,  and  that  the  very 
same  agencies  which,  under  improved  social  con- 
ditions, will  bring  about  a  real  and  effective  selection 
of  the  physically,  mentally,  and  morally  best,  will  also 
tend  towards  a  diminution  of  the  rate  of  increase  of 


300  MY   LIFE 

the  population.  The  facts  and  arguments  I  adduce 
are,  I  believe,  conclusive  against  the  two  classes  of 
writers  here  referred  to. 

A  year  later  I  contributed  a  paper  to  the  Boston 
Arena,  dealing  more  especially  with  the  laws  of 
heredity  and  the  influence  of  education  as  determin- 
ing human  progress,  showing  that  such  progress  is  at 
present  very  slow,  and  is  due  almost  entirely  to  one 
mode  of  action  of  natural  selection,  which  still  elimi- 
nates some  of  the  most  unfit.  And  I  pointed  out  that 
a  more  real  and  effective  progress  will  only  be  made 
when  the  social  environment  is  so  greatly  improved 
as  to  give  to  women  a  real  choice  in  marriage,  and 
thus  lead  both  to  the  more  rapid  elimination  of  the 
lower,  and  more  rapid  increase  of  the  higher  types  of 
humanity. 

Other  articles  were,  "  A  Representative  House  of 
Lords,"  in  the  Contemporary  Review  (June),  and  "A 
Suggestion  to  Sabbath-Keepers,"  in  the  Nineteenth 
Centtiry  (October),  both  which  articles  attracted  notice 
in  the  Press.  I  also  wrote  a  paper  criticizing  the  Rev. 
George  Henslow's  view  as  to  the  origin  of  irregular 
flowers,  and  of  spines  and  prickles,  in  Natural  Science 
(September),  the  three  articles  being  included  in  my 
"  Studies."  I  also  reviewed  James  Hutchinson 
Stirling's  "  Darwinianism "  in  Nat2cre  (February  8), 
and  Mr.  Benjamin  Kidd's  "  Social  Evolution  "  in  the 
same  paper  (April  12),  as  well  as  an  anonymous 
volume,  entitled  "Nature's  Method  in  the  Evolution 
of  Life,"  by  a  writer  who  suggests  vague  theories,  less 
intelligible  even  than  those  of  Lucretius,  as  a  substitute 
for  the  luminous  work  of  Darwin. 

In  the  next  year  (1895)  I  wrote  an  important 
article  on  "  The  Method  of  Organic  Evolution " 
{Fortnightly    Review,    February-March),   which   was 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       301 

chiefly  devoted  to  showing  that  the  views  of  Mr. 
Francis  Galton,  and  of  Mr.  Bateson  in  his  book  on 
"  Discontinuous  Variations,"  are  erroneous  ;  and  that 
such  variations,  which  are  usually  termed  "sports," 
and  in  extreme  cases  "  monstrosities,"  do  not  indicate 
the  method  of  evolution. 

Another  article  (in  the  October  issue  of  the  same 
Review)  on  "  The  Expressiveness  of  Speech  "  develops 
a  new  principle  in  the  origin  of  language,  and  brought 
me  a  holograph  (and  partly  unintelligible)  letter  from 
Mr.  Gladstone,  expressing  his  concurrence  with  it 

In  July,  1895,  I  went  with  my  friend  and  father-in- 
law  Mr.  William  Mitten,  for  a  short  botanizing  tour  in 
Switzerland.  We  walked  a  good  deal  of  the  time, 
and  I  thus  had  a  further  opportunity  of  examining 
glacial  phenomena.  We  went  to  Lucerne,  whence 
we  ascended  the  Stanzerhorn  by  the  electric  railway, 
and  found  a  very  interesting  flora  on  the  summit. 
Then  to  the  head  of  the  lake,  and  to  Gceschenen, 
whence  we  walked  to  Andermatt ;  then  over  the 
Furca  pass  to  the  Rhone  glacier,  staying  two  days 
at  the  hotel ;  then  over  the  Grimsel  pass,  where  we 
greatly  enjoyed  both  the  flowers  and  the  wonderful 
indications  of  glacial  action,  especially  on  the  slope 
down  to  and  around  the  Hotel  Grimsel,  where  we 
stayed  the  night.  The  valley  down  to  Meiringen  was 
excessively  interesting,  being  ice-worn  everywhere. 
We  stayed  an  hour  at  the  fine  Handeck  cascade,  and 
then,  with  the  help  of  a  chaise,  into  which  two  ladies 
hospitably  received  us,  got  on  to  Meiringen.  Here 
we  stayed  two  days,  exploring  the  gorge  of  the  Aar 
and  the  wonderful  rock-barrier  of  the  Kirchet,  visited 
the  Reichenbach  falls,  and  had  an  excursion  to  Brunig, 
where,  in  some  hilly  beech  woods,  we  were  greatly 
pleased  to  find  the  beautiful  CephalantJiere  rubra  in 


302  MY   LIFE 

fair  numbers  and  in  full  flower.  We  then  went  on 
to  Lauterbrunnen  and  the  Wengern  Alp,  where  we 
stayed  two  days,  botanizing  chiefly  among  the  woods 
and  slopes  near  the  Trummelthel.  We  were,  however, 
so  dreadfully  persecuted  by  swarms  of  blood-sucking 
flies,  which  filled  the  air  and  covered  us  in  thousands, 
piercing  through  our  thin  clothing,  that  we  returned 
home  some  days  earlier  than  we  had  intended. 

In  1896  I  wrote  an  article  on  "  The  Gorge  of  the 
Aar  and  its  Teachings,"  as  serving  to  enforce  my 
papers  on  the  "  Ice  Age  and  its  Work"  three  years 
before.  But  my  most  important  scientific  essay  this 
year  was  a  paper  I  read  to  the  Linnaean  Society  on 
"The  Problem  of  Utility."  My  purpose  was  to  en- 
force the  view  that  all  specific  and  generic  characters 
must  be  (or  once  have  been)  useful  to  their  possessor, 
or,  owing  to  the  complex  laws  of  growth,  be  correlated 
with  useful  characters.  It  was  necessary  to  discuss 
this  point,  because  Mr.  Romanes  had  unreservedly 
denied  it,  and  Professor  Mivart,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Henslow, 
Mr.  Bateson,  and  others,  had  taken  the  same  view.  I 
endeavoured  to  show  that  the  problem  is  a  funda- 
mental one,  that  utility  is  the  basic  principle  of 
natural  selection,  and  that  without  natural  selection 
it  has  not  been  shown  how  specific  characters  can 
arise.  By  specific  is,  of  course,  meant  characters 
which,  either  separately  or  in  combination,  distinguish 
each  species  from  all  others,  and  which  are  found  in 
all,  or  in  the  great  bulk,  of  the  individuals  composing 
the  species  ;  and  I  have  shown  that  it  is  for  want  of 
clear  thinking  and  accurate  reasoning  on  the  entire 
process  of  species  formation  that  the  idea  of  useless 
specific  characters  has  arisen  (see  "  Studies,"  vol.  i.). 

During  this  summer  I  was  invited  by  Dr.  H.  S. 
Lunn  to  go  with  him  and  his  party  to  Davos  for  a 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       303 

week,  early  in  September,  and  to  give  them  a  lecture 
on  Scientific  Progress  in  the  Nineteenth  Century. 
As  I  had  never  been  in  this  part  of  Switzerland,  I 
accepted  the  invitation,  and  had  a  very  pleasant  time. 
My  companion  on  the  first  part  of  the  journey  was 
Mr.  Le  Gallienne,  and  at  Basle  we  were  joined  by 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Lunn  and  others.  At  Davos  we  were 
a  large  party  in  one  of  the  best  hotels,  and  our  special 
party,  who  sat  together  at  meals,  included  the  Rev. 
Hugh  Price  Hughes  and  the  Rev.  H.  R.  Haweis, 
both  talented  and  witty  men,  whose  presence  was 
enough  to  render  almost  any  party  a  brilliant  success. 
Mr.  Price  Hughes,  was,  I  think,  without  exception, 
the  most  witty  man  and  one  of  the  best  companions 
I  ever  met.  At  breakfast  and  dinner  he  was  espe- 
cially amusing  and  brilliant,  ranging  from  pure 
chaff  with  his  old  friend  Dr.  Lunn  to  genial  wit  and 
admirably  narrated  anecdotes.  He  often  literally 
kept  the  table  in  a  roar  of  laughter.  But  this  was 
only  one  side  of  his  character.  He  was  a  Christian 
and  a  humanitarian  in  the  best  sense  of  the  words.  I 
saw  a  good  deal  of  him  in  private,  and  we  often 
walked  out  together,  at  which  times  we  discussed  the 
more  serious  social  problems  of  the  day ;  and  he 
gave  me  details  of  his  rescue  work  in  London  which 
were  in  the  highest  degree  instructive,  showing  that 
even  those  who  are  considered  to  be  the  most  de- 
graded and  irreclaimable  can  be  reached  through 
their  affections.  Their  degradation  has  usually  been 
brought  about  by  society,  and  has  been  intensified 
into  hate  and  despair  by  the  utterly  unsympa- 
thetic and  cruel  treatment  of  our  workhouses  and 
prisons. 

Dr.  Lunn  arranged  for  his  party  some  amusement 
for  several  evenings  in  each  week,  either  a  concert, 


304  MY   LIFE 

lecture,  or  conversazione.  Mr.  Le  Gallienne  gave  a 
very  interesting  lecture  on  "English  Minor  Poets," 
reading  selections  from  their  works  to  illustrate  their 
style. 

My  own  lecture  was  mainly  devoted  to  a  sketch 
of  the  chief  great  advances  of  science  during  the 
century,  but  I  added  to  it  a  kind  of  set-off  in  dis- 
coveries which  had  been  rejected  and  errors  which 
had  been  upheld,  referring  to  phrenology  as  one  of 
the  first  class,  and  vaccination  as  one  of  the  second. 
There  were,  of  course,  in  such  a  place  as  Davos,  many 
doctors  among  the  audience,  and  they  signified  their 
disapproval  in  the  usual  way  ;  but  I  assured  them 
that  some  of  them  would  certainly  live  to  see  the 
time  when  the  whole  medical  profession  would 
acknowledge  vaccination  to  be  a  great  delusion. 

Although  Davos  has  no  grand  alpine  scenery 
immediately  around  it,  there  are  many  delightful 
walks  through  woods  full  of  flowers  and  ferns,  alpine 
meadows  with  gentians  and  primulas,  and  stony 
passes  from  which  the  snow  had  just  retreated.  On 
the  Strela  pass,  about  eight  thousand  feet,  I  found 
some  charming  little  alpines  I  had  not  seen  before, 
among  them  the  very  dwarf  Viola  alpina,  growing 
among  stones,  the  leaves  hardly  visible  and  the  com- 
paratively large  flat  flowers  of  a  very  deep  blue-purple, 
with  a  large  orange-yellow  eye. 

On  leaving  Davos,  I  made  my  way  across  to 
Adelboden,  where  my  wife  and  daughter,  with  some 
friends,  were  staying.  This  is  surrounded  with  fine 
alpine  peaks  and  snow-fields,  and  though  the  weather 
was  unsettled  we  spent  a  pleasant  week  here — 
probably  the  last  visit  I  shall  make  to  ever-delightful 
Switzerland — the  sanatorium  and  alpine  garden  of 
overworked  Encrlishmen. 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       305 

From  this  time  onwards  I  did  not  write  many 
articles  or  reviews,  the  more  important  being  "  The 
Problem  of  Instinct,"  in  1897,  in  which  I  gave  an 
attempted  solution  of  bird  migration,  though  the 
article  was  really  a  review  of  Professor  Lloyd- 
Morgan's  "  Habit  and  Instinct  ; "  an  article  on  the 
question  whether  "White  Men  can  work  in  the 
Tropics,"  which  most  English  writers  declare  to  be 
impossible  without  thinking  it  necessary  to  adduce 
evidence,  but  which,  I  affirm,  is  proved  by  experience 
to  be  quite  easy.  Both  these  are  reprinted  in  my 
"  Studies,"  as  is  also  a  short  essay  on  "  The  Causes 
of  War  and  the  Remedies,"  written  for  V Humanity 
Noiivelle.  I  also  wrote  letters  to  the  Daily  Chronicle 
on  America,  Cuba,  and  the  Philippines ;  and  a  pro- 
test against  the  Transvaal  War  in  the  Manchester 
Guardian. 

In  the  year  1900  I  wrote  an  article  for  the  New 
York  Journal  on  "  Social  Evolution  in  the  Twentieth 
Century — An  Anticipation,"  for  which  I  received  a 
very  complimentary  letter  from  the  editor.  During 
the  next  two  years  I  was  engaged  in  preparing  new 
editions  of  my  books  on  "  Darwinism  "  and  "  Island 
Life,"  and  I  also  wrote  several  letters  on  political  and 
social  subjects,  such  as  an  "Appreciation  of  the  Past 
Century  "  (in  1901,  in  the  Morning  Leader),  and  (in 
1903)  an  article  on  "Anticipations  and  Hopes  for  the 
Immediate  Future,"  which  was  written  for  a  German 
paper  (the  Berliner  Local  Anzeiger),  but  which  was 
too  plain-spoken  for  the  editor  to  publish,  and  which 
I  accordingly  sent  to  the  Clarion. 

In  1904  I  wrote  a  short  letter  on  the  "  Inefficiency 
of  Strikes  "  for  the  Labour  Annual,  and  a  rather  long 
one  to  the  Clarion,  suggesting  a  policy  for  socialists 
in  opposition  to  continued   military  expenditure   as 

X 


3o6  MY   LIFE 

advocated  by  Robert  Blatchford  ;  but  this  was,  I  fear, 
too  much  advanced  even  for  the  readers  of  this  very- 
advanced  paper,  since  no  one  came  forward  in  my 
support.  I  feel  sure,  however,  that  there  are  many 
who,  when  it  is  clearly  put  before  them,  will  approve 
of  the  policy  I  have  sketched  out,  since  it  is  merely 
one  of  justice  and  consideration  for  nations  as  well  as 
for  individuals — of  adopting  the  same  rules  of  right 
and  wrong  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other. 

About  the  year  1899  our  house  at  Parkstone 
became  no  longer  suitable  owing  to  the  fact  that 
building  had  been  going  on  all  around  us  and  what 
had  been  open  country  when  we  came  there  had 
become  streets  of  villas,  and  in  every  direction  we 
had  to  walk  a  mile  or  more  to  get  into  any  open 
country.  I  therefore  began  to  search  about  various 
parts  of  the  southern  counties  for  a  suitable  house, 
and  after  almost  giving  up  the  attempt  in  despair,  we 
accidentally  found  a  spot  within  four  miles  of  our 
Parkstone  home  and  about  half  a  mile  from  a  station, 
with  such  a  charming  distant  view  and  pleasant 
surroundings  that  we  determined,  if  we  could  get  two 
or  three  acres  at  a  moderate  price,  to  build  a  small 
house  upon  it. 

After  a  rather  long  negotiation  I  obtained  three 
acres  of  land,  partly  wood,  at  the  end  of  the  year 
1901  ;  sold  my  cottage  at  Godalming  at  a  fair  price, 
began  at  once  making  a  new  garden  and  shrubbery, 
decided  on  plans,  and  began  building  early  in  the 
new  year.  The  main  charm  of  the  site  was  a  small 
neglected  orchard  with  old  much-gnarled  apple,  pear, 
and  plum  trees,  in  a  little  grassy  hollow  sloping  to 
the  south-east,  with  a  view  over  moors  and  fields 
towards  Poole  harbour,  beyond  which  were  the 
Purbeck  hills  to  the  right,  and  a  glimpse  of  the  open 


5  ^ 


o  -g 

Q  ^ 

J  — 
O 


FRIENDS  AND  OCCUPATIONS       307 

sea  to  the  left.  In  the  foreground  were  clumps  of 
gorse  and  broom,  with  some  old  picturesque  trees, 
while  the  orchard  was  sheltered  on  both  sides  by 
patches  of  woodland.  The  house  was  nearly  finished 
in  about  a  year,  and  we  got  into  it  at  Christmas, 
1902,  when  we  decided  to  call  it  Old  Orchard. 

Being  so  near  to  our  former  house,  I  was  able  to 
bring  all  our  choicer  plants  to  the  new  ground,  and 
there  was,  fortunately,  a  sale  of  the  whole  stock  of  a 
small  nursery  near  Poole  in  the  winter,  at  which  I 
bought  about  a  thousand  shrubs  and  trees  at  very  low 
prices,  which  enabled  us  at  once  to  plant  some 
shrubberies  and  flower  borders,  and  thus  to  secure 
something  like  a  well-stocked  garden  by  the  time  we 
got  into  the  house.  Since  that  time  it  has  been  an 
ever-increasing  pleasure,  and  I  have  been  able  to 
satisfy  my  craving  for  enjoying  new  forms  of  plant- 
life  every  year,  partly  by  raising  numbers  of  seeds  of 
hardy  and  greenhouse  plants,  always  trying  some 
of  the  latter  in  sheltered  places  out-of-doors,  and 
partly  by  exchanges  or  by  gifts  from  friends,  so  that 
every  year  I  have  the  great  pleasure  of  watching 
the  opening  of  some  of  nature's  gems  which  were 
altogether  new  to  me,  or  of  others  which  increase 
year  by  year  in  beauty.  In  one  end  of  my  greenhouse 
I  have  a  large  warmed  tank  in  which  I  grow  blue, 
pink,  and  yellow  water-lilies,  which  flower  the  greater 
part  of  the  year,  as  well  as  a  few  other  beautiful  or 
curious  aquatic  plants,  while  the  back  wall  of  the 
house  is  covered  with  choice  climbers. 

In  this  hasty  sketch  of  my  occupations  and  literary 
work  during  the  last  nine  years,  I  have  purposely 
omitted  the  more  important  portion  of  the  latter, 
because    the    circumstances    that    led    me     on    to 


308  MY   LIFE 

undertake  three  separate  works,  involving  a  consider- 
able amount  of  labour,  were  very  curious,  and  to  me 
very  suggestive,  and  I  will  now  give  a  connected 
account  of  them. 

When  in  1896  I  was  invited  by  Dr.  Lunn  to  give 
a  lecture  to  his  friends  at  Davos,  I  firmly  believed 
that  my  scientific  and  literary  work  was  concluded. 
I  had  been  for  some  years  in  weak  health,  and  had 
no  expectation  of  living  much  longer.  Shortly  after 
returning  from  America  I  had  a  very  severe  attack 
of  asthma  in  1890,  and  a  year  or  two  after  it  recurred 
and  became  chronic,  together  with  violent  palpitations 
on  the  least  sudden  exertion,  and  frequent  colds 
almost  invariably  followed  by  bronchitis.  Any  attempt 
at  continuous  work  was  therefore  very  far  from  my 
thoughts,  though  at  times  I  was  able  to  do  a  fair 
amount  of  writing. 

But  the  very  next  year  I  obtained  relief  (and  up 
to  the  present  time  an  almost  complete  cure)  in  an 
altogether  accidental  way,  if  there  are  any  "  accidents  " 
in  our  lives.  Mr.  A.  Bruce-Joy,  the  well-known 
sculptor  (a  perfect  stranger  to  me),  had  called  on  me 
to  complete  the  modelling  of  a  medallion  which  he 
had  begun  from  photographs,  and  I  apologized  for 
not  looking  well,  as  I  was  then  suffering  from  one 
of  my  frequent  spells  of  asthma,  which  often  pre- 
vented me  from  getting  any  sleep  at  night.  He 
thereupon  told  me  that  if  I  would  follow  his  directions 
I  could  soon  cure  myself.  Of  course,  I  was  altogether 
incredulous  ;  but  when  he  told  me  that  he  had  him- 
self been  cured  of  a  complication  of  allied  diseases — 
gout,  rheumatism,  and  bronchitis — of  many  years' 
standing,  which  no  English  doctors  were  able  even  to 
alleviate,  by  an  American  physician,  Dr.  Salisbury  ; 
that  it  was  effected  solely  by  a  change  of  diet  not 


•    FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       309 

founded  on  theory  or  empirical  treatment,  but  the 
result  of  thirty  years'  experiment  on  the  effects  of 
various  articles  of  food  upon  men  and  animals,  by 
the  only  scientific  method  of  studying  each  food 
separately  and  exclusively,  I  determined  to  try  it. 
The  result  was,  that  in  a  week  I  felt  much  better,  in 
a  month  I  felt  quite  well,  and  during  the  ten  years 
that  have  elapsed  no  attack  of  asthma  or  of  severe 
palpitation  has  recurred,  and  I  have  been  able  to  do 
my  literary  work  as  well  as  before  I  became  subject 
to  the  malady. 

I  may  say  that  I  have  long  been,  and  am  still,  in 
prmciple,  a  vegetarian,  and  believe  that,  for  many 
reasons,  it  will  certainly  be  the  diet  of  the  future. 
But  for  want  of  adequate  knowledge,  and  even  more 
from  the  deficiencies  of  ordinary  vegetable  cookery,  it 
often  produces  bad  effects.  Dr.  Salisbury  proved  by 
experiment  that  it  was  the  consumption  of  too  much 
starch  foods  that  produces  the  set  of  diseases  which 
he  especially  cures ;  and  that  when  these  diseases 
have  become  chronic,  the  only  cure  is  the  almost 
complete  abstention  from  starchy  substances,  especially 
potatoes,  bread,  and  most  watery  vegetables,  and,  in 
place  of  them,  to  substitute  the  most  easily  digestible 
well-cooked  meat,  with  fruits  and  nuts  in  moderation, 
and  eggs,  milk,  etc.,  whenever  they  can  be  digested. 
Great  sufferers  find  immediate  relief  from  an  exclusive 
diet  of  the  lean  of  beef.  I  myself  live  upon  well- 
cooked  beef  with  a  fair  proportion  of  fat  (which  I  can 
digest  easily),  a  very  small  proportion  of  bread  or 
vegetables,  fruit,  eggs,  and  light  milk  puddings.  The 
curious  thing  is  that  most  English  doctors  declare 
that  a  meat  diet  is  to  be  avoided  in  all  these  diseases, 
and  many  order  complete  abstinence  from  meat,  but, 
so  far  as  I  can  learn,  on  no  really  scientific  grounds. 


310  MY   LIFE 

Dr.  Salisbury,  however,  has  experimentally  proved 
that  this  class  of  ailments  is  due  to  malnutrition,  and 
that  this  malnutrition  is  most  frequently  caused  by 
the  consumption  of  too  much  starch  food  at  all  meals, 
which  overloads  the  stomach  and  prevents  proper 
digestion  and  assimilation.  My  case  and  that  of  Mr. 
Bruce-Joy  certainly  show  that  Dr.  Salisbury  has 
found,  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  medicine,  a 
(^^,yg — not  merely  an  alleviation — for  these  painful  and 
distressing  maladies.  This  personal  detail  as  to  my 
health  is,  I  think,  of  general  interest  in  view  of  the 
large  number  of  sufferers  who  are  pronounced  in- 
curable by  English  doctors,  and  it  was  here  an 
essential  preliminary  to  the  facts  I  have  now  to 
relate,  which  would  probably  not  have  occurred  as 
they  did  had  my  health  not  been  so  strikingly 
renovated. 

The  lecture  which  I  gave  at  Davos  on  the  science 
of  the  nineteenth  century  (a  subject  suggested  by  Dr. 
Lunn)  led  me  to  think  that  an  instructive  and  popular 
book  might  be  made  of  the  subject,  as  I  found  there 
were  so  many  interesting  points  I  could  not  treat 
adequately  or  even  refer  to  in  a  lecture.  I  therefore 
devoted  most  of  my  spare  time  during  the  next  year 
to  getting  together  materials  and  writing  the  volume, 
which  I  finished  in  the  spring  of  1898,  and  it  was 
published  in  June  under  the  title  of  "  The  Wonderful 
Century."  At  the  request  of  my  publishers  I  pre- 
pared from  it  a  School  Reader,  with  a  considerable 
number  of  illustrations,  which  was  published  in  1901. 
This  suggested  the  idea  of  a  much  enlarged  and 
illustrated  edition  of  the  original  work,  which  was,  as 
regards  many  of  the  more  important  sciences  and  arts, 
a  mere  outline  sketch.  Almost  all  the  year  1902  and 
part  of  1903  was  occupied  in  getting  together  materials 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS        311 

for  this  new  work,  as  it  really  was,  and  it  was  not 
published  till  the  autumn  of  the  latter  year. 

But  while  I  was  writing  three  new  chapters  on  the 
wonderful  astronomical  progress  of  the  latter  half  of 
the  century,  the  startling  fact  was  impressed  upon  me 
that  we  were  situated  very  nearly  at  the  centre  of  the 
entire  stellar  universe.  This  fact,  though  it  had  been 
noted  by  many  of  the  greatest  astronomical  writers, 
together  with  many  others  that  led  to  the  conclusion 
that  our  universe  was  finite,  and  that  we  could  almost, 
if  not  quite,  see  to  its  very  limits,  were  seldom  com- 
mented on  as  more  than  isolated  phenomena — 
curiosities,  as  it  were,  of  star  distribution — but  of  no 
special  significance.  To  me,  however,  it  seemed  that 
they  probably  had  a  meaning ;  and  when  I  further 
came  to  examine  the  numerous  facts  which  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  no  other  planet  in  the  solar  system 
than  our  earth  was  habitable,  there  flashed  upon  me 
the  idea  that  it  was  only  near  the  centre  of  this  vast 
material  universe  that  conditions  prevailed  rendering 
the  development  of  life,  culminating  in  man,  possible. 
I  did  not,  however,  dwell  upon  this  idea,  but  merely 
suggested  it  in  a  single  paragraph  on  pp.  329-330  of 
my  work,  and  I  might  probably  never  have  pursued 
the  subject  further  but  for  another  circumstance  which 
kept  my  attention  fixed  upon  it. 

While  I  was  still  hard  at  work  upon  this  book,  the 
London  agent  of  the  New  York  Independent  wrote  to 
ask  me  to  write  them  an  article  on  any  scientific 
subject  I  chose.  I  at  first  declined,  having  no  subject 
which  I  thought  suitable,  and  not  wishing  to  interrupt 
my  work.  But  when  he  urged  me  again,  and  told  me 
to  name  my  own  fee,  the  idea  struck  me  that  these 
astronomical  facts,  with  the  conclusion  to  which  they 
seemed  to  me  to  point,  might  form  a  very  interesting. 


312  MY   LIFE 

and  even  novel  and  attractive  article.  As  the  subject 
was  fresh  in  my  mind,  and  I  had  the  authorities  at 
hand,  it  did  not  take  me  very  long  to  sketch  out  and 
write  a  paper  of  the  required  length,  which  appeared 
simultaneously  in  the  Independent  and  in  the  Fort- 
nightly Review,  and,  to  my  great  surprise,  created 
quite  a  sensation  ;  and,  still  more  to  my  surprise,  a 
considerable  amount  of  antagonism  and  rather  con- 
temptuous criticism  by  astronomers  and  physicists,  to 
which  I  replied  in  a  subsequent  article. 

But  as  soon  as  my  agent,  Mr.  Curtis  Brown,  read 
the  MSS.  he  suggested  that  I  should  write  a  volume 
on  the  subject,  which  he  was  sure  would  be  very 
attractive  and  popular,  and  for  which  he  undertook  to 
make  arrangements  both  in  England  and  America, 
and  secure  me  liberal  terms.  After  a  little  con- 
sideration I  thought  I  could  do  so,  and  terms  were 
arranged  for  the  book  before  the  article  itself  was 
published.  This  enabled  me  to  get  together  all  the 
necessary  materials  and  to  begin  work  at  once,  and 
after  six  months  of  the  stiffest  reading  and  study 
I  ever  undertook,  the  book,  "  Man's  Place  in  the 
Universe,"  was  completed  in  September,  and  pub- 
lished in  November  of  the  same  year.  In  November 
of  1904  a  cheaper  edition  was  published,  with  an 
additional  chapter  in  an  Appendix.  This  chapter 
contained  an  entirely  new  argument,  founded  on  the 
theory  of  organic  evolution,  which  I  had  not  time  to 
introduce  into  the  first  edition.  This  argument  is 
itself  so  powerful  that,  when  compounded  with  the 
arguments  founded  on  astronomical,  physical,  and 
physiological  phenomena,  it  renders  the  improbability 
of  there  having  been  two  independent  developments 
of  organic  life,  each  culminating  in  man,  so  great  as 
to  be  absolutely  inconceivable. 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       313 

The  success  of  this  volume,  and  the  entirely  new 
circle  of  readers  it  brought  me,  caused  my  publishers 
to  urge  me  to  write  my  autobiography,  which  I  should 
otherwise  have  not  written  at  all,  or  only  on  a  very 
much  smaller  scale  for  the  information  of  my  family 
as  to  my  early  life. 

It  seems  to  me  a  very  suggestive  fact  that  my 
literary  work  during  the  last  ten  years  should  have 
been  so  completely  determined  by  two  circumstances 
which  must  be  considered,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the 
term,  and  in  relation  to  my  own  volition,  matters  of 
chance.  If  Dr.  Lunn  had  not  invited  me  to  Davos, 
and  if  he  had  suggested  "  Darwinism  "  or  any  other 
of  my  special  subjects  instead  of  the  "  Science  of  the 
Nineteenth  Century,"  I  should  not  have  written  my 
"  Wonderful  Century  ; "  I  should  not  have  had  my 
attention  so  specially  directed  to  great  astronomical 
problems ;  I  should  not,  when  asked  for  an  article, 
have  chosen  the  subject  of  our  sun's  central  position  ; 
and  I  should  certainly  never  have  undertaken  such  a 
piece  of  work  as  my  book  on  "Man's  Place  in  the 
Universe,"  or  the  present  autobiography.  And 
further,  without  the  accident  of  a  perfect  stranger 
calling  upon  me  for  reasons  of  his  own,  and  that 
stranger  happening  to  be  a  man  who  had  been  so 
marvellously  cured  by  Dr.  Salisbury  as  to  induce  me 
to  adopt  the  same  treatment,  with  similar  results,  I 
should  never  have  had  the  energy  required  to  under- 
take the  two  later  and  more  important  works.  Of 
course,  it  may  be  that  these  are  only  examples  of 
those  "  happy  chances  "  which  are  not  uncommon  in 
men's  lives  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  true 
that,  "there's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,  rough- 
hew  them  as  we  will ;  "  and  those  who  have  reason  to 


314  MY   LIFE 

know  that  spiritual  beings  can  and  do  influence  our 
thoughts  and  actions,  will  see  in  such  directive  incidents 
as  these  examples  of  such  influence. 

This  concludes  the  narrative  of  "  My  Life "  up  to 
the  date  of  its  publication  in  the  autumn  of  1905.  It 
will  therefore  be  well  to  give  here  a  short  statement 
of  what  has  occurred  to  me  in  the  three  succeeding 
years. 

Ever  since  my  friend  Dr.  R.  Spruce  died,  in 
December,  1893,  I  had  intended  (with  his  executor's 
cordial  assent)  to  edit  so  much  of  his  journals  and 
correspondence  as  related  to  his  fourteen  years  of 
travel  and  residence  in  South  America.  But  as  time 
passed  on  each  year  found  me  so  fully  occupied — as 
here  narrated — that  I  felt  quite  unable  to  undertake 
so  arduous  a  piece  of  work.  But  when  the  corrected 
proofs  of  "  My  Life  "  were  out  of  my  hands,  and  I  had 
no  other  large  work  in  immediate  prospect,  I  deter- 
mined to  begin  it,  especially  as  Spruce's  old  friends, 
Sir  Clements  Markham  and  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  both 
thought  it  ought  to  be  done,  and  that  I  was  the  only 
person  who  could  do  it. 

I  therefore  determined  to  begin  it,  and  having 
found  that  Macmillan  and  Co.  were  willing  to  publish 
it,  I  obtained  all  the  material — several  boxes  full  of 
journals,  note-books,  letters,  plant  catalogues  and 
descriptions,  maps,  and  numerous  partially  finished 
sketches  and  drawings — from  his  executor,  Mr. 
Matthew  B.  Slater,  of  Malton,  Yorkshire,  and  also 
made  arrangements  to  have  all  Spruce's  letters  to  Sir 
William  Hooker  and  George  Bentham,  Esq.,  which 
were  preserved  at  the  Kew  Herbarium,  carefully 
copied. 

A  large  part  of  the  journals  and  note-books 
were  written  in  very  minute  script,  often  full  of  Latin 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS       315 

names  and  abbreviations — a  kind  of  hieroglyphics,  as 
he  himself  termed  them,  which  could  hardly  be  fully 
utilized  by  any  one  but  the  writer  of  them.  The 
whole  would,  I  estimate,  have  given  material  enough 
to  fill  six  or  eight  large  volumes,  and  had  he  himself 
been  able  to  devote  some  years  of  good  health  to  the 
task,  I  have  little  doubt  he  would  have  produced  a 
work  which  would  have  ranked  among  the  classical 
records  of  travel  and  exploration. 

All  this  I  had  to  sort  out,  piece  together,  and 
condense  into  a  connected  narrative,  occupying  two 
volumes  of  moderate  bulk  ;  and  to  arrange  for  the 
requisite  maps,  and  for  such  illustrations  as  could  be 
obtained  to  render  the  work  attractive.  This  has 
been,  though  often  tedious,  on  the  whole  a  labour  of 
love  for  over  two  years.  It  is  now  going  through 
the  press,  and  I  hope  will  be  published  very  soon 
after  the  present  volume. 

Soon  after  I  had  begun  this  laborious  piece  of 
work,  I  was  left  sole  executor  to  my  dear  friend 
(and  father-in-law)  Mr.  William  Mitten,  who  died  in 
July,  1906,  at  the  ripe  age  of  8y.  This  involved  me 
in  the  usual  legal  formalities  and  added  to  my  already 
large  correspondence,  thus,  to  some  extent,  impeding 
my  literary  work.  But  I  still  continued  to  write 
articles  on  subjects  that  specially  interested  me. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  same  year  I  wrote  an  article 
on  "  A  New  House  of  Lords,"  showing  how  the  upper 
chamber  could  become  elective,  and  thus  fulfil  its  true 
functions  of  a  consultative  and  regulative  body,  while 
being  generally  in  harmony  with  the  best  thought 
and  opinion  of  the  time.  A  second  article,  entitled 
**  Personal  Suffrage,"  laid  down  the  principles  on 
which  a  truly  democratic  but  simple  elective  system 


3i6  MY   LIFE 

might  be  adopted  for  the  House  of  Commons.  These 
appeared  in  the  Fortnightly  Review  in  the  early 
months  of  1907. 

A  little  later  I  was  asked  to  write  one  of  the 
introductory  chapters  for  "  Harmsworth's  History 
of  the  World,"  which  I  did  under  the  title,  "  How 
Life  became  Possible  on  the  Earth."  In  this  chapter 
I  gave  a  popular  statement  of  those  numerous  and 
complex  conditions  and  adaptations,  which  I  had 
shown,  in  my  work  on  "  Man's  Place  in  the  Universe," 
to  be  the  essential  preliminary  to  the  slow  develop- 
ment of  organic  life,  and  which  do  not  exist  in  their 
exact  combination  on  any  other  planet. 

A  little  earlier  I  had  written  (at  request)  a 
rather  lengthy  article  on  "  Evolution  and  Character," 
intended  to  form  part  of  a  series  of  booklets  on 
various  aspects  and  applications  of  the  doctrine  of 
evolution.  This  series  did  not  appear,  and  my 
article  was  published  in  the  Fortnightly  Review  of 
January,  1908.  The  subject  was  treated  in  a  some- 
what novel  way,  and  excited  much  discussion  and 
criticism,  as  well  as  high  appreciation  from  several 
unknown  correspondents. 

Early  in  1907  I  obtained  a  copy  of  Professor 
Percival  Lowell's  new  and  popular  work,  "  Mars  and 
its  Canals,"  in  which,  even  more  confidently  than 
before,  he  put  forth  his  views  as  to  the  planet  being 
inhabited  by  beings  of  at  least  the  same  grade  of 
intelligence  as  ourselves,  and  that  the  strange  "  lines," 
forming  a  kind  of  network  over  its  surface,  really 
indicated  irrigation  canals,  artificially  constructed  to 
render  its  deserts  habitable.  This  whole  idea  seemed 
to  me  so  entirely  opposed  to  the  teachings  of  physical 
and  biological  science,  though  very  attractive  to  the 
public  who  had  no  means  of  weighing  the  evidence 


FRIENDS   AND   OCCUPATIONS        317 

against  it,  and  were  influenced  by  the  great  reputation 
of  the  author  and  his  extremely  positive  assertions, 
that  I  determined  to  write  a  reply,  which  occupied 
me  for  several  months,  and  involved  a  large  amount 
of  labour  in  order  to  avoid  errors  or  misconceptions. 
It  was  published  by  Macmillan  and  Co.,  in  a  small 
volume  at  the  end  of  1907,  under  the  title,  "  Is  Mars 
Habitable  ? "  This  question  is  answered  by  a  decided 
negative,  while  much  evidence  is  adduced  showing 
that  the  strange  markings,  misnamed  "Canals,"  can 
be  sufficiently  explained  by  an  appeal  to  purely 
physical  causes. 

Early  in  the  present  year  the  discussion  in 
Parliament  of  the  Unemployed  Workmen  Bill 
seemed  to  show  such  a  general  misconception  of 
what  was  required,  as  well  as  complete  ignorance 
of  experiments  and  methods  which  had  been  fully 
explained  many  years  before,  that  I  felt  impelled 
to  write  an  article  pointing  out  the  fundamental 
principles  on  which  any  effective  remedial  action 
must  be  based,  and  developing  to  some  extent  the 
detailed  measures  required  to  carry  them  out  success- 
fully. My  proposals  were  founded  on  those  of  Mr. 
Herbert  V.  Mills,  in  his  remarkable  work,  "  Poverty 
and  the  State,"  published  about  twenty  years  ago, 
but  which  was  overshadowed  by  General  Booth's 
ineffective  scheme,  for  which  large  sums  of  money 
were  subscribed,  while  the  far  better  plan  of  Mr. 
Mills  was  neglected.  My  article  appeared  in  the 
June  and  July  issues  of  the  new  Socialist  Review, 
where  I  thought  it  might  appeal  most  directly  to 
those  I  wished  especially  to  influence — the  Labour 
party  in  the  House  of  Commons. 

This,   with   a   few   short   articles   and   letters    in 


3i8  MY   LIFE 

English  or  American  periodicals — discussing,  among 
other  subjects,  the  best  mode  of  nationalizing  rail- 
ways, both  in  America  and  England — completes  the 
record  of  my  literary  work  up  to  the  publication  of 
the  present  volume. 

Although  I  have  now  completed  the  narrative  of 
my  literary  and  home  life,  there  are  a  number  of 
special  subjects,  which,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  I 
have  either  wholly  omitted,  or  only  just  mentioned, 
but  which  have  either  formed  important  episodes  in 
my  life,  or  have  brought  me  into  communication  or 
friendly  intercourse  with  a  number  of  interesting 
people,  and  which  therefore  require  to  be  narrated 
consecutively  in  separate  chapters.  These  will  now 
follow,  and  will,  I  think,  be  not  the  least  interesting 
or  instructive  portions  of  my  work. 


CHAPTER   XX 

LAND   NATIONALIZATION   TO   SOCIALISM 

Soon  after  I  returned  from  the  Amazon  (about  1853), 
I  read  Herbert  Spencer's  "  Social  Statics,"  a  work  for 
which  I  had  a  great  admiration,  and  which  seemed  to 
me  so  important  in  relation  to  political  and  social 
reform,  that  I  thought  of  inviting  a  few  friends  to 
read  and  discuss  it  at  weekly  meetings.  This  fell 
through  for  want  of  support,  but  the  whole  work,  and 
more  especially  the  chapter  on  "The  Right  to  the 
Use  of  the  Earth,"  made  a  permanent  impression 
on  me,  and  ultimately  led  to  my  becoming,  almost 
against  my  will,  President  of  the  Land  Nationalization 
Society,  which  has  now  been  over  a  quarter  of  a 
century  in  existence.  In  connection  with  this  move- 
ment, I  have  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  considerable 
number  of  persons  of  more  or  less  eminence. 

The  publication  of  my  "Malay  Archipelago"  in 
1869,  procured  me  the  acquaintance  of  John  Stuart 
Mill,  who  on  reading  the  concluding  pages,  in  which  I 
condemn  our  "  civilization  "  as  but  a  form  of  "  bar- 
barism," and  refer,  among  other  examples,  to  our 
permitting  private  property  in  land,  wrote  to  me 
from  Avignon  on  May  19,  1870,  enclosing  the  pro- 
gramme of  his  proposed  Land  Tenure  Reform  Asso- 
ciation, and  asking  me  to  become  a  member  of  the 
General   Committee.     Its   object  was   to   claim    the 


320  MY   LIFE 

future  "  unearned  increment "  of  land  values  for 
the  State,  to  which  purpose  it  was  to  be  strictly 
limited.  I  accepted  the  offer,  but  proposed  a  new 
clause,  giving  the  State  power  of  resuming  possession 
of  any  land  on  payment  of  its  net  value  at  the  time, 
because,  as  I  pointed  out,  the  greatest  evil  was  the 
monopoly  of  land,  not  the  money  lost  by  the  com- 
munity. This  he  himself  supported,  but  suggested 
giving  not  the  current  value  only,  but  something 
additional  as  compensation  ;  and  I  think  the  clause 
was  drawn  on  these  lines. 

The  last  letter  I  had  from  Mill  was  in  April,  1871, 
when  a  great  public  meeting  of  the  Association  was 
to  be  held  on  May  3,  as  to  which  he  said,  "  It  would 
be  very  useful  to  the  Association,  and  a  great  pleasure 
to  myself,  if  you  would  consent  to  be  one  of  the 
speakers  at  the  meeting.  There  is  the  more  reason 
why  you  should  do  so,  as  you  are  the  author  of  one 
very  valuable  article  of  the  programme.  Were  you 
to  explain  and  defend  that  article,  it  would  be  a 
service  which  no  one  is  so  well  qualified  to  render  as 
yourself."  I  had  then  recently  visited  the  stone 
circles  and  bridges  of  Dartmoor,  and  also  Stonehenge, 
and  urged  the  importance  of  preserving  them.  At 
that  time  there  would  probably  have  been  no  question 
of  paying  more  than  the  actual  selling  value  of  the 
land,  and  we  should  have  been  spared  the  disgrace  of 
having  our  grandest  ancient  monument,  after  centuries 
of  neglect  and  deterioration,  claimed  to  be  private 
property,  and  having  an  exorbitant  price  demanded 
for  it.  But  Mill's  death  soon  afterwards  put  an  end 
to  the  Association,  and  we  had  to  wait  many  years  for 
the  present  very  imperfect  legislation  on  the  subject. 

The  question  of  land  nationaUzation  continued  at 


LAND  NATIONALIZATION  321 

intervals  to  occupy  my  mind,  but  having  become 
strongly  impressed  by  the  teachings  of  Spencer,  Mill, 
and  other  writers  as  to  the  necessity  for  restricting 
rather  than  extending  State  agency,  and  by  their 
constant  reference  to  the  inevitable  jobbery  and 
favouritism  that  would  result  from  placing  the 
management  of  the  whole  land  of  the  country  in  the 
hands  of  the  executive,  I  did  not  attempt  to  write 
further  upon  the  subject.  But  when  the  topic  of 
Irish  landlordism  became  very  prominent  in  the  year 
1879-80,  an  idea  occurred  to  me  which  seemed  to 
entirely  obviate  all  the  practical  difficulties  which 
were  constantly  adduced  as  insuperable,  and  I  at  once 
took  the  opportunity  of  the  controversy  on  the  question 
to  set  forth  my  views  in  some  detail.  I  did  this 
especially  because  the  Irish  Land  League  proposed 
that  the  Government  should  buy  out  the  Irish  land- 
lords, and  convert  their  existing  tenants  into  peasant- 
proprietors,  who  were  to  redeem  their  holdings  by 
payments  extending  over  thirty-five  years.  This 
seemed  to  me  to  be  unsound  in  principle,  and  entirely 
useless  except  as  a  temporary  expedient,  since  it 
would  leave  the  whole  land  of  Ireland  in  the  posses- 
sion of  a  privileged  class,  and  would  thus  disinherit 
all  the  rest  of  the  population  from  their  native  soil. 

In  my  essay  I  based  my  whole  argument  upon  a 
great  principle  of  equity  as  regards  the  right  of 
succession  to  landed  property,  a  principle  which  I 
have  since  further  extended  to  all  property.^  But 
the  suggestion  which  rendered  land  nationalization 
practicable  was,  that  while,  under  certain  conditions 
stated,  all  land  would  gradually  revert  to  the  State, 
what  is  termed  in  Ireland  the  tenant-right,  and  in 
England  the  improvements,  or  increased  value  given 

*  See  my  "  Studies,  Scientific  and  Social,"  vol.  ii.  chap,  xxviii. 

Y 


322  MY   LIFE 

to  the  land  by  the  owner  or  his  predecessors,  such  as 
buildings,  drains,  plantations,  etc.,  would  remain  his 
property,  and  be  paid  for  by  the  new  state-tenants  at 
a  fair  valuation.  The  selling  value  of  land  was  thus 
divided  into  two  parts :  the  inherent  value  or 
ground-rent  value,  which  is  quite  independent  of  any 
expenditure  by  owners,  but  is  due  solely  to  nature 
and  society  ;  and  the  improvements,  which  are  due 
solely  to  expenditure  by  the  owners  or  occupiers,  and 
which  are  essentially  temporary  in  nature.  My  ex- 
perience in  surveying  and  land-valuation  assured  me 
that  these  two  values  can  be  easily  separated.  It 
follows  that  land  as  owned  by  the  State  would  need 
no  "  management "  whatever,  the  rent  being  merely  a 
ground-rent,  which  could  be  collected  just  as  the 
house-tax  and  the  land-tax  are  collected,  the  state- 
tenant  being  left  as  completely  free  as  is  the  "  free- 
holder "  now  (who  is  in  law  a  state-tenant),  or  as  are 
the  holders  of  perpetual  feus  in  Scotland. 

This  article  appeared  in  the  Contemporary  Revieiv 
of  November,  1880,  and  it  immediately  attracted  the 
attention  of  Mr.  A.  C.  Swinton,  Dr.  G.  B.  Clark, 
Mr.  Roland  Estcourt,  and  a  few  others,  who  had 
long  been  seeking  a  mode  of  applying  Herbert 
Spencer's  great  principle  of  the  inequity  of  private 
property  in  land,  and  who  found  it  in  the  suggestions 
and  principles  I  had  laid  down.  They  accordingly 
communicated  with  me  ;  several  meetings  were  held 
at  the  invitation  of  Mr.  Swinton,  who  was  the  initiator 
of  the  movement,  and  after  much  discussion  as  to 
a  definite  programme,  the  "  Land  Nationalization 
Society  "  was  formed,  and,  much  against  my  wishes, 
I  was  chosen  to  be  its  president. 

Our  Society  being  established,  it  seemed  necessary 
to  prepare  something  in  the  form  of  a  handbook  or 


LAND   NATIONALIZATION  323 

introduction  to  the  great  problem  of  the  land  ;  and  I 
accordingly  devoted  my  attention  to  the  subject,  study- 
ing voluminous  reports  on  agriculture,  on  Irish  famines, 
on  Highland  crofters,  and  numbers  of  special  treatises 
dealing  with  the  various  aspects  of  this  vast  and  far- 
reaching  question.  My  book  was  published  in  March, 
1882,  under  the  title  "Land  Nationalization:  its 
Necessity  and  its  Aims,"  and  gave,  in  a  compact 
form,  the  only  general  account  of  the  evils  of  our 
land  system  as  it  exists  in  England,  Ireland,  and 
Scotland  ;  a  comparison  with  other  countries  or  places 
in  which  a  better  system  prevails,  together  with  a 
solution  of  the  problem  of  how  to  replace  it  by  the 
only  just  system,  without  any  confiscation  of  property 
or  injury  to  any  living  individual.  The  book  has  had 
a  large  circulation,  and,  in  a  revised  edition,  is  still 
on  sale  ;  and,  together  with  numerous  tracts  issued  by 
the  Society,  has  done  much  to  educate  public  opinion 
on  this  most  vital  of  all  political  or  social  questions. 

As,  however,  it  was  quite  certain  that  it  would 
take  a  very  long  time  before  even  the  first  steps 
towards  land  nationalization  would  be  taken,  I  took 
every  opportunity  of  advocating  such  other  funda- 
mental reforms  as  seemed  to  me  demanded  by  equity 
and  to  be  essential  to  social  well-being.  One  of  the 
earliest  was  on  the  subject  of  interest,  about  which 
there  was  much  difference  of  opinion  among  advanced 
thinkers.  A  discussion  having  arisen  in  The  Christian 
Socialist,  I  developed  my  views  at  some  length  in  an 
article  which  appeared  in  the  issue  of  March,  1884. 

Soon  after  our  society  was  started,  Henry  George, 
author  of  that  remarkable  work,  "  Progress  and 
Poverty,"  came  to  England,  and  I  had  the  pleasure 
of  making  his  acquaintance.  He  spoke  at  several  of 
our  meetings  and  elsewhere  in  London,  as  well  as  in 


324  MY   LIFE 

various  parts  of  England  and  Ireland.  He  was  a  very 
impressive  speaker,  and  always  held  his  audience. 

Among  the  most  esteemed  of  the  friends  I  owed 
to  "  Land  Nationalization  "  were  two  eminent  Scotch- 
men, both  poets,  and  both  ardent  lovers  of  justice 
and  humanity  —  Professor  J.  Stuart  Blackie  and 
Charles  Mackay.  The  former  wrote  to  me  in  July, 
1882,  saying  that  he  had  just  finished  the  "careful 
study "  of  my  "  Land  Nationalization,"  and  that  he 
was  "happy  to  find  it  so  much  in  accordance  with 
my  oldest  and  most  mature  speculations,  and — what 
is  of  more  importance — observations  on  the  subject." 
He  sent  me  a  copy  of  his  small  volume,  "  Altavona," 
with  a  chapter  on  the  "  Sutherland  Clearances,"  and 
he  concluded,  "As  to  your  remedies  for  the  gigantic 
evils  which  our  present  system  of  land  laws  entails, 
they  recommend  themselves  strongly  to  every  con- 
sistent thinker." 

Both  he  and  I  suffered  some  inconvenience  from 
having  mentioned  the  name  of  the  agent  who  carried 
out  the  terrible  Sutherland  evictions  in  the  first  two 
decades  of  the  nineteenth  century,  as  it  is  given  in  all 
the  early  narratives,  as  well  as  in  the  report  of  the 
trial  of  the  agent  for  arson  and  murder,  when,  of 
course,  he  was  acquitted.  His  sons  were  at  that  time 
alive,  and  protested  against  the  publication.  Both 
our  publishers  were  frightened.  Professor  Blackie 
withdrew  his  book,  and  published  a  second  edition 
much  cut  down.  I  placed  mine  in  the  hands  of  a 
new  publisher,  and  I  promised  that  in  a  new  edition 
I  would  omit  the  name  of  the  agent,  but  refused  to 
make  any  alterations  in  the  statements  of  facts. 

Three  years  later  (in  December,  1885),  when  I 
was  lecturing  in  Edinburgh,  I  had  the  great  pleasure 
of  meeting  Professor  Blackie.      I   was  staying  with 


LAND   NATIONALIZATION  325 

the  late  Mr.  Robert  Cox,  at  whose  house  the  pro- 
fessor was  an  intimate.  He  called  soon  after  I 
arrived,  and  on  hearing  my  name,  he  cordially  em- 
braced me  (in  the  continental  fashion)  as  one  with 
whom  he  was  in  complete  sympathy,  and  then  threw 
himself  upon  the  rug  to  talk  to  Mrs.  Cox.  After- 
wards I  had  a  long  conversation  with  him  on  all  the 
subjects  that  interested  us  most,  and  was  delighted 
with  his  geniality  no  less  than  with  his  intense 
human  sympathy,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  cruelly 
disinherited  Highlanders. 

Although  I  had  for  many  years  been  a  great 
admirer  of  Charles  Mackay's  Songs  and  Poems,  and 
was  living  quite  near  him  while  we  were  at  Dorking, 
from  August,  1876,  to  March,  1878,  I  did  not  make 
his  acquaintance  till  some  years  afterwards,  as,  owing 
to  my  constitutional  shyness,  I  do  not  think  I  ever 
made  the  first  overtures  to  any  man,  or  even  called 
upon  any  one  without  some  previous  correspondence 
or  introduction.  But  several  years  later  I  sent  him  a 
copy  of  my  "  Land  Nationalization "  (I  think  pro- 
bably on  the  suggestion  of  some  one  who  knew  him), 
with  a  letter,  begging  his  acceptance  of  it.  This 
brought  me  three  letters  in  rapid  succession — one 
acknowledging  it,  saying  he  had  been  very  ill  for  six 
months,  but  adding  that  he  had  been  an  adherent  of 
our  cause  for  forty  years,  and  referring  me  to  his 
poem,  "  Lament  of  Cona  for  the  Unpeopling  of  the 
Highlands." 

In  the  following  year  he  removed  to  London  for 
good  medical  attendance,  and  wrote  me  a  very  flatter- 
ing letter  after  reading  my  "Malay  Archipelago." 
The  next  year  (1886)  I  was  able  to  call  on  him, 
when  in   London  for  a  day,  at  his  apartments  in 


326  MY   LIFE 

Longridge  Road,  South  Kensington,  when  we  had  a 
long  talk,  and  he  afterwards  wrote  to  me  as  "My 
dear  friend  and  philosopher."  On  the  occasion  of 
this  visit  he  introduced  me  to  his  step-daughter,  Miss 
Marie  Corelli,  a  very  pleasant  young  lady,  whose 
future  eminence  as  a  writer  I  did  not  divine. 

Notwithstanding  the  scanty  means  of  the  majority 
of  the  founders  and  members,  the  Land  Nationaliza- 
tion Society  has  struggled  on  for  more  than  a  quarter 
of  a  century.  Its  lecturers  and  its  yellow  vans  have 
pervaded  the  country,  and  it  has  effected  the  great 
work  of  convincing  the  highest  and  best  organized 
among  the  manual  workers,  as  represented  by  their 
Trades  Unions,  that  the  abolition  of  land  monopoly, 
which  is  the  necessary  result  of  its  private  ownership, 
is  at  the  very  root  of  all  social  reform.  Hence  the 
future  is  with  them  and  us,  and  though  the  capitalists 
and  the  official  Liberals  are  still  against  us,  we  wait 
patiently,  and  continue  to  educate  the  masses  in  the 
certainty  of  a  future  and  not  distant  success. 

For  about  ten  years  after  I  first  publicly  advo- 
cated land  nationalization  I  was  inclined  to  think 
that  no  further  fundamental  reforms  were  possible  or 
necessary.  Although  I  had,  since  my  earliest  youth, 
looked  to  some  form  of  socialistic  organization  of 
society,  especially  in  the  form  advocated  by  Robert 
Owen,  as  the  ideal  of  the  future,  I  was  yet  so  much 
influenced  by  the  individualistic  teachings  of  Mill 
and  Spencer,  and  the  loudly  proclaimed  dogma,  that 
without  the  constant  spur  of  individual  competition 
men  would  inevitably  become  idle  and  fall  back  into 
universal  poverty,  that  I  did  not  bestow  much  atten- 
tion upon  the  subject,  having,  in  fact,  as  much  literary 
work  on  hand  as  I  could  manage.  But  at  length,  in 
1889,  my  views  were  changed  once  for  all,  and  I  have 


SOCIALISM  327 

ever  since  been  absolutely  convinced,  not  only  that 
socialism  is  thoroughly  practicable,  but  that  it  is  the 
only  form  of  society  worthy  of  civilized  beings,  and 
that  it  alone  can  secure  for  mankind  continuous 
mental  and  moral  advancement,  together  with  that 
true  happiness  which  arises  from  the  full  exercise  of 
all  their  faculties  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  all  their 
rational  needs,  desires,  and  aspirations. 

The  book  that  thus  changed  my  outlook  on  this 
question  was  Bellamy's  "  Looking  Backward,"  a  work 
that  in  a  few  years  had  gone  through  seventeen 
editions  in  America,  but  had  only  just  been  repub- 
lished in  England.  On  a  first  reading  I  was  cap- 
tivated by  the  wonderfully  realistic  style  of  the  work, 
the  extreme  ingenuity  of  the  conception,  the  absorb- 
ing interest  of  the  story,  and  the  logical  power  with 
which  the  possibility  of  such  a  state  of  society  as  that 
depicted  was  argued  and  its  desirability  enforced. 
Every  sneer,  every  objection,  every  argument  I  had 
ever  read  against  socialism  was  here  met  and  shown 
to  be  absolutely  trivial  or  altogether  baseless,  while 
the  inevitable  results  of  such  a  social  state  in  giving 
to  every  human  being  the  necessaries,  the  comforts, 
the  harmless  luxuries,  and  the  highest  refinements 
and  social  enjoyments  of  life  were  made  equally  clear. 

From  this  time  I  declared  myself  a  socialist,  and 
I  made  the  first  scientific  application  of  my  conviction 
in  my  article  on  "Human  Selection"  in  the  Fort- 
nightly Review  (September,  1890).  This  article  called 
forth  several  expressions  of  approval,  which  I  highly 
value.  It  forms  the  last  chapter  of  vol.  i.  of  my 
"  Studies,  Scientific  and  Social." 

I  now  read  many  other  books  on  socialism,  but 
that  which  Impressed  me  as  being  the  most  complete 
and   thoroughly   reasoned    exposition,    both   of    the 


328  MY   LIFE 

philosophy  and  the  constructive  methods  of  socialism, 
was  Bellamy's  later  work,  "Equality,"  which  com- 
paratively few,  even  of  English  socialists,  are  ac- 
quainted with.  The  book  is  a  sequel  to  "  Looking 
Backward,"  and  contains  more  than  twice  the  matter. 
It  shows,  systematically,  how  our  existing  system  of 
competition  and  individual  profit  —  capitalism  and 
enormous  private  wealth — directly  lead  to  overwork, 
poverty,  starvation,  and  crime ;  that  it  is  necessarily 
wasteful  in  production  and  cruelly  unjust  in  distribu- 
tion ;  that  it  fosters  every  kind  of  adulteration  in 
manufacture,  and  almost  necessitates  lying  in  trade  ; 
that  it  involves  the  virtual  slavery  of  the  bulk  of  the 
population,  and  checks  or  destroys  any  real  progress 
of  the  race. 

Many  good  people  to-day  who  are  almost  horror- 
struck  at  hearing  that  any  one  they  know  is  a 
socialist,  would  be  still  more  amazed  if  they  knew 
how  many  of  the  very  salt  of  the  earth  belong  (or  did 
belong)  to  this  despised  and  much-dreaded  body  of 
thinkers.  Grant  Allen,  one  of  the  most  intellectual 
and  many-sided  men  of  our  time,  was  one  of  us  ;  so 
is  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  one  of  our  foremost  students  of 
physical  science ;  and  Professor  Karl  Pearson,  a 
great  mathematical  evolutionist.  Among  the  clergy 
we  have  the  Revs.  John  Clifford,  R.  C.  Fillingham, 
and  many  others  among  the  Christian  socialists,  who 
are  as  much  socialists  as  any  of  us.  Among  men  of 
university  training  or  of  high  literary  ability  we  have 
H.  M.  Hyndman,  Edward  Carpenter,  J.  A.  Hobson, 
Sydney  Webb,  Hubert  Bland,  H.  S.  Salt,  J.  C. 
Kenworthy,  Morrison-Davidson,  and  many  others. 
Of  poets  there  are  Gerald  Massey  and  Sir  Lewis 
Morris.  The  Labour  members  of  Parliament  are 
almost  all  socialists  ;  while  Margaret  Macmillan,  the 


VACCINATION  329 

Countess  of  Warwick,  and  many  less-known  women 
are  earnest  workers  for  the  cause. 

I  may  conclude  this  subject  with  the  answer  I 
recently  gave  to  the  question,  "Why  am  I  a 
Socialist  ? "  I  am  a  socialist  because  I  believe  that 
the  highest  law  for  mankind  is  justice.  I  therefore 
take  for  my  motto,  "  Fiat  Justitia  Ruat  Ccelum  ; " 
and  my  definition  of  socialism  is,  "  The  use  by  every 
one  of  his  faculties  for  the  common  good,  and  the 
voluntary  organization  of  labour  for  the  equal  benefit 
of  all."  That  is  absolute  social  justice  ;  that  is  ideal 
socialism.  It  is,  therefore,  the  guiding  star  for  all 
true  social  reform. 

The  Vaccination  Question. 

I  will  here  say  a  few  words  about  another  subject 
in  which  I  take  a  great  interest,  and  upon  which  I 
have  ventured  to  express  views  contrary  to  those  held 
by  the  orthodox  authorities. 

I  was  brought  up  to  believe  that  vaccination  was 
a  scientific  procedure,  and  that  Jenner  was  one  of 
the  great  benefactors  of  mankind.  I  was  vaccinated 
in  infancy,  and  before  going  to  the  Amazon  I  was 
persuaded  to  be  vaccinated  again.  My  children  were 
duly  vaccinated,  and  I  never  had  the  slightest  doubt 
of  the  value  of  the  operation — taking  everything  on 
trust  without  any  inquiry  whatever — till  about  1875-80, 
when  I  first  heard  that  there  were  anti-vaccinators, 
and  read  some  articles  on  the  subject.  These  did  not 
much  impress  me,  as  I  could  not  believe  so  many 
eminent  men  could  be  mistaken  on  such  an  important 
matter.  But  a  little  later  I  met  Mr.  William  Tebb, 
and  through  him  was  introduced  to  some  of  the  more 
important  statistical  facts  bearing  upon  the  subject. 


330  MY  LIFE 

Some  of  these  I  was  able  to  test  by  reference  to  the 
original  authorities,  and  also  to  the  various  Reports 
of  the  Registrar-General,  Dr.  Farr's  evidence  as  to 
the  diminution  of  small-pox  before  Jenner's  time,  and 
the  extraordinary  misstatements  of  the  supporters  of 
vaccination.  Mr.  Tebb  supplied  me  with  a  good  deal 
of  anti-vaccination  literature,  especially  with  "  Pierce's 
Vital  Statistics,"  the  tables  in  which  satisfied  me  that 
the  claims  for  vaccination  were  enormously  exagger- 
ated, if  not  altogether  fallacious.  I  also  now  learnt 
for  the  first  time  that  vaccination  itself  produced  a 
disease,  which  was  often  injurious  to  health  and  some- 
times fatal  to  life,  and  I  also  found  to  my  astonishment 
that  even  Herbert  Spencer  had  long  ago  pointed  out 
that  the  first  compulsory  Vaccination  Act  had  led  to 
an  increase  of  small-pox.  I  then  began  to  study  the 
Reports  of  the  Registrar-General  myself,  and  to  draw 
out  curves  of  small-pox  mortahty,  and  of  other  zymotic 
diseases  (the  only  way  of  showing  the  general  course 
of  a  disease  as  well  as  its  annual  inequalities),  and 
then  found  that  the  course  of  the  former  disease 
ran  so  generally  parallel  to  that  of  the  latter  as  to 
disprove  altogether  any  special  protective  effect  of 
vaccination. 

As  I  could  find  no  short  and  clear  statement  of 
the  main  statistical  facts  adverse  to  vaccination,  I 
wrote  a  short  pamphlet  of  thirty-eight  pages,  entitled 
"  Forty-five  Years  of  Registration  Statistics,  proving 
Vaccination  to  be  both  Useless  and  Dangerous." 
This  was  published  in  1885  at  Mr.  W.  Tebb's 
expense,  and  it  had  the  efifect  of  convincing  many 
persons,  among  whom  were  some  of  my  personal 
friends. 

A  few  years  later,  when  the  Royal  Commission  on 
Vaccination  was  appointed,  I  was  invited  to  become 


VACCINATION  331 

a  member  of  it,  but  declined,  as  I  could  not  give  up 
the  necessary  time,  but  chiefly  because  I  thought  I 
could  do  more  good  as  a  witness.  I  accordingly  pre- 
pared a  number  of  large  diagrams,  and  stated  the  argu- 
ments drawn  from  them,  and  in  the  year  1890  gave  my 
evidence  during  part  of  three  days.  As  about  half 
the  Commissioners  were  doctors,  most  of  the  others 
gave  way  to  them.  I  told  them,  at  the  beginning  of 
my  evidence,  that  I  knew  nothing  of  medicine,  but 
that,  following  the  principle  laid  down  by  Sir  John 
Simon  and  Dr.  Guy,  that  "the  evidence  for  the 
benefits  of  vaccination  must  now  be  statistical,"  I  was 
prepared  to  show  the  bearing  of  the  best  statistics 
only.  Yet  they  insisted  on  putting  medical  argu- 
ments and  alleged  medical  facts  to  me,  asking  me 
how  I  explained  this,  how  I  accounted  for  that ;  and 
though  I  stated  again  and  again  that  there  were 
plenty  of  medical  witnesses  who  would  deal  with 
those  points,  they  continually  recurred  to  them  ;  and 
when  I  said  I  had  no  answer  to  give,  not  having 
inquired  into  those  alleged  facts,  they  seemed  to  think 
they  had  got  the  best  of  it.  Yet  they  were  so  ignorant 
of  statistics  and  statistical  methods  that  one  great 
doctor  held  out  a  diagram,  showing  the  same  facts  as 
one  of  mine,  and  asked  me  almost  triumphantly  how 
it  was  that  mine  was  so  different.  After  comparing 
the  two  diagrams  for  a  few  moments  I  replied  that 
they  were  drawn  on  different  scales,  but  that  with 
that  exception  I  could  see  no  substantial  difference 
between  them.  The  other  diagram  was  on  a  greatly 
exaggerated  vertical  scale,  so  that  the  line  showing 
each  year's  death-rate  went  up  and  down  with 
tremendous  peaks  and  chasms,  while  mine  approxi- 
mated more  to  a  very  irregular  curve.  But  my 
questioner  could  not  see  this  simple  point  ;  and  later 


332  MY   LIFE 

he  recurred  to  it  a  second  time,  and  asked  me  if  I 
really  meant  to  tell  them  that  those  two  diagrams 
were  both  accurate,  and  when  I  said  again  that 
though  on  different  scales  both  represented  the  same 
facts,  he  looked  up  at  the  ceiling  with  an  air  which 
plainly  said,  "If  you  will  say  that  you  will  say 
anything ! " 

The  Commission  lingered  on  for  six  years,  and 
did   not   issue   its   final   report   till    1896,   while  the 
evidence,  statistics,  and  diagrams  occupied  numerous 
bulky  blue-books.     The   most   valuable   parts  of  it 
were    the    appendices,    containing    the    tables    and 
diagrams  presented  by  the  chief  witnesses,  together 
with  a  large  number  of  official  tables  and  statistics, 
both  of  our  own  and  foreign  countries,   affording  a 
mass    of    material    never    before    brought    together. 
This  enabled  me  to  present  the   general  statistical 
argument  more  completely  and  forcibly  than  I  had 
done  before,  and  I  devoted  several  months  of  very 
hard  work   to    doing    this,    and   brought    it  out    in 
pamphlet  form  in  January,  1898,  in  order  that  a  copy 
might   be   sent  to  every   member  of  the    House  of 
Commons  before  the  new  Vaccination  Act  came  up 
for    discussion.      This    was    done    by    the    National 
Anti- Vaccination  League,  and   I  wrote  to  the  half- 
dozen  members  I  knew  personally,  begging  them  to 
give  one  evening  to  its  careful  perusal.     But  so  far 
as  any  of  their  speeches  showed,  not  one  of  the  six 
hundred    and    seventy    members    gave    even     that 
amount   of  their  time  to   obtain   information   on    a 
subject  involving  the  health,  life,  and  personal  free- 
dom of  their  constituents.     Yet  I  know  that  in  no 
work  I  have  written  have  I  presented  so  clear  and 
so  conclusive   a   demonstration  of  the   fallacy  of  a 
popular  belief  as  is  given  in  this   work,  which  was 


VACCINATION  333 

entitled  "  Vaccination  a  Delusion  :  Its  Penal  Enforce- 
ment a  Crime,  proved  by  the  Official  Evidence  in 
the  Reports  of  the  Royal  Commission."  This  was 
included  in  the  second  part  of  my  "  Wonderful 
Century,"  published  in  June,  1898,  and  was  also 
published  separately  in  the  pamphlet  form,  as  it 
continues  to  be  ;  and  I  feel  sure  that  the  time  is 
not  far  distant  when  this  will  be  held  to  be  one  of 
the  most  important  and  most  truly  scientific  of  my 
works. 


CHAPTER   XXI 

MESMERISM  TO   SPIRITUALISM 

I  HAVE  already  described  my  first  introduction  to 
mesmerism  at  Leicester,  how  I  found  that  I  had 
considerable  mesmeric  power  myself,  and  could  pro- 
duce all  the  chief  phenomena  on  some  of  my  patients ; 
while  I  also  satisfied  myself  that  the  almost  universal 
opposition  and  misrepresentations  of  the  medical  pro- 
fession were  founded  upon  a  combination  of  ignorance 
and  prejudice. 

During  my  eight  years'  travel  in  the  East  I  heard 
occasionally,  through  the  newspapers,  of  the  strange 
doings  of  the  spiritualists  in  America  and  England, 
some  of  which  seemed  to  me  too  wild  and  outre  to  be 
anything  but  the  ravings  of  madmen.  Others,  how- 
ever, appeared  to  be  so  well  authenticated  that  I 
could  not  at  all  understand  them,  but  concluded,  as 
most  people  do  at  first,  that  such  things  must  be 
either  imposture  or  delusion.  How  I  became  first 
acquainted  with  the  phenomena  and  the  effect  they 
produced  upon  me  are  fully  described  in  the  "  Notes 
of  Personal  Evidence,"  in  my  book  on  "  Miracles  and 
Modern  Spiritualism,"  to  which  I  refer  my  readers. 
I  will  only  state  here  that  I  was  so  fortunate  as  to 
witness  the  simpler  phenomena,  such  as  rapping  and 
tapping  sounds  and  slight  movements  of  a  table  in  a 
friend's  house,  with  no  one  present  but  his  family  and 


MESMERISM   TO  SPIRITUALISM     335 

myself,  and  we  were  able  to  test  the  facts  so  thoroughly 
as  to  demonstrate  that  they  were  not  produced  by  the 
physical  action  of  any  one  of  us.  Afterwards,  in  my 
own  house,  similar  phenomena  were  obtained  scores 
of  times,  and  I  was  able  to  apply  tests  which  showed 
that  they  were  not  caused  by  any  one  present.  A 
few  years  later  I  formed  one  of  the  committee  of  the 
Dialectical  Society,  and  again  witnessed,  under  test 
conditions,  similar  phenomena  in  great  variety,  and 
in  these  three  cases,  it  must  be  remembered,  no  paid 
mediums  were  present,  and  every  means  that  could 
be  suggested  of  excluding  trickery  or  the  direct 
actions  of  any  one  present  were  resorted  to. 

At  a  later  period  I  paid  frequent  visits,  always 
with  some  one  or  more  of  my  friends  as  sceptical  and 
as  earnest  in  search  after  fact  as  myself,  to  two  of  the 
best  public  mediums  for  physical  phenomena  I  have 
ever  met  with — Mrs,  Marshall  and  her  daughter-in- 
law.  We  here  made  whatever  investigations  we 
pleased,  and  tried  all  kinds  of  tests.  We  always  sat 
in  full  daylight  in  a  well-lighted  room,  and  obtained 
a  variety  of  phenomena  of  a  very  startling  kind,  as 
narrated  in  the  book  referred  to.  During  the  latter 
part  of  my  residence  in  London  (1865-70)  I  had 
numerous  opportunities  of  seeing  phenomena  with 
other  mediums  in  various  private  houses  in  London. 
These  were  sometimes  with  private,  sometimes  with 
paid  mediums,  but  always  under  such  conditions  as 
to  render  any  kind  of  collusion  or  imposture  altogether 
out  of  the  question.  During  this  time  I  was  in  fre- 
quent communication  with  Sir  William  Crookes,  Mr. 
Cromwell  Varley,  Serjeant  Cox,  Mr.  Hensleigh 
Wedgwood,  and  many  other  friends,  who  were  either 
interested  in  or  were  actively  investigating  the  sub- 
ject ;  and  through  the  kindness  of  several  of  them  I 


336  MY   LIFE 

had  many  opportunities  of  witnessing  some  of  the 
more  extraordinary  of  the  phenomena  under  the  most 
favourable  conditions.  At  a  much  later  period,  when 
I  visited  America,  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  some 
of  the  most  eminent  spiritualists  in  Boston  and 
Washington,  and  had  many  opportunities  of  seeing 
phenomena  and  obtaining  tests  of  a  different  kind 
from  any  that  I  had  seen  in  England  ;  and  some  of 
these  I  may  refer  to  later  on. 

When  I  had  obtained  in  my  own  house  the  phe- 
nomena described  in  my  "  Notes  of  Personal  Evi- 
dence," I  felt  sure  that  if  any  of  my  scientific  friends 
could  witness  them  they  would  be  satisfied  that  they 
were  not  due  to  trickery,  and  were  worthy  of  careful 
examination.  I  therefore  endeavoured  to  persuade 
Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  Professor  Tyndall,  and  Mr.  G. 
H.  Lewes  to  attend  seances  and  investigate  the  subject 
for  themselves,  but  each  was  too  incredulous  to  give 
the  matter  serious  attention. 

In  1866  I  wrote  a  pamphlet,  entitled  "  The  Scien- 
tific Aspect  of  the  Supernatural,"  which  I  distributed 
amongst  my  friends.  After  reading  it,  Huxley  wrote 
that  he  "  could  not  get  up  any  interest  in  the  subject." 
Tyndall  read  it  "with  deep  disappointment,"  and  he 
deplored  my  willingness  to  accept  data  unworthy  of 
my  attention. 

I  received  many  letters  referring  to  this  pamphlet, 
both  satisfactory  and  otherwise,  but  perhaps  the  most 
interesting  was  that  from  Robert  Chambers,  which  I 
here  give — 

"  St.  Andrews,  February  lo,  1867. 

"Dear  Sir, 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  6th  inst., 
and  your  little  volume.      It  gratifies   me   much    to 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM      337 

receive  a  friendly  communication  from  the  Mr. 
Wallace  of  my  friend  Darwin's  *  Origin  of  Species/ 
and  my  gratification  is  greatly  heightened  on  finding 
that  he  is  one  of  the  few  men  of  science  who  admit 
the  verity  of  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism.  I  have 
for  many  years  known  that  these  phenomena  are  real, 
as  distinguished  from  impostures  ;  and  it  is  not  of 
yesterday  that  I  concluded  they  were  calculated  to 
explain  much  that  has  been  doubtful  in  the  past,  and 
when  fully  accepted,  revolutionize  the  whole  frame  of 
human  opinion  on  many  important  matters. 

****** 

*'  How  provoking  it  has  often  appeared  to  me  that 
it  seems  so  impossible,  with  such  a  man,  for  instance, 
as  Huxley,  to  obtain  a  moment's  patience  for  this 
subject  —  so  infinitely  transcending  all  those  of 
physical  science  in  the  potential  results  ! 

"  My  idea  is  that  the  term  '  supernatural '  is  a 
gross  mistake.     We  have  only  to  enlarge  our  concep- 
tions of  the  natural,  and  all  will  be  right. 
"  I  am,  dear  sir, 

"  Yours  very  sincerely, 
"  Robert  Chambers." 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  year,  while  attending  the 
meeting  of  the  British  Association  at  Dundee,  I 
visited  St.  Andrews,  and  after  a  geological  excursion 
under  the  guidance  of  Sir  A.  Geikie,  and  a  collation 
with  the  university  authorities,  at  which  Robert 
Chambers  was  present,  I  had  the  great  pleasure  of 
an  hour's  conversation  with  him  in  his  own  house. 

During  the  years  1870-80  I  had  many  opportuni- 
ties of  witnessing  interesting  phenomena  in  the  houses 
of  various  friends,  some  of  which  I  have  not  made 
public.     Early  in  1874  I  was  invited  by  John  Morley, 

z 


338  MY   LIFE 

then  editor  of  the  Fortnightly  Review,  to  write  an 
article  on  "  Spiritualism  "  for  that  periodical.  Much 
public  interest  had  been  excited  by  the  publication 
of  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Dialectical 
Society,  and  especially  by  Mr.  Crookes's  experiments 
with  Mr.  Home,  and  the  refusal  of  the  Royal  Society 
to  see  these  experiments  repeated.  I  therefore  ac- 
cepted the  task,  and  my  article  appeared  in  May  and 
June  under  the  title,  "  A  Defence  of  Modern  Spiri- 
tualism." At  the  end  of  the  same  year  I  included 
this  article,  together  with  my  former  small  book, 
"  The  Scientific  Aspects  of  the  Supernatural,"  and  a 
paper  I  had  read  before  the  Dialectical  Society  in 
1 87 1,  answering  the  arguments  of  Hume,  Lecky,  and 
other  writers  against  miracles,  in  a  volume  which  has 
had  a  very  considerable  sale,  and  has  led  many 
persons  to  investigate  the  subject  and  to  become 
convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena. 

The  publication  of  my  book  in  1874,  not  only 
brought  me  an  extensive  correspondence  on  the 
subject,  but  led  to  my  being  invited  to  take  part  in 
many  interesting  stances,  and  making  the  acquaintance 
of  spiritualists  both  at  home  and  abroad.  As  what  I 
witnessed  was  often  very  remarkable,  and  forms  a  sort 
of  supplement  to  the  "  Notes  of  Personal  Evidence  " 
given  in  my  book,  and  also  because  these  phenomena 
have  had  a  very  important  influence  both  on  my 
character  and  my  opinions,  it  will  be  necessary  here 
to  give  a  brief  outline  of  them. 

I  attended  a  series  of  sittings  with  Miss  Kate 
Cook,  the  sister  of  the  Miss  Florence  Cook  with 
whom  Sir  William  Crookes  obtained  such  very  striking 
results.  The  general  features  of  these  stances  were 
very  similar,  though  there  was  great  variety  in  details. 
They  took  place  in  the  rooms  of  Signor  Randi,  a 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM     339 

miniature-painter,  living  in  Montague  Place,  W.,  in 
a  large  reception-room,  across  one  corner  of  which  a 
curtain  was  hung  and  a  chair  placed  inside  for  the 
medium.  There  were  generally  six  or  seven  persons 
present.  Miss  Cook  and  her  mother  came  from  North 
London.  Miss  C.  was  always  dressed  in  black,  with 
lace  collar,  she  wore  laced-up  boots,  and  had  earrings 
in  her  ears.  In  a  few  minutes  after  she  had  entered 
the  cabinet,  the  curtains  would  be  drawn  apart  and  a 
white-robed  female  figure  would  appear,  and  some- 
times come  out  and  stand  close  in  front  of  the  curtain. 
One  after  another  she  would  beckon  to  us  to  come 
up.  We  then  talked  together,  the  form  in  whispers ; 
I  could  look  closely  into  her  face,  examine  the  features 
and  hair,  touch  her  hands,  and  might  even  touch  and 
examine  her  ears  closely,  which  were  not  bored  for 
earrings.  The  figure  had  bare  feet,  was  somewhat 
taller  than  Miss  Cook,  and,  though  there  was  a  general 
resemblance,  was  quite  distinct  in  features,  figure,  and 
hair.  After  half  an  hour  or  more  this  figure  would 
retire,  close  the  curtains,  and  sometimes  within  a  few 
seconds  would  say,  "Come  and  look."  We  then 
opened  the  curtains,  turned  up  the  lamp,  and  Miss 
Cook  was  found  in  a  trance  in  the  chair,  her  black 
dress,  laced-boots,  etc.,  in  the  most  perfect  order  as 
when  she  arrived,  while  the  full-grown  white-robed 
figure  had  totally  disappeared. 

Mr.  Robert  Chambers  introduced  me  to  a  wealthy 
Scotch  lady.  Miss  Douglas,  living  in  South  Audley 
Street,  and  at  her  house  I  attended  many  siances,  and 
met  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  and  several  other 
London  spiritualists.  On  one  occasion  Home  was 
the  medium  and  Mr.  (now  Sir  William)  Crookes  was 
present.  As  I  was  the  only  one  of  the  company  who 
had  not  witnessed  any  of  the  remarkable  phenomena 


340  MY   LIFE 

that  occurred  in  his  presence,  I  was  invited  to  go  under 
the  table  while  an  accordion  was  playing,  held  in 
Home's  hand,  his  other  hand  being  on  the  table. 
The  room  was  well  lighted,  and  I  distinctly  saw 
Home's  hand  holding  the  instrument,  which  moved 
up  and  down  and  played  a  tune  without  any  visible 
cause.  On  stating  this,  he  said,  "  Now  I  will  take 
away  my  hand  " — which  he  did  ;  but  the  instrument 
went  on  playing,  and  I  saw  a  detached  hand  holding 
it  while  Home's  two  hands  were  seen  above  the  table 
by  all  present.  This  was  one  of  the  ordinary  pheno- 
mena, and  thousands  of  persons  have  witnessed  it ; 
and  when  we  consider  that  Home's  siances  almost 
always  took  place  in  private  houses  at  which  he  was  a 
guest,  and  with  people  absolutely  above  suspicion  of 
collusion  with  an  impostor,  and  also  either  in  the  day- 
time or  in  a  fully  illuminated  room,  it  will  be  admitted 
that  no  form  of  legerdemain  will  explain  what  occurred. 
Perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  these  seances  were  a 
series  with  Mr.  Haxby,  a  young  man  engaged  in  the 
post-office,  and  a  remarkable  medium  for  materiali- 
zations. He  was  a  small  man,  and  sat  in  Miss 
Douglas's  small  drawing-room  on  the  first  floor 
separated  by  curtains  from  a  larger  one,  where  the 
visitors  sat  in  a  subdued  light.  After  a  few  minutes, 
from  between  the  curtains  would  appear  a  tall  and 
stately  East  Indian  figure  in  white  robes,  a  rich  waist- 
band, sandals,  and  large  turban,  snowy  white,  and 
disposed  with  perfect  elegance.  Sometimes  this  figure 
would  walk  round  the  room  outside  the  circle,  would 
lift  up  a  large  and  very  heavy  musical  box,  which  he 
would  wind  up  and  then  swing  round  his  head  with 
one  hand.  He  would  often  come  to  each  of  us  in 
succession,  bow,  and  allow  us  to  feel  his  hands  and 
examine  his  robes.     We  asked  him  to  stand  against 


MESMERISM  TO   SPIRITUALISM     341 

the  door-post  and  marked  his  height,  and  on  one 
occasion  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  brought  with  him 
a  shoe-maker's  measuring-rule,  and  at  our  request, 
Abdullah,  as  he  gave  his  name,  took  off  a  sandal, 
placed  his  foot  on  a  chair,  and  allowed  it  to  be 
accurately  measured  with  the  sliding-rule.  After  the 
siance  Mr.  Haxby  removed  his  boot  and  had  his  foot 
measured  by  the  same  rule,  when  that  of  the  figure 
was  found  to  be  full  one  inch  and  a  quarter  the  longer, 
while  in  height  it  was  about  half  a  foot  taller.  A 
minute  or  two  after  Abdullah  had  retired  into  the 
small  room,  Haxby  was  found  in  a  trance  in  his  chair, 
while  no  trace  of  the  white-robed  stranger  was  to  be 
seen.  The  door  and  window  of  the  back  room  were 
securely  fastened,  and  often  secured  with  gummed 
paper,  which  was  found  intact. 

On  another  occasion  I  was  present  in  a  private 
house  when  a  very  similar  figure  appeared  with  the 
medium  Eglinton  before  a  large  party  of  spiritualists 
and  inquirers.  In  this  case  the  conditions  were  even 
more  stringent  and  the  result  absolutely  conclusive. 
A  corner  of  the  room  had  a  curtain  hung  across  it, 
enclosing  a  space  just  large  enough  to  hold  a  chair  for 
the  medium.  I  and  others  examined  this  corner  and 
found  the  walls  solid  and  the  carpet  nailed  down.  The 
medium  on  arrival  came  at  once  into  the  room,  and 
after  a  short  period  of  introductions  seated  himself  in 
the  corner.  There  was  a  lighted  gas-chandelier  in  the 
room,  which  was  turned  down  so  as  just  to  permit 
us  to  see  each  other.  The  figure,  beautifully  robed, 
passed  round  the  room,  allowed  himself  to  be  touched, 
his  robes,  hands,  and  feet  examined  closely  by  all 
present — I  think  sixteen  or  eighteen  persons.  Every 
one  was  delighted,  but  to  make  the  stance  a  test  one, 
several  of  the  medium's  friends  begged  him  to  allow 


342  MY   LIFE 

himself  to  be  searched  so  that  the  result  might  be 
published.  After  some  difficulty  he  was  persuaded, 
and  four  persons  were  appointed  to  make  the  exami- 
nation. Immediately  two  of  these  led  him  into  a 
bedroom,  while  I  and  a  friend  who  had  come  with  me 
closely  examined  the  chair,  floor,  and  walls,  and  were 
able  to  declare  that  nothing  so  large  as  a  glove  had 
been  left.  We  then  joined  the  other  two  in  the  bed- 
room, and  as  Eglinton  took  off  his  clothes  each  article 
was  passed  through  our  hanjds,  down  to  underclothing 
and  socks,  so  that  we  could  positively  declare  that  not 
a  single  article  besides  his  own  clothes  were  found 
upon  him.  The  result  was  published  in  the  Spiritualist 
newspaper,  certified  by  the  names  of  all  present. 

Yet  one  more  case  of  materialization  may  be  given, 
because  it  was  even  more  remarkable  in  some  respects 
than  any  which  have  been  here  recorded.  A  Mr. 
Monck,  a  Nonconformist  clergyman,  was  a  remarkable 
medium,  and  in  order  to  be  able  to  examine  the  phe- 
nomena carefully,  and  to  preserve  the  medium  from 
the  injury  often  caused  by  repeated  miscellaneous 
stances,  four  gentlemen  secured  his  exclusive  services 
for  a  year,  hiring  apartments  for  him  on  a  first  floor 
in  Bloomsbury,  and  paying  him  a  moderate  salary. 
Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  and  Mr.  Stainton  Moses 
were  two  of  these,  and  they  invited  me  to  see  the 
phenomena  that  occurred.  It  was  a  bright  summer 
afternoon,  and  everything  happened  in  the  full  light 
of  day.  After  a  little  conversation,  Monck,  who  was 
dressed  in  the  usual  clerical  black,  appeared  to  go  into 
a  trance  ;  then  stood  up  a  few  feet  in  front  of  us,  and 
after  a  little  while  pointed  to  his  side,  saying,  "  Look." 
We  saw  there  a  faint  white  patch  on  his  coat  on  the 
left  side.  This  grew  brighter,  then  seemed  to  flicker, 
and  extend  both  upwards  and  downwards,  till  very 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM      343 

gradually  it  formed  a  cloudy  pillar  extending  from  his 
shoulder  to  his  feet  and  close  to  his  body.  Then  he 
shifted  himself  a  little  sideways,  the  cloudy  figure 
standing  still,  but  appearing  joined  to  him  by  a 
cloudy  band  at  the  height  at  which  it  had  first  begun 
to  form.  Then,  after  a  few  minutes  more,  Monck  again 
said  "Look,"  and  passed  his  hand  through  the  con- 
necting band,  severing  it.  He  and  the  figure  then 
moved  away  from  each  other  till  they  were  about  five 
or  six  feet  apart.  The  figure  had  now  assumed  the 
appearance  of  a  thickly  draped  female  form,  with 
arms  and  hands  just  visible.  Monck  looked  towards 
it  and  again  said  to  us  "  Look,"  and  then  clapped  his 
hands.  On  which  the  figure  put  out  her  hands, 
clapped  them  as  he  had  done,  and  we  all  distinctly 
heard  her  clap  following  his,  but  fainter.  The  figure 
then  moved  slowly  back  to  him,  grew  fainter  and 
shorter,  and  was  apparently  absorbed  into  his  body 
as  it  had  grown  OLt  of  it. 

Of  course,  sucl.  a  narration  as  this,  to  those  who 
know  nothing  of  the  phenomena  that  gradually  lead 
up  to  it,  seems  mere  midsummer  madness.  But  to 
those  who  have  for  years  obtained  positive  knowledge 
of  a  great  variety  o"  facts  equally  strange,  this  is  only 
the  culminating  point  of  a  long  series  of  phenomena, 
all  antecedently  incedible  to  the  people  who  talk  so 
confidently  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

Now  that  the  wiole  series  of  similar  phenomena 
have  been  co-ordinated,  and  to  some  extent  rendered 
intelligible,  by  Myers's  great  work  on  "  Human 
Personality,"  it  is  ;o  be  hoped  that  even  students 
of  physical  science  will  no  longer  class  all  those 
who  have  either  wtnessed  such  phenomena  or  ex- 
pressed their  belie"  in  them,  as  insane  or  idioti- 
cally credulous,   wi;hout  even   attempting  to   show 


344  MY   LIFE 

how,  under  similar  conditions,  such   effects  can   be 
produced. 

During  my  lecturing  tour  in  the  United  States  in 
1886-87,  I  stayed  some  time  in  three  of  the  centres 
of  American  spiritualism — Boston,  Washington,  and 
San  Francisco,  and  made  the  acquaintance  of  many 
American  spiritualists  and  inquirers,  with  whom  I 
attended  many  remarkable  seances.  At  Boston  I  met 
the  Rev.  Minot  J.  Savage,  whose  latest  work,  "Can 
Telepathy  Explain  ? "  contains  such  a  collection  of 
personal  experiences  as  have  fallen  tc  the  lot  of  few 
inquirers ;  Mr.  F.  J.  Garrison,  a  soi  of  the  great 
abolitionist ;  Mr.  E.  A.  Brackett,  a  scufptor,  and  author 
of  a  remarkable  book  on  "  Materialized  Apparitions  "  ; 
Dr.  Nichols,  author  of  "Whence,  Where,  and  Whither"; 
Professor  James,  of  Harvard,  and  sereral  others. 

I  attended  several  seances  at  the  house  of  Mrs. 
Ross,  a  very  good  medium  for  materializations,  in 
the  company  of  one  or  more  of  my  friends.  I  will 
state  what  occurred  on  one  of  these  occasions.  The 
seance  took  place  in  a  front  downstairs  room  of  a 
small  private  house,  opening  by  sliding  doors  into  a 
back  room,  and  by  an  ordinary  door  into  the  passage. 
The  cabinet  was  formed  by  cloth  curtains  across  the 
corner  of  the  room  from  the  fireplace  to  the  sliding 
door.  One  side  of  this  was  an  oiter  wall,  the  other 
the  wall  of  the  back  room,  where  tlere  was  a  cupboard 
containing  a  quantity  of  china.  I  was  invited  to 
examine,  and  did  so  thoroughly— front  room,  floor, 
back  room,  rooms  below  in  basenent,  occupied  by  a 
heating  apparatus ;  and  I  am  postive  there  were  no 
means  of  communication  other  1han  the  doors  for 
even  the  smallest  child.  Then  the  sliding  doors  were 
closed,  fastened  with  sticking-pkster,  and  privately 
marked  with  pencil.    The  ten  visitors  formed  a  semi- 


MESMERISM  TO  SPIRITUALISM     345 

circle  opposite  the  cabinet,  and  I  sat  with  my  back 
close  to  the  passage  door  and  opposite  the  curtain  at 
a  distance  of  about  ten  feet.  A  red-shaded  lamp  was 
in  the  furthest  corner  behind  the  visitors,  which 
enabled  me  to  see  the  time  by  my  watch  and  the  out- 
lines of  every  one  in  the  room  ;  and  as  it  was  behind 
me  the  space  between  myself  and  the  cabinet  was 
very  fairly  lighted.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
appearances  were  as  follows  : — 

(i)  A  female  figure  in  white  came  out  between 
the  curtains  with  Mrs.  Ross  in  black,  and  also  a  male 
figure,  all  to  some  distance  in  front  of  the  cabinet. 
This  was  apparently  to  demonstrate,  once  for  all,  that, 
whatever  they  were,  the  figures  were  not  Mrs.  Ross 
in  disguise. 

(2)  After  these  had  retired  three  female  figures 
appeared  together,  in  white  robes  and  of  different 
heights.  These  came  two  or  three  feet  in  front  of  the 
curtain. 

(3)  A  male  figure  came  out,  recognized  by  a 
gentleman  present  as  his  son. 

(4)  A  tall  Indian  figure  came  out  in  white 
moccassins ;  he  danced  and  spoke  ;  he  also  shook 
hands  with  me  and  others,  a  large,  strong,  rough 
hand. 

(5)  A  female  figure  with  a  baby  stood  close  to 
the  entrance  of  the  cabinet.  I  went  up  (on  invitation), 
felt  the  baby's  face,  nose,  and  hair,  and  kissed  it — 
apparently  a  real,  soft-skinned,  living  baby.  Other 
ladies  and  gentlemen  agreed. 

Directly  the  seance  was  over  the  gas  was  lighted, 
and  I  again  examined  the  bare  walls  of  the  cabinet, 
the  curtains,  and  the  door,  all  being  just  as  before, 
and  affording  no  room  or  place  for  disposing  of  the 
baby  alone,  far  less  of  the  other  figures. 


346  MY   LIFE 

At  another  special  seance  for  friends  of  Dr.  Nichols 
and  Mr.  Brackett,  with  Professor  James  and  myself — 
nine  in  all,  under  the  same  conditions  as  before, 
eight  or  nine  different  figures  came,  including  a  tall 
Indian  chief  in  war-paint  and  feathers,  a  little  girl 
who  talked  and  played  with  Miss  Brackett,  and  a  very 
pretty  and  perfectly  developed  girl,  "  Bertha,"  Mr. 
Brackett's  niece,  who  has  appeared  to  him  with 
various  mediums  for  two  years,  and  is  as  well  known 
to  him  as  any  near  relative  in  earth-life.  She  speaks 
distinctly,  which  these  figures  rarely  do,  and  Mr. 
Brackett  has  often  seen  her  develop  gradually  from  a 
cloudy  mass,  and  almost  instantly  vanish  away.  But 
what  specially  interested  me  was,  that  two  of  the 
figures  beckoned  to  me  to  come  up  to  the  cabinet. 
One  was  a  beautifully  draped  female  figure,  who  took 
my  hand,  looked  at  me  smilingly,  and  on  my  appear- 
ing doubtful,  said  in  a  whisper  that  she  had  often 
met  me  at  Miss  Kate  Cook's  seances  in  London. 
She  then  let  me  feel  her  ears,  as  I  had  done  before 
to  prove  she  was  not  the  medium.  I  then  saw  that 
she  closely  resembled  the  figure  with  whom  I  had 
often  talked  and  joked  at  Signor  Randi's,  a  fact 
known  to  no  one  in  America. 

The  other  figure  was  an  old  gentleman  with 
white  hair  and  beard,  and  in  evening-dress.  He  took 
my  hand,  bowed,  and  looked  pleased,  as  one  meeting 
an  old  friend.  Considering  who  was  likely  to  come, 
I  thought  of  my  father  and  of  Darwin,  but  there  was 
not  enough  likeness  to  either.  Then  at  length  I 
recognized  the  likeness  to  a  photograph  I  had  of  my 
cousin  Algernon  Wilson,  whom  I  had  not  seen  since 
we  were  children,  but  had  long  corresponded  with, 
as  he  was  an  enthusiastic  entomologist,  living  in 
Adelaide,  where  he  had  died  not  long  before.     Then 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM      347 

I  looked  pleased  and  said,  "  Is  it  Algernon  ? "  at 
which  he  nodded  earnestly,  seemed  very  much  pleased, 
shook  my  hand  vigorously,  and  patted  my  face  and 
head  with  his  other  hand. 

These  two  recognitions  were  to  me  very  striking, 
because  they  were  both  so  private  and  personal  to 
myself,  and  could  not  possibly  have  been  known  to 
the  medium  or  even  to  any  of  my  friends  present. 

In  Washington,  where  I  resided  several  months, 
I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Professor  Elliot  Coues, 
General  Lippitt,  Mr.  D.  Lyman,  Senator  and  Mrs. 
Stanford,  Mr.  T.  A.  Bland  the  Indians'  friend,  and 
Mrs.  Beecher  Hooker,  all  thorough  spiritualists,  as 
well  as  many  others  unknown  to  fame.  With  the 
three  former  gentlemen  I  attended  many  seances  of  a 
very  remarkable  public  medium,  Mr.  P.  L.  O.  A. 
Keeler,  and  both  witnessed  phenomena  and  obtained 
tests  of  a  very  interesting  kind.  The  medium  was 
a  young  man  of  the  clerk  or  tradesman  class,  with 
only  the  common  school  education,  and  with  no 
appearance  of  American  smartness.  The  arrange- 
ment of  his  seances  was  peculiar.  The  corner  of  a 
good-sized  room  had  a  black  curtain  across  it  on  a 
stretched  cord  about  five  feet  from  the  ground. 
Inside  was  a  small  table  on  which  were  a  tambourine 
and  hand-bell.  Any  one,  before  the  seances  began 
or  afterwards,  could  examine  this  enclosed  space,  the 
curtain,  the  floor,  and  the  walls.  I  did  so  myself,  the 
room  being  fully  lighted,  and  was  quite  satisfied  that 
there  was  absolutely  nothing  but  what  appeared  at 
first  sight,  and  no  arrangements  whatever  for  ingress 
or  egress  but  under  the  curtain  into  the  room.  The 
curtain,  too,  was  entire  from  end  to  end,  a  matter 
of  importance  in  regard  to  certain  phenomena  that 
occurred.     Three  chairs  were  placed  close  in  front  of 


348  MY   LIFE 

this  curtain  on  which  sat  the  medium  and  two  persons 
from  the  audience.  Another  black  curtain  was  passed 
in  front  of  them  across  their  chests  so  as  to  enclose 
their  bodies  in  a  dark  chamber,  while  their  heads  and 
the  arms  of  the  outer  sitter  were  free.  The  medium's 
two  hands  were  placed  on  the  hands  and  wrist  of  the 
sitter  next  him. 

The  stance  began  with  purely  physical  phenomena. 
The  tambourine  was  rattled  and  played  on,  then  a 
hand  appeared  above  the  curtain,  and  a  stick  was 
given  to  it  which  it  seized.  Then  the  tambourine  was 
lifted  high  on  this  stick  and  whirled  round  with  great 
rapidity,  the  bell  being  rung  at  the  same  time.  All 
the  time  the  medium  sat  quiet  and  impassive,  and 
the  person  next  him  certified  to  his  two  hands  being 
on  his  or  hers.  On  one  occasion  a  lady,  a  friend  of 
Professor  Elliott  Coues  and  a  woman  of  unusual 
ability  and  character,  was  the  sitter,  and  certified  at 
all  critical  times  during  the  whole  seance  that  the 
medium's  hands  were  felt  by  her.  After  these  and 
many  other  things  were  performed,  the  hand  would 
appear  above  the  curtain,  the  fingers  moving  excitedly. 
This  was  the  signal  for  a  pencil  and  a  pad  of  note- 
paper  (as  commonly  used  in  America)  ;  then  rapid 
writing  was  heard,  a  slip  of  paper  torn  off  and  thrown 
over  the  curtain,  sometimes  two  or  three  in  rapid 
succession,  and  in  the  direction  of  certain  sitters. 
The  director  of  the  stance  picked  them  up,  read  the 
name  signed,  and  asked  if  any  one  knew  it,  and  when 
claimed  it  was  handed  to  him.  In  this  way  a  dozen 
or  more  of  the  chance  visitors  received  messages 
which  were  always  intelligible  to  them  and  often 
strikingly  appropriate.  I  will  give  some  of  the 
messages  I  thus  received  myself. 

On  my  second  visit  a  very  sceptical  friend  went 


MESMERISM  TO  SPIRITUALISM     349 

with  us,  and  seeing  the  writing-pad  on  the  piano 
marked  several  of  the  sheets  with  his  initials.  The 
medium  was  very  angry  and  said  it  would  spoil  the 
seance.  However,  he  was  calmed  by  his  friends. 
When  it  came  to  the  writing  the  pad  was  given  to  me 
over  the  top  of  the  curtain  to  hold.  I  held  it  just 
above  the  medium's  shoulder,  when  a  hand  and 
pencil  came  through  the  curtain,  and  wrote  on  the 
pad  as  I  held  it.  It  is  a  bold  scrawl  and  hard  to 
read,  but  the  first  words  seem  to  be,  "  Friends  were 
here  to  write,  but  only  this  one  could.  ...  A.  W." 
Another  evening,  with  the  same  medium,  I  received 
a  paper  with  this  message,  "I  am  William  Martin, 
and  I  come  for  Mr.  William  Wallace,  who  could  not 
write  this  time  after  all.  He  wishes  to  say  to  you 
that  you  shall  be  sustained  by  coming  results  in  the 
position  you  have  taken  in  the  Ross  case.  It  was  a 
most  foul  misrepresentation." 

This,  and  other  writing  I  had  afterwards,  are  to 
me  striking  tests  in  the  name  William  Martin.  I 
never  knew  him,  but  he  was  an  early  friend  of  my 
brother  who  was  for  some  time  with  Martin's  father 
to  learn  practical  building,  the  latter  being  then 
engaged  in  erecting  King's  College.  When  I  was 
with  my  brother  learning  surveying,  etc.,  he  used 
often  to  speak  of  his  friend  Martin,  but  for  the  last 
forty-five  years  I  had  never  thought  of  the  name  and 
was  greatly  surprised  when  it  appeared.  About  a 
month  later  I  had  the  following  message  from  the 
elder  Martin,  written  in  a  different  hand : — 

"  Mr.  Wallace, 

"  Your  father  was  an  esteemed  friend,  and 
I  like  to  come  to  you  for  his  sake.  We  are  often 
together.     How  strange  it  seems  to  us  here  that  the 


350  MY   LIFE 

masses  can  so  long  exist  in  ignorance.  Console  your- 
self with  the  thought  that  though  ignorance,  super- 
stition and  bigotry  have  withheld  from  you  the  just 
rewards  to  which  your  keen  enlightenment  and  noble 
sacrifices  so  fully  entitle  you,  the  end  is  not  yet,  and 
a  mighty  change  is  about  to  take  place  to  put  you 
where  you  belong. 

"William  Martin." 

I  have  no  evidence  that  this  Mr.  Martin  was  a 
friend  of  my  father,  but  the  fact  that  my  brother 
William  was  with  him  as  stated  (which  must  have 
been  a  favour),  renders  it  probable.  On  the  same 
evening  there  was  a  number  of  messages  to  about  a 
dozen  people  all  in  different  handwritings,  several  of 
which  were  recognized.  My  friend  General  Lippitt 
had  a  most  beautiful  message  which  he  allowed  me 
to  copy,  as  it  was  a  wonderful  test  and  greatly  sur- 
prised and  delighted  him.  His  first  wife  had  died 
twenty-seven  years  before  in  California.  She  was  an 
English  lady  and  he  was  greatly  attached  to  her. 
This  is  the  message : — 

"Darling  Francis, 

"  I  come  now  to  greet  you  from  the  high 
spheres  to  which  I  have  ascended.  Do  you  recall  the 
past  ?  Do  you  remember  this  day .-'  This  day  I  used 
to  look  forward  to  and  mention  with  such  pride  ? 
This,  my  darling,  is  my  birthday  anniversary.  Do 
you  not  remember  ?  Oh  how  happy  shall  we  be 
when  reunited  in  a  world  where  we  shall  see  as  we 
are  seen  and  know  as  we  are  known. 

"  Elizabeth  Lippitt." 

General  Lippitt   told   me  it  was  his  first  wife's 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM     351 

birthday,  that  he  had  not  recollected  it  that  day, 
and  that  no  one  in  Washington  knew  the  fact  but 
himself. 

A  German  gentleman  who  was  present  had  a 
message  given  him,  which  was  not  only  written, 
as  he  declared,  in  excellent  German,  but  was  very 
characteristic  of  the  friend  from  whom  it  purported 
to  come. 

On  this  evening  most  wonderful  physical  mani- 
festations occurred.  A  stick  was  pushed  out  through 
the  curtain.  Two  watches  were  handed  to  me  through 
the  curtain,  and  were  claimed  by  the  two  persons  who 
sat  by  the  medium.  The  small  tambourine,  about 
ten  inches  diameter,  was  pushed  through  the  curtain 
and  fell  on  the  floor.  These  objects  came  through 
different  parts  of  the  curtain,  but  left  no  holes  as 
could  be  seen  at  the  time,  and  was  proved  by  a  close 
examination  afterwards.  More  marvellous  still  (if 
that  be  possible),  a  waistcoat  was  handed  to  me  over 
the  curtain,  which  proved  to  be  the  medium's,  though 
his  coat  was  left  on  and  his  hands  had  been  held  by 
his  companion  all  the  time  ;  also  about  a  score  lof 
people  were  looking  on  all  the  time  in  a  well-lighted 
room.  These  things  seem  impossible,  but  they  are, 
nevertheless,  facts. 

At  San  Francisco  my  time  was  short,  and  my 
experiences  were  limited  to  a  slate-writing  stance  of  a 
striking  and  very  satisfactory  nature.  I  went  with 
my  brother  John  who  had  lived  in  California  nearly 
forty  years,  and  who,  the  day  before,  had  bought  a 
folding-slate  bound  with  list  to  shut  noiselessly.  The 
seance  was  in  the  morning  of  a  bright  sunny  day,  and 
we  sat  at  a  small  table  close  to  a  window.  Mr.  Owen, 
the  editor  of  the  Golden  Gate,  with  a  friend  (a 
physician),  accompanied  us  ;  but  they  sat  a  little  way 


352  MY   LIFE 

from  the  table,  looking  on.  The  medium,  Mr.  Fred 
Evans,  was  quite  a  young  man,  whose  remarkable 
gift  had  been  developed  under  Mr.  Owen's  guidance. 

From  a  pile  of  small  slates  on  a  side-table  four 
were  taken  at  a  time,  cleaned  with  a  damp  sponge, 
and  handed  to  us  to  examine,  then  laid  in  pairs  on 
the  table.  All  our  hands  were  then  placed  over  them 
till  the  signal  was  given,  and  on  ourselves  opening 
them  writing  was  found  on  both  slates.  Two  other 
pairs  were  then  similarly  placed  on  the  table,  on  one 
of  which  the  medium  drew  two  diagonal  pencil  lines, 
and  on  that  slate  writing  was  produced  in  five 
different  colours — deep  blue,  red,  light  green-blue, 
pale  red-lilac,  deep  lilac,  and  these  could  be  seen  all 
superposed  upon  the  pencil  cross-lines.  My  brother's 
folding-slate  was  then  placed  upon  the  floor  a  foot  or 
two  away  from  the  table,  and  after  we  had  conversed 
for  a  few  minutes,  keeping  it  in  sight,  it  was  found  to 
be  written  on  both  the  inner  sides.  It  then  occurred 
to  me  to  ask  the  medium  whether  writing  could  be 
produced  on  paper  placed  between  slates.  After 
a  moment's  pause,  as  if  asking  the  question  of  his 
guides,  he  told  me  to  take  a  paper  pad,  tear  off  six 
pieces,  and  place  them  all  between  a  pair  of  slates. 
This  I  did,  and  we  placed  our  hands  over  them  as 
before,  and  in  a  few  minutes,  on  opening  them,  we 
found  six  portraits  in  a  peculiar  kind  of  crayon 
drawing. 

I  will  now  describe  the  writings  and  drawings  we 
obtained,  which  are  now  before  me.  The  first  was  a 
letter  filling  the  slate  in  small,  clear,  and  delicate 
writing,  of  which  I  will  quote  the  concluding  portion  : 
"  I  wish  I  could  describe  to  you  my  spirit  home.  But 
I  cannot  find  words  suitable  in  your  earthly  language 
to  give  it  the  expression  it  deserves.     But  you  will 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM      353 

know  all  when  you  join  me  in  the  spirit  world.  .  .  . 
Your  loving  sister,  Elizabeth  Wallace.  Herbert  is 
here." 

Here  are  two  family  names  given,  the  first  being 
one  which  no  one  else  present  could  have  known,  as 
she  died  when  we  were  both  schoolboys.  The  opening 
and  concluding  parts  of  the  letter  show  that  it  was 
addressed  specially  to  myself.  The  next  was  ad- 
dressed to  my  brother,  referring  to  me  as  "brother 
Alf,"  and  is  signed  "  P.  Wallace."  This  we  cannot 
understand,  as  we  have  no  relative  with  that  initial, 
except  a  cousin,  Percy  Wilson.  It  is,  I  think,  not 
improbable  that  in  transferring  the  message  through 
the  medium,  and  perhaps  through  a  spirit-scribe  (as 
is  often  said  to  be  the  case),  the  surname  was  mis- 
understood owing  to  the  latter  supposing  that  the 
communicant  was  a  brother. 

The  next  slate  contains  a  message  signed  "Judge 
Edmonds,"  addressed  to  myself  and  Mr.  Owen,  on 
the  general  subject  of  spirit  manifestations.  It  is 
written  very  distinctly  in  a  flowing  hand. 

The  next  is  the  slate  written  in  five  colours,  and 
signed  "John  Gray,"  one  of  the  well-known  early 
advocates  of  spiritualism  in  America.  It  is  also  on 
the  general  subject  of  spirit-return.  Then  comes  a 
slate  containing  a  portrait  and  signature  of  "  Jno. 
Pierpont,"  one  of  the  pioneers  of  spiritualism,  and 
around  the  margin  three  messages  in  different  hand- 
writings. One  is  from  Stanley  St.  Clair,  the  spirit- 
artist,  who  says  he  has  produced  the  portrait  for  me, 
at  the  request  of  the  medium.  The  others  are  short 
messages  from  Elizabeth  Wallace  and  R.  Wallace, 
the  latter  perhaps  one  of  the  unknown  Scotch  uncles 
of  my  father,  the  other  beginning,  "God  bless  you, 
my  boys,"  is  probably  from  our  paternal  grandmother, 

2    A 


354  MY   LIFE 

who  is  buried  at  Laleham.  The  last  is  my  brother's 
folding-slate,  containing  on  one  side  a  short  farewell 
from  "John  Gray,"  the  signature  being  written  three 
times  in  different  styles  and  tints  ;  the  other  side  is  a 
message  signed,  "  Your  father,  T.  V.  Wallace."  This, 
again,  was  a  test,  as  no  one  present  would  have  been 
able  to  give  my  father's  unusual  initials  correctly, 
and  as  he  was  accustomed  to  sign  his  name. 

The  six  portraits  on  paper  with  the  lips  tinted  are 
those  of  Jno.  Pierpont  (signed)  ;  Benjamin  Rush  (an 
early  spiritualist,  signed) ;  Robt.  Hare,  M.D.,  whose 
works  I  had  quoted  (signed)  ;  D.  D.  Home,  the  cele- 
brated medium  who  had  died  the  year  before — a 
likeness  easily  recognized  ;  a  girl  (signed  "  The  Spirit 
of  Mary  Wallace  "),  probably  my  sister  who  had  died 
the  year  before  I  was  born,  when  eight  years  old  ; 
and  a  lady,  who  was  recognized  as  Mrs.  Breed,  a 
medium  of  San  Francisco.  These  are  all  rather  rude 
outlines,  in  somewhat  irregular  and  interrupted  dashes, 
but  they  are  all  lifelike,  and  considering  that  they 
must  have  been  precipitated  on  the  six  surfaces  while 
in  contact  with  each  other  between  the  slates,  as 
placed  by  myself,  are  exceedingly  curious.  The 
whole  of  these  seven  plates  and  six  papers  were 
produced  so  rapidly  that  the  stance  occupied  less  than 
an  hour,  and  with  such  simple  and  complete  openness, 
under  the  eyes  of  four  observers,  as  to  constitute 
absolutely  test  conditions,  although  without  any  of 
the  usual  paraphernalia  of  tests  which  were  here  quite 
unnecessary.  A  statement  to  this  effect  was  pub- 
lished, with  an  account  of  the  seance^  signed  by  all 
present. 

During  the  last  fifteen  years  I  have  not  seen  much 
of  spiritualistic  phenomena  ;  but  those  who  have  read 


MESMERISM   TO   SPIRITUALISM     355 

the  account  of  my  early  investigations  in  my  book  on 
the  subject,  and  add  to  them  all  that  I  have  indicated 
here,  will  see  that  I  have  reached  my  present  stand- 
point by  a  long  series  of  experiences  under  such  varied 
and  peculiar  conditions  as  to  render  unbelief  impos- 
sible. As  Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter  well  remarked  many 
years  ago,  people  can  only  believe  new  and  extra- 
ordinary facts  if  there  is  a  place  for  them  in  their 
existing  "  fabric  of  thought."  The  majority  of  people 
to-day  have  been  brought  up  in  the  belief  that 
miracles,  ghosts,  and  the  whole  series  of  strange 
phenomena  here  described  cannot  exist ;  that  they 
are  contrary  to  the  laws  of  nature  ;  that  they  are  the 
superstitions  of  a  bygone  age ;  and  that  therefore 
they  are  necessarily  either  impostures  or  delusions. 
There  is  no  place  in  the  fabric  of  their  thought  into 
which  such  facts  can  be  fitted.  When  I  first  began 
this  inquiry  it  was  the  same  with  myself.  The  facts 
did  not  fit  into  my  then  existing  fabric  of  thought. 
All  my  preconceptions,  all  my  knowledge,  all  my 
belief  in  the  supremacy  of  science  and  of  natural  law 
were  against  the  possibility  of  such  phenomena.  And 
even  when,  one  by  one,  the  facts  were  forced  upon  me 
without  possibility  of  escape  from  them,  still,  as  Sir 
David  Brewster  declared  after  being  at  first  astounded 
by  the  phenomena  he  saw  with  Mr.  Home,  "spirit 
was  the  last  thing  I  could  give  in  to."  Every  other 
possible  solution  was  tried  and  rejected.  Unknown 
laws  of  nature  were  found  to  be  of  no  avail  when 
there  was  always  an  unknown  intelligence  behind  the 
phenomena — an  intelligence  that  showed  a  human 
character  and  individuality,  and  an  individuality  which 
almost  invariably  claimed  to  be  that  of  some  person 
who  had  lived  on  earth,  and  who,  in  many  cases,  was 
able  to  prove  his  or  her  identity.      Thus,  little  by 


356  MY   LIFE 

little,  a  place  was  made  in  my  fabric  of  thought, 
first  for  all  such  well-attested  facts,  and  then,  but 
more  slowly,  for  the  spiritualistic  interpretation  of 
them. 

Unfortunately,  at  the  present  day  most  inquirers 
begin  at  the  wrong  end.  They  want  to  see,  and 
sometimes  do  see  the  most  wonderful  phenomena 
first,  and  being  utterly  unable  to  accept  them  as  facts 
denounce  them  as  impostures,  as  did  Tyndall  and 
G.  H.  Lewes,  or  declare,  as  did  Huxley,  that  such 
phenomena  do  not  interest  them.  Many  people 
think  that  when  I  and  others  publish  accounts  of  such 
phenomena,  we  wish  or  require  our  readers  to  believe 
them  on  oiir  testimony.  But  that  is  not  the  case. 
Neither  I  nor  any  other  well-instructed  spiritualist 
expects  anything  of  the  kind.  We  write  not  to 
convince,  but  to  excite  to  inquiry.  We  ask  our 
readers  not  for  belief,  but  for  doubt  of  their  own 
infallibility  on  this  question  ;  we  ask  for  inquiry  and 
patient  experiment  before  hastily  concluding  that  we 
are,  all  of  us,  mere  dupes  and  idiots  as  regards  a 
subject  to  which  we  have  devoted  our  best  mental 
faculties  and  powers  of  observation  for  many  years. 


CHAPTER   XXII 

A  CHAPTER   ON   MONEY   MATTERS — EARNINGS   AND 
LOSSES— SPECULATIONS  AND   LAW-SUITS 

Up  to  the  age  of  twenty-one  I  do  not  think  I  ever 
had  a  sovereign  of  my  own.  I  then  received  a  small 
sum,  perhaps  about  ;^50,  the  remnant  of  a  legacy 
from  my  grandfather,  John  Greenell.  This  enabled 
me  to  get  a  fair  outfit  of  clothes,  and  to  keep  myself 
till  I  got  the  appointment  at  the  Leicester  school. 
While  living  at  Neath  as  a  surveyor  I  did  little  more 
than  earn  my  living,  except  during  the  six  months  of 
the  railway  mania,  when  I  was  able  to  save  about 
;^ioo.  This  enabled  me  to  go  to  Para  with  Bates, 
and  during  the  four  years  on  the  Amazon  my  collec- 
tions just  paid  all  expenses,  but  those  I  was  bringing 
home  with  me  would  probably  have  sold  for  ;;C20o. 
My  agent,  Mr.  Stevens,  had  fortunately  insured  them 
for  ;^I50,  which  enabled  me  to  live  a  year  in  London, 
and  get  a  good  outfit  and  a  sufficient  cash  balance 
for  my  Malayan  journey. 

My  eight  years  in  the  Malay  Archipelago  were 
successful,  financially,  beyond  my  expectations. 
Celebes,  the  Moluccas,  the  Aru  Islands,  and  New 
Guinea  were,  for  English  museums  and  private  col- 
lections, an  almost  unknown  territory.  A  large  pro- 
portion of  my  insects  and  birds  were  either  wholly 
new  or  of  extreme  rarity  in  England  ;  and  as  many 


358  MY    LIFE 

of  them  were  of  large  size  and  of  great  beauty,  they 
brought  very  high  prices.  My  agent  had  invested 
the  proceeds  from  time  to  time  in  Indian  guaranteed 
railway  stock,  and  a  year  after  my  return  I  found 
myself  in  possession  of  about  ^300  a  year.  Besides 
this,  I  still  possessed  the  whole  series  of  private  col- 
lections, including  large  numbers  of  new  or  very  rare 
species,  which,  after  I  had  made  what  use  of  them 
was  needed  for  my  work,  produced  an  amount  which 
in  the  same  securities  would  have  produced  about 
;i^200  a  year  more. 

But  I  never  reached  that  comfortable  position. 
Owing  to  my  never  before  having  had  more  than 
enough  to  supply  my  immediate  wants,  I  was  wholly 
ignorant  of  the  numerous  snares  and  pitfalls  that 
beset  the  ignorant  investor,  and  I  unfortunately  came 
under  the  influence  of  two  or  three  men  who,  quite 
unintentionally,  led  me  into  trouble.  Soon  after  I 
came  home  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  R.,  who 
held  a  good  appointment  under  Government,  and 
had,  besides,  the  expectation  of  a  moderate  fortune 
on  the  death  of  an  uncle.  I  soon  became  intimate 
with  him,  and  we  were  for  some  years  joint  investi- 
gators of  spiritualistic  phenomena.  He  was,  like 
myself  at  that  time,  an  agnostic,  well  educated,  and 
of  a  more  positive  character  than  myself.  He  had 
for  some  years  saved  part  of  his  income,  and  invested 
it  in  various  foreign  securities  at  low  prices,  selling 
out  when  they  rose  in  value,  and  in  this  way  he 
assured  me  he  had  in  a  few  years  doubled  the 
amount  he  had  saved.  He  studied  price-lists  and 
foreign  news,  and  assured  me  that  it  was  quite  easy, 
with  a  little  care  and  judgment,  to  increase  your 
capital  in  this  way.  He  quite  laughed  at  the  idea 
of  allowing  several  thousand  pounds  to  lay  idle,  as  he 


MONEY   MATTERS  359 

termed  it,  in  Indian  securities,  and  so  imbued  me  with 
an  idea  of  his  great  knowledge  of  the  money  market, 
that  I  was  persuaded  to  sell  out  some  of  my  bonds 
and  debentures  and  buy  others  that  he  recommended, 
which  brought  in  a  higher  interest,  and  which  he 
believed  would  soon  rise  considerably  in  value.  This 
change  went  on  slowly  with  various  success  for  several 
years,  till  at  last  I  had  investments  in  various 
English,  American,  and  foreign  railways,  whose  fluc- 
tuations in  value  I  was  quite  unable  to  comprehend, 
and  I  began  to  find,  when  too  late,  that  almost  all  my 
changes  of  investment  brought  me  loss  instead  of 
profit ;  and  later  on,  when  the  great  depression  of 
trade  of  1875-85  occurred,  the  loss  was  so  great  as  to 
be  almost  ruin. 

In  1 866  one  of  my  oldest  friends  became  secretary 
to  a  small  body  of  speculators,  who  had  offices  in 
Pall  Mall,  and  who,  among  other  things,  were  buying 
slate  quarry  properties,  and  forming  companies  to 
work  them. 

I  was  persuaded  to  take  shares,  and  to  be  a 
director  of  these  companies,  without  any  knowledge 
of  the  business,  or  any  idea  how  much  capital  would 
be  required.  The  quarries  were  started,  machinery 
purchased,  call  after  call  made,  with  the  result  in  both 
cases  that,  after  four  or  five  years  of  struggle,  the 
capital  required  and  the  working  expenses  were  so 
great  that  the  companies  had  to  be  wound  up,  and  I 
was  the  loser  of  about  a  thousand  pounds. 

While  this  was  going  on  a  still  more  unfortunate 
influence  became  active.  My  old  friend  in  Timor 
and  Singapore,  Mr.  Frederick  Geach,  the  mining 
engineer,  came  home  from  the  East,  and  we  became 
very  intimate,  and  saw  a  good  deal  of  each  other. 
He  was  a  Cornishman,  and  familiar  with  tin,  lead, 


36o  MY   LIFE 

and  copper  mining  all  his  life,  and  he  had  the  most 
unbounded  confidence  in  good  English  mines  as  an 
investment.  He  had  shares  in  some  of  the  lead- 
mines  of  Shropshire  and  Montgomeryshire,  and  we 
went  for  a  walking  tour  in  that  beautiful  country, 
visited  the  mines,  went  down  the  shafts  by  endless 
perpendicular  ladders,  and  examined  the  veins  and 
workings  with  the  manager,  who  had  great  confidence 
in  its  value,  and  was  a  large  shareholder.  "  Here," 
said  Geach,  "  you  can  see  the  vein  of  lead  ore.  It  is 
very  valuable,  and  extends  to  an  unknown  depth. 
This  is  not  a  probability,  it  is  a  certainty."  And  so 
I  was  persuaded  to  buy  shares  in  lead-mines,  and 
gradually  had  a  large  portion  of  my  capital  invested 
in  them.  About  1870  the  price  of  lead  began  to  fall, 
and  has  continued  to  fall  ever  since.  The  result  of 
all  this  was  that  by  1880  a  large  part  of  the  money 
I  had  earned  at  the  risk  of  health  and  life  was 
irrecoverably  lost. 

While  these  continued  misfortunes  were  in  pro- 
gress I  was  involved  in  two  other  annoyances, 
causing  anxiety  and  worry  for  years,  as  well  as  a  very 
large  money  loss.  The  first  was  with  a  dishonest 
builder,  who  contracted  to  build  my  house  at  Grays, 
and  who  was  paid  every  month  according  to  the 
proportion  of  the  work  done.  One  day,  when  the 
house  was  little  more  than  half  finished,  he  did  not 
appear  to  pay  his  men,  and  as  they  would  not  con- 
tinue to  work  without  their  money  I  paid  them.  He 
did  not  appear  the  next  week,  and  sent  no  excuse,  so 
the  architect  gave  him  notice  that  I  should  complete 
the  building  myself,  and  that,  according  to  the  agree- 
ment, he  would  be  responsible  for  any  cost  beyond 
the  contract  price.  After  a  few  weeks  he  appeared, 
and  wanted  to  go  on,  but  that  we  declined.     The 


MONEY   MATTERS  361 

house  cost  me  somewhat  more  than  the  contract  price, 
and  when  it  was  finished  I  sent  him  word  he  could 
have  his  ladders,  scaffold-poles,  boards,  etc.,  though, 
according  to  the  agreement,  they  were  to  be  my 
property  on  his  failure  to  finish  the  building. 

I  soon  found,  however,  that  he  had  not  paid  for  a 
large  portion  of  the  materials,  and  bills  kept  coming 
in  for  months  afterwards  for  bricks,  timber,  stone, 
iron-work,  etc.,  etc.  The  merchants  who  had  trusted 
him  found  that  he  had  no  effects  whatever,  as  he  lived 
as  a  lodger  with  his  father  ;  and  from  all  I  heard,  was 
accustomed  to  take  contracts  in  different  places  round 
London,  and  by  not  paying  for  any  materials  that  he 
could  get  on  credit,  made  a  handsome  profit.  But 
the  height  of  his  impudence  was  to  come.  About 
five  years  after  the  house  was  finished,  I  received  a 
demand  through  a  lawyer  for  (I  think)  between  £800 
and  ;^900  damages  for  not  allowing  this  man  to  finish 
the  house  !  I  wrote,  refusing  to  pay  a  penny.  Then 
came  a  notice  of  an  action  at  law  ;  and  I  was  obliged 
to  put  it  in  a  lawyer's  hands.  All  the  usual  prelimi- 
naries of  interrogatories,  affidavits,  statements  of  claim, 
replies,  objections^  etc.,  etc.,  were  gone  through,  and 
on  every  point  argued  we  were  successful,  with  costs, 
which  we  never  got.  The  case  was  lengthened  out 
for  two  or  three  years,  and  then  ceased,  the  result 
being  that  I  had  to  pay  about  ;^ioo  law  costs  for 
what  was  merely  an  attempt  to  extort  money.  That 
was  my  experience  of  English  law,  which  leaves  the 
honest  man  in  the  power  of  the  dishonest  one,  mulcts 
the  former  in  heavy  expenses,  and  is  thus  the  very 
antithesis  oi  justice. 

The  next  matter  was  a  much  more  serious  one, 
and  cost  me  fifteen  years  of  continued  worry,  litiga- 
tion, and  persecution,  with  the  final  loss  of  several 


362  MY   LIFE 

hundred  pounds.  And  it  was  all  brought  upon  me 
by  my  ignorance  and  my  own  fault — ignorance  of  the 
fact  so  well  shown  by  the  late  Professor  de  Morgan 
— that  "  paradoxers,"  as  he  termed  them,  can  never 
be  convinced,  and  my  fault  in  consenting  to  get 
money  by  any  kind  of  wager.  It  constitutes,  there- 
fore, the  most  regrettable  incident  in  my  life.  As 
many  inaccurate  accounts  have  been  published,  I  will 
now  state  the  facts,  as  briefly  as  possible,  from  docu- 
ments still  in  my  possession. 

In  Scientific  Opinion  of  January  12,  1870,  Mr. 
John  Hampden  (a  relative  of  Bishop  Hampden) 
challenged  scientific  men  to  prove  the  convexity  of 
the  surface  of  any  inland  water,  offering  to  stake 
;^500  on  the  result.  It  contained  the  following  words  : 
"  He  will  acknowledge  that  he  has  forfeited  his 
deposit  if  his  opponent  can  exhibit,  to  the  satisfaction 
of  any  intelligent  referee,  a  convex  railway,  river, 
canal,  or  lake."  Before  accepting  this  challenge  I 
showed  it  to  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  and  asked  him  whether 
he  thought  I  might  accept  it.  He  replied,  "  Certainly. 
It  may  stop  these  foolish  people  to  have  it  plainly 
shown  them."  I  therefore  wrote  accepting  the  offer, 
proposing  Bala  lake,  in  North  Wales,  for  the  experi- 
ment, and  Mr.  J.  H.  Walsh,  editor  of  the  Field,  or 
any  other  suitable  person,  as  referee.  Mr.  Hampden 
proposed  the  Old  Bedford  canal  in  Norfolk,  which, 
near  Downham  Market,  has  a  stretch  of  six  miles 
quite  straight  between  two  bridges.  He  also  pro- 
posed a  Mr.  William  Carpenter  (a  journeyman 
printer,  who  had  written  a  book  upholding  the  "flat 
earth "  theory)  as  his  referee ;  and  as  Mr.  Walsh 
could  not  stay  away  from  London  more  that  one 
day,  which  was  foggy,  I  chose  Mr.  Coulcher,  a  sur- 
geon and  amateur  astronomer,  of  Downham  Market, 


MONEY   MATTERS  363 

to  act  on  my  behalf,  Mr.  Walsh  being  the  umpire 
and  referee. 

The  experiment  finally  agreed  upon  was  as  follows  : 
The  iron  parapet  of  Welney  bridge  was  thirteen  feet 
three  inches  above  the  water  of  the  canal.  The  Old 
Bedford  bridge,  about  six  miles  off,  was  of  brick  and 
somewhat  higher.  On  this  bridge  I  fixed  a  large 
sheet  of  white  calico,  six  feet  long  and  three  feet 
deep,  with  a  thick  black  band  along  the  centre,  the 
lower  edge  of  which  was  the  same  height  from  the 
water  as  the  parapet  of  Welney  bridge ;  so  that 
the  centre  of  it  would  be  as  high  as  the  line  of  sight 
of  the  large  six-inch  telescope  I  had  brought  with  me. 
At  the  central  point,  about  three  miles  from  each 
bridge,  I  fixed  up  a  long  pole  with  two  red  discs  on 
it,  the  upper  one  having  its  centre  the  same  height 
above  the  water  as  the  centre  of  the  black  band  and 
of  the  telescope,  while  the  second  disc  was  four  feet 
lower  down.  It  is  evident  that  if  the  surface  of  the 
water  is  a  perfectly  straight  line  for  the  six  miles,  then 
the  three  objects — the  telescope,  the  top  disc,  and  the 
black  band — being  all  exactly  the  same  height  above 
the  water,  the  disc  would  be  seen  in  the  telescope 
projected  upon  the  black  band  ;  whereas,  if  the  six- 
mile  surface  of  the  water  is  convexly  curved,  then  the 
top  disc  would  appear  to  be  decidedly  higher  than 
the  black  band,  the  amount  due  to  the  known  size  of 
the  earth  being  five  feet  eight  inches,  which  amount 
will  be  reduced  a  little  by  refraction  to  perhaps  about 
five  feet. 

The  following  diagrams  illustrate  the  experiment 
made.  The  curved  line  in  Fig.  i,  and  the  straight 
line  in  Fig.  2,  show  the  surface  of  the  canal  on  the 
two  theories  of  a  round  or  a  flat  earth.  A  and  C  are 
the  two  bridges  six  miles  apart,  while  B  is  the  pole 


3^4 


MY   LIFE 


midway  with  two  discs  on  it,  the  upper  disc,  the 
telescope  at  A,  and  the  black  line  on  the  bridge  at  C, 
being  all  exactly  the  same  height  above  the  water. 
If  the  surface  of  the  water  is  truly  flat,  then  on  looking 
at  the  mark  C  with  the  telescope  A,  the  top  disc  B 
will  cover  that  mark.  But  if  the  surface  of  the  water 
is  curved,  then  the  upper  disc  will  appear  above  the 
black  mark,  and  if  the  disc  is  more  than  four  feet 
above  the  line  joining  the  telescope  and  the  black 


^^    it. 

mark,  then  the  lower  disc  will  also  appear  above  the 
black  mark.  Before  the  experiment  was  made  a 
diagram  similar  to  this  was  submitted  to  Mr.  Hampden, 
his  referee  Mr.  Carpenter,  and  Mr.  Walsh,  and  all 
three  agreed  that  it  showed  clearly  what  should  be 
seen  in  the  two  cases,  while  the  former  declared  their 
firm  belief  that  Fig.  2  showed  what  zvoiUd  be  seen. 

When  the  pole  was  set  up  and  the  mark  put  upon 
the  bridge,  Mr.  Carpenter  accompanied  me,  and  saw 
that  their  heights  above  the  water  were  the  same  as 
that  of  the  telescope  resting  on  the  parapet  of  the 
bridge.     What  was  seen  in   the  large  telescope  was 


MONEY   MATTERS 


365 


sketched  by  Mr.  Coulcher  and  signed  by  Mr.  Carpenter 
as  correct,  and  is  shown  in  the  following  diagram 
which  was  reproduced  in  the  Field  newspaper  (March 
26,  1870),  and  also  in  a  pamphlet  by  Carpenter  him- 
self. But  he  declared  that  this  proved  nothing, 
because  the  telescope  was  not  levelled,  and  because  it 
had  no  cross-hair ! 

At  his  request  to  have  a  spirit-level  in  order  to 
show  if  there  was  any  "  fall "  of  the  surface  of  water, 


"  Signed  by  Mr,  Carpenter."— Z)r.  Coulcher' s  Report.     '^Signed I " 

I  had  been  to  King's  Lynn  and  borrowed  a  good 
Troughton's  level  from  a  surveyor  there.  This  I  now 
set  up  on  the  bridge  at  exactly  the  same  height 
above  the  water  as  the  other  telescope,  and  having 
levelled  it  very  accurately  and  called  Mr.  Carpenter 
to  see  that  the  bubble  was  truly  central  and  that  the 
least  movement  of  the  screws  elevating  or  depressing 
it  would  cause  the  bubble  to  move  away,  I  adjusted 
the  focus  on  to  the  distant  bridge,  showing  also  the 
central  staff  and  its  two  discs. 

Mr.  Coulcher  looked  at  it,  and  then  Mr.  Carpenter, 


366 


MY    LIFE 


and  the  moment  the  latter  did  he  said,  "  Beautiful ! 
Beautiful!  "  and  on  Mr.  Hampden  asking  him  if  it 
was  all  right,  he  replied  that  it  was  perfect,  and  that 
it  showed  the  three  points  in  "a  perfect  straight 
line ; "  "  as  level  as  possible !  "  And  he  actually 
jumped  for  joy.  Then  I  asked  Mr.  Coulcher  and  Mr. 
Carpenter  both  to  make  sketches,  which  they  did. 
We  then  fixed  a  calico  flag  on  the  parapet  to  make 


The  "Bedford  Level"  Survey. — Sketches  by  the 
Two  Referees. 

Copied  from  the  Fielci  for  March  26,  1870. 


These  two  views,  as  seen  by  means  of  the  inverting  telescope,  are  exact 
representations  of  the  sketches  taken  by  Mr.  Hampden's  Referee, 
and  attested  by  Dr.  Coulcher  as  being  correct  in  both  cases  :  first, 
from  Welney  Bridge  ;  and  secondly,  from  the  Old  Bedford  Bridge. 

it  more  visible,  and  drove  back  with  the  instruments 
to  Old  Bedford  bridge,  where  I  set  up  the  level 
again  at  the  proper  height  above  the  water,  and 
again  asked  both  the  referees  to  make  sketches 
of  what  was  seen  in  the  level-telescope.  This  they 
did.  Mr.  Carpenter's  was  rather  more  accurately 
drawn,  and  Mr.  Coulcher  signed  them  as  being  correct, 
and  both  are  reproduced  here. 

The  view  in  the  large  telescope  and  in  the  level- 
telescope   both  told   exactly    the    same   thing,   and, 


MONEY    MATTERS  367 

moreover,  proved  that  the  curvature  was  very  nearly 
of  the  amount  calculated  from  the  known  dimensions 
of  the  earth.  Mr.  Hampden  declined  to  look  through 
either  telescope,  saying  he  trusted  to  Mr.  Carpenter ; 
while  the  latter  declared  positively  that  they  had  won, 
and  that  we  knew  it ;  that  the  fact  that  the  distant 
signal  appeared  below  the  middle  one  as  far  as  the 
middle  one  did  below  the  cross-hair,  proved  that  the 
three  were  in  a  straight  line,  and  that  the  earth  was 
flat,  and  he  rejected  the  view  in  the  large  telescope 
as  proving  nothing  for  the  reasons  already  stated. 

At  first  Mr.  Hampden  refused  to  appoint  an 
umpire,  because  my  referee,  Mr.  Coulcher,  refused  to 
discuss  the  question  with  Mr.  Carpenter ;  but  after  a 
few  days  he  agreed  that  Mr.  Walsh  should  be  the 
umpire,  after  receiving  the  reports  of  the  two  referees. 
He  had,  in  fact,  unbounded  confidence  in  what  Mr. 
Carpenter  told  him,  and  firmly  believed  that  the 
experiments  had  demonstrated  the  flat  earth,  and 
that  no  honest  man  could  think  otherwise. 

But  Mr,  Walsh  decided  without  any  hesitation 
that  I  had  proved  what  I  undertook  to  prove.  He 
published  the  whole  of  the  particulars  with  the  reports 
of  the  referees  and  their  sketches  in  the  Field  of 
March  18  and  26,  while  a  considerable  correspondence 
and  discussion  went  on  for  some  weeks  later.  At 
Mr.  Hampden's  request  he  allowed  Mr.  Carpenter 
to  send  in  a  long  argument  to  show  that  the  experi- 
ments were  all  in  Mr.  Hampden's  favour,  and  having 
considered  them,  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Hampden  that  he 
should  hand  me  the  stakes  on  a  certain  day  if  he  had 
no  other  reason  to  adduce  why  he  should  not  do  so. 
Thereupon  Mr.  Hampden  wrote  to  him  demanding 
his  money  hack  on  the  ground  that  the  decision  was 
unjust,  and  ought  to  have  been  given  in  his  favour. 


368  MY    LIFE 

In  thus  writing  to  Hampden  and  receiving  his 
demand  for  his  deposit  to  be  returned,  Mr.  Walsh 
made  a  great  mistake,  which  had  serious  consequences 
for  me.  The  law  declares  that  all  wagers  are  null 
and  void,  and  that  money  lost  by  betting  is  not 
recoverable  at  law.  But  the  judges  have  decided 
that  when  a  wager  is  given  against  him  by  the  umpire, 
the  loser  can  claim  his  money  back  from  the  stake- 
holder if  the  latter  has  not  already  paid  it  away  to 
the  winner.  Hence,  if  a  loser  immediately  claims  his 
money  from  the  stake-holder,  the  law  will  enforce  the 
former's  claim  on  the  ground  that  it  is  Jiis  money, 
and  the  fact  that  he  has  lost  it  in  a  quite  fair  wager 
is  beyond  the  cognizance  of  the  law.  Neither  I  nor 
Mr.  Walsh  knew  of  this,  although  he  had  decided 
and  paid  many  wagers ;  but  this  resulted  in  my 
having  to  pay  the  money  back  five  years  later,  as 
will  be  presently  described. 

I  will  now  briefly  state  what  were  Hampden's 
proceedings  for  the  next  fifteen  or  sixteen  years. 
He  first  began  abusing  Mr.  Walsh  in  letters,  post- 
cards, leaflets,  and  pamphlets,  as  a  liar,  thief,  and 
swindler.  Then  he  began  upon  me  with  even  more 
virulence,  writing  to  the  presidents  and  secretaries  of 
all  the  societies  to  which  I  belonged,  and  to  any  of 
my  friends  whose  addresses  he  could  obtain.  One 
of  his  favourite  statements  in  these  letters  was,  "  Do 
you  know  that  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  is  allowing  him- 
self to  be  posted  all  over  England  as  a  cheat  and 
a  swindler  ? "  But  he  soon  took  more  violent 
measures,  and  sent  the  following  letter  to  my  wife  : — 

"Mrs.  Wallace, 

"  Madam — If  your  infernal  thief  of  a  husband 
is  brought  home  some  day  on  a  hurdle,  with  every 


MONEY   MATTERS  369 

bone  in  his  head  smashed  to  pulp,  you  will  know  the 
reason.  Do  you  tell  him  from  me  he  is  a  lying 
infernal  thief,  and  as  sure  as  his  name  is  Wallace  he 
never  dies  in  his  bed. 

"You  must  be  a  miserable  wretch  to  be  obliged 
to  live  with  a  convicted  felon.  Do  not  think  or  let 
him  think  I  have  done  with  him. 

"John  Hampden." 

For  this  I  brought  him  up  before  a  police 
magistrate,  and  he  was  bound  over  to  keep  the  peace 
for  three  months,  suffering  a  week's  imprisonment 
before  he  could  find  the  necessary  sureties.  But  as 
soon  as  the  three  months  were  up,  he  began  again 
with  more  abuse  than  ever,  distributing  tracts  and 
writing  to  small  local  papers  all  over  England.  I 
now  began  to  receive  letters  from  friends,  and  also 
from  perfect  strangers,  asking  me  if  I  knew  what  was 
said  about  me  everywhere.  I  will  give  a  summary  of 
the  steps  I  was  obliged  to  take  with  the  results,  or 
rather  absence  of  results,  that  followed. 

In  1 87 1,  Mr.  Walsh  prosecuted  Hampden  for 
libel.  He  was  convicted  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and 
bound  over  to  keep  the  peace  for  one  year. 

In  January,  1871,  I  brought  an  action  for  libel 
in  order  to  give  Hampden  the  opportunity  of  justi- 
fying, if  he  could,  his  language  towards  me.  He 
did  not  defend  the  action,  but  suffered  judgment 
to  go  by  default,  and  the  jury  gave  me  a  verdict 
with  ^600  damages.  But  whatever  property  he  had 
had  been  transferred  to  his  son-in-law  (a  solicitor), 
so  I  could  not  get  a  penny,  and  had  to  pay  the 
costs  of  the  suit  which,  though  undefended,  were 
heavy. 

In  October,   1872,  I  prosecuted  him  at  the  Old 

2  B 


370  MY    LIFE 

Bailey  for  further  libels.    He  was  respited  on  publicly 
apologizing  in  several  newspapers. 

Some  months  afterwards,  however,  he  began 
again  with  equally  foul  libels,  and  I  had  him  brought 
up  under  his  recognizances,  when  he  was  sentenced 
to  two  months'  imprisonment  in  Newgate. 

But  within  a  year  he  began  again  as  violently  as 
ever,  and  on  March  6,  1875,  he  was  indicted  at 
Chelmsford  Assizes  for  fresh  libels,  and  on  proof 
of  his  previous  convictions  and  apologies,  he  was 
sentenced  to  one  year's  imprisonment  and  to  keep 
the  peace,  under  heavy  recognizances  and  sureties, 
for  two  years  more.  (A  full  report  is  given  in  the 
Chelmsford  Chronicle,  March  12,  1875.) 

Through  the  interest  of  his  friends,  however,  he 
was  liberated  in  about  six  months ;  and  thereupon, 
in  January,  1876,  he  brought  an  action  against  Mr. 
Walsh  to  recover  his  deposit  of  ;^500,  and  this  action 
he  won,  on  the  grounds  already  stated  ;  and  as  I  had 
signed  an  indemnity  to  Mr.  Walsh,  I  had  to  pay  back 
the  money,  and  also  pay  dl  the  costs  of  the  action, 
about  ;^200  more.  But  as  I  had  a  judgment  for  £6%^ 
damages  and  costs  in  my  libel  suit  against  Hampden, 
I  transferred  this  claim  to  Mr.  Walsh  as  a  set-off 
against  the  amount  due  by  him.  Hampden,  however, 
had  already  made  himself  a  bankrupt  to  prevent  this 
claim  being  enforced,  and  had  assigned  all  his  actual 
or  future  assets  to  his  son-in-law. 

There  were  now  legal  difficulties  on  both  sides. 
I  was  advised  that  the  bankruptcy  was  fraudulent, 
and  could  be  annulled ;  but  to  attempt  this  would  be 
costly,  and  the  result  uncertain.  On  the  other  hand, 
it  was  doubtful  whether  my  claim  against  Hampden 
would  not  be  treated  as  an  ordinary  creditor's  claim  in 
the  bankruptcy.    There  was,  therefore,  a  consultation 


MONEY   MATTERS  371 

of  the  solicitors,  and  a  voluntary  arrangement  was 
arrived  at.  I  was  to  pay  all  the  costs  of  the  suit 
and  ;{^I20,  amounting  to  £2^7 ;  while  £\\q  still 
remained  nominally  due  to  me  from  Hampden. 

These  terms  were  formally  agreed  to  by  Hampden 
and  his  son-in-law,  and  were  duly  carried  out.  Of 
course  I  had  also  to  pay  Mr.  Walsh's  costs  in  the 
action  and  my  own  lawyer's  bill  for  the  settlement,  as 
well  as  those  of  the  action  for  libel,  and  the  various 
criminal  prosecutions  of  Hampden  I  had  been 
compelled  to  undertake. 

About  this  time  he  printed  one  thousand  copies 
of  a  two-page  leaflet,  and  sent  them  to  almost  every 
one  in  my  neighbourhood  whose  address  he  could 
obtain,  including  most  of  the  masters  of  Charterhouse 
School,  and  the  residents  as  well  as  the  tradesmen  of 
Godalming,  It  was  full  of — "  scientific  villainy  and 
roguery," — "  cheat,  swindler,  and  impostor." — "  My 
specific  charge  against  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  is  that  he 
obtained  possession  of  a  cheque  for  £\oQ)0  by  fraud 
and  falsehood  of  a  party  who  had  no  authority  to 
dispose  of  it."  To  save  trouble,  I  drew  up  a  short 
circular  stating  the  main  facts  already  given  here  for 
the  information  of  those  who  had  received  Hampden's 
absurdly  false  libels,  and  thereafter  took  no  further 
notice  of  him. 

He  continued  to  circulate  his  postcards  and  tracts, 
and  to  write  to  all  manner  of  people,  challenging 
them  to  prove  that  the  earth  was  not  flat,  for  several 
years  after.  The  last  of  his  efforts  which  I  have 
preserved  is  an  eight-page  tract,  which  he  distributed 
at  the  Royal  Geographical  Society's  Exhibition  of 
Geographical  Appliances,  in  December,  1885,  in 
which  he  attacks  all  geographical  teaching  in  his 
usual  style,  and  declares  that  "  at  the  present  moment 


372  MY    LIFE 

they  are  cowering  beneath  the  inquiring  gaze  of  one 
single  truth-seeker,  John  Hampden,  the  well-known 
champion  of  the  Mosaic  cosmogony,  as  against  the 
infidel  theories  and  superstitions  of  the  pagan  mystics, 
who  is,  at  the  end  of  fifteen  years'  conflict,  still  holding 
his  ground  against  all  the  professional  authorities  of 
England  and  America  ;  and  the  single  fact  that  during 
the  whole  of  that  time,  no  one  but  a  degraded  swindler 
has  dared  to  make  a  fraudulent  attempt  to  support 
the  globular  theory,  is  ample  and  overwhelming  proofs 
of  the  worthless  character  of  modern  elementary 
geography."  And  this  man  was  educated  at  Oxford 
University !  Seldom  has  so  much  boldness  of  assertion 
and  force  of  invective  been  combined  with  such  gross 
ignorance.  And  to  this  day  a  society  exists  to  uphold 
the  views  of  Hampden,  Carpenter,  and  their  teacher, 
"  Parallax ! " 

The  two  law  suits,  the  four  prosecutions  for  libel, 
the  payments  and  costs  of  the  settlement,  amounted 
to  considerably  more  than  the  ;^500  I  received  from 
Hampden,  besides  which  I  bore  all  the  costs  of  the 
week's  experiments,  and  between  fifteen  and  twenty 
years  of  continued  persecution — a  tolerably  severe 
punishment  for  what  I  did  not  at  the  time  recognize 
as  an  ethical  lapse. 

There  is  one  other  small  money  matter  which  I 
wish  to  put  on  record  here,  because,  though  it  involves 
only  the  small  sum  of  sixpence,  it  affords  an  example 
of  official  meanness,  and  what  really  amounts  to  petty 
larceny,  which  can  hardly  be  surpassed.  In  1865  the 
British  Museum  purchased  from  me  some  specimen 
(I  think  a  skeleton)  for  which  they  agreed  to  pay 
£S'  Two  years  later  I  received  the  following  printed 
form : — 


MONEY   MATTERS  373 

"  Principal  Librarian  and  Secretary's  Office. 

"  British  Museum,  W.C,  June  24,  1867. 

"  Sir, 

"  If  you  will  send  your  own  stamped 
receipt  to  this  Office,  you  will  be  paid  the  amount 
due  to  you  by  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum, 
£S  OS.  od. 

"  I  am,  sir, 

"  Your  very  obedient  Servant, 

"Thomas  Butler, 

"Assist.  Secretary. 
"Mr.  A.  R.Wallace." 

I,  of  course,  complied  with  the  request  and  sent 
the  stamped  receipt,  and  by  return  of  post  had  the 
following  written  communication  : — 

"  Mr.  Butler  begs  to  transmit  the  enclosed  P.O. 
order  for  £4.  igs.  6d.  to  Mr.  Wallace,  and  the  amount 
of  it,  with  the  cost  of  the  order  (6d.),  makes  up  the 
sum  due  by  the  Trustees  to  Mr.  Wallace. 

"  British  Museum,  June  25,  1867." 

This  amazing  little  dodge  (for  I  can  call  it  nothing 
else)  completely  staggered  me.  I  was  at  first  inclined 
to  return  the  P.O.  order,  or  to  write  asking  for  the  6d., 
and  if  necessary  summon  Mr.  Butler  (or  the  Trustees) 
to  a  County  Court  for  the  6d.  due.  But  I  was  busy, 
and  did  not  want  to  enter  upon  what  I  felt  sure  would 
be  a  long  correspondence  and  endless  trouble  and 
expense.  I  therefore  determined  to  keep  the  two 
incriminating  documents,  and  some  day  print  them. 
The  day  has  now  come  ;  and  it  may  be  interesting  to 
learn  whether  this  preposterous  and  utterly  dishonest 
method  of  paying  part  of  an  admitted  debt,  after 


374  MY    LIFE 

obtaining  a  receipt  for  the  whole,  continues  to  be 
practised  in  this  or  any  other  public  institution. 

It  was  while  these  troubles  in  the  Hampden  affair 
were  at  their  thickest  that  my  earnings  invested  in 
railways  and  mines  continued  depreciating  so  con- 
stantly as  to  be  a  source  of  great  anxiety  to  me,  and 
every  effort  to  extricate  myself  by  seeking  better 
investments  only  made  matters  worse.  It  was  at  this 
time  that  the  endeavour  to  get  the  Epping  Forest 
appointment  failed,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the 
kindness  of  a  relative,  Miss  Roberts,  of  Epsom,  a 
cousin  of  my  mother's,  with  whose  family  I  had  been 
intimate  from  my  boyhood,  I  should  have  been  in 
absolute  want.  She  had  intended  to  leave  me  ;^iooo 
in  her  will,  but  instead  of  doing  so  transferred  it  to 
me  at  once,  and  as  it  was  in  an  excellent  security, 
and  brought  me  in  from  £^o  to  £6^  a  year,  it  was 
most  welcome.  I  had  sold  my  house  at  Grays  fairly 
well,  and  in  1880  bought  a  piece  of  land  and  built  a 
cottage  at  Godalming,  so  that  I  had  a  home  of  my 
own  ;  but  I  had  now  to  depend  almost  entirely  on 
the  little  my  books  brought  me  in,  together  with  a 
few  lectures,  reviews,  and  other  articles.  I  had  just 
finished  writing  my  "  Island  Life,"  and  had  no  idea 
that  I  should  ever  write  another  important  book,  and 
I  therefore  saw  no  way  of  increasing  my  income, 
which  was  then  barely  sufficient  to  support  my  family 
and  educate  my  two  children  in  the  most  economical 
way.  From  this  ever-increasing  anxiety  I  was  relieved 
through  the  grant  of  a  Civil  Service  Pension  of  ;^200, 
which  came  upon  me  as  a  very  joyful  surprise.  My 
most  intimate  and  confidential  friend  at  this  time  was 
Mrs.  Fisher  (then  Miss  Buckley),  and  to  her  alone  I 
mentioned  my  great  losses,  and  my  anxiety  as  to  any 


MONEY   MATTERS  375 

sure  source  of  income.  Shortly  afterwards  she  was 
visiting  Darwin,  and  mentioned  it  to  him,  and  he 
thought  that  a  pension  might  be  granted  me  in 
recognition  of  my  scientific  work.  Huxley  most 
kindly  assisted  in  drawing  up  the  necessary  memorial 
to  the  Prime  Minister,  Mr.  Gladstone,  to  whom 
Darwin  wrote  personally.  He  promptly  assented, 
and  the  next  year,  1881,  the  first  payment  was  made. 
Other  of  my  scientific  friends,  I  believe,  signed  the 
memorial,  but  it  is  especially  to  the  three  named  that 
I  owe  this  very  great  relief  from  anxiety  for  the 
remainder  of  my  life. 

I  have  already  stated  that  what  at  the  time 
appeared  to  be  the  great  misfortune  of  the  loss  of 
about  half  of  my  whole  Amazonian  collections  by  the 
burning  of  the  ship  in  which  I  was  coming  home,  was 
in  all  probability  a  blessing  in  disguise,  since  it  led 
me  to  visit  the  comparatively  unknown  Malay  Archi- 
pelago, and,  perhaps,  also  supplied  the  conditions 
which  led  me  to  think  out  independently  the  theory 
of  natural  selection.  In  like  manner  I  am  now 
inclined  to  see  in  the  almost  total  loss  of  the  money 
value  of  my  rich  collections,  another  of  those  curious 
indications  that  our  misfortunes  are  often  useful,  or 
even  necessary  for  bringing  out  our  latent  powers.  I 
am,  and  have  always  been,  constitutionally  lazy,  with- 
out any  of  that  fiery  energy  and  intense  power  of 
work  possessed  by  such  men  as  Huxley  and  Charles 
Kingsley.  When  I  once  begin  any  work  in  which  I 
am  interested,  I  can  go  steadily  on  with  it  till  it  is 
finished,  but  I  need  some  definite  impulse  to  set  me 
going,  and  require  a  good  deal  of  time  for  reflection 
while  the  work  is  being  done.  Every  important  book 
I  have  undertaken  has  been  due  to  an  impulse  or  a 


376  MY    LIFE 

suggestion  from  without.  I  spent  five  years  in  quiet 
enjoyment  of  my  collections,  in  attending  scientific 
meetings,  and  in  working  cut  a  few  problems,  before 
I  began  to  write  my  "  Malay  Archipelago,"  and  it 
was  due  to  the  repeated  suggestions  of  my  friends 
that  I  wrote  my  "  Geographical  Distribution  of 
Animals." 

But  if  the  entire  proceeds  of  my  Malayan  collec- 
tions had  been  well  invested,  and  I  had  obtained  a 
secure  income  of  ^^^400  or  .^500  a  year,  I  think  it 
probable  that  I  should  not  have  written  another  book, 
but  should  have  gone  to  live  further  in  the  country, 
enjoyed  my  garden  and  greenhouse  (as  I  always  have 
done),  and  limited  my  work  to  a  few  lectures  and 
review  articles,  but  to  a  much  less  extent  than  I 
actually  have  done.  It  was  the  necessity  of  earning 
money,  owing  to  my  diminishing  income,  that  caused 
me  to  accept  invitations  to  lecture,  which  I  always 
disliked  ;  and  the  same  reason  caused  me  to  seek  out 
subjects  for  scientific  or  social  articles  which,  without 
that  necessity,  would  never  have  been  written.  Under 
such  conditions  as  here  supposed,  my  dislike  to 
lecturing  would  probably  have  increased,  and  I  should 
never  have  ventured  on  my  lecturing  tour  in  America, 
in  which  case  I  should  not  have  written  "  Darwinism," 
and,  I  firmly  believe,  should  not  have  enjoyed  such 
good  health  as  I  am  now  doing.  Then,  too,  I  should 
probably  not  have  accepted  Dr.  Lunn's  invitation  to 
lecture  at  Davos,  and  my  two  later  books  would  never 
have  come  into  existence.  If,  therefore,  my  books 
and  essays  have  been  of  any  use  to  the  world — and 
though  I  cannot  quite  understand  it,  scores  of  people 
have  written  to  me  telling  me  so — then  the  losses  and 
the  struggles  I  have  had  to  go  through  have  been  a 
necessary  discipline  calculated    to   bring   into  action 


MONEY   MATTERS  377 

whatever  faculties  I  possess.  I  may  be  allowed  here 
to  give  an  extract  from  one  of  these  letters  on  my 
literary  work,  nearly  the  last  I  received  from  my 
lamented  friend  F.  W.  H.  Myers.  He  writes 
(April  12,  1898):— 

"  I  am  glad  to  take  this  opportunity  of  telling  you 
something  about  my  relation  to  one  of  your  books. 
I  write  now  from  bed,  having  had  severe  influenzic 
pneumonia,  now  going  off.  For  some  days  my  tempe- 
rature was  105°,  and  I  was  very  restless  at  night — ■ 
anxious  to  read,  but  in  too  sensitive  and  fastidious 
a  state  to  tolerate  almost  any  book.  I  found  that 
almost  the  only  book  which  I  could  read  was  your 
'  Malay  Archipelago.'  Of  course  I  had  read  it  before. 
In  spite  of  my  complete  ignorance  of  natural  history 
there  was  a  certain  uniqueness  of  charm  about  the 
book,  both  moral  and  literary,  which  made  it  deeply 
congenial  in  those  trying  hours.  You  have  had  few 
less  instructed  readers  ;  but  very  few  can  have  dwelt 
on  that  simple,  manly  record  with  a  more  profound 
sympathy." 

Other  people,  quite  strangers,  have  also  told  me 
that  they  have  read  it  over  and  over  again,  and  always 
take  it  with  them  on  a  journey.  This  is  the  kind  of 
thing  I  cannot  understand.  It  is  true,  if  I  open  it 
myself  I  can  read  a  chapter  with  pleasure  ;  but,  then, 
to  me  it  recalls  incidents  and  feelings  almost  forgotten, 
and  renews  the  delights  of  my  wanderings  in  the 
wilderness  and  of  my  intense  interest  in  the  wonderful 
and  beautiful  forms  of  plant,  bird,  and  insect  life  I 
was  continually  meeting  with.  Others  have  written 
in  almost  equally  laudatory  terms  of  my  books  on 
*'  Land  Nationalization  "  and  on  "  Spiritualism,"  which 
have  introduced  them  to  new  spheres  of  thought ; 
while  others,  again,  have  been  equally  pleased  with 


3/8  MY    LIFE 

parts  of  my  "  Wonderful  Century  "  and  "  Man's  Place 
in  the  Universe."  I  am  thus  forced  to  the  conclusion 
that  my  books  have  served  to  instruct  and  to  give 
pleasure  to  a  good  many  readers,  and  that  it  is 
therefore  just  possible  that  my  life  may  have  been 
prolonged,  and  its  conditions  modified  so  as  to  afford 
the  required  impulse  and  the  amount  of  time  for  me 
to  write  them. 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

MY  CHARACTER — NEW  IDEAS 

I  HAVE  already  given  an  estimate  of  my  character 
when  I  came  of  age.  I  will  now  make  a  few  further 
remarks  upon  it  as  modified  by  my  changed  views  of 
life,  owing  to  my  becoming  convinced  of  the  reality 
of  a  spirit  world  and  a  future  state  of  existence. 

Up  to  middle  age,  and  especially  during  the  first 
decade  after  my  return  from  the  East,  I  was  so  much 
disinclined  to  the  society  of  uncongenial  and  common- 
place people  that  my  natural  reserve  and  coldness  of 
manner  often  amounted,  I  am  afraid,  to  rudeness.  I 
found  it  impossible,  as  I  have  done  all  my  life,  to 
make  conversation  with  such  people,  or  even  to  reply 
politely  to  their  trivial  remarks.  I  therefore  often 
appeared  gloomy  when  I  was  merely  bored.  I  found 
it  impossible,  as  some  one  had  said,  to  tolerate  fools 
gladly  ;  while,  owing  to  my  deficient  language-faculty, 
talking  without  having  anything  to  say,  and  merely 
for  poHteness  or  to  pass  the  time,  was  most  difficult 
and  disagreeable.  Hence  I  was  thought  to  be  proud 
or  conceited.  But  later  on,  as  I  came  to  see  the 
baneful  influence  of  our  wrong  system  of  education 
and  of  society,  I  began  to  realize  that  people  who 
could  talk  of  nothing  but  the  trivial  amusements  of 
an    empty   mind   were  the  victims  of   these   social 


38o  MY    LIFE 

errors,  and  were  often  in  themselves  quite  estimable 
characters. 

Later  on,  when  the  teachings  of  spiritualism  com- 
bined with  those  of  phrenology  led  me  to  the  conclusion 
that  there  were  no  absolutely  bad  men  or  women, 
that  is,  none  who,  by  a  rational  and  sympathetic 
training,  and  a  social  system  which  gave  to  all  abso- 
lute equality  of  opportunity,  might  not  become  useful, 
contented  and  happy  members  of  society,  I  became 
much  more  tolerant.  I  learnt  also  to  distrust  all  first 
impressions  ;  for  I  repeatedly  came  to  enjoy  the 
society  of  people  whose  appearance  or  manner  had  at 
first  repelled  me,  and  even  in  the  most  apparently 
trivial-minded  was  able  to  find  some  common  ground 
of  interest  or  occupation.  I  feel  myself  that  my 
character  has  continuously  improved,  and  that  this  is 
owing  chiefly  to  the  teaching  of  spiritualism,  that  we 
are  in  every  act  and  thought  of  our  lives  here  building 
up  a  character  which  will  largely  determine  our  happi- 
ness or  misery  hereafter ;  and  also,  that  we  obtain 
the  greatest  happiness  ourselves  by  doing  all  we  can 
to  make  those  around  us  happy. 

As  I  have  referred  in  various  parts  of  this  volume 
to  ideas,  or  suggestions,  or  solutions  of  biological 
problems,  which  I  have  been  the  first  to  put  forth,  it 
may  be  convenient  if  I  here  give  a  brief  account  of 
the  more  important  of  them,  some  of  which  have,  I 
think,  been  almost  entirely  overlooked. 

I.  The  first  and  perhaps  the  most  important  of 
these  is  my  independent  discovery  of  the  theory  of 
natural  selection  in  1858,  in  my  paper  on  "  The 
Tendency  of  Varieties  to  depart  indefinitely  from  the 
Original  Type."     This  is  reprinted  in  my  "  Natural 


MY    CHARACTER— NEW    IDEAS      381 

Selection  and  Tropical  Nature ; "  and  it  has  been 
so  fully  recognized  by  Darwin  himself  and  by 
naturalists  generally  that  I  need  say  no  more  about 
it  here. 

2.  In  1864  I  published  an  article  on  "The  De- 
velopment of  Human  Races  under  the  Law  of 
Natural  Selection,"  the  most  original  and  important 
part  of  which  was  that  in  which  I  showed  that  so  soon 
as  man's  intellect  and  physical  structure  led  him  to 
use  fire,  to  make  tools,  to  grow  food,  to  domesticate 
animals,  to  use  clothing,  to  build  houses,  the  action 
of  natural  selection  was  diverted  from  his  body  to  his 
mind,  and  thenceforth  his  physical  form  remained 
stable  while  his  mental  faculties  improved.  This 
paper  was  greatly  admired  by  Mr.  Darwin  and  several 
other  men  of  science,  who  declared  it  to  be  entirely 
new  to  them  ;  but  owing  to  its  having  been  published 
in  one  of  my  less  popular  works,  "  Contributions  to 
the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection,"  it  seems  to  be 
comparatively  little  known.  Consequently,  it  still 
continues  to  be  asserted  or  suggested  that  because  we 
have  been  developed  physically  from  some  lower 
form,  so  in  the  future  we  shall  be  further  developed 
into  a  being  as  different  from  our  present  form  as  we 
are  different  from  the  orang  or  the  gorilla.  My  paper 
shows  why  this  will  not  be ;  %vhy  the  form  and 
structure  of  our  body  is  permanent,  and  that  it  is 
really  the  highest  type  now  possible  on  the  earth. 
The  fact  that  we  have  not  improved  physically  over 

the  ancient   Greeks,  and  that  most  savage  races 

even  some  of  the   lowest  in   material  civilization 

possess  the  human  form  in  its  fullest  symmetry  and 
perfection,  affords  evidence  that  my  theory  is  the 
true  one. 


382  MY    LIFE 

3.  In  1867  I  gave  a  provisional  solution  of  the 
cause  of  the  gay,  and  even  gaudy  colours  of  many 
caterpillars,  which  was  asked  for  by  Darwin,  and 
which  experiment  soon  proved  to  be  correct.  This  is 
fully  described  in  my  "  Natural  Selection  and  Tropical 
Nature,"  pp.  82-86.  The  principle  established  in 
this  case  has  been  since  found  to  be  widely  applicable 
throughout  the  animal  kingdom. 

4.  In  1868  I  wrote  a  paper  on  "A  Theory  of 
Birds'  Nests,"  the  chief  purport  of  which  was  to  point 
out  and  establish  a  connection  between  the  colours  of 
female  birds  and  the  mode  of  nidification  which  had 
not  been  before  noticed.  This  led  to  the  formulation 
of  the  following  law,  which  has  been  very  widely 
accepted  by  ornithologists  :  When  both  sexes  of  birds 
are  conspicuously  coloured,  the  nest  conceals  the  sitting 
bird ;  but  when  the  male  is  conspicuously  coloured  and 
the  nest  is  open  to  view,  the  female  is  plainly  coloured 
and  inconspicuous.  No  less  than  fifteen  whole  families 
of  birds  and  a  number  of  the  genera  of  other  families 
belong  to  the  first  class,  of  brightly  coloured  birds 
with  sexes  alike,  and  they  all  build  in  holes  or  make 
domed  nests.  Most  of  these  are  tropical,  but  the 
woodpeckers  and  kingfishers  are  European.  In  the 
second  class,  however  brilliant  the  male  may  be,  if 
the  nest  is  open  to  view,  the  female  is  always  plainly 
coloured,  sometimes  so  much  so  as  to  be  hardly  recog- 
nizable as  the  same  species.  This  is  especially  the 
case  in  such  birds  as  the  brilliant  South  American 
chatterers  and  the  Eastern  pheasants  and  paradise 
birds.  This  law  is  of  especial  value,  as  showing  the 
exceptional  need  of  protection  of  female  birds  as  well 
as  butterflies,  and  the  remarkable  way  in  which  the 
colours   of    both    classes    of    animals   have    become 


MY   CHARACTER— NEW    IDEAS      383 

modified  in  accordance  with  this  necessity.  This 
paper  forms  chapter  vi.  of  my  "  Natural  Selection  and 
Tropical  Nature." 

5.  In  the  great  subject  of  the  origin,  use,  and 
purport  of  the  colours  of  animals,  there  are  several 
branches  which,  I  believe,  I  was  the  first  to  call 
special  attention  to.  The  most  important  of  these 
was  the  establishment  of  the  class  of  what  I  termed 
"  Recognition  colours,"  which  are  of  importance  in 
affording  means  for  the  young  to  find  their  parents, 
the  sexes  each  other,  and  strayed  individuals  of 
returning  to  the  group  or  flock  to  which  they  belong. 
But  perhaps  even  more  important  is  the  use  of  these 
special  markings  or  colours  during  the  process  of  the 
development  of  new  species  adapted  to  slightly 
different  conditions,  by  checking  intercrossing  between 
them  while  in  process  of  development.  It  thus 
affords  an  explanation  of  the  almost  universal  rule, 
that  closely  allied  species  differ  in  colour  or  marking 
even  when  the  external  structural  differences  are 
exceedingly  slight  or  quite  undiscoverable.  The 
same  principle  also  explains  the  general  symmetry 
in  the  markings  of  animals  in  a  state  of  nature,  while 
under  domestication  it  often  disappears  :  difference  of 
colour  or  marking  on  the  two  sides  would  render 
recognition  difficult.  This  principle  was  first  stated 
in  my  article  on  "The  Colours  of  Animals  and 
Sexual  Selection  "  (in  "  Natural  Selection  and  Tropical 
Nature,"  1878)  and  more  fully  developed  in  "Dar- 
winism." I  am  now  inclined  to  think  that  it  accounts 
for  more  of  the  variety  and  beauty  in  the  animal 
world  than  any  other  cause  yet  discovered. 

I  may  here  add  that  I  believe  I  was  first  to  give 
adequate  reasons  for  the  rejection  of  Darwin's  theory 


384  MY   LIFE 

of  brilliant  male  coloration  or  marking  being  due  to 
female  choice. 

6.  The  general  permanence  of  oceanic  and  con- 
tinental areas  was  first  taught  by  Professor  J.  D. 
Dana,  the  eminent  American  geologist,  and  again  by 
Darwin  in  his  "  Origin  of  Species " ;  but  I  am,  I 
believe,  the  only  writer  who  has  brought  forward 
a  number  of  other  considerations,  geographical  and 
physical,  which,  with  those  of  previous  writers, 
establish  the  proposition  on  almost  incontrovertible 
grounds.  My  exposition  of  the  subject  is  given  in 
"Island  Life"  (chap,  vi.),  while  some  additional 
arguments  are  given  in  my  "  Studies  "  (vol.  i.  chap.  ii.). 
The  doctrine  may  be  considered  as  the  only  solid 
basis  for  any  general  study  of  the  geographical  dis- 
tribution of  animals,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  I 
have  made  it  the  subject  of  my  careful  consideration. 

7.  In  discussing  the  causes  of  glacial  epochs  I 
have  adopted  the  general  views  of  Mr.  James  Croll  as 
to  the  astronomical  causes,  but  have  combined  them 
with  geographical  changes,  and  have  shown  how  the 
latter,  even  though  small  in  amount,  might  produce 
very  important  results.  In  particular  I  have  laid 
stress  on  the  properties  of  air  and  water  in  equalizing 
temperature  over  the  earth,  while  snow  and  ice,  by 
their  immobility,  produce  cumulative  effects  ;  and  thus 
a  lowering  of  temperature  of  a  few  degrees  may  lead 
to  a  country  being  ice-clad  which  before  was  ice-free. 
This  is  a  vital  point  which  is  the  very  essence  of 
the  problem  of  glaciation  ;  yet  it  has  been  altogether 
neglected  in  the  various  mathematical  or  physical 
theories  which  have  recently  been  put  forward.  My 
own    discussion   of  the   problem    in   chapter  viii.  of 


MY   CHARACTER- NEW   IDEAS      385 

"  Island  Life  "  has  never,  so  far  as  I  know,  been  con- 
troverted, and  I  still  think  it  constitutes  the  most 
complete  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  yet  given. 

8.  In  1880  I  published  my  "  Island  Life,"  and  the 
last  chapter  but  one  is  "On  the  Arctic  Element  in 
South  Temperate  Floras,"  in  which  I  gave  a  solution 
of  the  very  remarkable  phenomena  described  by  Sir 
Joseph  Hooker  in  his  "  Introductory  Essay  on  the 
Flora  of  Australia."  My  explanation  is  founded  on 
known  facts  as  to  the  dispersal  and  distribution  of 
plants,  and  does  not  require  those  enormous  changes 
in  the  climate  of  tropical  lowlands  during  the  glacial 
period  on  which  Darwin  founded  his  explanation,  and 
which,  I  believe,  no  biologist  well  acquainted  either 
with  the  fauna  or  the  flora  of  the  equatorial  zone  has 
found  it  possible  to  accept. 

9.  In  1 88 1  I  put  forth  the  first  idea  of  mouth- 
gesture  as  a  factor  in  the  origin  of  language,  in  a 
review  of  E.  P.  Tylor's  "Anthropology,"  and  in  1895 
I  extended  it  into  an  article  in  the  Fortnightly 
Reviezv,  and  reprinted  it  with  a  few  further  corrections 
in  my  "  Studies,"  under  the  title,  "  The  Expressive- 
ness of  Speech  or  Mouth-Gesture  as  a  Factor  in  the 
Origin  of  Language."  In  it  I  have  developed  a 
completely  new  principle  in  the  theory  of  the  origin 
of  language  by  showing  that  every  motion  of  the 
jaws,  Hps,  and  tongue,  together  with  inward  or  out- 
ward breathing,  and  especially  the  mute  or  liquid 
consonants  at  the  end  of  words  serving  to  indicate 
abrupt  or  continuous  motion,  have  corresponding 
meanings  in  so  many  cases  as  to  show  a  fundamental 
connection.  I  thus  enormously  extend  the  principle 
of  onomatopoeia,  in  the  origin  of  vocal  language.     As 

2  C 


386  MY   LIFE 

I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  reference  to  this 
important  factor  in  the  origin  of  language,  and  as  no 
competent  writer  has  pointed  out  any  fallacy  in  it,  I 
think  I  am  justified  in  supposing  it  to  be  new  and 
important.  Mr.  Gladstone  informed  me  that  there 
were  many  thousands  of  illustrations  of  my  ideas  in 
Homer. 

10.  In  1890  I  published  in  the  Fortnightly  Review 
an  article  on  "  Human  Selection,"  and  in  1892  (in  the 
Boston  Arena)  one  on  "  Human  Progress,  Past  and 
Future."  These  deal  with  different  aspects  of  the 
same  great  problem — the  gradual  improvement  of 
the  race  by  natural  process ;  and  they  were  also 
written  partly  for  the  purpose  of  opposing  the  various 
artificial  processes  of  selection  advocated  by  several 
English  and  American  writers.  I  showed  that  the 
only  method  of  advance  for  us,  as  for  the  lower 
animals,  is  in  some  form  of  natural  selection,  and  that 
the  only  mode  of  natural  selection  that  can  act  alike 
on  physical,  mental,  and  moral  qualities  will  come 
into  play  under  a  social  system  which  gives  equal 
opportunities  of  culture,  training,  leisure,  and  happiness 
to  every  individual.  This  extension  of  the  principle 
of  natural  selection  as  it  acts  in  the  animal  world 
generally  is,  I  believe,  quite  new,  and  is  by  far  the 
most  important  of  the  new  ideas  I  have  given  to  the 
world. 

11.  In  an  article  on  "The  Glacial  Erosion  of  Lake 
Basins"  (in  the  FortJiightly  Revieiv,  December,  1893), 
I  brought  together  the  whole  of  the  evidence  bearing 
upon  the  question,  and  adduced  a  completely  new 
argument  for  this  mode  of  origin  of  the  valley  lakes 
of    glaciated   countries.      This   is   founded   on   their 


MY   CHARACTER— NEW    IDEAS       387 

surface  and  bottom  contours,  both  of  which  are  shown 
to  be  such  as  would  necessarily  arise  from  ice-action, 
while  they  would  not  arise  from  the  other  alleged 
mode  of  origin — unequal  elevation  or  subsidence. 

12.  In  a  new  edition  of  "Stanford's  Compendium, 
Australasia,"  vol.  i.,  when  describing  the  physical  and 
mental  characteristics  of  the  Australian  aborigines,  I 
stated  my  belief  that  they  were  really  a  low  and 
perhaps  primitive  type  of  the  Caucasian  race.  I 
further  developed  the  subject  in  my  "  Studies,"  and 
illustrated  it  by  photographs  of  Australians  and 
Ainos,  of  the  Veddahs  of  Ceylon,  and  of  the  Khmers 
of  Cambodia — all  outlying  members  of  the  same  great 
human  race.  This,  I  think,  is  an  important  simplifi- 
cation in  the  classification  of  the  races  of  man. 

Bees'  cells. — But  besides  these  more  important 
scientific  principles  or  ideas,  there  are  a  few  minor 
ones  which  are  of  sufficient  interest  to  be  briefly  men- 
tioned. In  the  article  on  the  "  Bees'  Cell "  in  the 
"Annals  and  Magazine  of  Natural  History,"  I  called 
attention  to  a  circumstance  that  had  been,  I  think, 
unnoticed  by  all  previous  writers.  An  immense  deal 
of  ingenuity  and  of  mathematical  skill  had  been 
expended  in  showing  that  the  two  layers  of  hexagonal 
cells,  with  basal  dividing-plates  inclined  at  a  particular 
angle,  gave  the  greatest  economy  of  space  and  of 
material  possible ;  and  the  instinct  of  the  bees  in 
building  such  a  comb  to  contain  their  store  of  honey 
was  held  to  show  that  it  was  a  divinely  bestowed 
special  faculty.  But  all  these  writers  omitted  to  take 
into  account  one  fact,  which  shows  their  whole  argu- 
ment to  be  fallacious.  This  is,  that  the  combs  are 
suspended  vertically,  and  that  when  full  of  honey  the 


388  MY    LIFE 

upper  rows  of  cells  have  to  support  at  least  ten  times 
as  much  weight  as  the  lowest  rows.  But  there  is  no 
corresponding  difference  in  the  thickness  of  the  walls 
of  the  cells  ;  so  that,  as  the  upper  rows  are  strong 
enough,  the  lower  must  be  quite  unnecessarily  strong, 
and  there  is  thus  a  great  waste  of  wax.  The  whole 
conception  of  a  supernatural  faculty  for  the  purpose 
of  economizing  wax  is  thus  shown  to  be  fallacious. 
Darwin's  explanation  entirely  obviates  this  difficulty, 
since  it  depends  on  the  bees  possessing  intelligence 
enough  to  reduce  all  the  cellwalls  to  a  nearly  uniform 
thickness,  being  that  which  is  sufficient  under  all 
circumstances  to  support  the  weight  of  the  whole 
mass  of  comb  and  honey. 

In  an  article  on  "  The  Problem  of  Instinct  "  in  my 
"  Studies "  (vol.  i.  chap,  xxii.),  I  have  supplemented 
the  usual  theory  as  to  zvhy  birds  migrate,  by  another 
as  to  how  they  migrate,  and  trace  it  wholly  to  experi- 
ence, the  young  birds  following  the  old  ones  ;  but  an 
enormous  proportion  of  the  young  fail  to  make  the 
outward  or  the  homeward  journey  safely. 

In  1894  I  wrote  an  article  for  the  Nineteenth 
Century  on  the  question  of  the  proper  observance  of 
Sunday,  which  I  have  reprinted  in  my  "  Studies " 
under  the  title,  "  A  Counsel  of  Perfection  for  Sabba- 
tarians." In  this  short  article  I  define  clearly,  I 
think  for  the  first  time,  what  the  "  work  "  so  strictly 
and  impressively  forbidden  really  is,  and  then  show 
how  utterly  inconsistent  are  the  great  majority  of 
Sabbatarians,  who  themselves  break  the  command- 
ment both  in  letter  and  spirit,  while  they  loudly 
condemn  others  for  acts  which  are  not  forbidden  by 
it.  I  also  show  how  the  commandment  can  be  and 
should  be  strictly  kept  by  all  who  believe  it  to  be  a 
Divine   command,  and   point   out  the   good   results 


MY   CHARACTER— NEW   IDEAS       389 

which  would  follow  such  a  mode  of  obeying  it.  That 
the  idea  was  new  and  its  reasoning  unanswerable  may 
be  perhaps  inferred  from  the  fact  that  no  reply,  so  far 
as  I  know,  was  made  to  it ;  while  a  well-known  writer 
was  so  impressed  by  it  that  he  made  his  own  bed  the 
following  Sunday  in  accordance  with  its  suggestions. 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

PREDICTIONS  FULFILLED:   LATEST  HONOURS. 

Having  devoted  some  space  to  an  account  of  my 
various  experiences  in  connection  with  modern 
spiritualism,  which  have,  however,  been  far  less  ex- 
traordinary than  those  of  many  of  my  friends,  I  may 
not  improperly  conclude  this  record  of  my  life  and 
experience  with  a  statement  of  a  few  of  the  pre- 
dictions which  I  have  received  at  different  times,  and 
which  have  been  to  some  extent  fulfilled. 

In  1870  and  the  following  years  several  communi- 
cations in  automatic  writing  were  received  through  a 
member  of  my  family  purporting  to  be  from  my 
brother  William,  with  whom  I  had  lived  so  many 
years.  In  some  of  these  he  referred  to  my  dis- 
appointments in  obtaining  employment  and  to  my 
money  losses,  always  urging  me  not  to  trouble  myself 
about  my  affairs,  which  would  certainly  improve  ;  but 
I  was  not  to  be  in  a  hurry.  These  messages  never 
contained  any  proofs  of  identity,  and  I  did  not  there- 
fore feel  much  interest  in  them,  and  their  ultimate 
fulfilment,  though  in  quite  unexpected  ways,  cannot  be 
considered  to  be  of  any  great  importance. 

Some  years  later,  when  we  were  living  at  Dorking, 
my  little  boy,  then  five  years  old,  became  very 
delicate,  and  seemed  pining  away  without  any  per- 
ceptible ailment.     At  that  time  I  was  being  treated 


PREDICTIONS    FULFILLED  391 

myself  for  a  chronic  complaint  by  an  American 
medium,  in  whom  I  had  much  confidence  ;  and  one 
day,  when  in  his  usual  trance,  he  told  me,  without 
any  inquiry  on  my  part,  that  the  boy  was  in  danger, 
and  that  if  we  wished  to  save  him  we  must  leave 
Dorking,  go  to  a  more  bracing  place,  and  let  him  be 
out-of-doors  as  much  as  possible  and  "have  the  smell 
of  the  earth."  I  then  noticed  that  we  were  all  rather 
languid  without  knowing  why,  and  therefore  removed 
in  the  spring  to  Croydon,  where  we  all  felt  stronger, 
and  the  boy  at  once  began  to  get  better,  and  has  had 
fair  health  ever  since. 

Some  time  afterwards  I  accompanied  a  lady  friend 
of  mine  to  have  a  siance  with  the  same  medium,  she 
being  quite  unknown  to  him.  Among  many  other 
interesting  things,  he  told  us  that  something  would 
happen  before  very  long  which  would  cause  us  to  see 
less  of  each  other,  but  would  not  affect  our  friendship. 
We  neither  of  us  could  guess  what  that  could  be,  but 
a  year  or  two  later  the  lady  married  a  very  old  friend,  a 
widower,  whose  wife  at  the  time  of  the  prediction  was, 
I  think,  alive,  while  he  was  living  in  a  distant  colony 
without  any  expressed  intention  of  coming  home. 
After  the  marriage  they  went  to  live  in  Devonshire, 
and  for  some  years  we  only  met  at  very  long  intervals. 
These  two  cases  seem  to  me  to  be  genuine  clairvoyance 
or  prediction. 

But  much  more  important  than  the  preceding  are 
certain  predictions  which  were  made  to  me  in  April, 
1896,  and  which  have  been  fulfilled  during  the 
succeeding  eight  years.  At  that  time  I  was  living  at 
Parkstone  in  rather  poor  health  and  subject  to  chronic 
asthma,  with  palpitations  and  frequent  bronchitis, 
from  which  I  never  expected  to  recover.  I  had  given 
up  lecturing,  and  had  no  expectation  of  ever  writing 


392  MY   LIFE 

another  book,  neither  had  I  the  least  idea  of  leaving 
the  house  I  was  living  in,  which  I  had  purchased  and 
enlarged  a  few  years  before.  It  was  under  these  cir- 
cumstances that   a  medium  I   had   visited   once   in 

London,  Madame  G ,  was  staying  with  friends  at 

Wimborne,  and  came  to  see  me,  and  offered  to  give 
me  a  siance.  One  of  her  controls,  an  old  Scotch 
physician,  advised  me  about  my  health,  told  me  to 
eat  fish,  and  assured  me  that  I  was  not  coming  to 
their  side  for  some  years  yet,  as  I  had  a  good  deal  of 
work  to  do  here.  The  other  control,  named  "  Sun- 
shine," an  Indian  girl,  who  seemed  to  be  able  to  get 
information  from  many  sources,  was  very  positive  in 
her  statements.  She  said,  "You  won't  live  here 
always.  You  will  come  out  of  this  hole.  You  will 
come  more  into  the  world,  and  do  something  public 
for  spiritualism."  I  replied,  "  You  are  quite  wrong.  I 
shall  never  leave  this  house  now,  and  I  shall  not 
appear  in  public  again."  But  she  insisted  that  she 
was  right,  and  said,  "  You  will  see  ;  and  when  it  comes 
to  pass,  remember  what  I  told  you."  She  then  said, 
"  Fanny  [my  sister]  sends  her  love.  She  loved  you 
more  than  any  one  in  the  world."  This  I  knew  to  be 
true,  though  during  her  life  I  did  not  so  fully  realize 
it.  Then  Sunshine  gave  me  her  parting  words,  speak- 
ing slowly  and  distinctly:  "The  third  chapter  of  your 
life,  and  your  book,  is  to  come.  It  can  be  expressed 
as  Satisfaction,  Retrospection,  and  Work,"  These 
three  words  were  spoken  very  impressively,  and  I 
wrote  them  at  once  in  a  small  note-book  with  capital 
letters,  though  I  had  no  notion  whatever  of  what  they 
could  refer  to,  and  no  belief  that  they  would  be  in  any 
way  fulfilled. 

Yet  two  months  later  the  first  step  in  the  fulfil- 
ment was  taken  though  Dr.  Lunn's  invitation  to  give 


PREDICTIONS    FULFILLED  393 

a  lecture  at  Davos,  and  my   acceptance  of  it,   due 
mainly  to  the  temptation  of  a  week  in   Switzerland 
free  of  cost  and  with  a  pleasant  party.     As  already 
described,  this  lecture  was  the  starting-point  of  all  my 
subsequent  work.     The   very  next  year  brought  me 
renewed   health   and   strength  to   do   the  work,  as 
already    mentioned.     Another    year    passed,    and    I 
received  a  pressing  invitation  to  take  the  chair  and 
give  a  short  address  at  the  International  Congress  of 
Spiritualists  in  1898,  which  I  felt  myself  unable  to 
refuse,  and  thus,  as  I  had  been  told  I  should,  I  "  did 
something    public    for    spiritualism."     Yet    another 
year,  and  a  great  desire  for  life  more  in  the  country 
than  at  Parkstone  (where  we  were  being  surrounded 
by  new  building   operations)  led    me  to  join   some 
friends  in  trying  to  find  a  locality  for  a  kind  of  home- 
colony  of  congenial   persons ;   and  though  the  plan 
was  never  carried  out,  it  led  ultimately  to  my  finding 
the  site  on  which  to  build  my  present  house,  and  thus 
"  get  out  of  that  hole,"  as  I  had  been  told  by  Sunshine 
that  I  should  do.     And  now,  looking  back  upon  the 
eight  years  of  renewed  health   I  have  enjoyed,  and 
with  constant  interesting  work,  how  can  this  be  better 
described  than  as  "  the  third  chapter  of  my  life ;"  while 
"Man's  Place  in  the  Universe" — a  totally  new  subject 
for  me — may  well  be  termed  the  "third  chapter  of 
my  book,"  that  is,  of  my  literary  work.     Again,  this 
wholesome  activity  of  body  and  mind,  the  obtaining  a 
beautiful  site  where  I  am  surrounded   by  grass  and 
woodland,  and   have  a  splendid  view  over  moor  and 
water  to  distant  hills  and  the  open  sea,  with  abund- 
ance of  pure  air  and  sunshine,  the  building  of  a  com- 
fortable  house  in   one  of  the  choicest  spots  in  the 
whole  district — surely  all  this  was  well  foretold  in  the 
one  word  "  Satisfaction."     What  has  chiefly  occupied 


394  MY   LIFE 

me  in  this  house — an  Autobiography  extending  over 
three-quarters  of  a  century— is  admirably  described 
by  the  word  "  Retrospection,"  And  the  whole  of  this 
process  has  involved,  or  been  the  result  of,  continuous 
and  pleasurable  "  Work." 

I  will  only  add  here  that  during  the  whole  of  this 
"  third  chapter  of  my  life  "  I  had  entirely  forgotten  the 
particular  words  of  the  prediction  which  I  had  noted 
down  at  the  time,  and  was  greatly  surprised,  on  refer- 
ring to  them  again  for  the  purpose  of  this  chapter,  to 
find  how  curiously  they  fitted  the  subsequent  events. 
Of  course  it  may  be  said  that  every  one  who  reaches  my 
age  enjoys  "  retrospection,"  but  that  kind  of  general 
looking  back  to  the  past  is  very  different  from  the 
detailed  Retrospection  I  have  had  to  make  in  search- 
ing out  the  many  long- forgotten  incidents  and  details 
of  my  varied  life,  as  here  recorded  ;  and  the  Work  this 
has  involved,  and  the  Satisfaction  I  have  had  in 
writing  it,  seem  fully  to  justify  the  solemn  emphasis 
with  which  the  prediction  was  made. 

Thus  far  I  had  written  in  "  My  Life,"  the  proofs  of 
which  passed  out  of  my  hands  in  September,  1905, 
and  I  never  contemplated  that  anything  more  would 
happen  to  me  which  would  add  force  and  complete- 
ness to  the  fulfilment  above  recorded.  But  two  things 
of  that  nature  have  happened,  both  totally  unexpected, 
and  in  themselves  very  unlikely,  and  in  neither  case 
was  my  action  in  any  degree  influenced  by  the 
thought  that  they  did  serve  to  fulfil  more  exactly 
what  had  been  predicted.  So  much  was  this  the  case 
that  this  point  of  view  did  not  occur  to  me  till  I 
came  to  read  again  the  last  pages  of  "  My  Life  "  for 
the  purposes  of  this  edition. 

I  will  first  mention,  however,  that  the  whole  period 


PREDICTIONS    FULFILLED  395 

between  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  and  the 
completion  of  the  second,  has  to  me  been  again  a 
long  retrospection  of  what  may  be  termed  the  best 
and  most  active  part  of  my  life,  in  the  lengthy  pre- 
paration of  Spruce's  "  Notes  of  a  Botanist."  This 
period  extends  from  1849,  when  I  first  met  him 
at  Para,  to  the  date  of  his  death  in  1893.  While 
studying  his  Journals  and  letters  I  recalled,  and  to 
some  extent  visualized,  places  and  persons  in  South 
America  long  forgotten,  as  well  as  the  pleasant 
talks  and  communications  I  had  with  him  after  his 
return  to  England.  Four  years  instead  of  one  have 
thus  been  occupied  in  a  long  course  of  agreeable 
Retrospection. 

Far  more  important  than  this,  however,  is  a 
circumstance  that  happened  only  last  year.  Early  in 
the  spring  of  last  year  I  was  asked  by  Archdeacon 
Colley  to  help  him  by  appearing  as  a  witness  in  a  civil 
action  between  himself  and  Maskelyne,  the  celebrated 
conjuror,  respecting  phenomena  occurring  with  a 
medium.  Dr.  Monck.  The  Archdeacon  had  challenged 
Maskelyne  to  reproduce  the  phenomena  of  materiali- 
zation, as  described  by  him  in  a  lecture  delivered  at 
Weymouth  during  the  Church  Congress,  in  October, 
1905,  and  agreed  to  forfeit  ;^iooo  if  he  did  so.  It 
happened  that  I  was  the  only  person  in  England  who 
had  witnessed  similar  phenomena  with  Monck,  as  de- 
scribed in  chapter  XXL,  and  it  was  thought  that  if  I  saw 
Maskelyne's  imitation  I  could  say  how  far  it  was  a 
reproduction  of  what  I  had  seen  with  Monck,  and  what 
Mr.  Colley  described.  At  first  I  positively  refused  to 
go  up  to  London  and  expose  myself  to  cross-exami- 
nation in  Court,  in  order  to  save  the  Archdeacon  from 
the  consequences  of  his  own  too  impulsive  challenge. 
But  repeated  and  most  earnest  letters  from  him,  and 


396  MY    LIFE 

the  statement  that  his  solicitor  and  counsel  both 
thought  the  case  might  go  against  him  without  the 
evidence  which  I  alone  could  give  ;  and  further,  that  in 
that  case  the  cause  of  spiritualism  would  be  greatly 
damaged,  at  length  prevailed,  and  I  consented  to  go. 
I  found  Maskelyne's  performance  to  be  a  ludicrous 
parody  of  the  actual  materialization  as  both  I  and 
Archdeacon  Colley  described  it,  and  explained  in 
Court  the  exact  difference  between  them,  pointing  out 
that  all  the  essential  features  of  the  one  were  omitted 
in  the  other,  and  that,  while  the  actual  phenomena 
were  totally  inexplicable  by  normal  causes,  Maske- 
lyne's imitation  could  deceive  no  one  at  all  familiar 
with  such  performances.  The  result  of  the  trial  was 
that  the  Archdeacon  won  his  cause,  and  the  contempt 
and  ridicule  thrown  by  the  opposing  counsel  on  the 
alleged  phenomena  were  to  some  extent  neutralized 
by  my  positive  evidence. 

During  the  whole  of  this  event,  and  the  succeeding 
discussion  in  the  Press,  or  in  my  correspondence,  I 
never  once  thought  of  any  connection  with  the 
prediction.  But  on  reading  it  again  now,  I  see  that 
it  fulfils  the  conditions  far  more  exactly  than  did  my 
attendance  at  the  International  Congress  of  Spiritua- 
lists. For  the  prediction  was — "  You  will  come  out 
of  this  hole.  You  will  come  more  into  the  world, 
and  do  something  public  for  spiritualism."  In  1898  I 
had  not  "  come  out  of  the  hole,"  and  attending  a  con- 
gress of  spiritualists  was  hardly  "  doing  something 
public."  But  giving  evidence  in  a  Court  of  Justice, 
which  was  more  or  less  reported  all  over  the  kingdom 
and  the  world,  and  which  was  believed  to  have  saved 
the  reputation  of  spiritualism  on  that  occasion,  was 
certainly  "  doing  something  public  "  for  the  cause,  and 
something  quite  unanticipated  by  myself  or  any  one 


PREDICTIONS   FULFILLED  397 

for  me.  But  in  this  very  year  another  event  has 
occurred  even  less  anticipated  by  myself,  and  which 
again  accords  with  the  prediction. 

In  February,  1908,  the  Linnean  Society  decided 
to  celebrate  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  reading  of 
the  joint  Essays  of  Darwin  and  myself  on  July  i, 
1858,  by  a  Jubilee  Celebration  and  the  presentation 
of  a  medal  with  our  two  portraits  to  persons  con- 
nected with  the  event ;  and  the  Council  invited  me 
to  attend,  to  give  a  short  address,  and  to  receive  one 
of  the  medals. 

This  wholly  unexpected  and  very  unusual  honour 
was  in  due  course  conferred  upon  me  in  the  presence 
of  many  of  the  most  eminent  naturalists,  British  and 
Foreign.  Here,  then,  was  yet  another  "  coming  more 
into  the  world,"  which  I  thought  I  had  taken  my 
leave  of — the  world  of  Science ;  and  it  was  an 
occasion  of  publicity  that  could  hardly  be  exceeded, 
since  the  record  of  it  would  be  carried  by  the  Press 
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  civilized  world. 
Here  was  surely  "  Satisfaction  "  for  any  man,  however 
greedy  of  praise  he  might  be.  For  myself,  I  can  only 
say  that  I  would  have  been  fully  content  with  a  lower 
place  than  that  accorded  me,  and  feel  that  I  attained 
to  the  honour  more  from  the  accident  of  my  having 
lived  to  see  the  Celebration,  than  from  any  idea  that 
I  could  have  the  slightest  claim  to  be  placed  on 
anything  approaching  a  level  with  Darwin. 

With  this  celebration,  and  the  publication  of  this 
volume,  I  close  my  Memoirs.  I  now  wish  my  readers, 
who  have  so  far  followed  the  record  of  my  life-history, 
a  hearty  Farewell. 


INDEX 


A 


Aar,  the  gorge  of,  301 

Abyssinia,  plants  of,  in  Mada- 
gascar, 233 

"Acclimatization,"  article  on, 
264 

Aden,  174 

Adelboden,  304 

Africa,  plants  of,  in  Madagascar, 

233 

Agassiz,  Louis,  on  glaciers,  7 1 
"  Age  of  Bronze,  The,"  63 
Alexandria,  described,  171 
Allen,  Grant,  A.  R.  Wallace  on, 

299 ;  socialist,  328 
AUingham,  William,  and  Tenny- 
son, 295 
"  Altavona,"  by  Professor  Blackie, 

324 
Altringham,  lecture  at,  295 
Amazon,  travels  on,  143-162 
Amboyna,  189-195 
America,  tour  in,  272-293 
Andermatt,  walk  to,  301 
Animals,  distribution  of,  262 
Animals,  colours  of,  272 
"Animals     and      Plants     under 

Domestication,"  221 
"Anticipations  of  the  Future,"  305 
"  Antiquity  of  Man,"  by  Lyell,  223 
"Appreciation  of  Past  Century," 

by  A.  R.  Wallace,  305 
Arctic  Plants  in  Tropics,  237,  385 
Arena,  The,  article  in,  300 
Argyll,  Duke  of,  226 
Article  on  law  of  introduction  of 

new  species,  183 
Aru  Islands,  187,  188 


Astronomy,  interest  in,  101-102 
Australia,  birds  of,  205-206 


B 


Backhouse,  Mr.,  gardens  of,  259 
"  Bad  Times,"  by  A.  R.  Wallace, 

271 
Bali,  1S7 
Barking,  A.  R.  Wallace  lives  at, 

260 
Barra,  Brazil,  146 
Barrett,Professor,  245 ;  on  thought- 
reading,  258  ;  founds  Psychical 

Research  Society,  258 
Bartholomew's     "Architecture," 

98 
Barton-in-the-Clay,  surveying  at, 

58-61 
Batchian,  195 
Bates,   Henry,    A.    R.    Wallace 

meets,      127  ;    correspondence 

with,  143,  184,  197  ;  goes  with 

A.  R.  Wallace  to  Brazil,  144; 

refers  Darwin  to  A.  R.  Wallace, 

227 
Bateson,  Mr.,  301,  302 
Bay  of  Biscay,  storm  in,  145 
Beacons,  the,  Brecknockshire,  86, 

88,  90,  138 
Beane  river  at  Hertford,  22 
Beau  Brummell,  5 
Becca  de  Nona,  excursion  to,  215 
Bedfordshire,  surveying  in,  5^-73 
Bees'  cells,  A.  R.  Wallace  on,  3S7 
Beetles,  abundance  of,  at  certain 

localities,  while  others  are  very 

poor,  185,  186,  199 


400 


INDEX 


Bellamy,  E.,  293  ;  "  Looking 
Backward,"  by,  327;  "Equa- 
lity," by,  328 

Bengeo,  23 

Bennett,  A.  W.,  reply  to  his 
criticism  of  natural  selection, 
229 

Biological  Section  of  B.  A.,  A.  R, 
Wallace,  president,  25S,  265 

Birds,  A.  R.  Wallace  writes 
about,  205-207,  388 

Birmingham,  first  railway  to,  69 

Blackie,  Professor,  324 

Blatchford,  Robert,  306 

Borneo,  177 

Borrow,  George,  quoted,  86,  93 

Boston,  spiritualism  in,  344 

Botany,  A.  R.  Wallace  studies, 
61,  104,  107 

Brackett,  Mr,  E.  A.,  spiritualist, 

344 
Bradgate  Park,  rambles  in,  128 
Bradley,  Professor,  on  age  of  big 

trees  of  California,  282 
Brady,  Sir  Antonio,  260 
Brecknockshire,  surveying  in,  87 
British  Association,  229,  256 
British     Museum,     its     business 

methods,  372 
Brooke,  Captain,  351 
Brooke,  Charles,  251 
Brooke,  Sir  J.,  177,  181,  250 
Brown,  Mrs.,  and  Lady  Burdett- 

Coutts,  250 
Brown,  Mr.  Curtis,  312 
Bruce-Joy,  Mr.  A.,  308 
Brunig,  excursion  to,  301 
Bryn-coch,  95,  96 
Buckland,  Dr.,  and  the  ice-age,  71 
Buckley,  Miss  A.,  220,  235,  374 
Bunbury,  Sir  Charles,  226 
Burdett-Coutts,  Lady,  250 
Burney,  Fanny,  "Evelina," by,  40 
Butterflies,  150,  186,  207 
Byron,  Lord,  laudatory  poem  on, 

62 


Cadoxton,  surveying  at,  94 
Cairo,  A.  R.  Wallace  visits,  173 


Calaveras  Grove,  big  trees,  279- 

2S0 
California,  J.  Wallace  goes  to,  9  ; 

A.  R.  Wallace  visits,  277 
Cambridge,    British    Association 

at,  256 
Carpenter,   Edward,  as  socialist, 

328 
Carpenter,  Dr.  W.  B.,  258,  336 
Carpenter,  William,  362-367 
Carroll,  Lewis,  books  of,  117 
Casey,    Mr.    Comerford,    transla- 
tion of  Latin  speech  by,  269 
"Causes    of    War,"    article    by 

A.  R.  Wallace,  305 
"Caterpillars  and  Birds,"  229 
Caterpillars,   colouring    of,  227, 

228,  382 
Celebes,  A.  R.  Wallace  at,  1S7, 

195 
Ceram,  195,  196 
Chambers,  Dr.  Robert,  letter   to 

A.  R.  Wallace,  336 
Champery,  A.  R.  Wallace  visits, 

215 

Charles  Allen,  172,  176 
Clarion,  The,  letter  to,  from  A.  R. 

Wallace,  305 
Clark,    Dr.    G.    B.,    and    Land 

Nationalization,  322 
Cleveland,      President,     A.     R. 

Wallace  meets,  275 
Clifford,  Rev.  J.,  socialist,  328 
Clydach  River,  96 
"Colours  of  Animals,"  by  A.  R. 

Wallace,  383 
Columbia    College,    Georgia,    F. 

Wallace  goes  to,  8 
Combe,  George,  125 
"  Compendium    of   Geography," 

Australasia,  by  A.  R.  Wallace, 

268 
"Constitution     of      Man,"      by 

Combe,  125 
Constitutional,  The,  63 
Contemporary  Review,  The,  articles 

by  A.  R.  Wallace,  300,  322 
Cook,  Miss,  medium,  338 
Corelli,  Miss  M.,  A.  R.  Wallace 

meets,  326 
Coulcher,  Mr.,  362-367 
Coulson,  Mr.,  at  Sarawak,  177 


INDEX 


401 


Cox,  Mrs,  Robert,  325 

Cox,  Serjeant,  335 

"Creed  of  Science,"  by  Graham, 

Darwin  on,  234 
Croll,  J.,  211,  233,  267 
Crookes,  Sir  W.,  338-339 
Croydon,  A.  R.  Wallace  lives  at, 

265 
Crutvvell,    C.    H.,    schoolmaster, 

28 
Crynant  at  a  village  beer-shop,  96 
Crystal  Palace,  helps  Dr,  Latham 

at,  166 
Cuba,    Article    on,    by    A.    R. 

"Wallace,  305 
Cubitt,  Mr.,  builder,  9 


D 


Daily  Chronicle,   The,  article  by 

A.  R.  Wallace,  305 
Dana,  Professor  J.  D.,  384 
Darlington,  lecture  at,  295 
Dartmoor,    A.    R.    Wallace    on 

preserving,  320 
Darwen,  lecture  at,  295 
Darwin,   C,    191-194,    226-238 ; 
correspondence  with,  183,  192, 
227-235  ;  on  caterpillars,  227, 
228  ;    and     A.    R.     Wallace, 
differences  of  opinion,  229  ;  and 
A.  R.  Wallace's  pension,  375 
Darwin,  Dr.  Erasmus,  226 
"Darwinism,"  lecture  on,  272 
"Darwinism,"  by  A.  R,  Wallace, 

218,  294 
Davos,  at,  with  Dr.  Lunn,  302- 

"  Defence  of  Spiritualism,"  by 
A.  R.  Wallace,  338 

Defoe,  Daniel,  "  The  Great 
Plague,"  by,  40 

Dent  du  Midi,  215 

"Descent  of  Man,"  A.  R.  Wal- 
lace's opinion  of,  230 

"  Development  of  Human  Races," 
by  A.  R.  Wallace,  381 

Devynock  in  Usk  vale,  91 

Dialectical  Society,  335 

"  Diary  of  a  Physician,"  40 

Dilke,  Elizabeth,  2 


Dinas  rock,  Vale  of  Neath,  136 
"  Distribution  of  Animals,  Geo- 
graphical," 262 
Distribution  of  Plants,  268 
Dorey,  194 
Dorking,  A.  R.  Wallace  lives  at, 

264 
Doubleday,  Mr.  E.,  145 
Douglas,  Miss,  spiritualist,  339 
Dringarth,   upper   Neath   valley, 

138 
Drumau  mountain,  135 
Dublin  University  degree,  269 
Dunstable,  68 
Dyaks,  1 78- 1 81 


E 


Edwards,   W.    H.,   "  Voyage  up 

Amazon,"  145 
Ega  rich  in  insects,  186 
Eglinton,  Mr.,  medium,  341 
"  Elements  of  Botany,"  Lindley's, 

103 
"  Encyclopedia  Britannica,"  arti- 
cles if  or,  264,  265 
Entomological  Society,  204,  240 
Epping  Forest,  article  on,  218 
"  Equality,"  by  E.  Bellamy,  328 
Estcourt,     R.,     an     early    land- 

nationalizer,  322 
Evans,  Frederick,  medium,  352 
"Evelina,"  by  F.  Burney,  40 
Exeter,  meeting  of  B.  A.,  256 
"Exeter     Change     for     British 

Lions,"  257 
"Expression    of  Emotions,"    by 
Darwin,  227 


"Faerie  Queenc,"  Spenser's,  40 
Fielding's  "Tom  Jones,"  40 
Fillingham,  Rev.  R.  C,  socialist, 

328 
"First  Principles," by  H. Spencer, 

237 
Fitch,  Walter,  artist,  165 
Flower,  Sir  W.,  245 
Forbes,  Prof.  E.,  184 

2   D 


402 


INDEX 


Forests  of  S.  America,  149 
Forests  of  California,  277-2S2 
Forttiightly  Review,  the,   articles 

in,  21S,  299,  300,  301,  312 
Forty-five      years'      Vaccination 

Statistics,  330 
Frolic  gunboat,  a  month  on  board, 

170 


G 


Gallienne,  Mr.  Le,  303-304 
Galton      disproves      pangenesis, 

222 
Games,  32 

Garden  of  the  Gods,  283 
Garrison,  F,  J.,  at  Boston,  344 
Geach,    F.,    at    Grays,    261  ;    in 

Timor,  359,  360 
Geographical    distribution,     184- 

185,  197,  205,  262-264 
"  Geographical     distribution     of 

Animals,"  264 
Geological  Climates,  211 
Geology,  59,  71,  88,  89,  90 
George,     Henry,     on    the    land- 
problem,  323 
Gibbons,  Dr.,  in  California,  277 
Glacial  epoch,  71,  214,  215,  222, 

233.  384 
Gladstone,   W.  E.,   Letter  from, 

301 
Glamorganshire,  residence  in,  87, 

129-142 
Glasgow,  B.A.  meeting  at,  258 
Godalming,  269 
Goram,  195 

Gorge  of  the  Aar,  301,  302 
Gothic  architecture,  99 
Government  of  natives,  182,  200 
Graham,  W.,  Darwin  on,  234 
Grand  Junction  Canal,  69 
Gravity,  specific,  68,  69 
Gray,  G.  R.,  204 
Gray,  John,  message  from,  353 
Grays,  217,  260-264 
Gray's  Peak,  283 
Greenell,  John,  4 
Greenell,  Rebecca,  6 
Grove,  Calaveras,  279 
Guia,  on  the  Rio  Negro,  148 


H 

"  Hall  of  Science,"  45 

Hall,  Spencer,  on  mesmerism,  124 

Hampden,  John,  362-372 

Hannay  and  Dietrichsen's  Alma- 
nac, 10 1 

Hanworth,  2 

Handeck  cascade,  301 

Hare,  Robert,  portrait  of,  354 

Harmsworth's  History,  316 

Hartham,  23 

Haweis,  Rev.  H.  R. ,  303 

Haxby,  Mr.,  medium,  340 

Hayward,  C.  F.,  269 

Hayward,  Charles,  269 

Health,  bad,  308-310 

Henslow,  Rev.,  criticism  of,  302 

Herbarium,  my  S.  Wales,  103 

Hertford,  6,  20 

Hertford  Mill,  22 

Hertford  Grammar  School,  26 

Higgins,  Mr.  H.  H.,  65,  66 

Higham  Gobion,  first  survey  of,  58 

Hill,  Rev.  Abraham,  122 

Hirwain,  137 

History  at  school,  30 

History,  Harmsworth's,  316 

Hobson,  J.  A.,  a  socialist,  328 

Hoddesdon,  6,  39 

Holmes,  O,  W.,  273 

Holman,  Judge,  275 

Holyhead  coach  road,  68 

Home,  D.  D.,  medium,  338-340  ; 
portrait  of,  354 

Hooker,  Mrs.  Beecher,  347 

Hooker,  Sir  J.,  192,  193,  195 

Hope,  Col.,  V.C.,  260 

Horn's  Mill,  Hertford,  23 

House  at  Grays,  261 

House  of  Lords,  article  on,  300, 315 

Hudson  River,  273 

Hughes,  H.  Price,  303 

"  Human  Personality,"  by  Myers, 

343 
Human  Race,  development  of,  381 
"Human  Selection,"  article  on, 

299,  327 

Human  Selection,  386 

Humboldt's  "  Personal  Narra- 
tive," 123 

Humming-birds,  283 


INDEX 


403 


Hurstpierpoint,  213,  216 
Huxley,  letter  from,  247 
Huxley  on  A.  R.  Wallace's  article, 

183 
Huxley,    T.    H.,   168,  238,    246, 

247,  249  ;  on  Spiritualism,  336 
Hyndman,  H.  M.,  socialist,  328 


Ice-age,   the,  71,  214,  215,  222, 

233,  384 
Ideas,  new,  3S0 
111  health,  308-3 lo 
Illness,  26,  77 
Inaccessible  valleys,  279 
Inclosure  Act,  80-85 
Income  from  collections,  35S 
Independejit,  The,  article  in,  312 
Ingleby,    C.     M.,     acquaintance 

with,  260 
Insect  pests,  97 
"Island  Life,"  by  A.  R.  Wallace, 

232,  265-268 
"  Instinct,  problem  of,"  305  ;  how 

birds  migrate,  388 
"  Is  Mars  Habitable  ? "  317 


James,  Professor,  at  seances  with, 

346 
James  Wallace,  2 
Java  and  Sumatra,  199 
Jenner,  329 

Journey  to  London  from  Usk,  20 
Journey  to  the  East,  169,  174 
Journey  to  Para,  145 
Juaurite,  Rio  Uaupes,  147 
Jubilee,  Darwin-Wallace,  397 


K 

Keeler,  P.  L.  O.  A.,  medium,  347 

Ke  Islands,  195 

Kenworthy,  J.  C,  a  socialist,  32S 

Khmers  of  Cambodia,  387 

Kingsley,  Charles,  256 

Kington,  78,  87,  94 

Kirchet,  the  rock  barrier  at,  301 


Labour  Annual,  article  in,  305 

Lakes,  origin  of,  222,  223-225 

Lake  basins,  erosion  of,  386 

Laleham,  2 

Lampreys,  14 

Land     Nationalization,    85,    241, 

319-326  ;  Spencer  on,  242 
"  Land     Nationalization,"     268 ; 

by  A.  R.  Wallace,  323 
Land      Nationalization     Society, 

322-326 
Land  question,  79-S5  ;  article  on, 

321,  322 
Land  Tenure  Reform  Association 

and  J.  S.  Mill,  319 
Language,  origin  of,  385 
Languages,  native,  166 
Latham,  Dr.  R.  G.,  166 
Latin,  learning  at  school,  29-31 
"Law   of  Introduction   of  New 

Species,"  183 
Lead  mines,  investments  in,  359 
Lecture  Tour  in  America,  272-293 
Legal  troubles,  361-372 
Leicester,  121 

Leicester  Collegiate  School,  122 
Letters  to  G.   Silk,  21,  74,   171, 

199 
Levi,  Professor  Leone,  270 
Lewes,  G,  H.,  and  Spiritualism, 

336 
Libels  by  Hampden,  368-371 
Lindley's  Botany,  103 
Linnean  Society,  papers  for,  207  ; 

paper  for,  302 
Linnean  Society  Celebration,  397 
Lippitt,  General,  347,  350 
Literary  eftbrts,  first,  107- 114 
Literary  work,  165,  205,  262,  269, 

299.  301.  305>  306,  310,  313 
Literature,  Welsh,  93 
Litigation,  361-372 
Liverpool,  lectures  at,  295,  299 
Llanbadock,  near  Usk,  14 
Llanbister,  Radnorshire,  78 
Llandrindod  Wells,  79 
Llantwit,  Glamorganshire,  133 
Llia  River,  92 

Lodge,  Sir  O.,  a  socialist,  328 
Lombok,  186-187,  206 


404 


INDEX 


London,  early  life  in,  43-4$  ;  life 
in,  163-170,  203-216 

"Looking  Backward,"  by  Bel- 
lamy, 327 

Loss  of  collections,  155 

Louray  Caves,  276 

Lowell  Institute,  Boston,  272 

Lowell  J.  Russell,  238,  273 

Lowell,  Professor  P.,  on  Mars,  316 

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  244 

Lung-disease,  77-78 

Lunn,  Dr.,  lecture  for,  302,  303 

Lyell's  Geology,  71,  88 

Lyell,  Sir  C,  183,  192,  193,  211, 
220-226,  362  ;  letters  to,  221, 
224 

Lyman,  D.,  a  spiritualist,  347 


M 

Macassar,  186,  187,  1S9 
Mackay,  Charles,  324-326 
Macmillan,  A.,  258 
Macmillan,  Margaret,  328 
Meiringen,  visit  to,  301 
Maescar,  survey  of,  91 
Maen  Llia,  92 
Malacca,  176 
Malay   Archipelago,    journey   to, 

169-174,  202,  210,  216 
Malays,  the,  200 

Malthus's  "  Population,"  123,  190 
Manchester  Guardia?i,  letter  to,  on 

war,  305 
Man,      development      of,      236 ; 

Natural  Selection  and,  212 
"Man's  Place  in  the  Universe," 

312 
Marriage  of  A.  R.  Wallace,  214 
"  Mars,  Is  it  habitable  ?  "  316 
Martin,  Mr.,  a  London  builder,  8 
Martin,  William,  349 
Massey,  Gerald,  a  spiritualist,  328 
Matabello  Islands,  195 
Mathews,  Mr.,  68,  72-73 
Mechanics,  I-ondon,  44 
Mechanics'  Institute,  Neath,  135 
Medal,  Darwin- Wallace,  397 
Medals,  246 

Memory,  peculiarity  of,  16 
Menado,  Celebes,  195 


Mental  nature,  115,  118 
Mesmerism,  124-127,  129,  334 
Migration  of  Birds,  305,  388 
Mill,  John  Stuart,  319-321 
Mill,  oil  cake,  23 
Mimicry,  208,  212,  228 
Mirlees,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  258 
"  Miracles    and     Modern     Spiri- 
tualism," 264,  334 
Mitten,   William,  213,  214,  301, 

315 

Mivart,  Professor  St,  G.,  249,  302 
Models  of  natives,  166,  167 
Monck,  Mr.,  medium,  342,  343 
Money  matters,  357,  378 
Monitor,  R.  Owen's  silent,  54 
Monkeys,  199 

Morgan,  Professor  Lloyd,  213,  30$ 
Morley,  John,  337 
Morrison-Davidson,    a    socialist, 

328 
Morris,   Sir   L.,   socialist  poems, 

328 
Moseley,  Professor,  188 
Mount-Temple,  Lord,  269 
Mouth-gesture,  385 
Murchison,  Sir  R.,  169,  170 
Museum,    British,    business    me- 
thods, 372 
Mutton,  G.  Borrow  on  Welsh,  86 
Myers's   "Human    Personality," 
343 


N 

Natives,  government  of,  182,  200  ; 
models  of,  at  the  Crystal  Palace, 
166,  167;  Sarawak,  178 

Natural  selection,  207,  211,  217, 
224,  300 

Neath,  Vale  of,  94,  131  ;  scenery 

of,  13s,  136 
Neaves,   Lord,    humorous   verses 

of,  257 
Nests,  theory  of  birds',  212,  382 
New  Guinea,  collecting  in,  194 
New  ideas,  380 
Nevada  Fall,  the,  279 
Newcastle,  lecture  in,  295 
New  Lanark,  45 
New  Radnor,  75 


INDEX 


405 


Newton,  Professor  A.,  256,  262 

Niagara,  274 

Nineteenth    Cetituiy,   articles    in, 

300 
Nolloth,  Commander,  170 
Nutwood  Cottage,  built  for  A.  R. 

Wallace,  270 


O 


Oceans,  permanence  of,  384 

Oilcake  mill,  Hertford,  23 

"  Old  Orchard  "  House,  307 

Old  Red  Sandstone,  89 

Ophir  Mount,  176 

Orang-utan,  177,  17S-180 

Ordnance  survey,  59-61 

Origin  of  life,  239 

Origin  of  species,  144,  183-185, 
189-194,  211 

Osgood,  Samuel,  a  mining  sur- 
veyor, 96-98 

Owen,  Mr,,  editor  of  Golden  Gate, 

351 
Owen,    Robert,    45,    46 ;    social 

philosophy,  47,  48 
Owen,  Robert  Dale,  46 
Oxford,  degree  of  D.C.L.  given 

by  the  University  of,  295 


Pain,  in  childhood,  not  severe,  19 

Palembang,  199 

Palisades  of  the  Hudson  river, 
283 

"  Palms  of  the  Amazon,"  165 

PapilionidK,  paper  on  the  Mala- 
yan, 207 

Pangenesis,  221 

Para,  arrival  at,  146 

Paradise,  birds  of,  1S8,  195,  201, 
207 

Parkstone,  residence  at,  297-306 

Parrots  and  pigeons,  papers  on, 
206 

Pears,  Messrs.,  prize  essay,  270 

Pearson,  Professor  Karl,  328 

Pension,  civil  list,  374 

Permanence  of  Oceans,  384 


"  Personal  Evidence  of  Spirit 
Phenomena,  Notes  of,"  334, 336 

Personal  characteristics,  115-118 

"  Personal  suffrage,"  315 

Photography,  a  suggestion,  112 

Phrenology,  17,  125,  140-142 

Pierpont,  Jno.,  portrait' of,  353 

Pigeons  of  the  Malay  Archipelago, 
206 

Plants,  Arctic,  in  temperate 
regions,  385 

Playloft,  at  Hertford,  35 

Political  and  moral  views  of 
Robert  Owen,  47 

Polymorphism,  in  Malayan  butter- 
flies, 209 

Porth-yr-Ogof,  137-139 

Portraits,  spirit,  353,  354 

Poulton,  Professor  E.  B.,  295 

Predictions  fulfilled,  390 

Price,  Mr.,  Neath  Abbey,  96 

Principles  of  Sociology,  241 

Problem  of  Instinct,  388 

Protective  colouring,  208,  209  ; 
colouration,  228,  229 

Proving  the  earth  round,  362-372 

Psychical  research,  124 

Purland,  Dr.  T.,  252,  256  j  letters 
from,  254 


Quakers'  Meeting,  41 
Quarterly  Revieiv,  article  in,  211 


R 


Radnorshire,  surveying  in,  74-79 
Railway  carriages,  early,  72 
Railway,   London   and   Birming- 
ham, 69,  72 
Railway  speculation,  132 
Railways,  nationalization  of,  318 
Ramage,  Dr.,  cures  my  lungs,  77 
Randi,  Signor,  seances  with,  339 
Reading,  miscellaneous,  39 
Reasoning  power,  115 
Reception  of  my  works,  377 
Reclus,  Elisee,  298 
"  Red  Lions,"  fraternity  of,  257 


4o6 


INDEX 


Red-wood  forest,  277 
Reflections  on  misfortunes,  375 
Regent's  Park,  house  near,  213 
Religious  doubts,  45,  46,  119 
Religion  of  my  parents,  41,  119 
Reminiscences  of  Amazon,  149 
Rescue  after  ship  burnt,  1 56 
Rhayader,  illness  at,  76 
Rhone  Glacier,  301 
Rio  Negro,  147 
Roberts,  Miss,  gift  from,  374 
Roman  road,  137 
Ross,  Mrs.,  medium,  344,  345 
Royal   Commission   on  Vaccina- 
tion, 330-332 
Rumball,  J.  Q.,  phrenologist,  142 


Sabbath-keepers,  suggestions  to, 
300 

Sabbatarians,  article  for,  3SS 

St.  Albans,  Duke  of,  father  of 
A.  R.  Wallace  named  after,  3 

St.  Clair  Stanley,  spirit  artist,  353 

St.  Mark's  Crescent,  residence  in, 
213 

Salisbury,  Dr.,  asthma-cure,  309 

Salisbury,  Lord,  on  natural  selec- 
tion, 243 

Salt,  H.  S.,  a  socialist,  328 

"Sandford  and  Merton,"  im- 
pressed by,  15 

San  Francisco,  big  trees  near,  277  ; 
seances  at,  351-356 

Santarem,  visit  to,  146 

Sarawak,  natives  of,  178  ;  orang- 
utans and  beetles,  177 

"Sarn  Helen,"  old  Roman  road, 

137 

Savage,  Minot  J.,  and  spiritualism, 

344 
Savages,  meeting  with,  150 
"Saving  the  Face,"  as  evidence 

of  Eastern  civilization,  34 
Scenery  of  Vale  of  Neath,  135 
School  life  at  Hertford,  26 
School  meals,  31  ;  work,  29 
Science,  interest  in,  101-120 
"Scientific  Aspect  of  the  Super- 
natural," 336 


Scientific  friends,  245 

Scientific      Opinion,      Hampden's 

challenge  in,  362 
Scientific  papers,  205 
Scientific  progress,  lecture  on,  303- 

304 
Sclater,   Dr.,    suggests    book   on 

geographical  distribution,  262 
Stances  in  America,  343-356 ;  in 

London,  335-343 
Senni  Bridge,  life  at,  91,  92 
Sequoia  gigantea,  277,  281 
Sexual  selection,  236 
Sheffield,  lecture  in,  299 
Shipwreck,  152-159 
Silent  monitor,  R.  Owen's,  54 
Silk,  George,  letters  to,  21,  74, 171, 

199 
Silsoe  and  Wray  Park,  67 
Sims,  Mr.,  lodge  with,  at  Neath, 

.133 

Singapore,  life  at,  175 

Sketches  while  at  Leicester  school, 

129 
Slate  quarries,  bad  investment  in, 

359     . 
Slate- writing  under  test  conditions, 

352 

Slater,  Mr,  M.  B.,  Dr.  Spruce's 
executor,  314 

Sleigh,  Frances,  a  possible  rela- 
tive, 2 

Smoking,  experiences  of,  59,  79 

Snowdon,  the  ancient  glaciers  of, 

215 

"Social   Evolution,"   article  on, 

395. 

Socialism,  founder  of,  57 
Socialism,    America     and,     293 ; 

conversion  to,  327-329 
Socialist  Review,  article  in,  317 
Soulbury,  an  old-world  village,  69 
Species,  origin  of,  189-194 
Speculations,  disastrous,  358-360 
Spencer,   Herbert,  first  interview 

with,  239 ;  correspondence  with, 

240-243 
Spirit  messages,  390,  392 
Spiritualism,  experiences  in,  334' 

356 
"Spiritualism,"    article     on,    by 

A.  R.  Wallace,  338 


INDEX 


407 


Spruce,  Dr,  R.,  I  first  meet  at 
Para,  146;  letter  to,  151  ;  213, 
251  ;  editing  journals  of,  314 

Standing  stone  in  Glamorganshire, 

137 

Stanford's       "  Geography       and 

Travel,"  268 
Stanford,  Senator,  a   spiritualist, 

347 
Stanner  Rocks,  near  Kington,  74 
Stanzerhorn,  visit  to  the,  301 
Stevens,   Mr,   Samuel,   my  agent 

while  abroad,  160,  163,  177,  1S3 
Stockton,  California,  stay  at,  278 
Stone,  standing,  in  Vale  of  Neath, 

"  Strikes,  Inefficiency  of,"  305 
"Studies,  Scientific  and  Social," 

by  A.  R.  Wallace,  305,  327 
Suez,  in  omnibus  to,  173-174 
"Succession  of  Species,"  183,  184 
Sumatra,  a  letter  from,  198 
Sunday    observance,    article    on, 

388 
Supernatural,  scientific  aspect  of 

the,  336 
Survey,    Ordnance,    interest    of, 

59-61 
Surveying,  experiences  of,  58,  74 
Surveying  in  Bedfordshire,  58-73  ; 

Radnorshire,    74-79 ;    in   Gla- 
morganshire, 87 
Survival  of  the  fittest,  190 
Sutherland  evictions,  the  story  of 

the,  324,  325 
Swimming,  no  success  in,  22,  95 
Swinton,      A.     C,     and     Land 

Nationalization,  322 
Switzerland,  visit  to,  in  1867,  215 
Switzerland,  tours  in,  301, 302, 304 


Tebb,  William,  introduces  me  to 

anti-vaccination,  329 
Telescope,  attempt  to  make  a,  loi 
Tennyson,  Lord,  and  spiritualism, 

295-296 
Ternate,   residence  at,   189,  194  ; 

disastrous  voyage  from  Waigiou 

to,  196 


Thomson,    Sir  W.,    "an    odious 

spectre  "  to  Darwin,  231 
Timor,  paper  on  birds  of,  206 
Toys,  advantages  of  home-made, 

36 
Travels  on  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro, 

146,  165 
Trees,  big,  of  California,  277,  281 
"  Tropical  Nature,"  265 
"Tropics,  White  men  in,"  305 
Tumuli  on  roadside  near  Steven- 
age, 64 
Turning-points  in  life,  105,  130 
Turvey,  an  incident  at,  69 
Tyndall,  Professor,  refuses  to  in- 
vestigate spiritualism,  336 


U 


Uaupes  River,  exploration  of,  147, 

150 
Underground  river  in  the  Vale  of 

Neath,  137,  139 
Unemployed  problem,  the,  317 
"  Universe,   Man's  Place  in,"  by 

A.  R.  Wallace,  312 
Usk,     my     birth-place,     6,     13  ; 

revisited,  18 
Utility,  the  problem  of,  302 


"Vaccination    a    Delusion,"    by 

A.  R.  Wallace,  333 
Vaccination,     lecture     on,     304 ; 

question,      the,     329  ;     Royal 

Commission       on,      330-332  ; 

statistics,  330 
Val  Savaranches,  216 
Varied    knowledge,     lecture    on, 

109 
Varley,   Cromwell,  a  spiritualist, 

335 
Veddahs  of  Ceylon,  387 
Verses  by  Lord  Neaves,  257 
"  Vestiges  of  Creation,"  143 
Voyage  home  from  the  Amazon, 

151-159 
Voyage  to  Para,  145 
"  Voyage  up  the  Amazon,  A,"  145 


4o8 


INDEX 


w 

Wallace,  T.  V.,  message  from,  353 
Waghorn,      Lie\it.,      established 

omnibus  line  to  Suez,  174 
Waigiou  Island,  visit  to,  195,  196  ; 

voyage  to,  196 
Wales,  North,  a  month  in,  214 
Wallace,  Cragie-,  family,  4 
Wallace,  A.  R.,  marries,  214 
Wallace,  Elizabeth,  message  from, 

353 
Wallace,  Fanny,  3,  8 
Wallace,  Herbert,  9,  146,  147 
Wallace,  James,  2 
Wallace,  John,  3, 43,  44,  273,  277 
Wallace,  Mary,  spirit-portrait  of, 

354 

Wallace,  R.,  message  from,  353 

Wallace,  William,  2,  3,  349 ; 
dies,  129 

Wallace,  T.  V.,  A,  R,  Wallace's 
father,  4,  10  ;  dies,  1 14  ;  mes- 
sage from,  354 

Wallace's  early  childhood,   1 3-25 

Wallace's  sisters,  10 

Walsh,  J.  H.,  362 

"  War  in  Transvaal,"  protest 
against,  305 

"  War,  causes  of,  &c.,"  305 

Warwick,  Countess  of,  a  socialist, 

329 

Washington    City,    residence   at, 

275 


Washington,  siances  at,  347-351 
Webb,  Sidney,  a  socialist,  328 
Webster,  Mr.,  John  Wallace  ap- 
prenticed to,  9,  43 
Wedderburn,  Sir  D.,  269 
Wedgwood,   Hensleigh,    a    spiri- 
tualist, 335,  339,  341 
Weir,  Jenner,  226,  228 
Weismann,  on  heredity,  222 
Westminster  Review,  article  in, 

228 
West  Point,  on  the  Hudson,  273, 

274 
White  House,  visit  to,  275 
"  Wild  Wales,"   George  Borrow 

on,  86,  93 
Wilson,  Algernon,  spirit  form  of, 

346 
Wilson,  Rev.  Percy,  i 
Windmills/A.  R.  Wallace  erects, 

at  Grays,  261-262 
Wokan,  in  the  Aru  Islands,  188 
"  Wonderful     Century,"    by 

A.  R.  Wallace,  310 
Wood,  Rev.  J.  G.,  272 
Workshop,     Mr,    Webster's,    in 
London,  44 


York,  lecture  at,  295 
Yosemite  Falls,  the,  279 
Yosemite  Valley,  the,  278 


THE   END 


PRINTED    BY   WILLIAM   CLOWES    AND   SONS,    LIMITED,    LONDON    AND    BECCLES.