========================================================================
Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters
Volume I: Investigations and Prosecutions — Lawrence E. Walsh, Independent Counsel
August 4, 1993, Washington, D.C. — public domain U.S. government work
Source text: Federation of American Scientists, https://irp.fas.org/offdocs/walsh/
========================================================================

Contributors to the Final Report


     One of the most difficult and important tasks of the Office of Independent Counsel has been
the preparation of this Final Report.  Since this Report seeks to cover the most important aspects
of a lengthy and complex investigation, it is a product of all who have served in the Office of
Independent Counsel in the Iran/contra matter_the lawyers, the investigators, and the support
staff.  To all of them, this office owes a debt of gratitude.


     In addition, Independent Counsel would like to give special recognition to the following
individuals who participated in the preparation of this Report:


     Editors, Mary J. Belcher, Michael D. Vhay, and James G. Wieghart.


     Lawyers, Thomas E. Baker, John Q. Barrett, Steven A. Ellis, Vernon L. Francis, Craig A.
Gillen, Jeffrey S. Harleston, William T. Hassler, Gregory A. Mark, Christian J. Mixter, Kenneth
J. Parsigian, Charles A. Rothfeld, Laurence S. Shtasel, Christina A. Spaulding, Guy Miller
Struve, William M. Treanor, Michael D. Vhay, and Samuel A. Wilkins III.


     Administrator, Carol McCreary-Maddox.


     Financial Officer, Philip J. Rooney.


     Researchers, Vincent T. Colosimo, Jr., Thomas F. Cusick, Michael S. Foster, Jennifer J.
Gamboli, Lisa M. Mallory, Fredrich Olsen, Kristina E. Rosenthal, Megan W. Semple, and
Michael D. Tang.


     Production, Joseph Foote, Ruth Anne Witucki Miller, Peggy J. Thume and Brenda S. Carman.


     Editorial and Clerical Support Team, Kathleen A. Betts, Kelly Hargreaves, Calvin S. Holt, Jr.,
Jacob D. Kortz, Josette M. Mercer, Jennifer J. Nicholson, Allen F. Stansbury, and Denise E.
Washington.

INTRODUCTION:

Letter of Transmittal to Volume 1

     REPORTS OF THE INDEPENDENT COUNSEL

     The Office of Independent Counsel for Iran/contra Matters is

submitting three volumes of reports to the United States Court of

Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Division for the

Purpose of Appointing Independent Counsel:

     1.  Volume I: Investigations and Prosecutions

     2.  Volume II: Indictments, Plea Agreements, Interim Reports

to the Congress and Administrative Matters

     3.  Volume III: Classified Materials

     The materials from Independent Counsel's investigations that

are not contained in one of these three volumes have been

deposited with the National Archives. Materials are also held,

some under seal, in the U.S. District Courts for the District of

Columbia, Maryland, and the Eastern District of Virginia and in

the United States Courts of Appeals for the District of Columbia

Circuit and for the Fourth Circuit.

Executive Summary

In October and November 1986, two secret U.S. Government operations were publicly exposed,
potentially implicating Reagan Administration officials in illegal activities. These operations
were the provision of assistance to the military activities of the Nicaraguan contra rebels during
an October 1984 to October 1986 prohibition on such aid, and the sale of U.S. arms to Iran in
contravention of stated U.S. policy and in possible violation of arms-export controls. In late
November 1986, Reagan Administration officials announced that some of the proceeds from the
sale of U.S. arms to Iran had been diverted to the contras.

As a result of the exposure of these operations, Attorney General Edwin Meese III sought the
appointment of an independent counsel to investigate and, if necessary, prosecute possible crimes
arising from them.

The Special Division of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
appointed Lawrence E. Walsh as Independent Counsel on December 19, 1986, and charged him
with investigating:

(1) the direct or indirect sale, shipment, or transfer since in or about 1984 down to the present, of military arms, materiel, or funds to
the government of Iran, officials of that government, persons, organizations or entities connected
with or purporting to represent that government, or persons located in Iran;

(2) the direct or indirect sale, shipment, or transfer of military arms, materiel or funds to any
government, entity, or person acting, or purporting to act as an intermediary in any transaction
referred to above;

(3) the financing or funding of any direct or indirect sale, shipment or transfer referred to above;

(4) the diversion of proceeds from any transaction described above to or for any person,
organization, foreign government, or any faction or body of insurgents in any foreign country,
including, but not limited to Nicaragua;

(5) the provision or coordination of support for persons or entities engaged as military insurgents
in armed conflict with the government of Nicaragua since 1984.

This is the final report of that investigation.

Overall Conclusions

The investigations and prosecutions have shown that high-ranking Administration officials
violated laws and executive orders in the Iran/contra matter.

Independent Counsel concluded that:

-- the sales of arms to Iran contravened United States Government policy and may have violated
the Arms Export Control Act1

1 Independent Counsel is aware that the Reagan Administration Justice Department took the
position, after the November 1986 revelations, that the 1985 shipments of United States weapons
to Iran did not violate the law.  This post hoc position does not correspond with the
contemporaneous advice given the President.  As detailed within this report, Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger (a lawyer with an extensive record in private practice and the
former general counsel of the Bechtel Corporation) advised President Reagan in 1985 that the
shipments were illegal.  Moreover, Weinberger's opinion was shared by attorneys within the
Department of Defense and the White House counsel's office once they became aware of the
1985 shipments.  Finally, when Attorney General Meese conducted his initial inquiry into the
Iran arms sales, he expressed concern that the shipments may have been illegal.

-- the provision and coordination of support to the contras violated the Boland Amendment ban
on aid to military activities in Nicaragua;

-- the policies behind both the Iran and contra operations were fully reviewed and developed at
the highest levels of the Reagan Administration;

-- although there was little evidence of National Security Council level knowledge of most of the
actual contra-support operations, there was no evidence that any NSC member dissented from the
underlying policy -- keeping the contras alive despite congressional limitations on contra support;

-- the Iran operations were carried out with the knowledge of, among others, President Ronald
Reagan, Vice President George Bush, Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger, Director of Central Intelligence William J. Casey, and national security
advisers Robert C. McFarlane and John M. Poindexter; of these officials, only Weinberger and
Shultz dissented from the policy decision, and Weinberger eventually acquiesced by ordering the
Department of Defense to provide the necessary arms; and

-- large volumes of highly relevant, contemporaneously created documents were systematically
and willfully withheld from investigators by several Reagan Administration officials.

-- following the revelation of these operations in October and November 1986, Reagan
Administration officials deliberately deceived the Congress and the public about the level and
extent of official knowledge of and support for these operations.

In addition, Independent Counsel concluded that the off-the-books nature of the Iran and contra
operations gave line-level personnel the opportunity to commit money crimes.

The Basic Facts of Iran/contra

     The Iran/contra affair concerned two secret Reagan Administration policies whose operations
were coordinated by National Security Council staff.  The Iran operation involved efforts in 1985
and 1986 to obtain the release of Americans held hostage in the Middle East through the sale of
U.S. weapons to Iran, despite an embargo on such sales.  The contra operations from 1984
through most of 1986 involved the secret governmental support of contra military and
paramilitary activities in Nicaragua, despite congressional prohibition of this support.

     The Iran and contra operations were merged when funds generated from the sale of weapons
to Iran were diverted to support the contra effort in Nicaragua.  Although this ``diversion'' may be
the most dramatic aspect of Iran/contra, it is important to emphasize that both the Iran and contra
operations, separately, violated United States policy and law.2  The ignorance of the ``diversion''
asserted by President Reagan and his Cabinet officers on the National Security Council in no way
absolves them of responsibility for the underlying Iran and contra operations.

     2 See n. 1 above.

     The secrecy concerning the Iran and contra activities was finally pierced by events that took
place thousands of miles apart in the fall of 1986. The first occurred on October 5, 1986, when
Nicaraguan government soldiers shot down an American cargo plane that was carrying military
supplies to contra forces; the one surviving crew member, American Eugene Hasenfus, was taken
into captivity and stated that he was employed by the CIA. A month after the Hasenfus
shootdown, President Reagan's secret sale of U.S. arms to Iran was reported by a Lebanese
publication on November 3. The joining of these two operations was made public on November
25, 1986, when Attorney General Meese announced that Justice Department officials had
discovered that some of the proceeds from the Iran arms sales had been diverted to the contras.

     When these operations ended, the exposure of the Iran/contra affair generated a new round of
illegality.  Beginning with the testimony of Elliott Abrams and others in October 1986 and
continuing through the public testimony of Caspar W. Weinberger on the last day of the
congressional hearings in the summer of 1987, senior Reagan Administration officials engaged in
a concerted effort to deceive Congress and the public about their knowledge of and support for
the operations.

     Independent Counsel has concluded that the President's most senior advisers and the Cabinet
members on the National Security Council participated in the strategy to make National Security
staff members McFarlane, Poindexter and North the scapegoats whose sacrifice would protect
the Reagan Administration in its final two years.  In an important sense, this strategy succeeded.
Independent Counsel discovered much of the best evidence of the cover-up in the final year of
active investigation, too late for most prosecutions.

Scope of Report

     This report provides an account of the Independent Counsel's investigation, the prosecutions,
the basis for decisions not to prosecute, and overall observations and conclusions on the
Iran/contra matters.

     Part I of the report sets out the underlying facts of the Iran and contra operations.  Part II
describes the criminal investigation of those underlying facts. Part III provides an analysis of the
central operational conspiracy.  Parts IV through IX are agency-level reports of Independent
Counsel's investigations and cases:  the National Security staff, the private operatives who
assisted the NSC staff, Central Intelligence Agency officials, Department of State officials, and
White House officials and Attorney General Edwin Meese III.

     Volume I of this report concludes with a chapter concerning political oversight and the rule of
law, and a final chapter containing Independent Counsel's observations.  Volume II of the report
contains supporting documentation.  Volume III is a classified appendix.

     Because many will read only sections of the report, each has been written with completeness,
even though this has  resulted in repetition of factual statements about central activities.

The Operational Conspiracy

     The operational conspiracy was the basis for Count One of the 23-count indictment returned
by the Grand Jury March 16, 1988, against Poindexter, North, Secord, and Hakim.  It charged the
four with conspiracy to defraud the United States by deceitfully:

     (1) supporting military operations in Nicaragua in defiance of congressional controls;

     (2) using the Iran arms sales to raise funds to be spent at the direction of North, rather than the
U.S. Government; and

     (3)  endangering the Administration's hostage-release effort by overcharging Iran for the arms
to generate unauthorized profits to fund the contras and for other purposes.

     The charge was upheld as a matter of law by U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell even
though the Justice Department, in a move that Judge Gesell called ``unprecedented,'' filed an
amicus brief supporting North's contention that the charge should be dismissed.  Although Count
One was ultimately dismissed because the Reagan Administration refused to declassify
information necessary to North's defense, Judge Gesell's decision established that high
Government officials who engage in conspiracy to subvert civil laws and the Constitution have
engaged in criminal acts.  Trial on Count One would have  disclosed the Government-wide
activities that supported North's Iran and contra operations.

     Within the NSC, McFarlane pleaded guilty in March 1988 to four counts of withholding
information from Congress in connection with his denials that North was providing the contras
with military advice and assistance.  McFarlane, in his plea agreement, promised to cooperate
with Independent Counsel by providing truthful testimony in subsequent trials.

     Judge Gesell ordered severance of the trials of the four charged in the conspiracy indictment
because of the immunized testimony given by Poindexter, North and Hakim to Congress.  North
was tried and convicted by a jury in May 1989 of altering and destroying documents, accepting
an illegal gratuity and aiding and abetting in the obstruction of Congress.  His conviction was
reversed on appeal in July 1990 and charges against North were subsequently dismissed in
September 1991 on the ground that trial witnesses were tainted by North's nationally televised,
immunized testimony before Congress.  Poindexter in April 1990 was convicted by a jury on five
felony counts of conspiracy, false statements, destruction and removal of records and obstruction
of Congress.  The Court of Appeals reversed his conviction in November 1991 on the immunized
testimony issue.

The Flow of Funds

     The illegal activities of the private citizens involved with the North and Secord operations are
discussed in detail in Part V.  The off-the-books conduct of the two highly secret operations
circumvented normal Administration accountability and congressional oversight associated with
covert ventures and presented fertile ground for financial wrongdoing.  There were several
funding sources for the contras' weapons purchases from the covert-action Enterprise formed by
North, Secord and Hakim:

     (1) donations from foreign countries;

     (2) contributions from wealthy Americans sympathetic to President Reagan's contra support
policies; and

     (3) the diversion of proceeds from the sale of arms to Iran.

     Ultimately, all of these funds fell under the control of North, and through him, Secord and
Hakim.

     North used political fundraisers Carl R. Channell and Richard R. Miller to raise millions of
dollars from wealthy Americans, illegally using a tax-exempt organization to do so.  These funds,
along with the private contributions, were run through a network of corporations and Swiss bank
accounts put at North's disposal by Secord and Hakim, through which transactions were
concealed and  laundered.  In late 1985 through 1986 the Enterprise became centrally involved in
the arms sales to Iran.  As a result of both the Iran and contra operations, more than $47 million
flowed through Enterprise accounts.

     Professional fundraisers Channell and Miller pleaded guilty in the spring of 1987 to
conspiracy to defraud the Government by illegal use of a tax-exempt foundation to raise
contributions for the purchase of lethal supplies for the contras.  They named North as an
unindicted co-conspirator.

     Secord pleaded guilty in November 1989 to a felony, admitting that he falsely denied to
Congress that North had personally benefited from the Enterprise.  Hakim pleaded guilty to the
misdemeanor count of supplementing the salary of North.  Lake Resources Inc., the company
controlled by Hakim to launder the Enterprise's money flow, pleaded guilty to the corporate
felony of theft of Government property in diverting the proceeds from the arms sales to the
contras and for other unauthorized purposes.  Thomas G. Clines was convicted in September
1990 of four tax-related felonies for failing to report all of his income from the Enterprise.

Agency Support of the Operations

     Following the convictions of those who were most central to the Iran/contra operations,
Independent Counsel's investigation focused on the supporting roles played by  Government
officials in other agencies and the supervisory roles of the NSC principals.  The investigation
showed that Administration officials who claimed initially that they had little knowledge about
the Iran arms sales or the illegal contra-resupply operation North directed were much better
informed than they professed to be.  The Office of Independent Counsel obtained evidence that
Secretaries Weinberger and Shultz and White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan, among
others, held back information that would have helped Congress obtain a much clearer view of the
scope of the Iran/contra matter.  Contemporaneous notes of Regan and Weinberger, and those
dictated by Shultz, were withheld until they were obtained by Independent Counsel in 1991 and
1992.

The White House and Office of the Vice President

     As the White House section of this report describes in detail, the investigation found no
credible evidence that President Reagan violated any criminal statute.  The OIC could not prove
that Reagan authorized or was aware of the diversion or that he had knowledge of the extent of
North's control of the contra-resupply network.  Nevertheless, he set the stage for the illegal
activities of others by encouraging and, in general terms, ordering support of the contras during
the October 1984 to October 1986 period when funds for the contras were cut off by the Boland
Amendment, and in authorizing the sale of arms to Iran, in contravention of the U.S.  embargo on
such sales.  The President's disregard for civil laws enacted to limit presidential actions abroad --
specifically the Boland Amendment, the Arms Export Control Act and congressional-notification
requirements in covert-action laws -- created a climate in which some of the Government officers
assigned to implement his policies felt emboldened to circumvent such laws.

     President Reagan's directive to McFarlane to keep the contras alive ``body and soul'' during
the Boland cut-off period was viewed by North, who was charged by McFarlane to carry out the
directive, as an invitation to break the law.  Similarly, President Reagan's decision in 1985 to
authorize the sale of arms to Iran from Israeli stocks, despite warnings by Weinberger and Shultz
that such transfers might violate the law, opened the way for Poindexter's subsequent decision to
authorize the diversion.  Poindexter told Congress that while he made the decision on his own
and did not tell the President, he believed the President would have approved.  North testified
that he believed the President authorized it.

     Independent Counsel's investigation did not develop evidence that proved that Vice President
Bush violated any criminal statute.  Contrary to his public pronouncements, however, he was
fully aware of the Iran arms sales.  Bush was regularly briefed, along with the President, on the
Iran arms sales, and he participated in discussions to obtain  third-country support for the contras.
The OIC obtained no evidence that Bush was aware of the diversion.  The OIC learned in
December 1992 that Bush had failed to produce a diary containing contemporaneous notes
relevant to Iran/contra, despite requests made in 1987 and again in early 1992 for the production
of such material.  Bush refused to be interviewed for a final time in light of evidence developed
in the latter stages of OIC's investigation, leaving unresolved a clear picture of his Iran/contra
involvement.  Bush's pardon of Weinberger on December 24, 1992 pre-empted a trial in which
defense counsel indicated that they intended to call Bush as a witness.

     The chapters on White House Chief of Staff Regan and Attorney General Edwin Meese III
focus on their actions during the November 1986 period, as the President and his advisers sought
to control the damage caused by the disclosure of the Iran arms sales.  Regan in 1992 provided
Independent Counsel with copies of notes showing that Poindexter and Meese attempted to
create a false account of the 1985 arms sales from Israeli stocks, which they believed were
illegal, in order to protect the President.  Regan and the other senior advisers did not speak up to
correct the false version of events. No final legal determination on the matter had been made.
Regan said he did not want to be the one who broke the silence among the President's senior
advisers, virtually all of whom knew the account was false.

     The evidence indicates that Meese's November 1986 inquiry was more of a damage-control
exercise than an effort to find the facts.  He had private conversations with the President, the
Vice President, Poindexter, Weinberger, Casey and Regan without taking notes.  Even after
learning of the diversion, Meese failed to secure records in NSC staff offices or take other
prudent steps to protect potential evidence.  And finally, in reporting to the President and his
senior advisers, Meese gave a false account of what he had been told by stating that the President
did not know about the 1985 HAWK shipments, which Meese said might have been illegal.  The
statute of limitations had run on November 1986 activities before OIC obtained its evidence. In
1992, Meese denied recollection of the statements attributed to him by the notes of Weinberger
and Regan. He was unconvincing, but the passage of time would have been expected to raise a
reasonable doubt of the intentional falsity of his denials if he had been prosecuted for his 1992
false statements.

The Role of CIA Officials

     Director Casey's unswerving support of President Reagan's contra policies and of the Iran
arms sales encouraged some CIA officials to go beyond legal restrictions in both operations.
Casey was instrumental in pairing North with Secord as a contra-support team when the Boland
Amendment in October 1984 forced the CIA to refrain from direct or indirect aid.  He also
supported the North-Secord combination in the Iran arms sales, despite deep reservations about
Secord within the CIA hierarchy.

     Casey's position on the contras prompted the chief of the CIA's Central American Task Force,
Alan D. Fiers, Jr., to ``dovetail'' CIA activities with those of North's contra-resupply network, in
violation of Boland restrictions.  Casey's support for the NSC to direct the Iran arms sales and to
use arms dealer Manucher Ghorbanifar and Secord in the operation, forced the CIA's Directorate
of Operations to work with people it distrusted.

     Following the Hasenfus shootdown in early October 1986, George and Fiers lied to Congress
about U.S. Government involvement in contra resupply, to, as Fiers put it, ``keep the spotlight
off the White House.''  When the Iran arms sales became public in November 1986, three of
Casey's key officers -- George, Clarridge and Fiers -- followed Casey's lead in misleading
Congress.

     Four CIA officials were charged with criminal offenses -- George, the deputy director for
operations and the third highest-ranking CIA official; Clarridge, chief of the European Division;
Fiers; and Fernandez.  George was convicted of two felony counts of false statements and perjury
before Congress.  Fiers pleaded guilty to two misdemeanor counts of withholding information
from Congress. The four counts of obstruction and false statements against Fernandez were
dismissed when the Bush Administration refused to declassify information needed for his
defense.  Clarridge was awaiting trial on seven counts of perjury and false  statements when he,
George and Fiers were pardoned by President Bush.

State Department Officials

     In 1990 and 1991, Independent Counsel received new documentary evidence in the form of
handwritten notes suggesting that Secretary Shultz's congressional testimony painted a
misleading and incorrect picture of his knowledge of the Iran arms sales.  The subsequent
investigation focused on whether Shultz or other Department officials deliberately misled or
withheld information from congressional or OIC investigators.

     The key notes, taken by M. Charles Hill, Shultz's executive assistant, were nearly verbatim,
contemporaneous accounts of Shultz's meetings within the department and Shultz's reports to
Hill on meetings the secretary attended elsewhere. The Hill notes and similarly detailed notes by
Nicholas Platt, the State Department's executive secretary, provided the OIC with a detailed
account  of Shultz's knowledge of the Iran arms sales.  The most revealing of these notes were
not provided to any Iran/contra investigation until 1990 and 1991.  The notes show that --
contrary to his early testimony that he was not aware of details of the 1985 arms transfers --
Shultz knew that the shipments were planned and that they were delivered.  Also in conflict with
his congressional  testimony was evidence that Shultz was aware of the 1986 shipments.

     Independent Counsel concluded that Shultz's early testimony was incorrect, if not false, in
significant respects, and misleading, if literally true, in others.  When questioned about the
discrepancies in 1992, Shultz did not dispute the accuracy of the Hill notes.  He told OIC that he
believed his testimony was accurate at the time and he insisted that if he had been provided with
the notes earlier, he would have testified differently. Independent Counsel declined to prosecute
because there was a reasonable doubt that Shultz's testimony was willfully false at the time it was
delivered.

     Independent Counsel concluded that Hill had willfully withheld relevant notes and prepared
false testimony for Shultz in 1987. He declined to prosecute because Hill's claim of authorization
to limit the production of his notes and the joint responsibility of Shultz for the resulting
misleading testimony, would at trial have raised a reasonable doubt, after Independent Counsel
had declined to prosecute Shultz.

     Independent Counsel's initial focus on the State Department had centered on Assistant
Secretary Elliott Abrams' insistence to Congress and to the OIC that he was not aware of North's
direction of the extensive contra-resupply network in 1985 and 1986.  As assistant secretary of
state for inter-American affairs, Abrams chaired the Restricted Inter-Agency Group, or RIG,
which coordinated U.S. policy in Central America.  Although the OIC was skeptical about
Abrams' testimony, there was insufficient evidence to proceed against him until additional
documentary evidence inculpating him was discovered in 1990 and 1991, and until Fiers, who
represented the CIA on the RIG, pleaded guilty in July 1991 to withholding information from
Congress.  Fiers provided evidence to support North's earlier testimony that Abrams was
knowledgeable about North's contra-supply network.  Abrams pleaded guilty in October 1991 to
two counts of withholding information from Congress about secret Government efforts to
support the contras, and about his solicitation of $10 million to aid the contras from the Sultan of
Brunei.

Secretary Weinberger and Defense Department Officials

     Contrary to their testimony to the presidentially appointed Tower Commission and the Select
Iran/contra Committees of Congress, Independent Counsel determined that Secretary Weinberger
and his closest aides were consistently informed of proposed and actual arms shipments to Iran
during 1985 and 1986.  The key evidence was handwritten notes of Weinberger, which he
deliberately withheld from Congress and the OIC until they were discovered by Independent
Counsel in late 1991.  The Weinberger daily diary notes and notes of significant White House
and other  meetings contained highly relevant, contemporaneous information that resolved many
questions left unanswered in early investigations.

     The notes demonstrated that Weinberger's early testimony -- that he had only vague and
generalized information about Iran arms sales in 1985 -- was false, and that he in fact had
detailed information on the proposed arms sales and the actual deliveries.  The notes also
revealed that Gen. Colin Powell, Weinberger's senior military aide, and Richard L. Armitage,
assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, also had detailed knowledge of the
1985 shipments from Israeli stocks.  Armitage and Powell had testified that they did not learn of
the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment until 1986.

     Weinberger's notes provided detailed accounts of high-level Administration meetings in
November 1986 in which the President's senior advisers were provided with false accounts of the
Iran arms sales to protect the President and themselves from the consequences of the possibly
illegal 1985 shipments from Israeli stocks.

     Weinberger's notes provided key evidence supporting the charges against him, including
perjury and false statements in connection with his testimony regarding the arms sales, his denial
of the existence of notes and his denial of knowledge of Saudi Arabia's multi-million dollar
contribution to the contras.  He was pardoned less than two weeks before trial by President Bush
on December 24, 1992.

     There was little evidence that Powell's early testimony regarding the 1985 shipments and
Weinberger's notes was willfully false.  Powell cooperated with the various Iran/contra
investigations and, when his recollection was refreshed by Weinberger's notes, he readily
conceded their accuracy.  Independent Counsel declined to prosecute Armitage because the OIC's
limited resources were focused on the case against Weinberger and because the evidence against
Armitage, while substantial, did not reach the threshold of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

The Reagan, Bush and Casey Segments

     The Independent Counsel Act requires a report as to persons not indicted as well as those
indicted.  Because of the large number of persons investigated, those discussed in individual
sections of this report are limited to those as to whom there was a possibility of indictment.  In
addition there are separate sections on President Reagan and President Bush because, although
criminal proceedings against them were always unlikely, they were important subjects of the
investigation, and their activities were important to the action taken with respect to others.

     CIA Director Casey is a special case.  Because Casey was hospitalized with a fatal illness
before  Independent Counsel was appointed, no formal investigation of Casey was ever
undertaken by the OIC.  Casey was never able to give his account, and he was unable to respond
to allegations of wrongdoing made about him by others, most prominently North, whose veracity
is subject to serious question.  Equally important, fundamental questions could not be answered
regarding Casey's state of mind, the impact, if any, of his fatal illness on his conduct and his
intent.

     Under normal circumstances, a prosecutor would hesitate to comment on the conduct of an
individual whose activities and actions were not subjected to rigorous investigation, which might
exculpate that individual.  Nevertheless, after serious deliberation, Independent Counsel
concluded that it was in the public interest that this report expose as full and complete an account
of the Iran/contra matter as possible.  This simply could not be done without an account of the
role of Director Casey.

Observations and Conclusions

     This report concludes with Independent Counsel's observations and conclusions.  He observes
that the governmental problems presented by Iran/contra are not those of rogue operations, but
rather those of Executive Branch efforts to evade congressional oversight.  As this report
documents, the competing roles of the attorney general -- adviser to the President and top
law-enforcement officer -- come into irreconcilable conflict in the case of high-level Executive
Branch wrongdoing.  Independent Counsel concludes that congressional oversight alone cannot
correct the deficiencies that result when an attorney general abandons the law-enforcement
responsibilities of that office and undertakes, instead, to protect the President.

     Independent Counsel asks the Congress to review the difficult and delicate problem posed to
the investigations and prosecutions by congressional grants of immunity to principals.  While
recognizing the important responsibility of Congress for investigating such matters thoroughly,
Congress must realize that grants of use immunity to principals in such highly exposed matters as
the Iran/contra affair will virtually rule out successful prosecution.

     Independent Counsel also addresses the problem of implementing the Classified Information
Procedures Act (CIPA) in cases steeped in highly classified information, such as many of the
Iran/contra prosecutions.  Under the Act, the  attorney general has unrestricted discretion to
decide whether to declassify information necessary for trial, even in cases in which Independent
Counsel has been appointed because of the attorney general's conflict of interest.  This discretion
is inconsistent with the perceived need for independent counsel, particularly in cases in which
officers of the intelligence agencies that classify information are under investigation.  This
discretion gives the attorney general the power to block almost any potentially embarrassing
prosecution that requires the declassification of information.  Independent Counsel suggests that
the attorney general implement standards that would permit independent review of a decision to
block a prosecution of an officer within the Executive Branch and legitimate congressional
oversight.

Classified Information

     In addition to the unclassified Volumes I and II of this report, a brief classified report, Volume
III, has been filed with the Special Division.  The classified report contains references to material
gathered in the investigation of Iran/contra that could not be declassified and could not be
concealed by some substitute form of discussion.

Summary of Prosecutions

     After Independent Counsel Lawrence E. Walsh's appointment in December 1986, 14 persons
were charged with criminal offenses.  Eleven persons were convicted, but two convictions were
overturned on appeal.  Two persons were pardoned before trial and one case was dismissed when
the Bush Administration declined to declassify information necessary for trial.  On December 24,
1992, President Bush pardoned Caspar W. Weinberger, Duane R. Clarridge, Clair E. George,
Elliott Abrams, Alan D. Fiers, Jr., and Robert C. McFarlane.

     Completed Trials and Pleas

     Elliott Abrams -- Pleaded guilty October 7, 1991, to two misdemeanor charges of withholding
information from Congress about secret government efforts to support the Nicaraguan contra
rebels during a ban on such aid.  U.S. District Chief Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., sentenced
Abrams November 15, 1991, to two years probation and 100 hours community service.  Abrams
was pardoned December 24, 1992.

     Carl R. Channell -- Pleaded guilty April 29, 1987, to one felony count of conspiracy to
defraud the United States.  U.S. District Judge Stanley S. Harris sentenced Channell on July 7,
1989, to two years probation.

     Thomas G. Clines -- Indicted February 22, 1990, on four felony counts of underreporting his
earnings to the IRS in the 1985 and 1986 tax years; and falsely stating on his 1985 and 1986 tax
returns that he had no foreign financial accounts.  On September 18, 1990, Clines was found
guilty of all charges.  U.S. District Judge Norman P. Ramsey in Baltimore, Md., on December
13, 1990, sentenced Clines to 16 months in prison and $40,000 in fines.  He was ordered to pay
the cost of the prosecution.  The Fourth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va., on
February 27, 1992, upheld the convictions.  Clines served his prison sentence.

     Alan D. Fiers, Jr. -- Pleaded guilty July 9, 1991, to two misdemeanor counts of withholding
information from Congress about secret efforts to aid the Nicaraguan contras.  U.S. District Chief
Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., sentenced Fiers January 31, 1992, to one year probation and 100
hours community service.  Fiers was pardoned December 24, 1992.

     Clair E. George -- Indicted September 6, 1991, on 10 counts of perjury, false statements and
obstruction in connection with congressional and Grand Jury investigations.  George's trial on
nine counts ended in a mistrial on August 26, 1992.  Following a second trial on seven counts,
George was found guilty December 9, 1992, of two felony charges of false statements and
perjury before Congress.  The maximum penalty for each count was five years in prison and
$250,000 in fines.  U.S. District Judge Royce C. Lamberth set sentencing for February 18, 1993.
George was pardoned on December 24, 1992, before sentencing occurred.

     Albert Hakim -- Pleaded guilty November 21, 1989, to a misdemeanor of supplementing the
salary of Oliver L. North.  Lake Resources Inc., in which Hakim was the principal shareholder,
pleaded guilty to a corporate felony of theft of government property in diverting Iran arms sales
proceeds to the Nicaraguan contras and other activities.  Hakim was sentenced by U.S.  District
Judge Gerhard A. Gesell on February 1, 1990, to two years probation and a $5,000 fine; Lake
Resources was ordered dissolved.

     Robert C. McFarlane -- Pleaded guilty March 11, 1988, to four misdemeanor counts of
withholding information from Congress.  U.S. District Chief Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr.,
sentenced McFarlane on March 3, 1989, to two years probation, $20,000 in fines and 200 hours
community service.  McFarlane was pardoned December 24, 1992.

     Richard R. Miller -- Pleaded guilty May 6, 1987, to one felony count of conspiracy to defraud
the United States.  U.S. District Judge Stanley S. Harris sentenced Miller on July 6, 1989, to two
years probation and 120 hours of community service.

     Oliver L. North -- Indicted March 16, 1988, on 16 felony counts.  After standing trial on 12,
North was convicted May 4, 1989 of three charges:  accepting an illegal gratuity, aiding and
abetting in the obstruction of a congressional inquiry, and destruction of documents. He was
sentenced by U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell on July 5, 1989, to a three-year suspended
prison term, two years probation, $150,000 in fines and 1,200 hours community service.  A
three-judge appeals panel on July 20, 1990, vacated North's conviction for further proceedings to
determine whether his immunized testimony influenced witnesses in the trial.  The Supreme
Court declined to review the case.  Judge Gesell dismissed the case September 16, 1991, after
hearings on the immunity issue, on the motion of Independent Counsel.

     John M. Poindexter -- Indicted March 16, 1988, on seven felony charges. After standing trial
on five charges, Poindexter was found guilty April 7, 1990, on all counts:  conspiracy
(obstruction of inquiries and proceedings, false statements, falsification, destruction and removal
of documents); two counts of obstruction of Congress and two counts of false statements.  U.S.
District Judge Harold H. Greene sentenced Poindexter June 11, 1990, to six months in prison on
each count, to be served concurrently. A three-judge appeals panel on November 15, 1991,
reversed the convictions on the ground that Poindexter's immunized testimony may have
influenced the trial testimony of witnesses. The Supreme Court on December 7, 1992, declined to
review the case. In 1993, the indictment was dismissed on the motion of Independent Counsel.

     Richard V. Secord -- Indicted March 16, 1988 on six felony charges.  On May 11, 1989, a
second indictment was issued charging nine counts of impeding and obstructing the Select
Iran/contra Committees.  Secord was scheduled to stand trial on 12 charges.  He pleaded guilty
November 8, 1989, to one felony count of false statements to  Congress.  Secord was sentenced
by U.S. District Chief Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., on January 24, 1990, to two years
probation.

     Pre-trial Pardons

     Duane R. Clarridge -- Indicted November 26, 1991, on seven counts of perjury and false
statements about a secret shipment of U.S. HAWK missiles to Iran.  The maximum penalty for
each count was five years in prison and $250,000 in fines.  U.S. District Judge Harold H. Greene
set a March 15, 1993, trial date.  Clarridge was pardoned December 24, 1992.

     Caspar W. Weinberger -- Indicted June 16, 1992, on five counts of obstruction, perjury and
false statements in connection with congressional and Independent Counsel investigations of
Iran/ contra.  On September 29, the obstruction count was dismissed.  On October 30, a second
indictment was issued, charging one false statement count.  The second indictment was
dismissed December 11, leaving four counts remaining.  The maximum penalty  for each count
was five years in prison and $250,000 in fines.  U.S. District Judge Thomas F. Hogan set a
January 5, 1993, trial date.  Weinberger was pardoned December 24, 1992.

     Dismissal

     Joseph F. Fernandez -- Indicted June 20, 1988 on five counts of conspiracy to defraud the
United States, obstructing the inquiry of the Tower Commission and making false statements to
government agencies.  The case was dismissed in the District of Columbia for venue reasons on
the motion of Independent Counsel.  A four-count indictment was issued in the Eastern District
of Virginia on April 24, 1989.  U.S. District Judge Claude M. Hilton dismissed the four-count
case November 24, 1989, after Attorney General Richard Thornburgh blocked the disclosure of
classified information ruled relevant to the defense.  The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth
Circuit in Richmond, Va., on September 6, 1990, upheld Judge Hilton's rulings under the
Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA).  On October 12, 1990, the Attorney General filed
a final declaration that he would not disclose the classified information.

Part I

     Iran/contra:  The Underlying Facts

     The Contras

     Independent Counsel's investigation produced a vast record of U.S. Government involvement
with the Nicaraguan contras during a prohibition on military aid from October 1984 to October
1986.  The Office of Independent Counsel (OIC) focused its inquiry on possible criminal activity
-- ranging from violations of the Boland Amendment prohibition on aid to conspiracy to violate
the tax laws -- in Administration efforts to assist the military and paramilitary operations of the
contras.  The investigation also centered on what officials knew about that assistance and what
they offered when questioned about it.  No effort was made to create a complete historical record
of U.S. activities in the region, or even of American ties to the contras.

     Independent Counsel's look at the ``contra'' side of Iran/contra quickly focused on critical
episodes for American policy in Central America.  A discussion of some of these episodes is
useful for understanding the prosecutions brought or declined by Independent Counsel.

     The Reagan Administration's Contra Policy

     President Reagan was an early and vigorous opponent of the Sandinista regime that seized
power in Nicaragua in 1979.  As a presidential candidate, Reagan advocated cutting all aid to the
Nicaraguan government; as President, Reagan stepped up American activities against the
Sandinistas and embraced their opponents, known as the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance or
``contras.''

     Reagan's posture towards the Sandinista government was highly controversial.  The opponents
of the Administration's anti-Sandinista policies convinced a majority of the
Democratic-controlled U.S. House of Representatives to view the contras with extreme
skepticism.  Their efforts resulted in passage in late 1982 of an amendment introduced by
Representative Edward P. Boland to the Fiscal Year 1983 Defense Appropriations bill.  This first
of a series of ``Boland Amendments'' prohibited the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the
principal conduit of covert American support to the contras, from spending any money ``for the
purpose of overthrowing the government of Nicaragua.'' 1

     1 Defense Appropriations Act for FY 1983,  793, Pub.L. 97-377 (1982).

     Controversy over contra policy continued past enactment of the first Boland Amendment.
The Reagan  Administration pushed hard for more money for the contras, while House
Democrats threatened to cut off such support altogether.  In early December 1983, a compromise
was reached:  Contra funding for FY 1984 was capped at $24 million -- an amount significantly
lower than what the Administration had wanted -- with the possibility that the Administration
could approach the Congress for supplemental funds later.

     The December 1983 cap on contra aid guaranteed a crisis in the Administration's contra
program the following year.  As early as February 1984, Reagan's national security adviser,
Robert C. McFarlane, had suggested to other Administration officials that one way to fund the
contras would be to encourage other countries to contribute support.  CIA Director William J.
Casey agreed with the idea, and recommended several countries that had been or could be
approached.  By May 1984, McFarlane had convinced one of these countries, Saudi Arabia, to
contribute $1 million per month to the contra cause.  McFarlane instructed his trusted assistant
on the National Security Council (NSC) staff, Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, to arrange for a covert
bank account to move the Saudi funds into contra hands.2

     2 A broader discussion of these events is found in the McFarlane chapter of this report.

     The Saudi contributions came just as it was clear that Congress would not increase direct
American support for the contras.  Disclosures in April 1984 that the CIA had secretly mined
Nicaraguan harbors had wrecked the Administration's chances to persuade the Congress to lift its
$24 million contra-aid cap.  According to McFarlane, an undaunted President Reagan instructed
McFarlane -- who in turn told North -- that the NSC staff had to keep the contras alive ``body
and soul.'' 3

     3 For broader discussions of these topics, see McFarlane and Reagan chapters.

     The NSC staff's efforts to assist the contras in the wake of Congress's withdrawal of funding
took many forms.  Initially it meant extending its earlier initiative to increase third-country
contributions to the contras.  Casey and McFarlane broached the subject of such funding at a
June 25, 1984, meeting of the National Security Planning Group (NSPG), consisting of the
President, Vice President Bush, Casey, McFarlane, Secretary of State George Shultz, Secretary of
Defense Caspar Weinberger, United Nations Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. John Vessey, and presidential adviser Edwin Meese III.  Shultz warned
that any approach to a third country could be viewed as an ``impeachable  offense,'' and
convinced the group that it needed a legal opinion from Attorney General William French Smith.
McFarlane agreed and told the group not to approach any foreign country until the opinion was
delivered.  McFarlane said nothing about what he already had obtained from the Saudis.4

     4 NSPG Minutes, 6/25/84, ALU 007863-76.  The following day, Casey met with the attorney
general and legal advisers from the CIA and Justice Department to press for an opinion.  The
attorney general expressed the view that discussions with third countries would be permissible as
long as it was made clear that the countries would spend their own funds, and not later be
reimbursed by the United States.  (Memorandum from Sporkin to the Record, 6/26/84, ALV
035917.)

     The Funding Cut-Off

     North's role in assisting the contras grew as Congress inched closer toward cutting all
assistance to the contras.  By early August, the House of Representatives had passed the toughest
restrictions on contra aid yet, restrictions that became law in October 1984.  This iteration of the
Boland Amendment provided in pertinent part:

     During fiscal year 1985, no funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency, the
Department of Defense, or any other agency or entity of the United States involved in
intelligence activities may be obligated or expended for the purpose or which would have the
effect of supporting, directly or indirectly, military or paramilitary  operations in Nicaragua by
any nation, group, organization, movement, or individual.

     To comply with the law, both the CIA and the Defense Department withdrew large numbers
of personnel from Central America -- leaving a void that North was to fill.

     Anticipating Boland, and hoping to mend fences with critics in the Congress, CIA Director
Casey reorganized the leadership of the CIA's Operations Directorate that had been responsible
for the contra war.  Out was the flamboyant chief of the Latin American Division of the
Operations Directorate, Duane R. ``Dewey'' Clarridge; in came Alan D. Fiers, Jr., who was made
chief of the Central American Task Force (CATF) within the Latin American Division.  It did not
take Fiers long, however, to learn who had taken the reins on contra activities:  North.  ``[W]ork
with him,'' Clarridge reportedly told Fiers.  As the CIA's deputy director for operations, Clair E.
George, told Fiers in early November 1984, Casey had promised the President that he would take
care of the contras.  Any denial of operational activity by North would be just for show.5

     5 Fiers, George Trial Testimony, 10/28/92, pp. 1254-69; George, George Trial Testimony,
11/16/92, pp. 50-52.

     With the bulk of their funds now coming via the NSC staff instead of the CIA, the contras
increasingly turned to the NSC for advice and assistance.  The point man for this assistance was
North.  McFarlane enjoined North from getting involved in direct fund-raising for the contras,
but approved of North's increasing contacts with them, warning North only to exercise ``absolute
stealth'' in his meetings.  North became familiar not only with the contra leadership, but with the
CIA's assets and resources in Central America -- all with the apparent approval and
encouragement of CIA Director Casey.  According to North, with CIA money down to a trickle
by the summer of 1984, Casey was all too willing to ``hand off'' the CIA's contra operations to
North.6

     6 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, pp. 6781-82, 6826; Cannistraro, North Trial
Testimony, 4/3/89, pp. 6405, 6409-10.

     North also turned to Americans outside the Government to assist him with the contras.  In the
summer of 1984, on Casey's recommendation, North reached out to retired U.S. Air Force Maj.
Gen. Richard V. Secord and asked him to help contra leader Adolfo Calero buy arms with his
new Saudi money.  Secord soon became an arms broker for the contras.  North also convinced an
employee of Gray &  Company, Robert Owen, to meet regularly with Calero and other contra
leaders to learn of their needs, deliver valuable intelligence to them, and supply them with money
raised by North.7

     7 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, pp. 6815-17.  For further discussion of these events,
see Flow of Funds chapter.

     By early 1985, North and his operatives were working several angles on behalf of the contras.
North obtained tactical and other intelligence from the CIA and passed it to contra military
commanders.  Secord was probing the international arms markets for the contras and purchasing
weapons for them.  North also made it known that he was the ``man to see'' about money for the
contras.  When one congressman questioned the propriety of the CIA funding contra leaders, who
in turn were lobbying Congress for increased contra aid, North proposed to Fiers and Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State Craig Johnstone that he line up private funding.  Fiers rejected the
idea on grounds that it would cause Congress only to question the new source of funds.8

     8 Memorandum from Fiers to DC/LA, C/LA, SA/ODDO, and ADDO/DDO, Re:  Status
Report on Honduran Discussions, 2/12/85, DO 94090-95.  For full treatments of North's early
1985 activities, see Flow of Funds and Fiers chapters.

     North was able to claim that he had private funds because he was lending a hand to various
large- and small-scale efforts to raise money for the contras.  Having learned from CIA
Operations Director George, for example, that the South Koreans were interested in contributing
funds to the contras, North arranged for contra solicitor retired Army Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub
to meet with South Korean officials in the United States.  Saudi Arabia, whose contributions
North earlier had arranged to transfer to the contras, doubled its monthly contribution in February
1985.  Beginning in April 1985, North aided the efforts of two private fund-raisers, Carl
Channell and Richard R. Miller, by arranging for speakers to potential contributors, presenting
his own briefings, and encouraging use of the White House as a stage prop for Channell and
Miller's pitch -- including arranging private chats and photo opportunities with the President.9

     9 For further discussion of these events, see Flow of Funds and George chapters.

     North also worked with McFarlane on efforts to use foreign aid as leverage with a number of
Central American countries -- particularly Honduras, the site of most of the contra encampments
-- to get them to support the contras more strongly.  In February 1985, the President approved a
McFarlane-North plan to assure the Honduran government of expedited economic, military, and
intelligence support if it agreed to allow contra bases to remain in Honduras and permit weapons
to be shipped to them.  Vice President Bush traveled to Honduras the next month, underscoring
with Honduran President Roberto Suazo the need for contra support and signaling what the
United States would be willing to do in return.  The Hondurans caught on to the linkage quickly.
When President Reagan called Suazo in April 1985 to implore him to release a shipment of
contra ammunition, Suazo reminded President Reagan that a high-level Honduran delegation
shortly would be in Washington to discuss a $15 million aid package.10

     10 For a full discussion of the early 1985 overtures to Honduras and other Central American
nations, see McFarlane chapter.

     A Southern Front

     By the spring of 1985 it became clear that Congress would not rescue the contras any time
soon.  The House defeated a $14 million supplemental aid package in March, leaving the contras
to rely on North and his associates.  Calero found himself surrounded not only with
recommended arms brokers like Secord -- who by June 1985 had arranged  several large arms
shipments -- but also willing broker/contribution solicitors like Singlaub.  There also were arms
merchants like Ron Martin, a Miami-based dealer who had been accused of consorting with
drug-runners.  While the NSC staff helped Saudi Arabian and other funds reach the contras,
Calero had been deciding how most of the money would be spent.  By May 1985, North realized
that he and Secord were facing increasing competition for Calero's attention -- and that contra
arms purchases were getting out of their control.11

     11 For a full discussion of these topics, see CIA Subject #1 and Flow of Funds chapters.

     While he and Secord were grappling with disorganized contra procurement, North and other
members of the Restricted Interagency Group on Central America (the RIG) had concluded that
the contras had to step up  pressure on the Sandinista regime.  The RIG's chief strategic decision,
reached in the summer of 1985, was to open a ``southern front'' in the Nicaraguan war.  Up to
then, the bulk of the contra forces -- and the focus of American efforts to influence and support
them -- lay along Nicaragua's northern border with Honduras.  The concentration of these forces
made them an easy target for the Sandinistas and tested the tolerance of the Honduran
government.

     North, Fiers, and others in the RIG concluded by mid-1985 that one way to relieve contra
forces in the north and to escalate the war would be to inspire opposition forces along
Nicaragua's southern border to go on the offensive.  Up to then, the anti-Sandinista groups in the
south were splintered.  A flamboyant but mercurial leader named Eden Pastora had attempted to
rally them in 1984, but the CIA had since concluded that Pastora was not inclined to drive his
forces into the heart of Nicaragua.  The RIG decided by the summer of 1985 that it had to get
opposition forces out of Costa Rica and into Nicaragua, where they could do some good for the
contra cause.12

     12 For a full discussion of this decision, see Abrams, Fiers, and Fernandez chapters.

     A Full-Service Enterprise

     North took bold steps in late June 1985 to solve the problems he perceived with contra
weapons procurement, while laying the foundation for a system that could supply both the
northern and southern fronts.  North convened a meeting on June 28, 1985, in Miami with
Secord; Thomas Clines, a former CIA officer who by then was acting as Secord's overseas arms
buyer; Raphael Quintero, another former CIA officer who had been acting as Secord's ``man on
the scene'' in Honduras, El Salvador, and Costa Rica; Calero; and contra military commander
Enrique Bermudez.  The men met through the night, during which North announced that he
would suspend his cash payments to Calero:  Henceforth, Secord would arrange for all weapons
purchases and deliveries.  North also stressed to Calero and Bermudez, whose ties were closest to
contra forces in the north, that they had to work with him and Secord -- including sharing
precious supplies -- to build a viable southern front.13

     13 For a full discussion of this meeting, see CIA Subject #1 and Flow of Funds chapters.

     Secord later described the June 1985 Miami meeting as a ``watershed'' event for him and his
involvement with the contras.  North convinced Secord to take charge of a covert air-delivery
system, one that would mirror earlier CIA efforts to arm the contras.  Thus, in addition to his
activities as an arms purchaser and supplier, Secord began hiring airplane crews, acquiring or
leasing aircraft, arranging for warehouses in Central America, and gaining landing rights in the
region.14

     14 For a full discussion, see Flow of Funds chapter.

     While Secord proceeded with setting up a full-service ``Enterprise,'' North continued to work
within the  RIG and elsewhere to implement his enhanced contra operation.  These stepped-up
efforts coincided with a significant reorganization of the State Department's Central American
officers, which saw Elliott Abrams become assistant secretary for inter-American affairs;
William Walker take over as Abrams' deputy; and the reassignments of Edwin G. Corr and Lewis
A. Tambs as U.S. ambassadors to El Salvador and Costa Rica, respectively.

     Both Corr and Tambs were informed of the RIG's decision to ``open'' the southern front, a
decision that was a particularly critical one for Tambs.  Costa Rican cooperation was deemed
essential to the southern front, including establishment of an airstrip in northern Costa Rica that
would facilitate supply drops to contra forces.  Tambs was charged with convincing the Costa
Rican government to agree with the new American effort, while the chief of the CIA's station in
San Jose, Joseph Fernandez, was responsible for working out many of the operational aspects of
the RIG's plan.  By August 1985, the Costa Ricans had approved the effort -- a decision that
coincided with promises of covert payments to a project headed by the Costa  Rican president --
and Tambs and Fernandez were working on sites for the airstrip.15

     15 For a full discussion of these events, see Corr, Fernandez, Fiers, Abrams, and Classified
CIA Investigation A chapters.

     The Nicaraguan Humanitarian Assistance Office (NHAO)

     Barred by Boland from directly or indirectly supporting the contras' military and paramilitary
activities, the CIA endeavored to do all it could in Central America in the way of
non-paramilitary activities, both in direct support of the contras and in an effort to undermine the
Sandinista regime.  When faced with a roadblock in Congress, Casey and Fiers would turn to the
designated contra trouble-shooter, North.  Congress explicitly had cut funding to a specific
non-paramilitary project against the Sandinistas, for example, in July 1985.  Notwithstanding
grudging promises to the congressional intelligence committees that they would comply with the
ban, Casey and Fiers turned to North for substitute funding.  They also encouraged other CIA
assets to divert funds to the project, an arrangement that continued for at least nine months before
being halted.16

     16 For a full discussion of this initiative, see Classified CIA Investigation B chapter.

     Notwithstanding Congress's decision to withdraw funds from certain CIA projects, the
Administration overall was slowly convincing members of Congress to resume direct aid to the
contras.  In August 1985, Congress approved $27 million in humanitarian aid to the contras, with
the proviso that the State Department -- not the CIA or the Defense Department -- administer the
aid.  President Reagan quickly established the Nicaraguan Humanitarian Assistance Office
(NHAO) within the State Department and ordered NHAO to get supplies moving south.

     Passage of NHAO aid gave the U.S. Government, acting principally through the CIA, new
leverage in dealing with the contras -- particularly those on the southern front.  The process of
gearing up NHAO's logistical and intelligence-gathering activities -- a daunting task for a
department that had little experience in logistics or air deliveries -- would also give North the
opportunity to insert people into NHAO who had been working covertly with him and Secord on
contra resupply.

     ``Bud McFarlane Just Perjured Himself for Me.  God Bless Him.''

     North's efforts to assist the contras did not escape the attention of others in the
Administration, or the press.  By August 1985, more and more accounts had appeared  in the
media alleging that North had been giving military advice to the contras and had been behind
logistical support for them.  On August 16, Representative Michael Barnes, chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee's Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, wrote to
McFarlane asking whether the NSC staff had provided ``tactical influence'' on contra military
operations, were ``facilitating contacts for prospective financial donors,'' or were involved in
``otherwise organizing and coordinating rebel efforts.'' 17  The chairman of the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), Representative Lee H. Hamilton, dispatched a similar
letter to McFarlane shortly after the Barnes inquiry.

     17 Letter from Barnes to McFarlane, 8/16/85, AKW 001510-11.

     Before responding to Barnes and Hamilton's letters, McFarlane ordered a search of the NSC's
records for memoranda that bore on contra activities.  The search, limited by NSC staff to
Freedom of Information Act standards, resulted in identification of several ``problem
documents,'' memoranda written by North that suggested there was truth to the allegations of
North's tactical support and fund-raising activities.  McFarlane and North agreed that the
documents could be so interpreted and pondered whether they should be altered.  Ultimately,
McFarlane decided not to bring the documents to Congress's attention, and instead decided to lie
about North's activities in a series of letters to Barnes and Hamilton in September-October 1985.
North soon told Fiers, ``Bud McFarlane just perjured himself for me -- God bless him.'' 18

     18 Fiers, FBI 302, 7/19/91, p. 17; Fiers, FBI 302, 7/30/91, p. 20; Fiers, George Trial
Testimony, 7/28/92, p. 1133.  Others in the Government in the summer of 1985 -- and later --
avoided answering questions about North's involvement by deferring to McFarlane.  See, for
example, Letter from Casey to Hamilton, 8/28/85, E.R. 11618 (referring inquiries to McFarlane
and telling HPSCI that Casey was not ``in a position to answer in any authoritative way''
questions about NSC support to the contras); Abrams chapter.

     For further discussion of all of these events, see McFarlane, North, Poindexter, and Thompson
chapters.

     NHAO By Day, Private Benefactors By Night

     Press allegations and questions from Congress did not hamper North in expanding resupply
operations.  In September 1985, on the recommendation of Col. James Steele, the commander of
the U.S. Military Group in El Salvador, North wrote to Felix Rodriguez, an ex-CIA operative
who had gone to El Salvador to fight communist guerrillas, and asked Rodriguez to help him win
approval from the Salvadoran Air Force to use its air base at Ilopango for  contra-resupply
activities.  Rodriguez successfully persuaded Salvadoran Air Force General Juan Rafael Bustillo
to grant North and his people entry to the base -- guaranteeing North a strategic position from
which to launch air operations to both the north and the south.

     Trouble with the Honduran government in October 1985 gave North the chance to infiltrate
NHAO and, in the words of Fiers, ``piggyback'' the activities of his Enterprise onto the fledgling
humanitarian program.  As early as September 1985, North urged the director of NHAO,
Ambassador Robert Duemling, to hire North's contra courier Owen as an ``on the scene'' Central
American specialist for NHAO.  Duemling ignored the advice.  On October 10, however, the first
air delivery to Central America by NHAO arrived in Honduras, carrying a television news crew.
Attempting to hide their support for the contras, the Hondurans banned further U.S. flights -- a
move that, for the moment, prevented NHAO aid from reaching contra troops.

     North seized on the Honduran fiasco to convince the RIG that Owen would not have let it
happen.  The RIG prevailed on an embarrassed Duemling to hire Owen shortly thereafter, giving
North a key operative within NHAO and providing Owen with a cover for his trips to Central
America for North.

     The Honduran ban created an additional problem for NHAO that worked to North's
advantage:  how to get aid into Honduras.  In separate trips, North, Fiers, and newly appointed
National Security Adviser John Poindexter traveled to Tegucigalpa to talk to the Hondurans, to
no avail.  It was not until late December 1985 that the Hondurans agreed to allow NHAO flights
to resume, on the condition that they not come directly from the United States.  North proposed
to the RIG that Ilopango air base -- the same airport North had envisioned as a point for private
resupply -- be used to ``trans-ship'' NHAO supplies from the United States to El Salvador, and
then on to Honduras.  Government officials including North and Fiers traveled to the region in
late December to gain Honduran and Salvadoran approval for the plan, with the help in El
Salvador of North's man, Rodriguez.

     By early 1986, large pieces of NHAO and what was known in official circles as the ``private
benefactors'' operation were virtually indistinguishable.  Owen was reporting on contra needs for
both.  Rodriguez was coordinating shipments at Ilopango for both entities.  Butler buildings
erected at Ilopango by NHAO were being used to store equipment for both entities.  And both
entities were using the flying services of Richard Gadd, a retired U.S. Air Force lieutenant
colonel who had been working with Secord on air-delivery operations since August 1985.  The
stage was set for Gadd's air crews to be, in Fiers' words, ``NHAO by day, private benefactors by
night,'' marking a rare occasion that a U.S. Government program unwittingly provided cover to a
private covert operation.19

     19 For a more extensive discussion of the merging of these operations, see the Fiers and
Gregg chapters.

     Leaning Forward

     The new year brought hope to many in the Administration that Congress was not far from
lifting the Boland restrictions altogether and allowing direct support for contra military activities
to resume.  Congress had allowed NHAO to consult with the CIA on setting up a secure delivery
system and had loosened Boland in late 1985 to permit the CIA to provide communications
support and training to the contras.  President Reagan instructed his advisers to propose an
ambitious $100 million contra-aid program.  Some in the Administration hoped that aid would be
on its way as early as April 1986.

     Confidence that official aid would soon resume encouraged Fiers and another CIA officer,
James Adkins, to take steps that took each of them into dangerous  territory.  Fiers met with
Gadd twice during February 1986 to learn more about Gadd's operations, hoping that his
experience would prove helpful in re-establishing a CIA covert lethal resupply network.  Adkins
for his part ordered CIA pilots to ferry lethal and non-lethal supplies to contras in southern
Honduras, using CIA helicopters.  Though he clearly violated Boland, Adkins was encouraged by
signs from Washington that Boland would not be around for long.20

     20 For a fuller discussion of Fiers and Adkins's activities in early 1986, see their respective
chapters.

     The immediate need for funds and fund-raising did not cease with the new year.  North and
Abrams continued to give briefings and provide other assistance to groups of contributors
gathered by Channell and Miller.  President Reagan continued to drop by some of these sessions
and grant private meetings and photo opportunities.  Money raised by Channell and Miller fed
the Enterprise, as did funds from the Saudis and diverted proceeds from covert sales of arms to
Iran.  They became all the more important when the House unexpectedly defeated President
Reagan's $100 million contra-aid package in March 1986.21

     21 For a fuller discussion of these activities, see the Flow of Funds chapter.

     The Cover Unravels

     North's use of a NHAO cover for private-benefactor lethal-resupply operations did not fool
other U.S. officials for long.  As early as late January 1986, Fiers began receiving intelligence
from CIA personnel in Central America that Rodriguez was asserting himself in both NHAO and
private-benefactor activities.  Tensions between Rodriguez and CIA personnel became apparent
to not only Fiers, but to State Department personnel as well.  Reports that Rodriguez was
involved in the crash of a private-benefactor aircraft on a highway in El Salvador and that he was
coordinating this with North over unsecured telephone lines ultimately prompted Fiers, at the
insistence of CIA Operations Director George, to tell a senior CIA officer in the region to stay far
away from the matter.22

     22 For a full discussion of these topics, see Fiers, Corr, and CIA Subject #1 chapters.

     At the same time Fiers was warning his personnel in Central America away from the private
benefactors, he candidly admitted to at least one senior officer there that more flights under
North's control would be coming.  While Fiers did not understand in early 1986 just how
complex North's network was in Central America -- including its secure, National Security
Agency-supplied, KL-43  communications devices linking North, Secord, Gadd, Steele,
Quintero, and Fernandez -- Fiers knew that it could provide lethal assistance, and that North had
a key role in it.  When contra forces in the north could not make a promised air drop of lethal
supplies to their fellows in the south in April 1986, Fiers joined a plan secretly engineered by
North and Fernandez to use the Enterprise instead.  The Enterprise successfully delivered an
L-100 aircraft full of materiel to the southern front on April 9, 1986, sealing a major effort by
Fernandez and other CIA officers to wean pro-active, dissident commanders away from Pastora
and keep them on the field of battle.23

     23 For a full discussion of these topics, see Fiers chapter.

     A Need for Bridge Financing

     President Reagan gathered his NSPG for a meeting on the contras on May 16, 1986.  While
Director Casey reported encouraging developments in the contra war, many of those in
attendance -- including Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger, White House Chief of Staff Donald
Regan, Casey, and Poindexter -- voiced concern that all would be for naught if money was not
found for the contras, and soon.   Shultz suggested that the State Department approach third
countries -- something that Congress had permitted beginning December 1985.  The President
wondered aloud whether ``Ollie's people'' could step into the breach.  Regan quickly changed the
subject, but not in time to prevent Fiers and others who were attending the meeting -- including
North and Abrams -- from understanding where the President was heading.24

     24 Memorandum from Burghardt to McDaniel Re:  Minutes of the May 16, 1986 National
Security Planning Group Meeting, 6/4/86, AKW 18802-13; Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp.
39-40.  For more detail on the 1986 foreign solicitations, see Abrams chapter.

     Ironically, between May 14-15, the Enterprise received an Iranian arms sales payment of $15
million, giving the Enterprise a total of $6 million for contra aid and other activities.  Additional
sources of funds for the contras were nonetheless in doubt.  The Administration's success in
convincing the House of Representatives to approve $100 million in contra aid in late June 1986
may have signaled past contributors that funds were no longer needed, at precisely the moment
that they were.25

     25 Aid opponents delayed final implementation of the President's package until the new fiscal
year, which began in October 1986.

     One way that North hoped to raise additional money was by liquidating the Enterprise's
substantial assets.  By July 1986, North was pressing CIA officials from Fiers up to buy all of the
Enterprise's Central American assets, partly in hope of converting the proceeds to contra aid.
North's pitch made clear to Fiers, George, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Robert Gates,
and Casey what was long apparent:  that North was working hand-in-glove with the management
and ownership of the private-benefactor operations in Central America.26

     26 For a fuller discussion of North's efforts to sell the Enterprise assets to the CIA, see Fiers,
Gates, and George chapters.

     The Trouble with Rodriguez

     North's efforts to sell the Enterprise's planes and facilities did not escape the notice of one
Enterprise associate, Rodriguez.  For several months, Rodriguez had been both a nuisance and a
key asset for the Enterprise and the RIG. As demonstrated in the February 1986 airplane mishap,
and time and again since, Rodriguez was perceived as a ``talker.''  Not only had he told people in
El Salvador that he was working with North, he regularly boasted of his ties to the CIA, Vice
Presidential National Security Adviser  Donald P. Gregg, and through Gregg to Vice President
Bush.  With Rodriguez involved in activities that, had he been a Government official, would
have violated the Boland Amendment, and with his bragging that all of his work -- including that
on behalf of the contras -- was sponsored by the U.S. Government, official Washington was
repeatedly uneasy about Rodriguez.  On numerous occasions, members of the RIG discussed how
to silence him, with little success.27

     27 For further discussion of Rodriguez's activities, see Gregg chapter.  For further description
of the CIA, State Department, and NSC discussions about Rodriguez, see Fiers and Abrams
chapters.

     At the same time, Rodriguez was essential to NHAO and the RIG's efforts in Central
America.  Rodriguez was friendly with the Salvadoran military, especially Bustillo, commander
of the air facilities so essential to NHAO and private-benefactor flights.  No one in the RIG had
an alternative to Rodriguez for keeping the Salvadoran military happy.  As a result, despite his
liabilities, Government officials took Rodriguez seriously.  As early as April 1986, Rodriguez
had become disenchanted with many of the persons involved in the Enterprise -- especially
Secord, Clines, and Quintero, all of whom had been touched by scandal and whom Rodriguez
suspected of  profiteering at the contras' expense.  Rodriguez threatened to move back to Miami
and abandon the operation.  It took persuasion by North and Corr to keep Rodriguez in place.28

     28 For further discussion, see Gregg chapter.

     Rodriguez's concerns about Enterprise profit-taking interfered, however, with North's plan to
liquidate the Enterprise's assets.  Saying that he was expressing Gen. Bustillo's views, Rodriguez
accused the Enterprise of trying to sell off assets -- particularly airplanes -- that had been donated
to the contras.  In July 1986, Rodriguez posted armed guards around planes used by the
Enterprise, thereby halting all resupply flights.  Shortly thereafter, North accused Rodriguez of
stealing a loaded Enterprise C-123 from a hanger in Miami and demanded that Gregg rein in
Rodriguez.  At Gregg's request, Rodriguez came to Washington on August 8, 1986, but instead
of responding to North's charges, Rodriguez ran through his complaints about the Enterprise --
including his suspicions about Clines, Secord, and Quintero; Enterprise profiteering; and
Bustillo's concerns about the future of the ``contras' '' planes.29

     29 For a full discussion of the circumstances surrounding this meeting, see Gregg chapter.

     Four days later, Gregg convened a meeting in his office to discuss Rodriguez.  Many
significant figures involved with contra operations -- including Ambassador Corr, Col. Steele,
Fiers, Lt. Col. Robert Earl of the NSC, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Walker -- listened
with amazement as Gregg aired Rodriguez's worries, and pressed Fiers on whether the CIA was
planning to take over the private benefactors' operations at Ilopango.  Again the RIG discussed
whether Rodriguez could be replaced.  Again the conclusion was no.30

     30 For further description of this meeting, see Fiers and Gregg chapters.

     More Lies

     As North was trying to bridge the gap in contra aid until official funds were resumed, his
activities were the subject of a second wave of media speculation and congressional inquiry.
Newspaper and television accounts of North's involvement with contra resupply coincided with
the House's June 1986 debate on contra aid.  Earlier, Representative Ron Coleman introduced a
Resolution of Inquiry directing the President to provide information and documents to the House
about NSC staff contacts with (1) private persons or foreign governments involved in contra
resupply; (2) any contra, involving contra military activities; and (3) Robert Owen, Maj. Gen.
Singlaub, and an American expatriate living in Costa Rica, John Hull.

     Coleman's resolution prompted the chairmen of the House Intelligence and Foreign Affairs
committees to request comments from the President. Poindexter replied on behalf of the
President and knowingly repeated McFarlane's earlier lie that NSC staff ``were in compliance
with both the spirit and letter'' of the Boland Amendments.

     Not satisfied with Poindexter's response, members of the House Permanent Select Committee
on Intelligence asked to meet with North.  North met with 11 members of the Committee on
August 6, 1986, assuring the group that he had not violated the spirit or the letter of the Boland
Amendment.  He also denied that he had raised funds for the contras, offered them military
advice, or had contacts with Owen that were more than ``casual.''  North's responses satisfied the
Committee and effectively killed Coleman's resolution.  After learning of North's false and
misleading remarks to the Committee, Poindexter replied to North, ``Well done.'' 31

     31 For further details of the summer 1986 inquiries and lies, see the North and Poindexter
chapters.

     Exposure Within, Exposure Without

     While he endeavored to hide his activities from the Congress in the summer of 1986, North
was becoming progressively more explicit in his discussions with other U.S. officials about what
he was doing for the contras.  His efforts to sell ``his planes'' to the CIA were only the beginning.
On August 28, 1986, during a breakfast with the RIG at the offices of Assistant Secretary of
Defense for International Security Affairs Richard Armitage, North ran through a list of his
contra activities, including his cash payments to contra leaders and organizations, provisions of
food, and money for air operations.  North's question for the RIG was simple:  Should he
continue his efforts?  Fiers told North yes.32

     32 For a full discussion of the RIG's growing exposure to North's activities, see Abrams
chapter.

     The Enterprise was pushing ahead on an accelerated schedule of deliveries in August and
September 1986.  Crews were making more sorties into both northern and southern Nicaragua,
some during daylight hours.  San Jose station chief Fernandez, who was in direct contact with
Quintero, ordered CIA personnel to relay drop zone and other  information to contra forces on
the Southern Front, as well as report news of deliveries.33

     33 For further discussion, see Fernandez chapter.

     Events besides the imminent renewal of U.S. aid and the drawing down of the Enterprise's
supplies for the contras were forcing North to wrap up his Central American operations.  On
September 25, 1986, a Costa Rican official disclosed the existence of the Enterprise's airstrip in
northern Costa Rica and publicly linked it to contra resupply and an Enterprise shell corporation,
Udall Resources, Inc.  North scrambled to draft false press guidance with Abrams and Fiers, and
assured Poindexter that he was doing his best to ``keep USG fingerprints off this'' -- including
dissolving Udall and covering its tracks.34

     34 For further discussion, see Abrams chapter.

     The Hasenfus Shoot-Down

     Unbeknownst to Enterprise crews at Ilopango, the accelerated resupply missions had alerted
the Sandinistas to the private benefactors' air routes to drop sites in southern Nicaragua.  Having
repositioned radar and anti-aircraft units in the area, it was only a matter of time before an
Enterprise plane was shot down by the Nicaraguans.  Such was  the case on October 5, 1986,
when an Enterprise C-123K loaded with lethal supplies and carrying three Americans was
brought down by Sandinista ground fire.

     Of the crew, only one survived, an American named Eugene Hasenfus.  The Sandinistas
combed the wreckage of the flight and recovered scores of documents linking it to NHAO and
numerous Americans working at Ilopango air base.  While in Sandinista custody, Hasenfus said
that he was working for the CIA, and that two CIA officers -- including a ``Max Gomez,'' the
local alias for Rodriguez -- had been in charge of food, lodging, and other services for the
operation's pilots and crews.  Within days, North had directed his Enterprise to clear out of
Ilopango -- planes and all -- and had begun to destroy ledgers detailing his disbursements to the
contras.  The Hasenfus flight was the Enterprise's last.

     The End of Boland

     The crash of the Enterprise C-123K could not have come at a worse time for the
Administration.  The President's $100 million contra-aid package was inching toward final
approval, and opponents were quick to latch on to Hasenfus's claims that he had been part of an
illegal CIA operation.  Speaking to the public and Congress, Administration officials -- including
Fiers, George and Abrams -- insisted truthfully that Hasenfus and his companions did not work
for the CIA.  They falsely denied knowing other facts, however:  who ``Max Gomez'' was, who
the private benefactors were, and whether any U.S. Government officials were involved.

     The Administration's statements worked.  Congress released the contra funds on October 17,
1986.  North had kept the contras alive, ``body and soul,'' despite the Boland cut-off, and the rest
of the Administration had convinced the Congress that it had complied with the law.  It took the
November 1986 disclosures of the Iran arms sales to pry the lid off North's contra activities once
and for all.  It took an independent counsel six years to ensure that concerted efforts to deny
knowledge of North's contra activities -- described in the rest of this report -- met with a similar
fate.

     The Iran Arms Sales

     What we now know as the Iran arms sales, or the Iran initiative, was actually a series of
related but distinct events that began in the summer of 1985 and continued through 1986.  Israel
sent U.S.-supplied weapons to Iran on three occasions in 1985.  These shipments  took place with
U.S. approval, and, in one instance, with U.S. participation.  They led to the release in September
1985 of one American held hostage in Lebanon.  The United States delivered missiles and
missile parts to Iran on five occasions in 1986, after President Reagan signed an intelligence
``Finding'' authorizing such shipments.  These 1986 shipments led to the release of two more
U.S. hostages, though terrorists seized two additional Americans in September 1986.

     The first shipment of U.S.-made weapons from Israel to Iran took place August 20, 1985.  But
discussion and debate within the U.S. Government as to the desirability of arms sales to Iran had
been going on for months at the time of the first Israeli shipment.

     The Policy Debate

     In early May of 1985, Michael Ledeen, a part-time consultant to the NSC, obtained National
Security Adviser Robert McFarlane's approval to meet in Israel with Prime Minister Shimon
Peres to explore whether Israel would share information on Iran with the United States.

     According to Ledeen, Peres expressed displeasure with Israel's intelligence on Iran and
suggested that the United States and Israel should work together to  improve their information
about and policies toward Iran.  He also mentioned a recent Iranian request to buy artillery shells
from Israel.  Israel would grant the request, Peres said, only if the United States had no objection.
Ledeen agreed to relay the question of the proposed weapons sale to McFarlane.35

     35 For a more detailed discussion of these events, see McFarlane chapter.

     In the weeks after Ledeen's trip to Israel, the number of Americans held hostage in Lebanon
grew.  David Jacobsen, the director of the American University Hospital in Beirut, was
kidnapped on May 28, 1985.  Thomas Sutherland, the dean of agriculture at the University of
Beirut, was seized on June 9, 1985.  These abductions were in addition to the March 1985
kidnapping of Terry Anderson, chief Middle East correspondent for the Associated Press, and the
January 1985 seizure of Father Lawrence Jenco, the senior Catholic Relief Services official in
Beirut.  Two other Americans kidnapped in 1984 remained in captivity as well:  the Reverend
Benjamin Weir and -- of special interest to CIA Director Casey -- CIA Beirut Station Chief
William Buckley.

     The hostages were not the only concern in U.S.-Iran affairs.  Some U.S. Government officials
feared increased  Soviet influence in Iran.  In a Special National Intelligence Estimate (SNIE)
prepared in May 1985 at the request of Casey, the intelligence community warned of this Soviet
threat and called for new approaches to improve Western relations with the government of Iran.
One possible avenue, according to the SNIE, would be the elimination of restrictions on weapons
sales to Iran.

     Casey pushed for adoption of the SNIE as a National Security Decision Directive (NSDD), an
operational paper for the national security community.  In June 1985, the NSC staff prepared for
McFarlane a draft NSDD responding to the ideas contained in the SNIE.  The proposed
presidential memorandum, entitled ``U.S. Policy Toward Iran,'' recommended that the initial
focus of any new policy should be on stimulating essential trade.  According to the draft NSDD,
the United States should:

     [e]ncourage Western allies and friends to help Iran meet its import requirements so as to
reduce the attractiveness of Soviet assistance and trade offers, while demonstrating the value of
correct relations with the West.  This includes provision of selected military equipment as
determined on a case-by-case basis.36

     McFarlane circulated the draft NSDD to Shultz, Weinberger, and Casey on June 17, 1985.
Both Shultz and Weinberger wrote to McFarlane opposing the NSDD.  Casey, on the other hand,
wrote McFarlane on July 18, 1985, endorsing it.

     36 Memorandum from McFarlane to Shultz and Weinberger, 6/17/85, AKW 001713-20.

     On June 18, 1985, President Reagan made a public statement that would prove to be ironic in
light of the arms-for-hostages shipments that were to occur over the next eighteen months:

     Let me further make it plain to the assassins in Beirut and their accomplices, wherever they
may be, that America will never make concessions to terrorists -- to do so would only invite more
terrorism -- nor will we ask nor pressure any other government to do so.  Once we head down
that path there would be no end to it, no end to the suffering of innocent people, no end to the
bloody ransom all civilized nations must pay.37

     37 ``The President's News Conference,'' Public Papers of the President, 6/18/85, p. 779.

     Manucher Ghorbanifar

     McFarlane met at the White House on July 3, 1985, with David Kimche, director general of
the Israeli Foreign Ministry.  McFarlane later testified that Kimche raised the possibility of a
renewed political dialogue between the  United States and Iran.  According to Kimche, Iranians
who had been in contact with Israel would show their good faith by using their influence over
radical groups in Lebanon to obtain the release of American hostages.  These Iranians would
expect a reciprocal show of good faith from the United States -- most likely in the form of
military equipment.

     McFarlane mentioned Kimche's proposal to President Reagan.  President Reagan expressed
interest and instructed McFarlane to explore it further.  On July 13, 1985, Ledeen told McFarlane
that Adolf ``Al'' Schwimmer, an adviser to Prime Minister Peres, said that Peres wanted
McFarlane to know that Israel's principal Iranian contact had told Kimche and Schwimmer that
he was in touch with a group of Iranians who wished to improve relations with the West and who
could demonstrate good faith by arranging the release of the American hostages.  In return, these
Iranians needed to have 100 American-made TOW anti-tank missiles.

     Schwimmer told Ledeen that the Iranian was Manucher Ghorbanifar.  Ghorbanifar was an
Iranian businessman who was well known to the American intelligence community as a
prevaricator.  The CIA had concluded, after past interaction with Ghorbanifar, that he could not
be  trusted to act in anyone's interest but his own.  So strong were the CIA's views on
Ghorbanifar that the Agency issued a ``burn notice'' in July 1984, effectively recommending that
no U.S. agency have any dealings with him.  Nevertheless, Ghorbanifar was to play a major role
over the next year as the initial intermediary (the ``First Channel'') between Iran, the United
States and Israel.

     Approving Israeli Sales

     In mid-July 1985, McFarlane informed Shultz, Weinberger and Casey of the Israeli proposal,
including the new demand for TOW missiles.  Shultz cabled to say that the United States should
make a tentative showing of interest in a dialogue with Iran.  Weinberger was opposed.  Casey's
July 18, 1985, letter supporting the draft NSDD favored the Israeli proposal.

     President Reagan entered Bethesda Naval Hospital on July 13, 1985, for cancer surgery.  On
approximately July 18, as President Reagan was recovering from his operation, McFarlane and
White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan met with him in his hospital room.  McFarlane
outlined Kimche and Schwimmer's proposal -- including the possibility of weapons shipments to
Iran.  President Reagan encouraged McFarlane to continue to explore the  proposed dialogue but
made no commitment to include weapons shipments.

     McFarlane authorized Ledeen to meet with Ghorbanifar.  Ledeen did so in late July 1985,
accompanied by Kimche, Schwimmer and Yaacov Nimrodi, an Israeli arms merchant and
business partner of Schwimmer.  Ghorbanifar described a group of Iranians interested in
improving relations with the United States.  He repeated the notion of Iranian assistance in
freeing American hostages in Lebanon, in return for American TOW missiles.  After the meeting,
Kimche agreed to brief McFarlane.

     Kimche met with McFarlane at the White House on August 2, 1985.  This time the issue of
arms shipments was front and center.  Would the United States itself sell weapons to Iran?  If
not, would the United States permit Israel to sell U.S.-manufactured weapons to the Iranians?  If
Israel sold the weapons, would the United States sell replacements to Israel?  McFarlane
promised Kimche that he would respond after consultations with President Reagan and other
senior officers.

     In early August 1985, McFarlane briefed President Reagan on Kimche's information.  Vice
President Bush, Regan, Weinberger, Casey and Shultz were also briefed.  Shultz and Weinberger
again expressed  their opposition to arms sales.  The various participants in the meeting had
differing perceptions of President Reagan's reaction to McFarlane's report.  McFarlane concluded
that President Reagan would approve sales of U.S.-supplied weapons by Israel if the weapons
went to reliable anti-Khomeini Iranians.

     The precise date of President Reagan's decision is unclear.  It was no later than August 23,
1985.  On that day, President Reagan wrote in his diary that he had received a ``secret phone'' call
from McFarlane, that ``a man high up in the Iranian govt.'' believed he could deliver ``all or part
of the 7 kidnap victims.''  President Reagan further noted that he ``had some decisions to make
about a few points -- but they were easy to make -- now we must wait.'' 38  According to
McFarlane, the President approved a commitment to replenish Israel's supply of missiles for
those sent to Iran.  McFarlane conveyed President Reagan's approval to Kimche.  There was no
notification to Congress.39

     38 OIC Review of Reagan Diary Excerpts, 1987.

     39 For full treatments of the President's approval of Israeli arms sales, see McFarlane, State
and Defense Department chapters.

     The Summer 1985 Shipments

     The Israelis had already prepared for the shipment and moved quickly.  On August 20, 1985,
after haggling over pricing and financing arrangements, the first shipment of 96 TOW missiles
arrived in Iran.  No hostages were released.  Ghorbanifar claimed that the TOWs fell into the
wrong hands but expressed hope that further shipments would lead to the release of the hostages.

     The Israelis tried to move things forward by convening a meeting in Paris on September 4 and
5.  McFarlane sent Ledeen.  As Ledeen put it, the ``usual suspects'' attended:  Israelis Kimche,
Schwimmer and Nimrodi, along with Ghorbanifar.  During discussions that often were heated,
Ghorbanifar explained that more TOWs would have to be sent -- 400 more -- in order to gain the
release of a single hostage.

     Israel proceeded with an additional delivery of missiles.  On September 14, 1985, an
Israeli-chartered aircraft arrived in Iran carrying 408 TOWs.

     McFarlane had told the Israelis that the United States wanted hostage William Buckley to be
released if only one hostage were to be freed.  On September 15, Reverend Benjamin Weir was
released in Beirut.  Ghorbanifar  claimed that Buckley had been too sick to be moved.  In fact,
Buckley had been dead for at least two months.

     The summer shipments marked Oliver North's first involvement with the Iran arms sales.
During September, North asked the CIA to arrange for continuing intelligence reports on
Ghorbanifar and Mohsen Kangarlu, Ghorbanifar's principal contact in the government of Iran.
Charles Allen, the CIA's national intelligence officer for counter-terrorism, made the necessary
arrangements.  The intelligence reports were initially relayed only to McFarlane, North, Casey,
and Vice Admiral Arthur S. Moreau, Jr., assistant to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Shultz and Weinberger did not get copies.  Weinberger soon found out and was included in the
distribution.40

     40 For more complete discussions of the Israeli shipments in the summer of 1985, see
McFarlane, State and Defense Department chapters.

     The November 1985 HAWK Shipment

     Despite the disappointing results in September, discussions among the United States, Israel
and Ghorbanifar continued.  Ledeen continued to be the U.S. representative.  In a late-September
meeting in Paris, Ghorbanifar suggested  Iran's interest in various anti-aircraft missiles, including
HAWK missiles.

     Shortly after this meeting, North asked Ledeen to invite Ghorbanifar to Washington to discuss
hostage issues.  Ghorbanifar, Schwimmer and Nimrodi arrived on October 7, 1985.  That same
day, the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro was hijacked by Palestinian terrorists.  North was so
heavily involved that he did not attend the scheduled meeting with Ghorbanifar.  The meeting
went ahead on October 8, 1985, without North.  Ledeen, Ghorbanifar, Nimrodi and Schwimmer
met in the Old Executive Office Building, with Ledeen serving as the primary spokesman for the
Americans.

     Ghorbanifar's basic proposal was for more trades:  Israeli deliveries of U.S.-manufactured
weaponry in return for the release of the Americans held in Lebanon.  Ghorbanifar requested
weapons that included HAWK anti-aircraft missiles, along with Sidewinder, Harpoon and
advanced Phoenix missiles.

     A few days afterward, Ledeen briefed McFarlane and North.  Ledeen and McFarlane claim
they each expressed distaste for further arms-for-hostages transactions and questioned pursuing
the Israeli channel.  Nevertheless, Ghorbanifar nudged the United States toward further  meetings
by promising to introduce Ledeen to a senior Iranian official.  Ledeen obtained McFarlane's
authorization to attend a meeting in Geneva in late October.  On approximately October 27,
1985, Ledeen met in Geneva with the ``usual suspects'' and the supposed senior Iranian official,
Hassan Karoubi.

     Karoubi's precise rank or position within the Iranian government was uncertain.  Karoubi
apparently renewed with Ledeen the theme of better U.S. relations with a powerful faction of
moderate Iranians, of whom Karoubi was one.  But arms shipments were discussed as well.
According to North's notes of Ledeen's briefing, Karoubi proposed a staggered exchange of
hostages for 150 HAWK missiles, 200 Sidewinder missiles and 30-50 Phoenix missiles.  Ledeen
also told North that the Israelis wanted the replenishment of the TOWs that had been sent to Iran
in August and September.

     North and Ledeen met with McFarlane, who was highly skeptical of the existence of moderate
Iranians.  McFarlane, however, was willing to have Israel make further deliveries of weapons to
Iran -- as long as arms shipments were preceded by the release of ``live Americans.''  Ledeen
sensed that McFarlane was close to resigning and to shutting down the Iran initiative.  To keep it
moving  forward, Ledeen maneuvered a meeting between Kimche and McFarlane in Washington.
This meeting took place on November 8, 1985, with North and Ledeen present.  Kimche pressed
McFarlane not to abandon the efforts to contact moderate Iranians through Ghorbanifar and
Israel.

     Less than a week later, after a regular weekly meeting with senior CIA officials on November
14, McFarlane told Casey and John McMahon, the deputy director of central intelligence, that
Israel planned to ship weapons to certain elements of the Iranian military who were willing and
ready to overthrow the government of Iran.  The following day, Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak
Rabin had breakfast with Casey and then met with McFarlane at the White House.  Rabin asked
McFarlane if the United States still approved of Israel selling arms to Iran.  McFarlane replied
that President Reagan continued to approve.  Rabin described a contemplated shipment of
HAWK missiles and raised the question of replenishment.  McFarlane agreed to it and said he
would assign North to follow through.  Within a day or two, McFarlane advised President
Reagan and Vice President Bush of the imminent Israeli delivery of HAWKs to Iran.

     As with the late summer TOW shipments, Israel moved quickly once assured of American
support.  On Sunday,  November 17, 1985 -- just two days after McFarlane's meeting with Rabin
-- Rabin telephoned North to say that Israel was ready to go forward with a shipment of 80
HAWKs, once replenishment issues were worked out.  Rabin then spoke with McFarlane, who
was in Geneva at a U.S.-Soviet summit.  McFarlane called North, telling him to solve Rabin's
replenishment problems.  McFarlane also told North to keep the Israeli replenishment orders
under $14 million per order.  Larger weapons orders, he believed, would have to be reported to
Congress.

     Rabin's statements to McFarlane and North reflected a sale of 80 HAWKs.  Subsequent
conversations between North and Schwimmer indicated that this 80-missile shipment was to be
the first of a larger total delivery of as many as 500-600 HAWK missiles.  Inventory checks at
the Pentagon, however, showed that only 79 HAWKs were available for the immediate
replenishment of Israel.  North told Poindexter on Wednesday, November 20, that plans had
changed.  The Israelis planned to dispatch planes carrying 80 HAWKs. This was to be followed
by the shipment of 40 additional HAWKs and other weapons, including more TOWs.  North's
notes of his conversation show that at least some weapons were to be delivered before any
hostages were freed -- contrary to McFarlane's order that ``live Americans'' go free before more
weapons went to Iran.

     On Tuesday, November 19, McFarlane asked Weinberger to check the availability of
HAWKs. Weinberger referred the request to his military assistant, Gen. Colin L. Powell, who
directed the Pentagon bureaucracy to prepare a negative response. The result was a memorandum
that not only discussed price and availability of HAWKs, but also questioned the wisdom and
legality of the proposed sale.

     The proposed shipment later ran into logistical problems.  The Israeli plan was to mask the
origin of the delivery by flying the missiles from Israel to Europe,41 loading them onto other
aircraft, and then shipping them on to Iran.  But the European country's officials were unwilling
to allow this transfer to take place without word from the United States as to its purpose.

     41 The name of the country is classified.

     North requested Secord to travel to Europe to help arrange the necessary flight clearances.  On
Tuesday, November 19, North gave a letter to Secord on White House letterhead, signed by
North for McFarlane.  Secord arrived in Europe on Wednesday, November 20.  North also
discussed the situation with his friend Duane Clarridge, a senior CIA operations officer.
Clarridge told North that the CIA could help gain overseas flight clearances.  On the evening of
November 19, North met with Clarridge and Vincent Cannistraro, a CIA operations officer
temporarily  assigned to the NSC, to discuss the flight clearances problem.

     In Geneva, at the summit meeting between President Reagan and Soviet General Secretary
Mikhail Gorbachev, McFarlane briefed President Reagan, Shultz and Regan on the details of the
upcoming HAWKs shipment.  President Reagan raised no objection.  Shultz disapproved but did
not try to stop the transaction. Weinberger telephoned McFarlane in Geneva that the transaction
without notice to Congress would be illegal.  McFarlane said the President had decided to make
the transfer through the Israelis.

     By late in the day on Thursday, November 21, Secord had been unable to get appropriate
European government officials to grant landing rights for the Israeli shipment.  After one of
Secord's attempts failed, the European government asked the U.S. Embassy for information about
the unusual situation.  The uninformed Embassy responded that the activities were not authorized
by the U.S. Government.

     Secord reported to North that evening.  North then telephoned Clarridge, who sent
high-priority cables to senior CIA officers overseas directing them to go to work and await
further instructions.  On Friday morning, November 22, Clarridge told these officers to contact
Secord (traveling under the alias ``Copp'') and offer assistance.  Secord mistakenly said he
needed no help.

     The project rapidly deteriorated during Friday.  An El Al 747 leased by the Israeli military
took off from Tel Aviv with 80 HAWKs on board headed for Europe.   Late Friday morning,
clearances were denied by the European country.  Secord called the senior CIA field officer with
an urgent request for assistance.

     North obtained State Department permission to involve the Embassy in the quest for
clearances.  The U.S. charge d'affaires in the European country tried to have the European foreign
minister called out of a cabinet meeting to receive a call from McFarlane.  The European country
stated that a formal diplomatic note from the United States explaining the circumstances would
be required before clearances could be approved.  McFarlane did not reach the foreign minister
until late Friday night.  But even this proved elusive:  Senior foreign ministry officials on
Saturday morning said they knew nothing of McFarlane's agreement with the foreign minister,
and said that a note was still required.

     Lacking flight clearances, the El Al 747 was forced to return to Israel.  Schwimmer canceled
the charter for two other jets that were to transport additional HAWKs.  With the planes Israel
had reserved no longer available, North again turned to Clarridge for help.  Clarridge met late
Friday afternoon with an officer from the CIA's Air Branch and told him that new charters for a
bulky shipment were needed as soon as possible.  The Air Branch told Clarridge that a plane
belonging to a CIA proprietary airline (an airline secretly owned by the CIA) might be available.
Clarridge obtained the approval of Edward Juchniewicz, the CIA's associate deputy director for
operations.  The CIA proprietary airplane flew to Israel to load missiles.

     Clarridge's office became the nerve center of the ill-fated HAWKs shipment.  North joined
Clarridge there on Saturday, along with Allen and the CIA Air Branch officer. Clarridge sent
cables to CIA personnel at two overseas locations seeking to obtain overflight clearances and
landing rights for the CIA's proprietary aircraft.  After much  effort, the aircraft landed in Tehran
late Sunday night, November 24.42

     42 For a more complete treatment of the events of November 1985, see McFarlane,
Thompson, Shultz, Defense, and Clarridge chapters.

     November Post-Mortem

     Only 18 HAWKs were delivered to Iran, instead of the planned 80.  These 18 HAWKs were
not what the Iranians wanted.  The Iranians had been given the impression that the ``I-HAWKs''
(improved HAWKs) were capable of shooting down planes at high altitudes.  They were not.  To
make matters worse, the missiles carried Israeli ``Star of David'' markings, which angered the
Iranians.  No hostages gained their freedom.

     The HAWKs shipment caused problems at the CIA as well.  The CIA's extensive involvement
in the logistics of the delivery, its efforts to gain foreign clearances, and the use of the proprietary
aircraft for an Israeli weapons delivery were ``covert actions'' that required a Presidential Finding.
Further operations were put on hold while a proper Finding was drafted.

     After checking with McFarlane and Regan to make sure that President Reagan would sign a
Finding, Casey  sent a draft Finding to Poindexter on November 26, 1985. Poindexter had
informed President Reagan on the morning of Monday, November 25, that the HAWKs had been
delivered to Iran.  On November 26, President Reagan had approved the continuation of the
Israeli arms-for-hostages operation.  On December 5, 1985, President Reagan signed the Finding
requested by the CIA that:  (1) stated the CIA's activities were part of an authorized effort to
secure the release of American hostages in exchange for shipments of weapons, (2) directed that
Congress not be notified, and (3) retroactively sought to approve the CIA activities already
completed.  Just under a year later, on November 21, 1986, Poindexter secretly destroyed the
signed Finding because, he said, he felt its existence -- and its plain arms-for-hostages language -- would embarrass President Reagan.

     The December-January Meetings

     On December 4, 1985, President Reagan announced McFarlane's resignation and appointed
Poindexter to replace him.  Poindexter soon told Ledeen that he would no longer be used by the
NSC in the initiative.  North assumed primary responsibility for the project.

     The debacle of the HAWKs shipment was barely a week old, yet things began moving again
toward more transactions.  Secord met in Paris on December 1, 1985, with Ghorbanifar, Kimche,
Schwimmer and Nimrodi.  Ghorbanifar registered the Iranians' anger and proposed additional
exchanges of large numbers of weapons in return for the release of the American hostages.  The
meeting ended with an agreement that the group would meet again in London on December 6.

     North sent Poindexter a computer message on December 4, 1985, outlining a broad new
program of Israeli weapons sales to Iran as part of an arms-for-hostages operation -- a sequential
exchange of 3,300 TOWs and 50 HAWKs for the release of all U.S. hostages and one French
hostage.  North contemplated an exchange in five separate phases coordinated over a single
24-hour period.  North expressed the view that cutting off the arms shipments so soon after
angering the Iranians with the HAWKs shipments risked the lives of the American hostages.43

     43 On December 5, North converted the computer message into a memorandum for
Poindexter.  He distributed copies to those involved in the transaction, including the Israelis.

     Poindexter briefed Shultz by telephone on December 5, 1985.  Shultz told Poindexter that he
opposed  the arms-for-hostages deals that had taken place and that were contemplated.  At the
CIA that same day, McMahon held a meeting with Juchniewicz, Deputy Director for Intelligence
Robert Gates, and others to discuss American efforts to free the hostages.  Notes from this
meeting indicate that these CIA officials were aware that the November shipment carried to Iran
by the CIA's proprietary aircraft had contained missiles.

     North flew to London on December 6, 1985, to meet with Ghorbanifar, Secord, Kimche,
Schwimmer and Nimrodi.  The group discussed details of the proposed Israeli sale of 3,300
TOWs and 50 HAWKs to Iran in return for the release of all hostages.  But the discussion was
only a preliminary one.  President Reagan planned to meet with his senior advisers on Saturday,
December 7, 1985, to discuss whether and how to proceed with the Iran arms sales.

     The December 7 meeting in the White House residence included Reagan, Regan, Shultz,
Weinberger, McMahon (in Casey's absence), Poindexter and McFarlane.  Shultz and Weinberger
voiced their strong opposition to the Iran arms sales on both legal and policy grounds.  McMahon
attacked some of the basic assumptions behind the arms sales -- especially the presence of
``moderates'' in Iran  with whom the United States could deal.  Poindexter favored a continuation
of past efforts through the Israelis, and told those gathered that he had a proxy to express Casey's
support for going ahead with the arms sales.  The result of the December 7 meeting was
inconclusive.   President Reagan expressed no clear decision except to send McFarlane
immediately to London, where North and the other negotiators were already talking.  McFarlane
was to inform the intermediaries that the United States was willing to pursue political
rapprochement with Iran and to negotiate the release of hostages, but that these steps should
precede or be independent of any further arms sales.

     McFarlane met in London on December 8 with Secord, North, Ghorbanifar, Kimche,
Schwimmer and Nimrodi.  McFarlane engaged in heated exchanges with Kimche and
Ghorbanifar, both of whom favored more arms-for-hostages shipments.  Like two ships passing
in the night, McFarlane spoke of political goals while Ghorbanifar complained about the
November HAWKs shipment and called for more arms-for-hostages transactions.  McFarlane
came away from the meeting extremely pessimistic about breaking out of the arms-for-hostages
mold, and adverse to any further interactions with Ghorbanifar.

     The next day, North wrote a memorandum to McFarlane and Poindexter that took issue with
McFarlane's assessment of the arms-for-hostages operations.  North's basic points were that
interacting with Ghorbanifar, though not optimal, had led to the release of Weir and was the best
channel the United States had into the Iranian government.  As North viewed it, the downside of
further arms-for-hostages transactions was a small number of weapons being sent to Iran with no
results.  The downside of breaking off the Israeli-sponsored channel, on the other hand, was the
potential for severe harm to the hostages.  North concluded that it would be a mistake to walk
away from Ghorbanifar at that point.

     North's December 9, 1985, memorandum mentioned one additional ``option'' that had not yet
been discussed.  He suggested that the United States, under an appropriate covert action Finding,
could sell arms directly to Iran using Secord as an intermediary who could serve as a watchdog
over Ghorbanifar.  A form of North's proposal eventually became the working model of the direct
U.S. arms sales to Iran that took place in 1986.

     McFarlane briefed President Reagan on the London meeting on December 10, 1985, in the
presence of  Weinberger, Casey, Regan, Poindexter and North.  McFarlane warned the group that
Ghorbanifar was a man of no integrity whose promises and representations could not be trusted.
Ghorbanifar and the Israelis were focused primarily on arms-for-hostages transactions and were
unlikely to pursue an expanded political dialogue between the United States and Iran through
other means.  McFarlane recommended that the United States have no further involvement in the
Iran arms sales.  McFarlane did, however, mention that one option was simply to let the Israelis
continue shipping weapons in the hope that the United States might get some benefit.

     President Reagan did not express any conclusive decision at the December 10 meeting, but
several present believed that he was unwilling to abandon an operation that might lead to the
release of the American hostages.  President Reagan clung to McFarlane's comment that simply
letting Israel go forward without any formal U.S. commitment or involvement might help
American hostage-recovery efforts.  President Reagan also expressed concern, first raised by
McFarlane, that abruptly breaking off the arms shipments would anger the Iranians and might
lead to the death of one or more hostages.

     As the December 10 meeting broke up, it was clear to Casey and other observers who knew
President Reagan well that he had not yet decided to put a stop to the Israeli arms shipments to
Iran.  President Reagan had very powerful feelings about the hostages, and a strong sense that it
was his duty to do all he could to gain their release.

     The NSC Iran Operation

     Poindexter sensed President Reagan's willingness to continue with some sort of weapons sales
to Iran.  Poindexter discussed with North several steps that needed to be taken to lay the
groundwork for future shipments.  The first involved developing a better Finding that could serve
as authority for future transactions.  Next was a change in personnel, replacing Ledeen,
Schwimmer and Nimrodi with North and Amiram Nir, an Israeli counter-terrorism expert and
adviser to Prime Minister Peres.

     North deviated from Poindexter's direction for a change in personnel.  North instructed
Ledeen to push the CIA to develop an intelligence relationship with Ghorbanifar.  Ledeen met
during December 1985 with Casey, Clarridge and Allen, advocating to each that  Ghorbanifar be
used in any future operations involving Iran.  Casey had a favorable reaction, but knew of the
CIA's ``burn notice'' on Ghorbanifar.  In an effort to get beyond this bad history, Casey told
George to reexamine Ghorbanifar's potential as an intelligence contact.

     George did as asked.  CIA officers polygraphed Ghorbanifar and reported that the CIA's
earlier appraisal of Ghorbanifar was correct:  The man could not be trusted.  Despite the debacle
of the November HAWKs shipment and this negative assessment from career CIA officials,
Casey still viewed Ghorbanifar as a potential link to the government of Iran and those who could
influence the holders of the hostages.  Casey wrote President Reagan a private letter stating that
one option for pursuing the Iran arms sales was the continued use of Ghorbanifar as an
intermediary.

     The Israelis wasted little time.  Nir came to Washington, D.C., on January 2, 1986, and met
with Poindexter and North.  He proposed a broad new initiative.  Israel would get things rolling
by sending 500 TOW missiles to Iran.  Iran would then cause all American hostages in Lebanon
to be released.  Israel would then arrange the release of certain Hezbollah prisoners in southern
Lebanon.  If all went well, Israel would send 3,500 more TOWs to Iran, which would foreswear
further hostage-taking and terrorism.  The United States would promptly replenish the missiles
delivered by Israel to Iran.

     Nir's proposal was well-received by Poindexter and North.  There appeared to be little risk for
the United States.  At worst, if no hostages were released, Israel would be out 500 TOWs with no
U.S. obligation to replenish them.  North immediately began the process for creating a new, more
sophisticated Finding to support the operations proposed by Nir.  Beginning on January 3, 1986,
CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin and North prepared a Finding authorizing the CIA to sell
arms to Iranians, which contemplated no notification of Congress and recited the broad goal of
improved relations with Iran.  North and Sporkin met with Casey about the Finding on January 5,
1986.  Over North's objection, Casey and Sporkin added language in the draft expressing the goal
of hostage recovery.

     Attorney General Edwin Meese III approved the procedures described in the Finding on
Monday, January 6, 1986.  That same day, Poindexter informed President Reagan of the new
Israeli plan.  Regan, Vice President Bush, and Poindexter's deputy Donald Fortier also were
present.  Poindexter gave the President the draft Finding produced by North, Sporkin and Casey.
Poindexter thought the Finding needed editing, but President Reagan, not realizing that he had
been given a draft, signed it.

     President Reagan called a National Security Council meeting for the following day, Tuesday,
January 7, to consider the Nir proposal and the new Finding.  President Reagan, Vice President
Bush, Shultz, Weinberger, Meese, Casey, Poindexter and Regan all took part.  Only Shultz and
Weinberger expressed opposition.  Weinberger argued that the operation violated the Arms
Export Control Act (AECA).  Meese responded that the President could authorize the weapons
transfers from the Defense Department to the CIA, and by the CIA to Iranians.  It was very clear
that President Reagan wanted to go forward.

     Over the next several days, North and Noel Koch, principal deputy assistant secretary of
defense for international security affairs, addressed the method by which the United States could
replenish TOW missiles that Israel sold to Iran.  This involved pricing discussions within the
Department of Defense (DoD), and pricing negotiations with  the Israelis.  It became clear that
any U.S. shipment of TOWs to Israel that exceeded $14 million had to be reported to Congress.
Resale by Israel of weapons acquired from the United States also required prior notice to
Congress and an eligible buyer.  This conflicted with the Administration's decision not to notify
Congress, and Iran's status as a sponsor of terrorism.

     These problems led Poindexter and North back to direct sales to Iran via the Economy Act.
North, Poindexter and Casey further decided that an extra layer of deniability would be provided
if Secord were inserted.  Several possible versions of Secord's role were considered.  It was
decided that the CIA would buy from DoD, and, after payment, transfer the weapons to Secord as
its agent to transfer them to Iran.

     On January 16, 1986, Poindexter met at the White House with Weinberger, Casey, Meese and
Sporkin to discuss the structure of the proposed arms sales.  Meese approved the sale under the
Economy Act and the National Security Act without notice to Congress prior to completion of
the transactions.

     The next day, Poindexter gave President Reagan a revised Finding authorizing the use of third
parties to  transfer the weapons.  Vice President Bush, Regan and Fortier were present.  President
Reagan signed the Finding under the impression that it was essentially the same as the Israeli
plan he discussed on January 7.

     The February 1986 TOW Shipments

     A series of organizational meetings followed the signing of the January 17 Finding.  On
January 20, Poindexter convened a meeting in the White House Situation Room to discuss the
next steps and to introduce Secord to the senior officials of the CIA with whom he would be
dealing.  Poindexter, North, Secord, George, Sporkin, Deputy Chief of the CIA's Near Eastern
Division Thomas Twetten and NSC Counsel Paul Thompson attended this meeting.  The group
discussed what the CIA's role would be under the Finding, and, to some extent, what Secord's
role would entail.  Poindexter designated North as the NSC's operational contact.  George
designated Twetten as North's counterpart at the CIA.

     North traveled to London for a meeting on January 22, 1986, with Ghorbanifar, Nir and
Secord to discuss the timing and structure of the transaction.  The topics included weapons
prices, delivery schedules, and the  sequential shipments of arms for the release of American
hostages.  North returned to Washington and met on January 23 with Twetten, Koch, Secord and
Allen to analyze the steps to prepare for the intra-governmental weapons sales from DoD to the
CIA.  They also discussed the logistics of transferring weapons from DoD inventories to Iran via
Secord.

     One day later, on January 24, 1986, North sent Poindexter a memorandum titled ``Notional
Time Line for Operation Recovery.''  The document laid out in detail the anticipated sequence of
events, culminating in the release of the American hostages.  North sent a copy of the time line to
Clair George.  The next day, January 25, 1986, North met at CIA Headquarters with Gates,
McMahon, George, Twetten and Allen.  The group reviewed the time line and discussed
providing Iran with samples of intelligence regarding Iraq.

     In the days following, Twetten and other CIA officers worked closely with the U.S. Army to
plan and coordinate the details of the arms shipments.  Preparations continued, but when North,
Twetten, Secord and Nir traveled to London on February 6, 1986, to finalize plans for  the first
weapons shipment, Ghorbanifar was a no-show.  No meeting took place.

     Nevertheless, the first shipment of 500 TOW missiles was delivered to Iran on February 18,
1986.  The logistics for the transfer followed what would become a regular pattern.  Ghorbanifar
deposited funds, borrowed from Saudi businessman Adnan Khashoggi, into a Swiss bank
account controlled by Secord.  Secord transferred the price fixed by DoD to a CIA account.  The
CIA purchased the TOW missiles from the U.S. Army.  Secord then arranged for Southern Air
Transport, a Miami-based aircraft charter company, to ferry the missiles from the United States
to Israel.  An Israeli charter carried the weapons on the last leg to Iran.  The planes that took these
first 500 TOWs into Iran returned with 17 HAWKs rejected by Iran after the November 1985
shipment.  Apparently, the Iranians had test-fired one.

     After the 500 TOWs were delivered, North and other U.S. officials had their first face-to-face
meeting with Iranian officials.  This took place in Frankfurt, West Germany, on February 25,
1986.  The ostensible leader of the Iranian delegation was Kangarlu, a person described by
Ghorbanifar as a senior member of  Speaker of Parliament Rafsanjani's staff.  Ghorbanifar,
North, Nir, Twetten, Secord and Secord's business partner Albert Hakim were also present.

     North pushed Kangarlu for commitments on the release of hostages.  Kangarlu, on the other
hand, emphasized the additional types of weapons that Iran wanted from the United States.  The
meeting in Frankfurt ended with no significant agreements or plans.

     On the return flight to the United States, Twetten complained to North about Secord and
Hakim's role.  Twetten felt that an intelligence professional was needed.  North responded that he
trusted Secord, whom North said was working with him on his contra-resupply operations in
Central America.  Twetten protested that the intertwining of Secord in these two separate
operations was an even stronger reason to eliminate him from the Iran transactions.  Twetten
reported his concerns about Secord and Hakim to George.

     A few days later, on February 27, 1986, 500 additional TOWs were delivered to Iran.  The
delivery of 1,000 TOWs was followed by silence.  No hostages were released.

     The Diversion

     North's disclosure to Twetten that Secord and Hakim were helping North in his Central
American activities understated the extent to which the NSC's Iran and contra operations were
overlapping.  In late November 1985, the North/Secord Enterprise found that it had $800,000 left
over from the initial $1 million deposited by Israel with the Enterprise to facilitate the abortive
November 1985 series of HAWK missile shipments.  North told Secord that the Enterprise could
keep the money and apply it to the Enterprise's contra-resupply operation.  Although no
U.S.-generated proceeds were involved, the principle of an Iran/contra ``diversion'' was now in
place.

     The NSC's Iran operations provided North with the elements essential for implementing a
diversion scheme with Secord.  In his January 1986 meetings with Ghorbanifar, North learned
that the Iranians were willing to pay $10,000 a piece for TOW missiles.  North structured what
became the February 1986 TOW transactions so as to have the funds from Iran pass into an
Enterprise account before payments were made to the CIA.  North then succeeded in negotiating
a price of $3,700 per TOW from the DoD -- never disclosing the true  spread between that price
and the price that the Iranians would pay.

     The February 1986 TOW shipments netted the Enterprise millions of dollars.  North realized
that the Iranian arms sales were the ideal covert fund-raiser.  By April 1986, North specified this
side benefit of the Iran arms sales to his superiors in a memorandum titled, ``Release of the
American Hostages in Beirut.'' A copy of this memorandum, later found in November 1986 by
Department of Justice attorneys, explained the details of the transaction and explicitly described
how proceeds from the Iran arms sales could be used to support the contras in Nicaragua.

     A Mission to Tehran

     Casey, North, Poindexter, George and Twetten met at the CIA on February 27, 1986, to assess
what had taken place in Frankfurt.  George and Twetten were skeptical of further negotiations,
but the others decided to press on.  In deference to the CIA professionals, it was agreed to include
in the operation George W. Cave, a retired CIA officer with expertise on Iran.  He was to serve as
an adviser and a reliable translator.  Cave replaced  Twetten as the CIA officer directly working
on the Iran arms sales.

     Cave traveled to Paris on March 7 with North and Twetten for another meeting with
Kangarlu.  Nir and Ghorbanifar were there as well.  Once again, the two sides had significantly
different agendas.  Kangarlu focused on weapons and intelligence on Iraq, North on hostages and
a broader political dialogue between the two countries.  Ghorbanifar brought to this Paris
meeting a listing of 240 HAWK missile spare parts that the Iranians desperately needed.  He
dangled an idea raised once before that an American delegation visit Iran.  Each side agreed to
work on the other's demands.

     Ghorbanifar grew concerned that, having put the United States and Kangarlu in direct contact,
he might be left out of the transactions.  He complained to Nir, who urged the United States to
involve Ghorbanifar.  To assuage Ghorbanifar's concerns, he was invited to Washington, D.C., in
early April 1986.  There, Ghorbanifar met with Cave, Allen, Twetten and North on April 3 and 4,
1986, to discuss arrangements for a trip to Iran by a U.S. delegation.  Ghorbanifar promised that
the hostages would be released  once the American party arrived in Tehran.  Poindexter selected
McFarlane as the leader of any U.S. delegation.

     Several international incidents, including the U.S. bombing of Libya, delayed the mission to
Tehran.  A U.S. Customs sting that had resulted in Ghorbanifar's arrest also set the plans back.
The sting hurt Ghorbanifar's finances, and since he had to arrange bridge financing for the arms
sales, they remained in suspense as the parties waited for Ghorbanifar to raise new capital.

     With no specific plans in place for a meeting in Iran, North, Cave, Nir and Ghorbanifar met
on May 6 and 7 in London to work out the final details.  Ghorbanifar promised that the U.S.
officials would meet with the most senior officials in the Iranian government.  On May 8, 1986,
Cave briefed senior CIA officials, including Casey and George, and CIA personnel prepared
logistical details.  President Reagan was briefed on the mission on the morning of May 12, 1986.

     On May 14 and 15, Ghorbanifar deposited a total of $15 million into Secord's Swiss account.
On May 22, 1986, North, in a memorandum to Poindexter, described in meticulous detail the
steps to take place.  All Americans  held hostage in Lebanon were to be freed within three days
of the Americans' arrival in Tehran.

     The American delegation was McFarlane, North, Cave and NSC staff officer Howard Teicher.
They traveled to Iran on aircraft arranged by Secord.  They delivered one pallet of HAWK spare
parts.  The rest were left in Israel pending the promised release of U.S. hostages.

     The U.S. party arrived in Tehran on May 25, 1986, accompanied by Nir and a CIA
communications specialist.  They waited for over an hour for Ghorbanifar and Kangarlu.
McFarlane, North, Cave, Nir and Teicher were then taken to the top floor of the former Tehran
Hilton Hotel.  Their plane was taken to another spot at the airfield for unloading.

     They remained in Tehran for approximately three and a half days of intermittent negotiations.
Little was accomplished.  The Iranians were in no position to arrange for the immediate release
of all American hostages.  They admitted they could only hope to facilitate the release of one or
two.  But even that had not been arranged.

     The Iranians demanded that all of the HAWK spare parts be delivered to Iran and demanded
additional weapons.  The Iranians urged extending the mission as they tried to encourage the
release of two hostages.  A plane from Israel loaded with additional spare parts departed for Iran
but was ordered to return in mid-flight to Israel, because no hostages were to be freed.  The
American party departed on the morning of May 28, 1986.  It was clear that Ghorbanifar had
made inconsistent and untenable promises to both sides.

     During the return trip while changing planes at Tel Aviv airport, North, to diminish the
humiliation, told McFarlane that some of the arms sales proceeds were going to the contras.
McFarlane thought to himself, ``Oh, shit.''

     The Pricing Dispute

     McFarlane briefed President Reagan, Vice President Bush, Poindexter and Regan about the
Tehran mission on May 29, 1986.  He did not reveal the diversion.  There was no decision to end
the arms sales, despite the disappointing results in Tehran.  While U.S. officials waited to see
what would happen, things got worse.  Kangarlu called Cave on approximately June 23, 1986,
and informed him that the Iranians had obtained a DoD pricing list  reflecting prices for HAWK
spare parts.  The Iranians determined that they had paid up to six times the list price for the
TOWs and HAWK spare parts they had received.  Cave alerted North and Allen.  Cave continued
conversations with Kangarlu during June and July.  North blamed Ghorbanifar.

     CIA officials suspected that North had been padding the weapons prices for some time.  At a
meeting in Twetten's office in late April of 1986 to discuss the prices of the HAWK spare parts,
North had told Cave and Twetten that he would have to add in his ``mark up'' to DoD's prices
when determining the price Iran was to pay.  At that time, Cave assumed that the ``mark up'' was
intended to cover Secord's shipping and handling costs.  The news from Kangarlu left both Cave
and Allen puzzled.

     The pricing impasse continued into July.  North refused to talk with Nir until more hostages
were released.  Ghorbanifar was in agony because he had paid Secord in advance for the
undelivered spare parts and the Iranians would not reimburse  him.  Khashoggi and his associates
who had loaned the purchase price to Ghorbanifar were not fully paid.

     On July 24, 1986, American hostage Father Lawrence Jenco was released by his captors.  Two
days later, North, Nir, Cave and Ghorbanifar met in Frankfurt to discuss what would happen
next.  Nir and Ghorbanifar urged the United States to send Iran the undelivered HAWK spare
parts.  Ghorbanifar and Kangarlu said that they and an American hostage would be killed if Iran
received nothing in return for the Jenco release.

     On July 29, 1986, in the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, Nir briefed Vice President Bush on
the status of the Iran arms sales.  Vice President Bush and his chief of staff, Craig Fuller,
described the briefing first as a discussion of counter-terrorism and later as a general review of
the hostage-rescue proposals, without mention of an Iran/contra diversion.  Vice President Bush
discussed the meeting with North on his return.

     That same day, North relayed Ghorbanifar's warning to Poindexter in a memorandum titled
``Next Steps on the American Hostages.''  North sought permission to send Iran the remaining
HAWK spare parts.  President Reagan  approved North's request the next day.  Secord arranged
the delivery for August 3 and 4, 1986.

     The Second Channel

     At this point, U.S. officials began moving through two different channels to continue the Iran
arms sales.  North met in London with Nir and Ghorbanifar on August 8, 1986.  Ghorbanifar
presented a seven-step plan for the sequential exchange of additional TOW missiles for the
remaining U.S. hostages.  At about the same time, through a contact in London, Hakim learned
that a nephew of Rafsanjani's was interested in establishing contacts with the United States.  This
led to a meeting in Brussels on approximately August 25, 1986, between Secord and ``the
Nephew.''  North continued to advocate the use of Ghorbanifar, but Poindexter decided on the
Nephew and his contacts, who became known as ``the Second Channel.''

     American Frank Reed was taken hostage in Beirut on September 9, 1986.  The next day,
Poindexter told North to pursue the Second Channel and avoid Ghorbanifar if possible.  Two
days later, on September 12, 1986, Joseph Cicippio was taken hostage in Beirut.  Thus, after a
full  year of working with Ghorbanifar on the Iran arms sales, and after repeated shipments of
TOWs, HAWKs and HAWK spare parts, the score seemed to be two hostages released (Weir and
Jenco) and two new hostages taken (Reed and Cicippio).

     The Nephew came to Washington on September 19 and 20, 1986.  He engaged in protracted
meetings with North, Cave and Secord.  They developed a seven-step plan involving sequential
arms deliveries and hostage releases.  North sent minutes of the meetings to Poindexter and
George.  Four days later, Poindexter met with Casey, George, North and Cave. All agreed that
the Second Channel should be pursued.

     Ghorbanifar repeatedly complained about his financial losses.  Nir warned North in early
September that Ghorbanifar's money problems, and his anger over being cut out of future deals,
jeopardized the operational security of the Iran arms sales.

     By October 2, U.S. efforts were being conducted through the Second Channel.  Nir had been
excluded.  North, Secord, Cave and Hakim met with the Second Channel in Frankfurt on October
6-8, 1986.  North presented his seven-point plan, but he and Secord left the meeting  after
learning of the Hasenfus crash in Nicaragua.  Hakim continued the negotiations and worked out a
nine-point proposal that went beyond the plan advanced by North.  It included interceding with
Kuwait to release Da'wa terrorist prisoners, a position wholly contrary to that stated by President
Reagan and Shultz.

     By October, the story of the diversion to the contras of proceeds from the arms sales had
leaked from North to Fiers and to George, and from Allen to Deputy Director for Intelligence
Richard Kerr, Gates and Casey.  Casey was told by Roy Furmark, a former business contact, that
certain Canadian financiers who had lent funds to Ghorbanifar were unpaid and were threatening
public disclosure -- including Ghorbanifar's claim that significant funds had been diverted from
arms sales proceeds to support the contras.  Casey and Gates urged Poindexter to consult White
House counsel.  He said he preferred to discuss it with Paul Thompson, NSC counsel.

     North continued to pursue the Second Channel.  On October 28, 1986, 500 U.S. TOW
missiles that had been sent to Israel in May were delivered to Iran.  The United States sent
replacement TOWs of a more recent vintage to Israel on November 7 and 8, 1986.

     North, Cave, Secord and Hakim met with the Nephew in Mainz, West Germany, on October
29 and 30, 1986.  Three days later, on November 2, 1986, hostage David Jacobsen was released.

     Exposure and Cover-Up

     On November 3, 1986, an article describing McFarlane's trip to Tehran appeared in Al-Shiraa,
a Lebanese publication.  Rafsanjani acknowledged the McFarlane visit the following day.  On
approximately November 8, North, Cave, Secord and Hakim had a final meeting with the
Nephew, agreeing to put things on hold in view of the growing publicity.

     The arms sales became the top news story of the day.  Within the Administration, officials at
the NSC and the CIA scrambled to put together an account of what had taken place.  The
President's most senior advisers and Cabinet officers met on November 10, 1986, to develop
their strategy.  Those who had opposed the sales all along, particularly Shultz, saw in the
exposure of the arms sales exactly what they had predicted:  a policy disaster.  All the President's
advisers  could agree on was to say nothing, or as little as possible.44

     44 Full discussions of these and other events in November 1986 are found in the North,
Poindexter, Meese, Regan, State Department, Defense Department and CIA officials in
November 1986 chapters.

     The White House released a press statement later that afternoon.  While not confirming or
denying the arms sales, the statement asserted that ``no U.S. laws have been or will be violated
and . . . our policy of not making concessions to terrorists remains intact.''  Some of the
President's advisers, including White House Counsel Peter Wallison, were not as confident that
laws had not been broken, particularly with respect to the 1985 arms sales.  The Reagan
Administration sidestepped the issue in briefings of congressional leaders two days later by
denying involvement in any transfers before January 1986.

     By the weekend of November 15-16, 1986, both congressional intelligence committees had
called for briefings on the arms sales by Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger, CIA Director Casey,
and National Security Adviser Poindexter.  The efforts to prepare for these briefings exacerbated
the tensions within the national security community over the arms sales.  Shultz publicly  stated
that he was against further sales, but added that he could not speak for the Administration.
Weinberger adopted a posture of continuing but silent opposition to the sales and firm support
for the President.  The CIA bureaucracy was scrambling to find out who had done what in the
initiative, an effort that uncovered facts that proved embarrassing to the NSC and the CIA about
the November 1985 HAWK shipment.  North unsuccessfully tried to deny that it was he who
drew the CIA into its support of the HAWK shipment.

     As the congressional briefings -- set for November 21, 1986 -- approached, Shultz and his
advisers suspected that the CIA and NSC were trying to hide the facts surrounding the
Government's activities in 1985, prior to the January 17, 1986, Finding which provided a legal
basis for the arms sales.  Shultz approached the President on November 19 and 20, 1986, in an
attempt to persuade him to transfer the continuing responsibility for Iran policy back to State.
Shultz pointed out mistakes in the President's public statements.  President Reagan
acknowledged that he had known of the November 1985 HAWKs shipment but insisted that it
was not an arms-for-hostages swap.

     By November 20, the Administration had agreed that Casey would brief the intelligence
committees on Capitol  Hill, while Poindexter would brief selected members at the White House.
That afternoon, Meese and Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper, Casey, Gates,
Poindexter, Thompson and North met in Poindexter's office to discuss Casey's testimony.  Legal
issues involving the 1985 shipments dominated the discussion.  Casey had brought a draft
statement that read:  ``We in the CIA did not find out that our airline had hauled HAWK missiles
into Iran until mid-January [1986] when we were told by the Iranians.''   This statement
conflicted with what Casey and other CIA personnel had known in 1985 about the shipment.
Nevertheless, North revised the statement to read:  ``No one in the USG,'' or U.S. Government,
knew before January 1986 that weapons had been shipped.

     Actions taken by State Department Legal Adviser Abraham Sofaer ultimately resulted in the
deletion of this specific misstatement from Casey's prepared testimony.

     Casey and Poindexter's presentations the next day were incorrect, misleading, and at times
criminally false.  Poindexter lied about U.S. involvement in and knowledge of the 1985
shipments.  Casey meanwhile claimed that he did not learn of the cargo of the November 1985
HAWK shipment until January 1986, but he conceded that others in  the CIA could have known
earlier.  Casey also gave misleading testimony about the flow of funds in the arms sales, the
extent of presidential approval for them, and his knowledge of who in the NSC was running the
Iran operation.

     While Casey and Poindexter were giving their accounts of the initiative, Meese -- who was
aware of the conflicting statements and was having increasing concerns about the lawfulness of
the 1985 activities -- met with the President and told him that it was ``absolutely necessary'' that
someone develop a coherent overview of the matter.  The President agreed and directed Meese to
report his findings at a meeting of senior advisers set for Monday, November 24, 1986.

     Meese gathered his team around mid-day on November 21, 1986.  He then called Poindexter
to tell him he wanted to get all relevant documents from the NSC.  Following Meese's call,
Poindexter had Thompson gather the documents, including the only known signed copy of the
December 1985 ``retroactive'' Finding that clearly stated that the HAWK shipment was an
arms-for-hostages deal.  With Thompson and North present, Poindexter destroyed the Finding.
He said he feared that it would be a political embarrassment.

     Document destruction at the NSC did not stop with Poindexter.  North returned to his offices
in the early evening of November 21 and shredded stacks of memoranda and messages.
Meanwhile, Meese's staff had begun reviewing pertinent intelligence and interviewing witnesses.
Meese himself handled the President's most senior advisers.  Meeting with Meese on the morning
of November 22, 1986, Shultz told him that the President had acknowledged only two days
earlier knowing about the November 1985 HAWK shipment.

     While Meese was conducting interviews, two Justice attorneys were at the NSC reviewing
documents.  They discovered one that North had not shredded:  a copy of his April 1986
memorandum that explained the diversion.  Meese was told of the memorandum during lunch on
November 22.  His inquiry continued, culminating in the questioning of North on November 23,
1986.  North lied about his knowledge of the cargo of the November 1985 HAWK shipment,
claiming as he had in the November 20 meeting that he thought at the time that the cargo was
oil-drilling equipment.  He also denied knowing about any retroactive Finding that covered the
shipment, although he suggested that ``someone ought to step up and say it was authorized.''
Meese then confronted  North with the diversion memorandum.  A shaken North admitted that
the diversion had occurred but attributed it to the Israelis.

     On November 24, 1986, Meese privately reported the diversion to President Reagan, Vice
President Bush, and Regan, and questioned McFarlane and Poindexter about it. Meese reported
his findings, other than the diversion, to a meeting of President Reagan and his senior advisers,
including Vice President Bush, Shultz, Weinberger, Casey, Regan and Poindexter on the
afternoon of November 24.  Meese reviewed the 1985 activities and asserted that the 1985 arms
shipments could have been illegal.  Meese reported further that, contrary to what Shultz had told
him, the President did not know in November 1985 that arms were being shipped to Iran.
Virtually everyone at the meeting knew better, but no one corrected the Attorney General.

     On the morning of November 25, 1986, Meese disclosed the diversion to the full Cabinet and
Congressional leaders. At noon, President Reagan and Meese announced at a nationally televised
press conference that proceeds from the Iran arms sales had been diverted to support the contras,
and that Poindexter had resigned and North had been reassigned to the U.S. Marines.

Part II

History of the Investigation

     The Initial Investigation, 1986-1988

     The criminal investigation into the Iran/contra matters was begun on November 26, 1986, by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation at the order of the attorney general.  Agents assigned to the
investigation, which the FBI called ``Operation Front Door,'' secured and began analyzing
thousands of documents in National Security Council offices.  They conducted preliminary
interviews with officials from the White House; Justice, State and Defense departments; Central
Intelligence Agency and National Security Agency.  The FBI investigation focused on the Iran
arms sales and the Iran/contra diversion -- in contrast to the broader probe subsequently
undertaken by Independent Counsel, which included the investigation of aid to the Nicaraguan
contra rebels.

     After Independent Counsel was appointed on December 19, 1986, FBI Director William H.
Webster assigned members of the bureau's investigative team to the Office of Independent
Counsel (OIC).

     Investigations by other bodies into Iran/contra were proceeding rapidly by December 1986.
The President had appointed a special review board, known as the ``Tower Commission,'' to
study the role and procedures of the National Security Council staff.1  The House and Senate
intelligence and foreign affairs  committees were conducting their own inquiries into the matter,
and, by the time Independent Counsel was appointed, both houses of Congress had agreed to
appoint special committees to investigate.2

     1 The Tower Commission's members were former Senators John Tower and Edmund Muskie
and former National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft.  Scowcroft became President Bush's
national security adviser in 1989 and held that post throughout Bush's presidency.

     2 The Senate Select Committee on Secret Miliary Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan
Opposition was formally established by Senate Resolution 23 on January 6, 1987, and the House
Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms Transactions with Iran was established by House
Resolution 12 on January 7, 1987.

     The initial outlines of Iran/contra emerged through interviews conducted by Attorney General
Edwin Meese III in his November 21-25, 1986, investigation.  Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, a
National Security Council staff member, confirmed to Meese that, in fact, there had been a
diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to the Nicaraguan contras.  National Security Adviser John
M. Poindexter admitted a general awareness of this fact.

     President Reagan, Vice President Bush and Cabinet members had publicly denied any
awareness of the Iran/contra diversion.  These denials, however, did not address broader
questions about the extent of their knowledge and approval of the other Iran and contra
operations of North, Poindexter and others.

     Additional elements of the secret Iran and contra operations became known through
aggressive investigative reporting by the media, including the fact that North and others had
destroyed  reams of sensitive documents as the Attorney General conducted his initial
investigation.  Senior Reagan Administration officials made statements to the press and to the
early congressional investigations about their own knowledge of or roles in Iran/contra, adding to
a growing body of facts and, in some cases, falsehoods.

     By the end of December 1986, congressional testimony had been given by McFarlane,
Director of Central Intelligence William J. Casey,3 Meese, Secretary of State George P. Shultz,
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan and
others.

     3 After the public exposure of the Iran/contra diversion on November 25, 1986, Casey gave
testimony to several congressional committees.  He was hospitalized with a fatal brain tumor in
early December 1986 and died before giving further testimony or being questioned by the Office
of Independent Counsel.

     Despite the seeming gusher of information from a variety of sources, by early January 1987
the most central Iran/contra operatives had refused to testify, invoking their Fifth Amendment
privilege against self-incrimination.  This group included Poindexter, North, North's secretary
Fawn Hall, retired Air Force Maj. General Richard V. Secord and his business partner Albert
Hakim.  Others would follow this course as the investigation reached them.

     It was clear there would be few, if any, friendly witnesses available to Independent Counsel's
investigation.  It also was clear that although a general outline of what happened  would be
quickly known, the development of solid proof, immune to impeachment, would be developed
only after the analysis of thousands of documents and by the carefully structured questioning and
immunization of subordinate figures.

     Independent Counsel viewed his mandate as a charge to determine who had committed
crimes, and how high up the true responsibility for those crimes went.  In prosecuting the central
operatives in the Iran/contra matter -- namely North and Poindexter -- Independent Counsel
hoped the question of higher complicity could be resolved.

     Office Organization and Investigative Plan

     In December 1986, in what proved to be a serious underestimate, Independent Counsel
decided to recruit a full-time staff of 10 associate counsel, supplemented by part-time senior
lawyers.  Because some of the lawyers could not move to Washington, Independent Counsel
organized a three-city operation:  the central investigation in Washington, a legal research and
analytical office in New York City, and a small office in Oklahoma City for Independent
Counsel's use of classified information when he was not in Washington.

     The Washington office temporarily occupied two vacant chambers of the U.S. Courthouse,
with additional space in the basement of the FBI building.  By late February 1987, the General
Services Administration had leased space at 555 Thirteenth Street, N.W., in downtown
Washington, while the building was  still under construction and offices could be built to comply
with specifications required for the use and storage of highly classified information.

     It was decided that the Office of Independent Counsel would investigate broadly.  It would
resist seeking a quick indictment on some fragment of the facts unless that type of prosecution
could produce quickly a witness useful in exposing the criminal activities central to OIC's
responsibility.  The office had a reasonably optimistic expectation that it could make
prosecutorial decisions on major indictments by early fall 1987.

     The Justice Department in late December 1986 presented 36 pending investigative matters
from around the country that arguably fell within OIC's broad jurisdiction.  Independent Counsel
accepted only those that held a significant possibility of misconduct by Government officers.

     Following the pattern set by the initial FBI probe, OIC divided its investigative work among
several teams, including: the White House/National Security Council/Justice Department team,
which would question officials and review documents from those entities; the CIA/State
Department team; and the flow-of-funds/Defense Department team, which was responsible for
negotiating with Switzerland, Israel and other foreign countries through which the funds passed
and for investigating the Pentagon.

     As the investigation progressed and the prosecutable cases became more apparent, the
make-up and focus of the teams  changed.  Also, because many Iran/contra matters overlapped
across several areas of team work, investigative boundaries were not rigid.

     With the expectation that Congress would grant immunity to central figures likely to be
prosecuted by this office, Independent Counsel moved quickly to interview witnesses and review
hundreds of thousands of documents from key agencies.  In addition to the FBI agents already
detailed to OIC, agents from the Customs Bureau and Internal Revenue Service were temporarily
assigned to Independent Counsel with the goal of building criminal cases as quickly as possible.

     On January 28, 1987, the first federal Grand Jury that would hear evidence on Iran-contra
matters was convened in the District of Columbia.4

     4 The first Grand Jury sat for 24 months, expiring January 27, 1989.  A second Grand Jury
was convened in the District of Columbia on May 15, 1990 and sat until May 15, 1992.  Chief
Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., granted Independent Counsel's requests for the extension of both
grand juries for six months beyond the normal 18-month period because of the complex nature of
the evidence being presented.  In addition, Iran-contra evidence was heard by grand juries sitting
in the Eastern District of Virginia in Alexandria (resulting in the Fernandez indictment) in
Baltimore, Md. (resulting in the Clines indictment), and later in the District of Columbia
(resulting in the Weinberger indictment).

     Liaison With Other Agencies

     Because the Iran/contra matter spanned several Executive agencies, and because other
investigations were underway, it was necessary for Independent Counsel to establish liaison
procedures with the White House; Congress; the  departments of Justice, State and Defense; the
Central Intelligence Agency; and the National Security Agency.  Typically, a team of lawyers in
each agency was appointed to work with Independent Counsel.  The agency teams oversaw
document production and requests for witness interviews and other information from OIC.

     Liaison with Congress and the White House was of highest importance during the early
phases of the investigation.

     Weekly meetings were held with representatives of the Select Iran/contra Committees before
central figures gave their immunized testimony.  Although OIC's concerns over the immunity
issue dominated these discussions, Independent Counsel and committee representatives had
mutual fact-gathering concerns.  OIC was precluded by grand jury secrecy rules from sharing
certain information with the Committees, but it could sometimes provide the Committees with
documents and evidence gathered outside the grand jury process.

     OIC had nearly daily contact with the White House.  Independent Counsel had requested all
relevant documents from the offices of the President and Vice President, from the NSC, from
White House staff members, and from administrative offices.  It was necessary to gain an
understanding and conduct searches of White House computer systems.  Finally, OIC had to
make arrangements with White House officials to review President  Reagan's diary and
ultimately to obtain his testimony and the testimony of Vice President Bush.5

     5 See Reagan and Bush chapters.

     President Reagan in December 1986 appointed former Ambassador David M. Abshire to
coordinate responses to the Iran/contra investigations of Independent Counsel, Congress and the
Tower Commission.  Abshire served in the post through March 1987, when his duties were
assumed by White House Counsel A.B. Culvahouse.

     Early Document Production

     The Office of Independent Counsel spent January and February 1987 heavily engaged in
obtaining and reviewing documents.  This work continued through the fall of 1987, when certain
Executive agencies were still responding to OIC document requests.6

     6 CIA response to the February 1987 document request continued into February 1988.
Production alternated between withholding and flooding with key documents not produced until
after months of delay.

     The Department of Justice had issued an initial request for relevant documents to each agency
in late November 1986, but its focus was more narrow than the area Independent Counsel was
subsequently appointed to investigate.  OIC made expanded document requests based on its
broad mandate.

     The documents requested by the OIC included handwritten and typed notes, computer records
and disks, diaries, appointment  calendars and schedules, tapes and films, phone logs,
correspondence, memos, messages, reports, studies, minutes, transcripts, work papers, agendas,
announcements, computer notes and messages, telegrams, teletypes, bank records and other
records.  Independent Counsel sought all materials relevant to Iran/contra from each Executive
agency; its request to the White House, which included the NSC, was the most expansive.  From
the White House, OIC sought the production of any materials pertaining to (1) the sale or
shipment of arms to Iran, and contacts with nine listed Iranians; (2) the sale or shipment of arms
to Iran, using but not limited to any of 26 listed intermediaries; (3) the diversion of proceeds
from the Iranian arms sales to the Nicaraguan contras or insurgents elsewhere, involving but not
limited to 25 listed individuals and business concerns; (4) the provision of support to the
Nicaraguan contras, including possible contacts with 71 listed individuals and organizations; (5)
meetings of 17 listed Administration working groups; (6) the calendars, schedules, phone logs
and travel records of 34 listed White House and other officials; (7) computer messages generated
or received by 35 White House staff members; and a variety of more specific items.

     It was impossible for Independent Counsel to determine early in the investigation whether the
agencies were complying in good faith with the document requests.  As in other complex
investigations, what was missing often became obvious only after a thorough review of what had
been received.

     Some early document production problems, however, were apparent.  The CIA, for example,
held back document production until late February 1987 -- only after Independent Counsel
suggested that subpoenas might have to be issued to force compliance.7  At the White House,
certain documents deemed relevant by FBI agents were subsequently reviewed and deemed
irrelevant by White House counsel; the issue took several months for OIC to finally resolve in its
favor.  Production from the National Security Agency was uneven.8  Certain individuals
throughout the Administration had relevant personal notes that were produced either late or in
incomplete form, or both; in some cases, individuals falsely claimed not to have any notes at all.9

     7 Independent Counsel decided to avoid initially issuing subpoenas for Executive branch
documents for several reasons:  (1) subpoenas enforceable by the court may require greater
specificity than document requests; (2) subpoena litigation would consume time that the office
could not afford as it worked quickly to outpace the congressional grants of immunity to key
individuals; and (3) subpoenas could be used as a last resort, when all else failed.  In the later
phases of OIC's investigation, when greater specificity was possible and when the congressional
hearings were concluded, subpoenas were used when necessary.

     8 See Classified Appendix.

     9 It was not until 1990 that OIC's continuing investigation began discovering the extent to
which personal notes were withheld from Independent Counsel.

     Although Independent Counsel was able to recover hundreds of thousands of relevant
materials, the disturbing fact remained that some of the most important documents almost
certainly were destroyed in October and November 1986, as the Iran and contra operations
became publicly exposed.

     Witnesses Begin To Tell the Story

     The individuals most directly involved in the Iran and contra operations -- North, Poindexter,
Secord and Hakim -- by early 1987 had all refused to testify, invoking their Fifth Amendment
protection against self-incrimination.  Joseph F. Fernandez, the CIA station chief in Costa Rica
who assisted North in supplying the contras, refused to talk, as did Thomas G. Clines, a former
CIA officer who worked with Secord and Hakim in the ``Enterprise'' that supported the Iran and
contra covert operations.

     McFarlane was an exception.  He testified before Congress and the Grand Jury voluntarily.
But McFarlane was not involved in implementing the Iran/contra diversion or many of the
activities in question in 1986, after he resigned as national security adviser.  Also, McFarlane was
misleading in many of his early interviews with Independent Counsel; it was only after he
entered into plea negotiations that he offered more complete testimony.

     It was clear from the beginning that Independent Counsel would have to question President
Reagan and Vice President Bush at some point.  Unlike other witnesses, neither person could be
repeatedly called to testify, especially in the absence of incriminating evidence.  Additionally,
Vice President  Bush had answered questions by the FBI in an early interview before Independent
Counsel's appointment, and both had been questioned by the Tower Commission.  Independent
Counsel decided to wait until the investigation had matured before approaching President Reagan
and Vice President Bush.  Ultimately, the President answered written interrogatories for the
Grand Jury in the fall of 1987, gave a deposition for the defense in the Poindexter trial early in
1990, and answered a final round of questions in an interview with Independent Counsel in the
summer of 1992.  Bush gave a videotaped deposition for the Grand Jury early in 1988 but
arrangements for a final interview in 1992 and 1993 were brought to an impasse by his insistence
that the questioning be very limited in scope.

     Senior Administration officials who continued in Government service typically testified
without seeking grants of immunity from Congress or Independent Counsel.  Additionally, most
support staff who remained in the Government after the Iran/contra affair was exposed answered
questions voluntarily.

     Cabinet officers and presidential advisers generally professed little knowledge of the Iran and
contra activities.  Attorney General Meese, White House Chief of Staff Regan, Secretary of State
Shultz and others admitted to greater or more specific knowledge only after repeated questioning
by Independent Counsel and when confronted with evidence contradicting their earlier
statements.

     Some of the most significant witnesses were those who came in frequent contact with North
and Poindexter, either as associates or subordinates, and who were potentially indictable. Most of
these individuals requested immunity from prosecution in exchange for their testimony against
others more central to Iran/contra matters.

     A witness refusing to testify may be given immunity at the request of the prosecutor.
Customarily, the witness first makes a proffer -- or detailed outline -- of the facts he or she will
testify to in court in order to obtain immunity.  Independent Counsel almost always conditioned
grants of immunity on a witness's willingness to make a proffer.

     One of the earliest witnesses to make a proffer was Fawn Hall, who had been North's
secretary on the National Security Council staff.  Like McFarlane, Hall was a difficult witness
who provided information only after a series of interviews.  Although Hall testified against North
reluctantly, she provided valuable evidence of his destruction and alteration of official documents
in November 1986, and about his extensive contacts and activities on behalf of the Nicaraguan
contras.  Hall testified that, with North's knowledge, she smuggled classified documents out of
the White House on November 25, 1986.

     Hall also told Independent Counsel that North kept detailed notebooks of his daily activities
and that she had seen  them in his counsel's office after the Iran-contra affair was exposed.  Hall's
revelation caused Independent Counsel to launch a lengthy effort to subpoena the notebooks,
whose potential evidentiary value was clear.10

     10 North's notebooks could not be obtained by OIC until North took the witness stand in his
trial in April 1989.  The trial court ruled that North had waived his right against
self-incrimination by deciding to testify in his own defense, and therefore copies of the
notebooks would be produced to Independent Counsel.

     Robert L. Earl, one of North's closest co-workers at the NSC, was granted immunity in
exchange for testimony about North's destruction of documents in November 1986.  Earl also
described a conversation he had with North and an associate Craig Coy, on November 25, 1986.
According to Earl, North told them that President Reagan had called him to express his regret at
North's firing and said that the President told North that it was important that Reagan ``not
know.''  Earl inferred from this statement that North had been cast in the scapegoat's role with the
President's knowledge.11

     11 Earl, Grand Jury, 5/1/87, pp. 118-19. See Earl chapter.

     Dozens of NSC and White House officials were interviewed and re-interviewed.  Some could
provide only fragments of information about North and Poindexter's activities.  Some potentially
more significant witnesses, such as former NSC counsel Paul B. Thompson, made themselves
available for  questioning on numerous occasions but were never fully forthcoming in their
answers.

     One of the earliest areas of investigation to bear fruit exposed North's fund-raising activities
with Carl R. ``Spitz'' Channell and Richard R. Miller.  Under the auspices of a tax-exempt
organization, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL), contributions
were solicited to buy weapons for the contras.  Wealthy contributors, some of whom were given
immunity, testified that North had described the weapons needs of the contras in soliciting their
donations, providing clear evidence that NEPL was using tax-exempt privileges for illegal
purposes.  This investigation resulted in Channell and Miller pleading guilty in the spring of
1987 on tax-fraud conspiracy charges, with each naming North as a co-conspirator.12  As part of
their plea agreements, Channell and Miller cooperated with Independent Counsel and provided
extensive evidence against North.

     12 See Channell and Miller chapter.  North was charged in March 1988 with conspiracy to
commit tax fraud but was acquitted of the charge.

     Another area of early concern was North's contra-resupply operation in Central America,
which was ostensibly financed and carried out by a ``private benefactor'' organization
sympathetic to the contra cause, but which, in fact, was run by Secord under North's control.
U.S. Government involvement in this operation defied the ban on military aid to  the contras
imposed from October 1984 to October 1986 by the Boland Amendment.

     Members of the Administration's Restricted Inter-Agency Group (RIG) on Nicaragua were
questioned about North's contra-support activities.  The testimony of Assistant Secretary of State
Elliott Abrams and CIA Central American Task Force Chief Alan D. Fiers, Jr. -- neither of whom
received immunity from prosecution -- was proven later to be untruthful.

     Robert W. Owen was immunized and gave detailed testimony about his role as North's private
liaison to the Nicaraguan contras.  He described carrying secret military information and large
amounts of cash and traveler's checks to contra leaders on North's behalf.

     Richard B. Gadd and Robert C. Dutton -- the men who were employed by Secord to run the
contra-resupply operation in Central America -- were granted immunity and testified extensively
about the organization's activities and finances.13  Rafael Quintero, Secord's Central American
representative, also was granted immunity in exchange for testimony about the weapons and
other lethal assistance provided to the contras.

     13 Dutton also provided details of the final Iran arms shipments.

     The contra leaders whom North assisted were questioned.  Adolfo Calero, who resisted
testifying until late March 1987, described North's contra-support activities in highly sympathetic
terms.  His testimony, however, exposed  North's violations of the Boland Amendment.  Many
other contra figures also were interviewed, providing an increasingly explicit picture of Reagan
Administration efforts to provide military support.

     U.S. ambassadors to Central America were interviewed about their knowledge of the
contra-resupply operation.  Some, such as former Ambassador to El Salvador Edwin G. Corr,
falsely denied details of their knowledge.  Others testified more forthrightly; for example, the
former ambassador to Costa Rica, Lewis A. Tambs, testified candidly about his participation in
opening a ``southern front'' of contra fighters.

     Testimony about North's contra-aid activities, as well as documentary proof that he reported
many of these activities to both Poindexter and McFarlane, showed that they and North had
obstructed congressional inquiries about contra assistance in 1985 and 1986.

     In investigative terms, much of the information on the Iran arms sale initiative in 1986 was
laid out in documents.  The record was less clear, however, on the 1985 shipments in which
Israel was involved.  Independent Counsel was effectively blocked from interviewing Israeli
nationals by the government of Israel, although OIC attempted to subpoena them on visits to the
United States.14

     14 In February 1987, the Israeli government made an agreement with the Select Iran/contra
Committees to supply written historical and financial chronologies in lieu of live testimony.
Independent Counsel, who was not aware of this agreement until after the fact, informed the
Israelis that he was not a party to the agreement and reserved the right to issue subpoenas and to
take other action as OIC saw fit.

     OIC in May 1987 subpoenaed the former director general of the Israeli Foreign Ministry,
David Kimche, who had proposed the Iran arms initiative to Administration officials in the
summer of 1985.  The subpoena was served during a visit by Kimche to the United States.  At the
request of the State Department and in accordance with lengthy negotiations with the Israelis,
Independent Counsel eventually agreed to withdraw the subpoena and accept a commitment by
the Israelis to supply OIC with chronologies, historical and financial, and with additional
information.

     The chronologies, although highly useful in certain respects, were not a true substitute for live
witness testimony.

     McFarlane provided testimony about the 1985 Iran arms shipments, but it was in doubt
because of conflicting testimony given by other senior Administration officials.  Michael Ledeen,
a former NSC consultant who helped set up the Iran arms sales in the summer of 1985, was
questioned.  Duane R. ``Dewey'' Clarridge, the CIA officer whom North enlisted in a November
1985 shipment of U.S. HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran, testified untruthfully about the
shipment.

     After questioning CIA and State Department officials, it became clear that testimony
delivered by Poindexter and Casey in November and December 1986 was false regarding their
knowledge of the 1985 arms shipments, particularly the November 1985 HAWK shipment.

     Evidence about the Iran/contra diversion was extremely difficult to obtain.  Few witnesses
admitted to knowledge of it, although some were found later to be lying.  Proving that the
diversion had occurred, and understanding its mechanics, required access to the secret Swiss
financial records of the North-Secord-Hakim covert-operation Enterprise.  These records could
not be obtained until late in 1987, after lengthy negotiations with the Swiss government and
litigation with Hakim and Iranian businessman Manucher Ghorbanifar.

     By late April 1987, Secord decided to testify without immunity before Congress.  In the same
period, he received limited immunity from Independent Counsel, allowing him to be questioned
with the agreement that nothing he said to OIC could be used against him as direct evidence in a
criminal prosecution, unless he committed perjury.  This did not preclude Independent Counsel
from prosecuting him with evidence from other sources.

     Secord provided valuable information about both the Iran and contra operations, as well as
about the diversion.  He was not truthful about the extent of his personal financial interests in the
Enterprise.

     The flow-of-funds investigative team, while awaiting Swiss financial records, developed
extensive information about the money trail in documents from U.S. banks and from bank
accounts in countries other than Switzerland.  Also, Willard I. Zucker, who managed the Swiss
financial accounts of the North-Secord-Hakim Enterprise, proffered testimony in exchange for
immunity.  Zucker could not provide the Enterprise's Swiss bank records because he was not a
signatory on the accounts.  Until the records were released, under the Swiss secrecy laws, he
could not even be interviewed.  But, through his American lawyers, he did inform OIC of
Hakim's establishment of a fund for North's family, constituting an illegal gratuity to a
Government official.

     The Swiss Financial Records of the Enterprise

     At the heart of the covert Iran/contra Enterprise run by North, Secord and Hakim were its
financial records, protected in Switzerland by strict banking-secrecy laws.  Both Independent
Counsel and the Select Committees were vitally interested in obtaining these records, as was the
Tower Commission.

     To bring a criminal indictment incorporating the diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to the
contras, and to expose other financial corruption, the Swiss records were essential.

     The Department of Justice in December 1986 requested access to the Swiss records under the
Treaty for Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the United States and Switzerland.  It
would take a full year from the time of that  request before Independent Counsel received the
banking documents.

     The Select Committees sought the assistance of Independent Counsel in acquiring the Swiss
records, but they could not wait for the treaty process to play out.  Over the objections of
Independent Counsel, they granted immunity to Hakim to obtain financial documents.15  The
presidentially appointed Tower Commission also asked for Independent Counsel's help on the
Swiss records, but its reporting deadline was too early to obtain them.

     15 During the wait for the Swiss records, OIC considered immunizing Hakim, who as a
signatory on the bank accounts could have authorized their release.  It was decided, however, that
a possible Hakim prosecution should be pursued.  He was then believed to be the architect of the
financial schemes to conceal the Enterprise operations, cheat the contras and bribe North.  He
also refused to give a proffer of his probable testimony.

     It is noteworthy that the financial documents Hakim provided to Congress pursuant to his
immunity grant were partially fabricated to conceal the recipients of the profits.  This fact was
revealed in the 1990 trial of Clines.

     The Swiss Office for Police Matters on February 27, 1987, initially authorized the release of
the records to Independent Counsel.  Hakim and Ghorbanifar appealed the decision in two Swiss
courts.  By September 1987, both appeals were denied as frivolous.

     After Independent Counsel's request worked its way through a system weighted heavily in
favor of bank secrecy, the Swiss authorities on November 3, 1987, made available most of the
records requested.  The records contained the proof essential to a conspiracy indictment against
North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim and to charge the Iran/contra diversion as a crime.

     Early Challenge to Independent Counsel's Constitutionality and the Parallel Appointment

     On February 24, 1987, North challenged the Independent Counsel in a legal action, North v.
Walsh, to test the constitutionality of the Ethics in Government Act under which Independent
Counsel was appointed.  In a parallel action before another judge, former presidential aide
Michael Deaver brought action against Whitney North Seymour, Jr., who was the Independent
Counsel prosecuting him.  The District Court dismissed North v. Walsh as premature, but the
Deaver motion was not dismissed.

     The day after North filed his legal challenge, Walsh sought a back-up appointment as
Independent Counsel from the attorney general.  The attorney general made the appointment on
March 5, 1987, closely paralleling the court appointment.16  In July 1987, U.S. District Chief
Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., held that the appointment was valid, allowing Independent
Counsel to continue the Grand Jury investigation of Iran/contra after the  Court of Appeals, in
another case, had held the independent counsel statute unconstitutional.17

     16 In making the back-up appointment, the Attorney General referred to the President's desire
to take every possible step that Independent Counsel's investigation continue.  This support was
intended to obviate any constitutional conflict based on the view that the appointment of
Independent Counsel was an unconstitutional intrusion upon the powers of the President.

     17 Legal challenges to the constitutionality of the independent counsel statute continued into
1988, when a federal appeals court panel in January struck down the law as unconstitutional in a
case brought against Independent Counsel Alexia Morrison.  The Supreme Court on June 29,
1988, reversed the appeals court ruling and upheld the constitutionality of the statute.

     Congressional Immunity Grants

     Congress's perceived need to quickly and publicly resolve the grave political questions posed
by Iran/contra nearly derailed OIC's efforts to bring high officials to justice.  No adverse factor
shaped or constricted Independent Counsel's criminal investigation more than the congressional
immunity grants made to North, Poindexter and Hakim.  The trial convictions of North and
Poindexter were ultimately reversed on appeal because they prevailed in arguing that the
testimony of witnesses in their trials was not proved to be unaffected by their highly publicized
immunized congressional testimony.

     OIC's most pressing concern from the outset of its work was that the Select Committees
would grant immunity to targets of the criminal investigation, compelling them to testify before
Congress while guaranteeing that nothing they said could be used against them in a criminal
proceeding.  The law was clear that Congress controlled the political decision of whether
immunity grants were justified by the importance of the hearings even  though they could destroy
a criminal prosecution.  With the exception of the congressional and criminal investigations of
the Watergate scandal in the 1970s, the situation confronting Independent Counsel was
unprecedented.  In the Watergate scandal, two congressionally immunized witnesses -- John
Dean and Jeb Stuart Magruder -- were judged guilty of crimes, but both men had pleaded guilty
before their cases came to trial.  Criminal charges against Gordon Strachan were dismissed
because of immunity problems.18

     18 Watergate Special Prosecution Force Report, p. 52 (1977).

     President Reagan had first proposed in December 1986 that North and Poindexter be granted
immunity after they refused to testify voluntarily before the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, which was conducting a preliminary investigation into Iran/contra.  He said their
testimony would exculpate him.  The intelligence committee resisted his proposal.  Yet that, in
the end, was exactly what the Select Committees did.

     In early meetings between Independent Counsel and the leaders of the Select Iran/contra
Committees, the leaders forthrightly stated that they were likely to grant immunity to central
figures.  In response, Walsh doubled the size of the OIC staff and took steps to focus the
investigation on the gathering of as much evidence as possible before the grant of immunity
tainted any of it.

     Independent Counsel repeatedly warned the committees that such immunity grants, coupled
with the high level of national exposure of the Iran/contra hearings, would pose serious if not
insurmountable obstacles to prosecuting central figures.  Independent Counsel also argued that
key witnesses would have little incentive to testify fully and truthfully before Congress if they
received immunity before impeaching or corroborating evidence had been gathered.

     Independent Counsel met repeatedly with representatives of the committees to persuade them
to seek alternatives to immunity grants to the central figures.  But, frustrated by North and
Poindexter's continuing refusal to testify voluntarily, the Select Committees decided to immunize
North, Poindexter and Hakim.19

     19 Independent Counsel persuaded the committees not to immunize Clines, Secord and
Hakim's business partner in the Iran/Contra Enterprise.  Clines was later successfully prosecuted
and convicted of four crimes.

     The Select Committees worked on tight, self-imposed deadlines.  Counsel told OIC that they
felt that the scandal should not be left hanging over the President.  Their public hearings were to
begin in early May 1987 and they planned to issue a final report by November 1987.20

     20 Some Committee members publicly expressed their frustration with the pace of
Independent Counsel's criminal investigation.

     Independent Counsel urged the Select Committees to delay granting immunity to North and
Poindexter for as  long as possible, to give OIC more time to gather criminal evidence that could
not be tainted, by any immunized testimony.  A compromise was reached between OIC and the
Committees in March 1987, setting the timing for immunity grants for North and Poindexter, as
well as the methods for insulating the private testimony Poindexter was to give before appearing
publicly.21

     21 Under a Memorandum of Understanding dated March 24, 1987, the Committees agreed
not to vote on immunizing North before June 4, not to question him privately before June 15, and
not to call him for public testimony before June 23.  In exchange, Independent Counsel agreed
not to seek an automatic 20-day deferral of North's immunity grant, as he was entitled to under
the federal use immunity statute.  For Poindexter, the Committees agreed not to vote on
immunity before April 20, not to question him privately before May 2 or three days before the
start of public hearings, and not to call him to testify publicly before June 15.  To insure against
leaks of Poindexter's private testimony, the Committees agreed that only three attorneys and a
court reporter would be present and that the notes of the private session would not be transcribed
or removed from a Committee vault before June 15.  The attorneys who questioned Poindexter
privately would not disclose his answers to Committee members or others before June 15 except
under ``certain extraordinary circumstances'' -- that is, if he provided evidence of an impeachable
offense.  Independent Counsel agreed in return not to seek a 20-day deferral of Poindexter's
immunity grant.

     OIC issued its First Interim Report to Congress on April 28, 1987, a week before the public
Iran/contra hearings began.  ``The allegations in the investigation concern possible violations of
public trust and possible misuse of position by high Government officials and their manipulation
by former Government officials,'' Independent Counsel reported.  ``In such matters, the public is
entitled to a fair and deliberate prosecutive judgment.''

     The interim report informed Congress and the public that more than 800 witness interviews
had been conducted, hundreds of boxes of White House and other agency documents had been
reviewed, and that an ongoing Grand Jury investigation was ``proving fruitful.''  This unusual
public accounting of the criminal investigation's progress was issued to enable the Select
Committees and Congress to make an informed decision in granting immunity that would
gravely handicap and, possibly, frustrate these potential prosecutions.22

     22 Independent Counsel's First Interim Report is reprinted in Volume II of this report.

     Providing concrete proof of Independent Counsel's progress were the guilty pleas in late April
and early May 1987 of Carl R. ``Spitz'' Channell and Richard R. Miller.  Both men pleaded guilty
to conspiring to defraud the Government by raising money for contra weapons under the auspices
of a tax-exempt organization, and both named North as a co-conspirator.  These guilty pleas gave
Independent Counsel the option of bringing an early tax-fraud case against North, but it was
decided that the charges should be incorporated into a more comprehensive indictment against
North and others.

     In late May 1987, North's attorney told the Select Committees that his client would not give
immunized testimony privately before his public appearance.  He claimed the Committees were
entitled to the testimony only once.  This was a dangerous proposition for the Committees.  Not
only would they  not be prepared for North's public appearance by questioning him privately first,
they would have no prior statements with which to impeach any self-serving or exculpatory
testimony he might give.  Independent Counsel urged the Committees not to strike such a deal
with North.  Nevertheless, it was clear that the they were determined to have North's testimony.
They were unwilling to await the outcome of litigation.  As Senator Warren Rudman,
Vice-chairman of the Senate Select Committee, put it, ``I would find it inconceivable . . . that
these hearings could ever be complete without the testimony of Col. North.'' 23

     23 Los Angeles Times, ``The Iran-Contra Hearings . . .'', 6/4/87.

     In May and June 1987, when it was highly unlikely that either Poindexter or North would
incriminate the President, immunity was granted, and, in July, their testimony was taken and
publicly exposed.  The President's December 1986 proposal was thereby carried out.

     Early Indictments Weighed

     To minimize the problems caused by the expected grants of congressional immunity,
Independent Counsel beginning in mid-February 1987 considered indicting North and others on
obstruction-of-justice charges, based chiefly on evidence of document destruction.

     In March, Independent Counsel considered a list of potential targets for prosecution, subjects
for further investigation and candidates for immunity.  This included a tentative outline for the
prosecution of North and others and included document destruction and illegal fundraising for
the contras.  It was decided not to try to obtain an indictment before the Select Committees
granted immunity.  There was no possibility that a case could be tried before North and
Poindexter were called as witnesses.  The confrontation with Congress and the ensuing litigation
to compel the testimony could be expected not only to expand the danger of tainting the projected
trial, but also to hamper and even threaten the continuation of the investigation.

     While cautioning against a fragmentary indictment, Independent Counsel in March 1987
required the investigative teams to produce a summary of their possible cases, witnesses, trial
documents and outlines of the applicable laws.  Then, ``canning'' procedures were established so
that each team could begin filing under seal with the U.S. District Court for the District of
Columbia their case summaries, draft indictments, witness leads and trial exhibits.  This was
done to provide proof when needed that the criminal evidence OIC gathered early in its
investigation could not have been ``tainted,'' or influenced, by the subsequent congressional
testimony of immunized witnesses.

     In early June 1987, Walsh prepared a lengthy analysis of a possible indictment based upon
information available before North and Poindexter testified before the Committees.   Secord,
who was also likely to be indicted, had already testified before the Committees but had done so
without immunity.24

     24 Independent Counsel invited each of the potential defendants to make a proffer -- or
outline -- of testimony he could give if he agreed to cooperate with the criminal investigation, to
begin possible plea negotiations.  Attorneys for North, Poindexter and Hakim rejected OIC's
proposal.

     On June 29 and 30, 1987, there was a further consideration of an immediate indictment, a
week before North's scheduled public appearance on Capitol Hill.  The proposed indictment of
North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim included a conspiracy to violate the Boland Amendment's
prohibition on military aid to the Nicaraguan contras, acts of obstruction and false statements to
Congress.  It could not include charges related to the diversion.25  Although proof of obstruction
by North and Poindexter was in hand, and although substantial evidence of Boland violations had
been collected, the investigation was not complete.  After lengthy discussion, Independent
Counsel and a large majority of the staff favored waiting for the Swiss bank records so that
charges on the Iran/contra diversion and the effort by Hakim and Secord to corrupt North could
be included.

     25 These charges required the Swiss bank records and Zucker's testimony because OIC was
unwilling to rely upon Zucker's proffers through his counsel.

     Other factors weighed heavily against an early indictment, including the legal and political
confrontation that  would have resulted from indicting North just before his scheduled
congressional testimony.  Had North been under indictment when called by Congress to testify,
his probable refusal to do so would have resulted in a firestorm that OIC might not have been
able to withstand.  A simultaneous attack by the defendants and Congress on Independent
Counsel could have resulted in a premature effort by the courts to deal with the immunity
problem in the abstract and the possible destruction of the prosecution of North and Poindexter
and also the ongoing investigation.26

     26 It was always the effort of Independent Counsel to proceed to indictment and trial with
immunity safeguards of his own design and to have court litigation develop as a review of the
conduct trial, rather than to obtain some kind of pre-trial or pre-indictment prescription.  Quite
apart from the dangers of litigation, if Poindexter or North did testify, the indictment would have
been subjected to a free-swinging, highly publicized attack by North, Poindexter and their
congressional supporters, to which OIC could not have listened, let alone respond.

     The decision was made not to indict but to take all steps necessary to keep the probable
prosecution of North, Poindexter and others free of taint from their immunized congressional
testimony.

     North Delivers His Immunized Testimony

     Independent Counsel was fully aware of the potential problems posed by North's immunized
testimony, which was finally delivered to intense public interest in early July 1987.   But the
Select Committees, by not insisting on privately  questioning North in advance of his public
appearance and by agreeing that his testimony would be limited in time, expanded the problem.
Without the advantage of prior private testimony, the Committees were not able to restrict
North's testimony to narrowly responsive answers.  The Committees publicly and blindly
examined a hostile, articulate, immunized witness without the protection and guidance of a
significant prior statement.

     Although OIC shielded itself from North's testimony, it quickly became clear that North had
turned the tables on the Select Committees.  Ollie North T-shirts and other North memorabilia
were being sold on the streets of Washington. It looked as though North's charismatic qualities
had enabled him to exploit his underdog role.  North had bested the Congress of the United
States in what was perceived to be its most ostentatious display of investigatory power since
Watergate.

     OIC in the spring of 1987 had doubled its staff to speed the investigation and to preserve a
core of trial attorneys and paralegals who would remain unexposed to the testimony.  A smaller
team of attorneys and support staff became exposed, or ``tainted,'' to serve as a buffer between
the outside world and the ``untainted'' staff, and to investigate potential defendants not
immunized by Congress.  The untainted staff members could not read about or in any way
monitor the immunized testimony.  Inadvertent exposures -- such as overheard conversations or
glimpses of banner headlines -- occurred and were recorded in a special file, which would later
be reviewed by the court to determine whether the incidents impermissibly tainted the
prosecutions.  Independent Counsel asked the Iran/contra grand jurors to avoid the immunized
testimony, and Grand Jury witnesses were told not to refer to it or base their testimony on it.27

     27 Teams of OIC attorneys later became exposed to those portions of the immunized
testimony that did not affect the individual trials they worked on.  Independent Counsel Walsh
and others who were involved in the broadest aspects of the investigation and trials remained
unexposed to all the immunized congressional testimony until the completion of the Poindexter
trial in April 1990.

     In the two weeks following North's public testimony, Independent Counsel considered
whether the investigation and prosecution could continue.  Could the staff avoid becoming
exposed to his testimony?  What should be done with Grand Jury and potential trial witnesses
who saw all or part of the immunized performance?  Should OIC accept what might be inevitable
-- an inability to prosecute North -- and try to use him as a witness?

     By early August 1987, after a full review of the legal questions, OIC decided that it would
continue to pursue a prosecution of North.  Discussions with North's counsel left no illusion of
possible cooperation.  The popularity of one of the subjects of the investigation could not be
permitted to deter Independent Counsel from applying the rule of law where, under less
extraordinary circumstances, it would be applied.  Prior court holdings on the effects of limited
immunity kept OIC from simply surrendering the prosecution.  The outcome would have to be
resolved by the courts after OIC rigidly avoided any use of the immunized testimony.

     On August 9, 1987, Independent Counsel delivered an address at the American Bar
Association meeting on ``Truth and the Rule of Law.''  He announced his decision to continue to
pursue the prosecution of immunized figures.  Every reasonable precaution would be taken to
respect constitutional protections, but the issue of the adequacy of these precautions would be left
to the courts, he said.  Finally, the popularity or unpopularity of possible defendants could not
affect prosecutorial decisions.

     The Swiss Records Are Obtained and an Indictment Is Written

     The elements of a comprehensive indictment against North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim
fell into place as the questioning of witnesses and review of documents continued into the fall of
1987.

     The ability to charge the Iran/contra diversion as a crime remained a pivotal concern, as OIC
awaited the release of the Swiss financial records.  It was the disclosure of the diversion, after all,
which shocked the public and caused the appointment of Independent Counsel.  In addition, it
was expected that the Swiss records would show not only profiteering by Secord and Hakim, but
also the possible financial corruption of North.

     By October 1987, OIC was ready to evaluate the assistance to the Nicaraguan contras by
North and other Government officers during the 1984-1986 period in which the Boland
Amendment prohibited such aid.  Although the Boland  Amendment itself carried no criminal
sanctions, these activities and the deceit with which they were concealed could be used as
elements in a conspiracy charge.  Such a charge of conspiracy would provide the necessary unity
for the other counts likely to be included in an indictment.

     After the Swiss records became available in November 1987,28 a comprehensive indictment
could be written.  Evidence would now support the charges that would reflect the over-pricing of
the missiles sold to Iran, and the subsequent diversion of the profits; the personal enrichment of
Secord and Hakim; and the gratuities paid to North.

     28 Before they could be used effectively, there were weeks of translation, computerization,
analysis, and lengthy interviews of Zucker and his assistants.

     Cases were also under consideration against McFarlane and former CIA Costa Rican station
chief Joseph F. Fernandez, as well as a narrower case against another CIA officer working in
Central America, James L. Adkins, who had been illegally involved in resupplying the
Nicaraguan contras.

     It was decided that Fernandez and Adkins would not be included in the broader indictment,
because the possible charges against them were limited to contra operational support.  This
distinguished them from the other potential defendants whose activities extended to both the Iran
arms sales and the Iran/contra diversion.29

     29 A separate indictment was brought later against Fernandez.

     Unlike Fernandez, McFarlane was linked to both the Iran and contra matters.  Unlike North,
Poindexter, Secord and Hakim, however, McFarlane apparently played no role in approving or
implementing the Iran/contra diversion.

     In January and February 1988, evidence was collected and presented to support an indictment
charging a corrupt conspiracy among North, Poindexter, Secord, and Hakim, and possibly
McFarlane.30  Its elements included:  (1) an unauthorized covert action to support military
activities in Nicaragua in violation of the Boland Amendment ban on military aid to the contras;
31 (2) using the Iran arms sale to create a slush fund to be spent at the direction of North and
Poindexter, and for self-enrichment; and (3) endangering the hostage-rescue effort by pursuing
unauthorized activities.  Other charges would include false statements to Congress, obstruction of
official inquiries, the payment and receipt of illegal gratuities, and the destruction and alteration
of official documents.

     30 It is not necessary, in a conspiracy, that all defendants be party to all activities.

     31 Under the National Security Act and related Executive Orders, covert action (``special
activities'') by the CIA required authorization of a Finding by the President with notice to
Congress either through the intelligence committees or the congressional leadership.  Such
activities undertaken by Government officials outside the CIA required the written authorization
of the President.  See The Operational Conspiracy: A Legal Analysis.

     In February 1988, McFarlane entered into plea negotiations.  On March 11, 1988, McFarlane
pleaded guilty to four misdemeanor counts of withholding information from Congress and agreed
to cooperate with Independent Counsel, allowing him to testify in a future trial of North,
Poindexter, Secord and Hakim.32

     32 McFarlane was later identified in a bill of particulars as a co-conspirator of North,
Poindexter, Secord and Hakim.

     Independent Counsel met for a final time with counsel for those who would be named in the
indictment to discuss the possibility of plea negotiations.  His effort was rejected.  On March 16,
1988, a 23-count indictment was returned against Poindexter, North, Secord and Hakim.

     Litigation, 1988-1990

     Following the March 1988 indictment of North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim, OIC became
heavily engaged in pre-trial work, responding to more than 100 defense motions and to discovery
requests for hundreds of thousands of documents.  Much time was devoted to trying to resolve
complications caused by the congressional grants of immunity to three of the defendants.  Also,
there were problems arising from the fact that the Iran/contra criminal cases were intertwined
with issues of national security, requiring lengthy negotiations with the intelligence agencies to
review and declassify thousands of pages of documents for possible use at trial.

     Significant pre-trial and trial issues are described in detail in the individual case sections of
this report.  For the purposes of understanding the progression of Independent Counsel's work,
however, the most important are noted briefly here.

     On June 8, 1988, U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell ordered the severance of the North,
Poindexter, Secord and Hakim cases, based on the fact that each of the defendants except Secord
had received immunity to testify before Congress.  Nothing they said in their widely publicized
congressional testimony could be used against them in a criminal proceeding.  Although
Independent Counsel took extensive measures to shield  its cases from the testimony, the
defendants successfully argued that their constitutional rights would be violated if they could not
use at trial possibly exculpatory immunized testimony given by their co-defendants.  The
severance doubled the length of time needed to try these cases.  Independent Counsel decided to
try North first.

     A further substantial delay occurred after severance. The court was moving firmly toward a
September 1988 trial of North, but North's counsel convinced the court in an ex parte
presentation that extensive further classified information was necessary for the defense. The
production could not be accomplished by the intelligence agencies in time for a September trial.
To avoid the need for this additional discovery, the court proposed a trial without the conspiracy
and diversion counts. Independent Counsel moved to sever but not dismiss those counts. North,
however, claimed he needed a postponement to assimilate material already produced to him.
Under those circumstances, the court vacated the trial date and denied Independent Counsel's
motion to sever the counts as moot. The discovery schedule was extended into the fall. Hearings
on the use of classified information at trial did not start until November 30.

     On January 13, 1989, Judge Gesell dismissed the central conspiracy and theft charges against
North because the Reagan Administration refused to declassify certain information deemed
relevant to these charges.  The Reagan and Bush Administrations, while yielding on some issues,
continued to resist the declassification of others, requiring extensive negotiations between
Independent Counsel and the intelligence agencies throughout the North trial.

     The trial of North on 12 charges began in February 1989.  On May 4, the jury convicted North
on three felony counts.

     Because the central conspiracy and theft charges were dropped against North, it was likely
that the same charges would be dismissed in the cases of Poindexter, Secord and Hakim.  As a
result, Independent Counsel subsequently dismissed or narrowed the charges on his own motion.
In Secord, Independent Counsel presented additional evidence to the Grand Jury, resulting in a
second indictment of Secord on April 7, 1989, on nine additional charges of obstruction, false
statements and perjury.

     In April 1989, former CIA Costa Rica station chief, Fernandez, was indicted in Alexandria,
Virginia, for false statements to the CIA inspector general and the Tower Commission.  This
indictment was similar to an earlier indictment of Fernandez -- brought in 1988 in the District of
Columbia and dismissed on venue grounds -- but was stripped of a conspiracy charge to
minimize classified information problems.

     In late July 1989, as jury selection was beginning in Fernandez, the Department of Justice --
over the objections of Independent Counsel -- obtained a stay of the trial to appeal trial Judge
Claude M. Hilton's rulings allowing Fernandez to introduce certain classified information in his
defense.  On September 29, 1989, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit ruled that the
attorney general had no standing to appeal Judge Hilton's rulings in a case prosecuted by
Independent Counsel.  As a result of this ruling, the trial was rescheduled for November, and
Independent Counsel resumed negotiations with the intelligence agencies over the classified
information at issue.

     Throughout the late summer and early fall of 1989, Independent Counsel attempted to
persuade the intelligence agencies that the critical part of the classified information at issue in
Fernandez was, in fact, well known to the public.  In this time, Independent Counsel briefed the
intelligence committees on the problems presented by the dispute.  It was Independent Counsel's
position that the importance of the prosecution outweighed the intelligence agencies' insistence
that the information remain officially deniable.

     In an effort to resolve the matter, Independent Counsel in October 1989 sought a meeting with
President Bush to discuss the need to declassify the information needed to prosecute Fernandez.
The President declined to meet with Independent Counsel, stating that the Attorney General was
his representative in the matter.  The Administration remained steadfast in its refusal to allow the
information to be disclosed, causing the dismissal of all charges against Fernandez on November
24, 1989.

     Despite the dismissal of Fernandez, the attorney general had indicated that he might
reconsider the declassification of the information if Independent Counsel appealed Judge Hilton's
rulings in the Fourth Circuit.  Independent Counsel accordingly became involved in an appeals
process that would take another 11 months before it was ultimately resolved, affirming Judge
Hilton's rulings.  In October 1990, after the appeals ruling was issued, the attorney general
notified the trial court that it was his final determination that the classified information could not
be disclosed, and the case was finally dismissed.

     In November 1989, Secord and Hakim entered guilty pleas.  Just a few days before his trial
was scheduled to begin, Secord pleaded guilty to the felony charge of false statements to
Congress.  Hakim pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor charge of illegally supplementing the salary
of a Government official (North).  As part of the Hakim guilty plea, Hakim's company, Lake
Resources Inc., pleaded guilty to a corporate felony of defrauding the Government in the
Iran/contra diversion. Hakim entered into an agreement, which he subsequently breeched, to
assist the United States in recovering Iran arms sales proceeds still on deposit in Switzerland.

     In late 1989 and early 1990, Poindexter pre-trial issues were resolved.  In February 1990, U.S.
District Judge Harold H. Greene ruled that former President Reagan could be called to testify in
Poindexter's defense.  In order to accommodate the former President, a two-day videotaped
deposition was taken in Los Angeles, California, on February 16 and 17, 1990.  This was shown
in full as part of the defense case in Poindexter's trial.

     Also in preparation for the Poindexter trial, Independent Counsel prevailed in obtaining North
as a witness, after Judge Greene rejected North's assertion that he could not separate his
testimony from Poindexter's immunized testimony before Congress.

     On February 22, 1990, a Grand Jury hearing Iran/contra evidence in Baltimore, Maryland,
returned an indictment of Thomas G. Clines, who had worked with Secord and Hakim  in both
the Iran and contra operations.  The Clines indictment centered on his filing false tax returns in
1985 and 1986.

     The Poindexter trial began March 5, 1990.  Unlike North, Poindexter did not take the witness
stand.  On April 7, 1990, the jury convicted him of the five felony counts on which he was tried.

     In July 1990, North's convictions were vacated because it had not been shown to the extent
required by the Court of Appeals that his widely publicized immunized testimony did not affect
the testimony of witnesses against him. In November 1991, Poindexter's conviction was reversed
for the same reason. The Supreme Court denied certiorari in both cases.

     Following the convictions of North and Poindexter, and the guilty pleas of Secord and Hakim,
a second, final phase of investigative work was begun by the Office of Independent Counsel,
described in detail in the following section.  In addition to this final phase of investigative work
and the resulting trials, the Office of Independent Counsel was engaged in 1990 and 1991 in
appeals and other areas of litigation, described more fully in the individual case sections.

     The Continuing Investigation:  1990-1993

     The completion of the trials of North and Poindexter in 1989 and 1990, respectively, marked
the beginning of an important phase of Independent Counsel's criminal investigation:  For the
first time both men became available to OIC for questioning.  Having convicted the individuals
most operationally involved in Iran/contra, Independent Counsel focused on the supporting roles
played by officials in the CIA, Defense and State departments, and the supervisory role of the
principal members of the President's National Security Council.

     The reactivated investigation, known as the ``continuing investigation,'' was directed by
Deputy Independent Counsel Craig A. Gillen.  It focused initially on fewer than a dozen
individuals who were suspected of having assisted or having falsely denied knowledge of
Iran/contra activities.  At the same time, the OIC reviewed whether the Executive agencies, in
response to the initial phase of the criminal investigation in 1987 and 1988, had cooperated fully
with Independent Counsel's document requests.  There was evidence that this had not been the
case.

     It was Independent Counsel's hope that the continuing investigation could be completed and
final prosecutorial decisions made within six months following the completion of the Poindexter
trial in April 1990.  Instead, it took three years,  prolonged by the discovery of previously
withheld notes and other documents by high-ranking Reagan Administration officials, and the
need to re-question key figures based on new information gleaned from these documents and
obtained from cooperating witnesses.

     The development of the continuing investigation can be viewed in three segments:

      -- The first, from January 1990 to July 1991, focused on the possibly false testimony of 10
former Reagan Administration officials in the Office of the Vice President, State Department,
Central Intelligence Agency and on the National Security Council staff.  The testimony in
question related primarily to support of the contras during the Boland prohibition on U.S.
military aid from 1984 to 1986.  Limited attention was given to U.S. knowledge and involvement
in the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran.  This phase involved the questioning of
North, Poindexter and Fernandez, following the disposition of their criminal cases.

      -- The second, from July 1991 to November 1991, began with Independent Counsel's
decision to prosecute Fiers, who had worked closely with North as the CIA's Central American
task force chief.  This phase  was fueled by Fiers' subsequent decision to plead guilty and the
investigative leads generated by his cooperation.  It led to the indictments of former CIA Deputy
Director for Operations Clair E. George, and former CIA official Duane R. Clarridge, and to the
guilty plea of former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.

      -- The third, from October 1991 to the spring of 1993, dealt with the discovery and analysis
of previously withheld notes and documents that directly contradicted the testimony of some of
the most senior Reagan Administration officials.  This phase focused on efforts by senior
officials to respond to the November 1986 public exposure of Iran/contra, their concerns over the
possible impeachment of President Reagan and an attempt by some to falsely minimize his
knowledge of a November 1985 shipment of U.S. HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran.  This
investigative phase led to the indictment of former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.

     Phase I:  Focus on Contra Support

     Questioning North and Poindexter

     As of January 1990, North had not been questioned by OIC for investigative purposes,
although he had been cross-examined at his trial in 1989.  Most of Independent Counsel's staff
had not even been exposed to his 1987 testimony before the Select Iran/contra Committees.
North had testified before the committees in general terms about what Reagan Administration
officials knew concerning his activities but he had not been questioned in detail about specific
possible violations of law by those officials.

     The Committees questioned North about a limited number of entries he had made in
notebooks but he had never been systematically examined about the hundreds of pages of notes
of his meetings, telephone conversations and agreements with various Administration officials
reflecting Iran/contra activities.  North's notebooks, from January 1984 to November 1986,
contained highly detailed but sometimes cryptic information that only he could fully explain.

     OIC obtained copies of North's notebooks when he took the witness stand at his trial in April
1989.  After the trial, it was necessary to question him about  his notebooks and to follow up,
from an investigative standpoint, on his congressional testimony.  Most provocative were North's
generalized assertions during his 1987 congressional testimony that there was widespread
knowledge among Administration officials of his activities. Many of his notebook entries seemed
to corroborate those claims.

     North's appearance before the Grand Jury was delayed to avoid disrupting his appearance in
Poindexter's trial in the spring of 1990.  In late April and early May 1990, OIC sought North's
voluntary cooperation in the investigation, which would have permitted him to answer questions
outside the Grand Jury in a more informal setting.  Independent Counsel took the extraordinary
step of submitting to North's attorneys four sets of questions describing the general parameters of
a major portion of the continuing investigation.  Ultimately, no agreement could be reached.

     Independent Counsel then obtained a court order granting him immunity and compelling his
testimony before the Grand Jury.  On May 15, 1990, North moved to quash his Grand Jury
subpoena, claiming that OIC was improperly using the Grand Jury to prepare its final report, that
he was being harassed, and that  Independent Counsel was setting up a ``perjury trap''. On May
24, 1990, the District Court denied North's motion.

     North's Grand Jury testimony began on June 1, 1990. Independent Counsel obtained North's
testimony in several areas:

      -- His contacts from 1984 to 1986 with the Office of the Vice President, and specifically with
Donald P. Gregg, the national security adviser to Vice President Bush, focusing on the
knowledge that OVP personnel had about North's contra-related activities and about the contra
support activities of former CIA operative Felix Rodriguez.

      -- The extent to which North discussed his contra-related activities with members of the RIG,
in which representatives of several Executive Branch agencies shared information on Central
American issues.

      -- His relationship with RIG member Alan D. Fiers, Jr., the CIA's Central American task
force chief, and the extent to which Fiers participated in or was knowledgeable of North's
contra-related activities during 1985 and 1986.

      -- His relationship with former CIA official Duane ``Dewey'' Clarridge in two areas:  their
involvement in the November 1985 HAWK missiles shipment to Iran, and in the 1984 CIA
``hand off'' of contra-support responsibilities to North and the NSC.

      -- His knowledge of whether Paul Thompson, general counsel to the NSC in 1985 and 1986,
had any role in false representations to Congress made by national security advisers McFarlane
and Poindexter in 1985 and 1986, respectively, about North's contra-support activities.
Additionally, North was asked about Thompson's knowledge of and access to the December 5,
1985, covert-action Finding signed by President Reagan, which sought to retroactively approve
the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran, and Thompson's witnessing of the
destruction of the Finding by Poindexter.

     In some instances, North had specific recollections of events detailed in his notes and was
able to confirm their apparent meaning.  In other instances, he could not recall or clarify the
substance of notebook entries.  North affirmed before the Grand Jury the accuracy of his prior
testimony in other forums.  This pattern of varying degrees of usefulness was true throughout the
range of topics covered in his questioning.

     North's series of appearances before the Grand Jury were halted for six months, after the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit on July 20, 1990, issued its  opinion in his
case.  The appeals court vacated North's convictions on the grounds that his immunized
congressional testimony had possibly tainted his trial, and it ordered further hearings in the trial
court.  North filed an additional motion to quash his Grand Jury subpoena, alleging that because
of the possibility of a re-trial, his constitutional rights would be violated by his continued
compelled appearance before the Grand Jury.  North also asserted that he was entitled to
transcripts of his prior Grand Jury testimony.

     North's motion to quash the subpoena was denied on October 26, 1990; his motion for
reconsideration was denied on November 16, 1990.  On November 17, 1990, North's attorneys
informed Independent Counsel that North would not comply with the court's order to compel his
testimony and would be held in contempt.  From November 1990 through January 1991, North
litigated the Grand Jury issue.  On January 29, 1991, North was held in contempt by the District
Court and was denied bail, and the Court of Appeals declined to stay these judgments.  Before
being incarcerated, North purged himself of contempt by continuing his testimony before the
Grand Jury.

     Most of North's testimony was completed by March 15, 1991.  He was called back for limited
questioning in November 1991.

     Following Poindexter's sentencing in early June 1990, Poindexter testified, under a court
order granting him use immunity, five times before the Grand Jury between June 27, 1990 and
March 6, 1991.

     Poindexter was questioned about Thompson's involvement in responding to the 1986
congressional inquiry into North's contra-support activities.  He was asked about Thompson's
knowledge of the Iran arms sales Findings and about his witnessing Poindexter's destruction of
the 1985 Finding.  He was asked also about Thompson's role in gathering documents for
Attorney General Meese's investigation of the Iran arms sales in November 1986.

     Poindexter's later Grand Jury appearances in November 1991, and March 1992 focused on a
broader scope of inquiry, including the knowledge and involvement of President Reagan, Vice
President Bush, the Cabinet and NSC staff members regarding Iran/contra matters.

     Focus on Ilopango

     During the spring and summer of 1990, the investigation focused on the contra-resupply
operation runs from Ilopango airbase in El Salvador.  OIC undertook to establish the extent of
U.S. Government knowledge of and participation in the Ilopango operation during the Boland
prohibition on U.S. military aid.  It was also important to determine U.S. Government knowledge
of the contra-support activities of Felix Rodriguez, a former CIA officer who used the alias
``Max Gomez'' and who was in Central America ostensibly to assist the Salvadoran government's
fight against communist guerrilla forces.

     Following the October 5, 1986, shootdown of a contra-resupply aircraft which originated at
Ilopango, Reagan Administration officials denied any U.S. Government connection to the flight.
They also denied knowledge of ``Max Gomez,'' whom  American Eugene Hasenfus, upon his
capture by Nicaraguan soldiers, had publicly identified as a CIA agent  involved in the
contra-resupply operation.

     The continuing investigation sought to learn what Elliott Abrams, Clair George and Alan
Fiers knew about the  Ilopango operation and Rodriguez prior to their October 1986 appearances
before congressional committees investigating the Hasenfus shootdown.  Abrams, George and
Fiers had denied that they were aware of who was behind the contra-resupply flights.

     It was also important to determine what information was conveyed, and at how early a date, to
the Vice President's national security adviser, Gregg, about Rodriguez's activities at Ilopango on
behalf of the contras.

     Steele and Corr

     The initial phase of the Ilopango inquiry began with Army Col. James J. Steele, who was the
military group commander at the U.S. Embassy in El Salvador during 1985 and 1986.  Colonel
Steele in December 1986, appearing before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI),
testified that he tried not to actively assist the contra-resupply operation, that he had not provided
such assistance, and that he did not think anyone at the U.S. Embassy had.  He said that
humanitarian supplies for the contras were kept in a separate place from the lethal material,
which he had not seen at  Ilopango.33

     33 Steele, SSCI Testimony, 12/18/86, pp. 10-14, 18-22, 36-37, 46-49.

     During 1990 and 1991 Steele was interviewed by OIC six times and appeared before the
Grand Jury once.  In the course of this questioning and after failing a lie-detector test, Steele
recanted critical aspects of his earlier testimony.  His truthful admissions provided the continuing
investigation with a valuable basis by which to gauge the truthfulness of others testifying about
the same events.

     In his initial interviews with the continuing investigation, Steele denied that Gregg was aware
of Rodriguez's contra-related activities before August 1986. He confirmed Gregg's own
testimony.

     He agreed to submit to a polygraph examination by the FBI.  In the opinion of the polygraph
examiner, his answers were indicative of deception on this question of Gregg's knowledge of
Rodriguez's contra-related activities before July and August 1986.  Following the examination,
Steele remembered a meeting in approximately January 1986, when he visited Gregg's office and
mentioned to Gregg  Rodriguez's activities on behalf of the contras.

     During his interviews, Steele was confronted with certain documents and North notebook
entries indicating that he was an active participant in the resupply operation at Ilopango.  Steele
then admitted being involved in discussions concerning certain resupply flights and other aspects
of the operation.34 Steele admitted going on board a cargo plane at Ilopango in April 1986 prior
to its dropping lethal supplies to the contras' southern fighting front.  Steele believed that he told
Corr about the lethal cargo on the flight.35  Steele acknowledged  informing Corr of his activities
and of the lethal contra-resupply operation.  He said he informed Corr of everything that wasn't
``below his noise level.'' 36  Steele stated that both he and Corr knew that North was working
very closely with the contra-resupply operation.

     34 Steele, FBI 302, 9/18/90, p. 5.

     35 Ibid., 2/4/91, p. 7.

     36 Ibid., 9/17/90, p. 5.

     Following the Hasenfus shootdown, Corr and Steele discussed the Salvadoran officials' denial
of a connection between the Salvadoran government and the Hasenfus flight, which originated at
Ilopango airbase in El Salvador.  It was clear to Steele that Corr was in a ``damage control
mode.'' 37

     37 Steele, FBI 302, 2/5/91, p. 6.

     Because of Steele's candor during his 1990 and 1991 interviews, he was not subjected to
charges based upon his earlier misstatements. Steele acknowledged active participation by U.S.
Government personnel in the contra-resupply operation at Ilopango. His information provided a
much clearer picture of the activities at Ilopango.

     Corr, the U.S. ambassador to El Salvador during the 1985-1986 period, was interviewed in
January 1991 to follow up on Steele's statements.

     Corr was questioned about an April 20, 1986, meeting at the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador,
with Steele, North and Secord.38  Corr denied meeting with both North and Secord, although he
acknowledged a perfunctory meeting with Secord, which he said was not related to the resupply
operation.

     38 Secord became a cooperating witness following his plea agreement with OIC in November
1989.

     In April 1991, Corr was compelled to testify before the Grant Jury pursuant to a grant of use
immunity.  He was subpoenaed also to produce relevant documents.  As the result, Corr
produced in April and May 1991 notes of conversations which not previously produced to
Iran/contra investigators.  They reflected conversations with Abrams and others during 1986.

     Many of Corr's newly produced notes were highly relevant to his knowledge and that of others
within the State Department following the Hasenfus shootdown.  One note reflected an October
14, 1986, telephone  conversation with Abrams just a few hours before Abrams appeared before
the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence to testify about the  shootdown.  The note
reflects that Corr and Abrams discussed Rodriguez and his role in El Salvador.39

     39 Corr Note, 10/14/86, ALW 0032906.

     By the date of the call, Corr was fully aware of Rodriguez's role with the contra-resupply
operation at Ilopango.  During Abrams' testimony, a few hours after his telephone conversation
with Corr, Abrams did not reveal Rodriguez's role with the resupply operation at Ilopango.

     Tambs and Fernandez

      questioned former U.S. Ambassador to Costa Rica Lewis Tambs.  Tambs had previously
testified  candidly about his activities in Costa Rica to help open a southern fighting front for the
contras.  In March 1990, Tambs gave testimony about his conversations with Abrams and other
officials regarding the opening of a  southern front, as well as U.S. Embassy involvement in
facilitating the building of a secret contra-resupply airstrip in Costa Rica. He also testified about
the extent of Reagan Administration knowledge of the activities of Fernandez, the CIA chief of
station in Costa Rica.  He supplied information about the knowledge that Fiers and Abrams had
of Fernandez's contra-support activities.

     Fernandez was ordered to testify under a grant of use immunity in October 1990, after the
case against him was dismissed.  He appeared six times before the Grand Jury between
November 1990 and January 1991.  Fernandez was asked to explain CIA cable traffic, encoded
messages that were relayed on special communications devices known as KL-43s between the
contras and the resupply operation, and excerpts from North's notebooks.

     He was helpful in providing information about the knowledge his CIA superiors had regarding
his contacts with the contra-resupply operation, and about Abrams' knowledge of the secret
contra-resupply airstrip in Costa Rica.

     The Gregg Inquiry

     In the summer of 1990, Donald Gregg agreed to submit to a polygraph examination.  It
concerned, among other things, when he first learned of Felix Rodriguez's contra-support
activities and when, if ever, he relayed that information to Vice President Bush.  In response to
an FBI polygraph examiner's questions, Gregg reasserted his earlier statements that he was not
aware of Rodriguez's involvement in contra support before August 1986 and that he had not
relayed the information to the Vice President.

      In the opinion of the FBI examiner, Gregg's answers to the relevant questions indicated
deception. OIC intensified its inquiry as to the when and to what extent the Office of the Vice
President was aware of Rodriguez's contra-support activities at Ilopango airbase.

     In the late summer and fall of 1990, former members of Vice President Bush's staff were
interviewed. The investigation re-analyzed the testimony of Col. Samuel Watson, Gregg's
assistant, regarding Rodriguez's contra-support activities and particularly the purpose of
Rodriguez's meetings with Vice President Bush in 1986.

     Rodriguez testified twice before the Grand Jury in May 1991 about his contacts with the
Office of the Vice President and his contra-resupply activities at Ilopango. He denied discussing
activities with Gregg prior to August 1986 or ever with Bush.

     Previously Withheld Documents

     One of the major difficulties confronting the continuing investigation was the passage of time
since the Iran/contra events had occurred, and the corresponding lack of witness recollection of
specific details.  To combat this problem, OIC carefully searched for previously unproduced,
contemporaneously created documents such as notes that would reflect on Iran/contra matters.

     The search for previously undiscovered documents was fueled also by the fact that most
significant Iran/contra witnesses were reluctant to provide truthful information unless they were
confronted with difficult-to-refute documentary evidence.  Much of the early phase of the
continuing  investigation focused on contradictions between the prior sworn testimony of Reagan
Administration officials and contemporaneously created documents.

     Members of the Restricted Interagency Group (RIG) on Central America, for example,
generally denied knowledge of North's extensive contra-support activities.  North's notebooks
indicated that he had in fact exposed the RIG to a full airing of his activities as early as the
summer of 1986.  As a result, the investigation sought to discover the existence of notes made by
other RIG members, which could either corroborate or contradict North's assertions.  An
extensive search was conducted in late 1990 and early 1991, but no additional relevant notes of
RIG members were found at that time.

     There was additional concern that some relevant documents had not been produced in 1987,
because the early production of documents had been in response to document requests rather than
compelled by grand jury subpoena.  The investigation in 1990 and 1991 spent a great amount of
time reviewing bodies of government records that potentially contained Iran/contra documents.40
In  some cases, these reviews did result in the discovery of significant evidence.

     40 In its search for previously undiscovered evidence, the continuing investigation in January
1990 sought access to the millions of documents seized by the United States following the
December 1989 arrest of Gen. Manuel Noriega in Panama.  OIC sought to review any
Panamanian documents that might reflect upon Noriega's contacts with North, Abrams, the CIA
or any U.S. Government official regarding contra-support efforts.

     FBI Special Agent Michael S. Foster, who had been assigned to OIC since December 1986,
along with two paralegals, traveled to Panama to review seized documents of possible relevance.
On one occasion, the FBI agent observed index cards referring to document files entitled (1)
Bush, (2) Irangate, (3) CIA, and (4) Contras.  Because of the logistical chaos that occurred
subsequent to Noriega's arrest, however, these files were not available for immediate Independent
Counsel review.  When these files were ultimately obtained, their contents were not helpful.

     Additional witness interviews also led OIC to previously unseen Iran/contra notes. Former
White House counsel Peter Wallison, interviewed concerning his dealings with Thompson during
November 1986, disclosed that he kept a diary of his work experiences in the White House.
Wallison's diary was significant in the investigation of the November 1986 activities of
President's Reagan's closest advisers.

     During the summer of 1990, the investigation began searching for State Department
documents that might reflect Abrams' knowledge of North's contra-resupply activities.  OIC
discovered that M. Charles Hill, an executive assistant to Secretary of State George P. Shultz,
had produced to criminal and congressional investigators in 1987, only those portions of his
notebooks that related to the Iran arms sales -- not to contra-related activities.

     During the summer of 1990, OIC reviewed approximately 12,000 pages of Hill's handwritten
notes, recording, in almost verbatim form, conversations between high-level State Department
officials.  In addition, Shultz was in the habit of giving Hill a read-out, or recounting, of
important meetings he had with the President and other senior Administration officials.

     The 1990 review of Hill's notes prompted the investigation to seek, but not initially find,
another significant set of notes -- those of former Defense Secretary Weinberger.  In an August 7,
1987 note that Hill took about the Select Committee hearings, Shultz stated ``Cap [Weinberger]
takes notes but never referred to them so never had to cough them up.'' 41  Based upon the Hill
note, OIC in October 1990 asked Weinberger about whether he had taken notes that had not been
previously produced; he said he had not.  It was not until November 1991 that Weinberger's notes
at the Library of Congress were discovered, as will be described later.

     41 Hill Note, 8/7/87, ANS 0002776.

     After the Hill notes had been reviewed, Shultz and Hill were interviewed in December 1990
at the Hoover Institution in Stanford, California.  The interviews, coupled with certain Hill
notebook entries, raised concerns about prior testimony by Weinberger and other high-ranking
Reagan Administration officials regarding the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran.
This ultimately became a central focus of the investigation.

     Phase II:  The Fiers Plea

     In early 1991, the goal of the continuing investigation was to complete the questioning of
relevant witnesses to determine whether to prosecute Fiers, Thompson, Clarridge, Gregg,
Watson, Abrams and Corr.  The Fiers investigation was the first to reach a conclusion.
Independent Counsel determined that, based on the evidence, the prosecution of Fiers was
necessary.

     OIC negotiated with Fiers' attorneys in May and June 1991. In an effort to reach a plea
agreement, Fiers proffered information that indicated his extensive knowledge of Iran/contra
matters.

     In his proffer, Fiers inculpated himself and others regarding their knowledge of North's
contra-support activities and of the diversion of the funds from the Iran arms sales to the contras
prior to it becoming public in November 1986.  Because Fiers worked closely with North and
Abrams on the RIG, he was able to provide valuable information on U.S. Government
involvement in contra-support activities.

     Fiers was reluctant to implicate others unless he had a specific recollection of an event. Fiers'
caution enhanced his credibility. On July 9, 1991, Fiers tendered a plea of guilty to two
misdemeanor counts of withholding information from Congress and agreed to cooperate with
Independent Counsel's office.

     From the beginning of the continuing investigation, there was a focus on the testimony of
George, Abrams and Fiers before congressional committees in October 1986 following the
shootdown of the Hasenfus plane.  That testimony was given days before $100 million was to be
appropriated by Congress for United  States funding for the contras. Fiers admitted that
protection of the $100 million appropriation was a factor in the concealment of facts from
Congress about the contra-resupply operation at Ilopango.

     In October 1986, Congress was interested in learning what Abrams, George and Fiers knew
about who was behind the contra-resupply flights, who funded them, and whether, as Hasenfus
had publicly alleged, a former CIA agent named ``Max Gomez'' (Rodriguez's alias) was helping
run the resupply operation at Ilopango airbase.  Fiers acknowledged that Congress was not told
what he, George and Abrams knew about North's connections to the contra-resupply operation
and about Felix Rodriguez's activities at Ilopango.  Fiers revealed conversations that he had with
George prior to the congressional testimony, in which George stated that he ``did not want to put
the spotlight on Oliver North or the White House.'' 42

     42 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 11-12.

     Fiers also disclosed that North had told him in the spring and summer of 1986 that Iran arms
sales proceeds were being diverted to the contras.  Fiers admitted that he had conversations with
George and other CIA officials about North's assertions of an Iran/contra diversion, long before
its public exposure in November 1986.

     Fiers supplied convincing proof of North's claim that he had exposed other members of the
RIG to his contra-support activities in the summer of 1986 and sought their advice on whether
they should be continued.  Fiers confirmed North's assertions.  He said North did this on more
than one occasion, beginning as early as July 1986.  Fiers remembered a RIG meeting in Abrams'
office in which North went over, item-by-item, activities being conducted on behalf of the
contras and asked if they should continue.  Fiers said North's recounting of the contra-support
activities was followed by an awkward silence, and Fiers finally responded to North about which
activities should be continued.

     Corroborating North's testimonial assertions and North's notebook entry of a RIG meeting on
August 28, 1986, OIC in the fall of 1991 discovered at the Department of Defense a September
2, 1986, handwritten note by Army Col. Stephen Croker, reflecting information he received from
Lt. General  John Moellering who had attended an August 28 RIG meeting.  The Croker note
corroborated North and Fiers' testimony.  The note reads:

     . . . $1m [million]/month 32 people -- private

     ops [operations]

     flying planes for resupply in country do we want to keep it going or choke off . . .43

     43 Croker Note, 9/2/86, ALZ 0034813-14.

     Fiers also described a September 19, 1986, meeting of RIG members in the Pentagon.  During
that meeting North discussed the possibility of paying Panamanian Gen. Manuel Noriega $1
million in non-U.S. Government funds to commit acts of sabotage against the Nicaraguan
government.  Fiers understood that $1 million in cash would come from ``Project Democracy,''
the contra-resupply operation being run by Secord at North's direction.  Fiers' description of this
RIG meeting shed new light on a Charles Hill notebook entry of September 20, 1986, in which
Abrams described to Hill the Noriega proposal and how it would be funded by money from
non-U.S. Government sources.44  Fiers' testimony, corroborated by newly-discovered
documents, greatly  strengthened the possibility of a prosecution of Abrams for false statements
to Congress.

     44 Hill Note, 9/20/86, ANS 0001617.

     Previously unproduced State Department notes were located in 1991 reflecting Abrams'
knowledge as early as 1985 about North's role in providing lethal supplies to the contras.  The
newly discovered notes indicated that Abrams was not truthful when he told the Select
Committees in the summer of 1987 that he determined there was nothing legally questionable in
North's activities.45  Following the discovery of Hill's contra-related notebook entries, OIC
discovered that another Shultz assistant, Nicholas Platt, executive secretary for the State
Department, had significant notes that had not been produced to congressional and criminal
investigators.  One Platt note reflected the September 4, 1985, Shultz admonition to Abrams to
monitor North's contra activities.

     45 See Abrams chapter.

     [SHULTZ]:  What is happening on other support for contras for lethal aid etc. -- E. ABRAMS
doesn't have the answer.  Stayed away let Ollie North do it.  Fundraising continuing -- weapons
stocks are high.  We  have had nothing to do with private aid.  Should we continue?

     Hate to be in position, [Shultz] says, of not knowing what's going on.  You re supposed to be
managing overall Central American picture.  Ollie can go on doing his thing, but you, [Abrams],
should know what's happening.46

     46 Platt Note, 9/4/85, ALW 0036261.

     Platt's notes indicated that by September 1985, Abrams and Shultz knew North was involved
in lethal assistance to the contras.  According to Platt's notes, Shultz told Abrams that North
could continue ``doing his thing,'' but Abrams needed to be informed.

     Throughout the summer and fall of 1991 the investigation focused on the possible indictments
of Abrams, George and Clarridge.  A case against Abrams appeared likely based on information
provided by North and Fiers and newly obtained documentary evidence.  As a result of the Fiers
plea in July 1991 and his public acknowledgement of cooperation with the investigation, two
CIA officials and one former CIA official came forward and volunteered additional information
regarding the Clarridge investigation.

     During July and August 1991, despite the efforts of Independent Counsel, George was
unwilling to admit any criminal misconduct.  The Grand Jury on September 6, 1991, returned an
indictment charging George with 10 felonies, including obstruction of Congress and the Grand
Jury, false statements and perjury.

     Similarly, Clarridge declined to enter into plea discussions with Independent Counsel.
Clarridge in November 1991 was indicted on multiple felony counts.

     Following the September 1991 indictment of George, negotiations began with Abrams'
attorneys. Abrams was confronted with a multi-count felony indictment. An agreement was
reached, and Abrams pleaded guilty on October 7, 1991, to two counts of withholding
information from Congress.

     Abrams agreed to cooperate with the continuing investigation.  He provided information
useful to a potential Gregg prosecution. His pleas expedited the work of the office, although they
did not lead to other prosecutions.

     The development of Fiers as a witness, and the continuing investigation of other CIA officials,
was complicated in the summer of 1991 by President Bush's nomination of Robert Gates as CIA
director.  As a result of the Fiers plea -- particularly his admission that he had discussed the
Iran/contra diversion with other CIA officials before its public disclosure -- the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence called Fiers and other CIA officials to testify about Gates's knowledge
of the diversion.  Fiers was subsequently immunized to provide testimony to SSCI, but the
Committee declined to immunize certain individuals who were potential investigative targets.

     Phase III:  NSC Principals

     As of October 1991, the continuing investigation had resulted in the pleas of Fiers and
Abrams and the felony indictments of George and Clarridge.  At this point, the investigation
began its third significant phase.

     Shultz's Congressional Testimony Contradicted by Notes

     During October and November 1991, the investigation continued analyzing the notes of State
Department officials Hill and Platt relating to the Iran arms sales.  OIC discovered that portions
of  highly relevant notebook entries had not been given to Congress or to the criminal
investigation before 1990.  Additionally, portions of Hill and Platt's separate notes that had not
been produced closely corresponded to one another in terms of their substance and the events
they reflected.

     The majority of the notes that were not produced dealt with contemporaneously recorded
conversations in which Shultz reports his conversations with the President, the Vice President or
other Cabinet officials.  These notes also contradicted Shultz's congressional testimony about his
knowledge of the Iran arms sales.

     Consequently, the investigation in early 1992 concentrated on collecting notes from other
State Department officials that might reflect further upon the level of department knowledge of
the Iran arms sales that existed in 1985 and 1986.

     Additional notes of mid-level State Department employees were found.  From these notes,
OIC was able to reconstruct the level of contemporaneous knowledge that Shultz and other State
Department officials had about the Iran arms sales in 1985 and 1986.  OIC's findings indicated
that Shultz's testimony concerning his knowledge about the arms sales was incorrect.  The next
step was to determine whether the mistakes were deliberate or inadvertent.

     An investigation was conducted into how the State Department collected relevant documents
for the congressional and criminal investigations and whether certain individuals in the State
Department intentionally withheld relevant notes reflecting a greater level of knowledge about
the Iran arms sales by Shultz and others than was acknowledged in 1986 and 1987 congressional
testimony.  The investigation revealed that some notes that had been produced in 1986 and 1987
to congressional and criminal investigators had been redacted to exclude material that showed
greater knowledge by State Department officials about the Iran arms sales.

     Shultz gave two lengthy interviews to OIC in 1992.  He acknowledged the accuracy of Hill's
notes, agreed that they were relevant and should have been produced, and stated that if he had
reviewed them prior to his testimony before Congress, his testimony would have been very
different.  He admitted that portions of his congressional testimony were wrong.

     OIC also interviewed Hill and Platt to find out whether there was an intentional effort to
withhold relevant portions of notes from Congress.47

     47 See State Department chapter.

     The Weinberger Notes

     In October 1990, OIC, based on a lead provided by Hill's notes, interviewed former Defense
Secretary Weinberger about whether he had failed to produce relevant notes to Iran/contra
investigators.  Weinberger stated that after his first year in office, it was not his practice to take
notes because he could not use them, in light of the many meetings he had to attend, to dictate
memoranda. Despite these assertions, Independent Counsel obtained Weinberger's permission to
review his papers, which had been deposited at the Library of Congress, for any Iran/contra
information.

     After mistakenly searching for relevant documents in the classified section of the Weinberger
collection at the Library of Congress, OIC in late 1991 discovered in the unclassified section
approximately 7,000 pages of handwritten notes by Weinberger, including nearly 1,700 from the
1985-1986 Iran/contra period.48  These notes reflect conversations Weinberger had with the
President and other Cabinet officials, providing a unique, contemporaneous record of many
significant Iran/contra events.   Weinberger's notes contradicted his prior testimony regarding the
extent and timing of his knowledge and the knowledge of others within the Administration about
the Iran/contra matters.

     48 Many of these notes contain information that is highly classified.

     The notes contradicted Weinberger's testimony on his knowledge of and discussions within
the Administration about the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran, the issue of
replenishing Israeli stocks after that country in 1985 sent TOW missiles to Iran, and the issue of
Saudi support for the contras.  After extensive discussions with Weinberger's counsel,
Weinberger was indicted on June 16, 1992, on five felony charges, including obstruction, perjury
and false statements.

     The Regan Notes and the November 1986 Investigation

     The discovery of other highly relevant, previously non-produced notes continued through the
final phase of the continuing investigation.  In 1992, OIC discovered the existence of notes of
former White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan that had not been previously produced.
Independent Counsel obtained access to these notes.

     The most significant of the Regan notes recorded a November 24, 1986, meeting among
President Reagan and his most senior advisers, including Regan, Vice President Bush,
Poindexter, CIA Director William J. Casey, Meese and Weinberger.

     The Regan notes of the November 24, 1986, meeting, and Weinberger's notes, reveal that
Meese, notwithstanding his contrary knowledge following a weekend investigation into the facts
of the arms sales, told the group that President Reagan hadn't known about the November 1985
HAWK missile shipment to Iran. He acknowledged that it was probably illegal.  The meeting
notes, combined with Hill's notes of Shultz's read-out to him following the meeting, and the
Wallison diary which recounted the Reagan Administration's legal concerns surrounding  the
arms sales, caused the continuing investigation to focus on the Meese investigation and his
assertions at the November 24, 1986, meeting to determine whether there was a deliberate effort
by senior officials to cover up the President's involvement in the November 1985 HAWK
shipment.

     Independent Counsel in 1992 attempted to re-question the participants of the November 24,
1986, meeting about it and about the November 1986 period generally.  In the spring and summer
of 1992, OIC reinterviewed President Reagan, Regan, Shultz and Meese.  Weinberger was facing
trial and was not available to be questioned.  It was decided that questioning of President Bush
would be deferred until after the November 1992 election; subsequent efforts to question him
about this meeting were rejected by him.49

     49 President Reagan was among those who could not recall details of the key events in
question.  After several hours of careful interrogation in a deposition in Los Angeles in July
1992, Independent Counsel determined that the lack of recollection was genuine.  Those who had
worked with President Reagan had said that although the President absorbed the facts necessary
to make a decision, once it was made he seemed to have the capacity for, as one witness put it,
erasing the facts from his mind, like deleting data from a computer.  Once the policy was set, it
was said that he held his subordinates to that policy without much further reflection on how the
policy developed.  Furthermore, his lack of memory was reflected also in subjects not directly
relevant to the inquiry.

     The Investigation is Closed and Reopened:  The Bush Diary

     In September 1992, Independent Counsel reported to the special D.C. Court of Appeals panel
that appointed him that the investigation was complete, barring unforeseen developments at the
upcoming trials of Weinberger and Clarridge.  The full resources of the OIC then became trained
exclusively on the trial of pending cases and on drafting a final report.

     On December 11, 1992, the White House unexpectedly informed Independent Counsel that
President Bush had not produced to the investigation previously requested diaries relevant to
Iran/contra.  The review of Bush's diary notes, and the circumstances surrounding his failure to
produce them earlier, required the investigation to re-open.

     On December 24, 1992, President Bush pardoned Weinberger, who was to be tried in less
than two weeks, and Clarridge, scheduled for trial in March 1993, as well as four others already
convicted.

     During late December and January 1993 the diaries were produced. They did not justify
re-opening the investigation. Independent Counsel's efforts to requestion President Bush about
Iran/contra matters were thwarted by Bush's insistence that the questioning be limited to the
subject of his failure to produce his previously requested diaries.  This limitation was
unacceptable to OIC, which over the course of its continuing investigation had gathered
significant new evidence about which it wanted to question Bush.

     President Bush was the first President to grant a pardon on the eve of a trial.  The question
before Independent Counsel was, and remains, whether President Bush exercised his
constitutional prerogative to pardon a former close associate to prevent further Iran/contra
revelations.  In the absence of evidence that the pardon was secured by corruption, Independent
Counsel decided against taking the matter before the Grand Jury.

     The continuing investigation resulted in the discovery of large caches of previously withheld
contemporaneous notes and documents, which provided new insight into the highly secret events
of Iran/contra.  Had these materials been produced to congressional and criminal investigators
when they were requested in 1987, Independent Counsel's work would have proceeded more
quickly and probably with additional indictments.

     With the passage of time, mounting office expenses and dwindling staff resources,
Independent Counsel decided not to prosecute certain individuals.  Prosecutorial decisions were
based primarily on the seriousness of the crimes, the certainty of the evidence, the likelihood that
the targeted individual could provide valuable information to the investigation, and the centrality
of the individual to the Iran/contra events.

     Independent Counsel's decision to pursue the investigation beyond the Poindexter trial
resulted in these major findings:

      -- that there was extensive knowledge of North's   contra-support activities by high-ranking
officials   in the CIA, State and Defense departments;

      -- that false testimony was given to and highly   relevant documents were withheld from the
congressional and criminal Iran/contra   investigations, despite representations of   cooperation
by the Reagan and Bush Administrations;

      -- that, contrary to their testimony, Bush, Shultz and   Weinberger were kept informed of the
details of the    Iran arms sales; and

      -- that senior Administration officials in November 1986 were being invited to conceal
President Reagan's involvement in the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran by
Attorney General Meese who believed that it was possibly illegal.

Chronology of Key Public Events

     Oct. 5, 1986: Nicaraguan soldiers shoot down a contra-resupply plane; Eugene Hasenfus, an
American, survives.

     Nov. 3, 1986:  Lebanese newspaper Al-Shiraa reports that the United States secretly sold arms
to Iran.

     Nov. 6, 1986:  President Reagan denies arms were sold to Iran.

     Nov. 13, 1986:  President Reagan acknowledges weapons were sold to Iran but denies that the
arms were sold to win the release of American hostages.

     Nov. 19, 1986:  President Reagan holds a news conference at which he denies U.S.
involvement in shipments prior to January 1986.

     Nov. 25, 1986:  White House discloses contra diversion from the Iran arms sales.

     Dec. 1, 1986:  Tower Commission appointed by President Reagan.

     Dec. 4, 1986:  Meese requests appointment of Independent Counsel on Iran/contra.

     Dec. 6, 1986: Swiss financial records of Enterprise requested by Department of Justice
pursuant to treaty.

     Dec. 19, 1986:  Walsh appointed Independent Counsel.

     Jan. 6, 1987:  Senate creates Iran/contra committee.

     Jan. 7, 1987:  House creates Iran/contra committee.

     Jan. 29, 1987:  Senate Select Committee on Intelligence issues report on Iran/contra.

     Feb. 7, 1987: Swiss Office for Police Matters approves request for financial records; Albert
Hakim and Manucher Ghorbanifar appeal.

     Feb. 26, 1987:  Tower Commission issues Iran/contra report.

     March 5, 1987:  Walsh receives parallel appointment as Independent Counsel from Justice
Department.

     March 18, 1987: Walsh reaches agreement with House and Senate Iran/contra committees to
delay voting on and obtaining immunized testimony by North and Poindexter.

     April 28, 1987: Independent Counsel submits First Interim Report to Congress on potential
problems caused by immunity grants.

     April 29, 1987: Carl ``Spitz'' Channell pleads guilty to conspiracy to defraud the United
States.

     May 5, 1987:  Congress begins public hearings on Iran/contra.

     May 6, 1987:  Richard R. Miller pleads guilty to conspiracy to defraud the United States.

     July 7-10 and July 13-14, 1987: North testifies publicly under grant of immunity before
Congress.

     July 15-17 and July 20-21, 1987: Poindexter testifies publicly under grant of immunity before
Congress.

     Nov. 10, 1987: Swiss financial records of Enterprise received by Independent Counsel.

     Nov. 18, 1987:  Congress issues Iran/contra report.

     Jan. 22, 1988:  The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia strikes down the
Independent Counsel law as unconstitutional.

     March 11, 1988: McFarlane pleads guilty to withholding information from Congress.

     March 16, 1988: North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim indicted on conspiracy to defraud the
United States and other charges.

     June 8, 1988:  Judge Gesell orders separate trials for North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim
due to problems caused by congressional grants of immunity.

     June 20, 1988:  Fernandez indicted in District of Columbia for conspiracy and false
statements to the CIA Inspector General and the Tower Commission.

     June 29, 1988:  Supreme Court upholds the constitutionality of the Independent Counsel law.

     Oct. 19, 1988:  Judge Robinson dismisses Fernandez case without prejudice on venue
grounds.

     Jan. 13, 1989:  Central conspiracy and theft charges against North are dismissed because of
classified information problems.

     Jan. 31, 1989 to May 4, 1989:  North trial, resulting in three-count conviction.

     April 7, 1989: Secord is indicted on nine additional charges of obstruction, false statements
and perjury.

     April 21, 1989: Fernandez indicted on false statement and obstruction charges in Eastern
District of Virginia.

     July 24, 1989:  Attorney general obtains a stay of the Fernandez trial to appeal Classified
Information Procedures Act (CIPA) rulings.

     Aug. 23, 1989:  The Fourth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals hears oral arguments in Fernandez
on the attorney general's right to appeal under CIPA.

     Sept. 19, 1989: Walsh testifies before the legislative subcommittee of the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence on CIPA and submits a report to the House and Senate
judiciary committees and the Senate Intelligence Committee.

     Sept. 29, 1989: The Fourth Circuit rules that the attorney general does not have standing
under CIPA to appeal trial court rulings in cases prosecuted by Independent Counsel. It dismisses
the appeal and remands the case to the district court.

     Nov. 8, 1989:  Secord pleads guilty to making false statements to Congress.

     Nov. 21, 1989:  Hakim pleads guilty to illegally supplementing the salary of a Government
official; Lake Resources Inc. pleads guilty to a corporate felony of diverting Iran arms sales
proceeds to the contras.

     Nov. 24, 1989:  Fernandez is dismissed after the attorney general refuses to allow the
disclosure of certain classified information at trial.  Independent Counsel files notice with the
Fourth  Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals that the Government will appeal the trial court's CIPA
rulings.

     Dec. 11, 1989:  Independent Counsel submits Second Interim Report to Congress on CIPA.

     Dec. 12, 1989:  Walsh testifies on CIPA in closed session of the legislative subcommittee of
the House Intelligence Committee.

     Feb. 6, 1990:  North appeal oral arguments.

     Feb. 16-17 1990: Reagan gives videotaped deposition in Poindexter.

     Feb. 22, 1990:  Thomas G. Clines is indicted on tax charges.

     Feb. 22, 1990:  Walsh testifies on CIPA in a closed session of the Senate Intelligence
Committee.

     March 5, 1990 to April 7, 1990: Poindexter trial, resulting in five-count conviction.

     July 20, 1990: U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit vacates North's
convictions and orders further hearings by trial court on immunity issue.

     Sept. 6, 1990:  Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upholds trial court's rulings in Fernandez.

     Sept. 4-18, 1990: Clines trial, resulting in convictions on four felony charges.

     Oct. 12, 1990:  Fernandez dismissed after attorney general notifies trial court that he has made
a final determination not to withdraw CIPA 6(e) affidavit to bar use of classified information.

     Oct. 24-25, 1990: Walsh reports to the congressional intelligence and judiciary committees on
final outcome of Fernandez.

     May 28, 1991:  Supreme Court declines review of North case.

     July 9, 1991:  Alan D. Fiers, Jr., pleads guilty to withholding information from Congress.

     Sept. 6, 1991:  Clair E. George is indicted on 10 counts of perjury, false statements and
obstruction.

     Sept. 16, 1991: Case against North is dismissed on motion of Independent Counsel after two
days of hearings by the trial court.

     Oct. 7, 1991:  Elliott Abrams pleads guilty to withholding information from Congress.

     Nov. 15, 1991: U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit reverses
Poindexter's convictions.

     Nov. 26, 1991:  Duane R. Clarridge is indicted on seven counts of perjury and false
statements.

     Feb. 27, 1992:  Fourth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals affirms Clines' convictions.

     May 21, 1992:  Clair George is reindicted on two additional charges after three are dismissed
with Independent Counsel's consent; George now faces nine felony charges.

     May 25, 1992:  Thomas Clines begins serving 16-month jail sentence.

     June 16, 1992:  Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger is indicted on five felony
charges of obstruction, perjury and false statements in congressional and Independent Counsel
investigations.

     June 24, 1992:  Walsh issues Third Interim Report to Congress, stating that investigation is in
its final phase and focusing on whether high-ranking Administration officials beginning in
November 1986 tried to obstruct official investigations into the 1985 Iran arms sales.

     July 13, 1992:  George trial begins.

     August 26, 1992: Mistrial declared in George case after jury fails to reach a verdict.
Independent Counsel announces that the case will be retried.

     Sept. 17, 1992: Walsh informs Chief Judge George MacKinnon, of the Independent Counsel
appointing panel, and Attorney General William Barr that the investigation is complete barring
unforeseen developments at the remaining trials.

     Sept. 29, 1992: Judge Hogan dismisses Count 1, an obstruction of Congress charge, in the
Weinberger case on grounds it does not conform to the Poindexter appeals ruling on the
obstruction statute.

     Oct. 19, 1992:  George retrial on seven counts begins.

     Oct. 30, 1992:  Weinberger is re-indicted on a false statement charge, replacing the previously
dismissed Count 1 obstruction charge.

     Dec. 7, 1992:  Supreme Court declines to review Poindexter.

     Dec. 9, 1992:  George is found guilty on two counts of false statements and perjury before
Congress; sentencing is set for February 1993.

     Dec. 11, 1992:  Judge Hogan dismisses the new one-count indictment against Weinberger on
statute of limitations grounds, leaving four charges remaining.

     Dec. 11, 1992:  White House informs Independent Counsel that President Bush has kept
diaries relevant to Iran/contra, which have never been produced to investigators.

     Dec. 24, 1992:  President Bush pardons Weinberger, Clarridge, McFarlane, Fiers, Abrams and
George.  Independent Counsel denounces pardons.

     Jan. 5, 1993:  Weinberger trial was scheduled to begin.

     Feb. 8, 1993:  Independent Counsel issues Fourth Interim Report to Congress on the
Weinberger case and the presidential pardons.

Part III

    The Operational Conspiracy:  A Legal Analysis

     The central and perhaps the most important criminal charge developed by Independent
Counsel was the conspiracy charge against Oliver L. North, John M. Poindexter, Richard V.
Secord and Albert Hakim.  According to that charge -- set forth as Count One of the indictment
returned on March 16, 1988 -- these four men conspired to defraud the United States by
deceitfully (1) supporting a war in Nicaragua in defiance of congressional controls; (2) using the
Iran arms sales to raise funds to be spent at the direction of North and Poindexter, rather than the
United States Government; and (3) endangering the effort to rescue Americans held hostage in
Lebanon by pursuing ends that were both unauthorized and inconsistent with the goal of
releasing the hostages.1

     1 Count One charged a violation of 18 U.S.C.  371.  The bill of particulars in North stated
that among the co-conspirators not indicted were National Security Adviser Robert C.
McFarlane; CIA Station Chief Joseph F. Fernandez; Fawn Hall, North's secretary; and Robert
Earl, North's assistant.

     The Reagan Administration was unambiguously hostile to this count.  In a move that Judge
Gerhard A. Gesell described as ``unprecedented,'' the Justice Department in November 1988 filed
an amicus brief supporting North's claim that the count was legally insufficient and should be
dismissed.2  Subsequently, having been informed by Independent Counsel that the conspiracy
count could be tried only if a small amount of classified information were declassified, the
Administration refused to release that information.  Because there was no way to appeal such a
refusal to declassify, Independent Counsel was forced in January 1989 to drop Count One in
North and a related charge that the diversion of profits from the Iran arms sales was a theft of
Government funds.

     2 Memorandum of Law of the United States Filed by the Department of Justice as Amicus
Curiae with Respect to the Independent Counsel's Opposition to the Defendant's Motions to
Dismiss or Limit Count One (filed November 18, 1988).

     Although Count One was not tried, it was established as a matter of law that if North,
Poindexter, and the others had done what they were charged with doing, they had committed
criminal acts.  In rejecting the challenges of the Department of Justice and North, Judge Gesell
ruled that the count ``allege[d] [a] well-established offens[e]'' and that the activity set forth in the
count was criminal.3  He stated: ``The indictment clearly alleges a conspiracy which involved
concealing the very existence of the profits of the enterprise from the start and hiding from
Congress information relating to the conspirators' assistance for the Contras.'' 4  In addition to
holding that the  indictment set forth a crime, Judge Gesell also found that his review of the
evidence presented to the Grand Jury indicated there was probable cause that that crime had in
fact been committed.5

     3 U.S. v. North, 708 F. Supp. 375, 380 (1988).

     4 Ibid., p. 377.

     5 698 F. Supp. 300, 315 (``The grand jury transcript and exhibits reflect solid proof and ample
probable cause to indict on each and every count.'').

     At the heart of the Iran/contra affair, then, were criminal acts of Reagan Administration
officials that the Reagan Administration, by withholding non-secret classified information,
ensured would never be tried.  Yet Judge Gesell's decision marked an important, if incomplete,
accomplishment of Independent Counsel.  Judge Gesell's decision unambiguously established
that high national security officials who engage in a conspiracy to subvert the laws of this country
have engaged in criminal acts, even when the laws themselves provide no criminal sanctions.

     A successful prosecution would have allowed Independent Counsel to present
comprehensively the results of his investigation into the operational conspiracy.  Much of the
evidence of the conspiracy was presented at the trials of the dismembered individual charges of
obstruction and false statements but the questions of intent were different, the diversion of funds
from Iran to the contras was peripheral rather than central, and the absence of the conspiracy
charge deprived the North case of its cohesiveness and completeness.

     The following discussion is an attempt to present in an abbreviated fashion what would have
been Independent Counsel's case at a conspiracy trial of North, Secord, Poindexter and Hakim,
and an explanation of the criminal nature of their actions.

     Overview of Count One

     In summary the proof would have shown three separate but intertwined activities, each
specified in the indictment as an object of the conspiracy.

     First, using Government resources, the conspirators conducted an unauthorized covert
program in support of the contras.  Because they feared that Congress would stop them if it knew
of their activities and because they feared, as well, the political consequences of that exposure,
they deceived Congress about the fact that they were providing this support.  By so doing, the
conspirators obstructed Congress's legitimate functions of regulating governmental expenditures
and overseeing foreign covert actions.

     Second, North and Poindexter used their Government positions to create a hidden slush fund
under the exclusive control of the conspirators.  This conflict of interest affected North and
Poindexter's actions in numerous ways.  On a mundane level, they permitted significant profits to
be generated for the benefit of the private members of the conspiracy and less significant
benefits to North.  On a power-grabbing level, North -- in order to increase the body of funds
under his control for covert activities -- used his position to drive down the amount that the U.S.
Government received from the Iran arms sales and to inflate the amount that the Iranian
purchasers paid the conspirators.

     Third, by secretly pursuing their own ends, the conspirators outraged the Iranians they were
attempting to persuade and thus jeopardized the success of the Iran initiative.  In particular, the
initiative's goals of establishing improved relations with Iran and securing the release of
American hostages held by groups sympathetic to that country were jeopardized by the
conspirators' private objective to overprice the weapons in order to secure additional proceeds for
unauthorized purposes.

     The following explanation of the charge of conspiracy to defraud brought against North,
Poindexter, Secord, and Hakim begins with a brief discussion of what the crime of conspiracy to
defraud the United States is.  After that general explanation, each object of the conspiracy will be
discussed:  first, the evidence as to each object, and then why that object was criminal.

     Federal Conspiracy Law and Iran/contra

     The federal conspiracy statute, 18 U.S.C.  371, states that it is a crime to conspire to
``defraud the United  States, or any agency thereof in any manner or for any purpose. . . .''  The
attempt to carry out the three objectives described above -- in other words, the attempt to
interfere in a deceitful fashion with lawful governmental processes -- constituted a classic
conspiracy to defraud the United States.  Almost a century of case law established that  371
makes criminal deceitful schemes to obstruct the lawful functions of Government, either by
defeating enforcement of legal restrictions or by using governmental authority to further
illegitimate ends.  Far from breaking new ground, Judge Gesell's ruling in North simply followed
precedent.  Fraud is criminal even when those who engage in the fraud are Government officials
pursuing presidential policy.

     The authoritative definition of the crime was set out by the Supreme Court almost 70 years
ago in Hammerschmidt v. United States.  In that case, Chief Justice Taft, speaking for a
unanimous Court, stated:

     To conspire to defraud the United States means primarily to cheat the government out of
property or money, but it also means to interfere with or obstruct one of its lawful governmental
functions by deceit, craft or trickery, or at least by means that are dishonest.  It is not necessary
that the Government shall be subjected to property or pecuniary loss by the fraud, but only that its
legitimate official action and purpose shall be defeated by misrepresentation, chicane, or the
overreaching of those charged with carrying out the governmental intention.6

     6 265 U.S. 182, 188 (1924) (emphasis added).

     Over the years the Supreme Court has frequently reaffirmed the validity of Chief Justice Taft's
definition.  For example, shortly before the Grand Jury indicted North and Poindexter, the
Supreme Court in McNally v. United States 7 declared that  371 barred deceitful interference
with governmental operations.  In that case, the Court declared that Congress specifically
designed  371 to protect not merely property rights, but the interests of the Government in fair
administration of its functions for the benefit of the entire population.8

     7 107 S. Ct. 2875 (1987).

     8 Ibid., at 2881 n.8, quoting Curley v. United States, 130 F. 1, 7 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 195
U.S. 628 (1904).  See also Dennis v. United States, 384 U.S. 855, 861 (1966) (``It has long been
established that this statutory language is not confined to fraud as that term has been defined in
the common law.  It reaches `any conspiracy for the purpose of impairing, obstructing, or
defeating the lawful function of any department of government.' '') (quoting Haas v. Henkel, 216
U.S. 462, 479 (1910));  United States v. Johnson, 383 U.S. 169, 172 (1966); Lutwak v. United
States, 344 U.S. 604 (1953); Glasser v. United States, 315 U.S. 60, 66 (1942).

     Section 371 extends beyond the traditional concept of a conspiracy as simply an agreement to
commit a substantive crime.  Early in this century, the Supreme Court held that a conspiracy to
defraud the United States need not involve conduct that violates another independent criminal
statute.9  From the start of this century, the requisite element of fraud has been construed
expansively so as to  encompass not only a scheme to cheat the Government out of money, but
also -- in fact, especially -- deceitful conduct aimed at obstructing the Government's ability to
implement its programs, and to administer its affairs honestly and in accordance with the law.10

     9 See, for example, United States v. Keitel, 211 U.S. 370, 393 (1908).

     10 See, for example, Curley v. United States, 130 F. 1, 9-10 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 195 U.S.
628 (1904).

     Similarly, in interpreting the mail and wire fraud statutes, courts repeatedly have found
deceitful interference with governmental operations to be criminally fraudulent.  For example, in
United States v. Diggs,11 the Court of Appeals upheld the wire fraud conviction of a
congressman who had secretly used monies from his clerk-hire allowance to pay certain of his
district office expenses.  The Court stated that the Congressman did not have ``unfettered power
to divert monies intended for one purpose to another, completely unauthorized purpose,'' and
concluded that by carrying out this secret diversion Diggs had ``defrauded the public . . . of his
faithful and honest services.'' 12

     11 613 F.2d 988 (D.C. Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 982 (1980).

     12 Ibid., at 995, 998 (emphasis in the original).  While the Supreme Court in McNally rejected
the theory on which cases such as Diggs had been prosecuted, the Court emphatically did not
conclude that the conduct in those cases was not fraudulent; rather, its holding was based solely
on the history of the mail fraud statute, which the Court determined was ``limited in scope to the
protection of property rights.''  107 S.Ct. 2875, 2882.  As pointed out above, the McNally Court
was careful to distinguish  371 cases brought on the same theory that was rejected as to  1341
in McNally.  Mail fraud cases brought under this theory thus remain persuasive authority in
interpreting  371.

     Such basic principles of the law of conspiracy and the law of fraud were applied in an
important case growing out of Watergate, United States v. Haldeman.13  Three of President
Nixon's closest advisers -- Robert Haldeman, John Ehrlichman, and John Mitchell -- were
charged with conspiring to defraud the United States by, among other things, ``attempting to get
the CIA to interfere with the Watergate investigation being conducted by the FBI.'' 14  There was
no hint in the case that they had been motivated by a desire to enrich themselves, and there was
no criminal statute punishing Executive Branch officials for manipulating the Central
Intelligence Agency for political reasons.  Nonetheless, the Court of Appeals accepted that the
Watergate conspirators' ``misuse of the CIA'' defrauded the United States because it denied the
Government of its ``right to have the officials of its departments and agencies transact their
official business honestly and impartially, free from corruption, fraud, improper and undue
influence, dishonesty and obstruction.'' 15

     13 559 F.2d 31 (D.C. Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 431 U.S. 933 (1977).

     14 Ibid. (quoting jury instructions).

     15 Ibid., at 122 & n.255 (quoting jury instruction).

     In short, long before Iran/contra, it had been established beyond question that deceptive
schemes to prevent the enforcement of civil statutes or other Government policies reflected in
law -- whatever form such schemes may take -- fall squarely within the ambit of the crime of
conspiracy to defraud the United States.  The teaching of Hammerschmidt and its progeny can be
reduced to the following:  It constitutes fraud within the meaning of 18 U.S.C.  371 to breach
the public trust by agreeing, through deceitful or dishonest means, to prevent the Government
from conducting its operations and implementing its policies honestly and faithfully, and in
accordance with applicable legal constraints and guidelines.

     Under Hammerschmidt and the cases that followed it, a conspiracy must have two elements.
First, it must involve ``interfere[nce] with or obstruct[ion of a] lawful governmental function[]. .
. .'' 16  The ways in which Poindexter, North, Secord and Hakim interfered with governmental
functions are spelled out in more detail below.  The secret contra war activity obstructed
Congress's control of the appropriations process and its oversight of covert operations.  North
and Poindexter's self-dealing defeated the public's right to have Government officers pursue
officially sanctioned ends, rather than inconsistent private ends.

     16 265 U.S. 182, 188.

     The second element of a criminal conspiracy is that the interference with governmental
operations must be accomplished by deceit.  In the absence of deceit, an agreement to interfere
with governmental operations is not a conspiracy to defraud the United States, although it may
constitute some other crime. The conspiracy charged by Independent Counsel involved activities
that were shielded by a campaign of lies and deceptions from Government officials who could
have disagreed with those activities and might have sought to stop them.  It was that deceit
which, in Independent Counsel's opinion, made the conspiracy criminal.  Over the objections of
North and the Reagan Justice Department, Judge Gesell, in the only definitive judicial statement
on Iran/contra and the conspiracy law, found that Independent Counsel's view was right.

     There follows an abbreviated presentation of the evidence that would have supported the
conspiracy charge. First, the secret support of the contras; second, the self dealing diversion; and
third, the corruption of President Reagan's Iranian initiative.

     First Object of the Conspiracy:  The Secret War Activities

     The crux of the first charged object of the conspiracy was an agreement to provide military
assistance to the Nicaraguan contras and to deceive Congress about the fact  that support was
being provided.17  Poindexter, North, and their co-conspirators carried out their ``secret war'' in a
way calculated to defeat legal restrictions governing the conduct of military and covert operations
and congressional control of appropriations, and they concealed their activities from legitimate
congressional oversight.

     17 Paragraph 13(a)(1) of Count One stated that the conspirators sought to defraud the United
States:

     by impeding, impairing, defeating and obstructing the lawful governmental functions of the
United States, including compliance with legal restrictions governing the conduct of military and
covert action activities and congressional control of appropriations and exercise of oversight for
such activities, by deceitfully and without legal authorization organizing, directing and
concealing a program to continue the funding of and logistical and other support for military and
paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by the Contras, at a time when the prohibitions of the
Boland Amendment and other legal restrictions on the execution of covert actions were in effect.

     Had the case been tried as indicted, the Government's proof of U.S. secret war activities
would have fallen into three broad categories:  (1) the organization and direction of a resupply
operation to provide the contras with logistical and other support; (2) funding of the resupply
operation, including exploitation of the Iran initiative; and (3) attempts to conceal from Congress
the conspirators' involvement in these activities.

     The Evidence

     Organization and Direction of the Resupply Network

     During the last half of 1984 and the first half of 1985, North had developed a loose structure
for contra support.  Secord, responding to contra requests through North, was selling arms.
Thomas G. Clines, a Secord associate, arranged for their purchase; Hakim, assisted by Swiss
money manager Willard I. Zucker, set up the structure to finance the activities with funds
provided to the contras through North and raised primarily by President Reagan and National
Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane.

     The creation of the conspirators' more tightly organized secret resupply network dated from a
June 28, 1985, meeting in Miami, Florida.  This meeting was attended by, among others, North,
Adolfo Calero (political leader of one contra faction known as the FDN), Enrique Bermudez
(commander of the FDN's military forces), Secord, Clines and Rafael Quintero, an associate of
Secord.  At the Miami meeting, North informed Calero and Bermudez that the contras would no
longer be left to decide what arms they would purchase or from whom they would buy them.  In
the future, North would provide the contras with materiel, and Secord would deliver it to the
contras in the field.  In addition, North directed that actions be taken to develop and resupply a
``southern front'' along the border of Costa Rica and Nicaragua.

     Following the Miami meeting, North assumed a central role in the contra war effort.  Using
Robert W. Owen as a courier, North provided the contras with significant military advice and
guidance.  At the same time, with the assistance of Secord, North in the following fashion
secretly brought into being the resupply operation that he had described on June 28.

     First, North directed Owen and William Haskell, another North courier, to travel to Costa
Rica and help activate a southern military front.  Owen and Haskell, aided by CIA Costa Rican
Station Chief Joseph F. Fernandez, undertook to build a clandestine airstrip to be used to
resupply it.  Haskell eventually negotiated the acquisition of property for the strip, which was
funded using Swiss accounts controlled directly by Secord and Hakim, and indirectly by North.
Within the United States, North attended planning sessions and personally commissioned private
individuals to do preliminary site work and engineering tasks necessary for the construction of a
usable airstrip.

     North arranged for Haskell and Owen to be introduced to Fernandez.  Fernandez minimized
and concealed from his superiors at the CIA the true nature of his contacts with North and
North's private representatives.  Fernandez and North eventually developed a secret
communications network using National Security Agency (NSA)-supplied KL-43 encryption
devices, outside normal CIA communications channels.  In addition, telephone records show
over 100 calls from Fernandez to North during the period August 1985 until November 1986.
Under the direction of North, Fernandez and U.S. Ambassador to Costa Rica Lewis A. Tambs
used their influence as representatives of the United States to obtain the support of senior Costa
Rican officials for the airstrip project.

     Second, North directed Secord to purchase aircraft capable of resupplying contra forces.
From January to August 1986, private parties working on behalf of North and Secord purchased
four military aircraft costing approximately $1.8 million, as well as additional equipment for
operation of these aircraft.  The funds for these purchases came from Hakim and Secord's secret
Swiss bank accounts.

     North took an active part in the purchase of the aircraft.  He reviewed and approved a
technical proposal for the resupply organization solicited by Secord from Richard B. Gadd, a
Secord associate.  North and Secord then directed Gadd in November 1985 to approach the
Government of Venezuela in an unsuccessful attempt to purchase military aircraft.  North used
his influence as a Government official to vouch for Gadd's bona fides with the government of
Venezuela.  Similarly, North exercised final approval on major expenditures for equipment.  In
January 1986, North personally directed Secord to provide Gadd with over $100,000 for
anticipated costs.  Later in 1986, North directed Secord to purchase a package of spare parts
required by the resupply operation that cost in excess of $200,000.  North personally approved
the purchase of a fourth military aircraft in August 1986 at a cost of $250,000.  When there was a
dispute between Gadd and Secord as to the ownership of the aircraft, North resolved it in favor of
Secord's Enterprise.

     Third, North secretly undertook to obtain the use of Ilopango air base in El Salvador for his
resupply operation.  In a letter dated September 20, 1985, North requested that Felix Rodriguez,
an American citizen with close ties to the commander of the Salvadoran Air Force,  solicit
permission to use the base for his resupply operation.  North gave Rodriguez a code name for a
representative of Secord who would be assigned there.18   In December 1985, Secord's assistant
in charge of Central American operations, Quintero, using that code name, obtained through
Rodriguez the consent of the commanding officer.

     18 In that letter, North explicitly directed Rodriguez not to advise a particular CIA official of
the proposed resupply project.  North advised Rodriguez, ``AFTER READING THIS LETTER
PLEASE DESTROY IT.''  (Letter from North to Rodriguez, 9/20/85, AKW 022740.)

     Fourth, at North's instruction, Secord through Clines purchased in Europe and delivered to
Central America thousands of pounds of arms from December 1985 to September 1986.  The
cost of purchase and transport of these arms was paid from the secret Swiss accounts.

     Fifth, North, with the assistance of Secord, secretly directed the actual administration of the
resupply project during 1986.  Secord hired first Gadd and then Robert Dutton as project
managers.  Gadd and Dutton, through the corporation Amalgamated Commercial Enterprises
(ACE), in turn hired numerous other employees.  By the summer of 1986, the resupply operation
had over 20 full-time employees whose combined salaries totalled over $60,000 per month.  The
cost of equipment and salaries for the operation was paid from the Enterprise's secret Swiss
accounts.

     The activities at the Ilopango air base were supervised by Quintero for Secord.  Rodriguez
served as liaison with the base commander, General Juan Rafael Bustillo.  Additional assistance
and supervision was  provided by the military group detailed to the U.S. Embassy in El Salvador.

     Gadd and Dutton reported directly to Secord.  At the same time, they had frequent -- often
daily -- contact with North, from whom they accepted guidance and direction.  North frequently
gave them orders regarding specific operations, usually in order to accelerate resupply drops to
the contras.

     In April 1986, for example, North commandeered an aircraft provided to the State
Department's Nicaraguan Humanitarian Assistance Office (NHAO) by Southern Air Transport
(SAT) for the delivery of U.S.-approved humanitarian supplies to Ilopango.  SAT was also an
Enterprise subcontractor for the delivery of weapons.  Contrary to SAT's contract with NHAO
and the legal limits on the U.S. humanitarian activities, North directed the aircraft to drop a load
of weapons to the southern front of Nicaragua.  North was able to accomplish this because the
aircraft was being leased by Gadd, pursuant to Gadd's State Department contract (which North
had helped Gadd obtain) for delivery of humanitarian aid.  North personally coordinated planning
of this operation with Secord and Fernandez and Enterprise representatives at Ilopango using
their network of KL-43 communication devices.

     Later in April 1986, it was North and Secord who secretly met at Ilopango with Salvadoran
and contra  military leaders, as well as personnel of the U.S. Embassy, to resolve disputes
regarding the resupply operation and its disappointing lack of success.  Contra leaders criticized
the quality of the aircraft being used and requested funds with which to purchase their own
aircraft.  North responded that the aircraft had been donated and that funds were unavailable to
purchase alternative aircraft.

     Under North's and Secord's direction, the resupply operation in 1986 improved and ultimately
delivered to the contras in the field in Nicaragua thousands of pounds of arms previously
purchased by Secord.  North generally received detailed inventories of the lethal supplies
provided contra forces.  The resupply operation also delivered substantial quantities of nonlethal
aid and engaged in projects such as training contra forces in the use of explosives.  These
operational activities of the Enterprise ended in early October 1986 when an Enterprise aircraft
was shot down over Nicaragua, killing three crew members and leading to the capture of Eugene
Hasenfus, an American who told his Nicaraguan captors that he was working for the CIA.

     Funding of the Resupply Operation

     Funds for the secret war came primarily from three sources:  (a) the National Endowment for
the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL); (b) the Iran arms sales; and (c) foreign governments.  As set
forth in the ``Flow of Funds'' chapter of  this Report, the total amount of funds deposited in
Enterprise accounts in Switzerland was $47.6 million.  By the time the Iran/contra affair became
public, the Enterprise had given to the contras or had spent on efforts related to the contras
approximately $17.6 million of these funds.

     Foreign Donations

     From December 1984 through July 1985, the contras paid into Enterprise accounts
approximately $11.3 million for a variety of services and goods.  Most of these funds came from
the Saudis, who contributed $32 million in 1984 and 1985.  The Saudi funds were nearly
exhausted by mid-1985.

     After North held his June meeting in Miami, the contras were no longer the direct recipient of
such funds.  Thereafter, the conspirators directed to Enterprise bank accounts all funds from third
countries that had been solicited by U.S. officials on behalf of the contras, even though some of
them had been restricted for only humanitarian purposes.

     In August 1985, North asked Gaston Sigur, an NSC staff officer, to arrange a meeting
between North and an official of the Taiwanese government for the purpose of soliciting funds
for the contras.  Following this meeting, North had Sigur confirm the decision by Taiwan to
provide the contras with $1 million.  North then directed Robert Owen to deliver an envelope
containing the number of an  Enterprise account to the Taiwanese official.  On September 20,
1985, $1 million was received by the Enterprise.  In late 1985, North renewed his request, via
Sigur, that Taiwan provide additional funds to the contras.  In February 1986, a second transfer of
$1 million was received in an Enterprise account.

     Similarly, in June 1986, when the State Department planned to raise $10 million for the
contras from the Sultan of Brunei, North undertook to divert the funds to the Enterprise by giving
one of its Swiss account numbers to Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.  Fawn Hall,
North's secretary, apparently made a transcription error in the account number so the funds were
misdirected and never received.

     On November 20, 1985, the Enterprise received $1 million from the government of Israel to
pay the Enterprise for transporting a number of shipments of weapons from Israel to Iran.  That
weapons transfer was abandoned after the first shipment.  The Enterprise's expenses for that
shipment were less than $200,000, but the Enterprise kept the balance.

     NEPL

     Beginning in the spring of 1985, North, working primarily with Carl R. ``Spitz'' Channell, the
president of NEPL, arranged for this tax-exempt organization to sponsor briefings and receptions
designed in part to raise funds for  the contras.  North gave briefings at the White House and the
Old Executive Office Building (OEOB) for audiences of prospective contributors concerning the
war in Nicaragua and the needs of the contras.  To assist Channell in his solicitation of
purportedly tax-deductible contributions, North identified specific military and other needs of the
contras.

     In addition to general briefings for groups of contributors, Channell, his assistant Daniel
Conrad, and their business associate Richard R. Miller of International Business
Communications (IBC), arranged private briefings by North to individual prospective
contributors.  The private briefings were given from June 1985 to late September 1986 in a
variety of locations, including North's office at the OEOB.  Prior to some of these briefings,
Channell or Conrad advised North of the amount of money that would be solicited from a
particular contributor immediately following the private meeting.  North would then include in
some of his briefings a discussion of the need for specific pieces of military equipment and their
cost, knowing that contributors to whom this information was provided would be immediately
solicited to purchase the items he had discussed.

     North thanked those who gave contributions to NEPL, either in person, by telephone, or in
writing on official NSC stationery.  As further inducement to contribute to NEPL, North and
Channell told some prospective  contributors that, if they donated a specified amount to the
contras, they would be given private meetings and photo opportunities with the President.  North
and Channell arranged several such meetings between contributors and President Reagan.

     Between June 1, 1985, and November 25, 1986, North and his NEPL partners raised
approximately $6.3 million for the contras, and transferred $3.3 million to Calero and to the
Enterprise for contra expenses.  To conceal both the source of this money and his own
participation, North personally directed that approximately $1.7 million be transferred from
NEPL through IBC to corporate bank accounts in the Cayman Islands, and then ultimately to
Enterprise bank accounts in Switzerland.

     Exploitation of the Iran Arms Sales

     The Iran arms sales were the major source of the Enterprise's funds for the secret war
activities.  In all, the Enterprise received slightly more than $30 million for the sale of
Government arms and returned only $12.2 million to the United States.  At least $3.6 million was
to fund the Enterprise's resupply operation in support of the contras.

     Concealment

     Soon after the June 1985 meeting in Miami, a series of congressional inquiries sought to
determine exactly what  the U.S. Government, and North in particular, were doing on behalf of
the contras.  McFarlane, Poindexter and North responded by actively deceiving committees of
Congress with a series of false statements and by other efforts to ensure that Congress would
never find out about the secret contra military support.

     The first false statements came in McFarlane's September 5, 1985, letter to the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, a letter on which McFarlane, Poindexter, and North
all worked.  The letter contained false denials of North's fund-raising activities and his provision
of tactical advice to the contras, as well as a false assurance that no one on the NSC staff had
``violate[d] the letter or spirit'' of the Boland prohibition on military aid.  September 12, 1985,
and October 7, 1985, letters under McFarlane's signature, both jointly drafted by North and
McFarlane, contained similar false statements.

     McFarlane's replacement by Poindexter as national security adviser on December 4, 1985, did
not alter the pattern of deceit.  North continued to work to prevent dissemination of information
about his activities.  On June 16, 1986, North sent Fernandez a KL-43 message that stated in
part:

     I do not think we ought to contemplate these operations without [Quintero] being on scene.
Too many things go wrong that then directly involve you and me in  what should be deniable for
both of us.19

     19 KL-43 Message from North to Fernandez, 6/16/86, AKW 004389.

     On May 15, 1986, Poindexter sent this computer message to North:

     I am afraid you are letting your operational role become too public.  From now on I don't want
you to talk to anybody else, including Casey, except me about any of your operational roles.  In
fact you need to generate a cover story that I have insisted that you stop.20

     20 PROFs Note from Poindexter to North, 5/15/86, AKW 021378.

     North responded to Poindexter on the same day with a computer note that said ``Done.''
North subsequently had Robert Dutton inform Enterprise employees in El Salvador that the
resupply operation had been taken over by a new entity known as ``B.C. Washington.'' 21

     21 Nevertheless, on June 10, 1986, Poindexter reminded North via computer:  ``I still want
you to reduce you visibility.''  (PROFs Note from Poindexter to North, 6/11/86, AKW
021426-27.)

     In the summer of 1986, Congress renewed its inquiries.  On July 21, 1986, responding to a
House resolution of inquiry, Poindexter sent letters to two committee chairmen, stating that
McFarlane's 1985 letters to Congress accurately described the activities of the NSC staff.  When
members of the House Intelligence Committee questioned North in person, he falsely denied his
contra-support activities.

     The deception continued after one of the resupply organization's planes carrying Hasenfus was
shot down in October 1986.  Congress was about to authorize resumption of contra support by
the CIA, with an appropriation of $100 million.  Administration officials denied any connection
with the aircraft.  In October and November 1986, North altered, destroyed, and removed
documents and official records relating to the resupply operation.  On November 23, 1986, he
lied to the attorney general to conceal Secord's operation and his own responsibility in directing
the secret resupply activities and the control of the funds used to finance them.  Between
November 22 and 29, 1986, Poindexter unsuccessfully tried to delete from the White House
computer system all of his communications with North.  Finally, on December 8, 1986,
McFarlane told the House Foreign Affairs Committee that he was unaware that the government
or citizens of Saudi Arabia had been involved in financing the contras.

     The Secret War Activities as a Conspiracy to Defraud the United States

     The contra-support activities of the conspirators were charged as criminal because they were
designed to deceive Congress and to obstruct and frustrate Congress's constitutional powers.  The
essence of the crime was not the provision of support for the contras per se, nor were the
conspirators charged simply with conspiring to violate the Boland Amendment as such.  Rather,
the essence of the crime  was the deceit of Congress.  In the language of the indictment, North
violated  371 not simply by agreeing to ``organiz[e]'' and ``direct[]'' the program of military
support for the contras, but by agreeing to organize and direct the program ``deceitfully and
without legal authorization,'' and by ``concealing'' that program (emphasis added).  In other
words, what the conspirators did was criminal because United States Government support of the
contras was a matter within congressional oversight and a matter that Congress could
legitimately legislate about and because the conspirators used fraud to keep Congress from
discharging these responsibilities.

     In particular, the conspirators' plan to fund the contras and keep Congress from finding out
about that funding interfered with governmental functions in two ways specified in the
indictment:  by contravening specific ``legal restrictions governing the conduct of military and
covert action activities'' and more generally by defeating ``congressional control of
appropriations and exercise of oversight for such activities.''

     Legal Restrictions on Covert Action

     In recent years, spurred by revelations of controversial covert actions undertaken without
sufficient accountability, Congress and the President have erected a complex web of restrictions,
rules, and notification  requirements to assure that past abuses by our intelligence agencies are
not repeated.  Congress has also enacted specific restrictions on covert action in particular
regions.22  The most pertinent of these restrictions is, of course, the Boland Amendment, which
essentially prohibited expenditure of U.S. funds in support of the contras.  But the Boland
Amendment must be understood in the context of the entire system of restrictions on covert
action adopted since 1970.

     22 In addition to the various versions of the Boland Amendment, discussed below, see, for
example, the congressional cut-off of funding for military actions in Angola (the ``Clark
Amendment,'' P.L. 94-329, Title IV,  404, 90 Stat. 757 (1976), 22 U.S.C.  2293 note) and
Cambodia (P.L. 93-51, 87 Stat. 134 (1973)).

     Responding to ``allegations of substantial, even massive wrong-doing within the `national
intelligence' system,'' the special Senate investigating committee known as the Church
Committee found in 1976 that ``presidents and administrations have made excessive, and at
times self-defeating, use of covert action,'' and that these uses were in large part attributable to
Congress's ``fail[ure] to provide the necessary statutory guidelines to carry out their necessary
missions in accord with constitutional processes.'' 23

     23 U.S. Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to
Intelligence Activities, Final Report, Book I:  Foreign and Military Intelligence, S.Rep. No. 755,
94th Cong., 2d Sess. 1, 425 (1976) (hereafter, ``Church Committee Report'').

     Recognizing that covert action remained necessary in ``extraordinary circumstances involving
grave threats to U.S. national security,'' and that the nature of covert action made it impossible to
``assur[e] public participation in assessing each covert action,'' the Church Committee was
insistent that ``the mechanisms of executive branch review and control and of legislative
intelligence oversight must serve'' to prevent abuses of covert action.24  The result of the Church
Committee's 18-month investigation was a series of interlocking restrictions on covert actions
that, in combination, required that significant covert actions be supported by an explicit
presidential authorization and reported to the relevant congressional oversight committees.

     24 Ibid., pp. 446-47.

     At the time of the Iran/contra operational conspiracy, the central pillars of this structure were
the Hughes-Ryan Amendment of 1974 and Executive Order 12333, as supplemented by National
Security Decision Directive 159.  The Hughes-Ryan Amendment, responding to the same
revelations of ``excessive'' and ``self-defeating'' use of covert action that led to the creation of the
Church Committee, prohibited expenditure of funds to support covert action operations by the
CIA abroad

     unless and until the President finds that each such operation is important to the national
security of the United States and reports, in a timely fashion, a description and scope of such
operation  to the appropriate committees of the Congress. . . .25

     25 P.L. 93-559,  32, 88 Stat. 1804.

     The remedy of the Amendment was to require (1) formal approval and certification by the
President -- thus preserving political and legal accountability by the President for covert action --
and (2) the provision of timely information to the Congress so that it can oversee and, if
necessary, take action concerning, such covert activity.

     While the Hughes-Ryan Amendment initially applied only to the CIA, in 1980, Congress
modified Hughes-Ryan.  It left intact the limitation of the Finding requirement to CIA covert
activities.26  But it recodified the congressional-notification requirement as part of the newly
enacted 50 U.S.C.  413.  Between 1984 and 1986,  413 required that appropriate congressional
authorities be ``informed of all intelligence activities which are the responsibility of, are engaged
in by, or are carried out for or on behalf of, any department, agency, or entity of the United
States,'' and thus imposes a reporting requirement for both CIA and non-CIA covert
operations.27

     26 22 U.S.C.  2422.  (Repealed by 8/14/91, P.L. 102-88, Title VI,  601, 105 Stat. 441.)

     27 50 U.S.C.  413(a)(1) (1982).

     In addition to these statutes, executive orders -- most recently Executive Order 12333 -- have
long forbidden Government agencies other than the CIA from carrying out covert actions unless
there is a presidential determination that the use of some agency other than the CIA ``is more
likely to achieve a particular objective.'' 28  National Security Decision Directive 159 requires
that this determination be in writing.  Since the Executive Branch is required to keep the
intelligence oversight committees of the Congress ``fully and currently informed of all
intelligence activities which are the responsibility of, are engaged in by, or are carried out for or
on behalf of, any department, agency, or entity of the United States,'' 29 these executive orders
have given Congress an additional means of keeping itself informed of covert activities in the
Executive Branch.

     28 The version of this prohibition in effect at all times relevant to Count One is found in Part
1.8(e) of Executive Order 12333, 46 Fed. Reg. 59941, 59945 (Dec. 4, 1981).  Similar restrictions
have applied since President Carter promulgated Executive Order 12036, 43 Fed. Reg. 3674
(1978).

     29 50 U.S.C.  413(a)(1) (1982) (emphasis added).

     Taking the Hughes-Ryan Amendment and Executive Order 12333 together, the law governing
accountability for covert action is clear:  Personal presidential accountability and reporting to
Congress are the rule for all covert actions.

     In addition to this basic structure of restrictions on covert military actions, Congress placed
additional limitations on covert assistance to the contras in Nicaragua, principally through a
series of laws known as the ``Boland  Amendments.''  They are relevant primarily as the law the
conspirators were determined to evade.

     There were four different versions of the Boland Amendment in the years 1982-1986.  Only
the last two applied during the period relevant to Count One.  Section 8066(a) of the Department
of Defense Appropriations Bill, enacted in the Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 1985,30
was in effect from October 12, 1984, to December 19, 1985.  It provided:

     30 P.L. 98-473.

     During fiscal year 1985, no funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency, the
Department of Defense, or any other agency or entity of the United States involved in
intelligence activities may be obligated or expended for the purpose or which would have the
effect of supporting, directly or indirectly, military or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by any
nation, group, organization, movement or individual.

     The second relevant Boland Amendment was enacted on December 4, 1985, as part of the
Intelligence Authorization Act for fiscal year 1986.31  In effect until October 18, 1986, this
statute provided:

     31 P.L. 99-169.

     Funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, or any other
agency or entity of the United States involved in intelligence activities may be obligated and
expended during fiscal year 1986 to provide funds, materiel, or other assistance to the
Nicaraguan democratic  resistance to support military or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua
only as authorized in section 101 and as specified in the classified Schedule of Authorizations
referred to in section 102, or pursuant to section 502 of the National Security Act of 1947, or to
section 106 of the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1985 (P.L. 99-88).

     The ``classified schedule'' authorized a limited amount of funds for communications
equipment and communication training for the contras.32  Neither the classified schedule nor any
of the statutes enumerated permitted the provision by the Government of lethal materiel for the
contras' military or paramilitary efforts.  The Boland Amendments were always provisions in
appropriation acts.  They did not provide for criminal sanctions.

     32 In addition to the communication equipment and training, the 1986 Intelligence
Authorization Act permitted United States employees to provide ``advice'' to the contras,
including advice on the ``effective delivery and distribution of materiel.'' (Senator Durenberger,
131 Cong. Rec. S16074 (1985).)  However, the agencies could not ``engage in activities . . . that
actually amount to participation in the planning or execution of military or paramilitary
operations in Nicaragua by the Nicaraguan democratic resistance, or to participation in logistics
activities integral to such operations.'' (H.R. Rep. 373, 99th Cong., 1st Sess. at 16 (1985).)

     While the two versions of the Boland Amendment differed slightly, they shared a common
purpose: Congress clearly intended to oversee U.S. support for contra military operations, to limit
the amount spent on such assistance and, indeed, during certain periods relevant to this
indictment, to prohibit such assistance entirely.  As Representative Boland, the principal sponsor
of the Amendment, explained during the final debate for the fiscal year 1985 Boland
Amendment, it did not leave open loopholes for covert U.S. support for the contras.
Congressman Boland stated that the Amendment ``clearly ends U.S. support for the war in
Nicaragua.  . . .  There are no exceptions to the prohibitions.'' 33

     33 130 Cong. Rec. H11980 (1984).

     While the activities of the conspirators fell within the prohibitions of the Boland Amendment,
its precise interpretation was not critical to the criminality of the conspiratorial objective charged
in Count One.  Rather, the indictment charged that the defendants conspired to defraud the
United States ``by . . . obstructing the lawful government functions of the United States,
including compliance with legal restrictions governing the conduct of military and covert action
activities.''  The crux of the crime of conspiracy to defraud the United States, as the cases cited
earlier make clear, is not a conspiracy to violate some particular provision of law.  The essence of
the crime, rather, is to ``interfere with or obstruct one of [the Government's] lawful governmental
functions by deceit, craft or trickery. . . .'' 34

     34 Hammerschmidt, 265 U.S. at 188.

     Even if the conspirators' actions somehow had fallen within a loophole in the Boland
Amendment, the entire  operation of the Enterprise to support the contras was deliberately
designed to defeat the restrictions on covert action Congress had enacted to prevent its
``excessive'' and ``self-defeating'' abuse.  The Enterprise, under the direction of the NSC staff,
provided support for the military and paramilitary activities of the contras outside the CIA,
without the presidential Finding required by Executive Order 12333 or the reporting to
congressional intelligence committees required by 50 U.S.C.  413.  To the extent that CIA
resources were coopted by the Enterprise for use in this venture, that too was done without a
presidential Finding, as required by the Hughes-Ryan Amendment.  And, of course, the entire
funding operation was at best a deliberate and deceptive attempt to evade the plain intent of the
Boland Amendment.

     Against this extensive background of congressional investigation, legislation and Executive
action to control and limit covert action in general, and covert military support for the
Nicaraguan contras in particular, the system of preserving presidential accountability and
congressional oversight over covert action constituted a lawful function of the United States.
The Boland Amendment, moreover, shows at the very least that Congress had expressed its
interest in strictly supervising covert action in Nicaragua as an exercise of that function.  North
was one of the NSC team making drafting suggestions to Congress to liberalize Boland.   The
conspirators were fully aware of Congress's efforts to exercise its oversight function, and the
danger of serious retaliation, including the end of all hopes for congressional support for the
contras.  Accordingly, they deliberately did their utmost to defeat the system by deceitfully
concealing their operation from Congress, and acting without a formal presidential Finding.

     Congress's Appropriations and Oversight Functions

     The second way in which the secret contra-support efforts interfered with governmental
functions is that they denied Congress its legitimate role of regulating Government expenditures
and of overseeing covert activities.

     Our constitutional order emphatically reserves the powers of taxing and spending to Congress.
That ``the power of the purse belongs to Congress'' is fundamental to our system of
government.35  The Appropriations Clause of the Constitution 36 provides that ``No Money
shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law'' -- thus
guaranteeing that money may not be spent for purposes that have not been approved by the
representatives of the people.  The Boland and Hughes-Ryan Amendments are specific exercises
of Congress's power to deny funds to programs disapproved by Congress.

     35 L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law 256 (1988).

     36 Article I,  9, cl. 7.

     But Congress also has a broader responsibility in foreign affairs.  No less an authority than
James Madison argued that Congress had plenary authority over foreign affairs.37  The
conspiracy charge was not, however, premised on such an extreme position.  It was based instead
on the uncontrovertible and non-controversial proposition that Congress has some role to play in
foreign affairs.

     37 6 J. Madison, Writings, 138, 147-50 (Hunt ed. 1910), cited in L. Henkin, Foreign Affairs
and the Constitution, pp. 82-83 (1972).  As Professor Henkin summarizes Madison's argument:

     Basically, . . .  Congress is the principal organ of government and has all its political
authority, in foreign affairs as elsewhere, except that specifically granted to the President (alone
or with the Senate).  The determination of foreign policy and the control of foreign relations lay
with Congress under the Articles of Confederation and, with particularized exceptions, the
Constitution left them there.  The powers of Congress are not limited to domestic ``law-making,''
narrowly conceived:  witness, to Congress is expressly given the most important foreign affairs
power, the power to declare war. . . .

     (Ibid.)

     The congressional powers to regulate foreign commerce,38 to define offenses against
international law,39 to raise and support armies,40 and to tax and spend ``for [the] common
defense,'' 41 make it apparent that Congress has a major role to play in defining foreign policy
cooperatively with the President.  Although Congress has not prohibited covert foreign
operations, it has put in place requirements of reporting and accountability that enable it to
exercise substantial control over particular operations when necessary.42  The Constitution
provides Congress with a key role in determining whether resources should be committed to
foreign adventures, such as those engaged in by the Iran/contra conspirators.

     38 Art. I,  8, cl.3.

     39 Ibid., cl. 10.

     40 Ibid., cl. 12.

     41 Ibid., cl. 1.

     42 22 U.S.C.  2422 (Repealed by 8/14/91, P.L. 102-88, Title VI,  601, 105 Stat. 441); 50
U.S.C.  413 (1982).

     Congress thus has a right as part of its oversight function to demand information about covert
activities.  It also has a right as part of its appropriations function to deny funding to covert
activities.  Both functions were impaired by the actions of the Iran/contra conspirators.  In other
words, Congress's powers are impaired not merely when Government officials deceitfully fund
foreign military activities that Congress has specifically refused to fund (as was the case with the
Boland Amendment); Congress's powers are also impaired when Government officials
deceitfully fund and conduct foreign military activities and scheme to prevent their actions from
coming to congressional attention by fraud, concealment, deception and disinformation.

     Thus, even if it were the case that the conspirators in some way avoided violating both the
Boland Amendment and the specific legal controls over covert action,  the broader problem with
their deceitful activities would have remained:  The conspirators, aware of statutory efforts to
limit and allow Congress to monitor funding for the military operations of the contras, chose to
hide their activities from Congress -- with the aim of ensuring that Congress would not have the
opportunity to consider whether to close such a loophole.  The entire point of their pattern of
deceit and evasion, Count One charged, was to defraud the United States by acting unilaterally
and thereby thwarting the normal processes of constitutional government.

     The Boland Amendment was Violated

     The applicability of Boland to the actions of North and others was an issue of importance
when the Iran/contra affair became public.  The majority and minority reports of the Select
Committees reached opposing conclusions as to whether Boland had been violated.43

     43 Compare Report of the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran-Contra Affair, pp.
395-410 (majority report; Boland Amendments violated ``in letter and spirit'') (hereinafter cited
as majority report); Ibid., pp. 489-500 (minority report; Boland Amendments not violated) herein
cited as Minority Report).

     As previously noted, the conspirators were not charged with having conspired to violate the
Boland Amendment.  Nonetheless, it is clear that the conspirators did violate that statute.  As
Independent Counsel argued  prior to the North trial,44 Independent Counsel could as a matter of
law have framed the conspiracy charge in that fashion, and its evidence at trial would have
proved that the conspirators violated the Boland Amendment.

     44 Government's Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Opposition to Defendant's
Motions to Dismiss or Limit Count One (filed October 25, 1988), pp. 48-82.

     More to the point, the Boland Amendment entered into the conspirators' motivations for lying
to Congress:  It was certainly the critical part of the statutory framework that they were either
violating or evading.  It was central to the statements of both McFarlane and Poindexter to
Congress that the NSC staff was in compliance with both the ``spirit and the letter'' of Boland.

     While the Boland Amendment went through four versions, the relevant statutory language
was clear and never changed.  Many of the activities in which the conspirators engaged --
including provision of weapons and funding for weapons, strategic and tactical advice about the
conduct of military operations, and supervision of the Enterprise's resupply efforts -- were
unambiguously prohibited to those entities covered by the Amendment.45  The description of its
breadth of application did not change at all in the period covered by Count One.  Both versions of
the Boland  Amendment in effect from October 12, 1984, to October 18, 1986, expressly applied
to the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and ``any other agency or entity
of the United States involved in intelligence activities.'' 46

     45 There may be doubt about the peripheral coverage of the Amendments -- for example, as to
whether the Amendment in effect in fiscal year 1986 barred provision of logistical advice to the
contras.

     46 Section 8066 of Department of Defense Appropriations for fiscal year 1985, as enacted in
P.L. 98-473; Section 106 of the Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1986, P.L. 99-569.

     The Select Committees' disagreement centered on whether the NSC was covered by the
Amendment.  In determining, however, whether there was a conspiracy to violate the Boland
Amendment, that question need not be reached, for two reasons.  First, the Boland Amendment
explicitly covered the CIA, and co-conspirator Fernandez, as the station chief in Costa Rica, was
a CIA employee.  His activities are discussed in greater detail elsewhere in this Report, but in
short, by his efforts to facilitate construction of a clandestine airstrip in Costa Rica for contra
resupply, his promises to contra leaders of military supplies, and his role in carrying out those
promises, Fernandez -- on instructions from North -- did precisely what he was barred from
doing by Boland.

     Second, North himself was covered, since his salary was paid by the Department of Defense,
another entity specified by the Boland Amendment.  The legislative history of the Boland
Amendment clearly explains that its  prohibitions applied to all Defense Department funds --
including those used to pay salaries.47

     47 For example, during the final debate on the Boland Amendment, Representative Boland
stated that the Amendment ``clearly prohibits any expenditure, including those from accounts for
salaries and all support costs.'' 130 Cong. Rec. H11980 (1984).

     More broadly, the NSC itself was covered.  The critical question was whether the NSC was
covered as an ``entity of the United States involved in intelligence activities.''  The NSC was such
an entity.  The National Security Act of 1947, the statute that created the NSC,48 charges it to
``assess and appraise the objectives, commitments, and risks of the United States in relation to
our actual and potential military power, in the interest of national security. . .'' -- virtually a
definition of strategic intelligence.49  More specifically, the Act then establishes the CIA -- the
archetypal ``agency involved in intelligence activities'' -- ``under the National Security Council,''
and assigns the CIA the responsibility of ``coordinating the intelligence activities of the several
Government departments and agencies in the interest of national security . . . under the direction
of the National Security Council.'' 50

     48 The same Act also establishes the NSC staff.  50 U.S.C.  402(c).

     49 50 U.S.C.  402(b)(1) (1982).

     50 50 U.S.C.  403(a), (d) (emphasis added).

     The basic operating charter of the NSC during the years in question, Executive Order 12333,
is to the same effect.  President Reagan's order states that the purpose of the NSC is to

     act as the highest Executive Branch entity that provides review of, guidance for and direction
to the conduct of all national foreign intelligence, counterintelligence, and special activities, and
attendant policies and programs.51

     51 Executive Order 12333, Part 1.2(a), 46 Federal Register 59941, 59942 (December 4,
1981), reprinted in 50 U.S.C.A., pp. 59-67 (1988 Supp.).  The Church Committee had noted that
the NSC had been an ``effective means for exerting broad policy control over at least two major
clandestine activities -- covert action and sensitive data collection.''  (Church Committee Report,
p. 427.)  The Committee recommended that the NSC should be given broad policy-making
responsibility for all of ``the intelligence activities of the United States, including intelligence
collection, counterintelligence, and the conduct of covert action.''  (Ibid., p. 429.)  It is precisely
this recommendation that is taken up by Executive Order 12333.

     Accordingly, the NSC was, by its very charter, an ``entity involved in intelligence activities.''
52

     52 In a pre-trial motion challenging Count One, North contended that the statutory language
``agency or entity involved in the intelligence activity'' had a particular technical meaning, one
excluding the NSC.  The legislative history of the Amendments, however, establishes that
Congress intended no such technical meaning of ``agency . . . involved in intelligence activities. .
. .''  Rather, Congress intended the definition of intelligence agencies to be sufficiently broad to
accomplish its objectives.  It cannot successfully be argued that the Boland Amendment applies
only to agencies that ``have operational responsibility for conducting intelligence activities.''  The
statutory language -- ``involved in intelligence activities'' -- is much broader, and plainly is broad
enough to cover an agency or entity ``involved in'' intelligence activities by directing and
supervising them.

     Thus, at every stage of the debates on the fiscal year 1985 version of the Boland Amendment,
both sponsors and opponents of the legislation described it as involving a total and complete
cut-off of all U.S. support for the contras.  This understanding of the Boland Amendment as
ending all support for the war in Nicaragua would be incomprehensible if the amendment in fact
were intended to eliminate only support by certain agencies.  Indeed, such an intent would make
little sense in any case.

     Plainly, Congress did not intend to prohibit aid to the contras by only a few agencies, and
permit the same type of covert assistance from others.  The restriction was placed on the budgets
of the CIA and the Defense Department, and made generally applicable to other ``agenc[ies] . . .
involved in intelligence activities'' not other ``intelligence agencies.''  In other words, the
restriction was not limited to agencies with traditional intelligence functions.  If any Government
entity undertook an intelligence activity its appropriation became unavailable for support of the
contras.  Only with this view could Congress believe that it had ``end(ed) support for the war in
Nicaragua'' by passing the Boland Amendment.  Otherwise, the Amendment would have become
to a large extent an empty gesture, merely transferring the military assistance program for the
contras from the presumably competent hands of the military and intelligence community to
some branch of the Government with less relevant  experience and skills.  Such was obviously
not the congressional intent.

     There is only one specific reference to the NSC in the legislative history of the relevant
Boland Amendments.  By the summer of 1985, press reports of North's activities had come to the
attention of Congress.53  The classified legislative history of the fiscal year 1986 version of the
Boland Amendment demonstrates that the framers of the legislation -- supporters and opponents
of American support for the contras -- specifically understood and intended the Amendment to
apply to the NSC and its staff.  For example:

     53 In the 1984 debates concerning the fiscal year 1985 appropriations act, there was, of
course, no special reason for Congress to focus specifically on the NSC.  Congress dealt with the
problem generically, and, as indicated above, intended by their broad proscription of the use of
funds for military- or intelligence-related agencies in support of the contras to cut off all United
States funding for their activities.

      -- On May 9, 1985, during the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence mark-up
of the Intelligence Authorization Act for fiscal year 1986, Representative Hyde, a supporter of
aid for the contras, stated: ``As I read (the Boland Amendment), no funds available to the CIA,
the Department of Defense or any other agency or entity involved in intelligence activities -- and
I presume the President is (covered], because he has a National Security Council -- may be
obligated or expended to support directly or indirectly military or paramilitary in Nicaragua. . . .''
54

     54 Transcript at 7.

      -- On November 7, 1985, during the House and Senate conference on the Intelligence
Authorization  Act for fiscal year 1986, the following colloquy occurred:

     Senator Leahy:  It is also your understanding that [the Boland Amendment] would preclude
the National Security Council -- I am thinking about a long discussion you and I had with Bud
McFarlane about Colonel North.  This precludes the National Security Council from going out
soliciting, I mean, I think that would be pretty well an agency involved in intelligence matters.
Am I correct in that?

     Representative Hamilton:  Yes.55

     55 Transcript at 38 (emphasis added).  In connection with the Fiscal Year 1986 renewal of
Boland, the Senate Intelligence Committee chairman also received a staff memorandum stating
that the NSC was covered by the Boland Amendment.  (See September 23, 1985 Memo from
Gary Chase and Bernard McMahon to Senator Durenberger at 9:  ``In the absence of clear
legislative history indicating that the phrase 'involved in' was meant to be read narrowly as
`conducting' it is difficult to quarrel with the proposition that the NSC is `involved in'
intelligence activities''.)

     Second Object of the Conspiracy:  Self-Dealing

     The second charged object of the conspiracy to defraud was to ``depriv[e] the Government of
the United States of the honest and faithful services of employees free from conflicts of interest,
corruption and self-dealing. . . .'' 56  More specifically, Count One charged that the defendants
conspired to ``deceitfully us[e] the influence and position of [North and Poindexter] to generate
funds'' -- including the proceeds of the Iran arms sales -- which were then held by Secord and
Hakim at the disposal of Poindexter and  North for the support of projects of their choice,
including aid to the contras.  In effect, Count One concerned the creation of a secret slush fund,
in which Secord and Hakim agreed to hold funds generated by North and to apply them to
purposes selected by North outside the normal channels of governmental accountability.

     56 Count One,

 13(a)(2).

     At its core, the self-dealing aspect of the conspiracy consisted of four elements:  (1) North and
Poindexter's use of their official positions to make funds available to Secord and Hakim; (2)
Secord and Hakim's use of some of these funds to support projects designated by Poindexter and
North; (3) Secord and Hakim's retention of some of these funds for their personal use; and (4) all
of the conspirators' efforts to conceal their corrupt arrangement, which each found beneficial.

     The Evidence

     In 1986, elements in Iran paid $30 million for weapons from U.S. arsenals, a price negotiated
by North, the nominal representative of the U.S. Government.  Of that $30 million, the United
States received $12 million.  The remainder went to the Enterprise, and its expenses totalled
about $2 million.  Its compensation, although never specifically set, would have been expected to
have some reasonable relationship to its services.  It was not an entity that bought for its own
account with a risk as to  resale.  It was a service agency.  About $16 million, money that should
have been deposited in the U.S. Treasury, was secretly kept by the conspirators, after they had
secretly generated those funds.

     The Israeli Initiative

     The early history of the Iran arms sales is related in Part I of this Report.  This discussion is
concerned with the evidence against those charged with conspiracy.

     By September 1985, after McFarlane had assured Israel of U.S. authorization to transfer
U.S.-origin weapons to elements in Iran, North took an active interest.  His participation in the
initiative arose from his official duties regarding terrorism and hostages.  On September 15,
1985, an American, Reverend Benjamin Weir, was released in Beirut by his captors.  Shortly
before Weir's release, on September 9, 1985, North had directed the intelligence community to
take certain measures in anticipation of the possible release of an American hostage.  This was
the first of many directions that North was to give to the intelligence community in connection
with efforts to secure the release of American hostages by means of the developing channel to
Iran.

     The second Israeli shipment of arms to Iran took place on November 24, 1985.  At that time,
Israel sent 18 HAWK missiles to Iran in what was to be the first of several  deliveries, but
problems with the missiles led to the cancellation of the subsequent shipments.  Moreover, Israel
encountered difficulties in the shipment of the HAWKs.  Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin
called McFarlane, and McFarlane directed North and Poindexter to help with the shipment.

     North's assistance consisted of coordinating logistical arrangements for the shipment:  He
confirmed the availability of CIA proprietary aircraft for use in executing the transfers, enlisted
Secord to supervise and participate in the actual delivery, worked to obtain necessary flight
clearances, and ensured that adequate preparations were made for the reception of any hostages
whose release might ensue.  The Israelis paid Secord $1 million for his assistance.  When the
HAWK shipments were cancelled, Secord was left with a surplus of $800,000.

     This November 1985 transaction was the subject of the indictment in three respects:  (1)
North's direction that Israeli funds, intended to cover the transportation costs for delivery of
materials to Iran, be deposited into an Enterprise bank account, (2) the Enterprise's retention and
use of excess Israeli funds, and (3) Poindexter and North's attempted concealment in November
1986 of NSC participation in the November 1985 transaction.  In the course of the initial Israeli
arms sales, McFarlane, Poindexter, North and Secord became involved in the  initiative, and the
pattern of using arms sales to Iran to generate funds was established.

     The United States Initiative

     In December 1985 and January 1986, despite serious disagreements within the Reagan
Administration about the advisability of pursuing arms shipments to Iran, North helped move the
initiative forward.  He was now principally responsible for the initiative; Poindexter had replaced
McFarlane as national security adviser, and NSC consultant Michael Ledeen had been told that
he was no longer part of the initiative.  In a December 9, 1985, memorandum to Poindexter and
McFarlane, North suggested, as an alternative to the prior Israeli activities, that the Government
itself commence deliveries.  North suggested Secord as a conduit.

     Thus, in a January 15, 1986, computer note to Poindexter, North recounted conversations with
CIA Director Casey and U.S. Army Gen. Colin Powell in which he had identified Secord as ``a
purchasing agent'' and ``an agent for the CIA.''  At the same time, North advised Poindexter of a
critical piece of information that they did not share with non-conspirators:  ``the Iranians have
offered $10K per TOW.'' 57

     57 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 1/15/86.

     The effective Finding signed by President Reagan on January 17, 1986, limited the provision
of arms, equipment and related material to elements in Iran to three specific purposes:  ``(1)
establishing a more moderate government in Iran, (2) obtaining from [elements in Iran]
significant intelligence not otherwise obtainable, to determine the current Iranian Government's
intentions with respect to its neighbors and with respect to terrorist acts, and (3) furthering the
release of the American hostages held in Beirut and preventing additional terrorist acts by these
groups.''  While working on the Finding, North had been advised by Stanley Sporkin, the general
counsel of the CIA, that a Finding must specifically enumerate each purpose to be accomplished
by a particular covert action.  Nonetheless, the Finding signed by the President did not authorize
the generation of surplus funds to be used for the contras, or for any other unspecified covert
action.

     At three different points in North's memorandum for presentation to the President by
Poindexter explaining the Finding, North described the intermediary who would transfer the arms
to Iranians as an ``agent'' of the CIA, without any suggestion that Secord would operate
independently of Government control and retain (subject to direction by North and Poindexter)
more than 60 percent of the funds received from the Iranians.  North recommended that rather
than using the Israelis to deliver weapons, ``the  CIA, using an authorized agent as necessary,
purchase[d] arms from the Department of Defense under the Economy Act and then transfer[red]
them to Iran. . . .''  He further stated: ``Therefore it is proposed that Israel make the necessary
arrangements for the sale of the 4,000 TOW weapons to Iran.  Sufficient funds to cover the sale
would be transferred to an agent of the CIA.  The CIA would then purchase the weapons from the
Department of Defense and deliver the weapons to Iran through the agent.'' 58  By portraying the
intermediary as a U.S. Government agent, North failed to reveal that the Enterprise would treat
the proceeds of the arms sales as its own and did not present this aspect to President Reagan for
authorization.59

     58 Memorandum from Poindexter (prepared by North) to the President, 1/17/86, AKW
001919.

     59 In an ex parte statement to Judge Harold H. Greene, filed September 20, 1988, Poindexter
claimed he told President Reagan that Secord was a ``middleman'' acting in a private capacity.
This was inconsistent with contemporaneous note that he briefed the President from North's
memorandum, which described Secord as an agent of the CIA.

     Secord never controlled the disposition of the weapons.  President Reagan, through
Poindexter, retained full control over the weapons after Secord received them and up to the point
of actual delivery to Iran.

     President Reagan was informed and personally approved both February shipments of TOWs.
During his May trip to Tehran, McFarlane, in consultation with the White  House, turned back to
Israel the second load of HAWK spares, even though Iranian arms dealer Manucher Ghorbanifar
had paid Secord for them the full,  marked up, purchase price and Secord had paid the CIA the
lower price set by the Department of Defense.  Only with President Reagan's personal approval
was this second plane load of weapons and parts subsequently delivered.

     Generating a Surplus

     In each of the 1986 Iranian transactions, North, operating with Poindexter's knowledge and
approval, exercised control over the money received by Secord from the Iranians.

     During its life, the Enterprise had three bank accounts at Credit Suisse in Geneva,
Switzerland, through which it received funds totaling $47.6 million:  the Energy Resources
account ($11.3 million); the Lake Resources account ($31.5 million); and the Hyde Park Square
Corporation account ($4.8 million).  North directly or indirectly (through Calero) was responsible
for virtually every penny that flowed into those three accounts.  Accordingly, he was consulted
on major expenditures.  Of this $47.6 million, $28.6 million was received as a result of the sale
of U.S. Government weapons to Iran.

     The generation of funds for the Enterprise began almost immediately after the January 17
Finding was signed.  With Secord installed as a participant in the initiative,  he and North
traveled to London on behalf of the United States for a meeting on January 22, 1986, with
Ghorbanifar and Amiram Nir, an Israeli official involved in the transaction.  At that meeting,
North set the price for the Government weapons, as he was to do in all subsequent transactions.
According to a tape-recording seized from North's office by the FBI, Ghorbanifar confirmed a
willingness to pay $10,000 per TOW; North accepted that offer and directed Ghorbanifar to pay
$10 million for 1,000 TOWs into the Enterprise's Lake Resources account.  They agreed that
after the hostages were released, an additional $30 million would be deposited to an Enterprise
account and an additional 3,000 TOWs delivered to Iran.  Accordingly, North contemplated that
within a short period of time a total of $40 million would come under the control of the
Enterprise.

     On January 23, 1986, North met with an official of the Defense Department and two officials
of the CIA, including Charles Allen, to provide them with a detailed briefing of events in
London.  North advised them of anticipated steps, but he advised them that Secord would receive
and pass on to the CIA only $6,000 per TOW, or a total of $6 million -- knowing well that $10
million was the negotiated price and that Secord would not pass on to the CIA the full amount
received.

     North had actually told CIA officials that the quoted price of $6,000 per TOW was too high.
The Defense Department later cut the price to $3,469 per TOW.  The total requirement, including
handling costs, was $3.7 million for 1,000 TOWs.  The surplus North contemplated to be
received by Secord over the amount to be paid to the Government was, at that time, more than
$25 million out of a total sales price of $40 million.

     On or about February 7, 1986, $10 million was deposited in an Enterprise account by the
Iranians.  On or about February 10-11, 1986, $3.7 million was transferred from the account to a
CIA Swiss account.  Between February 18 and 27, 1986, 1,000 TOWs, in two installments, were
shipped to Iran.  Secord's direct expenses in connection were less than $1 million.  The surplus
was almost $6 million.60  Subsequently, in March and April 1986, the Enterprise made
deliveries of weapons to Central America.

     60 The transfer of the first 1,000 TOWs did not result in the release of the American hostages
as expected and further negotiations with Ghorbanifar ensued.

     HAWK Spare Parts

     In the spring of 1986, in a meeting in Paris attended by North, Ghorbanifar, George Cave (a
CIA annuitant expert in Iranian affairs) and another CIA official, Ghorbanifar raised the
possibility of obtaining HAWK spare parts.  After further discussions with  Ghorbanifar, on
April 5 or 6, 1986, North prepared a memorandum for Poindexter setting forth details of a
proposed HAWK spare parts deal which referred to the allocation of $12 million from the arms
sales to the contras.61

     61 Memorandum from North to Poindexter, 4106, AKW 004352-59.  The discovery of this
memorandum by the Department of Justice in November 1986 led, in part, to the Attorney
General's announcement of the Iran/contra diversion on November 25, 1986.

     The price that the Iranians paid for the HAWK spare parts was $15 million.  North and his
assistant, Robert L. Earl, arrived at this figure by multiplying the prices obtained from the CIA by
a factor of 3.7.  In bringing Earl in to work on the pricing of the HAWK spare parts, North
emphasized both the special secrecy of the inflated prices and of the fact that the extra money
was to go to the contras.

     On or about May 14-15, 1986, $15 million was deposited for the Iranians to an Enterprise
account.  On May 16 and 21, 1986, a total of $1.685 million was deposited by Israel into an
Enterprise account to pay for the replenishment by the United States of the 504 TOWs shipped
by Israel to Iran in August and September 1985.  On May 15, 1986, $6.5 million was transferred
by the Enterprise to a CIA Swiss account for the HAWK spare parts for Iran and the
replenishment TOWs for Israel.  On May 16, 1986, North reported to Poindexter in a computer
note that ``the  resistance [contra] support organization now has more than $6M [million]
available for immediated disbursement.'' 62  In May 1986, the Enterprise again shipped weapons
to Central America for the contras.

     62 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 5/16/86, AKW 021383.

     On May 20-22, 1986, replenishment TOWs were shipped to Israel as well as the HAWK spare
parts en route to Iran.  Subsequently, one pallet of spare parts was delivered to Tehran aboard the
plane carrying an American delegation led by McFarlane.  When talks aborted without the
release of any hostages, the remaining spare parts were left in storage in Israel.  Nevertheless, the
Enterprise had received full payment for all of the HAWK spare parts.  None of those funds was
ever returned.

     Through May and June, North sought to persuade Poindexter and, through him, the President
to permit the second shipment of spare parts to go forward to extricate Ghorbanifar from his
embarrassment.  During this period, North had Amiram Nir brief Vice President Bush during a
visit to Israel.  In particular, Nir undertook to convince Bush that the arms shipments should
continue with the hostages being released one or two at a time rather than all at once.

     On July 26, 1986, one hostage, Father Lawrence Jenco, was released.  On North's
recommendations,  transmitted through Poindexter, the President approved the shipment to Iran
of the remaining spare parts.

     During the summer of 1986, fissures began to develop in North's scheme.  The Iranians had
obtained an accurate microfiche price list for HAWK spare parts.  With the list, the Iranians
realized that they had been massively overcharged -- by approximately 600 percent.

     As the summer of 1986 progressed, pricing complaints continued and intensified.  At one
point, when confronted with these complaints, North told Allen of the CIA to tell the Iranians
that the price they had paid was correct and that it was higher than the microfiche because it was
difficult to locate the HAWK spare parts.  In another conversation, relayed to North, Ghorbanifar
complained to Allen that he was being unfairly blamed for the overcharges.  He explained to
Allen that he paid $15 million to Secord and that he had marked up his prices by only 41 percent;
not 600 percent.  North's reaction to Allen's report of this conversation was to question the
trustworthiness of Ghorbanifar.  North also requested that the CIA generate a false microfiche
price list to provide to the Iranians and extinguish the complaints.  North further sought to have
Cave fabricate a letter which would appear to explain and justify the spare parts prices.

     The Second Channel and the October 1986 TOW Shipment

     In the late summer and fall, primarily as a result of Hakim's efforts, the conspirators began
working with another Iranian who came to be known as the ``second channel.''  Though the
Iranian interlocutor had changed, the conspirators continued to use the Iran initiative to generate
excess funds for the Enterprise.

     At a meeting with the second channel in October 1986, North learned, as he reported to
Poindexter in a computer note dated October 10, 1986, that the Iranians would pay $3.6 million
for 500 TOWs, or $7,200 each.63  Six days later, he learned from Earl that the CIA would be
charging the Enterprise $2.037 million for the TOWs, approximately the same price it had been
charged in the February sale.  Subsequently, 500 TOWs were shipped to Iran.  Again North had
arranged for the shipment to generate a surplus for the Enterprise.

     63 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 10/10/86.

     Concealment of the Diversion

     During the summer of 1986, Charles Allen informed his supervisor, Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence Robert M. Gates, and then Casey of his concerns that North and Secord had
generated funds from the Iran arms sales to divert to the contras; he further  warned that
Ghorbanifar might go public with allegations concerning the pricing of the weapons.  Private
businessman, Roy Furmark, who had complained to Casey that Ghorbanifar had not repaid
certain Canadian lenders, also disclosed details of the financing of the arms shipments and
conveyed Ghorbanifar's suspicion that funds had been diverted to Central America.  When Allen
told North, North again attempted to deflect the inquiries, responding that Furmark should not be
trusted.  Casey related these concerns to Poindexter and suggested he consult the counsel to the
President.  Poindexter said he would prefer to discuss it with the NSC counsel.

     In November 1986, the conspirators engaged in a cover-up.  North began the shredding and
destruction of documents and materials, including those relating to the diversion; North's
explanation to McFarlane for the later discovery of the diversion memo was ``I missed one.''  On
November 23, 1986, in a meeting with the attorney general and other Justice Department officials
at which he was confronted with that memo, North confirmed the existence of the diversion but
lied about his role in it by claiming that (1) the NSC had no involvement in the diversion; that (2)
the Israelis had determined how much of the proceeds from the arms sales were diverted to the
contras; and that (3) he, North, had advised contra leader Adolfo Calero to open bank accounts in
Switzerland to receive the proceeds of the  diversion.  When asked by FBI agents about the
diversion, Poindexter misleadingly minimized his knowledge and support of North's activities,
saying only that he knew North ``was up to something,'' and that he could have stopped his
subordinate but did not.  Between November 22 and November 29, 1986, Poindexter tried to
delete from his White House computer system all the messages that he had received and sent,
including those that revealed the diversion.

     Self-Dealing and Conspiracy Law

     As discussed above, the self-dealing aspect of the conspiracy involved two Government
officials -- North and Poindexter -- using their positions to create a substantial pool of funds
under their control; the transmission of these funds to Secord and Hakim and their subsequent
disbursement at North's direction (with the general approval of Poindexter) for a variety of
purposes, including expenditures for contra arms deliveries, payments to contra leaders, radio
transmitters for a foreign country, the purchase and operation of a small cargo vessel, personal
payments to Secord and Hakim, and the allocation of a smaller amount to North; and the use of
deception to create this pool of funds and to hide its existence and the way it was disbursed.

     As a result of this scheme, the United States was deprived of the honest and faithful services
of Poindexter and North because these two Government employees had undisclosed conflicts of
interests.  Specifically, North and Poindexter had an undisclosed interest in using their positions
for the private purpose of creating and increasing the pool of funds under their personal control.
For instance, when North was negotiating with the Iranians concerning the sale of arms, he had a
duty as an employee of the Government to pursue single-mindedly the purposes of the Iran
initiative; at the same time he had a secret and conflicting goal of obtaining as much money as
possible for the Enterprise.

     This was not a technical or minor conflict of interest.  North, with Poindexter's permission, in
effect negotiated both the price the Iranians would pay and the considerably lower price the
Government would receive.  He exploited his position to exact from the Iranians a high selling
price, while concealing from the Government the nature of the price spread and his control over
the excess proceeds.  President Reagan authorized the sale of weapons to elements in Iran for
carefully specified objectives.  Rather than limit their operation to the specified goals of the
initiative, North and Poindexter used their control of the initiative to fund the Enterprise.  In
effect, the Government officials had a hidden interest in maximizing the  mark-up of the
ostensible middlemen, Secord and Hakim, at the expense of the United States.

     The scheme charged in the self-dealing object of the indictment's conspiracy count --

 13(a)(2) of Count One -- constituted a classic fraud on the Government.  The thrust of the fraud
was a breach of the public trust:  Poindexter and North's use of their public office for execution
of the Iran arms sales was driven by a concealed and wholly improper motive -- a desire to
generate a concealed fund for use in financing unauthorized activities designated by them.  The
implementation of that scheme obstructed the lawful conduct of the Government's business
within the meaning of the cases outlined earlier by depriving the Government of the honest and
faithful services of its employees.

     An impressive series of precedents established that a public official who conspired to deprive
the United States of his honest and faithful services by acting on matters in which he had a
hidden conflict of interest properly violated 18 U.S.C.  371.64  Schemes to deprive the
Government of  the honest and faithful services of its employees by creating a conflict of interest
were held fraudulent in a long line of cases decided under the mail and wire fraud statutes prior
to the decision in McNally v. United States.65  One of these cases, which has already been
discussed, was directly analogous to the activities of North and Poindexter.  In United States v.
Diggs, the Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction of a member of Congress who diverted
funds authorized for staffing his Washington congressional office and applied them to the
payment of, among other things, the  expenses of maintaining an office in his home district.66
The defendant argued that the use of the funds for that purpose was legitimate.67  The Court
concluded, however, that Diggs defrauded the public when he allocated public funds in
accordance with his private agenda, rather than in compliance with legislative dictates.

     64 See, for example, United States v. Lane, 765 F.2d 1376 (9th Cir. 1985) (upholding
conspiracy to defraud United States charge based on agreement of defendants, state
administrators of job training program, to channel federally-funded contracts to each other);
United States v. Burgin, 621 F.2d 1352, 1356-57 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 1015 (1980)
(upholding conspiracy to defraud United States charge based on state legislator's agreement to
direct federally funded state contracts to entity that, in turn, agreed to funnel part of profits to
legislator); United States v. Johnson, 337 F.2d 180, 185-86 (4th Cir. 1964), aff'd on another
issue, 383 U.S. 169 (1966) (upholding conspiracy to defraud United States charge based on
Congressman's agreement to exert influence on Department of Justice to win dismissal of
pending indictment in exchange for payments characterized as campaign contributions); Harney
v. United States, 306 F.2d 523 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 371 U.S. 911 (1962) (upholding
conspiracy to defraud charge based on a scheme pursuant to which state official arranged a
federally-funded land condemnation at an inflated cost in exchange for seller's agreement to
channel a portion of the proceeds to state official, among others); United States v. Sweig, 316 F.
Supp. 1148, 1155-56 (S.D.N.Y. 1970) (upholding indictment charging that aide to House
Speaker entered into scheme by which co-conspirator took fees from people with matters before
federal agencies with the promise that he would use the influence of the office of the Speaker on
their behalf).

     65 107 S.Ct. 2875 (1987).  Justice Stevens collected more than a dozen examples of such
cases in his dissent in McNally.  107 S.Ct. at 2883 n.1.  As previously noted, although McNally
rejected the theory on which those cases had been prosecuted, it did so as a matter of
interpretation of the mail fraud statute.  The Court specifically approved  371 cases brought on
the same theory.

     66 613 F.2d 988 (D.C. Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 982 (1980).  It was also alleged and
proved that defendant had diverted some of the money to pay his personal expenses, but because
the indictment had charged in the same counts both personal and congressional uses of the funds,
the Court was required to consider whether the use of the funds for expenses which, though
incurred for legitimate governmental purposes, were not authorized to be paid from the funds in
question.  (Ibid. at 994.)

     67 Ibid., p. 994.

     Accordingly, a crime was committed when Poindexter and North undertook to channel funds
to Secord and Hakim, retaining the concealed right to control a portion of those funds.  The
establishment of a privately controlled fund for Government officials, their secret arrangement to
increase the fund and the diversion of those funds for unauthorized purposes deprived the United
States of the honest and faithful services of its employees, in violation of 18 U.S.C.  317.

     Third Object of the Conspiracy:  The Corruption of the Iran Initiative

     The final substantive object of the conspiracy -- set forth in

 13(a)(3) of Count One -- was that the  conspirators ``deceitfully exploit[ed] for their own
purposes and corrupt[ed] a United States Government initiative involving the sale of arms to
elements in Iran'' by bending their efforts toward the enrichment of the Enterprise and the pursuit
of its goals, ``rather than pursuing solely the specified governmental objectives of the initiative,
including the release of Americans being held hostage in Lebanon.'' 68

     68 The bill of particulars specified that the deception involved in this aspect of the agreement
was directed at both Congress and the Executive branch, and that the conspirators' ``own
purposes'' toward which the Iran initiative was diverted were:  (1) ``providing support of military
or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by the Contras;'' (2) ``providing radios to an entity'' in a
foreign country; (3) ``purchasing and operating the [ship] Erria;'' and (4) ``providing profits to
defendants Secord and Hakim.''

     Much that has been said earlier concerning the self-dealing aspect of the conspiracy applies as
well to the objective of corrupting the Iran initiative, because that corruption was in effect a
specific instance -- and by far the most important instance -- in which the conspirators manifested
the conflict of interest with which the self-dealing charge was concerned.  The corruption of the
effort to release the hostages by North and Poindexter to finance the Enterprise and the contras
epitomized the broader conflict of interest.69

     69 The conduct constituting the corruption of the Iran initiative also served the conspiratorial
goal charged in

 13(a)(1) of Count One (the secret war objective), since the money obtained from the diversion of
profits from the arms sales to Iran was used to support the conspirators' illegal Enterprise in
support of the contras.

     Paragraph 13(a)(3) is alleged as a separate objective because it set forth two additional ways
in which the conspiracy impaired Government functions:

     First, the use of the initiative as a private fund-raising device made it significantly less likely
that the purposes for which the initiative was undertaken would be accomplished.  As set forth in
the Finding, those purposes were ``(1) establishing a more moderate government in Iran, (2)
obtaining from them significant intelligence . . . and (3) furthering the release of the American
hostages held in Beirut and preventing additional terrorist acts. . . .''  Poindexter and North
promoted their private, unauthorized ends at the cost of putting at hazard the presidential
objective they were supposed to be pursuing, including that of saving the lives of the Americans
held hostage in Lebanon.

     Second, more broadly, the creation and diversion of excess proceeds to the Enterprise for
unspecified covert action impaired another Government function, that of presidential control of
covert activity.  National Security Decision Directive 159 and Executive Order 12333 give the
President the power to define the scope of covert activities.  The President alone can authorize
covert activities; he alone can determine whether to assign such activities to agencies other than
the CIA; and, by stating the activity's rationale  in the Finding authorizing it, he alone can specify
what the covert action is intended to achieve.  By diverting the proceeds of the Iran initiative to
providing support to the contras without an explicit presidential Finding, the conspirators
converted a covert action authorized for particular purposes to the accomplishment of
unauthorized goals.  Their scheme therefore undermined presidential control of covert activities,
as well as impairing the congressional power of oversight over them and its control by
appropriation.

     The corruption of the Iran arms sales to the private purposes of the conspirators was the
logical outcome of the conspiracy's other two objects.  First, the creation and diversion of excess
proceeds from the Iran arms sales helped impede through concealment and deceit congressional
participation in the orderly administration of foreign affairs under the Constitution.  Second, the
corruption of the hostage-release effort brought to fruition the conflict of interest of Government
officers and the deprivation of their honest and faithful services.

Part IV

     Investigations and Cases:

     The National Security Council Staff

     At the center of the covert Iran and contra operations were three members of President
Reagan's National Security Council staff:  National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane;
McFarlane's deputy and successor, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter; and the deputy director of
political-military affairs, Lt. Col. Oliver L. North.

     It is the duty of the national security adviser to brief the President daily on foreign and
domestic developments of national security concern, and to integrate and keep him apprised of
the views of his National Security Council.  The national security adviser heads the NSC staff.
The principal members of the NSC in the Iran/contra matters were the President, the Vice
President, the secretaries of state and defense and the director of the CIA.

     Beginning in 1984 through most of 1986, members of the NSC staff implemented President
Reagan's foreign-policy directive to keep the Nicaraguan contras alive as a fighting force, despite
a law -- the Boland Amendment -- prohibiting U.S. aid for their military activities.  Largely
acting through North, their contra-support activities included approaches to foreign countries and
private American citizens for funding; the provision of military and tactical advice and
intelligence; and working with private operatives, chiefly retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V.
Secord and Albert Hakim, to supply weapons.

     In 1985, in what was originally a separate undertaking from the contra-support operation,
McFarlane initiated contacts with Israel leading to the sale of U.S. weapons to Iran in an effort to
free American hostages held by pro-Iranian terrorists in Beirut; in 1986, the NSC staff under
Poindexter continued in this effort through direct U.S. arms sales to Iran. Poindexter authorized
North to arrange the diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to the contras, secretly marking up the
prices for U.S. weapons and relying on the excess proceeds to help finance the contra-resupply
operation, subsequently called the ``Enterprise,'' which was run by Secord and Hakim under
North's direction.

     The NSC staff members in these operations could not have carried out many of their activities
without the support or knowledge of officials in other agencies:  most prominently the CIA, State
Department and the Department of Defense.  Nevertheless, after public exposure, the Reagan
Administration used the most dramatic dimension of the Iran/contra affair -- the Iran/contra
diversion -- to focus public attention and to blame the NSC staff for what went wrong.1  On
November 25, 1986, President Reagan announced the firing of North and the resignation of
Poindexter.  Attorney General Edwin Meese III then disclosed  the Iran/contra diversion,
erroneously stating that only three U.S. officials knew about it:  North, Poindexter and
McFarlane.

     1 On November 24, 1986, the day before the Iran/contra diversion was to be publicly
announced, White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan recommended a damage-control
strategy that put the NSC staff in the line of fire:  ``. . . Tough as it seems[,] blame must be put at
NSC's door -- rogue operation, going on without President's knowledge or sanction.  When
suspicions arose he took charge, ordered investigation, had meeting of top advisers to get at facts,
and find out who knew what.''  (Memorandum from Regan, 11/24/86, ALU 0138832.)

     The criminal prosecutions showed that members of the NSC staff, although most directly
involved in the operations, were not the only participants in Iran/contra matters.  Rather, these
matters often were not aberrant acts but part of a widespread pattern of covert conduct condoned
at the highest levels of Government.

Chapter 1

     United States v. Robert C. McFarlane

     Robert C. ``Bud'' McFarlane was President Reagan's national security adviser from October
1983 to December 1985.  He briefed the President daily about world events and conferred
regularly with Vice President Bush, Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger and CIA Director William J. Casey, who were the principal members of
President Reagan's National Security Council.

     Prior to becoming national security adviser, McFarlane had been deputy to his predecessor
William Clark; counselor to Alexander M. Haig, Jr., when he was secretary of state; a member of
the staff of the Senate Armed Services Committee; and military aide to Henry Kissinger when he
was national security adviser to President Nixon.  An Annapolis graduate, he commanded the
first U.S. Marine battery to land in the Republic of South Vietnam.  He completed two tours,
each characterized by the heavy fighting in I-Corps just south of the demilitarized zone that
separated North and South Vietnam.  He received a Bronze Star for valor and other individual
and unit decorations.  He resigned from the U.S. Marine Corps as a lieutenant colonel.

     As national security adviser, McFarlane headed the President's NSC staff, which was designed
to assist the President in integrating the views of Government agencies responsible for national
security matters.  McFarlane regularly advised President Reagan on foreign and domestic issues
of national security  significance.  He ordinarily based this advice on consultations with the NSC
members, and on objective analyses by their agencies and the NSC staff.

     Under President Reagan, the NSC staff assumed a role beyond that of an advisory or
coordinating body:  It at times became operational, taking on primary responsibility for the
execution of the Iran and contra covert operations.  McFarlane did not shrink from the
operational tasks that were of high personal interest to the President.  He delegated some of them
to a hard-driving NSC staff member, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, McFarlane's deputy
director of political-military affairs.

     In 1984, President Reagan directed McFarlane to keep the financially strapped Nicaraguan
contras alive as a viable fighting force, despite a ban on U.S. military assistance, McFarlane
assigned the job to North.  North kept McFarlane generally informed of his efforts on behalf of
the contras, which McFarlane told North to undertake in utmost secrecy.  When Congress in
1985 inquired about press reports of North's contra-aid efforts, McFarlane denied the allegations.

     In 1985, McFarlane and Casey were the chief advocates of weapons sales to Iran in exchange
for the release of American hostages held by pro-Iranian terrorists in Beirut; again, McFarlane
turned to North to help implement, in utmost secrecy, the arms-for-hostages deals.  Although
McFarlane resigned as national security adviser in December 1985, he stayed in contact with his
former deputy and successor, Navy Vice Adm. John M.  Poindexter, and with North.  He
remained involved in the Iran weapons sales, acting as President Reagan's emissary on a mission
to Tehran in May 1986.  In November 1986, McFarlane helped Poindexter and North conceal
details of the Iran initiative, just as they had done when the operation was underway.

     Beginning in December 1986 after the public exposure of Iran/contra, McFarlane voluntarily
provided information to Congress, to President Reagan's Tower Commission and to Independent
Counsel.  Because McFarlane was only partially truthful, it was difficult for investigators to
determine on which matters he could be believed.  Further complicating the matter was the fact
that McFarlane's testimony was, in some crucial respects, at odds with that of other senior
Reagan Administration officials.  McFarlane, for example, stood alone in insisting that President
Reagan had approved the earliest 1985 sales of U.S. arms to Iran by Israel and had agreed to
replenish Israeli weapons stocks.  It was only after contemporary notes recording the events in
question were discovered late in Independent Counsel's investigation that much of what
McFarlane said could be verified.  His desire to keep secret certain contra-assistance activities
resulted in criminal charges being brought against him.

     After lengthy negotiations with Independent Counsel, McFarlane on March 11, 1988, pleaded
guilty to four misdemeanor charges that he unlawfully withheld information from Congress
about North's contra-support activities and about the solicitation of foreign funding for the
contras.  As a condition of his plea, he agreed to cooperate with the ongoing criminal
investigation.  On December 24, 1992, McFarlane was one of six Iran/contra defendants
pardoned by President Bush.

     McFarlane's Involvement in Aiding the Contras

     The contra effort was a matter of high priority to President Reagan and his Administration.
The President compared the contras' struggle against Nicaragua's communist-supported
Sandinista government to that of the American revolutionaries who fought and triumphed over
British rule.  But the contra war engendered battles on Capitol Hill, where military funding was
alternately won and lost by narrow margins.

     Early in 1984, President Reagan gave McFarlane responsibility for keeping the contras alive
``body and soul.'' 1  McFarlane took this charge seriously, seeking ways to deal with the problem
of rapidly depleting funds and later an all-out ban on contra aid imposed by the Boland
Amendment in October 1984.  McFarlane testified that the President was angry about the funding
cut-off and viewed Congress's actions as a ploy not only to injure the contras but to damage him
politically.2

     1 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3946.

     2 Ibid., 3/14/89, pp. 4357-59.

     On January 6, 1984, the President's National Security Planning Group (NSPG) approved
``immediate  efforts to obtain additional funding of $10-15 million from foreign or domestic
sources to make up for the fact that the current $24 million appropriation [for the contras] will
sustain operations only through June 1984.'' 3  McFarlane was responsible for the
implementation of this plan with the assistance of North and another NSC staff member,
Constantine Menges.

     3 Memorandum from North and Menges to McFarlane, 1/13/84, AKW 038381.

     In late March 1984, Casey sent a memo to McFarlane urging him to explore with Israel and
other countries the possibility of obtaining weapons and financial aid for the contras.4
Subsequently, McFarlane in April 1984 dispatched NSC staff member Howard Teicher to ask the
Israelis for assistance; the mission was unsuccessful.5  Although McFarlane later characterized
the Teicher approach to Israel as ``perfectly legal,'' he was intent on keeping it secret, because
such a disclosure would be ``annoying to and upsetting to the Congress'' and ``embarrassing'' to
Israel.6  When Secretary of State Shultz learned of Teicher's mission from the U.S. Embassy in
Israel, McFarlane informed Shultz that Teicher had gone to Israel ``on his own hook.'' 7

     4 Memorandum from Casey to McFarlane, 3/27/84, ER 13712.

     5 Teicher, Grand Jury, 6/24/87, pp. 10-12.

     6 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/15/89, p. 4619.

     7 Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, pp. 31-33.

     Despite the failed approach to Israel, McFarlane  continued his secret search for third-country
funding for the contras.  In May 1984, he met with Prince Bandar, the Saudi Arabian ambassador
to the United States, and explained President Reagan's strong concern that the gap in the financial
support of the contras be filled.  According to McFarlane, ``it became pretty obvious to the
Ambassador that his country, to gain a considerable amount of favor and, frankly, they thought it
was the right thing to do, they would provide the support when the Congress cut it off.'' 8

     8 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3933.

     A few days later, Prince Bandar contacted McFarlane and volunteered $1 million a month for
the contras.  Bandar said that the donation signified King Fahd's gratitude for past Reagan
Administration support of the Saudi government.9  McFarlane subsequently obtained from North
a contra bank account number where a donation could be made, and McFarlane gave the number
to Prince Bandar.

     9 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/10/87, p. 6.  See Classified Appendix on the nature of this support.

     A day or two after the Saudis agreed to provide a million dollars a month to the contras,
McFarlane informed President Reagan and Vice President Bush.10  He said he also  informed
Shultz and Weinberger that money had been provided to the contras through the end of the year,
but neither pressed him for details.11

     10 McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/11/87, pp. 38-39.  McFarlane, North Trial
Testimony, 3/13/89, pp. 4203-04, said he notified the President of the first Saudi contribution in
June 1984 by putting the information on a card that he slipped into the President's daily briefing
book.  He said he either told the President in writing on the card or orally that ``no one else
knows about this'' and the President responded, either in writing or orally, ``Good, let's just make
sure it stays that way.''  When McFarlane learned from Bandar of a second donation in February
1985 and brought it to the President's attention, he said he got the same response.

     11 Ibid.

     The topic of third-country funding for the contras dominated a June 25, 1984, meeting of
President Reagan's National Security Planning Group (NSPG).  Casey advocated such a plan.
Shultz quoted White House Chief of Staff James Baker (who was not in attendance) as stating
that such solicitations would constitute an ``impeachable offense.''  The group, however, agreed
that a legal opinion should be sought from the Justice Department.  Underscoring the extreme
secrecy surrounding the matter, President Reagan warned against leaks, stating, ``If such a story
gets out, we'll all be hanging by our thumbs in front of the White House until we find out who
did it.'' 12

     12 NSPG Minutes, 6/25/84, ALU 007876.

     None of the participants in the NSPG meeting -- which included the President, Vice President,
Shultz, Weinberger, Casey, then-presidential counselor Edwin Meese III and McFarlane --
apparently raised the fact that the successful Saudi solicitation had already occurred.  McFarlane,
who was most knowledgeable about it, stated:  ``I propose that there be no authority for anyone
to seek third party support for the anti-Sandinistas [contras] until we have the information we
need, and  I certainly hope none of this discussion will be made public in any way.'' 13

     13 Ibid.

     The day after the NSPG meeting, Casey met with Attorney General William French Smith.
Smith determined that third-country funding of the contras was legally permissible as long as no
U.S. funds were used for the purpose, and as long as there was not an expectation on the part of
the third country that the United States would repay the aid.14

     14 Memorandum for the Record from Sporkin, 6/26/84, ALV 035917.

     Over the course of the following year, Saudi Arabia gave a total of $32 million to the
contras.15 Taiwan later contributed $2 million.

     15 North attempted to persuade McFarlane to seek even more Saudi funding in a March 16,
1985, memorandum, recommending an additional $25 to $30 million for the purchase of arms
and munitions; McFarlane responded, ``doubtful.''  Between late February and the end of March
1985, the Saudis contributed a total of $32 million to the contras.

     McFarlane Gives North the ``Body and Soul'' Directive

     McFarlane continued to discuss the issue of contra funding with the President and his top
advisers throughout the spring and summer of 1984.  McFarlane said, ``He [President Reagan] let
us know very clearly in that spring and summer of 1984 that we were to do all that we could to
make sure that the movement, the freedom fighters [contras], survived and I think the term at the
time that's come up here and there was that we  were to do all we could to keep them together
body and soul.'' 16

     16 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3946.

     McFarlane said he discussed the President's directive with his NSC deputy, Donald Fortier,
and with North.  McFarlane knew that Fortier and North ``were very resourceful people and
would go out and do a number of things that they believed would achieve what the President told
me and them he wanted and that is, to keep this movement going as healthy as we could so that
ultimately we could win the vote in the Congress, as we did the following year.'' 17  Fortier was
assigned to handle the political and legislative aspects of seeking renewed contra support on
Capitol Hill; 18 North was to act as a liaison with the contra forces, acting as a symbol of
continued Reagan Administration support despite Congress's decision to withhold assistance.19

     17 Ibid., p. 3949.

     18 McFarlane, FBI 302, 2/16/88, p. 7.

     19 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/4/87, pp. 10-13.

     In October 1984, President Reagan signed into law the Boland Amendment, a provision added
to a 1985 omnibus appropriations bill, which forbade the use of U.S. Government funds
appropriated to any agency involved in intelligence activity for the support of military or
paramilitary action in Nicaragua.

     McFarlane testified that he believed that the NSC  staff's actions were restricted by the Boland
prohibition on aid to the contras, and he said he specifically gave his staff instructions not to raise
money for the contras.20  McFarlane stated he made clear to North that ``no one could solicit,
encourage, coerce, or broker the transmission of money . . . to the contras.'' 21

     20 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3975.

     21 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 4/29/87, p. 21.  There is documentary evidence that McFarlane
was sensitive to questions of legality, even before the most extreme Boland restrictions were in
place.  In a September 2, 1984, memorandum to McFarlane, for example, North asked to
approach a private donor to obtain a ``civilian'' helicopter for use on the contras' northern fighting
front; McFarlane noted, ``I don't think this is legal.'' (Memorandum from North to McFarlane,
9/2/84, ALW 019179.)

     After the Boland Amendment was enacted, McFarlane said that CIA Director Casey
expressed concerns that North was doing more than the law permitted.  ``I believe that he said
that he had learned that Col. North was conveying intelligence information, as I recall, to the
leadership of the freedom fighters [contras] and that that seemed to him to be a questionable
activity, whether it was allowed or not,'' McFarlane said.22

     22 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3977.

     In response to Casey's concerns, North sent McFarlane a memo titled ``Clarifying Who Said
What to Whom'' on November 7, 1984.23  In it, North described contra leader Adolfo Calero's
desire for intelligence reports to help the  contras ``take out'' Soviet-made Hind helicopters
obtained by Nicaragua.  North reported that he got the intelligence Calero needed from Robert
Vickers, a CIA national intelligence officer, and from Army Gen. Paul Gorman.  North assured
McFarlane that -- contrary to Casey's concerns -- he had not discussed contra financial
arrangements and the provision of intelligence with CIA Central American Task Force Chief
Alan D. Fiers, Jr.24

     23 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 11/7/84, AKW 000329-30.

     24 Also in the fall of 1984, Fiers attended an extraordinary meeting in which Casey asked
North whether he was assisting the contras, and North assured him that he was not.  Fiers said
that Clair E. George, the CIA's deputy director for operations, told him after the meeting that this
exchange had been a ``charade'', allowing meeting participants to deny knowledge of North's
activities.  See Fiers chapter.

     McFarlane and other Administration officials repeatedly claimed that there was a
``compartmentation'' of knowledge regarding North's activities, and that only a limited number of
people were made privy to the information.  In many cases, Independent Counsel found that this
claim was feigned, and many officials knew much more than they initially admitted.  Even
McFarlane found Casey's inquiry into North's activities in November 1984 as ``very odd at the
time'' because ``Bill Casey knew what Ollie was doing.'' 25

     25 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/15/89, p. 4645.

     McFarlane, North and the President

     North reported many of his contra-assistance efforts to McFarlane.  McFarlane testified that
he reported almost daily  to President Reagan on changes in the military situation in
Nicaragua.26  Asked by the Select Committees whether he ever withheld information from the
President to protect him, McFarlane answered no, ``and I believe the President was conscious of
everything I did that was close to the line.'' 27  Because McFarlane generally denied knowledge
of North's legally questionable activities, however, it was not possible to determine whether
McFarlane ever reported North's unlawful acts to the President.

     26 McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/13/87, pp. 10-12.

     27 Ibid., p. 81.

     In some notable instances, there is documentation that McFarlane elevated certain
contra-assistance issues to the President and his Cabinet, setting into motion contacts between
President Reagan and other heads of state.  These contacts resulted in increased foreign aid and
other favors to those countries that assisted the contras.

     On February 11, 1985, McFarlane received from North and another NSC staff member,
Raymond Burghardt, a draft memo for circulation to Shultz, Weinberger, Casey and Joint Chiefs
Chairman Gen. John Vessey, the principal members of the Crisis Pre-Planning Group (CPPG).
The memo, reflecting the substance of a CPPG discussion several days earlier, sought
``agreement in a strategy for enticing the Hondurans to greater support for the Nicaraguan
resistance [contras],'' specifically, release of $75 million in embargoed economic aid.   It also
sought CPPG concurrence on a draft letter from President Reagan to President Roberto Suazo of
Honduras, signaling continued U.S. assistance to Suazo and recognizing Honduras' continued
support for the contras.28

     28 Memorandum from North and Burghardt to McFarlane, 2/11/85, ALU 0086481-82.

     As a result of the North-Burghardt memo, on February 19, 1985, McFarlane sent a memo to
President Reagan attaching a proposed letter to Suazo.  McFarlane explained to the President,
``The CPPG agreed that an emissary should again proceed to Honduras carrying the signed copy
of your letter and, in a second meeting, very privately explain our criteria for the expedited
economic support, security assistance deliveries, and enhanced CIA support.'' 29  The President
approved the plan.30

     29 Memorandum from McFarlane to President Reagan, 2/19/85, ALU 0101807.

     30 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/15/89, pp. 4531-32.

     On April 25, 1985, McFarlane enlisted President Reagan's help in unsnagging a contra
weapons shipment that the Honduran military had seized.31  McFarlane recommended that the
President call Suazo.  ``The Honduran military this morning stopped a shipment of ammunition .
. .'' McFarlane informed the President:

     President Suazo will need some overt and concrete sign of this commitment in order to
forestall his military in taking action against the FDN [contras] . . . [I]t is essential  that you call
President Suazo to reassure him that we intend to continue our support for the freedom fighters
[contras] and that you are examining actions for which Congressional approval is not required.32

     31 McFarlane, Recommended Telephone Call, 4/25/85, ALU 0097413-14.

     32 Ibid.

     In a handwritten note on McFarlane's memo recommending the phone call, President Reagan
recorded the substance of his conversation with Suazo:

     Expressed his respect of me & his belief we must continue to oppose Communism.  Will call
his mil. commander & tell him to deliver the ammunition.  Pledged we must continue to support
the freedom [fighters] in Nicaragua.  Then he spoke of a high level group coming here next week
about [illegible] mil. in aid(?) . . . [illegible] both Shultz & Weinberger will meet with them.33

     33 Ibid.  The question mark in parentheses was part of President Reagan's handwritten note.

     On October 30, 1985, North sent a memo to McFarlane titled ``Reconnaissance Overflights,''
reporting on contra military developments.34  According to notations on the document,
Poindexter briefed President Reagan on North's recommendations that two reconnaissance
aircraft be deployed to collect intelligence for the contras.  North stated explicitly in the memo,
``You should also tell the President that we intend to air-drop this intelligence to two Resistance
[contra] units deployed along the Rio Escondito, along with two Honduran  provided 106
recoilless rifles which will be used to sink one or both of the arms carriers which show up in the
photograph at Tab I.''  A handwritten note by Poindexter on the memo indicated that the
``President approved.'' 35

     34 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 10/30/85, ALU 0068483-86.

     35 Ibid.

     The 1985 Congressional Inquiries and ``Problem Documents''

     Although McFarlane and North tried to keep their contra-support activities secret, it was
impossible to conceal completely such an ambitious project involving individuals throughout
Central America and in Washington.  In the summer of 1985, a series of press reports raised
serious, detailed allegations of North's fund-raising and other contra-support activities, in
apparent violation of the Boland prohibition on contra aid.  These press reports prompted
inquiries to McFarlane from Rep. Michael Barnes, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, and Rep. Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.

     McFarlane and North recognized the serious problems posed by the press stories.  Despite the
danger, North continued his clandestine activities.  In an August 10, 1985, memo to McFarlane,
North described efforts to assist a southern military front for the contras from Costa Rica.  North
noted, referring to the press reports:  ``I am sincerely sorry that this very difficult time has
occurred and wish to reiterate my offer  to move on if this is becoming a liability for you or the
President.'' 36   McFarlane responded by approving North's obtaining a false passport and
personal papers using an alias for a trip to Central America.

     36 PROFs Note from North to McFarlane, 8/10/85.

     In testimony since the public exposure of Iran/contra in November 1986, McFarlane took
general responsibility for North's activities as his superior, while professing little knowledge of
his actual contra-support efforts.  There is extensive documentary evidence, however, that North
reported regularly to McFarlane about many of his activities.

     Some of the most detailed and explicit memos that North wrote to McFarlane were identified
by NSC general counsel Paul B. Thompson in August 1985, after Congress asked McFarlane to
respond to press allegations about North.  Thompson, whom McFarlane had asked to gather
documents relevant to the congressional inquiries, pulled six aside as potentially troubling in
their contents.  McFarlane called these the ``problem documents.'' 37

     37 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, pp. 4084-85, and 3/16/89, p. 4796.

     They were culled from the NSC's ``System IV'' document file, which is a permanent, official
collection of highly classified material, carefully logged and strictly controlled.  Thompson and
another NSC staff member, Brenda Reger, decided not to search North's office for documents
that might have been responsive to the congressional inquiries but were not logged into the
official NSC system.38  The six System IV ``problem documents'' were:

     38 See Thompson chapter.

     1.  A North to McFarlane memo of December 4, 1984, titled ``Assistance for the Nicaraguan
Resistance.'' 39  This three-page memo first described a meeting North had with a Chinese
official in Washington regarding a transfer of Chinese-made SA-7 missiles and missile launchers
for the contras.  The official expressed concern because the end-user certificates indicated that
the missiles were bound for Guatemala, which was on unfriendly terms with China.  North
explained to the Chinese official that the Guatemalan end-user certificates were false and that the
weapons were, in fact, destined for the Nicaraguan contras.40

     39 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 12/4/84, AKW 037386-88.

     40 This sale of weapons to the contras was the first executed by retired U.S. Air Force Maj.
Gen. Richard Secord and Albert Hakim.  Washington attorney Thomas Green and a Canadian
weapons dealer, Emanuel Weigensberg, were the chief investors.  See Flow of Funds section.

     In the memo's second part, North described efforts by retired U.S. Army Maj. Gen. John
Singlaub to seek military aid for the contras in South Korea and Taiwan.

     The third part of the memo recounted a meeting North had with David Walker, a British
military-security expert whom North wanted to introduce to Calero to conduct sabotage against
Nicaragua.  North added that efforts would be made to help Calero ``defray the cost'' of
employing Walker.

     2.  A North to McFarlane memo dated February 6, 1985, titled ``Nicaraguan Arms
Shipments.'' 41  North reported that a Nicaraguan merchant ship, the Monimbo, would be
carrying weapons from Taiwan to the Sandinistas.  North proposed that the cargo be seized and
delivered to the contras, and/or that the ship be sunk.  North suggested seeking the assistance of
the South Korean military to sink the ship.  He also sought McFarlane's authorization that Calero
be given intelligence on the Monimbo. Poindexter added in a handwritten note at the bottom of
the memo, ``We need to take action to make sure ship does not arrive in Nicaragua.''

     41 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 2/6/85, AKW 011528 (2 pages).

     3.  A North to McFarlane memo dated March 5, 1985, titled ``Guatemalan Aid to the
Nicaraguan Resistance.'' 42  North attached a memo for McFarlane to send to Shultz,
Weinberger, Casey and Vessey seeking their views on increased U.S. aid to Guatemala.  North
told McFarlane, ``The real purpose of your memo is to find a way by which we can compensate
the Guatemalans for the extraordinary assistance they are providing to the Nicaraguan freedom
fighters [contras].''  North attached fabricated end-user certificates provided by Guatemala, to
allow the contras to receive $8 million in weapons under the guise of receipt by Guatemala.  Also
attached was a ``wish list'' of military items needed by Guatemala.  North added, ``Once we have
approval for at least some of what they have asked for, we can ensure that the right people in
Guatemala understand that we are able to provide results from their cooperation on the resistance
[contra] issue.''  McFarlane approved and signed North's proposed memo to Shultz, Weinberger,
Casey and Vessey.

     42 Ibid., 3/5/85, AKW 015554-65D.

     4.  A North to McFarlane memo of March 16, 1985, titled ``Fallback Plan for the Nicaraguan
Resistance.'' 43  North reported on possible options if Congress did not approve renewed funding
for the contras, informing McFarlane that money from the ``current donors'' (Saudi Arabia)
would keep the contras supplied until October 1985.  North proposed that President Reagan
publicly seek donations to a tax-exempt organization; McFarlane noted ``not yet'' on the memo in
the margin next to North's recommendation that the President announce the formation of a
tax-exempt contra fund.  When North recommended that the ``current donors'' be urged to
provide an ``additional $25-30M[illion] to the resistance [contras] for the purchase of arms and
munitions,'' McFarlane noted:  ``doubtful.''  McFarlane briefed the President on this memo.44

     43 Ibid., 3/16/85, AKW 000536-38.

     44 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 4017.

     5.  A North to McFarlane memo dated April 11, 1985, titled ``FDN Military Operations.'' 45
North summarized contra funding from July 1984 to April 9, 1985, and reported on  growth in
troop strength from 9,500 to more than 16,000.  He attached a detailed list of contra weapons
purchases and deliveries between July 1984 and February 1985, and stated that the contras had
spent approximately $17 million of the $24.5 million available to them since U.S. funding was
cut off.  Although the Secord Enterprise was not mentioned, North categorized the non-Secord
purchases as ``Independent Acquisition.''  North again recommended that ``the current donors
[Saudi Arabia] be approached to provide $15-20M[illion] additional between now and June 1,
1985.''

     45 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 4/11/85.

     6.  A North to McFarlane memo dated May 31, 1985, titled ``The Nicaraguan Resistance's
Near-Term Outlook.'' 46  North reported on contra operations to cut Nicaraguan supply lines and
other actions on the northern front ``in response to guidance . . .''  He noted that plans were
underway for the CIA to take back intelligence-gathering and political operations, once certain
portions of the Boland prohibitions were lifted by Congress.  He reported that, ``The only portion
of current activity which will be sustained as it has since last June, will be the delivery of lethal
supplies.''

     46 Ibid., 5/31/85, ALU 008429-31.

      The documents were clearly responsive to a letter from Chairman Barnes dated August 16,
1985, in which he asked McFarlane to ``provide Congress with all information, including
memoranda and any other documents, pertaining to any contact between Lt. Col. North and
Nicaraguan rebel leaders as of enactment of the Boland Amendment in October, 1984.'' 47
Hamilton followed with a similar request in a letter dated August 20, 1985.  A short while later,
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) also sought information about North's
alleged activities.

     47 Letter from Barnes to McFarlane, 8/16/85, AKW 001511.

     The Barnes and Hamilton inquiries arrived at the White House while McFarlane was in
California with President  Reagan.  When McFarlane returned to Washington, he met with North
to discuss the problem documents that Thompson had identified.

     ``. . . [T]hese are the ones [the documents] that had passages in them that in my mind I
thought a congressman might criticize or believe was -- was not allowed by the Boland
Amendment,'' McFarlane later explained.48  He said he met with North several times and
discussed the documents because ``they were documents that at least I did not fully understand
and I figured a congressman wouldn't either and so I wanted to know what the truth was so I
could answer it.'' 49

     48 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, p. 4077.

     49 Ibid., p. 4085.

     McFarlane gave North a list of the problem documents, which North taped to his desk.50
McFarlane said North suggested that he re-write at least one of the memoranda -- the May 31,
1985, document -- ``to make sure that it was clear.'' 51  McFarlane told OIC that North's stated
intention was to make the documents more accurately reflect the facts of the  situation.52  North's
changes to the document, however, were obviously intended to obscure his contra-aid efforts.53
McFarlane asked NSC counsel Paul Thompson about the legality of altering NSC documents and
was told that both the original and the altered document should be filed with an explanation of
the changes.  McFarlane said he threw away the altered memo.54

     50 In November 1986, North retrieved from the System IV files five of the six documents on
the list and attempted to alter their substance.  A sixth document, the December 4, 1984,
document could not be located by the System IV officer at the time of North's request.  North's
secretary, Fawn Hall, altered the documents that North retrieved.  North's purpose was defeated,
however, because both the altered and unaltered versions of the documents were found in the
NSC files by investigators.

     51 McFarlane North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, p. 4109.

     52 McFarlane, FBI 302, 4/15/87, p. 5.

     53 Instead of referring to the ``guidance'' the contras had received from the NSC staff about
cutting Nicaraguan supply lines, North inserted the word ``awareness;'' he deleted the entire
passage of the document regarding the delivery of lethal supplies.North was tried and convicted
of altering and shredding official documents; his conviction was overturned on appeal.

     54 McFarlane North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, pp. 4114-15.

     In addition to reviewing the problem documents with North, McFarlane said they discussed
the press allegations that North had been fund-raising for the contras.  ``I asked him how he
responded to the charge that he had been raising money, and he explained how he had conducted
himself whenever he had been speaking in public and explained to me why this was not a
violation of law, in his judgment, and we went over it in some detail.'' 55  McFarlane said North
assured him that although he made public speeches on behalf of the contras, he always explained
that he, personally, could not raise funds because he was a Government official.56

     55 Ibid., p. 4074.

     56 Ibid., pp. 4074-75.

     McFarlane testified that it was not ``clear'' to him that  North was involved in delivering
weapons to the contras, despite memos indicating that he was.57  McFarlane admitted that North
reported to him in 1985 that a secret airstrip was being constructed in Costa Rica to resupply the
contras, but he claimed he did not know what North's role was in establishing a southern military
front for the contras.   McFarlane said:

     57 Ibid., 3/10/89, p. 4035.

     . . . He was reporting to me that one [a southern front] was being set up but I'd been in the
military for 20 years and I knew quite well that the activities of a single officer devoted to setting
up an entire front for an army is inconsequential.58

     58 Ibid., p. 4038.

     McFarlane and North drafted letters of response to Congress that were patently false.59  On
September 5, 1985, McFarlane wrote Hamilton:

     59 North was charged with obstruction of and false statements to Congress in regard to the
1985 false responses.  He was not convicted of those charges.

     . . . I can state with deep personal conviction that at no  time did I or any member of the
National Security Council staff violate the letter or spirit of the law. . . . It is equally important to
stress what we did not do.  We did not solicit funds or other support for military or paramilitary
activities either from Americans or third parties.  We did not offer tactical advice for the conduct
of their military activities or their organization.60

     60 Letter from McFarlane to Hamilton, 9/5/85, AKW 001528-29.

     On September 12, 1985, McFarlane sent Barnes a letter containing virtually identical false
denials of contra-aid activities by North and the NSC staff.61

     61 Letter from McFarlane to Barnes, 9/12/85, AKW 001512-14.

     In addition to written representations, McFarlane on September 5, 1985, met with leaders of
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and assured them no laws had been broken and no
NSC staff member had aided the contras or solicited funds on their behalf.  On September 10,
1985, he made similar assurances in a meeting with Hamilton and other House Intelligence
Committee members; the Hamilton meeting was followed up with written questions and answers,
in which McFarlane again misrepresented the facts.62  In these responses, he stated that North
had not helped facilitate the movement of supplies to the contras and that no one on the NSC
staff had an official or unofficial relationship to fund-raising for the contras.

     62 Letter from McFarlane to Hamilton, 10/7/85, AKW 001540-48.

      Despite McFarlane's denials, Barnes on September 30, 1985, sought from McFarlane ``oral
and documentary'' information, including memoranda, on NSC staff involvement in contra
assistance.63  McFarlane invited Barnes to meet with him at the White House on October 17,
1985.  McFarlane showed Barnes a large stack of NSC documents described as relevant to his
inquiry.  McFarlane told Barnes, however, that the material could not leave the White House --
that members of Congress could review them there.

     63 Letter from Barnes to McFarlane, 9/30/85, AKW 001515-16.

     Barnes did not take up McFarlane's offer.  On October 29, 1985, he again requested that
McFarlane turn over the  documents to the House Intelligence Committee, which had facilities
for safeguarding classified materials.64  McFarlane did not respond.

     64 Letter from Barnes to McFarlane, 10/29/85, AKW 011734-36.

     McFarlane later admitted that his responses to Congress were ``too categorical'' and they were
at the least, overstated.65 He claimed, however, that he did not lie.  He explained that he
understood that Congress was primarily concerned with fund-raising for the contras -- not the
other types of violations exposed by North's memoranda.

     65 McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, p. 13.

      McFarlane said North did not tell him certain things, because, ``he was probably trying to
protect me.'' 66  McFarlane was asked whether North raised objections when they were drafting
the false responses to Congress:

     66 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, p. 4184.

     Q:  Did Colonel North say anything to indicate that he believed that these statements were just
flat-out lies?

     A:  No, but that's not his fault.  It's mine.

     Q:  You say it's your fault.  But you also say you didn't do anything wrong.  Is that -- do I
understand your testimony correctly?

     A:  I have said over and over again I did a lot of things wrong.

     Q:  Did you lie to Congress, Mr. McFarlane, in connection with these statements right here?

     A:  At the time I didn't believe it but at the time I  was wrong and I admit that.67

     67 Ibid., pp. 4168-69.

     McFarlane insisted that he did not lie to Congress.  Instead, he claimed, he merely told them
his version of the truth:

     You do not lie to the Congress, that in my experience and working nine years on the White
House staff it was often the case that congressmen would not always tell us everything on their
agenda and similarly the Executive branch didn't always tell everything on its agenda to the
Congress.  You don't lie.  You put your own interpretation on what the truth is.68

     68 Ibid., pp. 4129-30.

     In 1986, after McFarlane resigned as national security adviser, North continued to seek his
advice on a range of contra-related matters, making it clear that he was still actively involved in
contra support.69  In the spring and summer of 1986, after a new round of press allegations of
North's activities spurred a new round of congressional inquiries, McFarlane raised concerns
about North's vulnerability with Poindexter in a computer message dated June 11, 1986.70
McFarlane said, ``I was worried in Colonel North's behalf.  It didn't have anything to do with
truth or falsity, but as a human  being.'' 71  McFarlane continued:

     69 On April 21, 1986, for example, North in a computer note to McFarlane expressed his
frustration over a shortage of contra funds:  ``There is great despair that we may fail in this effort
and the resistance support acct. is darned near broke. Any thoughts where we can put our hands
on a quick $3-5 M?''  North added, ``the pot is almost empty.'' (PROFs Note from North to
McFarlane, 4/21/86, AKW 001150-51.)

     70 PROFs Note from McFarlane to Poindexter, 6/11/86, AKW 021425.

     71 ,McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, pp. 4234.

     Q:  Was Colonel North worried in his own behalf when he talked to you?

     A: Some.

     Q: And did he tell you why he was concerned about having to talk to the people in Congress
about his  activities?

     A: No.

     Q: Did you ask him?

     A: No.  It was on the telephone and I don't think I would have.

     Q: Do you know what his concerns would be, so that you didn't have to ask him, I mean?

     A: No.  I recognized, as I had the year before, that  there certainly were understandable
reasons for him  to be concerned because many in the Congress would  certainly not agree with
what he did, whatever he  did.72

     72 Ibid., pp. 4234-35.

     McFarlane and the Iran Arms Sales

     McFarlane, along with CIA Director Casey, was an early exponent of the view that the United
States should reopen ties with Iran to influence events after the death of the Ayatollah Khomeini.
Independent Counsel did not charge McFarlane with any crime stemming from the arms
initiative. As one of its originators and prime movers he provided valuable testimony regarding
its genesis.

     By the end of June 1985, six Americans were being held  hostage by pro-Iranian Shi'ite
Muslim terrorists in Beirut.73  Other acts of terrorism were launched against Americans,
including the hijacking of a TWA jet in June 1985 and the murder of one of its passengers, U.S.
Navy diver Robert Stetham.

     73 The American hostages were William Buckley, the CIA's chief of station in the Lebanese
capital; Presbyterian minister Benjamin Weir; Father Lawrence Martin Jenco, a Catholic priest;
Associated Press reporter Terry Anderson; David Jacobsen, a hospital administrator; and Thomas
P. Sutherland, a university dean.

     Iran had, since the taking of the U.S. Embassy in 1979, been barred from receiving U.S.
weaponry, and the United States, through a policy known as ``Operation Staunch,'' discouraged
weapons sales by other countries.  In January 1984 Iran was officially declared by the State
Department to be a sponsor of international terrorism, making it subject to additional
arms-export restrictions.

     Against this troubling backdrop, McFarlane dispatched Michael Ledeen, an NSC consultant,
in the spring of 1985 to sound out Israeli officials about the possibility of establishing contacts
inside Iran, in hopes of building ties with more moderate factions there.  During the 1985 arms
shipments, Ledeen acted as a conduit for information between Israeli officials, Israeli and Iranian
arms brokers, and the NSC staff.74   By using Ledeen as a private intermediary, McFarlane
pretended not to have official NSC involvement in these overtures.  Ledeen said he ``had an
understanding with Mr. McFarlane that neither of us would keep anything in writing regarding
this initiative.'' 75

     74 Ledeen was an early subject of Independent Counsel's investigation because of allegations
that he personally profited from the Iran arms sales.  No evidence was found supporting these
allegations, although Ledeen admitted that he asked Israeli arms brokers Adolf (Al) Schwimmer
and Yaakov Nimrodi to open a bank account in October 1985 to cover Iran arms sales expenses.
Ledeen said an account was opened in Switzerland, that Schwimmer and Nimrodi gave him the
number, and that he subsequently gave it to North.  After the Iran arms sales became public, he
received a letter from Credit Suisse stating that the account was never used and no money was
ever deposited in it.  (Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, pp. 125-27, and Letter from Credit Suisse to
Ledeen, 4/23/87.)

     75 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, p. 34.

     Ledeen said he learned in March 1985 from a Western European intelligence official that
Iran's political situation was fluid and that the United States could gain valuable information
from the Israelis.76  At about this time, Ledeen said he discussed with former CIA official
Theodore Shackley a meeting Shackley had in late 1984 with an Iranian (Manucher Ghorbanifar),
who told him it might be possible to ransom the release of American hostage William Buckley,
the CIA's station chief in Beirut.  According to Ledeen, Shackley in April or May 1985 asked
him to relay to the Administration a memo on the ransom plan that had already been rejected by
the State Department in December 1984.77  Ledeen said he gave the  Shackley memo to
North.78

     76 Ibid., pp. 21-23.

     77 Memorandum from Shackley to Walters, 11/22/84.

     78 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, p. 48.  Despite the lack of documentation by McFarlane and
Ledeen, North's notebooks suggest the timing of Ledeen's early contacts regarding Iran.  North's
notebooks on January 15, 1985, reflect a call to CIA counterterrorism official Duane R.
Clarridge, regarding Ledeen. (North Notebook, 1/15/85, AMX 000327.)  On March 21, 1985,
North noted: ``Mtg w/Ledeen -- Wants to make trip to Israel -- RCM [McFarlane] . . .''   On April
28, 1985, North noted, ``Call Clarridge re Ledeen [] Iranian.'' (North Notebook, 4/28/85, AMX
000626.)

     Ledeen traveled to Israel on McFarlane's behalf in early May 1985 and met with Israeli Prime
Minister Shimon Peres. According to Ledeen, Peres asked him to carry a request back to
McFarlane.  Peres said Iran wanted to purchase from Israel U.S.-made artillery shells or pieces,
and Israel could not make the sale without U.S. approval.79  Shortly after his return to the United
States in mid-May 1985, Ledeen relayed the results of his meetings in Israel and also the Peres
request.  Ledeen said McFarlane checked on the request and subsequently told Ledeen ``that it
was okay but just that one shipment and nothing else.'' 80  McFarlane claimed not to have
remembered any discussion with Ledeen regarding artillery parts.81

     79 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, p. 30.

     80 Ibid., p. 37.

     81 McFarlane, Tower Commission Testimony, 2/19/87, p. 93.

     In Israel, meanwhile, talks were progressing among Israeli officials, including Adolf (Al)
Schwimmer, an adviser to  Prime Minister Peres; Israeli arms dealer Yaakov Nimrodi; and
Iranian entrepreneur Manucher Ghorbanifar.  Ghorbanifar had proposed that Israel sell Iran 100
U.S.-made TOW missiles; as a sign of the power of his contacts in Iran, he would obtain the
release of CIA Station Chief Buckley.82

     82 Israeli Historical Chronology, Part One, 7/29/87, p. 5, AOW 0000018, as released in Select
Committees Report, pp. 164-65.

     In early June 1985, McFarlane approved a second trip by Ledeen to Israel, but it was canceled
because Secretary of State Shultz was angry when he learned after the fact of Ledeen's earlier
secret mission.83  When U.S. Ambassador to Israel Samuel Lewis learned of Ledeen's previous
visit, he complained to Shultz; when Shultz confronted McFarlane on the matter, McFarlane
informed Shultz that Ledeen was there on his own, not on an NSC assignment.84

     83 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, pp. 40-41.  North's notebooks reflect that he discussed the
impending trip with Ledeen on June 3, 1985:  ``Call from Ledeen -- Re Iran contact -- so many
people making approaches -- confused as to intermediary -- could we sit down and talk --
Mullah's want to meet with a `person we can deal with' -- Ledeen leaving Friday on trip for Bud
[McFarlane] -- Gone for week -- Ted Shackley 320-2190 (H) 522-3253 (O).''  (North Notebook,
6/3/85, AMX 000732.)

     84 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/10/87, p. 4.

     On June 17, 1985, McFarlane circulated a draft National Security Decision Directive (NSDD)
on Iran to Shultz, Casey and Defense Secretary Weinberger, recommending the option of selling
military equipment to Iran in an effort to re-open ties.  Shultz and Weinberger opposed the draft
NSDD;  Casey endorsed it.

     On July 3, 1985, David Kimche, the director general of Israel's Foreign Ministry, met with
McFarlane in Washington.  McFarlane's recollection of the discussion was:

     . . . In this conversation, there was no request for arms, in any respect, nor linkage made
between arms and the release of the hostages although Mr. Kimche did advert to the possibility
that arms might be raised in the future.  He asked that I provide the U.S. Government position.

     Within two or three days, I conveyed this information to the President as well as to the
Secretaries of State and Defense.  The President reflected on the matter and gave his approval to
such a political dialogue.  I conveyed this information to Mr. Kimche. . . .85

     85 McFarlane, SSCI Testimony, 12/7/86, p. 9.

     McFarlane heard shortly after his Washington meeting with Kimche about a request from
Ghorbanifar for 100 TOW missiles.  On July 7, 1985, Kimche, Nimrodi, Schwimmer,
Ghorbanifar and international financier Adnan Khashoggi met in Geneva, where Ghorbanifar
proposed the TOW missile sale to strengthen his position in Iran.  As in earlier meetings,
Ghorbanifar claimed he could obtain the release of American hostages as a result.86  On July 8,
1985, Kimche, Nimrodi, Schwimmer, Khashoggi and Ghorbanifar met with Ghorbanifar's
Iranian contact in Hamburg, West Germany.  The participants discussed TOW missiles and
hostages,  and the possibilities of U.S.-Israeli cooperation on the matter.87

     86 Israeli Historical Chronology, Part One, 7/29/87, pp. 12-13, AOW 0000025-26, as released
in Select Committees Report, p. 166,

     87 Ibid., pp. 13-14, AOW 0000026-27, as released in Select Committees Report, p. 166.

     On July 11, 1985, Schwimmer at Kimche's direction met with Ledeen in Washington.
Schwimmer told Ledeen that Ghorbanifar thought the American hostages could be freed and that
selling TOW missiles to Iran would improve U.S.-Iran relations.88 Continuing the rapid pace of
events in July 1985, Ledeen relayed to McFarlane the information Schwimmer had given him.
McFarlane told Ledeen he would have to study whether the United States should sell TOW
missiles to Iran.89  Shortly after meeting with McFarlane, Ledeen left for Israel, where he met
with Israeli officials and Ghorbanifar.

     88 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, pp. 44-45.  Ledeen said this was the first time he had ever
heard of Ghorbanifar; he said he did not realize at the time that the memo he had received earlier
from Shackley about ransoming Buckley was based on a meeting with Ghorbanifar. (Ibid., pp.
47-49.)

     89 Ibid., p. 53.

     McFarlane informed Shultz by way of a back-channel cable on July 14, 1985, about Kimche's
proposal that 100 TOWs be shipped to Iran.

     McFarlane's testimony about the July-August 1985 period wavered in terms of precise dates,
but it remained relatively consistent regarding the progression of events.  McFarlane said he
informed President Reagan of the Kimche proposal to sell arms to Iran when Reagan was
recovering from cancer surgery at Bethesda Naval Hospital in July 1985.90  According to
McFarlane, the President said ``that he could  understand how people who were trying to
overthrow a government would need weapons, but we weren't yet sure about whether they were
legitimate.  So he said that we, the United States, could not do it.'' 91

     90 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/16/89, p. 4761.  According to ``The Public Papers of
the President, 1985,'' Appendix A, p. 1513, McFarlane on July 18, 1985, ``briefed the President
on the conclusion of round two of the U.S.-Soviet nuclear and space arms negotiations and also
on terrorism and efforts to combat it.''  McFarlane's schedule also shows a meeting with the
President and Secretary of State George Shultz at Bethesda Naval Hospital at 11 a.m. on Friday,
July 19, 1985.

     91 Ibid.

     McFarlane reported the President's response to Kimche, and Kimche requested a second
meeting.  On August 2, 1985, Kimche met with McFarlane at the White House and told
McFarlane that the Iranian contacts the Israelis had developed were legitimate.  According to
McFarlane, Kimche asked, ``What if Israel were to deliver the TOWs, not the United States,
would that be different?  Would you agree with that?'' 92  Kimche asked McFarlane for the
official U.S. position and McFarlane agreed to report it to the President.

     92 Ibid., p. 4762.

     McFarlane said Kimche asked whether the United States would sell replacement weapons to
the Israelis if the TOW missiles came from their stocks.  McFarlane said he told Kimche:
``David, that's not the point.  You've been buying missiles from us for a long time and you
always can.  You know that.  The issue, and I will get you an answer, is whether it should be
done at all.'' 93

     93 Ibid.

     McFarlane said in the week following his August 2 meeting with Kimche, there were
meetings at which the TOW missile sale was discussed; he repeatedly testified that  Shultz,
Weinberger, Vice President Bush, Poindexter and White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan
were either present in those meetings or kept apprised of the discussions.94  McFarlane said,
President Reagan ``decided that he would approve Israel's delivery of HAWK -- excuse me --
TOW missiles, and that if Israel came to us to purchase replacements they could do that.'' 95
McFarlane said the replenishment issue, as part of his presentation of the Kimche proposal, was
discussed with Shultz and Weinberger.96  McFarlane said shortly thereafter he notified Kimche
of the President's decision.97

     94 In an interview with the Tower Commission, McFarlane was perplexed by a lack of White
House meeting agendas for the late July-early August 1985 time frame where all or more than
two or three of the NSC principals gathered. ``[I]t is those meetings where Iran was discussed,''
he said.  `` . . . I called the Executive Secretary at the NSC and I asked are there agendas for each
of the following meetings, and I gave them six meetings from July 22 to August 7, and he said
no, there are no agendas for meetings at which the President met with all of them on at least two
occasions.  I don't know.''  (McFarlane, Tower Commission Testimony, 2/19/87, p. 19.)

     95 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/16/89, p. 4764.

     96 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, p. 5.

     97 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/16/89, p. 4764.

     On August 20, 1985, Israel -- working through Nimrodi, Schwimmer and Ghorbanifar --
transferred 96 U.S.-made TOW missiles to Iran via chartered aircraft. No hostages  were freed
following the initial TOW missile shipment, although Ghorbanifar continued to promise their
release.98

     98 Israeli Historical Chronology, Part One, 7/29/87, p. 27, AOW 000040, as released in Select
Committees Report, p. 168.

     In September 1985, Ledeen provided North with information to allow surveillance of
Ghorbanifar and his contacts.99  By this point, North had become involved in logistical aspects
of arranging for the hostages to leave Lebanon.  A note taken by a Shultz aide, Nicholas Platt, on
September 4, 1985, reflects information that North, Ledeen and McFarlane were involved in
obtaining the release of hostages, via Israel providing ``equipment'' to Iran.100

     99 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, pp. 103-04.

     100 Platt Note, 9/4/85, ALW 0036259.

     On September 14, 1985, a second shipment of 408 TOW missiles from Israel to Iran was
made, finally resulting in the release of one American hostage, Reverend Benjamin Weir.
Ledeen said the Weir release ``confirmed the legitimacy of Ghorbanifar as a channel to powerful
people in Iran.'' 101  But U.S. officials clearly expected more.  The fact that Buckley had not
been released was of special concern, because  Administration officials had sought his return
first.102   Throughout September and October, Ledeen continued to act as McFarlane's private
liaison with Israeli officials and Ghorbanifar in the arms-for-hostages deals.103  Instead of
further releases following Weir, however, there were increasing demands by Ghorbanifar for
more weapons.  In early October 1985, the terrorist group believed to be holding the hostages in
Beirut reported that Buckley was dead.

     101 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, p. 105.

     102 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, pp. 1, 12.

     103 Among these meetings, on October 7 and 8, 1985, Ledeen met in Washington with North,
Schwimmer, Nimrodi and Ghorbanifar.

     In October 1985, Ledeen told McFarlane the Iranians wanted several types of missiles,
including Phoenix and Harpoon missiles.  McFarlane said it was ``out of the question, it's nuts,
just forget about it.'' 104

     104 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/4/87, p. 59.

     North noted an October 30, 1985, discussion with Ledeen, in which Ledeen described a recent
meeting he had with one of Ghorbanifar's Iranian contacts, Hassan Karoubi, in Geneva.  The
notes state:  ``what's Rqd. [required] to get hostages out.''  North then noted, 150 HAWKS, 200
Sidewinder missiles, and 30-50 Phoenix  missiles.105  The notes also reflect the Israelis'
continuing concern over replenishment of the TOW missiles they shipped to Iran in
August-September 1985, the fact that Buckley had not been released, and McFarlane's apparent
belief that arms sales should be stopped unless more hostages are freed.

     105 North Notebook, 10/30/85, AMX 001836.

     By November, Ghorbanifar and his Iranian contacts were seeking U.S.-made Improved
HAWK missiles from Israel.  Israel proceeded to make plans for a shipment.  On November 8,
1985, McFarlane met with Kimche in Washington.106

     106 McFarlane Calendar, 11/8/85, MF 856-57.

     On November 9, 1985, McFarlane told Weinberger that hostage-release efforts were tied to
arms sales to Iran.  Noting a call from McFarlane, Weinberger wrote:  ``wants to start `negot.'
exploration with Iranians (+ Israelis) to give Iranians weapons for our hostages . . .'' 107  On
November 10, 1985, Weinberger noted a discussion with McFarlane, stating, ``we might give
them -- thru Israelis -- Hawks but no Phoenix.'' 108  On November 14, 1985, Shultz aide Charles
Hill noted a conversation between Shultz and State Department official Michael Armacost,
stating, ``in last few days Bud [McFarlane] asked Cap [Weinberger] how to get 600 Hawks + 200
Phoenix to Iran.  Its [sic] highly illegal.  Cap won't do it I'm sure.  Purpose not clear.  Another
sign of funny stuff on  Iran issue. . .'' 109

     107 Weinberger Note, 11/9/85, AKW 018126.

     108 Ibid., 11/10/85, ALZ 0039775.

     109 Hill Note, 11/14/85, ANS 0001187.  McFarlane said he did not believe he ever raised
with Weinberger a request for 600 HAWKs and 200 Phoenix missiles for Iran, because he had
rejected such a request by Ledeen in October and was strongly opposed to it.  (McFarlane, FBI
302, 3/20/92, pp. 14, 15.)

     McFarlane met with Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin on November 15, 1985, in
Washington, shortly before McFarlane left for the Geneva summit of President Reagan and
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.  McFarlane said, ``I believe that his [Rabin's] purpose in
coming was simply to reconfirm that the President's authority for the original concept was still
valid.  We hadn't changed our minds.  And I reconfirmed that that was the case.'' 110  McFarlane
said Rabin told him that the Israelis were about to make another arms shipment to Iran, but he did
not mention HAWKs.111

     110 McFarlane, Tower Commission Testimony, 2/19/87, p. 36.

     111 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, p. 14.

     On November 14, 1985, McFarlane and Poindexter discussed hostage-release efforts with
Casey and his deputy John McMahon.  McMahon memorialized this meeting for the record,
noting that:  ``. . . McFarlane then told us about the Israeli plan to move arms to certain elements
of the Iranian military who are prepared to overthrow the government.'' 112

     112 Memorandum for the Record by McMahon, 11/15/85, ER 32809-10.

     During the Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Geneva, McFarlane informed President Reagan and
White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan of the impending arms shipment and the
anticipated hostage release.  On  November 19, 1985, McFarlane also informed Shultz in Geneva
of the impending shipment by Israel to Iran.  Hill's notes reflect a secure call between McFarlane
and Shultz:

     Bud [McFarlane] talked to Kimche.  4 host[a]g[es] to be released Thursd[a]y.  Isr[ael]. will fly
plane w[ith] 100 Hawk to [a European city].  Transfer to another plane.  If host[a]g[e]s released,
plane will go to Iran.  If not, Israel.  Isr[ael]. will buy from us to replace & be p[ai]d by Iran. . .
.113

     113 Hill Note, 11/18/85, ANS 0001200.

     Weinberger, who was in Washington, received a call from McFarlane in Geneva.  He noted
that McFarlane ``wants us to try to get 500 Hawks for sale to Israel to pass on to Iran for release
of 5 hostages Thurs[day].'' 114  Although Weinberger had opposed the principle of trading arms
for hostages in White House meetings with the other NSC members, he asked his chief military
aide U.S. Army General Colin Powell to research the viability of McFarlane's request.  Powell
reported back that the large quantity of HAWKs at issue could not be shipped without
congressional notification.  Weinberger on November 19, 1985, called McFarlane in Geneva
with the information.115  On November 20, 1985, McFarlane informed Weinberger in a call
from Geneva:   ``. . . President has decided to do it thru Israelis.'' 116

     114 Weinberger Note, 11/19/85, ALZ 0039795.

     115 Ibid., ALZ 0039797.

     116 Ibid., 11/20/85, ALZ 0039799.

     Israeli Defense Minister Rabin called McFarlane in Geneva and told him there was a problem
getting an arms shipment through a European country.  McFarlane called Poindexter in
Washington to help, and North undertook a series of steps in response. North told McFarlane
there were two problems:  the European country was not granting landing rights, and the missiles
needed to be loaded  onto another aircraft because they were coming from Tel Aviv in an El Al
plane with Israeli markings.  At North's request, McFarlane, who was in Rome, contacted
officials in the European country to seek permission to land.117

     117 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/4/87, pp. 60-64.

     On November 22, 1985, McFarlane, who was in Rome, contacted the foreign minister of the
European country where landing rights were being sought.118

     118 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 11/22/85, AKW 002068.

      Ultimately, the HAWK missiles went from Israel by way of a west Asian country on
November 24, 1985.  When the missiles arrived in Iran, they were rejected as the wrong type of
HAWK.  Consequently, only one planeload bearing 18 HAWK missiles was delivered.  No
hostages were released.119

     119 The failed HAWKs shipment resulted in the illegal involvement of the CIA.  North had
enlisted the help of CIA official Duane ``Dewey'' Clarridge to unsnag the landing-rights problem
in the European country and to obtain the name of a CIA proprietary airline that could transfer
the missiles to Iran.  Clarridge's action caused CIA officials to insist, following the weekend of
the HAWK shipment, that the President sign a covert-action Finding retroactively authorizing a
CIA role.  See Clarridge chapter.

     On or about November 25, 1985, Ledeen received a frantic phone call from Ghorbanifar,
asking him to relay a message from the prime minister of Iran to President Reagan regarding the
shipment of the wrong type of HAWKs.  Ledeen said the message essentially was ``we've been
holding up our part of the bargain, and here you people are now cheating us and tricking us and
deceiving us and you had better correct this situation right away.'' 120

     120 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, p. 133.

     Ledeen relayed the message to Poindexter, and Poindexter informed Ledeen he was no longer
needed for the project, that instead the Administration would use a person with more technical
expertise.121  Ledeen said North informed him in December 1985 that the arms deals ``had been
shut down.'' 122  Despite this information, Ledeen continued his contacts with Ghorbanifar into a
new phase of the arms shipments, meeting with Duane Clarridge and Charles Allen of the CIA,
in early December 1985 to ``brief them on Ghorbanifar, who he was, how I had known him, what
we had done with him, to lay the groundwork for possible cooperation between them and him.''
123

     121 Ibid., pp. 134-35.

     122 Ibid., p. 150.

     123 Ibid., p. 158.

     McFarlane's Resignation:  The Iran Initiative Continues

     McFarlane resigned as national security adviser on December 4, 1985.  In announcing
McFarlane's departure to the press, President Reagan said:  ``I should warn you that I'll probably
be calling on you from time to time for your wise counsel and advice.'' 124  In an exchange of
letters regarding McFarlane's resignation, President Reagan again hinted that he would continue
to use his former national security adviser in a special capacity, stating:  ``I trust you will still
permit me to call on you from time to time.'' 125  The President immediately called McFarlane
into service, as further arms sales to Iran were under consideration.

     124 ``Remarks Announcing the Resignation of Robert C. McFarlane as Assistant to the
President for National Security Affairs and the Appointment of John M. Poindexter,'' 12/4/85,
Public Papers of the Presidents, 1985, p. 1440.

     125 ``Letter Accepting the Resignation of Robert C. McFarlane as Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs,'' Public Papers of the Presidents, 1985, p. 1443.

     On December 5, Poindexter notified the NSC principals that there would be an
off-the-schedule meeting on Saturday, December 7, in the White House residence to discuss
whether the Iran initiative should continue.

     On the morning of December 7, President Reagan met with McFarlane, Shultz, Weinberger,
Regan, McMahon and Poindexter.  Weinberger's notes reflect a discussion of HAWKs and
TOWs that the President believed would go to ``moderate elements in Army'' in Iran; Weinberger
objected strongly on the grounds that the U.S. embargo on arms sales to Iran would make such a
sale illegal, even if it were done through Israel. Regan and Shultz agreed with his position, but
the President was adamant that he should not pass up a chance to free the hostages.126

     126 Weinberger Note, 12/7/85, ALZ 0039831.

     McFarlane said he was the principal speaker at the December 7 White House meeting,
describing the progression of the Iran arms sales since August and asking the NSC principals
whether the initiative should continue.127  As a result of the meeting, McFarlane was dispatched
to London to meet for the first time with Ghorbanifar.  North, meanwhile, was already in
London, meeting with Secord, Kimche, two other Israeli officials, and later Ghorbanifar.128

     127 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, p. 20.

     128 Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/6/87, pp. 11-14.

     According to Weinberger's notes, McFarlane's mission to London was to ``advise President's
decision that we will g008not ransom our hostages -- he will discuss with UK possibility of
their selling some arms to negotiators.'' 129  Shultz was told by Poindexter:

     129 Weinberger Note, 12/7/85, ALZ 0039832, ALZ 0039838.

     . . . Bud [McFarlane] is to ask them [Iran] to release hostg. [hostage].  Then, we prep[ared] to
work for better rel[ations].  If rejected, he auth[orized] to go to [Great Britain which] sells arms
to IR[an] anyway & see if [they] will pick up sale.  I s[ai]d its [sic] still US arms.  Just more
complicated & we more vulnerable.  P[resident] annoyed.  McF[arlane] had him sold on it.130

     130 Hill Note, 12/9/85, ANS 0001246.

      On Sunday, December 8, 1985, McFarlane met at the London home of arms dealer Nimrodi,
with North, Secord, Ghorbanifar, Schwimmer, Kimche and an Israeli defense official.
McFarlane stated the position of the United States, that it welcomed discussions with Iran and an
improvement of relations.  The release of the hostages would be important evidence of a similar
desire by the Iranians.  Such a release would be followed by an appropriate effort to supply
arms.131  Ghorbanifar responded that he would not transmit this position for fear that the
hostages would be killed.  McFarlane walked away from his meeting with Ghorbanifar with a
mixed impression of his political knowledge and personal character:

     131 Memorandum from North to McFarlane and Poindexter, 12/9/85, AKW 02088-91.

     . . . while he seemed to have a rather agile and creative mind for intrigue and in retrospect, a
rather accurate  view of the politics within Iran, he was a person of intrigue and conspiracy and
not a diplomat.  Kind of a north end of a south bound horse.  And I didn't think we should do
business with the man.132

     132 McFarlane, SSCI Testimony, 12/7/86, p. 33.

     On December 10, 1985, McFarlane met at the White House with the President, Weinberger,
Casey, Regan, and Poindexter to brief them on his meeting in London with Ghorbanifar.
McFarlane told them he found him untrustworthy.  According to McFarlane, he told the group
that he told Ghorbanifar to tell the Iranians that, ``We will talk with them [the Iranians], but no
more weapons.'' 133  According to Weinberger's notes of the meeting, McFarlane called
Ghorbanifar ``corrupt, duplicitous -- g008not to be trusted.'' 134  Weinberger's notes also reflect
that five options for future hostage-release efforts were discussed, including ``US deal with
Iranians + give up Israeli cover.'' 135

     133 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, p. 21.

     134 Weinberger Meeting Note, 12/10/85, ALZ 0040644B.

     135 Ibid.  These options tracked with an options paper dated December 9, 1985, that North
prepared for McFarlane and Poindexter; the fifth option described in the paper was for the United
States to sell arms directly to Iran, acting pursuant to a Presidential covert-action finding, using
Secord as an operative.  (Memorandum from North to McFarlane and Poindexter, 12/9/85, AKW
002088-91.)

     The December 10, 1985, meeting, in which McFarlane recommended no further dealings with
Ghorbanifar, marked McFarlane's last involvement for several months in the Iran arms sales.
McFarlane's pessimistic report did nothing to stop the arms deals; instead, in January 1986
President Reagan approved  direct U.S. arms sales to Iran.  Also, Ghorbanifar remained involved
as an intermediary, although, confirming McFarlane's assessment, he failed polygraph tests
administered to him by the CIA.136

     136 See Casey chapter.

     The Tehran Mission

     Poindexter and North continued to keep McFarlane apprised of developments on the Iran
arms sales in 1986.  McFarlane's special relationship with the NSC staff was demonstrated by the
fact that he remained in regular contact with them via a White House PROFs computer terminal
in his home.137

     137 PROFs was the name of the NSC computer program; it stood for Professional Office
system.

     On February 27, 1986, North reported in a PROFs message to McFarlane about discussions he
had just had in Frankfurt with an Iranian official, Mohsen Kangerlu, in which the Iranians sought
a high-level meeting with U.S. officials.  North noted that neither Poindexter nor Casey were
``very enthusiastic'' about such a plan, but he told McFarlane ``you shd [should] be chartered'' to
attend such a meeting.138  Later that same day, McFarlane in a PROFs note to North told him
Poindexter had asked and he agreed to go to a meeting with Iranians the following week.
McFarlane told North, ``So hunker down and get some rest; let this word come to you in
channels, but pack your  bags to be ready to go in the next week or so.'' 139

     138 PROFs Note from North to McFarlane, 2/27/86, AKW 072209.

     139 PROFs Note from McFarlane to North, 2/27/87, AKW 072211.

     The mission would not, in fact, occur, until May 1986, following a series of meetings between
North, Ghorbanifar, CIA officials, Secord, Hakim and Israeli counterterrorism official Amiram
Nir, both in the United States and Europe.  North regularly reported on breaking developments to
McFarlane.  The two men continued to enjoy close relations.140

     140 In a March 10, 1986, message to North, McFarlane expressed concern over renewed
scrutiny by Congress over North's contra-aid activities, suggesting that North join him in the
private sector at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a Washington think
tank.  He painted a simple scenario for North's future:  ``1.  North leaves the White House in May
and takes 30 days leave.  2.  July 1st North is assigned as a fellow at the CSIS and (lo and
behold) is assigned to McFarlane's office. 3.  McFarlane/North continue to work the Iran account
as well as to begin to build other clandestine capabilities so much in demand here and there.  Just
a knee jerk musing.''  (PROFs Note from McFarlane to North, 3/10/86, AKW 001141.)

     Negotiations for a high-level meeting with Iranian officials continued through April. On April
21, 1986, Poindexter told McFarlane that the Iranians were insisting on a delivery of HAWK
missile parts before releasing the hostages.  Poindexter said the U.S.-Iran meeting should take
place first, followed by the release of the hostages, and concluding with the delivery of the
HAWK parts.  Poindexter told McFarlane, ``The President is getting quite discouraged by this
effort.  This will be our last attempt to make a deal with the Iranians.'' 141  In response,
McFarlane told Poindexter:  ``Your firmness against the recurrent attempts to up the ante is
correct.  Wait them out; they will come around.  I will be flexible.'' 142

     141 PROFs Note from Poindexter to McFarlane, 4/21/86, AKW 021469.

     142 PROFs Note from McFarlane to Poindexter, 4/22/86, AKW 021474.

     In early May, North and CIA annuitant George Cave met in London with Ghorbanifar and
Nir, where the groundwork finally was laid for a meeting between McFarlane and high-level
Iranian officials, as well as financial arrangements for the arms deal.  Among the officials
Ghorbanifar said would meet with an American delegation were the president and prime minister
of Iran and the speaker of the Iranian parliament.

     Before McFarlane left for the meeting, scheduled to take place in Tehran, Poindexter briefed
McFarlane on the plan:  When the American party arrived in Tehran, two of the  American
hostages would be released to the U.S. ambassador in Beirut; then, a second aircraft carrying
HAWK parts would depart from Tel Aviv, Israel, en route to Tehran, and two more American
hostages would be released to the U.S. ambassador; upon confirmation that the releases had
taken place, a third aircraft carrying HAWK parts would depart Tel Aviv for Tehran, and at that
point the remains of Buckley would be turned over.143

     143 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/13/87, pp. 10-11.

     McFarlane, North, Cave, NSC staff member Howard Teicher, and two CIA communications
specialists left Washington for Iran via Frankfurt and Israel on May 23, 1986.  In Israel, Secord
and Nir -- who had replaced Kimche as the Israeli official in the arms deals -- joined the group.
Only a portion of the HAWK spare parts expected by the Iranians was loaded onto the aircraft
that the party was taking to Iran.

     On May 25, 1986, the McFarlane party arrived in Tehran at 8:30 a.m. local time, bringing
with them HAWK spare parts.  The rest of the parts expected by the Iranians remained in Israel,
to be flown in once the hostages were released in  Lebanon.  The Americans were escorted to the
former Hilton Hotel.  According to North's notes of a secure message transmitted to the White
House, ``We have been treated politely, though heavily escorted by Rev[olutionary] Guard types
who are also physically and technically surveilling our rooms.'' 144  That evening, the McFarlane
party began three days of largely fruitless talks with Iranians.

     144 North Note, 5/25/86, AMX 001128.

     McFarlane expected the hostage releases to begin when they arrived in Tehran, and asked the
deputy-level officials with whom they met the first evening why that hadn't occurred.  He was
also disappointed that he was not meeting with higher-level officials.  Already, it was clear that
the Iranians and Ghorbanifar had not agreed on the hostage-release plan that Ghorbanifar had
previously laid out to the Americans.145

     145 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/13/87, pp. 12-13.

     According to notes taken by Teicher, the Iranian officials with whom they met the first night:

     . . . were in a bargaining mode.  They claimed the [HAWK] spares were inadequate and used,
and that we couldn't keep a man on the plane.  After an hour of polite exchanges, Bud got
steamed.  Nonetheless, things didn't seem to be too off-track; until during dinner we learned that
contrary to our refusal, they had taken our man off the plane.  This stimulated a flurry of angry
exchanges which in the end proved unsat. [unsatisfactory].  By 11:00, after shish, caviar, ice
cream things were beginning to look grim.  Bud [McFarlane] threatened + started to pack.  At
11:30 we broke up + called it a night.146

     146 Teicher Note, 5/25/86, AKW 005419.

     According to North's notes, McFarlane opened the meeting with a broad political discussion,
telling the Iranians that President Reagan instructed him ``to do what is necessary to find
common ground for discussions in future.'' 147  McFarlane said the ``very fact that I am here is
proof that we have turned page of history.'' 148  North's notes also reflect that the Iranians were
upset with the limited amount of HAWK spare parts the Americans had brought with them.

     147 North Note, 5/25/86, AMX 001129.

     148 Ibid., AMX 001132.

     On May 26 McFarlane met again with Iranian officials.  According to Teicher's notes, the
``meeting w/Bud doesn't go well, deservedly.  He finally walks out basically telling them to fix
the problems + we can then resume a dialogue.  They tell us that a special representative will
soon be here to meet w/Bud.'' 149  In a memo of the discussion prepared by Teicher, the Iranian
official told McFarlane that more preparations had to be made before discussions could begin
with McFarlane at the ``ministerial'' level; McFarlane expressed disappointment and told him
before a dialogue could begin with the United States, ``[t]he preliminary problem in Lebanon
must be overcome.'' 150

     149 Teicher Note, 5/26/86, AKW 005420.

     150 Memorandum of Conversation from Teicher, 5/26/86, AKW 005310-12.

     That evening North, Teicher, Cave and Nir met -- without McFarlane -- with an Iranian
foreign affairs adviser to the speaker of the Iranian Parliament.  Teicher described this as ``our
most serious meeting,'' lasting several hours.151  The next day, May 27, the Iranian adviser
informed the American delegation that the hostage-holders in Beirut had been contacted and put
heavy conditions on the release of hostages, including the release of Dawa terrorists imprisoned
in Kuwait.

     151 Teicher Note, 5/26/86, AKW 005421.

     On the late afternoon of May 27, McFarlane told the Iranian foreign affairs adviser that the
President had already tried in three previous weapons shipments to Iran to establish a dialogue
with that country:

     But his instructions to me in sending me here were that if this 4th try didn't achieve results it
was pointless to pursue an ineffective dialogue.  I can understand that there may have been
misunderstandings + I don't point to any bad faith.  But my Pres.'s instructions are firm, w/o
[without] results we are to discontinue the talks.  These are very firm instructions.  All the items
that have been paid for are loaded + poised for release the minute the hostages are in our custody.
Their prompt delivery w/i [within] 10 hours is our solemn commitment . . . to the problem raised
by the captors, the Dawa prisoners, it is much on our mind as it has been raised before.  Our
position is derived from our policy which respect's [sic] all nations judicial policies.  We cannot
ignore their process.  I am sad to report this.  I respect what you said.  I will report to my Pres.
But I cannot be optimistic.152

     152 Ibid., 5/27/86, AKW 005449-50.

     In the late evening of May 27, the Americans said they would give the Iranians until 4 a.m. the
following morning to free all the hostages.  An aircraft carrying the remainder of the HAWK
spare parts would arrive in Tehran at 10 a.m.; if the  hostages were not freed by 4 a.m., the
aircraft would be ordered back in mid-flight.  The Iranian foreign affairs adviser asked about the
hostage-takers' demand for the Dawa prisoners, and North proposed a statement that the United
States would make every effort to achieve their release and fair treatment.153  At 11:30 p.m.,
after ``more wrangling'' between McFarlane and the Iranian foreign affairs adviser, Teicher
noted:

     153 Memorandum from Teicher, 5/27/86, AKW 005327.

     . . . we conclude that they're just stringing us along.  RCM [McFarlane] gives order to
pack/depart.  We discovered 15 minutes earlier that all day the plane was not refueled . . . leaving
us semi-stranded.154

     154 Teicher Note, 5/27/86, AKW 005452.

     At 1:30 a.m. on May 28 Tehran time, Poindexter called McFarlane and told him that President
Reagan said to launch the plane carrying HAWK parts from Tel Aviv, but if there were no word
on hostage releases by 4 a.m., to leave Tehran; the Iranians asked that they be given until 6
a.m.155

     155 Ibid., 5/28/86, AKW 005452.  In testimony to the Select Committees, McFarlane said that
North called the second plane to leave Tel Aviv for Tehran and that he (McFarlane) learned of
North's order after the fact.  (McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/12/87, p. 79.)  North
said he gave the order for the second plane to leave Tel Aviv based on the previously established
schedule.  (North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/9/87, pp. 113-15.)  Teicher's notes indicate
that the order for the plane to leave Tel Aviv came from President Reagan early on the morning
of May 28, 1986:  ``12:45 Bud [McFarlane] talks to John [Poindexter].  Advises us to hold
pending discussion w/RR [Reagan].  1:30 [a.m.] JMP [Poindexter] calls.  RR says launch second
plane.  If no word on hostage release by 4:00, leave Tehran.  2:00 [a.m.] RCM [McFarlane]
meets [Iranian foreign affairs adviser].  They ask for us to delay until 6.  They will get answer on
hostages.  RCM says if they give us a time we will launch A/C [aircraft] from T.A. [Tel Aviv] so
that it will land here 2 hours after hostages in U.S. custody.  2:20 conveyed to Washington.
Maybe they're serious now.''  (Teicher Note, 5/28/86, AKW 005452.)

     After a series of false signals throughout the night resulting in no hostage release, the
McFarlane party left Tehran at approximately 9 a.m., May 28.156  The plane carrying the second
portion of HAWK parts from Tel Aviv to Iran turned back in mid-flight.

     156 Teicher Note, 5/28/86, AKW 005452-53.

     McFarlane Learns of the Diversion

     McFarlane said he left Iran feeling that the United States had been ``conned.'' 157  The
Americans stopped in Tel Aviv where, on the airport tarmac, North attempted to cheer up
McFarlane by revealing to him the fact of the Iran/contra diversion.  McFarlane said North told
him:  ``It's not a total loss, at least some of the money from this deal is going to Central
America.'' 158  McFarlane, already troubled by the Reagan Administration's failed series of
approaches to Iran, received North's statement in silence, finding that it only deepened his
distress.159

     157 McFarlane, FBI 302, 2/17/88, p. 10.

     158 Ibid., 4/15/87, p. 11.

     159 Ibid.

     After returning to Washington, McFarlane, accompanied by North, briefed President Reagan,
Vice President Bush and Regan on the Tehran mission.   McFarlane was concerned about North's
revelation regarding the Iran/contra diversion, but said he shared the information with no one.
He recommended to  Poindexter that North be reassigned to the Marine Corps.160

     160 Ibid.

     McFarlane's Response to the Public Exposure of Iran/contra

     McFarlane was one of the first principals to speak publicly about the Iran arms sales after they
were exposed in the press in early November 1986.  These reports focused on the fact that
McFarlane had made a secret mission to Tehran bringing spare weapons parts and a cake.
Iranian Parliament Speaker Rafsanjani confirmed the reports, calling the mission a sign of U.S.
``helplessness.''161  McFarlane on November 6 publicly dismissed the reports as ``fanciful.'' 162
On November 7, 1986, McFarlane sent a computer message to Poindexter, complaining that
Donald Regan was pinning the blame on him in briefings to the press.  In the computer message,
McFarlane recounted the early Iran arms sales, beginning with discussions with the Israelis in
June 1985, mentioning the 1985 TOW shipment but not the November 1985 HAWKs, going
straight to a description of his December 1985 meeting in London with Ghorbanifar.163

     161 Facts on File, 11/7/86.

     162 Ibid.

     163 PROFs Note from McFarlane to Poindexter, 11/7/86, AKW 002047.

     On November 8, 1986, McFarlane sent a PROFs message to North:  ``SUBJECT:  Audit trail
[ -- ] I hope to daylights that someone has been purging the [intelligence] files on this  episode.''
164

     164 PROFs Note from McFarlane to North, 11/8/86, ALU 049630.

     On November 15, 1986, McFarlane sent a PROFs message to Poindexter, expressing concern
about the way the White House was handling the rapidly unfolding public exposure of the Iran
arms sales:

     . . . I lived throught [sic] Watergate John.  Well-meaning people who were in on the early
planning of the communications strategy, didn't intend to lie but ultimately came around to it.  I
don't know how Regan will tend.  He might choose two courses; either to push it off on someone
outside the White House, which is fine with me, or he might go ahead with a ``sell it on its
merits'' strategy.  If the latter is the course followed, it must not be confrontational, but open and
candid.

     The judgments made on this and other matters in the next four or five days will be crucial. . .
.165

     165 PROFs Note from McFarlane to Poindexter, 11/15/86, AKW 077240.

     By the time McFarlane raised his concerns about a ``communications strategy,'' however,
Administration officials had already lied to the public and to Congress, most notably on
November 12, 1986, when Poindexter falsely told congressional leaders there was no U.S.
involvement in the 1985 Israeli arms sales to Iran.

     On November 18, Poindexter asked McFarlane to come to the White House to review an Iran
arms sales chronology that the President would use in a press conference the following evening.
At about 8 p.m., McFarlane came to North's office.  North showed him a CIA chronology in
which North thought there were  errors.166  North told McFarlane that Administration lawyers,
whom North did not name, had pinpointed legal problems with the November 1985 HAWK
shipment:

     166 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/14/89, pp. 4262, 4267.

     Q:  . . .  Now, what did Colonel North say about the lawyers identifying a problem with the
1985 HAWK shipment?

     A:  I believe that it was a matter of whether or not the involvement of the CIA was
appropriate.

     Q:  And by appropriate do you mean whether or not it was legal?

     A:  Yes.  Or properly executed by decision.167

     167 Ibid., pp. 4268.

     North told McFarlane that U.S. officials believed at the time that the cargo of the shipment
was oil-drilling equipment.

     McFarlane said his own recollection about the November 1985 shipment was uncertain:

     Q:  Did it cross your mind that he [North] may be feeding you a cover story or asking you to
join with him in a cover story?

     A:  At the time I don't think so.  Within a couple of days what I did learn led me to believe
that yes, this really was a HAWK shipment and I began to recall more about it.  But that evening
I didn't.168

     168 Ibid., p. 4272.

     McFarlane told the Tower Commission that the November 18 chronology prepared by North
``was not a full and completely accurate account of those events, but rather this effort to blur and
leave ambiguous the President's role.'' 169

     169 McFarlane, Tower Commission Testimony, 2/21/87, p. 43.

     McFarlane revised a version of the chronology that had made plain the fact that in November
1985 the Israelis provided HAWK missiles to Iran.  He omitted reference to the HAWKs and
referred instead to a shipment of equipment:

     Q:  Now, was that done to solve this problem that the lawyers had raised and Colonel North
had told you about?

     A:  Well, it didn't solve that problem but it was done that way to solve a problem in my mind,
that the statement in the draft that there was a HAWK shipment together with Colonel North's
statement that we hadn't learned of that until later on, I wasn't really willing to accept and so by
saying equipment which I had said publicly before it seemed to me not to contradict the truth but
it didn't say anything that was false or that I did not know for sure.170

     170 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/14/89, p. 4281.

     Beside the HAWKs problem, McFarlane knew that another complication was looming:  the
possible disclosure of the Iran/contra diversion.  In a November 18 or 19 meeting with North,
Teicher, Deputy National Security Adviser Alton Keel and Poindexter, according to McFarlane,

     . . . someone made the summary remark, well, we don't have a problem, and just popping off I
said, well, I believe you have a problem about the use of the Iranian money and after a moment --
Colonel North and Mr. Teicher had left the room, Colonel North came back and said Howard
[Teicher] isn't aware of that, and I  think that was it.171

     171 Ibid., p. 4277.

     On November 21, 1986, Ledeen asked McFarlane to come to his house because Ledeen felt
that Keel had ``muzzled'' him, and he wanted to start speaking out.172  According to Ledeen,
McFarlane on the morning of November 21, 1986, advised him ``when I described my own role
in this affair that I should not get too far out in front and that I should not portray myself as
having gone to Israel originally to carry out a specific mission for him at his request,'' which was
what Ledeen, in fact, had done.173  It was Ledeen's belief that McFarlane was trying to ``protect''
him, that ``he would just simply try to be nice to me and leave me out of it . . .'' 174

     172 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/4/87, pp. 170-73.

     173 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/30/87, p. 77.

     174 Ibid., p. 78.

     While McFarlane was at Ledeen's house in a Maryland suburb of Washington, North arrived.
According to McFarlane, North asked Ledeen, ``What concerns me is not what happened but
what are you going to say happened?''  Ledeen said, ``I've just gone through with Bud what I did
as part of this and my role was nothing more than being a person who listened at meetings and
reported what I heard.''  North then told Ledeen, ``You and I can talk some more this afternoon.''
175

     175 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/4/87, pp. 174-175.  At a meeting with Ledeen in the Old
Executive Office Building later that day, North became more specific about his concerns.
Ledeen said North asked him, ``Look, the basic question here is what will you say when you are
asked or what would you say if you are asked about a shipment of HAWK missiles [to Iran] in
November of 1985?''  Ledeen said, ``I said I would tell the truth which was that I was aware of it,
that I knew that it had happened, but that I was not aware or could not recall who had made the
decision to do it or when that decision had been made.''  North said, ``Fine.''  (Ledeen, Grand
Jury, 9/30/87, pp. 81-82.)

     Besides his familiarity with the details of the 1985 HAWKs shipment, Ledeen also had
potentially explosive knowledge about financial irregularities in the Iran transactions.
Ghorbanifar had told him of excessive mark-ups and that investors in the deals who claimed they
were owed $10 million were threatening to go public.  Ledeen had approached both North and
Casey about the problem in September or October 1986.176

     176 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/30/87, pp. 57-63.  Arms financier Adnan Khashoggi concocted the
story that there was a threatened exposure in order to pressure the U.S. Government into paying
him $10 million to repay his investors.  See the Flow of Funds chapter.

     As McFarlane and North left Ledeen's house, North said, according to McFarlane:

     . . . he was worried that Michael may have made some personal gain in this whole thing.  I
said, ``What do you mean?'' and he said, ``I think that Schwimmer'' who refers to Mr. Al
Schwimmer, an Israeli who was involved as one of their participants -- that Mr. Schwimmer and
Michael had, he thought -- he, North, thought, had some kind of agreement to share some of the
gain from the sales.  I didn't pursue it any further and neither did he.177

     177 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/6/87, pp. 74-75.  Ledeen believes North heard from Nir rumors
that Ledeen was profiting from the arms sales.  Ledeen denied that he profited.  (Ledeen, Grand
Jury, 9/30/87, pp. 16-20.)  Independent Counsel found no evidence that he did. Israel never gave
OIC access to financial accounts or records.

      As McFarlane and North drove toward downtown  Washington, North made ``statements on
his part that he intended to try to protect me and the President,'' according to McFarlane:

     Q:  Did he say how he was going to protect you and the President?

     A:  Well, at some point in the trip, the fact of documents being shredded was raised and that
seemed to me to be an expression of perhaps trying to protect me from documents which while
explainable were certainly likely to create criticism and argument. . . .

     Q:  And you say the documents that he was going to shred would protect you from
embarrassment?

     A:  Well, he didn't say that exactly.  He said simply that we are going to have to have a
shredding party or something like that, an offhand remark, but I took it, it was my interpretation,
that he said it to relieve any fears that I might have in my mind that I was going to be
embarrassed by documents.

     Q:  And what you had in mind were the documents that you and he had reviewed back in 1985
before you sent those letters to Congress, right?

     A:  Those, plus probably hundreds of others that -- certainly, people who don't agree with you
can find a basis to criticize hundreds of things, simply because they disagree.  He didn't
specify.178

     178 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/14/89, pp. 4285-86.

     According to McFarlane, he told North:  ``Don't worry about me.  Tell it like it is and it will
be okay.'' 179

     179 Ibid., p. 4286.

     Meese Questions McFarlane

     On the morning of November 21, 1986, President Reagan authorized Attorney General Edwin
Meese III to conduct an inquiry into the Iran arms sales.

     Specifically, Meese was confronted with the problem that Casey and Poindexter had told
Congress that they had not known at the time of the November 1985 HAWKs shipment that the
cargo was weapons.  Shultz, meanwhile, had told other Administration officials that he was told
by McFarlane at the Geneva summit in November 1985 that a HAWK transfer was going to
occur.  Hill, Shultz's executive assistant, had notes of the Shultz-McFarlane discussion.

     McFarlane was Meese's first interview subject.  Meese, with Assistant Attorney General
Charles Cooper taking notes, questioned McFarlane for two hours on the late afternoon of
November 21, 1986, about the genesis of the Iran arms sales.  According to Cooper's notes of the
meeting, McFarlane described the Iran initiative as beginning in July and August 1985 when
Kimche and other Israeli officials approached the United States.  McFarlane told Meese he
briefed the President and Regan about it, and while the President was interested in a dialogue he
was cautious about sending weapons.  McFarlane said Ledeen reported to him about Israeli
contacts in Iran.  McFarlane said he talked with Shultz, and that Poindexter remembered a
meeting with the ``Family Group'' (Shultz, Weinberger and McFarlane) and the President, when
the President was in pajamas, either in Bethesda Naval Hospital or during his  recovery from
surgery at the White House in July 1985.180 Cooper's notes reflect that McFarlane said he
learned of the 1985 shipment of TOWs from Ledeen, and McFarlane briefed the President,
Weinberger, Shultz and probably Casey.  McFarlane said he knew of no one in the U.S.
Government who had contact with the Israelis regarding the transfer of TOWs.181

     180 Cooper Note, 11/21/86, ALV 071808.

     181 Ibid., ALV 071808-09.

     McFarlane told Meese he believed he first learned of the November 1985 HAWK shipment
when he was preparing to go to Iran in May 1986, according to Cooper's notes.  McFarlane told
Meese that at the Geneva summit in November 1985 he learned that Israel had shipped oil
equipment.  McFarlane then described North's involvement in sorting out the logistical problems,
at Rabin's request. ``. . . M. [McFarlane] remembers no mention in all this of arms,'' according to
Cooper's notes.  But when Meese told McFarlane that Shultz said they discussed the HAWKs
shipment in Geneva, McFarlane ``doesn't g008remember chat w/G.S. [Shultz], but probably
had one,'' Cooper noted.182

     182 Ibid, ALV 071810.

     At the conclusion of his interview, McFarlane had a  private conversation with Meese, out of
Cooper's earshot.  McFarlane testified that he told Meese at this point that the President was
``four-square behind'' the arms sales from the beginning.183  McFarlane said Meese expressed
relief at this because the President's approval in advance of the sales would constitute a Finding.
McFarlane said after telling Meese of the President's prior approval:

     183 McFarlane, Tower Commission Testimony, 2/21/87, p. 56.

     Ed said, Bud, I know that, and I can understand why.  And, as a practical matter, I'm glad you
told me this because his legal position is far better the earlier that he made the decision. . . . It
was very clear and acknowledged by the Attorney General that the President had approved the
policy providing for Israeli sale of weapons to Iran in the expectation of the U.S. sale of
replacement part items.184

     184 Ibid., pp. 56-58.

     According to Meese, McFarlane ``said something to the effect that I have been taking a lot of
this on my shoulders in the speech I gave this last week and what I have said this last week but I
want you to know -- it was something to the effect he wanted me to know that the President was
generally in favor of pursuing the Israelis' ideas all along.'' 185  Meese said he responded:  ``It
might even be helpful to the President, not hurtful, if he generally supported this from the start.''
186

     185 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, p. 93.

     186 Ibid.  According to Cooper, Meese told him that McFarlane told him privately:  ``You
know, I am trying and I am hopeful that I can keep the President's interests uppermost in this.  I
am trying to protect the President.'' (Cooper, Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87, pp. 79-80.)
Cooper later said, ``I think he made a reference to the fact that, you know, the President was for
this from the beginning or something like that,'' which Cooper said was inconsistent with what
McFarlane had said in the interview.  (Cooper, Grand Jury, 1/11/88, pp. 101-103.)

     Immediately following his interview with Meese, McFarlane called North from a pay phone
outside the Justice Department and told him about the interview.  North's notes indicate that
McFarlane said:  ``RR [Reagan] said -- of course in July -- Intent of Pres[ident] is important --
RR said he wd [would] support `mental finding.' '' 187  McFarlane said:

     187 North Notebook, 11/21/86, AMX 001707.

     . . . I talked to him and said that I had finished an interview with the attorney general and that
the attorney general had said that he was relieved to learn that the President had approved the
Iranian initiative and that the -- he believed that because he had approved it, the President had
approved it, that that justified the actions that were taken after the approval.188

     188 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/14/89, pp. 4293-94.

     McFarlane also called Abraham Sofaer, the State Department legal adviser, to try to obtain a
copy of the Charles Hill note that reflected his conversation with Shultz in Geneva about the
HAWK shipment.189  He was not successful.

     189 Ibid., p. 4297.

     In a late night PROFs note to Poindexter on November 21, McFarlane described his interview
with Meese.  Among other things he wrote:

     . . . The only blind spot [o]n my part concerned a shipment in November '85 which still
doesn't ring a bell with me.

     But it appears that the matter of not notifying about the Israeli transfers can be covered if the
President  made a ``mental finding'' before the transfers took place.  Well on that score we ought
to be ok because he was all for letting the Israelis do anything they wanted at the very first
briefing in the hospital.  Ed seemed relieved at that. . . .190

     190 PROFs Note from McFarlane to Poindexter, 11/21/86, AKW 021677.

     On November 23, 1986, McFarlane met with North and North's attorney, Thomas C. Green, at
McFarlane's downtown office.  According to McFarlane, North:

     . . . was going over in his own mind, aloud, what he thought the problems would be in the
unfolding of the investigation.  And he said that he had spent a lot of time on all the facts and he
believed that the only potential problem might be the use of some of the funds from Iran in
Central America.

     And I said, well, that was approved, wasn't it?  And he said, yes.  You know I wouldn't do
anything that wasn't approved.

     And I said, well, tell it like it is and it will be okay, Ollie.191

     191 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/14/89, p. 4299.

     North told McFarlane the diversion was a matter of record.192

     On November 24, 1986, Meese met with McFarlane again and told him about the weekend
discovery of the Iran/contra diversion.  North had, in an interview on November 23, told Meese
that McFarlane was only one of three Government officials -- including North and Poindexter --
who knew about the diversion.   Meese asked McFarlane whether this was true; McFarlane said
yes.

     192 Ibid., p. 4300.  McFarlane told a closed congressional hearing late in 1986:  ``Thinking
about what I've said today, I can recall one thing that is certainly a very, very volatile thing to say
if in the public domain, and that is that I believe the President must have known about this
diversion of resources.  It seems to me that that ought to be a matter, and it will surely become a
matter, of record with Admiral Poindexter's testimony.  But that is speculation on my part. . . .''
(McFarlane, SSCI Testimony, 12/7/86, NK 0001205.)

     Meese was to report the results of his weekend investigation at a meeting of the President's
senior advisers -- including the President, Vice President Bush, Poindexter, Casey, Weinberger
and Shultz -- on the afternoon of November 24, 1986.  That morning, Shultz remarked to his
executive assistant Hill:  ``They may lay all this off on Bud [McFarlane].  That won't be enough.''
193

     193 Hill Note, 11/24/86, ANS 0001898.

     At the meeting, Regan asked about the 1985 HAWK shipment -- who knew about it, who
authorized it, and whether President Reagan was told.  According to notes of the meeting,
Poindexter responded that McFarlane conducted the 1985 sales all alone, without documentation.

     Poindexter, of course, was involved personally in the 1985 arms sales and was present in
meetings at which McFarlane briefed others on the matter.

     Following Poindexter's statement, Meese described the November 1985 HAWK shipment to
Iran.  According to two sets of notes, Meese indicated that the shipment was not legal but the
President had not been aware of it.194

     194 Regan and Weinberger Notes, 11/24/86.

     Shultz told Hill after the meeting:

     . . . I s[ai]d g008I knew something of what he did.  An Aug 85 mtg w[ith] P[resident] & me
& Bud.  Bud s[ai]d all deniable.  I s[ai]d impossible.  They rearranging the record.  . . . P
[President] now saying he didn't know what Bud was up to. . . .195

     195 Hill Note, 11/24/86, ALW 0059439, ALW 0059441.

     On November 25, 1986, Meese publicly disclosed the Iran/contra diversion.  He named
McFarlane, along with North and Poindexter, as the only three U.S. Government officials who
knew about it.

     McFarlane Conceals the Saudi Donations From Congress

     On December 8, 1986, McFarlane testified under oath before the House Committee on
Foreign Affairs.  He was asked:

     There have been also press reports that the Saudis have been indirectly involved in financing
the contras.  Are you aware of any such activities?

     cFarlane replied:

     I have seen the reports and I have heard that the Saudis have contributed.  The concrete
character of that is beyond my ken.196

     196 McFarlane, House Foreign Affairs Committee Testimony, 12/8/86, pp. 57-58.

     In another response at the same hearing, McFarlane stated:

     I did not solicit any country at any time to make contributions to the contras . . . I have no idea
of the extent of that or anything else . . . I know of no such solicitation of funds from any third
country.197

     197 Ibid., p. 66.

     McFarlane later explained that these questions took him by surprise because he had been
called to testify regarding the Iran initiative, not the contras.  He said he tried to deter  further
questioning with his answers.198  He felt an obligation to preserve the confidence of Prince
Bandar and attempted to give an answer that was incomplete -- not false -- but was unable to
quite carry it off.  As to the questions regarding solicitation, he repeatedly claimed that he did not
solicit Prince Bandar.  He said he explained to him the difficulty confronting President Reagan in
light of the contra-funding cut-off, but McFarlane said he did not ask for funds.  He knew,
however, that Prince Bandar would be bright enough to understand that a contribution would be
welcome and would invite future goodwill.199

     198 McFarlane, FBI 302, 2/16/88, pp. 2-3.

     199 Ibid., 2/17/88, p. 3.

     The Guilty Plea

     On March 11, 1988, to resolve all criminal charges against McFarlane growing out of the
Iran/contra affair, Independent Counsel recommended that McFarlane be permitted to enter a
plea of guilty to four misdemeanors, each charging him with unlawfully withholding material
information from Congress.  The charges to which he pleaded guilty were:

     1.  In his September 5, 1985, reply to Chairman Hamilton, he unlawfully withheld material
information when he stated, ``From that review I can state with deep personal conviction that at
no time did I or any member of the National Security Council staff violate the letter or spirit of
the law. . . . We did not solicit funds or other support for military or paramilitary activities either
from Americans or third parties.''

     2.  In his September 12, 1985, reply to Chairman Barnes he stated, ``. . . I want to assure you
that my actions, and those of my staff, have been in compliance with both the spirit and the letter
of the law. . . . Throughout, we have scrupulously abided by the spirit and the letter of the law.
None of us has solicited funds, facilitated contacts for prospective potential donors, or otherwise
organized or coordinated the military or paramilitary efforts of the resistance. . . . There has not
been, nor will there be, any such activities by the NSC staff.''

     3.  In his October 7, 1985, response to questions forwarded by Hamilton, he answered,
``Lieutenant Colonel North did not use his influence to facilitate the movement of supplies to the
resistance.''  He also stated, ``There is no official or unofficial relationship with any member of
the NSC staff regarding fund raising for the Nicaraguan democratic opposition.  This includes the
alleged relationship with General Singlaub.''  His letter also denied knowledge of the source of
funds supporting the contras.

     4.  On December 8, 1986, he withheld material information from the House Committee on
Foreign Affairs as follows:

     Q:  There have also been press reports that the [nationals of a third country] have been
indirectly involved in financing the contras.  Are you aware of any such activities?

     A: I have seen the reports and I have heard that the [nationals of such third country] have
contributed.  The concrete character of that is beyond my ken.

     As a condition of the recommendation and acceptance of the plea, McFarlane agreed to
cooperate with the Office of Independent Counsel.  At his request, the Court also agreed that he
would be sentenced before he was required to give trial testimony against another person.  On
March 3, 1989, McFarlane was sentenced to two years probation, 200 hours of community
service, and a $20,000 fine.

     In recommending the acceptance of this plea of guilty,  Independent Counsel gave up the
opportunity to prosecute McFarlane as a member of the conspiracy to defraud the United States
by conducting an unauthorized covert activity,200 for making false statements to Congress, and
for obstruction of a congressional investigation.  The strength of such felony prosecutions would
lie in the admissions of McFarlane and the documentary proof of memoranda from North to
McFarlane.  In addition, members of the NSC staff could have testified to North's direct access to
McFarlane, notwithstanding their difference in rank.

     200 McFarlane, however, was an unindicted co-conspirator in Count One of the March 1988
indictment of Poindexter, North, Secord and Hakim.

     The weaker side of a McFarlane prosecution would have been that neither Poindexter nor
North was available as a witness against McFarlane.  Both had refused to testify without
immunity and Independent Counsel was not willing to grant it, particularly when each refused to
even give a proffer of his prospective testimony.  Casey, who might have been able to give some
information as to McFarlane's participation, was dead.  Prior admissions by McFarlane were
carefully hedged:  At no time did he admit deliberately misleading Congress or making a false
statement.  He contended that he was not adequately informed of North's activities and that even
though there were memoranda from North to him, they were not carefully read for Boland
violations in view of the heavy volume of material he was required to review each day,
particularly when information as to  a Boland violation was slipped into the context of a larger
memorandum on a broader subject.

     In addition, a McFarlane prosecution posed procedural problems.  The first question was
whether he should be included in the indictment of Poindexter, North, Secord and Hakim or
whether he should be indicted separately.  Ordinarily, it would have been preferable to try all
defendants at once.  McFarlane, however, posed a problem of severance.  First, he was not a
participant in the diversion which was the central feature of the original indictment.  Second,
whereas he had confessed to a point, North and Poindexter had given their testimony only after
receiving immunity and the Government could not have exposed it at trial.  Third, there could
have been an inconsistency between the confessions of McFarlane and the probable testimony of
North and Poindexter -- especially on the critical questions of the extent of McFarlane's
knowledge of North's activities and the extent of North's authorization by McFarlane.  Fourth, the
indictment as then planned and as finally drawn, alleged a conspiracy beginning in late June
1985, when North and Secord took control of contra resupply, well after North's last surviving
operational memorandum to McFarlane.

     Tactically, there was a need on the part of the prosecution for a witness who could, to some
extent, act as a narrator, linking together the complex activities that were the subject matter of the
litigation contemplated in the original indictment and explaining the background against which
these  activities were conducted.  Also, McFarlane was a witness against North as to the
diversion, the center of the March 1988 indictment.

     Other factors also played a role in Independent Counsel's decision to accept McFarlane's
guilty plea to misdemeanor charges. In February 1987, McFarlane attempted to commit suicide.
It was clear from his extensive meetings, interviews and testimony thereafter that he continued to
suffer as a consequence of his role as national security adviser in Iran/contra policies.
Independent Counsel also gave McFarlane credit for his willingness -- unlike Poindexter and
North, who invoked their Fifth Amendment privilege and refused to testify without immunity --
to assist the investigation at an early date, prior to his plea.

     In the end, although it was recognized that McFarlane would be a very imperfect witness
because of his persistent, almost ritualistic denials of knowledge of much of North's conduct, it
was decided to recommend the plea and get his agreement for cooperation.  This was done even
though Independent Counsel realized that the prosecution of Poindexter and North would be
seriously hampered by the jury's realization that McFarlane -- their superior -- had been permitted
to plead guilty to crimes less severe than those for which his subordinates were on trial.201

     201 Much later it also became apparent that the difficulties with classified information that
arose in the North case would have certainly arisen in a prosecution of McFarlane.

     Conclusion

      There is no question, from Independent Counsel's perspective, that President Reagan put
McFarlane in a difficult position by charging him to keep the contras together, ``body and soul,''
during the Boland cut-off of U.S. aid.  It is also Independent Counsel's belief that McFarlane put
his subordinates in an equally difficult position by delegating to them the operational tasks to
carry out the President's directive, and by joining them in a criminal effort to keep their activities
concealed from Congress.

      There is no evidence that McFarlane or any NSC staff member raised concerns to the
President that his policy directives were causing them to undertake actions that might be
unlawful, although the NSC staff discussed such concerns among themselves and took steps to
cover their tracks.

     McFarlane's willingness to allow the NSC staff to take on operational duties -- while
affording the President and the CIA, State and Defense departments a degree of deniability --
came at a cost to him.  His efforts to keep North's activities and the Saudi donation concealed
from Congress resulted in his guilty plea.

     Furthermore, in testimony regarding the 1985 Iran arms sales, McFarlane contradicted other
senior officials on critical points.  McFarlane repeatedly testified that he kept the NSC principals
briefed and was insistent that the President had approved the 1985 shipments.  It was not until
Independent Counsel in 1990, 1991 and 1992 obtained previously unproduced notes from Hill,
Weinberger, Regan and others that the truthfulness of many of McFarlane's statements regarding
the early shipments could be proven.

Chapter 2

     United States v. Oliver L. North

     Oliver L. North, a Marine lieutenant colonel assigned to the National Security Council staff
beginning in 1981 until he was fired on November 25, 1986, was the White House official most
directly involved in secretly aiding the contras, selling arms to Iran, and diverting Iran arms sales
proceeds to the contras.

     North, who was deputy director of political-military affairs, reported many of his activities to
his superiors, National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane and later John M. Poindexter.  He
claimed to have taken much of his direction from Central Intelligence Agency Director William
Casey.1

     1 See Casey chapter.

     More significantly, North testified repeatedly that he believed President Reagan was aware
and approving of his activities.  North was unable to offer direct proof of presidential knowledge
and authorization.  Both McFarlane and Poindexter, who were North's channel to the President,
have either claimed ignorance of certain of North's activities or said they deliberately shielded the
President from such details.  President Reagan in written interrogatory answers to Independent
Counsel also denied knowledge of North's illegal conduct.  Although the Office of Independent
Counsel could not prove that President  Reagan directly approved North's criminal actions, there
is no doubt that he and his national security advisers allowed North to operate with
unprecedented latitude in furtherance of Administration policies.

     North was indicted in March 1988 on 16 Iran/contra charges, along with Poindexter, retired
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim in a 23-count indictment.  After
the cases were severed and the central conspiracy charges were dropped due to
classified-information problems, North stood trial beginning in February 1989 on 12 counts.  On
May 4, 1989, he was found guilty of three counts, including aiding and abetting obstruction of
Congress, shredding and altering official documents, and accepting an illegal gratuity from
Secord.  North's convictions were vacated on July 20, 1990, after the appeals court found that
witnesses in his trial might have been impermissibly affected by his immunized congressional
testimony.

     The Decision to Prosecute

     It is no exaggeration to say that the North case was central to the investigation into the entire
Iran/contra matter.  This may be difficult to understand in view of North's middle-level position
on the NSC staff.  It gave him no statutory power to command and control activities within the
NSC, much less other areas of the vast government bureaucracy such as the departments of State
and Defense and  the CIA.  Despite these limiting factors, it was clear from the earliest stages of
OIC's investigation that North had working control of the Secord-Hakim covert-action
Enterprise.

     North amassed the authority to carry out his role through a combination of factors, including:

     (1) President Reagan's directive to McFarlane to keep the contra forces together ``body and
soul,'' despite the Boland Amendment funding cut-off,2 and the President's determination to
pursue the release of American hostages at whatever cost.

     2 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3946.

     (2) An extraordinary delegation of authority to North by McFarlane and Poindexter in
executing the contra and Iran operations.

     (3) The decision by President Reagan, Casey and others to run covert operations out of the
NSC, where there was no institutional framework for conducting such operations and no system
of accountability or oversight.

     (4) The designation of North as the secret point man for contra support after CIA assistance
was cut off by the Boland prohibition.

     (5) The perception, promoted by North and his operational partners, that their activities were
known to and authorized by the President, making others more willing to support and less eager
to question them.

     (6) North's powerful, can-do persona, his enthusiastic commitment to both operations, and his
ruthlessness to make them succeed.

     Independent Counsel viewed the prosecution or cooperation of North as the key to the secrets
behind the Iran/contra affair.  When North refused to enter into plea negotiations leading to a
cooperation agreement, it left no alternative but to proceed with prosecution, even though it
presented unusual difficulties.

     The most serious obstacle to North's prosecution was the immunity grant extended him by the
Select Committees that in 1987 investigated the Iran/contra matter.  North's nationally televised
testimony under that grant of use immunity, which guaranteed that nothing he told Congress
could be used against him in a criminal proceeding, greatly complicated Independent Counsel's
investigation and raised serious questions as to whether North could ever be tried.  A second and
equally formidable challenge was whether North would try to ``graymail'' his prosecution by
claiming the need for classified information that could not be declassified for trial.

     Pre-Trial Proceedings

     The Grand Jury on March 16, 1988, returned a 23-count indictment charging North,
Poindexter, Secord and Hakim with conspiracy to defraud the Government, theft of Government
property and wire fraud.  North was charged also with obstruction of congressional investigations
and false statements to a congressional committee and the attorney  general, shredding and
altering official documents, acceptance of an illegal gratuity from Secord in the form of a
home-security system, conversion of traveler's checks and tax-fraud conspiracy.

     The four-defendant case, U.S. v. Poindexter, was assigned to Judge Gerhard A. Gesell of the
U. S. District Court for the District of Columbia.  The battle to bring the case to trial was fought
on a number of fronts, with the defense filing over 100 pre-trial motions.  The principal issues
were the validity of the indictment itself; the application of Kastigar v. United States,3 the ruling
which set the standard for the protection of immunized witnesses from prosecution and which
would govern the rules to keep the trial free of the immunized congressional testimony given by
North, Poindexter and Hakim; the application of the Classified Information Procedures Act
(CIPA), which governs the disclosure of classified information in trials; and immense discovery
demands, which required the prosecution to turn over hundreds of thousands of documents to the
defendants.

     3 406 U.S. 441 (1972).

     The defendants' first successful challenge to the March 1988 indictment was a motion for
severance of the four cases.  They successfully argued that their intention to use  the immunized
testimony of their co-defendants in their own defenses prevented a joint trial.4

     4 North also contended that evidence which would be admissible against his co-defendants
would not be admissible against him, a factor which weighed in favor of severance. North
attempted to use the immunized testimony of Poindexter at trial, but Judge Gesell upheld the
Government's objection to such use.

     The severance of the four trials on June 8, 1988, was a major setback for Independent
Counsel.5  He elected to try North first.  Because North was tried alone, without his superior and
co-conspirators, he was better able to present himself as a fall guy and blame others for his
misdeeds.  But the worst impact of severance was the delay it imposed on Independent Counsel's
investigative and trial schedule.  This put off for a year the completion of the Poindexter, Secord
and Hakim cases and the opportunity to question them, which was essential to the investigation.

     5 Judge Gesell ruled from the bench to sever the trials, after hearing oral arguments on the
matter.

     North's challenges to the indictment were virtually all rejected by the court.  One count was
dismissed with the Government's consent.  One count was dismissed on the court's own motion
to avoid confusion at trial.

     The most significant ruling by Judge Gesell was his upholding as a crime Count One of the
indictment, which described the Iran/contra conspiracy in detail.  Count One charged a
conspiracy to defraud the United States by  deceitfully conducting a covert action in violation of
executive orders and statutory restraints.  Trial on this count, which was dismissed later because
the Administration refused to declassify information material to North's defense, would have
disclosed the Government-wide activities that supported the Iran and contra operations.6

     6 See The Operational Conspiracy:  A Legal Analysis chapter.

     Judge Gesell also ruled that:

      -- Briefings by Executive officials of congressional committees, even though informal and
unsworn, may be ``proceedings'' under the obstruction statute.

      -- The federal statute prohibiting false statements covers false and deceitful statements in
official correspondence from Executive Branch officials responding to congressional
committees.

     Kastigar:  The Problem of the Congressional Immunity Grants

     Prior to severance, the immunized defendants requested a pre-trial hearing to preview the
Government's case witness-by-witness to see whether it could be tried without the improper use
of their immunized testimony.  Independent Counsel urged that this review be deferred until after
trial when the actual trial record would be available for analysis.  He argued that immunity was a
bar to conviction, not to trial.  The District Court granted a limited pre-trial hearing.  It agreed to
inquire into (a)  Independent Counsel's procedures for insulating his staff from immunized
testimony, (b) the extent to which the Grand Jury heard evidence affected by that testimony, and
(c) the independent leads to proposed witnesses and other evidence.  After two days of
evidentiary hearings, Judge Gesell reviewed Independent Counsel's investigative leads, the Grand
Jury proceedings, and the internal files of OIC that documented its efforts to insulate itself from
immunized testimony.  He permitted extensive examination of Independent Counsel in sworn
testimony regarding insulation procedures adopted to protect OIC from being ``tainted'' by
exposure to immunized testimony.

     In the end the court held that (1) the Office of Independent Counsel effectively protected itself
from undue exposure to immunized testimony, (2) there was no direct use of immunized
testimony in the Grand Jury, (3) Independent Counsel's instructions to the grand jurors and Grand
Jury witnesses to avoid using immunized testimony were effective, (4) Independent Counsel had
untainted leads to each of its witnesses, and (5) immunized testimony did not enhance the focus
of Independent Counsel's investigation.7

     7 U.S. v. Poindexter, 698 F.Supp. 300, 305-09, 314-16 (D.D.C. 1988).  The court later refused
to reconsider either its legal view of ``use'' under Kastigar or the preliminary decisions which
shaped the factual record upon which the court based its ultimate conclusions.  See Motion for
Reconsideration . . . , North, (D.D.C. June 28, 1988); Order, North (July 13, 1988).

     The three immunized defendants immediately appealed the court's ruling.  They also
petitioned the Court of Appeals for a writ of mandamus to compel a more extensive, pre-trial
Kastigar hearing.  Independent Counsel successfully opposed the appeal on grounds that the
question could be reviewed after judgment and that interlocutory review was not warranted.  The
Court of Appeals ruled that Judge Gesell had ``a considerable degree of discretion to fashion the
procedure most conducive to resolving fully and fairly all issues regarding the use of immunized
testimony at trial.'' 8

     8 See Petition of Defendants . . . for a Writ of Mandamus, In re Poindexter, No. 88-3097
(D.C. Cir. July 20, 1988); U.S. v. Poindexter, 859 F.2d 216, 222 (D.C. Cir. 1988).

     Following severance, Kastigar requirements continued to hamper the orderly trial of the case.
During 10 days of jury selection, North succeeded in having all prospective jurors who had any
recollection or impression of his immunized testimony excused for cause.9  The court rejected
North's pretrial motion to suppress the testimony of  prosecution witnesses on the grounds that all
of them had been exposed to immunized testimony.  The court also denied his requests at trial for
hearings before the testimony of each prosecution witness.  The court instead decided to warn
each witness prior to testimony to testify only from his or her personal knowledge, and not to
testify to any matter learned or derived from North's immunized appearance before Congress.
During trial, Judge Gesell dismissed one prospective witness who said he was unable to comply
with this instruction.

     9 The court's careful method of excusing jurors who admitted exposure to North's immunized
testimony drew fire from North both during trial and on appeal.  The Court of Appeals
nevertheless concluded that Judge Gesell's method of screening the jurors was proper.  See
Defendant's Motion to Stay the Proceedings . . . Pending the Selection of a Jury in Conformity
With the Jury Selection and Service Act . . ., North (D.D.C. Feb. 7, 1989); Order, North (D.D.C.
Feb. 9, 1989) (motion denied), aff'd, U.S. v. North, 910 F.2d 843, 909-10 (per curiam), modified
in other respects on petition for reh'g, 920 F.2d 940 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (per curiam).

     Classified Information and Discovery Problems

     In addition to Kastigar problems, Judge Gesell had to confront the problems posed by the
likely use of classified information at trial.  Using steps prescribed by CIPA, Judge Gesell began
carefully sifting North's requests to disclose in his defense certain classified information; if the
Government refused to allow material evidence to be disclosed, or if it failed to provide adequate
substitutions, charges could be dismissed.  Before and during the trial, CIPA problems dominated
and very nearly overwhelmed the case.

     First, Judge Gesell ordered the construction of a secure facility operated at Government
expense to house the classified documents for use of the defendants.  After a large, downtown
office was remodeled to provide adequate security, Independent Counsel produced to the defense
in pretrial discovery more than 100,000 pages of classified and almost 200,000 pages of
unclassified documents.  This represented only a fraction of what the defendants would
ultimately receive.

     North and his co-defendants demanded in discovery a search throughout the Government for
any and all documents touching on Iran/contra and also on other highly sensitive activities which
they claimed were analogous in some respects.  Once located, all documents had to be reviewed,
redacted, and annotated as to classification.  At the same time, North claimed that he himself had
no countervailing responsibility to indicate which classified materials were truly relevant to his
defense.  In the first challenge to CIPA's requirements, North raised numerous arguments,
ranging from complaints that the statute unconstitutionally forced him to disclose defense
strategies, to the charge that those responsible for reviewing the materials were too slow and
arbitrary in their work.

     On July 5, 1988, Independent Counsel presented to the court a 151-page summary of 395
documents that the Government intended to use in its case-in-chief against North.  An
Interagency Review Group (IRG) -- made up of representatives from the departments of State,
Defense and Justice, the CIA, NSC and National Security Agency, and which was responsible for
protecting classified information -- required numerous redactions, or omissions, in many
documents.

     Meanwhile, Judge Gesell, with the consent of Independent Counsel, met privately with North
and heard a presentation of his defense in order to better judge the materiality of the classified
documents he planned to introduce at trial.  As a result of that presentation, the details of which
were never disclosed to the prosecution, Judge Gesell afforded North wider discovery, set three
deadlines for North to file notices of the classified information that North expected to disclose,
and set trial for September 20, 1988.

     It soon became clear that neither the intelligence agencies nor North could meet Judge
Gesell's schedule.  In July 1988 alone, the Government produced 350,000 pages of documents in
response to the court's expanded discovery order.  Independent Counsel reported that full
production would require additional months of work.  North, meanwhile, sought a continuance in
order to absorb the documents already produced.

     The court suggested the feasibility of avoiding the mounting discovery and CIPA problems by
dropping the first three counts of the indictment.  In hopes of saving these crucial counts,
Independent Counsel moved that Counts One through Three be severed from the rest of the case
and tried later.  North followed up with an 85-page CIPA  notice objecting to most of the
deletions of classified information proposed by the Government for its case-in-chief documents,
and he tendered an unspecific 265-page description of the classified documents he intended to
disclose in his defense.

     In response to North's motion for a delay necessary for his trial preparation, Judge Gesell
cancelled the September trial date.  He gave the Government until October 10, 1988, to comply
with discovery orders.  He denied the motion to sever the first three counts as moot.  He struck
North's CIPA notices, extended the deadline for filing new notices to November 14, 1988, and
directed North to make his notices complete and specific.  The Government met the discovery
deadline.  North's November CIPA notices again contested virtually all of the deletions in the
Government's case-in-chief documents and contained a two-inch-thick list of classified
documents he intended to submit for his defense, again without spelling out their relevance.10

     10 North attempted by these broad notices to refrain from disclosing certain classified
materials that allegedly were most critical to his defense, and thus central to his claim that the
CIPA process violated his constitutional rights.  While allowing North to preserve his
constitutional objections, the court directed North to submit a final CIPA notice ex parte and in
camera by December 19, 1988, or face preclusion of the evidence.

     Judge Gesell conducted seven days of closed hearings, beginning November 30, 1988, to hear
arguments regarding the appropriateness of the redactions on the  classified documents in the
Government's case-in-chief.11  To speed the proceedings and minimize confrontations over
classification issues during these hearings, Independent Counsel withdrew 100 of its proposed
exhibits, and North withdrew 10,000 pages of his documents.

     11 Independent Counsel's presentations on CIPA issues were directed by Associate Counsel
Christian J. Mixter.

     Judge Gesell on December 12, 1988, made several critical CIPA decisions.  He wrote that a
``fully open, public trial [was] essential'' to obtaining justice for North.  In the Government's
case-in-chief documents, he approved redactions designed to protect the identities of CIA
personnel and cooperating foreign nationals, the locations of overseas CIA stations, and
intelligence sources and methods.  But he also ruled that if the Government introduced all of its
proposed evidence, it would have to disclose the identities of certain countries and foreign
leaders.  These subjects appeared ont the Interagency Review Group's list of items that could not
be disclosed under any circumstance, even if it meant dismissal of the case -- these items became
known in Judge Gesell's courtroom as the ``drop-dead'' list.  Also, Gesell held that certain
intelligence reports could only be used in verbatim form, even if that disclosed an intelligence
source which the intelligence agencies claimed to be secret.  Although Independent Counsel
would have  proceeded without these reports, North claimed they were also material to his
defense.

     As for North's claimed need for classified information for his defense, Judge Gesell observed
that North had again failed to comply with CIPA in his notices of classified information he
intended to disclose.  Judge Gesell stated that North's CIPA notices reflected ``deliberate
disregard'' of the court's orders regarding specificity and materiality.  In response, Judge Gesell
sanctioned North by permitting him to introduce only 300 classified documents.  Over North's
objections, the court turned over to the intelligence agencies and to Independent Counsel North's
third CIPA notice, which included a 162-page narrative of proposed testimony by North and/or
other unidentified defense witnesses.  Judge Gesell set the trial date at January 31, 1989.

     As a result of Judge Gesell's December 12, 1988 CIPA rulings, the heads of the intelligence
agencies met with President Reagan's national security adviser to determine whether to permit
the disclosure of the information so the trial could proceed, or to ask Attorney General Richard
Thornburgh to file a CIPA affidavit refusing to do so, thus forcing dismissal of the case.  At that
time, no attorney general had ever taken such a step.

     The classified information at issue included the names of Latin American countries and
officials referred to  in certain documents, even though the country identities and the facts spelled
out in the documents were publicly known.  The intelligence agency heads also refused to permit
the disclosure of the nature of intelligence reports circulated to Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, Casey, Deputy CIA Director Robert M. Gates and others, which exposed the U.S.
arms sales and Iranian claims of being overcharged.12  Judge Gesell ruled that the nature of the
intelligence enhanced its credibility and thus would be material to the defense.

     12 See Classified Appendix.

     In advance of the meeting of the intelligence heads, Independent Counsel on December 20,
1988, filed a brief with Attorney General Richard Thornburgh stressing the importance of the
North prosecution.  Independent Counsel made clear that the refusal to declassify the information
at issue would result in dismissal of central counts against North.  Independent Counsel's brief
included an extensive collection of press reports, including a book, to demonstrate that the
information was not in fact secret.  Independent Counsel offered to meet with the group to
present his argument, but Thornburgh did not acknowledge the offer.

     The meeting went forward in the White House Situation Room on December 21 without
Independent Counsel.  Associate Counsel to the President William Landers informed
Independent Counsel that evening that the agencies would refuse to permit the use of the
classified information at North's trial and that Thornburgh would file a CIPA affidavit forcing
dismissal of the case if necessary to prevent the information's disclosure.  That message was
confirmed in subsequent letters from Assistant Attorney General Edward S.G. Dennis, Jr., and
CIA Director William H. Webster.

     The Reagan Administration's position made it clear that important counts against North were
in jeopardy.  Independent Counsel unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration of Judge Gesell's
order.  An appeal of Judge Gesell's rulings as to what was material to the defense was not
promising.  A trial judge, particularly one as diligent as Judge Gesell, is allowed wide discretion
on such matters.  Moreover, an appeal would have made an immediate trial impossible, even if
the appeal were expedited.

     More promising was an effort by Independent Counsel to reach agreement with the
intelligence agencies by offering to drop two major counts of the indictment:  the conspiracy and
theft charges associated with the diversion.13  These were the counts to which the intelligence
reports at issue were relevant.  They were also  the counts the Administration most feared.14  In
return for dismissal of Counts One and Two, Independent Counsel obtained tacit agreement from
the departments of Justice and State not to block the disclosure of the identities of certain Latin
American countries which, if withheld, would have forced the dismissal of many of the
remaining counts.

     13 These were Counts One and Two.  In late November 1988, the court had dismissed another
major count, wire fraud, on the grounds that it essentially duplicated Count Two.

     14 In an earlier effort to dismiss Count One, the conspiracy count, Thornburgh had filed an
amicus brief against Independent Counsel in support of defendant North.

     After obtaining this assurance of support, Independent Counsel informed Thornburgh on
January 4, 1989, that he would move for the dismissal of the conspiracy and theft counts.  The
motion was made the following day.  After the attorney general filed his affidavit confirming the
need to withhold the information, Counts One and Two were dismissed on January 13, 1989.

     The dismissal of the conspiracy and theft counts did not end the conflict over classified
information in North.  The court conducted two more days of hearings on North's additional
CIPA notices, which laid out 300 proposed defense trial documents.  On January 19, 1989, the
court did not rule in advance on each item.  The court defined categories of classified information
that could or could not be exposed.  The court permitted North to use classified information in
accordance with those categories relevant to  seven specific purposes and for the purpose of
impeaching witnesses.15

     15 North could use the information to show that (1) the chronologies charged in the
indictment were correct, (2) his answers to Attorney General Meese were true in November
1986, (3) his answers to various congressional inquiries were also true, (4) he was directed to
testify falsely, (5) he did not destroy documents, (6) money donated to the contras were for
legitimate, tax-deductible purposes, and (7) he lacked intent to violate the law.

     The intelligence agencies were outraged.  Judge Gesell's order did not literally comply with
the precise pre-trial procedures of CIPA by giving the Government in advance of trial the
opportunity to challenge each specific intended use of classified information, one document at a
time.  However, as Judge Gesell pointed out, CIPA never contemplated such an extensive use of
classified information, and there were limits to the court's ability to resolve all questions of
materiality before the trial developed.

     As the jury was being selected, the intelligence agencies pressed Independent Counsel to get
the court to agree to a system whereby the Government would be given 24-hour's advance notice
from North of his intent to use classified information in his documents.  Independent Counsel
offered two proposals, but Judge Gesell rejected both.  At the same time, OIC attorneys worked
continuously with the intelligence agencies to draft acceptable substitutions for key pieces of the
most sensitive classified information in the North documents.

     On February 8, 1989, the day before the jury was to be sworn and opening statements were to
be delivered, the attorney general attempted to intervene in the case.  He filed a motion to compel
literal adherence to CIPA procedures, seeking to stay the trial until the issue was litigated.
Independent Counsel opposed the attorney general's motion.  Judge Gesell denied the attorney
general's request.  In response, the attorney general, over the opposition of Independent Counsel,
filed an appeal.  Judge Gesell excused the jury to await action by the Court of Appeals.

     The Court of Appeals denied two motions by the attorney general for a stay of North's trial,
agreeing with Judge Gesell and Independent Counsel that the attorney general had no standing to
appeal.  Although the attorney general obtained a stay from the Supreme Court, during a
weekend of negotiations Independent Counsel and the Department of Justice agreed on
procedures satisfactory to Judge Gesell.  The stay was lifted.  Independent Counsel and the
attorney general proposed to Judge Gesell a list of nine categories of information requiring prior
notice to Independent Counsel by North, so that Independent Counsel could give the Government
the opportunity to weigh the impact of public disclosure.  The court approved most of the
proposal, but stated that Independent Counsel, not the attorney general, bore sole responsibility
for the  prosecution and would be the Government's sole representative in court.

     North was unsuccessful in graymailing the Government into dropping additional charges on
grounds of classification.  Only one intelligence agency persisted in abusing its classification
powers during the trial by stubbornly refusing to consider declassifying even the most mundane
and widely known ``secrets'' under its jurisdiction.  But the attorney general declined to support
that agency in its extreme positions.16

     16 See Classified Appendix.

     Little classified information was divulged during the trial without the Government having had
an opportunity to approve its release.  Hardly a day went by, however, without controversy.
Evenings and weekends were spent in lengthy negotiations between Independent Counsel and the
intelligence agencies in an effort to resolve disputes and head off problems.  A major
achievement was the negotiation of a 42-page Government admission of facts surrounding ``quid
pro quo'' arrangements between the United States and Central American countries for the benefit
of the contras, introduced in lieu of the disclosure of classified documents.

     Confrontations over CIPA prompted Judge Gesell to observe later that the statute ``was
ill-suited to a case of this type and amendments are needed to recognize practical  difficulties.'' 17
After trial, the only challenge North raised on appeal to Judge Gesell's CIPA rulings was his
decision to allow the Independent Counsel and the intelligence agencies to review the 162-page
summary of anticipated defense testimony.  The Court of Appeals agreed with North that Judge
Gesell ``did not move straightforwardly down the procedural path'' of CIPA, and that he
erroneously failed to order the Government to notify North of the classified information with
which the Government expected to rebut North's information.  However, the appeals court
refused to reverse convictions on CIPA grounds, holding that North failed to demonstrate any
surprise or prejudice as a result of trial errors:  ``In the absence of any showing by North of actual
injury, we find no constitutional violation arising out of the application of CIPA in this case.'' 18

     17 See Transcript, North (D.D.C. Apr. 6, 1989); U.S. v. North, 713 F. Supp. 1452 (D.D.C.
1989).

     18 North, 910 F.2d at 898-903.

     The North Trial

     Public interest in the North case remained high, despite months of pre-trial proceedings and
three weeks of jury selection.  After the jury was finally sworn in on February 21, 1989, there
were long lines of spectators vying for the 14 or 15 public seats available in Judge Gesell's
courtroom.  Outside the courthouse, North's arrivals and  departures were recorded by waiting
camera crews throughout the eight-week trial.

     With the dismissal of the central conspiracy and theft charges against North, the prosecution
trial team 19 faced the difficult job of proving beyond a reasonable doubt a case consisting of 12
individual charges without the central charges to which they had been appended.  They included
obstructing a congressional investigation, shredding documents, accepting a bribe and tax-fraud
conspiracy.

     19 The North case was tried by Associate Counsel John W. Keker, Michael R. Bromwich and
David M. Zornow.

     In summary, the charges, renumbered, were:

     Count One: Obstruction of Congress in September and October 1985, when congressional
committees sought information on press reports alleging that North was engaged in a variety of
contra-support activities, in violation of the Boland prohibition on U.S. aid.  The indictment
charged that North and McFarlane obstructed Congress by falsely denying in three letters North's
contra-assistance efforts.  The first letter was sent September 5, 1985, to the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI); the second, on September 12 to a House Foreign
Affairs subcommittee; and the third, on October 7 to HPSCI, responding to additional questions.

     Counts Two, Three, and Four:  False statements to Congress, charging specific
misrepresentations in the three letters described in Count One.  These included statements that
North had not solicited funds or other support for the contras, had not provided military advice to
them, and had not used his influence to facilitate the movement of supplies to the contras.

     Count Five:  Obstruction of Congress in August 1986, charging that in a presentation to
HPSCI members and staff, North falsely denied press  accounts that he:  (1) had given military
advice to the contras; (2) had knowledge of specific military actions conducted by the contras; (3)
had contact with retired Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub within the previous 20 months; (4) raised
funds in support of the contras; (5) advised and guided Robert W. Owen with respect to the
contras; and (6) had frequent contact with Owen.

     Count Six:  Obstruction and aiding and abetting in the obstruction of congressional
investigations in November 1986, charging that North helped draft a false chronology of the Iran
arms sales and altered and destroyed documents in response to congressional inquiries into the
Iran initiative.

     Count Seven: Obstruction of a presidential inquiry conducted by Attorney General Edwin
Meese III from November 21-23, 1986.  The indictment charged that North made false
statements to Meese on November 23, including that:  (1) the NSC had no involvement in the
diversion of Iran arms sales proceeds to the contras; (2) the Israelis determined how much of the
proceeds from the arms sales were diverted to the contras; and (3) North had advised contra
leader Adolfo Calero to open bank accounts in Switzerland to receive the diverted funds.  The
indictment also charged that North obstructed the Meese inquiry by altering, destroying,
concealing and removing relevant official documents.

     Count Eight: False statements on November 23, 1986, charging the specific
misrepresentations North made to Meese as described in Count Seven.

     Count Nine: Concealing, removing, mutilating, obliterating, falsifying and destroying official
NSC documents relevant to the Iran/contra matter from November 21-25, 1986.

     Count Ten: Receipt of an illegal gratuity, charging North with accepting a home-security
system paid for by Secord, in exchange for official acts performed by North.

     Count Eleven: Conversion of traveler's checks, charging that North from April 1985 to July
1986 personally used $4,300 in traveler's checks from approximately $90,000 in checks given to
him by  Calero for hostage-release and contra-related expenses.

     Count Twelve: Conspiracy to defraud the United States, the Department of the Treasury and
the Internal Revenue Service.  The indictment charged that beginning in the spring or summer of
1985, North and others conspired to defraud the United States by illegally using a tax-exempt
organization, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL), to solicit money
for weapons for the contras and other unlawful purposes.20

     20 Private fund-raisers Carl R. Channell and Richard R. Miller pleaded guilty to identical
charges in 1987, naming North as a co-conspirator in the tax-fraud scheme.

     Although the North trial was hard fought, with few exceptions the underlying facts were not
truly in dispute.  The principal issue was whether North acted with criminal intent.  The
prosecution presented more than 30 witnesses and hundreds of trial exhibits demonstrating that
North did, in fact, perform the acts charged in the indictment.  Instead of disproving the facts,
North's defense centered on his claims that all his actions were known to and approved by his
superiors, that although he knew certain of his actions were wrong, they were justifiable in light
of the need for covert action in a dangerous world, and that he never believed any of his actions
were unlawful.

     At issue, then, was North's intent in performing these acts.  The jury had to decide whether
North's motives were criminal, or whether he acted out of good intentions in  difficult
circumstances -- whether he was, as he claimed, a ``pawn in a chess game being played by
giants.'' 21

     21 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/7/89, p. 6928.

     It was clear that North's job at the NSC was to implement two of the President's most
important policy goals:  the sustenance of the contras despite the Boland prohibition on U.S. aid,
and the release of American hostages being held by pro-Iranian terrorists in Beirut.  It was also
clear that North worked tirelessly in pursuit of these goals.

     To prosecute North successfully, the Government was required to distinguish for the jury
North's illegal actions from those that were legitimate, and it had to prove those crimes beyond a
reasonable doubt.

     The Government's task was complicated by the fact that most of its key witnesses were hostile
to the prosecution of North.  These witnesses reluctantly described their knowledge of the
criminal acts of which North was accused, but at every opportunity sought to help the defendant:

      -- McFarlane, who testified about the false letters sent to Congress and other efforts to
conceal North's contra-assistance activities, said: ``I believe that I am at fault, not him.'' 22  After
testifying on direct  examination that North informed him on the weekend of November 21-23,
1986, that there would be a ``shredding party,''  McFarlane asserted on cross-examination that he
believed North intended to destroy documents only to protect McFarlane:  ``I took it not as an act
of malice, but just a statement to me that he was going to make sure that I wasn't hurt.  And I
took it as a statement of a subordinate trying to be loyal . . .'' 23

     22 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/13/89, p. 4146.

     23 Ibid., 3/14/89, p. 4287.

      -- Meese, whose testimony was central to proving two of the charges against North, likened
his fact-finding interview with North on November 23, 1986, to a ``chat among colleagues,''
although he had previously testified that discovery of the diversion -- the subject of his interview
with North -- had caused him to fear the possible impeachment of the President.

      -- North's secretary Fawn Hall testified extensively about helping North alter, shred and
remove from the White House official NSC  documents.  She also testified about the blank
traveler's checks North kept in his office to distribute to contra leaders.  On cross-examination,
she described North as a ``tireless'' and ``inspirational'' boss, who was ``never lazy or
self-serving.'' 24  Hall suggested that repeated questioning by Congress and the OIC caused her
to testify that she recalled certain things more clearly than she actually did, including
incriminating evidence she provided against North.25

     24 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, p. 5419.

     25 Ibid., 3/23/89, p. 5423.

      -- Calero gave detailed testimony for the prosecution about North's role in supplying weapons
and other support to the contras during the Boland cut-off period.  On cross-examination, he
described North as a ``savior,'' for whom the Nicaraguans should ``erect a monument for . . . once
we free Nicaragua.'' 26

     26 Calero, North Trial Testimony, 2/23/89, pp. 2054-2055.

      -- Colorado beer magnate Joseph Coors, after testifying about his $65,000 payment to NEPL
which was unlawfully solicited as a tax-deductible contribution, stepped down from the witness
chair and shook hands with North in full view of the jury.

      -- Gen. Singlaub, who testified about his contacts with North in soliciting contributions for
the contras from foreign countries, saluted North following his testimony, also in full view of the
jury.

     On April 6, 1989, North took the stand in his own defense.  For six days, North admitted to
having assisted the contras during the Boland prohibition on U.S. aid, to having shredded and
removed from the White House official documents, to having converted traveler's checks for his
personal use, to having participated in the creation of false chronologies of the U.S. arms sales, to
having lied to Congress and to having accepted a home security-system from Secord and then
fabricating letters regarding payment for the system.  But, North testified, ``I don't believe I ever
did anything that was criminal.'' 27

     27 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/10/89, p. 7134.

     North described how, in 1984, he was directed by McFarlane and Casey to sustain the contras
during the Boland funding cut-off of U.S. aid.  ``I understood it [the assignment] very clearly to
be that I would be the one to replace the CIA for each of these activities,'' North said, referring to
the efforts he was about to undertake to assist the contras.28  North also testified that ``I was told
not to tell other people, not to talk about it, to keep my operational role very, very secret, that it
should not be something that others came to know about.'' 29

     28 Ibid., 4/6/89, p. 6782.

     29 Ibid.

     North described how he and Secord, in order to replace the CIA in assisting the contras, in
their covert-action Enterprise created a ``mirror image outside the government of what the CIA
had done.'' 30  He claimed he never made a single trip or contact ``without the permission,
express permission, of either Mr. McFarlane or Admiral Poindexter, and usually, when I could,
with the concurrence of Director Casey . . .'' 31

     30 Ibid., p. 6817.

     31 Ibid., p. 6829.

     North defended himself against the charges that he helped McFarlane and Poindexter obstruct
and make false statements to Congress in 1985 and 1986 by characterizing  these actions as part
of a political dispute that had nothing to do with law-breaking.  On direct examination by his
attorneys, North cast himself as a victim of circumstances when he lied repeatedly about his
contra-assistance efforts to HPSCI members and staff who were pursuing a resolution of inquiry
into those activities at an August 6, 1986, meeting at the White House:

     Q: How did you feel about being put in that position?  You knew that Mr. McFarlane had
denied them the information in 1985 in three letters.  You knew that Mr. McFarlane had denied
them the information twice on Capitol Hill in 1985.  You knew that there was a letter from
Admiral Poindexter referring back to these letters saying to answer the question.  How did you
feel about being told by your boss to go into a meeting on August 6th, 1986?

     A: I felt like a pawn in a chess game being played by giants.  It was a situation where I had
been sent to do a lot of things, almost everything that was in that Resolution of Inquiry, by the
direction of the President of the United States, I had been told by Admiral Poindexter and by Mr.
McFarlane countless times; that I had given the commitment of the United States in the name of
the President to the resistance [contra] leadership, to the people in those other countries, the
people in foreign governments all over 18 or 19 countries, and that those were things I was told
could not, should not and will not be revealed, and yet there was a very strong likelihood that
they would be asked, and they were; that the things I had  done with the resistance itself in
delivering everything from medicine for jungle leprosy to ammunition, to the bases we built for
deliveries for the resistance, the arrangements I had made with foreign governments to deliver
surface-to-air missiles and ammunition, all of those things I had been told to give the
commitment of the United States that it wouldn't be revealed.

     I had been told specifically that the Saudi aid that the President had gotten and that Mr.
McFarlane had gotten will never be revealed.  And by this time we were also using monies from
the sale of arms to the Nicaraguan resistance -- to the Iranians to help the Nicaraguan resistance,
and that would never be revealed.

     And I was put in this situation where having been raised to know what the Ten
Commandments are, that it would be wrong to do that, but I never perceived that it would be
unlawful.32

     32 Ibid., 4/7/89, pp. 6928-29.

     In November 1986, after the Iran arms sales became public, North said he went along with
what appeared to be a top-level agreement not to reveal information regarding the 1985 arms
sales, including the fact that the President retroactively authorized in a covert-action Finding the
November 1985 shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran.  ``That 1985 shipment, particularly the
HAWK shipment in November of 1985, had been a disaster.  And we had, throughout, denied
that we were involved in it, even though we were.  And the reason we  denied that is because the
Iranians themselves were so upset about it,'' North said.33

     33 Ibid., 4/10/89, p. 7079.

     North said on cross-examination that on November 20, 1986, during preparation of
congressional testimony for Casey and Poindexter, an entire roomful of individuals knew that
false assertions were being drafted when North suggested that they say no one in the U.S.
Government knew the true cargo of the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran.  North
said he knew it was false, Poindexter knew it was false, NSC counsel Paul Thompson knew it
was false, Casey knew it was false, and North said he assumed Meese, Assistant Attorney
General Charles Cooper, and Deputy CIA Director Gates knew it was false.34

     34 Ibid., 4/12/89, pp. 7624-7632.

     On November 21, 22 or 24, 1986, North said he witnessed Poindexter destroy what may have
been the only signed copy of a presidential covert-action Finding that sought to authorize
retroactively CIA participation in the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran.  North
said the Finding was destroyed because its language made clear that it was a swap of
arms-for-hostages, and because public revelation of the fact that the United States had been
involved in the ill-fated shipment would jeopardize the lives  of Americans still being held
hostage in the Middle East.35  Asked whether he felt he was part of a ``den of thieves,'' North
answered he felt he was among honorable men.  He said:

     35 Ibid., pp. 7601-17.

     We sat and tried to formulate and put the very best possible face on what was a diplomatic
disaster and a political catastrophe in this country, but I did not regard it to be a criminal act.  Nor
did I regard the place in which I worked to be a den of thieves.36

     36 Ibid., pp. 7620-21.

     North denied that he gave false information to Meese in Meese's fact-finding interview of
November 23, 1986.37  He disputed the accuracy of notes taken during the interview.38

     37 Ibid., 4/10/89, pp. 7091-97.

     38 Ibid., 4/13/89, p. 7684.

     North testified that he was shocked to hear Meese in a press conference on November 25,
1986, refer to the possibility of criminal action in connection with the Iran/contra diversion.
North said he was also surprised to hear Meese suggest that the President did not know about the
November 1985 shipment until months later.  North said Meese's assertion ``was not only
contrary to my knowledge and my participation, it was contrary to what I had said the very day
before, or on Sunday.  It was contrary to what I  believed the President had authorized.  It was
contrary to what I believed all of the other people I had worked with up the chain in the Cabinet
knew to be the truth.'' 39

     39 Ibid., 4/10/89, pp. 7104-07.

     North blamed his decision to remove classified NSC documents from his office on November
25, 1986, on Washington, D.C., attorney Thomas C. Green.  According to North, Green asked
him in the wake of his public firing, ``Do you have anybody or anything to protect yourself?''  As
a result, North said, ``I gathered up a number of documents that I believed would indicate or
show that I had had the authority to do what I had done over the course of those two operations.
I put them in my briefcase, along with my notebooks, and left the Executive Office Building with
him [Green].'' 40

     40 Ibid., pp. 7109-10.  North's attorney Brendan V. Sullivan, Jr., in early December 1986
returned to NSC counsel Paul B. Thompson 168 pages of documents North took with him from
the White House.  Included were copies of the undated memo in which North described the
diversion of Iranian arms sales proceeds to the contras.

     After North left the White House and went with Green and Secord to a hotel in Northern
Virginia, he received a call from President Reagan.  North testified:

     The President came on the line and he said, I want to thank you for all your work.  I am sorry
that it happened the way that it did.  He said, ``You are an American hero.''  He asked me to
understand that it was -- he just hadn't known or didn't know, words to that  effect.  I thanked him
for the phone call and told him that I was sorry that this had created so much difficulty for him,
for the country.41

     41 Ibid., p. 7111.

     North had difficulty on cross-examination explaining why he destroyed some NSC records, as
he claimed, to protect the lives of individuals involved in the Iran and contra operations, but had
taken with him from the White House more than a dozen notebooks containing 2,000 pages of
names and details on operations, including some highly classified information.42

     42 Ibid., pp. 7159-60.

     North also had difficulty on cross-examination explaining why he was told by Casey to keep
careful track of the payments he made to contra leaders out of an ``operational fund'' in his office,
and why he was subsequently told by Casey in October 1986, following the shootdown of a
contra-resupply plane in Nicaragua, to destroy the ledger in which he kept track of those
disbursements.43  North testified that $4,300 in traveler's checks given to him by Calero for the
operational fund, and which North spent at grocery stores, gas stations and other retail outlets,
were to reimburse himself for operational expenses he paid from his own pocket.44  He said he
was not nervous about  destroying the only record he kept of the operational fund disbursements
because he never believed he would ever be accused of doing anything dishonest with the
money.45

     43 Ibid.

     44 Ibid., pp. 7141-45.

     45 Ibid., pp. 7196-97.

     North testified that he had $15,000 in cash in a metal box bolted to a closet floor in his home,
saved from pocket change and a decades-old insurance settlement.46  This, North said, was the
source of funds for a car he bought in October 1985.  North could not explain why he paid for the
car in two cash payments -- the second after North had visited Secord.  He said he could not
recall the October 1985 payment.47

     46 Ibid., pp. 7145-49.

     47 Ibid., pp. 7145-53.

     North claimed no awareness of a $200,000 investment account that Secord's business partner
Albert Hakim set up for North in Switzerland, although he did admit that he sent his wife Betsy
to Philadelphia in March 1986 to meet with Willard I. Zucker, the Secord-Hakim Enterprise's
financial manager.  North said he believed the purpose of Betsy North's trip to Philadelphia was
for her to identify herself to Zucker in case North didn't return from a dangerous trip to Iran.
North said he assumed that in the event of his death, something would be done ``that was proper
and honorable and nothing wrong in any way,'' denying that the investment account was a bribery
attempt by Hakim.48

     48 Ibid., pp. 7184-98.  Hakim pleaded guilty in November 1989 to attempting to supplement
the salary of North, based partly on the establishment of the $200,000 investment account.  See
Hakim chapter.

     North was unable to blame others for his acceptance of a home security-system from Secord,
except to explain that he accepted the system in response to reported terrorist threats on his life.
North admitted that after the Iran/contra affair became public, he exchanged false back-dated
letters with Glenn Robinette, a former CIA officer who worked for Secord in installing the
system, suggesting payment arrangements.  ``[I]t was a fairly stupid thing to do,'' North said.49

     49 Ibid., pp. 7203-10.

     North was insistent that many of the activities charged in the indictment were authorized and
concealed to protect foreign nationals and others involved in his covert operations.  North also
reasserted his belief through most of 1986 that President Reagan had approved even the diversion
of Iran arms sales proceeds to the contras:

     Q: You understood that you had the approval of the President to use those monies to
undertake operations?

     A: I'm absolutely certain of the fact that I believed throughout from early February [1986]
when we began the concept or putting in place the  concept of using Iranian arms sale monies to
aid the Nicaraguan resistance and to do those other things, that I deeply believed that I had the
authority of the President to do it.50

     50 Ibid., 4/12/89, pp. 7564-65.

     North said on November 21 or 22, 1986, he showed Poindexter a copy of the diversion memo
and assured him incorrectly that all copies had been destroyed.  He asked Poindexter ``at that
point if the President knew and he told me the President did not know. . . .'' 51

     51 Ibid., p. 7566.

     Important Evidence Emerging at Trial

     A total of 49 witnesses testified during the eight-week trial:  17 for the defense (including
North) and 32 for the Government.52  Hundreds of exhibits were admitted into evidence, many
of them previously classified Top Secret and beyond, dealing with secret communications and
operations over a several-year period, and covering events in the Middle East, Europe, Africa,
Central and South America and Asia.

     52 One of Independent Counsel's witnesses, Thomas Claggett, a businessman who contributed
to the contras, was excused by Judge Gesell after he indicated that he could not fully comply with
the judge's Kastigar instructions.

     Poindexter's Destruction of the Finding

     For the prosecution, which had been shielded from immunized congressional testimony, one
of the most important items of new evidence to emerge from the trial was North's eyewitness
description of Poindexter's destruction of the presidential covert-action Finding authorizing the
November 1985 HAWK shipment.  Although Poindexter had testified to that destruction in the
congressional hearings, Independent Counsel had not heard his immunized testimony.  In
two-and-a-half years of investigation, no other witness -- including NSC counsel Paul
Thompson, whom North said also witnessed the event -- had provided Independent Counsel with
this information.53

     53 See Thompson chapter.

     North subsequently testified about the destruction of the Finding in the Poindexter trial.
Although it was not one of the charges against Poindexter because Independent Counsel had no
evidence of the destruction when the indictment was returned, it provided important
corroborating evidence of his obstruction of and false statements to Congress in November 1986
about the November 1985 arms shipment.  The information also caused Independent Counsel to
re-question Thompson and to consider bringing charges against him based on this information.54

     54 Ibid.

     The Quid Pro Quo Admission

     In lieu of the disclosure of classified information deemed relevant by Judge Gesell to North's
defense, the Government for trial purposes only admitted to a 42-page statement of facts
describing an elaborate series of secret Reagan Administration contacts with foreign countries in
efforts to assist the contras, primarily during the prohibition on U.S. aid.  This document, which
became known as the ``Quid Pro Quo'' admission, among other things described these alleged
activities:

      -- The delivery of Israeli-seized PLO weapons to the contras; in exchange, the Department of
Defense assured Israel that the United States would be flexible in its approach to Israeli military
and economic needs.

      -- Various forms of assistance to the contras from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and
other countries in Central and South America; in exchange, the United States provided increased
economic and other aid.

      -- Approaches for funding to Saudi Arabia, Taiwan, China, South Korea and Brunei, and
approaches to other countries for special weapons purchases.

      -- Discussions with Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega about committing acts of sabotage
against the Nicaragua Sandinista government in exchange for U.S. help in rehabilitating
Noriega's public image.

      -- Secret contacts by President Reagan and other top-ranking officials with foreign leaders
about assisting the contras, and similar approaches by U.S. ambassadors abroad.

     The ``Heads of State'' Documents

     North entered into evidence seven documents indicating greater knowledge and involvement
by President Reagan in contra-assistance efforts than had previously been made public.55  Six of
the documents described White House approaches to Honduras regarding contra aid in February
and March of 1985, outlining incentives to be provided to the Hondurans for their continued
support to the contras.  The seventh document indicated that in October 1985, National Security
Adviser McFarlane sought President Reagan's approval of U.S. reconnaissance overflights of
Nicaragua, and  notations suggested that the President was informed about the illegal air-drop of
recoilless rifles to the contras.

     55 The documents were: a February 19, 1985 memo to President Reagan from McFarlane
concerning a proposed letter to President Suazo of Honduras, which President Reagan approved;
a February 20, 1985 memo to McFarlane from North and Raymond F. Burghardt of the NSC
staff, and a notation from Poindexter; a October 30, 1985 memo to McFarlane from North with a
notation by Poindexter indicating President Reagan's approval of reconnaissance overflights of
Nicaragua, with attachments concerning the air-drop of recoilless rifles to the contras; a February
22, 1985 memo to McFarlane from Burghardt seeking authorization to carry a presidential letter
to U.S. Ambassador John Negroponte in Honduras to be transmitted to President Suazo; a
February 11, 1985 memo to McFarlane from North and Burghardt regarding a special emissary to
Honduras to brief President Suazo on ``conditions'' for expedited assistance, with a handwritten
notation from Poindexter to McFarlane regarding who the emissary should be, and attaching a
memo to Secretary of State George P. Schultz, Weinberger, Casey and Joint Chiefs of Staff
Chairman Gen. John W. Vessey describing an agreement for expedited aid to Honduras ``as an
incentive to the Hondurans for their continued support to those in jeopardy along the border;'' and
an April 25, 1985 memo from McFarlane recommending that President Reagan call President
Suazo, bearing President Reagan's handwritten notations of the call.

     Most of these documents were obtained by Independent Counsel in 1988 in response to
discovery requests by North, which resulted in the production of 15,000 pages of White House
materials not previously produced to OIC despite comprehensive requests.  Of the seven defense
documents regarding Honduras and the recoilless rifle drop, OIC had received in response to its
original White House document request only that document about the rifle drop.

     Following the trial, Independent Counsel pursued the question of why documents had not
been produced to the criminal investigation until North's discovery request.  The House and
Senate intelligence committees also sought to determine why Congress had not received the
documents in 1987.56  The reasons for non-production were not clear.  Three of the original
documents were found to have been segregated from NSC institutional files and kept in a special
``heads of state'' file, which apparently was not searched in response to earlier document requests.

     56 At least four of the seven North trial documents apparently had never been provided by the
White House to the Select Committees in 1987.  Two had been provided in a different form,
without the questionable notations or without certain attachments.  The status of one document's
production to Congress was never clearly determined.  (HPSCI report to Rep. Lee Hamilton,
6/28/89.)

     Independent Counsel in June 1989 sought through the National Archives ``prompt access'' to
all documents relevant to Iran/contra matters contained in the heads-of-state file, which had been
shipped to the Reagan Presidential Library in California.57  In December 1989, several
documents were returned from California in response to Independent Counsel's request.58  These
documents did not contain significant new information.

     57 Letter from Christian J. Mixter to John P. Fawcett, National Archives, 6/27/89.

     58 Letter from Patricia Aronsson to Christian J. Mixter, 12/14/89.

     North's Notebooks

     When North took the witness stand, Judge Gesell granted Independent Counsel's
long-standing request for access to North's daily, detailed working notes, filling 2,617 pages from
January 1, 1984 to November 25, 1986.59  Earlier OIC efforts to subpoena the spiral-bound
notebooks, which North removed from the White House when he was fired in November 1986,
failed because North successfully argued that  their production would violate his Fifth
Amendment protection against self-incrimination.60

     59 Independent Counsel only received copies, however; North retained the original notebooks
at the secure facility that had been created for his defense facility in 1988.

     60 The Select Iran/contra Committees obtained redacted copies of the North notebooks in
1987, under the terms of North's immunity agreement.  The Senate Foreign Relations Committee
in April 1988 sought to subpoena unedited copies of the notebooks, finding the Select
Committees' versions unusable because North's lawyers had blacked out large portions of text.

     The notebooks were not immediately made public at the North Trial because they contained
highly classified information.  They included names, phone conversations, meetings and lists of
action items North recorded diligently throughout the day.  Although the prosecution team
quickly reviewed the notebooks in preparation for cross examining North, their cryptic contents,
level of great detail and sheer volume made digesting them for use at trial nearly impossible.  But
they provided invaluable leads and information for further investigation.61

     61 In view of the enormous amount of highly classified, compartmented information in the
North notebooks, Independent Counsel is at a loss to explain why attorneys general Meese and
Thornburgh declined to recover the notebooks from North, who removed them from the NSC
after he was fired November 25, 1986.  The Government did not recover North's original
notebooks until Independent Counsel obtained them pursuant to a Grand Jury subpoena, and after
additional litigation by North in 1991.

     When the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in June 1989 asked OIC for copies of the
notebooks, Independent Counsel responded that he had no objection to their release but that the
NSC, as the agency from which the notes originated, would have to approve their release.  At that
point, to assist the Senate committee, Independent Counsel attempted to return copies of the
notebooks to the NSC.  The NSC refused to accept them when an OIC courier tried to deliver
them to the Old Executive Office Building.  In October 1989, the Department of Justice informed
OIC that the NSC was concerned about its ``legal right to receive this material without judicial
authorization and notice to the defendant. . . .'' (Letter from Edward S.G. Dennis to Walsh,
10/2/89.)

     Only after OIC was sued under the Freedom of Information Act by two public interest groups
-- the National Security Archive and Public Citizen -- for access to the notebooks did the Justice
Department finally accept custody of copies of North's notes.  In May 1990, approximately 2,000
pages of notes were declassified and made public.  Independent Counsel subsequently sent copies
of the declassified notebooks to the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee and a classified,
uncensored version to the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence.

     Presidential Authorization

     North's attorneys effectively employed a higher-authorization defense, repeatedly eliciting
testimony and exhibiting documents showing that North executed many of his secret activities
with the knowledge and approval of his superiors.  Important elements of this defense were the
quid-pro-quo admission of facts and the seven documents indicating presidential awareness of
certain contra-assistance efforts described above.  Although North testified that he believed he
had his immediate superiors' and even presidential approval for all he did, he offered no hard
proof of presidential awareness of any of his criminal acts.

     In mounting his higher-authorization defense, North attempted to subpoena President Reagan
and President Bush to testify.  Judge Gesell on January 30, 1989, quashed the Bush subpoena,
ruling that the defendant had ``made no  showing that President Bush has any specific
information relevant and material to the charges of the indictment which makes it necessary or
appropriate to require his appearance.''  At the same time, the court ordered that President Reagan
would ``remain subject to call'' and additional consideration would be given the matter if the
defense could support a claim that he ``ordered, directed, required or, with advance knowledge,
condoned'' any of the criminal actions of which North stood accused.62

     62 North, Order Re:  Motion of the President and the President-Elect to Quash the
Defendant's Subpoenas.  Government's Motion to Quash Defendant's Subpoenas Duces Tecum to
the President and the Custodian of Records of the Executive Office of the President, 1/30/89.

     On March 31, 1989, Judge Gesell quashed North's subpoena of President Reagan.  His
memorandum and order stated:

     . . . Whether or not authorization is a defense, authorization is not established by atmosphere,
surmise or inference.  The written record has been exhausted in this regard.  The trial record
presently contains no proof that defendant North ever received any authorization from President
Reagan to engage in the illegal conduct alleged, either directly or indirectly, orally or in writing.
No such authorization to any obstruction or false statement count has been identified in materials
submitted to the Court by the defense either in CIPA proceedings or on the public record.
Additionally, the Court has examined President Reagan's responses to extensive interrogatories
furnished by him under oath to the grand jury as well as references (filed herewith under seal) to
portions of Mr.  Reagan's personal diary developed by Independent Counsel during the
investigatory stages of this matter.  Nothing there even remotely supports an authorization claim.

     According, the Court holds that neither defendant North nor his counsel has presented any
basis which warrants the Court to exercise its discretion by enforcing the ad testificandum [for
testifying] subpoena served on President Reagan.  There has been no showing that President
Reagan's appearance is necessary to assure Lt. Col. North a fair trial. . . .63

     63 North, Memorandum and Order, 3/31/89.  Following his convictions on three charges,
North appealed on several grounds, including the fact that he was unable to call President Reagan
to testify.  In a dissenting opinion issued July 20, 1990, (pp. 44-45), U.S. Appeals Court Judge
Laurence Silberman agreed with North's argument, writing:

     Presidents, even ex-Presidents, may not be called to testify capriciously or needlessly.  But
this is not such a case.  North worked in the White House, only one step removed from the
President himself, with what appears to have been enormous responsibility.  He has been
convicted of violating criminal statutes (never before employed as here) and his defense is that he
was lawfully doing the President's bidding, and doing so with regard to a substantive area of
national security policy, which, whatever one's view of those policies, would have been thought
at the core of the Chief Executive's constitutional responsibility.  His immediate superior,
Admiral Poindexter, was unavailable as a defense witness.  Under these circumstances, for the
trial judge to have refused to compel Reagan's testimony, was to deprive North of a fair trial.

     The Jury's Verdict

     The jury was sequestered and began deliberating April 22, 1989.  After deliberating for 64
hours over a 12-day period, the jury on May 6, 1989, returned a verdict of guilty on three counts
and not guilty on nine.  North was found guilty of:

      -- Aiding and abetting an obstruction of congressional inquiries in November 1986 (Count
Six).

      -- Destroying and falsifying official NSC documents (Count Nine).

      -- Receiving an illegal gratuity (Count Ten).

     The Sentence

     Judge Gesell on July 5, 1989, sentenced North to two years probation, $150,000 in fines and
1,200 hours community service.  He told North that a jail sentence would ``only harden your
misconceptions'' about public service and how he had tarnished it.64  Stating that North's
notoriety had caused him problems but also made him wealthy, Gesell ordered North to serve in
an inner-city youth-counseling program as an administrator.65

     64 Gesell, North Sentencing Hearing, 7/5/89, p. 36.

     65 Subsequently, it is Independent Counsel's understanding that North fulfilled his
community-service requirement, but payment of the fine was suspended pending the outcome of
his appeal.

     The fact that North was not given a jail sentence, as Independent Counsel had recommended,
gave North little incentive for cooperating with the ongoing criminal investigation.  Indeed,
North litigated against the Independent Counsel for months in an attempt to escape giving
testimony to the Grand Jury.  The court's decision not to impose jail time on North was a
contributing factor also in lighter sentences imposed in subsequent Iran/contra cases.

     In imposing sentence, Judge Gesell expressed his views of the case this way:

     The indictment involves your participation in particular covert events.  I do not think that in
this area you were a leader at all, but really a low-ranking subordinate working to carry out
initiatives of a few cynical superiors.  You came to be the point man in a very complex power
play developed by higher-ups.  Whether it was because of the excitement and the challenge or
because of conviction, you responded certainly willingly and sometimes even excessively to their
requirements.  And along the way you came to accept, it seems to me, the mistaken view that
Congress couldn't be trusted and that the fate of the country was better left to a small inside
group, not elected by the people, who were free to act as they chose while publicly professing to
act differently.  Thus you became and by a series of circumstances in fact and I believe in your
mind part of a scheme that reflected a total distrust in some constitutional values.

     Now, a trial is a very extraordinary thing.  As you stand there now you're not the fall guy for
this tragic breach of the public trust.  The jury composed of everyday citizens your supporters
mocked  and mocked throughout the trial understood what was taking place.[ 66]  Observing that
many others involved in the events were escaping without censor or with prosecutorial promises
of leniency or immunities they used their common sense.  And they gave you the benefit of a
reasonable doubt.

     66 Judge Gesell was referring to media opinion pieces and public statements by North
supporters expressing the view that the jury was too ill-informed about current affairs to pass
judgment on North.  They argued this based on the fact that none of the jurors claimed to be
knowledgeable of or interested in North or the Iran/contra matter before being sworn in.  It was
North's attorneys, however, who insisted on selecting a jury virtually unaware of their client's
widely publicized congressional testimony.

     In pre-trial hearings regarding jury selection and possible problems stemming from the
publicity that had surrounded the Iran/contra matter, Judge Gesell said it was his experience in
presiding over high-profile cases, including some of the Watergate cases, that ordinary citizens
pay little attention to the national news events occurring around them in Washington.  Because of
this, he said, it was possible to pick a fair-minded jury even in the most publicized cases.

     You're here now because of your own conduct when the truth was coming out.  Apparently
you could not face disclosure and decided to protect yourself and others.  You destroyed
evidence, altered and removed official documents, created false papers after the events to keep
Congress and others from finding out what was happening.

     Now, I believe that you knew this was morally wrong.  It was against your bringing up.  It was
against your faith.  It was against all of your training.  Under the stress of the moment it was
easier to choose the role of a martyr but that wasn't a heroic, patriotic act nor was it in the public
interest.67

     67 Gesell, North Sentencing Hearing, 7/5/89, pp. 35-36.

     The North Appeal

     North appealed his convictions on all three counts on a variety of grounds.  North's most
serious appeals issues related to Judge Gesell's application of the Kastigar decision in keeping
North's trial free of taint from his immunized congressional testimony and the application of the
Classified Information Procedures Act during the trial.

     The appeals were argued at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit on February 6, 1990.  The court ruled on July 20, 1990.

     By a 2-1 vote, the Appeals Court set aside North's convictions.  The divided court ruled that
Judge Gesell erred in failing to hold a full hearing as required by Kastigar to ensure that the
prosecution witnesses made no use of North's immunized congressional testimony.

     The Court of Appeals disagreed sharply with the Independent Counsel and Judge Gesell's
definition of ``use'' under the federal use-immunity statute.  The Court of Appeals determined
that the statute, as interpreted in Kastigar, prevented ``evidentiary'' uses of immunized testimony
including ``the use of immunized testimony by witnesses to refresh their memories, or otherwise
to focus their thoughts, organize their testimony, or alter their prior or contemporaneous
statements. . . .''  The court observed that Judge Gesell never inquired into these uses of
immunized testimony, and it held that warnings to witnesses not to testify to anything  they did
not know or recall first-hand did not insure against such uses.68

     68 North, 910 F.2d at 856.

     The Court of Appeals did not reject Judge Gesell's Kastigar rulings in their entirety.  The
court upheld his determination that Independent Counsel did not present any of North's
immunized testimony to the Grand Jury or trial jury.  The court also affirmed the District Court's
holdings that Independent Counsel did not use the immunized testimony to guide its
prosecutorial or trial decisions, and that Independent Counsel had proven untainted leads to all of
its witnesses.

     Nevertheless, the court remanded all three convictions to the District Court for a
``witness-by-witness [and,] if necessary . . . line-by-line and item by item'' inquiry into the
content as well as the sources of grand jury and trial witness testimony.69

     69 Ibid., 910 F.2d at 872.

     On September 4, 1990, Independent Counsel petitioned for rehearing by the panel and
suggested a rehearing by the en banc (full) Court of Appeals.  The panel granted the petition in
part on November 27, 1990, and released a lengthy opinion, but it did not modify its  judgment.
Over two dissents, the full court denied the request for rehearing en banc.70

     70 North, 920 F.2d at 940.

     On May 28, 1991, the Supreme Court denied Independent Counsel's petition for certiorari.71
At that point, Independent Counsel decided to return for additional Kastigar hearings in Judge
Gesell's court, as prescribed by the Court of Appeals.  In two days of remand hearings,
McFarlane testified that his trial testimony was ``colored'' by, and that he was deeply affected by,
North's immunized congressional testimony.  Independent Counsel then consented to dismiss the
remaining counts of the indictment.72

     71 North, 111 S. Ct. 2235.

     72 Order, North (D.D.C. Sept. 16, 1991) (dismissing Counts Six, Nine, and Ten of
Indictment, with prejudice).

     Conclusion

     Despite the dismissal of North's convictions, the prosecution of the case showed that even
individuals entrenched in national security matters can be held accountable for crimes committed
in the course of their official duties.  It was not classified information, after all, that caused North
to prevail on appeal.  It was Congress's political decision to grant immunity to North, despite the
danger it posed to prosecution.

     Obtaining the convictions against North put CIPA and Kastigar to extreme tests.

     It exposed structural problems in the CIPA law when central conspiracy counts had to be
dismissed because of the Reagan Administration's refusal to declassify information deemed
necessary to a fair trial of the case.  This raised serious questions about whether the Reagan
Administration -- which in the Iran/contra matter had sought the appointment of Independent
Counsel to investigate and prosecute possible crimes because of an appearance of conflict of
interest -- in fact had the final say in determining what crimes could be tried.73

     73 This question was posed again in Independent Counsel's case against former CIA Costa
Rican Station Chief Joseph F. Fernandez, whose trial was stayed in 1989 and whose case was
dismissed in 1990 after the Bush Administration refused to declassify information deemed
relevant to his defense.  See Fernandez chapter.

     In North, the Court of Appeals extended the protections afforded to defendants who receive
limited immunity.  Not only must prosecutors fully shield themselves from immunized testimony
-- as the court determined Independent Counsel had done -- but now all prosecution witnesses
must essentially prove that they were not influenced in any way by the defendant's immunized
testimony.  As Chief Judge Patricia M. Wald in her dissenting opinion wrote:  The procedural
regime set forth in the majority  ruling ``makes a subsequent trial of any congressionally
immunized witness virtually impossible.'' 74  This is particularly true where, as in the North case,
many prosecution witnesses are hostile to the Government and favorable to the defense.

     74 North, 910 F.2d at 924.

     Not since the Watergate prosecutions of the 1970s had a case been tried against a more
politically charged backdrop.  Although Independent Counsel has been criticized for pursuing the
prosecution of North after he had been granted immunity by Congress, the congressional hearings
did nothing to hold North or others responsible for the crimes they committed.  This, Congress
said, was the role of Independent Counsel.

Chapter 3

     United States v. John M. Poindexter

     Navy Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter was appointed as President Reagan's national security
adviser on December 4, 1985, succeeding Robert C. McFarlane, whom Poindexter had served
under as deputy for two years.  Poindexter's White House career ended November 25, 1986,
when he was forced to resign in the wake of the public disclosure of the Iran/contra diversion.

     Poindexter, Lt. Col. Oliver North and McFarlane were the three individuals Attorney General
Edwin Meese III identified on November 25, 1986, as knowledgeable of the diversion.
Poindexter's supervision of North and his own participation in the Iran and contra operations
were early focuses of Independent Counsel's investigation.

     As in the case against North, criminal evidence against Poindexter had to be gathered quickly
before he was compelled to testify on Capitol Hill in the summer of 1987 under a grant of limited
immunity.  Otherwise, the prosecution of Poindexter was likely to be challenged on the grounds
that it was derived from or in some way influenced by his immunized congressional testimony.

     On March 16, 1988, Poindexter was indicted on seven felony charges arising from his
involvement in the Iran/contra affair, as part of a 23-count multi-defendant indictment.  He was
named with North, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim as a
member of the conspiracy to defraud the  United States Government by effecting the Iran/contra
diversion and other acts.

     After the cases were severed and two of the original charges dismissed, Poindexter was tried
and convicted in April 1990 of five felonies, including:  one count of conspiring to obstruct
official inquiries and proceedings, two counts of obstructing Congress, and two counts of false
statements to Congress.1  U.S. District Judge Harold H. Greene sentenced him to a six-month
prison term. In November 1991, Poindexter's convictions were overturned on appeal.  In
December 1992, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the case.

     1 The Poindexter case was tried by Associate Counsel Dan K. Webb, Christian J. Mixter,
Howard M. Pearl, and Louise R. Radin.

     Poindexter joined the National Security Council staff in June 1981, following a distinguished
naval career that included battleship command and high-ranking Pentagon posts.  In October
1983 he became deputy to National Security Adviser McFarlane; among his subordinates was
North.  During Poindexter's one-year tenure as national security adviser, which began in
December 1985, he oversaw the Iran/contra operations in which North was directly involved.

     In November 1986, as the secret operations were becoming publicly exposed, Poindexter
became the senior Administration  official responsible for briefing the President's other top
advisers about the Iran arms sales.  In a series of White House meetings with other officials and
members of Congress throughout the month, he repeatedly laid out a false version of the
transactions that distanced President Reagan from the legally questionable 1985 arms shipments
made through Israel, particularly the November 1985 HAWK-missile transaction.

     Although Poindexter was the spokesman, he was not alone responsible for knowing the facts.
Virtually every other senior official, including President Reagan, who heard his version of the
arms sales in briefings throughout November 1986 had reason to believe it was wrong.  Yet no
one, according to contemporaneous notes of those briefings, spoke up to correct Poindexter.

     Poindexter along with North and others in November 1986 attempted to shred and alter the
paper trail reflecting their Iran/contra activities.  Among other things, Poindexter destroyed the
only existing signed presidential covert-action Finding that was intended to authorize
retroactively CIA involvement in the November 1985 HAWKs shipment.

     Poindexter and North were less successful in eradicating the computer-message trail of their
Iran/contra activities.  Poindexter and North often communicated through a special channel that
Poindexter, a computer expert, had set up on the NSC computer system.  This channel, known as
``Private Blank Check,'' allowed Poindexter and North to relay messages to each  other without
their being routed through channels in which others on the NSC staff could screen them.

     Between November 22 to 29, 1986, North deleted from his computer file 736 messages, and
Poindexter deleted 5,012 messages during the same period.2  Despite these deletions, the White
House routinely saved back-up tapes containing all data in the system for two weeks to protect
against inadvertent loss.  When the Iran/contra affair was exposed in late November 1986, the
White House Communications Agency, which manages the NSC computer system, retained the
back-up tapes dating from November 15.  Investigators, therefore, were able to retrieve copies of
all messages that were in the Poindexter-North computer files in mid-November 1986 before
most of the deletions occurred.  These computer messages became important evidence in both the
Poindexter and North trials.

     2 Williams, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/15/90, pp. 1752-65.

     Poindexter admitted to many of his activities before the Select Committees in July 1987 under
a grant of testimonial immunity, which prevented his admissions from being used against him in
any criminal proceeding.  Because President Reagan did not testify in that forum, Poindexter was
called to answer the question that dominated the hearings:  Did the President know about and
approve the diversion of the Iran arms sales proceeds to the contras?  Poindexter answered no,
``the buck stops here with me.'' 3  He said he deliberately withheld the information from
President Reagan  because ``I wanted the President to have some deniability so that he would be
protected. . . .'' 4

     3 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, p. 95.

     4 Ibid., p. 101.

     Facing a criminal trial, Poindexter confronted a different dilemma:  It was no longer a
question of protecting the President but defending himself against five felony charges.  Before
Congress, Poindexter's most significant testimony corroborated President Reagan's repeated
denials of awareness of the Iran/contra diversion.  In the courtroom, Poindexter mounted a
higher-authorization defense, attempting to convince the jury that the President had approved his
actions, including those that resulted in criminal charges.  Instead of taking the stand in his own
defense, however, he called President Reagan to testify.

     Pre-Trial Proceedings

     U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell in June 1988 ordered that the multi-defendant case
against Poindexter, North, Secord and Hakim be severed.5  Following severance, Poindexter's
case was transferred to Chief Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., and then to Judge Greene, who
presided over further proceedings.

     5 For a more detailed description of the severance of the multi-defendant case, see North
chapter.

     All of Poindexter's substantive challenges to the validity of the indictment were dismissed
before trial.  The remaining important issues concerned:  (1) the preservation of the  conspiracy
charge; (2) the resolution of classified-information disputes; (3) the resolution of issues related to
Poindexter's immunized congressional testimony, under the ruling known as Kastigar; and (4) the
defendant's successful effort to secure trial testimony from former President Reagan.

     Preserving and Narrowing the Conspiracy Charge

     Problems with classified information led to the dismissal of the central conspiracy charges
before the North trial, and similar problems were expected to arise in the case against Poindexter.
On June 20, 1989, Independent Counsel moved to eliminate the original broad conspiracy
charges based upon the supply of the contras and the diversion and to substantially narrow the
charge of conspiracy to violate other substantive criminal statutes, forbidding false statements
and obstruction. After filings and oral argument, the court granted the Government's motion.

     The charge was refocused on the illegal act of conspiring with North and Secord to conceal
activities from Congress.  Independent Counsel argued successfully that this narrowing of the
conspiracy charge would minimize the classified-information problems that plagued the North
prosecution.

     Classified Information Issues

     The Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA) allowed the trial court effectively to
resolve issues involving the use of classified documents and testimony in Poindexter.  Judge
Greene's supervision of the CIPA process and fruitful negotiations between counsel for the
Government and Poindexter resolved most disputes with a minimum of delay.

     In contrast to North, there was no prolonged or significant litigation concerning the form or
scope of Poindexter's CIPA notices to the court to disclose classified information at trial.
Between November 27, 1989, and March 13, 1990, Poindexter served 11 such notices, including
eight that listed classified documents he wanted to use at trial, two describing possible classified
testimony, and one focused solely on information he wanted to elicit at the deposition of
President Reagan.

     Judge Greene ordered that all differences over classified information be negotiated between
the parties before being brought before the court. Judge Greene held six closed CIPA hearings
before the trial began and supplemented those with several shorter hearings during trial.  Most of
his rulings on the relevance and admissibility of classified information, and on the adequacy of
substitutions proposed by the Government, were made from the bench.

     Taken together, Poindexter's CIPA notices listed approximately 1,200 documents, only a
small fraction of which were  ultimately introduced at trial.  Most classified information was
covered by Government stipulations to certain facts and other unclassified substitutions.  This
allowed the trial to proceed smoothly, without the conflicts that complicated North or the case
against former CIA station chief Joseph F. Fernandez, which was dismissed due to
classified-information problems.6

     6 See Fernandez chapter.

     Kastigar Proceedings

     Poindexter was compelled under a grant of use immunity to testify in 1987 before the Select
Committees investigating Iran/contra.  As did the other Iran/contra defendants who gave
immunized testimony before Congress, Poindexter moved to dismiss the indictment on the
theory that it violated the standards enunciated in Kastigar v. United States,7 arguing that his
immunized testimony was used against him in the Grand Jury and at trial.  This argument proved
unsuccessful on the trial level but ultimately prevailed in the Court of Appeals.

     7 406 U.S. 411 (1972).

     Before their trials were severed, Poindexter moved jointly with North and Hakim, who also
had received immunity to testify before Congress, to have the charges against them dismissed on
the ground that the evidence against them was tainted by their immunized testimony.  Judge
Gesell denied that motion.  However, in deference to defense claims that they would use one
another's  possibly exculpatory immunized testimony, Judge Gesell in June 1988 severed the
trials.

     Poindexter renewed his Kastigar motion before Judge Greene in August 1989.  After briefing
and argument,8 the court ordered that two evidentiary hearings be held.  At the first, the court
heard testimony from Associate Counsel Dan K. Webb and Howard M. Pearl concerning their
exposure to Poindexter's immunized testimony before joining the Office of Independent Counsel.
Webb and Pearl joined the OIC staff in 1989 and had not, before their appointments, been subject
to OIC's procedures to insulate itself from Poindexter's immunized testimony.  Judge Greene
found their exposure to Poindexter's testimony to be insignificant and allowed both attorneys to
participate in the trial.

     8 The Poindexter case was tried before the Court of Appeals ruled in North that witness
hearings were necessary to permit the trial of an immunized defendant.

     The second set of court hearings concerned trial witnesses, whose testimony may have been
tainted by Poindexter's immunized testimony.  Judge Greene accepted Judge Gesell's earlier
review of Grand Jury witnesses and declined to re-examine his findings.  He also refused to
dismiss the indictment on the basis of potential grand juror exposure to the immunized
testimony.

     Regarding trial witnesses, the court took extensive measures to ensure that Poindexter's
immunized statements were not used against him.  The court ordered the Government to make an
ex parte submission (later disclosed to Poindexter) of all statements made by potential trial
witnesses before Poindexter gave his immunized testimony before Congress in July 1987.  The
court found that all of the proposed testimony of most of the potential  witnesses had been
memorialized before Poindexter appeared publicly on July 15, 1987, and therefore was not
tainted.

     As for those witnesses whose expected trial testimony would not be limited to the evidence
OIC had sealed with the court prior to Poindexter's immunized testimony, Judge Greene required
additional information. He concluded that the Government had failed to establish that five of its
potential witnesses were free of taint and ordered them to appear at a pre-trial hearing.  Two of
the three witnesses who ultimately appeared at trial credibly affirmed that their anticipated
testimony would not be influenced in any way by Poindexter's immunized testimony; the third,
North, refused to do so.

     North stated at the pre-trial hearing that he was unable, with respect to any subject, to
distinguish what he had personally done, observed or experienced from what he had learned from
watching Poindexter's immunized testimony.9  As for Poindexter's destruction of the December
1985 presidential covert-action Finding -- important evidence in the obstruction of Congress --
North acknowledged that he had seen Poindexter destroy a piece of paper but insisted that he did
not know it was a Finding until Poindexter stated that fact in his immunized testimony before
Congress.

     9 North Testimony, Poindexter Pre-trial Hearing, 12/13/89, pp. 374-77.

     The court rejected North's pre-trial testimony as not believable.  North, the court found,
``appears to have been embarked at that time [at the hearing] upon the calculated course  of
attempting to assist his former colleague and co-defendant . . . by prevaricating on various issues
. . .'' 10

     10 Opinion, Poindexter, 3/8/90, p. 9.

     In a separate post-trial ruling, the court added that as far as the destruction of the Finding was
concerned, North's testimony at his own trial about the event was inconsistent with his claim that
he could not remember it independent of Poindexter's immunized testimony.  The court found it
``inherently incredible'' that North did not remember ``his participation in an event he witnessed
first hand and that was as dramatic, indeed historic, as the tearing up of an extremely rare
Presidential Finding.'' 11

     11 Ibid., 5/29/90, pp. 32-40.

     The Reagan Subpoena

     One of the most notable aspects of the Poindexter case was the defendant's successful attempt
to call former President Reagan to testify at his trial by videotaped deposition.

     Poindexter first sought presidential and vice presidential notes from OIC as part of his
pre-trial discovery requests.  In a pre-trial hearing on September 6, 1989, Poindexter's attorneys
told the court that presidential notes would reflect that Poindexter informed the President of his
denials to Congress in 1986 of NSC activity in support of the contras, and that the notes would
``show what the President was told about what was being done to support the contras in Central
America, and the President's consent and ratification and approval of that  activity.'' 12  In
seeking vice presidential notes,  Poindexter's attorneys told the court that ``anytime he [Bush]
missed a meeting, Admiral Poindexter briefed him on it afterwards.'' 13

     12 Robinson, Poindexter Pre-trial Hearing, 9/6/89, p. 18.

     13 Ibid., p. 19.

     The court, before making a decision on whether to compel OIC to produce these documents,
on September 11, 1989, directed Poindexter to file an ex parte memo explaining precisely how
these documents would assist his defense.14  It required from Independent Counsel a legal
memorandum concerning its responsibility to produce presidential and vice presidential
documents not in OIC's possession.

     14 Opinion, Poindexter, 9/11/89, p. 22.

     Independent Counsel in a filing on September 18, 1989, told the court that the office did not
have in its possession presidential notes, but rather had been granted access to notes and allowed
to copy only a portion of them with special permission.  As far as President Reagan's diary was
concerned, Independent Counsel had been allowed to review typed extracts of portions deemed
relevant by White House counsel, but the President had retained custody of his diary, which both
he and the national archivist regarded as personal records, making them unaccessible under the
Presidential Records Act unless their production were compelled by subpoena.15

     15 Government's Memorandum Concerning Presidential and Vice Presidential Documents
that Are Not in the Possession of Independent Counsel, 9/18/89.

     Attached to Independent Counsel's filing was a declaration by John Fawcett, assistant
archivist for the Office of Presidential Libraries of the National Archives and Records
Administration.  Fawcett stated that President Bush's vice presidential records were transferred to
the archives at the end of the Reagan Administration, but, ``No personal diary of former Vice
President Bush has been specifically identified as being included in the Vice Presidential records.
However, these Vice Presidential records have not yet been processed.'' 16

     16 Ibid., Exhibit A.  President Bush in December 1992 for the first time informed Independent
Counsel that he had kept a diary as vice president from 1986 to 1988.  See Bush chapter.

     On September 25, 1989, Poindexter's attorneys informed the court that ``the defendant is
willing to seek access to the personal diaries and notes of former President Reagan and former
Vice President Bush pursuant to a . . . subpoena.'' 17 After reviewing Poindexter's ex parte
submission on the materiality of presidential and vice presidential documents, the court on
October 24, 1989, ruled that there was sufficient likelihood that President Reagan's documents
would be material to the defense.  Judge Greene differentiated between Reagan and Bush
documents, however, because ``the Vice President had no operational authority with respect to
Poindexter,'' because the information contained in vice presidential papers may be largely
cumulative, and because of deference to the sitting President Bush.18

     17 Defendant's Response to Government's Memorandum Concerning Presidential and Vice
President Documents That Are Not in the Possession of Independent Counsel, 9/25/89, p. 2.

     18 U.S. v. Poindexter, 725 F. Supp. 13, 28-31 (D.D.C. 1989). Judge Greene added that with
respect to Bush documents, he would reevaluate the matter if Poindexter at a later date showed a
more pressing need for them.

     On November 3, 1989, Poindexter filed with the court a classified petition for leave to serve
subpoenas on former President Reagan and the National Archives, seeking materials and
testimony relevant to Iran/contra activities in 67 categories.  On November 16, Judge Greene
granted Poindexter's petition.  Both President Reagan and the National Archives moved to quash
the subpoena for documents.

     In a pre-trial hearing December 4 the court stated that its order covered only documents, and
not the President's possible trial testimony.  On December 18 Poindexter sought the court's leave
to subpoena President Reagan to testify at trial. In deciding whether Poindexter could subpoena
President Reagan's testimony, Judge Greene asked Poindexter to submit a list of specific
questions he intended to ask.  Poindexter submitted a list of 183 questions, which were not made
available to Independent Counsel.19  The court ruled that the questions directly related to the
charges in the indictment and to Poindexter's anticipated defense.

     19 In 1993, during preparation of this report, Independent Counsel obtained copies of these
questions and other ex parte submissions from Poindexter's case.

     In his February 5, 1990, ruling upholding the testimonial subpoena of Reagan, Judge Greene
described Poindexter's proposed questions as falling into 12 categories.  These included:   (1) the
frequency and occasions on which President Reagan and Poindexter met; (2) the President's view
of the Boland Amendment and how it applied to contra support; (3) whether the President
authorized Poindexter to seek foreign support for the contras; (4) what instructions the President
gave Poindexter regarding meetings with Central American officials, and what information
Poindexter subsequently relayed back to the President; (5) presidential discussions with Central
American leaders concerning contra support; (6) presidential discussions with Poindexter
regarding actions to be taken if Congress did not renew contra aid; (7) presidential knowledge of
North's relationship to Iran/contra figures; (8) Poindexter's briefings of the President regarding a
congressional inquiry in 1986 into North's activities; (9) Poindexter's communications with
Congress at the direction of the President; (10) whether Poindexter informed the President about
Secord's status; (11) discussions Poindexter had with the President regarding a chronology of the
Iran arms sales prepared in November 1986; and (12) the President's knowledge of the arms
shipments to Iran.

     In his opinion explaining his decision to uphold Poindexter's subpoena of President Reagan,
Judge Greene concluded:

     Former President Ronald Reagan is claimed by Admiral Poindexter to have direct and
important knowledge that will help to exonerate him from the criminal charges lodged against
him.  In view of the prior professional relationship between the two men, and defendant's
showing discussed above, that claim cannot be dismissed as fanciful or frivolous.  That being so,
it would be inconceivable -- in a Republic that subscribes neither to  the ancient doctrine of the
divine right of kings nor to the more modern conceit of dictators that they are not accountable to
the people whom they claim to represent or to their courts of law -- to exempt Mr. Reagan from
the duty of every citizen to give evidence that will permit the reaching of a just outcome of this
criminal prosecution.  Defendant has shown that the evidence of the former President is needed
to protect his right to a fair trial, and he will be given the opportunity to secure that evidence.20

     20 U.S. v. Poindexter, 732 F. Supp. 142, 159-60 (D.D.C. 1990)

     President Reagan did not claim executive privilege once he was ordered to testify.

     The seven-hour videotaped deposition of the former President was taken February 16 and 17,
1990, in the Los Angeles federal courthouse, near his  residence.  The public and the press were
not allowed to attend the deposition. Transcripts and the opportunity to view the videotape were
made available to members of the press before the trial.

     As for Poindexter's subpoena for documents from the former President, Judge Greene ordered
President Reagan to make diary entries available for the court's in camera review.  After its
review, the court ordered President Reagan to produce the relevant diary entries to Poindexter in
the absence of a claim of executive privilege.  President Reagan, joined by the Bush
Administration, claimed executive privilege as to the diary entries on February 5, 1990.  On
March 21, the court granted the Reagan-Bush motions to quash the subpoena for the diary
entries, concluding that Poindexter's defense would be adequately served by the President's
testimony.

     The Poindexter Trial

     The month-long Poindexter trial, which resulted in a five-count conviction on April 7, 1990,
centered largely on the testimony of two witnesses:  Oliver North for the prosecution and former
President Reagan for the defense.

     Both men attempted to help the defendant in their appearances on the witness stand, but each
had given prior testimony harmful to Poindexter, and they could not deviate from that under
threat of perjury charges.21  North could not abandon his earlier defense stance that he dutifully
reported his activities -- including those found to be crimes -- to his superior, Poindexter.
President Reagan was compelled at trial to state, as he had previously, that he repeatedly told his
aides to obey the law and that he was unaware of their criminal acts.

     21 Before taking the witness stand in Poindexter, North had testified before the Select
Committees in July 1987, at his own trial in 1989, and at a Poindexter pre-trial hearing in 1990.

     President Reagan was questioned by his Tower Commission on two occasions in early 1987.
More significantly, the President in November 1987 answered 53 written interrogatories from
Independent Counsel, which were submitted as sworn testimony to the federal Grand Jury
investigating the Iran/contra affair.

     Poindexter chose not to testify at his trial.

     Although Poindexter and North had destroyed and altered official papers and computer
messages, the prosecution offered convincing documentary evidence that Poindexter was kept
apprised of North's efforts to provide military aid to the Nicaraguan contras while it was
outlawed from October 1984-October 1986 by the Boland Amendment; that Poindexter adopted
false statements McFarlane and North made to Congress; and that Poindexter had been fully
aware of the ill-fated November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran, which he subsequently
tried to conceal from Congress.

     The Trial Testimony of Oliver L. North

     The testimony of North, named as a co-conspirator in the case, was important to proving each
of the five charges against Poindexter:

      -- Count One, that Poindexter conspired with North and Secord to obstruct congressional
inquiries of Iran- and contra-related matters, to make false statements to Congress, and to falsify,
remove and destroy official documents.

      -- Count Two, that Poindexter obstructed Congress in 1986 when it was investigating media
allegations that North was raising funds and providing military aid to the contras.  In letters to
three committees, Poindexter answered questions by repeating denials McFarlane made before
Congress in 1985 of North's involvement in contra-support activities, even though Poindexter
knew the denials to be false.  He set up a meeting with the House Intelligence Committee in
August 1986 in which he knew North would have to give false testimony, and afterward
congratulated North on his performance.

      -- Count Three, that Poindexter obstructed Congress in November 1986 by participating with
North in the preparation of false chronologies of the secret U.S. arms sales to Iran and by making
false statements to the House and Senate intelligence committees.  Specifically, Poindexter
falsely asserted that no U.S. official knew before January 1986 that HAWK missiles had been
shipped to Iran in November 1985.  The indictment stated that North as early as November 20,
1985, told Poindexter about the shipment in advance and advised him of it again after the fact in
late 1985.

      -- Counts Four and Five, that Poindexter made false statements about the HAWK shipment to
the House and Senate intelligence committees on November 21, 1986.  As in Count Three, the
false statement charges were based on North's informing Poindexter about the shipment in 1985.

     In four days of trial testimony, North reluctantly recounted his central operational role in the
Iran/contra affair.  He described the extensive contra-resupply network he ran with Secord and
Hakim,22 his contra fund-raising efforts, and the military advice he gave the contras.  He
testified that he kept his bosses McFarlane and Poindexter fully informed of his activities and
that he acted only with their approval.23

     22 North objected to the prosecutor's use of the word ``Enterprise'' to describe the
profit-making web of contra- and Iran-related operations he undertook with Secord and Hakim.
He also objected to the use of the word ``testimony'' in reference to the false statements he made
before the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence in August 1986, and the word
``diversion'' to describe the scheme in which he, Poindexter and others diverted Iran arms sales
proceeds to the contras.

     23 North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/12/90, pp. 1275-76.

     North, who was forced to testify for the prosecution under a grant of immunity, frequently
claimed that he could not  recall many of the incidents in question, some of which had occurred
several years before.  North admitted a wide range of contra-support and Iran-related actions only
when confronted with prior testimony in which he had provided extensive details.

     North admitted that he lied in August 1986 when he told the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) he was not engaged in raising funds or providing military
support to the Nicaraguan contras.24   North described exchanges with Poindexter before and
after the meeting that directly implicated Poindexter in a scheme to frustrate the congressional
investigation.25

     24 Ibid., 3/9/90, pp. 1042-43.

     25 Ibid., 3/12/90, p. 1083.

     HPSCI was one of three congressional committees pursuing a House inquiry into reports of
North's contra-aid activities.  North testified that prior to appearing before the committee in the
White House Situation Room, he told Poindexter he would be asked about ``things that I had
been told never to reveal.'' 26  In response, Poindexter told him, ``You can handle it, you can take
care of it,'' according to North.27

     26 Ibid., 3/9/90, p. 1033.

     27 Ibid.

     After receiving reports of North's statements to HPSCI, which Poindexter knew were false,
Poindexter by way of his computer sent North a terse congratulatory message:  ``Well done.'' 28

     28 PROFs Note from Poindexter to North, 8/11/86, AKW 018921.

     Based on the statements of North and Poindexter, HPSCI Chairman Lee Hamilton informed
other members of Congress that the media allegations about North could not be proven.   North's
false testimony, in combination with Poindexter's perpetuation of McFarlane's previous lies,
successfully frustrated the congressional oversight process.  It was not until Nicaraguan soldiers
on October 5, 1986, shot down a contra-resupply plane carrying American Eugene Hasenfus that
Congress renewed its investigation into North's activities.

     North testified that he kept Poindexter apprised of his involvement in the covert sales of U.S.
arms to Iran in 1985 and 1986, including the operation's most secret aspect:  the Iran/contra
diversion.  He sent Poindexter five or six memos stating that overcharges to the Iranian buyers
would generate millions of dollars for diversion to the contras.29  North said Poindexter told him
the diversion should never be revealed.30  North said he reported the diversion plan to
Poindexter because he thought that projects funded by it ``ought to have the authority of the
President behind them.'' 31

     29 North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/12/90, pp. 1107-11.

     30 Ibid., pp. 1103-05.

     31 Ibid., p. 1111.

     North testified that in November 1985, he became directly involved in an Israeli shipment of
U.S. HAWK missiles to Iran at McFarlane's behest.32  North said he got permission from both
McFarlane, who was then the national security adviser, and Poindexter, then deputy national
security adviser, to enlist Secord's help in resolving logistical problems surrounding the
shipment.33  He also got McFarlane and Poindexter's permission to supply the Israelis with the
name of a CIA-connected airline to assist.34  North outlined the details of the planned HAWK
shipment in a computer note to Poindexter on November 20, 1985.35  By memoranda on
December 4 and on December 9, 1985, North informed Poindexter that the Iranians were
unhappy with the shipment and wanted the missiles to be retrieved.36

     32 Ibid., pp. 1118-20.

     33 Ibid., pp. 1121-22.

     34 Ibid., pp. 1122-27.

     35 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 11/20/85, AKW 002066.

     36 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 12/4/85, AKW 002070-73; Memorandum from
North to McFarlane and Poindexter, 12/9/85, AKW 002088-91.

     When CIA officials insisted after the HAWK shipment that the President should retroactively
authorize the agency's participation in the operation, CIA Director William J. Casey on
November 26, 1985, gave Poindexter a covert-action Finding for President Reagan's signature.37
North testified that he saw the  signed Finding either in Poindexter's office safe or in the safe of
NSC counsel Paul Thompson.38

     37 Memorandum from Casey to Poindexter, 11/26/85, AMY 000651-52.

     38 North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/12/90, p. 1245.

     After public exposure of the Iran arms sales in November 1986, North -- at Poindexter's
request -- prepared a chronology of U.S. involvement in the Iran arms sales, which underwent a
series of re-writes.  North testified that McFarlane removed from the chronology North's factual
account of the November 1985 HAWKs shipment and substituted a cover story:  that although
the CIA became involved in the November 1985 shipment after Israel encountered logistical
difficulties, U.S. officials at the time believed the cargo to be oil-drilling parts and did not learn
until January 1986 that the true cargo was weapons.39

     39 Ibid., pp. 1188-98.

     Asked whether the McFarlane revision was part of a plan to ``cover up'' the existence of the
November 1985 Finding, North answered:  ``I don't know that cover up is the right word.  I
listened to the President's press conferences, I listened to statements being made by people and
they just didn't talk about it.'' 40  North said McFarlane told him the cover story should be
incorporated into the chronology because the 1985 Finding authorizing the weapons shipment
described too directly an arms-for-hostages swap, which, if exposed, would politically embarrass
the President.41

     40 Ibid., p. 1191.

     41 Ibid., pp. 1190-91.

     The same oil-drilling-parts cover story was part of a CIA-prepared chronology that Casey and
his deputy, Robert Gates, brought to a White House meeting on November 20, 1986, with
Poindexter, North, Meese, Cooper and Thompson.  The purpose of the meeting was to prepare
Casey and Poindexter for their congressional testimony the following day.  North was asked at
trial:

     Q: . . . did it become clear to you by the time McFarlane tells you that [the finding was too
close to an arms-for-hostage swap] and by the time you see the CIA show up with this phony
chronology, then at least did it appear to you that there was some effort or plan going on to cover
up with U.S. involvement because of that finding?

     A: Well, there is no doubt in my mind that I came to realize that finding was a disaster, and I
understood that.42

     42 Ibid., pp. 1208-09.

     North testified that he altered and destroyed numerous documents in October and November
1986 that would have revealed details of the Iran and contra operations.  He said he assured
Poindexter that he had ``taken care of'' the documents that reflected his activities.43  He said he
told Poindexter all the documents describing the Iran/contra diversion were destroyed, after
learning from Poindexter on November 21, 1986, that Attorney General Meese would be
conducting a weekend investigation into the Iran arms sales.44  North also testified that he
altered other  original NSC documents, after receiving Poindexter's permission to retrieve them
from the NSC document-archiving system.45

     43 Ibid., p. 1218.

     44 Ibid., pp. 1120-21.

     45 Ibid., pp. 1224-27.

     More important, North reluctantly testified that he saw Poindexter destroy the only known
copy of the signed presidential Finding that sought to authorize retroactively the November 1985
shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran.46 North's eyewitness account of the destruction of the
Finding provided significant proof of Poindexter's intent to conceal facts about the HAWK
missile shipment from Congress in November 1986.47

     46 Ibid., 1252-54.

     47 The destruction of the 1985 Finding was not charged as a separate crime in the indictment
of Poindexter because Independent Counsel did not learn of it until North testified about it at his
own trial in April 1989.  Poindexter had told the Select Committees in 1987 that he destroyed the
only signed copy of the 1985 presidential Finding.  Independent Counsel did not learn of this
statement at the time, however, because the OIC had taken measures to insulate itself from all
immunized testimony. Even if Independent Counsel had been aware of the Poindexter testimony,
OIC could not have used it in any criminal proceeding against Poindexter under the terms of
immunity grant.

     North's wide-ranging testimony enabled the prosecution to streamline its witness list to only
nine other individuals, many of whom supplemented the central details provided by North.

     The Trial Testimony of President Reagan

     Before the trial of Poindexter, President Reagan had not testified publicly about Iran/contra.
On February 16 and 17, 1990, he gave a seven-hour videotaped deposition as a defense witness.
No classified matters were discussed and executive  privilege was not invoked in response to any
question.  The videotaped deposition was shown in full, therefore, to the Poindexter jury during
the trial on March 21 and 22, 1990.48

     48 Immediately after each tape was shown to the jury, a copy was given to the television
networks, allowing the public to see President Reagan's only courtroom testimony on the
Iran/contra affair.

     In direct examination, defense counsel sought to show presidential knowledge and approval of
Poindexter's activities.  But President Reagan frequently claimed memory lapses when
questioned about specific exchanges he may have had with Poindexter and about his knowledge
of individuals and details involved in the Iran and contra operations.

     Although President Reagan exhibited virtually no detailed knowledge of the Iran/contra
matter, he made clear to the jury that it had his imprimatur, calling it ``a covert action that was
taken at my behest.'' 49  President Reagan said North was the only person he remembered being
involved in the arms initiative.50  He could not recall being briefed by Poindexter on the May
1986 trip by McFarlane and North to Tehran, but he said he did recall signing a Bible for
Iranians.51   President Reagan testified that the amount of weapons sold to Iran totaled $12.2
million.52

     49 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Deposition, 2/16/90, p. 9.

     50 Ibid., p. 21.

     51 Ibid., p. 24.

     52 Ibid., pp. 154-55.

     Asked specifically about the November 1985 HAWK shipment to Iran, President Reagan said
he recalled a plan in which the Israelis would turn their plane around in mid-delivery of the
weapons if no hostages were released.53  He did not recall when he became aware of the
November 1985 HAWK shipment; 54 he did not recall Poindexter telling him in November 1986
that others in the White House were having trouble remembering when they learned of it.55

     53 Ibid., pp. 24-25.

     54 Ibid., pp. 33-36.

     55 Ibid., pp. 38-39.

     President Reagan also claimed virtually no memory of the November 1986 period in which
his top advisers were scrambling to limit public exposure of the Iran arms sales.  He only
generally recalled telling members of Congress about the arms sales on November 12, 1986.56
He could not remember receiving any information from Poindexter for any of his presentations
on the matter in that time.57 The former President could not remember asking Poindexter to
assemble the facts on the arms sales.58  He could not recall that Poindexter briefed the House
and Senate intelligence committees on November 21, 1986.59

     56 Ibid., pp. 37-38.

     57 Ibid., p. 30.

     58 Ibid., p. 28.

     59 Ibid., pp. 44-45.

     Defense counsel's questions suggested that their client had significant exchanges with the
President during the arms-sale period and its aftermath.  But Reagan's lack of recollection, and
lack of specificity when he did remember events or individuals, left those questions unresolved.

     President Reagan provided more helpful testimony for the defense on the subject of
contra-support operations.  Calling the Boland prohibition on contra funding a ``disaster,'' 60
Reagan testified that he urged his aides to do what they could to support the contras, while
staying ``within the law.'' 61  Reagan recalled that Saudi Arabia's King Fahd pledged millions of
dollars for the contras.62  He said he told his aides not to solicit contributions for the contras
directly but to tell people how they could contribute if they wanted to help.63

     60 Ibid., p. 69.

     61 Ibid., pp. 53-54.

     62 Ibid., pp. 74-75.

     63 Ibid., pp. 53-54.

     Asked whether Poindexter briefed him on the contras, President Reagan said:  ``Oh yes, I
depended on him for that.'' 64   He said he had no reason to believe that Poindexter was not
keeping him fully informed.

     64 Ibid., p. 116.

     Asked to describe what he knew about North's responsibilities in the White House, President
Reagan said:

     Well, he was mainly performing tasks, as I understand it,   for the NSC, but he -- his
background and record had been   one of being decorated for heroism and so forth in the
Vietnamese conflict, and that he had been a very bold and   brave soldier -- Marine.

     And -- so, he was -- it was my impression, not from any   specific reports or anything, that in
through all of this   that he was communicating back and forth between on the   need for the
support of the Contras and so forth.65

     65 Ibid., p. 131.

     In addition to professing a benign view of North and his activities, President Reagan indicated
general knowledge of and support for the contra-resupply operation in Central America:

     Q: Do you recall any discussions that he [Poindexter] may have had with you about the
construction of an airstrip down there in Central America?

     A: Well, I did hear -- we had learned that there was a rather primitive lane in there in the
jungle near the border of Costa Rican [sic], and that was then being put into better shape as a
usable airstrip.

     Q: Did you have any -- do you recall any discussion about who was constructing the airstrip?

     A: Well, no.  I assume it was the Costa Rican government.

     Q: And do you know what that airstrip was going to be used for?

     A: Well, I know that -- I hoped that it would be used in the delivery of when once again we
could supply, keep the Contras supplied, that it could be involved in the -- used there, if there
was need  for a refueling or anything of that kind of a plane.66

     66 Ibid., p. 121.

     President Reagan was then asked whether he knew who would be using the Costa Rican
airstrip for contra resupply.  His answer reflected knowledge of the operation supposedly being
funded and run by private citizens -- the so-called ``private benefactors'' -- that was in fact being
run by Secord at North's direction:

     Q: Do you know who it was that was going to be using the airstrip?  It was going to be used
for supplying the Contras, but do you know who it was that was actually going to be doing the
supplying and using the airstrip?

     A: No, I do not on that.  I don't think -- I don't think I ever considered that it would be military
planes of ours.  So, possibly some of those that weren't officially planes of ours that had been
helping in the past in deliveries to the Contras and so forth.

     Q: Earlier this morning or earlier today, I should say, you mentioned General Secord.  That
you knew that he was involved in the Contra supply effort.

     Was it part of his operation you thought that he might be using the airstrip?

     A: I can't say that I actually recall that, but it seems to me logical that he would have been
involved in that.67

     67 Ibid., p. 122.

     President Reagan, who winked and smiled at Poindexter from the witness stand, did not hide
his contempt toward congressional inquiries into NSC staff contra-support activities.   Shown
misleading letters written by Poindexter in July 1986 to the committees of Congress that were
investigating allegations of North's contra efforts, Reagan said:  ``I am in total agreement.  If I
had written it myself, I might have used a little profanity.'' 68

     68 Ibid., pp. 146-47.

     In cross-examination, the prosecution was able to impeach much of President Reagan's
testimony.  This was possible because Reagan late in 1987 had answered, under oath, 53 written
interrogatories for Independent Counsel and the Grand Jury investigating the Iran/contra matter.

     The July 21, 1986, letters -- in which Poindexter embraced and perpetuated the lies McFarlane
had told Congress about North's contra-support activities a year earlier -- were a key element in
the obstruction charges against the defendant.  Under cross-examination by the prosecution,
President Reagan was asked whether he was aware that the Poindexter letters repeated
McFarlane's previous lies.  The former President equivocated:

     Well, I simply -- no, I did not have this information, but I have a great deal of confidence in
the man who was quoted as sending these letters, McFarlane.  And I have  never -- I have never
caught him or seen him doing anything that was in any way out of line or dishonest.  And so, I
was perfectly willing to accept his defense.69

     69 Ibid., p. 151.

     President Reagan said he did not know that McFarlane had pleaded guilty to withholding
information from Congress in connection with the false letters.70

     70 Ibid., pp. 220-21.

     Asked whether he approved either the McFarlane or Poindexter letters to Congress, the former
President said he had no recollection of doing so, adding that his memory could be faulty.71
Asked directly whether he would approve of sending false information to Congress, President
Reagan conceded that he would not.72  Would he have authorized Poindexter to make false
statements to Congress?  President Reagan again attempted to assist his former aide:  ``No.  And
I don't think any false statements were made.'' 73

     71 Ibid., pp. 150-51.

     72 Ibid., pp. 151-52.

     73 Ibid., p. 158.

     President Reagan also testified that he did not approve the destruction of Iran/contra
documents by Poindexter, and that he was not told about their destruction.74  But the former
President, in response to subsequent questioning, described the dilemma in which he placed his
aides in November 1986 by instructing them that  certain information could not be revealed
because ``it will bring to risk and danger to people that are held and with the people that we were
negotiating with.'' 75

     74 Ibid., p. 160.

     75 Ibid., p. 252.

     Asked again whether he approved the destruction of alteration of any Iran/contra records,
President Reagan said:  ``And this, I cannot answer.  I cannot recall because it is the possibility
that there were such papers that would violate the secrecy that was protecting those individuals'
lives.'' 76  President Reagan had denied in response to the earlier written interrogatories that he
approved the destruction and alteration of documents; when confronted with his previous
testimony he stated that it was truthful.

     76 Ibid., p. 255.

     On the issue of the contras, President Reagan said he ``never had any inkling'' that North was
guiding their military strategy.77  But Reagan muddied the issue in a later statement about North:

     77 Ibid., p. 170.

     I know that he [North] was very active, and that was certainly with my approval, because I
yesterday made plain how seriously I felt about the Contra situation and what it meant to all of us
here in the Americas.  And, so, obviously, there were many things that were being done.  But,
again, as I say, I was convinced that they were all being done within the law.78

     78 Ibid., p. 189.

     In questioning about the Iran/contra diversion, President Reagan surprisingly asserted that he
had no proof that a diversion had occurred:

     And to this day, I still with all of the investigations that have been made, I still have never
been given one iota of evidence as to who collected the price, who delivered the final delivery of
the weapons, or what was -- whether there was ever more money in that Swiss account that had
been diverted someplace else.  I am still waiting to find those things out and have never found
them out.79

     79 Ibid., p. 155.

     Asked whether he had approved a diversion, Reagan again stated:

     May I simply point out that I had no knowledge then or   now that there had been a diversion,
and I never used   the term.  And all I knew was that there was some money   that came from
some place in another account, and that   the appearance was that it might have been a part of the
negotiated sale.  And to this day, I don't have any   information or knowledge that that wasn't the
total   amount that -- or that there was a diversion.80

     80 Ibid., p. 156.

     Asked again whether he would have approved a diversion, President Reagan said he would
not.  But, he added, ``No one has proven to me that there was a diversion.'' 81

     81 Ibid., p. 157.

     President Reagan said he did not recall that the Tower Commission concluded in March 1987
that, in fact, a diversion had occurred.  ``I, to this day, do not recall ever hearing that there was a
diversion,'' he said.82  Shown that portion of the Tower Commission report describing the
diversion, Reagan said:  ``This  report -- this is the first time that I have ever seen a reference that
actually specified there was a diversion.'' 83

     82 Ibid., p. 240.

     83 Ibid., p. 243.

     Asked whether Poindexter should have told him about an Iran/contra diversion, Reagan said:
``Yes.  Unless maybe he thought he was protecting me from something.'' 84

     84 Ibid., pp. 243-44.

     The Verdict and Sentencing

     After six days of deliberation, the jury on April 7, 1990, found Poindexter guilty of each of
the five felony charges against him.  Judge Greene on June 11, 1990, sentenced Poindexter to six
months imprisonment on each of the five counts, to be served concurrently.

     In imposing the sentence, Judge Greene noted complaints by Poindexter's supporters that the
most he was guilty of was having become embroiled in a political quarrel between the White
House and Congress.  Judge Greene stated:

     Whatever may have been the nature of the original dispute, what the defendant and his
associates did was emphatically not a part of the normal political process.

     . . . When Admiral Poindexter and his associates obstructed the Congress, what were they
seeking to accomplish?  In a word, it was to nullify the decision that body had made on the issue
of supplies to the Contras. . . .

     President Reagan did not, or for parliamentary reasons he could not, veto the bill [which
contained the Boland prohibition on contra aid].  He did not attempt to assert his own
constitutional powers or take the issue to the  people, and at the conclusion of the political
process the Boland Amendment thus became law.

     No problem.  What the president was unwilling or unable to do -- to defeat this law -- Admiral
Poindexter, together with Oliver North and others, did on their own.  They decided that the
policy embodied in the Boland Amendment was wrong, and they went about to violate it on a
large scale and for a lengthy period, and then to lie about their activities to prevent the Congress
and the public from finding out. . . .

     With all due respect to the distinguished military records of Admiral Poindexter, Colonel
North, General Secord, and the others, they have no standing in a democratic society to invalidate
the decisions made by elected officials . . . As I said several times during the trial, it is immaterial
to this criminal case who was right and who was wrong about the wisdom of the Contra policy.
That is not what this trial was about.  The jury and this court were not competent to decide for
this nation whether resistance forces in Nicaragua should or should not have been supplied with
weapons.

     But more importantly for present purposes, neither was Admiral Poindexter.  When he and his
associates took it upon themselves to make that decision anyway, to implement it on a broad
scale, and to work actively to keep what they were doing from the Congress and the public, they
not only violated various statutes.  They were also in violation of a principle fundamental to this
constitutional Republic -- that those elected by and responsible to the people shall make the
important policy decisions, and that their decisions may not be nullified by appointed officials
who happen to be in positions that give them the ability to operate programs prohibited by law.
It is unfortunate that, whatever may be his view of his own purposes and actions, the defendant
still gives no evidence of recognizing that principle and the seriousness of its violation.

     Given the nature of the offenses, the sentencing principle that is primarily applicable here is
that of deterrence, and as a practical matter, deterrence means meaningful penalties.  If the court
were not to impose such a penalty here, when the defendant before it was the decision-making
head of the Iran-contra operation, its action would be tantamount to a statement that a scheme to
lie to and obstruct Congress is of no great moment, and that even if the perpetrators are found
out, the courts will treat their criminal acts as no more than minor infractions.

     A message of that kind could not help but encourage others in positions of authority and
secrecy to frustrate laws that fail to accord with their notions of what is best for this country, and
to carry out their own private policies in the name of the United States. . . .85

     85 Judge Greene, Poindexter Transcript of Sentencing, 6/11/90, pp. 18-22

     The Appeal

     A three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in a 2-1
decision on November 15, 1991, reversed Poindexter's convictions on the grounds that his trial
was impermissibly tainted by his immunized congressional testimony.  The Poindexter ruling
was based on the appeals court decision in the North case, which extended the protections of the
use immunity statute to prohibit use of any witness whose testimony has been refreshed or
shaped in any way by the defendant's immunized testimony.  In his dissenting opinion, Chief
Judge Abner Mikva noted that the majority ruling ``tells future defendants that all they need to
evade responsibility [to testify at trial] is a well timed case of amnesia.'' 86

     86 U.S. v. Poindexter, 951 F.2d 369, 390 (D.C. Cir. 1991).

     The Poindexter appeals panel also overturned the two obstruction convictions on the grounds
that the statute was ``unconstitutionally vague'' in its proscription of ``corruptly'' endeavoring to
impede a congressional inquiry.  The appeals panel ruled that a defendant's lying to Congress
does not constitute obstruction unless the defendant corruptly influences someone else  to do so.
Again, Chief Judge Mikva dissented, finding it ``obvious . . . that Poindexter 'corruptly'
obstructed the congressional investigation when he lied to Congress.'' 87

     87 Ibid.

     In October 1992, Independent Counsel petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court to review the
Poindexter case.  Independent Counsel said the appeals court ruling that the obstruction statute
was unconstitutional ``leaves a large gap in the criminal law, while endorsing a method of
analyzing constitutional vagueness challenges that could prove enormously destructive to a
substantial body of federal legislation.'' 88  The petition noted that at least 17 other laws besides
the obstruction statute at issue use the word ``corruptly'' to define an element of the offense.89

     88 U.S. v. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88-0080-01, Petition for Writ of Certiorari by United States
of America, at 9 (October 1992).

     89 Ibid., p. 10.

     On immunized testimony, Independent Counsel in its petition to the Supreme Court said the
appeals ruling in Poindexter would

     make almost impossible the prosecution of any case involving public immunized statements
that requires testimony by persons sympathetic to the accused, such as co-conspirators or other
associates.  And the dangers of abuse and manipulation are magnified by the court of appeals'
view, expressed in North, that a witness inclined to assist the defense may become disqualified
from testifying at trial by the simple expedient of soaking himself in the defendant's immunized
statements. 90

     90 Ibid., p. 22.

     Independent Counsel also noted that the appeals ruling

     . . . will have its most profound impact on cases involving public immunized testimony before
Congress -- cases that, by definition, involve issues of the most fundamental import.  If the court
of appeals has erred, this Court should right that error before significant further damage is done
to the legislative oversight function. 91

     91 Ibid., p. 29.

     The U.S. Supreme Court in December 1992 declined, without comment, to review the
Poindexter case.

     Conclusion

     Poindexter was responsible for providing President Reagan with advice on national-security
matters of highest importance.  What his conviction showed was that a jury of ordinary citizens
can sort and weigh complex evidence and agree that obstructing and lying to Congress is a
serious act worthy of felony conviction.

     The Poindexter trial served the public interest in another sense.  Poindexter's determination to
call President Reagan as a witness allowed the public the rare opportunity to see him testify for
seven hours about the Iran/contra matter.

     The completion of the Poindexter trial in April 1990, two years after the original indictment
was returned, necessitated the re-activation of the criminal investigation into Iran/contra.  For the
first time, Poindexter and North were available for questioning by Independent Counsel.
Although this decision was questioned by some, Independent Counsel determined that his
Iran/contra investigative mandate could not be fulfilled until the central operational figures were
interrogated to find out whether other high-ranking officials helped support and cover up their
activities.

Chapter 4

     Paul B. Thompson

     Paul B. Thompson, a Navy commander who was detailed to the National Security Council
(NSC) staff in June 1983, became military assistant to National Security Adviser Robert C.
McFarlane in January 1985.  In June 1985, he also became NSC general counsel.  When
McFarlane resigned in December 1985 and was replaced by his deputy, Vice Adm. John M.
Poindexter, Thompson retained his dual post.

     As military assistant, Thompson provided administrative support to the national security
adviser.  Most paperwork passed through Thompson on its way to the national security adviser,1
and NSC staff members would often schedule meetings or communicate with the national
security adviser through Thompson.2  Poindexter, unlike McFarlane, allowed Thompson to sit in
on meetings in his office.3  Both McFarlane and Poindexter occasionally gave  documents to
Thompson to store in safes in or near his office.4

     1 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, p. 12.  Ronald K. Sable, FBI 302, 8/6/90, p. 2.  McFarlane
said his papers were routed through Thompson or secretary Wilma Hall.  (McFarlane, FBI 302,
3/11/87, p. 2.)  Thompson said his paperwork role expanded under Poindexter.  (Thompson,
Grand Jury, 5/13/87, pp. 20-22.)

     2 McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, p. 3; North, Grand Jury, 6/6/90, pp. 9-10; Sable, FBI 302,
8/6/90, p. 2.  As Thompson himself put it, ``I was the military assistant to the National Security
Adviser and wherever he was in the world, I was the one that stayed up all night on the phone.''
(Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 7/24/87, p. 74.)

     3 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, p. 75; McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, pp. 2, 3.  According to
NSC Legislative Affairs Director Ronald K. Sable, Thompson was Poindexter's ``right hand.''
(Sable, Grand Jury, 8/10/90, p. 11; and Sable, FBI 302, 8/6/90, p. 2.)

     4 McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, p. 2; Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, p.
368; Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 45-46.

     As general counsel, Thompson provided legal advice to McFarlane and Poindexter, although
he consulted on many issues with White House counsel and counsel for other agencies and
departments.5  McFarlane in particular preferred to use Thompson only as an avenue for getting
legal advice from others on important or complex matters.6

     5 Rodney B. McDaniel, Grand Jury, 4/4/90, pp. 14-17; Sable, Grand Jury, 8/10/90, p. 91.

     6 McFarlane, FBI 302s, 9/13/90, pp. 2, 10, and 3/13/87, p. 8.

     Thompson was not involved in the operational details of either the Iran arms initiative or the
contra-resupply effort.  In his position as military assistant to McFarlane and Poindexter,
however, Thompson did become involved in the criminal acts of others in Iran/contra.

     Independent Counsel's investigation of Thompson focused on his role in Poindexter's
destruction of a presidential Finding on November 21, 1986.  Independent Counsel also
investigated Thompson's role in McFarlane's false denials to Congress in 1985 regarding Lt. Col.
Oliver L. North's contra-support efforts, and his role in Poindexter's false statements to Congress
about North in 1986.  In relation to these matters, OIC was concerned also with statements made
by Thompson to congressional and criminal investigators that were potentially false or
misleading.

     Although there was strong evidence for a possible false  statements and obstruction case
against Thompson, Independent Counsel ultimately decided not to prosecute him.  The evidence
and the reasons for not prosecuting are detailed below.

     Thompson's Role in the November 1985 HAWK Shipment and the Destruction of the Finding

     In November 1985, while Thompson and McFarlane were in Geneva with President Reagan,
Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin called McFarlane for assistance in making a shipment of
U.S.-made HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran.  Over the next several days, McFarlane was in
contact with North in Washington about operational details, in an attempt to facilitate the
shipment.

     Thompson was frequently the point of contact between North and McFarlane, relaying
messages about the planned shipment between the two.  Among the messages that Thompson
relayed was a request from North for McFarlane to call the prime minister of a European country
to obtain landing rights for the plane carrying the HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran.7  In
addition, Thompson informed Poindexter, who was also in Washington, that McFarlane had
asked North for help with an ``Israeli aircraft problem.''  Because they were speaking on a
non-secure phone line, however, Thompson was not more specific about the project and
suggested that Poindexter ask North for the  details.8

     7 North, Grand Jury, 6/6/90, p. 10; McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, p. 17; Thompson, Select
Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, pp. 105-107; Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/20/87, pp. 63-66;
Thompson, FBI 302s, 11/29/86, p. 3, 4/3/87, p. 3, 5/19/87, p. 6, and 1/3/91, pp. 3-4.

     8 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 80-81, and 6/17/87, p. 344;
Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 39-40; Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90,
pp. 61-63, and 10/31/90, p. 23.

     In his first congressional deposition, Thompson minimized his role in the November 1985
HAWK shipment, claiming that he did not inform McFarlane of North's reason for asking him to
call the prime minister of a European country and that, at the time, he had ``no idea''  what the
call was about.9  Subsequently, although Thompson acknowledged that he knew that
McFarlane's call involved landing rights for an aircraft and that the Israelis had an interest in the
plane, Thompson continued to assert that he  did not know that the plane was carrying weapons
or that its destination was Iran.10

     9 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, pp. 106-107.

     10 Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/20/87, pp. 63-66; see also Thompson, FBI 302s, 11/29/86, p. 3,
4/3/87, p. 3, 5/19/87, p. 6, and 1/3/91, pp. 3-4.

     In passing substantive messages between North and McFarlane about the transaction,
Thompson did gain some information about the shipment -- so much so that when he gave
McFarlane one message from North, McFarlane registered surprise at the extent of Thompson's
knowledge.11  Independent Counsel obtained no conclusive evidence, however, contradicting
Thompson's assertions that he did not know the cargo or destination of the HAWKs flight.12

     11 Thompson, FBI 302, 5/19/87, p. 6.

     12 North told the Select Committees it was ``possible'' that Thompson did not know the truth
about the HAWK shipment.  (North, Select Committee Testimony, 7/7/87, pp. 102-104.)  But in
his trial, North said he believed that Thompson knew that the plane was bound for Iran and had
weapons on board.  (North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp. 7630-7632.)  North later told the
Grand Jury that it was ``inconceivable'' that Thompson ``would not have known what was on that
airplane in November of 1985.''  (North, Grand Jury, 6/15/90, p. 74.)  McFarlane said although
Thompson acted as a channel for information between him and North, he probably would have
``cloaked'' the operation from Thompson.  (McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, pp. 17-18.)

     After the November 1985 HAWK shipment, the CIA sought a Presidential Finding to
authorize retroactively its involvement in the shipment.  On December 5, 1985, Poindexter
presented the Finding to the President, and he  signed it.13  Poindexter kept the Finding in his
immediate office.14

     13 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 105-106; Poindexter, Select
Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 41-44.

     14 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, pp. 367-368; Poindexter, Select
Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, p. 45; Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, pp. 66-67.

     Poindexter later contended that he was unhappy with the language of the 1985 Finding
because it justified the arms shipments to Iran as a narrow, arms-for-hostages deal rather than a
broad initiative to improve relations with moderates in the Iranian government.15  He discussed a
more broadly worded draft Finding with President Reagan on January 6, 1986, and the President
signed the draft.  The President signed a final version of a Finding authorizing the Iran arms sales
on January 17.  Because of the extreme sensitivity of all three Findings -- the December 1985,
and January 6 and 17, 1986, Findings -- copies were not distributed through regular channels to
the State and Defense departments, and the CIA.16  Poindexter retained personal custody of the
January 17, 1986, original Finding in an envelope that also contained the December 1985 Finding
and  the January 6 Finding, and permitted no other copies to be made.17

     15 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, p. 45; Poindexter, Grand Jury,
6/27/90, pp. 71, 75-78, and 10/31/90, pp. 19-20.

     16 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, pp. 69, 72-73.

     17 Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/20/87, pp. 79-80, 84-85.

     Thompson participated peripherally in the drafting of the January 17, 1986, Finding.  On the
evening of January 16, Poindexter, Attorney General Edwin Meese III, Secretary of Defense
Caspar Weinberger, CIA Director William Casey, and CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin met
in Poindexter's office.18  During the meeting, Poindexter called in Thompson and asked him
whether the executive order establishing an arms embargo of Iran was still in effect.  Either
Weinberger or Meese also asked Thompson whether Iran was still on the State Department's list
of countries sponsoring international terrorism.19  At about this time, Thompson had a general
discussion with  Sporkin about withholding congressional notification of a Finding.20

     18 Ibid., pp. 57-58; Thompson, FBI 302s, 11/29/86, p. 2, and 4/3/87, p. 3.

     19 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, pp. 43-44; Thompson, Grand Jury,
5/20/87, pp. 57-58; Thompson, FBI 302s, 11/29/86, p. 2, 4/3/87, p. 3, and 7/22/88, p. 7.

     According to Poindexter, Thompson was in and out of the meeting.  (Poindexter, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, p. 151; Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, pp. 18, 74-75.)
Poindexter said Thompson's sole contribution to the meeting was to retrieve a copy of the Arms
Export Control Act from his office (Ibid., pp. 70-71, 74-75, 85-87; Poindexter, Grand Jury,
10/31/90, p. 21.)

     20 Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/20/87, pp. 31-33, 58-60.

     On either January 17 or January 20, 1986, Poindexter handed Thompson the envelope that
contained the three Findings so that Thompson could show the signed version of the January 17
Finding to three CIA officials -- Sporkin, Deputy Director for Operations Clair E. George, and
Thomas Twetten, deputy chief of the Near East Operations Division.21  Throughout most of
1986, Thompson kept the envelope containing the three Findings in the safe in his office.22

     21 Ibid., pp. 25-35; Thompson, FBI 302s, 11/29/86, pp. 2-3, and 5/19/87, p. 4.

     22 Poindexter said Thompson had custody of the envelope beginning some time in 1986.
(Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, p. 102, and 10/31/90, pp. 31-32.)  Thompson certainly had the
Findings in his safe on October 21, 1986, when Poindexter sent him a computer note asking him
to make a copy of ``the very sensitive finding'' on the Iran initiative for Casey.  (PROFs Note
from Poindexter to Thompson, 10/21/86, ALU 049972).

     Thompson conceded that he was the knowing custodian of the January 17, 1986, Finding at
``various times'' throughout 1986,23 but he flatly denied having any knowledge of the 1985
Finding.24

     23 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 7/24/87, p. 30; see also Thompson, Select
Committees Deposition, 4/28/87, pp. 45-46; and Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/20/87, pp. 79-80.

     24 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 4/28/87, p. 47.

     On the morning of November 21, 1986, President Reagan authorized Attorney General Meese
to conduct a fact-finding inquiry into the Iran arms sales.  The White House meeting at which the
inquiry was authorized was attended by the President, Meese, White House Chief of Staff Donald
T. Regan and Poindexter.  One focus of Meese's inquiry was to resolve a conflict within the
Administration about the November 1985 HAWK shipment:  Secretary of State George Shultz
said he knew at the time of the shipment that the cargo was HAWKs because McFarlane had
briefed him, but NSC and CIA officials were stating that the Government did not know the true
nature of the shipment until after the fact.

     According to Poindexter, early in the afternoon of November 21, 1986:

     the Attorney General called me and said, ``In following up on our discussion with the
President this morning,'' he said, ``I would like to be able to send over a couple of my people to
look at the files and records that you have and could you have somebody pull them together and
I'll have my people get in touch with Commander Thompson,'' who was my military assistant,
also the General Counsel for the NSC, and the primary liaison with the Attorney General's front
office.

     So immediately after the telephone call from the Attorney General, I called Commander
Thompson on the intercom and told him about the Attorney General's request and I asked him to
take responsibility for pulling the material together.

     After I finished talking to him, I called Colonel North, told him the same thing.  I wanted him
to clearly understand the directions that I had provided to Commander Thompson about pulling
the material together.  He said that he would do that.25

     25 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 109-10.

     Later on November 21, Poindexter said Thompson:

     brought in to my office the envelopes that I had given him earlier containing the material we
had on the Iranian project in the immediate office, which was essentially the various Findings,
and he pulled out this November Finding, it was actually signed in December, and my
recollection is that he said something to the effect that, ``They'll have a field day with this,'' or
something to that effect.

     And my recollection is that the import of his comment was that up until that time in
November of 1986, the President was being beaten about the head and shoulders, that this was --
the whole Iranian project was just an arms-for-hostages deal.

     . . . [W]hen he made his comment, I said, `Well, let me see the Finding,' and he pulled it out
and gave it to me, and I read it . . .26

     26 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 47-49.

     Poindexter said the 1985 Finding gave the impression that the Iran initiative was nothing
more than an arms-for-hostages deal, and

     I, frankly, didn't see any need for it at the time.  I thought it was politically embarrassing.  And
so I decided to tear  it up, and I tore it up, put it in the burn basket behind my desk.27

     27 Ibid., p. 48.

     North, who was in Poindexter's office at the time, witnessed the destruction of the Finding
and later gave testimony regarding it.28  According to both North and Poindexter, Thompson
was present when Poindexter destroyed the 1985 finding.29

     28 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp. 7612-13, 7615-18; North, Poindexter Trial
Testimony, 3/12/90, pp. 1252-55.

     29 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, p. 114; Poindexter, Select Committees
Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 48-49; North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp. 7613, 7615; North,
Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/12/90, p. 1250, and 3/14/90, p. 1539.

     In Thompson's first congressional deposition, he admitted that he spoke to Poindexter on the
afternoon of November 21 and that Poindexter told him that Justice Department personnel would
be coming over to review the NSC's Iran arms sale files.   According to Thompson, later that
afternoon Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper called him and said that two Justice
Department officials would be coming over to review North's files.30  In this initial testimony,
Thompson volunteered no information about the destruction of the 1985 Finding.

     30 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, p. 90.

     Subsequently, Thompson changed his testimony.  In one OIC interview and in two Grand Jury
appearances, Thompson  categorically denied that he had any conversation with Poindexter on
November 21 about the Justice Department's fact-gathering inquiry.31  More importantly, in a
congressional deposition in April 1987, Thompson stated that he had no knowledge at all of the
1985 Finding:

     31 Thompson, FBI 302, 4/22/87, pp. 8-9; Thompson, Grand Jury, 6/1/87, pp. 7-9.

     Q. The CIA has produced what they call a mini-Finding which was drafted by Stan Sporkin,
General Counsel at the CIA, shortly after the November '85 shipment.  Have you ever seen the
document I have just described?

     A. No.

     Q. To your knowledge was it ever signed by the President?

     A. Not to my knowledge.

     Q. Did anybody ever tell you that it was signed by the President?

     A. No.

     Q. Have you seen -- I've not shown it to you because I did not bring it with me, but have you
ever seen the document I'm referring to?

     A. No.  There was an earlier Finding involving Iran from early January, but you're talking
about yet a different Finding.

     Q.  Yes.  I'm talking about one that would have been drafted in late November or early
December of 1985.

     A. No.  That sounds like that Finding didn't go anywhere.

     MR. McGRATH [Associate White House Counsel]:  The Finding you are referring to is
substantially different than the ones that Mr. Thompson saw in late January.

     MR. EGGLESTON [Deputy Chief Counsel, House Select Committee]: It's a Finding that
relates to the November '85 shipment and it's a ratification Finding, if you will.  It's a Finding
which in the last paragraph, since the events had already taken place, is a Finding which states in
the last paragraph or maybe the last sentence that ``this Finding ratifies the prior actions by the
Central Intelligence Agency.''

     BY MR. EGGLESTON: (Resuming)

     Q. I take it that description of it doesn't bring anything to your mind, Mr. Thompson.

     A. No.32

     32 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 4/28/87, pp. 47-48 (emphasis added).

     Thompson also stated in the spring of 1987 that he had no knowledge of anyone at the
National Security Council or the White House, other than North, destroying or altering any
documents relevant to the Iran arms sales.33

     33 Thompson, Grand Jury, 6/1/87, pp. 87-89.

     In May 1987, during a closed deposition before the Select Committees staff pursuant to an
immunity order, Poindexter was the first witness to reveal that he destroyed the 1985 Finding,
and he said Thompson was aware of that destruction. The next month, the Select Committees
questioned Thompson about it.

     On June 26, 1987, after being questioned by the Committees, Thompson was interviewed at
his initiative by an OIC attorney and an FBI Special Agent.  Thompson stated that the Senate
Select Committee had asked him whether he had any information about the destruction of
documents by a senior  White House official from November 17-25, 1986.  Thompson said he
now remembered a meeting at which Poindexter asked him to retrieve Poindexter's Iran file from
Thompson's safe.34  After he retrieved the file, Thompson stated, Poindexter went through it,
looked at one document, commented that this was not it, and then ripped up the document.35
Thompson said the document that Poindexter destroyed could have been the January 6, 1986,
Finding, the January 17, 1986, Finding, the December 1985 Finding, or another Finding.36
Thompson had told a similar story to the staff of the Senate Select Committee the same day.37

     34 Thompson, FBI 302, 6/26/87, pp. 2-3.

     35 Ibid., p. 2.

     36 Ibid., pp. 2-3.

     37 Memorandum from Terry A. Smiljanich to the File, 6/26/87, pp. 3-5, AMY 000174-76.

     In July 1987, Poindexter appeared before the Select Committees.  In that nationally televised
appearance, Poindexter testified that Thompson removed the 1985 Finding from the safe in
Thompson's office on November 21, 1986, brought it to Poindexter, told Poindexter, ``They'll
have a field day with this,'' and watched without objection as Poindexter destroyed the finding.38
After hearing that testimony, Thompson in a congressional deposition attempted  to explain the
inconsistency between his prior testimony and Poindexter's.  Thompson now admitted that,
contrary to his earlier testimony, he had discussed the fact-finding inquiry with Poindexter on
November 21.  According to Thompson:

     38 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 47-48.

     I met with him [Poindexter] in his office for about 30 seconds, and he told me that Meese was
going to send people over, to be cooperative, and at that time he handed me this accordion file . .
. with his working papers, and said basically, ``Here is what I have got.  Let them see what you
have, and assist them in whatever else they want to do in the staff.'' 39

     39 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 7/24/87, p. 32.

     Thompson said that he did not look through the file that Poindexter handed him immediately.
Rather, according to Thompson, an hour or two later he joined a meeting in Poindexter's office
that probably was attended by North, Poindexter's Deputy Alton Keel, and NSC Executive
Secretary Rodney McDaniel.40  Thompson said:

     40 Ibid., p. 34.

     Right during the conversation while I was there, the Admiral kept saying, ``There is yet
another document.''  Or, ``There is some memo that we still haven't come up with that I know has
to be somewhere.''

     When I heard him say those words, I thought to myself, perhaps it is among the working
papers that he gave me earlier, and since I had not looked at them, perhaps it would be helpful
one more time for him to look at them.  So I got back up, went out and came back in carrying his
accordion file. . . .

     And the conversation continued.  I came back in.  The conversation continued on a subject I
can't recall, but I assume it had to do with general posturing and strategy in dealing with the
congressional requests and press requests and so forth.  We had just finished briefing both the
House and Senate committees, and I suspect we were trying to have a discussion as to where we
stood on the issue.  At any rate, as the conversation was continuing, I would open the file and
quickly take out documents, look at them to see their general subject matter, and I would hand
them to him.

     He was sitting off to my left, and he would just kind of look at them and drop them or leave
them on his lap.  One document we came to he ripped up, not as a major action, but merely as he
came to it.  He ripped it up saying, ``This is no longer necessary.''  Or, ``This has no future.''  That
document turns out to have been the finding of the fall of 1985.41

     41 Ibid., pp. 33-36.  Poindexter contradicted Thompson's account again in the Grand Jury.
(Poindexter, Grand Jury, 10/31/90, pp. 42-43.)  In addition, Poindexter stated that he could not
recall giving Thompson any documents related to the Justice Department's fact-finding inquiry
on November 21. (Ibid., p. 57.)

     Thompson provided no explanation for recanting his earlier testimony that he had not talked
to Poindexter on November 21 about the fact-finding inquiry and that he had no knowledge of
document destruction (other than North's) related to the Iran initiative.

     Thompson's Role in False Denials to Congress Regarding North's Contra Activities

     Independent Counsel investigated Thompson's role in McFarlane's false responses to
Congress in the summer of 1985, when two committee chairmen asked about press allegations of
North's contra-aid activities.

     In response to the inquiries, which came while McFarlane was out of town, NSC staff
member Brenda Reger informed Poindexter that she would search NSC institutional files but not
North's personal files.42  NSC Deputy Executive Secretary Robert Pearson in a computer note to
Thompson reiterated this fact,43 and Thompson informed McFarlane.44

     42 Memorandum from Reger to Poindexter, 8/20/85, AKW 026758-59.

     43 PROFs Note from Pearson to Thompson, 8/23/85, AKW 026746.

     44 McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, pp. 4-5.

     The decision not to search the files in North's office was an important one.  Some of the
memoranda that North had written about his contra activities were not logged in on the NSC
institutional file system and, therefore, were not uncovered in Reger's search.  Although Reger
and Pearson were apparently concerned enough about the possibility that there were ``non-log''
memoranda in North's office to document in writing the limits of their search, there is no
evidence that Reger, Pearson or  Thompson knew with certainty that North's office contained
relevant non-log documents.45

     45 Thompson may not have been involved in the initial decision not to search North's office.
According to Thompson, he was on vacation in Maine at the time that the first congressional
inquiry was received and was not aware at the time of the decision.  (Thompson, Grand Jury,
5/13/87, pp. 58, 60-62.)  Poindexter, however, noted that Thompson and Reger ``normally
worked very closely together on these issues.''  (Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, p. 37.)

     In his first Select Committees deposition Thompson minimized his knowledge of the limits of
Reger's document search in August 1985:

     Q. Did you, in the course of preparing this response [to the congressional inquiries], did you
search Mr. North's own office, his personal office?

     A. No, I did not.  I relied on a normal system search and that was performed under the
auspices of our Directorate of Information Policy, Brenda Reger.

     Q.  Do you know whether there was a conscious decision not to search his office?

     A. I am not aware of any decision not to.46

     46 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, p. 38.

     There is ample evidence that Thompson was aware of the decision not to search North's
office.  As described above, Thompson (1) received Reger's memorandum dated August 20, 1985
(a copy of which was retrieved from Thompson's personal files); (2) received Pearson's computer
note dated August  23; and (3) informed McFarlane that a decision had been made not to search
North's office.47

     47 Also, in early September 1985, Thompson showed the President's Intelligence Oversight
Board Counsel Bretton G. Sciaroni the documents that had been gathered in the search of NSC
institutional files and told him that North's office had not been searched for documents.
(Sciaroni, Grand Jury, 6/1/87, pp. 14-19; Select Committees Deposition, 6/1/87, pp. 20-21; and
FBI 302s, 5/22/87, p. 1, and 3/19/87, p. 2.)

     After completing the NSC institutional file search, Reger sent Thompson the documents that
appeared to be relevant to the congressional inquiries.  Thompson then reviewed the documents
and noted that several raised concerns.  These documents -- all memoranda written by North --
appeared to indicate that North had been fund-raising for and providing military assistance to the
contras, in apparent violation of the Boland Amendment.48  When McFarlane returned from
California at the end of August 1985, Thompson presented him with the entire stack of
documents and pointed out the existence of the ``problem documents.'' 49

     48 Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/13/87, pp. 68-71; Select Committees Deposition, 7/24/87, pp.
3-7.

     49 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 4/29/87, pp. 108-10; Select Committees Testimony, 5/11/87, p.
185, and 5/12/87, p. 69.

     McFarlane retained the documents while he worked on the responses to the congressional
inquiries.  (McFarlane, Grand Jury, 4/29/87, pp. 109-10; Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/13/87, p. 71;
Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 4/28/87, p. 24.)  At the end of each day, however,
McFarlane gave the documents back to Thompson for Thompson to store in the safe in his office.
(McFarlane, Grand Jury, 4/29/87, p. 110; McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/11/87, p.
190, and 5/12/87, p. 145; Thompson, FBI 302, 4/1/87, p. 7.)  For more information on the
problem documents, see McFarlane chapter.

     In his first congressional deposition, Thompson did not mention his own review of the
documents or that he pointed out the problem documents to McFarlane.  In fact, Thompson said
he could not recall the documents but was sure nothing in the documents caused him to conclude
that North's contacts with the contras were ``excessive.'' 50  In Thompson's next congressional
deposition, when asked whether he reviewed the documents before he gave them to McFarlane,
he replied, ``I can't recall that I did.'' 51  When asked whether he discussed the contents of the
memoranda with McFarlane, Thompson answered, ``Not really.'' 52

     50 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, pp. 36-40.

     51 Ibid., 4/28/87, p. 23.

     52 Ibid., p. 22.

     Before the Grand Jury, Thompson admitted he reviewed the documents before giving them to
McFarlane, but Thompson downplayed the significance of that review, claiming it was only to
determine relevance and whether the documents were covered by executive privilege.  Thompson
was then asked:

     Q. Did you direct his [McFarlane's] attention to any documents in particular . . .?

     A. Well, I think I had -- as I recall we had the documents according to systems and the most
sensitive documents are in system 4 which is where they should be.  I think I told him that the
ones in system 4 contained information that needed to be looked into.

     Q. Did you explain what you meant by needed to be looked into?

     A. I don't recall that I did.53

     53 Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/13/87, pp. 68-70.

     On the significance of his review, Thompson said:

     I did not spend a lot of time then -- my role at that time, I was not acting as a counsel who had
been asked to do an investigation.  I was forwarding these papers to the national security advisor
who was tasked with responding to Congress. . . . I was helping him get ready to respond.54

     54  Ibid., p. 169.

     After receiving the ``problem'' documents from Thompson, McFarlane reviewed them and
then met with North.55  According to Thompson, before North and McFarlane met, Thompson
asked North whether he was raising funds for the contras or providing military  assistance to
them.  North, according to Thompson, told him he was not.56

     55 McFarlane said he asked North to alter the memoranda to reflect his activities more
accurately.  Subsequently, McFarlane asked Thompson whether it would be proper to alter the
memoranda, and Thompson informed McFarlane that it would not be unless the originals were
preserved and the changes in the memoranda marked.  See McFarlane chapter.

     Although Thompson's account of his exchange with McFarlane about altering documents is
essentially consistent with McFarlane's, Thompson described it as a ``very generic'' discussion
``about document creation, classification and control.''  (Thompson, Select Committees
Deposition, 4/28/87, p. 30).  Thompson called it ``the typical conversation between the head of
the agency and counsel of an agency, as to when a document achieves permanent status, when it
can be modified, when it can be changed to reflect differences of facts or views.''  (Thompson,
Select Committees Deposition, 7/24/87, pp. 7-8.)

     56 Thompson, Select Committees Depositions, 3/9/87, pp. 37-38, 4/28/87, pp. 24-25, and
7/24/87, pp. 5-6; Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/13/87, pp. 72-73; Thompson, FBI 302s, 4/1/87, p. 7,
4/27/87, p. 6, and 1/3/91, p. 8.  North remembers no such meeting.  (North, North Trial
Testimony, 4/11/89, pp. 7406-08).  McFarlane did not recall hearing about a meeting either.
(McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, p. 11.)

     McFarlane responded to Rep. Lee Hamilton, chairman of the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), on September 5, 1985, stating that, based on his review of
relevant NSC documents, no one on the NSC staff violated the letter or spirit of the law, and they
did not solicit funds for contra military or paramilitary activities.57  One week later, McFarlane
made the same assertions in a letter to Rep. Michael Barnes, chairman of the House Foreign
Affairs Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs.58

     57 Letter from McFarlane to Hamilton, 9/5/85, AKW 001528-29.

     58 Letter from McFarlane to Barnes, 9/12/85, AKW 001512-14.

     The letters that McFarlane wrote Barnes and Hamilton were false.59  There is little evidence,
however, that Thompson played any significant role in their drafting. The evidence on the
question of Thompson's knowledge of the falsity of the letters is mixed.  McFarlane believed
that, because Thompson reviewed almost  all of the paperwork that flowed through McFarlane's
office, Thompson was aware that the letters were false.60  Neither McFarlane nor North,
however, could recall specifically discussing with Thompson the true extent of North's activities
on behalf of the contras in 1985.61

     59 In March 1988, McFarlane admitted that he had unlawfully withheld information from
Congress and pleaded guilty to four misdemeanor charges, two of which were based on these
letters.

     60 McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, p. 14.

     61 North, Grand Jury, 6/6/90, pp. 14, 48; McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/13/90, pp. 7-9.

     Thompson claimed that he did not know the letters were false.  According to Thompson,
before the NSC received the congressional inquiries, he had no knowledge of the extent of
North's activities.62  Although seeing the ``problem documents'' in August 1985 raised concerns
in his mind about North's activities, Thompson said that he believed North when he denied
raising funds for the contras or providing military assistance to them.63

     62 Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/13/87, pp. 44-45; Thompson, Select Committees Deposition,
7/24/87, pp. 2-3.

     63 Thompson, FBI 302, 1/3/91, p. 8.

     While the NSC staff was formulating a response to the congressional inquiries, the President's
Intelligence Oversight Board (PIOB) was conducting its own inquiry into North's activities.
PIOB Counsel Bretton G. Sciaroni spoke to North and Thompson, who each denied that North
was providing military assistance to the contras or  raising funds for them.64  In addition,
Thompson showed Sciaroni a stack of NSC documents, which Sciaroni reviewed in Thompson's
office.65  According to Sciaroni, Thompson told him that he was being shown all of the relevant
documents that the NSC had retrieved in its file search and that the NSC had shown the same
documents to the congressional committees.66  Several of the problem documents were not in
the stack of documents that Thompson showed to Sciaroni, however.67

     64 Sciaroni, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 4, 17-19, 26-27, 124-126; Sciaroni,
Grand Jury, 6/1/87, pp. 14-18, 22-25; Sciaroni, FBI 302s, 11/4/87, pp. 1-2, and 3/19/87, p. 2.

     Thompson acknowledged that he met with Sciaroni.  (Thompson, Select Committees
Depositions, 4/28/87, p. 36-38, and 7/24/87, p. 13.)  Thompson did not remember, however,
speaking to Sciaroni specifically about North's activities in support of the contras.  (Thompson,
Select Committee Depositions, 4/28/87, pp. 37-38, and 7/24/87, pp. 15-16.)  In the Grand Jury
Thompson had no specific recollection of meeting with Sciaroni.  (Thompson, Grand Jury,
5/20/87, pp. 10-11.)

     65 Sciaroni, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 19-20; Sciaroni, Grand Jury, 6/1/87, pp.
18-19; Sciaroni, FBI 302, 3/19/87, p. 2.

     66 Sciaroni, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 4, 19-20, 43; Sciaroni, Grand Jury,
6/1/87, pp. 18-19, 55-57; Sciaroni, FBI 302, 3/19/87, p. 2.  Thompson could not recall whether
he showed Sciaroni the documents gathered in response to the congressional inquiries.
(Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 4/28/87, pp. 38-39; Thompson, FBI 302, 5/6/87, p.
4.)

     67 Sciaroni, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 20-25, 43-44; Sciaroni, Grand Jury,
6/1/87, pp. 20-22; Sciaroni, FBI 302, 11/4/87, pp. 1-2.

     In 1986, Congress again sought White House responses to press reports of secret
contra-support  activities being run by North.  In response to a House resolution of inquiry,
Poindexter falsely denied the allegations.  In letters to the chairmen of the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), Foreign Affairs Committee and Armed Services
Committee, he cited McFarlane's false letters of 1985, reasserting that the press allegations were
wrong.  Poindexter was convicted in 1990 for obstructing Congress in connection with these
letters.68

     68 This conviction was overturned on appeal.  See Poindexter chapter.

     The extent of Thompson's involvement in the drafting of Poindexter's false letters is unclear.
Poindexter denied that Thompson had any substantive role in drafting them.69  After Poindexter
received the inquiries, however, he did speak to Thompson about McFarlane's responses to
Congress the previous year.70  Moreover, Thompson was the NSC point of contact with White
House Counsel Peter Wallison in formulating a response:  Thompson sent Wallison a draft of
Poindexter's letter, received Wallison's response, made suggestions within the NSC on how best
to incorporate Wallison's suggestions, and (along with Reger and Wallison) concurred when
NSC  Legislative Affairs Director Ronald Sable sent the final draft to Poindexter for his
signature.71

     69 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 6/27/90, pp. 114-19.

     70 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 192-193.

     71 Memorandum from Thompson to Wallison, 7/15/86, ALU 005415-18; Memorandum from
Wallison to Thompson, 7/17/86, ALU 005411-14; Note from Thompson to Sable and Reger,
7/18/86, AKW 038265-67; Memorandum from Sable to Poindexter, 7/21/86, AKW 042397-98.

     Thompson testified that he was aware of the fact that the letter was being sent and that,
although he could not ``specifically recall'' seeing the letter at the time, ``I think I saw it.''
(Thompson, Grand Jury, 6/1/87, p. 6.) Sable initially speculated that Thompson drafted
Poindexter's letter. (Sable, FBI 302, 1/8/88, p. 11.)  Subsequently, Sable stated that he believed
that North drafted the letter but that Thompson provided input into the response. (Sable, Grand
Jury, 8/10/90, pp. 34, 38-40, 43, 45-46, 80; Sable, FBI 302, 8/6/90, pp. 3-4.

     Soon after Poindexter sent the letters to Congress, Thompson appeared before HPSCI with
Sable and briefed the committee.  According to Sable, the subject was North's activities on behalf
of the contras, and Thompson answered most of the questions consistent with Poindexter's earlier
written denials.72  Thompson's memory of the briefing, however, was quite different.  According
to Thompson, the briefing:

     72 Sable, Grand Jury, 8/10/90, pp. 65-68; Sable, 302, 8/6/90, p. 5.

     had nothing to do with North.  It had to do with the alleged disinformation campaign that was
directed against [Libya], appearing in the press at the time and Chairman Hamilton wanted to
find out some background as to how the thing came  about so I went up and explained it to
them.73

     73 Thompson, Select Committees Deposition, 3/9/87, p. 51.  Sable had no memory of the
subject of disinformation being raised during the briefing.  (Sable, FBI 302, 10/9/90, p. 2.)

     OIC's attempts to obtain independent evidence from HPSCI about the subject matter of this
briefing were unsuccessful.

     Independent Counsel's Decision Not to Prosecute Thompson

     After Independent Counsel obtained felony convictions of both North and Poindexter, a
Grand Jury in 1990 and early 1991 heard extensive evidence regarding Thompson in the areas
previously described.

     Independent Counsel concluded that the Grand Jury's investigation did not produce sufficient
evidence to charge Thompson for involvement in the efforts of McFarlane and Poindexter to
obstruct congressional inquiries into North's contra-aid activities.  Although there was some
evidence that Thompson helped draft letters to Congress that he knew to be false, the evidence
did not appear to be sufficient to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt on a charge of aiding
and abetting or of conspiring to make false statements to Congress.  Similarly, although
Thompson flagged for Poindexter the December 1985 Finding as a potential  problem, there was
only circumstantial evidence that Thompson acted with the intent of facilitating its destruction.74

     74 In addition, Independent Counsel concluded that there was not sufficient evidence to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that Thompson knowingly made false statements to the President's
Intelligence Oversight Board in August-September 1985.

     The evidence that Thompson had obstructed justice, committed perjury, and made false
statements before Congress and the Grand Jury was much stronger.  Thompson's assertions that
he had no knowledge of the December 1985 Finding and no knowledge of the destruction of
documents seriously obstructed Independent Counsel's investigation.  Two of the three people
present when the Finding was destroyed -- North and Poindexter -- had valid Fifth Amendment
claims against testifying before the Grand Jury in the spring of 1987.  Therefore, only Thompson
was available to describe the destruction of the Finding.  He did not.  As a result, Independent
Counsel did not learn of Poindexter's destruction of the Finding until North testified about it at
his own trial in April 1989.75

     75 Poindexter told Congress in the summer of 1987 that he destroyed the December 1985
Finding, but the testimony was immunized and could not be used against him directly or
indirectly in a criminal prosecution.  See Poindexter chapter.

     Because of the strength of the evidence and the seriousness of the likely charges, Independent
Counsel considered an indictment of Thompson in late 1990.  In January 1991, Thompson agreed
to a voluntary interview but  provided little new information.76  In April 1991, Thompson was
informed through counsel that he was a target of the Grand Jury's investigation into perjury,
obstruction of justice, and false statements; he was invited to appear before the Grand Jury but
declined.

     76 Thompson, FBI 302, 1/3/91, p. 7.

     Independent Counsel did not recommend that the Grand Jury return an indictment of
Thompson.  This decision was based on the long passage of time since the events in question,
Thompson's peripheral role in the Iran/contra matter, and the simultaneous development of strong
cases against more centrally involved Government officials.

Chapter 5

     Fawn Hall

     Fawn Hall was Lt. Col. Oliver L. North's secretary on the National Security Council staff from
February 1983 until North was fired on November 25, 1986.  In November 1986, Hall
participated with North and other NSC staff members in obstructing official investigations and
altering, destroying, and removing official Iran/contra-related documents from the White House.

     At a very early point in the investigation, Independent Counsel granted Hall immunity in
exchange for truthful testimony about her activities and those of North and others in connection
with Iran/contra.  Hall provided valuable evidence against both North and former National
Security Adviser John M. Poindexter, in whose trials Hall was an important, although reluctant,
Government witness.1

     1 Because Hall testified before the Grand Jury in March and April 1987 -- before North and
Poindexter testified to Congress under the grant of use immunity -- Hall was able to testify at the
trials of both North and Poindexter without serious Kastigar objections from the defense.

     As North's secretary, Hall was generally aware of his involvement in the Iran arms sales and
in supporting the contras, as well as his correspondence and contacts with numerous individuals
involved in both projects.2  Hall maintained records of North's meetings and his incoming
telephone calls, and she typed memoranda and letters for him.  Because of her proximity to
North, Hall became aware that North was engaged in financial activities on behalf of the
contras.3  Hall did not, however, sit in on North's meetings, listen to his telephone conversations,
or discuss North's activities with him, and so, according to her testimony, ``I did not know many
of the details relevant to the Iran and contra initiatives.'' 4

     2 For example, Hall knew and provided information about the relationship between North and
every person listed in his Rolodex.  (Hall, FBI 302, 2/12/87, afternoon session, pp. 1-30.)

     3 Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 242-44.  On one or two occasions, Hall saw
North writing in a financial ledger in his office, which Hall believed to be related to the contras.
(Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 233-35; Hall, Grand Jury, 4/22/87, pp. 37-45.)
In addition, on June 21, 1985, Hall asked to borrow money from North; North produced three
$20 traveler's checks that were drawn on a Central American bank, gave them to Hall, and said,
according to Hall, something to the effect of `` `Make sure you return -- pay back the money.  It
is not mine.' ''  (Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 237-40.)  Moreover, some time
in the summer or fall of 1986, an individual involved with the contras called to complain that a
certain contra leader had not received a delivery that he was expecting; based on what was said,
Hall concluded that the expected delivery was in fact a transfer of funds.  (Hall, Select
Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, pp. 241-44; Hall, Grand Jury, 4/22/87, pp. 28-32.)

     4 Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 186.

     Hall's first involvement in the criminal activity of North and others occurred on Friday,
November 21, 1986, when North learned that the Department of Justice was conducting a
fact-finding inquiry into the Iran arms sales. North retrieved a number of original documents
from the NSC's institutional files indicating that he had violated the Boland Amendment by
aiding the contras.  North marked handwritten revisions on the original documents, changing the
text so that it would appear that North had not violated the Boland Amendment.  Then he asked
Hall to replace the original documents with new, altered documents that contained his changes.
Hall did so.5

     5 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 5311-16, and 3/23/89, pp. 5373-80, 5385-87;
Hall, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/14/90, pp. 1598-1600.

     Hall, however, did not complete the process of altering the documents given to her by North.
She interrupted her work to help North shred documents.  Some time in the early evening of
November 21, Hall saw that North

     opened the five-drawer safe [in his office] and began to pull items from it and I joined him in
an effort so that he would not have to -- wasting his time shredding.  As he pulled documents
from each drawer and placed them on top of the shredder, I inserted them into the shredder.

     At the same time, I asked him if I could go ahead and shred the PROFs notes and phone logs.
He acknowledged I should go ahead and do that, and I did so.6

     6 Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 284.

     Hall shredded documents in piles of 12-18 pages for between 30 minutes and one hour; she
estimated that she shredded approximately one-and-a-half feet of documents.7  Although
shredding documents was part of the daily routine at the NSC,  Hall had never shredded
documents in such a large quantity.8

     7 Hall, Grand Jury, 3/20/87, pp. 72-74.

     8 Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 290.

     The following Tuesday, November 25, 1986, President Reagan publicly fired North because
of his involvement in the Iran/contra diversion.  NSC director of information policy, Brenda
Reger, then secured suite 302 of the Old Executive Office Building -- a two-floor suite that
contained the offices of North, Hall, Lt. Col. Robert L. Earl, Cmdr. Craig P. Coy, and two other
staff members -- and refused to allow any removal of documents without her approval.

     After Reger secured suite 302, Hall remembered that she had not completed the process of
altering and destroying the original NSC documents North had requested on the previous Friday.
In addition, Hall observed that documents related to the Iran arms sales and the contras that were
similar to the documents that she and North had shredded were still in the suite.9  Hall then
began concealing these documents in her clothes to remove them from suite 302 without Reger's
knowledge.  She placed some documents inside her boots and others inside the back of her
skirt.10

     9 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 5354-58; Hall, Poindexter Trial Testimony,
3/14/90, pp. 1654-56.

     10 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 5359-60, 5362; Hall, Poindexter Trial
Testimony, 3/14/90, p. 1657.  Hall removed about 16 pages of documents from the office.  (Hall,
North Trial Testimony, 3/23/89, p. 5407.)  Hall initially falsely stated to the OIC that she
concealed and removed from the NSC only hard-copy print-outs of North's PROFs computer
notes.  (Hall, FBI 302s, 1/29/87, morning session, p. 7; 2/5/87, pp. 13-14; and 2/8/87, p. 7.)  Hall
subsequently acknowledged, however, that she also removed unaltered copies of the documents
that she had begun altering on November 21 at North's request.  (Hall, FBI 302, 2/27/87, p. 6.)

     Hall went upstairs in the suite to Earl's office and told him what she was doing.  Hall either
asked Earl to take the documents out of the suite or he volunteered to do so; Earl then placed the
documents in a pocket of his suit coat.  A few minutes later, Hall returned to Earl's office,
retrieved the documents, and concealed them under her clothes.  She asked Earl whether he could
see the documents, and Earl responded that he could not.11

     11 Hall, Grand Jury, 3/18/87, pp. 201-2; Hall, FBI 302s, 1/29/87 (morning session), pp. 7, 9,
2/5/87, pp. 13-14, 2/8/87, p. 7.

     Either before or after she began to hide the documents in her clothes, Hall called North who
was out of the office.  Because Reger and others were in the suite, Hall spoke in a whisper and
tried to convey in vague terms that there was a problem with the documents and that it was
important for North to return to the office.12  North agreed to return and informed Hall that
Thomas Green, who was then serving as North's attorney, would accompany him.13

     12 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, p. 5361; Hall, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/14/90,
p. 1657.

     13 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, p. 5361.

     When North and Green arrived in suite 302, North went into his private office to receive a
phone call, and Hall followed him.  She either stated or indicated that she had documents in the
back of her skirt and asked North whether he could see them; North replied that he could not.14
Hall then carried the concealed documents out of suite 302, accompanied by North and Green.15

     14 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 5364-65, and 3/23/89, pp. 5390-91; Hall,
Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/14/90, p. 1658.  In one early OIC interview of Hall, she stated that
when Green and North entered suite 302, she told both of them that she had some documents in
her possession and neither Green nor North advised her that she should not remove the
documents from the office.  (Hall, FBI 302, 1/29/87, morning session, p. 7.)

     15 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, pp. 5363-65, and 3/23/89, p. 5391; Hall, Poindexter
Trial Testimony, 3/14/90, pp. 1658-59.

     While Hall, North, and Green were at the elevator bank on the third floor of the Old Executive
Office Building, according to Hall

     I indicated with a gesture or words that I wanted to give him [North] the documents, and he
said -- he turned to me and said, ``No, just wait until we get outside,'' and we went down the
elevator, exited the Old Executive Office Building on 17th St., and again I indicated with a word
or gesture that I wanted to pass the documents, and Tom Green said, ``No, wait until we get
inside the car.''

     We crossed 17th St., got in Tom Green's car on G St., took off, and I started pulling the
documents from my boots, pulled them from my back, indicated to Colonel North, I believe at
this time, I had not completed the process of replacing the altered  documents in the files and that
I had started the Xeroxing, but I had, in fact, left the originals in the office.

     As we turned the corner, Tom Green was dropping us both off at the parking lot where our
cars were parked.  Tom Green turned to me and asked me if I was asked about shredding what
would I say, and I said, ``We shred every day.''  And he said, ``Good.'' 16

     16 Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 306.  Two days later, when Hall was asked
by Jay Stephens of the White House counsel's office about the reports of shredding documents in
North's office, Hall said, ``I told him that we shred every day, and I led him to believe that there
was nothing unusual about what had occurred.''  (Hall, Grand Jury, 3/20/87, pp. 48-9; Hall, FBI
302, 2/27/87, p. 4.)

     Hall's final involvement in illegal activities occurred three days later, on Friday, November
28, 1986.  After Hall learned that the FBI had asked to interview her, Earl and Coy over the
coming weekend, Hall and Earl spoke together about the events of the previous week.  According
to Hall, she and Earl agreed that neither would disclose to the FBI that Hall had removed
documents from the office on November 25.17

     17 Hall, Grand Jury, 3/20/87, pp. 38-40; Hall, FBI 302, 2/8/87, pp. 1-2.

     By granting Hall immunity, Independent Counsel sacrificed the possibility of charging Hall
with conspiracy to obstruct justice and illegally destroying, altering, and removing official NSC
documents.  In return, however,  Independent Counsel obtained important evidence of
wrongdoing by Hall's superiors, including North and Poindexter.18

     18 Hall was an unindicted co-conspirator in Count One of the March 1988 indictment of
North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim.  This count -- which charged the Iran/contra diversion as a
conspiracy to defraud the U.S. Government -- was not tried due to classified-information
problems.

     At the trial of North, Hall was an important Government witness who provided testimony
central to obtaining felony convictions for obstructing Congress in November 1986 and for
illegally destroying, altering, and removing NSC documents.  At Poindexter's trial, Hall provided
testimony for the Government to obtain a felony conviction for conspiring to obstruct Congress.

Chapter 6

     Robert L. Earl

     Marine Lt. Col. Robert L. Earl served on the National Security Council staff from February to
December 1986.  He worked closely as a subordinate to Lt. Col. Oliver L. North on
counter-terrorism activities, including the Iran arms sales.  Earl was aware of North's plan to use
profits from the arms sales to support the contras, and in the summer of 1986 Earl helped North
calculate the marked-up prices of the arms sold to Iran.  In November 1986, Earl attempted to
conceal evidence regarding the arms sales to Iran and the diversion of profits to the contras.  He
destroyed NSC documents, assisted North in the destruction of documents, assisted North's
secretary, Fawn Hall, in the illegal removal of NSC documents, conspired with Hall to make
false statements to the FBI, and made false statements to the FBI.

     On April 15, 1987, Independent Counsel granted Earl immunity from prosecution in exchange
for his truthful testimony.  He provided important evidence about the Iran arms sales and North's
contra-resupply network, including the diversion of profits from the arms sales to the contras.1

     1 In addition, because Earl testified before the Grand Jury in May and June 1987 -- before
North testified to Congress under the grant of use immunity -- Earl was able to testify at North's
trial without serious objections from the defense that his testimony was tainted by North's
congressional appearance.

     North and Earl met many years before Earl was detailed to the NSC.  The two attended the
Naval Academy in Annapolis at the same time and became friends while attending an
amphibious warfare training school in the early 1970s.  Subsequently, their career paths in the
Marine Corps crossed on a number of occasions.

     In the summer of 1985, Earl was assigned to work on the Vice President's Task Force on
Terrorism.  In its final report, the task force recommended that the NSC add staff to address
terrorism on a full-time basis.  To implement this recommendation, Earl and Coast Guard Cmdr.
Craig P. Coy, who had also served on the Vice President's task force, were assigned to the NSC
staff in February 1986.  Earl and Coy both reported to North, who supervised the NSC staff's
counter-terrorism activities.  In May 1986, North, Earl, Coy and Hall moved into suite 302 of the
Old Executive Office Building.

     In April 1986, before North traveled to Tehran with former National Security Adviser Robert
C. McFarlane, North briefed Earl about the Iran arms sales.2  At the same time, according to
Earl, North informed him about one of the initiative's most secret aspects: that  a portion of the
proceeds from the arms sales to Iran was to be used to support the contras.3

     2 Earl, North Trial Testimony, 3/23/89, pp. 5531-32, 5555.  Before North left for Iran, he told
Earl that if he did not return, Earl should destroy the contents of the bottom drawer of his safe.
(Ibid., p. 5564.)

     3 Ibid., pp. 5532-33.

     Later, during the summer of 1986, North asked for Earl's help in determining the prices of the
various pieces of military equipment requested by the Iranians.4  Based on information provided
to him by North regarding the pricing in prior arms sales to the Iranians, Earl determined that the
average mark-up of the sales had been 370 percent.  For consistency, Earl applied a 3.7 multiplier
to the cost of the equipment from the Department of Defense to calculate the price that the
Iranians would have to pay for each item.  Earl understood that one purpose of the 370 percent
mark-up was to generate funds for the contras.5

     4 Ibid., pp. 5537-38.

     5 Ibid., pp. 5538-45.

     On Friday, November 21, 1986, North learned that the Department of Justice was conducting
a fact-finding inquiry into the Iran arms sales.  North asked Earl to give him the entire contents of
Earl's file on Iran and told Earl about the fact-finding inquiry.  From this exchange, Earl
understood that North was going to destroy the contents of his file.6  Believing that he was
following North's cue, Earl then went through his own files and destroyed his copies  of
documents and computer notes that related to the Iran arms sales.7  Earl also observed North
going through his own files later that same day, segregating documents to be destroyed.8  Fawn
Hall, meanwhile, was feeding a large number of documents into the shredder.9

     6 Ibid., 3/28/89, pp. 5616-17.

     7 Ibid., pp. 5608, 5620-21, 5633-34, 5641.

     8 Ibid., pp. 5616, 5620.

     9 Earl, Grand Jury, 5/1/87, p. 91; Earl, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, p. 72.

     Earl said North told him after returning from a White House meeting on November 21 ``that it
was time for North to be the scapegoat.'' 10  According to Earl, North said ``he had asked the
Attorney General if he could have -- I'm not sure whether it was 24 or 48 hours -- and that the
Attorney General replied that he didn't know whether he could have that long, or something to
that effect.'' 11  Independent Counsel was not able to corroborate Earl's testimony.

     10 Earl, Grand Jury, 5/1/87, p. 82.

     11 Ibid., p. 86.

     On Saturday, November 22, 1986, North told Earl that the shredder in suite 302 was broken.
North and Earl discussed the location of other shredders in the OEOB or the White House.  Later,
Earl saw North leave their office suite with a pile of documents; Earl understood that North  was
planning to use the shredder in the Situation Room of the White House to shred the
documents.12

     12 Earl, North Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, p. 5625.

     On the afternoon of Tuesday, November 25, 1986, after North had been fired and NSC staff
member, Brenda Reger, had sealed suite 302 so that documents could not be removed, Hall told
Earl that she needed to take some documents from the suite.  She either asked Earl to take the
documents out of the suite or Earl volunteered to do so; Earl placed the documents in one of his
suit coat pockets, but a few minutes later Hall retrieved them.  After concealing the documents
under her clothes, Hall asked Earl whether he could see them and Earl said no.  Hall
subsequently left suite 302 with the documents concealed under her clothes.13

     13 Earl, Grand Jury, 5/1/87, pp. 121-25; Earl, FBI 302, 4/30/87, p. 2; Hall, Grand Jury,
3/18/87, pp. 201-2; Hall, FBI 302, 1/29/87, morning session, pp. 7, 9; Hall, FBI 302s, 2/5/87, pp.
13-14, and 2/8/87, p. 7.

     On the evening of November 25 or 26, Earl testified that he had a conversation with North
and Coy on the stairway adjoining the two floors of suite 302.  According to Earl, it concerned a
call that North had received from President Reagan on November 25, after North was fired.
``Colonel North turned and confided, `And you know what' -- again I don't have the exact
wording so I'm just going to relay the thrust of what he said -- that the President had  told him
that it was important that he not know; that he was told that it was important that he not know.''
14  Independent Counsel was not able to corroborate Earl's testimony regarding this
conversation.

     14 Earl, Grand Jury, 5/1/87, pp. 118-19.

     Three days later, on Friday, November 28, 1986, the FBI contacted Earl and asked to
interview him during the weekend.  That evening, Earl and Hall agreed that neither would
disclose to the FBI that Hall had removed documents from suite 302 after Reger sealed it on
November 25.15

     15 Hall, Grand Jury, 3/20/87, pp. 38-40; Hall, FBI 302, 2/8/87, pp. 1-2.  Earl testified that he
``repressed'' his memory of this conversation ``almost totally'' and that he could not ``recall
almost anything from that conversation.''  (Earl, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, p. 94; see
also Earl, FBI 302, 4/30/87, p. 2.)

     On Saturday, November 29, 1986, Earl was interviewed about Iran/contra by two FBI agents.
During the interview, Earl made a number of false statements.  Earl falsely stated that he merely
``suspected'' but did not know that North was diverting the profits from the arms sales to the
contras.16  In addition, Earl falsely stated that he did not observe North or anyone else in suite
302 engaging in an unusual destruction or shredding of documents in  November 1986.17  Earl
subsequently admitted that he lied to the FBI agents in this interview.18

     16 Earl, FBI 302, 11/29/86, p. 8.

     17 Ibid., p. 10.

     18 Earl, North Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, pp. 5636, 5640-41.

     In April 1987, Independent Counsel granted Earl full immunity from prosecution for his role
in Iran/contra. In exchange, Independent Counsel obtained Earl's testimony about the roles of
North and others in Iran/contra.  At North's trial, Earl's testimony confirmed the documentary
evidence that showed that North knowingly and intentionally diverted some of the profits from
the Iran arms sales to the contras and that North planned the diversion as early as April or May of
1986.  Earl also complemented Hall's account of North's role in the illegal destruction and
removal of documents from the NSC from November 21-25, 1986.

Chapter 7

     Thomas C. Green

     Thomas C. Green served briefly as attorney for Lt. Col. Oliver L. North during November
1986.  In connection with this representation, there is evidence that Green assisted North and
North's secretary Fawn Hall in removing official National Security Council documents from the
White House after North was fired.

     On the afternoon of November 25, 1986, the NSC director of information policy, Brenda
Reger, had secured North and Hall's office suite 302 of the Old Executive Office Building and
refused to allow any removal of documents without her approval.  Subsequently, Fawn Hall
decided to remove certain documents secretly and hid them inside her clothing.  Hall called
North back to the office, and North informed Hall that Green would accompany him.1

     1 Hall, North Trial Testimony, 3/22/89, p. 5361.

     After North and Green arrived, Hall informed North -- but apparently not Green -- that she
had documents in the back of her skirt.  Hall carried the concealed documents out of suite 302,
accompanied by North and Green.

     While Hall, North and Green were at the elevator bank on the third floor of the Old Executive
Office Building, according to Hall, she indicated to North that she had documents.  She said that
after they left the building, she  indicated she wanted to ``pass the documents, and Tom Green
said, `No, wait until we get inside the car.' ''  She said she took the documents out of her clothes
once they were in Green's car.  As Green dropped her off at her car, she said he asked her ``if I
was asked about shredding what would I say, and I said, `We shred every day.'  And he said,
`Good.' '' 2

     2 Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 306.

     Based on Hall's testimony, Green's conduct on November 25 raised questions.  First, if Green
told Hall not to hand the documents to North on the street but to ``wait until we get inside the
car,'' it could have been instinctive prudence, or it could have been that Green knew that Hall had
in her possession documents that she had illegally removed from the NSC offices, and that he
was aiding and abetting a crime. Second, Green asked Hall about what she would say if she were
asked about destroying documents.  By approving testimony by Hall that would mislead
investigators, Green could be said to have exposed himself to a charge that he attempted to
obstruct justice.3

     3 Two days later, when Hall was asked by Jay Stephens of the White House counsel's office
about the reports of shredding documents in North's office, according to Hall, ``I told him that we
shred every day, and I led him to believe that there was nothing unusual about what had
occurred.''  (Hall, Select Committees Testimony, 6/8/87, p. 309.)

     Additionally, North testified that Green advised him to remove documents from his office
after his firing.  According to North, Green asked him whether he had ``anybody or anything to
protect yourself?''  In response to Green's question, North said he ``gathered up a number of
documents that I believed would indicate or show that I had had the authority to do what I had
done over the course of those two [Iran and contra] operations.  I put them in my briefcase, along
with my notebooks, and left the Executive Office Building with him [Green].'' 4

     4 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/10/89, pp. 7104-7.

     When Green was called before the Grand Jury in April 1987, he refused to testify, citing his
Fifth Amendment right not to incriminate himself, his clients' constitutional rights to effective
representation by counsel, and the attorney-client and attorney work-product privileges.5

     5 Green, Grand Jury, 4/3/87.

     North was not available as a witness until after his conviction. Independent Counsel
determined that a prosecution of Green, based essentially on the testimony of the person who
removed the documents, Hall, would not be useful to the investigation.

Part V

     The Flow of Funds: The Prosecution of the Private Operatives

     Overview

     Amid the complexities of Iran/contra were crimes of a more common sort:  those committed
for personal enrichment.

     Once Reagan Administration officials decided to conduct foreign policy off the books, outside
of congressional funding and oversight channels, crimes of greed followed.  The decision to flout
Government procedures meant that private profiteers could control tens of millions of dollars
without accountability, under a cover of secrecy and with the claimed cachet of the White House.
The decision to employ the same profiteers in two covert but disparate operations led to the
commingling of funds and to the Iran/contra diversion.  In short, the privatization of Government
covert operations presented fertile ground for financial wrongdoing.

     The overarching money crime in the Iran/contra affair formed part of the central conspiracy
charge against Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, retired Air Force Maj.
Gen. Richard Secord and Albert Hakim.  The four co-defendants were charged in March 1988
with conspiring to use proceeds from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran to create a slush fund that
could be spent at their own discretion, although the proceeds belonged to the United States.  The
co-defendants were charged also with theft of Government property, by embezzling and
converting to  their own use the proceeds generated by the arms sales to Iran.1

     1 These central charges were dropped in January 1989 because the Reagan Administration
refused to release classified information deemed relevant by the trial court to the defense case of
North, the first of the co-defendants to be tried.

     Other money-related crimes stemmed from the Iran/contra affair, resulting in the convictions
of those most centrally involved.  These included filing false tax returns, the offer and acceptance
of illegal gratuities,2  and fraud.

     2 North's conviction for accepting a gratuity was reversed because of immunity granted to
permit his congressional testimony.

     CIA Director William Casey in 1984 paired North of the National Security Council staff with
Secord to supply the Nicaraguan contras in anticipation of a Government funding cut-off.3
Secord and his business partner Hakim quickly seized the opportunity to graft their business
interests onto the policy goals of the Reagan Administration.  Former CIA agent Thomas G.
Clines became the  third man in this profitable venture that came to be known as ``the
Enterprise.'' 4

     3 North told Congress that Casey wanted to have ``an overseas entity that was capable of
conducting operations or activities of assistance to U.S. foreign policy goals that was . . .
stand-alone . . . self-financing, independent of appropriated monies and capable of conducting
activities similar to the ones that we had conducted here. . . .'' (North, Select Committees
Testimony, 7/10/87, pp. 314-15.)  By the time North testified, Casey was dead.

     4 In interviews with OIC and congressional investigators during 1987, Secord coined the term
``the Enterprise'' to describe the covert operations he and others undertook on behalf of the
Reagan Administration.  The phrase was not used by the participants while the operations were
ongoing.

     There were several funding sources for the contras' weapons purchases from the Enterprise:
donations from foreign countries that had received U.S. favors, donations from wealthy
Americans sympathetic to President Reagan's pro-contra policies, and later the diversion of
proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran.

     In addition to selling weapons, the Enterprise principals with the backing of North assembled
a private air force of small planes, pilots and crews to supply the contras with weapons and other
lethal materiel.  To make deliveries in Nicaragua, they built a secret airstrip in Costa Rica and
worked practically unfettered on a Salvadoran military airbase.  They purchased a Danish
freighter for trans-oceanic weapons shipments and for use in other covert projects.  They
obtained from foreign officials specious end-user certificates for weapons purchases, so that the
true recipients -- the contras -- could not be identified and weapons laws could be evaded.  They
put at North's disposal a network of shell corporations and Swiss bank accounts, through which
transactions were concealed and laundered.

     In late 1985 and throughout 1986, the Enterprise became centrally involved in the Reagan
Administration's secret arms sales to Iran.  This proved a more lucrative business venture than
supplying the contras.  Tens of millions of dollars were funneled through Enterprise accounts,
ostensibly in support of an effort to obtain the release of Americans held hostage in the Middle
East, and secondarily to renew ties to Iran.  But the profiteers of the Enterprise corrupted the
legitimate humanitarian and political goals of the Iran operation by inflating the prices for the
weapons and by putting business interests ahead of their duties as Government agents.

     The links between the private operatives were long-standing.  The Secord-Clines relationship
dated back to the 1960s, when both had worked in secret Government operations in Southeast
Asia.  Secord and Hakim met in the late 1970s, while Hakim was seeking to do business with the
United States in Iran and Secord was a U.S. official stationed there.  By the early 1980s, Secord
and Hakim were business partners specializing in weapons-related ventures, and Clines also had
become an international entrepreneur.5

     5 Before Iran/contra, all three men had been subject to investigative scrutiny.  Hakim was the
subject of an investigation examining whether he had bribed Iranian officials on behalf of the
Olin Corporation, but he was not prosecuted.  Secord was investigated while a Pentagon official
for his ties to Edwin Wilson, the former CIA agent serving a life sentence for smuggling arms to
Libya's General Kaddaffi; Secord was not prosecuted, but he admitted receiving from Wilson the
free use of a private plane.  Clines, who had been Wilson's case agent at the CIA, also was the
subject of a criminal investigation probing Wilson's activities.  As a result of that investigation, a
corporation that Clines owned, SSI, pleaded guilty to theft of government property and paid the
fine of $100,000 with money from Secord.

     Professional fundraisers also profited by the Reagan Administration's decision to finance its
foreign-policy goals outside the congressional-appropriations process.  They used the White
House, the President's name and other accoutrements of official power to profit illegally.
Beginning in 1985, North joined with Carl R. ``Spitz'' Channell and Richard R. Miller to solicit
donations for the contras from wealthy Americans, and ultimately to divert these contributions to
the Enterprise.  Especially generous donors were rewarded with personal meetings with President
Reagan and private briefings from North.  Raising money for weapons and other lethal supplies
was not a charitable activity under U.S. tax laws, but North, Channell and Miller illegally used a
tax-exempt organization, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL), for
this purpose.

     To investigate these money trails, Independent Counsel obtained the Swiss financial records
of the Enterprise, bank documents from other foreign countries, extensive domestic financial
records, and also the immunized  testimony of Enterprise and NEPL officers and employees.6
Willard I. Zucker, the Enterprise's Swiss financial manager, was given immunity to illuminate the
financial structure of the Iran and contra operations.

     6 All grants of immunity were preceded by proffers of testimony.

     As detailed in the following sections, Secord and Hakim pleaded guilty to profit-related
crimes.  Clines was convicted after a jury trial for tax-related felonies.  One of the Enterprise's
principal corporations, Lake Resources Inc., pleaded guilty to the corporate felony of theft of
U.S. Government property by diverting Iranian arms sales proceeds to the contras.  Channell and
Miller pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit tax fraud, naming North as a co-conspirator.7

     7 North was convicted of accepting an illegal gratuity from Secord; he was charged with but
not convicted of tax fraud.  His conviction was set aside on appeal.

Chapter 8

     The Enterprise and Its Finances

     Secord and Hakim in 1983 founded Stanford Technology Trading Group International
(STTGI).1  Hakim was chairman of the board.  Secord was president.  STTGI was wholly
controlled by them.  In the fall of 1984, North  introduced Secord to contra leader Adolfo Calero
to assist Calero in the purchase of arms, using the proceeds of a contribution from Saudi Arabia.

     1 STTGI is distinct from Stanford Technology Corporation (``STC''), founded in 1974 by
Hakim.  Hakim and Secord subsequently formed a number of shell corporations in Switzerland
with related names, including StanTech Services S.A.; Stanford Technology Corporation
Services, S.A.; and Scitech, S.A.

     In 1985 and 1986, weapons sales to the contras and Iran generated an increasing proportion of
STTGI's income; by 1986, the business of STTGI was the Enterprise.  Financial management of
all Enterprise assets was done in Switzerland by Compagnie de Services Fiduciaire (CSF),
controlled by Willard Zucker, an American tax lawyer living in Geneva.2

     2 Zucker had provided Hakim with financial services since the mid-1970's, when Hakim still
lived in Iran.  Swiss fiduciaires combine functions that Americans associate with money
managers, bankers and lawyers.  The services CSF provided to the Enterprise included inter-bank
and inter-account transfers, cash disbursements to individuals, expense payments, investments,
currency deals, the establishment of financial accounts and shell corporations, and bookkeeping.

     Secord and Hakim decided very early -- by mid-1985 at the latest -- to conceal the sources of
their income through a variety of schemes.  One of their purposes was to avoid the payment of
income taxes.  In addition to the protection afforded by Switzerland's strict bank-secrecy laws,
Zucker at the direction of Secord and Hakim erected a maze of dummy corporations and bank
accounts to conceal the true sources and recipients of funds.3

     3 The Enterprise's Swiss corporate accounts were:  Energy Resources International, S.A.;
Lake Resources Inc.; Hyde Park Square Corporation; Albon Values Corporation; Defex, S.A.;
Dolmy Business, Inc.; Gulf Marketing Consultants, Ltd.; Stanford Technology Corporation
Services, S.A.; Stantech Services, S.A.; Toyco, S.A.; and Udall Research Corporation.  The
investment accounts were:  Richard V. Secord; C. Tea; Albert Hakim; Korel Assets; Scitech
Trading Group, Inc.; Lake Resources Inc.; B. Button; and A.H. Sub-accounts #1, #2 and #3.

     More than $47.6 million flowed from the Iran and contra operations into the Swiss Enterprise
accounts.  The receiving accounts were:  Energy Resources International, S.A. ($11.3 million);
Lake Resources Inc. ($31.5 million); and Hyde Park Square Corporation ($4.8 million). (See
``Enterprise Gross Receipts'' chart, next page.)

     From its receipts, the Enterprise transferred to a CIA Swiss account a total of $12.2 million to
be paid to the Department of Defense for U.S. weapons sold to Iran.  The Enterprise also
disbursed $17.6 million for weapons purchases for the contras and contra-related expenses.

     Shortly after the Iran/contra matter became public in late November 1986, the Swiss
government at the request of the United States froze the accounts of the Enterprise.  At the time,
16 out of 21 corporate and investment accounts of the Enterprise contained a total of $7.8
million.

     The direct U.S. weapons sales to Iran, which began early in 1986, generated by far the largest
revenues for the Enterprise.

     Unlike the contra sales transactions, the Enterprise did not buy and sell the Iran arms as
brokers or for its own account. It acted as agent, a front, for the true owner of the arms, the
United States. The sales were incidental to a presidential direction and a presidential objective.
Sales and delivery to the ultimate purchaser were at all times subject to the control of the
President, acting through Poindexter and North. As agent, the Enterprise was a service
organization collecting funds for the United

     Insert offset folio 468a here.

     States and delivering weapons for the United States.

     In 1986 the Enterprise received $30.3 million from the sale of this U.S. Government property
to Iran and for replacement TOW missiles to Israel.  Only $12.2 million was returned to  the
United States.  Direct expenses of the Enterprise were approximately $2.1 million.  Thus, the
amount of U.S. Government funds illegally held by the Enterprise as its own was approximately
$16 million.4

     4 The compensation of a proprietary or private ``cut-out'' for the CIA is usually set in advance.
This was not done for Secord. Although technically an agent for the CIA, he operated under the
direction of the national security adviser. Under these circumstances, a claim for compensation
would have been limited to that which was agreed to by a properly authorized Government
officer and which was reasonable for the services rendered -- not half the proceeds.

     The Enterprise and the Contra Arms Sales

     In late 1984, Secord and Hakim, at North's request, began selling weapons and other lethal
supplies to the contras.  They acted as brokers, buying weapons from other arms dealers and
paying for them with money provided by Calero, whose funds primarily came from secret
donations by Saudi Arabia.5  Beginning in mid-1985, private and foreign-country donations to
the contras were deposited directly into the accounts of the Enterprise to supply the contras,
effectively eliminating Calero as a money-handler, with the exception of what remained in the
contra account from the Saudi donations.

     5 The Saudis in mid-1984 began donating $1 million a month to the contras; in 1985, they
doubled that amount.  In all, the Saudis gave $32 million for the purpose of resupplying the
contras during the period in which U.S. aid was prohibited by the Boland Amendment.

     In 1985 and 1986, there were ten pro-rated profit distributions among members of the
Enterprise for the contra weapons sales.  The draws from these sales between April 1985 and
September 1986 amounted to $4.579 million.  The distributions occurred in seven numbered
phases, and three that were unnumbered. (See ``Contra Arms Sales, Pro-Rated Profit
Distributions'' chart, next page.)

     Phase I, Contra Arms Sales (November 1984-March 1985)

     Secord late in 1984 arranged an initial sale of weapons to the contras through a Canadian
firm, TransWorld Arms (TWA), headed by Emanuel Weigensberg.  TWA's supplier was a
Portuguese weapons firm known as Defex, which arranged for the purchase of a shipload of
weapons from the People's Republic of China.  Due to unexpected delays, the weapons did not
arrive in Central America until April 1985.

     The contras paid $2.3 million for the weapons.  According to Enterprise books, total profits
on the ``Phase I'' contra weapons sale amounted to $720,400.  Weigensberg at TWA received
one-third of this amount ($240,133), as did Thomas  Green, the Washington, D.C., lawyer who
had introduced Secord to TWA.  Secord and Hakim split the remaining amount equally, each
receiving $120,066.

     Due to delays in delivery of the Phase I shipload of weapons and in order to eliminate
Weigensberg and Green from the profit shares, Secord recruited two former colleagues, Clines
and Rafael Quintero, to arrange a second purchase of arms.  Clines' acquaintance with the owner
of Defex (Portugal) enabled Secord to work directly  with that company.  All profits from this
and later arms sales were allocated to Secord, Hakim and Clines.  Quintero was paid a monthly
salary plus bonuses for successful arms deliveries.

     Phase II of the Contra Arms Sales (January-March 1985)

     A second order, Phase II, was filled in two plane loads of arms purchased from Defex
Portugal:  one delivered in January and the second in March 1985.  Secord arranged for air
transport with the help of Richard Gadd, an Enterprise sub-contractor who had served under
Secord in the Air Force.  Gadd in turn enlisted a Miami air charter company, Southern Air
Transport (SAT), which then subcontracted these flights to a second carrier.

     CSF's books show that the contras paid $1.235 million for the weapons in these two
shipments.  Total profits were $310,840.  Secord and Hakim each received 40 percent of the
profits (or $124,336 each), and Clines 20 percent ($62,168).

     Phase III of the Contra Arms Sales (March-May 1985)

     Secord made plans for a third shipment of arms to the contras in the spring of 1985.  The
weap-

     Insert offset folio 468b here

     ons arrived in Honduras from Portugal in June 1985 on a leased Danish freighter, the Erria,
which the Enterprise purchased a year later.  CSF's books show that the contras paid $6.407
million  for the arms.  Total profits were $1.5 million; Secord and Hakim got 40 percent each
($621,936 each), and Clines 20 percent ($310,966).

     Summer 1985:  Calero's Purchasing Power Is Removed, the Creation of the ``Defex'' Account
to Disguise Profits, and the Lake Account

     In late June 1985, North and Secord met in Miami with Calero and contra military
commander Enrique Bermudez to inform them that private contributors would begin paying the
suppliers -- the Enterprise -- directly for weapons, rather than giving money to the contras to buy
the weapons themselves.  In the future, funds raised from private donors and from third countries
were to be deposited into the accounts of the Enterprise, effectively allowing it to corner the
contra-arms market.

     Shortly after the Miami meeting, Secord and Hakim devised a new system for distribution of
the profits.  They had the Enterprise's Swiss fiduciaire CSF in July 1985 create a Liberian shell
corporation named ``Defex S.A.''  The new corporation was intentionally given a name similar to
that of the Portuguese arms company, Defex, to enable Secord and Hakim to conceal from the
contras the high mark-ups of the Enterprise, by having their financial records suggest that the
marked-up prices they charged for arms were being paid to Defex, the supplier.

     CSF opened the Defex S.A. bank account at Union de Banques Suisse (UBS) in Fribourg,
Switzerland, on July 23, 1985.  More than $3 million went through the Defex S.A. bank account
between July 1985 and August 1986.

     Zucker described the purpose of creating the Defex S.A. account -- to hide the profits -- in a
memo to his assistant Roland Farina on July 8, 1985.  Zucker told Farina that Defex Portugal, the
Lisbon-based arms supplier from which the Enterprise (under the name Energy Resources)
purchased the contra weapons, may

     . . . seek to approach Energy's customer [the contras] directly, thereby seeking to cut out
Energy, and offer similar merchandise at significantly lower prices, explaining to the ultimate
customer that Energy has kept for itself a large commission.

     To counter this possibility, we have created a LIberian [sic] company with the name DEFEX.
S.A.  Energy would like us to pay to the account of this Liberian Company ``DEFEX'' the spread
or commission earned on the transactions . . . In this manner, we can show debit advices on the
Credit Suisse account of Energy for transfers made to DEFEX, and those together with all of the
other disbursements made, will more or less equal the amounts received by Energy.

     . . . The objective, I repeat, is to have in hand sufficient debit advices in Energy so that if any
questions are asked whether the entire amount received was expended, we can show payments
approximating the amounts received to DEFEX or for expenses relating to the shipments.6

     6 Memorandum from Zucker to Farina, 7/8/85, AMU 005189.

     A further change in the financial structure of the Enterprise in the summer of 1985 helped
disguise the money trail further.  Payments from the contras for the first  series of arms sales
went into the Enterprise account named Energy Resources International.  In the summer of 1985,
after taking control of all contra supply, Secord and Hakim created a new receiving account,
Lake Resources.  In July and August 1985, they had CSF transfer all funds out of Energy and into
Lake, through the Defex S.A. account and an account of a Zucker-controlled company named
Audifi S.A.  After Lake was formed, all Enterprise receipts were effectively commingled in that
account, regardless of their origin.

     Phase IV of the Contra Arms Sales (December 1985)

     Secord and Hakim arranged a fourth shipment of arms to the contras in December 1985.  The
weapons were purchased by Calero with funds remaining in his account; transportation and other
expenses were covered by funds from Calero and other sources commingled in the Lake account.

     The weapons were delivered to El Salvador on December 15, 1985.  On December 17, CSF
credited Secord's personal account, known as ``Korel Assets,'' with $100,800 in profits.  The
same day, Hakim received $100,800, and Clines received $50,400 in cash.

     The February 1986 Distribution

     On February 6 and 7, 1986, CSF distributed $165,000 to both Secord's Korel account and the
Hakim account.7  This distribution was distinctive for several reasons:  It did not follow any
arms shipment to Central America, Clines did not share in the distribution, and it was not
assigned a phase number.  Most importantly, the distribution was made literally hours before the
Enterprise received the first payment for a $10 million U.S. weapons shipment to Iran.

     7 The financial records provided by Hakim to Congress in 1987 inaccurately showed
distributions one year apart (one in February 1985 and a second in February 1986), thus
concealing the apparent 50-50 split between Secord and Hakim.

     Secord and Hakim drew out their Lake Resources account apparently in anticipation of the
payment for the Iran shipment, which represented the start of a lucrative new venture for the
Enterprise.

     Phases V-VII of the Contra Arms Sales (March-June 1986)

     Between February 27 and May 23, 1986, the Enterprise paid Defex Portugal about $860,000
for contra weapons.  Weapons were delivered to Central America in March, April and May in
three shipments.  CSF books show profit distributions between April and June, numbered Phases
V through VII, totaling $550,471.  In addition, there was an unnumbered distribution of $37,277
on June 20, 1986, resulting from the Phase VII shipment.

     The Undelivered Shipment and Distribution (July-September 1986)

     In July 1986, the Enterprise paid Defex (Portugal) $2.6 million and $500,000 to another
dealer, Monzer Al Kassar, for contra weapons.  In late July, a shipment of arms left Portugal for
Central America aboard the recently acquired Enterprise freighter, the Erria.8  According to
Thomas Parlow, the Erria's Danish shipping agent, the freighter was carrying arms picked up in
Poland and Portugal.9

     8 Clines, Hakim and William Haskell, an associate of North, traveled to Copenhagen in April
1986 to purchase for approximately $320,000 the Erria, which the Enterprise had leased a year
earlier for a weapons shipment to the contras.  The ship was purchased by the Enterprise in the
name of Dolmy Business Inc., a Panamanian shell company.  Thomas Parlow became the Erria's
Danish shipping agent.  According to Parlow, Hakim would telephone Parlow to direct
movement of the ship, and Parlow would communicate those directions to the ship's captain.
(Parlow, FBI 302, 3/5/87, pp. 2-3.)

     9 Ibid., p. 3.

     As the Erria was nearing Bermuda, Parlow, acting on instructions from Hakim, ordered it to
slow its speed and await further instructions.  Clines then directed the ship to work its way
slowly back to Portugal.10  When it arrived in Portugal it could not obtain permission to enter
the port.  In this mid- to late-August 1986 period, Secord ordered Clines to try to sell the cargo or
dump it at sea,  according to Parlow.  The vessel headed for Spain, where it remained anchored
for two weeks.

     10 The ship apparently was ordered back to Europe because it was to be used in an impending
U.S.-Israeli venture involving Iran.

     As the Erria made its circuitous journey, the CIA through a series of commercial entities
arranged to buy the weapons aboard.  According to CIA officials, they did not learn the identity
of either the owner of the ship or its cargo until January 1987, when a newspaper article named
the Secord-Hakim Enterprise as the owner of the ship and the weapons.

     The CIA paid $2.1 million for the arms shipment, including shipping and handling costs.11
According to the private arms dealer who bought the arms for the CIA, he paid $1.6 million for
the weapons.  Of that, the Enterprise received $1.2 million, and the remainder went to Parlow or
Defex, who worked together to re-sell the weapons.

     11 CIA Inspector General's Report, July 1987, p. 38.

     The Enterprise paid $3.1 million to arms suppliers for this shipment, but sold it to the CIA for
only $1.2 million.  In a conventional business, this would have represented an enormous loss.
The Enterprise partners, however, split more than $861,000 in claimed profits on the transaction.
Because the money originally used to purchase the weapons came from commingled funds in
Enterprise accounts -- including U.S. funds generated by the sale of arms to Iran and funds
donated to the contras -- Secord, Hakim and Clines, in effect, allocated to themselves funds that
either rightfully belonged to the United States or the contras.  In addition, the CIA helped cushion
the blow of any loss the Enterprise might have felt by paying for the arms at a reduced price.
Independent Counsel obtained no evidence that these arms ever reached the contras.

     The Finances of the Contra-Resupply Operation

     In addition to selling arms to the contras, the Enterprise in the late summer of 1985 began
assembling a full-service resupply operation in Central America that would air-drop weapons and
other goods to contra forces in the field.  In December 1985, North instructed Secord to establish
an operating fund of $150,000 for Richard Gadd, whom Secord had hired to manage the resupply
operation.12  In response, the Enterprise wire-transferred $100,000 to Gadd for start-up costs.13

     12 Gadd, FBI 302, 7/14/87-7/15/87, p. 13.

     13 Ibid.

     The resupply operation, known as ``Project Democracy,'' was organized and fully running by
the spring of 1986.  Enterprise expenditures on this effort flowed principally to four commercial
entities:

     1. Eagle Aviation Service and Technology (EAST). This company was run by Gadd, who was
experienced in Government contracts involving covert activity.  EAST received $550,007 from
the Enterprise for contra-related  expenses, including work on the construction of a secret airstrip
in Costa Rica, payments for communications specialists, a demolitions expert and some pilots
and crews.

     2. Amalgamated Commercial Enterprises, Inc. (ACE).  This Panamanian corporation was set
up by Southern Air Transport at Gadd's request to serve as a financial ``cut-out'' -- or extra layer
of concealment for the true owners of the contra-resupply operation -- for billing purposes.  After
its creation in late 1985, ACE received and disbursed $1,540,956 in Enterprise funds for the
operation.  This included payments for two C-7 and one C-123 airplanes, for services provided
by Corporate Air Services (see below); and for Southern Air Transport expenses not directly
reimbursed by the Swiss Enterprise accounts.

     3. Southern Air Transport (SAT).  This Miami air-charter company was used by the
Enterprise in both the contra and Iran operations.  In 1985 and 1986, it received $1,935,596 for
contra-related services, including the purchase of a C-123 cargo plane, repair and maintenance of
aircraft, sale of spare parts and the supply of cash advances to the resupply operation in Central
America.  In addition, the Enterprise paid SAT $200,000 for a Jetstar aircraft used by Secord and
others for contra-related travel.

     4. Corporate Air Services (CAS).  Gadd employed this Pennsylvania company owned by
Edward T. de Garay as the on-site manager of the resupply operation.  CAS received from  the
Enterprise Swiss accounts and through ACE $457,769 for salaries and other expenses.

     Summer-Fall 1986:  The Enterprise Tries to Sell Its Contra-Resupply Operation to the CIA

     As Congress in the summer of 1986 moved toward lifting the ban on U.S. military aid to the
contras and toward final approval of a $100 million funding bill, the Enterprise envisioned
another possible business opportunity:  CIA assumption of its resupply operation in Central
America.  As a result, North, Secord and other members of the Enterprise readied the resupply
network for possible sale to the CIA.

     Secord in the spring of 1986 asked Robert Dutton, who had replaced Gadd as manager of the
resupply operation, to prepare a description of Enterprise assets; North later asked Dutton to add
a price list.14  Dutton's memo describes how extensive the operation had grown by mid-1986.

     14 Undated Dutton outline of the resupply operation; attached list of assets and expenditures
dated 7/21/86, 00001-15.

     In describing the organizational structure, Dutton stated that ``Benefactor Company,'' or ``B.C.
Washington'' had operational control of all assets in support of the resupply operation, or
``Project Democracy.''  He stated that all contracts and payments went through Amalgamated
Commercial Enterprises (ACE), which acted as the broker for SAT in Miami, which provided
aircraft and maintenance and other support.

     Dutton valued the resupply operation's assets at $4.089 million, which included, among other
items, two C-123 cargo jets; two C-7 planes; a Maule aircraft; 15 a secret Santa Elena, Costa
Rica, airstrip; the Santa Elena property; spare parts; and munitions and supplies.

     15 In 1985 and 1986, the Enterprise purchased four Maule aircraft, but apparently was
offering only one as part of its resupply-operation package.

     Dutton described Project Democracy's operating locations:  Washington, ``the hub for all
operational project information;'' ``Cincinnati,'' the code name for Ilopango air base in El
Salvador, where aircraft were based and four houses maintained in the city for about 18
employees; ``The Farm,'' the air base at Aguacate, Honduras, used as a ``launch and recovery site
for support missions;'' ``The Plantation,'' the secret Santa Elena, Costa Rica, airstrip for refueling
and emergency landing; and ``Maintenance Support Miami,'' where a support crew worked
closely with SAT for procurement and delivery of required items.  Dutton listed 25 salaried
employees of the resupply operation, including managers, flight crews and others.

     Dutton proposed two options for transferring the assets of the resupply operation to the CIA:
(1) sale of the assets for less than the estimated value of $4 million; or  (2) leasing the assets to
the CIA for $311,500 per month plus add-ons.  Dutton stated that the first option was preferable.

     But the CIA was not eager to associate itself with the Enterprise resupply network, whose
illicit operation had been concealed from Congress despite repeated inquiries.  North in a
computer message to Poindexter on July 15, 1986, complained about the CIA's reluctance to
purchase the resupply network's assets:  ``It would simply be ludicrous for this to simply
disappear just because CIA does not want to be `tainted' with picking up the assets and then have
them spend $8-10M of the $100M to replace it -- weeks or months later.'' 16  In July 1986,
North, at a meeting with Abrams and Fiers, described the Enterprise assets in Central America.

     16 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 7/15/86, AKW 018917.

     North asked Poindexter to speak to Casey about the matter; Poindexter agreed to talk to
Casey, adding that he (Poindexter) had told CIA Deputy Director Robert M. Gates that ``the
private effort should be phased out.'' 17  According to Alan Fiers, chief of the CIA's  Central
American task force in 1986, Fiers advised against CIA assumption of the operation's assets.18

     17 PROFs Note from Poindexter to North, 7/26/86, AKW 021732.  Poindexter told Congress
he believes he told Gates ``that these assets are available and you ought to look at them, or
something to that effect.''  (Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 208-9.)

     18 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, p. 77.

     Dismantling the Operation

     The Nicaraguan shootdown of the contra-resupply plane carrying American survivor Eugene
Hasenfus on October 5, 1986, settled irrevocably the question of CIA assumption of Enterprise
assets.  With a $100 million contra-funding bill awaiting final approval in Congress, the agency
could not associate itself in any way with the Enterprise operation.  CIA officials had publicly
and in closed congressional testimony disavowed any involvement with it.

     ral Juan Rafael Bustillo, the Salvadoran military chief at Ilopango air base, ordered the
resupply crews out of the country.  The planes were flown to Aguacate air base and the
Hondurans later took possession of them.19  Luis Posada, whose alias was Ramon Medina and
who handled expenses for the pilots and crews, cleaned out the houses where resupply personnel
had stayed, retrieved documents and delivered them to Quintero, who then gave them to
Dutton.20  Posada also terminated the operation's leases, paid the bills and disposed of radio
equipment, cars  and other goods.21  The Salvadoran Air Force took possession of the
operation's warehouse of parts and supplies at Ilopango.22

     19 Ibid., p. 5.

     20 Dutton, who received immunity from prosecution, provided these documents to OIC.

     21 Posada, FBI 302, 2/3/92, pp.25-26.

     22 Ibid., p. 26.

     North's notebooks reflect a series of conversations with Secord and others about obtaining a
lawyer for Hasenfus, who was imprisoned and facing trial in Nicaragua, as well as discussions
about death benefits and funeral arrangements for the pilots killed in the crash.23  William
Haskell, North's friend who performed a variety of Enterprise-related duties on his behalf, and
resupply manager Edward de Garay went to Panama to obtain a lawyer for Hasenfus, who was
imprisoned and facing trial in Nicaragua; their mission was not a success.24

     23 North's Notes, dated October 8-10, 13-15, 1986, AMX001574-93.  At Secord and Hakim's
request, Zucker hired a Swiss lawyer for Hasenfus.  Zucker said the Swiss lawyer was unable to
contact Nicaraguan officials and did not continue with the case.  (Zucker, FBI 302, 5/16-18/88,
pp. 4-5.)

     24 Gadd, FBI 302, 7/6/87-7/7/87, pp. 22-23; Haskell, FBI 302, 7/6/87, p. 11.

     In December 1986, John Piowaty, an air-support manager for the resupply operation, at
Dutton's request carried $6,000 in cash from Southern Air Transport in Miami to Sally Hasenfus,
Eugene Hasenfus's wife.25  This amount represented two months' salary for Hasenfus, who was
released from jail and allowed to return to the United States in December 1986.

     25 Piowaty, FBI 302, 6/22/87.

     North testified that Abrams asked him to ``raise the money to pay'' for the retrieval of the
bodies of pilots Wallace Sawyer and William Cooper from Nicaragua.26  According to Piowaty,
Dutton told him that the families of the pilots who were killed in the shootdown would each
receive $60,000 in benefits.  The families, however, never received such payments.27  The
Enterprise did arrange to have delivered $3,000 in cash to a Magnolia, Arkansas, funeral home
for Sawyer's burial costs.28

     26 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/8/87, pp. 167-68.

     27 Piowaty, FBI 302, 6/22/87, p. 4.

     28 McAlister, FBI 302, 5/4/87, pp. 1-3. Independent Counsel obtained no evidence indicating
that a similar payment was made for Cooper's funeral.

     The Enterprise attempted to establish a defense fund for Hasenfus from allocations intended
for the contras.  In early October 1986, before the shootdown, Secord and Hakim at North's
request had three checks issued to pay outstanding contra grocery bills.  These checks were made
payable to Aquiles Marin, a contra representative, and sent to Rafael Quintero in Miami.  Only
one check for $75,000 went to the contras.  Following the shootdown, Secord told Quintero to set
aside a second $75,000 check and a third $50,000 check to establish a  defense fund.  Quintero
endorsed the $75,000 check, forging Marin's signature, and mailed it with the unendorsed
$50,000 check to the Banque Intercommerciale de Gestion in the Bahamas; Quintero instructed
the bank to use the $75,000 check for a defense fund and to hold the $50,000 check for him
(Quintero).29

     29 Quintero, FBI 302, 9/1/87.

     The Enterprise and the Sale of U.S. Arms to Iran

     The 1985 Israeli Sales

     Private arms dealers in 1984 began suggesting to U.S. officials that if weapons were sold to
Iran, Iranians could gain the release of Americans held hostage by terrorists in Lebanon.
Manucher Ghorbanifar, an Iranian exile and former CIA informant who had been discredited by
the agency as a fabricator, was a driving force behind these proposals.

     By August 1985, Israel  had obtained, through National Security Adviser Robert C.
McFarlane, President Reagan's approval to sell U.S. arms to Iran and to replenish Israeli weapons
stocks.

     In 1985, there were two Israeli sales of U.S. weapons to Iran:  504 TOW missiles in August
and September 1985, and 18 HAWK missiles in November 1985.  The Israelis relied on
international financier Adnan Khashoggi to raise ``bridge financing'' for the deals, because the
Iranians would  not pay for the weapons until they were delivered, and Israel would not ship the
weapons before Iran paid for them.

     Although no U.S. funds were involved in the November 1985 HAWKs transaction, the
Enterprise derived a windfall.  As described elsewhere in this report, the HAWK shipment
encountered logistical difficulties, resulting in the direct involvement of North and Secord.
North told the Israelis to transfer $1 million to the Enterprise's Lake Resources account in
Geneva to pay for airlifting the missiles to Iran; they did so on November 20, 1985.30  The
Israelis thought the million-dollar request was reasonable based on an anticipated four flights to
ship 80 HAWKs at $250,000 per flight.31

     30 Israeli Financial Chronology, 4/26/87, AOW 0000182, as released in Select Committees
Report, p. 179.

     31 Ibid.

     After the first 18 HAWKs were delivered to Iran, the Iranians rejected them. The rest of the
shipment was cancelled. The Enterprise had spent only $127,700, on the single shipment. The
difference -- approximately $870,000 -- remained in the Lake Resources account commingled
with funds from other sources; it was used for aid to the contras and other purposes.32

     32 Secord testified before Congress that the Israelis did not ask for their money back.  He said
he discussed the matter with North in December 1986, and North told him they could use the
money ``for whatever purpose we wanted.  We actually expended it on the Contra project.''
(Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/5/87, p. 95.)  Because of the commingling of funds in
the Lake Resources account, however, it is not possible to directly tie the Israeli deposit to an
expenditure of funds on the contras.

     Direct U.S. Arms Sales to Iran: The Enterprise as U.S. Agent

     In January 1986, the Reagan Administration decided to sell weapons directly from U.S. stocks
to Iran, eliminating Israel as an intermediary and employing Secord as an agent to make the sales
and transport the arms, masking official U.S. involvement.  President Reagan authorized the
direct sales in a January 17, 1986, covert-action Finding.  Under the Finding, Secord, acting as an
agent of the CIA, would sell arms to brokers representing the Iranians, who then would sell them
to Iran.  Secord would obtain payment in advance from the Iranians and deposit in a CIA account
the amount the CIA was to pay the Department of Defense for the weapons.  The CIA would
purchase the weapons from the Department of Defense at cost under the Economy Act; 33
Secord would deliver them to Iran.

     33 The Economy Act permitted sales at cost between Government agencies.

     Ghorbanifar, as broker for Iran, borrowed funds for the weapons payments from Khashoggi,
who loaned millions of dollars to Ghorbanifar in ``bridge financing'' for the deals.  Ghorbanifar
repaid Khashoggi with a 20 percent commission after being paid by the Iranians.

     The Reagan Administration's 1986 decision to sell weapons directly to Iran eliminated the
Israeli arms dealers from the initiative.  Amiram Nir, an Israeli counter-terrorism official, became
the Israeli representative in the negotiations.  At North's request, he gave Ghorbanifar the number
of the Lake Resources account, into which deposits for the arms purchases were to be made.34

     34 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/4/88, pp. 46-47; Secord, Grand Jury, 5/14/87, p. 339.

     February 1986:  1,000 TOW Missiles

     In January 1986, North and Secord negotiated on behalf of the United States the sale of 4,000
TOW missiles to Iran.  Ghorbanifar agreed to pay $10,000 for each TOW.  The terms and
conditions negotiated by North and Secord required an initial sale of 1,000 TOW missiles for $10
million, and subsequent sales of an additional 3,000 TOW missiles for $30 million.  North
falsely informed DoD and the CIA that Secord would receive only $6,000 per TOW, or a total of
$6 million.  The Defense Department established its price as $3,700 per TOW missile for its sale
to the CIA and the price to be paid to the CIA by Secord.

     Between February 7 and February 18, 1986, Khashoggi deposited $10 million into the
Enterprise's Lake  Resources account.35  On February 10-11, 1986, $3.7 million was transferred
from Lake to a CIA account for the weapons.  Between February 17 and 27, 1986, 1,000 TOWs
were shipped to Iran.  In addition, 17 HAWK missiles from the failed November 1985 shipment
were returned from Iran to Israel.

     35 Khashoggi transferred $5 million from his own Bank of Credit and Commerce account in
Monte Carlo to Lake Resources, and he raised  the remaining $5 million from two investors:  He
borrowed $2.5 million from a wealthy woman in Monte Carlo and $2.5 million from Galliot
Lines S.A., owned by Syrian banker Oussama Lababidi.  (Khashoggi, FBI 302, 5/8/87, p. 8.)

     The Enterprise's direct expenses in connection with the transportation of the weapons were
about $716,000, leaving a surplus of $5.6 million.  The plan to sell 3,000 more TOW missiles on
the same terms to Iran did not materialize.36

     36 As originally contemplated by North and Secord, the Enterprise would have drawn off
roughly $22 million after expenses, if 4,000 TOWs had been sold.  This calculation is arrived at
by quadrupling the surplus of $5.6 million on the 1,000 TOW deal.

     Iran paid higher prices for the weapons than those already inflated by the Enterprise, because
Ghorbanifar added large commissions of his own.  Khashoggi said his commission was split with
Ghorbanifar; Roy Furmark, who had introduced Khashoggi to Ghorbanifar; and Triad
International Marketing, a Khashoggi business.37

     37 Ibid., p. 11.  Ghorbanifar described a similar split.  (Ghorbanifar, OIC Deposition, 12/9/87,
p. 142.)

     Further complicating the matter, Israel had expected to pay for the replacement of TOWs it
sent to Iran  in 1985 from Enterprise mark-ups on the 1,000 TOWs sold to Iran in February 1986.
According to the Israelis, however, North claimed the proceeds were less than anticipated and
would not cover the cost of the replenishment.38

     38 Israeli Financial Chronology, 4/26/87, p. 20, AOW 0000190, as released in Select
Committees Report, p. 224.

     May-August 1986: HAWK Parts to Iran; Israeli TOWs Replenished

     In the spring of 1986, North negotiated on behalf of the United States a sale of 240 HAWK
missile spare parts to Iran.  He also negotiated with representatives of Israel for the purchase of
508 U.S.-made TOW missiles to replace those shipped by Israel in August and September of
1985.  In combination, these transactions resulted in $16.685 million being deposited by Iranian
and Israeli representatives into the Enterprise's Lake Resources account in Geneva.

     The CIA charged the Enterprise $3,469 for each of the 508 TOW missiles sold for
replenishment to the Israelis, plus shipping and handling costs.  This cost was passed on to the
Israelis.  For the HAWK spare parts for Iran, the CIA charged $4.337 million, plus shipping and
handling.  North, however, had multiplied this true cost by a factor of 3.7 in setting the price to
be paid by Ghorbanifar.

     On May 14-16, 1986, a total of $15 million in bridge financing was deposited into the Lake
Resources account by Khashoggi, acting on behalf of Ghorbanifar.  On May 15-16, 1986, Israel
deposited a total of $1.685 million in the Lake account.39  Of the total $16.685 million
deposited, only $6.5 million was paid to the United States for the Iranian and Israeli weapons
purchases.  The expenses involved in these shipments were about $1 million, resulting in a
surplus of $9.2 million for the Enterprise.

     39 Although the Israelis expected the replenishment to be paid from mark-ups on the Iran
weapons sales, they finally agreed to pay this amount after Nir was informed that sufficient funds
were not being generated.  (Israeli Financial Chronology, 4/26/87, pp. 26-67, AOW 0000196-97,
as released in Select Committees Report, pp. 224-341.)

     Khashoggi and Ghorbanifar Encounter Financial Problems; a ``Second Channel'' into Iran Is
Pursued

     In raising the $15 million bridge financing for the HAWKs spare parts, Khashoggi in April
1986 asked British entrepreneur Tiny Rowlands to invest.  After Rowlands declined, Khashoggi
turned to Oussama Lababidi who, using the name ``Kremdale Corporation,'' put up $5 million.
The remaining $10 million came from Vertex International in the Cayman Islands, backed by
investors Ernie Walter Miller and Donald Fraser of Canada.  Khashoggi said he created a
company ``Trivert International,'' to handle the Vertex loan.40

     40 Khashoggi, FBI 302, 5/8/87, p. 10,  and 11/4/87, p. 5.   According to bank records obtained
by Independent Counsel, on May 14, 1986, a $10 million payment was made into Lake
Resources by Trivert International by order of W.E. Miller.  On May 16, 1986, Lake Resources
received $5 million from Garnet Overseas at BCCI; Garnet received the funds from Khashoggi's
account and Khashoggi's account received the funds from Ray Trading.  Because Ghorbanifar
only repaid $8 million, the investors lost $7 million of their initial investment.  Ghorbanifar
received from Iran only $4 million; it is unclear where he obtained the other $4 million to
partially repay the investors.

     In June 1986, the Iranians obtained a U.S. price list for the HAWK spare parts.  After seeing
the list, they refused to pay the radically inflated amount -- $24 million -- Ghorbanifar had
charged them.  As a result, Ghorbanifar paid back Khashoggi a total of only $8.1 million on the
$15 million bridge-financing loan, which with the 20-percent bridge-financing commission
required payment to Khashoggi of $18 million.

     While these financial disputes were brewing, the Reagan Administration decided to pursue a
``second channel'' into the Iranian parliament, cutting out Ghorbanifar, his Iranian contact and
Nir.  When Poindexter told Nir about the second channel in September 1986, Nir responded that
making a switch would require paying off Ghorbanifar's $10 million debt to the financiers.41

     41 Allen, Grand Jury, 8/9/91, pp. 122-25.

     October-November 1986:  500 TOWs Sold; Hakim Seeks More

     In October 1986, North and Secord on behalf of the United States negotiated a sale of 500
TOW missiles to Iran.  The United States charged $3,469 per TOW missile, plus shipping and
handling, while the Enterprise charged the  Iranians $7,200 per TOW.  The Iranians, no longer
acting through Ghorbanifar but through a ``second channel,'' paid $3.6 million, deposited on
October 29, 1986, into the Enterprise account known as Hyde Park Square Corporation.  The
Enterprise paid the CIA $2.037 million for the TOWs.  Direct expenses incurred by the
Enterprise came to less than $200,000.  The Enterprise cleared $1.463 million as a result.

     In October 1986, Hakim in meetings with Iranian representatives took on the role of arms
dealer and hostage negotiator.  He proposed a nine-point plan for the phased release of the
American hostages, based on further arms shipments and other conditions to be met by the
United States.42  These negotiations did not result in further arms sales.

     42 In these meetings, Hakim was continuing a process begun by North, who, on behalf of
President Reagan, presented a seven-point plan for hostage release.

     Hakim told Independent Counsel that he had expected Iran to invest $50 million in future
arms sales.43

     43 Hakim, FBI 302, 2/20/91, p. 14. Hakim told Congress that had the United States renewed
ties to Iran, he and Secord expected a 3 percent share of an expected $15 billion-a-year arms
market. (Hakim, Select Committees Deposition, 5/23/87, pp. 256, 263-64.)

     Fall 1986, the Arms Sales Unravel:  Exposure and Cover-Up

     In August 1986, Ghorbanifar complained to Furmark that the mark-ups charged by the
Enterprise were going to the contras or Afghan rebels.  Ghorbanifar told Furmark:  ``No sooner
than we pay money, it probably is going down south.'' 44

     44 Furmark, FBI 302, 2/22/88, p. 10.

     Khashoggi also was upset about being cut out of the U.S. arms sales by the establishment of
the ``second channel'' into Iran.  He said he devised a ``ploy'' to get CIA Director Casey to repay
the $9.9 million he felt he was owed for the HAWK-parts investment.  Aware of Furmark's past
ties to Casey, Khashoggi said he told Furmark on October 1, 1986, that the bridge loan from the
HAWKs parts deal had not been repaid and that Canadian investors (Miller and Fraser with a $10
million participation) might sue, publicly exposing the U.S. arms sales to Iran.45

     45 Khashoggi, FBI 302, 5/8/87, p. 11.

     Fraser said he did not threaten to sue, and it was likely that Miller didn't either (Fraser, Select
Committees Deposition, 4/29/87, pp. 58-59).  Khashoggi said he sold stocks in April 1987 to
repay Fraser and Miller.  (Khashoggi, FBI 302, 5/8/87, p. 11.)

     Before Furmark approached Casey with this information, there had been other attempts to
warn the Reagan Administration.  Charles Allen of the CIA learned of Ghorbanifar's financial
difficulties in August 1986; he knew previously about the mark-up in arms sales prices from
intelligence reports; he had suspected that the extra funds were used for an Iran/contra diversion.
In August, Allen warned his superior, CIA Director of Intelligence Richard Kerr.  Kerr warned
Deputy Director for Central Intelligence Robert Gates.46  By early October, Allen warned Casey.

     46 See Gates chapter.

     Ghorbanifar complained to his original U.S. sponsor, Michael Ledeen, an NSC consultant.
Ledeen testified that Ghorbanifar told him that Canadian investors were owed $10 million from
the Iran deals and might go public; Ledeen at some time told North and Casey, but the date is
unclear.47  Nir also in mid-September warned CIA and NSC officials that Ghorbanifar needed
$10 million or his creditors might expose the arms sales.48

     47 Ledeen, FBI 302, 12/17/86, p. 13. Also, Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/30/87, pp. 57-60, 64-65,
114-16.

     48 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/4/88, pp. 22-26. Members of the Enterprise, meanwhile, were
apparently trying to shut down the Ghorbanifar-Khashoggi operation through other means.  On
September 2, 1986, Hakim informed Allen that Ghorbanifar and ``his banker'' were involved in a
planned shipment of 1,250 TOWs to Iran.  Allen alerted Customs and the FBI, which reported
back that there was no evidence to substantiate the claim.  (Ibid., p. 11.)

     North was aware that he would have to pay Ghorbanifar some amount of money to eliminate
him from the deals.  In a September 10, 1986, memorandum to Casey, Allen relayed that North
had told him that Poindexter  believed that ``to cut Ghorbanifar out, Ollie will have to raise a
minimum of $4 million.'' 49

     49 Ibid., p. 20.

     Furmark met with Casey in Washington on October 7, 1986, to warn of possible exposure of
the Iran arms sales.  Furmark said he told Casey about Khashoggi's financial problems and
mentioned the Lake Resources account, which Casey said he believed was an Israeli account.
Furmark did not, at this meeting, mention Ghorbanifar's belief that the money had gone to the
contras.50  Casey told Furmark that CIA officials would get in touch with him for additional
information.

     50 Furmark, FBI 302, 2/22/88, p. 10.

     CIA officers Allen and George Cave then met with Furmark.  On October 22, Furmark told
them that Iran proceeds possibly were being diverted to the contras.  In early November 1986,
Furmark met with Allen and gave him Ghorbanifar's bank account number.  On November 24,
1986, Furmark said he met again with Casey and showed him records indicating that Khashoggi
had put up $25 million for the arms sales, and that $10 million was owed.

     The Iran/Contra Diversion

     Because of the commingling of Enterprise funds, it was not possible to determine precisely
how much money was diverted from the Iran arms sales proceeds to the contras.   After direct
U.S. sales of arms to Iran began in February 1986, the amount of proceeds diverted to the contras
that could have been proved at trial was $3.6 million.  It probably was at least $1.1 million
more.51

     51 The $3.6 million diversion estimate does not include expenditures OIC could not provide
evidence for at trial but were, in fact, contra-related, including:  the purchase of a $200,000
Jetstar by the Enterprise for contra-related travel; a $500,000 weapons purchase from Monzer Al
Kassar, who was not available to testify; and about $535,000 that was used to purchase, operate
and insure the Danish freighter, the Erria, which was not used exclusively for contra operations.

     Independent Counsel arrived at the diversion figure of $3.6 million by calculating the
Enterprise's total contra-related expenses following the first direct U.S. shipment of arms to Iran
in February 1986, less the amount of funds in Enterprise accounts specifically deposited on
behalf of the contras.  The Enterprise's contra-related expenses after February were
conservatively estimated at $6.7 million.  The amount deposited for the contras was $3.1 million.
Thus, the amount that was clearly diverted from the arms sales was $3.6 million.

     North, in his testimony, attributed to Nir and Ghorbanifar the idea for a diversion of arms
sales funds to the contras.  In the Poindexter trial, although uncertain, he fixed the date in
December 1985 or January or February of 1986.52  As early as November 14, 1985, North's
notebooks show that he discussed with Nir a plan to obtain the release of the hostages by
payments to certain Middle Eastern factions.  The questions they discussed included:  ``How to
pay for; how to raise $,'' and a possible solution was to set up a ``joint'' Israeli-U.S. ``covert op.''
According to the Israelis, North apparently told Israeli defense officials  in a meeting in New
York on December 6, 1985, that he intended to divert funds from the arms sales to the contras.53

     52 North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/13/90, p. 1092.

     53 Israeli Historical Chronology, 7/29/87, pp. 55-56, AOW 000068-69, as released in Select
Committees Report, p. 197.

     Secord said North pressed him to send funds from the Iran operation to the contra
operation.54  Secord claimed he did not view this as a diversion, but simply as shifting funds
from one of his operations to another.

     54 Secord, FBI 302, 3/12/88, p. 4.

     The diversion to the contras was only one dimension of a much larger theft of Government
funds generated by the Iran and Israeli-replenishment transactions.  The Enterprise in 1986
illegally diverted for its own purposes $16 million generated by the sale of U.S. property to Iran.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     [In millions]*** BOX HEAD *** *** BOX HEAD ***

--------------------------------------------------------------------

     Amount Charged for U.S. Weapons to Iran and Israel.....$30.3

     Amount Paid to the U.S......12.2

     Enterprise Expenses.....2.1

     Funds Owed to U.S......$16

--------------------------------------------------------------------

     The funds from inflated arms prices went into the network of Swiss accounts controlled by
Hakim, Secord and North.  Funds from all sources were commingled, laundered, and disbursed
to a variety of individuals and entities.  Although approximately $16 million was withheld, only
$7.8 million remained in the Enterprise Swiss accounts when they were frozen in December
1986.55

     55 Sixteen of 21 Swiss Enterprise accounts had funds remaining in them when they were
frozen in December 1986.  The total at that time was $7,814,899.24.  Since then, at least $3
million in interest has accrued.  The accounts and balances at the time the funds were frozen
were:

     Albon Values Corp.

     $5,494.16

     Defex S.A.

     $88,662.50

     Dolmy Business Inc.

     $6,508.85

     Gulf Marketing Consultants Inc.

     $235.36

     Hyde Park Square Corp.

     $1,136,815.47

     Lake Resources Inc.

     $430.60

     Stanford Technology Corp.

     $13,955.99

     Stantech Services S.A.

     $15,806.48

     Toyco S.A.

     $25.73

     B. Button

     $211,990.71

     Hakim Albert

     $259,593.46

     AH/Subaccount 1

     $2,129,151.51

     AH/Subaccount 2

     $2,051,909.30

     AH/Subaccount 3

     $157,146.12

     Korel Assets

     $1,547,035.75

     Scitech Trading Group Inc.

     $190,137.25rn,s

     Total

     $7,814,899.24

     The Swiss Enterprise accounts that had no funds in them in December 1986 were:  Energy
Resources International S.A., Udall Research Corp., C. Tea investment account, Lake Resources
investment account, and Richard V. Secord investment account.

     Enterprise Benefits to Secord and Hakim

     Secord and Hakim benefited substantially as a result of their involvement in the Iran and
contra operations.  Secord in 1985 and 1986 received $2 million in direct personal benefits from
the Enterprise, and more than $1 million in cash payments.  Hakim in 1985 and 1986 received
$2.06 million in direct benefits, and more than $550,000 in cash.

     The benefits fell into three broad categories:  pro-rated profit distributions on contra weapons
sales, for which each received $1,557,377; money from Enterprise accounts that went into
Secord-Hakim business ventures, amounting to $520,000 each; 56 and funds withdrawn from
Enterprise accounts for personal use, including repairs to a Secord plane amounting to $5,729,
payments of $20,000 each  by Secord and Hakim for a business venture in the Middle East, and
$3,000 each for investment in a catfish business venture.

     56 Secord and Hakim apparently lost substantial sums in each of these business ventures, all
of which occurred in 1986.  None of the money was ever returned to the Swiss Enterprise
accounts from which it came.

     Secord and Hakim in 1986 shared jointly in the following investments:

     Tri-American Arms

     $150,000

     Quinnault Timber

     $130,000

     Forways

     $760,000rn,s

     Total

     $1,040,000

     Tri-American Arms was a Colorado arms-manufacturing venture; Quinnault Timber involved
the development of timberland in Washington state; and the Forways investment was in a New
Jersey military parts manufacturing concern partly owned by the Enterprise's money manager,
Willard Zucker.

     Cash payments to Secord in 1985 and 1986 totaled approximately $1,037,000.  About
$14,000 could be traced to the payment of business expenses, and nearly $20,000 was cash
Secord withdrew from his profit account.  The remaining $1.003 million in cash payments to
Secord were for unknown purposes.

     Hakim in 1985 and 1986 received $550,000 in cash from the Enterprise.  Hakim spent about
$32,000 of this on business expenses, and about $39,000 were withdrawals from his profit
account.  Hakim received approximately $478,500 in cash for unknown purposes.

     In addition, the Enterprise transferred at least $696,000 in 1985 and 1986 from its foreign
accounts into Secord and Hakim's domestic company, STTGI.  Secord and Hakim went to great
lengths to conceal this income -- using false loan documents and invoices -- to suggest that the
transfer of cash to STTGI was a loan.

     Secord and Hakim took other steps to keep their profits hidden.  As described earlier, in
mid-1985 they created a receiving account -- Defex, S.A. -- with virtually the same name as a
Portuguese weapons supplier to create the false impression that they were paying almost the
same price for contra weapons as they were charging the contras.  Also  in mid-1985, Secord
instructed Zucker to remove Secord's name from all Enterprise accounts and to transfer his
profits into a code-named account.  He closed the ``Richard V. Secord'' investment account and
opened an investment account named ``Korel Assets.''  In December 1986, Secord attempted to
get Zucker to agree to a false story that Secord had foresworn his profits.

     Finally, Secord and Hakim did succeed to some extent in disguising their benefits.  Hakim
provided the Select Committees in 1987 a set of financial records that did not identify payments
to himself, Clines and Secord. These financial records were recorded in what was known as the
``Hakim Ledger,'' pursuant to Hakim's instruction to Zucker in 1986 to collapse the individual
profit accounts.  OIC reconstructed the profit accounts with the help of a former assistant to
Zucker, Roland Farina, who had coded the receipts to show the profit account to which they
would have been allocable had they not been collapsed.

Chapter 9

     United States v. Richard V. Secord

     Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord flew 285 combat missions while serving in
Southeast Asia during the 1960s.  From 1975 to 1978, he was chief of the Air Force Section of
the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group in Iran, where he met Albert Hakim, who would
later become his business partner in the Enterprise.  Secord was promoted to major general in
May 1980 and was the ranking Air Force officer in charge of rescue efforts for U.S. hostages
held in Iran during 1980-81.  After serving as deputy assistant secretary of defense for
international security affairs from 1981 to 1983, he retired from the Air Force following
allegations of improper dealings with former CIA agent Edwin Wilson, who was convicted of
smuggling arms to Libya.

     Upon leaving the Air Force, Secord went into business with Hakim, co-founding in 1983
Stanford Technology Trading Group International (STTGI).  Using a complex web of secret
Swiss bank accounts and shell corporations managed by Willard Zucker at Compagnie de
Services Fiduciaires (CSF) in Geneva, they built a lucrative Enterprise from covert-operations
business assigned to them by Lt. Col. Oliver L. North.

     Secord brought important operational skills to the Iran/contra transactions supervised by
North.  He disclosed most of his operational exploits in testimony before Congress and to
criminal investigators, but he lied when he claimed that he acted as a volunteer for the benefit of
the United States and that he personally did not profit from his participation.

     One of Secord's central purposes in establishing and carrying out the operations of the
Enterprise was the accumulation of untaxed wealth in secret overseas accounts.  Testimony and
records obtained from the Enterprise's Swiss financial manager, Willard Zucker, show that
Secord personally received at least $2 million from his participation in the Enterprise during
1985 and 1986, that he set up secret accounts to conceal his untaxed income, and that he later
lied and encouraged others to lie to keep it concealed.

     Secord was indicted in March 1988 for conspiring with North, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter
and Hakim to defraud the U.S. Government of money and services, and for theft of Government
property.  After the trials were severed and the main conspiracy counts dropped due to problems
with classified information, the Grand Jury in April 1989 charged Secord with nine additional
felonies as a result of his false testimony before Congress in 1987.

     Secord pleaded guilty on November 8, 1989, to the felony charge of lying to Congress about
illegal gratuities he provided to North.1  Secord entered his plea five days before he was to be
tried on 12 felony charges.  As part of his plea, Secord promised to cooperate in the pending
trials and ongoing investigation of Independent Counsel.

     1 The Secord guilty plea was obtained through the work of Associate Counsel Reid
Weingarten, William Hassler and Antonia Ianniello, who would have prosecuted the case had it
gone to trial.

     Secord's Finances

     In July 1985 Secord instructed Zucker at CSF to delete references to Secord's name from all
Enterprise profit accounts.  Zucker transferred funds from the ``Richard V. Secord'' account to
one maintained under the name of a shell corporation known as ``Korel Assets.'' 2  All
subsequent profit distributions -- totaling $1,457,568 -- for Secord were credited to Korel.  On
September 20, 1985,  Secord signed a series of documents formalizing his control of the Korel
account.3

     2 The name ``Korel'' has no particular significance.  Secord rejected Zucker's first
recommendation, a company known as ``Homel General,'' apparently because it could have
suggested a reference to Secord's military rank.

     3 The documents signed by Secord included a standard Swiss Fiduciary Agreement and three
Mandatory Agreements authorizing Zucker to invest funds and otherwise act on behalf of Korel.
The Fiduciary Agreement defines Secord as ``mandator,'' and begins by stating:  ``WHEREAS
the Mandator is the principal shareholder of KOREL ASSETS INC.''

     Zucker, who received immunity from Independent Counsel, did not testify before Congress.
Hakim, who received limited use immunity from Congress to testify, was the Select Committees'
chief source for Enterprise financial information.  Zucker produced these Korel documents to
Independent Counsel, but they were not produced to congressional investigators by Hakim.

     Secord masked his withdrawal of funds from the Korel account.  In September 1985, he
received $52,500 for the purchase of a small $35,000 private airplane; the rest of the money went
for other personal uses.  He and Zucker used a series of specious, misleading telex messages to
make it appear that Secord had purchased the airplane not for himself but for a wealthy Arab.  In
1986, Secord purchased a Porsche using $31,827 withdrawn from Korel.  Secord later claimed
that he believed this car to be the fruit of a loan from an Arab acquaintance.  In spring 1986,
Secord, Thomas G. Clines and others vacationed at a German weight-reduction spa using $4,600
from Korel and Clines's profit account.

     Although Secord denied ownership of the Korel account before his guilty plea, he eventually
admitted  ownership of the account as part of his testimony at the trial of Clines.4

     4 Secord, Clines Trial Testimony, 9/5/90, p. 193.

     During 1985 and 1986, Secord received $1.037 million in cash payments from the Enterprise.
About $34,000 was accounted for as legitimate business expenditures or withdrawals from his
profits, leaving more than $1 million in unaccounted-for cash withdrawals by Secord.

     Of the unexplained withdrawals, three totaling $796,000 stand out.  On May 15 and 21, 1986,
Secord personally received cash payments of $225,000 and $260,000.  Secord said he provided
this money to Israeli official Amiram Nir, but there is no supporting documentation.5  In July
1986, Secord withdrew $311,000 in cash, which he said he provided to the Iranian arms dealer
Manucher Ghorbanifar, also without documentation.6  Nir, who has since died, was unavailable
to OIC to verify Secord's account.  The Israelis denied that their government ever received these
funds, whether or not Nir did.  The Israelis, however, were unwilling to provide a witness to
testify to these facts.  Ghorbanifar also denied receiving $311,000 from Secord.7

     5 Secord, OIC Interview, 3/9/88, pp. 106-07.

     6 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/22/88, pp. 150-51.

     7 Ghorbanifar, OIC Deposition 12/10/87, p. 94.

     Secord received two additional cash payments that could be traced as far as his home.  In late
September 1986, Zucker personally delivered to Secord's wife $50,000 in cash at a restaurant in
New Jersey.8  On November 17, 1986, William Haskell, a courier for North and Secord,
delivered an unknown amount of cash to Secord at Secord's home.9  Haskell received the cash
from David Morabia at Republic National Bank in New York.10

     8 Zucker, FBI 302, 12/12-18/87, p. 24.

     9 Haskell, FBI 302, 7/6-7/87, p. 14.

     10 David Morabia, his father Elliot and his mother Nan assisted Zucker in laundering cash
deliveries to various U.S. clients. See Other Money Matters chapter.

     Secord claimed to have no specific memory of what was done with the cash he received in
late 1986.  To the extent he received cash, however, he said he was sure he spent it on
operational matters.

     Despite Secord's suggestion that the money went to operational expenses, the Enterprise had
effectively ceased Central American activities after a contra-resupply aircraft carrying Eugene
Hasenfus was shot down over Nicaragua on October 5, 1986.  None of the operatives received
significant amounts of cash from Secord after that.  The Enterprise generally did not deal in cash
on the  Iranian side.  The obvious inference is that Secord retained the cash for his own use.

     On January 24, 1987, the Israelis refunded to Secord $23,000 in cash remaining from an
Enterprise account in Israel.  Secord originally denied having received this money, but when
confronted with a receipt, he admitted receiving it and claimed it was used for travel expenses in
1987 in response to investigations of the Enterprise's activities.

     The calculations described above contrast with Secord's financial profile reported to the
Internal Revenue Service and with Secord's testimony to the Select Committees in 1987.  Secord
and his wife reported adjusted gross income of $147,000 in 1985, which consisted mainly of
Secord's salary.  Secord's personal return for 1985 shows none of the income he realized on arms
sales to the contras or Iran.

     On Schedule B of his 1985 personal return, Secord answered ``no'' when asked whether he
had any foreign financial accounts.  Secord was not charged with giving false information on his
income tax form because the Swiss financial records available to Independent Counsel at the
time of his indictment could not be used in a tax case, under the provisions of the treaty through
which the records were obtained.  But Secord's failure to give honest answers on his tax  forms
provides evidence of his motive in attempting to deliberately conceal his profits.

     Secord's Testimony to Congress and Independent Counsel

     In December 1986, when subpoenaed by the congressional intelligence committees, Secord
refused to testify, invoking his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.  In late April
1987, however, Secord agreed to testify voluntarily before the Select Iran/contra Committees; he
also agreed to be interviewed by OIC.11  Secord, the Committees' first witness, testified from
May 5 to 8, 1987.  He was recalled and deposed by Congress in June 1987.

     11 In February 1987, Secord appeared before the Grand Jury investigating Iran/contra and
refused to testify.  In March, he appeared before U.S. District Chief Judge Aubrey E. Robinson,
Jr., in response to a corporate subpoena and denied having custody of Enterprise records.
Otherwise, Secord did not respond to OIC inquiries during early 1987.

     Secord's congressional testimony can be characterized in two ways:  He provided an
enormous amount of largely truthful information regarding the Enterprise's operational workings;
his responses to questions about its financial activities were much less candid. Secord's testimony
to OIC followed the same pattern:  It was generally accurate as to operational matters and
blatantly false regarding his personal finances.

     OIC investigators were handicapped in early interviews with Secord by a lack of access to the
Swiss financial records of the Enterprise, which did not become available until November 1987.
The absence of these records, together with the need to remain unexposed to records produced by
Hakim to Congress under a grant of limited immunity, made it difficult to examine Secord on
specific transactions.  This problem was largely cured by the time Secord was deposed by
Independent Counsel for two days in January 1988, after receipt of Swiss records.  Secord,
nevertheless, continued to lie about his personal finances.

     Secord Indicted: March 1988 and May 1989

     In March 1988, Secord was indicted with North, Poindexter and Hakim on conspiracy and
theft charges and on three additional charges involving illegal gratuities offered or paid to North.
The trials of the four defendants were severed because of problems arising from the grants of
immunity by Congress.  The conspiracy and theft charges were dismissed due to
classified-information problems,12 leaving Secord to face the three remaining North-gratuities
charges.

     12 See North chapter.

     In May 1989, Secord was charged in a supplemental indictment with nine additional counts of
obstruction, perjury and false statements.  In November 1989, he pleaded  guilty to one felony
charge of false statements to Congress, admitting that he lied when he denied that North had
received personal benefits from the Enterprise.

     Gratuities to North:  The Basis for the Guilty Plea

     Four of the criminal charges facing Secord involved illegal gratuities for North.  The evidence
showed that Secord and Hakim wanted to ensure that North would continue in his position as an
NSC staff member so that they could continue to profit from the covert operations that North
oversaw.

     Specifically, the charges centered on Secord paying for a $16,000 security system for North's
home in Great Falls, Virginia.  In addition, Secord and Hakim established for North and his
family a $200,000 Swiss investment fund.  Because North was a Government official, the gifts
amounted to illegal gratuities.  As a result of these facts, Secord pleaded guilty to lying in the
following exchange with congressional investigators in June 1987:

     Q:  Mr. Secord, did there -- are you aware of any money from the Enterprise which went to
the benefit of Mr. North?

     A:  No.

     The North Security Fence

     In the spring of 1986, Secord introduced North to Glenn A. Robinette, a former CIA agent
who became  involved in a variety of operations for the Enterprise.  At Secord's request,
Robinette purchased and installed for North a home-security system, after North was reportedly
targeted for assassination by the Abu Nidal terrorist group.  On May 19, 1986, Robinette paid a
subcontractor $6,000 for part of the system's installation.  On May 20, Robinette received from
Secord $7,000 in cash.

     During July and August, Robinette spent an additional $8,000 on the North security system.
Following a request from Robinette to Secord, the Enterprise issued a check for $9,000 to
Robinette on August 20.

     After exposure of the Iran/contra affair in November 1986, Secord, Robinette and North tried
to cover up the gratuity paid to North.  In December 1986, North asked Robinette to send him a
``bill'' for the security system.  Robinette sent North two back-dated bills dated July and
September 1986.  North in turn sent Robinette two back-dated letters in which arrangements for
future ``payment'' of the security system were discussed.  When Robinette informed Secord of the
letters he had sent North, Secord said, ``Fine. Glad you did.'' 13

     13 North was convicted in 1989 of accepting an illegal gratuity -- the home-security system --
from Secord.  This conviction was overturned on appeal.

     The ``B. Button'' Account and Phantom Job Discussions

     Secord and Hakim in 1986 provided a fund for North and his family by establishing a
$200,000 Swiss investment account, the ``B. Button'' account.  Evidence regarding this account
was part of the Government's proffer to support Secord's guilty plea.

     In February 1986, Secord and Hakim asked Zucker in Switzerland to find a way to transfer
Enterprise money to North to help defray the costs of educating his children.  First, they arranged
a meeting between Zucker and North's wife, Betsy.  Zucker met with Mrs. North in Philadelphia
in March 1986, where he got information from her regarding the North children.  As a first step,
Zucker opened a new Enterprise bank account -- Hyde Park Square Corporation -- with a
$200,000 deposit.  Using a Government encryption device to relay a message, Secord in April
1986 informed North of the existence of a ``200 K Insurance Fund.''

     In May 1986, Zucker transferred the $200,000 from the Hyde Park Square account to an
account titled ``B. Button.''  In Zucker's handwritten notes, ``Mrs. Button's'' phone number was
the same as North's residence.  Zucker called Mrs. North a few weeks after establishing the B.
Button account, but Mrs. North was unavailable for another meeting.  Zucker reported this to
Secord.  Independent Counsel could not prove that North accepted or received any of the money.

     During the summer of 1986, Zucker continued to look for ways to transfer funds to the North
family.  In September 1986, at Hakim's urging, Zucker met with a Washington, D.C., attorney to
create a phantom real-estate job for Mrs. North so that bogus commissions could be paid to her.
This arrangement was never consummated.

     Secord also provided cash to North.  In September 1985, North purchased a vehicle for
$9,500, shortly after Secord gave North $3,000 in cash, according to Secord's handwritten notes.
North testified at his trial that he paid for the vehicle with money from a $15,000 cash fund kept
in a metal box in his bedroom closet, in which he deposited pocket change.14

     14 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/10/89, pp. 7150-51.

     Obstruction, Perjury and False Statements

     In addition to the four gratuity-related charges against Secord, he faced eight charges based on
false testimony to Congress about his Enterprise profits.  The charges, in summary, were:

      -- Obstruction of Congress.  Secord testified falsely about his economic interest in and
benefits from the Enterprise, as well as about its financial structure and the manner in which
accounts were manipulated to conceal individual profit interests.

      -- ``Korel'' perjury.  Secord in May 1987 falsely testified before the congressional Select
Committees that: (1) Enterprise profits had been kept for him under his name and not under a
pseudonym; (2) Korel was not his company and not a  repository for his profits; and (3) his
interest in Korel was no different from his interest in the other companies constituting the
Enterprise.  In fact, profits from the Enterprise were kept for Secord in the Korel account, which
was established and maintained exclusively for him.  As mentioned previously, Secord
subsequently admitted in the Clines trial that Korel was, in fact, his investment account.

      -- Perjury regarding the foreswearing of profits.  Secord testified falsely to the Select
Committees in May 1987 that:  (1) he waived all interest in Enterprise profits in July-August
1985 and thereafter retained no personal economic interest in Enterprise companies; (2) his
personal profits were returned to the Enterprise; and (3) Zucker only managed personal profits
for Secord of about $400,000 for a period of months until those funds were ``washed out'' when
he foreswore his profits.

     In fact, Secord retained an economic interest in the profits of the Enterprise, continued to
receive benefits from it and used Zucker on a continuous basis to manage the Korel account,
which held in excess of $1 million in profits.  While Secord said he was foreswearing his profits
in July 1985, he was actually arranging to conceal his profit distributions in Korel, signing a
fiduciary agreement with CSF in September.

     Zucker was never informed that Secord had foresworn his profits until a discussion with
Secord in December 1986 in Geneva, after the Iran/contra affair was publicly exposed.
According to Zucker, Secord said:  ``you do remember that I said that I had renounced all interest
in any of these accounts.'' 15  Zucker did not respond, knowing the assertion was false.

     15 Zucker, FBI 302, 11/6-10/87, pp. 4-5.

      -- Perjury regarding Iranian proceeds.  Secord testified falsely before the Select Committees
in May 1987 that:  (1) he did not personally receive any money from the Iran arms sales beyond
his $6,000 monthly salary; (2) he and Hakim agreed not to make a profit on the sales; and (3)
Hakim received no profit from the sales.  In fact, both Secord and Hakim did receive personal
funds  from the Iran arms sales, and Secord received funds beyond his monthly salary.

      -- Perjury about payments to STTGI.  Secord testified falsely before the Select Committees in
May 1987 that it was ``his belief'' that $500,000 that STTGI received from CSF was ``the result
of the line of credit loan that [STTGI] signed with CSF in 1985.''  STTGI actually received at
least $700,000.  According to Zucker and CSF documents, none of it constituted a loan from
CSF.

      -- Perjury about ``Tri-American Arms.''  Secord lied to the Select Committees in May 1987
about an investment in Tri-American Arms, a Colorado weapons company.  First, Secord
testified falsely that a $150,000 transfer to Tri-American Arms came from Hakim's profit
distribution and not from other Enterprise funds.  Second, he falsely denied that one of the
purposes of Tri-American was to sell weapons to the contras.

     In fact, it is undisputed that the $150,000 transfer to Tri-American Arms came from an
Enterprise disbursement account -- Albon Values -- and not from Hakim's personal funds.  Notes
taken at a meeting of would-be investors in April 1986 showed that weapons sales to the contras
were contemplated, and Secord himself told a federal law-enforcement agent in 1986 that one of
the potential markets was the contras.

      -- Perjury about the Defex Account.  Secord before the Select Committees in May 1987
falsely asserted that the Enterprise's ``Defex'' account was established to hide the source and
location of Enterprise funds from arms dealers.  In fact, the Defex S.A. account was opened to
conceal from contra leaders and U.S. officials the profits Secord and his partners were receiving
on weapons sales to the contras.

      -- Perjury about foreign bank accounts.  Secord falsely denied before the Select Committees
in May 1987 that he had any beneficial interest in any foreign financial accounts, with the
exception of a British checking account with a small balance.  In fact, Secord had substantial
beneficial interests in Swiss Enterprise accounts.

Chapter 10

     United States v. Albert Hakim

     Albert Hakim, an Iranian-born American citizen, did not claim to be a patriot, acting out of
unselfish interests in the Enterprise.  He described himself as a businessman with a clear profit
motive.  But like retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, he concealed the size of his
personal profits for tax purposes.  He also arranged illegal gratuities to North in order to use
North's Government office to serve his own money-making interests.

     On November 21, 1989, Hakim pleaded guilty to an information charging a misdemeanor
count of supplementing the salary of a Government officer, North.  Hakim's corporation, Lake
Resources Inc., pleaded guilty to a corporate felony of illegally diverting to the contras and to
other unauthorized purposes U.S. funds generated by the sale of arms to Iran.1

     1 The guilty pleas of Hakim and Lake Resources were obtained by Associate Counsel Stuart
E. Abrams, Geoffrey S. Berman and William M. Treanor, who would have prosecuted the case
had it gone to trial.

     Following his guilty plea, Hakim entered into a separate civil agreement with Independent
Counsel.  Under the agreement, Hakim agreed to accept $1.7 million of the funds on deposit in
Swiss accounts and waive his claim to the  remainder of the $9 million 2 in funds frozen in the
Swiss Enterprise accounts in December 1986.  From the amount he received, Hakim agreed to
settle two other claims on the funds -- $800,000 claimed by Zucker for legal expenses and
$120,000 claimed by Phillippe Neyroud, Hakim's Swiss lawyer, for legal fees.3  This was to
leave the United States the only claimant of the funds.  It was to have received $7.3 million.  The
agreement, which had been approved by the Department of Justice, did not bar the United States
from seeking civil damages from Hakim or taking tax action against him.  Although Hakim
agreed to take all steps necessary to facilitate the recovery of the funds by the United States, he
subsequently refused to carry out his agreement.4

     2 As of December 31, 1986, the amount of Enterprise funds frozen in Swiss accounts at the
request of the United States was $7.8 million.  As of December 1989 -- the time of Hakim's
agreement -- approximately $1.2 million in interest had accrued, bringing the total to $9 million.

     3 Since this agreement was under negotiation, Secord filed a claim in the Swiss courts for the
money in the Enterprise accounts.

     4 The recovery of the funds is now being pursued through litigation.

     Criminal Charges Brought

     In March 1988, Albert Hakim was charged with five felonies as a co-defendant with Vice
Adm. John M. Poindexter, Lt. Col. Oliver L. North and Secord.  He  was charged with
conspiracy to defraud the United States, illegal conversion of U.S. Government property, wire
fraud, conspiracy to pay illegal gratuities to North, and offering to pay an illegal gratuity to
North.

     The first two of these charged offenses -- the conspiracy and theft charges -- would have been
dismissed due to classified-information problems, had the case against Hakim gone to trial; the
third had previously been dismissed as duplicative.5   The remaining counts involved Hakim and
Secord's attempts to provide North with gratuities to encourage him to remain on the National
Security Council staff and continue to use Secord and Hakim in pursuing his efforts with Iran.

     5 See Secord chapter.

     As described earlier, in 1985 and 1986, Albert Hakim had received $2.06 million from the
Enterprise.  He also received $550,249 in cash; $478,508 of which went for unknown purposes.
Hakim also used Enterprise funds to invest with Secord in over $1,040,000 worth of business
ventures.

     Gratuities to North

     In support of Hakim's guilty plea, Independent Counsel offered evidence to show that by early
1986, Secord and Hakim had become aware that North was having family problems because of
reported threats on his life, the long hours he worked, and his financial difficulties.  Because
Secord and  Hakim believed that North's wife was pressing him to leave the NSC, they attempted
to reduce her anxiety by providing North with gratuities.

     Secord took the lead.  He arranged for a $16,000 security system to be installed at North's
home, paid for by Enterprise funds.6  Hakim then undertook to transfer a significant sum of
money from Swiss Enterprise accounts to North.  Early in 1986, Hakim instructed Zucker, the
money manager of the Swiss Enterprise accounts, to meet with Mrs. North to discuss the
provision of financial support for North's children.  Mrs. North traveled to Philadelphia to meet
Zucker on March 6, 1986.  She gave him the ages and school prospects of her children.  After
Zucker reported this meeting to Secord and Hakim, they directed him to set up a $200,000
investment account for North in Switzerland.  As previously explained, this account, called the
B. Button account, was calculated to produce funds for the education of North's children as they
needed it.

     6 Secord pleaded guilty to falsely denying before Congress that North had benefitted from the
Enterprise.  See Secord chapter.

     In June 1986, Hakim asked Zucker to speak to Mrs. North a second time.  Hakim told Zucker
to tell Mrs. North that they had ``advanced the ball,'' that something had been done.  Zucker
called Mrs. North on June 4, 1986, and asked her to meet with him in Philadelphia  on June 5 or
6.  She declined, saying she had other commitments.  The $200,000 is among those funds still
frozen in Swiss bank accounts.

     After the establishment of the Button account, Hakim had several more conversations with
Zucker in which he urged Zucker to find other ways to get money to North.  These included the
possibility of someone making a gift to the Norths, the possibility of finding Mrs. North a
no-show job, the possibility of providing her with unearned real estate commissions, or the
possibility of providing some commission or fee for allegedly introducing business to someone.

     As he attempted to pursue these options, Zucker had several conversations with Washington
attorney David Lewis.  In one he asked whether someone needed a broker's license to receive a
real estate commission in Washington, D.C., or Maryland.  In a subsequent conversation, Zucker
told Lewis that he had a client who wanted to get money to someone in the form of a commission
or a job and asked Lewis whether he knew of anyone who might be of assistance.

     Possible Tax Crimes

     Records obtained by Independent Counsel pursuant to the Swiss Treaty showed that Albert
Hakim engaged in tax fraud with respect to his 1985 income tax returns, substantially
underreporting his gross income and taxable  income, and failing to file reports on his foreign
financial accounts.

     The treaty under which Independent Counsel obtained the Enterprise financial records from
Switzerland explicitly provides that the records cannot be used in the prosecution of tax crimes.
Unless the records could be obtained from some source other than pursuant to the treaty, they
could not be used in a tax prosecution.  Thus, though the financial records showed Hakim had
violated tax laws, they could not be used in a criminal prosecution against him.

     The Lake Resources Plea

     Hakim was the principal shareholder in Lake Resources, Inc., a Panamanian shell corporation
established in May 1985.  This corporation was the owner of the account at Credit Suisse Bank in
Geneva that was the Enterprise account that received the proceeds from the Iran arms sales.

     At the time Hakim entered his guilty plea on November 21, 1989, Lake Resources pleaded
guilty to a corporate felony charge of illegally diverting from the U.S. Government $16.2 million
in proceeds from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran.

Chapter 11

     United States v. Thomas G. Clines, a.k.a. ``C. Tea''

     Thomas G. Clines, a retired CIA agent, earned nearly $883,000 helping retired Air Force Maj.
Gen. Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim carry out the secret operations of the Enterprise.
Clines oversaw the logistics of purchasing weapons from private suppliers in Europe and
arranging for their delivery to Central America.  In early contra weapons sales in 1985, he
received 20 percent of the profits; in 1986, he began receiving a third of the profits from the
contra sales.

     In February 1990, following the guilty pleas and promises of cooperation by Secord and
Hakim, Clines was indicted and charged with concealing from the Internal Revenue Service the
full amount of his Enterprise profits for the 1985 and 1986 tax years.  He was charged also with
denying on his 1985 and 1986 income-tax returns his foreign financial accounts, in which he hid
his Enterprise profits and from which he and his surrogates transferred thousands of dollars to his
U.S. bank accounts.

     In September 1990, Clines was convicted of four income-tax-related felony charges,
following a two-week jury trial in U.S. District Court in Baltimore, Maryland, before Judge
Norman P. Ramsey.1

     1 The prosecution's case was presented by Associate Counsel Stuart E. Abrams, Geoffrey S.
Berman and William M. Treanor.

     The trial was held in U.S. District Court in Baltimore because Clines' accountant was based in
Bethesda, Maryland, and filed Clines' tax forms there.

     The Charges

     Clines was charged with two felony counts of falsely underreporting his gross receipts on his
1985 and 1986 tax returns.  He was charged also with two felony counts of falsely denying
having foreign financial accounts on his tax returns for 1985 and 1986.

     Clines on his 1985 tax return falsely reported his gross receipts as totaling $265,000 -- or
$203,431 less than his income from his Enterprise activities proved at trial.  On his 1986 tax
return, Clines reported his gross receipts as $402,513 -- or $57,009 less than he actually received
from the Enterprise.  In both cases, Independent Counsel's estimates of Clines' underreported
income were conservative.

     Regarding his foreign financial accounts, Clines denied having such accounts on 1985 and
1986 income tax forms requiring their disclosure.  In fact, Independent Counsel proved through
extensive documentation and testimony that Clines had knowledge and control of large sums of
money abroad in two secret Swiss accounts:  the ``T.C.'' capital account he maintained with
Compagnie de Services Fiduciaires  (CSF) in Geneva in 1985, and the ``C. Tea'' investment
account he maintained with CSF in 1986.

     The Clines Trial

     The central prosecution witnesses at the Clines trial were Secord, who was compelled to
testify under a cooperation agreement with Independent Counsel, and Willard Zucker, the CSF
financial manager of the secret Swiss Enterprise accounts and shell corporations, who also
testified under a grant of immunity from prosecution.  Thomas Cusick, a special agent with the
Internal Revenue Service, testified about the complex financial structure of the Enterprise.

     Clines, a 30-year veteran of the CIA, after leaving the agency in 1978, had developed
significant contacts with arms dealers in Western Europe and behind the Iron Curtain. In 1985
and 1986, after becoming involved in the Enterprise, Clines was responsible for locating and
purchasing weapons abroad and shipping them to Central America.  He worked primarily with
the arms company Defex Portugal, maintaining a small office at the company in Lisbon. When
the Enterprise became involved in secret U.S. weapons shipments to Iran late in 1985, Clines
also became active in this aspect of its activities.2

     2 Clines accompanied Secord in late November 1985 to Europe to facilitate a snagged
shipment of U.S. HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran.  In the summer of 1986, Clines became
involved in an unsuccessful Ross Perot-funded hostage-rescue operation in which the
Enterprise's Danish freighter, the Erria, waited off the coast of Cyprus where a $1 million
exchange was to be made for a hostage release.  This operation did not result in a release.

     In 1985, Clines began receiving 20 percent of the profits from each arms shipment, plus
expenses.  He received his first share in April 1985, when $310,840 was distributed among
Secord and Hakim, who each received $124,366, and Clines, who got $62,168.  A capital
account was maintained by CSF for Clines.  He had some of this money wired from this account
to the United States, withdrew some of it in cash, and transferred some amounts to a third party
for his benefit.  In 1985, a total of $155,000 was wired from Clines' capital account to his
account at First American Bank in Virginia.  Clines also made cash withdrawals from the TC
capital account totaling $217,820.  At trial the evidence showed that Clines' gross receipts in
1985 were at least $468,431.  This figure represented $423,431 from the Enterprise and $45,000
from non-Enterprise sources.  The estimate was conservative.

     In 1986, as the Enterprise continued selling arms to the contras, its involvement in the secret
U.S. sale of arms to Iran generated a new source of funds for Clines, Secord, and Hakim.  Clines'
share of the distributions increased to 30 percent, like Secord and Hakim.  (The final 10 percent
of the distribution went to Scitech, a company jointly owned by Secord and Hakim.)  As a result
of these pro-rated distributions, Clines received $420,238 in 1986.  In addition, Clines received
four small distributions from the Enterprise in 1986.  On February 18, 1986, CSF transferred
$7,000 to the bank account of a friend of Clines in South Carolina for Clines' personal benefit.
On May 2, 1986, CSF wired $1,137 and on July 7, 1986, CSF wired $1,147 to the Klinik
Buchinger to pay for Clines' attendance at that weight-reduction clinic.  On November 10, 1986,
CSF transferred $30,000 into an investment account that Clines maintained with CSF.  Thus,
Clines' total receipts from the Enterprise in 1986 were at least $459,522.3

     3 Clines also received $70,000 in other payments from the Enterprise in 1986.  But since the
underlying documents did not clearly establish the nature of these additional funds, they were not
included in the estimate of Clines' underreporting.  In addition, in 1986 Clines' bank accounts in
the United States received wire transfers of $160,000 from unknown foreign sources.  This
money was not included in calculating Clines' true gross receipts.

     When Clines opened an Enterprise account in late spring or early summer 1986, he decided to
use an assumed name.  Zucker suggested ``C. Tea,'' and Clines agreed.  Clines signed the
agreement using his assumed name, C. Tea; his real name does not appear on that document.
Clines earned income of $17,135.10 on the deposits in the C. Tea account during 1986.

     Enterprise activities were effectively curtailed in November 1986 with the exposure of the
Iran arms sales.  Clines expressed concern about his inability to obtain  his funds.  Hakim, at
Clines' request, persuaded Zucker 4 to release Clines' funds.

     4 The Government proffered at trial that, if permitted to testify about his conversation with
Hakim, Zucker would testify that ``Mr. Hakim alerted Mr. Zucker to the fact that Mr. Clines was
a former CIA field operative and was potentially violent, and [Mr. Hakim] suggested that Mr.
Zucker should give him his money back.''  (Zucker, Clines Trial Testimony, 9/7/90, p. 551.)  The
Government contended that this testimony was admissible as to Zucker's state of mind, since, on
the cross-examination of Secord, defense counsel had elicited testimony that Zucker was a
``basket case'' in early December 1986.  (Secord, Clines Trial Testimony, 9/5/90, p. 214). The
Court ruled the substance of the Hakim-Zucker conversation inadmissible.  (Zucker, Clines Trial
Testimony, 9/7/90, pp. 552-53.)

     When Zucker began to liquidate Clines' investment account on December 4, 1986, Clines
instructed Zucker that he wanted the funds transferred to a numbered Swiss bank account that
Zucker recognized as Defex Portugal.  Clines gave Zucker a letter specifying that the money was
to be transferred for ``services rendered.''  On December 19, 1986, CSF transferred $311,600 as
directed.  Thereafter, Clines told Secord in December 1986 that he had received his money from
Zucker.

     At trial, Clines acknowledged that he had the C. Tea funds transferred to a Defex Portugal
account so it could be handled for Clines' by Defex head Jose Garnel.  According to Clines, only
$266,000 had been transferred to Defex from the C. Tea account.  In fact, $311,600 had actually
been transferred.  Clines testified that he only learned this after being indicted.   Clines described
a complicated series of personal ``loans'' between him and Garnel.  He said he believed Garnel
deliberately concealed the true amount and stole the difference from him.

     The Garnel-Clines ``loans'' were among a series of Clines' financial maneuvers to conceal
income.  In addition, Clines stored large amounts of cash in Swiss safety deposit boxes,
withdrawing and carrying funds to banks and individuals, who would subsequently wire the
amounts to his U.S. bank accounts.  He also signed over real estate holdings to friends and
family, while continuing to pay for them and claiming the payments as income-tax deductions.

     In his 1985 and 1986 tax returns, Clines followed a consistent practice:  He reported what he
believed the Government knew and could prove against him, and nothing more.  Beginning in
1982, Clines used as his accountant Melvyn Leshinsky, in Bethesda, Maryland.  As previously
discussed, Clines' gross receipts in 1985 were at least $468,431.  The figure he actually reported
was $265,000, a shortfall of $203,431.  The basis for the $265,000 figure was Clines' January 10,
1986, letter to Leshinsky listing his gross income for 1985 ``as reflected on my bank statements''
-- exactly the amount that he brought into the United States that was traceable to him.  The
money that Clines left abroad was not reported.

     In answering ``no'' to the question whether Clines had an interest in or authority over a foreign
account, Leshinsky specifically asked Clines whether he had an account in any foreign country;
Clines said he did not.  In 1983, Clines and various of his corporate entities had been the subject
of a criminal investigation.  Leshinsky in the context of that investigation, found that Clines
controlled a bank account in Bermuda in 1981 and had not reported it.  Leshinsky had to have
Clines file a corrected form.  Given this prior record, it was clear that Clines was familiar with
the reporting requirement for foreign accounts.5

     5 In March 1987, after Clines had been subpoenaed by the Office of Independent Counsel,
Leshinsky, Clines, and Clines' then-lawyer John Stein met to review Clines' finances.  Clines
stated in essence that when his 1985 income tax returns were filed, he had not grasped the
difference between net and gross and that the figure on his income tax returns for gross receipts
was actually his net receipts.  The three agreed that Clines should file an amended return.  The
amended return was eventually filed on November 2, 1987.  On that return, a gross receipts
figure of $486,490 was reported.  The cost-of-goods-sold figure of $152,640 was $68,850 short
of offsetting the increase in the gross receipts from the original return.  The cost-of-goods-sold
figure was unsubstantiated:  Clines did not provide Leshinsky with any support for that figure.
Clines did not tell Leshinsky of reimbursements that he had received from the Enterprise for
expenses.

     Leshinsky also prepared Clines' 1986 income tax return.  Initially, Clines represented to
Leshinsky that his gross receipts were $297,673.  Later, he informed Leshinsky his gross receipts
were $342,673.  On the income  tax returns as filed, his gross receipts were listed as $402,513, or
$57,009 less than his proven gross receipts.

     The 1986 income tax return also contained a false denial that Clines had a foreign account.
Again, Leshinsky had asked Clines whether he had a foreign account, and Clines answered no.
None of the $17,135 Clines earned in income from his C. Tea account was reported.

     At trial, Clines claimed that the underreporting on tax returns arose from his inability to
understand the difference between net and gross income.  He referred to his 1985 capital account
as his ``profit account,'' but said he did not believe it was reportable.  He nonetheless
acknowledged control over the funds.  He admitted that the answer on his income tax returns
stating that he did not have a foreign account was ``incorrect.'' 6

     6 Clines, Clines Trial Testimony, 9/14/90, p. 1305.

     Secord attempted to confuse the jury by suggesting that Government evidence against Clines
was based on inaccurate financial records fabricated, or ``cooked,'' by Hakim.7  In fact, some
financial records were reconfigured by Zucker at Hakim's request.  In late 1986, Hakim instructed
CSF to collapse separate profit accounts into one ledger so that payments to Clines, Secord and
himself could not be identified.  This document,  according to Zucker, was known as the ``Hakim
ledger.''  The ``Hakim ledger,'' however, was not what the Government used to prove its case.  As
described previously, Independent Counsel reconstructed the profit accounts, going piece by
piece through thousands of pages of foreign and domestic bank records that illuminated in detail
the true financial machinations of the Enterprise and Clines' personal profits.8

     7 Secord, Clines Trial Testimony, 9/5/90, p. 219.

     8 The key to understanding the collapsed profit accounts was provided by Roland Farina, an
assistant to Zucker, who retained codes on the Hakim ledger that corresponded to the receipts.

     Verdict and Sentence

     The jury found Clines guilty on all four counts in the indictment on September 18, 1990.  On
December 13, 1990, Judge Ramsey sentenced Clines to 16 months in prison and a $40,000 fine.
On appeal, the convictions were affirmed by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.
The Supreme Court denied certiorari.

Chapter 12

     U.S. Efforts To Recover the Enterprise Funds

     In December 1986, before Independent Counsel was appointed, the Swiss government at the
request of the Department of Justice froze the Enterprise accounts maintained in Switzerland.
Sixteen accounts contained funds totaling $7.8 million.  While the initial U.S. request for
assistance included a request for return of the funds, Independent Counsel's efforts to recover the
funds for the United States began in earnest in early 1989, after the bank account records of the
Enterprise had been obtained under the Swiss-American Treaty on Mutual Assistance in
Criminal Matters and after the indictments of Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, Vice Adm. John M.
Poindexter, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim were secured.

     In Switzerland, the request for the return of the funds was before the Federal Office for Police
Matters.  The Office of Independent Counsel made its request through the Justice Department's
Office of International Affairs.

     Under the mutual assistance treaty, the U.S. request for the return of the funds had to be based
on crimes recognized by Swiss law.  In the Iran/contra request, the crimes were conspiracy to
defraud and embezzlement, which corresponded to Counts One and Two of the indictment
brought in March 1988 against North, Poindexter, Secord and Hakim.  These counts were
eventually dropped because the  Reagan Administration refused to declassify certain information
the court deemed relevant to the defense of North.1  It was Independent Counsel's position,
however, that the evidence it had provided to the Swiss authorities was sufficient to prove that a
fraud on the U.S. Government had occurred.2

     1 Although as part of the Hakim plea agreement, Lake Resources Inc. in November 1989
pleaded guilty to a corporate felony of defrauding the U.S. Government in the Iran/contra
diversion, Swiss law does not recognize corporate criminality.  The Lake Resources guilty plea,
therefore, could not support Independent Counsel's request for return of the funds.

     2 The standard of proof in the Swiss courts in this matter was ``reasonable suspicion.''  The
indictment and Judge Gerhard A. Gesell's upholding of Count One as a crime met the standard of
proof.

     Challenging the U.S. request for return of the funds were claims in Switzerland reportedly
made by Secord, Hakim, Willard Zucker, and Hakim attorney Phillippe Neyroud.  Although
Hakim, after his criminal plea in November 1989, agreed to settle his claim for $1.7 million of
the funds and to settle the claims of others within that amount, he later reneged on the agreement.

     In February 1992, the Federal Office for Police Matters advised the Office of Independent
Counsel that it would not return the funds to the United States because the conspiracy and
embezzlement charges had been dismissed.  Independent Counsel's appeal of the ruling was
rejected by  the Swiss Federal Tribunal on grounds that the United States had no standing to
appeal.3

     3 Decision, Proceeding Nos. 1A.125/1992 and 1A.233/1992 (Swiss Federal Tribunal Mar. 29,
1993).

     Independent Counsel had received the assistance of Richard Owen in the Criminal Division of
the Department of Justice.  In 1992 OIC requested, pursuant to the Independent Counsel Act, that
the Department of Justice's Civil Division take over the matter in the Swiss civil courts.4  It at
first declined.  It then assigned a liaison attorney.  With the change of Administration, it has now
aggressively undertaken efforts to recover the stolen funds.  That litigation is pending.  At the
time of this report to the court, the Enterprise funds, plus several million dollars in interest that
has accrued since December 1986, remain frozen in Switzerland.

     4 28 U.S.C.  596(b)(2), (1987) P.L. 101-191, 101 Stat. 1305.

Chapter 13

     Private Fundraising:  The Guilty Pleas of Channell and Miller

     As funding prospects for the contras grew increasingly dim in the spring of 1984, one source
of funds for the contras was wealthy American citizens sympathetic to President Reagan's contra
policy and willing to donate large sums to send weapons and other military supplies to the
contras.  Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the National Security Council staff worked principally with
two private fundraisers -- Carl R. ``Spitz'' Channell and Richard R. Miller -- to solicit donations
through a tax-exempt foundation, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty
(NEPL).

     NEPL in 1985 and 1986 received $6,323,020 for the contras.  Because of overhead costs,
commissions and salaries taken by the fundraisers, it disbursed to the contras at North's direction
only $3,306,882.

     In the spring of 1987 Channell and Miller each pleaded guilty to a felony:  conspiracy to
defraud the United States.  Together they provided extensive information about their fundraising
activities.  The pleas were based on Channell and Miller's illegal use of a tax-exempt
organization to raise funds for non-charitable items, including  weapons and other lethal supplies
for the contras.1

     1 The Channell and Miller guilty pleas were obtained principally through the work of
Associate Counsel Michael R. Bromwich and David M. Zornow.

     On April 29, 1987, Channell pleaded guilty to a felony charge of conspiracy to defraud the
United States.  At the time of his plea, Channell entered into an agreement with Independent
Counsel requiring him to cooperate with the investigation and to provide truthful testimony in
future court proceedings.

     On May 6, 1987, Miller entered a plea of guilty to the felony charge of conspiring to defraud
the United States.  At the time of his plea, Miller agreed to cooperate with Independent Counsel's
investigation and to provide truthful testimony in subsequent court proceedings.

     Supplementing the information provided by Channell and Miller, a number of their
subordinates and associates entered into cooperation agreements with Independent Counsel in
exchange for immunity from prosecution.  They included:  Channell employees Daniel L.
Conrad, F. Clifton Smith, Krishna S. Littledale and Jane McLaughlin; Miller associate Francis
Gomez; and Channell-Miller consultant David Fischer.

     Both Channell and Miller in the allocutions preceding their guilty pleas identified North as an
unindicted co-conspirator.  Both men testified at the trial of North, who was acquitted of the
charge of  conspiracy to commit tax fraud and making false statements to Congress regarding his
fundraising activities.2

     2 The private fundraising in which North engaged with Channell and Miller also formed part
of the central diversion-conspiracy charge against North, which was dismissed due to
classified-information problems before the case came to trial.

     National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL)

     Channell formed NEPL in 1984.  He obtained Internal Revenue Service approval to operate it
as a tax-exempt organization based on his representations that its activities were not for profit
and focused on the study, analysis and evaluation of the American socioeconomic and political
systems.  NEPL was exempted from taxes under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
which covers groups organized exclusively for ``religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public
safety, literary or educational'' purposes.  Channell was NEPL's president and Daniel L. Conrad
its executive director.

     Channell had years of experience in raising funds for conservative political causes.  As a
result, he was asked by White House officials early in 1985 to help organize a ``Nicaraguan
Refugee Fund Dinner'' to raise money for the contra cause.  Channell became disenchanted with
the way the dinner-planning had been conducted, and in April 1985 he approached White House
political director Edward Rollins to offer his assistance in promoting President Reagan's contra
policies.

     He was referred to White House political aide John Roberts, who in turn directed him to
Miller, a private public relations consultant who ran a firm known as International Business
Communications (IBC).3  According to Channell, Roberts told him that Miller and his partner
Frank Gomez ``are the White House -- outside the White House.'' 4

     3 In 1984, Miller and his partner Gomez began providing public relations advice to contra
leader Adolfo Calero.  Calero's Nicaraguan Development Council between September 1984 and
May 1985 paid $55,000 in retainer fees to IBC.  (Miller, FBI 302, 7/8/87, p. 4.)

     4 Channell, Select Committees Deposition, 9/1/87, p. 53.

     By the late spring of 1985, Channell and Miller had begun raising money for direct aid to the
contras through NEPL.5  Channell had developed a fundraising technique  in which a
comparatively small number of wealthy potential contributors were invited to briefings with
Administration officials in Washington and then solicited for donations.

     5 Shortly before Miller and Channell joined forces, Miller and North in March 1985 began
pursuing a promised contra donation from a man named Mousalreza Ebrahim Zadeh, also known
as Al-Masoudi, who fraudulently represented himself as a member of the Saudi royal family.
Miller and North referred to him as ``the prince.''

     In various efforts to assist Zadeh throughout 1985 and to obtain from him a promised $14
million donation to the contras, Miller estimated that he disbursed more than $270,000 in IBC
funds, which had been earmarked for the contras and raised by Channell's NEPL organization.
(Miller Grand Jury,  6/17/87, p. 104.)  According to Miller, North was aware of these
expenditures and said that the needs of the contras were so great that money spent on Zadeh from
funds intended for the contras were justified.

     By the fall of 1985, the FBI had begun investigating Zadeh for bank fraud.  The FBI informed
Miller that Zadeh was not a Saudi prince but an Iranian national and con-man.  Despite this
warning, Miller remained in contact with Zadeh to obtain information about American hostages
in the Middle East and continued to pay some of his expenses.  In 1986 Zadeh pleaded guilty to
bank fraud charges.  (Miller, FBI 302, 7/8/87.)

     The North Briefings

     The success of the Channell-Miller operation was dependent on donors recognizing its close
ties to the White House.  Miller introduced Channell to North, who in June 1985 began giving
personal and group briefings for NEPL contributors on the war in Nicaragua and the needs of the
contras.  North's dramatic presentation style prompted many wealthy donors to give tens of
thousands of dollars immediately following these briefings.

     North testified that he received permission from his immediate superior Donald Fortier and
from National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane in 1985 to engage in fundraising with
Channell and Miller.6  North said he was told, however, that he could not solicit donations
directly for the contras under the Boland prohibition.  As a result, North said, he would provide
information about contras needs and then leave it to Channell and others to follow with a
solicitation.  North's participation in these fundraising events gave a clear White House
endorsement to the Channell-Miller operation, and although North may not have specifically
asked for money, he was a party to a joint effort to solicit it.  He had no other purpose in briefing
wealthy donors.

     6 North, North trial testimony, 4/10/89, p. 7217.

     Fortier died in August 1986.  McFarlane denied authorizing fund solicitation, but he pleaded
guilty in March 1988 to misleading Congress based in part on false representations he made
about NSC staff fundraising activities in letters in 1985 to the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence and the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere
Affairs. See McFarlane chapter.

     Following the first NEPL briefing at the White House in June 1985, Channell presented
contra leader Adolfo Calero with a $50,000 check.  But shortly after this direct payment,
Channell expressed concerns to North that the donations might be unwisely used if they were
given directly to contra leaders.7  North told Channell to direct funds to Miller at IBC.  Miller, in
turn, transferred the bulk of these funds to a Cayman Islands bank account, I.C. Inc., that he had
established in coordination with North.8  At North's direction, Miller transferred $1.7 million to
the Enterprise's Swiss accounts. (See ``Flow of Funds from Contributors through NEPL to Lake''
chart, next page.)

     7 In June 1985, North and Secord informed contra leaders that they would no longer receive
money directly for weapons purchases, but that funding would go to the Enterprise, which would
purchase weapons for them.

     8 The name of I.C., Inc., was later changed to Intel Co-operation, Inc.

     Insert offset folio 468C

     Channell arranged for wealthy contributors to attend briefings by North, co-hosted by the
White House  Office of Public Liaison, at the White House or the Old Executive Office Building
(OEOB) next door.  On some occasions -- particularly with the most generous donors -- North
would discuss specific military needs of the contras, and their specific costs.  For example, on
August 23, 1985, North and Channell met with contributor Ellen Garwood in North's OEOB
office and discussed the need for a $75,000 Maule aircraft; Garwood subsequently gave Channell
a $75,000 check to buy a Maule.

     Group briefings were held at the White House on June 27, 1985; November 21, 1985; January
30, 1986; March 27, 1986; and April 16, 1986.  At the January 30, 1986, briefing, the speakers
included North, President Reagan, White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan, White House
Director of Communications Patrick Buchanan, and Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.

     Following White House briefings, Channell arranged for lodging for potential contributors at
the Hay-Adams Hotel, across Lafayette Park from the White House.  It was at the Hay-Adams
that Channell would often make his direct pitch for funding from the donors.  Potential donors
were sometimes shown lists that North prepared describing contra weapons needs and their
prices, including SAM-7 missiles, Blowpipe missiles, C-4 plastic explosives and other
equipment.

     In some cases, the briefings took place outside of Washington.  In September 1985, Channell
flew North by private plane to Dallas to meet with Bunker Hunt.9 Channell, NEPL's executive
director Daniel Conrad, and North brought with them a $5 million to $6 million projected budget
for contra supplies.  According to Channell, North described the needs of the contras but told
Hunt he couldn't ask for money himself.  He then turned the meeting over to Channell.

     9 Channell, North Trial Testimony, 3/8/89, pp. 3414-15.

     As an added incentive for future donations, contributors received thank-you letters on White
House stationery from North and other Administration officials.  Major contributors received
personal thanks in letters from President Reagan.  The most generous were invited to pose for
photos with Reagan in the Oval Office.

     To assist in gaining access to the President, Channell and Miller retained David Fischer, a
former special assistant to President Reagan, and Fischer's associate, Martin L. Artiano.  Both
men had worked in Reagan's unsuccessful 1976 presidential bid and his successful 1980
campaign.  Fischer contracted with Miller and IBC for a $20,000-a-month retainer for him and
Artiano  to be paid by Channell with NEPL funds.10  Fischer received immunity from
prosecution in exchange for his cooperation.

     10 Fischer denied allegations that he received $50,000 from NEPL for each meeting he set up
with President Reagan.  (Fischer, FBI 302, 5/5/87, p. 4; Grand Jury 12/2/87, p. 69.) Independent
Counsel found no evidence supporting these allegations.

     Beginning in January 1986, Channell through Fischer was able to set up private meetings with
the President for the top contributors, who included Barbara Newington, Fred Sacher, Mr. and
Mrs. David Warm, Ellen Garwood, Hunt, May Dougherty King and Robert Driscoll.11  Fischer
said he set up photo opportunities for donors with the President through the Office of White
House Chief of Staff Regan.12

     11 Newington contributed $1,148,471; Sacher $400,000; the Warms $355,232; Garwood
$2,546,598; Hunt $475,000; King $921,500; and Driscoll $106,000.  These were the top donors.

     12 Fischer, FBI 302, 3/18/87, p. 3.

     Fischer said that he described to Regan these individuals as supporters of the President and
the Republican party.  Fischer said that the President was told, preceding the photo sessions,
general information about the people, including the fact that they supported his contra policy.
(Fischer, Grand Jury, 12/2/87, pp. 49-53.)

     NEPL Income

     In 1985 and 1986, NEPL received $10,385,929 in total contributions for a variety of causes.
The major contra-related contributions from June 1985 to November 1986  totaled $6,323,020.
Of this, only $3,306,882 went to contra support, disbursed at North's direction as follows:
$1,738,000 to the Swiss Enterprise account Lake Resources; $1,080,000 in transfers to Calero;
and $488,882 to other contra-related activities.

     The NEPL donations were transferred to Miller's International Business Communications
account and then to foreign accounts, including the Cayman Islands bank account controlled by
Miller, I.C. Inc. Between September 1985 and April 1986, North directed Miller to transfer more
than $1.7 million raised by NEPL to the Enterprise's Lake Resources account in Switzerland,
including:

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     .....9/20/85:  .....$130,000 .....from the I.C. Inc. account

     .....9/26/85:  .....$100,000 .....from the I.C. Inc. account

     .....11/1/85:  .....$150,000 .....from the I.C. Inc. account

     .....11/18/85: .....$48,000 .....from the I.C. Inc. account

     .....12/16/85: .....$300,000 .....from the IBC account

     .....1/21/86:  .....$360,000 .....from the I.C. Inc. account

     .....4/11/86:  .....$650,000 .....from the I.C. Inc. accountrn,n,s,n

     .....Total: .....$1,738,000

--------------------------------------------------------------------

     North also directed Miller to transfer NEPL funds to other projects.  These disbursements
included $200,000 for a purported Arab ``prince'' who promised to make a  sizable donation to
the contras; 13 and $75,000 to the Institute for Terrorism & Subnational Conflict, to pay the
salary of Robert W. Owen, North's personal courier to the contras.  About $450,000 went to a
Cayman Islands entity, World Affairs Counselors Inc., through which Miller and Gomez paid
themselves for their fundraising services.

     13 Miller, FBI 302, 6/11/87, p. 2. See n. 5.

     On two occasions, Roy Godson of the Heritage Foundation helped solicit funds from private
donors.14  In the fall of 1985, Godson, at North's direction, informed Miller that an anonymous
donor wanted to make a large contribution to the Catholic church in Nicaragua.  Based on a plan
agreed to by Godson and Miller, the donor contributed $100,000 to the Heritage Foundation,
which then forwarded the money to a Miller-Gomez entity known as the Institute for
North-South Issues (INSI).  Miller and Gomez took a $20,000 commission and forwarded
$80,000 to their I.C. Inc. account in the Cayman Islands.

     14 Miller, FBI 302, 7/8/87, pp. 10-11.

     In November 1985, North spoke with another private donor about the needs of the contras and
the Nicaraguan Catholic church.15  North informed Miller that Godson had located the donor,
who would be making a $60,000 contribution.16  The money was deposited directly  into the
INSI account and then transferred to the Lake Resources Account in Switzerland.  Miller and
Gomez took no commission on this donation.

     15 Richard MacAleer, FBI 302, 9/30/87, p. 2.

     16 Miller, FBI 302, 7/8/87, p. 10.

     After business expenses, Channell and Miller earned substantial sums for their work.
Channell was paid $345,000 during the two-year period; his associate Conrad was paid
$270,000.  Including ``commissions'' totaling $442,000, Richard Miller and Frank Gomez and
their firm, IBC, received approximately $1.7 million.  Public relations contractors David Fischer
and Martin Artiano received $662,000.

Chapter 14

     Other Money Matters:  Traveler's Checks and Cash Transactions

     Nearly $6 million dollars in cash and traveler's checks changed hands in the course of the Iran
and contra operations of Lt. Col. Oliver L. North and the Enterprise.1  The full extent of the cash
transactions will never be known because of a purposeful lack of documentation.  Traveler's
checks were purchased by contra leader Adolfo Calero and used as a convenient form of
currency.  They were largely traceable as  far as who cashed them, but the task was complicated
by their volume -- 25,637 checks -- and the illegibility of many of the recipients' signatures.

     1 This estimate includes approximately $2.7 million in cash transactions between February
1985 and November 1986 reflected in the Swiss records of the Enterprise, and $2.7 million in
traveler's checks cashed in 1985 and 1986, which could be identified and traced by the Office of
Independent Counsel.  In addition, more than $450,000 in cash was delivered from Southern Air
Transport and other sources to the Enterprise's contra-resupply operation in Central America.

     The largest cash transfers originated with the Enterprise primarily in connection with: (1) cash
deliveries in the United States from foreign Enterprise accounts to Albert Hakim, Richard V.
Secord and Thomas G. Clines; and, (2) the transportation of cash from Southern Air Transport
(SAT) in Miami to the Enterprise's contra-resupply operation in Central America.  Independent
Counsel traced the movement of a total $2.7 million in 97 separate cash transactions through
records supplied by the Swiss Government and Enterprise financial manager Willard Zucker.  In
addition, more than $450,000 in cash deliveries from SAT and from other Enterprise sources to
the resupply operation were analyzed based on SAT and Swiss financial records, and on
interviews with SAT financial officers and couriers who took the cash to Central America.

     A separate but related area of investigation was the ``operational fund'' that North admitted
keeping in his office.  He estimated that $150,000 to $200,000 in cash from Secord and $100,000
in blank traveler's checks from contra leader Adolfo Calero passed through this fund.  From the
fund, which North said he established at CIA Director William Casey's direction, North made
payments to contra leaders and paid other expenses.  North testified that he kept track of the
payments in a ledger, which he said he destroyed in October or November 1986 to protect the
identities of those involved in the unraveling operation.2

     2 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/10/89, pp. 7134-45.  North's daily notebooks, which were
obtained by Independent Counsel when North took the stand in his trial, reflect various payments
to contra leaders, but these notebooks apparently were separate from the ledger North claims to
have kept.

     Finally, large sums of cash were traced in connection with a North-directed hostage-rescue
operation using two Drug Enforcement Agency agents detailed to him.  This operation, which did
not come to fruition, was to have included bribes and hostage-ransom payments, funded largely
by a contribution from H. Ross Perot.  North continued to use these DEA agents in other
operations involving large amounts of cash, making them subject to investigative scrutiny, but no
prosecution resulted.

     The Traveler's Checks

     North was charged in March 1988 with converting to his personal use $4,300 worth of
traveler's checks, provided to him by Calero in support of the contras and hostage-rescue efforts.
The Government at trial showed that North used these checks at supermarkets, gas stations and
other stores.  North, did not dispute the expenditures, but said he used the traveler's checks to
reimburse himself for  operational expenses he had paid out of his pocket.3  The jury acquitted
North of the traveler's-check-conversion charge.

     3 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, p. 6849.

     North estimated that he received from Calero about $100,000 in blank traveler's checks,
which went into an operational fund he kept in his office.  He said the checks were used to make
payments to about 40 contra leaders and to reimburse himself for expenses.4  North said he
discussed the operational fund with Casey and national security advisers Robert C. McFarlane
and John M. Poindexter.5  Asked why he kept such a fund, North said he believed it allowed him
to operate outside the Boland Amendment prohibition on the expenditure of appropriated funds.6
Calero said it was necessary for North to make the payments to contra leaders because of
politically sensitive relationships between Calero and rival faction heads.7

     4 Ibid., pp. 6841-6851.  According to OIC's analysis of the traveler's checks signatories, North
cashed in his true name 49 checks totaling $4,940.  In addition, he cashed 37 checks totaling
$2,420 using his alias, William P. Good.

     5 Ibid., 4/10/89, p. 7135.

     6 Ibid., p. 7173.

     7 Calero, North Trial Testimony, 2/23/89, p. 2081.

     Calero said his lawyer, Carlos Morales, purchased the blank traveler's checks for him from
BAC International  Bank in Miami, using funds transferred from the contras' Cayman Island bank
accounts.8  Calero sent some of the blank traveler's checks to Honduras for expenses there,
others were used to pay the travel expenses of contra leaders, and on occasion they were spent on
contra supplies in the United States.  In addition, payments were made to the families of contras
living in the United States.9

     8 Calero, FBI 302, 9/22/87, p. 1.

     9 Ibid., pp. 1-10.

     In February or March 1985, North asked Calero for $15,000 to $25,000 in traveler's checks for
a hostage-rescue operation, shortly after the contras' Cayman Islands bank account had received
$15 million from Saudi Arabia.10

     10 Ibid., p. 4.

     Calero on several occasions sent some of the checks to North via Robert W. Owen, North's
personal courier to the contras.11  Owen estimated that he gave out more than $30,000 in
traveler's checks to contra leaders at North's behest.12  According to OIC's analysis, Owen
cashed 426 checks totaling $45,880.  In October 1985, North  gave Owen $1,000 in traveler's
checks as a wedding gift.13

     11 Ibid., p. 6.

     12 Owen, North Trial Testimony, 2/27/89, p. 2427.

     13 Ibid., p. 2272.  Clear evidence of abuse was difficult to establish because no records of the
purpose of the expenditures were kept or at least produced to Independent Counsel.

     Both Owen and North's secretary, Fawn Hall, were aware of the checks North kept in his
operational fund.14  According to North and Owen, at least one other White House official,
Johnathan Miller, a State Department employee detailed to the National Security Council staff,
helped North distribute the traveler's checks from the fund to contra leaders.15  In an interview
with OIC, however, Miller claimed little awareness of North's contra efforts and divulged
nothing about his knowledge of North's cash fund.  Miller said his contacts with North were
limited to policy issues and education efforts relating to the contras.16  When Miller
subsequently appeared before the Grand Jury, he refused to testify.17

     14 Fawn Hall testified that North gave her $60 in traveler's checks from the fund for a beach
trip; she repaid the loan. (Hall, Select Committees testimony, 6/8/87, p. 458.)

     15 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, p. 6851; and Owen, North Trial Testimony, 2/27/89,
p. 2427.

     16 Johnathan Miller, FBI 302, 5/1/87, p. 5.

     17 Johnathan Miller, Grand Jury, 5/27/87.

     There are no known documents explaining the traveler's check expenditures, which totaled
$2,691,950.   Calero said he initially kept a journal of the traveler's checks disbursements but
discontinued the practice; he said the journal was no longer available.18  He said he wrote no
memoranda describing the check expenditures because the contras were involved in a covert
operation.19  As a result, OIC obtained no record of what the payments were intended for -- only
who endorsed the blank travel- er's checks.  Even then, on about a fifth of the traveler's checks --
4,982 checks totaling $479,010 -- the signatories' names were illegible.

     18 Calero, FBI 302, 9/22/87, p. 2.

     19 Ibid., p. 3.

     The Cash Drops

     In order to transfer money from the Swiss Enterprise accounts into the United States while
avoiding financial reporting requirements, Zucker employed a New York bank officer, Nan
Morabia, her husband Elliot, and their son David to make cash drops to Hakim, Secord and
others on their behalf.  Beginning in early 1985, Zucker would contact Nan Morabia and inform
her that Hakim or Secord needed a certain amount of cash; Nan Morabia would communicate
this to her husband Elliot, who provided and delivered the cash or had their son David deliver
it.20   Zucker wired from Enterprise accounts an equal amount to an account named ``Codelis'' at
the Trade Development Bank in Geneva.  This account was controlled by two brothers, Edgar
and Elie Mizrahi, who were family friends of the Morabias.21

     20 Nan Morabia was an officer of the Republic National Bank in New York, which handled
many of the Enterprise's wire transfers, but she said the cash-delivery operation was conducted
by her outside bank channels.  (Nan Morabia, FBI 302, 11/16/87, p. 4.)

     21 Ibid., 2/17/88, p. 2.

     According to Nan Morabia, she arranged at Zucker's request six cash drops, ranging in
amount from $5,000 to $60,000.22  David Morabia said he became involved at his father's
request in drops to Hakim and to a man carrying Secord's business card, who was later identified
as William Haskell, a North courier.23  David Morabia said he did not know the amounts of cash
involved.

     22 Ibid., p. 2.

     23 David Morabia, FBI 302, 2/19/88, p. 3.

     David Morabia delivered to Hakim in May 1986 $100,000 at the New York Hilton Hotel.  He
delivered to Haskell in November 1986 at the Summit Hotel in New York an uncertain amount,
possibly totaling $100,000. Elliot Morabia delivered $100,000 in cash to Hakim in New York, on
uncertain dates, possibly in June and August 1986; he delivered $50,000 more to Hakim in late
October 1986.  Nan Morabia delivered $7,000 in cash to Robert W. Owen at Republic  National
Bank in New York in August 1985, and she delivered to Zucker in New York in late September
1986 cash totaling $50,000.24

     24 In addition to cash payments to Enterprise figures, Nan Morabia said that on November 26,
1986, she delivered $150,000 in cash to Adnan Khashoggi, an Iran arms sales financier, in New
York.  She said this cash delivery was an authorized payment from the account of Samir
Trabigulsi, who has not been identified as an Iran/contra figure.  Khashoggi, who had already
been questioned in Paris by the time Nan Morabia informed Independent Counsel of this cash
drop, was not asked about it.  (Nan Morabia, FBI 302, 2/17/88, p. 9.)

     The Morabias' drops do not reflect the full extent of the cash deliveries to Hakim and others.
Zucker sometimes made the deliveries himself or had other individuals make them.25

     25 Zucker, FBI 302, 11/6-10/87, p. 9.

     Mrs. Morabia said she understood the purpose of the secret cash deliveries was to avoid
Currency Transaction Reports, requiring that cash transactions involving $10,000 or more be
reported to the Federal Government.26  The drops were made surreptitiously -- code names and
phrases were used when the parties met in person, so that each could determine the other's good
faith.  David Morabia said he sometimes would carry with him a half of a dollar bill; the recipient
of the cash would have to present the missing half in order for the drop to be made.27

     26 Nan Morabia, FBI 302, 11/16/87, p. 2.  In addition to Currency Transaction Reports, these
cash drops also circumvented Currency and Monetary Reports, which are required for cash being
transported in or out of the United States.

     27 David Morabia, FBI 302, 2/8/88, pp. 1-2.

     Nan and David Morabia were given immunity from prosecution in exchange for their
testimony. Elliot Morabia died in March 1987 before he could be questioned.

     SAT's Cash Deliveries to the Resupply Operation

     Once the contra-resupply network was operational in Central America in 1986, cash was
transported to the region from Southern Air Transport's petty-cash funds at the request of the
operation's managers Richard Gadd and later Robert Dutton.  According to OIC's analysis of
SAT financial records, the Miami company disbursed approximately $467,000 in cash in
connection with the contra-resupply operation.

     The cash was carried in amounts ranging from several thousand dollars up to $50,000 by
resupply pilots and other employees traveling from Miami to Ilopango airbase in El Salvador,
where it was used for fuel purchases.28  The Enterprise reimbursed these cash advances with
wire transfers to SAT accounts.29  In addition to the SAT cash transactions, Gadd's company,
Eagle Aviation Service and Technology (EAST), issued a total of $43,000 in  cash on four
occasions for transfer to the fuel fund in Central America.30

     28 William Langton, FBI 302, 4/30/87, p. 2.

     29 Ibid., p. 1.  Also, Robert H. Mason, Grand Jury, 6/19/87, pp. 11-12.

     30 Cynthia Dondlinger, FBI 302s, 3/19/87, 4/6/87, 4/12/87.

     Once the cash was delivered to Ilopango airbase in El Salvador, fuel fund deposits were made
by Enterprise employees Luis Posada (alias Ramon Medina) and Felix Rodriguez, and recorded
by William Cooper.31

     31 Dutton, Grand Jury, 5/11/87, p. 39.

     Rafael Quintero, Secord's representative in Central America, personally carried to Central
America at least $30,000 in cash from SAT in Miami.  He said he also received cash several
times from Secord's office in northern Virginia for delivery to Central America.32

     32 Quintero, FBI 302, 12/28/87, pp. 8-9.

     On at least one occasion, cash was carried from SAT in Miami to North in Washington.  In
August 1986, Shirley Napier, Secord's secretary, flew to Miami to pick up a package containing
$16,000 in cash.33  Napier delivered the cash to Fawn Hall, North's secretary.34  Hall gave the
cash to North.  On the same day, he gave $10,800 in cash to one of the DEA agents involved
with him in hostage-rescue efforts.

     33 Napier, FBI 302, 4/2/87, p. 5.  Napier was involved in another cash transaction in March
1986, when she picked up $15,000 in cash from two branches of First American Bank and
delivered it to Hakim at STTGI offices in Northern Virginia.

     34 Ibid., p. 5.

     North testified that it was ``reasonable'' to conclude that the purpose of using cash in the
Enterprise operations was that it was untraceable.35  Independent Counsel was able to identify
21 transactions involving approximately $357,000 in cash in which North participated.

     35 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/10/89, p. 7163.

     In conducting its contra and Iran operations, the Enterprise employed couriers whom North
personally trusted to deliver traveler's checks and cash, as well as to relay secret information.
Rob Owen, in addition to handling traveler's checks for contra leaders, picked up and delivered
$16,500 in cash.  William Haskell, a tax accountant whom North sent on a variety of missions,
received an estimated $143,905 in cash and dispersed $116,600 that could be traced.  Both Owen
and Haskell received immunity from prosecution in exchange for their testimony about their
roles as North's couriers.

     The Cash:  The DEA Hostage-Rescue Operation

     The largest lump sum of cash North is known to have handled was $200,000 provided to him
in May 1985 for a hostage-rescue effort.  Ross Perot provided the money for the operation, which
North conducted with two Drug Enforcement Agents temporarily detailed to the NSC staff.

     In all, Perot made available $1.3 million for this operation.  In addition to the previously
mentioned  $200,000 which was paid to a DEA informant, Perot provided another $100,000
through the FBI, and $1 million for a hostage-ransom payment that was never made.  The $1
million in ransom money was returned to Perot.  Other funding for the operation came from the
CIA, which spent $50,000 for payments to informants; and the DEA, which spent $49,098 for
travel expenses and informant payments.  Finally, North generated approximately $150,900 in
traveler's checks and currency from Calero, Hakim and Richard R. Miller, a private fundraiser.

     Independent Counsel investigated possible conversions of any of the large sums of cash and
traveler's checks for personal purposes by the DEA agents.  Possible misuse of small amounts
was found in the case of one of the DEA agents, whose names are protected.  It did not merit
prosecution.

     Third-Country Funding and the Missing Brunei Funds

     From 1984 through 1986, Administration officials approached more than a dozen foreign
countries for various forms of assistance for the contras.36  Most of them responded positively,
providing weapons, weapons end-user certificates, training, equipment and other aid for the
contras.  Three countries -- Saudi Arabia, Taiwan and Brunei -- made or attempted to make
substantial cash contributions.  The Saudis donated $32 million between July 1984 and March
1985.  Taiwan contributed a total of $2 million in September 1985 and February 1986.

     36 These included Saudi Arabia, Israel, China, Taiwan, South Korea, Chile, Singapore,
Venezuela, England, South Africa, Brunei, Panama, Honduras, Salvador, Guatemala and Costa
Rica.

     In the summer of 1986, Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Assistant Secretary Elliott
Abrams decided to solicit $10 million from the Sultan of Brunei.  Although Shultz originally was
to have made the approach, he failed to do it.  Abrams instead solicited the contribution from a
Bruneian official at a meeting in London.37

     37 Abrams, FBI 302, 11/5/87, p. 5. See Abrams chapter.

     Abrams provided the Bruneian official with a bank account number into which the deposit
should be made.  Abrams had obtained it from North.  But the number -- which was to have been
for the Enterprise's Lake Resources account in the Credit Suisse bank Geneva -- had two
numbers transposed, and the subsequent $10 million deposit went into the wrong account.38

     38 Instead of Lake Resources account number 386.430.22.1, the number North provided to
Abrams, on a card typed by North's secretary Fawn Hall, was 368.430.22.1.

     After the United States submitted to Switzerland its initial request for assistance in
investigating possible Iran/contra crimes in December 1987, Swiss authorities noted the
similarity of the two account numbers.  The individual who controlled account number
368.430.22.1 had not been  identified by the United States as among a list of individuals involved
in Iran/contra.  Therefore, the magistrate executing the request concluded that this individual was
not involved in activities subject to the request.  The magistrate stated that this individual
benefitted from the transfer of funds solely because of the transposition of figures in the account
number.

     Independent Counsel late in 1989 obtained new information indicating that the $10 million
Brunei contribution passed through an account or accounts controlled by or on behalf of Bruce
Rappaport, a Swiss businessman with ties to certain individuals involved in the Iran/contra
affair.39  In August 1989, Rappaport's lawyers received  from Credit Suisse bank a letter
disclaiming Rappaport as the recipient of the Brunei funds.  It stated:  ``Credit Suisse knows the
identity of the person in whose account the Sultan of Brunei's $10 million was placed.  Neither
Bruce Rappaport, nor any entity directly or indirectly controlled by Bruce Rappaport was the
recipient of the Sultan of Brunei's $10 million.'' 40  Despite Credit Suisse's denial, Independent
Counsel sought further information regarding the deposit through the State Department, but these
efforts did not resolve the question.

     39 Rappaport had participated from 1984 through early 1986 in a plan to build an oil pipeline
from Iraq through Jordan to the Gulf of Aqaba.  Rappaport and his representatives met repeatedly
with individuals at the National Security Council to secure financing for a ``political risk''
insurance package to protect Rappaport's projected investment in the pipeline.  Among the
individuals with whom he met were McFarlane and CIA Director William Casey, a long-time
friend.

     The Aqaba pipeline was never built.  However, during the precise time that Israel, individuals
from the NSC staff and Rappaport were discussing U.S. Government financing and the division
of profits from the pipeline, many of the same individuals from the NSC staff were participating
(along with Israel) in the arms sales to Iran in November 1985 and February 1986.

     Allegations of improper use of influence by Attorney General Edwin Meese III on behalf of
Rappaport were investigated in 1987 by Independent Counsel James McKay.

     40 Rappaport, FBI 302, 10/2/90, pp. 1-2.

     In October 1990, Independent Counsel questioned Rappaport, under an immunity agreement,
about his knowledge of the Brunei funds.41  Rappaport said the account that received the Brunei
deposit was not his, and that it did not belong to any of his family members or to any companies
in which he had an interest.  He said the Brunei money was not transferred from one of his
accounts into any other account, and the money was not converted into some other form, such as
certificates of deposit owned or controlled by him.   Rappaport said he did not know whose
account received the Brunei deposit.

     41 Ibid.

     Independent Counsel was unable to determine the recipient of the $10 million Brunei deposit.
Although Swiss authorities continued to refuse to identify the recipient, they did report that the
money was returned to Brunei.42

     42 Rappaport also said he did not know North or Abrams.  He said he had met on June 24,
1985, with McFarlane.  Rappaport said either McFarlane or E. Bob Wallach, a long-time friend
of Attorney General Meese, told Rappaport in that time frame that the NSC had a ``piggy bank
account'' with many millions of dollars in it which could be used for emergency purposes.
Rappaport said he thought he was told about the money because it might have been available for
the Aqaba pipeline project.  Rappaport said he believed McFarlane controlled the fund.
McFarlane said Meese in mid-1985 recommended that he meet with Rappaport concerning the
Aqaba pipeline.  (Rappaport, FBI 302, 10/2/90, p. 4.)

     According to McFarlane, Rappaport asked if Israel assured him it would support the project,
would he help get funding for it.  McFarlane said he thought such a project, with Israel's
endorsement, would promote goodwill in the region.  McFarlane recalled that he talked to the
Export-Import Bank and possibly representatives of Overseas Private Investments Corporation
(OPIC) regarding the project.  (McFarlane, FBI 302, 9/27/90, pp. 9-10.)

Part VI

     Investigations and Cases:

    Officers of the Central Intelligence Agency

     The Central Intelligence Agency's role in the Iran/contra affair was in large measure a
manifestation of Director William J. Casey and President Reagan's shared goal of rolling back
Soviet-supported communist regimes around the world.  Casey and Reagan mutually supported
the cause of the Nicaraguan contras.  This support inspired Lt. Col. Oliver L. North's efforts to
supply the contras in defiance of the Boland Amendment's prohibition on U.S. military aid.
Casey also respected Reagan's concern for the Americans held hostage in Lebanon.  Casey was
an early and vigorous advocate of the Iran arms sales and was strongly against telling Congress
about them until all of the hostages were released -- a position consistent with his general attitude
as director of central intelligence that Congress be told as little as possible.

     Casey's support of the contras and his backing of the Iran arms sales had direct consequences
for the officers under his direction.  Casey's position on the contras gave his chief of the Central
American Task Force, Alan D. Fiers, Jr., a green light to ``dovetail'' the CIA's Central American
activities with those of North's contra-resupply operation.  With Casey's encouragement, Fiers
also used North to replace CIA funding of a classified project banned by Congress in the summer
of 1985.

     As for the Iran arms sales, Casey was largely responsible for forcing the CIA's Directorate of
Operations,  the U.S. Government's covert-action arm, to rely on operatives whom they
distrusted, whom they could not monitor, and who ultimately laid the groundwork for the
infamous diversion of Iran arms profits to the contras.  Casey supported the decision to have the
national security adviser direct the operations of the Iran arms sales.  He also overrode strong
opposition from seasoned CIA professionals to using Manucher Ghorbanifar, retired Air Force
Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, and Albert Hakim in the effort.  Ghorbanifar was ``a liar and has a
record of deceit,'' warned Casey's deputy, John McMahon.  ``[W]e would be aiding and abetting
the wrong people.'' 1  Thomas Twetten, a senior agency official, returned from meetings in
Europe shocked to learn that Secord and Hakim, whom North told Twetten were assisting him in
Central American operations, were principals in the Iran initiative.  Casey, who had originally
paired Secord and North in contra resupply, overrode these concerns.

     1 DIRECTOR 705574, 1/25/86, ER 24834-35.

     When the Iran/contra affair became public in late 1986, at least three of Casey's subordinates -- Fiers, Clair E. George, and Duane R. Clarridge -- responded to Congress in keeping with the
tone set by Casey throughout his tenure at the CIA:  Tell Congress as little as possible and keep
the spotlight off the White House.  Independent  Counsel found that key Agency officials were
better informed and more directly involved in the contra-resupply effort and in the Iran arms
sales than they previously admitted.

     It would be wrong, however, to blame all of the improper conduct of CIA officers on Casey.
Some CIA officers had their own motives for violating the law during the course of the affair, or
for denying knowledge of it once it came into public view.  For example, James L. Adkins, chief
of a CIA facility in Central America, acted out of what he claimed were ``humanitarian'' motives
in supplying the contras in violation of the Boland cut-off of contra aid, without any
demonstrable tie to Casey or other CIA officials.  Joseph F. Fernandez, a CIA station chief in
Costa Rica, disregarded explicit warnings from his superiors:  He deliberately violated the
Boland restraints, and subsequently lied to federal investigators out of friendship for North and to
protect himself.  The claims of faulty memories by ``CIA Subject #1,'' a counterpart of
Fernandez's in Central America, and Robert M. Gates, deputy director of the CIA, were
self-protective.

     The accounts that follow in this section are based on an exhaustive review of CIA cables and
documents, and from extensive interviews with former and present Agency employees.

     Independent Counsel's investigation resulted in a comprehensive analysis of CIA activities in
the Iran arms sales and in contra resupply during the mid-1980s.  Despite this investigation, the
last word about the CIA in Iran/contra cannot be written.  Casey suffered a seizure in his office
on December 15, 1986, and died on May 6, 1987.  Independent Counsel never questioned him,
and the investigation recovered only a few contemporaneous notes written by him.2  A
potentially significant area of inquiry was thus closed to Independent Counsel.

     2 Independent Counsel learned in November 1987 that   after Casey had resigned as DCI in
January 1987, the CIA removed safes, telephones and other Agency equipment and materials
from Casey's three homes.  The CIA later returned to Casey's widow, Sophia, 25 boxes of
unclassified papers, documents and other materials.  (Murphy, FBI 302, 11/5/87, pp. 1-2.)  A
subpoena directing Mrs. Casey to produce to the Grand Jury ``any and all'' documents, diaries,
notes, calendars and other materials maintained by Casey in his capacity as director of the CIA
had little result.  Mrs. Casey reported that the boxes had been sent to the Hoover Institution at
Stanford University.  Family members who reviewed the boxes said that no CIA material or
documents or notes relevant to Iran/contra were included.  (Sophia Casey, Grand Jury, 3/7/88, pp.
7-18.)

     Renewed interest in possible Casey documents and relevant Iran/contra materials was spurred
in 1992 with the opening of the Casey Library and statements by Casey's biographer, Joseph
Persico, that Mrs. Casey had made available to him all of Casey's personal papers.  Despite
extensive effort, no significant materials were recovered.

     Casey's death also provided an opportunity for many -- most importantly, North and Fiers -- to
attribute activities and decisions to the late director, without rebuttal from him.  That Casey was
close to both North  and Fiers cannot be disputed.  As the head of an agency that had no
supervisory authority over North, Casey had an impressive number of individual contacts with
the National Security Council staffmember.  Casey also interceded with the White House in May
1984 to keep North on the staff of the National Security Council, characterizing North's
impending transfer back to the Marine Corps as a ``critical problem'' for the Administration's
Central American program.3  As for Fiers, Casey personally put Fiers in charge of the contra
program as the ``full Boland'' restrictions went into effect, and both men regularly sidestepped the
CIA's chain of command to work exclusively on the program. Nevertheless, important charges
about Casey's conduct were made only after his death, making verification in many instances
impossible.

     3 Meese Notes, 5/15/84, 55301467; Kelley, North Trial Testimony, 4/3/89, pp. 6272-74.

     The OIC charged four CIA officials with criminal offenses:  George, the deputy director for
operations and the third highest-ranking CIA official; Clarridge, chief of the Agency's Latin
American Division and, later, its European Division; Fiers; and Fernandez.  George was
convicted by a jury of two felony counts of false statements and perjury before Congress.
Clarridge was charged with seven  counts of perjury and false statements.  Fiers pleaded guilty to
two misdemeanor counts of withholding information from Congress. The case against Fernandez,
who was charged with four counts of false statements and obstruction, was dismissed after the
CIA, backed by Attorney General Richard Thornburgh, refused to declassify information sought
by the defense.

     President Bush pardoned George, Clarridge and Fiers on December 24, 1992, before Clarridge
could be tried.

Chapter 15

     William J. Casey

     William J. Casey served as director of central intelligence from January 1981 until he resigned
on January 29, 1987, incapacitated by a brain tumor.  Casey had been director of President
Reagan's successful 1980 campaign, but his appointment as CIA director was not seen as a
political reward.  During World War II, Casey had a distinguished record in the Office of
Strategic Services, the forerunner of the CIA, serving as intelligence chief for Europe.  He also
was an experienced Washington hand, having served as head of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and as under secretary of state for economic affairs in the Nixon Administration.
As CIA director, Casey and President Reagan shared similar world views, at the center of which
was their determination to roll back communism and bring about the collapse of the Soviet
Union.

     The Iran/contra investigations and prosecutions could not have been pursued without
developing evidence on Casey's role, particularly guidance or authorization he may have
provided in the commission of illegal acts.  Because Casey did not have the opportunity to
answer questions arising from the evidence, however, Independent Counsel did  not conduct his
investigation with an eye toward establishing Casey's guilt or innocence.1

     1 For example, North, at his trial, testified to conversations with Casey.  By that time in his
investigation, as indicated below, Independent Counsel did not use his resources just to check the
truth of some of North's statements.

     There is evidence that Casey played a role as a Cabinet-level advocate both in setting up the
covert network to resupply the contras during the Boland funding cut-off, and in promoting the
secret arms sales to Iran in 1985 and 1986.  In both instances, Casey was acting in furtherance of
broad policies established by President Reagan.

     There is evidence that Casey, working with two national security advisers to President Reagan
during the period 1984 through 1986 -- Robert C. McFarlane and Vice Admiral John M.
Poindexter -- approved having these operations conducted out of the National Security Council
staff with Lt. Col. Oliver L. North as the action officer, assisted by retired Air Force Maj. Gen.
Richard V. Secord.  And although Casey tried to insulate himself and the CIA from any illegal
activities relating to the two secret operations, using there is evidence that he was involved in at
least some of those activities and may have attempted to keep them concealed from Congress.

     Casey, North and the Contras

     There is abundant evidence that President Reagan was determined that the contras be
sustained as a viable military force during the period of the Boland cut-off, from October 1984 to
October 1986.2  When President Reagan was asked in written interrogatories from Independent
Counsel whether he authorized Casey, among others, to take action with respect to the contras
during the Boland cut-off period, Reagan said the question was too broad to answer specifically.
He conceded that Administration policy was to support the contras:  ``Thus, Administration
officials were generally authorized to implement that policy.'' 3

     2 The Boland Amendment was signed into law by President Reagan as part of Public Law
98-473.  It expressly prohibited the use of appropriated funds from being obligated or expended
in support of military or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua, stating in relevant part:

     During fiscal year 1985, no funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency, the
Department of Defense, or any other agency or entity of the United States involved in
intelligence activities may be obligated or expended for the purpose or which would have the
effect of supporting, directly or indirectly, military or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by any
nation, group, organization, movement, or individual.

     3 Answers of the President of the United States to Interrogatories, In re Grand Jury
Investigation, Answer to Question 9 (hereafter, ``Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories'').  President
Reagan stated:  ``As I have stated in these Interrogatory answers, it was the consistent policy of
my Administration to advocate the support of the Freedom Fighters by the Congress, the
American people, and our friends and allies abroad.  Thus, Administration officials were
generally authorized to implement that policy.''

     But the President also stated that he never authorized the transfer of CIA contra duties to the
NSC and did not recall discussing such a transfer with anyone.  The President also stated that he
did not authorize anyone to violate the Boland Amendment or other laws in implementing his
policy to support the contras.4

     4 Ibid., Answers to Questions 14-17.

     There is evidence that Casey welcomed North's taking over some of the activities done by the
CIA prior to enactment of the Boland Amendment.  North testified that in the spring of 1984, as
CIA funds appropriated by Congress to assist the contras began to run out, he was directed by
McFarlane to set up a secret account for the contras to accept Saudi Arabia's
$1-million-per-month contribution.  McFarlane directed North to contact Casey to find out which
of the contra leaders should receive the contributions and get foreign accounts for the money
transfers.5

     5 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, pp. 6778-79.

     Casey and McFarlane in the spring of 1984 were aware that contra funds were running out and
discussed alternative means of financing.6  In a March 27, 1984, memo  to McFarlane, Casey
endorsed McFarlane's plan to seek funding from third countries, including Israel.  Casey stated
that the CIA was exploring possible contributions from the Israelis and another country.7

     6 In a June 11, 1984, memo, CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin advised Casey that the
$24 million FY 1984 appropriation for CIA assistance to the contras had virtually run out, and
told Casey further that under the Anti-Deficiency Act, 31 U.S.C.  1341-1519, sanctions could
be imposed directly on CIA officers if spending beyond the $24 million cap occurred.
(Memorandum from Sporkin to Casey, 6/11/84, ER 46099.)

     7 Memorandum from Casey to McFarlane, 3/27/84, ER 13712.

     At a June 25, 1984, meeting of the National Security Planning Group (NSPG), Casey debated
with Secretary of State George P. Shultz the legality of obtaining contra funding from third
countries in the face of the Boland restrictions.  Shultz declared that White House Chief of Staff
James Baker, who was not at that meeting, had said that soliciting aid from third countries might
be ``an impeachable offense.''  Casey insisted that ``[w]e need the legal opinion which makes
clear that the U.S. has the authority to facilitate third country funding for the anti-Sandinistas. . .
.'' 8  The following day, Casey and CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin met with Attorney
General William French Smith and legal advisers from the Justice Department to press for such
an opinion, framing the issue in terms of aid from ``other nations in the region.''  Smith expressed
the view that discussions with third countries for such assistance would be permissible as long as
it was made clear that the  countries must spend their own funds and would not be reimbursed by
the United States.9

     8 Minutes of NSPG meeting, 6/25/84, ALU 007863-76.

     9 Memorandum from Sporkin to the Record, 6/26/84, ALV 035917.

     While the CIA was, in May 1984, still able to supply, direct, and advise the contras, it was
already apparent to the Administration that Congress was going to pass very restrictive
legislation, perhaps even an outright ban on contra assistance in the coming fiscal year.  North
testified that in the spring and summer of 1984, he was instructed on the CIA's contra operation,
introduced to the CIA officials with whom he would be dealing and brought together with contra
leaders.10  North said Casey also gave him the names of CIA assets in Central America with
whom to work.  North said Casey ``told me to work with them  because they were totally reliable
people, that they had worked with the CIA before, that they were people who we could trust in
Central America.'' 11

     10 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, p. 6781-6782:

     Through the summer, as a consequence of my having been sent down and meeting with
resistance [contra] leadership, having given Mr. McFarlane the accounts to set up funding for
them, slowly but surely more and more of that CIA responsibility had been, I suppose, passed on
to me.  I don't recall that there was any specific break point up until late in the summer where I
was finally told, Okay, you have got it all, but it did occur just before the bill [the Boland
Amendment] passed into law, having been fought bitterly by the Administration and by some
supporters up in Congress.  There was finally a point in time where Director Casey set up a
number of meetings with me and the resistance, some of them down south in Central America,
some in Miami, some in Washington, through he and his people.  And basically, what we would
call a hand off, just like in basketball, I suppose, you got the ball, go on with it.  And certainly
that was fully in force by October when the bill was passed.

     11 Ibid., p. 6826. Independent Counsel was unable to corroborate North's story.

     North testified that at Casey's direction in late summer 1984, he recruited Secord, a retired Air
Force major general skilled at clandestine operations, to set up his contra-supply network.12
According to North, Secord's operation was modeled on prior CIA operations, using a series of
organizations to obtain weapons and deliver them to the contras.

     12 Ibid., p. 6815.  According to a North computer message, Casey also later approved
Secord's involvement in the covert arms sales to Iran, designating him as a CIA agent to serve as
an intermediary in 1986.  (PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 1/15/86, 012.)  Under the
January 17, 1986, Presidential Finding, which Casey and CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin
helped North put together, the U.S. Army sold the TOW missiles to the CIA, who in turn passed
them on to Secord, the unnamed ``third party'' in the Finding, who then delivered them to Iranian
agents.

     In late July 1984, Casey took North to a meeting in a Central American location of all of the
CIA's senior field officers in the region.  ``Director Casey told me he wanted me to see them
eyeball-to-eyeball and them to see me, so we would know each other in the event, his words
were, something went wrong,'' North said.13  North testified that Casey advised him to set up a
secret account to accept  foreign contributions to the contras so that arms and other purchases
would be controlled by him rather than the contra leaders.14  North testified that at the end of
1984, he also set up an operational account in his office to provide funds for the contra and later
the hostage-release operations.15  North said Casey gave him a ledger to keep an accurate
account of the cash and traveler's checks disbursements from the fund.  North said he destroyed
the ledger in October or November 1986 at Casey's direction when it appeared that the secret
contra-supply effort would be publicly exposed following the downing over Nicaragua of one of
the operation's aircraft and the capture of crew-member Eugene Hasenfus.16

     13 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/6/89, p. 6841.

     14 Ibid., 4/10/89, pp. 7267-68, 7273-84.

     15 Ibid., 4/6/89, pp. 6841-49.

     16 Ibid., 4/10/89, pp. 7138-39.  Independent Counsel was unable to corroborate North's
testimony concerning the ledger or Casey's instruction to destroy it.

     Casey demonstrated his high regard for North as a Central American player by asking
Presidential counselor Edwin Meese III in the spring of 1984 to intercede when North was
scheduled to be detailed back to the Marines.  A Meese notebook entry on May 15, 1984, shows
a call from Casey:  ``Critical problem g008re Central America:  Keep Ollie North from being
trf'd back to USMC.  Will F [follow up] + call GEN Kelley [P. X. Kelley, Commandant of the
Marine Corps].''  Although he had misgivings  about extending North's tour at the NSC, Kelley
agreed to do so.17

     17 Meese Notes, 5/15/84, 55301467 (emphasis in original); Kelley, North Trial Testimony,
4/3/89, pp. 6272-74.

     The only testimony linking the President to Casey's  purported decision to install North as the
action officer for the contras was the hearsay testimony of CIA official Vincent Cannistraro at the
North trial.  Testifying as a defense witness, Cannistraro described a series of meetings in the
spring and summer of 1984 in which he said the ``hand off'' to North was effected.  Cannistraro
said in June 1984 in a meeting in Casey's office attended by Duane R. (Dewey) Clarridge, then
head of the CIA's Latin American Operations Division; Joseph F. Fernandez, then an officer in
the CIA's Central American Task Force; and contra leader Adolfo Calero, Casey had told Calero
that

     speaking on behalf of the President of the United States, [Casey] wanted to assure the freedom
fighters [the contras] that the United States government would find a way to continue its support
to the freedom fighters after the 30th of September, 1984, if the Boland Amendment became part
of the operational restrictions against the involvement of the CIA.18

     18 Cannistraro, North Trial Testimony, 4/3/89, pp. 6404-5.

     Cannistraro said that Casey explained that North, ``as a member of the National Security
Council, would not be subject to those restrictions and that North would be a principal  point of
reference.'' 19  Casey said that ``he had discussed this with the President of the United States and
that it was agreed with the President that this was how it should be handled.'' 20

     19 Ibid., p. 6405.  Casey and President Reagan took the position that the President and the
NSC were not covered by the Boland restrictions, an interpretation not shared by Congress or
Independent Counsel.

     20 Ibid., pp. 6409-10.  Independent Counsel was unable to corroborate Cannistraro's
testimony.

     Aside from North's testimony, the most important evidence of Casey's role in handing off to
North the CIA's contra-support operations is testimony from Alan D. Fiers, Jr., chief of the CIA's
Central American Task Force.21  Fiers was appointed to that position by Casey in late August
1984, about a month before the Boland cut-off became effective.  Fiers, following his guilty plea,
testified that shortly after he assumed his new position in approximately mid-September 1984, he
was called at his home by Clarridge, and was asked to come in to the office.  Once there, Fiers
was introduced to North by Clarridge.  ``He [Clarridge] said, `He's [North] someone you need to
get to know.  He's got responsibilities at the  NSC for Central America and you'll be working
with him.' '' 22  In early November 1984 Fiers said he was again called into Clarridge's office and
told: ``Alan . . . you've got to cooperate with Ollie [North].  Ollie has got special responsibilities
here for -- for things in Central America and I want you to work with him.'' 23  Fiers said he was
concerned that Clarridge's directive ``would draw me into a collaboration with Ollie North that
took me beyond the bounds of that [the Boland cut-off] restriction.'' 24

     21 Fiers pleaded guilty on July 7, 1991, to two charges of withholding information from
Congress, including facts about secret Government efforts to support the contras during Boland.
He was a key Government witness in the trial of Clair E. George, the former deputy director for
operations at the CIA.  George was convicted on December 9, 1992, of two felony charges of
perjury and false statements before Congress.  Both George and Fiers were pardoned by
President Bush on December 24, 1992.

     22 Fiers, George Trial Testimony, 10/28/92, pp. 1254-57.

     23 Ibid., pp. 1257-58.

     24 Ibid., p. 1261.

     Shortly after Fiers reported his concerns about North to Clarridge's successor as chief of the
Latin American Division and to Clair E. George, CIA deputy director for operations, Fiers was
summoned to a meeting with Casey, George, the new chief of the Latin American Division, and
North.  Fiers gave this account of the meeting:

     . . . the director sort of leaned back in his chair and said, ``Ollie, Alan says you're operating in
Central America'' or words to that effect.  ``Are you operating in Central America?''  And then the
director said to me, ``Alan, tell Ollie what you told -- what you said.''  And I was sort of taken
aback and kind of rounded the edges off -- softened -- the conversation that had taken place
between Dewey [Clarridge] and myself . . . Well, the director then said, ``Now Ollie, I don't want
you operating in Central America.  You understand that?''  And  Ollie said, ``Yes, sir. I
understand it.'' 25

     25 Ibid., pp. 1263-64.

     After the meeting, George told Fiers that he had just witnessed a charade:  ``Alan, you've got
to understand what happened in there.  What we saw was for our consumption.   Sometime in the
dark of night Bill Casey has told the President:  I'll take care of Central America, Mr. President;
don't worry about it.  And what you saw was essentially for our consumption.''  Fiers said he
replied to George, ``Wow, if that's true and if it blows it will be worse than Watergate.'' 26

     26 Ibid., p. 1264.

     To Fiers, the message from George, the third highest ranking officer in the CIA, was clear:
North, with Casey's support and direction, was taking on the CIA's role of supplying and advising
the contras during the period of the Boland prohibitions.

     This message was underscored to Fiers shortly after the ``charade'' meeting by two separate
incidents.  The first involved a request from North for CIA-produced intelligence on Nicaraguan
air defenses, which would have been valuable to the contras but which Fiers could not produce
under the Boland restrictions.  When Fiers declined to produce it, within 24 hours he was
summoned to bring the requested intelligence to George's office.  Describing the  incident, Fiers
said:  ``I took it upstairs and gave it to him [George] and said, `What are you going to do with it?'
And he said, `Never mind, just give it to me.' '' 27

     27 Ibid., p. 1269.

     The second example cited by Fiers involved a policy paper he was asked to write by Casey on
what the United States ought to do to advance its goals in Central America.   While his task force
was in the final process of completing the paper, Fiers said, North called and asked for a copy.
After Fiers refused to provide it to North, Fiers got a call from Casey asking him to bring the
policy paper to the director's office in the Old Executive Office Building adjacent to the White
House.  After working into the night to complete the paper, Fiers gave this account of delivering
it to Casey the following morning:

     I went down with it and he [Casey] looked at it and he said, ``Now, take it down and give it to
Ollie North.''  And I thought to myself, wow, I just got rolled big time.  I took it down and gave it
to Oliver North.  And I came away with two conclusions: that Ollie North had the ability to work
down in my chain of command and to cause to override me if and when I didn't do something.28

     28 Ibid., p. 1271.

     Casey was aware that North was raising money for the contras.  He referred a potential
contributor, beer magnate Joseph Coors, to North, explaining to Coors  that he, Casey, could not
be involved in assisting the contras because of the Boland restrictions.29

     29 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/10/89, pp. 7220-21.

     Casey, like other Administration witnesses when asked by congressional committees how the
contras were managing to prosper during the Boland cut-off period, professed ignorance.30

     30 See, for example, Letter from Casey to Hamilton, 8/28/85, ER 11618 (explaining that
Casey was not ``in a position to answer in any authoritative way'' inquiries whether the NSC was
providing support to the contras).

     In September 1986, in response to allegations that the CIA had provided $50 million to the
contras over the past two years, Casey replied to the Senate Intelligence Committee: ``The CIA
has not provided any assistance whatsoever to support military or paramilitary operations in
Nicaragua beyond that which was specifically authorized by Congress in the FY86 Intelligence
Authorization Act.  This Agency has scrupulously adhered to congressional restrictions in the
past and will continue to do so in the future.'' 31

     31 Letter from Casey to Durenberger, 9/25/86, DDO TS8366-86.

     In August 1984 CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin determined that a draft version of the
Boland prohibition and the subsequent congressional floor debate ``make it clear that this
restriction is intended by its  sponsors to halt CIA activities supporting the Contras.'' 32  While
strict Agency guidelines were issued to appraise CIA field personnel of this reading, Casey's
increased contacts with North show that he did not regard himself as cut off from the contras.33

     32 Memorandum to Sporkin, 8/10/84, DO 182616-13.

     33 Disregarding unrecorded Casey-North meetings and telephone calls, the number of
recorded contacts between them is impressive.  In 1984, nine meetings with North are noted on
Casey's schedule; in 1985, there were six meetings; in 1986, nine meetings are recorded.  These
do not include group meetings at the NSC or elsewhere where both were present.  North and
Casey were also in frequent telephone contact.  There were numerous phone calls between Casey
and North in the fall of 1984, after Boland went into effect.   Between October 12 and October 31
they spoke on the phone 12 times and met twice, according to Casey's schedules.  Another spurt
of contacts occurred in April 1985, when 13 calls with North are recorded on Casey's schedules.
According to Casey's official schedules, Casey spoke with North 67 times on the phone in 1984,
54 times in 1985, and 44 times in 1986.  Independent Counsel did not attempt to ascertain the
substance of these contacts on a meeting-by-meeting or phone-call-by-phone-call basis.

     By the late summer of 1986, Congress was prepared to lift the Boland restrictions, put the
CIA back fully in play in Central America and appropriate $100 million in contra assistance.  As
the CIA prepared to move back into contra support and the North/Secord Enterprise was
preparing to phase out, North attempted to sell the Enterprise's resupply assets to the CIA.  North
prevailed on George, Deputy CIA Director Robert M. Gates and Casey to intercede on behalf of
the Enterprise.  Fiers fought North off.  ``All three times I told each one the same thing, that they
were not the right  airplanes, they were heavy on maintenance, I didn't want to contaminate the
old program with the new program,'' Fiers said.  ``They all understood the points . . . there was no
argument, they all nodded their head [sic].  And this time Ollie didn't roll me in other words.'' 34

     34 Fiers, George Trial Testimony, 10/28/92, pp. 1333-34.

     Casey and the Iran Arms Sales

     Casey was an early advocate of finding an opening to Iran.  He worked closely with
McFarlane, who shared his view that the policy that existed at the end of 1984 was not adequate.
The Iran policy then in effect essentially called for direct U.S. response with force if Iran should
undertake terrorist attacks against the United States and a U.S.-led international embargo on all
arms sales to Iran.  The policy was based on a State Department study completed in October
1984, which concluded that the death of Ayatollah Khomeini was a precondition for any
improvement in the Iran-U.S. relationship.

     In the spring of 1985, reports began filtering back to the CIA that hostage William Buckley, a
former CIA station chief in Lebanon, was being tortured.  According  to former Attorney General
Edwin Meese III, Buckley's fate was of special concern to Casey.35

     35 Meese, Grand Jury, 11/20/87, p. 83.

     In early spring 1985, Casey directed CIA National Intelligence Officer Graham Fuller to draft
a paper suggesting a new Iran policy.  Fuller, in a May 17, 1985, memorandum to Casey,
suggested that the Iranian arms embargo might work against U.S. interests by moving the
Iranians, who were desperately seeking arms on the world market to carry on their war with Iraq,
toward a closer relationship with the Soviet Union.  The Fuller memorandum to Casey, which
was circulated as a Special National Intelligence Estimate (SNIE) to the NSC, State and Defense,
contained several themes that were later picked up by McFarlane and Casey in support of the
arms-for-hostages proposal.  The first was that Iran was losing the war with Iraq; second was the
notion that encouraging U.S. allies to resume arms sales to Iran would stop an Iranian drift
toward the Soviet Union; third was the concept that the ``arms door'' was an opening which
``might encourage the emergence of Iran's moderates into a greater policy role.'' 36

     36 Memorandum from Fuller to Casey and McMahon, 5/17/85, ER 15478-83.

     On May 30, 1985, Casey asked in a meeting with Poindexter about the status of a new
National Security  Decision Directive (NSDD) on Iran.  Poindexter replied that the NSC was
pulling together a policy paper on Iran.37  Two weeks later in a memorandum to  Chief of CIA's
Near East Division titled, ``Release of Hostages,'' Casey described a conversation with his
personal friend, John Shaheen, about an offer from indicted Iranian arms trader Cyrus Hashemi
to set up contact with ``leading figures in the Iranian Government.''  Shaheen had been told the
Iranians were interested in obtaining TOW missiles.38

     37 Memorandum from McMahon to the Record, 5/31/85, ER 25830-31.

     38 Memorandum from Casey to Chief, Near East Division, DO, 6/17/85, ER 15126-27.  In the
memo, Casey noted Hashemi's claim that Vice President Bush's brother, Prescott, had
approached the Iranians.  Casey's schedules indicate that Casey received calls from Prescott Bush
on March 1, 1985, and May 15, 1985.   They are the only calls from Prescott Bush noted in the
Casey schedules from 1984 to 1987.

     In mid-June 1985, the NSC produced a draft NSDD entitled ``U.S. Policy Toward Iran,''
proposing, among other things, a resumption of limited arms sales to Iran as a means of seeking
an opening.  It adopted much of Fuller's memorandum to Casey.  Casey supported the draft
NSDD in a July 18 memorandum to McFarlane, stating:  ``I strongly endorse the thrust of the
draft NSDD on U.S. Policy Toward Iran, particularly its emphasis on the need to take concrete
and timely steps to enhance U.S. leverage in order to ensure that the USSR is not the primary
beneficiary of change and turmoil in this critical country.''  Casey did not mention  Fuller's ``arms
door'' concept.39  Both Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger strongly opposed the
draft NSDD.  The opposition of Shultz and Weinberger effectively blocked any formal change in
U.S. policy and the draft NSDD was abandoned.

     39 Memorandum from Casey to McFarlane, 7/18/85, AKW 00075-79.

     While the discussion over whether to use the ``arms door'' to Iran was taking place, McFarlane
was acting.  He authorized Michael A. Ledeen, a part-time NSC consultant on anti-terrorism, to
ask Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres to check on a report that the Israelis had access to good
sources on Iran.  By early August 1985, Ledeen's talks had led to a direct approach by Israeli
officials to McFarlane, to obtain President Reagan's approval to ship U.S.-supplied TOW
missiles to Iran in exchange for the release of American hostages in Beirut.  McFarlane said he
briefed the President, Regan, Shultz, Weinberger, Casey and perhaps the Vice President about
the proposal in July and August 1985.40  McFarlane said that Casey recommended that Congress
not be informed of the arms sales.41

     40 See McFarlane, Shultz, and Defense Department chapters.

     41 McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 7/14/87, pp. 243-45 (``It seems to me that at the
July and August meetings in 1985 with the President and his Cabinet officers that Mr. Casey
expressed the view that Congress should not be advised [of the arms initiative], and the President
agreed with him, that -- I don't recall any dissent from that position at the time.'').

     In testimony to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) on
November 21, 1986, Casey said he was first informed about contacts with Iran by McFarlane in
the early fall of 1985, after the Israeli shipment of 504 TOWs in August and September.42

     42 Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, p. 5.

     Charles Allen, the CIA national intelligence officer for counterterrorism, was asked by North
in early September 1985 to arrange for collection of intelligence about arms broker Manucher
Ghorbanifar, his Iranian contact Mohsen Kangarlu, and their contacts in Lebanon.  North said the
request was related to a possible release of hostage Buckley.43

     43 Allen, Grand Jury, 12/18/87, pp. 19-21.

     On September 13, 1985, Allen informed Casey of North's request when he called Casey in
New York to tell him that the intelligence reports ordered by North indicated a possible hostage
release 44 and arms transaction.  Allen testified that North had directed him to restrict the
intelligence reports to McFarlane, North, Casey and his deputy John McMahon, the secretary of
defense and his senior military adviser, but to exclude Shultz and the State Department.45

     44 Hostage Benjamin Weir was released two days later.

     45 Allen, Grand Jury, 12/18/87, pp. 22-25, 128-29.

     The year-long intelligence effort initiated by North provided a steady stream of information.
It included information as to bank accounts and weapons shipments and, beginning in the
summer of 1986, references to a price spread between what the Iranians were paying for the
equipment and what was being charged by the Department of Defense.  Although Casey was
among the listed recipients of this intelligence, it is not known how closely he followed the
reports.  A note from Defense Secretary Weinberger's diary of September 20, 1985, written after
Weinberger learned of ``strange'' reports about an arms-for-hostages swap, indicated that Casey
followed at least the early reports: ``Called Bill Casey - he too is surprised by [intelligence
reports] + suspects Bud [McFarlane] is not telling us all he knows or has promised.''46  The
reports at that time contained information about the Israeli TOW shipments to Iran and the
release of hostage Benjamin Weir.

     46 Weinberger Note, 9/20/85, ALZ 0039671.

     Casey and McMahon met with McFarlane and Poindexter on November 14, 1985.  According
to McMahon's Memorandum for the Record:

     McFarlane then briefed on Ollie North's visit to London [Classified Information Withheld] **
[McFarlane then told us about the Israeli plan to move arms to certain elements of the Iranian
military who are prepared to overthrow the government].47

     47 Memorandum from McMahon to the Record, 11/15/85, ER 32809-10 (second set of
brackets and asterisks in original).

     The following morning, Casey had breakfast with Israeli Defense Minister Yitzak Rabin, who
was in Washington to learn whether the President still approved the Israeli arms sales to Iran.
Later that day, McFarlane assured Rabin of the President's continuing approval.48

     48 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 5/6/87, pp. 34-35.

     Casey was on a trip to Asia when the delivery of 18 HAWK missiles from Israeli stocks was
finally made on November 24, 1985.  The proposed shipment of 80 HAWK missiles ran into
trouble when the El Al 747 cargo aircraft that the Israelis had commissioned for the task could
not obtain landing rights in a European city.  Neither Casey nor his deputy McMahon were
available the weekend of November 21, 1985, so Clarridge undertook a series of operations
largely on his own -- including granting an NSC request to use an Agency proprietary airline.49
When McMahon, on Monday, November 25, learned that a CIA proprietary was involved, he
decided a presidential Finding authorizing the covert action was required. He called Sporkin,
who agreed that a Finding was necessary.50  A Finding drafted by Sporkin the next day
described the Iran initiative as a straight arms-for-hostages arrangement.51

     49 See Clarridge chapter.

     50 McMahon, Grand Jury, 9/18/91, pp. 8-12.

     51 Draft Finding, ALV 014320.  Sporkin's draft Finding for the President provided:

     I have been briefed on the efforts being made by private parties to obtain the release of
Americans held hostage in the Middle East, and hereby find that the following operations in
foreign countries (including all support necessary to such operations) are important to the
security of the United States.  Because of the extreme sensitivity of these operations, in the
exercise of the President's constitutional authorities, I direct the Director of Central Intelligence
not to brief the Congress of the United States, as provided for in Section 501 of the National
Security Act of 1947, as amended, until such time as I may direct otherwise.

     DESCRIPTION

     The provision of assistance by the Central Intelligence Agency to private parties in their
attempt to obtain the release of Americans held hostage in the Middle East.  Such assistance is to
include the provision of transportation, communications, and other necessary support.  As part of
these efforts certain foreign material and munitions may be provided to the Government of Iran
which is taking steps to facilitate the release of American hostages.

     All prior actions taken by U.S. Government officials in furtherance of this effort are hereby
ratified.

     Casey agreed with the necessity of the Finding and forwarded it to Poindexter the same day,
November 26, 1985.52 Poindexter testified that the President signed the Finding on December 5,
1985.54  Poindexter also testified that he destroyed the Finding on November 21, 1986, after the
Iran arms sales had been publicly revealed and Congress was initiating inquiries on the matter.55
President Reagan did not recall signing the Finding 53 and no copy of the signed Finding was
ever located by the OIC.

     52 Memorandum from Casey to Poindexter, 11/26/85, AMY 000651-52.  Casey directed that
it ``should go to the President for his signature and should not be passed around in any hands
below our level.''  The CIA never received a copy of the signed Finding. But in a December 7,
1985, Memorandum for the Record, McMahon noted, ``After repeated calls to NSC personnel on
27 November and during the week of 2 December continuously receiving assurances of the
President's intent to sign the Finding, we were notified on 5 December that indeed the Finding
was signed.''  (Memorandum from McMahon to the Record, 12/7/85, ER 32388-89.)

     53 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Deposition, 2/17/90, pp. 230-33. When presented with his
response to interrogatories posed by Independent Counsel in which he did not deny signing the
Finding, Reagan responded that he still did not deny signing the Finding, but simply did not
recall it.

     54 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 105-07.

     55 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 46-48.  North said he was present
at the time Poindexter destroyed the Finding.  (North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp.
7616-18.)

     The Administration in December 1985 and January 1986 continued to weigh alternatives on
how to pursue the Iran arms sales.  McFarlane, who resigned as national security adviser on
December 4, 1985, had soured on the arms-for-hostages deals and had become skeptical that
arms broker Manucher Ghorbanifar and his Iranian contacts were interested in anything except
buying additional arms from the United States.  This left Casey and Poindexter, who succeeded
McFarlane as national security adviser, as the  two main protagonists for going forward with the
arms deals.  Weinberger and Shultz remained opposed.  But the President, ever sensitive to the
plight of the hostages, seemed willing to be convinced.  It was against that backdrop that a
second phase of the Iran arms sales began, this time under direct U.S. auspices and control.

     Poindexter scheduled a meeting of the President's top national security officials for December
7, 1985, to discuss the future of the Iran arms sales.  Casey could not attend.  His deputy, John
McMahon, described the Agency's negative views of Ghorbanifar's reliability and questioned the
existence of a moderate faction in Iran.  Poindexter claimed to have Casey's personal proxy in
support of the proposal. A follow-up meeting was set for December 10, 1985, to hear
McFarlane's report on an upcoming meeting with Ghorbanifar in London.

     On December 10, 1985, McFarlane recommended that the Administration have no further
dealings with Ghorbanifar. Casey's memorandum of the meeting indicated that McFarlane
suggested other options.  There was general support for a dialogue with other Iranian
intermediaries on a ``purely intelligence basis being alert to any action that might influence
events in Iran.''  But Casey indicated that another McFarlane option -- simply letting the Israelis
continue the arms deals on their own -- was generally opposed because it would be a ``little
disingenuous and still bear the  onus of having traded with the captors and provide an incentive
for them to do some more kidnapping. . . .''   While the President stated no conclusion at the
meeting, Casey came away with probably the clearest reading of the President's mind, observing
in his memorandum to McMahon:

     As the meeting broke up, I had the idea that the President had not entirely given up on
encouraging the Israelis to carry on with the Iranians.  I suspect he would be willing to run the
risk and take the heat in the future if this will lead to springing the hostages.  It appears that Bud
[McFarlane] has the action. 56

     56 Memorandum from Casey to McMahon, 12/10/85, ER 10409.

     Despite Casey's report that McFarlane ``has the action,'' the record indicates that some of the
``action'' as far as continuing the Iran arms sales stayed with Casey.  There were two troubling
aspects of continuing the Iran arms sales through the Israelis and Ghorbanifar: (1) Ghorbanifar's
unreliability and (2) legal problems stemming from selling weapons from Israeli stocks, on
account of congressional reporting requirements under the Arms Export Control Act.  Casey took
steps to defuse these problems.  On December 18, Casey was called by North, according to
Casey's schedule.  It was their first documented telephone conversation since early October 1985.
While there is no direct proof of the substance of the conversation, the following day, Casey met
with Ledeen and asked Ledeen to  talk to Ghorbanifar about taking a lie-detector test at the
CIA.57  Later that day, Casey met at the White House with Poindexter and McMahon.  On the
next day, December 20, Casey met with Secord to discuss both the Iran arms sales and the
contra-resupply operation.58  Before taking his Christmas holiday, Casey met on December 23
with Clair George, the chief of the CIA's Near East Division, and the chief of the CIA's Iran
Branch, to be briefed on the branch chief's meeting with Ghorbanifar in Washington the previous
day.59

     57 Ledeen, Grand Jury, 9/18/87, pp. 170-73.

     58 Secord, OIC Deposition, 4/30/87, pp. 1-5; Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/5/87,
pp. 192-97.

     59 Iran Branch Chief, FBI 302, 12/4/86, pp. 2-3.  The CIA administered a polygraph
examination to Ghorbanifar on January 11, 1986.  The results indicated that Ghorbanifar showed
deception on 13 of 15 questions.  The only two questions for which no deception was noted were
his name and place of birth.

     On the more complex question of how to avoid the legal problems created by arms sales to
Iran from Israeli stocks, North and CIA General Counsel Sporkin began drafting ``an expanded
Finding'' on January 2, 1986.60  Casey, who was in Florida, sanctioned the collaboration by
phone, but instructed Sporkin to keep him advised.61  North and Sporkin opted for sales from
Defense Department stocks to  the CIA under the Economy Act.  This gave control of the sales
and pricing to the United States.

     60 Sporkin, Select Committees Testimony, 6/24/87, pp. 37-38.

     61 Ibid., pp. 49-50.

     The proposal to resume arms sales to Iran was formally discussed at a White House meeting
on January 7, 1986, attended by the President, Vice President Bush, Regan, Poindexter,
Weinberger, Shultz, Meese and Casey.  Weinberger memorialized the meeting in his diary notes
for January 7 in succinct terms:

     Met with President, Shultz, Poindexter, Bill Casey, Ed Meese, in Oval Office -- President
decided to go with Israeli-Iranian offer to release our 5 hostages in return for sale of 4000 TOWs
to Iran by Israel -- George Shultz + I opposed - Bill Casey, Ed Meese + VP favored -- as did
Poindexter.62

     62 Weinberger Note, 1/7/86, ALZ 0039883.

     Despite being informed of Ghorbanifar's failing a polygraph test on January 11, Casey noted
that Ghorbanifar nevertheless appeared to have information on terrorist threats.  He directed
Charles Allen to meet with Ghorbanifar and learn more about him.

     Casey was involved in planning how the new Iran arms sale operation would be conducted.
In a memorandum dated January 13, 1986, Casey outlined two options for proceeding with TOW
sales to Iran from U.S. stocks.  Option 1 would have the Israelis buy improved TOWs from the
United States and have the Israeli's ship older, basic TOWs in their arsenal to Iran.  Casey
pointed out that the Iranians had  already placed $22 million for the transaction into a Swiss
account, which was sufficient to pay for the basic TOWs but was not enough for the improved
TOWs, which would cost about $44 million.  Casey noted that Sporkin ``feels that the most
defensible way to do it from a legal standing'' was through a CIA purchase of the weapons from
the Defense Department.  But he added:  ``We prefer keeping the CIA out of the execution even
though a Presidential Finding would authorize the way Defense would have to handle the
transactions.'' 63

     63 DCI Talking Points, 1/13/86, ER 10410-11.  Leaving the execution of the initiative to
North and Secord paved the way for profiteering and the diversion.

     On January 15, North reported to Poindexter that Casey said that Weinberger would continue
to be a roadblock in the Iran arms sales unless Weinberger was informed that the President had
ordered it to go forward.  North also reported that Casey saw no problem with having Secord deal
directly with the Department of Defense in the missile purchases as an ``agent of the CIA.'' 64
On January 16, Casey met with Poindexter, Weinberger, Attorney General Meese and Sporkin at
the White House to discuss the Iran arms sales.65

     64 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 1/15/86, 012.

     65 Sporkin, Grand Jury, 3/2/88, pp. 61-64.

     President Reagan signed the third and final Iran arms sales Finding on January 17, 1986.  The
President, Vice  President, Chief of Staff Regan and Poindexter's deputy, Donald Fortier, were
briefed by Poindexter from a cover memo which stated that the CIA would purchase 4,000
TOWs from the Department of Defense and deliver them to Iran through ``an agent of the CIA.''
66  Casey informed Clair George that the President had signed the new Finding and directed
George to attend a meeting at the White House Situation Room on January 20 to discuss its
implementation.  George, Sporkin and Thomas Twetten, deputy chief of the CIA's Near East
Division, attended the meeting, which was presided over by Poindexter.  To the surprise of the
CIA contingent, Secord also attended.  The meeting concluded with the understanding that the
CIA should make the financial and logistical arrangements necessary for the TOW missiles to be
transported to Iran.67  Thus, despite protests by virtually all of the Agency's top officials, Secord
and Ghorbanifar were to play key roles in the Iran arms sales.

     66 Memorandum from Poindexter to Reagan, 1/17/86, AKW 001918-20.

     67 Twetten, Grand Jury, 1/22/88, pp. 27-34;  Twetten, George Trial Testimony, 8/6/92, pp.
2315-23; Sporkin, Grand Jury, 3/2/88, pp. 69-74.

     There is evidence that Casey followed the meetings and subsequent arms transfers connected
with the Iran initiative throughout 1986.  On January 25, while Casey was overseas, McMahon
cabled Casey to inform him that as a result of a meeting between North and Ghorbanifar in
London, North had agreed that the CIA would furnish highly sophisticated intelligence to the
Iranians, including ``a map depicting the order of battle on the Iran/Iraq border showing units,
troops, tanks, electronic installations. . . .''  McMahon noted that ``[e]veryone here at
headquarters advises against this operation not only because we feel the principal involved
[Ghorbanifar] is a liar and has a record of deceit, but, secondly, we would be aiding and abetting
the wrong people.''  Notwithstanding McMahon's strong objections, Casey did not change his
mind.  As a result, Allen passed the intelligence to Ghorbanifar in London on January 25.68

     68 DIRECTOR 705774, 1/25/86, ER 24834-35; Allen, SSCI Testimony, 12/5/86, pp. 14-15.

     On January 27, Casey met at various times with McMahon, Gates, George, and Clarridge.  He
spoke on the phone with Twetten three times and with Poindexter and the President, but
Independent Counsel was unable to learn the subject of these meetings.  The following day,
Casey met with Gates, George and Allen to discuss Allen's meetings with Ghorbanifar in
London.69

     69 Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 4/24/87, pp. 360-62.

     In early February, Casey participated in meetings with Allen, George and Twetten to discuss
the Iran arms sales.  He also talked to North before North, Secord and Nir were to meet in
London on February 5.  On February  18, the day after the first direct U.S. shipment of 500
TOWs was delivered in Tehran, Casey met with North.  After the February 25 meeting of North,
Secord, Hakim, Twetten and Nir with Ghorbanifar and Iranian representatives in Frankfurt,
Casey was briefed by North and Twetten.  Casey also met with North, Poindexter, George and
Twetten at the White House.  The same day, Casey met privately with the President.  Talking
points prepared for Casey by McMahon indicate that he suggested to the President that the
Israelis and Ghorbanifar should not be included in the initial meetings with Iranian leaders in
Iran.  Casey suggested that the American party consist of McFarlane, North, Twetten, a staffer for
McFarlane, and CIA annuitant George Cave.  He also suggested that Secord fly to Tehran to set
up a secure communications facility.70

     70 DCI Talking Points, 2/27/86, ER 1997-98.

     Casey spent the first two weeks of March abroad.  Immediately upon his return on March 15,
he met on hostage-related matters with McMahon, Gates, George, Clarridge and Twetten.
During the remainder of the spring and summer, Casey was kept informed on progress and
problems with the Iran initiative by North and CIA officers involved with the project, particularly
Cave, Allen and Twetten.

     Casey was out of the country from July 4 to 15, 1986.  The day after his return, Casey met
with his Near East experts -- including Clarridge -- then followed up with a private session with
North at the Old Executive Office Building.  Independent Counsel could not prove the substance
of these meetings.

     The release of American hostage Father Lawrence Jenco on July 26, 1986, was attributed to
the Iranians, in a July 28 Casey memorandum to Poindexter.  The memorandum advised that the
United States maintain the Ghorbanifar-Kangarlu contact in order to facilitate the release of the
rest of the hostages and provide an opening to factions in Iran that could be dealt with in the
future.71

     71 Memorandum from Casey to Poindexter, 7/28/86, ER 31324-26.

     In late July and throughout August, Ghorbanifar complained repeatedly about the price of the
HAWK spare parts that had been sold to the Iranians.  The overcharging complaints of the
Iranians were presented in the intelligence reports which were delivered to the executive suites of
the CIA.  On September 8, 1986, Casey was briefed by Allen and Cave.  Since early July, Cave
had been involved in negotiations with Iranians who eventually became ``the second channel''
into Iran.  On September 9, North informed Allen that Poindexter had approved use of the second
channel.  Allen expressed his concern that an unhappy Ghorbanifar might pose a security  threat
and North conceded he might have to take money out of ``the reserve'' to solve this problem.  In a
memo on this exchange sent to Casey the next day, Allen stated that ``[t]o cut Ghorbanifar out,
Ollie will have to raise a minimum of $4 million.'' 72 Allen called Casey early that same
afternoon.

     72 Memorandum from Allen to Casey, 9/10/86, ER 19179. It is not known whether Casey
saw the memo.

     On September 17, Casey met with Allen, Cave, and CIA lawyer Bernard Makowka to discuss
gathering intelligence during a visit by a nephew of Iranian Majlis Speaker Rafsanjani.  Casey
talked to both North and Poindexter about the arrangements.  Casey was asked to ensure that the
nephew was cleared to come into the United States.73  Following the meetings with the nephew
on September 19 and 20, George Cave briefed Casey and Clair George on September 22.
According to a computer note from North to Poindexter that same day, Casey reportedly was
concerned about ``bringing the Sec State [Shultz] up to speed on results.  I told him this was your
call.  Casey is urging a [meeting] on Wed[nesday] among you, Casey, Cave and me to discuss
situation prior to discussion w/ Shultz.'' 74  The following day, Casey met with Poindexter, Cave,
North  and Twetten at the White House ``re George Cave discussion.'' 75

     73 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 9/17/86, AKW 021694. See also PROFs Note from
Poindexter to North, 9/17/86, AKW 2021696.

     74 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 9/22/86, AKW 021708.

     75 Casey Schedules, 9/23/86, ER 411-12.

     On October 2, Casey was called by North.  A North memorandum to Poindexter on the same
day proposed a trip to Frankfurt by North, Secord and Cave to meet with the nephew.  The
memorandum asked Poindexter to tell Casey to prepare ``an appropriate intelligence package'' for
the Frankfurt meeting.76  On October 9, Casey and Gates had lunch with North in Casey's office
at Langley to discuss the Frankfurt talks with Rafsanjani's nephew.77

     76 Memorandum from North to Poindexter, 10/2/86, AKW 007234-50.  The memorandum
does not indicate whether Poindexter approved North's recommendation.

     77 Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 7-11.

     Casey and the Diversion

     In 1986, the CIA arranged for the sale of 2,008 TOW missiles and a variety of HAWK spare
parts to Iran in three separate transfers on February 13, May 23 and November 3. Agents acting
for Iran deposited $28.6 million in the Swiss accounts controlled by Secord; approximately $1.7
million more was deposited by Israel for replenishment weapons.78   Only $12,237,000 was
deposited in CIA accounts. This enormous price differential -- approximately $18 million --
paved the way for the Iran/contra ``diversion.''

     78 See Flow of Funds chapter.

     North testified that the idea of using ``residuals'' from the Iran arms sales to assist the contras
was first suggested to him by Israeli official Amiram Nir or Ghorbanifar in late 1985 or January
1986.79  North said both Casey and Poindexter endorsed the idea.

     79 North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/12/90, p. 1092.

     Independent Counsel obtained no documentary evidence showing Casey knew about or
approved the diversion.  The only direct testimony linking Casey to early knowledge of the
diversion came from North.  When asked by the Select Committees when Casey learned of the
diversion, North replied:

     Actually, my recollection is Director Casey learned about it before the fact.  Since I am
confessing to things, I may have raised it with him before I raised it with Admiral Poindexter,
probably when I returned from the February -- from the January discussions.

     Q. You are referring now to the trip during which you had the discussion with Mr.
Ghorbanifar in the bathroom?

     A. Yes, I don't recall raising the bathroom specifically with the Director, but I do recall talking
with the Director and I don't remember whether it was before or after I talked to Admiral
Poindexter about it.

     I was not the only one who was enthusiastic about this idea and I -- Director Casey used
several words to describe how he felt about it, all of which were effusive.  He referred to it  as the
ultimate irony, the ultimate covert operation kind of thing and was very enthusiastic about it.80

     80 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/8/87, p. 124.

     North indicated that Casey not only saw the profits from arms sales as a source of aid to the
contras, but also as a means of financing other similar unauthorized covert operations:

     At various times, he [Casey] and I talked about the fact that it might be necessary at some
point in the future to have something, as he would put it, to pull off the shelf and to help support
other activities like that.  And none of those aside from the ones we talked about in terms of
cooperation with Israel, the ones I referred to in my notes as TA-1, 2, and 3, or TH-1, 2, and 3, I
don't recall exactly which -- aside from those operations, he was looking forward to the
possibility of needing to support other activities beyond that, and that is why I am not exactly
certain as to what perhaps was intended beyond the use of those moneys for support of the
Nicaraguan Resistance and the other purposes that I described to you earlier, in that I had, I think,
communicated that to General Secord and he did prepare a layout which showed how other of
those commercial entities could be used to support activities in other places besides Central
America and besides U.S.-Israeli operations, besides the hostage recovery operations.81

     81 Ibid., pp. 126-27.

     The credibility of North's testimony is weakened by the fact that he never made such
assertions while Casey was alive.  In fact, when questioned by Attorney General Meese on
November 23, 1986, about the diversion, North  said the only persons in Government who knew
about the diversion were McFarlane, Poindexter and himself.  However, North did tell one of his
NSC staff associates, Lt. Col. Robert L. Earl, that he had told Casey about the diversion.  In
testimony at North's trial, Earl said that North told him in May or June 1986 that he had informed
Casey of the use of profits from the Iran arms sales to assist the contras.  Referring to North, Earl
said:

     He said that he had talked to Director Casey about the provision of certain parts of the money
paid by the Iranians to -- in support of the contras and that Director Casey had -- had been
impressed by the manipulation of the situation to the disadvantage of the Ayatollah, that we were
taking some of the Ayatollah's money and applying it to a cause that the Ayatollah did not
support.82

     82 Earl, North Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, p. 5601.

     Another person who was told of the diversion by North was Fiers, but North did not tell Fiers
about Casey's knowledge.83

     83 Fiers, George Trial Testimony, 10/28/92, p. 1338.  Fiers said after North mentioned the
diversion a second time, in late summer 1986, Fiers told his superior and Clair George.  Fiers
said George's response was, ``Well, Alan, now you're one of a handful of people that know that,
and keep it under your hat or keep it to yourself.''  (Ibid., p. 1340.)  Fiers said he believed
George's response was in reference to the fact of the Iran arms sales, not the diversion.

     Casey denied knowledge of the diversion.  While he did not seem surprised on November 24,
1986, when Regan informed him that Meese had learned about the diversion, Regan reported that
Casey did not admit prior knowledge.   He denied knowing about the diversion in his
congressional testimony following the public disclosure by Meese on November 25, 1986.  He
also denied knowing about the diversion to Clair George and CIA General Counsel David
Doherty during a meeting on November 20, 1986.84

     84 Doherty, FBI 302, 11/13/87, p. 6.

     Regardless of his knowledge, Casey was at least instrumental in setting up a situation which
made the diversion possible.  North testified that Casey directed him in mid-1985 to take control
of the funds going to the contras from third-country solicitations and contributions from private
citizens.  Casey approved North's suggestions in December 1985 and January 1986 for
restructuring the Iran initiative, resulting in North and Secord's effective control of the funding
for the arms purchases from Defense stocks and the payments from the Iranians.

     Casey's meetings with North were also frequent during the crucial period leading up to and
following the creation of the so-called ``diversion memo'' prepared by North in early April 1986
for approval by Poindexter and President Reagan.  The month before, George Cave wrote a
memo for the record reporting Ghorbanifar's proposal ``that we use profits from these deals and
others to fund support to the rebels in Afghanistan.  We could do the same with  Nicaragua.'' 85
Casey's schedule shows a private meeting on April 7, 1986, with the President, after a Casey
meeting with Clarridge and Allen.  Independent Counsel could not obtain direct evidence of the
purposes for these meetings.  That same day, North wrote a computer note to McFarlane which
stated, ``Per request of JMP [Poindexter] have prepared a paper for our boss which lays out
arrangements.'' 86  On April 9, Casey met privately with North at the OEOB after having met
with President Reagan in the morning.  Again, Independent Counsel could not obtain direct proof
of the purpose of this meeting.

     85 Memorandum from Cave, 3/7/86, DO 25936-37 (dated by Cave on December 11, 1986).
Cave wrote a second memo in April referring to Ghorbanifar's ``scheme to use the profits to
support the Afghan rebels.''  This memo did not refer to the contras.  There is no evidence that
Casey ever saw either of the Cave memos.

     86 PROFs Note from North to McFarlane, 4/7/86, AKW 01145.

     In October and November 1986 Casey was confronted with growing evidence from a variety
of sources of a diversion.  His inactivity in responding to this evidence has yet to be explained.
On October 1, Allen informed Gates of his mounting concerns regarding a diversion from the
arms sales.  After hearing his concerns, Gates advised him to speak with Casey as soon as
possible.87  Allen and Gates did not meet with Casey until October 7, when Allen briefed Casey
on the  reliability of the ``second channel'' into Iran.  Allen told Casey of his concerns over a
possible diversion of Iran arms sales funds to the contras, explaining that he had only a series of
indicators, but no hard evidence.  Allen said Casey seemed disturbed and called it a dangerous
situation.  Gates stated that if reports of the diversion were true, North had gone too far.  Casey
agreed.88

     87 Allen, FBI 302, 6/24/87, pp. 4-5.

     88 Ibid., p. 5. Gates disputed this account.  See Gates chapter.

     Casey then disclosed that Roy Furmark, a New York businessman and former client, had told
him earlier that day that Adnan Khashoggi was a financial backer of Ghorbanifar and that
Khashoggi and his Canadian investors were owed money by Ghorbanifar.89  In describing his
initial conversation with Furmark to the House Appropriations Committee, Casey later said that
Furmark was informed by Khashoggi that the Canadians were threatening a lawsuit, which could
publicize the Iran initiative.  Following his meetings with Furmark and Allen, Casey called
Poindexter that same afternoon.90  In a memo dated October 8, Casey also informed the chief of
the CIA's Near East Division, Tom Twetten, of his conversation with Furmark.91

     89 Ibid.

     90 Casey, House Appropriations Committee Testimony, 12/8/86, pp. 19-20.

     91 Memorandum from Casey to Twetten, 10/8/86, DO 84625.  In the memo, Casey said
Furmark believed the Canadian investors had been talking to Senators Leahy, Cranston and
Moynihan, claiming that on the latest arms shipment they came up $10 million short.

     On October 9, Casey and Gates met for lunch with North to receive a report on the Iran arms
sales ``second channel'' into Iran.  According to Gates, the discussions also focused on security
problems posed by a dissatisfied Ghorbanifar and unhappy Canadian investors and the claim by
Eugene Hasenfus, who had been shot down over Nicaragua and captured that week, that he was
working for the CIA.  North told Gates the CIA was ``absolutely clean'' in the Hasenfus matter.
North also made a passing reference to Swiss bank accounts and the contras, according to Gates.
After the meeting, Gates said he asked Casey about the meaning of North's mention of the Swiss
bank accounts:

     I mentioned the comment about the Swiss bank accounts, and because it was new information
to me, or something that I hadn't been exposed to -- I asked him if he understood what North was
talking about -- whether there was anything we should be concerned about in all of that.  His
reaction was that it gave me the impression that he hadn't even heard or had not picked up on
what North had to say.  Basically, in effect, said there was nothing to be concerned about then.92

     92 Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 7-11.

     On October 14, Allen sent identical memoranda to Casey and Gates outlining ``problems that
I see with our  initiative towards Iran.''  Allen described the threat posed by Canadian investors
and expressed concern that Ghorbanifar's allegations would include the claim that ``the
Government of the United States, along with the Government of Israel, acquired a substantial
profit from these transactions, some of which profit was redistributed to other projects of the U.S.
and of Israel.'' 93  Late in the day, Casey phoned Poindexter, then met with North, Twetten, and
Cave at CIA headquarters.94

     93 Memorandum from Allen to McMahon, 10/14/86, ER 127-34.

     94 Independent Counsel was unable to establish direct evidence of the purpose of this
meeting.

     Gates said he was so disturbed by the Allen memorandum that the following day he obtained
permission from Casey to give the information to CIA General Counsel Doherty.  Doherty
recommended that the Allen memorandum be provided to Poindexter.95  Later in the afternoon
of October 15, Gates and Casey met with Poindexter in the Old Executive Office Building where
Casey showed Poindexter the Allen memorandum and asked him to read it immediately.
According to Gates, Casey then expressed concern that the project was out of control and urged
that the whole Iran affair be made public.96  On October 16, Casey directed Allen to meet with
Furmark, who was in Washington at that time.  Allen  interviewed Furmark at the OEOB.  Casey
had three telephone conversations with Furmark that day and Furmark returned to New York on
a flight with Casey and Casey's wife.  The day after his meeting with Furmark, Allen wrote to
Casey that his conversation with Furmark ``only served to underscore the serious concerns that I
outlined to you in my memorandum of 14 October.'' 97

     95 Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 19-20.

     96 Ibid., pp. 20-21.

     97 Memorandum from Allen to Casey and Gates, 10/17/86, ER  46446-48.

     On October 20, Casey met with President Reagan and Poindexter at the White House.  Two
days later Casey met early in the day with Allen.  Allen and Cave then flew to New York to meet
again with Furmark.  Among other things, Furmark told Allen and Cave that Ghorbanifar
believed that millions of dollars from the arms sales were earmarked for Central America.  The
following day, Casey was briefed on the meeting with Furmark.  Casey directed Cave to write a
memorandum for Casey's signature for forwarding to Poindexter.  In the memorandum, which
apparently was not sent, Cave repeated Furmark's claim that Ghorbanifar believed the bulk of
$15 million in profits was earmarked for Central America.98

     98 Memorandum from Casey to Poindexter, ER 19051-53.  On November 25, after Meese
learned of the diversion, Casey appeared to be upset to learn that the memorandum had not been
sent.  But, according to Allen, he said, ``Well, it doesn't matter, I briefed Admiral Poindexter on
the substance of this.''  (Allen, Grand Jury, 1/4/88, pp. 107-8.)

     On November 6, 1986, three days after the Iran arms sales were publicly exposed, Casey met
with Gates and Poindexter at the White House, where Casey recommended that Poindexter have
White House Counsel Peter J. Wallison review the Iran affair. Poindexter said he did not trust
Wallison to keep his mouth shut and that NSC Counsel Paul B. Thompson would conduct the
review.99  The next day, Allen wrote still another memorandum to Casey on his continuing
debriefing of Furmark.  Among other things, Allen wrote:

     99 Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 23-25.

     The Canadians intend to expose fully the US Government's role in the backchannel arms
transactions with Iran.  They believe Lakeside [probably referring to Lake Resources, an
Enterprise shell company] to be a proprietary of the US Government; they know that former
Major General Richard Seccord [sic] is heavily involved in managing the arms transactions to
Iran for Oliver L. North, and that Secord is also involved in assisting North in the support the
[sic] Contras in Nicaragua.100

     100 Memorandum from Allen to Casey and Gates, 11/7/86, ER 46449-52.

     On November 10, Casey attended a meeting with the President, Vice President, Poindexter,
Poindexter's deputy Alton G. Keel, Shultz, Weinberger, Meese and Regan.  It was at this meeting
that Poindexter, at Reagan's request, gave an account of the Iran arms sales.  Poindexter falsely
stated that they began in 1986 with the  signing of the January 17, 1986, Finding, leaving out the
1985 Israeli shipments.  There was no mention of a diversion.

     On November 12, Poindexter repeated his performance for the same group but with
congressional leaders present.  Senator Robert Byrd asked if ``anything happened'' in 1985, and
Poindexter answered that there were ``contacts,'' but no materials were shipped.101

     101 Weinberger Meeting Notes, 11/12/86.

     On November 16, Casey departed on a three-day trip to Central America.  Before he left, he
directed Gates to take charge of preparing testimony on the Iran arms sales for Senate and House
intelligence committee hearings set for November 21.  While Casey was in Central America,
Shultz emerged as the sole dissenter to a cover story that the President did not have prior
knowledge of the 1985 HAWK shipment and did not authorize it.

     Casey returned from his Central American trip on the evening of November 19.  En route, he
rewrote the proposed testimony which had been prepared under Gates's direction and had been
flown down to Casey by Norman Gardner, a special assistant to Clair George.  At a meeting held
November 20 to help prepare Casey's testimony, North suggested that Casey state that ``no one in
the U.S.  Government'' knew the nature of the cargo in the November 1985 HAWKs flight ``until
January 1986.''  Casey, who had been prepared to state that no one in the CIA knew the nature of
the cargo until January 1986, marked North's suggested change into his documents.102

     102 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp. 7628-33.  Casey's executive assistant later
testified that Casey returned to CIA Headquarters with this draft and promptly misplaced it.
Casey's Executive Assistant Statement to SSCI, as set forth in Nomination of Robert M. Gates to
be Director of Central Intelligence, Sen. Exec. Rpt. 102-19, 102d Cong., 1st Sess., pp. 65-66
(Oct. 24, 1991).  Evidence uncovered by Independent Counsel supports this officer's testimony.
See Conduct of CIA Officers in November 1986 chapter.

     The proposed statement brought Casey into direct conflict with Shultz, who contended that he
was briefed in Geneva by McFarlane prior to the shipment in November 1985 and told that the
cargo would be missiles.  It also was at odds with Sporkin's recollection that he learned soon
after the November 1985 flight that the cargo was missiles.  Conflicts such as these led to a very
thin description of the CIA's 1985 activities in Casey's November 21 testimony.103

     103 See ibid.

     Casey was so angry at Shultz's public airing of his opposition to the Iran arms sales that in a
letter to the President on November 23, 1986, he urged that Shultz be fired.

     On Friday I spent over five hours discussing and answering questions for the House and
Senate Intelligence Committees on g008our effort to develop a relationship with important
elements in Iran.  I was able to deal with all of  their questions with no problem while, at all
times, insisting on the value and need for this.  A full house of each of the Committees was
present throughout and, except for the expected partisan posing by Bobby Byrd and Jim Wright,
when they went out to speak to the cameras, the members took it well.

     As to the manner in which Shultz had conducted himself regarding the Iran disclosures, Casey
said:

     The public pouting of George Shultz and the failure of the State Department to support what
we did inflated the uproar on this matter.  If we all stand together and speak out I believe we can
put this behind us quickly.  Under Secretary of State Armacost sat through my briefing like a
bump on a log, opening his mouth only to deny any involvement or knowledge. . . . Rich
Armitage, who accompanied me for Defense, was helpful in explaining the rules on arms transfer
and was forthcoming and supportive whenever he had the opportunity. . . . You need a new
pitcher!  A leader instead of a bureaucrat.  I urge you to bring in someone like Jeane Kirkpatrick
or Paul Laxalt, who you may recall, I recommended for State in 1980.104

     104 Letter from Casey to Reagan, 11/23/86, AKW 020592.

     In response to conflicting accounts over the 1985 Israeli arms shipments to Iran, President
Reagan on November 21, 1986, directed Meese to conduct an inquiry to develop a ``coherent''
account of the Iran initiative.105  During the weekend of the Meese inquiry, Casey had contact
with all of the principals involved in the initiative except McFarlane.  There are no notes on these
contacts.  Testimony that exists about these contacts is often illogical, or not believable, in the
context of the weekend's dramatic developments.  Casey's schedules and witness testimony show:

     105 Meese, Grand Jury, 2/17/88, pp. 47, 122.

     Friday, November 21:

     4:25 p.m.  Call to Poindexter

     5:20 p.m.  Call to Regan

     Evening  Meese called Casey about inquiry

     Saturday, November 22:

     9:55 a.m.  Call to Meese

     10:05 a.m.  Meeting with Gates

     10:05 a.m.  Call from Sporkin

     10:10 a.m.  Call to Meese

     10:10 a.m.

     Meeting with Gates, George, Twetten, Clarridge, Kerr, Layton, Allen, Cave, Gries, and
Kinsinger

     10:15 a.m.  Call to Poindexter

     12:25 p.m.  Call from Sporkin

     12:35 p.m.  Call to Poindexter

     12:50 p.m.  Call to Cave

     12:52 p.m.  Call to Allen

     12:55 p.m.  Meeting with Cave

     1:15 p.m.  Lunch with Poindexter and North

     3:46 p.m.  Call to Meese

     Evening meeting at residence with Meese

     Sunday, November 23:

     10:20 a.m.  Call to Meese

     10:25 a.m.  Call to Allen

     10:30 a.m.  Meeting with Allen and Doherty

     10:37 a.m.

     Meeting with Cooper, Allen, Doherty, Jameson

     10:55 a.m.  Call to Allen

     11:05 a.m.  Call from Michael Deaver

     11:07 a.m.  Call to Deaver

     11:12 a.m.  Call from Sporkin

     11:17 a.m.

     Meeting with Doherty (joined by Allen at 12:10 p.m.)

     12:30 p.m.  Meeting with Doherty and Jameson

     1:20 p.m.  Call to President Reagan

     3:30 p.m.  Meeting with Deaver

     Monday, November 24:

     10:25 a.m.

     Meeting with Twetten and Casey Executive Assistant

     10:30 a.m.  Meeting with Allen and Cave

     10:35 a.m.

     NSPG pre-brief with George, Kerr, Twetten

     12:45 p.m.  Meeting with Allen and Cave

     2:00 p.m.  NSPG meeting, White House

     5:10 p.m.  Meeting with Furmark

     5:20 p.m.  Call to North

     5:25 p.m.  Call to Twetten

     6:00 p.m.  Call from George

     6:15 p.m.  Meeting with Cave

     6:35 p.m.  Meeting with Regan

     7:05 p.m.  Call to Poindexter

     Tuesday, November 25:

     6:30 a.m.  Call to Meese, who subsequently dropped by Casey's home

     7:20 a.m.  Meeting with Allen

     7:25 a.m.  Call to Richard Allen

     8:00 a.m.  Meeting with George

     8:25 a.m.  Call to Meese

     8:30 a.m.  Call to Twetten

     8:45 a.m.  Call to Doherty

     8:46 a.m.  Call to George

     8:50 a.m.  Meeting with Twetten

     8:55 a.m.  Call from Gates

     9:00 a.m.  Meeting with Doherty

     9:15 a.m.  Call to Weinberger

     10:15 a.m.  NSPG meeting, White House

     11:00 a.m.

     Meeting with Congressional Leaders at White House

     11:58 a.m.  Call from Allen

     12:02 p.m.  Call to Poindexter

     3:00 p.m.  NSPG meeting on interim restraint

     5:10 p.m.  Call from Clarridge

     5:12 p.m.  Call to Regan

     5:25 p.m.  Meeting with Allen and Cave

     5:40 p.m.  Call from Twetten

     6:10 p.m.  Call from Fred Ikle

     Some of the more significant contacts were:

      -- The evening of Friday, November 21, when Meese said he told Casey he was launching an
inquiry into the Iran initiative at the President's request.  Meese said he did not schedule an
interview with Casey because he already had Casey's prepared remarks from the November 21
hearings before the Senate and House intelligence committees.  Meese told Casey he wanted to
speak with Sporkin and McMahon.106

     106 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/21/87, pp. 101-4.

      -- November 22, when Meese said he received calls from Casey at 9:55 a.m. and 3:46 p.m.
and visited Casey that evening.  Meese told the Grand Jury that the reason Casey called in the
afternoon was that he wanted to provide information.  Meese said he went to Casey's home that
evening but did not take notes of their conversation.  Meese said  Casey disclosed to him the
information given him by Furmark about the disgruntled Canadian investors.  Meese did not
recall Casey mentioning the contras or the diversion.  Meese said he did not tell Casey about the
diversion memo his staff had uncovered that afternoon at the White House because  he was not
certain where it would lead.107  Meese said Casey told him he had spoken to Poindexter about
the funds and that Poindexter had assured him that nothing wrong had occurred.  Meese still did
not discuss the diversion with Casey. Meese said Casey ``may have'' discussed the December
1985 Finding with him at that time, but he wasn't sure.  The December 1985 Finding ``wasn't
particularly important at this stage because it really didn't alter anything that had happened,''
Meese said.  He said Casey did not tell him about his two-hour meeting with Poindexter earlier
that day.108

     107 Ibid., pp. 143-44.

     108 Ibid., pp. 138-39, 141-52.

      -- November 22, when Casey had lunch with Poindexter and North, Poindexter said that the
topic of discussion was Casey's testimony from the day before.  Poindexter said there was no
discussion of the diversion.  Poindexter said he did not tell Casey about his destruction the day
before of the December 1985 Finding.109

     109 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/21/87, pp. 71-75.

      -- November 24, when Casey called Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper.  Cooper said
Casey, who had never called him before, asked whether Cooper had come across the name
``Lakeside Resources'' in the course of the Meese inquiry.  This was apparently a reference to the
Enterprise's Lake Resources account, which was misidentified by Furmark to Allen, who
subsequently used the name ``Lakeside'' in a memo to Casey on October 7, 1986.  Cooper said
the name had some familiarity, but he could not place it.110

     110 Cooper, Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87, pp. 147-49.

      -- November 24, when at 6:35 p.m. Regan met with Casey at the CIA and told him what
Meese had discovered about the diversion.  Regan said Casey did not act surprised, but his
reaction was one of concern for the impact on the contras.  Casey also expressed concern that
public disclosure would close down contacts with Iran.  Regan said that Casey reminded him that
he had mentioned Furmark and unhappy Canadian investors.  Regan could not recall when Casey
first mentioned Furmark to him.   He has given various estimates of when this occurred, from
late October 1986 to November 20, 1986.111

     111 Regan, FBI 302, 7/14/87, pp. 19-27, 92-94.

      -- November 25, when Casey called Meese at home and asked him to drop by on his way to
work.  Meese told Casey about the diversion, and Casey told Meese he would send him a copy of
a memo about Furmark's allegations.  Meese said that while he was at Casey's home, Regan
placed a call to Meese to tell him he would be asking for Poindexter's resignation that
morning.112

     112 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 157-59.

      -- Early on November 25, when Casey asked Allen to  gather the Furmark memoranda so that
he could send them to Meese immediately.  Allen said that Casey told him some very serious
developments were about to happen.  Casey was frantically trying to find a copy of the
memorandum of October 24, 1986, which outlined Furmark's diversion allegations and which
Casey said he thought had been sent to Poindexter but apparently had not.113

     113 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/4/88, pp. 74-75.

     Casey's Testimony to Congress

     Casey's virtually identical opening statements on November 21, 1986, to both the House and
Senate intelligence committees 114 were incorrect or incomplete in several respects:

     114 Casey appeared before HPSCI and SSCI with these CIA officers:  George, Doherty,
Comptroller Daniel Childs; Allen; a special assistant to George (called CIA Subject #2 in
Conduct of CIA Officials in November 1986 chapter); David Gries; and another member of
Gries staff.  George's special assistant Norman Gardner was at the afternoon HPSCI hearing; W.
George Jameson was at the SSCI session.  Also present before both panels were Under Secretary
of State Michael H. Armacost and his executive assistant; Assistant Secretary of State Richard
W. Murphy; State Department Legal Adviser Abraham D. Sofaer (morning session of HPSCI
only); two deputy assistant secretaries of state; Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Armitage;
and a Department of Defense legal adviser.  John Bolton of the Department of Justice attended
the SSCI session only.

     1.  Casey concealed the U.S. role in the 1985 TOW and HAWK shipments. He limited the
CIA's involvement to providing an Agency proprietary to transport ``cargo'' from Israel to Iran.
Casey failed to mention the September 1985 stepped-up intelligence on Iran and Lebanon and
individuals involved in the Iran initiative.

     2. In the responses Casey omitted the December 5, 1985, retroactive Finding:

      -- Regarding the CIA's involvement in November 1985 Casey said that McMahon directed
that no further flights take place without a Presidential Finding.  But Casey did not mention that
McMahon demanded a Finding to cover the  November 1985 shipment, nor did he mention that
he had sent a draft Finding to Poindexter with directions that the President sign it.

      -- Casey stated there had been ``only two findings'' in the past 10 years on Iran, which did not
count the after-the-fact December 5, 1985, Finding. 115

     115 There is, however, no direct proof Casey knew the December 5, 1985, Finding had been
signed.

      -- Again failing to mention the December 1985, Finding, Casey stated that the January 17,
1986 Finding was only the second time notice of a Finding was withheld from Congress by
Presidential directive, the first time being President Carter's brief withholding of notification of a
Finding regarding the aborted 1980 Iranian hostage-rescue effort.

     3.  Casey testified that the Agency's proprietary flight crew was told the cargo contained
oil-drilling equipment.  While Casey's testimony was technically correct -- the flight crew
initially was told the cargo was oil-drilling equipment -- CIA field personnel quickly learned and
communicated back that the cargo was missiles.116

     116 See Clarridge chapter.

     4.  Casey's description of the Iran arms sales focused almost exclusively on the geopolitical
rationale for seeking an opening to Iran. He mentioned the hostage issue only in passing, even
though the initiative was an arms-for-hostages operation.

     5.  Casey's description of the money flow in the 1986 weapons shipments was inaccurate and
incomplete. He did not mention the roles of Secord and the Enterprise in the arms deals.  Casey
testified that the Iranian funds were deposited in an Israeli account, then transferred to a sterile
CIA account, when in fact the funds were deposited by the Iranians into the Enterprise's Swiss
accounts controlled by Secord, operating as an ``agent for the CIA.''  Whether or not Casey knew
the precise details of the money flow, he laid it out to the committees as if he did.  He was
accompanied by others who did know the flow but did not correct him, as they did on other
occasions when he misspoke.  Casey withheld from the committees a central aspect of the arms
transfer -- the role of Secord as the CIA's ``agent.''

     Nor did Casey disclose his information of a substantial diversion.  In fact, he assured the
committees:

     I would like to reiterate that the funds for the material I have enumerated as well as all
associated costs were provided by the Iranians, funding for Iran was transferred to CIA for
deposit in a covert funding mechanism. . . . This action provided secure means for controlled
payment and accountability of all the funds associated with this program.  The Iranian funds, a
total of  $12,237,000 were deposited in a special account in a Swiss bank.117

     117 Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, pp. 17-18.

     While the House committee did not focus on the contents of the November 1985 shipment,
they questioned Casey as to whether the President authorized the shipment.  Casey alluded to a
shipment made by the Israelis that ``violated our law.''  Later, Casey, without mentioning the
HAWK shipment but apparently referring to it, said it was sent without the President's
knowledge and ``we ultimately required the Israelis to reverse,'' meaning get the materials back.
This led Representative Dwyer to ask:

     Mr. Dwyer:  One more point I would like to have cleared up in my mind, the Israelis
transferred some equipment to the Iranians.  We apparently were chagrined because they
transferred that equipment and the Israelis got the equipment back.  Is that what I heard?

     CIA Subject #2:  That is correct.

     Mr. Allen:  That is right.

     Mr. Dwyer:  There must be an excellent relationship between the Israelis and the Iranians to
deliver the equipment and say, hey, look, we made a mistake; you got to give us the equipment
back.  Is that really what happened?

     Mr. Casey:  I don't know if they actually got the   equipment back.

     CIA Subject #2:  We got it back.

     Mr. Allen:  The Israelis obtained back the equipment, 17 of them.

     Mr. Casey:  There is a good relationship between the Iranians and Israelis.

     Mr. Dwyer:  But how was it that -- how did they get it back?  Does anybody know?  I mean
who went and got it?

     Mr. Casey:  They probably shipped it back.  I don't know.

     Mr. Allen:  I think it was brought back in the February-March time frame by one of the flights
that went in with TOW missiles.  So that they were retrieved.118

     118 Ibid., pp. 101-2.

     When questioned about why the CIA played a support role in the Iran arms sales while the
NSC supervised it, Casey conceded that the NSC's principal role is to advise the President, not to
conduct operations.  Asked by Representative McCurdy,  ``Who headed the team?  Who called
the shots?  Was it Poindexter or Casey?,''  Casey replied:  ``I think it was the President.''  Asked
by McCurdy if the NSC had managed similar operations, Casey replied, ``I am trying to think.
Apart from the Central American thing which has NSC people involved in it, I don't know of
any.'' 119  Pressed later by Representative Brown about how the NSC got involved in running the
Iran initiative, Casey conceded, ``I don't think that is a good idea.  It happened.  It happened first
because the Administration wanted to pursue  something that the Congress that created the CIA
and Defense Department should not do and that is this Central American business.'' 120

     119 Ibid., pp. 42-43.

     120 Ibid., p. 64.

     Questioning of Casey by the SSCI focused more sharply on how the CIA could fail to know
that the cargo in the November 1985 shipment consisted of HAWK missiles.  Casey originally
stated that the people ``running the airplane were told that they were oil field parts.'' 121

     121 Casey, SSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, p. 32.

     Casey incorrectly testified that McFarlane briefed him about the Israeli initiative before he left
for a trip overseas ``without getting into the arms aspect of it.'' 122  This conflicts with
McMahon's memo for the record on the McFarlane briefing which indicated that McFarlane
made it clear that the initiative involved the shipment of arms.

     122 Ibid., p. 62.

     Casey also incorrectly testified about North's active participation in drafting the January 17,
1986, Presidential Finding.  Asked who in the NSC participated in  the drafting, Casey, who
worked closely with North and Sporkin on the Finding, said: ``I really can't tell you all who
might have been in.  I would just be guessing.'' 123

     123 Ibid., p. 76.

     On December 8, 1986, Casey testified before the House Defense Appropriations
Subcommittee.  Casey denied all knowledge of a diversion.  He stated that while he had heard
reports of a diversion to Central America from Furmark in early and mid-October, he had no firm
proof until told of Meese's discovery by Regan on November 24, 1986.

     Casey continued to withhold information about Secord's role as an agent of the CIA in the
initiative and to misstate the money flow for the 1986 TOW and spare HAWK missile parts.  He
withheld his knowledge of North's central role in the contra-resupply effort, attributing the flow
of funds to the contras to unnamed ``private benefactors.''

     When he appeared before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on December 10, 1986,
Casey's testimony on the diversion was similar to his account two days earlier to the House
Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, except he did add that ``[i]t's barely conceivable'' that
North and Poindexter initiated the diversion on their own.124  On contra support, Casey testified
that the CIA learned in the spring of 1986 of ``private benefactor supply activity being
conducted out of Ilopango'' air base in El Salvador and said the Agency did not permit its people
to become involved.125  As to who the ``private benefactors'' were, Casey said ``I have heard
speculation over a period of time, various rich people, other countries, but it was all rumor.''
Asked if the Saudis ever contributed to the contras, he said, ``I have seen press reports to that
effect,'' but he said he never inquired about those reports.126

     124 Casey, HFAC Testimony, 12/10/86, p. 53.

     125 Ibid., pp. 20-21.

     126 Ibid., pp. 154-55.

     Casey's most difficult testimony came on December 11, 1986, before the House Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence, before whom he had previously testified on November 21,
1986.

     Casey said he did not inform the committee of a possible diversion at his previous appearance
because ``I had to protect the ongoing operation which the NSC and the President and everybody
else hoped would bring additional hostages out.'' 127  Asked if he had informed Reagan about
the rumors of a diversion, Casey said, ``No, I didn't tell the President.  I didn't think it reached
that order. . . . I don't bother the President about little details like that.'' 128

     127 Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, p. 6.

     128 Ibid., pp. 119, 184.

     Casey faced tough questions over the December 5, 1985, Finding.  The committee asked
whether  there were ``any other covert activities or findings that this committee has not been
informed of.''  Casey said ``No,'' explaining that a November 26, 1985, draft Finding was ``sent
up and it didn't get completed until January 17th.'' 129  After being confronted with a copy of the
November 26 draft Finding and asked whether it was sent to the President for signing, Casey
replied:

     129 Ibid., pp. 80, 89.

     It wasn't this.  It was the one he signed as far as I remember.  I guess we just passed it around
for discussion.  There was an objection to this all prior action clause, I think on the part of the
NSC and it was taken out before it was finally signed.

     Casey said he did not think it was sent to the President:  ``It didn't get accepted.  It was not
accepted.  It was redrafted.'' 130  Casey was shown a memo for the record from McMahon dated
December 7, 1985, in which McMahon stated that the Finding was cleared by Casey, who
``called McFarlane and Don Regan to ascertain that indeed [the shipment] had Presidential
approval and to get assurances that a Finding would be so signed.''  The memo went on to say
that the CIA was notified on December 5, 1985, that the Finding had been signed by the
President.  Casey's final word on the subject was:  ``Maybe that finding was signed but it was
certainly signed on January 17th, the ultimate Finding.  I don't think one was signed in between. .
. . Maybe it was  possible that it was signed and it was replaced by another Finding.'' 131

     130 Ibid., pp. 92-94.

     131 Ibid., pp. 155-56.

     Conclusion

     Casey's conduct in October and November 1986 certainly can be questioned.  His actions
when confronted with mounting evidence of a diversion were more consistent with the behavior
of a person aware of the diversion and concerned with keeping it concealed, than with the
behavior of a responsible official learning for the first time that one of the President's top covert
foreign policy initiatives had been illegally subverted.

     When Allen and Gates met with Casey in early October 1986 to share Allen's concerns about
a possible diversion, Casey, who had independently received similar reports from his friend
Furmark, did not request an immediate investigation.  He did not call the President or the
Attorney General.  Instead, he directed Allen to write another memorandum.  And Casey called
Poindexter, the man in charge of the operation presumably gone bad.  The next day, Casey and
Gates had lunch with North, the man who was running the operation.  Again, Casey did not
confront North or demand to know what was going on.  Instead, he talked about operational
details, warned North about dissatisfied Canadian investors, and obtained from North a
disingenuous clean bill of health for the CIA on any involvement in the illegal contra-supply
operation.

     In separate appearances before the House and Senate intelligence committees on November
21, Casey made no mention of his suspicions of a diversion.  There is no evidence that he told
the Attorney General even after he learned that Meese, at the President's direction, was
conducting an inquiry to get a coherent picture of the Iran arms sales.  It was not until after
Meese publicly announced the diversion on November 25 that Casey made available to Meese
the final Allen memorandum outlining a possible diversion.

     The objectivity, professionalism, and integrity of the Central Intelligence Agency were
compromised by Casey's attitude and behavior in connection with the Iran venture.  To a large
degree, the CIA's top professionals were dragged against their better judgment into supporting a
questionable venture conducted by NSC staff who lacked competence and expertise in covert
operations.  At Casey's insistence, two persons -- Ghorbanifar and Secord -- were placed in key
roles, although Agency leaders considered them to be unreliable and unfit for such important and
sensitive assignments.  As a result, key Agency officials felt obliged to adopt a cynical
see-no-evil, hear-no-evil, report-no-evil posture.

Chapter 16

     Robert M. Gates

     Robert M. Gates was the Central Intelligence Agency's deputy director for intelligence (DDI)
from 1982 to 1986.  He was confirmed as the CIA's deputy director of central intelligence
(DDCI) in April of 1986 and became acting director of central intelligence in December of that
same year.  Owing to his senior status in the CIA, Gates was close to many figures who played
significant roles in the Iran/contra affair and was in a position to have known of their activities.
The evidence developed by Independent Counsel did not warrant indictment of Gates for his
Iran/contra activities or his responses to official inquiries.

     The Investigation

     Gates was an early subject of Independent Counsel's investigation, but the investigation of
Gates intensified in the spring of 1991 as part of a larger inquiry into the Iran/contra activities of
CIA officials.  This investigation received an additional impetus in May 1991, when President
Bush nominated Gates to be director of central intelligence (DCI).  The chairman and vice
chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) requested in a letter to the
Independent Counsel on May 15, 1991, any information that would ``significantly bear on the
fitness'' of Gates for the CIA post.

     Grand Jury secrecy rules hampered Independent Counsel's response. Nevertheless, in order to
answer questions about Gates' prior testimony, Independent Counsel accelerated his investigation
of Gates in the summer of 1991.  This investigation was substantially completed by September 3,
1991, at which time Independent Counsel determined that Gates' Iran/contra activities and
testimony did not warrant prosecution.1

     1 Independent Counsel made this decision subject to developments that could have warranted
reopening his inquiry, including testimony by Clair E. George, the CIA's former deputy director
for operations.  At the time Independent Counsel reached this decision, the possibility remained
that George could have provided information warranting reconsideration of Gates's status in the
investigation.  George refused to cooperate with Independent Counsel and was indicted on
September 19, 1991.  George subpoenaed Gates to testify as a defense witness at George's first
trial in the summer of 1992, but Gates was never called.

     Gates and the Diversion

     Gates consistently testified that he first heard on October 1, 1986, from the national
intelligence officer who was closest to the Iran initiative, Charles E. Allen, that proceeds from
the Iran arms sales may have been diverted to support the contras.2  Other evidence proves,
however, that  Gates received a report on the diversion during the summer of 1986 from DDI
Richard Kerr.  The issue was whether Independent Counsel could prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that Gates was deliberately not telling the truth when he later claimed not to have
remembered any reference to the diversion before meeting with Allen in October.

     2 See, for example, Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, p. 135 (``Q.  Do you recall that in this time
frame also you became initially -- well, let me not characterize it -- you became aware of what is
now referred to as the diversion.[sic]  A.  Yes.  I had a meeting with the NIO, the national
intelligence officer, Charlie Allen, on the lst of October.''); Gates, SSCI Confirmation Hearing,
2/17-18/87, p. 13 (response to written interrogatory about his knowledge of the diversion).

     Allen did not personally convey to Gates his concerns about the diversion until October 1,
1986.3  Allen testified, however, that he became worried during the summer of 1986 that the Iran
initiative would be derailed by a pricing impasse that developed after former National Security
Adviser Robert C. McFarlane failed in his attempt to secure release of the hostages during his
trip to Tehran in May 1986.  Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the NSC staff had inflated the price to
the Iranians for HAWK missile spare parts that were to be delivered at the Tehran meeting by a
multiple of 3.7.  Manucher Ghorbanifar, who brokered the parts sale, added a 41% markup to
North's price of $15 million.  With another increase added by Ghorbanifar during the Tehran
meeting, the Iranians were charged a total of  $24.5 million for HAWK spare parts priced by the
Defense Department at $3.6 million.4

     3 Allen believed, however, that he sent a memorandum to Gates discussing, among other
things, how much money North needed to pay Manucher Ghorbanifar from the Iran initiative.
(Memorandum from Allen to the DCI, Subject:  American Hostages, 11/10/86, ER 19739; Allen,
Grand Jury, 1/4/88, pp. 19-21.)  Independent Counsel was unable to corroborate Allen's
testimony.

     4 Allen, Grand Jury, 8/9/91, pp. 100-02.

     In late June 1986, Mohsen Kangarlu, Ghorbanifar's channel to the Iranian government,
informed the CIA through Agency annuitant George Cave  that the Iranians had evidence that
they were being drastically overcharged for HAWK missile spare parts.  Kangarlu asked the
Americans to lower the price.  Led by North, the Americans first attempted to blame Ghorbanifar
for the overcharges.  When blaming Ghorbanifar failed to break the impasse in U.S.-Iran talks,
North sought to convince the Iranians that the pricing was fair, and attempted to provide the
Iranians with falsified pricing documents.5

     5 Cave, Grand Jury, 8/30/91, pp. 94-99; Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 6/29/87, pp.
534-40.

     A frightened and angry Ghorbanifar finally called Allen in late August 1986 to complain that
the situation had become unbearable.  He told Allen that he had borrowed $15 million to finance
the HAWK parts transactions, and that he was now being pursued by his creditors for repayment.
Ghorbanifar insisted that it was not his markup, but the U.S. Government's, that was responsible
for the pricing  impasse.  Ghorbanifar then pleaded with Allen to do something to resolve the
issue.  Allen told Ghorbanifar that he would bring the matter to North's attention.6

     6 Allen, Grand Jury, 8/9/91, pp. 110-13.

     By this time, Allen had concluded that something was deeply wrong with the Iran initiative.7
Allen related  his concerns to Cave, Duane R. Clarridge, a senior officer in the CIA's Directorate
of Operations, and North.  North told Allen not to believe Ghorbanifar because he was a liar.
Instead, North insisted that Allen stick to the story that gathering the HAWK spares was
expensive and to not break ranks with other U.S. officials on the pricing cover story.8

     7 Ibid., pp. 113-15:

     I had begun to think along those lines, after the 15th of August 1986, when it was clear that
with White House support, Major General Secord and Mr. Hakim had established a new link or a
new channel into the government of Iran.  It was clear that they were dealing with Hashem
Rafsanjani, Ali Hashem Rafsanjani, who was a nephew, I believe, of the current President
Rafsanjani.

     It was clear to me that Mr. Hakim and Major General Secord were moving to take over the
control of the operation; that they were moving to exclude Mr. Ghorbanifar -- that was very clear.
I was very much aware that Mr. Hakim by that time and Mr. Secord were involved in other
matters, relating to the contras in Central America.

     It appeared to me that Mr. Ghorbanifar's call was sort of the final indicator that something was
deeply awry -- that the problem was not Mr. Ghorbanifar; the problem was the operation being
directed by U.S. officials.  And I then came to the analytic judgement -- based on all these
indications that money was being diverted from the profits from the sale of arms to Iran to the
contras in Central America.

     I did not have hard proof of this.  In fact, I had no direct evidence in writing from anyone.  It
was simply aggregating a series of indicators into a conclusion.  And at that point it was at that
time or shortly thereafter, I recall walking out from the building to my car late in the evening and
thinking very deeply about this -- thinking of the fact that two operations were probably being
combined -- that the lives of the hostages were being actually endangered by such a reckless
venture; [a]nd I raised the point with Mr. Cave at the office.

     8 Ibid., p. 115.

     Having received no satisfaction from North or Clarridge, Allen brought his concerns to
Richard Kerr, who was DDI and Allen's immediate superior.  Kerr's deputy, John Helgerson,
joined their meeting.  Allen testified:

     I went through what was occurring.  I brought Mr. Kerr up to date on the initiative.  I met with
him occasionally to brief him orally on the White House effort and the Agency support.  He had
asked to be kept informed when I had something useful to say, so I worked my way through the
current problem -- the fact that after the failure of the McFarlane trip to Tehran, there had been a
hiatus and efforts had been made to move this process along; but the Iranians had begun to
complain very strongly about the price being charged.

     Then I went through the rationale of why I believed that the United States was charging
excessive costs to the Iranian government for the arms and that profits from the sale of the arms
were being diverted to Central America.

     I made it clear I did not have direct evidence, but that when you put the indicators together, it
sounded as if two separate problems or projects were being mixed together.  And I pointed out to
him that it made no sense to me and in fact could endanger the hostages in Lebanon.

     Allen believed he also told Kerr and Helgerson that retired U.S. Air Force Major General
Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim were involved in both the Iran arms sales and the NSC's
contra project.  Allen related the markups alleged by Ghorbanifar, and described intelligence
reports that indicated that the Iranians were upset by the high prices.9

     9 Ibid., pp. 117-18.

     Allen testified that this information made Kerr visibly upset.  Kerr told Allen to ``stay on top
of the issue'' and to ``keep him advised of any new developments.''  According to Allen, Kerr
pulled him  aside later that same day and expressed ``deep concern.''  Kerr believed that if Allen's
story were true, the arms sales ultimately would be exposed.10

     10 Ibid., pp. 118-19.

     In various interviews, Kerr admitted Allen told him of his suspicions.  Kerr also corroborated
Allen that Helgerson was present at the meeting.  Kerr's account of his reaction to Allen's
information, however, differed from Allen's.  Kerr said that, as a general matter, he did not find
Allen credible -- that Allen was ``a person who started and put out his own fires'' -- and therefore
he did not take his allegations as seriously as Allen said he did.  Kerr had Helgerson there, he
stated, to calm Allen down.11

     11 Kerr, FBI 302, 7/31/91, pp. 4-5; see also Helgerson, FBI 302, 9/5/91, pp. 4-5.

     Still, Kerr admitted that he took Allen's concerns seriously enough to bring them to Gates,
who was Kerr's immediate superior.  Kerr acknowledged this meeting in two interviews with the
CIA's inspector general, and in an interview with the Select Committees.  Kerr stated that he did
not remember when this meeting took place, dating it some time between May and September
1986.12  In an  interview with the inspector general on December 4, 1986, Kerr stated that
Gates's response was, ``God only knows what Ollie is up to.''  A memorandum for the record
written by a CIA attorney reporting Kerr's interview with the Select Committees recites that Kerr
testified that when he informed Gates of Allen's concerns, ``Gates responded that he was aware
that rumors were circulating that profits were being made on the sales of arms to Iran and that
money from the arms sales was being made available to the Contras.'' 13

     12 Gates's calendar shows frequent meetings with Kerr in late August 1986, but this is
inconclusive evidence of when the meeting occurred.  Dating the meeting is made even harder by
the close working and personal relationship between Kerr and Gates.  According to Diane
Edwards, Gates's secretary, Kerr was in regular contact with Gates and was among a handful of
people who would see Gates without an appointment.  (Edwards, FBI 302, 8/23/91, pp. 1-2.)

     13 Working Notes, Kerr, CIA IG Interview, 12/4/86; Memorandum from Pearline to the
Record, Subject:  Interview of Dick Kerr, 9/10/87,  OCA 87-3899.  Pearline stood by his notes of
Kerr's Select Committees' interview.  (Pearline, FBI 302, 9/12/91, p. 5.)  Helgerson told the OIC
that Kerr informed him shortly after speaking with Gates of their conversation.  (Helgerson, FBI
302, 9/5/91, p. 5.)

     Kerr told Independent Counsel that he did not recall Gates referring to other rumors of a
diversion at this meeting.14  The Select Committees' report of the interview did not contain the
statement that Gates was aware of ``rumors'' of a diversion, but it did state that Gates told Kerr to
``keep him informed.''   Accordingly, the evidence was clear that Gates's statements concerning
his initial awareness of the  diversion were wrong:  Kerr brought him the information from Allen
over a month earlier than Gates admitted.  This would have been material because it suggested
that the CIA continued to support North's activities without informing North's superiors or
investigating.  By October, when Gates claimed he first remembered hearing of the diversion,
Casey ordered an inquiry and later made a report to Poindexter; but, by then, the Hasenfus
aircraft had been shot down and Casey and Gates were beginning to cover.

     14 Kerr, FBI 302, 7/31/91, p. 5.  Kerr admitted that he and Gates had reviewed the incident
several times since.  (Ibid.)

     Gates's defense was that he did not recall the Kerr meeting.15  To say the least, this was
disquieting.  He had been told by a very senior officer that two of President Reagan's personal
priorities were in danger -- not something an ambitious deputy director of central intelligence
would likely forget.  Allen was acting as a whistle-blower in a difficult situation.  His concern
was for the safety of the hostages and the success of the efforts of the President.  His information
suggested serious malfeasance by Government officials involved in a clandestine and highly
sensitive operation.  Even though Gates may have believed Allen to be excessively concerned,
could such an expression  of concern be forgotten, particularly after it had been corroborated
within a few weeks?  Logically, Gates could ignore or forget the Allen report only if he already
knew of the diversion and he knew that Casey and Poindexter knew of the diversion.  Gates also
was on the distribution list for highly reliable intelligence that should have informed him of the
pricing dispute among Kangarlu, Ghorbanifar, and the U.S. Government, although it did not refer
specifically to any diversion of funds.  Gates claimed that he rarely reviewed the intelligence.16
North testified that he did not discuss the diversion with Gates or in Gates's presence.  Gates also
never met with Richard Secord, whom Gates was aware of only as a ``private benefactor'' (the
CIA's term for non-Government donors to the contras) by July 1986.17

     15 In testimony he gave before the Select Committees' report was issued, Gates made no
reference to a meeting with Kerr.  In two later Grand Jury appearances, however, Gates
acknowledged the conflict between his recollection of events and Kerr's, but he insisted that he
did not recall the meeting.  (Gates, Grand Jury, 2/19/88, pp. 22-23; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, p.
140.)

     16 Gates, Grand Jury, 2/19/88, pp. 13-14 (found intelligence ``confusing,'' so he stopped
reading it); Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, p. 138 (intelligence showed ``a couple of Iranian arms
dealers . . . lying to each other,'' so he stopped reading it).

     17 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp. 7552-55; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 71-72,
87-88.  Gates admitted that he and others were concerned about Secord's involvement in the Iran
initiative because of Secord's prior contacts with unsavory individuals, but he did not link these
concerns with the diversion.  (Gates, SSCI Testimony, 12/4/86, pp. 80-85; Gates, Select
Committees Deposition, 7/31/87, p. 13.)

     Notwithstanding Independent Counsel's disbelief of Gates, Independent Counsel was not
confident that Kerr's testimony, without the support of another witness to his conversation with
Gates, would be  enough to charge Gates with perjury or false statements for his testimony
concerning the timing of his knowledge of the diversion.

     Gates and North's Contra Activities

     Gates maintained consistently that he was unaware that North had an operational role in
supporting the contras.  He testified that he believed that North's activities were limited to putting
contra leaders in contact with wealthy American donors, and to giving the contras political
advice.18  While sufficient circumstantial evidence exists to question the accuracy of these
statements, it did not adequately establish that Gates knowingly was untruthful about his
knowledge of North's activities.

     18 Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 59-60; Gates, Grand Jury, 2/10/88, pp. 74-75; Gates, Select
Committees Deposition, 7/31/87, p. 30; Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, p. 36.

     Gates first met North at meetings of the Crisis Pre-Planning Group (CPPG) beginning in
1982, when Gates was deputy director of intelligence.  Gates claimed that his contacts as DDI
with North were almost exclusively in the CPPG context, apart from meetings on intelligence
assignments.  Other than these meetings, Gates said that he had little to do with North.  He was
nonetheless aware of  allegations that North was involved on some level with contra support.19

     19 Gates, SSCI Testimony, 12/4/86, pp. 69-71; Gates, FBI 302, 5/15/87, p. 1.  One disturbing
evolution in Gates's description of his knowledge is the degree to which he relied on McFarlane's
false assurances to Congress in 1985 that North was not involved in contra resupply.  Before the
Select Committees, Gates claimed that the CIA, as a whole, was aware of McFarlane's
statements, and that the Agency relied on them:

     I might add, you know, there's been a great deal of attention drawn to the letter that McFarlane
sent to Mr. Hamilton avowing that whatever North was doing was legal and proper.  The House
Intelligence Committee were not the only ones who read that letter and were not the only ones
who believed it.  So there was a predisposition that while we didn't know or certainly from my
standpoint, I think from the standpoint of others as well, that while we didn't know entirely what
North was up to, the presumption was that it was proper because of that letter.

     But when the Select Committees asked if he specifically was aware of McFarlane's
representations at the time McFarlane made them, Gates was quick to deny that he was.  (Gates,
Select Committees Deposition, 7/31/87, pp. 32-33.)  In his 1991 Grand Jury testimony, Gates
reversed his position.  (Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, p. 82.)

     Notwithstanding his claims, Gates was aware of information that caused others to question the
legality of North's activities.  The most obvious source of concern should have been Allen's
allegations, discussed above, about North's corruption of the Iran arms sales to support the
contras.  But other evidence -- available before October 1, 1986 -- should have alerted Gates to
North's contra support role.

     Gates became deputy director of central intelligence on April 18, 1986.  As DDCI, Gates had
at least two sources of information about North's activities:  CIA personnel -- particularly Alan
D. Fiers Jr. -- who had duties relating to Central America, and his regular contacts with National
Security Adviser John M. Poindexter and others at the NSC.

     The Cannistraro Question

     In the spring and summer of 1986, Gates became involved in a debate over what role Vincent
Cannistraro, a CIA officer detailed to the NSC, should play in the $100 million contra program
that was expected to take effect in October 1986.  There was concern that if Cannistraro replaced
North, the CIA would be drawn into North's contra supply activities.  Gates discussed
Cannistraro's assignment with a number of CIA and NSC personnel, including Fiers, Clair E.
George, and Poindexter.  Gates met with Cannistraro himself in an attempt to resolve the
situation.  OIC's inquiry focused on whether Gates, in the course of these discussions, learned
about North's role in contra operations.

     By the time Gates became DDCI, Fiers was chief of the CIA's Central American Task Force
(CATF).  Fiers ran the CIA's support for the Nicaraguan contras and planned for the day when
the CIA would again be allowed to provide lethal support to the insurgents.  Fiers did not readily
share information  about his unit's operations in Nicaragua.  This had led to complaints with the
CIA's intelligence analysis directorate.  20

     20 One of the protesters was Robert Vickers, the CIA's national intelligence officer for Latin
America from July 1984 to November 1987.  Vickers told Gates that Fiers was not keeping him
informed about the contras. (Vickers, FBI 302, 4/28/87, p. 4; Kerr, FBI 302, 7/31/91, p. 6.)
Vickers did not remember this meeting with Gates in his most recent interview.  (Vickers, FBI
302, 5/15/91,  p. 5.)  Vickers also complained to Cannistraro about being cut out of the new
interagency group on Nicaragua, and asked Cannistraro to assist him in getting into the group.
Cannistraro brought up Vickers's concern with Gates in a meeting at Gates's office.  Cannistraro
told Gates that Vickers ``was very knowledgeable and was a real student of Central America,''
and he recommended that Vickers be included in meetings of the new interagency group.
(Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, p. 9.)  A PROFs note from Cannistraro to Rodney McDaniel,
Executive Secretary of the NSC, corroborates Cannistraro's efforts to get Vickers involved and
Cannistraro's meeting with Gates.  (PROFs Note from Cannistraro to McDaniel, 7/21/86, AKW
022235.)

     According to both Fiers and Gates, Gates's role in the contra program increased significantly
once he became DDCI.  Fiers testified Gates became ``intricately involved'' in developing policy
and coordinating interagency work on the contras.  Fiers dealt with Gates on requests from the
NSC and on structural discussions with other Executive Branch agencies about the contra
program.  Fiers kept Gates informed ``generally, on our state of planning and the nature of our
operations.''  Fiers met with Gates regularly and weekly.21

     21 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 44-45; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 12-14.

     Fiers testified that he did not lay out to Gates his extensive knowledge about North's
activities.22 From two events, however, Fiers concluded that Gates too was aware of North's
operational role with the contras.  The first incident involved Cannistraro, who had been Fiers's
predecessor as chief of CATF.

     22 Fiers's knowledge of North's contra-resupply activities is discussed more fully in the Fiers
chapter.

     Cannistraro, then detailed to the NSC, was nominally in charge of monitoring all U.S.
covert-action programs.  By June 1986, North's operational activities caused Cannistraro
concern.23  In mid-1986, media reports repeated earlier assertions that North was linked to
contra military aid.  As an important House vote on renewed contra aid approached, on June 24,
1986, a resolution of inquiry was introduced in the House to inquire about North's activities.  On
June 25, after the House approved a $100 million military and humanitarian aid package,
Representatives Lee Hamilton and Dante Fascell wrote the President for comment on the
resolution of inquiry; that night, CBS News ran a program that expressly linked North to the
private contra-aid network.

     23 Cannistraro, FBI 302, 9/18/90, p. 2; Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, p. 9.

     On June 26, Cannistraro suggested in a computer note to Poindexter that the new contra-aid
program should be a ``regularized C[overt] A[ction] program which would normally fall under
my responsibility.''  Poindexter agreed in a computer note sent to NSC Executive Secretary
Rodney McDaniel that same day:

     Yes, I would like to regularize it.  The Vince-Ollie relationship would be the same as between
Vince and Howard [Teicher, another NSC staffer] on Afghanistan.  Ollie will have mixed
reactions.  He has wanted CIA to get back on the management of the problem and we need to
lower Ollie's visibility on the  issue.  Talk to him about it and I will follow up when I get back.24

     24 Cannistraro, FBI 302, 9/18/90, p. 3; PROFs Note from Cannistraro to McDaniel, 6/26/86,
AKW 019032; PROFs Note from Poindexter to McDaniel, 6/26/86, AKW 021436.

     Fiers recalled Cannistraro's move to take the contra program away from North, as well as
Poindexter's concerns about North's program.  The question of who would run the anticipated
contra-aid program was important to Fiers and the CIA.  Fiers had been planning the CIA's
program ``in earnest.''  According to Fiers, Gates was intimately involved in structuring the new
program, both within the CIA and the Executive Branch as a whole.  Gates admitted he was
aware that Poindexter had been contemplating changes in who oversaw contra issues at the
NSC.25

     25 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 53-57; Gates, FBI 302, 5/15/87, pp. 4-5; Gates, Grand Jury,
5/1/91, pp. 103-04.

     In the midst of the struggle over who would run the contra-aid program, Cannistraro visited
Gates at his office.  Cannistraro told Independent Counsel that he came to express his desire to
return to the CIA's Directorate of Operations (DO).26   Gates promised to urge the directorate to
take Cannistraro back.  But soon Cannistraro's future became an item on the agenda for one of
Gates' weekly meetings with Poindexter.  On July 10, 1986, Paul Kinsinger, an aide to Gates,
sent Gates a memorandum that stated:

     26 Cannistraro claimed that he had long-standing differences with DO chief Clair George,
which is why Cannistraro went to Gates.  (Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, p. 6; see also Gates,
FBI 302, 5/15/87, p. 4; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 83-84.)

     Vince Cannistraro called to say that Poindexter wanted to discuss how we are going to
coordinate the Nicaragua program.  Attached is a short memo to you from the Director, you may
recall, that lays out the Director's views.

     Vince also said that Poindexter would want to know whether Ollie North should be involved.
Peggy [Donnelly, a CIA officer assigned to the DCI-DDCI executive offices] checked with the
DO and they say yes.27

     27 Note for ADCI, Subject:  Late Item for Poindexter Meeting, 7/10/86, ER 27199-206.

     The DO officer mentioned in Kinsinger's memo was Fiers.  Fiers recalled that he specifically
talked about Cannistraro's duties with Gates.  Fiers was concerned that having Cannistraro in the
management of the new program would bring a CIA officer ``into the proximity of operations
that I knew to go on, that were someplace we didn't want CIA officers to be.''  Fiers recalled
voicing this concern not only to Gates, but to George and Casey as well.28

     28 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 58-59.

     Fiers made it clear in several meetings in Gates's office that he wanted North to stay involved
in contra aid -- and have Cannistraro kept out.  Fiers recalled telling Gates:

     I just think I said, if Vince were to take over the Central American account, he can't be doing
the same thing that Ollie is doing with the private sector people in lining up support for the
resistance.  That crosses over the Boland Amendment, and it's just someplace that we don't want
to be.  We've got to keep Vince away from that.  And, I think those probably were my exact
words, or very similar to that.

     Fiers testified that Gates ``understood me.  We all understood that to be the case, and we were
going to have to keep Vince away from that.'' 29

     29 Ibid., pp. 59-60.

     On July 10, 1986, Gates raised the Cannistraro issue with Poindexter.  Gates wrote after their
meeting:

     I followed up on Vince Cannistraro's assignment.  Poindexter clearly wants to keep Vince
indefinitely and while I told him that Clair did not have to have a final answer before the end of
August, his reaction strongly suggested to me that he will keep Vince there.  I also repeated our
concern that should Vince take over the Central American account, that he should have nothing
to do as a CIA employee with the private sector people Ollie North had been dealing with in
support of the Contras.

     Cannistraro remained at the NSC,30 and was not transferred.

     30 Memorandum from Gates to the Record, Subject:  Meeting with Adm. Poindexter,
7/11/86, ER 27195-97 (emphasis added); Gates, FBI 302, 5/15/87, pp. 4-5.  See also Poindexter,
Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 200-02 (giving his reasons for easing North out of the
contra effort, and North's reluctance to leave).

     Gates's explanation of these events was that he wanted to keep Cannistraro from becoming
entangled with the contras for political reasons -- and not because he was concerned about North.
Gates was concerned, he said, about Congress finding a CIA employee anywhere close to the
situation.  Gates claimed he had not considered the legality or nature of what North was doing on
behalf of the contras:  ``I had no concerns -- I had no reason to have concerns based on what was
available to me about North's contacts with the private sector people, but I didn't think a CIA
person should do it.'' 31

     31 Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 79-83, 85.  The information that Gates claimed to have
about North consisted of ``rumors'' from various Government officials that North had put contra
leaders in touch with Secord and retired U.S. Army Major General John K. Singlaub.  Gates
testified that at the time he did not know that North had ``hands-on'' involvement with contra
resupply.  (Ibid., pp. 86-89.)

     Gates acknowledged that he might have raised the Cannistraro issue with Fiers, but he did not
recall it.  He did not recall any conversations with Fiers and he  claimed not to recall any
recommendation from Fiers one way or the other.32

     32 Ibid., pp. 110-11.  Fiers said that a ``note-taker'' usually attended his meetings with Gates.
This note-taker was Kinsinger.  Fiers remembers telling Kinsinger -- whom Fiers did not
remember by name -- occasionally not to write down things such as disparaging comments or
other matters because of their sensitivity.  Fiers also would ask Kinsinger to leave the room for
matters that he wanted to discuss privately with Gates.   (Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 45-46.)
Kinsinger kept none of his notes for the period that he served as Gates's aide.  (Kinsinger, FBI
302, 7/25/91, p. 8.)

     Given the accusations swirling about North's support of the contra rebels, and the prospect of
a formal Congressional inquiry into North's actions, Gates must have been concerned about the
nature of his activities as a threat to the planned resumption of support to the CIA.  It was,
however, also politically wise to keep Cannistraro away from any activities that resembled
North's.  Independent Counsel did not believe that provable evidence of Gates's awareness of
North's operational activities would sustain a prosecution for his denials to the Select
Committees or to OIC.

     Sale of Enterprise Assets

     North attempted to sell aircraft and a vessel, the Erria, that were owned by the Enterprise to
the CIA.  The proposed sales were discussed in Gates's presence at meetings with Poindexter.
Gates also spoke about the aircraft with  Fiers, who discouraged their purchase.  These
discussions must have provided some additional knowledge about North's role in contra
resupply.

     The Erria had carried munitions to Central America for the contras.33  Poindexter, Gates and
Casey discussed the Erria at one of their weekly meetings in May 1986.  Memoranda prepared
for that meeting associated North with the Erria.  Cannistraro recalled that discussion of the ship
at a Poindexter-Gates meeting suggested Gates knew the Erria was used in support of North's
contra operation.34

     33 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/7/89, pp. 6883-84.  North approached several CIA officers
with his proposal.  North asked Cannistraro to convince the CIA to purchase the ship as a
floating broadcast platform.  Cannistraro found out that CIA officers had considered the matter
and had declined North's offer because of the ship's association with Thomas Clines.
(Cannistraro, Grand Jury, 6/15/87, pp. 53-65; see also Twetten, Select Committees Deposition,
4/22/87, pp. 181-82; Haskell, FBI 302, 7/6-7/7/87, p. 10.)

     34 Memorandum from Cannistraro to Poindexter, Subject: Agenda for Your Weekly Meeting
. . . , 5/14/86, AKW 045227-28; Memorandum, Item . . . Poindexter May Raise With The DCI at
their 8 May Meeting, 5/8/86, ER 143-5 91-0041; Gates 1986 Appointment Book, 5/15/86; DCI
Schedule, 5/15/86, ER 598; Kinsinger, FBI 302, 7/25/91, p. 9; Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, p.
10.  See also Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 221-22 (recounting
discussions with the CIA about its purchasing the Erria).

     At a later meeting, Gates and Poindexter discussed North's proposal that the CIA buy the
Enterprise's aircraft.  In a computer note to Poindexter dated July 24, 1986, North complained
that the CIA was  unwilling to purchase the Enterprise assets and urged Poindexter to ask Casey
to reconsider.  Poindexter responded that he did ``tell Gates that the private effort should be
phased out.  Please tell Casey about this.  I agree with you.''  Poindexter later elaborated that he
had told Gates that the Enterprise's assets were available for purchase, and that Gates said he
would check on the matter.35

     35 See PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 7/24/86, AKW 021735; PROFs Note from
Poindexter to North, 7/26/86, AKW 021732; Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 5/2/87,
pp. 187-88, 228.

     North's calendar and pocket cards show that North scheduled a meeting with Gates for July
29, 1986, three days later.  Gates's calendar also shows a meeting with North on July 29.36
About this time, Gates approached Fiers and asked why the Central American Task Force would
not purchase North's, or ``the private benefactor's,'' aircraft.  According to Fiers, Gates accepted
Fiers' explanation that the aircraft were in poor condition and unduly risky for the CIA.  Fiers
also ``vaguely'' recalled discussing ``phasing out the private Contra aid effort'' with Gates in July
1986.  Both men agreed that  the private effort was a political liability for the Agency.  From
their discussions, Fiers -- like Cannistraro -- concluded that Gates was aware that ``North was
running a private supply operation.'' 37

     36 North Schedule Card, 7/29/86, AKW 002640;  Gates 1986 Appointment Book (Doc. No.
258). When asked about this meeting by SSCI in his second confirmation hearings. Gates could
not recall the meeting.  (SSCI Confirmation Nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of
Central Intelligence, Sen. Exec. Rpt. No. 102-19, 102d Cong., 1st Sess., p. 80 (Oct. 24, 1991).
10/19/91, p. 85.)

     37 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 68-69; Fiers, FBI 302, 8/1/91, pp. 14, 16.  See also Sen.
Exec. Rpt. No. 102-19, p. 80.

     Gates denied discussing phasing out the private resupply effort with Poindexter.  Asked about
Poindexter's message to North, Gates testified that he examined his records upon reading the
message and could find no evidence that such a meeting with Poindexter occurred.  Gates
claimed, ``If Poindexter made a comment to me like that, it would have been in the context of
once the authorized program is approved there would be no point in having any of these private
benefactors any longer.''  Neither did Gates recall meeting with North about the Erria during this
time.38

     38 Gates, Grand Jury, 2/10/88, pp. 76-77.

     The evidence established that Gates was exposed to information about North's connections to
the private resupply operation that would have raised concern in the minds of most reasonable
persons about the propriety of a Government officer having such an operational role.  Fiers and
Cannistraro believed that Gates was aware of North's operational role.  The question was whether
there was proof  beyond a reasonable doubt that Gates deliberately lied in denying knowledge of
North's operational activities.  A case would have depended on the testimony of Poindexter.
Fiers would not testify that he supplied Gates with the details of North's activities.  In the end,
Independent Counsel concluded that the question was too close to justify the commitment of
resources.  There were stronger, equally important cases to be tried.

     Obstruction of the Hasenfus Inquiries

     There was conclusive evidence that in October 1986, following the Hasenfus shootdown,
Clair George and Alan Fiers obstructed two congressional inquiries.39  Gates attended meetings
where the CIA's response to these inquiries was discussed.  None of the evidence, however, links
Gates to any specific act of obstruction.

     39 See George and Fiers chapters.

     The background for Congress's inquiries into the Hasenfus shootdown is discussed in the
Fiers and George chapters. By October 9, 1986, the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations
(SCFR) had set a hearing on the shootdown for October 10, 1986, and the House of
Representatives Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) had set a hearing for
October 14, 1986.  Gates's main concern during this period was convincing Congress that the
CIA had sponsored no resupply flights.  He appeared before SSCI on October 8, 1986, and gave
the committee brief biographies of the pilots on the downed plane.  He responded to Senator
Cohen when asked whether the plane was owned by a CIA proprietary:

     No, sir.  We didn't have anything to do with that.  And while we know what is going in --
going on with the Contras, obviously as you indicate, by virtue of what we come up here and
brief, I will tell you that I know from personal experience we have, I think, conscientiously tried
to avoid knowing what is going on in terms of any of this private funding, and tried to stay away
from it.  Somebody will say something about Singlaub or something like, we will say I don't want
to hear anything about it.40

     40 Gates, SSCI Testimony, 10/8/86, p. 9.

     To the extent that Gates spoke for others in the CIA, this was wrong.  It was true that the
Hasenfus plane was not owned by a CIA proprietary.  But as set forth in the Fiers, George, and
Fernandez chapters, several individual CIA officers had not stayed away from
``private-benefactor'' activities.  There was no evidence, however, that Gates knew this as early as
October 8, 1986, although he did know by then of the concern that North and Secord were
diverting funds from the Iran arms sales to the contras.41

     41 Gates was informed by Allen about the diversion, North, and Secord on October 1, 1986,
and met with Allen and Casey about them on October 7.

     The day after his SSCI testimony Gates double-checked his statements with a number of
people.  He met with Fiers and George at 10:10 a.m. on October 9 and was told ``that there had
been no contact between -- that the Agency wasn't involved in the Hasenfus matter at all.''  Gates
then had lunch with Casey and North.  North had just returned from negotiations in Frankfurt
with the ``Second Channel'' to the Iranian government.  North briefed Gates and Casey on the
progress of the negotiations.  The discussion then turned to the contras.  North testified at trial
and before the Grand Jury that during this luncheon, Casey told him that North's Iran and contra
operations were unraveling, and that he should begin to clean up both of them.  North specifically
recalled being told by Casey about allegations by Roy Furmark of a diversion; he did not recall
telling Gates about the diversion or going into detail about the nature of his operations.  North
also did not recall whether Gates was there when Casey told North to clean up his operation.42

     42 DDCI Appointments -- Thursday, 10/9/86, AKY 006296; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp.
176-77; Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 6-7; North, North Trial Testimony, 4/12/89, pp. 7552-57;
North, Grand Jury, 3/8/91, pp. 30-32.  Casey testified in December 1986 that the October 1986
luncheon included questions concerning a possible diversion.  (Casey, HPSCI Testimony,
12/11/86, pp. 120-21; Casey, House Appropriations Subcommittee Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 102.)

     In his testimony about the lunch, Gates stressed his attempt to get North to confirm that the
CIA was not involved with the Hasenfus crash.  Gates claimed that he was not invited to the
lunch, and that he ``crashed the lunch'' because he wanted to speak with North.  Gates said that
Casey discussed the Furmark allegations with North and told him that the situation had to be
straightened out.  Gates remembered no instruction from Casey to North to start cleaning up
operations, but did recall asking North directly whether any CIA personnel had been involved in
the resupply network.  Gates said that North told him that the CIA was ``absolutely clean.''  North
made a ``cryptic comment'' about Swiss bank accounts, which Gates claimed not to have
understood.  Gates stated that he then left Casey's office for ten minutes, and returned to ask
Casey alone about North's comment about Swiss accounts.  Casey seemed not to have picked up
on the comment, and Gates dropped it.43

     43 Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 177-79; Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 8-11; Gates, Select
Committees Deposition, 7/31/87, pp. 23-29, 33-35; Gates, Grand Jury, 2/19/88, pp. 46-47; Gates,
FBI 302, 5/15/87, p. 5.  When confronted with Gates's account of the meeting, Casey did not
dispute it.  (Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, pp. 180-81.)

     Gates changed his story in only one significant way between his early testimony and his final
Grand Jury appearance:  He expressly added that he left Casey and North alone together during
lunch.

     Gates wrote an exculpatory memo the next day.  Gates wrote:

     North confirmed to the DCI and to me that, based on his knowledge of the private funding
efforts for the Contras, CIA is completely clean on the question of any contacts with those
organizing the funding and the operations.  He affirmed that a clear separation had been
maintained between the private efforts and CIA assets and individuals, including proprietaries.

     Gates recorded North's purportedly exculpatory statement uncritically, even though he was by
then clearly aware of the possible diversion of U.S. funds through the ``private benefactors.''
Although, in testimony before SSCI, Gates admitted that his concerns about Allen's allegations
were behind the questioning of North, he did not ask North whether a diversion had occurred.
He was interested only in eliciting statements protective of his Agency.44

     44 Memorandum from Gates to the Record, Subject:  Lunch with Ollie North, 10/10/86, ER
24605; Gates, SSCI Testimony, 12/4/86, p. 20.

     After his lunch with North and his post-lunch discussion with Casey, Gates met again with
Casey and George at 1:45 p.m. on ``Directorate Reporting.''  Casey then briefed congressional
leaders about the downed aircraft.  Casey and Gates then met with George, Fiers and the CIA's
congressional affairs chief, David Gries.  Gates, George and Gries stated that they did not recall
what occurred at this meeting.  Fiers  recalled that the meeting concerned whether it would be
Gates or George who testified on October 10 before SCFR.  Fiers testified that he, Casey and
George had decided earlier on October 9 that George was to testify.  As Fiers recalled it, the later
meeting was to give Gries the opportunity to argue in favor of Gates testifying.  The content of
the next day's briefing, except for the categorical denial made in the CIA's opening statement,
was not discussed.45

     45 George, Grand Jury, 4/5/91, pp. 72-73; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 197-98; Gries, FBI
302, 4/9/91, pp. 4-5; Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 19-20.

     The early evening meeting of Casey, Gates, George, Fiers, and Gries ended Gates's
involvement with the preparation of the CIA's testimony concerning the Hasenfus crash.  The
only other evidence relating to Gates during this period was a meeting that took place in Casey's
office around the time of George and Fiers's briefing of HPSCI on October 14, 1986.  During this
meeting, Fiers told George and Casey that the Hasenfus inquiries would not end until someone
took responsibility for the private resupply flights.  Fiers recommended that Secord take
responsibility.  George turned to Casey and said, ``Bill, you know Secord has other problems,''
and the conversation ended soon after.  Fiers had a vague recollection of Gates being present for
part of the  conversation, and then leaving the room.  Fiers was uncertain if Gates heard his
remarks about Secord.46

     46 Ibid., pp. 40-43.

     At most, the evidence showed that Gates was in and around meetings where the content of
George and Fiers's testimony was discussed, and that he participated in two briefings that helped
lull congressional investigators into believing that the CIA was not involved in facilitating
private resupply flights.  The evidence shows further that Gates was aware of at least general
information suggesting involvement by North and Secord with the contras, and that Gates did not
disclose this information -- or argue that it should be disclosed.  For Gates, the CIA's task in
October 1986 was to distance the CIA from the private operation, in part by locking North into
statements that cleared the CIA of wrongdoing.47

     47 Indeed, according to Allen, when Allen first discussed rumors of a diversion with Gates on
October 1, 1986, Gates told Allen he ``didn't want to hear about Central America'' and ``I've
supported Ollie in other activities . . . but he's gone too far.''  (Allen, Grand Jury, 1/4/88, pp.
31-33.)  See also Gates, SSCI Testimony, 12/4/86, pp. 18-19 (confirming that he told Allen that
he ``didn't want to hear anything about funding for the Contras'').

     In the end, although Gates's actions suggested an officer who was more interested in shielding
his institution from criticism and in shifting the blame to the NSC than in finding out the truth,
there was insufficient evidence to  charge Gates with a criminal endeavor to obstruct
congressional investigations into the Hasenfus shootdown.

     Gates and Casey's November 1986 Testimony

     The events leading up to the preparation of false testimony by Director Casey in November
1986 -- preparations that Gates nominally oversaw -- are set forth in a separate chapter of this
Report. There was insufficient evidence that Gates committed a crime as he participated in the
preparation of Casey's testimony, or that he was aware of critical facts indicating that some of the
statements by Casey and others were false.

     Conclusion

     Independent Counsel found insufficient evidence to warrant charging Robert Gates with a
crime for his role in the Iran/contra affair.  Like those of many other Iran/contra figures, the
statements of Gates often seemed scripted and less than candid.  Nevertheless, given the complex
nature of the activities and Gates's apparent lack of direct participation, a jury could find the
evidence left a reasonable doubt that Gates either obstructed official inquiries or that his two
demonstrably incorrect statements were deliberate lies.

Chapter 17

     United States v. Clair E. George

     Clair E. George served as deputy director for operations (DDO) of the CIA from July 1984
through December 1987, after a long and distinguished career in the CIA's Directorate of
Operations (DO) that began in 1955.  During his tenure at the CIA, he completed numerous
overseas assignments, often in dangerous locations.  His primary activity was the recruitment of
foreign agents to work clandestinely for the United States.  Interspersed with these tours of duty
abroad were assignments at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, during which George
coordinated the CIA's activities in various parts of the world.  He rose through the ranks at CIA
during this progression of assignments.

     As director of the Agency's clandestine operations, George was the CIA's third-in-command
and highest ranking of the four CIA officers prosecuted by Independent Counsel.  During his
term as DDO, George was responsible for the CIA's covert actions and espionage activities
worldwide.  The only individuals senior to George in the Agency were CIA Director William J.
Casey, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence John N. McMahon, and McMahon's successor,
Robert M. Gates.1   George was the highest ranking CIA official convicted after trial since the
Agency was formed under the National Security Act of 1947.2

     1 McMahon served as DDCI from 1982 until March 26, 1986, when he retired. Gates was
deputy director for intelligence from 1982 until he was appointed to replace McMahon in April
1986.  Gates became acting director of the CIA when Casey became ill in December 1986.

     2 After he had left the Agency, former CIA Director Richard M. Helms pleaded nolo
contendere in 1977 to a misdemeanor charge of withholding information from Congress during
testimony about CIA activities in Chile in connection with the overthrow and murder of Marxist
President Salvador Allende in 1970.

     The very fact that Independent Counsel was able to bring the George case to trial was a
significant achievement.  The prosecution of any CIA officer is inherently difficult because of the
issues of secrecy involving national security information of the highest classification.  These
problems are magnified when the defendant is the director of the CIA's global spy network and
the criminal charges against him relate to his conduct in carrying out his official responsibilities.
Thus, Independent Counsel had to ensure that the case against George could survive the stringent
requirements of the Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA), which is designed to prevent
the disclosure of national security information while at the same time not inhibiting a defendant's
right to a fair trial.  The CIPA procedures were a major hurdle in the George case as the defense
sought to block trial by claiming that huge  quantities of the nation's top secrets needed to be
exposed to put on George's defense.3

     3 Much of the pre-trial litigation in the George case revolved around classification problems
in discovery and in working through the CIPA process.  There were more than 10 pretrial
motions relating to CIPA and over 80 hours devoted to hearings regarding classification issues.
Although the classified information problems in the George case were formidable, the pre-trial
obstacles were surmounted largely through excellent cooperation and diligence on the part of the
Inter-Agency Review Group, a group made up of representatives from the intelligence
community, and thoughtful application of the CIPA procedures by U.S. District Judge Royce C.
Lamberth.

     The George case was also important in Iran/contra because Clair George was one of a small
group of high officials who was unavoidably a supervisor having oversight of both ventures and
had, therefore, substantial knowledge of both the secret arms sales to Iran and the secret
contra-resupply operation. This meant that George was one of the few officials who could have
provided Congress with specific and crucial information on the Iran arms sales and the illicit
contra-resupply network when both operations began unraveling publicly in October and
November of 1986.

     George was not only privy to many of the details concerning the Iran/contra affair, he was also
aware that other senior Government officials were aware of the same information.  Moreover,
George knew that many of these  officials were withholding information or lying about what they
knew.

     During the investigation of the CIA's role in Iran/contra, Independent Counsel uncovered
evidence indicating that George was a well-informed supervisor of the CIA's support of the NSC
effort to supply military aid to the contras and to sell weapons to Iran.  The evidence indicated
that George was aware of information he later denied knowing.  The relevant evidentiary
documents were, for the most part, either created, reviewed or received by George.  The witness
testimony came primarily from individuals who had worked closely with George, or who had
provided information to his most senior, trusted assistants.

     Independent Counsel's case against George centered on testimony he gave before the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee on October 10, 1986, the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence on October 14, 1986, and a federal Grand Jury investigating Iran/contra in 1991.
The charges against him involved statements he made in the wake of the October 5, 1986,
shootdown in Nicaragua of the contra-resupply plane carrying American Eugene Hasenfus.
George was charged with falsely denying before Congress knowledge of who was behind the
contra-resupply operation and the true identity of Max Gomez, a former CIA operative whose
real name was Felix Rodriguez and whom Hasenfus had publicly identified as part of the
resupply operation.  According to the charges,  George also falsely denied contacts with retired
U.S. Air Force Major General Richard V. Secord, who was involved in both the Iran and contra
operations.

     George was tried in the summer of 1992 on nine counts of false statements, perjury and
obstruction in connection with congressional and Grand Jury investigations.  This trial ended in a
mistrial after the jury was unable to reach a verdict on any count.  George was retried in the fall
of 1992 on seven counts, resulting in convictions on two charges of false statements and perjury
before Congress.  Before George was sentenced, President Bush pardoned him on December 24,
1992.

     George and Contra Support

     Beginning in early 1985, George was aware that North was the key player in the Reagan
Administration's secret contra-resupply operations.  For example, CIA officers in South Korea
informed CIA headquarters on January 28, 1985, that retired U.S. Army Major General John K.
Singlaub had asked the governing political party to contribute $2 million to the contras. The
Koreans told CIA personnel that some signal from the U.S.  Government endorsing the Singlaub
request would be necessary.4 George called North to inform him of the developments.  North's
notes from February 4, 1985, describe a call from ``Clair'' which relayed the information
provided by CIA personnel in South Korea.  According to North's notes, George said that the
South Koreans were ``increasingly inclined to contribute $2M'' but that they ``[n]eed W[hite]
H[ouse] indication.'' 5  George also called North on February 2 and 5, 1985, to discuss the
potential South Korean contribution to the contras.6

     4 CIA Cable, 1/28/85, ER 29941, George GX 5.

     5 North Notebook, 2/4/85, AMX 000427, George GX 8.

     6 North Notebook, 2/2/85, AMX 000421 & 2/5/85, AMX 00043, George GX 7 & GX 9.

     In a February 6, 1985, memorandum from North to McFarlane, North discussed Singlaub's
solicitation of the South Koreans as a possible means of obtaining short-term financing for the
contras:

     Regarding [the Contras' short-term financing needs], as a consequence of GEN Singlaub's
recent trip, both the Taiwanese and the South Koreans have indicated [to CIA field personnel]
that they want to help in a ``big way.''  Clair George (CIA) has withheld the dissemination of
these offers and contacted me privately to assure that they will not become common knowledge.7

     7 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 2/6/85, ALU 130089-90, George GX 10 (emphasis
added).

     Documents indicate that George was aware of the identity of others who were secretly
arranging for arms shipments to the contras.  In the first half of March 1985, George sent a
memorandum to national security adviser Robert C. McFarlane regarding reports that a Canadian
arms dealer was purchasing weapons in China on behalf of Secord for shipment to Guatemala.8
Alan D. Fiers, Jr., chief of the CIA's Central American Task Force from 1984 to 1986 testified
that there was no doubt within the CIA that the arms purchased by Secord were headed to the
contras.9

     8 Memorandum from George to McFarlane, 3/6/85, ER  AKW 031346-47, George GX 12.

     9 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/12/91, pp. 49-50.  Fiers further testified that he vaguely recalled
discussing the memorandum on Secord's arms purchases in China with George.

     In the latter part of 1985, Congress authorized the sending of humanitarian aid to the contras.
To oversee this aid, the Reagan Administration created an entity within the State Department
known as the Nicaraguan Humanitarian  Assistance Office, or ``NHAO.''  During late 1985 and
early 1986, NHAO humanitarian-supply flights began being routed through Ilopango air base in
El Salvador.  At the same time, Felix Rodriguez was based at Ilopango and was coordinating
North's secret weapons shipments to the contras.10  As the early months of 1986 passed, the two
operations became indistinguishable, both using the same equipment and pilots, and both being
coordinated by Rodriguez.

     10 North's secret network of personnel that supplied weapons to the contras became known
later in 1986 as the ``private benefactors.''

     CIA personnel in Central America had been instructed to abide by the Boland Amendment's
restrictions on aiding the contras.  But as the NHAO and ``private benefactor'' operations at
Ilopango grew, and as Rodriguez's role expanded, a senior CIA official in Central America grew
more uncomfortable remaining on the sidelines.  Guidance from headquarters was slow in
coming, and finally, on February 7, 1986, the officer, known in the George trials as ``Officer #1,''
wrote a frustrated, sarcastic cable to headquarters.  The cable described a recent incident in which
a NHAO plane had crash-landed in El Salvador.  Officer #1 had been unaware of the event until
later, because Rodriguez was ``coordinating'' all of his actions with North and leaving everyone
else in the dark.  The cable, titled ``End the Silence,'' ended with the question, ``What is going on
back there?'' 11

     11 CIA Cable, 2/7/86, DO 10959, George GX 32.

     The cable raised eyebrows at CIA headquarters.  Fiers discussed it with George, whose
reaction was unambiguous.  George ordered Fiers to go to El Salvador and instruct Officer #1 to
keep his nose out of the activities at Ilopango.  Those activities, George told Fiers, were being
run by ``Ollie North'' and the White House.12

     12 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/12/91, pp. 150-53.

     In April 1986, CIA headquarters received cable traffic from Europe regarding Thomas Clines,
a former CIA employee whose association with convicted arms trafficker Edwin Wilson had
given him a bad reputation within the CIA.13  According to one cable, Clines was planning a
large shipment of arms from Europe to Honduras and ultimately to the contras.  Fiers discussed
this and similar cables with George.  Both men were concerned about Clines's involvement with
contra resupply, but, according to Fiers, George told him not to get involved in what was a
sensitive operation.14

     13 CIA Cable, 4/28/86, George GX 37.

     14 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 30-33.  At his trials, George acknowledged that he read
cables regarding Clines and the contras.

     Additional documentary evidence regarding the private benefactors shows that key details
were reported to George's office on October 9, 1986, on the eve of his Senate Foreign Relations
Committee testimony.  After Eugene Hasenfus, a captured resupply  operation employee, had
accused the CIA of being involved in contra-resupply operations, the CIA received a cable from
Central America plainly stating that ``Max Gomez,'' whom Hasenfus had named as a resupply
manager, was a local alias used by Rodriguez.15  The cable also explicitly discussed Rodriguez's
involvement with the private benefactors:

     15 CIA Cable, 10/9/86, George GX 45.

     [At a lunch with a senior CIA officer in Central America,] Rodriguez stated that he was [in El
Salvador] in a dual capacity.  One of his duties was to advise the Salvadoran Air Force in
counter-insurgency tactics.  The other was to participate in private benefactors' (unnamed) efforts
to assist the FDN.16

     16 Ibid.,

 2.

     This cable arrived at the CIA at 8:50 p.m. on October 9, 1986 and three copies were sent to
George's office.  This information subsequently appeared in the briefing book and other papers
prepared for George's use during congressional testimony over the next several days.17  Copies
of this briefing book and the Rodriguez papers were retrieved from one of George's CIA office
files, or ``soft files,'' suggesting that he received and retained them.18

     17 Briefing Book, Tab H, DO 44536-44535, George GX 119.

     18 ''Soft file'' is another term for a personal or working file.  George retained certain
documents of extreme sensitivity in soft files in his safe.  (George, George Trial Testimony,
8/14/92, p. 3545.)

     George denied having been involved in the drafting of the opening statement he gave to the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee on October 10 and HPSCI on October 14. Drafts of that
opening statement, however, show that George played an active role in the preparation of the
opening statement, directing subordinates to remove significant information from it.  One draft
had contained language regarding the NHAO operations conducted at Ilopango.  The language
was crossed out, with the notation ``deleted by DDO'' written in the margin.19  On another copy
of the same draft, one recovered from George's ``soft'' files, the same sentence is crossed out.
FBI experts identified George's fingerprints on the page where the NHAO information was
deleted.20

     19 Draft, ``Subject: DDO's Opening Statement,'' ANT 1771-73, George GX 48.

     20 Draft, ``Subject: DDO's Opening Statement,'' DO 44828-26, George GX 105.

     Besides the documents discussed above, numerous statements by a variety of witnesses,
including subsequent statements made by George himself, showed that George's knowledge of
the contra-resupply operation was extensive.21

     21 A detailed recounting of these statements would be too lengthy for this report.  What
follows are highlights of the key points made by various witnesses.

     Alan D. Fiers, Jr., who served as chief of the Central American Task Force within the
Directorate of Operations, had day-to-day responsibility for CIA operations  in Central America.
From 1984 through 1986, Fiers's duties brought him in close contact with North and resupply
operatives, including Rodriguez.  In turn, Fiers reported significant information regarding the
contra-resupply operation to George and others.

     In the latter part of 1984, George was aware of North's activities in Central America.  North
during this time called Fiers asking for sensitive information on Nicaraguan air defenses.  Fiers
refused.  He believed the information was too ``operational,'' and ``could only be used in
conjunction with some support of air drops or contra activity.'' 22  Within a day, George called
Fiers and asked for exactly the same information.  Fiers brought it to George's office and asked if
George intended to give the data to North.  George responded that Fiers did not have to worry
about what George would do with the information.23

     22 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/12/91, pp. 24-26.

     23 Ibid., pp. 25-26.

     Fiers testified that George was also aware of Rodriguez's presence in El Salvador by early
1985.  Rodriguez had been recommended by individuals within the office of Vice President Bush
to work with the Salvadoran military on counterinsurgency operations.  Because of Rodriguez's
ties to the White House, George and other CIA officials knew that any dealings with Rodriguez
could  have broader political implications.24  Thus, Rodriguez's identity and whereabouts were a
topic of discussion within the CIA by early 1985.

     24 Ibid., pp. 30-32.

     Fiers put many of the documents discussed above in context.  Fiers recalled discussing
Singlaub's solicitation of the Koreans with George. The upshot of this conversation was that
North should be called so that he could take care of the situation.25  Fiers also recalled
discussing with George Secord's 1985 weapons purchases in China on behalf of the contras.
There was no doubt within CIA where the arms were headed.26 Further, Fiers discussed with
George the April 1986 cables from Europe that indicated that Clines was purchasing arms on
behalf of the contras.  When Fiers pressed for more information, George told him not to get
involved.27

     25 Ibid., pp. 33-34.

     26 Ibid., pp. 49-50.

     27 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 30-32.

     When Fiers received the ``End the Silence'' cable from Officer #1 in February 1986, George
responded decisively.28  He instructed Fiers to tell Officer #1 that the activities at Ilopango were
not something  the CIA should be involved in.  George said that those activities were being
handled by North and the White House.  If Officer #1 could not keep out of it, George threatened
to replace him.29

     28 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/12/91, pp. 151-52.

     29 Ibid., pp. 151, 153.

     During the summer of 1986, Congress appeared ready to approve $100 million of unrestricted
aid for the contras to be administered by the CIA -- in particular, by Fiers and the Central
American Task Force.  North hoped that the CIA would buy the airplanes that the resupply
operation had been using to deliver secret weapons shipments to the contras.30  Fiers was not
interested. The planes were old, needed maintenance, and were not fuel-efficient.  Fiers also
wanted the new CIA program to be free from the taint of the equipment used by North's secret
network.31  Fiers told North this. Shortly thereafter, George pressed Fiers on his reasons.32
Fiers's position ultimately prevailed, and the CIA did not buy the planes.  George's efforts to
change Fiers's mind nevertheless indicated that George was hearing from North about the
operation.

     30 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, p. 68.

     31 Ibid., pp. 68-69.

     32 Ibid., p. 69.  Others besides George pressed Fiers on the same point, including CIA
Director Casey and CIA Deputy Director Gates.

     Finally, Fiers provided important information about the preparation of the opening statement
George gave to the congressional committees in October 1986.  George ordered him to remove
from the draft opening statement a section discussing the way the NHAO humanitarian aid flights
out of Ilopango had become intertwined with private-benefactor lethal resupply flights out of the
same facility.33  George told Fiers that this information would turn a spotlight on the White
House and the Reagan Administration's links to the lethal resupply operation.  George did not
want to be the first person to expose that link.34

     33 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 10-12.

     34 Ibid., pp. 11-12.

     Louis Dupart, Fiers's compliance officer, corroborated portions of Fiers's testimony.  Dupart
testified that he prepared the initial draft of the statement on the evening of October 9, 1986, and
left it on Fiers's desk at approximately 2:30 a.m. or 3:00 a.m. on October 10.35  When Dupart
came to work later that morning, Fiers was upstairs with George, going over the proposed
opening statement.36  When Fiers came back downstairs to the Task Force, he had a copy of the
opening statement with  some changes in it.37  Dupart later wrote on one version of the draft
opening statement the words ``Deleted by DDO.''38

     35 Dupart, Grand Jury, 3/15/91, p. 27.

     36 Ibid., pp. 28-29.

     37 Ibid., p. 29.

     38 Draft, ``Subject:  DDO's Opening Statement,'' ANT 1771-73.  See also Draft, ``Subject:
DDO's Opening Statement,'' DO 44828-26.

     George also told Fiers, who was to testify alongside him on Capitol Hill, that the CIA was not
going to inform the committees that Gomez was an alias for Rodriguez.  Fiers objected, telling
George that he, Fiers, knew for a fact that Gomez was Rodriguez.  But George instructed Fiers to
answer any questions about Gomez by saying that the CIA was still checking into Gomez's
identity.39

     39 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, p. 21.

     Fiers also explained that George aided an effort to conceal headquarters knowledge of the
activities of CIA Costa Rican station chief Joseph F. Fernandez.  Despite the Boland
Amendment's ban on most forms of CIA support for the contras, Fernandez continued to have
direct contacts with the resupply operation and North.  In October 1986, Fernandez informed
Fiers that there were phone records in Costa Rica that would show numerous calls between
Fernandez and the resupply  operation's quarters at Ilopango.  Fiers told his immediate superior,
and the division chief, in turn, informed George.40

     40 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, p. 57.  When asked by SSCI on December 3, 1986, if he had
``any knowledge of any activities by any official of CIA in conjunction with or in cooperation
with North to raise private funds or otherwise assist in providing private assistance to the
contras,'' George replied, ``I do not.''  (George, SSCI Testimony, 12/3/86, p. 57.)

     Despite learning in October of Fernandez's misconduct, Fiers, the division chief and George
took no steps to correct George's inaccurate testimony to two congressional committees that the
CIA had no involvement with the contra-resupply operation.  Louis Dupart threatened to inform
the CIA general counsel if the record was not corrected.  On November 25, 1986 -- the date of
the public exposure of the diversion, Poindexter's resignation and North's dismissal -- the three
men simply agreed to say they had met on the Fernandez matter on November 10, even though
this was pure fiction.41  The division chief wrote a  memorandum on November 26, 1986 that
and referred to this non-existent meeting in the first sentence.42

     41 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 62-63.

     42 Memorandum from Division Chief to the DDO, 10/26/86, DO 166541-39, George GX
131.

     Another witness who called the truthfulness of George's testimony into question was a CIA
officer who testified at George's second trial as ``CIA Officer #7.''  In October 1986, Officer #7
was employed in the Air Branch of George's Directorate of Operations.  But from February
through June of 1986, before joining the CIA, Officer #7 had worked as a pilot flying
contra-resupply flights out of Ilopango airbase.  He also helped set up the air operation at
Ilopango, and trained other pilots -- including Wallace Sawyer, one of the Americans killed when
Hasenfus's plane was shot down over Nicaragua.  Officer #7 had extensive knowledge of the
secret contra-resupply network operating out of Ilopango.  He also was working in George's
directorate at the time George told the congressional committees in October 1986 that he did not
know the identities of the persons behind the resupply flights.43

     43 CIA Officer #7, FBI 302, 6/21/91, pp. 1-2.

     Shortly after the Hasenfus shootdown, Norman N. Gardner, Jr. one of George's two special
assistants, sought out Officer #7 while he was attending an antique auto show in Hershey,
Pennsylvania.  Gardner asked him to return to CIA headquarters.  The two men met in Gardner's
office, which was located in George's suite of offices, prior to George's HPSCI testimony on
October 14, 1986.  Officer #7 told Gardner the full story of his contra-resupply activities.44
Gardner then accompanied George to the HPSCI hearing.  When Independent Counsel asked
Gardner whether he informed George of Officer #7's information prior to the HPSCI hearing,
Gardner claimed his rights under the Fifth Amendment and refused to testify.45

     44 Ibid., p. 3.

     45 Gardner, Grand Jury, 8/7/91, p. 8.

     When Fiers learned of Officer #7's story, he spoke with both Gardner and George about how
to handle the situation.46  Fiers urged interviewing Officer #7 immediately and addressing
head-on any problems caused by his recent employment.  But George wanted to ``slow-roll'' any
action taken with respect to Officer #7 and the information he had provided about the
contra-resupply operations. Officer #7's information was never used to correct George's
testimony.47

     46 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 54-55.

     47 Ibid., p. 55.

     George and the Iran Arms Sales

     Fiers recounted to Independent Counsel that around the time of George's HPSCI testimony,
Fiers and George met in Director Casey's office.  Fiers suggested to Casey and George that
congressional interest in the Hasenfus crash and the secret resupply flights would not abate until
someone stood up and took responsibility for the flights.48  Casey asked Fiers who that should
be, and Fiers suggested Secord.  According to Fiers, George then ``looked at the Director and
said, `Bill, you know Secord has other problems.' '' 49

     48 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, p. 41.

     49 Ibid.

     George knew where Secord's ``other problems'' lay:  in the Iran arms sales.50  Fiers testified
that North had told him in late summer 1986 that profits from the arms sales were being used to
support the contras.  Fiers said he  reported North's statements to George, who told Fiers that
only a handful of people in the U.S. Government knew of this.  Fiers interpreted this to mean the
arms sales, not the diversion.51

     50 George told the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on December 3, 1986, that he had
not learned of the diversion until Attorney General Meese's announcement of it on November 25,
1986.  To a follow-up question inquiring whether George had any indication that anyone else at
CIA knew of the diversion prior to Meese's statements, George replied, ``None whatsoever.''
(George, SSCI Testimony, 12/3/86, pp. 29-30.)

     51 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 104-05.  Fiers was not alone in recalling telling George
about the diversion in advance of Meese's announcement.  George Cave testified to SSCI that he
had informed George in late October or early November of 1986 of allegations by Roy Furmark
that arms sales proceeds had been diverted to the contras.  (Cave, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp.
89-90.)

     In his 1986 congressional testimony, George deflected questions about Secord by stating that
he did not know him.52  Documents show that George knew what Secord's role was in the Iran
arms sales.  White House gate logs from January 20, 1986, show that George attended a meeting
on that day with Secord and others in the White House Situation Room to discuss the
operation.53  According to Secord, he was introduced to George at this meeting, and the group
discussed the role Secord was to play in the Iran arms sales.54

     52 George denied knowing Secord in his testimony to SSCI on December 3, 1986.  Before
SFRC on October 10, 1986, George denied ever having had contact with Secord.

     53 White House Gate Log 1/20/96, ALU 49624-27, George GX 52.

     54 Secord, OIC Interview, 5/14/87, p. 318.

     Shortly after this meeting, on January 24, 1986, North prepared what he termed a ``notional''
time line for ``Operation Recovery,'' North's code name for the arms-for-hostages deal with
Iran.55  The document described in detail the logistics of the Iran arms sales, particularly
Secord's role.  The only copy of the document at CIA was kept in George's safe, and George
discussed the document with his senior subordinates before January 27, 1986.56  Although the
document referred to Secord by his code name ``Copp,'' a colleague of George at the CIA who
reviewed the Notional Time Line with him, Thomas Twetten, testified that George knew ``Copp''
was Secord.57

     55 George, George Trial Testimony, 8/13/92, p. 3307.

     56 Twetten, Grand Jury, 8/21/91, pp. 33-34, 36.

     57 Ibid., p. 33.

     In late February 1986, George approved the issuance of false or ``alias'' passports for Secord
and for Albert Hakim, Secord's business partner.58  George knew that these passports were
needed in order to facilitate Secord and Hakim's roles in the Iran arms sales.59

     58 Twetten, Grand Jury, 1/22/88, p. 85.  Twetten had recommended that George not approve
the issuance of the passports.  George took the matter to Director Casey, who instructed him to
issue the passports.

     59 George, George Trial Testimony, 8/13/92, p. 3324.  The passports were introduced into
evidence at George's trials.  See Alias Passport for Richard V. Secord (Richard J. Adams), DO
69903, George GX 57; Release for Alias Passport for Secord, DO 69904, George GX 58; Alias
Passport for Albert Hakim (Ibrahim Ibrahamian), DO 69870, George GX 59; Release for Alias
Passport for Albert Hakim, DO 69871, George GX 60.

     As the Iran arms sales progressed, George was briefed on important details by Twetten and
George Cave,  the CIA operative closest to the day-to-day events of the Iran arms sales.60 CIA
records indicate that after meetings in London in early May 1986, Cave briefed George and other
CIA officials about Secord including his role as financial intermediary.61  According to Cave,
George expressed concern about Secord's involvement.62  Records indicate that at a subsequent
meeting on May 9, 1986, George and other CIA and NSC officials discussed Secord's role
again.63  As discussed in more detail below, CIA officers testified that George was present at yet
another meeting in mid-May 1986 prior to McFarlane's mission to Tehran at which Secord's role
was discussed in detail.

     60 Cave, Grand Jury, 8/30/91, p. 26.

     61 Casey Schedule, 5/8/86, ER 609, George GX 61; Cave, Grand Jury, 8/30/91, pp. 78-79.

     62 Ibid., pp. 80-81.

     63 Memorandum for the Record by Robert Earl, 5/9/86, AKW 8904-06, George GX 72.

     As an Iranian ``Second Channel,'' 64 or Iranian contact, was being cultivated in the late
summer of 1986, George was kept informed of the developments.  After the Second Channel
came to Washington in mid-September 1986 for in-depth meetings with North, Cave and Secord,
North  prepared and sent to Poindexter transcribed minutes of the meetings.65  This document
stated on its front page that Secord had been one of the three U.S. participants in the talks.
North's cover memorandum to Poindexter recited that ``[t]he only other copy of this
memorandum of conversation has been given (by hand) to the DDO of CIA.'' 66

     64 The ``Second Channel'' referred to a group of Iranians, including a nephew of Rafsanjani,
who were viewed as more promising intermediaries for releasing the hostages.

     65 Memorandum from North to Poindexter, 9/25/86, AKW 7291-7308, George GX 98.

     66 Ibid., AKW 7291.

     North's memorandum contained information that would have been of great interest to George.
The Second Channel reported that the Iranians possessed a 400-page transcript of the
torture/debriefing of William Buckley, the former CIA station chief in Beirut who had been taken
hostage and killed by terrorists in Lebanon.67  George had been ``extremely emotionally
involved'' in the Buckley matter.68

     67 Ibid., AKW 7293-94.

     68 George, Select Committees Deposition, 4/24/87, p. 131.

     On November 18, 1986, two weeks after details of the Iran arms sales began to appear in the
press,  George gave a briefing to congressional staffers on the CIA's role in the initiative.  A
memorandum of that briefing written by the chief counsel of Senate intelligence committee
recited that George told the staffers that the CIA received money directly from Iran, and made no
mention of Secord's role as  a financial intermediary.69  A contemporaneous internal CIA
document retrieved from George's working files contained a handwritten notation next to a
similar assertion that Iranian funds went directly to the CIA.  The notation is ``Gorba > Secord >
CIA Account > DOD.'' 70  A CIA witness identified the writing as George's.71  The document
indicates that George clearly understood the path of the Iran arms money and Secord's role in the
Iran arms sales.

     69 Memorandum to the Record by Daniel Finn, 11/19/86, SSCI Covert Action Document
86-3964, George GX 77.

     70 Subject:  CIA Involvement in NSC Iran Program, DO 44620-17, George GX 68.

     71 George subsequently acknowledged at trial that the writing was his.  George, George Trial
Testimony, 8/13/92, p. 3461.

     Following the November 18, 1986, briefing, George's two special assistants, Norman Gardner
and an officer referred to in this report as ``CIA Subject #2,'' met with North.  A one-page
document containing North's notes of that meeting was retrieved by FBI agents from the ``burn
bag'' in North's office one week later.72  North recorded the points made by George at the
briefing. North then wrote ``Not reveal Dick Secord.''

     72 North Note, AKW 32705.

     Significant witnesses added to the documentary record of George's knowledge of Secord's role
in the Iran arms sales.  Thomas Twetten, who later became deputy director for operations,
testified that during his return from a meeting in Europe relating to the Iran arms sales, North
told him that Secord and Hakim were working with North in Central America.73  Twetten was
concerned that Secord and Hakim were involved in both operations. He reported North's
comments to George, including the information about Secord and Hakim's conflicting roles.74

     73 Twetten, Grand Jury, 8/21/91, pp. 36-38.

     74 Ibid., pp. 41, 44-45.

     Twetten also discussed with George North's Notional Time Line, which frequently referred to
actions to be taken by ``Copp.'' 75  Twetten testified that George knew that Copp was an alias for
Secord,76 and that George was aware of the flow of funds associated with the Iran arms sales --
including Secord's role.77

     75 Ibid., p. 26.

     76 Ibid., pp. 33-34.

     77 Ibid., p. 35.

     After Twetten's meeting in Europe, George assigned Cave, an experienced CIA operative who
spoke fluent Farsi, to work with North as an interpreter. Cave briefed George throughout 1986 on
important issues relating to the arms sales.78  After a meeting in London in early May 1986, he
explained to George and others at the CIA the financial arrangements, including Secord's role in
the flow of funds.79  Cave recalled George expressing concern over Secord's involvement in the
Iran arms sales.80  And prior to traveling with McFarlane to Tehran in late May 1986, Cave
informed George and other CIA officials about the role Secord was playing with respect to the
Tehran mission: arranging for aircraft and supervising other logistical details.81

     78 Cave, Grand Jury, 8/30/91, p. 26.

     79 Ibid., pp. 78-79.

     80 Ibid., pp. 80-81.

     81 Ibid., pp. 48-49, 85.

     In August through October 1986, Cave kept George informed also of Secord's involvement in
the development of the Second Channel.82  Then in October 1986, Cave informed George of
Roy Furmark's  allegations of a diversion of funds from the Iran arms sales to the contras.83

     82 Ibid., p. 115.

     83 Cave, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 44, 89-90.

     In an April 24, 1987 deposition taken by the staff of the Senate Select Committee, George
himself made significant admissions that contradicted his 1986 congressional testimony.  First,
regarding Secord, he admitted that he had a clear memory of Secord's presence at the Situation
Room meeting on January 20, 1986.  In conflict with his October 10, 1986, denial to the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee of ever having had contact with General Secord, and his December
3, 1986 denial to SSCI that he had ever had any meetings with Secord, George testified:

     Q: When did you know that Secord and North were associated together in their efforts on
behalf of the Contras?

     A: Well, my mind is so riveted on the day when I saw them both standing there together that I
might have to say, if there was ever any question, that was the day, in the White House situation
room.84

     84 George, Select Committees Deposition, 4/24/87, p. 44.

     George's False Testimony

     George's Congressional Testimony

     George testified on several occasions before various congressional committees and other
investigative bodies.  The charges brought against him arose out of this testimony.  On two
occasions, George essentially denied the CIA's knowledge of and involvement in the
contra-resupply network: On October 10, 1986, before the Senate  Committee on Foreign
Relations (SFRC) and on October 14, 1986, before the House of Representatives Permanent
Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI).  On December 3, 1986, George testified before the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) regarding the CIA's role in the Iran arms sales.

     During his testimony before SFRC, the focus of the committee's inquiry was the recent
downing of a contra resupply plane within Nicaragua.  Two Americans died in the crash.  The
sole survivor, an American named Eugene Hasenfus, claimed that he was working for the CIA
and had flown numerous missions delivering lethal supplies to contra forces inside Nicaragua.  In
light of these statements, the committee wanted to know (1) whether Hasenfus's assertions  about
CIA involvement were true, and (2) if not, what knowledge the CIA had regarding the persons
coordinating the contra resupply effort of which the downed flight was a part. On October 10,
1986, George told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee:

     [MR. GEORGE]:  . . .  We learned that support flights had American citizens involved.

     [SENATOR KERRY]:  When was this?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  Oh, I would say probably around March of this year, Senator.  However,
we were not aware of their identities.

     * * *

     However, to reiterate my opening remarks, we did not directly or indirectly assist them.  We
provided a great deal of intelligence about supplies into Nicaragua, and I believe that those of
you who followed the ``National Intelligence Daily'' over the last two or three months will have
noted that we have provided several articles about the growing amount of supplies being
provided over land and by air to the Contras inside Nicaragua.  I would only conclude in saying
that at no time did we attempt to investigate those Americans.  That is not our responsibility.  On
those occasions in the past, where we have come across Americans who we have determined
were violating law, we have made that information available to the Department of Justice.  We
do not know the individuals involved in this affair which led to the downing of the airplane, and
we do not know the details of supply  routes which they used.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.85

     85 George, SFRC Testimony, 10/10/86, pp. 29-31.  In this and other quoted passages of
George's testimony, the specific statements later charged in the indictment are underscored.

     During the same SFRC testimony, George made the following statements regarding Secord:

     [SENATOR KERRY]:  . . .  How about General Secor[d]?  Do you have any contact with
General Secor[d]?

     [MR. ABRAMS]:  I never met him.  I read in today's paper that he is alleged to be behind all
of this.  But I have never met him.

     [SENATOR KERRY]:  You have never had any contact with him at all?

     [MR. ABRAMS]:  None whatsoever.

     [SENATOR KERRY]:  What about you?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  No.  I know his name well and I have known his name for years.  But I do
not know the man.86

     86 Ibid., pp. 74-75.

     Four days later, George testified before HPSCI about the same subjects.  Like SFRC, HPSCI
was interested in learning what George knew about the Hasenfus allegations and the individuals
behind the secret contra-resupply flights.  Once again, George made statements indicating he had
little information on these topics.  He denied knowing the identities of the individuals who were
behind the secret contra-resupply flights of which the downed flight was a part:

     [MR. CHAIRMAN]:  There are a number of airplanes that take off there to supply the Contras
regularly.  You don't know who they are?

     [MR. FIERS]:  We know the airplanes by type.  We knew, for example, there were two
C-123s and two C-7 cargoes.  We knew that they were flying out of Ilopango and we knew they
were flying both from [another location in Central America] and from [another location in
Central America] into Nicaragua.  We knew in some cases much less frequently that they were
flying down the Pacific air corridors into southern Nicaragua for the purposes of resupply, but as
to who was flying the flights and who was behind them, we do not know.

     [MR. CHAIRMAN]:  And you still don't?

     [MR. FIERS]:  No.

     [MR. GEORGE]:  No, sir.

     [MR. FIERS]:  We know from the newspapers that a company called Corporate Air Services
is the company that appears to have some involvement with them, but --  --

     [MR. GEORGE]:  What we know at this point is as [Alan] says, is from the press.87

     87 George, HPSCI Testimony, 10/14/86, pp. 20-21.

     Second, George denied to HPSCI knowing whether ``Max Gomez'' was actually involved in
providing supplies to the contras.  Hasenfus had stated at an October 9, 1986, press conference in
Managua, Nicaragua, that he and numerous other crew members had been flying contra resupply
missions out of Ilopango air base. Hasenfus had claimed  that Max Gomez and Ramon Medina,
two Cubans who purportedly worked for the CIA, were overseeing the operation.  Congress
wanted to know whether this was true.

     Before the SFRC, George stated that he had some tentative information that the name Max
Gomez was an alias for a former CIA employee.  But George said his information was not firm
and needed further checking.

     Between George's October 10 testimony and his HPSCI appearance on October 14, several
major newspapers reported that Max Gomez was an alias for Felix Rodriguez. According to
these reports, Rodriguez had close contacts inside the office of Vice President George Bush.  So
by the time of George's HPSCI testimony, Max Gomez's true identity -- Felix Rodriguez -- had
become common knowledge.  For this reason, George agreed that the CIA could no longer fail to
acknowledge that Gomez was Rodriguez.88  But Rodriguez's specific activities on behalf of the
contras were still not fully understood, and HPSCI was looking for detailed information.

     88 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/16/91, pp. 43-44.

     This led to the following interchange between George and Representative Matthew McHugh:

     [MR. McHUGH]:  . . . Do any of you gentlemen know Ramone [sic] Medina?  His name has
been mentioned.

     [MR. GEORGE]:  That was the other name mentioned by Mr. Hasenfus.  He mentioned two.
We have identified the first as Felix Rodriguez, and correct me, Alan or Elliott, we don't know
what that second name means.

     [MR. FIERS]:  We still are trying to find out who Ramone Medina is.

     [MR. McHUGH]:  I'd like to be clear in my own mind as to whether you or anybody in the
Government knows as a matter of fact whether Mr. Gomez or Rodriguez was involved in
providing supplies to the Contras.

     [MR. GEORGE]:  I do not know that per se.  I do not.  Or any record I have ever read.89

     89 George, HPSCI Testimony, 10/14/86, p. 40.

     On November 28, 1986, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence began a formal
investigation into the circumstances surrounding the Iran arms sales and the use of funds
generated by these sales for contra resupply operations.  On December 3, 1986, George testified
under oath as part of SSCI's investigation.

     By then, Secord's name had been publicly linked to both the Iran arms sales and the secret
contra resupply network. This produced the following dialogue between George and Keith Hall,
the Committee's deputy staff director:

     [MR. HALL]:  Was it your understanding that Colonel North or anybody else in the National
Security Council or any private parties would have some responsibilities and roles in the
financial transactions?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  I'm told that an individual that had -- I'm told after the fact that an
individual who did have a role in the financial affairs of this enterprise was Richard Secord.

     [MR. HALL]:  Were you aware of any role that Colonel North played?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  I have no information on Colonel North and funds.

     [MR. HALL]:  Can you tell us what role Secord did play?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  I cannot.  Please.

     * * *

     [MR. HALL]:  Are there any other details associated with this project that you have not
already discussed with us that you are aware of?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  No.  . . . I am sure [the people I put into the initiative] told me many, many
things that I, sitting here before you, can't recall off the top of my head, and I have again, as I
said, gone out of my way not to sit down with Mr. Cave and Mr. Twetten and everyone else and
say now let's all remind each other what happened here, because I understand that's the way it
should be.  But I at no time felt uncomfortable that the law was  broken or that we knew money
was being siphoned off or --  --

     [MR. HALL]:  Did you have --

     [MR. GEORGE]:  I was a little disturbed about some of the players in the affair.  I think I was
worried about -- I was worried about, you know, who was Hakim and where is his role in this,
and the good General Secord whom I had never laid eyes on but whose name I was familiar with.

     * * *

     [MR. HALL]:  Did you ever ha[ve] any meetings with General Secord?

     [MR. GEORGE]:  [The witness nodded in the negative.] 90

     90 George, SSCI Testimony, 12/3/86, pp. 19, 30-31.

     George's Grand Jury Testimony

     In early 1991, Independent Counsel was investigating the testimony given by George and
others before Congress in October 1986.  In late June 1990, Independent Counsel received drafts
of the opening statement showing that important information about the origins of the secret
contra-resupply effort had been deleted.  The preparation of the opening statement became an
area of investigative concern for Independent Counsel.

     On April 5, 1991, George appeared before a federal Grand Jury in the District of Columbia.
He was asked for information regarding the preparation of his opening statement:

     Q: . . . During our meeting in our office, the Office of Independent Counsel, you indicated that
you did not edit anything out of these drafts?

     A: I do not recall editing these drafts at all.

     Q: Okay.

     A: I was finally handed Draft Number whatever it was, and that was it.

     * * *

     Q: On page two of Draft 3, at the bottom of that I will read the following sentence and it has
three lines through it.  It says, ``Subsequent to the 1984 cutoff, Ilopango airfield in San Salvador
was used to support the democratic resistance as a transit point for congressionally authorized
humanitarian assistance.''  And then by the third line through that sentence, it says, ``Deleted by
DDO.''

     First of all, is that your handwriting?

     A: It's not my handwriting.

     Q: Did you direct that portion of the draft be excised?

     A: I cannot believe I did.

     Q: Do you know who did?

     A: I do not.   Uh, as we said previously, ``deleted by DDO'' could be by DO, the Director of
Operations and they were confusing terminologies.  I do not recall getting to this kind of detail in
preparing this statement.91

     91 George, Grand Jury, 4/5/91, pp. 70-80, 82-83.

     The George Prosecution

     On September 6, 1991, a federal Grand Jury in the District of Columbia returned a 10-count
felony indictment against George, charging him with perjury, false statements and obstruction of
congressional and Grand Jury investigations.

     Based on the narrow interpretation of the obstruction statute expressed in United States v.
Poindexter,92 which was decided after the George indictment was returned, Judge Royce C.
Lamberth dismissed three obstruction counts in George on May 18, 1992.  In light of the
Poindexter decision, the Government did not object.  On May 21, 1992, a federal Grand Jury in
the District of Columbia returned a supplemental two-count indictment charging violations in
conformity with the holding in  Poindexter.  George's efforts to dismiss the new counts were
unsuccessful.  The case proceeded to trial on nine counts.93

     92 951 F.2d 369 (D.C. Cir. 1991).

     93 The charges faced by George in the first trial under the consolidated indictment included:

      -- Count 1: False statement to the SFRC on October 10, 1986, about knowledge of
individuals involved in contra-resupply, including Rodriguez, North and Secord.

      -- Count 2: False statements to SFRC on October 10, 1986, about knowledge of Secord and
his involvement in both the Iran arms sales and contra-resupply.

      -- Count 3: Obstruction of Congress stemming from his actions on October 9-10, 1986, by
directing Fiers to delete portions of George's SFRC testimony regarding the use of Ilopango air
base for contra-resupply and by telling Fiers not to reveal that Max Gomez was an alias for
Rodriguez.

      -- Count 4: Obstruction of Congress stemming from his actions on October 9-14, 1986, by
instructing Fiers not to convey certain facts regarding the use of Ilopango air base for
contra-resupply.

      -- Count 5: False statements to HPSCI on October 14, 1986, about his knowledge of
individuals involved in contra-resupply, including North, Secord and Rodriguez.

      -- Count 6: False statements to HPSCI on October 14, 1986, about his knowledge of
Rodriguez's involvement in contra-resupply.

      -- Count 7: Perjury before SSCI on December 3, 1986, about Secord's role in the Iran
initiative and about his contact with Secord.

      -- Count 8: Obstruction of a federal Grand Jury on April 5, 1991, regarding the preparation of
testimony before the SFRC on October 10, 1986.

      -- Count 9: Perjury before a federal Grand Jury on April 5, 1991, regarding his role in
preparing testimony given the SFRC on October 10, 1986.

     On August 26, 1992, the Court declared a mistrial in light of the jury's inability, despite
protracted deliberations, to reach a unanimous verdict on any count.  The Court scheduled a
second trial to begin on October 19, 1992.

     Independent Counsel took steps to simplify the George case at retrial based on the experience
at the first trial.94  First, he moved to dismiss the two obstruction counts.  Second, he chose to
delete certain specific charged statements in other counts,  where more than one statement was
charged as false.95  The retrial began as scheduled on October 19, 1992.

     94 Both trials were conducted by Deputy Independent Counsel Craig A. Gillen, assisted by
Associate Counsel Jeffrey S. Harleston, Michael D. Vhay, and Samuel A. Wilkins III.

     95 The charges faced by George in the second trial were simplified.  They included:

      -- Count 1:  False statements before SFRC on October 10, 1986, about the identity of
individuals involved in contra-resupply, including Rodriguez, North and Secord.

      -- Count 2:  False statements before SFRC on October 10, 1986, about his contact with
Secord and Secord's involvement in the Iran initiative.

      -- Count 3:  False statements before HPSCI on October 14, 1986, regarding his knowledge of
the identity of individuals involved in contra-resupply, including North, Rodriguez and Secord.

      -- Count 4:  False statements before HPSCI on October 14, 1986, about his knowledge of
Rodriguez's involvement in contra-resupply.

      -- Count 5:  Perjury before SSCI on December 3, 1986, about Secord's role in the Iran
initiative.

      -- Count 6:  Obstruction of a federal Grand Jury on April 5, 1991, regarding his role in the
preparation of testimony to SFRC on October 10, 1986.

      -- Count 7:  Perjury before a federal Grand Jury on April 5, 1991, regarding his denial of
editing his opening statement to SFRC on October 10, 1986.

     The case went to the jury on November 19, 1992.  After eleven days of deliberation, the jury
returned on December 9 with a verdict of guilty on Counts 4 and 5 and acquittal on the other five
counts. Count 4 charged that George made false statements before HPSCI on October 14, 1986,
in denying knowledge about Rodriguez's role in the  contra-resupply operation.  Count 5 charged
that George committed perjury before SSCI on December 3, 1986, in denying knowledge about
North and Secord's role in the Iran initiative.

     The Court set sentencing of George for February 18, 1993.  Before sentencing could take
place, President Bush granted a full and unconditional pardon to George and five other
Iran/contra defendants on December 24, 1992.  Three of the five had, like George, been
convicted of crimes prior to receiving their pardons.  In view of the pardon granted to George, the
Court dismissed the indictment with prejudice on January 15, 1993.

     Conclusion

     The documentary and testimonial evidence presented against George in the two trials refuted
the view that the secret Iran/contra operations were essentially run out of the NSC and that high
Administration officials at the various departments of Government, including the CIA, Defense
and State, were unaware of the details or not involved in the activities. George was in a position
to provide this crucial information to Congress when various congressional  committees, in
attempting to fulfill their constitutional oversight responsibility, began official inquiries into the
Iran/contra affair.  But instead George chose to evade, mislead and lie.

Chapter 18

     United States v. Duane R. Clarridge

     Duane R. ``Dewey'' Clarridge was a career CIA officer whose major posts included chief of
the Latin American Division, chief of the European Division, and chief of the Counterterrorism
Center.  He retired from the CIA in 1987 after being formally reprimanded for his role in the
Iran/contra affair.

     As chief of the Latin American Division from 1981 to 1984, Clarridge directed CIA efforts to
support the Nicaraguan contras.  One of the people helping Clarridge during this period was Lt.
Col. Oliver L. North of the National Security Council staff.  When Congress passed the Boland
Amendment and cut off all aid to the contras in October 1984, Clarridge allegedly passed off
responsibility for supporting the contras to North.

     The investigation of Clarridge focused on his knowledge of and role in both parts of the
Iran/contra affair -- the arms-for-hostages trades with Iran and the effort to secure covert foreign
funding for the contras after Congress cut off U.S. aid.  In November 1985, when North became
involved in an Israeli effort to ship U.S.-made HAWK missiles to Iran to secure the release of
U.S. hostages being held in Lebanon, he turned to Clarridge, then chief of the CIA's European
Division, for assistance.  Clarridge testified extensively about his role in the operation, but
steadfastly  denied contemporaneous knowledge that the shipment contained weapons.  Clarridge
also testified at length about his efforts to support the contras, but denied soliciting support from
third countries or even knowing about discussions of such efforts.  In both instances, there was
strong evidence that Clarridge's testimony was false.

     On November 26, 1991, a federal Grand Jury indicted Clarridge on seven counts of perjury
and false statements to congressional investigators and to the President's Special Review Board
(the Tower Commission) stemming from his testimony about his role in the November 1985
arms shipment to Iran.1  The OIC decided not to seek an indictment against Clarridge for false
testimony about CIA  efforts to solicit third-country funding for the contras, primarily because
the solicitation effort in which Clarridge was involved was called off at the last minute by his
superiors.

     1 On December 10, 1992, Judge Harold H. Greene ruled that Counts One and Two and
Counts Six and Seven were multiplicitous, and ordered the OIC to choose between Counts One
and Two and between Counts Six and Seven.  Count One charged Clarridge with lying to the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence about when he learned, from any source, that the cargo
of the November 1985 shipment was weapons.  Count Two charged Clarridge with lying to the
same Committee when asked specifically when North told him the plane contained weapons.
The court ruled those statements were essentially the same lie, and ordered the OIC to choose
between them.  At the time Clarridge was pardoned, the OIC's motion to reconsider that ruling
was pending.

     Counts Six and Seven did charge essentially the same lies, but the statements were made to
different entities.  The false statements charged in Count Six were made to the staffs of the Select
Committees while the false statements charged in Count Seven were made to the Committee
members themselves. At the time of the pardon, the OIC had not yet chosen between Counts Six
and Seven.

     Counts One through Three of the Indictment charged Clarridge with perjury (18 U.S.C.
1621) before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence on December 2, 1986.  Count One was
based on the following exchange:

     Mr. Newsom:  At what point did you . . . have knowledge that the cargo of the plane was
actually weapons?

     Mr. Clarridge:  Well, as I say, the trouble is that when I really got a fix on it was in January
when Charlie [Allen] debriefed a -- the Iranian go-between in all this.2

     2 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, p. 20.

     In Count Two, in response to a question about whether North had ever told him the cargo of
the flight from Israel to Iran was military equipment, Clarridge answered: ``No, and I can't say
that he [North] knew.  I can't say for sure that he knew.'' 3

     3 Ibid., p. 73.

     In Count Three, Clarridge was asked whether he had any concern about using the CIA
proprietary airline for a mission like this.  He responded that ``it seemed to be a straight
commercial deal.  In other words, private people  apparently hiring our proprietary.'' 4  Senator
Thomas Eagleton then asked: ``Didn't you have a second thought or question, `Here's a hotshot
from the NSC who's on this interagency group coming to my personal office, one on one.  Maybe
this might be a shade more than a commercial endeavor.' ''  Clarridge responded: ``I'm sorry, I
didn't see it any more than what he was telling me.'' 5

     4 Ibid., p. 14.

     5 Ibid., pp. 56-57.

     Count Four charged Clarridge with perjury for testifying before the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence on December 11, 1986, that a November 25, 1985, CIA cable from an
Asian country stating that the pilot of the proprietary had said that the cargo was military
equipment was ``the first indication that we had that maybe that something other than oil drilling
equipment was on the plane.'' 6

     6 Clarridge, HPSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, p. 69.

     Count Five charged Clarridge with making false statements for testifying before the Tower
Commission on December 18, 1986, as follows:

     [T]he question was asked when did I feel that that shipment in November, the 25th, had had
weapons on board.  By the 26th or 27th -- and I can't give you a precise date -- Charlie Allen was
showing me [intelligence reports] . . . that indicated that  that flight had had munitions or
something on board.7

     7 Clarridge, Tower Commission Testimony, 12/18/86, p. 14.

     Count Six charged Clarridge with perjury before the Select Iran/contra Committees for the
following exchanges:

     Mr. Eggleston:  As of this early time [November 22, 1985], your initial conversations with
Colonel North, did you know or had you been informed by Colonel North what was on the
plane?

     Mr. Clarridge:  No, I was not.

     * * *

     Mr. Eggleston:  . . . it is your understanding as of that time [November 22] that the cargo
onboard is oil drilling equipment . . . ?

     Mr. Clarridge:  Yes.

     * * *

     Mr. Eggleston:  The person who gave you the problem knew [the cargo was weapons].  The
person you gave the problem to solve [a senior CIA field officer in a European country] knew.
The person who was helping, [the charge AE1 d'affaires to the European country], knew.  The
[European] government knew. But you did not know?

     Mr. Clarridge:  That is the way it was.

     * * *

     Mr. Eggleston:  You had not heard . . . other than this cable . . . that reflected what the pilots
had said . . . that it [the cargo] was anything other than oil-drilling equipment?

     Mr. Clarridge:  I had not.8

     8 Clarridge, Select Committees Deposition, 8/4/87, pp. 8, 21, 32, 42.

     Finally, Count Seven charged Clarridge with making false statements in a deposition before
the staffs of the Select Committees, when he stated that he had no knowledge that the cargo was
weapons as of November 21 or 23; that North never told him in November 1985 that the cargo
was military equipment; and that as of November 25, 1985, he believed the cargo was oil parts.

     The Clarridge trial, which would have been the final Iran/contra prosecution, was scheduled to
begin March 15, 1993.9  Trial was precluded by President Bush's December 24, 1992, par-don
of six Iran/contra defendants, including Clarridge.

     9 Had the Clarridge case gone to trial, it would have been conducted by Associate Counsel
Paul J. Ware, Kenneth J. Parsigian, and David J. Apfel.

     Clarridge's Role in the November 1985 HAWK Shipment

     In the summer of 1985, President Reagan approved an Israeli plan to ship weapons to Iran in
exchange for the Iranians' pledge to use their influence to persuade Lebanese kidnappers to
release American hostages.  With U.S. acquiescence, Israel shipped 504 U.S.-made TOW
missiles to Iran in August and September of 1985, and U.S. hostage Benjamin Weir was released
as a result.

     Israel was planning another shipment, this time of HAWK missiles, in November 1985, when
it ran into difficulty  obtaining requisite flight clearances.10  Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak
Rabin sought assistance from National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane, who directed
North to help the Israelis in obtaining the flight clearances.11  The plan called for an Israeli El Al
747 to fly 80 HAWK missiles into a European country, transfer them to other planes, and then fly
the missiles, one plane at a time, into Iran.12  The first delivery was supposed to trigger the
release of two hostages, followed by another delivery, another release, and a third delivery and a
third release.13

     10 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/7/87, pp. 133-134, 156-157.

     11 Ibid.

     12 North Notebook, 11/17/85, AMX 001865; Ibid., 11/18/85, AMX 001866-71.  There is
some evidence that the initial plan called for as many as 500-600 HAWKs to be shipped.  There
was also some talk of 120 HAWKs.  The number actually on the El Al plane, however, was only
80.  Transferring the HAWKs from the El Al plane to the other planes was necessary because
poor relations between Israel and Iran made it untenable to fly an Israeli plane into Iran.

     13 Ibid., 11/20/85, AMX 001878-81.

     North enlisted retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord to go to the European country to
obtain the necessary clearances to land the El Al flight.14  North also brought Clarridge into the
mission to get a senior CIA  field officer in the European country to assist Secord.15  Late on
November 21, 1985, Clarridge sent cables to the senior officer and his deputy instructing them to
report to the office and stand by for messages.16   The cables were sent ``flash'' priority, which is
the second highest priority for CIA cables and requires immediate attention.17  The senior field
officer and his deputy went to their office where they received another flash cable from Clarridge
instructing them to contact Secord, who was using the code name ``Copp,'' and offer him
assistance.18  The cable  indicated that Secord was on assignment for the National Security
Council and that the mission was so sensitive that the senior field officer should not discuss it
with the U.S. ambassador to the European country.19  The senior field officer contacted Secord,
who indicated he did not require assistance at that time; the senior field officer cabled that
information back to Clarridge and awaited developments.20

     14 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/7/87, pp. 135-36, 157; Letter from McFarlane to
Secord, 11/19/85, AKW 000001.

     15 North, Grand Jury, 2/1/91, pp. 20-21.  Precisely when Clarridge became involved in the
mission would have been a key issue at trial.  Clarridge testified that he first learned of the
mission on November 21, 1985, when North called seeking his assistance.  (Clarridge, Select
Committees Deposition, 8/4/87, p. 6.)  The OIC would have established at trial, however, that
Clarridge was involved and knew the flight would be carrying weapons at least by November 19.

     16 DIRECTOR 624839, 11/22/85, DO 21379; DIRECTOR 624939, 11/22/85, DO 21378.
(The cables are dated November 22, 1985 because CIA cables use ``Zulu,'' or Greenwich mean
time).

     17 The only precedence higher than ``flash'' is ``critic,'' which is rarely used and is only for
events like an attack on an embassy or a coup.  (CIA Field Communications Officer, Select
Committees Deposition, 7/13/87, pp. 18-19.)  When a ``flash'' message is sent, the intended
recipient will be contacted at home, if necessary, and must open the message within thirty
minutes.  (Ibid., p. 18.)

     18 Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, pp. 4-5.  The actual
cable is missing.  The senior field officer referenced that cable, DIRECTOR 625103, however, in
his cable back to Clarridge in which he indicated that he had spoken with Copp and offered ``all
assistance'' but that Copp did not require assistance at that time.  (CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO
21380.)

     19 Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, p. 5.

     20 Ibid., pp. 5-6; CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO 21380.

     At that time, Secord was confident that his contacts at a private company in the European
country would get him access to the foreign minister, who would grant the necessary
clearances.21  Unfortunately for Secord, the private company's contacts were not helpful and an
attempt by the company's president to bribe a European country official to secure the necessary
clearances not only failed but angered the European government.22  Thus, by 12:50 p.m
European country time on November 22, 1985, the entire operation was in jeopardy and Secord
telephoned the senior  CIA field officer with an urgent request for assistance.23  The senior CIA
field officer immediately made inquiries 24 and suggested to Clarridge that a more formal
diplomatic approach should be made by the second-ranking person in the U.S. Embassy, who
was the charge AE1 d'affaires.  The senior CIA field officer indicated that Secord approved of
involving the charge AE1 and was seeking approval from Washington.25  Clarridge cabled back
that the NSC wanted the senior CIA field officer to bring the charge AE1 into the operation and
to ``pull out all the stops'' because the El Al plane was only one hour from aborting.26

     21 Secord, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 4.  Indeed, Secord apparently believed, and informed the
senior CIA field officer in the European country, that the foreign minister of the European
country had orally approved the clearances before November 22, 1985, but had failed to sign the
papers.  (CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO 21381.)  The OIC was not able to verify that oral approval.

     22 CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 21397-96.

     23 Ibid.

     24 See Classified Appendix.

     25 CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 23197-96.  The Ambassador was out of the country.

     26 DIRECTOR 625908, 11/22/85, DO 21383.  Clarridge also telephoned the senior CIA field
officer with approval for bringing the charge AE1 into the operation.  (Senior CIA Field Officer,
Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, p. 13.)

     The cables between Clarridge and the senior CIA field officer over the next day show
extensive knowledge and involvement by both men in trying to salvage an operation that North
later described as ``a bit of a horror story.'' 27   First, it was discovered that when the president of
the private concern used by Secord had been in contact with European country authorities on
November 20, 1985, he claimed  to be working with a retired U.S. general.  The authorities had
checked with the U.S. Embassy and were told the Embassy knew nothing of such an operation
and that the United States remained opposed to arms sales to Iran.28  Thus the senior CIA field
officer had to explain to European country officials that while the Embassy's position had been
correct on November 20, circumstances had changed by November 22.29

     27 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/7/87, p. 137.

     28 Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, pp. 8, 14; CIA Cable,
11/22/85, ALW 0034616-17; CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO 21384.

     29 CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO 21384; Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition,
4/13/87 p. 12.

     The next problem was that the foreign minister of the European country was the only person
who could approve the clearances, and he was in a cabinet meeting.  The senior CIA field officer
asked a lower-level ministry official to pull the foreign minister out of the meeting and was told
that would require a formal statement from the U.S. Embassy.30  Secord told the senior CIA
field officer he had called the White House and recommended authorizing the charge AE1 to pull
the foreign minister out of the cabinet meeting.  Secord noted that McFarlane was being pulled
out of a meeting with the Pope in order to telephone the foreign minister.  Clarridge then
telephoned the senior CIA field officer and instructed him to have the charge AE1 formally
request that the foreign minister be pulled out of the cabinet meeting.31

     30 CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO 21384; Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition,
4/13/87, p. 13.

     31 Ibid.

     While waiting for the foreign minister, the El Al plane had to abort and return to Israel.32
The NSC was still hoping that McFarlane could reach the foreign minister and revive the
operation for the next day, November 23.33  With that hope in mind, Clarridge cabled CIA
officers in an Asian country requesting advice and assistance in obtaining clearances for three
planes to fly through that country's airspace en route from a European country to Iran and back on
November 23 or 24.34  Clarridge explained that this was a ``National Security Council initiative''
that had ``the highest level of USG [U.S. Government] interest.'' 35  He described the mission as
``humanitarian in nature'' and in ``response to terrorist acts,'' and told the senior CIA official in
the Asian country not to inform the Ambassador.36

     32 CIA Cable, 11/22/85, DO 21386.

     33 DIRECTOR 626226, 11/22/85, DO 21388.

     34 Ibid., DO 21389.

     35 Ibid.

     36 Ibid.

     When the European cabinet meeting ended, the foreign minister still would not approve the
flights.   Instead, his aide informed the charge AE1 that the U.S. Embassy would have to send a
diplomatic note stating the type of aircraft, the routes to and from the European country, and the
cargo.37  Late at night on November 22 (European country time), McFarlane finally reached the
foreign minister by telephone and persuaded him to approve the flights without a diplomatic
note.38  It was not until mid-morning the next day, however, that the charge AE1 was able to
contact anyone in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.39  When the charge AE1 did reach the
secretary general of the Foreign Ministry and then the chief of the Cabinet of the Foreign
Minister, they knew nothing of McFarlane's deal with the foreign minister and insisted that a
diplomatic note was required.40

     37 CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 21391; Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition,
4/13/87, p. 16.

     38 DIRECTOR 626552, 11/22/85, DO 21390; Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select Committees
Deposition, 5/27/87, p. 9.

     39 Ibid., pp. 9-10.

     40 Ibid.; CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 21397-96; Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees
Deposition, 4/13/87, pp. 17-18.  The charge AE1 ultimately confirmed that the phone call
between the foreign minister and McFarlane occurred, but the foreign minister thought he agreed
only to approve the clearances if he received the necessary background information -- i.e., a
diplomatic note about the cargo and the purpose of the mission.  (Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, p. 20.)

     On Saturday, November 23, North telephoned CIA intelligence officer Charles Allen at home
and asked him to go to his office and show Clarridge a collection of  intelligence reports
concerning Mohsen Kangarlu, Iran's director of security, and Manucher Ghorbanifar, the Iranian
expatriate arms dealer who was serving as an intermediary between Israel and the Iranians.41  At
about the same time, North was beginning to seek alternate routes for delivering the missiles and
asked Clarridge if the CIA could recommend a reliable charter.42  Clarridge began checking into
charters, and North headed in to the CIA to meet with Clarridge.43

     41 Allen, Grand Jury, 12/18/87, pp. 52-55.  Ghorbanifar's codename was ``Ashgari.''  As a
result, these intelligence reports have come to be known as the A-K, or Ashgari-Kangarlu,
Reports.

     42 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 5-6.

     43 Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 4/21/87, p. 160.

     Allen arrived at the CIA before North and showed the packet of intelligence reports to
Clarridge per North's instructions.  Allen explained to Clarridge that North wanted him to
understand that this was ``a very serious initiative under way by the White House.'' 44  Allen told
Clarridge that the reports had been very tightly held and they discussed the highly sensitive
nature of the operation.45  Clarridge leafed through the intelligence reports and told Allen that he
understood this was a  serious initiative; Allen left the reports with Clarridge who said he would
read them.46

     44 Ibid., p. 157.

     45 Ibid., 7/2/87, p. 669; Allen, Grand Jury, 12/18/87, p. 54.

     46 Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 4/21/87, p. 157; Ibid., 7/2/87, p. 669; Allen, FBI
302, 1/10/91, p. 2.

     While waiting for North, Clarridge called the CIA Air Branch seeking the name of a reliable
charter.  The Air Branch recommended that North use a CIA proprietary airline.47  Clarridge
then called his superior, acting Deputy Director for Operations Edward Juchniewicz, to inform
him that North wanted to use a CIA proprietary.  According to Clarridge, Juchniewicz approved
North's using a CIA proprietary.48

     47 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 5-6.

     48 Ibid.  Juchniewicz, who placed the call from Clarridge on November 22, has told
somewhat conflicting stories about this event.  He testified that Clarridge told him only that
North was searching for a reliable charter, not that he had specifically requested assistance.
(Juchniewicz, SSCI Testimony, 12/4/86, p. 4.)  Later, he testified, North called him at home and
inquired about using a CIA proprietary.  Juchniewicz testified that he told North the proprietary
was a ``strictly commercial venture'' that anyone could hire.  (Ibid., p. 5.)  When he was
interviewed by the OIC in 1991, however, Juchniewicz told a version of the events that more
closely parallels Clarridge's testimony.  He said that Clarridge had come to his office and said
that North needed a plane to ship some oil-drilling equipment.  He asked if it would be a problem
for North to use the CIA proprietary and Juchniewicz said he did not see it as a problem.
(Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 10/8/91, p. 2.)  At that time, Juchniewicz did not recall a phone call from
North.  (Ibid., p. 3.)

     About an hour after Allen left Clarridge's office, North arrived.49  The mission was now
proceeding on two separate fronts.  While the senior CIA field officer and the charge AE1 were
still trying to obtain clearances from the European country, North was attempting to set up a
series of flights using the CIA proprietary and flying through a different city, perhaps in a second
European country.50  Clarridge, who was monitoring efforts in the first European country, was
simultaneously attempting to arrange clearances for a CIA proprietary to fly from Israel through
an Asian country's airspace with a possible stopover in the second European country ``for
deception purposes,'' that is, to satisfy the Asian country's concerns about being involved with a
direct flight from Israel to Iran.51  Clarridge informed senior field personnel in both the second
European country and the Asian country that the mission was essential to the release of the U.S.
hostages.52  By this  time, a CIA Air Branch officer was in Clarridge's office to discuss staffing
the proprietary flights and arranging an ``appropriate cover . . . so it would look like a normal
charter activity.'' 53  Allen had also returned to Clarridge's office along with another CIA
intelligence official, Dr. Joseph Markowitz; thus, Clarridge, North, Allen, the CIA Air Branch
officer, and Markowitz were all in Clarridge's office working on the operation.54

     49 Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 7/2/87, p. 670.

     50 For a brief period, there was some thought that the flights by the CIA proprietary might
still be able to fly through the first European country.  (CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 21397; Senior
CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, p. 18; Clarridge, Select Committees
Deposition, 4/27/87, pp. 45-47.)

     51 DIRECTOR 627461, 11/23/85, DO 21402 (to Asian country personnel); DIRECTOR
627576, 11/23/85, DO 21404 (to second European country personnel).

     52 Ibid.

     53 Allen, Select Committees Deposition,  4/21/87, pp. 162-63.

     54 Ibid., 7/2/87, pp. 670-72.

     The situation in the first European country finally collapsed on the afternoon of November 23,
1985.  Despite his telephone conversation with McFarlane, the foreign minister was still insisting
on a diplomatic note that said the purpose of the mission was to secure the release of the U.S.
hostages.  McFarlane and his deputy, Vice Admiral John M. Poindexter, determined that the
United States would not send a formal note mentioning the hostages, but could tell the European
country that the mission was ``humanitarian'' in nature.55  Finally, McFarlane and Poindexter
decided to terminate efforts to run the planes through the European country.  Clarridge cabled a
message from Poindexter to the  charge AE1 to send the following note to the European
government: ``We regret that your government was unable to fulfill the USG [U.S. Government]
request for this humanitarian mission.'' 56

     55 Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, pp. 10-11; Clarridge,
SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 4, 10-11; CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 21405; CIA Cable, 11/23/85,
DO 21406; DIRECTOR 627621, 11/23/85, DO 21407; DIRECTOR 627627, 11/23/85, DO
21410.

     56 Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, pp. 11-12; DIRECTOR
627621, 11/23/85, DO 21407; DIRECTOR 627627, 11/23/85, DO 21410.

     Meanwhile, negotiations with the Asian country were continuing.  It agreed to permit one
flight, not three as requested, with the possibility of more the next day; the Asian government
also insisted on information about the cargo the plane would be carrying.57  According to
Clarridge, that was the first time he asked North what the cargo was and North told him it was
spare parts for the oil industry.58  Clarridge cabled that information to a senior CIA field officer
to relay to the Asian country authorities.59  After another day of negotiations and cables between
Clarridge and CIA field personnel, the Asian country permitted one plane to traverse its airspace.
The plane, which left Israel late on November 24 and arrived in Iran early on November 25,
carried 18 HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran with a stop in an intermediate country.60

     57 CIA Cable, 11/23/85, DO 21412.

     58 Clarridge, Tower Commission Testimony, 12/18/86, p. 7.

     59 DIRECTOR 627797, 11/24/85, DO 21416.

     60 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 15-16; CIA Cable, 11/25/85, DO 21428.

     At that time, four additional flights were planned, and Clarridge continued his efforts to
arrange necessary clearances.  The Asian country authorities were upset about the stop in the
intermediate country, so Clarridge arranged for the remaining four flights to stop in the second
European country.61  A senior CIA field officer cabled Clarridge on November 25 that the Asian
country authorities were also upset about confusing accounts about the cargo of the completed
flight.  According to Asian country authorities, the proprietary's ground personnel had said the
cargo was medical supplies; CIA field officers, at Clarridge's direction, had told them it was
spare parts for the oil industry; and the pilot had told Asian country ground controllers it was
military equipment.62  In response to that cable, Clarridge checked with North, who confirmed
that the cargo was spare parts for the oil industry.63  Clarridge cabled that information back to
the field.64

     61 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, p. 16.

     62 CIA Cable, 11/25/85, 21428.

     63 Clarridge, Tower Commission Testimony, 12/18/86, p. 9.  Clarridge later determined that
the pilot probably did not tell the ground controllers anything about the cargo and that the Asian
country authorities were ``on a fishing expedition'' trying to find out what the cargo was.  (Ibid.)

     64 DIRECTOR 628289, 11/25/85, DO 31394-95.

     Clarridge continued working on arrangements for the remaining four flights until
mid-December, when they were finally called off.65

     65 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, p. 25.  On Monday, November 25, Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence John McMahon told Clarridge that no more flights should take place without
a Presidential Finding authorizing such flights.  (McMahon, Select Committees Deposition,
6/1/87, p. 105; Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 18-19.)  Apparently, Clarridge did not
understand McMahon's instruction to preclude planning for further flights.  (Clarridge, Select
Committees Deposition, 8/4/87, pp. 47-48.)  McMahon was surprised that such planning took
place and considered it a violation of his instructions.  (McMahon, Select Committees
Deposition, 6/1/87, p. 105.)

     The Case Against Clarridge

     When the arms sales to Iran first became public in November 1986, the Reagan
Administration was concerned about the legality of the 1985 shipments.66  The November 1985
HAWK shipment was particularly troubling because a CIA proprietary airline had transported the
weapons, and the CIA had been heavily involved in attempting to influence foreign governments
to obtain clearances for the flight without a  written finding authorizing such action under the
National Security Act.

     66 The 1986 shipments were made pursuant to a written Presidential Finding under the
National Security Act.  Under that act, the President was required to give Congress ``timely''
notice of the covert action of shipping weapons to Iran.  In the Administration's view, the
President could withhold notification from Congress for a reasonable period to protect the lives
of the hostages.  Because neither the statute nor the case law defined ``timely'' notice,
Administration officials were not nearly as concerned about the legality of the 1986 shipments as
they were about the 1985 shipments, which were not made pursuant to a Finding.

     On November 20, 1986, CIA Director William J. Casey, Attorney General Edwin Meese III,
Poindexter, North and others met to prepare Casey's testimony to Congress on the arms
shipments.  The group agreed that Casey would testify that no one in the U.S. Government was
aware that weapons were on the November 1985 flight by the CIA proprietary.  The story was
that the CIA believed the cargo was oil-drilling equipment and that the true nature of the cargo
did not become clear until January 1986.

     Later that day, Abraham D. Sofaer, State Department legal adviser, protested to the
Department of Justice that Casey's planned testimony was wrong because Secretary of State
George P. Shultz had been informed in advance of the November 1985 HAWK shipment by
McFarlane.  That revelation sparked an inquiry by Meese that focused on who in the U.S.
Government had contemporaneous knowledge that the November 1985 shipment contained
HAWK missiles.67

     67 See Meese chapter.

     When Meese falsely stated at a November 25, 1986, press conference that the President was
not aware of the November 1985 HAWK shipment until February 1986, but that others in the
Government ``probably'' knew,68 attention  focused on who in the Government had known of the
HAWK shipment but had failed to inform the President (or had failed to report to their superiors,
who in turn might have informed the President).  Because he had directed the CIA's efforts in the
November 1985 HAWK shipment, Clarridge, along with North, was one of the lower-level
officials suspected of being involved in a ``rogue'' operation without Presidential approval. As a
result, everyone investigating Iran/contra -- the Tower Commission, the CIA's inspector general,
Congress, and Independent Counsel -- questioned Clarridge at length about his role in the
November 1985 HAWK shipment, as well as his efforts on behalf of the contras.

     68 Transcript of Meese press conference, 11/25/86, ALV 014375.

     The critical questions about Clarridge's testimony regarding the November 1985 shipment are
not what he did, but what he knew about the mission and when he knew it.  Although Clarridge
testified in detail before the Tower Commission and congressional investigators about his role in
facilitating the shipment, he steadfastly maintained that he did not know until after the mission
was completed that the shipment contained weapons.

     All of the charges against Clarridge were based on evidence that he knew prior to November
24, 1985, that the shipment contained weapons.  Six of the seven counts charged Clarridge with a
variety of false statements about his knowledge of the cargo of the November 1985 shipment,
while  the other count charged him with falsely stating that he believed the use of the CIA
proprietary was a ``straight commercial deal.''  At trial, Independent Counsel would have proven
in three ways that Clarridge learned before November 24, 1985, that the November 1985
shipment contained weapons: (1) from discussions with North, (2) from a cable sent to Clarridge
by the senior CIA field officer in the first European country, describing the mission as an
arms-for-hostages exchange -- a cable that has never been found -- and (3) from the intelligence
reports given to Clarridge by Allen to brief Clarridge on the mission.

     Discussions With North

     The most direct evidence that North told Clarridge prior to November 24, 1985, that the
shipment contained weapons is the testimony of CIA official Vincent Cannistraro.  In November
1985, Cannistraro was a career CIA officer who had been detailed to the NSC where he served as
director of intelligence programs.  On November 19, 1985, Cannistraro received a call from
North, who said he needed to meet with Cannistraro and Clarridge that evening at a McLean,
Virginia restaurant called Charley's Place.69   Cannistraro had plans that evening, but North
insisted that the meeting was important and Cannistraro relented.70

     69 Cannistraro, Grand Jury, 8/2/91, pp. 10-11.  Cannistraro was unable to precisely date the
meeting other than to state that it occurred before the November 24, 1985 shipment.  (Ibid., pp.
14, 57; Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, pp. 3-4.)  North's calendar for November 19, 1985 lists a
7:00 p.m. meeting at ``Charlie's [sic] Place Vince + Dewey [Clarridge's nickname].''  Clarridge's
calendar for that evening has only an illegible erasure. (North Calendar, 11/19/85, AKW
003910.)

     70 Cannistraro, Grand Jury, 8/2/91, pp. 10-11, 50-51.  Cannistraro recalls North urging him to
attend the meeting ``because Americans are dying face down in the mud.''  (Ibid., pp. 50-51.)

     Cannistraro arrived at Charley's first, followed by Clarridge; North arrived later.71
Cannistraro and Clarridge were having drinks and talking while waiting for North when
Cannistraro told Clarridge that North was shipping weapons to Iran in an attempt to free the U.S.
hostages; Clarridge indicated that he already knew.72  When North arrived, he told Clarridge and
Cannistraro that he needed Clarridge's help getting clearances to fly a shipment of military
equipment to Iran from the first European country.73   North said he needed authorization from
Poindexter to bring Clarridge into the operation, and he called Poindexter from Charley's seeking
such authorization.74  North then reported to Clarridge and Cannistraro that Poindexter had
approved using Clarridge to obtain the clearances.75  Several days after the Charley's meeting,
Cannistraro asked Clarridge what had happened and Clarridge responded that he had made some
arrangements for the flight.76

     71 Ibid., p. 12.

     72 Ibid., p. 13.  Cannistraro's memory of the conversation is vivid because he thought the
news that North was shipping weapons to Iran would be ``a real shocker to Mr. Clarridge.''  He
was surprised to learn that Clarridge already knew.  (Ibid., p. 50.)

     73 Ibid., pp. 15-16; Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, p. 4.  Cannistraro could not recall the
precise language North used to describe the cargo, but was positive North identified the cargo as
military equipment:

     . . . I can't recall whether he specifically said HAWK missile parts or TOWs or what; but he
indicated there was military equipment on board. . . . I'm not positive he said missiles.  He said
military equipment.  My impression is that he said missiles, but I can't be 100 percent certain of
it.

     (Cannistraro, Grand Jury, 8/2/91, p. 15.)

     74 Ibid., pp. 16-17.

     75 Ibid., p. 16.

     76 Cannistraro, FBI 302, 7/24/91, p. 5.

     Cannistraro's testimony establishes that Clarridge knew by November 19, 1985 -- two days
before Clarridge testified he first learned of the operation -- that North was trying to ship arms to
Iran, through the European country, to secure the release of U.S. hostages.  North's notebook
provides further evidence that Clarridge knew of the operation by November 19, 1985.77

     77 See Classified Appendix.

     North gave conflicting testimony about when he told Clarridge the shipment contained arms.
During the Poindexter trial, North testified that he ``made sure'' the CIA knew that weapons were
going to be on the CIA proprietary flight.78  In his July 7, 1987, Select Committees testimony,
however, North stated several times that he could not say whether he informed Clarridge that the
shipment contained arms before or after the flight.79  He did not remember the Charley's
Meeting, but conceded ``it could well have happened.'' 80

     78 North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/12/90, pp. 1197-98.

     79 North, Select Committees Deposition, 7/7/87, pp. 165, 184.

     80 North, Grand Jury, 11/15/91, p. 104.

     There is documentary evidence that North and Clarridge discussed the operation in great
detail before December 4, 1985.  North wrote Poindexter a long computer message about the
operation on December 4, 1985.  In it, he discussed both the November HAWK shipment, which
the Iranians had rejected as having the wrong type of missile, and the plans for further
shipments.81  The plan called for the Israelis to provide 50 HAWKs  and 3,300 TOWs in five
staggered shipments beginning on December 12; one or two of the five  American hostages and
one French hostage would be released after each shipment.82  After describing the plan, North
wrote:

     81 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 12/4/85, AKW 002070-73.

     82 Ibid.

     Dewey is the only other person fully witting of this entire plan.  Copp is not briefed on
[another classified aspect of the plan] -- though he suspects.  The Israelis are in the same
position.  Dewey and I have been through the whole concept twice looking for holes and can find
little that can be done to improve it given the ``trust factor'' with the Iranians.83

     83 Ibid., AKW 002073.

     While the computer note does not establish that North told Clarridge the cargo was weapons
before November 24, it does contradict Clarridge's testimony that he did not get ``a fix on'' the
cargo until ``January [1986] when Charlie Allen debriefed . . . the Iranian go-between in all this.''
84  It also contradicts Clarridge's testimony that his only involvement with the planning for
shipments in December 1985 was ``getting the aircraft clearances.'' 85  Clarridge disputed the
story told in the December 4, 1985 computer note, claiming not to remember any conversations
during early December 1985 with North about the operation, and specifically denying that he and
North had gone over the ``whole concept twice.'' 86  Indeed, Clarridge testified that  as late as the
middle of December 1985, when he pointed out to North that reliable intelligence reports were
``beginning to . . . suggest'' that the cargo had been weapons, that North still maintained it was
oil-drilling equipment.87

     84 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, p. 20.

     85 Ibid., p. 25.

     86 Clarridge, Select Committees Deposition, 4/27/87, pp.  102-03.

     87 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 75-76.

     Finally, the relationship between North and Clarridge makes more compelling the evidence
that North told Clarridge that the cargo of the November 1985 shipment was weapons.  North
and Clarridge had a close working relationship, dating back to Clarridge's work in support of the
contras when he was chief of the Latin American Division.  According to former Deputy Director
of Central Intelligence John McMahon, ``North thought that Duane Clarridge was the best guy in
CIA . . . [b]ecause he was . . . an action-oriented guy who would get things done.'' 88  He
described North and Clarridge as ``professionally close'' and ``peas in a pod.'' 89  The husband of
a CIA employee who had worked for Clarridge recalled a CIA Christmas party he attended at
which Clarridge was wearing an ``Ollie North is an American Hero'' T-shirt.90

     88 McMahon, Grand Jury, 9/18/91, pp. 60-61.

     89 McMahon, FBI 302, 7/22/87, p. 4; FBI 302, 3/26/87, p. 2.

     90 [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/16/91, p. 2.

     Given North's admiration for Clarridge, it makes little sense for him to have kept Clarridge in
the dark about  the cargo when virtually everyone else involved in the mission -- North, Allen,
Poindexter, numerous CIA field personnel in the European country, Secord, the charge AE1, and
even officials of the European country -- knew that weapons were being shipped.91  Clarridge
has testified that he was not informed about the cargo because of ``compartmentation''; that is, he
did not have a ``need to know.'' 92  But excluding Clarridge from information about the cargo
was inexplicable when persons with much smaller roles in the operation were aware that the
cargo was weapons.93  Moreover, North testified that there would not have been  any reason for
him not to have told Clarridge that the cargo was weapons.94

     91 In a hearing before the Select Committees, Clarridge was involved in the following
exchange regarding the anomaly of his not knowing that the shipment contained weapons while
nearly everyone else involved with operation did know:

     Mr. Eggleston:  The person who gave you the problem [North] knew.  The person you gave
the problem to solve [the senior CIA field officer in the European country] knew.  The person
who was helping, [the charge AE1], knew.  The [European] government knew.  But you did not
know?

     Mr. Clarridge: That is the way it was.

     (Clarridge, Select Committees Deposition, 8/4/87, p. 32.)

     With respect to the charge AE1's knowledge and the knowledge of the European government,
see Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, pp. 20-22.  Allen's
knowledge has been discussed previously in this section.

     92 Clarridge, Select Committees Deposition, 4/27/87, p. 49.

     93 For example, a CIA secretary in the European country on November 23, 1985, was aware
that the cargo was weapons, as was a CIA communications officer in that country.  (CIA Field
Secretary, FBI 302, 9/23/92, p. 2; CIA Field Communications Officer, Select Committees
Deposition, 7/13/87, p. 67.)

     94 North, Grand Jury, 2/1/91, p. 128.

     In fact, not informing Clarridge that the cargo was weapons would have been inconsistent
with North's disclosures when he brought others in to help with the mission.  When Secord was
having trouble obtaining the clearances and asked North to get the U.S. Embassy involved, North
called Ambassador Robert Oakley, who was then director of the State Department's
counter-terrorism unit.  According to Oakley, North said he needed to get a plane into the first
European country in order to ship arms to Iran, and wanted Oakley to authorize involving the
charge AE1 there.95  Oakley agreed and called Clarridge to tell him that the State Department
was aware of the operation and that Clarridge should contact the foreign minister of the first
European country for assistance.96  Although Oakley cannot recall the details of his conversation
with Clarridge, he had no doubt that Clarridge knew the cargo was weapons.97  North  was
``completely up front'' about the cargo with Oakley, and there was no suggestion of
compartmentation.98

     95 Oakley, FBI 302, 11/14/91, p. 1.

     96 Ibid., pp. 1-2.

     97 Ibid., p. 1.

     98 Ibid. (quotation is from FBI 302, which paraphrases Oakley).

     The ``Missing'' Cable

     North was not the only person who contemporaneously informed Clarridge that the cargo of
the November 1985 shipment was weapons.  On November 23, 1985, the senior CIA field officer
in the first European country sent Clarridge a cable explaining that the cargo was HAWK
missiles.  Although Clarridge has steadfastly maintained that he never received any such cable,
there is overwhelming evidence that the cable was sent.  CIA communications experts would
have testified that, under the circumstances, there is no reason that the cable would not have been
received in Washington.99

     99 The CIA inspector general conducted an exhaustive search for the ``missing cable,''
electronically checking the files and systems of the CIA field officers involved in the November
1985 shipment and those at CIA headquarters.  The inspector general also interviewed relevant
CIA personnel.  Independent Counsel then conducted his own search, interviewing additional
witnesses and searching files from various CIA field locations by hand.

     On Saturday, November 23, 1985, the senior CIA field officer, the charge AE1 and Secord
were still trying to recycle the mission through the first European country, using three planes
instead of the original El Al plane that had aborted its flight and returned to Israel when
clearances were not  obtained. At about 11:30 a.m. European country time, Secord called the
senior CIA field officer to seek assistance in arranging for the planes that would fly to Iran.100
During that conversation, Secord asked if the officer had been briefed on the operation.  When
the officer replied that he had not, Secord suggested they meet.101

     100 Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, p. 18.

     101 Ibid., pp. 18-19.

     The senior CIA field officer and Secord met at Secord's hotel shortly thereafter.  They sat in
the officer's car and discussed the operation for approximately ten minutes.102  Secord told the
officer that HAWK missiles were being shipped to Iran in exchange for the release of U.S.
hostages.103  The officer promptly returned to his office and wrote two cables: (1) a round-up
report on the morning's events in which he mentioned the meeting with Secord, and (2) a detailed
report on his meeting with Secord in which he reported that the cargo being shipped to Iran was
HAWK missiles.104  The officer sent the first cable to Clarridge at 2:13 p.m. European country
time, and the  second cable, in which he mentioned the HAWK missiles, shortly thereafter.105

     102 Ibid.

     103 Ibid.

     104 Ibid., pp. 25, 32-33; Senior CIA Field Officer, Deposition in lieu of Grand Jury
testimony, 4/8/87, pp. 33-35.

     105 CIA Cable 63397, 11/23/85, DO 21397-96; Senior CIA Field Officer, Deposition in lieu
of Grand Jury testimony, 4/8/87, pp. 33-35 (senior CIA field officer recalls sending the first cable
at approximately 12:30, but the cable, DO 21397-97, indicates the transmission time as 1413, or
2:13 p.m., Zulu (Greenwich) time which was the same as European country time).  The senior
officer was clear that he sent the more detailed cable about 30 minutes after the round-up cable.
(Senior CIA Field Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, pp. 25-26.)

     The senior CIA field officer's testimony is supported by four persons who were in his office
that day: a CIA field communications officer, who sent the cable; the charge AE1; a CIA
operations officer; and a CIA administrative officer.  Furthermore, the CIA cable call-numbering
system indicates that a cable was sent from the European country at the appropriate time. This
was the only cable missing from the file Clarridge kept of cables he received from the European
country during the November 1985 operation.106

     106 One cable Clarridge sent to the European country, DIRECTOR 625103, is also missing.
(Memorandum from CIA Iran/contra Task Force to Scopeletis, 7/8/87,

 2.)

     The CIA field communications officer was on duty at the senior CIA field officer's office on
Saturday, November 23, 1985, when the senior officer claims to have sent the critical cable.107
The communications officer testified that he regularly reads the cables he transmits and that he
distinctly remembers transmitting a cable on November 23, 1985, that a shipment of HAWK
missiles was being sent from Israel to Iran.  He remembered the cable so clearly because it
angered him that Israel was shipping weapons to its ``arch-enemy'' and that the United States was
trying to help; the communications officer personally felt Iran was ``the enemy'' because he had a
good friend who had been held hostage by Iran for 444 days in 1980.108  Finally, the
communications officer noted that he ``had nothing to gain'' by supporting the senior officer's
story because he and the senior officer disliked each other.  He simply felt he had a professional
obligation to tell what he remembered.109

     107 CIA Field Communications Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 7/13/87, pp. 11,
66-67.

     108 Ibid., p. 67; CIA Field Communications Officer, IG Interview, 7/13/87, p. 1.

     109 CIA Field Communications Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 7/13/87, pp. 68-69;
CIA Field Communications Officer, IG Interview, 7/13/87, p. 1; FBI 302, 5/8/92, p. 2.  In his
interview with the CIA inspector general, the communications officer was quite graphic in
describing his relationship with the senior officer, stating that the senior officer regarded
communicators as ``creatures that `crawled out from under the rocks, the lowest form of life.' ''
Carla Scopeletis, who interviewed the senior officer for the CIA, observed that ``[i]t was hard not
to be convinced that [the communications officer] believes he saw such a cable.  Moreover, his
true feelings about [the senior officer] were very apparent as well.  I don't think this is a man
lying or speculating to save his boss.''  (CIA Field Communications Officer, IG Interview,
7/13/87, p. 1.)

     The charge AE1 also recalls the ``missing'' cable.  He was in the senior CIA field officer's
office when the officer returned from his meeting with Secord.  According to the charge AE1, the
senior CIA officer returned ``around midday'' and briefed him on the meeting with Secord.110
Later, the senior officer showed the charge AE1 a cable to CIA headquarters in which he
discussed the meeting with Secord.  The charge AE1 did not recall whether he read the cable or
the senior officer read it to him, but the charge AE1 was certain the cable indicated that the cargo
of the shipment going from Israel to Iran was HAWK missiles.111  The senior CIA officer told
him he was sending the cable to CIA headquarters, and the charge AE1 ``has no doubt'' that the
cable was sent.112

     110 Charge AE1 d'Affaires, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 3; Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, pp. 34-36.  The Charge AE1's recollection that the briefing
occurred ``around midday'' is consistent with the cable traffic and the senior CIA field officer's
testimony that he met with Secord at approximately 11:30 a.m.  (CIA cable, 11/23/85, DO
21397-96; Senior CIA field officer, Select Committees Deposition, 4/13/87, p. 19.)

     111 Charge AE1 d'Affaires, FBI 302, 3/11/92, pp. 3-4; Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, pp. 34-36.

     112 Charge AE1 d'Affaires, Select Committees Deposition, 5/27/87, p. 36; Charge AE1
d'Affaires, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 5.

     Another CIA operations officer in the European country also saw the cable informing CIA
headquarters, that is, Clarridge, about the details of the Secord briefing.113  On November 23,
1985, the senior CIA officer asked the operations officer to become involved in obtaining  flight
clearances for the Israeli aircraft.114  The operations officer later learned that Secord had
informed the European country authorities that he was seeking clearances for a plane carrying
HAWK missiles from Israel en route to Iran.115  Secord reportedly had told the officials that the
missiles would be flown on one plane then transferred to another plane and flown into Iran.116
Secord reportedly suggested that, as a cover story, the European country could say that a transfer
had occurred at an airport in their country but that the cargo was oil-drilling equipment.117

     113 CIA Operations Officer, Grand Jury, 9/13/91, pp. 5-6.

     114 Ibid., pp. 9-10; CIA Operations Officer,  FBI 302, 9/12/91, pp. 2-3.  See also Classified
Appendix.

     115 CIA Operations Officer, FBI 302, 9/12/91, pp. 2-3.

     116 Ibid.

     117 Ibid.

     When the CIA operations officer returned to the senior field officer's office, he told the senior
officer what he had learned about Secord's overtures.  The senior CIA officer said he had heard
essentially the same story from Secord.118  The senior CIA officer said he was pleased that the
operations officer's information matched Secord's.119  The senior officer told the operations
officer to prepare a cable for CIA headquarters with his report, which the operations officer did,
specifically mentioning that the cargo was HAWK missiles and that oil-drilling equipment was a
cover story.120  Meanwhile, the senior officer was preparing his own cable on the Secord
meeting.121  The two officers compared their cables and found them to be ``[b]asically, the same
thing.'' 122  The operations officer was not sure whether the senior officer sent both cables or
simply combined the two into a single cable.123   In either event, the operations officer did see a
final draft of a cable to ``C[hief]/EUR,'' reporting the details he had learned and what the senior
officer had learned from Secord, between 1:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m. on November 23, 1985.124
The senior officer showed the operations officer the draft before taking it up to the
communications center to send out.125

     118 Ibid., p. 3.

     119 Ibid., p. 4.

     120 Ibid., p. 3; CIA Operations Officer, Grand Jury, 9/13/91, pp. 18-20.

     121 Ibid., pp. 18, 21.

     122 Ibid., p. 21.

     123 Ibid., pp. 38-39.

     124 CIA Operations Officer, FBI 302, 9/12/91, p. 3; CIA Operations Officer, Grand Jury,
9/13/91, pp. 21-23.

     125 CIA Operations Officer, FBI 302, 9/12/91, pp. 3-4.  The round-up cable, which
immediately preceded the ``missing'' cable, was sent from the European country at 1413 or 2:13
p.m.

     The operations officer received a ``come-back copy'' of the cable the following Monday.126
A ``come-back copy'' is a copy generated by the CIA communications system for each cable sent.
It indicates the time and date the cable was transmitted.127  The operations officer reviewed the
``come-back copy'' and found that it contained the same information as his original draft
cable.128

     126 Ibid., p. 4; CIA Operations Officer, Grand Jury, 9/13/91, pp. 24-26.

     127 Ibid.

     128 CIA Operations Officer, FBI 302, 9/12/91, p. 4.  The operations officer vividly recalls the
``come-back copy'' because he used it later that week as a reference in drafting another cable.
(See Classified Appendix.)

     Finally, a CIA administrative officer in the European country also saw a copy of the
``missing'' cable, which reported on the senior officer's briefing by Secord.  The administrative
officer was taking all of the cables up to the communications center for the senior officer on
Saturday, November 23, 1985, and recalls a cable that described the Secord briefing in detail,
including that the cargo Secord was trying to ship to Iran was HAWK missiles.  The
administrative officer remembered being upset that trading ``HAWKs for Hostages'' would
encourage terrorists to ``grab us and get missiles.'' 129

     129 CIA Administrative Officer, FBI 302, 10/31/91, p. 4.

     Assuming the ``missing cable'' was sent, the next question is, was it received at CIA
headquarters in Langley, Virginia?  The cables between Langley and the European country that
weekend were sent in Clarridge's ``privacy channel'' -- a special channel for ``background
exchanges on sensitive issues between Chiefs of Division and [senior field officers]. . . .'' 130
Privacy channel cables may be retained only ``temporarily''; they must be destroyed once the
``issue in question is transferred to the command channel or when the temporary circumstances
end.'' 131  Although the senior CIA officer in the European country destroyed all of his copies of
the cables, Clarridge instructed his secretary to retain copies in an unofficial, ``shadow'' file.132
Clarridge's secretary maintained carbon copies of the cables in a file ``in a corner of her desk,''
while the originals went to CIA field chronological files and were routinely purged in accordance
with normal practice.133  Clarridge's secretary kept the file even after Clarridge left to become
chief of the Counterterrorism Center because she ``never got around to  throwing the material
away.'' 134  When the Iran/contra affair became public in November 1986, Clarridge called his
former secretary to see if she still had the file, and she sent the entire file to him.135  It turned out
that Clarridge had retained the CIA's only file of the November 1985 cables.

     130 Memorandum from McMahon re: Privacy Channel Correspondence, 4/14/80.

     131 Ibid.

     132 CIA Secretary, IG Interview, 4/10/87; Clarridge, IG Interview, 4/10/87, p. 1.

     133 CIA Secretary, IG Interview, 4/10/87.

     134 Ibid.

     135 Ibid.  Clarridge recalls that he asked his new secretary to contact his former secretary.
(Clarridge, IG Interview, 4/10/87, p. 1.)

     The CIA cable system automatically assigns a number, in sequential order, to each cable
transmitted from a particular location.136  Thus, Country X Cable 63397 would be followed by
Country X Cable 63398, and so on.137  When the CIA inspector general conducted an
investigation of the ``missing cable,'' he recovered copies (either from Clarridge's file or from
CIA electronic searches) of every cable sent out of the European country on November 22 and
23, 1985 except one.138  The cable immediately preceding the missing cable is unrelated to the
arms shipment.139  The cable  before that is the round-up cable the senior field officer sent in
which he referenced his meeting with Secord but did not provide details.  That cable was
transmitted at 2:13 p.m. European country time on November 23, 1985.  The cable after the
missing cable, which is also about the arms shipment, was transmitted at 2:53 p.m. European
country time on November 23, 1985.  Thus, the missing cable was transmitted between 2:13 and
2:53 p.m. European country time on November 23, 1985.  That corresponds with the senior CIA
field officer's testimony that he sent the cable in which he identified the cargo as HAWK missiles
approximately 30 minutes after he sent the round-up cable, and with the CIA operations officer's
testimony that he saw a final draft of such a cable between 1:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m. on November
23, 1985.

     136 CIA Communications Expert, FBI 302, 11/21/91, p. 2.

     137 The numbers are assigned based on when each cable is sent, not when it is printed at the
receiving end.  When numerous cables are sent, they often queue up at the printer on the
receiving end.  Higher-priority cables will jump the queue and be printed before lower priority
cables that were sent earlier.  (DDO Duty Officer, FBI 302, 7/16/92, p. 2.)

     138 Memorandum from CIA Iran/contra Task Force to Scopeletis, 7/8/87, p. 3,

 8.

     139 Ibid.

     At trial, CIA cable communications experts would have explained how once a cable is given a
number and transmitted, there is virtually no way for that cable to disappear from the system.140
If a number is skipped on the receiving end, the supervisor on the receiving end  automatically
inquires about the missed number, usually each hour.141  Thus, if the missing cable had not been
received in Langley, inquiries would have been made.142  There is no record of any such inquiry,
no record of any power outage, and no record of a mechanical problem with the system in the
European country during the relevant period.143  In addition, if the missing cable had been sent
by flash precedence, as it surely would have been, the message center in Langley would have
been required to acknowledge its receipt, and such acknowledgment would have been
automatically generated by the system within a minute of transmission.144

     140 CIA Communications Expert, FBI 302, 11/21/91, pp. 2-3.  When asked if he knew of any
explanation for the missing cable, former Deputy Director for Operations Clair E. George
testified, ``I suppose three times in the last 20 years I have seen a cable eaten alive by the relay
station. . . .  The odds are so high, I am afraid we would be foolish to think that happened.''
(George, Select Committees Deposition, 8/5/87, p. 296.)

     141 CIA Communications Expert, FBI 302, 11/21/91, pp. 2-3.

     142 Ibid.  See also Iran/contra Telecommunications Review of Late November 1985, 6/19/87,

 14 (prepared by CIA) (``Missing check numbers are serviced back to the field within hours, at
most.'').

     143 Ibid.,

 13; CIA Field Communications Officer, Select Committees Deposition, 7/13/87, p. 21.

     144 Ibid. pp. 36-38; CIA Communications Expert, FBI 302, 11/21/91, p. 3.

     Thus, all the evidence confirms that the ``missing cable'' was sent.  The only evidence
suggesting the cable was not received is the testimony of Clarridge and former Deputy Director
for Operations Clair E. George that they do not recall such a cable.  Because the missing cable,
like all the cables between Clarridge and senior CIA field officers that weekend, was sent in the
privacy channel, only Clarridge and  George would have received copies.145  Clarridge could
have destroyed his copy of the cable at any time, even after he retrieved the working file from his
secretary in 1986.146  George has testified that on Monday, November 25, 1985, he instructed
both his secretary and Clarridge to collect the relevant cables and bring them to him.147
Whether Clarridge or George's secretary was the last to see the package of cables delivered to
George is unclear.  In addition, a CIA cable duty officer who was on duty on November 23, 1985
in Langley has testified that if the named recipient of a privacy channel cable had requested that
he be given all the copies of the cable -- including the copy slated for the Directorate of
Operations -- the duty officer probably would have complied.148

     145 CIA Cable Duty Officer, FBI 302, 7/10/92, p. 3.

     146 The secretary who maintained the file did not read the cables.  CIA Secretary, IG
Interview, 4/10/87.

     147 George, Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, p. 293.

     148 DDO Duty Officer, FBI 302, 7/16/92, p. 3.  The duty officer also testified that the copy of
a privacy channel cable slated for the Directorate of Operations (``DO'') would normally print out
automatically at the DO Registry.  If, however, the named recipient of the cable was coming in to
pick it up, the cable duty officer could print it out on his own printer.  This would be especially
likely when the Registry was closed.  Ibid., p. 2.

     The A-K Reports

     The third way Clarridge learned that the cargo of the November 1985 shipment was weapons
was from the A-K  Intelligence Reports Allen showed him on November 23, 1985.  The A-K
Reports concerned negotiations between Iranian expatriate arms dealer Manucher Ghorbanifar
(code named ``Ashgari,'' the ``A'' of A-K) and Iran's Chief of Security Mohsen Kangarlu (the ``K''
of A-K).  Distribution of the reports was extremely limited.149

     149 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/11/91, pp. 61-62.

     On Saturday, November 23, 1985, North asked Allen to show the A-K Reports to Clarridge to
brief him on the mission.  Allen gave the reports to Clarridge to read, telling him that this was

     an extremely sensitive NSC initiative, that . . . had been held with a small number of people in
Washington at the White House and Defense and within the Central Intelligence Agency, that the
Department of State was not part of this process, and that through this process we had obtained
the release of Reverend Weir [a U.S. hostage in Lebanon released in September 1985]. . . .150

     150 Ibid., p. 47.

     Allen left the reports with Clarridge for approximately half an hour.151

     151 Ibid.

     Clarridge admitted that he saw the A-K Reports and that they were given to him to brief him
on the mission.152  He read the reports with at least sufficient scrutiny to glean that the purpose
of the mission was to secure the release of the U.S. hostages being held in Lebanon.153
According to Clarridge, however, there was nothing in the reports about weapons, at least not
that he could recall.154

     152 Clarridge, Select Committees Deposition, 4/27/87, pp. 36-38.

     153 Clarridge, Select Committees Testimony, 8/4/87, pp. 13-14.

     154 Ibid.

     In fact, the reports are replete with references to an arms-for-hostages swap, including specific
references to HAWK, TOW, Phoenix, Harpoon, and Sidewinder missiles.155  As Allen put it,
the ``the principal content of the intelligence [reports] reflected negotiations relating to military
equipment.'' 156  After reading the reports, Allen said, he had ``no doubts'' the cargo of the
November 1985 shipment was military equipment and that it was ``clear'' to him that North's
assertion that the cargo was oil-drilling  equipment was ``a cover story.'' 157  North similarly
agreed that the packet of reports Allen showed Clarridge made it ``very obvious'' that the cargo
was missiles.158  Finally,  there is no reference in any of the reports to oil-drilling
equipment.159

     155 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/11/91; A-K Reports, 9/15/85-11/22/85, AMW 0001918-91.

     156 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/11/91, pp. 66, 68 (the file of reports Allen showed Clarridge ``refers
directly on a consistent basis to military equipment'').

     157 Allen, FBI 302, 1/10/91, p. 3.  In his testimony before congressional investigators, Allen
was never quite so forthcoming.  When questioned about North's assertion that the cargo was
oil-drilling equipment, Allen testified that he ``had doubts . . . as to whether Colonel North was
being totally candid. . . .''  (Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 4/21/87, p. 165.)  At other
times he referred to a ``suspicion'' he had that the cargo was weapons. (Ibid., 7/2/87, pp. 674-78;
ibid., 6/29/87, pp. 625-26.)  He never admitted to congressional investigators, however, that he
knew the cargo was weapons. (See Allen, Select Committees Deposition, 7/2/87, p. 678, denying
certainty about cargo but admitting ``suspicion.'')

     Whether from the A-K Reports or otherwise, however, Allen was quite certain that the cargo
was weapons.  On Monday, November 18, 1985, Allen told intelligence officials responsible for
the reports that a ``planeload of arms'' was going into Iran, ``probably'' on Wednesday, November
20, 1985.  (Classified Communications Log, November 18, 1985.)  On November 22, 1985,
Allen told these officials that a ``planeload of arms is now over the Med[iterranean] en route to
Iran.''  (Classified Communications Log, 11/22/85, AMW 0000548.)

     The Classified Communications Logs raised serious questions about Allen's evasive
congressional testimony about his knowledge of the cargo.  Independent Counsel decided not to
pursue possible perjury and false statements charges against Allen because he admitted his
knowledge of the cargo in interviews with Independent Counsel and in testimony before the
Grand Jury, and assisted the investigation with truthful testimony about the knowledge of others.

     158 North, Grand Jury, 2/1/91, pp. 113-15.  North was shown a packet of the A-K Reports
dating from September 1985 to November 22, 1985.  (Ibid., p. 114.)  Allen testified that he
showed Clarridge all the A-K Reports he had for that period.  (Allen, Grand Jury, 1/11/91, p. 15.)

     159 Ibid., p. 66.  There are a very few references to using the proceeds from oil sales to pay
for military equipment, but no references to oil-drilling equipment.  (Ibid.)

     Admission Evidence

     In December 1986, Clarridge attended a CIA Christmas party wearing an ``Ollie North is an
American Hero'' T-shirt.160  At the party, Clarridge had a heated argument with the husband of a
CIA employee who worked for Clarridge, about congressional oversight of the CIA.161
Clarridge was generally opposed to congressional oversight, while the husband was defending
it.162  According to the husband, Clarridge ``had no real use for Congress.'' 163

     160 [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/16/91, p. 2.  A CIA employee who worked for
Clarridge remembered Clarridge's wearing an Ollie North button rather than a T-shirt.
([Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/9/91, p. 4.)

     161 [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/9/91, pp. 3-4; [Classified Identity Withheld],
FBI 302, 9/16/91, pp. 1-2.

     162 Ibid.

     163 [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/16/91, p. 2.  Clarridge had a reputation for
being less than forthcoming with Congress.  Juchniewicz, Clarridge's superior, said that
Clarridge ``never told anyone a full story.''  (Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 3/20/91, p. 14.)  Clarridge, he
said, would ``dance around a question'' and would not tell Congress anything unless specifically
asked.  (Ibid.) Senator Thomas Eagleton, who questioned Clarridge extensively, was asked at the
trial of Clair George whether he assumed everyone testifying on behalf of the CIA would lie to
Congress.  He responded, ``I didn't trust Dewey Clarridge.  We knew he was lying.''  (Eagleton,
George Trial Testimony, 11/5/92, p. 2317.)

     The CIA employee who worked for Clarridge also recalled that Clarridge said at the party that
he ``had slipped something by Congress'' or ``really slipped by Congress.'' 164  The CIA
employee said Clarridge moved his hand forward in a sliding motion while making the
statement.165

     164 [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/9/91, p. 3.  Later in the interview, the employee
said she was not certain Clarridge had made the comment at the Christmas party, but that he had
said it a day or two after his congressional testimony.  (Ibid., p. 4.)  Clarridge testified before the
congressional committees investigating Iran/contra on December 2, 1986 and December 11, 1986
and before the Tower Commission on December 18, 1986.

     165 [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 9/9/91, p. 3.

     Count Three -- ``Straight Commercial Deal'' -- Evidence

     In Count Three, Clarridge was charged with perjury for testifying that he believed the
November 1985 flight by the CIA proprietary airline from Israel to Iran was a ``straight
commercial deal.''  While the evidence set forth above that Clarridge knew the cargo of the flight
was weapons would have been sufficient to disprove Clarridge's stated belief that it was a
``straight commercial deal,'' there is additional evidence material only to that count.

     The text of the false statements charged in Count 3 is emphasized in the following exchange
from Clarridge's December 2, 1986, testimony under oath before the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence:

     Mr. Newsom:  At that time, did you have any concern about the  [sic] whether necessary or
sufficient authority existed to use a U.S. proprietary aircraft under the control of the CIA for this
kind of mission?

     Mr. Clarridge: For oil spare parts?

     Mr. Newsom:  For using the CIA proprietary to fly a mission destined for Iran.

     Mr. Clarridge: Well, the way I talked to Juchniewicz about it was that this would, although
the NSC was interested in it, it seemed to be a straight commercial deal.  In other words, private
people apparently hiring our proprietary.  That was the reason that he felt he [Juchniewicz] didn't
have to go any higher apparently on the approval process.166

     166 Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 13-14.

     * * *

     Sen. Eagleton: . . . You thought this was a commercial undertaking, right, this flight?  We're
going back to this flight.

     Mr. Clarridge: Right.167

     167 Ibid., p. 54.

     * * *

     Sen. Eagleton: Didn't you have a second thought or question, ``Here's a hotshot from the NSC
[North] who's on this interagency group coming to my personal office, one on one.  Maybe this
might be a shade more than a commercial endeavor.''

     Mr. Clarridge: I'm sorry, I didn't see it any more than what he was telling me.168

     168 Ibid., pp. 56-57.

     While the charged quotes do not state it expressly, the underlying premise of Clarridge's
professed belief that the operation was a ``straight commercial deal'' was that the cargo was
normal commercial cargo -- oil-drilling equipment.  The committee's concern about the use of the
CIA proprietary airline paralleled its concern about Iran/contra generally:  that unsupervised
operatives like North and Clarridge were running the affair with minimal authorization from
those in charge.  Clarridge's response, ``For oil spare parts?'' implies that authorization for using
the proprietary was not a major problem because the cargo was oil spare parts which are
commercial.  In response to Eagleton's follow-up questioning to the passage quoted above,
Clarridge makes the point more clearly:

     Sen. Eagleton: The second time the guy from the NSC [North] comes back.

     At that second time, did that cause you to say, ``Well, gee, I wonder if this is completely
commercial''?

     Mr. Clarridge: You know, you have to believe in people once in awhile.  A fellow says it's,
you know, this flight has got all spare parts on it.169

     169 Ibid., p. 60.

     Conversely, if Clarridge knew the cargo was military equipment, he did not believe that the
operation was a ``strictly commercial deal.'' 170

     170 Clarridge was formally reprimanded and reduced in rank for ``provid[ing] assistance to
the NSC staff in connection with [shipping arms to Iran] . . . without appropriate authorizations.''
(Letter from Webster to Clarridge, 12/16/87.)  In a memorandum for the record of his meeting
with Clarridge to discuss the reprimand, Webster wrote that he told Clarridge that he was
``culpable in respect to his testimony before Congress'' and for ``fail[ing] to keep his senior
officials properly apprised and to obtain appropriate authorizations'' in connection with the use of
the CIA proprietary in November 1985. (Memorandum from Webster to the Record, 12/16/87.)
In other words, Clarridge was reprimanded for failing to tell Juchniewicz the truth about the
operation when he sought approval for using the proprietary.  According to Juchniewicz, even if
Clarridge thought the cargo was ``commercial,'' he had an obligation to inform Juchniewicz that
the purpose of the mission was to secure the release of the hostages and that the flight was going
into Iran.  (Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 3/20/91, p. 13.)  If he knew the cargo was weapons, it would
have been even more critical that he inform his superiors.  (Ibid.)  Thus, once Clarridge lied to
Juchniewicz, he had to lie to Congress to conceal the first lie.  If he was reprimanded merely for
not informing Juchniewicz that the mission was about the hostages and that the flight was going
into Iran, Clarridge might well have been fired for failing to inform Juchniewicz that the cargo
was weapons.

     Clarridge testified that he thought Juchniewicz had been reviewing the flash cables between
headquarters and the European country and thus knew all about the mission.  (Clarridge, Tower
Commission Testimony,  12/18/86, p. 5.)  Flash priority cables in a division chief's privacy
channel are screened, with only the most important of them being forwarded to Juchniewicz's
level.  (Hohing, FBI 302, 7/10/92, pp. 1-2; Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 3/20/91, pp. 11-12.)
According to Chimera Hohing, who was reviewing the cables in November 1985, she would pass
on only 75-150 of the roughly 1000 cables she screened per day.  (Hohing, 7/10/92, p. 2.)  She
would decide which cables were important based on content, not precedence (flash, immediate,
etc.).  She did not think it likely that she would have forwarded cables about flight clearances and
weapons being shipped to Iran.  (Hohing, FBI 302, 7/13/92, p. 3.)

     The testimony of John McMahon, former Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, was that
Clarridge would withhold information from his superiors if he thought the superior would
impede an operation he believed in.  (McMahon, FBI 302, 2/15/91, p. 9.)  Juchniewicz agreed,
stating that Clarridge ``never told anyone a full story,'' and that Clair George and McMahon never
felt that Clarridge ``squared with them.''  (Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 3/20/91, p. 14) (quotations are
from the report, which paraphrases Juchniewicz).  McMahon believed that using oil-drilling
equipment as a cover story within the CIA would have been a good way to get the operation
``through the CIA hierarchy without setting off alarms. . . .''  (McMahon, FBI 302, 2/15/91, p. 9)
(quotations are from the report, which paraphrases McMahon).

     Clarridge seemed to distinguish a commercial deal that the ``NSC was interested in,'' from an
NSC operation.  Everything Clarridge knew and said about the operation at the time, however,
belies that purported belief.

     First, Clarridge repeatedly testified that he knew the purpose of the operation was to secure
the release of the  hostages -- hardly a ``strictly commercial'' deal.171  Second, the cables
Clarridge sent to the first European country identify the ``Subject'' as ``NSC Mission.'' 172
Third, when Allen gave Clarridge the reliable intelligence reports he told him this was

     171 See, e.g., Clarridge, SSCI Testimony, 12/2/86, pp. 10-11; Clarridge, Select Committees
Deposition, 12/11/86, p. 63; Clarridge, Tower Commission Testimony, 12/18/86, pp. 3-4.

     172 The cables Clarridge sent to the second European country also identify the ``Subject'' as
``NSC Mission,'' while the cables Clarridge sent to the Asian country identify the ``Subject'' as
``NSC Request.''

     an extremely sensitive NSC initiative, that . . . had been held with a small number of people in
Washington at the White House and Defense and within the Central Intelligence Agency, that the
Department of State was not part of this process, and that through this process we had obtained
the release of Reverend Weir.173

     173 Allen, Grand Jury, 1/11/91, p. 47.

     Finally, in a cable Clarridge sent to the senior CIA officer in the second European country on
November 25, 1985, he wrote: ``One of the key elements for [the Asian country] is the
requirement that they have at least a good approximation when the aircraft is going to enter their
airspace eastbound. . . .  If this were a normal commercial flight, it probably wouldn't make much
difference to them but under the circumstances it does.'' 174

     174 DIRECTOR 628959, 11/25/85, DO 21443 (emphasis added).

     Soliciting Third-Country Support for the Contras

     Independent Counsel also investigated Clar-ridge's role in soliciting funding from a third
country for the contras.  Clarridge testified that he did not solicit funds from the country and that
he was unaware of discussions within the CIA about soliciting third-country funding for the
contras.  Although CIA cables about a spring 1984 trip that Clarridge took to the country belie
Clarridge's testimony, Independent Counsel decided not to pursue false statement and perjury
charges against Clarridge.  The reasons for Independent Counsel's decision are set forth in the
Classified Appendix.

Chapter 19

     United States v. Alan D. Fiers, Jr.

     Alan D. Fiers, Jr., was the chief of the Central Intelligence Agency's Central American Task
Force (CATF) from October 1984 until his retirement in 1988.  An extraordinary career officer --
with accolades that included the CIA's Distinguished Officer Rank, the CIA's highest award --
Fiers was the CIA headquarters official most heavily involved with efforts to support the contras.
After 1984, Fiers was perhaps second only to CIA Director William J. Casey in the extent of his
contact with Lt. Col. Oliver L. North's efforts to keep the contras supplied, notwithstanding the
limits of Boland Amendments upon contra aid.

     On July 9, 1991, Fiers pleaded guilty to two counts of withholding information from
Congress.  Fiers entered the plea as part of an agreement to cooperate with Independent Counsel's
investigation.  On January 31, 1992, Chief Judge Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr., sentenced Fiers to one
hundred hours of community service to be performed within one year of his sentence.  Fiers was
pardoned by President Bush on December 24, 1992.

     Fiers's cooperation with Independent Counsel was extensive and exemplary.  No other
Iran/contra defendant assisted OIC with the degree of professionalism exhibited by Fiers.  Many
pieces of the Iran/contra puzzle fell into place solely because of the information provided by
Fiers.  Fiers  also was the principal witness for the Government in the two trials of Clair E.
George.

     What follows is a discussion of Fiers's involvement in the Iran/contra affair.1  Independent
Counsel's analysis relies primarily on evidence other than that provided by Fiers pursuant to his
cooperation agreement with Independent Counsel.  This analysis caused Independent Counsel to
conclude that Fiers had made false statements and committed the perjury that led to his
prosecution.  These include:

     1 Because the Department of Justice specially referred two aspects of Fiers's Iran/contra
activities to Independent Counsel, these matters are treated in other sections of this report.  See
Classified CIA Investigations A and B.

      -- Denying knowledge of the true identity of ``Max Gomez,'' an alias for Felix Rodriguez, and
knowledge of to whom he was reporting.

      -- Denying CIA contacts with the contra-resupply operation at Ilopango air base in El
Salvador.

      -- Denying knowing the identities of any of the ``private benefactors.''

      -- Denying that North discussed his contra-resupply activities, and denying knowledge of
North's fund raising, supply-providing, and intelligence-passing activities, as well as North's
connection with arranging flights into the Ilopango air base.

      -- Denying that any American citizen was providing aid to the contras outside of the law.

      -- Denying North's account of an August 1986 RIG meeting where North claimed he revealed
all of his Central American activities in support of the contras.

     Fiers' Knowledge of Contra Resupply

     Fiers became chief of the CATF on October 9, 1984, shortly before the ``full'' Boland
restrictions on contra aid took effect.  By all indications, Fiers was fully in control of task force
operations and ran them with a firm hand.2

     2 See, for example, Deputy Chief of CATF (DC/CATF), FBI 302, 2/28/91, p. 2 (``All of
CATF was a support mechanism for Fiers, who ran it all.''); Chief #2, Latin America Division
(C/LA #2), Grand Jury, 5/8/91, p. 25 (``Alan was Mr. Central America.  I mean he went to every
congressional hearing, he went to every place, and when you really wanted to know what [the]
policy was, Alan was the guy to talk to.''); Deputy C/LA, FBI 302, 5/2/91, pp. 5, 11.

     Fiers learned by late 1985 of a private network that was supporting the contras.  He knew that
North was a manager in this effort, and that Felix Rodriguez and Richard Gadd were involved in
its day-to-day operations.  Fiers approved specific activities that facilitated the network's
operations.  On one occasion, Fiers encouraged the network to drop supplies to contra units
operating in northern Costa Rica and southern Nicaragua (the so-called contra ``southern front'').

     During 1986, Fiers also learned that an airstrip had been built at Santa Elena, Costa Rica, by
the ``private benefactors'' involved in contra resupply to facilitate aerial resupply.  He became
aware in April or May of 1986 that the Chief of the CIA's station in San Jose, Costa Rica, Joseph
Fernandez, was passing CIA intelligence directly to the operation to facilitate resupply missions
to the southern  front.  Fiers helped develop a plan to terminate Fernandez's direct involvement
with the network, but it was scrapped after other task force officers criticized it as being too
risky, both legally and politically.  Although Fernandez continued to facilitate resupply drops
after August 1986 without informing headquarters of his actions, Fiers knew from Fernandez's
activities prior to August 1986 that he was in direct contact with the resupply network, and was
facilitating its operations, at the time Fiers was first questioned about the resupply effort in
October 1986.

     Fiers dated the beginning of his knowledge of the ``private benefactors'' resupply operation
and their involvement with U.S. officials around a meeting held on November 9, 1984, in
Director Casey's office.3  Fiers' own experience arose from events that occurred the following
year, beginning with Fiers' realization that North was raising funds on behalf of the contras.

     3 See description of the meeting in the George chapter.

     In a February 1985 memorandum written by Fiers to his superiors at the CIA, Fiers reported
that North could line up funding for contra leaders Arturo Cruz, Sr., and Edgar Chamorro, who to
that point had been receiving money from the CIA.  By using private funding, Fiers believed
these contra representatives could continue to lobby Congress  without it appearing that
Government funds were supporting the contras to influence legislation.4

     4 Memorandum from Fiers, re:  Status Report on Honduran Discussions, 2/12/85, DO
94090-94; Fiers, Select Committee Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 22-24.  North professed not
remembering any specific conversation about funding with Fiers, but had ``absolutely no doubt
that it occurred.''  (North, Grand Jury, 1/18/91, p. 36.)  Fiers subsequently acknowledged to the
Independent Counsel that he knew more than he had previously disclosed about North's
fund-raising activities in 1985, particularly an incident where Fiers helped refer intelligence to
North concerning South Korean interest in contributing to the Contras.  (See Fiers, Grand Jury,
8/12/91, pp. 40-45 and George chapter.)

     Secord

     In early March 1985, the CIA received reports that retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V.
Secord was seeking to buy weapons from the Peoples' Republic of China, for delivery to
Guatemala.  Fiers passed this information to North.  This was the first document to link them.
North noted on March 7, 1985:

     Mtg w Fiers

     [CIA] Source -- businessman in Boston

     ``knows'':  Canadian Arms Broker Working

     w/ Secord

     Went to China

     Secord working w/ USG

     China refused Guat EUC's [End User

     Certificates]

     Moroccan EUC's used

     1st Shipment Feb

     offshore bank Cayman/Bahamas

     Rodriguez

     In the fall of 1985,  North recruited a former CIA officer named Felix Rodriguez, who was
working in El Salvador, to join the ``private benefactors.''  Rodriguez's work led to a significant
confrontation between Fiers and Rodriguez in February 1986, as well as a meeting in
Washington in August of that year where Rodriguez's role in contra resupply was fully aired.
Together these events showed Fiers just what Rodriguez was doing for the resupply operation.

     On December 30, 1985, a delegation from the Restricted Interagency Group on Central
America (the RIG) arrived at Ilopango air base to discuss using the air base as a transshipment
point for U.S. Government humanitarian assistance provided by the Government's Nicaraguan
Humanitarian Assistance Office (NHAO).  The delegation consisted of Fiers, North, Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State William G. Walker, and Cresencio Arcos, the deputy director of
NHAO.5  Numerous meetings took place  during this visit, including one among North,
Salvadoran Air Force Gen. Juan Bustillo, U.S. Military Group commander Col. James J. Steele,
and Rodriguez.6  The meetings resulted in agreements on use of Ilopango air base as a
transshipment point for NHAO assistance to the contras.  A consensus also was reached that
Rodriguez and Steele would pass information about NHAO flights to CIA field personnel.7

     5 CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 3/16/90, pp. 31, 40-42, 51; CIA Officer #1, FBI 302, 4/19/91,
p. 3; CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 8-13, 16-19.  Fiers later told the Independent
Counsel that shortly before this trip, he talked with North about a weapons resupply flight that
was on its way from Europe.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/17/91 AM, p. 13; Fiers, FBI 302, 7/17/91 PM, p.
11; Fiers, FBI 302, 7/23/91, p. 4.)  Also during this period, Fiers learned from North that
Rodriguez was using the alias ``Max Gomez.''  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/17/91 PM, p. 7.)  By the end of
December 1985, Fiers had concluded that Rodriguez was ``North's man'' at Ilopango and was
``greasing the skids'' for Contra resupply activities there.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/23/91, p. 3.)

     6 CIA Officer #1's stand-in during the RIG's December 1985 visit placed Fiers in these
``closed door'' sessions.  ([Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 11/20/90, p. 5; [Classified
Identity Withheld], CIA IG Interview, 2/12/87, p. 2.)  Fiers insisted that he was not in these
meetings.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/17/91 PM, p. 13.)  Notes prepared by Ambassador Corr in February
1986 confirm Fiers's account.  (Corr Notes, 2/9/86, ALV 1399-1400.)

     7 DIRECTOR 672514, 12/30/85, DO 39663; DIRECTOR 672517, 12/30/85, DO 58061; Corr
Notes, 2/9/86, ALV 1399-1400; Corr, Grand Jury, 4/26/91, pp. 86-90; [Classified Identity
Withheld], Grand Jury, 5/31/91, pp. 47, 67-82.

     Fiers provided general guidance to CIA field personnel on tracking NHAO shipments out of
Ilopango in a cable dated January 4, 1986.  CIA personnel were to monitor the arrival of all
equipment brought in by NHAO, and to report in detail on shipments from Ilopango -- including
the contents of each load, the destination of the flight and type of aircraft used.  Personnel were
also instructed ``to confirm that none of the supplies are diverted to [Eden Pastora's]
organization.'' 8

     8 DIRECTOR 677959, 1/4/86, DO 84690; CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 13-15.
The cable also noted that CIA field personnel would assist Contra forces in Honduras in placing
an FDN communicator at Ilopango.  (Ibid.)  On the significance of the ban on providing
assistance to Eden Pastora, see section below.

     NHAO supplies began landing at Ilopango in January 1986.  With large amounts of supplies
arriving and no contra logistics team in place, coordination problems arose.  North noted that
U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador Edwin G. Corr and Steele were becoming concerned about what
CIA Officer #1 was reporting about these problems to Washington, and that Bustillo wanted to
deal with Rodriguez, not the CIA:

     Amb & Steele concerned

     [CIA Officer #1] msg to Wash re mtg he had w/Bustillo re movement of matl [material]
through El Salv.

     [CIA Officer #1] advised Bustillo that he [CIA Officer #1] had a reporting reqmt

     Bustillo told this is overt program -- reported back to D.C.

     Bustillo very concerned that [CIA Officer #1] involved

     Does not want to deal w/ CIA wants no reports is going to shut down OP

     Bustillo wants CIA out or he will shut this off will work only w/Steele and  Maximo

     Ambassador Corr's notes indicate that he attempted to persuade Fiers to limit distribution of
Officer #1's reports.9

     9 North Notebook, 1/22/86, AMX 00927 (emphasis in original); CIA Cable, 1/16/86, DO
10458; Corr Notes, ALV 1396.  CIA Officer #1 felt during this period that Corr was cutting him
out of the machinations at Ilopango.  (CIA Officer #1, FBI 302, 4/19/91, p. 4.)  Fiers later
disclosed to Independent Counsel that he was aware by October 1985 that someone was
complaining to North about CIA Officer #1.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/17/91 PM, p. 8.)  Fiers also did
not dispute the implication of North's notes.  (Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/12/91, pp. 128-29.)

     In late January 1986, CIA field personnel -- including CIA Officer #1 -- began to complain
that Rodriguez was attempting to take over coordination of NHAO flights.  Personnel in one
location reported to Headquarters:

     [Personnel believe] additional confusion being introduced into San Salvador scenario by Felix
((Rodriguez)), who has somehow become involved in the San Salvador end of the NHAO
system.  He repeatedly was the person who receipted for the NHAO shipment to Ilopango, and he
has become involved in conflict with both [the contra air force commander and the contra
logistics coordinator at Ilopango] by insisting that all matters relating to the Ilopango logistics
system be channelled through him.

     CIA Officer #1 agreed and further informed CATF headquarters:

     [We are] standing by for final decision on who will do what at Ilopango.  Until this
determined, our preference is to stay away from all other players. . .at moment there does not
seem to be convenient way to be partially involved;  it's either us or the other group (i.e.,
Rodriguez and Col. Steele).10

     10 CIA Cable, 1/25/86, DO 39674-73; CIA Cable, 1/27/86, DO 39675; CIA Officer #1, FBI
302, 4/19/91, p. 7; CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 21-32.  Officer #1 testified that
during this period, his personnel had to compete with Rodriguez and Steele for NHAO flight
manifests.  Cables state that Rodriguez personally arranged for at least one humanitarian resupply
flight from Guatemala to Ilopango without informing CIA personnel.  (CIA Officer #1, Grand
Jury, 3/16/90, pp. 42-43; CIA Cable, 1/27/86, DO 39676.)

     CIA Officer #1 pressed again for guidance in a special message addressed to Fiers on
February 6, 1986.

     Meanwhile, Ambassador Corr, who was in Washington, had spent the last two days meeting
with North, Fiers, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, and Abrams's deputy Walker
about the situation at Ilopango -- particularly Officer #1's performance.  Corr's notes from one of
these meetings state in part:

     Re-hash of earlier mtgs w/ North & Fiers.

     I said I'd prefer early promotion & transfer of [CIA Officer #1], emphasizing that he'd done a
superb job of pulling USG intel effort together.  Said that perhaps same qualities that enabled
him to do this were detrimental on the Contra question.

     Corr later wrote that another topic during this meeting was ``coordination among Front
Office, [CIA Officer #1], Steele, Felix, and UNO/FDR.'' 11

     11 Corr Notes, 2/5/86, ALW 33715-16; Corr, Grand Jury, 5/29/91, pp. 96-106; ALV
1399-1400 (emphasis added).  UNO/FDR was an acronym for the principal contra organization
that operated out of Honduras.

     On February 6, 1986, a private-benefactor C-7 aircraft crashed on a highway in El Salvador,
its crew frantically unloading cargo on the way down.  In frustration, CIA Officer #1 sent a cable
to Fiers with a subject line that read ``END THE SILENCE'':

     1. [My last cable asked Fiers] for update on the Salvadoran aspects of Washing-ton
negotiations on NHAO/UNO-FDN/Ilopango et al, to be available by OOB [opening of business]
this morning, 7 February.  Nothing arrived.  Given that two weeks have passed since that awful
mix-up on this subject at HQS, with sloppy repercussions here,12 do not feel our request for a
timely response was unreasonable.

     12 CIA Officer #1 testified that his reference here was to the cables discussed above.  (CIA
Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 35-36.)

     2. Minutes ago Charge [David] Passage came to [me] with story that presumed
NHAO-chartered Caribou aircraft on ill-fated supply run to Ilopango via Mexico made
emergency landing yesterday, 6 February, on road in Southwest El Salvador.  Charge says his
source was Felix Rodrigues [sic] who apparently has been ``coordinating'' all of this with Ollie
North (one supposes on open phone).  [I] had to say, honestly, that [I] knew nothing of this
Caribou and indeed had not heard anything from [Fiers] on this subject for two weeks.

     3. Rodrigues has just called Charge to advise that UPI [United Press International] is on the
downed Caribou and wants a story.  Charge's  position is that he has no knowledge re this A/C.
God knows what Felix Rodrigues is saying.

     4. What is going on back there? 13

     13 CIA Cable, 2/6/86, DO 84797; CIA Cable, 2/7/86, DO 58911; CIA Officer #1, FBI 302,
4/19/91, pp. 8-10; CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 32-37, 42-43.

     Fiers cabled CIA Officer #1 four hours later and told him that CIA Deputy Director for
Operations Clair George had instructed Fiers to meet Officer #1 at Ilopango to discuss NHAO
operations in San Salvador.  Fiers came to Ilopango from Honduras, where he had reached
agreement with the Honduran government over the size of aircraft and other rules that would
govern flights of NHAO aircraft from Ilopango to contra bases in Honduras.  Fiers met Officer
#1.  He and another CIA field officer took Fiers past a Southern Air Transport C-130, on which
supplies were being loaded.  It exceeded the size of aircraft acceptable to Honduras.  Fiers asked
the loaders where the plane was headed, and was told that it was going to Honduras -- on Felix
Rodriguez's authority.14

     14 DIRECTOR 726822, 2/7/86, DO 84799; CIA Officer #1, FBI 302, 4/19/91, pp. 9-10; CIA
Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 43-50; Fiers, Grand Jury, 4/17/87, pp. 107-13; Fiers, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 102-05.

     Fiers and Officer #1 drove to Rodriguez's quarters at the air base, where Fiers told Rodriguez
that he could not send the plane to Honduras.  Rodriguez said that he had North's permission.
Fiers told Rodriguez  to call North.  Rodriguez dialed North's number, spoke briefly with North,
then handed the phone to Fiers.  Fiers convinced North that the plane could not fly over
Honduran airspace, and North said, ``Okay, give me Felix.''  North cancelled the flight.15

     15 Ibid., pp. 104-05; [Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 4/18/90, p. 10; CIA Officer #1,
Grand Jury, 3/16/90, pp. 52-54; CIA Officer #1, FBI 302, 4/19/91, pp. 9-10; CIA Officer #1,
Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 49-53; Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/3/91, pp. 86-88, 157, 199-210; Chief
#1, Latin American Division (C/LA #1), Grand Jury, 8/28/91, pp. 48-50, 75-77.  North did not
recall the incident.  (North, Grand Jury, 2/8/91, pp. 13-14.)

     Despite North's orders, Rodriguez made one last effort to get his C-130 to Honduras.  See CIA
Subject #1 chapter.

     Fiers had to admit that by this time, that he knew that North had involved Rodriguez in
coordinating NHAO shipments at Ilopango.  Fiers also knew that C-7 Caribous, like the one that
crashed on the highway in El Salvador were linked to Rodriguez and were controlled by private
benefactor Richard Gadd 16 -- and that these planes carried arms when they were not carrying
NHAO goods.  He knew as well that Rodriguez had arranged to bring the C-7s into Ilopango.17

     16 Fiers' knowledge of Gadd is discussed in more detail below.

     17 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 72-73, 99-100; Fiers, Select Committees
Testimony, 8/5/87, p. 13.

     CIA Officer #1 told Independent Counsel that even before the confrontation with Rodriguez,
he and Fiers took  a drive to talk about NHAO operations at Ilopango.  Fiers disclosed that there
would be ``more flights'' similar to the ones Officer #1 was now seeing, flights that Fiers ``would
not handle.''  Fiers told Officer #1 that these new flights would be managed by North, and that
they would be lethal resupply missions.  Officer #1 pressed Fiers to ``get a handle on this;'' Fiers
told Officer #1 not to worry -- that he would ``take care of Ollie North.'' 18  Subsequent to his
meeting Fiers at Ilopango, CIA Officer #1's was ``promoted'' to another post.19

     18 CIA Officer #1, FBI 302, 4/19/91, p. 10; CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 46-49,
53-56.  North's notebook suggests that Fiers discussed the incident with North upon Fiers's return
from Ilopango.  A February 11, 1986 entry reads: ``Fiers -- Why clearing out Ilopango''.  (North
Note, 2/11/86, AMX 955.)

     19 CIA Officer #1, FBI 302, 4/19/91, p. 10.  For an example of a sanitized reference to
Rodriguez, see CIA Cable, 2/14/86, DO 101121.  Fiers admitted to Independent Counsel that he
``probably'' ordered CIA Officer #1 not to mention Rodriguez in cables.  (Fiers, FBI 302,
7/19/91, pp. 3-4.)

     Fiers's ``trouble with Felix'' arose on at least three other occasions.20  Rodriguez was a topic
of discussion at a meeting of senior CIA field officers in May 1986, when Fiers, his new superior
and the field officers attempted to fix once and for all problems associated with  the private
benefactors.21  Fiers's concern regarding Rodriguez was also reflected in a secure phone
conversation with a senior CIA field officer in August 1986.  Fiers said:

     20 After pleading guilty, Fiers disclosed that he discussed security concerns about Rodriguez
with North on several occasions in 1986.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/18/91 AM, p. 2.)  Fiers also revealed
that the RIG discussed Rodriguez, his whereabouts, and his plans to return to El Salvador on
October 8, 1986, in the wake of the Hasenfus crash.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/23/91, p. 9.)

     21 C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 5/8/91, pp. 30-45.  This meeting is discussed in greater detail below.

     [A]pparently, Felix Rodriguez is. . .getting himself out of control and about to get himself and
General Bustillo into . . . trouble. . . .  [I]t appears that . . . Bustillo and Felix Rodriguez took off
from Miami . . . in a C-123K that did not belong to them. . . .  [W]e have checked . . . with
everybody in Washington, including the Vice President's office, and . . . there is no writ
anywhere for Felix Rodriguez in any way to be involved with anything to do with Nicaragua, the
Nicaraguan Resistance or . . . C-123s or C-7s or anything else operating out of Ilopango. . . .
[W]e checked and we've got to try to get [Rodriguez] out of the Nicaraguan pot because he is
really . . . muddying the waters and is going to cause us big problems just at a time when we don't
need them. . . .22

     22 PRT-250 Conversation, 8/6/86.

     Rodriguez also was the center of an August 12, 1986, meeting in Donald P. Gregg's office.
Fiers testified that the meeting focused on Rodriguez's frictions with the private benefactors and
on whether the CIA would purchase the resupply operation's planes.23  The participants
uncomfortably agreed that they would try to work with Rodriguez, and Fiers so informed his
field personnel.24

     23 Fiers later explained that he turned down North's offers of the planes because they were
old, poorly maintained and heavy users of fuel.  Fiers also did not want to ``contaminate'' the
$100 million program with planes that could be traced back to North's program.  (Fiers, George
Trial Testimony, 10/28/92, pp. 1333-34.)

     24 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 120-31.Gadd

     Gadd

     Richard Gadd was the first manager of the North/Secord contra-resupply network.  He also
supervised contracts for deliveries of NHAO aid to Central America.  Fiers admitted he met with
Gadd around February 7 or 8, 1986 -- the same week a private benefactor C-7 aircraft crashed in
El Salvador, and the same time that Fiers had confronted Rodriguez at Ilopango.  Fiers testified
that his meeting with Gadd made him uncomfortable, and that he never met Gadd again.25

     25 Ibid., pp. 82-84.

     According to Gadd, some time in January or February 1986 he received a message from
Secord, who relayed a request from North that Gadd brief a CIA official on air operations at
Ilopango.  Gadd received a phone number of an individual named ``Cliff,'' whom Gadd knew to
be Fiers.26

     26 Gadd, Grand Jury, 10/16/87, pp. 63-64; Gadd, FBI 302, 2/19/91, p. 4; Gadd, Grand Jury,
6/19/91, pp. 5-7.  North did not remember setting up the briefing, but did recall that Fiers and
others were concerned at this time about NHAO money paying for lethal supplies.  (North, Grand
Jury, 2/8/91, pp. 109-12.)

     At Fiers' suggestion, Gadd and one of his employees met Fiers and a CIA annuitant who was
in charge of air logistics for the Central American Task Force.  The annuitant was also the task
force's airlift liaison to NHAO.  They met at Charley's Place, a restaurant near CIA headquarters.
The meeting lasted two to three hours.  Fiers said little, remaining aloof and allowing the
annuitant to do most of the questioning.  Gadd testified that he told both men about his efforts to
airlift guns and ammunition from Europe to Central America, and on into Nicaragua, using
C-123 aircraft.27

     27 Gadd, Grand Jury, 10/16/87, pp. 65-69; Gadd, Grand Jury, 6/19/91, pp. 7-11, 13-15.  Gadd
said in 1991 he was not sure whether Fiers was aware of the NSC's involvement with his
operation.  (Gadd, FBI 302, 2/19/91, p. 4)  In his first Grand Jury appearance, however, Gadd
testified that it was ``clear'' from the circumstances surrounding the meeting that ``Fiers was
aware of North's involvement in all of this.''  (Gadd, Grand Jury, 10/16/87, pp. 69-70.)  Gadd
said, however, that Fiers never mentioned North's name.  (Ibid., p. 70.)  The annuitant, for his
part, gave interviews to Independent Counsel in 1987 and 1988, and never admitted to meeting
with Gadd and Fiers.  (CIA Annuitant, FBI 302, 6/12/87; CIA Annuitant, FBI 302, 2/9/88.)  He
included Fiers in a meeting with Gadd only when pressed, in May 1991.  The annuitant
acknowledged learning that Gadd was involved with lethal Contra resupply efforts, but denied
that he learned it during the February Charley's Place meeting.  (CIA Annuitant, FBI 302, 5/1/91,
p. 7.)  Gadd's associate, John Cupp, could not recall if lethal contra-resupply efforts were
discussed during the meeting.  (Cupp, FBI 302, 3/26/91, p. 4.)

     Fiers later added two details to the Gadd story, first that he had met Gadd alone the day
before, and second, that North had encouraged him to meet with Gadd,  whom North called
``Colonel East.''  North told Fiers that Gadd could be helpful to Fiers in ``running this stuff'' --
meaning contra resupply -- once official aid to the contras resumed.28

     28 Fiers, FBI 302, 7/18/91 AM, p. 5; Fiers, FBI 302, 7/18/91 PM, p. 2; Fiers, Grand Jury,
8/12/91, pp. 168-70.

     The Airstrip

     Joseph F. Fernandez was the CIA's chief of station in San Jose, Costa Rica from 1984 to
1987.  His involvement in the construction and planning of a ``private benefactor'' airstrip near
Santa Elena, Costa Rica, and the effort by the CIA to induce Costa Rican President Luis Monge
to permit construction of the airstrip, are discussed elsewhere in this report.29  The focus of this
section is Fiers's knowledge of what was occurring at Santa Elena.

     29 See Fernandez and Classified CIA Investigation A chapters.

     The first information available to Fiers of private benefactor efforts to build the airstrip
appeared on August 13, 1985, in a cable from Fernandez.  Fernandez informed Fiers that
President Monge had agreed to allow construction of an airstrip, and Fernandez asked Fiers for
guidance on facilitating it.  Fiers responded that Monge's interest in supporting the contras was
``gratifying,'' but he told  Fernandez that the CIA could not be involved in pushing the airstrip.30

     30 SAN JOSE Cable, 8/13/85, DO 189740-38; SAN JOSE Cable, 8/14/85, DO 189743-41;
WASHINGTON 497837, 8/17/85, HC 10; Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/4/87, pp.
264-65.  Fiers later admitted to Independent Counsel that he remembered these cables clearly, but
denied that they contained any hidden instructions to Fernandez.  Fiers assumed that the private
benefactors, perhaps with North's help, would find a way to get the airstrip built.  Fiers also
described discussions during September 1985 with North and Abrams about these cables.  (Fiers,
FBI 302, 7/30/91, p. 14, and Classified CIA Investigation A chapter.)

     At the conclusion of a Senior Interagency Group meeting on February 12, 1986, North
showed photographs of the airstrip, then under construction, to everyone in attendance.  North
did not say that he was building the airfield, but Fiers inferred that he was behind it.  Fiers
thought that North was reckless to show the pictures at such a meeting, and he told North, ``You
ought to keep your mouth shut.'' 31

     31 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 60-61; Fiers, Select Committees
Testimony, 8/4/87, pp. 270-72; Croker, Grand Jury, 9/13/91, pp. 54-57.  Fiers later told
Independent Counsel that the evening of the meeting, he questioned Gadd about the airstrip and
its use.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/30/91, p. 19.)

     In early September 1986, the new President of Costa Rica, Oscar Arias, threatened to expose
the airstrip and its connection to the ``private benefactors.''  Fiers consulted with an extremely
upset North.  At Abrams' request, Fiers called Fernandez.  Fernandez claimed that the situation
had been handled through a CIA asset. The  situation, however, was merely delayed.  On
September 25, 1986, a Costa Rican official revealed the airstrip in a press conference.  According
to a memo to National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter from North, Fiers, Abrams, and
North prepared the false press guidance to cover it.32

     32 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 63-64; Memorandum from North to
Poindexter, Subject:  Press Guidance re Costa Rican Airstrip, 9/30/86, AKW 002131-39.  Fiers
later admitted that this further proved to him that North was closely tied to the private
benefactors.  Fiers also feared that press inquiries about the airstrip would lead to revelation of
North's operation.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 8/1/91, p. 6.)Clines

     Clines

     By February 1986, Fiers knew that Rodriguez, North, and Gadd were engaged in lethal
resupply of the contras.  By April he could add another name to his list:  Thomas Clines.

     Clines was a former CIA officer who had begun working with the Enterprise in 1985 as an
arms purchaser.  On April 28, 1986, CIA personnel in Europe cabled headquarters about business
discussions between Clines and a CIA source concerning a possible shipment of arms from
Portugal, and possibly Poland, along the lines of earlier shipments to the contras.  The cable
reported that the shipment in question was ``directly dependent for time being on successful
passage  of bill in U.S. Congress providing funding support for Nicaraguan `contras.' '' 33

     33 CIA Cable, 4/28/86, DO 187161-60.

     Fiers called North on May 2, 1986.  North's notes state:

      -- Lisbon -- reporting on Clines

      -- Poland -> Honduras

      -- Direct contact w/

      -- People are reporting

     North remembered that CIA stations worldwide were reporting on arms purchases on behalf
of the contras. North testified that Fiers probably called him to brief him on one  report, and to
suggest improvements in the operational security of his program.34

     34 North Notebook, 5/2/86, AMX 1093; North, Grand Jury, 2/8/91, pp. 114-18.  North
recalled receiving calls about the operational security of the resupply operation from others at the
CIA, including Director Casey, deputy directors of central intelligence John McMahon and
Robert Gates, and Clair George.  North recalled that eventually, by agreement with Casey and
George, the reports were ``restricted so that there would not be a widespread dissemination of the
fact that arms were being purchased in foreign countries by specific individuals or by the
resistance. . . .''  (Ibid., p. 115.)  North also said that he ``undoubtedly'' communicated to Secord
that there was a security leak, and may have done so without Fiers's knowledge or consent.
(Ibid., p. 119.)  Someone undoubtedly reported the leak to Clines.  CIA personnel in Europe
reported in June 1986 that the source who had reported the April discussions had received an
``angry phone call'' from Clines warning him to ``stop talking 'to those other people' '' about a
ship Clines had recently purchased.  Clines also reportedly told the source that these ``other
individuals'' were not involved and had no need to know what he was doing, and that he would
no longer do business with the source ``if he could not keep his mouth shut.''  (CIA Cable,
6/19/86, DO 13000-12999.)

     Fiers testified that he spoke to North about Clines, essentially to warn North and his contacts
away from him.35

     35 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, p. 35; Fiers, Select Committees Testimony,
8/5/87, p. 65.

     Advice and Information

     Alan Fiers not only learned about private benefactor activities -- he assisted them.  North's
notebook reveals, for example, a discussion on April 2, 1986, with Fiers concerning Blowpipe
missiles, in which Fiers apparently gave North a source for the missiles and a price.  North
remembered discussing Blowpipes generally with ``a lot of different people,'' possibly including
Fiers.  North testified that information about his search for Blowpipes was ``not the kind of
information I held back from Alan Fiers or any of the other people that I had to deal with.'' 36

     36 North, Grand Jury, 2/15/91, pp. 38-39, 76.  Fiers later admitted these conversations.
(Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 21-22.)

     Fiers assisted the private benefactors by providing them information, such as flight vectors
and clearances, that assisted their air deliveries.37  Much of this assistance  was done indirectly,
and therefore legally.  In one instance, however, Fiers encouraged and perhaps directed a lethal
``private benefactor'' mission to forces that had been promised lethal aid by the CIA.

     37 Fiers would later reveal to Independent Counsel that on Clair George's instructions, he
provided intelligence to North in February 1985 that North intended to pass to the Contras
illegally.  See George chapter.

     The CIA and the Southern Front

     Prior to 1985, the bulk of U.S. Government effort and resources earmarked for the contras
benefited those elements arrayed against the Sandinista regime along Nicaragua's border with
Honduras, on Nicaragua's northern frontier.  By August 1985, officials in the CIA and other
federal agencies had decided that they could press the Sandinistas harder if there were a
politically and militarily viable contra force along Nicaragua's southern border with Costa Rica --
a ``southern front.''

     Prior to August 1985, contra forces along Nicaragua's southern border were commanded by
Eden Pastora, a charismatic ex-Sandinista who enjoyed significant political support in the U.S.
Congress.  The CIA viewed Pastora as a militarily ineffective personality who would not take his
forces out of Costa Rica.  This produced diplomatic friction between the American and Costa
Rican governments.  Further, as evidence mounted that Sandinista spies and drug smugglers had
penetrated Pastora's inner circle, the CIA believed that Pastora had become a security and public
relations risk.  The CIA saw Pastora as a difficult and opportunistic  leader who also did not
share United States objectives for the region.38

     38 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 37-40; Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90,
pp. 59-67; CIA Officer #1, Grand Jury, 5/22/91, pp. 15-16.

     The task of shaping a Pastora-free, viable Southern Front fell primarily to Fernandez.  As
chief of the CIA station in Costa Rica, Fernandez carefully helped neutralize Pastora's influence
among contras who were operating in Costa Rica and persuaded his military commanders to join
the United Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO).39  Fernandez pursued these actions under Fiers'
supervision, and kept CIA headquarters informed of his progress.

     39 UNO was a contra organization under the leadership of Alfonso Robelo, Adolfo Calero,
and Arturo Cruz, Sr.  UNO was created in 1985 under the auspices of the CIA and the State
Department to unify the various elements of the resistance.

     Fiers and Fernandez began planning to separate Pastora's commanders from their leader in the
spring of 1985.  Both viewed the effort as a critical objective for the CIA in the contra war.40
Their plans crystallized in early August 1985.  North noted on August 6, 1985, a call from Fiers
during which they discussed Fiers' plans:

     40 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 40-41; Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90,
pp. 69-70.

      -- Alfonso [Robelo] alone is not enough in South

     * * *

      -- Told Robelo to get in touch w/3 Pastora [commandantes]

     Gonzalez

     Lionel

     Omar

      -- Fold 3 commandantes, into [UNO] 41

     41 North Notebook, 8/6/85, AMX 001305.  North did not recall the specifics of this
conversation, but he admitted that he discussed these kinds of matters regularly with Fiers.
(North, Grand Jury, 1/18/91, p. 40.)

     The next day, Fiers cabled Fernandez with a ``Strategy for the Southern Front.''  Fiers wrote
that ``a cohesive and viable southern front has not evolved'' and that the CIA was ``left with the
problem of trying to develop an alternative organization which could be folded into our overall
objectives.''  CIA headquarters had reached this conclusion in light of ``consensus having
developed that neither we nor [UNO] could work with any confidence with [Pastora].''  The cable
suggested that an effective and complementary course of action would be to ``have [Arturo Cruz,
Jr.] seek out Southern Commanders who we understand to have a positive record (such as
`Ganso,' `Lionel' and `Omar') and begin a dialogue with them on behalf of [UNO] with the
objective of bringing them into the overall effort.'' 42

     42 DIRECTOR 482618, 8/7/85, DO 186312-11.

     Fernandez, who eventually was given responsibility for persuading Pastora's commanders to
abandon him, responded by cable on August 8, 1985.  Fernandez suggested bringing Pastora's
military commanders under Fernando (``El Negro'' or ``Blackie'')  Chamorro, who for much of
1986 served as military commander for the southern front.  Fernandez also concurred in efforts to
wean Pastora's commanders away from him, suggesting that these commanders and other
sympathetic individuals would ``unite with [UNO] once its programs are funded and under way.''
43

     43 Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90, pp. 71-72; SAN JOSE Cable, 8/8/85, DO 181545-41.

     Fiers denied authorizing such activities until after Congress amended its restrictions on aid to
the contras in December 1985, and allowed for expanded political activities in support of the
contras.  On December 31, 1985, Fernandez reported to Fiers that four commanders within
Pastora's organization, known as the ARDE, were ``planning to abandon Pastora and ally
themselves with UNO/FDN'' and Fernando Chamorro.  Fiers responded by asking Fernandez for
a plan to contact the dissidents, whom CIA officers would later dub the ``Newly Aligned
Commanders'' or ``NACs.'' 44

     44 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, p. 41; SAN JOSE Cable, 12/31/85, DO
100930-29; DIRECTOR 676529, 1/3/86, DO 10336.

     Supporting the NACs

     The success of the CIA's effort to enlist dissident Pastora commandantes in the UNO/FDN
cause depended in large part on the acquisition and delivery of lethal and non-lethal support to
them.  The CIA provided communications equipment  and training for the NACs as permitted by
law.  This alone, however, would not have drawn the NACs into the field.  As plans were made
in early February 1986 to move these forces into southern Nicaragua, it became a priority for the
CIA to get supplies to them.  The NACs and Fernando Chamorro were promised support, both
lethal and non-lethal, to enter southern Nicaragua.45

     45 Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90, p. 73; SAN JOSE Cable, 2/4/86, DO 100961.

     Two CIA paramilitary officers testified that Fernandez authorized CIA officers to promise
support to the NACs to induce them to join UNO.46  Rafael Quintero, a former CIA operative
who helped coordinate ``private benefactor'' activities in Central America, also testified that
Fernandez made such promises to the NACs.47  Other  evidence -- most notably from North and
Robert Owen 48 -- indicates that North and others promised lethal support to the NACs during
this period.

     46 [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 6/5/87, pp. 21-22; [Classified Identity
Withheld], Grand Jury, 4/13/88, p. 14.  These officers and a third paramilitary officer also
testified that Fernandez ordered them to provide training (permitted by law) in map reading and
drop site selection for the southern forces.  The third paramilitary officer, who arrived in San
Jose in August 1986, essentially chose drop sites for Enterprise resupply drops with Fernandez's
knowledge.  The third officer knew that private sources were supplying the arms, but he assumed
the activities were authorized by CIA headquarters.  ([Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury,
1/20/88, pp. 34-36; [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 4/13/88, p. 20; [Classified
Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 6/5/87, pp. 26-27.)   Fernandez admitted only to authorizing
training.  (Fernandez, Grand Jury, 12/19/90, pp. 6-9.)  He also denied authorizing his
subordinates to promise aid to the NACs.  (Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90, pp. 82-83.)

     47 Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 105-6.

     48 North, Grand Jury, 2/8/91, p. 46; Memorandum from TC [Owen] to BG [North], 2/10/86,
p. 1 (``Once [Chamorro's] column reaches its destination, they will request a large amount of
goods and they have been promised they will get what they need'').

     Confirmation of CIA offers of lethal support also came from Fernando Chamorro.  In
February 1986, Chamorro, on instructions from Fernandez, traveled to Washington, D.C.  He met
with a ``Mr. Cliff.''  (Fiers's cover name was Cliff Grubbs.)  ``Mr. Cliff'' congratulated Chamorro
on the unification of the southern troops with UNO and reaffirmed promises of increased
assistance.  Chamorro was told that in terms of arms, whatever Chamorro thought was necessary,
``he would receive.'' 49

     49 Chamorro, FBI 302, 11/17/87, p. 4.

     Fiers admitted that he encouraged CIA officers and others to lead the NACs to believe that
Fiers would do whatever was possible under the law to support them if they left Pastora.  The
NACs were to be offered communications equipment, humanitarian aid, and an equal share of
U.S. weapons once Congress had resumed aid to the contras.  Fiers also testified that he twisted
Adolfo Calero's arm to get the FDN to release weapons from FDN stocks for the NACs, and that
he spoke with North about the Southern Front's need for  arms -- knowing that North might be
able to influence Calero.50

     50 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 42-49.

     CIA cables and other evidence from early 1986 establish that, to seal the NACs' allegiance to
UNO, the Central American Task Force actively promoted non-lethal airdrops, and later, lethal
missions to them.  Soon after the NACs' defection, Fiers informed the San Jose station that the
task force wanted to ensure that the NACs received ``some demonstrable material benefit as a
result of their decision,'' and noted that NHAO had authorized money and other aid to the NAC
forces.  Fiers pushed for a NHAO drop to the southern forces that was accomplished on March 6,
1986.51

     51 DIRECTOR 684429, 1/9/86, DO 10392; Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90, p. 94.
According to Fernandez, these drops had to be in Nicaragua because the CIA ``felt that if [the
NACs got] their supplies inside Costa Rica, they might never go back into Nicaragua.  So we put
the carrot out there and let them go.''  (Ibid., p. 95.)  Fiers explained his rationale by cable: [W]e
do not view [Pastora] in vicious or malicious terms, but rather see him as a tragic figure, who for
multiple reasons. . .is incapable of a positive contribution.  It is also important to point out that
supplies will be made available to FRS [contra] units in the field via NHAO, if they (the unit
commandantes) so request.  (FYIO [For Your Information Only]: specific plans to this end are
being made.) DIRECTOR 677959, 1/4/86, DO 84690.

     Despite having received humanitarian aid, Fernando Chamorro complained that the U.S.
Government had abandoned  its commitments to the NACs, who by that time had been in
southern Nicaragua for a month without having received fresh ammunition or other lethal
supplies.  Chamorro had attempted to arrange for an airdrop sponsored by the FDN, the contra
organization in Honduras, to the southern forces on March 7 or 8, 1986, only to have the mission
scrubbed by the FDN, Fernandez, and U.S. Ambassador to Costa Rica Lewis Tambs.

     On March 11, 1986, Fernandez informed Fiers that Chamorro's forces had established a
secure drop zone in southern Nicaragua.  Fernandez also reported that the NACs had made an
``urgent request'' for ammunition.  Headquarters replied, suggesting that a ``list of items needed
be obtained and sent through UNO secure commo net and drop of ammunition be arranged
through UNO/FDN.'' 52

     52 SAN JOSE Cable, 3/11/86, DO 11405; Fernandez, Grand Jury, 11/19/90, pp. 127-28;
DIRECTOR 776030, 3/13/86, DO 11467.

     On March 15, 1986, Fiers directed Fernandez and other CIA personnel in Central America to
assist a drop of lethal supplies by UNO/FDN to the NACs.  By this time, according to CIA field
reports, Chamorro and the NAC forces had received the March 6 NHAO drop and were dividing
it among themselves.  Fernandez related that the UNO/South leadership had given priority to a
lethal drop, noting that the NACs were ready to receive supplies at their secure drop zone.  Fiers
responded:

     1. Note [your cable] planning to expedite ammunition resupply for [Southern] forces.  Hqs
views this as positive step to expand NAC forces.  If the ammunition drop can be made with the
UNO/FDN aircraft it will go a long way toward promoting UNO/FDN/FARN unity.

     2. Suggest this drop be expedited by the FDN to speed up the development of NAC forces and
[CIA field personnel] assist as appropriate.

     By this cable, Fiers instructed Fernandez and other CIA personnel in Central America not
only to encourage an FDN drop to the NACs, but to make sure that it happened.53

     53 SAN JOSE Cable, 3/13/86, DO 100977; DIRECTOR 780844, 3/15/86, DO 11534; Fiers,
Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, p. 18.

     Handwritten notes by Fiers on cables received by CIA headquarters during late March-early
April 1986 urged headquarters personnel to move ahead with plans for a drop of supplies.54

     54 SAN JOSE Cable, 4/1/86, DO 101154-53.

     A Lethal Mission for the Southern Front

     Three events prompted North and Secord to stage its first aerial delivery of supplies to the
southern front on the night of April 11, 1986, after the CIA was blocked from a lawful means of
delivery.

     The first development came in Congress.  On March 20, 1986, the House of Representatives
rejected the  Reagan Administration's request for 100 million dollars for contra aid.

     The second event was the imminent collapse of the newly formed NAC alliance, a collapse
fueled in part by private American donors.  Pastora vied with the CIA and UNO for the NAC
commanders' allegiance throughout January-May 1986.  In early March 1986, Pastora traveled to
Washington and was received by the State Department.  He returned to Costa Rica insisting that
he would be receiving supplies from the U.S. Government.  The Central American Task Force
assured a worried Fernandez that, although the State Department had met with Pastora, ``no
commitments were made to support him or his troops.''  In a separate communication, the task
force ``strongly'' suggested that a

     message be sent to Newly Aligned Commanders . . . alerting them to rumors being circulated
by [Pastora], and setting the record straight.  They should be made aware that as soon as some
basic operational problems are resolved they will be receiving further supplies from UNO, rpt
[repeat] UNO.55

     55 DIRECTOR 772442, 3/11/86, DO 11375; DIRECTOR 773931, 3/11/86, DO 100976.

     Soon after Pastora's trip, retired Army Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub traveled to Costa Rica.
During his visit Singlaub met with Pastora and attempted to negotiate an agreement with him,
purportedly on behalf of the United States.  Word of a Singlaub-Pastora agreement stoked the
already tense competition for the NACs and momentarily gave the advantage to Pastora.  Shortly
after hearing about the agreement, Fiers cabled Fernandez and other CIA personnel in Central
America that Singlaub's actions did not reflect a new posture toward Pastora, and that the NACs
should be reminded that any and all U.S. support would come through UNO.  Fiers also wrote
that in view of Singlaub's ``agreement,''

     it is more crucial than ever that we maintain our commitment to the NAC's and that the
required drop be made at the absolutely first possible opportunity.  Recognizing aircraft
problems, request [CIA personnel in Central America] ensure that [the FDN] understands
urgency and assigns proper priority to this mission.56

     56 AMEMB SAN JOSE 0144, 3/27/86, ALV 5011-12; DIRECTOR 799822, 3/28/86, DO
10799.  Fernandez testified that the drop to which Fiers referred was the lethal drop contemplated
by the FDN.  (Fernandez, Grand Jury, 12/19/90, p. 48.)

     Despite Fiers' efforts, news of the Singlaub-Pastora accord spread quickly through the NAC
coalition.  UNO/FARN commander Ramon and NACs Lionel and Oscar threatened to march
back towards the Costa Rican border if they did not receive the arms they were promised as soon
as possible.  Moreover, Franklin and Navigante -- the NAC commanders most loyal to Pastora
and most skeptical of their UNO/FDN brethren in the north -- informed other NACs that they
remained allied with Pastora's ARDE.  In short, in the days  immediately preceding North's lethal
resupply mission, the nascent southern front was teetering.57

     57 Fernandez, Grand Jury, 12/19/90, p. 55; SAN JOSE Cable, 4/1/86, DO 101154-53.

     The third event that forced a private benefactor drop to the NACs was UNO/FDN's inability
to stage its own mission.  CIA personnel in Central America reported on April 1, 1986, ten days
before North's mission, that the FDN had scheduled a drop to the NACs on April 3, using an
FDN-owned DC-3 aircraft.  The proposed route would have taken the FDN aircraft twice over
Costa Rican air space.  It also called for landing at the San Jose international airport if the
mission had to abort.58

     58 CIA Cable, 4/1/86, DO 11714.

     Fernandez objected that any flight that crossed Costa Rican air space would violate American
assurances to President-elect Arias.  Fernandez also argued that the route would make the flight
vulnerable to detection by Sandinista radar and anti-aircraft fire.  Fernandez suggested an
alternative route.59

     59 SAN JOSE Cable, 4/2/86, DO 11741.

     CIA headquarters agreed and directed other CIA personnel in Central America to change the
route. In response, CIA field personnel reported that the FDN's airplane was having mechanical
problems, and that the FDN flight crew was too inexperienced to fly the prescribed  route.  Angry
and concerned, Fernandez cabled headquarters and his Central American colleagues:

     UNO/South is currently making arrangements with sources other than FDN for a smaller
resupply drop utilizing a C-123 aircraft which will be able to fly the preferred route mentioned
previous traffic.  That drop is tentatively scheduled for the week of 6 April.  In the event that
[Calero] cannot assist and if San Jose cannot be assured that DC-6 will follow flight plan
recommended believe that [FDN] drop should be held in abeyance until further notice.

     The FDN mission was scrapped and the FDN's pre-packed load of lethal materiel designated
for the NACs remained in Honduras.60

     60 DIRECTOR 809755, 4/3/86, DO 101156; CIA Cable, 4/4/86, DO 11782; SAN JOSE
Cable, 4/5/86, DO 101158 (emphasis added); CIA Cable, 4/7/86, DO 101159; Fernandez, Grand
Jury, 12/19/90, p. 52.

     The North-Secord Enterprise resupplied the NACs by air within a week by commandeering an
aircraft in Ilopango under NHAO contract. A Southern Air Transport L-100 under contract to the
private benefactors -- which had delivered NHAO supplies to Ilopango from the United States --
dropped a mixed load of arms and non-lethal supplies to the NACs on the night of April 11,
1986.

     Fernandez, North, and Secord were the moving forces behind the L-100 mission.  The most
direct evidence of Fiers' involvement in the drop was a KL-43 message, one  written a few days
before April 9, 1986.  In this message North informed Secord that he had briefed Fiers on the
L-100 flight and secured Fiers's approval for the mission.  The message states:

     The unit to which we wanted to drop in the southern quadrant of Nicaragua is in desperate
need of ordnance resupply.  We had planned to do a material drop from the supplies we are
bringing into Ilo Pango [sic] but the units -- headed by [NACs] Ramon, Lionel and Navigante
cannot wait.  Have therefore developed an alternative plan which Cliff [Fiers] has been briefed
on and in which he concurs.  The L-100 which flies from MSY [Miami] to Aguacate on
Wednesday should terminate it's [sic] NHAO mission on arrival at Aguacate.  At that point it
should load the supplies at Ilo Pango which -- theoretically [CIA Subject #1] is assembling today
at Aguacate -- and take them to Ilo Pango.  These items should then be transloaded to the C-123
after being properly rigged.  On any night between Wednesday, Apr 9, and Friday, Apr 11 these
supplies should be dropped by the C-123 in the vicinity of 11 22 15N and 84 18 00W -- SSE of
Nueva Guinea.  The A/C shd penetrate Nicaragua across the Atlantic Coast shouth [sic] of
Monkey Point.  Call signs freqs and zone marking light diagram to be provided to Ralph
[Quintero] at Ilo Pango by the new UNO Sur operator we are taking care of.  Hope we can make
this happen the right way this time.  If we are ever going to take the pressure off the northern
front we have got to get this drop in -- quickly.  Please make sure that this is retransmitted via
this channel to Joe [Fernandez], Ralph, Sat [Southern Air Transport] and [the US military group
commander in El Salvador, Colonel James] Steele.  [Robert] Owen already briefed and prepared
to go w/ the L-100 out of MSY if this will help.  Please advise soonest.

     North, Fiers, and Abrams' calendars show that the three of them met at 3:00 p.m. on April 4,
1986, and at 4:30 p.m. on April 10, 1986.  North's calendar and schedule cards show that he met
with Fiers alone on April 8, 1986, at 4:30 p.m., and that he met with Fiers alone at the CIA at
9:00 a.m. on April 11, 1986 -- the morning after a first failed attempt to drop lethal supplies to
the NACs.  The meeting also was on the heels of a request by Secord that North learn whether
there was intelligence indicating that the Sandinistas knew of the attempted drop.61

     61 KL-43 Message from Secord to North, 4/11/86, AKW 4413; Fiers, Select Committees
Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 91-92; Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/4/87, pp. 271-72.  North
claimed not to remember either briefing Fiers on the mission or writing the KL-43 message.
North did not dispute the message, however.  (North, Grand Jury, 2/8/91, p. 94.)

     By April 13, 1986, the CIA had published news of the L-100 drop to other U.S. government
agencies.  Fernandez cabled CIA headquarters with word of the drop's success on April 12, and
sent an elated KL-43 message to North at midnight that same day.  The drop had the desired
effect on the NACs.  Shortly after the drop, Fernando Chamorro met with NAC leaders and
convinced them to resume negotiations with UNO.  By the end of May, the NACs publicly
announced an agreement to align themselves with UNO under Chamorro.  Meanwhile, Pastora
had turned himself in to Costa Rican authorities and had applied for political  asylum -- thereby
ending his military influence.62

     62 CIA Intelligence Cable, 4/12/86, DO 101167; SAN JOSE Cable, 4/16/86, DO 12126; CIA
Intelligence Cable, 4/29/86, DO 100997; CIA Intelligence Cable, 5/7/86, DO 101012; SAN
JOSE Cable, 3/15/86, DO 12637.

     Fiers's Effort to Insulate Fernandez

     Continuing from April to October 1986, Fernandez passed intelligence directly to Rafael
Quintero, Secord's Central American representative.  To remove himself from direct contact with
the resupply operation, Fernandez began working to place a UNO/South representative at
Ilopango air base as a liaison between the resupply operation and UNO/South.  Although this
plan was ultimately rejected by Fiers -- and although Fernandez continued to pass information
directly to Quintero without informing headquarters -- Fiers learned enough between April and
July 1986 to know that Fernandez was in direct contact with the private resupply network in
1986.

     Fernandez first announced his plan to place a UNO/South communicator at Ilopango on April
8, 1986.  Ultimately, it was decided that the UNO/South communicator would be housed and
would use radio equipment provided by the ``private benefactors.'' 63

     63 SAN JOSE Cable, 4/8/86, DO 11890; SAN JOSE Cable, 7/10/86, ANT 3729-30.

     At least one senior CIA official learned that Fernandez was involved in passing information
directly to the benefactors in April 1986.  C/LA #2, who was to become Chief of the CIA's Latin
American Division and Fiers' direct superior on May 1, 1986, visited San Jose in April.
Fernandez and C/LA #2 were friends.  Shortly after C/LA #2 arrived, Fernandez told him this
about his contacts with the resupply operation:

      -- he was passing intelligence to the private benefactors to facilitate the delivery of supplies,
including guns and ammunition, to the southern front;

      -- he had not previously told headquarters about these activities;

      -- North had introduced him to the private benefactors;

      -- he communicated with the private benefactors by ``communications gear'' used in
conjunction with the telephone and manufactured by TRW;

      -- he had received this gear [a KL-43 device] from the private benefactors; and

      -- at the request of Ambassador Tambs, he was monitoring the construction of an airfield that
was being paid for and would be used by the private benefactors.64

     64 C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88, pp. 15-31; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 5/8/91, pp. 15-24.

     C/LA #2 expressed concern and promised to look into the situation when he returned to
Washington and to provide guidance.  C/LA #2 remembered more than one meeting after his
return in which he discussed Fernandez's predicament with Fiers.  He did not tell Fiers about the
mysterious  ``communications gear'' obtained by Fernandez, but he told Fiers everything else.65

     65 Ibid., pp. 25-31; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88, pp. 24, 36-42; Fernandez, Grand Jury,
11/19/90, pp. 131-32.  C/LA #2's calendar shows meetings with Fiers on May 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12
and 13, 1986.  Fiers denied C/LA #2's account.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/19/91, p. 14.)

     C/LA #2 and Fiers agreed that Fernandez's direct contacts with the private benefactors were
contrary to CIA policy.  They believed that the solution was to place a UNO/South
communicator at Ilopango, and to inform Fernandez of this decision personally at a regional
conference of senior CIA officers later in May 1986.  C/LA #2 and Fiers presented their proposal
to Fernandez as planned, provoking a wider discussion among the senior CIA field officers in
attendance about Fernandez's contacts with the private benefactors.  C/LA #2 and Fiers directed
the officers to help place the UNO/South communicator at Ilopango.66

     66 C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88, pp. 45-52; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 5/8/91, pp. 31-46;
[Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 3/24/87, p. 2; DIRECTOR 830033, 4/16/86, DO 12111;
Fernandez, Grand Jury, 12/19/90, pp. 70-76.  Only one officer who attended the May 1986
meeting, CIA Subject #1, failed to recall the discussion of Fernandez's contacts with the private
resupply operation.  (CIA Subject #1, Grand Jury, 6/5/87, pp. 65-66.)  Fernandez recalled that
Quintero's name came up during the meetings, as the officers joked about Quintero's arranging a
delivery of pizza to the private benefactors at Aguacate.  (Fernandez, Grand Jury, 12/19/90, p.
106.)  For his part, Fiers testified before cooperating with the Government that C/LA #2 did not
speak with him upon C/LA #2's return from his April 1986 trip, and that the first he heard of
Fernandez's situation was at the May 1986 meeting.  (Fiers, Select Committees Deposition,
5/1/87, p. 114; Fiers, Grand Jury, 4/17/87, pp. 116-19, 126.)

     By July 10, 1986, the arrangements were complete and were reported to the CATF.  It was
only then that Louis Dupart, the task force compliance officer and a lawyer, decided that the plan
took the CIA too close to the line drawn by the Boland Amendment restrictions on contra aid.
Dupart persuaded Fiers that the move was politically and legally risky, and that the CIA could
not be involved in any effort to place a contra liaison to the private benefactors at Ilopango.
Dupart and Fiers informed the field of their decision on July 12, 1986.  Fiers assured C/LA #2
that the contras would place the communicator on their own.67

     67 Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 66-71; DIRECTOR 959273, 7/12/86, DO 169558; C/LA
#2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88, pp. 61-63; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 5/8/91, p. 63.

     Fiers knew as early as May 1986 that Fernandez had passed information directly to the
``private benefactors.'' No one at the CIA -- including Fiers -- disclosed this information to any
congressional committee in October 1986, when questioned about CIA contacts with the private
resupply network.

     Fiers's Request for North's Financial Assistance

     Fiers joined one last attempt in July 1986 to use North's private resupply operation after the
House of Representatives approved an Administration-backed effort to provide the contras with
$100 million in assistance.  By May 1986 it was clear to some that ``bridge financing,'' until the
contras would eventually receive aid from the U.S. Government, would be necessary.  A
computer message from North to Poindexter indicates that Fiers and Abrams turned to North for
some of this aid.

     All seriously believe that immediately after the Senate vote the [contras] will be subjected to a
major Sandinista effort to break them before the U.S. aid can become effective.  PRODEM
[Project Democracy] currently has the only assets available to support the [contras] and the CIA's
most ambitious estimate is 30 days after a bill is signed before their own assets will be available.
This will be a disaster for the [contras] if they have to wait that long.  Given our lack of
movement on other funding options, and Elliot/Allen's plea for PRODEM to get food to the
resistance ASAP, PRODEM will have to borrow at least $2M to pay for the food.  . . . The only
way that the $2M in food money can be repaid is if CIA purchases the $4.5M worth of PRODEM
equipment for about $2.25M when the law passes.68

     68 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 7/24/86, AKW 021735 (emphasis added).  Fiers
later admitted to Independent Counsel that he and Abrams had sought aid from ``Project
Democracy.''  (Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 72-76.)  Fiers said that North had approached him
about this time with an offer to sell the private benefactors' planes to the CIA, (Fiers, FBI 302,
7/19/91, p. 18); and that Fiers had pleaded with several senior CIA officials in July 1986 to keep
a CIA detailee to the NSC, Vincent Cannistraro, away from the ``private sector people'' with
whom North was dealing.  (Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, p. 59.)

     North tried to enlist the CIA in extricating himself from ``private benefactor'' operations; he
sought the Restricted Interagency Group's (RIG's) advice as well.  In at least one RIG meeting
prior to October 1986 -- meetings that Fiers attended -- North exposed his role in private
assistance to the contras, with such detail that Fiers had a comprehensive understanding of his
activities.69

     69 Fiers later corroborated North's general account of these discussions.  (Fiers, FBI 302,
7/22/91, p. 14; Fiers, FBI 302, 8/2/91, pp. 9-10.)  For further discussion of these meetings, see
Abrams Chapter.

     Exposure

     The Hasenfus Crash

     Fiers' control of Central American issues for the CIA extended beyond management of
regional operations.  Fiers also had a unique command of the CIA's relationship with Congress
on Central American affairs throughout 1985 and 1986.  The Task Force was not subject to the
same control by the CIA's Office of Congressional Affairs (OCA) as other Agency units, but
despite (or perhaps because of) this autonomy, relations with the Hill were positive.  Members of
Congress admired Fiers and his ability to give them details of Central American operations.
Fiers was the one to whom Congress turned when it wanted answers about the specifics of the
Nicaragua program.  As a result, Fiers spent hours speaking with people from the Hill.  It was a
task that he enjoyed.70

     70 Fiers, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/8/87, pp. 18-19, 22; C/LA #2, Grand Jury,
4/29/88, pp. 72-73; Memorandum for DCI & DDCI, Subject: Meeting with VADM Poindexter,
13 November, 1700 Hours, 11/12/86, ER 27230; Pearline, FBI 302, 3/4/91 302; Memorandum
re:  HPSCI Request for a Briefing on Downed Cargo Plane, 10/9/86, DO 112485; Fiers, Select
Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, p. 60; Gries, FBI 302, 4/9/91, p. 2.

     Fiers was more than a knowledgeable mouthpiece on Central America.  He was politically
astute, something which earned him credit at Agency headquarters but which sometimes
frustrated those in the field.  Fiers's chief political interest beginning in late 1985 was persuading
the Congress to let the CIA back into the ``resistance game'' -- that is, appropriate funds to the
CIA so that the Agency could support and better influence the contras.71

     71 Fernandez, Grand Jury, 12/21/90, p. 89; Fiers, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/8/87, pp.
21, 27, 60; Fiers, Grand Jury, 4/17/87, pp. 79-85; Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87,
pp. 171-72; Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 20-21; Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87,
pp. 16-17.

     Fiers worked hard to persuade Congress to support President Reagan's 1986 proposal to
appropriate $100 million in contra aid.  His chief contribution to this effort was demonstrating
that the Agency was abiding by the law.  Fiers underestimated the delays.  Both Fiers and CIA
field officers promised supplies to the contras in anticipation of renewed aid, but they could not
deliver.  Efforts to demonstrate compliance were thus redoubled.72

     72 Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, pp. 192-93; Dupart, Grand Jury, 3/15/91, pp.
11-13.

     Eventually the House approved the $100 million aid package on June 25, 1986, but the final
steps toward enacting the package came slowly.  The October 5, 1986, crash of the Hasenfus
C-123 could not have occurred at a more inopportune time.

     The Hasenfus crash unleashed chaos in the Central American Task Force.  The Task Force
spent the Monday following the crash, and most of the rest of the week, scrambling for
information.  Matters were made worse on Tuesday, October 7, when Nicaragua announced that
the plane had CIA backing.73  That same day a staff member of the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) called the CIA to seek the identities of the private
benefactors.  Fiers equivocated about the cargo of the Hasenfus plane -- despite having received
specific cables on the subject -- and denied knowing who sponsored the flight:  ``I can assure you
that we won't touch any of that stuff, we have come too far to commit political suicide.''  Later, to
another HPSCI staffer, Fiers stressed that he was trying ``to be as up front as possible and we
don't want to hide any information from anybody.'' 74

     73 Dupart, FBI 302, 2/19/91, p. 2; Strother, FBI 302, 3/8/91, pp. 4, 6-7.

     74 Ibid.; Memorandum to Fiers, Subject: Request from HPSCI Staffer Giza, 10/7/86, DO
166462; Memorandum for the Record by Strother, Subject: Request from Dick Giza, 10/7/86,
DO 166472-71; Memorandum for the Record by Strother, Subject:  Telephone Call from Steve
Berry, 10/7/86, DO 166474-73; CIA Cable, 10/6/86, DO 101228; SAN JOSE Cable, 10/6/86,
DO 101254-52; DDO Duty Officer, FBI 302, 4/30/91.  Fiers later told Independent Counsel that
he read DO 101228 late on the afternoon of October 6, 1986.  He also admitted talking with
North, who said that the Hasenfus plane was one of his and that he was dismantling his
operation.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/22/91, pp. 10-11.)  Fiers admitted that his aim during this period
was to protect North and not disclose his knowledge of North's operation.  (Fiers, FBI 302,
7/30/91, pp. 5, 8.)

     The controversy continued.  Director Casey and Deputy Director Gates briefed ranking
members of HPSCI and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) on October 9, only
to have one member say he was ``shaken'' by the disclosures.  HPSCI met on the morning of
October 9 to hear House Speaker Tip O'Neill report that the Hasenfus crash was ``mysterious
still.''  The Chairman of HPSCI, Rep. Lee Hamilton, decided that he would call the CIA for a
briefing.  Likewise, the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations told the CIA that it wanted a
hearing the next day about the crash, the history of the Central America covert-action program,
and CIA compliance with the law.75

     75 Lugar, SCFR Hearing, 10/10/86, p. 44; Durenberger, SSCI Hearing, 12/9/86, pp. 22-23;
HPSCI Session, 10/9/86, pp. 3-5, 23; Memorandum for EPS/LG by Randolph, Subject: HPSCI
Request for a Briefing on Downed Cargo Plane, 10/9/86, DO 112485; Memorandum for the
Record by Rice, Subject: SFRC Briefing -- Airplane Crash in Nicaragua, 10/9/86, DO 169160.

     CATF was told that it would be responsible for putting a statement together for Deputy
Director Gates.  The deputy chief of CATF cabled all Central American personnel for
information about their contacts with the Hasenfus crew and Hasenfus's press statements about
CIA contacts.  Another CATF officer contacted a senior CIA officer in Central America by
secure phone to learn his knowledge of Felix Rodriguez.76

     76 Ibid.; CIA Cable, 10/9/86, DO 177158.  The Task Force officer who spoke with the senior
officer, who was identified as CIA Officer #2 in U.S. v. George, did not recall telling Fiers about
his conversation or the cable summarizing it, which arrived around 6:00 p.m.  (CATF Officer,
FBI 302, 6/6/91, pp. 11-12.)

     Fiers ordered Dupart, who was on leave, back to the office.  Fiers told him, ``[T]his is it.  This
is what you were hired for,'' and instructed him to prepare testimony and a briefing book.  Fiers
later left to join Casey, Clair George (who had replaced Gates as the lead witness for the
Agency), and David Gries from the Office of Congressional Affairs about the next day's
testimony.77

     77 Dupart, FBI 302, 2/1/88, pp. 8-9; Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 39-40; Dupart, FBI 302,
2/19/91, pp. 3-4; Casey Schedule, 10/9/86, ER 379; George, FBI 302, 3/11/91, p. 5.

     Dupart worked into the night.  In his draft, the CIA categorically denied direct or indirect CIA
involvement in ``private benefactor'' operations.  The statement acknowledged only that the
Agency had passed intelligence legally to the contras, who may have passed the information to
private groups that aided deliveries of supplies.78

     78 Dupart, FBI 302, 2/1/88, pp. 8-9; Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, p. 43; Dupart, FBI 302,
2/19/91, pp. 6-7; DDO's Opening Statement, ANT 1779-82.

     The rest of the story of Dupart's draft testimony is treated elsewhere.79  After drafting the
testimony, Fiers and George joined Abrams to appear before the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee at 10:11 am on October 10, 1986.  George read from his opening statement that the
CIA ``has not been involved directly or indirectly in arranging,  directing, or facilitating resupply
missions conducted by private individuals in support of the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance.''
``Not only do we wish to share what we know with all the members of the Senate,'' said George,
``but this is very critical testimony for us because there is some question as to our legal behavior.
We want to share with you the frank, open facts, because it is not anything that we want to have
hanging over our head at any moment, that we broke the law in our performance in Nicaragua or
Central America.'' 80

     79 See George chapter.

     80 George, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Testimony, 10/10/86, pp. 16, 29-31, 51-52.

     Fiers remained silent throughout George's opening statement.  The Committee chairman asked
Fiers at the end of George's statement whether Fiers had ``anything additional, or are you in
support of Mr. George's testimony?''  Fiers replied:  ``That's it.  Yes.'' 81

     81 Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, pp. 90-91; Fiers, Senate Foreign Relations
Committee Testimony, 10/10/86, p. 31.

     Fiers and George repeated their false testimony and disavowals on October 14, 1986, this time
before HPSCI.  The next day, Fiers briefed Sen. John Kerry, two Senate foreign relations staff
members, and later Sen. Edward Kennedy on the contras -- again denying CIA complicity in
resupply activity.  Fiers' aim in these briefings, like the  ones before them, was to head off an
effort by Sen. Tom Harkin to stop the $100 million aid package.82

     82 Memorandum for the Record by Dorn, Subject:  Briefing for Senator Kerry, 10/16/86, DO
166519-18; Dupart Notes, ANT 01783-89; Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 45-48, 110-11;
Dupart, Grand Jury, 3/15/91, pp. 56-73; Memorandum by Buckman, Subject:  Briefing for
Senator Kennedy, 10/15/86, ER 28571.

     Fernandez

     Fiers' efforts to persuade Congress that the CIA had no involvement with the private
benefactors succeeded.  On October 17, 1986, Congress released the $100 million contra-aid
package.  In the wake of this vote, Fiers traveled with an interagency group to Central America,
where he learned that Fernandez had been in telephone contact with the private benefactors since
the regional meeting in May 1986.  Returning to Washington on October 23, Fiers informed
C/LA #2 of the news, but not Dupart.83

     83 132 Cong.Rec., No. 144, at H 11068, S 16638; Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 48-49;
C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88, pp. 73-77; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 5/8/91, pp. 61-63.

     Fernandez returned to Washington for consultations on Saturday, October 25.  The following
Monday, Fernandez met with C/LA #2 about the private benefactors.  C/LA #2 learned for the
first time in this meeting that the ``communications gear'' that Fernandez told him about in April
was a KL-43 encryption device.  Fernandez described the device as National Security Agency
issue, and said that he got it from North.  Fiers may have joined this meeting late; in  any event,
C/LA #2 understood that Fiers would talk to George and continue discussions with Fernandez.
Fernandez returned to San Jose two days later.84

     84 Ibid., pp. 69-71, 79-84; Dupart, FBI 302, 2/1/88, pp. 4-5; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88,
pp. 77-93; Fernandez, Grand Jury, 1/4/91, pp. 39-40; SAN JOSE Cable, 10/30/86, DO 22949.

     Unaware that the Fernandez situation was about to compromise his work as the CATF's
compliance officer, Dupart penned a memorandum on November 4, 1986, in which he boasted of
the task force's responses to Congress in the wake of the Hasenfus crash.  Two days later Dupart
traveled to San Jose to explain the new contra-aid rules, only to learn from Fernandez that he had
been in contact with the private benefactors since early 1986.  ``Shocked'' by this information,
Dupart instructed Fernandez to report the matter to headquarters by special cable.85

     85 Dupart, FBI 302, 2/19/91, pp. 7-8; Memorandum for General Counsel by Dupart, Subject:
The Compliance Process and the Crash of the Private Benefactors C-123 Transport Aircraft,
11/4/86, DO 169157-58; Dupart, FBI 302, 4/3/87, pp. 4-5; Dupart, FBI 302, 2/1/88 302, p. 5;
Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 51-58; Dupart Notes, ANT 1790; Fernandez, Grand Jury,
1/4/91, pp. 42-44.

     Dupart returned to Washington on November 10.  Dupart advised Fiers privately of what he
had learned from Fernandez.  He warned Fiers that the CIA had to correct its October testimony
before Congress.  Fiers was surprised by Dupart's reaction, and claimed he never ``perjured''
himself.   Dupart told Fiers that perjury was not the issue, but rather, frank disclosure.86

     86 Dupart, Grand Jury, 4/27/88, pp. 62-63; Dupart, FBI 302, 2/1/88, p. 6; Dupart, FBI 302,
2/19/91, pp. 7-8; Dupart Notes, ANT 1790.

     Despite Dupart's warning, Fiers did not take any steps to correct the testimony until November
26, the day after North was fired and after Attorney General Edwin Meese III announced the
diversion to the contras of profits from the Iran arms sales.  On November 26, Fiers, C/LA #2,
and George met to discuss what to do about the Fernandez matter.  After the meeting, C/LA #2
wrote a memorandum to George about his involvement with the Fernandez/private benefactor
issue, and recommended review by the CIA's inspector general.87

     87 Memorandum for the DDO by C/LA #2, Subject:  Possible Impropriety in San Jose,
11/26/86, DO 62341-39; C/LA #2, Grand Jury, 4/29/88, pp. 100-01; C/LA #2, Grand Jury,
5/8/91, pp. 89-91.  Fiers later disclosed that George directed that C/LA #2's memorandum
fabricate an account of a meeting on November 10, 1986, that never happened.  See George
chapter.

     On December 4, NBC broadcast the connection between the pilots of the Hasenfus flight and
``Tomas Castillo,'' Fernandez's alias.  The next day HPSCI asked the CIA to respond to NBC's
allegations -- triggering the CIA's first admission to HPSCI that the October 1986 testimony had
been incorrect.88  On December 9, 1986, Fiers told SSCI that Fernandez had been in contact
with private benefactor  Quintero.  Fiers stated that he discovered the matter in a conversation
with Fernandez in late October.  Sen. David Durenberger asked Fiers:  ``Are there any other
incidents like that that you want to leave with us today?''  Fiers replied:  ``No, no, no.  That's the
one.'' 89

     88 Dupart, FBI 302, 4/3/87, p. 4; Dupart, FBI 302, 2/1/88, p. 10.

     89 Fiers, SSCI Testimony, 12/9/86, pp. 30-32.

     Official Inquiries

     During 1987, Fiers began admitting that he knew more about North's involvement in contra
resupply than he had disclosed previously.  For example, Fiers admitted that he knew that North
and Fernandez talked often about the contras.  Fiers acknowledged that he had a general sense in
1985-86 that North had a relationship with Secord, and that Secord was involved in contra
weapons purchases.  He also admitted that North tried to sell the CIA Enterprise assets.90

     90 Fiers, Grand Jury, 4/10/87, pp. 30-31, 39-40, 45-46; Ibid., 4/17/87, pp. 175-78.

     Fiers had a tougher time explaining his efforts with respect to the southern front and his
knowledge of Felix Rodriguez.  About the former, Fiers gradually gave a more complete account
of the May 1986 regional meeting, where he ``really developed an understanding of this whole
private benefactor program. . . .''  In answer to the question, ``Did you ever during this period of
'85 and '86 have reason to believe that the private benefactors or individuals within the  private
benefactors had received information generated by the CIA,'' Fiers said, ``I had no hard reason to
believe it but I also wouldn't have doubted it.''  Fiers also admitted to a hazy memory about the
Costa Rican airstrip, North's showing pictures of the airstrip, and North and Fernandez's role in
the ``flap'' over the airstrip's exposure.91

     91 Fiers, Grand Jury, 4/10/87, pp. 38-45; Ibid., 4/17/87, pp. 118-130, 156-71, 179-80; Fiers,
Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 56-57.

     Fiers denied, however, that he had promised southern front commanders lethal aid, or that he
authorized subordinates to do so.  He did acknowledge discussing the southern front and its
problems with North, ``within the context of legislation'' and in deciding whether to deal with
Eden Pastora.  Fiers denied asking North to try to find a way to supply the front, as well as prior
knowledge of or briefings on the April 1986 L-100 flight.  Fiers did describe in May 1987,
however, how the CIA passed flight vectors via Fernandez to what he believed was UNO/South,
attributing these activities to being ``a little too far forward leaning'' in anticipation of renewed
U.S. funding.92

     92 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 43, 47, 49, 108-13; Ibid., 5/11/87, pp.
12-17; Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, p. 21.

     Fiers could not square his previous testimony about North with what he knew about
Rodriguez.  Fiers admitted that he first became aware of Rodriguez's relationship with North and
Ilopango in December 1985.  Fiers also admitted  to his confrontation with Rodriguez at Ilopango
in early 1986, and eventually divulged the phone call to North.  From this Fiers admitted that he
had concluded that Rodriguez was keeping North informed of the private benefactor operation at
Ilopango and that North was influencing it through Rodriguez.  Fiers also admitted to attending
the August 1986 meeting in Donald P. Gregg's office concerning Rodriguez.93

     93 Fiers, Select Committees Deposition, 5/1/87, pp. 71-72, 100-06; Fiers, Grand Jury,
4/17/87, pp. 107-16, 120-27.

     When it came time to appear before the Iran/contra Committees, Fiers was clearly prepared to
answer questions about his and George's testimony of October 14, 1986.94  Fiers acknowledged
that he intentionally remained silent before HPSCI on that day, but denied that it was because he
knew of Fernandez's problems.  Fiers was less prepared, however, to talk about other false
testimony such as his responses to Sen. David Boren in December 1986 to a question of his
knowledge of any involvement by persons associated with the U.S. Government in resupply
activities.  Fiers could say only that he had been ``exposed'' and ``nervous'' during his testimony.
As for questions about North, Fiers said that he had been ``cutting some very tight corners'' and
was ``technically correct, specifically evasive'' in October 1986.95

     94 Fiers had earlier defended this testimony in a Select Committees deposition, arguing that
his answer about ownership of private benefactor planes was literally true.  Fiers, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/11/87, pp. 42-44.

     95 Fiers, Select Committees Testimony, 8/5/87, pp. 59-63, 80, 121-22, 116-17.

     The Fiers Plea and Cooperation

     Count One of the criminal information to which Fiers pleaded guilty charged Fiers with
withholding information concerning his knowledge of the diversion of funds from the Iran arms
sales to the contras during a November 25, 1986, briefing of SSCI.  Fiers had claimed that the
first time that he had heard of the diversion was from a Cable News Network broadcast of
Meese's November 25, 1986, news conference, and that he was aware of no official above him in
the CIA hierarchy who was aware of this information.96

     96 Information, United States v. Fiers, Crim. No. 91-0396 (D.D.C. July 8, 1991). Fiers' guilty
plea was obtained by Deputy Independent Counsel Craig A. Gillen and Associate Counsel
Vernon L. Francis and Michael D. Vhay.

     As he admitted in 1991, Fiers knew that these statements withheld material information from
Congress because North had given him information about the diversion on two occasions in
1986, and because Fiers communicated this information to his superiors.  Fiers reported these
contacts to his superiors, and purposely avoided telling SSCI about them during his November
25, 1986 briefing.

     In Count Two of the information, Fiers was charged with concealing his knowledge of North's
resupply operation from HPSCI, during this exchange:

     [MR. CHAIRMAN]:  You don't know whose airplane that was?

     [MR. George]:  I have no idea.  I read -- except what I read in the paper.

     [MR. CHAIRMAN]:  I understand, but you don't know?

     [MR. FIERS]:  No, we do not know.

     [MR. CHAIRMAN]:  There are a number of planes that take off there to supply the Contras
regularly.  You don't know who they are?

     [MR. FIERS]:  We know what the planes are by type, we knew, for example, there were two
C-123s and two C-7 cargoes. . . .  We knew in some cases much less frequently that they were
flying down the Pacific air corridors into southern Nicaragua for the purposes of resupply, but as
to who was flying the flights and who was behind them we do not know.

     [MR CHAIRMAN]:  And you still don't?

     [MR. FIERS]:  No.

     These statements withheld Fiers's actual knowledge about the operations and sponsorship of
the resupply flights.  Fiers was aware generally from November 1984 through November 25,
1986, that North was actively involved in coordinating lethal assistance for the contras.  Fiers
coordinated CATF activities with North to facilitate North's efforts.  As a result, Fiers became
aware by February 1986 that North was involved specifically in coordinating flights carrying
lethal supplies to the contras from Ilopango air base in  El Salvador.  This knowledge was
reinforced throughout 1986 in a variety of meetings and conversations, some solely between
Fiers and North, others attended by other Government officials.

     After pleading guilty, Fiers spent over 100 hours reviewing documents and notes, recounting
events to FBI agents and the Grand Jury, and preparing himself for trials.  Information obtained
from Fiers contributed significantly to Independent Counsel's investigation of Iran/contra,
particularly his investigation of the activities of the CIA, the Department of State, and the RIG on
Central America.  Fiers gave critical evidence against Clair George, and would have been a major
witness against Elliott Abrams had Abrams not pleaded guilty.  At the cost of alienating those
with whom he worked, Fiers broke the conspiracy of silence within the Reagan Administration
that concealed the widespread high-level support for North's illegal contra resupply activities.

Chapter 20

     United States v. Joseph F. Fernandez

     The beginning and end of the case against Joseph F. Fernandez were unprecedented.  The
indictment of Fernandez represented the first time that a CIA chief of station had been charged
with crimes committed in the course of his duties as a CIA officer.  The dismissal of Fernandez
derived from the first and only invocation by the attorney general of his power to prohibit the
introduction of classified information at trial.  As a result, Independent Counsel was deprived of
the opportunity to demonstrate at trial the crucial role Fernandez played in the contra resupply
operation run by Lt. Col. Oliver L. North and retired U.S. Air Force Major General Richard V.
Secord, as well as the extent to which Fernandez tried to obstruct the inquiries of official
investigative bodies attempting to learn the facts of the Iran/contra matter.

     The Fernandez Indictments

     Fernandez was originally charged in a five-count indictment returned on June 20, 1988, by a
federal Grand Jury sitting in the District of Columbia.  Fernandez was accused of conspiring with
North, Secord and others to defraud the United States, obstructing an investigation by the Tower
Commission, and making false statements.  The indictment alleged that the conspirators deprived
Congress of its  ability to oversee the operation of covert actions pertaining to Nicaragua by
establishing and running a military support enterprise which was unaccountable to the CIA and,
in turn, to Congress.  By operating outside of prescribed channels, Fernandez prevented those
with oversight authority from monitoring activities that were at the heart of congressional
concern regarding Central American policy.1

     1 Indictment, U.S. v. Fernandez, No. 88-0236 (D.D.C. June 20, 1988).

     The activities undertaken by Fernandez -- most at a time when the CIA was forbidden from
``participation in the planning or execution of military operations'' or ``participat[ion] in logistics
activities integral to such operations'' -- included:  (1) participation in the planning and
construction of an airstrip in Costa Rica to serve the contra resupply operation; (2) mobilization
of a contra fighting force on the southern front through inducements of lethal resupply; and (3)
coordination of the southern front resupply effort.  When questioned about these activities in
early 1987 by investigators working separately for the Tower Commission and the CIA's
inspector general, Fernandez made false statements regarding his relationship with North and
Secord, the origin of the Costa Rican airstrip, and his involvement in and knowledge of the
resupply operation.

     The indictment alleged that the conspiracy took place within the District of Columbia and
elsewhere, and that the obstruction and false statements occurred in the Eastern District of
Virginia where Fernandez had been questioned.  Independent Counsel properly presented the
combined charges to a Grand Jury sitting in the District of Columbia, and following return of the
indictment, Fernandez spent several months making various motions to dismiss it.  It was only
after litigating for three months that Fernandez moved to dismiss four of the counts on grounds
of improper venue.  In response, Independent Counsel moved to dismiss the entire indictment
without prejudice, in order to avoid separate indictments in two separate districts for crimes that
were entirely connected.  Independent Counsel's motion was granted on October 19, 1988.

     On April 24, 1989, as the North trial was ending, Fernandez was indicted by a Grand Jury
sitting in the Eastern District of Virginia.2  In an effort to avoid the issues under the Classified
Information Procedures Act that had plagued North, Independent Counsel did not seek the return
of the conspiracy charge contained in the District of Columbia indictment.  This was consistent
with Independent Counsel's decision on January 13, 1989, to dismiss similar conspiracy charges
in North.

     2 Pre-trial and trial proceedings in Fernandez were supervised by Associate Counsel Laurence
S. Shtasel, Geoffrey S. Stewart, and Geoffrey S. Berman.

     The four-count Virginia indictment charged that during a three-week period in January 1987,
Fernandez made false and misleading statements to two official investigative bodies -- the CIA's
Office of Inspector General and the Tower Commission -- that were examining the facts
surrounding the Iran/contra affair.  These statements created a distorted picture of Fernandez's
activities in support of the contras during the time of the Boland Amendment prohibitions on
U.S. aid.  More specifically, the indictment alleged that Fernandez made these false statements:

     1. That the airstrip was a Costa Rican initiative, rather than an initiative of Fernandez, North,
Secord and others;

     2. That the airstrip was designed to help defend Costa Rica from a Nicaraguan invasion, rather
than to support the resupply of the contras;

     3. That Fernandez's contacts with Rafael Quintero, a member of the North-Secord ``private
benefactor'' network, were limited to the occasions of the resupply flights, rather than including
their work together on the airstrip and other projects;

     4. That Fernandez did not know that North was involved in the resupply operation, when in
fact the two worked closely together on this project; and

     5. That Fernandez did not know that the supplies he had assisted in delivering to the contras in
September 1986 contained weapons and ammunition, when in fact Fernandez knew that they
were.3

     3 Indictment, U.S. v. Fernandez, No. CR89-0150-A (E.D.Va. Apr. 24, 1988).

     Independent Counsel further sought to prove that Fernandez endeavored to obstruct these
investigations by making these and 25 other misleading statements (13 to the Inspector General
and 12 to the Tower Commission) pertaining to:

     1. His involvement with the airstrip;

     2. His dealings with the resupply operation;

     3. His relationship with North; and

     4. His contacts with Felix Rodriguez, a representative of North and Secord in El Salvador.

     Summary of the Evidence

     From mid-1985 through October 1986, while the Boland Amendment prohibited the CIA
from supporting military and paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by the contras, Fernandez
played a crucial role in an effort spearheaded by North and Secord to provide lethal support to the
contras.  Fernandez's activities for the North-Secord operation centered largely on two
interconnected activities.  Both of these projects focused on developing a contra ``southern front''
along the Costa Rica/Nicaragua border that would complement contra forces arrayed to the north
along the Honduras/Nicaragua border.4

     4 Fernandez admitted to the Tower Commission that opening a southern front was his ``one
mission'' received from the newly appointed U.S. ambassador to Costa Rica, Lewis Tambs, in
July 1985.  (Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 8-12.)  Tambs was
knowledgeable of many of Fernandez's activities set forth in this chapter, especially those
concerning the airstrip at Santa Elena, discussed later in this section.  (See also Classified
Investigation A, set forth in the Classified Appendix to this Report, which describes Tambs'
involvement in a possibly illegal quid pro quo to Costa Rican President Luis Monge to induce the
Costa Ricans to permit construction of the airstrip.)

     Independent Counsel concluded in November 1987 to go forward with a case against
Fernandez in hopes of eventually using Fernandez as a witness.  The demise of Boland
conspiracy charges in North in January 1989 and Independent Counsel's subsequent decision not
to seek conspiracy charges in the second indictment of Fernandez ended Independent Counsel's
plans to prosecute other conspirators. Tambs later voluntarily testified in Independent Counsel's
investigation.  See History of Investigation chapter.

     First, beginning in August 1985, Fernandez assisted North, Secord and others in building a
refueling airstrip at Santa Elena in remote northwest Costa Rica that was designed to facilitate
aerial resupply of the contras.  Second, throughout the first nine months of 1986, Fernandez
worked closely with Rafael Quintero, North and Secord's representative in Central America, both
in building the airstrip and in coordinating the actual resupply flights that delivered weapons,
ammunition and supplies to contra troops along the Southern Front.

     Both of these efforts were designed to encourage the contras in northern Costa Rica to move
back inside Nicaragua and resume fighting the Sandinistas.  Fernandez  urged contra leaders,
directly and through CIA field personnel, to take up this struggle and induced them by promising
lethal and non-lethal supplies.  In the words of one CIA paramilitary officer, Fernandez
authorized provision to the contras of everything from ``beans to bullets'' if they would
re-infiltrate Nicaragua and provide a military counterpoint to the contras to the north.5  Having
made these assurances, Fernandez worked closely with Quintero and North to follow through
with their plans to construct an airstrip and resupply contra forces in the south.

     5 [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 6/5/87, pp. 21-25.  See also [Classified Identity
Withheld], OIC Deposition, 5/28/87, pp. 41-46, 49-51; [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand
Jury, 4/13/88, pp. 14-18.

     The Airstrip

     In August 1985, Fernandez began assisting efforts to construct an airstrip to be used as an
emergency landing strip and refueling point for contra-supply aircraft making the long round trip
from Ilopango, El Salvador, to the southern front.  Because the aircraft could not fly over
Nicaragua, they flew off-shore along the Pacific coast to the  Costa Rican border, then along the
border to drop sites just inside Nicaragua.6

     6 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 9, 12-14; SAN JOSE Cable, 8/8/85,
DO 181545-41; SAN JOSE Cable, 8/13/85, DO 189740-38; SAN JOSE Cable, 8/14/85, DO
101720-19.

     Fernandez sent two CIA paramilitary officers to northwest Costa Rica to locate an appropriate
site for the strip.  The officers surveyed a potential location at Santa Elena and reported to
Fernandez that it was a feasible site.7  During the fall of 1985, Fernandez also consulted with
Robert Owen, a representative of North, both to design an overall strategy for the southern front
and to obtain permission from Coast Rican officials to construct the airstrip.8

     7 [Classified Identity Withheld], OIC Deposition, 5/28/87, pp. 25-26, 52-54; [Classified
Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 10/13/87, p. 3.

     8 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 14-15; Owen, Grand Jury,
11/13/87, pp. 52-58; Owen, North Trial Testimony, 2/27/89, pp. 2446-47 and 3/1/89, pp.
2705-07; Memorandum from TC [Owen] to BG [North], 8/25/85; [Classified Identity Withheld],
OIC Deposition, 5/28/87, pp. 23-24, 29.

     Also during the fall of 1985, Fernandez worked with William Haskell, an associate of North
and Secord, who ultimately purchased land for the airstrip on behalf of Udall Corporation, a
company established by Secord.  Fernandez traveled to the airstrip site with Haskell and provided
assistance to Haskell's efforts.9  In January 1986, Haskell introduced Fernandez to Quintero, who
took over the coordination of the airstrip project at Secord's request.10

     9 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 16-17; Quintero, FBI 302,
11/13/87, p. 10; [Classified Identity Withheld], OIC Deposition, 5/28/87, pp. 24-25; Haskell, FBI
302, 7/6-7/87, pp. 4-6.

     10 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 16-17; Quintero, FBI 302,
11/13/87, p. 10; Quintero, FBI 302, 11/23/87, p. 4; Quintero, North Trial Testimony, 3/2/89, pp.
2916-17.

     In January 1986, Quintero and Fernandez traveled to inspect the site for the airstrip; after this
trip, Fernandez modified the layout of the airstrip to accommodate the swampy terrain.11  During
the next three months, Quintero made numerous trips to Costa Rica to oversee construction of
the airstrip.  Fernandez explained to Quintero that Congress was expected to reverse its prior
prohibition on CIA military support for the contras and the airstrip was, therefore, being built in
anticipation of renewed funding for CIA contra-support efforts.  Fernandez stated that the object
was to have the airstrip ready by the time Congress changed its course.12  Some months later,  in
the spring of 1986, Quintero learned that Congress had rejected renewed funding for the contras.
When Quintero raised this issue, Fernandez announced that the airstrip project and the
contra-resupply operation would continue nonetheless.13

     11 Ibid.

     12 Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, p. 95.  In his November 1987 interviews, Quintero attributed
this explanation for the airstrip to Secord.  (Quintero, FBI 302, 11/13/87, pp. 10-11; Quintero,
FBI 302, 11/23/87, p. 4.)

     13 Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, p. 96.  See also KL-43 Message from Secord to North,
6/6/86, ALU 003835 (asking North to ``light a fire'' under Fernandez to get increased guard
protection for the airstrip).

     The airstrip was completed, although it proved to be less significant in the resupply operation
than was originally expected.  The landing strip would get muddy after a rain, and on one
occasion a plane got stuck there.14  While Fernandez would later assert that the purpose of the
airstrip was to provide defensive support to Costa Rica in the event of an invasion by Nicaragua,
this purported objective was a cover story.  An airstrip built for these reasons would have been
redundant, since the U.S. Army's Southern Command maintained its own airport, with a paved
airstrip, only one hour's drive from Santa Elena.  In fact, Fernandez told U.S. Army Lt. Col. John
Taylor, head of the U.S. Military Group in Costa Rica and a man who had  unwittingly
discovered the airstrip, that it was Fernandez's project.15

     14 Quintero, FBI 302, 11/13/87, pp. 12-13; Quintero, FBI 302, 11/23/87, pp. 15-16;
Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 25-26.

     15 Taylor, FBI 302, 1/30/89, p. 5.  See also KL-43 Message from Secord to Dutton, 7/29/86,
0360-61 (proposing that Dutton negotiate with Fernandez ``re future use'' for airstrip); Galvin,
FBI 302, 6/13/87, pp. 3-4 (Southern Command unaware of purpose for airstrip).

     The Resupply Operation

     During the first nine months of 1986, Fernandez spent considerable time coordinating the
resupply of weapons and ammunition to the contras along the southern front.  Through the use of
a KL-43 -- a National Security Agency communication device supplied to Fernandez by North --
Fernandez was able to send encoded messages over the telephone to Quintero and North about
the supply needs of the contras, flight path information, coordinates for specific air drops, and the
overall plan for the enhancement of the southern front.16

     16 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 52-56; Quintero, FBI 302,
11/13/87, p. 14; Quintero, FBI 302, 11/23/87, pp. 5-6; KL-43 Message from Fernandez to North,
3/3/86, AKW 004421; KL-43 Message from Secord to North, 4/9/86, AKW 004416; KL-43
Message from Fernandez to North, 4/12/86, AKW 004410; KL-43 Message from North to
Fernandez, 4/15/86, AKW 004409.  See also messages cited in n.16 below.

     From January through September 1986, Fernandez communicated with those overseeing the
North-Secord operation.  Telephone records reveal hundreds of calls between Fernandez and
North and Quintero.  During calls with Quintero, Fernandez would provide material
requirements of the contras (including weapons lists) and would dictate locations for air drops.
On a number of occasions, Fernandez postponed or cancelled scheduled drops.17

     17 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, pp. 33-34; Quintero, FBI 302,
11/13/87, pp. 13-14.  See also these KL-43 messages, all of which involve Fernandez or which
report on conversations with Fernandez:  Secord to North, 3/24/86, AKW 004419 & 004424;
Secord to North, 4/9/86, ALU 003840; Secord to North, 4/16/86, AKW 004408; Secord to North,
4/23/86, AKW 004403; Quintero to Secord, 4/23/86; Secord to North, 5/2/86, AKW 004401;
Secord to North, 5/12/86, ALU 003834; Secord to North, 6/2/86, AKW 004393; Secord to North,
7/11/86, 00371; Quintero to Secord, 7/16/86, 00367; Steele to Earl, 8/18/86, 00342; Fernandez to
Quintero, 9/2/86, 00308-09; Dutton to Quintero, 9/9/86, 00413; Quintero to Dutton, 9/10/86,
00410; Fernandez to Quintero, 9/10/86, 00414; Dutton to North, 9/17/86, 00423; Fernandez to
Quintero, 9/17/86.

     To improve the efficiency of the resupply operation, Fernandez used CIA field personnel.
Beginning in August 1986, Fernandez relied on a CIA paramilitary officer to ``get the job done.''
18  Fernandez would tell the officer to determine coordinates for a drop on a designated date.
The officer would then evaluate the best site for the drop, then give the drop coordinates, call
signals and bonfire  configurations to Fernandez, who would pass this information to Quintero.19

     18 [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 1/20/88, pp. 27-28, 40-41.

     19 Ibid., pp. 29-40; SAN JOSE Cable, 12/7/86, DO 166532.  On one occasion, Fernandez had
the paramilitary officer bring a map bearing drop site coordinates to his home to show to
Quintero.  ([Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 1/20/88, pp. 48-50, 58; Quintero, FBI
302, 11/13/87, p. 15.)

     Despite Fernandez's later statements that he was a mere conduit for information,20  Fernandez
clearly played an important role in shaping the strategy for the southern front.  Fernandez's
principal goal was to link the southern front forces with contra troops to the north.  Fernandez
indicated that he wanted to use systematic placement of air drops to create northward movement
of the southern front units.21  Following the first successful lethal air drop in April 1986,
Fernandez sent a KL-43 message to North that stated in part:

     20 See, for example, SAN JOSE Cable, 12/7/86, DO 166532; Inspector General Notes,
1/11/87, ER 8820; ``Ex-CIA Agent is Bitter Over Iran Affair,'' The New York Times, 11/27/89,
p. A31.

     21 [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 4/13/88, pp. 8-19.

     Our plans during next 2-3 weeks includes [sic] air drop at sea for UNO/KISAN [contra]
indigenous force area Monkey Point, maritime deliveries NHAO [humanitarian] supplies to
same, NHAO air drop to UNO South, but w/ certified air worthy aircraft, lethal drop to UNO
South, Negro [Chamorro] visit to UNO South Force with photogs, UNO newspapers, caps and
shirts, and transfer of 80 UNO/FARN recruits now in Costa Rica carrying all  remaining cached
lethal materiel to join UNO South Force.  My objective is creation of 2,500 man force which can
strike northwest and link-up with quiche to form solid southern force.  Likewise, envisage
formidable opposition on Atlantic Coast resupplied at or by sea.  Realize this may be overly
ambitious planning but with your help, believe we can pull it off.22

     22 KL-43 Message from Fernandez to North, 4/12/86, AKW 004410.

     The need for secrecy regarding Fernandez and North's roles in the resupply operation was
emphasized in a KL-43 message from North to Fernandez in June 1986:

     We are committed to commencing drops to FDN [contras] by C-7 tomorrow night but can
delay for one night to do your drop if we can get the necessary info for the pilots.  To facilitate,
have asked Ralph [Quintero] to proceed immediately to your location.  I do not think we ought to
contemplate these operations without him being on scene.  Too many things go wrong that then
directly involve you and me in what should be deniable for both of us.23

     23 KL-43 Message from North to Fernandez, 6/16/86, AKW 004389.

     As a result of Fernandez's efforts, resupply operations had improved greatly by September
1986.  During that month alone, six successful lethal air drops were made along the southern
front.24  The resupply operation came to an abrupt halt in early October 1986, however, when a
private  benefactor plane carrying, among others, Eugene Hasenfus, was shot down over
Nicaragua.

     24 SAN JOSE Cable, 9/10/86, DO 72985; SAN JOSE Cable, 9/15/86, DO 73134; SAN JOSE
Cable, 9/30/86, DO 77565.

     Investigation and Obstruction

     In the aftermath of the downing of the Hasenfus aircraft, Fernandez took steps to erase records
of his relationship with North and Quintero.  In the Fall of 1986, Fernandez approached Eva
Groening, a State Department employee working at the U.S. Embassy in San Jose, and instructed
her to remove from the general files all records of his telephone calls.  Groening isolated
Fernandez's telephone records -- which documented the hundreds of calls to North and Quintero -- and placed them in a personal safe.  When Groening completed her tour in Costa Rica, she did
not take these records with her.25

     25 Groening, FBI 302, 1/6/89, pp. 1-3.

     Some months after Fernandez arranged to have his telephone records removed from their
proper place of storage, Independent Counsel requested these records from the Embassy.  They
could not be located. The Costa Rican telephone company provided the records to Independent
Counsel in August 1988.  At trial, these records would have demonstrated that there was frequent
contact between Fernandez and North, and Fernandez and Quintero -- particularly at the times of
attempted resupply flights.

     The downing of the Hasenfus airplane and the exposure of secret sales of arms to Iran sparked
two official  investigations, both of which sought in part to examine the role of the CIA in these
operations.  One investigation was made by the CIA's inspector general; the other was by the
President's Special Review Board, the Tower Commission.

     In January and February 1987, Fernandez was interviewed on several occasions by both of
these bodies.26  During these interviews, Fernandez gave false and misleading answers on
matters at the core of the investigations.  Fernandez provided inaccurate information about his
involvement with the airstrip, insisting that it was a Costa Rican initiative to help defend against
a Nicaraguan invasion.  Fernandez stated that he dealt with Quintero only on the occasions of
resupply flights, failing to mention his numerous contacts with Quintero in connection with the
construction of the airstrip.  Fernandez claimed that he did not know that North had been
involved in the resupply network, despite the fact that he had worked with North closely on this
very project for nine months.  Fernandez also asserted that he did not know that the supplies that
he had assisted in delivering to the contras in September 1986 were lethal.  Fernandez further
denied having ever communicated with Secord -- even though he had met  with Secord, Quintero
and Costa Rican Security Minister Benjamin Piza in March 1986 to discuss the airstrip -- or Felix
Rodriguez, even though Fernandez had several conversations with him about the resupply
operation.27

     26 Fernandez was interviewed by Tower Commission staff on January 21, 1987.  Fernandez
testified to the Commission on January 28, 1987.  Fernandez was interviewed by the CIA's
Office of Inspector General on January 11, January 24, and February 2, 1987.

     27 Inspector General Notes, 1/11/87, ER 8820-25; Inspector General Notes, 1/24/86, ER
8826-36; Inspector General Notes, 2/2/86, ER 8792-98; Black, Grand Jury, 5/13/88, pp. 9-11,
13-24; Fernandez, Tower Interview, 1/21/87, ALU 3818-20.

     At the time Fernandez was initially questioned by CIA and Tower Commission investigators,
neither Fernandez nor the investigators knew that on some occasions, messages transmitted by
the KL-43 machine were printed and retained.  Fernandez thus believed that no permanent record
of his extensive, ongoing relationship with North and Quintero existed that would disprove his
denials of involvement with either the airstrip or the resupply operation.  When some of the
KL-43 messages were discovered by Tower Commission investigators, Fernandez was forced to
concede that he had been untruthful in his responses.  On January 28, 1987, Fernandez admitted
to the Tower Commission that he had been ``less than candid or even misleading'' in his
answers.28  Fernandez told the Commission  he was ``stunned'' when he was shown written
copies of his KL-43 messages.29  That led to this exchange:

     28 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, p. 5.

     29 Ibid., pp. 3-4.  See also Fernandez, Tower Interview, 1/21/87, ALU 3821-26; Bruh, FBI
302, 10/2/87, p. 2 (Fernandez admitted, ``You have me and my career is ruined!'').

     General Scowcroft:  That stunned you in what way?  That they existed?

     Mr. Fernandez:  Yes, that they existed -- not in the sense that I was -- in the way that the
communications between Colonel North and I and Mr. Quintero and I, who was Colonel North's
I guess representative, although never defined in that way, were things that were written on this
machine.  It was all in digital.  There were no hard copies -- see hard copies -- of things.  It was
sort of  startling because, up until that time, I had been recalling everything I had said from
memory.30

     30 Fernandez, Tower Commission Testimony, 1/28/87, p. 4.

     Pretrial Proceedings

     In both the District of Columbia and Virginia proceedings, Fernandez made a number of
motions to dismiss the indictments.  All of the motions that Fernandez directed at the legal
sufficiency of the charges that were adjudicated were denied.

     As in North, the most significant legal issues raised by Fernandez concerned immunity
granted him by Congress in return for his testimony and the protective requirements of Kastigar
v. United States, 406 U.S. 441, 458 (1972), and his demands for classified information.  While
the court had little difficulty disposing  of Fernandez's Kastigar challenge, Fernandez's CIPA
claims ultimately resulted in dismissal of the case.

     Kastigar

     Fernandez argued from the start that his prosecution was barred by Kastigar because he had
provided testimony to Congress under a grant of immunity. Judge Claude M. Hilton of the
Eastern District of Virginia adopted procedures proposed originally by the District of Columbia
court and ordered the Government to submit in camera and ex parte an explanation of
Independent Counsel's measures to insulate the Fernandez case from Fernandez's immunized
congressional testimony.31  After reviewing the Government's papers, Judge Hilton concluded
that there had been no violation of Kastigar.32

     31 Ibid., pp. 22-23; Memorandum Opinion and Order, Fernandez, slip. op. at 4-5 (E.D. Va.
June 15, 1989).

     32 Order, Fernandez (E.D. Va.  June 15, 1989); Memorandum Opinion and Order, Fernandez
(E.D. Va.  July 10, 1989).  Unlike North and Poindexter, Fernandez did not give his immunized
congressional testimony in open, nationally televised hearings, but in executive session. Thus,
dissemination of his immunized testimony was much more limited and therefore posed less of a
problem for the trial judge.  (Ibid., pp. 5-6.)

     Classified Information (CIPA)

     Relevancy Hearing

     Fernandez filed notices under the Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA) on May 24,
June 23, July 3, and July 7, 1989, that identified the classified information he proposed to
disclose at trial.  The district court conducted hearings on the notices on July 10, 13, and 14,
1989.  On the first day of hearings, over the Government's objection, the district court ruled
orally and without written opinion that two broad categories of classified information were
material to Fernandez's defense:  the operational details of three highly sensitive projects in Costa
Rica, none of which was described or implicated by the indictment or was in any way a part of
the Government's case-in-chief; and the identity of three CIA stations or facilities in Central
America.

     Fernandez argued that he had to introduce documents showing highly classified operational
details of the three projects in order to demonstrate the fear of the Costa Rican government of the
military threat posed by Nicaragua.33  Fernandez contended that Costa Rica's concern about
Nicaragua, in turn, supported the truth of his statement to the CIA's inspector general that the
Santa Elena airstrip -- an entirely separate project -- too was a Costa Rican initiative to protect
itself.  The court ruled that evidence establishing the origin, purpose, development and
magnitude of these programs was admissible.34

     33 Defendant's Second Notice Pursuant to Section 5 of CIPA, Fernandez (E.D. Va.  July 3,
1989).

     34 Transcript, Closed CIPA Hearing, Fernandez, 7/10/89, pp. 48-50.

     The second category of classified information deemed relevant to Fernandez's defense
involved the identity of three specific CIA facilities and stations, all of which remain classified.
Fernandez argued it was critical that he show the understanding of CIA headquarters and
high-ranking CIA officials of the activities of the North-Secord contra-resupply operation.
Fernandez argued that the knowledge of CIA officials about these activities made it less probable
that he would have lied intentionally about these subjects.  The district court determined that
Fernandez could identify these stations and facilities.35

     35 Ibid., pp. 34-40.

     Rejection of Substitutions

     On July 12, 1989, Independent Counsel moved under CIPA for substitutions for the classified
information deemed relevant to Fernandez's defense by the trial court.  Along with its motion,
Independent Counsel filed affidavits by Assistant Attorney General Edward S.G. Dennis, Jr., and
two intelligence officials, which stated that the three projects  could not be disclosed without
serious injury to national security.  They similarly stated that official acknowledgement of the
existence of the three disputed CIA facilities would adversely affect national security.36

     36 Affidavit of Assistant Attorney General Edward S.G. Dennis, Jr., Fernandez (E.D. Va.
July 12, 1989); Declaration of Deputy Director for Operations of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Fernandez (E.D. Va.  July 12, 1989); Declaration of [Classified Identity of Agency Director
Withheld], Fernandez (E.D. Va.  July 12, 1989).

     The Government's first proposed substitutions addressed Fernandez's evidence of the three
projects in Costa Rica.  The court rejected the Government's initial proposal on July 13, 1989 --
the day after it was offered.  The court acknowledged that ``[w]e are not talking about details.
We are not talking about trying these programs.''  Nevertheless, the court insisted that Fernandez
could ``introduce into evidence the fact that they did have other serious ongoing programs.'' 37
In the court's view, ``hard core programs that really shows [sic] that America is doing something
other than talking'' went directly to Fernandez's defense that the Costa Ricans wanted American
involvement with the airstrip.  The court suggested that an adequate substitution would show
``that there were three or four other specific, substantial programs going on at the same time'' as
the airstrip.38

     37 Transcript, Closed CIPA Hearing, Fernandez, 7/13/89 p. 74.

     38 Ibid., p. 76.

     The Government broadened its proposal on July 14, 1989.  The text of the Government's
revised substitution is set forth in the Classified Appendix to this Report.  The revised
substitution conceded, that ``Fernandez, as well as other United States Government officials,
provided support for these specific projects,'' and that ``[a] substantial amount of Fernandez's
time during his tenure as Chief of Station'' was spent working on them.  The Government was
also prepared to concede that the projects

     were all fully discussed in cables and in face to face meetings between . . . Fernandez and CIA
Headquarters.  Once it was determined that . . . Fernandez, as well as other CIA personnel, would
participate in these projects, there was ongoing communication between the Costa Rica Station
and Headquarters regarding the implementation, functioning and success of these projects.
During the period 1984 through 1986, over forty cables -- providing background, operational
details, mutual concerns and the results of these important projects -- were exchanged between
Fernandez and senior CIA officers at Langley, Virginia.

     * * *

     During the period late-1984 through 1986, CIA Headquarters at all times was informed of,
and approved, Fernandez's role in these projects.  Fernandez's immediate superior was consulted
extensively about his work, and senior officers were also familiar with Fernandez's work on these
projects.

     The day that the Government offered the revised substitution, the district court rejected it.
The court  ruled that it did not adequately disclose the instigation and magnitude of the programs;
that, having been charged with lying about the airstrip operation, Fernandez would be permitted
to show ``there were three operations that were set up which . . . were set up in the same kind of
way, that shows how they were done, the purpose for doing them, who instigated them, and for
what purposes.  And also the magnitude of them.''  To do this, Fernandez would be permitted to
prove ``any and all circumstances of these operations, subject only to my rulings on relevancy of
how much detail he needs to go into.'' 39  In the court's view, Fernandez could ``get on the stand
and testify to whatever he knows about these three operations, subject only to the relevancy of
the amount of detail that I will let him put in. . . . I am ruling that it is all relevant.  It is all
relevant evidence.'' 40  Accordingly, the court did not review individual documents, adding:

     39 Transcript, Closed CIPA Hearings, Fernandez, 7/14/89, pp. 5-6.

     40 Ibid., pp. 7-8.

     I suppose every prosecutor would like the proposition of being able to put on their live
witnesses and then have a defendant get on the stand and tell his story and only be able to
corroborate it with a brief stipulation. . . . I don't believe that the prosecutors should be permitted
to do that.  I think the defendant ought to have leeway, in order to have a fair trial, to put on that
evidence which is  relevant to corroborate his defense, and would so rule.41

     41 Ibid., pp. 9-10, 14.

     On July 24, 1989, the district court rejected the Government's offer to narrow the indictment
to eliminate the charges relating to the airstrip.  Judge Hilton stated:

     While we did discuss at the previous hearing, reference was made as an example concerning
the statement about the airstrip, it really goes broader than that in terms of some allegations as to
other meetings and the fact that there may have been or at least the defendant alleges that these
programs were overlapping or intertwined.

     So, your proposal I don't believe is really any different than before.  If it is, that would not be
acceptable.42

     42 Trial Transcript, Fernandez, 7/24/89, p. 8.

     On the separate issue of CIA stations, on July 12, 1989, the Government was prepared to
concede this about the stations and facilities in Central America:

     1. The CIA maintains a presence in various foreign countries in furtherance of its intelligence
collection activities and certain covert operations.  The offices the CIA maintains in foreign
countries generally are referred to as ``stations.''  In addition, the CIA has other facilities abroad
from which it collects intelligence or manages covert operations.  These other facilities
sometimes are referred to as ``facilities'' or ``bases.''

     2. In 1984 through 1986, the CIA had stations and facilities in various countries in Latin
America.

     3. Throughout the period from 1984 to 1986, the CIA had officers and employees working in
the countries of [Classified Country Names Withheld].43  Certain of these officers and
employees worked on matters involving the contras.  CIA officers and employees also collected
intelligence concerning (a) the activities of the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, (b) Nicaraguan
military activities, (c) the activities of the political leadership of the contras, (d) the contras'
military activities, (e) the contras' logistical requirements, (f) the contras' receipt of arms, food,
clothing and other materiel, and (g) certain activities of private benefactors who were supplying
the contras with lethal and non-lethal aid.

     43 While the names of these countries have been withheld here, the Government would have
admitted them at trial had the trial court approved the Government's July 12, 1989, submission.

     The Government also agreed that Fernandez could refer to ``a CIA employee located in
[Country Name Withheld]'' 44 or ``a CIA employee located in [Country Name Withheld],'' 45
and that these employees could be described as being familiar with matters such as the operations
at [Location Withheld] 46 or the operations of the contras in [Country Name Withheld].47  The
Government also agreed that a chief of station could be identified as ``a senior CIA officer.''

     44 See note 43 above.

     45 See note 43 above.

     46 See note 43 above.

     47 See note 43 above.

     On July 13, 1989, the district court rejected the Government's proposed substitution
concerning CIA facilities and personnel in Central America.  The court insisted that Fernandez
was entitled to ``divulge the identity of those . . . particular two stations.'' 48  It held that the
substitution would be acceptable, however, if it identified only two CIA stations in Central
America.49

     48 Transcript, Closed CIPA Hearing, Fernandez, 7/13/89, p. 65.

     49 Ibid., p. 66.

     On July 24, 1989, the Government offered a new proposal on CIA facilities.  It agreed that
Fernandez could identify the two Central American stations and the CIA facility by means of a
key card given to each juror. Witnesses would refer to the stations and the facility by number, but
the jurors would know the real location.50  In this way, while the Government would avoid
publicly acknowledging the facilities, the jury would be able to follow in complete detail
Fernandez's evidence about them.  The district court rejected this proposal without explanation,
except to say that it regarded it as a ``repeat of what I ruled on better than a week ago.'' 51

     50 Trial Transcript, Fernandez, 7/24/89, p. 5.

     51 Ibid., p. 8.

     The Attorney General's Intervention & Affidavit

     After the district court rejected the Government's proposals to eliminate CIPA problems from
Fernandez, the Department of Justice moved over the objection of Independent Counsel to
intervene, stay the proceedings, and appeal the district court's rulings.  The district court
summarily rejected the Department's move.52  The Department then obtained a stay from the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, pending appeal.  After full briefing and argument,
the Fourth Circuit dismissed the Department's appeal on grounds of lack of jurisdiction and lifted
its stay.53  The case was returned to the district court. On November 22, 1989, for the first time
in history, Attorney General Richard Thornburgh filed an affidavit under CIPA  6(e) that barred
disclosure at trial of information pertaining either to the three programs or the CIA's disputed
stations and facilities.54

     52 Ibid., p. 13.

     53 U.S. v. Fernandez, 887 F.2d 465 (4th Cir. 1989).

     54 Although the existence of the disputed facilities had from time to time been publicly
reported, the intelligence agencies and the Attorney General concluded that it would be
detrimental to national security if the U.S. Government acknowledged their presence through
Government documents or Government witnesses.  Independent Counsel attempted to persuade
the Attorney General to release the information because of its prior exposure.  Independent
Counsel was unsuccessful.  The Attorney General's decision in Fernandez to preclude, pursuant
to CIPA  6(e), the introduction of classified information at trial was not subject to judicial
review.

     Facing the prospect of dismissal of the case, Independent Counsel proposed to the district
court less severe responses to the Attorney General's affidavit, including a narrowing of the
charges to avoid the need for testimony regarding the three CIA programs, and certain findings of
fact against the Government. On November 24, 1989, the district court rejected these proposals
and entered a dismissal order.  The court repeated its view that narrowing the charges would not
satisfy the court's ruling that the evidence in question was ``essential to this defendant to enable
him to defend himself against the charges in this case . . .'' 55  The court described the
Government's proposals for alternative sanctions as a request ``essentially for a rehearing of the
rulings previously made in regard to the admissibility and the necessity of the defendant to
divulge this information.'' 56

     55 Hearing on Motions, Fernandez Transcript, 11/24/89, p. 10.

     56 Ibid.

     Fourth Circuit Appeal

     On September 6, 1990, the Fourth Circuit affirmed Judge Hilton's CIPA rulings and his
decision to dismiss with prejudice the indictment against Fernandez.  The three-judge appeals
panel ruled that Judge Hilton did not abuse his discretion in holding that Fernandez needed to
disclose classified information to demonstrate that CIA headquarters was provided ``with
detailed  information about the resupply program, and that CIA headquarters urged . . .
encouragement and assistance to the lethal aid resupply network.'' 57  The court observed:

     57 U.S. v. Fernandez, Top Secret Opinion, p. 29 (4th Cir. 1990).

     All of the charges against Joseph Fernandez concern what he was doing as the CIA station
chief in Costa Rica in the mid-1980's, including the nature of his assignments, the persons with
whom he worked, and the context in which he carried out certain acts.  Because his trial was
essentially going to be about the truth of his version of these activities, he must be allowed to tell
the jury exactly what he was doing as the CIA's station chief in Costa Rica.  The nature of the
charges against him demand that he be able to place his job before the jury in a concrete, palpable
context, and that he be able to explain his understanding of the world in which he worked.  Only
against such a background could the jury realistically and fairly evaluate his allegedly false
statements.58

     58 Ibid., pp. 42-43.

     Following the Fourth Circuit's decision, Independent Counsel invited the Attorney General to
reconsider his decision.  The Attorney General declined, informing Judge Hilton that there would
be ``potentially serious damage to national security'' from disclosure of the  two categories of
classified information deemed relevant to Fernandez's defense.59

     59 Fernandez Notice of Lodging (E.D. Va.  Oct. 12, 1990) (filing Letter from James S.
Reynolds to Hon. Claude M. Hilton, 10/12/90).

     The Public Nature of the Classified Information

     Independent Counsel did not challenge the need to protect the three CIA programs. He was
willing to drop the charges to which the programs had been held to pertain. The critical
information that would have permitted trial of the other charges was the location of two
well-known CIA stations. Each had been identified in North. They were regularly mentioned in
the press -- even in the obituary of a former station chief. The intelligence agencies' submissions
to the Attorney General were not specific enough to rebut this fact. They were general
reiterations of the need to preserve ``deniability'' of well-known facts.

     Conclusion

     The Attorney General's actions in Fernandez were an unprecedented and unwarranted
intrusion into the prosecution of a case conducted by an Independent Counsel.  It is clear that the
Attorney General's refusal to hear Independent Counsel on the need for continued secrecy, and
his decision not to release limited classified information, stemmed solely from his uninformed
assessment of the merits of the prosecution, and not from an informed balance of competing
policy interests.  In a report to Congress dated October 24, 1990, a representative of the Attorney
General explained that the Attorney General blocked disclosure of classified information in
Fernandez because

     those who are familiar with the case assess it as a relatively weak one which would not have
been brought had Fernandez been willing to cooperate with the investigation.  While a criminal
conviction might assist the Independent Counsel in gaining Fernandez's cooperation, other
mechanisms are available in the Federal criminal justice system to elicit that cooperation.60

     60 Letter from W. Lee Rawls to Anthony C. Beilenson, 10/24/90, p. 5.

     In Fernandez or any other case prosecuted by an Independent Counsel, it is not up to the
Attorney General to assess its merits or its investigative purpose.  In fact, although Fernandez's
testimony to Congress was immunized and could not have been used against him, the Attorney
General must have known that Fernandez admitted to the Select Committees that he had lied to
both the Tower Commission and the CIA's Inspector General.  Further, in a newspaper interview
following Judge Hilton's dismissal of the case, Fernandez stated that he would have incriminated
higher-ups in the CIA and other Administration officials had the case gone to trial.61  It should
have been Independent Counsel's decision -- not the Attorney General's -- whether this
evidentiary information should have been developed at trial or by some other means.

     61 ``Ex-Agent is Bitter Over Iran Affair,'' The New York Times, 11/27/89, p. A31.

Chapter 21

     CIA Subject #1

     CIA Subject #1 was a senior CIA field officer in Central America from 1984 through 1987.
His identity as a CIA officer is classified. Independent Counsel learned in early 1987 that CIA
personnel under Subject #1's supervision had illegally resupplied the contras.  While Independent
Counsel determined that Subject #1 was unaware of this activity,1 other evidence raised
questions about his contacts with persons working on behalf of the contra-resupply operation run
by Lt. Col. Oliver L. North and retired U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, and Subject
#1's knowledge of these activities.

     1 See Adkins chapter and Adkins Classified Appendix.  Subject #1 may have conveniently
forgotten witnessing, however, a confrontation between James L. Adkins and another CIA
officer, during which Adkins admitted that he had authorized CIA pilots to ship lethal materials
to the Contras.  Subject #1 admitted witnessing part of the argument, but never testified that
Adkins confessed his wrongdoing.

     Subject #1's responses to this evidence were unconvincing.  Nevertheless, for the reasons set
forth below, Independent Counsel chose in the summer of 1991 not to prosecute Subject #1.
This unclassified chapter describes some of the highlights of Subject #1's contacts with the
North-Secord Enterprise, his false statements to congressional investigators and Independent
Counsel, and  Independent Counsel's reasons why he declined to seek an indictment.  A more
complete version of this chapter is found in the Classified Appendix.

     Subject #1 and the North/Secord Enterprise

     The Honduran Arms Competition

     The genesis of the North-Secord effort to help the contras purchase weapons is described
elsewhere in this report.2  The halt to U.S. aid to the contras opened the door to a host of arms
dealers.3  These dealers realized that, since the bulk of the contra forces was in Honduras, an
essential element to providing them with weapons was good relations with the government of
Honduras.  One way the North/Secord Enterprise hoped to obtain Honduran government
approval for its services to the contras was through CIA Subject #1.

     2 See Secord and North chapters.

     3 See the Flow of Funds section.

     Secord and his associate Thomas G. Clines, a former CIA agent, knew Subject #1 from their
service together in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War.  Clines knew Subject #1 particularly
well, as Subject #1 had been  Clines's deputy for four years.  Clines and Subject #1 remained in
contact.  They met socially as late as December 1984, when Clines and another former CIA
operative, Rafael Quintero, were on a business trip in Mexico City.  Subject #1's contacts with
Secord and Clines ``from the old . . . days'' were well known to North, who talked to Secord
frequently about Subject #1.4

     4 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, pp. 3-4; Clines, Grand Jury, 4/19/91, p. 26; Secord, OIC
Interview, 5/13/87, pp. 105, 113.  According to Quintero, the Mexico City meeting occurred
because he and Clines had bumped into Subject #1's wife.  The men met later with Subject #1.
(Quintero, FBI 302, 4/9/91, p. 10; Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, p. 55.)  Subject #1 did not tell
Independent Counsel about the Mexico City meeting until well after Quintero first disclosed it.
Subject #1 never mentioned that Quintero was with Clines.  (CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 6/24/88,
p. 2.)

     Subject #1 was aware of the post-Boland competition among international arms dealers. Chief
among these competitors was Ron Martin, a Miami-based arms dealer who had been the focus of
investigation by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms for many years, and who at one
time had been charged with providing arms illegally to narcotics traffickers.  Martin had been
approached about selling arms to the contras in late 1984 by a former U.S. military attache to
Nicaragua, Col. James McCoy. McCoy assured Martin that such sales would have U.S.
Government approval.5

     5 Martin, FBI 302, 4/13/92, p. 2.  Martin told Independent Counsel that he learned later from
Calero and a Honduran military officer that the U.S. Government sanctioned private weapons
sales to the contras.  Calero told Martin, however, that some U.S. officials disliked Martin.
(Ibid., p. 8.)

     Over time McCoy and a Honduran-based U.S. national who was working for McCoy, Mario
Dellamico,6 convinced Martin to get into the contra arms market.  Martin and McCoy developed
a plan to ship a storehouse of weapons into Honduras, where the Honduran government would
take possession of them.  The contras then could purchase weapons from this supply as they
needed.  Martin obtained financing for this proposal from Enrique DeValle, the brother of a
former Panamanian president.  Martin was responsible for purchasing and shipping the weapons;
Dellamico's job was to intercede with the Honduran government (that is, the Honduran military)
and contra military commander Enrique Bermudez.

     6 According to Dellamico, but contrary to many of the transcripts and documents cited in this
chapter, this is the correct spelling of his name.

     Subject #1 became aware of Martin's ``Arms Supermarket'' by mid-February 1985.  CIA
officers learned from Calero and others that the Honduran government had agreed to permit an
``international arms supplier to establish  a stock of ammunition and weapons parts in Honduras
upon which the FDN [contras] could draw as needed [on] a cash-and-carry basis.''  CIA officers
further reported that the Honduran government had issued end-user certificates for weapons
transactions to the supplier.7

     7 Field Intelligence Report, 2/11/85, DO 94825.  This report was disseminated throughout the
intelligence community, including the NSC, by Classified Intelligence Report, 2/19/85, DO
181966-64.

     A Meeting in Honduras

     By May 1985 the supermarket was worrying the North-Secord Enterprise.  A large shipment
of arms purchased by the Enterprise in Europe was on board the Danish freighter Erria and on its
way to Honduras in May 1985 when North noted during a meeting with Secord:  ```Martin'
setting up munitions `supermarket' in Tegu[cigalpa].''  Intelligence reports a week later stated that
the contras were entertaining an offer by ``an international arms dealer'' to store a stock of
munitions in Honduras, from which contras could make purchases as required.  North noted that
he had to raise the matter with the contra leadership when they next spoke.8

     8 North Note, 5/1/85, AMX 000638; Classified Intelligence Report, 5/8/85, DO 175558;
North Notebook, 5/9/85, AMX 000658.

     North and Calero met on May 13, 1985.  North starred as ``to do'' items ``Check w/ Ron
Martin  `Supermarket' being set-up by Aplicano'' (a colonel in the Honduran army) and
``Secord/Aplicano meeting.'' 9 North spoke with Secord four days later, noting:

     9 Ibid., 5/13/85, AMX 000668.

     Ron Martin & Mario del Amico (Cuban American) wanted in Guatemala for criminal activity
Dealing w/ AUTOMEX in Lisbon & CRADDOCK in U.K.

     * * *

      -- Promised to sell weapons thru ``supermarket''

      -- Probably levered by HOAF personnel

      -- DEFEX people [Secord's suppliers] will not work w/

      -- g008MARTIN letter of credit floating all over Lisbon

      -- Prices from Secord based on adequate lead time.

     North further noted this report from Secord, whose ``on scene'' man in Honduras was
Quintero:

     View from on scene:

      -- Mario more & more in picture

     * * *

      -- serious logistics problems

      -- Possible Martin interference w/ Puerto Cortez delivery

      -- Ship arrives 1 June 85 -- Danish vessel 10

     10 North Note, 5/17/85, AMX 000679-80.

     After talking with Secord, North phoned Calero.  Calero said that a representative of the arms
supermarket had quoted him prices on AK-47 and M-16 ammunition.  The Honduran military
was said to guarantee that the arms supermarket would not  ``run short.'' 11  On May 20, 1985,
North noted Calero's assessment that ``Supermarket is proceeding.'' 12

     11 Ibid.

     12 Ibid., 5/20/85, AMX 000687.

     As Secord and North had discussed, the Erria was due at the Honduran port of Puerto Cortes
in early June.  Clines and Quintero departed for Honduras on May 31, 1985, to meet the vessel.
Clines and Quintero were not the only ones, however, who were interested in what was arriving.
Ron Martin had heard of the Erria from his own sources in Portugal, who said that the Enterprise
was selling the contras old equipment at outrageous prices.  Sensing an opportunity to shame his
rivals, Martin ordered Dellamico to arrange with Col. Aplicano to secure as much paperwork as
possible about the Erria's cargo.13

     13 Quintero Passport; Martin, FBI 302, 4/13/92, p. 11.

     With the help of the Honduran military, Dellamico boarded the Erria shortly after it arrived in
Puerto Cortes.  Dellamico convinced the Erria's captain that he was a representative of the
purchasers and obtained a cargo manifest.  Dellamico received the papers shortly before Clines
and Quintero reached the ship.  Clines confronted the captain, who explained that he thought
Dellamico worked for Clines.  Clines angrily threw Dellamico off the ship.14

     14 Martin, FBI 302, 4/13/92, p. 11; Clines, Grand Jury, 4/19/91, pp. 27-28; Quintero, FBI
302, 11/13/87, p. 7.  Quintero told Independent Counsel that he had first met Dellamico in late
April 1985, somewhere near the Guatemalan/Honduran border.  Quintero was in Guatemala
supervising the first Secord arms shipment to the contras.  According to Quintero, Dellamico
arrived at the border with a Honduran military officer, who was to take possession of the arms
shipment prior to its delivery to the contras.  (Quintero, FBI 302, 11/13/87, p. 5.) Dellamico has
denied ever meeting Clines or Quintero.  (Dellamico, FBI 302, 2/4/92, p. 7.)  Martin claims,
however, to have learned all that he knows about the Erria incident from Dellamico.  Martin told
Independent Counsel that he used the manifest and other documents that Dellamico took from
the Erria to try to convince Calero that Secord was ``ripping off'' the contras.  (Martin, FBI 302,
4/13/92, p. 11.)

     That same day -- witnesses are not sure if it was before or after the fight with Dellamico --
Clines and Quintero met with CIA Subject #1.  Accounts of the meeting, which Subject #1
denies, differ.

      -- Quintero testified that as he and Clines were awaiting the arrival of the Erria, they heard
rumors that a ship carrying weapons had been sunk in the Caribbean.  Clines tried to telephone
Subject #1 to confirm the story.15  The Erria arrived safely, and afterwards Subject #1 picked up
Quintero and Clines at the Maya Hotel in Tegucigalpa.  Subject #1 took them to his residence for
lunch. Quintero and Clines asked Subject #1 how they could contact the leaders of the
anti-Sandinista Miskito Indians.  Subject #1 reportedly advised them not to go to a Miskito
encampment at Rus-Rus, but instead contact the  leadership in Tegucigalpa.16  They then
discussed the Erria shipment, particularly Clines, Quintero, and North's role in it.17  Quintero
recalled asking Subject #1 if the CIA had been reporting on Quintero's many trips to Honduras.
Subject #1 replied no, to which Quintero responded, ``Fine, that's great, because Oliver North is
going to be very happy about knowing that I'm coming here and there are no reports going around
that I am doing any work here.''  Quintero asked Subject #1 for his telephone numbers, which
Quintero wrote down in his address book.18  They then discussed Martin, Dellamico, and
Dellamico's relationship with Col. Aplicano.19

     15 In the Grand Jury, Quintero testified that Clines's call to Subject #1 came after their lunch
meeting with Subject #1, and that Clines actually spoke with him.  (Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88,
p. 61.)

     16 According to Quintero, he and Clines contacted the Tegucigalpa office, only to learn that
Indian leader Wycliffe Diego was in Miami.  (Ibid., pp. 62-63.)

     17 In a 1991 interview with Independent Counsel, however, Quintero said that he and Clines
did not discuss contra resupply with Subject #1, although Quintero ``assumed'' Subject #1 knew
about it.  (Quintero, FBI 302, 4/9/91, p. 9.)

     18 In 1991, however, Quintero said that Clines gave him Subject #1's telephone number.
(Ibid., p. 11.)

     19 Quintero, FBI 302, 11/13/87, pp. 6-7; Ibid., 12/28/87, pp. 4-5; Ibid., 4/9/91, pp. 9-10;
Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 54-63; Quintero, North Trial Testimony, 3/2/89, pp. 2982-86.

      -- Clines corroborated only a few aspects of Quintero's story.  According to Clines, Quintero
said that he had been advised previously that they should contact Subject #1.  Quintero already
had Subject #1's phone number.20  Clines agreed that the three met with Subject #1 at his
residence for forty minutes, around noon.  Subject #1 acted as if he had met Quintero before.
According to Clines, however, the only topic of discussion was where he and Quintero could
meet  the leadership of the Miskito  Indians.21  Clines testified that they did not discuss contra
resupply with Subject #1, as Clines wanted to ``keep [Subject #1] out of trouble'' with the Boland
Amendment.22

     20 Quintero's telephone records reveal several calls to Subject #1.  Quintero could not recall
why he made the telephone calls, or if he reached Subject #1.  (Quintero, FBI 302, 12/28/87, p.
5.)

     21 According to Clines, Subject #1 said that the Miskito leaders were not in Honduras, but
rather were in Miami.  Compare with n.16 above.

     22 Clines, Grand Jury, 4/19/91, pp. 28-33.

     On June 5, 1985, CIA field officers reported that the Honduran military backed the arms
supermarket.  This report, which was placed into an intelligence memorandum sent to North the
next day, valued the arms destined for the supermarket at $17 million.  CIA field officers said
that a Honduran military official had discussed the proposal with Calero, and that Calero had
provided a list of weapons that the Supermarket should carry.  CIA field officers concluded that
the arrangement ``should help solve the problem [the contras] are now having with the time lag
between the ordering and subsequent delivery of munitions.'' 23

     23 CIA Cable, 6/5/85, DO 94828-26; Memorandum from George, 6/6/85, AKW 22961-64.
CIA officers further noted that the Honduran military was expecting a cut of the supermarket's
profits or ``a good deal'' on its own munitions purchases in return for granting Martin his
``franchise. . . .''  (CIA Cable, 6/5/85, DO 94828-26.)

     A Meeting in Virginia

     The North-Secord Enterprise's frustration with how the contras spent their money prompted
North to call a meeting of Secord, Clines, Quintero, Calero and Enrique Bermudez in Miami in
late June 1985.  During the meeting, North noted:

      -- Supermarket

      -- Honduran E.U.C.'s

      -- L & M Equipment

      -- g008del Amico

      -- g008Martin 24

     24 North Note, 6/28/85, AMX 000820.

     After the meeting, which Secord described as a ``watershed'' for him, North asked Secord to
set up his own private airlift operation to benefit the contras.  Starting this operation occupied
Secord throughout the summer and early fall of 1985.25

     25 Secord, OIC Interview, 4/29/87, pp. 31-38; Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/5/87,
pp. 164-69; Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, pp. 7-9; Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 66-75.

     In setting up his private airlift service for the contras, Secord met with CIA Subject #1.  On
July 11, 1985, North was told by Alan D. Fiers, Jr., Subject #1's superior as chief of the CIA's
Central American Task Force (CATF), that Subject #1 was in town and that he would call North
that evening.  New  intelligence reports revealed that a shipment of 1,300 tons of arms from
Poland had arrived in Honduras for the supermarket.  These reports indicated that another
shipment was due in August, and that while contra commander Enrique Bermudez was
``dubious'' about the supermarket concept, the supermarket's terms and prices sounded to
Bermudez ``almost too good to be true.'' 26

     26 Secord, OIC Interview, 4/29/87, pp. 37-38; Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/5/87,
pp. 168-69; Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, p. 9; Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 73-75; CIA
Subject #1 Travel Records; CIA Cable, 7/9/85, DO 178759; CIA Cable, 7/9/85, DO 107993, DO
108034; CIA Field Intelligence Report, 7/10/85, DO 181999-98; CIA Information Report,
Subject:  Scheduled Arrival in Honduras of Arms Shipment from Poland for the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, 7/22/85, DO 175398-96; CIA Field Intelligence Report, 7/10/85, DO
107991-90.  CIA headquarters directed its officers in Central America to find out more about the
Supermarket shipments.  (DIRECTOR 447814, 7/11/85, DO 178758; DIRECTOR 448583,
7/11/85, DO 178757.)

     As Fiers promised, Subject #1 called North on the evening of July 11.  North wrote down
Subject #1's local telephone number, then noted:

      -- passed # to Dick

     Subject #1 met with Secord, Clines, and Quintero at Secord's home the next day.  While
Secord is unsure whether Clines or North told him that Subject  #1 was in town, Secord was
certain that North set up the meeting.27

     27 North Note, 7/11/85, AMX 001222; CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 5/16/91, p. 5; Secord, FBI
302, 2/26/88, pp. 2-3; Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, pp. 8-11.  Quintero says that Secord told him
at the time that North had set up the meeting.  (Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 83-87;
Quintero, North Trial Testimony, 3/2/89, pp. 2986-87.)  North's secretary wrote ``Secord [CIA
Subject #1]'' in the 7:00 am to 10:00 am slot on North's appointment calendar for July 12, 1985.
(North Calendar, 7/12/85, AKW 003872.)

     The witnesses to the July 12, 1985, meeting at Secord's home gave different accounts of what
was discussed.

      -- Clines described the meeting as very brief, lasting no more than a few minutes.  Clines said
he was not privy to the entire conversation and did not recall hearing about the contras. Clines
could not recall even if Quintero was there.28

     28 Clines, Grand Jury, 4/19/91, pp. 34-35.

      -- Secord recalled the meeting more vividly, saying he told Subject #1 that he ``wanted to get
a handle'' on what was happening in Honduras.  They discussed the general tactical situation of
the contra war, the extent of Honduran government support for the contras, and how best to
ensure effective private deliveries to the contras (``a common theme,'' according to Secord, since
the June 1985 Miami meeting).29

     29 Secord, FBI 302, 2/26/88, pp. 2-3; Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, pp. 8-10.

      -- Quintero corroborated Secord.  Quintero said that Secord had called him in Miami and told
him to come to Washington.  Quintero and Clines went with Secord to meet with Subject #1.
The meeting was short but friendly, revolving around the  contras and events in Honduras.  One
topic was how Martin and Dellamico were working with the Honduran government to block
Secord from selling and airlifting weapons to the contras.30  Subject #1 said that he had spoken
with North about Martin and the Honduran problem, but that he did not want to assist Secord in
solving it.31

     30 Secord told Independent Counsel that at this time, Calero had been saying that Martin was
pressuring him to buy arms from the supermarket.  ``I believe that starting about August of `85 a
number of desperate groups started focusing on me and my men as great threats, one was Ron
Martin and his group.  They saw me and my group as a threat to their business which we weren't
even aware of.''  Mario Dellamico ``was seen by all of us -- that means Clines, Secord, Quintero -- as hostile to our interests. . . .''  (Secord, OIC Interview, 4/29/87, pp. 55-56; Secord, Grand Jury,
1/16/91, pp. 40, 54-56, 70; Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, pp. 52-53.)

     31 Quintero, FBI 302, 12/28/87, p. 6; Quintero, FBI 302, 4/9/91, pp. 9-10; Quintero, Grand
Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 83-87; Quintero, North Trial Testimony, 3/2/89, pp. 2986-87.  Quintero
provided other details that are presented in the Classified Appendix.

     Secord reported the meeting to North later the same day.  North's notes corroborate Secord
and Quintero's version of the meeting:

      -- mtg. tonight w/Dick/Rafael/Tom w/ Romero FDN Log Chief

      -- [CIA Subject #1] discussions re Supermarket

      -- HO Army plans to seize all mat'l when supermarket comes to a bad end

      -- $14M to finance came from drugs

      -- [Subject #1] expects HOAF to seize the supermarket's assets when the supermarket folds.

      -- [Subject #1] likes light A/C [aircraft] ASAP

     oesn't like goons [slang term for C-47]

     Should get CASA 212's 32

     32 North Note, 7/12/85, AMX 001225.

     Watching the Arms Supermarket

     Subject #1's actions subsequent to the July 12, 1985 meeting are consistent with Quintero's
characterization of him as an intelligence officer who was unwilling to side either with the
Enterprise or the Supermarket in their rivalry.  Subject #1 returned to Central America and
secretly recounted to Fiers later that he would begin collecting more intelligence about the
supermarket.  Subject #1 further passed on his understanding that the contras were about to make
their first purchases from Martin:

     My concern is the source of the funds for the Supermarket (10 to 14 million USD).  We
cannot conceive that the backers of this program are doing it for patriotic or altruistic reasons and
we hope UNO/FDN leader[s]hip will exercise prudence and conduct an in-de[p]th check of
sources of the financial backing before becoming involved.33

     33 CIA Cable, 8/29/85, DO 94841.  By late August 1985, North's interest in Martin and
McCoy had flared once again.  He may have prompted CATF to run traces on the men.  (North
Note, 8/28/85, AMX 001341; DIRECTOR 511129, 8/28/85, DO 94835; CIA Cable, 8/29/85, DO
94837.)  On August 30, 1985, North noted information similar to what had been reported by DO
94837.  (North Note, 8/30/85, AMX 001343.)  See also CIA Cable, 8/30/85, DO 94843
(confirming DO 94837 and reporting on ATF investigation of Martin's operations).

     Subject #1's subsequent reports reflected the CIA's concerns that Martin and McCoy had an
``unsavory past,'' but Subject #1 did not attempt to exploit this anxiety to the Enterprise's
advantage.34

     34 All of the examples of this conduct are classified and are thus set forth in the Classified
Appendix.

     Cables from the Fall of 1985 support the view that Subject #1 was honestly monitoring, rather
than choosing sides in, the supermarket/Enterprise competition.  Fiers cabled Subject #1 on
September 17, 1985, that Calero urgently needed to know more about the supermarket, as Calero
was ``under increasingly intense pressure'' from Bermudez and others ``to avail himself of . . . the
warehouse.''  Subject #1 suggested that Calero question the supermarket's backers himself.
Calero did just that, prompting Martin and McCoy to offer to fly a CIA representative to Panama
City to meet ``the banker financing the supermarket transaction and to examine the paperwork.''
35

     35 DIRECTOR 534371, 9/17/85, DO 94859; CIA Cable, 9/18/85, DO 94860; CIA Cable,
9/27/85, DO 94864. Calero called North a few days after meeting Martin with a full report.
North noted:

      -- Martin said that Calero has created probs w/ weaps

      -- ``Damned ship is not mine''

      -- preoccupied -- believes that [Calero] has screwed up the supermarket.

      -- says he has someone who has invested heavily + bank support.

      -- Says he wants to see [CIA Subject #1].  Take him to Panama to show him paperwork.

      -- Says he has a valid contract w/ Honduran Govt.

     (North Note, 9/24/85, AMX 001773.)

     Calero reported his discussions with Martin and McCoy to Subject #1 on September 27, 1985.
Subject #1 relayed Calero's information via special channels to Fiers.  Subject #1 argued against
accepting Martin's invitation to examine the supermarket's records:  ``There is no advantage for
[CIA] to get involved in anything like this nor do we wish to be seen as the approval mechanism
on whether or not [Calero] buys from Martin.''  Subject #1 recognized, however, that Calero
wanted to buy from Martin.  Subject #1 wrote that Martin's

     prices are good, the credit terms excellent and the material newer and in better condition than
that UNO/FDN [contras] has received from other sources.  [Calero] wants to be told if [U.S.
Government] has any information that would make his involvement with the  Supermarket an
unwise decision.  [Calero] will hold back on purchases until he hears . . . but he has to make
some move soon.

     The CIA ended up making no recommendation to Calero about the supermarket, and Calero
purchased weapons from it.36

     36 CIA Cable, 9/27/85, DO 94864; Calero, FBI 302, 6/10/91, pp. 5-6.  Subject #1 shared his
views about the Supermarket with U.S. Government personnel in Honduras.  (See, for example,
Comee, FBI 302, 5/17/91, pp. 10-12.)

     Subject #1 and 1986 Resupply Activities

     Subject #1's agnosticism towards the arms supermarket and the North-Secord Enterprise
manifested itself in an incident that occurred in February 1986 -- an episode that made Subject #1
aware of a link between the two resupply operations in the persons of Dellamico and Felix
Rodriguez.  Subject #1 had met Rodriguez in the early 1980s.  Subject #1 later claimed that he
and Rodriguez had a falling-out in 1984, shortly before Rodriguez headed to El Salvador, and
never spoke again.  Evidence from as early as January 1985 suggests, however, that Subject #1
kept aware of Rodriguez's activities.37

     37 CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 5/16/91, pp. 1-2.  North noted, for example, during a trip to
Honduras in late January 1985 (emphasis in original):

     Discussion w/ [Subject #1]

     La Quinta, Las Vegas,

      -- FDN Air Arm

      -- Felix too involved w/ Alvarez

      -- Not enough money to do what's needed

      -- Parachutes.

     (North Note, 1/30/85, AMX 000409.)

     Subject #1 and NHAO #4 Transshipment

     In September 1985, Subject #1 and other CIA field personnel began assisting a new U.S.
Government humanitarian assistance program for the contra rebels.  Sponsored by the State
Department's Nicaraguan Humanitarian Assistance Office (NHAO), the new aid was to travel
from the United States directly to Honduras, to be shipped overland to contra bases.
Unfortunately, excessive press coverage of the first NHAO mission to Honduras soured the
Honduran Government on the program and resulted in a temporary ban on NHAO flights into
Honduras.38

     38 CIA Cable, 10/10/85, DO 22975; CIA Cable, 10/16/85; CIA Cable, 10/16/85, ER
33056-57; DIRECTOR 584237, 10/23/85; CIA Cable; CIA Cable, 10/24/85, DO 22976; CIA
Cable, 10/25/85, DO 2298; CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 5/16/91, pp. 4-5.

     The halt to NHAO flights began in mid-October 1985.  After a series of official visits from
persons including North, National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter, U.S. Ambassador to
Honduras John Ferch, and Subject #1,39 the  Honduran government eventually agreed to allow
NHAO-sponsored flights to resume over Honduran airspace -- provided that the flights
originated from El Salvador.40

     39 CIA Subject #1 Travel cables; CIA Subject #1, Select Committees Deposition, 4/25/87, pp.
94-105; CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 5/16/91, p. 11; CIA Cable, 11/9/85; CIA Cable, 11/11/85, DO
22983; CIA Cable, 11/13/85, DO 7409; CIA Cable, 11/15/85; CIA Cable, 11/16/85; CIA Cable,
11/18/85, DO 22984; CIA Cable, 11/20/85, DO 7443; CIA Cable, 11/21/85, DO 7451; CIA
Cable, 11/27/85, DO 7475; CIA Cable, 12/2/85; DIRECTOR 637248, 12/2/85, DO 7488; North
Notebook, 12/13/85, AMX 001933-34; CIA Cable, 12/13/85, DO 8527; CIA Cable, 12/17/85,
DO 8544; CIA Cable, 12/17/85, DO 8545.

     40 CIA Cable, 12/20/85, DO 8556; AMEMB TEGUCIGALPA 17411, 12/20/85, ALW
30596-602; DIRECTOR 665928, 12/21/85, DO 8572; DIRECTOR 667352, 12/24/85.  Subject
#1 grudgingly provided testimony on this subject to Congress in 1987.  (CIA Subject #1, Select
Committees Deposition, 4/25/87, pp. 32-36.)

     NHAO worked to mount the first in the new series of flights -- embarking from the United
States to Ilopango air base in El Salvador, and then crossing to contra bases in Honduras -- in
January 1986.  CIA officers in Central America were charged with obtaining clearances for these
flights from the Honduran military.  As a result, CIA officers in Central America began learning
about the contractors who were making NHAO's deliveries -- some of whom were delivering
lethal supplies for the North-Secord operation.  In seeking clearances for the first drop, proposed
for the contra base at Yamales, field officers reported their concern that a ``possible conflict in
aircraft use'' could jeopardize it.  Officers said that another Honduran project was using ``an
L-100 . . . , operated by Dick ((Gadd)), who in turn gets his aircraft from Southern Air in Miami.''
Gadd, an associate of Secord, was known by CIA field personnel to be a NHAO contractor.  CIA
field personnel feared that if Gadd used  the NHAO mission as a way to lessen his expenses on
the other project, the Hondurans would get angry.  The drop to Yamales was eventually
cancelled, at the Hondurans' insistence.41

     41 CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 4/9/87; DIRECTOR 683461, 1/9/86; DIRECTOR 685439,
1/10/86; CIA Cable, 1/10/86; CIA Cable, 1/10/86, DO 84692;  DIRECTOR 687081, 1/10/86;
CIA Cable, 1/13/86, DO 20034.  See also DIRECTOR 691558, 1/15/86, DO 39668 (advising
that Gadd will move supplies for NHAO from cancelled Yamales drop, and has arranged for
construction of Butler buildings at Ilopango).

     Subject #1 denied knowing the background of the cables  discussing Gadd when questioned
about them in 1987.  (CIA Subject #1, OIC Interview, 8/28/87, pp. 102-3.)  Other cables suggest
that personnel other than Subject #1 may have been close to the situation.  (See, for example,
CIA Cable, 1/15/86, DO 83565; CIA Cable, 1/18/86, DO 83567-66.)  Subject #1's deputy
believed he may have been the first senior official in the region to learn of Gadd's activities,
although the deputy told Independent Counsel that DIRECTOR 687081 should have been
sufficiently important to CIA Subject #1 for him to know what Gadd was doing in Honduras.
(Field Deputy, FBI 302, 6/7/91, pp. 7-8.)

     For other cables about Gadd's activities in Honduras, see DIRECTOR 760645, 3/3/86; and
CIA Cable, 3/3/86, DO 103566 (proposal to use Gadd to erect warehouses at Aguacate); CIA
Cable, 3/10/86; CIA Cable, 3/11/86, DO 103566; CIA Cable, 3/12/86, DO 85474; DIRECTOR
778444, 3/14/86, DO 177472 (squabble among CIA field personnel over the unannounced
appearance of ``NHAO communications specialist'' described as a Gadd employee); DIRECTOR
780844, 3/15/86, DO 11534; CIA Cable, 3/17/86; DIRECTOR 803080, 3/29/86; CIA Cable,
4/1/86, DO 85492; DIRECTOR 807942, 4/2/86, DO 85493; CIA Cable, 4/3/86, DO 85494 (CIA
field activities in arranging contra-sponsored drops of lethal and non-lethal supplies to contra
forces on the Nicaraguan ``Southern Front;'' Gadd mentioned as NHAO and private benefactor
contractor).

     Rodriguez and Dellamico

     By late January 1986 CIA personnel in Central America, including those closest to Subject
#1, recognized a second American citizen, Felix Rodriguez, in NHAO and private lethal resupply
efforts.  CIA field personnel had been asked in late January to facilitate the movement of contra
logistics officers to Ilopango air base and to set up a contra communications network linking
Honduras and El Salvador.  CIA headquarters complained that CIA officers closest to Subject #1
were responding slowly.  CIA officers closest to Subject #1 tried to put the blame elsewhere:

     [Officers] believe additional confusion being introduced into San Salvador scenario by Felix
((Rodriguez)), who has somehow become involved in the San Salvador end of the NHAO
system.  He reportedly was the person who receipted for the NHAO shipment to Ilopango, and he
has become involved in conflict with both UNO/FDN [contra] air force commander Col Juan
((Gomez)) and UNO/FDN San Salvador logistics chief Lopez by insisting that all matters
relating to the Ilopango logistics system be channelled through him.  According to Col Gomez,
Rodriguez implied that he was employed by [CIA] without actually saying so. . . .

     Other field personnel warned that, in fact, logistics officer Lopez was being ``dominated'' by
Rodriguez and the  Chief of the U.S. Military Group in El Salvador, U.S. Army Col. James
Steele.42

     42 CIA Cable, 1/18/86, DO 83567-66; CIA Cable, 1/23/86, DO 84696; CIA Cable, 1/24/86,
DO 10534; CIA Cable, 1/24/86, DO 10545; DIRECTOR 706924, 1/25/86, DO 10548; CIA
Cable, 1/25/86, DO 39672; CIA Cable, 1/27/86, DO 39675.  See also CIA Cable, 1/27/86, DO
39676 (reporting from Col. James Steele that a January 26 NHAO flight was arranged by a
contact of Rodriguez).

     Ten days later, CIA officers closest to Subject #1 reported that the Hondurans finally had
granted permission for resumption of contra resupply flights. CIA officers expected the flights
would begin promptly, and were stumped when they learned that Lopez had been told to stop
work on the first load.  CIA officers closest to Subject #1 suspected Rodriguez. Fiers soon
announced that he would travel to Honduras and El Salvador to consult with officers about
NHAO transshipment operations.43

     43 CIA Cable, 2/7/86, DO 84703; CIA Cable, 2/8/86, DO 178737.

     Fiers went first to Honduras to cement an agreement on obtaining clearances of NHAO
flights.  He then traveled to Ilopango air base, where he witnessed the loading of a Southern Air
Transport C-130 with supplies for the contras. Concerned that the flight would upset the new
American-Honduran rapprochement, Fiers went to Rodriguez's quarters at Ilopango and
persuaded North to have him cancel the flight.44

     44 For a more complete account of Fiers's confrontation with Rodriguez, see Fiers chapter.

     Or so Fiers thought.  Two days later, CIA officers closest to Subject #1 reported that
Rodriguez attempted to make a second end-run around the official clearance system -- this time,
with the help of Mario Dellamico:

     It appears that the private citizen in San Salvador 45 who was sowing confusion on the
question of a C-130 flight to Honduras did not give up easily.  While we have not established the
time of day of the request, during the day on 9 Feb he did contact his counterpart in  Tegucigalpa,
[Mario Dellamico], and requested that clearance for the L-100 be obtained.  [Dellamico] met
with Honduran Army Commander Col Thumann morning of 10 Feb, without having discussed
the subject with any other interested party in Honduras, and subsequently appeared at UNO/FDN
Directorate house saying he had obtained clearance for the aircraft and needed to travel to San
Salvador immediately to coordinate the flight from that end.  Per Col Thumann's office, no such
approval was granted, and Hondurans had merely agreed to consider the subject, somewhat
reluctantly and based on appeals by [Dellamico] that were not necessarily true.  This situation has
been corrected.46

     45 According to Fiers, he instructed CIA personnel in Central America during his February
1986 trip to keep Rodriguez's name out of CIA cables.  (See Fiers chapter.)  CIA field personnel
thus began using phrases like ``private citizen in San Salvador'' as euphemisms for Rodriguez.
For an example of an exchange among CIA field personnel (not including Subject #1, who was
in Miami) that reflects an understanding of the meaning of this euphemism, see CIA Cable,
2/28/86, DO 85445; CIA Cable, 3/1/86, DO 85451; CIA Cable, 3/2/86, DO 103559.

     46 CIA Cable, 2/11/86, DO 10987.  This cable raised Fiers' temperature.  (See DIRECTOR
731090, 2/11/86 (report ``disturbing'').)  See also CIA Cable, 2/15/86, DO 11038; CIA Cable,
2/15/86 (reporting angry reaction of a contra leader).

     By February 14, 1986, contra shipments from Ilopango to Aguacate had resumed.  CIA
personnel reported to the Central American Task Force that ``[t]he role of the now infamous
local `private American citizen' has been reduced to that of an `on-looker' at the
NHAO/UNO/FDN warehouse at Ilopango.'' 47

     47 CIA Cable, 2/14/86, DO 101121.

     CIA Subject #1 denied hearing anything about Rodriguez's private resupply activities until
October 1986. In a May 1991 interview, Subject #1 explained his ignorance of repeated mentions
of Rodriguez in field  cable traffic by insisting that other field personnel wrote the cables and
were more knowledgeable of the resupply operation.48  Subject #1's excuse is unconvincing.
First, as is clear from the events of 1985, Subject #1 was the CIA officer in the area most
knowledgeable of Dellamico's activities in Honduras.49  Subject #1 also knew that Dellamico
had high contacts in the Honduran military -- specifically, with Col. Thumann -- and that he was
a friend of Rodriguez.50  Second, Subject #1 was heavily involved in trying to persuade the
Honduran government to allow resumption of NHAO resupply operations -- a critical U.S.
objective in early 1986.

     48 Some CIA cables do suggest that Subject #1's deputy was heavily involved in discussions
with the Honduran government about clearances.  (See, for example, CIA Cable, 2/19/86, DO
11062; CIA Cable, 2/27/86, DO 85443-42.)

     49 See Classified Appendix.

     50 CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 5/16/91, p. 6.

     The most telling evidence of Subject #1's contemporaneous knowledge of the
Rodriguez/Dellamico clearance incident is, however, a contemporaneous KL-43 message from
North to Secord.  The message states in part:

     Regarding the El Salvador problem, we may have created one of our own with Maximo [Felix
Rodriguez's alias].  While our  L-100 was on the ground in El Sal he apparently called to Mario
Del Amico . . . and asked Del Amico to go to the general staff to get flight clearance from
Ilopango to Aguacate.  Thumann, the Honduran Chief of Staff -- who had just cleared the FDN
C-47 flight clearances[ -- ]told Del Amico that he would quote consider the request unquote.
Thumann then called [CIA Subject #1] and asked him what the hell was going on since he --
Thumann -- was reluctant to give any clearances at all but that [Subject #1] had brought enough
pressure to bear with [Subject #1] that he -- Thumann -- had no choice and now Del Amico was
asking for more before the first flight of the C-47 had even taken place.  [Subject #1] told
Thumann -- without checking with Fiers -- to stand down on the Del Amico request and that Del
Amico might well be a close friend of Calero but he was no friend of ours. . . . The bottom line is
that Felix has once again exceeded his mandate and has dissembled with us -- or at least allowed
himself to hear from Del Amico that the L-100 was cleared.  I have no reason to disbelieve
[Subject #1] and find the story about Del Amico to be plausible.51

     51 Secord, OIC Interview, 5/13/87, pp. 118-19; KL-43 Message from North to Secord, AQT
000002.  The KL-43 message refers to upcoming talks between Fiers and Gadd.  Independent
Counsel's evidence is that these meetings occurred on February 12, 1986.  See Fiers chapter.

     North's account of the Dellamico/Rodriguez ``end run,'' which describes Subject #1 as a
knowledgeable witness, is corroborated by the former U.S. military adviser to Honduras, Col.
William C. Comee.  Colonel Comee told Independent Counsel in May 1991 that he was in
frequent contact with Subject #1 during February 1986.  According to  Comee, Subject #1 was
very upset by the ``end run'' around the CIA's clearance system -- not because a private resupply
flight was involved, but rather because it ruffled the delicate Honduran relationship.52

     52 Comee, FBI 302, 5/17/91, pp. 2-3.  See also CIA Cable, 4/24/86, DO 177531, DO 83790;
CIA Cable, 4/26/86, DO 3792 (attributing resupply confusion to ``local contractors'' identified as
Rodriguez and Quintero).

     Independent Counsel was unable to prove another Boland violation attributed to Subject #1 in
a later North KL-43 message.  In early April 1986, the North-Secord Enterprise arranged for
another L-100 cargo plane to drop lethal supplies to contra forces operating on the Nicaraguan
``southern front.''  Preparations for this drop were at their peak on April 10-12, 1986.  Prior to the
drop, North sent a KL-43 message to Secord that stated that Subject #1 would be assembling
supplies at the contra base at Aguacate and moving them to Ilopango Air Base in time for the
L-100's mission.  (KL-43 Message, from North to Secord, 4/86.)  To the best of Secord's
knowledge, however, Subject #1 played no part in the L-100 mission and did not assemble
materials at Aguacate.  Subject #1's travel records confirm that he was out of Central America at
the time.  Secord admitted, however, that Subject #1's subordinates occasionally interceded with
contra leaders in the north to free up supplies for the Southern Front -- an apt description of what
the Enterprise accomplished with its April L-100 flight.  (Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, pp. 17-18;
Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/6/87, p. 147; CIA Subject #1, OIC Interview, 8/28/87,
pp. 107-11; CIA Subject #1 Travel Cables.)

     Subject #1's False Statements

     Meetings With Quintero, Secord, and Clines

     Subject #1 first testified that he had no contact with Quintero, Secord and Clines between
1984 and 1987.  The FBI Form 302 of an interview Subject #1 gave on April 9, 1987, to agents
assigned to Independent Counsel states:  ``[CIA Subject #1] advised that during his assignment
in  [Central America] he had no contact with the following people:  Richard Secord . . . and
Thomas Clines.''  Subject #1 did indicate that one source of supplies for the contras was the
supermarket managed by Martin.  Subject #1 stated that he never met Martin, however, ``and the
CIA was told to stay away from him.'' 53  But on April 25, 1987, in a deposition for the Select
Committees, Subject #1 admitted that he had met Secord and Clines:

     53 CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 4/9/87, pp. 1-2.  The special agents' handwritten notes are
consistent with the Form 302 prepared following their interview with Subject #1.  One agent
noted specifically:  ``Tom Clines -- never in Hond [Honduras].''

     Q: Richard Secord.  What knowledge do you have of this individual?

     A: Oh, I knew Richard Secord for a number of years.

     Q: Let's say after 1984, the beginning of 1984.  Have you seen Secord?

     A: Yes.

     * * *

     Q: What was the nature of that contact?

     A: Well, I ran into him.  I'm not sure how it occurred.  But he invited me to stop by his place
for a cup of coffee.  I'm not sure if it was '84 or '85.  And I did.

     Q: That was his home?

     A: Yes.

     * * *

     Q: Did he have any specific reason to see you at that time?

     A: It was more just shooting the breeze, as I recall.

     Q: Did he make any statements, to your recollection, that would indicate that he was involved
in private support to the contras?

     A: No.

     Q: Did he give you any reason to believe that he sought something or sought some assistance
from you with respect to that?

     A: No.  No, sir.

     * * *

     Q: When is the last time you saw Mr. Clines?

     A: It was at Secord's house.

     Q: At that same function?

     A: Yes.

     Q: Did Secord or Clines explain why they were together at that time?

     A: No, they did not.

     Q: Was this a family function?

     A: It was just in the morning.

     Q: Just the three of you?

     A: And Secord's wife.

     Q: Did Clines give you any reasons to believe that he was involved in Central
American-related things?

     A: No.

     * * *

     Q: Do you recall the nature of the discussion you did have at that time?

     A: No, I don't.  It was just a general how are you doing type of thing.  Have a cup of coffee.

     Q: How long did that last?

     A: Forty-five minutes, an hour at the most.

     Subject #1 continued to deny having met Quintero.54

     54 CIA Subject #1, Select Committees Deposition, 4/25/87, pp. 76-79, 81 (emphasis added).
Subject #1 was questioned by counsel for the minority of the Senate Select Committee.
Statements by counsel during the deposition indicate that Subject #1 had advance notice of some
of the questions.

     Subject #1 was called before a federal Grand Jury on June 5, 1987.  Subject #1 once again
denied knowing Quintero.  He acknowledged meeting Secord and Clines once in 1985, but he
claimed not to recall how the meeting came about.

     Q: What went on at the meeting, do you know?

     A: He just asked how I was doing, how things were going -- basically that's it -- what's the
situation we're fighting in Nicaragua?  Nothing memorable, actually.

     Q: Were they asking you or you asking them?

     A: They're asking me.  It was more just a chat -- how ya' been?  Haven't seen you in a long
time.

     Q: When did you first become aware, if ever, that [C]lines had a business relationship with
Secord.

     A: I didn't know he had a business relationship with Secord.  I just thought they were personal
friends  from back in those days in the late sixties.

     Q: Did you ever become aware that they had a relationship?

     A: Not until this most recent stuff that's come out.

     Q: What about General Secord.  When did you become aware that he had an involvement in
Central America and supplying the Contras?

     A: I don't know.  I guess when it came out in the press, frankly.

     Q: In other words, in '87?

     A: Whenever that was, yes.

     * * *

     Q: Did you know of the relationship, or did Colonel North ever advise you of the relationship
between North and Secord?

     A: Negative.

     * * *

     Q: Did you have any knowledge of Oliver North's involvement in fund raising or in providing
materials [for the contras]?

     A: No, I did not.

     * * *

     Q: When Secord had you over to his house . . . was he having you over because you are old
friends, or was he having you over to, essentially, probe for information?

     A: I assumed he was having me over because we are old friends.  Or I knew him from the old
days.  That  may have not been the case, of course, now.  That's what I assumed.55

     55 CIA Subject #1, Grand Jury, 6/5/87, pp. 65, 58-62, 72, 86-87 (emphasis added).  In a
deposition taken in August 1987, CIA Subject #1 repeated many of these points.  (CIA Subject
#1, OIC Interview, 8/28/87, pp. 106-9.)

     Independent Counsel interviewed Subject #1 again in June 1988 about his contacts with the
North-Secord Enterprise.  During that interview, Subject #1 admitted for the first time that he
and his wife had met Clines (but not Quintero) in Mexico City sometime in 1984.  As for the July
1985 meeting, Subject #1 said that either Secord had telephoned him or they had run into each
other.  Subject #1 admitted that he was close to North, but denied ever giving Clines or Quintero
his telephone numbers.  The FBI agent who attended the interview noted:

     [CIA Subject #1] did not recall discussing Contra resupply in Honduras with Secord, Clines,
or North.  He did not recall meeting with Secord or Clines to discuss setting up a Contra resupply
operation or obtaining Honduran flight clearances for such an effort. . . . As far as [Subject #1]
knew, Clines was not involved in purchasing weapons for the Contras.56

     56 CIA Subject #1, FBI 302, 6/24/88, pp. 3, 5.

     Subject #1 was interviewed one last time by Independent Counsel in May 1991.  Subject #1
continued to deny (1) knowing as early as 1985 that Clines was involved in weapons shipments
to the contras, (2) ever meeting  Quintero, or meeting Quintero and Clines in Honduras (although
he confirmed that the Miskito Indians had an office in Tegucigalpa), or (3) ever giving Quintero,
Clines, or Secord his telephone number.  He asserted that his first memories of the meeting at
Secord's house may not have been good because the primary purpose for his extended leave in
Washington in the summer of 1985 was to resolve certain upsetting family matters.  He did not
recall discussing the arms supermarket with North, but he admitted that such a discussion would
not have been unusual.  Subject #1 denied discussing the supermarket with Secord during their
meeting.

     Knowledge of Rodriguez and Other Private Benefactors

     CIA Subject #1 claimed not to know much about the NHAO transhipment operation when
questioned about it less than eighteen months after it began: 57

     57 The classified text of this exchange makes Subject #1's denials more unbelievable than
they are rendered here.

     Q: So you don't recall a specific period in which humanitarian assistance was coming only
from Ilopango and not from the United States directly?

     A: No, but it could very well have happened.

     Q: So at some point, at any rate, supplies were coming in, humanitarian supplies were being
received at Aguacate and they could have come from one of two sources, either from the
mainland United States directly or from El Salvador, from Ilopango?

     A: Yes.

     Q: What was the role of [CIA field personnel] with respect to making arrangements to assist
NHAO in providing the assistance in this matter?

     A: Well, we were requested, I believe after the flights resumed, to obtain flight clearances
from the Hondurans to allow those aircraft to come.

     Q: Did [field personnel] obtain clearances for flights from Ilopango?

     A: I don't know.  I had the feeling flights from Ilopango were sort of -- the FDN may have
done those themselves and it was sort of catch as catch can when a bird was coming.  And there
was traffic that went back and forth, but my recollection would have been from the States.

     Q: So you can confirm that [field personnel were] making flight clearance arrangements for
deliveries from the United States?

     A: I have been told that and read that, but I did not remember that.

     Q: But you cannot recall, at any rate, [ ] assistance in making similar arrangements for the
flights from Ilopango?

     A: I can't recall that, no.

     Subject #1 was more categorical in denying knowing about Rodriguez:

     Q: When did you become aware that Max Gomez or Felix Rodriguez was located at
Ilopango?

     A: Oh, I had heard Max Gomez was going to Salvador and Ilopango when I was still in
[Classified Location], so that must have been '83 or early '84.

     Q: Did you at some point link Gomez with the humanitarian assistance program?

     A: No.

     Q: When did you become aware that Gomez was performing some function with respect to
deliveries to the FDN at Aguacate from Ilopango?

     A: I don't recall.  Perhaps the newspapers.

     Q: Did you become aware at some point that private air crews had been retained by someone
to shuttle supplies between Ilopango and Aguacate?

     A: What time period are we talking about -- during the NHAO period?

     Q: Yes.  Let's say in the period of November of '85 to March of '86.

     A: No, I did not.

     Q: So it's your belief that the private air crews did not appear on the scene prior to the winding
down of the NHAO program?

     A: As far as I know.

     * * *

     Q: At the point that the humanitarian program was winding down were you generally aware
that the contras  were the beneficiaries of a private supply network that was operating out of
Ilopango?

     A: I'd say yes.

     Q: Did you associate that network with Max Gomez' presence at Ilopango?

     A: No.

     Q: So it was your understanding that Gomez was at Ilopango solely to assist the Salvadoran
government's counter-insurgency effort?

     A: I may have heard that he was involved in, you know, some of these other things, but Max
Gomez was involved in that for quite some time.  That was his reason for being there, the
insurgency effort, whatever he did with the insurgents or counter-insurgency, yes.58

     58 CIA Subject #1, Select Committees Deposition, 4/25/87, pp. 35-36, 37-38, 46-47
(emphasis added).

     Subject #1's testimony on these subjects was slightly more straightforward in his August 1987
deposition for Independent Counsel.  He admitted that officers under his command -- most likely
those closest to James Adkins -- were responsible for clearing NHAO flights into Honduras.  He
denied learning, however, of a link between NHAO and the private benefactors:

     Q: Were you involved in [clearances for NHAO flights]?

     A: We would also get the cable; sure.

     Q: You personally though?

     A: The cable would go to both locations.

     Q: Would the air ops officer under Adkins command check with you before he talked to the
Honduran government to get the clearance?

     A: Probably with someone [close to Subject #1] or [Adkins] would talk to him probably, yes.

     Q: Do you remember someone talking to you about some of the clearances, any clearances?

     A: No, not really.  Since I first discussed these I had forgotten that we did the clearances to
tell you the truth.

     * * *

     Q: Did you ever make a connection between the NHAO flights and the private lethal flights?

     A: The private lethal flights?

     Q: Yes.

     A: You mean the two?

     Q: Yes.

     A: No.59

     59 CIA Subject #1, OIC Interview, 8/28/87, pp. 97-98, 102 (emphasis added).

     The Decision Not to Prosecute

     Independent Counsel uncovered very little evidence that CIA Subject #1 participated in or
facilitated the affairs of the North-Secord Enterprise.  Subject #1 also appears not to have
knowingly violated any of the statutory  restrictions on assistance to the contras that were in
effect from 1984 to 1986 -- particularly the Boland Amendment.  This left the possibility of
charging Subject #1 with false statements, obstruction, or perjury.  Independent Counsel's
decision whether to prosecute Subject #1 rested on (1) the strength of the case against him, (2)
the significance of his obstruction of the Iran/contra investigations, and (3) the prospects for
furthering Independent Counsel's investigation.

     The strongest evidence against Subject #1 concerned his meetings with Secord, Clines, and
Quintero in 1985.  Independent Counsel believed that the circumstantial and direct evidence
about these meetings was overwhelming.  Nevertheless, the three principal witnesses to the 1985
meetings were carrying significant baggage by 1991.  Secord had pleaded guilty to providing
false testimony; Clines had been convicted of tax evasion; and Quintero had testified only under
immunity.  Moreover, while the witnesses agreed that the meetings had occurred, they disagreed
as to what had been discussed.  Could their testimony convince a jury that Subject #1's motive
for covering up the 1985 meetings was to distance himself from the Enterprise  when Quintero,
Secord, and Clines could not agree whether Subject #1 had been told about it? 60

     60 With respect to the meeting at Secord's house, Independent Counsel also would have had
to overcome an emotional preoccupation defense.

     The evidence of Subject #1's contemporaneous knowledge of Rodriguez and the NHAO
transshipment operation was likewise powerful. Much of the Rodriguez/NHAO case relied on
CIA cables, many of which were written or released by Subject #1.  Nevertheless, in many
significant instances, proving Subject #1 released a cable would have been impossible, as the
original cables had been destroyed by the CIA in the ordinary course of its business.

     The strengths of a Subject #1 case were overshadowed by the relative insignificance of his
false statements, the slim prospects for obtaining important information from him, and the
resources that would have been required to obtain a conviction.  Subject #1 sought only to
distance himself from the Enterprise. No evidence suggested that he was covering for anyone
else, or that he had particularly valuable information concerning the matters about which he lied.
There was no evidence of a special relationship between Subject #1 and North; he  did not appear
to be a confidant of Alan D. Fiers, Jr., or other senior officials at CIA; and Independent Counsel
had scant evidence that Subject #1 was involved in situations that could have incriminated other
senior CIA officials.

Chapter 22

     James L. Adkins

     James L. Adkins was the chief of a CIA facility in Central America from January 1986 until
May 1987.1 Independent Counsel found that from January 1986 until October 1986, when lethal
U.S. Government aid to the contras was prohibited, Adkins knew and approved of
contra-resupply missions by CIA pilots, in violation of the Boland Amendment.  Independent
Counsel also found that Adkins approved of the provision of thousands of dollars of aviation fuel
to the contras -- fuel that was mischarged to CIA accounts -- and lied to investigators from the
CIA's Office of Inspector General about his activities.2  Despite the evidence, Independent
Counsel concluded in November 1987 that he would not bring criminal charges against Adkins,
principally because prosecution would not have advanced Independent Counsel's investigation
into the Iran/contra affair.

     1 In May 1987, the CIA placed Adkins on administrative leave.  The Agency later forced
Adkins to resign.

     2 Inspector's Notes, Adkins Interview, 3/26/87, ANT 003312-14; Inspector's Notes, Adkins
Interview, 5/7/87.  Independent Counsel found additional evidence that Adkins authorized
activities that violated the Mrazek Amendment, Title II of the Military Construction
Appropriations Act of 1987, Pub. L. 99-500, but concluded that the legal guidance that was
provided to Adkins about the Amendment was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that Adkins knew his conduct was illegal.

     Much of the information gathered during Independent Counsel's investigation of Adkins is
classified and came from  classified sources.  A complete account of the investigation is set forth
in the Classified Appendix to this report.

Chapter 23

     Conduct of CIA Officials in November 1986

     Independent Counsel investigated the concerted conduct of senior CIA officials in response to
early congressional inquiries into the Iran/contra affair in November 1986.  This investigation
was substantially complete as of November 17, 1991, by the end of the statutory limitations
period for the conduct under investigation.  Upon completion of this investigation, Independent
Counsel decided not to seek additional indictments.1  The chief reason was the unavailability of
three key witnesses -- former CIA Deputy Director for Operations Clair E. George, his former
special assistant, Norman H. Gardner, Jr., and most importantly, former CIA Director William J.
Casey.2

     1 At the time Independent Counsel reached this decision, one former CIA official, Clair E.
George, was under indictment for perjury committed in December 1986.  George's December
1986 statements were consistent with false statements he made during November 1986.  For
reasons that will be described below, Independent Counsel declined to bring charges for George's
November 1986 statements.

     2 By all accounts, despite showing some signs of the illness that eventually took his life,
Casey was a commanding figure at the Agency during most of November 1986.  He also knew,
or was in a position to know, about aspects of the Iran initiative that others in the CIA professed
to have never learned.  In short, Casey was a man whose potential knowledge of the Iran
initiative and control of the CIA was such that putative defendant could have cast doubt on a
Government case concerning CIA conduct in November 1986 by attributing responsibility to the
deceased Casey.

     Congressional Inquiries Into the Iran Initiative

     After the secret U.S. arms sales to Iran became exposed in the first week of November 1986,
they quickly caught the attention of the Congress. They contained at least three troublesome
aspects:  (1) The sale of arms to a ``terrorist state'' was contrary to express policy, and in violation
of export restrictions; (2) The link between the arms sales and the release of American hostages
also contradicted the stated Reagan Administration position of not dealing with kidnappers; (3)
The Administration had failed to inform Congress of the initiative.3

     3 50 U.S.C.  501 (1982).  On congressional reaction to news of the Iran initiative, see
Hamilton, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/19/90, pp. 2177-78; ``Hill Probes of NSC Planned,''
The Washington Post, 11/10/86, A1;  ``Congress Members Predict Move to Curb President's
Secret Diplomacy,'' Los Angeles Times, 11/15/86, Pt. I, 9.

     The Reagan Administration first responded to these reports with a series of public denials.
When this strategy failed, President Reagan decided to address the nation on November 13, 1986.
In anticipation of this address, four congressional leaders received a briefing on  November 12,
1986, about the arms sales.4  President Reagan opened the briefing by assuring the leaders that
the sales were legal and that arms had not been exchanged for hostages.  National Security
Adviser John M. Poindexter described the Iran initiative without disclosing -- and sometimes
affirmatively disclaiming -- activities in support of the arms sales prior to a Presidential
covert-action Finding dated January 17, 1986. Casey was among those present.5

     4 By this time, the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) had called for
briefings on the Iran initiative by Poindexter, Shultz, Secretary of Defense Weinberger, and
Casey.  (Letter from Hamilton to Poindexter, 11/10/86, North Trial, GX 119.)

     5 For a more complete discussion of this briefing, see Reagan and Meese chapters.

     CIA Briefing

     On November 13, shortly before the President's speech, Poindexter and Casey briefed five
senators and three congressmen on the speech and the January 17 Finding.  Once again
Poindexter denied any U.S. Government activity before the January 17 Finding ``except talk,''
while Casey remained largely silent.  By the next day, however, it was clear to Casey that the
Administration's briefings and the President's speech had not satisfied the intelligence oversight
committees.6  Casey contacted Deputy National  Security Adviser Alton G. Keel for guidance on
what to tell the House and Senate intelligence committees in scheduled appearances the
following week.  Keel passed along Casey's request to Poindexter, who in turn directed the
National Security Council's operating officer on the Iran project, Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, to
respond to the director's queries.7

     6 November 14 was also the day that the CIA formally notified the intelligence committees of
the January 17 Finding.

     7 PROFs Note from Pearson to Poindexter, 11/14/86, AKW 021641; North Notebook, AMX
001684; DCI Phone Log, 11/14/86, ER 320.

     On Saturday, November 15, 1986, Casey spoke with Senators Durenberger and Leahy of the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI).  Casey and Durenberger agreed that committee
staffers would meet with CIA personnel on Tuesday, November 18, 1986, to receive a
preliminary briefing on the initiative and to advise the CIA of SSCI's concerns.  This briefing
would be the first expansive CIA presentation to Congress by persons closely associated with the
Iran operation.8

     8 George, Select Committees Deposition, 4/24/87, pp. 126-27.  By November 18, the briefing
had been expanded to include staff from HPSCI.

     The CIA briefed committee staffers on the morning of November 18 at CIA headquarters.
CIA Deputy Director for Operations Clair E. George was the principal speaker, supported by the
deputy chief of the CIA's Near East Division; 9 the Director of the Office of  Congressional
Affairs, David Gries; CIA comptroller, Daniel Childs; an executive assistant to Casey (EA/DCI);
10 two special assistants to George, Norman H. Gardner, Jr., and CIA Subject #2; 11 counsel to
the Operations Directorate (DO), W. George Jameson; and the head of a DO congressional
liaison unit, George W. Gerner.  The NSC's director of legislative affairs, Ronald K. Sable, also
attended.

     9 The deputy's identity is classified.

     10 The identity of Casey's assistant is classified.  In United States v. George, the assistant was
called CIA Officer #8.

     11 The identity of this officer is classified.  It is disclosed in the Classified Appendix to this
chapter.

     While the briefing was not transcribed, Gerner took notes.  These notes indicate that from the
outset of the briefing, Clair George attempted to limit himself to describing his directorate's
support to what he called ``the White House initiative to Tehran,'' and tried to avoid discussing
the legal or political wisdom of the project.  George nevertheless stated this about the CIA's
involvement:

      -- In prepared remarks, George implied that Iranians deposited funds for American arms
directly into a CIA account.  In fact, Iranian payments passed through several hands (including
those of retired Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord) before reaching CIA accounts.

      -- In response to a staffer's question, George stated that, ``to the best of his knowledge,'' a
CIA proprietary was used on only one occasion in the course of the initiative.  Later George
stated that there was no CIA support to the initiative prior to  1986.  In fact, a CIA proprietary
was also used to ship Israeli HAWK missiles to Iran in November 1985.

      -- In response to press reports of arms shipments before the January 17 Finding, George
responded that this ``could be true, but it wasn't us.''  CIA Director of Congressional Affairs
David Gries echoed George's remarks.  Again, these statements ignored the November 1985
HAWK shipment carried by a CIA proprietary.12

     12 Gerner, Memorandum for the Record, 11/18/86, ER 29688-95.  Notes taken by two SSCI
staffers, Edward Levine and Daniel Finn, corroborate Gerner's account of the briefing.  (Finn,
Memorandum for the Record, Subject:  Iranian Arms Deal, 11/19/86, SSCI 86-3964; Levine,
Memorandum for the Record, Subject:  CIA Briefing on support to the Iran Arms Program,
11/18/86, SSCI 86-3958.)

     The Director Testifies

     The next congressional briefings by the CIA came on Friday, November 21, 1986, in Casey's
appearances before HPSCI and SSCI.13  Casey came before each committee with a prepared
statement and a retinue of advisers, along with representatives from the State and Defense
departments.14  In both appearances, Casey was the  primary spokesman.  In his opening remarks
to HPSCI, Casey volunteered that ``[t]he CIA's involvement [with the Iran initiative] began in
late November of 1985'' when the CIA was asked to recommend an airline to transport ``bulky
cargo to an unspecified location in the Middle East.''  Casey suggested that the CIA's associate
deputy director for operations, Edward Juchniewicz, and the deputy director of central
intelligence at the time, John McMahon, had approved the flight, although McMahon ``directed
that we would not provide any future flights into Iran in the absence of a Finding.'' 15

     13 Both of these appearances came on the heels of two separate briefings of the members of
the intelligence committees by Poindexter.  Gardner attended these briefings and remained silent
as Poindexter lied about prior presidential approval for the November 1985 HAWK shipment.
Gardner later denied that he went to these briefings to insure that Casey and Poindexter were
saying the same thing.  (Gardner, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/23/90, pp. 2676-79, 2689-91.)

     14 Casey appeared before HPSCI and SSCI with these CIA officers:  George; CIA General
Counsel David Doherty; Comptroller Childs; National Intelligence Officer Charles Allen; CIA
Subject #2; Gries; and another member of Gries's staff.  Gardner joined Casey for his afternoon
HPSCI session; George Jameson joined Casey for his SSCI appearance.  Also present with Casey
before HPSCI and SSCI were Under Secretary of State Michael H. Armacost and his executive
assistant; Assistant Secretary of State Richard W. Murphy; State Department Legal Adviser
Abraham D. Sofaer (HPSCI morning session only); two deputy assistant secretaries of state;
Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Armitage; and a Department of Defense legislative
affairs representative.  John Bolton of the Justice Department attended the SSCI session only.

     15 Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, pp. 5-6.  In early December 1986, Casey corrected
this testimony to say that DDCI McMahon had not approved the flight.  (Casey, Defense
Appropriations Subcommittee Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 10.)

     Casey went on to describe briefly the financial mechanics of the arms sales:

     First, the Iranian intermediary would deposit funds in an Israeli account, the funds would then
be transferred to a sterile US-controlled account in an overseas bank.  Using these funds the CIA
would work with the Army Logistics Command to obtain any material  and the material would
then be transported to Israel for future shipment to Iran.

     Casey fielded questions from HPSCI members, House Majority Leader James Wright and
House Minority Leader Robert Michel.  The questioning of Casey went past the allotted time,
forcing HPSCI to ask Casey to return that afternoon.16

     16 Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, pp. 11, 51.

     Casey's intervening appearance before SSCI was marked by much sharper exchanges than
those that had occurred before HPSCI.  After Casey repeated his HPSCI opening statement,
Senate Minority Leader Robert Byrd raised the possibility of placing all of the witnesses under
oath.  Chairman Durenberger denied the request and the questioning of Casey began with Sen.
Leahy.  Leahy had attended a briefing by Poindexter that morning and had learned that there had
been activities in 1985 -- prior to the signing of a Presidential Finding authorizing such activity.
Leahy quickly inquired about the November 1985 HAWK shipment and the CIA's
contemporaneous knowledge of its contents.  Casey explained that the CIA did not know of the
contents until some time in January 1986, but pleaded that he was uncertain whether the air crew
had learned earlier than that.  Leahy pressed the issue, because he could not square the CIA's
attributing the flight to the NSC with what  Poindexter had told him: that the NSC had just
learned about the flight.17

     17 Casey, SSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, pp. 7-26, 31-36.

     Casey returned to HPSCI for further questioning at 1:50 p.m.  Chairman Hamilton sought a
summary of ``all the arms transfers that reached Iran pursuant to this initiative, both direct
transfers from the United States, which may have gone through Israel, but nonetheless were
basically direct, and transfers by the Israeli government to Iran in which the President approved.''
At Clair George's suggestion, CIA Subject #2 recited a list of shipments.  This list included the
September 1985 Israeli shipment of TOW missiles to Iran, the February, May, and November
1986 TOW shipments, and the May 1986 U.S. shipment of HAWK spare parts to Iran.  CIA
Subject #2 did not include, however, the November 1985 U.S.-assisted shipment of 18 HAWK
missiles to Iran.  CIA Subject #2 also did not disclose the shipment upon closer questioning:

     The Chairman.  Now, what about the amount of arms sent from Israel to Iran?

     Mr. Childs.  We don't have that.

     Mr. George.  We don't have that, Mr. Chairman.

     The Chairman.  Other than these?

     CIA Subject #2.  Other than the September 1985 shipment of TOWs we don't know.

     The members of HPSCI also questioned the CIA on the extent of presidential approval for
Israeli actions in the initiative, including the November 1985 HAWK shipment:

     The Chairman.  Well, look, there have been reports in the press that I have seen, $40, $60
million has been sent in by Israel.  Under the law Israel could not ship those without the approval
of the President.  Am I right about that?

     Mr. [Richard] Armitage [Assistant Secretary of Defense].  That is right.

     The Chairman.  How many times did the President give his approval for Israel to ship arms
into Iran?

     Mr. Allen.  None to our knowledge, sir.

     The Chairman.  The President did not approve any arms shipments by Israel directly into Iran?

     Mr. Allen.  We don't know.

     Mr. George.  We don't know.

     Mr. Allen.  We don't know that and --

     Mr. George [sic].  What do you mean we don't know it?

     Mr. Allen.  We don't know.

     The Chairman.  You mean the President hasn't told you?

     Mr. Allen.  We have no knowledge of that as part of this project whatsoever.

     Mr. George.  We received the missiles, we transported them to Israel and away they go.  We
don't know whether or what transpires.  We bring them to Kelly Air Force Base I should say.18

     18 George, HPSCI, 11/21/86, pp. 75-79.

     Casey returned to CIA headquarters, angry that his Directorate of Operations had not served
him well in preparing his testimony.  Gardner reported to Poindexter later that afternoon that
``nothing that we did up there today has done anything to answer their concerns about the whole
Iran activity.'' 19

     19 Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, p. 19; Gardner, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/23/90, pp.
2695-96.

     The CIA's Incorrect Statements

     At least seven of the statements described above were incorrect:

     (1) George's statement to intelligence committee staff on November 18, 1986, that the
Iranians deposited funds directly into a CIA account for the purchase of arms;

     (2)  George's twin denials that same day of any CIA support for the Iran initiative prior to the
January 17 Finding;

     (3)  David Gries's denial that there had been CIA support for the Iran arms sales prior to the
January 17 finding;

     (4)  The prepared remarks of Casey on November 21, 1986, that CIA involvement with the
arms sales began in November 1985;

     (5)  Additional prepared remarks by Casey, echoing George's statement about the flow of
funds;

     (6)  CIA Subject #2's failure to include the November 1985 HAWK shipment in the list that
he recited to HPSCI on November 21, 1986, of all of the arms shipments by the Israelis and the
Americans in support of the initiative; and

     (7)  Allen and George's denials before HPSCI of knowing whether the President had approved
Israeli arms shipments prior to the January 17 Finding.

     As in most other investigations involving illegal false statements, the key questions in
assessing the liability of senior CIA officials for these statements were, first, whether each
official knew at the time he spoke that his statement was false, and second, whether that official
deliberately made that statement.  The answers to some of these questions are found upon close
examination of what happened at the CIA prior to Casey's appearances before the intelligence
committees on November 21, 1986.

     Disclosure and Alarm

     According to Charles Allen, the National Intelligence Officer for Counter-Terrorism and the
CIA analyst who worked most closely with the Iran initiative, the CIA's first response to the
public disclosures of the initiative in early November 1986 was no response. Allen departed on a
trip to Israel, during which he met with the Israeli representative in the 1986 arms sales, Amiram
Nir.  Nir quizzed Allen on how the United States would respond to the  disclosures, and Allen
was chagrined to admit that the United States apparently intended to do nothing.20

     20 Allen, FBI 302, 11/6/91, p. 3.  On the day before leaving on this trip, Allen met at the Key
Bridge Marriott for the third time with Roy Furmark, an associate of arms-sales financier Adnan
Khashoggi.  Furmark earlier had given Allen evidence that profits from the Iran arms sales may
have been diverted to other projects, including the contras.  Furmark told Allen that investors in
the initiative who had not been paid were threatening to expose it.  (Memorandum from Allen to
Casey, 11/7/86, ER 46449-52.)

     Unbeknownst to Allen, some in the U.S. Government, even in the CIA, were preparing to
respond to the growing firestorm.  Poindexter asked North on November 5, 1986, to prepare a
chronology of involvement in the initiative.  The next day, after a morning staff meeting, the
chief of the CIA's Iran Branch (C/Iran) 21 -- who was the CIA's day-to-day operational contact
with the NSC in the late stages of the initiative -- decided on his own that he would prepare a
chronology of CIA involvement.  C/Iran's chronology contained generally accurate statements
about CIA involvement in the Iran arms sales, including a note that CIA activities began in
September 1985.  On the advice of his immediate superior, Chief of the CIA's Near East Division
Thomas Twetten, C/Iran personally delivered a copy of his chronology to North on November 6.
Upon reading the section concerning the CIA's 1985 activities, North expressed  amazement that
C/Iran wrote about it, since ``you were not involved.'' 22

     21 The identity of this officer is classified.  He testified as C/Iran Branch #2 in the second
George trial.

     22 Subject:  Background and Chronology of Special Project, 11/6/86, ER 24517-20; Earl
Note, 11/5/86 & 11/6/86; Earl, FBI 302, 4/21/87, p. 2; Earl, Select Committees Deposition,
5/30/87, pp. 53-55; Earl, North Trial Testimony, 3/23/89, pp. 5546-47; C/Iran, FBI 302,
10/29/91, pp. 6-7; WAVE Records, ALU 049209-17; 11/6/86, ER 18195-98; AKW 10038-45;
North, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/13/90, pp. 1443-47; Earl Note, 11/10/86; Earl, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/30/87, pp. 76-77.

     For their part, Casey and Deputy CIA Director Robert Gates' stated concerns about the arms
sales focused on their legality.  Casey and Gates met with Poindexter on the morning of
November 6, 1986, to discuss what to do about allegations that profits from Iranian arms sales
had been diverted to other covert projects.  According to Gates, Casey proposed that Poindexter
raise these allegations with White House Counsel Peter Wallison.  Poindexter said he would take
up the matter with NSC Counsel Paul B. Thompson instead.  After the meeting, Gates returned to
CIA headquarters and ordered CIA General Counsel David Doherty to take his first look at the
January 17, 1986 Finding.23

     23 Gates 1986 Appointment Book; DCI Schedule for 11/6/86; Gates SSCI Testimony,
12/4/86, pp. 23-24, 51, 53-59; Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 23-25; Gates, SSCI Deposition,
7/31/87, pp. 36-39; Doherty Notes, 11/6/86, ER 46562; Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, pp. 2-3;
Doherty, FBI 302, 11/13/87, pp. 3-4; Doherty, SSCI Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 55.  Gates asked the
NSC for the Finding during the now famous  North-Casey-Gates luncheon of October 9, 1986.
See Gates chapter.  Inexplicably, it took the NSC several weeks to get the Finding to Gates.
(Gates, SSCI Testimony, 12/4/86; Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 9-10; Gates, SSCI Deposition,
7/31/87, p. 26; EA/DCI, FBI 302, 9/12/91, pp. 6-7.)

     The day after C/Iran wrote his chronology, he revised and sent it to Associate Deputy Director
for Operations Bertram Dunn and Casey.24  What Dunn and Casey did with the chronology is
not known.  Dunn later denied having seen the chronology or having had any role in preparing
CIA responses to inquiries about the Iran initiative.  CIA Subject #2, who worked as closely with
Dunn as he did with Clair George, stated that he did not recall seeing the chronology -- with its
explicit references to CIA activities in 1985 -- at the time he was drafting testimony for George
in November 1986.25

     24 DO 44631-35 and DO 83915-18.  These papers are identical.  Independent Counsel
obtained the first from a ``DDO Iran Soft File'' recovered from Clair George's safe.  The second
of these papers was found in a working file labeled ``DO Iran/Contra Investigation,'' along with
other papers of Gardner.  Both papers bear C/Iran's handwritten note that his November 7
chronology was passed to Dunn and Casey on 11/7/86. C/Iran could not recall who asked him to
send his chronology to these men.  (C/Iran, FBI 302, 10/29/91 p. 71.)

     25 Dunn, FBI 302, 9/25/91, p. 17; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p. 4.

     Preparing for Clair George's Briefing

     During the week of November 9, 1986, it became clear to Casey that the controversy
surrounding the Iran initiative would not abate.  Organized efforts thus began to write the story of
the Agency's involvement with the arms  sales.26  After a senior staff meeting on November 12,
Gates asked Doherty to join George, Twetten, and him for a brief meeting.  Doherty and Gates
listened while George and Twetten summarized the CIA's involvement in the Iran initiative --
activities that Doherty believed were consistent with the Finding he had read the previous
week.27

     26 Casey also consulted with other senior Administration officials on the text of President
Reagan's first public statements on the initiative and sat in on the President's first briefing of
congressional leaders on the sales.  See Regan chapter for a fuller discussion of the preparation of
the President's statement; Letter, Casey to Poindexter, 11/10/86, ER 24035 (transmitting draft of
statement); DCI Schedule, 11/10/86, ER 326-27; Letter, Casey to Poindexter, 11/10/86, ER
24032-34 (transmitting revised two-page draft statement); AKW 20674-77 (same, recovered
from NSC); DCI Schedule, 11/12/86, ER 323-24; Presidential log, 11/12/86, ALU 027752.

     By November 12, Casey and Gates had concluded that they could not respond to Congress
unless the President lifted his order in the January 17 Finding that prohibited congressional
notification of it.  Poindexter agreed to end the ban.  (Draft letter from Casey to Poindexter,
11/12/86, ER 27233; Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, p. 25; Gates, SSCI Deposition, 7/31/87, p. 39;
Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 200-01.)

     27 Gates 1986 Appointment Book; Doherty, SSCI Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 55-56; Doherty,
FBI 302, 11/13/87, p. 3; Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, pp. 3-4.  While Doherty could not recall
why he was asked to this meeting, he believed that it prompted him to ask others within the CIA's
Office of General Counsel (OGC) to begin drafting their own chronologies.  It may have been at
this point that an OGC lawyer, Bernard Makowka, told Doherty about pre-1986 activities and his
involvement in the preparation of a retroactive finding that covered them.  (Makowka, FBI 302,
10/11/91, p. 2.)

     Charles Allen returned from Israel on November 12 to find that the Agency had gone from
nonchalance to panic.  His colleague on the Iran initiative, George Cave, had  returned from
meetings with the Iranians in Geneva, and was now in daily contact with the White House in the
preparation of the President's November 13 address.  Clair George for his part instructed CIA
Subject #2 on November 13 to prepare a chronology and an opening statement of the Directorate
of Operations's involvement in the initiative, in anticipation of a request for CIA testimony.28

     28 Allen, FBI 302, 11/6/91, pp. 3-4; WAVE records, 9/28/87; Cave, Grand Jury, 1/15/88, pp.
171-172; Cave, Select Committees Deposition, 4/17/87, pp. 170-71; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302s,
3/4/88, p. 2 & 9/17/91, p. 4.

     CIA Subject #2 claimed not to have known much about the Iran arms sales at the time George
directed him to start drafting.  Subject #2 thus sought out Twetten, who had been involved with
the initiative since January 1986.  Twetten was scheduled to leave the country on November 15,
and so he turned over much of the work to C/Iran.29

     29 CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p. 4; C/Iran, FBI 302, 10/29/91, p. 7; CIA Chronology,
2/27/87.

     Over the next few days (approximately November 13 through November 15) Twetten had
C/Iran draft and revise several documents concerning CIA involvement in the arms sales.  For
some reason, all of these documents focused solely on CIA activities following the January 17,
1986 Finding.30  This decision or understanding was in effect at least through Clair George's
briefing of intelligence committee staff on November 18.  These documents also were the source
for George and Casey's later misstatements that the Iranians had deposited payments for arms
directly into a CIA bank account -- omitting Secord.  This omission caused George Cave, who
read the statements prior to November 18, to note in the margins of his copies of these
documents:  ``Not True.'' 31

     30 In his October 1991 interview with Independent Counsel, C/Iran vaguely recalled
instructions from Twetten that he should limit his chronology to those events occurring after the
CIA's Near East Division, the Division for which both C/Iran and Twetten worked, began
supporting the Iran initiative.  (C/Iran, FBI 302, 10/29/91, p. 8.)  CIA Subject #2 alleged that the
congressional committees had limited their request for information to 1986 activities.  (CIA
Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p. 15.)  Independent Counsel found no evidence to support CIA
Subject #2's claim.  At the 1990 trial of Poindexter, Gardner claimed that the omission of 1985
references in these documents was not part of an effort to sell a ``cover story'' to the Congress.
(Gardner, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/23/90, pp. 2647-51.)

     31 Draft chronologies DO 44631, ER 29709, ER 18203, ER 18200, ER 18199 & ER 18202;
Cave, Grand Jury, 11/22/91, pp. 13-14.

     Clair George reviewed C/Iran's papers prior to his briefing of intelligence  committee staff on
November 18.32  George's handwritten notes on these documents are telling. George was
familiar enough with the flow of funds from the Iranians to write ``Gorba -> Secord -> CIA
Account -> DOD'' next to one of C/Iran's descriptions of the flow, and he replaced the words
``Iranians deposit'' in two other descriptions with the words ``Channel deposit'' and ``System
deposit.'' George knew or was informed of the minutiae of the initiative well enough to insert, for
example, the number of communications officers and false passports provided to McFarlane's
mission to Tehran in May 1986.33

     32 The evidence includes C/Iran's comments on the draft statement ER 18203, which indicate
that a draft had been passed to the DDO's office sometime during the weekend of November
15-16; statements made on documents prepared on November 17 that reflect George's comments
on C/Iran's drafts; and George's near-verbatim recitation of the contents of one C/Iran document
during the staff briefing.  See DO 44620-17, which were retrieved from a ``DDO Iran Soft File''
and bear George's handwriting. In his second trial, George admitted that he used the C/Iran
documents.

     33 DO 44620-17.

     Did George Know the Truth?

     Clair George knew during his briefing of intelligence staffers on November 18, 1986, and in
his reviews that week of Casey's testimony, that there was something more to the CIA's obtaining
money from the Iranians than having  the Iranians make a deposit into a CIA bank account.34
According to Cave, he informed one of George's special assistants, Gardner -- most likely before
George's briefing -- that the description of the money flow found in George's briefing papers was
inaccurate.35

     34 For a fuller discussion of the evidence that supports this conclusion, see George chapter.

     35 Cave, George Trial Testimony, 8/11/92, pp. 2849-51; Cave, Grand Jury, 11/22/91, pp.
27-28. It appears that George was prepared largely by his special assistants, Gardner and CIA
Subject #2.  Independent Counsel found no evidence that CIA Subject #2 was aware of the
financial aspects of what all witnesses said was a closely held program.  Two CIA officers apart
from Cave who knew about the finances of the initiative, C/Iran and his predecessor, claimed that
they did not speak with George about this subject close to the time of the briefing. Twetten was
in the Mideast in the days leading up to the briefing, and there is no record of communications
between him and George during this time.

     George knew that his statement was false.  George had been absent from CIA headquarters
over the weekend of the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment, but he was involved in
numerous events that followed in its wake.  According to Juchniewicz and McMahon, George
knew the ``full story'' about the  flight within three days.  McMahon also recalled repeatedly
telling George to find out from the NSC -- particularly Poindexter -- whether the President had
signed the retroactive Finding covering the shipment.36  Further, Gardner had been at CIA
headquarters when the NSC made its request for assistance for the HAWK shipment. Both he
and CIA Subject #2 later conceded that they would have reviewed closely held CIA cable traffic
that discussed the flight.37  Both men denied that they remembered the flight in  November 1986
until some time after George's erroneous briefing of committee staff on November 18.38

     36 Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 10/8/91, p. 4; McMahon, SSCI Deposition, 6/1/87, pp. 95-101, 108;
McMahon, Grand Jury, 10/15/91, pp. 9-10; McMahon, Grand Jury, 9/18/91, pp. 9-20.  North's
notebooks for November 25 and 26, 1985, support the view that George was upset about the
shipment on November 25, that he spoke with Poindexter about it, and that he was aware of
General Counsel Stanley Sporkin's advice to get a Finding.  Independent Counsel also discovered
that shortly after the shipment, George visited a European location that was involved in the
November 1985 shipment.  Officers who met with George during the trip, however, deny that
they discussed anything with George about the shipment, other than commenting about the flurry
of cable traffic.  ([Classified Identity Withheld], FBI 302, 11/5/91, p. 8; [Classified Identity
Withheld], FBI 302, 11/7/91, p. 5.)  George testified to trying to gather facts in November 1985,
but he denied that he was aware of a 1985 hostages finding.  (George, Select Committees
Testimony, pp. 200-01, 290-93; George, Select Committees Testimony, 8/6/87, p. 5; George,
Select Committees Deposition, 4/24/87, pp. 85-86.)

     37 Gardner, Grand Jury, 4/19/91, pp. 97-100; CIA Subject #2, SSCI Testimony, 12/9/86, pp.
4-5.  CIA Subject #2 testified that he did not connect the November 1985 incident to the Iran
initiative until November 1986.  (Ibid., p. 4.)

     38 Their stories are not consistent.  Gardner claimed to have recalled the flight ``vaguely''
during a conversation that he and CIA Subject #2 had with North in North's office during the
afternoon following George's briefing.  (See text and citations at notes below.)  Subject #2
recalled some aspects of Gardner's story, but linked his and Gardner's recognition of the flight to
a phone call from someone in the CIA's Air Branch, after Gardner and Subject #2 returned from
North's office.  (CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, pp. 3-4.)

     In order to charge George's misstatements concerning the November 1985 HAWK shipment,
Independent Counsel would have had to prove either that George recalled the flight
independently of Gardner and CIA Subject #2, or else that Gardner and CIA Subject #2 had lied
themselves.39 Independent Counsel found no direct evidence that George independently recalled
the November 1985 flight in November 1986.

     39 Proving that CIA Subject #2 or Gardner remembered the flight prior to George's briefing
could have been enough to place knowledge in George's mind, as Subject #2 said he brought the
flight to George's attention immediately after learning about it in November 1986.  (CIA Subject
#2, FBI 302s, 3/4/88, p. 2 & 9/17/91, pp. 3-4.)

     There was evidence that information about the flight was developed for Gardner and CIA
Subject #2 prior to George's briefing, but this evidence was not sufficient to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that Gardner and CIA Subject #2 were lying. On the evening of Wednesday,
November 12, 1986, a lawyer who was assigned to the CIA's Air Branch, Cynthia Erskine, had
dinner with a pilot for the CIA proprietary that had ferried the HAWK missiles to Iran in
November 1985.  During their dinner, the pilot boasted to Erskine about flying Israeli ``Gabriel''
anti-aircraft missiles to Iran in November 1985, an effort that the pilot linked to the
arms-for-hostages deals.  Erskine repeated the pilot's story to CIA General Counsel Doherty the
next morning.  Later that day or the following Monday, Erskine spoke to the CIA's contact with
the pilot's proprietary.  That officer gave Erskine the flight records of the November 1985
shipment, which the officer was carrying.40  Erskine used the flight records in editing a
chronology prepared by the Air Branch of its involvement with the Iran arms sales, which she
finished by the end of November 17.  Erskine had to correct the Air Branch's chronology to
reflect that missiles had been shipped in November 1985, instead of oil-drilling equipment. She
attached the flight records to the chronology, which she understood was intended for George.41

     40 Independent Counsel was unable to ask this CIA officer why he had these records.  By the
time Independent Counsel had interviewed Erskine, the officer was dead.

     41 Erskine, Memorandum for the Record, Subject:  [Proprietary] Flight to Tehran, 11/13/86,
ER 91-00487-88; Erskine, FBI 302s, 9/27/91, pp. 3-4 & 11/21/91, p. 3.  Erskine became firmer
in her recollection of these dates in her second interview.  She was initially unable to date her
completion of the Air Branch's chronology.  Further, at some point after she spoke with Doherty
but before she saw the CIA's contact with the proprietary, Erskine says she met an Air Branch
supervisor who denied that the proprietary's flight records existed.  Neither the Air Branch
supervisor nor another CIA officer who was involved in the Air Branch chronology could say
when he received his first instructions about it.

     The finished chronologies are dated November 25, 1986, although there are undated draft
chronologies that point to earlier Air Branch contacts with George's office.  For his part, CIA
Subject #2 recalled that the first information that reached George's office on November 18 about
the November 1985 flight came from the Air Branch, and not the other way around.  (CIA
Subject #2, FBI 302s, 3/4/88, p. 2 & 9/17/91, pp. 3-4.)

     Erskine's story of November 13 had puzzled Doherty, as it did not square with the briefing
that he had received from George and Twetten the previous day.  Doherty asked the legal adviser
to the Operations Directorate, attorney W. George Jameson, to question directorate personnel
about the flight. Jameson initially reported on November 13 or 14 that Gardner and CIA Subject
#2 were unaware of November 1985 activity.  By early the next week, sometime prior to
November 19, 1986, Jameson called back and said that the Operations Directorate now was
acknowledging a November 1985 flight involving HAWK missiles.42

     42 Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, pp. 4-7.  Doherty also may have received confirmation of the
November 1985 flight on November 17, 1986, during a meeting with former CIA general counsel
Stanley Sporkin.  See text accompanying notes below.  Jameson and Erskine's efforts could have
prompted CIA Subject #2 or Gardner to contact Air Branch personnel earlier than CIA Subject
#2 or Gardner has claimed.  Air Branch officers could not recall when they first spoke to the
DDO's office about the November 1985 flight.  (See Air Branch Supervisor, Grand Jury, 11/8/91,
p. 32; [Classified Identity Withheld], Grand Jury, 11/8/91, pp. 27-33.)

     Charles Allen also believed that CIA Subject #2 and Gardner had been confronted prior to
George's November 18 briefing of congressional staffers with memories of the November 1985
HAWK shipment.  Allen testified that Gates called a meeting on November 17, 1986, to assign
responsibilities for Casey's upcoming testimony.  Allen recalled that many senior CIA officials
attended.  Allen claimed further that, after  Gates had concluded his business and left the room,
Allen presented details of the HAWK shipment and witnessed a debate between former
Associate Deputy Director for Operations Juchniewicz and Duane R. Clarridge, the CIA officer
who had coordinated the CIA's activities in support of the shipment.  Allen recalled that George
listened passively, while CIA Subject #2 took notes.43

     43 Allen, FBI 302, 11/6/91, pp. 3-4.

     Allen's description of this meeting could not be corroborated.  Gates's calendar shows a brief
meeting late in the afternoon of November 17. No one placed Allen at this meeting.  Juchniewicz
claimed that, while he recalled a large gathering of senior CIA officials and vaguely remembered
discussions about the flight, he and Casey's calendars date this meeting as December 1, 1986.
Juchniewicz did not recall speaking with anyone at the CIA prior to Casey's November 21
testimony.44

     44 Gates 1986 Appointment Book; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p. 10; EA/DCI, FBI
302, 9/12/91, p. 11; Gates, Grand Jury, 6/26/87, pp. 27-28; Gates, Select Committees Deposition,
7/31/87, p. 47; Gates, Grand Jury, 2/19/88, p. 58; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91, pp. 202-03;
Juchniewicz, Phone Interview, 11/8/91; DCI Calendar, 12/1/86, ER 290; Jameson, Meeting With
DCI, 12/1/86, AKY 006443-48.  Allen insisted that this meeting occurred on a Monday before
``Casey's testimony'' because he had to postpone a meeting of a public committee that met
Monday evenings.  (Allen, FBI 302, 11/6/91, p. 4.)  December 1 was also a Monday evening,
however, and it came before a series of congressional appearances by Casey in December 1986
on the Iran/contra matter.  Allen also wanted to place Doherty at the meeting.  (Ibid.)  Doherty's
conduct on November 19, see text accompanying notes 63-65 below, suggests that he was not
present for any discussion with Juchniewicz about the flight prior to that date.

     Questions remain unexplained about two documents generated during this period, documents
which indicate recognition of the November 1985 flight at some point earlier than CIA Subject
#2 and Gardner admitted:

      -- Gardner's handwritten notes appear on a copy of a statement drafted by C/Iran prior to
George's briefing.  Gardner listed on the front of the statement the dates of release of hostages
Benjamin Weir, Lawrence Jenco, and David Jacobsen.  On the back of the last page of the
statement is a handwritten list of items that parallels the topics of concern raised by intelligence
committee staffers during George's briefing, which Gardner attended.  On the same page,
however, are the words `` '85 Trip'' -- an indication that, at least during George's briefing, an
additional 1985 event struck Gardner as important.45

     45 Draft Statement, DO 84292-86.  For corroboration of the timing of the draft, see draft DO
83905-11; draft DO 84074-80; Gardner, FBI 302, 6/17/87 302; draft ER 18359-65; C/Iran, FBI
302, 10/29/91; DIRECTOR 161904, 11/18/86, DO 83899-904; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302,
9/17/91.  The notes of Gerner and the SSCI staffers who attended George's November 18 briefing
make no mention of any 1985 trips.  They do refer, however, to NSC ``contacts'' with Iranian
representatives in Western Europe in 1985.  (See sources cited in n. 12 above.)

      -- CIA Subject #2 testified that, on the afternoon of November 18, he wrote a one-page paper
that presents the first detailed description of the November 1985 shipment.  Gardner and Subject
#2 visited North around 2:00 p.m., to report on George's briefing.46  Subject #2 and Gardner
then returned to Langley, where Subject #2 claimed they received a report from the Air Branch
indicating that there had been a November 1985 flight in support of the initiative.  Subject #2 and
Gardner immediately reported the flight to George, who instructed the men to get all of the facts
together.  According to Subject #2, the facts of the flight were sketchy, and not easily gathered.
Nevertheless, Subject #2 claimed to have written the document -- a rather detailed account of the
November 1985 shipment -- that same afternoon, in time for Gardner to take a copy of it to
Casey in Central America early the next morning.47

     46 Interestingly, North's crumpled notes of his debriefing from Gardner and Subject #2,
recovered from a ``burn bag'' at NSC, contain the point:  ``Not reveal Dick Secord.''  (11/18/86,
AKW 32705.)  North did not recall these notes or the debriefing.  (North, Grand Jury, 11/15/91,
pp. 31-33.)

     47 Subject: CIA Airline Involvement, ER 24219; North Calendar, 11/18/86, AMX 5517-21;
WAVE Records, 9/28/87; AKW 32705; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, pp. 3-4.  CIA Subject
#2 claimed that November 18 was further complicated with a return visit to North's office that
evening to compare chronologies.  (Ibid; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 3/4/88, pp. 3-4.)  No one
corroborated this visit, nor does Subject #2's name appear on White House gate logs on
November 18 after his afternoon talk with North.

     Subject #2's recollection of the timing of these events and his writing the first CIA chronology
acknowledging the November 1985 flight is unconvincing.  The completeness of the chronology
and Gardner's briefing notes indicate that Clair George's assistants knew that George was falsely
denying to congressional staffers CIA activities prior to 1986.

     Preparing Casey's Testimony

     Casey's preparations for his intelligence committee testimony were handicapped by his taking
a twice-postponed trip to Central America between November 16 and November 20.  Before
leaving, Casey instructed George to gather facts for his testimony.  Casey also met with Allen on
the afternoon of Saturday, November 15, to discuss the extent to which the CIA should protect in
its briefings the identities of sensitive Iranian contacts.  Casey and Allen agreed that the Agency
would withhold six names at all costs.48  The next day Casey spoke with Poindexter, White
House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan, and North.  Casey then prepared a list of items he wished
to  have done before he returned, and departed for Central America.49

     48 DCI Schedule, 11/15/86, ER 317; Allen, FBI 302, 11/6/91, p. 5.  Allen recalled that
because of these instructions, he withheld the names of the Iranian contacts from Justice
Department officials the following weekend, during Attorney General Meese's investigation into
the Iran matter.

     49 DCI Schedule and Phone Logs, 11/16/86, ER 316; Memorandum, Casey to Gates,
11/16/86, ER 24305, DO 84041, ER 24256-57.

     Documents that C/Iran had drafted as informational papers for George's briefing were
transformed into formal, more elaborate statements about the Iran initiative.  The persons
principally responsible for this transformation appear to have been Jameson, C/Iran and Subject
#2, although documents indicate that George exercised considerable editorial responsibilities as
well.50

     50 Draft Statement, DO 44642-36; Draft Statement, 11/17/86, ER 7834-37; Jameson Notes,
11/17/86, ER 13980; Jameson, FBI 302, 9/20/91, pp. 7-8; Draft Statement, DO 83919-26; Draft
Statement, 11/17/86, ER 7838-46; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 3/4/88; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302,
9/17/91.

     Casey instructed Gates:  ``It is understood that this Finding existed.  Someone ought to get
Stan Sporkin's recollection of the advice he gave the NSC with respect to the Finding.'' 51 On
November 17, 1986, Doherty met with Sporkin, who had been CIA general counsel at the time of
the HAWK shipment and had drafted the retroactive Finding that sought to authorize CIA
involvement in it.  Doherty took with him three CIA lawyers, Bernard Makowka, Edward Dietel
and George Clarke, who had worked with Sporkin on this Finding. Sporkin discussed the period
between the HAWK shipment and the ultimate January 17, 1986, Finding:

     51 Memorandum, Casey to Gates, 11/16/86, ER 24256-57.

      -- Sporkin and Makowka both recalled that Sporkin talked about the November 1985 flight
and his learning that there were weapons on the plane.  Sporkin also mentioned ``prior
documents'' and the drafting of a retroactive Finding.  Sporkin directed Makowka to look for
these drafts.52

     52 Sporkin, North Trial Testimony, 4/3/89, pp. 6369-75; Makowka, FBI 302, 10/11/91, pp.
2-3; Makowka, Gates Interrog., 7/12/91, p. 3.

      -- Doherty's recollection of the meeting was not that crisp.  Doherty recalled Sporkin, perhaps
at this meeting, saying that ``there was something else'' drafted prior to the January 17 Finding.
Three days later, Doherty sent Makowka back to Sporkin to confirm Doherty's ``vague
recollection'' that Sporkin knew shortly after the shipment that arms were involved.53

     53 Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, pp. 8, 13.  In view of what Doherty called his ``concerns''
about the November 1985 flight -- concerns he had once he had heard Erskine's story the
previous week -- it is puzzling that any mention by Sporkin of a November 1985 arms shipment,
or even a November 1985 flight, did not prompt Doherty to react immediately.  Doherty was
unable to account for his lack of response to Sporkin's statements, except to suggest that perhaps
he had spoken with Sporkin sometime prior to the November 17 meeting -- a suggestion that, if
true, would call Doherty's recollection of Jameson's first report about the November 1985 flight
into question.  (Ibid.)

      -- Dietel and Clark could not remember the meeting.54

     54 Dietel, FBI 302, 10/28/91, p. 5; Clarke, FBI 302, 9/24/91, pp. 2-3.

     Makowka put together soon thereafter a rough chronology of the office's involvement with the
initiative, a chronology that referred to the November 1985 flight and the drafting of the
retroactive Finding.  Makowka also told Doherty that he remembered North saying on Christmas
Eve of 1985 that the President had signed ``the document'' concerning the initiative and that it
was in North's safe.55

     55 Memorandum from Doherty to DCI, Subject: Discussion with Stanley Sporkin about the
Iranian Finding, 11/18/86, ER 32384-85; Makowka, FBI 302, 10/11/91, pp. 2-3; Doherty, FBI
302, 10/30/91, p. 8; ER 32377-78 (rudimentary OGC chronology dated 11/20/86).  Doherty's
November 18 memorandum of the Sporkin meeting does not discuss missiles, but it does refer to
a ``shipment of equipment'' to Iran that had prompted calls for a finding.  (ER 32384-85.)

     Doherty's Concerns

     The day after the Sporkin interview, November 18, 1986, White House Counsel Wallison
convened a meeting of  general counsel from the State and Defense departments, NSC and CIA.
Those who attended left with sharply contrasting impressions.56  Doherty was struck most by the
tone of the NSC's presentation.  NSC Counsel Paul Thompson seemed to imply by what little
information he provided to the group that the arms sales were a CIA operation, and that the CIA
had more facts about it than the NSC.  Doherty left the meeting concerned that the NSC would
shift the blame for the initiative's failures onto the CIA.57

     56 See Meese and Regan chapters for a fuller account of the Wallison general counsels'
meeting.

     57 Doherty Notes, 11/18/86, ER 46616; Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, p. 9; Doherty Notes,
prepared after 11/18/86 meeting, ER 46524; see also ER 46603; Doherty, FBI 302, 11/13/87, p.
4.

     Doherty learned from Jameson that the Directorate of Operations was acknowledging a
November 1985 flight.  This news, coupled with Thompson's remarks, caused Doherty to fear
that the CIA would find itself unfairly attacked for its role in the arms sales and lacking the facts
with which to fight back.  Doherty requested that DDCI Gates gather the testimony team for a
meeting on Wednesday, November 19.  Doherty intended to use the meeting to point out the
weaknesses in  the Operations Directorate's facts, and to have Gates get the directorate to do
better work.58

     58 Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, p. 11.

     Gates testified that the task of preparing a statement for Casey overwhelmed him, and others
have criticized Gates for not providing sufficient leadership to the project.59 Casey cabled that
he was dissatisfied with an early draft of a proposed statement, and on the morning of November
19 Gardner was dispatched to Casey in Central America.  Gardner took with him many of the
papers Casey had requested, but he did not take a draft of testimony that addressed Casey's
criticisms.60 Gates agreed readily to  Doherty's request for a meeting of the Casey testimony
team.

     59 Gates was taking many of his directions from Casey.  (Casey-Gates PRT-250
Conversation, 11/17/86.)  Nevertheless, early in the evening of November 18, the growing
problems with Congress's calls for briefings prompted Poindexter to call Casey directly in
Central America.  (Poindexter Phone log, 11/18/86, AKW 45588; Casey-Poindexter PRT-250
Conversation, 11/18/86, ER 50206-08.)

     60 CIA Chronology, 2/27/87; Gardner, North Trial Testimony, 4/4/89, pp. 6613-16; CIA
Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91.  Subject #2 finished a draft of testimony that reflected Casey's
comments some time on the morning of November 19, after Gardner had departed for Central
America.  (Draft Testimony, DO 44589-97.)  This was the first full statement on the arms sales
that included the November 1985 shipment.  The statement implies that the NSC told the CIA
about the cargo at the time the NSC requested the name of the proprietary.  Jameson's comments
on this draft suggest adding the phrase ``to assist the Israelis in shipping HAWK missiles to
Iran.''  (Draft Statement, ER 7764-72.)  In his September 1991 interview with Independent
Counsel, Jameson professed that he could not recall where or when he got his information.
(Jameson, FBI 302, 9/20/91, p. 9.)

     Prior to the meeting, Doherty spoke with two congressional staff members, State and Defense
department counsel, and Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper.  What he heard only
heightened his anxiety.  Abraham Sofaer of the State Department complained to Doherty that he
was unable to get facts from the NSC, which Sofaer perceived to be in chaos.  Sofaer's concerns,
as well as his appeal for a draft of Casey's testimony, made Doherty fear that Under Secretary of
State Michael H. Armacost, who was scheduled to accompany Casey, would make a ``bad
wit[ness] for Admin[istration].'' 61

     61 Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, p. 10; Doherty Notes, telephone conversations with Daniel
Finn (SSCI) and Michael O'Neill (HPSCI), 11/19/86, ER 46620-21; Doherty Notes, telephone
conversations with Abraham Sofaer (State) and Larry Garrett (Defense), 11/19/86, ER 46523.

     Before going to the meeting, Doherty prepared a list of imperative points to discuss with
George and CIA Subject #2, in front of Gates:

      -- What was the extent of Casey's knowledge?

      -- What about Sporkin and Makowka's memories of a second finding?

      -- What was Charles Allen's involvement in the initiative?

      -- How did the CIA use proprietaries and private companies in the initiative, and who were
they? 62

     62 Doherty Notes, ER 46518; Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, pp. 9-10.  Doherty also prepared a
report on what he had learned from Sofaer and the intelligence committees that morning.
(Doherty Notes, 11/19/86, ER 46519.)

     Doherty testified that he raised all of these concerns in the Gates meeting, which took place at
2:30 p.m. on November 19.  Just as Doherty was leaving for the meeting, Makowka handed him
physical proof that Sporkin had prepared a Finding other than the January 17, 1986, Finding.
Makowka had recovered from Sporkin's secretary a draft of a retroactive Finding, a
``mini-Finding,'' that had been stored on a magnetic computer card.  The draft contained an
explicit arms-for-hostages equation not found in the later Finding and was intended to provide,
retroactively, legal protection for the CIA's support of the November 1985 shipment.  Doherty
took the draft Finding to Gates's office, although he could not recall showing it to anyone other
than Gates.63

     63 Draft Finding, DO 44568-69; Makowka, FBI 302, 10/11/91, p. 4; Makowka, Gates
Interrog., 7/12/91, pp. 3-4; Doherty, FBI 302, 11/13/87, p. 4; Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, p. 11.
The only copy produced to Independent Counsel of the draft finding that was uncovered by
Makowka, and marked by Doherty, came from Clair George's files.

     Attending the November 19th meeting in Gates's office were Gates, George, CIA Subject #2,
two persons from the CIA's Office of Congressional Affairs, and Casey's  executive assistant.
Doherty took notes of the meeting.  According to Doherty, his concerns forced George and his
staff to ``volunteer'' to:

      -- Talk to Allen about his recollection of the mini-Finding and his activities in the initiative;

      -- Get all of the facts of the November 1985 flight, including interview Juchniewicz and
former DDCI John McMahon about whether they had authorized it; and

      -- Obtain a signed copy of the mini-Finding from North.64

     64 Doherty Notes, 11/19/86, ER 46520; Gates 1986 Appointment Book; Doherty, FBI 302,
10/30/91, p. 11; EA/DCI, FBI 302, 9/12-9/16/91, pp. 13-14; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p.
10; Doherty Notes, 11/19/86, ER 46519.  The only thing that Gates remembered about this
meeting were Doherty's concerns that the facts in the proposed testimony were ``shaky.''  (Gates,
Select Committees Deposition, 7/31/87, pp. 48-49; Gates, Grand Jury, 5/1/91 pp. 206-07.)
According to Doherty's notes, Gates approved Doherty's plan to brief Cooper and the State and
Defense departments on Casey's upcoming testimony.  (Doherty Notes, 11/19/86, ER 46521,
46600.)

     Three observations must be made about the Gates meeting.  First, it should have been clear to
everyone that at least Doherty was upset with the state of the Directorate of Operations' story,
with less than two days to go before Casey was to brief Congress.65  Second, as of November 19,
1986, no one in the Directorate of  Operations had spoken to McMahon or Juchniewicz about the
November 1985 flight -- or at least no one was willing to admit he had.66 The drafts of testimony
that Subject #2 prepared both before and after the meeting avoided specifying whether
Juchniewicz or McMahon had authorized the November 1985 flight.67

     65 Doherty told Independent Counsel that in the car on the way back from Casey's November
21 briefings, Casey complained that the Operations Directorate had done a ``lousy job'' of
gathering the facts.  (Doherty, FBI 302, 10/30/91, p. 19.)

     66 Subject #2 claimed later that he had spoken with Juchniewicz before Casey's testimony.
Juchniewicz recalled only that someone attempted to reach him that week, but he did not return
the call.  (CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p. 11; Juchniewicz, FBI 302, 11/8/91, p. 6.)

     67 Express references in Casey's final testimony to Juchniewicz and McMahon crept into the
text beginning with a draft that Casey himself (perhaps with Gardner's help) composed during
Casey's return flight from Central America.  (Compare Draft Testimony, 11/19/86, DO 44653-62
(Subject #2 draft); Draft Testimony, 11/19/86, DO 84277-85 (Subject #2 draft); and Draft
Testimony, 11/20/86, DO 84042-52 (Subject #2 draft) with Draft Testimony, 11/20/86, DO
44671-80 (Casey/Gardner draft).  See also EA/DCI, FBI 302, 9/16/91; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302,
9/17/91; Gardner, North Trial Testimony, 4/4/89, pp. 6620-28; Gardner, Poindexter Trial
Testimony, 3/23/90, pp. 2654-60.)  Independent Counsel found no evidence that Casey or
Gardner was aware of Doherty's concern that nothing be said about authorization until someone
had spoken with Juchniewicz and McMahon.

     The third and most striking consequence of the November 19 meeting was that afterwards the
team had to know that a mini-Finding had been drafted, and that the answer to whether it had
been signed by President Reagan lay with the NSC.  The meeting also makes the testimonies of
North, Gardner  and CIA Subject #2 inconsistent about the state of the CIA's knowledge of the
mini-Finding prior to Casey's briefing on November 21.

      -- Both North and Gardner claimed that, at a meeting on November 18 among North,
Gardner, and Subject #2, North told Gardner that if the CIA insisted on talking about the
November 1985 HAWK shipment, then ``they ought to know'' that the President signed a Finding
authorizing it.68

     68 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/7/89, pp. 7044-45; North, Grand Jury, 11/15/91, p. 36.  At
North's trial, Gardner explained further that he told North that the CIA was only a ``mechanic'' in
the November 1985 shipment, referring to the CIA's limited role in providing the name of a
proprietary to the NSC.  (Gardner, North Trial Testimony, 4/4/89, pp. 6610-11; see also Gardner,
Poindexter Trial Testimony, 3/23/90, pp. 2649-50.)

      -- In a March 1988 interview with Independent Counsel, Subject #2 recalled portions of his
and Gardner's discussion with North, but he did not remember any discussion of a prior
Finding.69  If North had mentioned a prior Finding, however, it is strange that Subject #2 did not
tell this to the Casey testimony team on November 19.

     69 CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 3/4/88, p. 4.

     ``Shut Up, There is No Mini-Finding''

     Allen believed that he raised questions about the existence of a prior Finding early in the week
of November 17-21, 1986, or perhaps late the previous week, with Makowka, as both Allen and
Makowka had been in North's office on Christmas Eve 1985 when North spoke about the
``signed document.''  Allen believed he then called North and asked him if there had been a prior
Finding.  North denied it.70  Later, Makowka called North back, asked again about the Finding,
and received another denial.  Allen said that around midday on November 20, Allen raised the
topic at a meeting with Casey, George, George Cave, and perhaps Gates.  Allen claims that
George sharply told him that he was ``causing trouble'' about the mini-Finding, that ``it didn't
exist'' and that Allen should ``shut up'' about it.71

     70 Makowka corroborated Allen's story of his inquiry to North and North's denial.
(Makowka, Gates Interrog., 7/12/91, p. 2.)

     71 DCI Schedule, 11/20/86, ER 310; Allen, Grand Jury, 8/9/91, pp. 160-61; Allen, FBI 302,
11/6/91, p. 6.  Gates and Cave did not recall George and Allen's exchange on November 20.
North did not recall denying the mini-Finding's existence to Allen.  (North, Grand Jury, 11/15/91,
p. 36.)  Indeed, at his trial North said he told Allen the opposite.  (North, North Trial Testimony,
4/7/89, p. 7045.)

     The exchange recounted by Allen explains why he told HPSCI on November 21, 1986, that he
did not know whether the President had authorized Israeli shipments to Iran prior to the January
17, 1986, Finding.  Despite his suspicion that there was a document reflecting approval, a
superior officer, George, had told him that no such thing existed.72  For George, the exchange
with Allen raises the likelihood that George (1) spoke with North (note his ``causing trouble''
comment to Allen), (2) received confirmation that a Finding existed but that it could not be
disclosed, (3) tried to silence Allen, and (4) lied about Presidential approval for 1985 activities
when asked on November 21, 1986.

     72 Allen, FBI 302, 11/6/91, p. 6.

     On November 19, George and CIA Subject #2 told Gates that the Directorate of Operations
would find out whether the Finding had been signed. George admitted phoning North at least
once during the week.  George, Subject #2, and Gates also went to the White House shortly after
the Casey testimony team meeting of November 19 to see Poindexter, North, Thompson, and
Cave. Subject #2 stayed after the White House meeting to work with North on coordinating the
NSC and CIA chronologies.73  Despite these opportunities, however, no witness (including
North) recalled that George and North talked with each other about the mini-Finding.74

     73 North Note, 11/19/86, AMX 5522-26; Thompson, FBI 302, 4/22/87, p. 5; Gates 1986
Appointment Book; Cave, Select Committees Deposition, 4/17/87, p. 172.  Those attending the
meeting recall different aspects of the meeting.  A CIA 2/27/87 Chronology states that the
purpose of the meeting was to describe George's briefing of 11/18/86.  George recalled conflict
over the November 1985 flight (George, Select Committees Deposition, 4/24/87, pp. 123-26),
while Subject #2 stated in his 9/17/91 FBI 302, p. 13, that the meeting was a relaxed affair.
Gates had no specific recollection of the meeting.

     74 North affirmed in the Grand Jury, however, that after November 12, 1986, it was his belief
that the Administration had decided that Congress was not to be told of the mini-Finding or the
November 1985 HAWK shipment -- a position that culminated in Poindexter's destruction of the
mini-Finding on November 21, 1986. (North, Grand Jury, 11/15/91, pp. 33-35.)

     Finishing Touches

     By November 19, 1986, CIA Subject #2 was aware of the November 1985 HAWK shipment.
Subject #2 had composed chronologies and drafted testimony that referred to the flight and its
contents.  Although parts of the story may have been in dispute -- the extent of the CIA's
contemporaneous knowledge of the flight's contents, or the level of authorization for the NSC's
use of the proprietary airline -- it was clear to Subject #2 by November 19 that a flight had taken
place and that it had carried arms.75

     75 See also Earl Notebook, 11/20/86, AMT 733 (entry:  ``[CIA Subject #2]/proprietary
flight-bad problems/OLN himself ask for/McMann [sic]-Casey argument-help OK this one time
but thereafter need a Finding./Seacord [sic]-hired CIA proprietary for flt from T.A. [Tel Aviv] to
Europe to T. [Tabriz, Iran]'').

     The November 1985 flight was a major source of friction between the NSC and the CIA by
the time Casey testified. Subject #2 admitted that he was aware of a conflict by the time he sat
down with North on November 19 to coordinate chronologies.  Casey and Gates, for their part,
went to the White House on the afternoon of November 20 to try to settle the dispute over the
flight.  This dispute contributed to the ultimate decision -- made around the time of a large
meeting  at the CIA on the evening of November 20, which Subject #2 attended -- to present an
extremely unspecific and thin description of the flight in Casey's prepared remarks.76

     76 DCI Schedule, 11/20/86, ER 310; Gates 1986 Appointment Book; Gates, Grand Jury,
2/19/88, pp. 62-63; Gardner, North Trial Testimony, 4/4/89, pp. 6629-33; Gardner, Poindexter
Trial Testimony, 3/23/90, pp. 2660-63; Jameson, FBI 302, 9/18/91, pp. 6-7; Doherty, FBI 302,
11/13/87, pp. 4-5; Doherty 8/5/91 Gates Interrog. at 3-4.  The description of the November 1985
flight in Casey's prepared statement was at its fullest on November 19.  It steadily waned
thereafter, particularly between noon and 8:00 p.m. on November 20.  Part of the reason for this
appears to have been the conflict with the NSC; another reason appears to have been disputes
within the CIA over how the flight was authorized and when the CIA learned that missiles were
being or had been shipped.  (See drafts discussed in note 67 above; see also Doherty, FBI 302,
11/13/87, p. 15; Makowka, FBI 302, 10/11/91, pp. 6-7; Draft Testimony, 11/20/86, DO
83967-76; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 3/4/88, pp. 8-9; EA/DCI, FBI 302, 9/16/91, p. 6; Draft
Testimony, 11/20/86, DO 83977-87; Draft Testimony, 11/20/86 [unnumbered Doherty 4:15 p.m.
version]; Gries, FBI 302, 9/9/91 Interview.)  Doherty found the situation so disturbing that he
called Casey sometime on November 20 and implored him to postpone his congressional
appearances.  (DCI Phone Log, 11/20/86, ER 311; Doherty, FBI 302, 11/13/87.)

     Subject #2 went home immediately after the large CIA gathering on November 20.  Casey's
executive assistant and his secretary, Deborah Geer, stayed to produce a draft of testimony that
incorporated the changes discussed at the meeting.  The assistant dated this draft ``November 20,
2000.'' Doherty later reported to Casey that Sporkin was certain that he knew that weapons were
on the November 1985 flight ``within days'' of its occurrence.  Doherty thus sought and obtained
Casey's permission to delete a reference from Casey's ``1200'' version of testimony -- the version
which Doherty then assumed was everyone's working copy -- that stated that no one in the CIA
knew about the contents of the flight until mid-January 1986. Doherty phoned Casey's assistant.
On the 2000 draft, Casey's assistant deleted a single sentence that read:  ``Neither the airline nor
the CIA knew the cargo consisted of 18 HAWK missiles.''  This was the only reference in the
2000 text to HAWK missiles.77

     77 Draft Testimony, 11/20/86, DO 83988-98; CIA Subject #2, FBI 302s, 3/4/88, pp. 5-6 &
9/17/91, p. 15; EA/DCI, FBI 302, 9/16/91, p. 6; Doherty, SSCI Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 10.  The
final Casey draft is DO 83999-84009, which Casey had typed on the morning of November 21.

     The next morning, Subject #2 got a copy of the 2000 version of Casey's testimony and took it
with him to Casey's appearances on the Hill.  Subject #2 made notes on the draft while Casey
spoke, for he was surprised that his draft was not what Casey was reading to the committees.
Subject #2 jotted in the upper right hand corner of the first page a list of the 1986 TOW missile
shipments, which corresponds with the list that Subject #2 recited of all of the arms shipments to
Iran.78

     78 CIA Subject #2, FBI 302, 9/17/91, p. 16.

     Independent Counsel's Decision Not to Prosecute

     The evidence suggests a concerted effort by CIA officials to withhold information from or lie
to Congress about the November 1985 shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran. The available
evidence could not, however, prove beyond a reasonable doubt that concerted action by CIA
officials violated federal laws in responding to congressional inquiries about the November 1985
shipment. The primary reason was that crucial witnesses to the events surrounding the Agency's
responses in November 1986 were unavailable in 1991: Clair George was under indictment for
false statements and  perjury; Gardner had invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege against
self-incrimination and had refused to give Independent Counsel a proffer; and Casey was dead.

     There was evidence of individual crimes. Independent Counsel had proof beyond a reasonable
doubt that Clair George knew on November 18, 1986, more about the flow of funds from the
Iranians to the CIA than he told to intelligence committee staffers.  By the time this proof was
fully developed, however, Independent Counsel had charged essentially the same category of
false statement -- in a more formal setting, before SSCI -- in the George case.  As for George's
denial in the November 18 briefing of CIA activity prior to 1986, the evidence did not establish
beyond a reasonable doubt that George at that time remembered that a CIA proprietary had
shipped weapons in 1985.  George would have had two witnesses, Gardner and CIA Subject #2,
who could have testified that as they helped George prepare for his briefing, they themselves had
been unaware of the flight.

Chapter 24

     The Investigation of State Department
     Officials:
 Shultz, Hill and Platt

     From the Reagan Administration's first suggestion in June 1985 that the United States should
transfer arms to Iran through the final decision in December 1986 that arms shipments would
cease, Department of State officials opposed these dealings for reasons of policy and status.
Department officials argued that trading arms for hostages would only increase the value and
therefore the number of hostages.  They also believed that the Department, not the National
Security Council  staff or the Central Intelligence Agency, should establish counterterrorism
policy, including dealings with Iran and efforts to free hostages in Lebanon.

     During 1985 and 1986, senior State Department officials monitored the U.S. contacts with
Iranians quite closely, with increasing consternation.  At several points, department officials
attempted to stop the arms-for-hostages initiative.  At least twice, they attempted to circumvent it
by opening other channels to Iran.  After the arms-for-hostages story broke in November 1986,
the department and Secretary of State George P. Shultz eventually used the revelations to regain
control over counterterrorism policy.  Following a strenuous bureaucratic struggle, Shultz
persuaded President Reagan to prohibit further arms transfers to Iran and to announce that the
Department of  State would take the lead on such counterterrorism and diplomatic matters in the
future.

     During the congressional investigations in December 1986 and throughout 1987, Shultz
testified -- to great effect -- about State Department efforts to oppose arms shipments to Iran and
State's limited contemporaneous knowledge of the activities in this regard of the NSC staff.  In
contrast to other agencies, State Department officials appeared open and cooperative; they were
the emerging heroes of the Iran/contra story and seemed to have nothing to hide.

     In 1990 and 1991, however, Independent Counsel received new evidence, in the form of
handwritten notes that had not been provided in response to previous document requests,
suggesting for the first time that central aspects of Shultz's testimony were incorrect.  Based on
the notes, it appeared that Shultz and other senior Department of State officials had known
significantly more about arms shipments to Iran than Shultz's testimony reflected.  As a result of
this new evidence, Independent Counsel conducted an investigation into whether Shultz or other
department officials deliberately misled or withheld information from Iran/contra investigators.

     Independent Counsel concluded that Shultz's testimony was incorrect, if not false, in
significant respects and misleading, if literally true, in others, and that information had been
withheld from investigators by  Shultz's executive assistant, M. Charles Hill.  Nevertheless, for
reasons explained in this chapter, the investigation did not result in criminal charges.

     Department of State Organization and Arms Shipments to Iran

     During 1985 and 1986, Shultz was the secretary of state, John C. Whitehead was deputy
secretary of state and Michael H. Armacost was under secretary of state for political affairs.
These senior ranking officials met daily to keep each other informed of the department's activities
and relevant domestic and international events.1

     1 Armacost, Grand Jury, 3/13/92, p. 6.

     Shultz and Whitehead were political appointees.  Armacost was a career foreign service
officer.  During 1985 and 1986, two other senior foreign service officers occupied posts of
importance in the department:  Executive Secretary Nicholas Platt, and Shultz's executive
assistant, M. Charles Hill.

     Formally, the executive secretary was responsible for making sure that the secretary of state
was adequately supported by the department bureaucracy:  that matters were appropriately
staffed, that deadlines were met and that appropriate guidance was given up and down the
bureaucratic  chain of command.2  To fulfill that role, Platt attended and made a detailed
handwritten record during most of Shultz's meetings within the department.3  One of Platt's two
deputies accompanied Shultz on all trips outside Washington, D.C., and reported back to Platt,
who made notes of those reports.  In addition, Platt had a close working relationship with Hill,
who regularly reported to Platt what had occurred in Shultz's meetings outside the department;
Platt also made notes of these reports.  Platt also took notes in other meetings he attended and of
significant information he acquired throughout the day.  Platt created over 4,500 pages of daily
handwritten notes from January 2, 1985, through February 12, 1987.4

     2 Ibid.; Platt, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Testimony, 7/24/87, p. 35 (hearing on
nomination to be United States Ambassador to the Philippines); Platt, FBI 302, 4/5/91, pp. 1-2.

     3 E.g. Platt, FBI 302, 7/14/87, p. 1; Ibid., 4/5/91, p. 2; Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 65.

     4 Platt Notes, 1/2/85-2/12/87, ALW 0034815-9618.

     Hill had served as the department's executive secretary prior to Platt.  Thereafter, as Shultz's
executive assistant from summer 1984 until the end of the Reagan Administration in January
1989, Hill's formal role was to write speeches and keep a record of Shultz's activities.  In
practice, Hill was one of Shultz's closest advisers and his principal gatekeeper.  Hill regularly
traveled with  Shultz and, with few exceptions, attended and kept a handwritten record of
Shultz's meetings in the department.  In addition, Shultz regularly reported to Hill significant
information he received and meetings he attended outside of Hill's presence, both to get Hill's
reaction to the information and to permit Hill to record it in his notebooks.5  Shultz, who
characterized Hill's notes as a ``remorselessly precise record and a vivid picture'' after using them
to write his recent memoirs,6 consistently stated that Hill's notes were accurate.7  During the
period January 1984 through December 1987, Hill filled more than 50 stenographer's notebooks
with detailed, often verbatim, daily notes of Shultz's meetings, statements and activities.

     5 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 4-5, 142-45.

     6 George P. Shultz, Turmoil and Triumph (Chas. Scribers Sons 1993), p. xiii.

     7 E.g., Shultz, OIC Interview, 12/11/90, p. 6 (describing Hill's notebooks as ``a useful
managerial tool'' to Shultz as Secretary of State).

     The two State Department components with primary responsibility for the Middle East and
counterterrorism were the Bureau of Near Eastern and Asian Affairs (NEA) and the Office of
Counterterrorism and Emergency Planning (S/CT).  Throughout 1985 and 1986, Assistant
Secretary of State Richard W. Murphy headed NEA and Arnold L. Raphel served as his principal
deputy.  Ambassador  Robert B. Oakley headed the counterterrorism office during 1985 through
September 1986; his principal deputy was Parker Borg.

     These nine senior officials -- Shultz, Whitehead, Armacost, Platt, Hill, Murphy, Raphel,
Oakley and Borg -- together with a very few assistants, appear to have been the only State
Department officials with significant contemporaneous knowledge of U.S. and Israeli contacts
with Iranians and arms shipments to Iran during 1985 and 1986.  Among that group, Armacost,
Raphel and Oakley constituted what one participant called a ``floating directorate'' that monitored
this activity, principally through contacts outside the department, and reported any significant
developments to Shultz, often through Platt and Hill.8

     8 Ross, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 4.

     Department of State Evidence of Iran Arms Shipments: The Notes

     The best evidence of Department of State knowledge of U.S. dealings with Iran comes from
Hill and Platt's notes.  It was their job to bring important information to the attention of Shultz
and to communicate to others his guidance and questions.  Both Hill and Platt took
minute-by-minute notes that document this exchange of information in remarkably detailed
fashion.

     Notes taken by three other department officials supplement Platt and Hill's notes.  Platt's
deputy Kenneth M. Quinn took detailed notes of information he received from or passed on to
Platt.  Christopher W.S. Ross, the principal deputy to Armacost, took detailed notes of
information he received from or passed to Armacost.  Arnold Raphel took less detailed, but still
valuable, notes of significant information he received.

     The notes of these five officials -- Hill, Platt, Quinn, Ross and Raphel -- were particularly
important to Independent Counsel's investigation because State Department officials committed
so little about the Iran arms transfers to formal documents.9  With the exception of a few cables
and memoranda, almost everything significant that Independent Counsel was able to learn about
the Department of State's role in the Iran initiative came from these handwritten notes.

     9 Although Ross was a prolific notetaker and produced a typed transcript of his relevant
handwritten notes to Iran/contra investigators during 1987, he was unable to locate notes dated
earlier than November 18, 1985.  (Ross, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 1; DAMASCUS 02366, 3/30/92,
ALW 0054999.)  During 1992, the OIC reviewed Ross's collection of handwritten notes and
confirmed the completeness of his December 1986 production of transcribed relevant entries.

     The Department of State's Production of Evidence During 1986 and 1987

     On November 28, 1986, Attorney General Edwin  Meese III wrote a letter to Shultz requesting
that department information ``be segregated and held for review by and transmission to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) upon its request.'' 10  Meese's request applied to

     10 Letter from Meese to Shultz, 11/28/86, ALV 004590-91.

     [a]ny and all material of any kind, type, or description, including, but not limited to, all
memoranda, briefing materials, minutes, handwritten notes, diaries, telephone logs, . . . files and
other documents of the . . . State Department, . . . from 1 January 1985 to the present, concerning
the following:

     1. All arms activities involving Iran;

     2. All hostage negotiations or similar communications involving arms as an inducement;

     3. All financial aid activities involving the Nicaraguan resistance movement which are related
to Iran or Israel; [and]

     4. All activities of Robert C. McFarlane, . . . Lt. Col. Oliver L. North, Vice Admiral John M.
Poindexter . . . relating to 1-3 above.11

     11 Ibid.

     In response to the Meese request, the Department of State's Legal Adviser Abraham D.
Sofaer, and the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration Donald J. Bouchard sent a
memorandum the next day to the senior official in each department component that potentially
would possess relevant information, including  Hill and Platt.12  The Sofaer/Bouchard
memorandum, which the Department of Justice had reviewed and approved before it was issued
at State,13 distributed a copy of Meese's letter to each of these persons, reported that the
President had ordered the Department of Justice investigation and stated that ``[t]he Secretary has
pledged full Department cooperation. . . .''  The memorandum stated that, with regard to the
phrase ``All arms activities involving Iran'' in the Meese letter, the department was interpreting
this request,

     12 Memorandum from Sofaer and Bouchard to Platt (S/S), Grossman (D), Ross (P), Boyce
(T), Abrams (ARA), Murphy (NEA), Holmes (PM), Abramowitz (INR), Bremer (S/CT) and
Lamb (DS), cc:  Hill (S), Subject:  Search for Documents, 11/29/86, ALV 004587-89.

     13 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 4/6/92, pp. 4, 16-17.

     [b]ased upon consultation with the FBI, . . . to encompass any materials concerning
allegations or evidence of U.S. or U.S.-authorized arms shipments to Iran, requests by Iran for
arms or alleged offers by the U.S., Israel, or other parties allegedly acting on behalf of the U.S. to
supply arms.14

     14 Memorandum from Sofaer and Bouchard to Platt (S/S), et al., Subject:  Search for
Documents, 11/29/86, ALV 004587.

     The memorandum also instructed that, with regard to named individuals such as McFarlane,
North and Poindexter, ``[y]ou should . . . provide information of any alleged activities [by them].
. . .'' 15  The memorandum, which stated  twice that the Meese request covered handwritten
notes,16 directed those addressed to transmit copies of responsive documents to the department's
information coordinator by December 3, 1986, and to hold the original documents in their offices
pending the conclusion of the investigation.17

     15 Ibid., ALV 004588 (emphasis added).

     16 Ibid. (``Please note that the request defines documents which are subject to production
most broadly to include handwritten notes, diaries, and telephone logs of Department officials.  .
. .  It is not necessary to retrieve documents that were directed to the central information system. .
. .  However, any . . . personal notes . . . must be produced'').

     17 Ibid., ALV 004588-89.  The memorandum also directed that, ``[i]f you have any question
as to whether a particular document is responsive, you should forward it.  L [Office of the Legal
Adviser] will make the final determination of responsiveness.''  (Ibid., ALV 004589.)

     On December 3, Shultz took note of the document request in a letter to Meese:

     Dear Ed:

     Your letter of November 28 requested that this Department segregate and hold for review by
and transmission to the FBI various documents of potential relevance to your ongoing
investigation.  I wish to assure you personally of this Department's full cooperation as you pursue
this highly important task.

     In response to your request, we immediately ordered production of all documents requested.  .
. .  Our goal is to have the requested materials in the hands of the FBI by the end of this week.

     The Legal Adviser and his staff have been in close touch with the FBI investigators and will
continue to provide them full cooperation and assistance as the investigation proceeds.

     Sincerely yours,

     /s/ George 18

     18 Letter from Shultz to Meese, 12/3/86, ALV 011058.

     Hill -- who had reviewed his notebooks after the revelations of early November 1986 and
located numerous notes regarding Iran, hostages, McFarlane, North and possible arms shipments
19 -- began to review his notebooks again after receiving the Meese request and the
Sofaer/Bouchard memorandum.20  On December 2, 1986, Hill noted, in red pen, that ``CH
[Charles Hill] wkg [working] full-time on notebooks for FBI re Polecat,'' 21 a term used by Hill
to describe arms-for-hostages deals with  Iran.22  Hill also received a report that afternoon from
Sofaer, who had met with the FBI to discuss the sensitivity of Hill's notes and how their
production could be avoided:

     19 E.g. Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 18-19, 21; accord Hill Note, 11/8/86, ANS
0001743-44 (``g008CH bfs (S) [Charles Hill briefs Shultz] on all details of g008Polecat.  . . .
Arf [Raphel] knows more than this chronology[.]  CH -- . . . does chronology of what g008we
told since May '85'') (emphasis in original); Hill Note, 11/9/86, ANS0001748. (``g008(S) = CH
[Shultz meeting with Charles Hill] 0915 at [Shultz's] house (upstairs study)[.]  CH -- (hands over
3 papers -- Chron [Chronology] of what we knew since May '85, . . .'') (emphasis in original);
Hill Note, 11/10/86, ANS 0001756 (``g008from CH [Charles Hill] notebooks'').

     20 On December 1, 1986, Hill made a note, and told Shultz, that the topic of Brunei's $10
million contribution to the contras was ``g008not w/I [within] the purview of what they asked
for in this investigation.''  (Hill Note, 12/1/86, ANS 0001941, emphasis in original).  Hill made
another note to the same effect the next day, and again passed the information to Shultz.  (Hill
Note, 12/2/86, ANS 001946.)  Hill's notes suggest that he read the Sofaer/Bouchard
memorandum closely.

     21 Hill Note, 12/2/86, ANS 0001946.

     22 Both Platt and Hill were evasive about the origin and meaning of the term ``Polecat,''
which appears throughout their notes as a reference to arms-for-hostages proposals and
developments.  (See Hill, Grand Jury, 7/10/92 pp. 39-41, ``That is what Platt and I began to call
this whole thing because we associated it with Oliver North.  I believe Platt made this name up.
North equaled Pole . . . and Polecat was something that kind of smelled.  . . .  It was whatever
Oliver North and McFarlane were up to.''); cf. Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 46 (``That
[Polecat] was Charlie Hill's characterization, I think.'').   Platt's principal deputies from 1985 each
confirmed that ``Polecat'' was a derogatory term for Oliver North personally (North -- North Pole
-- Polecat) and referred to the arms-for-hostages aspects of North's counterterrorism activities.
(Quinn, FBI 302, 12/4/91, pp. 2-3; Brunson McKinley, FBI 302, 12/13/91, p. 3.)  For a time in
late 1985, Hill replaced ``Polecat'' in his notes with the less pejorative term ``Night Owl.''

     R/O [Readout] g008Abe [Sofaer] g008= [meeting with] g008CH [Charles Hill]  . . .  Abe
mtg w [meeting with] FBI.

     * * *

     On g008Polecat notes, I [Sofaer] sd [said] parts sensitive, + probl [problem] of coherence in
context.  (S) [Shultz] wd [would] prefer to meet w [with] Dir. Webs [FBI Director William
Webster] + go thru story w him orally.  They accepted that + will let us know tomorrow what
Dir. [Director Webster] says.23

     23 Hill Note, 12/2/86, ANS 001946.  Hill's note indicates that he passed this information to
Shultz.  Ibid. (symbol of arrow pointing to the right with a star at the end of the arrow and a
vertical line through the shaft of the arrow); accord Hill, OIC Interview, 7/9/92, pp. 8-9
(explaining meaning of the symbol).

     Later that afternoon, Hill wrote, underlined and circled:  ``g008CH [Charles Hill]
Reemerges from Notebook research on Polecat.'' 24

     24 Hill Note, 12/2/86, ANS 0001947.

     Hill continued his notebook review the next day.  At the top of his first page of December 3
notes, Hill wrote and circled, ``CH [Charles Hill] works on Notebook Research.'' 25  Hill also
received Sofaer's report that the FBI had determined that one agent would need to see Hill's
notes:

     25 Ibid., 12/3/86, ANS 0001953.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------- *** BOX HEAD *** *** BOX
HEAD *** *** BOX HEAD *** *** BOX HEAD ***
--------------------------------------------------------------------

     ..........g008CH Notes

     .....g008Abe = CH1220.....Dir Webst [FBI Director Webster] doesnt want to get personally
involved.  One guy wd [would] go over docs [documents] w CH [Charles Hill].  Tell you what he
needs + leave the rest.26 --------------------------------------------------------------------

     Hill immediately reported this proposed arrangement to Shultz, who replied, ``ok, good.'' 27

     26 Ibid., ANS 0001955.

     27 Ibid.

     On Thursday, December 4, 1986, Hill provided the notes he had selected from his review to
three FBI special agents who met at State with him and Michael G. Kozak, the principal deputy
legal adviser.28  Hill told the agents that he had searched his handwritten notes and other records
that were available to him in the secretary's office and  located a set of documents pertinent to the
Iran/contra arms controversy.29  Hill provided the agents a chronological set of 65 photocopied
pages.30  The documents Hill provided consisted of excerpted entries (some of which also were
partially redacted) from 32 pages of his own notebooks; three excerpted notes by Platt dated
November 19, 1985; and cables and other Department of State documents.31  Hill did not state
to the FBI agents that he had more relevant material, that he had not had time to review all of his
notebooks, or that this production was the result of a partial review of the notebooks.  FBI
Special Agent Danny O. Coulson understood that Hill was providing everything he had that was
relevant to Iran/contra within the parameters of  Attorney General Meese's November 28, 1986,
letter to Shultz.32

     28 Hill, FBI 302 (Special Agent Beane), 12/4/86.

     29 Ibid., p. 1.

     30 See Ibid. (attached photocopies).  Hill wrote the date of each incompletely dated or
undated document on the upper right-hand corner of each photocopied page.

     31 Ibid., pp. 1-5 (itemizing the documents produced).

     32 Memorandum from FBI Special Agent Michael S. Foster re: Coulson/OIC Meeting,
3/5/92, pp. 1-2, 027774.

     Pursuant to Sofaer's discussion with FBI Director William H. Webster, Hill also met privately
on December 4, 1986, with Coulson, who was the senior FBI agent assigned to the Iran/contra
investigation.33  During this interview, Hill said that he possessed notes he had taken of his
conversations with Shultz regarding arms sales to Iran.  Hill stressed that these notes, which
represented confidential conversations between Cabinet officers and the President, were
extremely sensitive and asked Coulson to disseminate the notes only to individuals with an
absolute ``need to know.''  Hill then disclosed that these notes related in part to the December 7,
1985, meeting of President Reagan, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, Shultz, White
House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan, former National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane,
National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter and CIA Deputy Director John N. McMahon
regarding selling arms to Iran.34  After walking Coulson through the documents, which
contained explosive statements attributed to President  Reagan,35 Hill provided copies of five
photocopied pages to the FBI:  one page of typed talking points that had been prepared for
Shultz's use at the December 7, 1985, meeting; excerpted entries from three pages of Hill's
December 7 notes; and one page with two excerpted notes by Platt dated December 7.36  In his
own notes, Hill subsequently made this account of the interview:

     33 Hill, FBI 302 (Special Agent Coulson), 12/4/86.

     34 Ibid., p. 1.

     35 Coulson's interview report states that,

     [a]t the December 7, 1985 meeting, Secretary of Defense Weinberger, Secretary of State
Shultz and Donald Regan opposed sale of arms to Iran as being illegal.  . . .  During this meeting
President Reagan indicated that the American people would not understand if four hostages died
because ``I wouldn't break the law.''

     ***

     During the course of this meeting the President indicated that ``they can impeach me if they
want, visiting days are Wednesday.''  Weinberger indicated ``you will not be alone.''

     (Ibid., pp. 1-2.)

     36 Ibid. (attachments); ALW 0059585-88 (``original'' photocopied handwritten Hill and Platt
notes provided by Hill to FBI on December 4, 1986; each page is dated by Hill in red pen in
upper right hand corner).

     g008CH [Charles Hill] g008= [meeting with] g008FBI

     1030-1300Reads g008Polecat Record

      -- Parts on P [Presidential] conversations (Dec 6, 7, 1985) read to sr. [senior] agent only, who
will discuss w the Director.

      -- Asked for nothing to take away.

      -- astounded at the detail of fact. Much that was new to them.

      -- said, personally, ``g008if only the WH [White House] had taken the (S) [Secretary's]
advice.'' 37

     37 Hill Note, 12/4/86, ANS 0001966.

     Hill later received a report of the reactions that the FBI agents had expressed to Kozak after
their meeting with Hill:

     y [you] impressed the hell out of them  . . .  one FBI sd [said] to Kozak[:]  ``I deal w [with]
murderers, rapists, terrorists + the scum of the earth and I'm a pretty thick skinned guy -- but
when I hear what those guys in the WH [White House] did to the Sec of State -- as a citizen -- I'm
furious.''

     (Ibid., 12/4/86, ANS 0001968.)

     Two weeks later, the senior FBI agent met again with Hill to discuss these documents.  Hill
clarified that his notes resulting from the December 7, 1985, White House meeting were based on
a general conversation and then a more detailed meeting with Shultz; Hill identified Platt as the
author of the other notes Hill had produced on December 4; and Hill stated that Platt's note
marked ``from Rich'' reflects information that Weinberger gave to Assistant Secretary of Defense
Richard Armitage, who in turn reported Weinberger's comments to Platt.  (Hill, FBI 302,
12/18/86; accord, Hill Note, 12/18/87, ANS 0002073: ``1415 -- g008Colson [sic] = [meeting
with] CH [Charles Hill] (Just to ask CH to explain relationship betw [between] the various R/O's
[read outs] of the Dec 7 '85 mtg + the tp [talking points] prepared for it.[)]''.)

     Later on the afternoon of December 4, 1986, Sofaer told Hill that the FBI wanted to take
possession of his original notes regarding the Brunei solicitation,38 but added that Kozak would
try to make alternative arrangements:

     38 At this time, there was substantial concern among Department of State officials such as
Abrams, Sofaer and Hill (who knew that Brunei had contributed $10 million to the contras but
that North had claimed it never arrived) that North had absconded with the Brunei money.

      -- Webster wants orig [original] notes + wd [would] lock up for indep. counsel.  Kozak will
work for giving copies + CH [Charles Hill] showing originals on request.39

     39 Hill Note, 12/4/86, ANS 0001968.  Hill later told Shultz that ``Webster wants orig
[original] pages of notebooks. -- but that wd [would] destroy `best evidence' on g008other
issues (2 sided pages) in order to get `best evidence' for g008this [Brunei] issue.''  (Hill Note,
12/4/86, ANS 001970, emphasis in original.)  Hill, who graduated from law school but never
practiced, recalled the ``best evidence rule'' from ``a case in [his law school] Evidence course.''
(Ibid.)

     Hill also wrote some reflections that day on the process of reviewing his notebooks in
response to the Meese request and the Sofaer/Bouchard memorandum:

      -- g008Polecat

     Reviewing the notebooks for the 4th time

     Like rereading g008Paradise Lost; each time something new seems to appear -- not new
evidence, but new interpretations impress themselves on you.  The impression now shining
through is that the key figures were . . . [Michael Ledeen and North].

     So 2 activists -- one policy driven, one operationally driven [ -- ] play on the flaws of 2
leaders: -- McF's [McFarlane's] megalomania -- P's [President Reagan's] humanitarian spirit 40

     40 Hill Note, 12/4/86, ANS 0001970-71.

     In April 1987, the OIC transmitted its omnibus document request to the Department of State.
This request, which covered the period January 1, 1983, to the present, specifically called for the
production of all ``notes'' prepared or maintained by Hill and Platt on subjects including the sale,
shipment or transfer of military arms to Iran.41  On May 28, 1987, the Office of the Legal
Adviser produced various photocopied documents in response to the OIC request.  One set of
documents, which includes a number of excerpted Hill notebook entries, was a slightly expanded
version of the chronological set of document copies that  Hill had provided to the FBI special
agents on December 4, 1986: It included copies of excerpts from 34 pages of his own notebooks
and five excerpted notes by Platt.42  A second set of documents consists of excerpted Platt notes,
including 18 photocopied pages of excerpted notes regarding Iran that Platt had provided to
Sofaer's office in December 1986.43

     41 Letter from Geoffrey S. Stewart to Michael Kozak, Deputy Legal Adviser, 4/23/87.

     42 ALV 001577-1680.

     43 ALV 002710-40.

     In early 1988, the Department of State also provided to the OIC a copy of the set of Hill's
November and December 1986 ``post-revelation'' notes, which had been provided to the Senate
Select Iran/contra Committee in 1987.44

     44 Hill Notes, 11/3/86-12/31/86, ALW 021109-430 (set of photocopied, redacted pages
selected from Hill's notebooks that was provided to the Senate Select Committee by the
Department of State in 1987; produced by State to the OIC on January 20, 1988).

     OIC Acquires Additional Department of State Evidence During 1990 and 1991

     In 1990, the OIC requested and received Hill's permission to review his original notebooks
covering the period 1983 through the end of the Reagan Administration in January 1989, and to
photocopy all entries relevant to the continuing Iran/contra investigation.45  At the time,
Independent Counsel's investigation was focused on support for the Nicaraguan contras and the
activities and statements  of sub-Cabinet officials such as Elliott Abrams, Duane R. Clarridge,
Alan D. Fiers, Jr. and Donald P. Gregg.  Neither Shultz nor Hill was a subject of the OIC's
investigation.

     The 1990 review of Hill's notebooks resulted in the OIC keeping copies of a much greater
volume of relevant notes than the Department of State had produced in response to OIC and
congressional requests in 1986 and 1987.46  The OIC continued to assume the accuracy of
Shultz's well-known testimony regarding his exclusion from information regarding arms
shipments to Iran and his (and Hill's) seeming  cooperation with each Iran/contra investigation.
When Shultz and Hill were reinterviewed at the end of 1990, the OIC remained focused upon the
subjects of its investigation at that time:  Abrams, Clarridge and Gregg.

     45 Hill made his notebooks available to the OIC for its review off-site, first during June 1990
in a secure facility at the Hoover Institution library in Stanford, California, and then during July
and August 1990 in a secure section of the National Archives and Records Administration in
Washington, D.C.  The OIC reviewed these documents anew, identifying and copying all
relevant items.  It was not until much later that the OIC compared its selection to Hill's original
production of relevant notes.

     46 Most of the ``new'' Hill notes that the OIC identified and photocopied in 1990 fell into two
categories.  Some notes address the plethora of specific topics concerning the Nicaraguan contras
(including strategy for obtaining contra aid from Congress, regional diplomatic activity and
contra financial analyses) that the OIC had agreed to exclude from its request for relevant Hill
notes in 1987.  Other notes were created during the period April 24, 1987, through January 20,
1989, which was outside the scope of the OIC's previous requests for relevant Hill notes.  The
OIC accordingly was not troubled to find these notes when it reviewed Hill's notebooks in July
1990.

     On April 5, 1991, the OIC also interviewed Nicholas Platt as part of its continuing
investigations of Clarridge, Abrams and Gregg.47  Platt described his notetaking practices as
executive secretary and said that, although he already had reviewed his notes for any relevant
Iran/contra material and turned the relevant notes over to both Congress and the OIC, his
complete notes were in a safe deposit box at a local bank, and the OIC was welcome to review
them and duplicate them as necessary.48  The following Monday, an FBI special agent took
custody of Platt's original notes for the period January 1985 through February 1987.49  In May
1991, after a brief review of Platt's original handwritten notes revealed that they were highly
relevant to the continuing Iran/contra investigation, the OIC  requested and obtained Platt's
permission to copy his entire collection of notes.50 The OIC returned Platt's original notes later
in 1991.51

     47 Platt, FBI 302, 4/5/91, pp. 4-9.  This interview, which the OIC had requested months
earlier, had been deferred until Platt, who was serving as United States ambassador to the
Philippines at the time, was in Washington for regular consultations.

     48 Ibid., pp. 2-3.

     49 Ibid., 4/8/91, p. 1.

     50 Letter from John Q. Barrett to Ambassador Platt, 5/28/91, 016491; Letter from
Ambassador Platt to Barrett, 6/5/91, 016596.

     51 Platt, FBI 302, 9/24/91, p. 1.

     It was not until the summer and fall of 1991, in connection with the accelerating
investigations of Abrams and several CIA officials, that the OIC realized that Hill's notes were
inconsistent with Shultz's testimony.  Further investigation revealed that Hill had not produced
these notes in 1986 or 1987, and that Platt had not produced corresponding notes of many of the
same events.  The OIC later obtained notes from other Department of State officials that also had
not been produced to Iran/contra investigators.52

     52 For example, in 1991 and 1992, the OIC located for the first time handwritten meeting and
reminder notes that had been created contemporaneously by three junior foreign service officers
(Glyn Davies, Keith Eddins and Debi Graze) who served as special assistants to Shultz during
1986-87.  Although these notes were largely cumulative, repeating much information that Hill,
Platt, Ross, Quinn and/or Raphel had recorded in their notes, they occasionally contained
substantive information that was not recorded in any other document.  These notes were not
produced earlier because the Department of State failed to advise the special assistants that they
had been requested.  (Eddins, FBI 302, 1/28/91, p. 6; Graze, FBI 302, 8/27/92, p. 3.)  When
contacted directly by the OIC in 1991-92, each special assistant promptly and voluntarily
provided the requested material.

     Shultz's ``Three Phases'' of Department of State Knowledge Regarding Arms Shipments to
Iran

     Starting with his earliest closed-session testimony before Congress on December 16, 1986,
Shultz characterized his knowledge of the Iran arms shipments in three phases:  from June to
November 1985, when he said he knew arms sales were debated but was not informed that any
took place; from December 1985 to May 1986, when he said he knew the United States was
attempting to open a dialogue with Iran but was unwilling to sell arms; and from May 4 to
November 3, 1986, when he received no information of arms transfers.  In essence, Shultz's
testimony centered more on what he did not know than on what he did; it laid the groundwork for
the widely held misperception that he and other Department of State officials were largely
ignorant of the Iran arms shipments.  Shultz's testimony -- which was prepared by Hill and
Sofaer, and reviewed by Platt -- specifically  characterized the development of the Iran initiative,
and his knowledge of the initiative, as follows:

     The following chronology would fail to give the full picture as I saw it if I did not note at the
outset that this year-and-a-half-long episode involving contacts with Iran seems to me in
retrospect to have taken place in three phases:  an initial period from June until November 1985
when arms transfers were periodically debated as part of an effort to improve relations with Iran
and secure the release of our hostages -- during this period I learned of two  proposed arms
transfers, but was not informed that either was consummated; a middle period, from December
'85 to May '86, during which I had strong evidence that we were trying to open a dialogue with
Iran but were unwilling to sell arms; and a third phase, from May 4, 1986, when I heard of a
discussion in London about arms transfers and protested to the White House, until the revelations
in the media beginning November 3, 1986 -- during this period I received no information
indicating that an arms transfer to Iran had occurred.53

     53 Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, pp. 6-7 (emphasis added); accord, Shultz, House
Foreign Affairs Committee (HFAC) Testimony, 1/21/87, pp. 13-14; Shultz, Tower Commission
Testimony, 1/22/87, pp. 8-9.  In 1992, Shultz explained that it had been his thinking that the
``three phases'' construct

     just made the account more understandable and easier to describe.  The phases were
characterized, I believe, by if a phase came to an end and I concluded for one reason or another
that the effort to sell arms to Iran had stopped, so that ended the phase.

     (Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 37.)  Although Shultz had abandoned the ``three phases''
organizational scheme by the time he gave public testimony before the Select Committees in July
1987, the substance of his testimony was largely unchanged and he did, on one occasion,
resurrect ``three time periods'' in response to a specific question.  (Shultz, Select Committees
Testimony, 7/24/87, pp. 87-93.)  He also told the Select Committees at the beginning of his
testimony that he would make no opening statement because Congress had his prior Iran/contra
testimony and what he had to say was ``basically the same testimony.  So I don't choose to read it
out again.''  (Ibid., 7/23/87, p. 2.)

     The evidence contained in contemporaneous notes supports the thesis that Shultz and others
in the department opposed the initiative.  But it does not support the commonly accepted
corollary:  that they were prevented  from monitoring the initiative.  In fact, Shultz and his senior
officials did monitor the initiative.  As a result, Shultz and other top department officials had a
far better understanding of the initiative than their testimony suggests.  Moreover, significant
aspects of Shultz's testimony were incorrect:  Shultz learned in ``phase one'' that arms had been
shipped; Shultz repeatedly complained during ``phase two'' that arms were still on the table; and
there is strong evidence that, during ``phase three,'' Shultz learned in both late May and late July
that arms had been shipped to Iran in exchange for the release of hostages.  The evidence shows
that Shultz's characterization of each of the three phases set out in his testimony was incorrect:
Shultz and others in the department were substantially better informed during each of the three
phases than he stated.

     Phase One:  ``from June until November 1985 . . . I learned of two proposed arms transfers,
but was not informed that either was consummated''

     As Shultz told Congress, he learned during 1985 of two proposed transfers of U.S. arms to
Iran:  the Israeli TOW missile shipments planned for August and September, and the Israeli
HAWK missile shipment planned for November.  He did not admit knowledge that either was
consummated.

     Contemporaneous notes taken by both Platt and Hill show that Shultz and other senior
Department  officials received information indicating that the transfers had taken place.  These
notes corroborate McFarlane's contention that he had kept Shultz and others informed about the
Iran initiative.

     Hill's notes reflect that McFarlane informed Shultz (who was traveling in Australia) by a
``back channel'' cable transmitted on July 14, 1985, that he (McFarlane) had been advised by an
Israeli emissary of contacts with Iranians who

     were confident that they cld [could] achieve the release of the 7 hostg [hostages].  They
sought some gain in return:  100 TOWS from Israel -- but the larger purpose wld [would] be the
opening of the private dialogue w [with] a high level American official and a sustained
discussion of US-Iranian relations[.] 54

     54 Hill Note, 7/14/85, ANS 0001109 (emphasis deleted); Back Channel Cable from
McFarlane to Shultz (unnumbered), 7/14/85, ALV 005092-95.

     Shultz directed Hill to ``do a cautiously positive reply to say ok.'' 55  Shultz, by cable
transmitted later that day, told McFarlane that he (Shultz) agreed

     55 Hill Note, 7/14/85, ANS 0001109. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     that we should make a tentative show of interest without commitment.  . . .

     That being said, I further agree with you that this situation is loaded with ``imponderables''
that call for great caution on our part.  . . .  I would only underscore a couple of them:  the fraud
that seems to accompany so many deals involving arms and Iran. . . .

     I suggest . . . that we give the emissary a positive but passive reply.  That is tell him that he
may convey to his Iranian contacts that the U.S. has been informed of the Iranian proposal and is
receptive to the idea of a private dialogue involving a sustained discussion of U.S.-Iranian
relations.  In other words, we are willing to listen and seriously consider any statement on this
topic they may wish to initiate.  . . .56

     56 SECTO 13108, 7/14/85, ALW 001132-34.

     Shultz followed up after he returned to Washington on July 19, 1985.57  Hill made a note that
Shultz should ``check w[ith] Bud'' McFarlane about

     57 Shultz Record of Schedule, 7/19/85, ALW 0048791.

     * ``Emissary'' from Israel re Israel-Iran contact to help w[ith]  A. 7 hostages  B. moderates in
post-Khomeini Iran (Gorbanefar) [sic] 58

     58 Hill Note, 7/23/85, ANS 0001140.  Shultz also discussed this topic at a ``wrap up'' meeting
with his senior aides late the next day.  (Hill Note, 7/24/85, ANS 0001141.) Hill made another
note two days later that Shultz should ``check out'' this matter with McFarlane.  (Hill Note,
7/26/85, ANS 0001143.)  On August 5, 1985, Hill made a note indicating that he told Shultz to
ask McFarlane ``tonight at 6 pm'' about ``Peres + Isr [Israel]/Iran intel [intelligence] link[.]''  (Hill
Note, 8/5/85, ANS 0001152.) None of these notes was produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     On August 6, Hill took detailed notes of Shultz's ``read out,'' or recounting, of his
conversation with McFarlane regarding the ``Israel-Iran link:''

     3 mtgs [meetings] betw [between] Israelis + 2 or 3 from Iran (Hamburg + Tel Aviv)  Bud's
contact is [Israeli official David] Kimche.  Was in DC on weekend.  Irans [Iranians] sees IR
[Iran] in shambles.  See new govt as inevitable.  Mil  [military] + people still pro-American.
Want a dialogue w [with] Amers [Americans].  Want arms from us.  Want 100 TOWS from
Israel.  All totally deniable.  Say they can produce 4 or more of hostg [hostages].  Want a meeting
somewhere.  So Bud is pursuing it.  Shamir told Kimche he wanted to know explicitly whether I
informed. Kimche sd [said] Murf [Murphy] mtg [with Syria] scares them.59

     59 Hill Note, 8/6/85, ANS 0001154.

     Hill also noted his own response to Shultz's report, and Shultz's ultimate response to
McFarlane:

     g008CH [Charles Hill] to (S) [Shultz]

     We are being had.  Isr [Israel] desperate for a big arms trade rel [relationship] w [with] Iran
that US permits.  They have finally hit on the way to do it.

     (S):  its a mistake.  I sd [said] it had to be stopped 60

     60 Ibid.

     On September 4, 1985, Platt noted information -- which he labeled as a matter that had lots of
``juice'' 61 -- about Shultz-McFarlane discussions and ``equipment'' shipments to Iran in
exchange for hostages:

     61 Platt Note, 9/4/85, ALW 0036258.  Platt's deputy said Platt used the term ``juice'' to refer
to anything that was ``especially interesting.''  (Quinn, FBI 302, 12/4/91, p. 3.)

      -- Juice -- O [Oliver North] -- Bud [McFarlane] -- Ledeen -- Back channels Israel-Iran --
would produce 7 hostages[.]  Kimche.  g722Israel Israelis g722produce said they could
produce -- Because Iranians wanted equipment.

     Past 2 days -- sidebar conversations w Bud + S [Shultz] -- How to move them -- numbers, etc.
. . .

      -- This AM Bud said to S -- Deal is -- They'll move seven hostages to beach . . .

      -- Ollie North will go out + arrange.  He needs a fake passport -- g722will get  We have
one.62

     62 Platt Note, 9/4/85, ALW 0036258-59.

     On September 11, 1985, Hill noted his awareness that these exchanges would leave the
United States with an obligation to replenish ``arms'' to Israel:

     Bud [McFarlane] wkg [working] on 7 hstgs [hostages].  Don't stir it up.  Its independent from
Syrian effort.  Iran-Israel.  Shd [Should] be worked thru by end of week.

     (Scam on us)  They [Iran] giving us what wld [would] anyway [hostages] (for Atlit [prisoners
in Israel]) + then give us a bill for arms for IR [Iran] from Israel.63

     63 Hill Note, 9/11/85, ANS 0001117.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     On the evening of September 14, 1985, the balance of the Israeli TOW shipment went to Iran
and Reverend Benjamin Weir was released.  The next day, Platt made a note, based on a call
from Oakley (who had just spoken with North) that ``Polecat [is] beginning to Pay off -- Weir
has been released.  . . .  Other things could happen.'' 64  On September 16, Hill's first note of the
day recorded his understanding of events:

     64 Platt Note, 9/15/85, ALW 0036343.

     Weir released + taken to CIA [facility] in Va.  Secret because op. [operation]  still going on.
Oakley working w Ollie [North].

     McF [McFarlane] + Ollie are getting us into deal where we will have to pay off Isr [Israel], IR
[Iran] and Syr [Syria] for what we wd [would] get from Syria for nothing following Atlit
release.65

     65 Hill Note, 9/16/85, ANS 0001123.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     On September 17, 1985, Weir's release became public and both Platt and Hill's notes reflect
numerous discussions about the release.  They both noted an early morning telephone call
between Hill and Reginald Bartholomew, the U.S. ambassador to Lebanon.66  Bartholomew,
who had not been informed of any of the arms-for-hostages proposals leading up to Weir's
release,67 told Hill that ``all signs are we g008didn't get Weir from Syria.  As for others (IR
[Iran], Isr [Israel] etc) I have no info.'' 68  Bartholomew, from his position outside the circle of
knowledge in Washington, said it was his feeling that ``Weir was let out to g722put bring
letters + put pressure  on us to release the Dawa prisoners [in Kuwait].'' 69  Since then, Shultz
has used Bartholomew's uninformed speculation that Weir was released to deliver a message
regarding the Dawa prisoners as proof that it was the reason for Weir's release and that Shultz,
himself, was unaware of the arms transfers that preceded Weir's release.70  Contrary to Shultz's
pretenses, Hill's notes from later in the day on September 17, 1985, show that Shultz did receive
indications that arms were involved.

     66 Hill Note, 9/17/85, ANS 0001125; Platt Note, 9/17/85, ALW 0036354.

     67 Bartholomew, FBI 302, 1/2/92, pp. 3-6; Hill Note, 9/17/85, ANS 0001125 (``I
[Bartholomew] know precious little about origins of this or who is involved.  Bud [McFarlane]
has told me nothing of who else [is] involved.'').

     68 Hill Note, 9/17/85, ANS 0001125.

     69 Platt Note, 9/17/85, ALW 0036354.  The Dawa prisoners held in Kuwait reportedly
included a close relative of a key member of the Hezbollah faction that was holding the hostages
in Lebanon.  (See generally Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 72, 93, 95, 159; Shultz, OIC
Interview, 2/13/92, pp. 300-1.)

     70 E.g. Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 60-61, 70-73, 77, 79, 90, 113, 115, 172-73.  The
suggested explanations are not mutually exclusive:  The terrorists could have decided to free
Weir after Iran received TOW missiles from the West, and they could have told Weir that the
remaining hostages would suffer unless he communicated the terrorists' demand that Kuwait free
the Dawa prisoners.

     On the day that Weir's release was announced, NBC News had a story about an airplane that
had run into trouble on its flight back to Israel after delivering arms to Iran.  Hill noted on
September 17, 1985:

     NBC -- Isr. [Israeli] arms to g722arms Iran.

     DC-8 flew from Iran to Isr [Israel]. Isr sd yes, but elec. + commo [electrical and
communications] failure.  Story is Iran Jews on board.  Plane picking up spare parts.  Kimche
met in London in last month w [with] NSC official. + arrangements made.  US interested in
leverage w Iran mil. (ingratiating) over what comes after Khomeini.

     (false) Kashoggi [sic] + Nimrodi.71

     71 Hill Note, 9/17/85, ANS 0001126.  Hill marked this note with stars and the symbol ``H),''
which indicated that he regarded the information as ``interesting.''  This note was not produced to
the FBI, Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or
1987.

     The Department of State apparently learned of NBC's information through a telephone call
from NBC reporter Chris Wallace to Raphel on September 17, 1985.  (See Raphel Note, 9/17/85,
ALW 0062116-17; same information as Hill's 9/17/85 note; Raphel Chronology, 1987, p. 1,
ALW 0056726.)  A series of State Department cables during this period also referred to the
reports of the plane returning to Israel running into trouble over Turkey after delivering weapons
to Iran.  (See Department of State cable to Beirut, Damascus and London, 9/17/85, ALW
025278-79; MANAMA 02805, 9/19/85, ALW 025287; Department of State cable to all Near
East diplomatic posts, Ankara, Paris, London, Rome and Nicosia, 9/19/85, ALW 025282-83; see
also ``Rara avis,'' The Economist, 9/21/85, p. 42, ALW 025280; cf. RIYADH 08507, 9/23/85,
ALW 025281, reporting front page Al Riyadh story of previous day claiming President Reagan
sent U.S. official to Tehran to discuss release of hostages in Lebanon.)

     Hill noted Shultz's reply:  ``Well, sometimes you have to try things.''  Hill's note indicates that
he told Shultz The Washington Post had a story that Weir had been released.  Hill observed that
reporters ``[h]ave not yet put the two [stories] together.''  In the margin of his notebook, he wrote:
``Bud's folly is out.'' 72

     72 That same day, Platt made notes of McFarlane's report that the effort to obtain hostages
other than Weir ``appears not going anywhere'' and wrote that this activity had turned into a
``[r]ace between Syria to round up hostages so [Classified Country Name Withheld] can pay or
Israelis can pay iranians with weapons sales.''  (Platt Note, 9/17/85, ALW 0036360.)

     On September 20, 1985, after it was clear that no additional hostages would be freed, Shultz
stated that he was ``uncomfortable with polecat operations.'' 73  The next day, Shultz, Armacost
and Whitehead discussed their concern for the U.S. Government position -- bargaining for
hostage release while publicly denying a deal.  Hill recorded their discussion in his notebook:

     73 Platt Note, 9/20/85, ALW 0036387.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     g008Weir + 6 Hostg [Hostages]

     Arma [Armacost]:  I have anxiety about

     strange bargaining going on.  Iran plane in Israel.

     (S):  I'm not comfortable, don't know what to do about it.

     When Weir released, lot of people wanted

     to take credit for it.  But looks like they let him go just to propagandize their cause.

     Arma -- They are being cute w [with] me.

     Pdx [Poindexter] just says its v [very] confused.

     I wd be concerned about bargaining w Iran while we say we not doing a deal.

     (S):  WH [White House] has taken control. When they want us to do something they will tell
us.

     JW [Whitehead]:  do you tk [think] they tell the P [President]?

     (S):  Yes, But he doesn't appreciate the  problems w [with] arms sales to Iran.74

     74 Hill Note, 9/21/85, ANS 0001132-33 (original emphasis).  This note was not produced to
the FBI, Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or
1987.

     In 1993, Armacost acknowledged that during the period surrounding Weir's release,
arrangements involving ``giving something for hostages'' were ``going on,'' and Armacost
understood that one major component was arms going to Iran.75  Armacost, although not
recalling specific discussions, testified that the connection between Israel's dealings with Iran and
Weir's release ``surely'' was something that he and Shultz discussed.76  Oakley, who was
informed by North that an arms shipment produced Weir's release,77 generally kept Shultz
informed by briefing Armacost and Platt.78  Oakley believed that Shultz knew everything that he
knew about the Weir release because he had reported his information.79  McFarlane and
Poindexter also testified that they  informed Shultz about the Israeli shipments preceding the
release.80

     75 Armacost, Grand Jury, 3/13/92, p. 30.

     76 Ibid., p. 43.

     77 Oakley, FBI 302, 8/19/87, p. 2; Ibid., 11/13/91, pp. 3, 5; Ibid., 11/14/91, p. 2; accord,
Oakley, Tower Commission Interview Notes, 12/17/86, p. 2, ALS 002391.

     78 E.g. Ibid.

     79 Oakley, FBI 302, 11/14/91, p. 4.

     80 E.g. McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92; Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp.
180-81.

     Notes from November and December 1985 corroborate this testimony and reflect the working
understanding within the Department of State that the Weir release had, in fact, involved arms
transfers to Iran.  A note taken by Raphel during a meeting with Armacost, Oakley, Borg and
Ross on November 12, 1985, states that ``Iranian/Israeli connection got Weir released.'' 81

     81 Raphel Note, 11/12/85, ALW 0062333.  Raphel, who died in 1988, was not interviewed
regarding this note.

     An early morning Hill note from November 18 reflects the same understanding.  It indicates
that Hill and Shultz discussed:

     McF [McFarlane] + Isr/IR [Israel/Iran] hostg [hostages].  That was attempt to see (S) [Shultz]
last night.  He thinks something's coming down in next week or so (not for the first time)

      -- Nothing cld [could] be more

     (S): its appropriate than a meeting

     a bad  betw [between] [a non-Iranian

     deal intermediary] + Ollie North.

     Looney  Tunes.82

     82 Hill Note, 11/18/85, ANS 0001194.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     The next day, Hill made another note regarding ``Ollie North's hostg [hostage] caper.  Ollie
telling story (skewed) to Parker Borg.  Using [non-Iranian intermediary]  (witting) as cover.'' 83
Hill later received a secure telephone call from Platt in Washington, D.C.  Platt reported that
North told Borg he (North) had stumbled on the Israelis sending arms to Iran as a result of his
contra activities.  North claimed he ``went to Isr [Israel] + sd [said] we know yr [you're] doing
this + we want something for it -- use yr [your] channel to IR [Iran] to get hstg [hostages] out.
They thot [thought] all wd [would] come out w [with] Weir.  Didn't.  Now will try again.'' 84
Hill responded to this account of North's story by stating, ``I think Ollie is lying to try to make
the arrangement sound more acceptable.  We (he) didn't just stumble on this.'' 85

     83 Hill Note, 11/19/85, ANS 0001198.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     84 Hill Note, 11/19/85, ALW 0058650 (misdated as 11/18/85).  This note was not produced
to the FBI, Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986
or 1987.

     85 Ibid.

     A memorandum from Oakley sent electronically to Shultz in Geneva on November 18, 1985,
states that,

     [t]hrough other sources and connections, those used for the release of Reverend Weir, there is
an expectation of a possible break through on the hostages on November 20 or 21.  [Non-Iranian
intermediary] was informed of the possibility and urged to be present so he could take credit.86

     86 Memorandum from Oakley to Shultz, 11/18/85, ALW 0047963-65.

     As Shultz has testified, McFarlane informed him in Geneva the next day (November 19,
1985) that the remaining hostages were about to be released following a shipment of 120
HAWKs from Israel to Iran.  Oakley's memo and McFarlane's report together told Shultz that the
Weir release had involved the same kind of arms-for-hostages deal.  Oakley's memorandum
stated the ``sources and connections'' who were developing the November 1985 activity were
those used for the release of the Reverend Weir.  McFarlane's report disclosed these ``sources
and connections'' included the Israelis and their arms dealers.  The inference from Oakley's
memorandum and McFarlane's report, then, is that the Israelis were following the same pattern in
November 1985 to obtain the release of the remaining hostages, as they had in obtaining the
release of Weir.

     Notes from discussions leading up to the December 7, 1985, White House meeting of the
President with his national security advisers confirm Shultz's and other senior department
officials' awareness of the Israeli arms transfers prior to the Weir release.  Shultz spoke with
Poindexter on December 5, 1985, first by unsecured telephone, then on secure.  Shultz reported
to Hill that during the first call he (Shultz) told Poindexter,

     I think we shd [should] say g008stop[.]  Syria has indicated to Murf [Assistant Secretary
Richard W. Murphy] that Iran [is] playing a big role + they can't influence it much.  We are
signalling to  Iran that they g008can kidnap people for profit.87

     87 Hill Note, 12/5/85, ANS 0001227 (emphasis in original).

     Later, during the secure call, Shultz said, ``This is paying for hostgs [hostages] -- so we have
broken our principles.'' 88  The only hostage who had been paid for at that point was Weir, and
the only currency that had been discussed was arms.

     88 Ibid., ANS 0001229.

     Hill's notes of Shultz's report of the December 7, 1985, meeting state:

     They [McFarlane and Poindexter] say Isr [Israel] sent 60 I-hawks [missiles] for release of
Weir.  Maybe thats why he released + maybe not.  [Non-Iranian intermediary] sent back to Beirut
so he can get credit for it.89

     89 Hill Note, 12/7/85, ANS 0001242; accord generally Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 45
(``I'm not a military person so I always have trouble with TOWs and HAWKs and things like
that.'').

     Hill's note shows that Shultz was informed that arms transfers in fact had been consummated
in connection with the release of Weir.  Thus, although Shultz stated as recently as February
1992 that he still believed that Weir was released to bring pressure on Kuwait to release the
Dawa prisoners, and not because of the Israeli arms shipments, he could not maintain that he was
never informed that Israel made arms shipments at or before the time of the Weir release.

     Before the Select Committees in 1987,  Shultz testified that McFarlane had informed Shultz
and President Reagan on August 6, 1985, of an Israeli proposal to sell 100 U.S.-supplied TOWs
to Iran in return for the release of four Americans held hostage in Beirut.90  Shultz testified that
he objected and heard nothing indicating that the transfer had taken place.91

     90 Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, pp. 67-68.  Hill's notes do not reflect such
a meeting with McFarlane and the President on August 6, 1985.

     91 Ibid.

     Regarding the November 1985 HAWK shipment, numerous notes reflect that Shultz and other
senior department officials were informed contemporaneously of many of its details, including
discussions prior to the Geneva summit of President Reagan and Soviet Leader Mikhail
Gorbachev, the flight plan, the need for overflight clearances, the delay in the shipment and the
reasons the Iranians eventually returned the missiles.

     With regard to the November 1985 shipment of HAWKs, Shultz testified to Congress that he
knew the shipment was planned, but that he believed that it was never consummated.  At first, he
believed no arms were actually sent.  Later, he understood the shipment had been unsatisfactory
and therefore returned.  He said:

     I learned about the -- I learned about the proposed shipment in connection with the hostages,
as I described it, in the telephone call in Geneva.  But since no  hostages were released, I
assumed that no arms were sent.  I later learned, as I testified, that a shipment went from Israel to
Iran but was rejected by Iran and presumably sent back; so as of that time, as far as I knew, no
arms had been shipped.92

     92 Shultz, HFAC Testimony, 1/21/87, p. 64.

     The shipment was not in fact sent back to Israel until February 1986.  No contemporaneous
State Department records indicate a belief that the shipment was immediately ``sent back.'' 93

     93 Congress never asked Shultz whether he was informed that the President had approved the
shipment, and he never volunteered that information.  Hill's notes reflect that McFarlane told
Shultz, before the shipment, that the President had approved what Shultz called at the time ``A
30M [$30 million] wpns [weapons] payoff.''  (Hill Note, 11/22/85, ALW 0058654.)

     Phase Two:  ``from December '85 to May '86, during which I had strong evidence that we
were trying to open a dialogue with Iran but were unwilling to sell arms''

     Shultz's position on phase two was that during this period he ``had strong evidence that we
were trying to open a dialogue with Iran but were unwilling to sell arms.'' 94  The notes of Hill,
Platt and others, however,  reflect Shultz's awareness of ongoing arms-for-hostages negotiations
during nearly this entire period.

     94 Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 6.  In 1992, Shultz stated that his December 1986
testimony had incorrectly drawn the line between phases two and three in early May 1986.
Shultz said that he should have started phase three some time in or after early June 1986, after
McFarlane's trip to Tehran with a planeload of HAWK missile battery parts.  Shultz said that he
had meant to draw the line between phases two and three at the point that Poindexter and Casey
told him ``that the whole operation was going to stand down or some phrase like that.''  (Shultz,
OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 229.)

     Both Platt and Hill took notes of a meeting between Shultz and Armacost on January 4, 1986,
in which they discussed the Iran initiative.  Shultz told Armacost that Israeli counterterrorism
adviser Amiram Nir had met with Poindexter ``to revive hostg [hostage] idea.''  The new deal
would involve trading ``3300 TOWS for hostg [hostages].''  Shultz reported that he told
Poindexter that the new proposal raised ``all [the] same probls [problems] as before.  A payment.
Blows our policy.''  Shultz complained to Armacost, ``[s]o its not dead.  [Israeli Prime Minister
Shimon] Peres comes to me on some things + to the NSC [staff] on others.'' 95

     95 Hill Note, 1/4/86, ANS 0001255. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Following a January 7, 1986, meeting at the White House, Shultz made a brief report to Hill.
Hill's note of the report, under the caption ``Iran Polecat,'' states:  ``P [President Reagan] decided
to go ahead.  Only Cap [Weinberger] + I opposed.  I won't debf [debrief] anybody about it.
(TOWS for hostages).'' 96  Then, on January 14, Hill noted that Armacost reported to Shultz that
``g008Hostg  [hostage] dealing still going on.''   Shultz's response was ``WH [White House] is
running this.  No comment[.]'' 97

     96 Ibid., 1/7/86, ANS 0001264 (emphasis deleted). This note was not produced to the FBI,
Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     97 Ibid., 1/14/86, ANS 0001270. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Three days later, on January 17, 1986, there was another meeting at the White House to
discuss the initiative.  Platt noted Shultz's report of that meeting as follows:  ``[l]ong discussion
of Polecat at lunch.  He [Shultz] half shut his eyes -- Want it to be recorded as[:]  A[.] unwise
[and] B[.] illegal.'' 98

     98 Platt Note, 1/17/86, ALW 0037151.

     News of the new arms transactions circulated through Shultz's inner circle.  Armacost's deputy
Ross on January 23 noted that Quinn reported that Raphel had heard that the arms-for-hostages
effort had been reactivated, that this might indicate the Iranians had come back to us, that a
reported hostage-relief initiative involving New York Cardinal John O'Connor might simply be a
cover,99 and  that Shultz had said the department should stay out of the activity but attempt to
keep itself informed:

     99 In January 1986, Department of State officials learned of a complicated initiative to free
Shi'ite detainees held by Israel in South Lebanon as a means of obtaining the freedom of the
hostages in Lebanon.  This supposed initiative involved such religious figures O'Connor, Terry
Waite, Pope John Paul II and the Greek Orthodox Patriarch in Damascus, Syria, along with
General Antoine Lahad in South Lebanon.  See, e.g., Memorandum from P -- Christopher Ross
to the Files, Subject:  Transcription of Personal Notes in Response to Request for Search for
Documents, Ref:  L [Sofaer] and A [Bouchard] Memorandum Dated November 29, 1986,
12/8/86, p. 5, ALV 002745-46 (Ross' translation and narrative explanation of his 1/14/86
handwritten note).

     1/23 g0081100 KQ [Quinn]

     * * *

     (2) AR [Raphel] info of Sat meeting

     reactivating Arms for hostages.

     Iranians came back?

     GPS [Shultz]:  let's stay out, just keep

     informed.  No control or

     involvement.100

     100 Ross Note, 1/23/86 ALW 0047076; accord Memorandum from P -- Christopher Ross to
the Files, Subject:  Transcription of Personal Notes in Response to Request for Search for
Documents, Ref:  L [Sofaer] and A [Bouchard] Memorandum Dated November 29, 1986,
12/8/86, p. 6, ALV 002746 (Ross' translation and narrative explanation of his 1/23/86
handwritten note).

     On January 24, 1986, Platt noted:  ``Polecat lives.'' 101

     101 Platt Note, 1/24/86, ALW 0037163. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     On February 6, the U.S. Embassy in Paris sent a ``No Distribution'' (NODIS) cable to Shultz
reporting that the ``Embassy has been approached by a French, Swiss-based arms dealer . . . with
a written prospectus alleging ongoing negotiations between the government of Iran and U.S.
middlemen toward exchange of 10,000 TOW missiles for release of six U.S. hostages in
Lebanon.'' 102  Hill noted the  cable in his notebook as follows:  ``g008Polecat?  NODIS from
g008Paris.  Its spreading around[.]'' 103

     102 PARIS 05480, 2/6/86, ALV 004154-60.

     103 Hill Note, 2/7/86, ANS 0001317. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.  The
Department of State replied, in a cable drafted by Oakley, to the Paris cable on February 23:  ``As
Embassy [Paris] has surmised, the proposal described Reftel [in the Paris cable] is a scam.  There
is no rpt [repeat] no USG [U.S. Government] official involvement in or knowledge of the
purported arrangement to transfer TOW missiles to Iran, nor is there any evidence of which USG
is aware that such a transfer would produce the release of American citizens held hostage in
Lebanon.''  (STATE 054752, 2/22/86, ALV 004161-64.)  The reply appears to have been literally
true, because the proposal described in the Paris cable was not the proposal the White House had
approved.  But, as Hill's note reflects, the cable was a foretaste of leaks to come.

     On February 11, Shultz attended a ``family group'' lunch with Poindexter, Weinberger and
Casey.104  Weinberger took extensive notes of the discussion, which revolved around the
arms-for-hostages arrangements.105  Weinberger's notes record a timeline for the anticipated
hostage release that included 1,000 TOW missiles being transferred from Kelly Air Force Base in
Texas to Israel on February 15.106  According to the timeline, 500 of the TOW  missiles were to
be delivered to Bandar Abbas in Iran on February 16, and the second 500 TOWs would be
delivered on February 19, with the U.S. hostages to be released on February 23.107  Appearing
after the timeline in Weinberger's notes is a statement attributed to Shultz:  ``Try to find pattern
of various connections between a number of countries -- ours with Iran, French with Iraq, South
Africa, etc. etc.'' 108  The latter note indicates that Shultz was present for the entire lunch,
including the recitation of the timeline.

     104 Shultz Record of Schedule, 2/11/86, ALW 0049130.  Shultz explained that he arranged
for these periodic, principals-only gatherings, which began during McFarlane's tenure as national
security adviser and continued during Poindexter's, ``to create more amity among the people who
tended to be fighting with each other a lot.''  (Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 89.)  These
lunches, which would not occur unless all four ``family'' members could be in attendance,
typically occurred in the White House Family Dining Room.  (Ibid., pp. 89, 203.)

     105 Weinberger Meeting Note, 2/11/86, ALZ 0040652A-52E.

     106 Ibid., ALZ 0040652D.

     107 Ibid.

     108 Ibid., ALZ 0040652E.

     The next family group lunch took place February 21, 1986.  Afterward, Shultz reported to Hill
and Platt that the ``hostg [hostage] deal getting screwed up.  [syndicated columnist] Jack
Anderson is on to it.''  Shultz also reported that the hostage ``[t]urnover supposed to be g008this
g008weekend [as would be expected based on the timeline laid out at the February 11 Family
Group lunch].  I pleaded w [with] Pdx [Poindexter] that if not pls [please] shut it down.  Fr
[French] got stung.  Spaniards too.''  Shultz added, ``I think we have already turned over some
wpns [weapons]'' -- again, as would be expected based on the timeline.  In fact, 1,000 TOW
missiles had been delivered to Iran between February 15 and 17, 1986.  Shultz concluded by
stating that ``at F4 [family group] we agreed no comment on any Qs [questions].  But we will get
crucified.'' 109

     109 Hill Note, 2/21/86, ANS 0001321.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Platt's corresponding notes are similar:

     Hostage deal.  Have not wanted to know much.  Getting g722fuc screwed up to a fare the
[sic] well

      -- Israelis have screwed up

      -- Jack Anderson has wind

      -- g008turnover to take place this weekend

      -- French have paid penalty -- have not gotten people out.  Spaniards got a deal.

      -- Asked PDX [Poindexter] to shut it down if it doesn't work.

      -- Agreed that in respect to Qs [questions] CT [State's Office of Counterterrorism] et al
stonewall, but we will get g722crucifiee crucified.

     (Platt Note, 2/21/86, ALW 0037404-05.)  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Platt reported this conversation to Quinn, who noted ``[t]urnover of people this weekend.  If it
doesn't work -- please shut it off.  Some weapons already Exchanged.''  (Quinn Note, 2/21/86,
ALV 002336.)

     The next development came in March, when Department officials learned that one of the
Iranian negotiators was going to come to Washington, D.C., in April.  Raphel reported to Quinn
that a DoD component wanted to tap the Iranian's phone while he was in Washington and that the
visit indicated that the initiative ``was back on.'' 110

     110 Quinn Note, 3/31/86, ALV 002337.

     Iranian arms broker Manucher Ghorbanifar did visit Washington in April 1986.  On April 3,
Shultz  reported to Hill and Platt that he had talked to Poindexter about the visit, and about a
possible meeting between McFarlane and high-level Iranians.  Hill's notes state:

     g008Polecat VI[ 111] Money man in town w

     111 Hill sarcastically began to add numerals to some of his Polecat notes during 1986.

     [with] $ [money] to pay

     for TOWS.  If he pays, They'll

     set the McF [McFarlane] mtg [meeting].

     During that mtg our hostg [hostages] supposed to be released.  I [Shultz] sd [said] this all has
me horrified.  Region petrified that Iran will win + we are helping them.  He [Poindexter] said
TOWS are defensive wpns [weapons].  I sd [said] ``so's yr [your] old man.'' 112

     112 Hill Note, 4/3/86, ANS 0001399.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Platt's notes are to the same effect.

     Hill's notes from April 15 indicate he told Shultz that the ``plans are for Bud [McFarlane] to
go to Tehran 4/25 w [with] Ollie [North] to work on hostages for arms.  To see Rafsanjani[.]''
113  On April 21, Armacost reported to Shultz, as reflected in Hill's notes, that ``Bud
[McFarlane] may show up in Tehran on Wednesday [April 23, 1986].''  The danger in this
planned mission was apparent: Hill asked, ``How much will we pay to get McF [McFarlane]
back?'' and called it ``all disastrous.'' 114  The next day,  Shultz told Hill (who labeled his note
``g008Polecat 15'') that ``Ir [Iran] keeps haggling.  P [President Reagan] g722says has said
here's the deal + that's it, Pdx [Poindexter] says.  -- McF [McFarlane] [is] in town today, so wont
be in Tehran tomorrow.'' 115

     113 Ibid., 4/15/86, ANS 0001412. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     114 Ibid., 4/21/86, ALW 0053811. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     115 Ibid., 4/22/86, ANS 0001426. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Later that day, April 22, Armacost and Shultz discussed a Customs Department sting
operation in Bermuda that had resulted in the arrest of six Israelis, charged with selling arms to
Iran in violation of U.S. law.  According to Hill's notes (which, in a pun on ``Polecat,'' he labeled
``Poledog''), Armacost worried aloud to Shultz that, ``[i]f it breaks, Isr [Israel] may blow whistle
on g008Polecat.'' 116  On April 24, Hill noted that, as a result of the ``g008Isr [Israel] + arms
to Iran sting,'' Poindexter had ``put Bud's [McFarlane's] trip [to Iran] on ice.'' 117

     116 Ibid., ANS 0001427.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent Counsel, the
Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     117 Ibid., 4/24/86, ANS 0001432. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     It was in May 1986 that McFarlane's trip to Tehran finally took place.  State Department notes
reflect discussions about the trip in advance, knowledge that weapons parts were transferred to
Iran during the trip, and, subsequently, the mission's failure to obtain the release of the hostages.

     The month of May began with a leak similar to that reported in the February 1986 Paris cable,
but this time word of U.S. arms sales to Iran surfaced in London.  U.S. Ambassador Charles
Price called home and demanded to know what was going on.  Price's call prompted Shultz, who
was at a presidential economic summit in Tokyo, to confront White House Chief of Staff Regan
and Poindexter and demand that the operation be stopped.

     Shultz later testified that, following this confrontation, Poindexter assured him in late May
that the initiative was over.118  No contemporaneous notes record such assurances.  Platt and
Hill's notes suggest that, in early May at least, Poindexter gave Shultz a more equivocal response.
Hill's May 4 notes state that Shultz said,

     118 E.g. Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, pp. 26-28.

     Pdx [Poindexter] sd [said] he told Price [that there was] no more than smidgn [smidgeon] of
reality to it.  I [Shultz] went thru my feelings.  He [Poindexter] doesnt share it.  Says we
g008not dealing w these people.  g008He has great decision-making g008equanimity.  But I
sd to him he has the P [President] very exposed.119

     119 Hill Note, 5/4/86, ANS 0001439.

     Platt's subsequent note regarding a Shultz-Poindexter exchange reads as follows:

     S [Shultz] made strong personal effort to turn off Polecat tues [Tuesday] AM [May 6, 1986].
Saw Regan + Pdx [Poindexter].  unloaded.  D R  [Regan] said he'd raise it w Pres [President
Reagan].  PDX then muddied waters.  . . .  S did it again.  g7220 No insulation between this
operation + Pres.  This is wrong + illegal + Pres is way overexposed.  Nothing will happen CH
[Hill] thinks.120

     120 Platt Note, 5/8/86, ALW 0037956.

     On May 13, Weinberger called Shultz about a specific intelligence report he had just received.
The report described an ``arrangement to pay for items being provided to Iran by U.S.'' 121  That
afternoon, Weinberger brought the report to a White House meeting and showed it to Shultz.
Weinberger's notes state that Shultz was ``appalled'' at the report that, among other things, a U.S.
delegation was going to Iran and that ``240 types of spare parts'' Iran wanted ``would be available
when the delegation arrives.'' 122  A Hill note of May 19 appears to refer to this discussion
between Shultz and Weinberger.  The note indicates that Hill discussed the following
information with Shultz:

     121 AMW 0002161-62 (intelligence report).

     122 Weinberger Diary, 5/13/86, ALZ 0040148; AMW 0002161 (intelligence report).

     Iran at F4 [family group] last Friday [May 16, 1986]?  Wbgr [Weinberger] told S [Shultz]
about [intelligence report] that Bud [McFarlane] wd [would] get arms there +  g008then they
see about hostg [hostages].  More + more elusive.  Parts for [HAWK] anti-missile system.  But
we believe sys [system -- Iran's HAWK missile batteries] wont work.123

     123 Hill Note, 5/19/86, ANS 0001453.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     The question of Department of State access to these intelligence reports became an issue
during the Select Committees investigation.  Shultz consistently testified that he was denied
access to the intelligence reports.  (E.g. Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, pp.
75-77.)  Although there is no evidence that Shultz generally saw the intelligence reports that were
distributed to Executive branch officials, Shultz was at least intermittently given the gist of
significant developments contained in them. He had several sources of this information.  The
director of the Defense Department component that produced these reports, Armacost and his
deputy Ross all stated, and Hill's notes reflect, that the defense official regularly called Armacost
to report significant developments from the intelligence reports.  (Armacost, FBI 302, 1/22/87;
Armacost, Grand Jury, 3/13/92, p. 95; Ross, FBI 302, 3/11/92, pp. 3-4.)  In addition, Assistant
Secretary of Defense Richard Armitage, who was shown some of these reports by Weinberger
and Powell, testified that he spoke to Raphel on a daily basis and informed him of significant
developments from the intelligence reports; Raphel's handwritten notes reflect these discussions.
(Armitage, Grand Jury, 4/29/92, p. 42.)  Finally, as Weinberger's diary and meeting notes reflect,
Shultz had opportunities during 1985 and 1986 to learn about the intelligence from the people
who were receiving hard copies, including Weinberger, Casey, McFarlane and Poindexter.

     In the May 13, 1986, instance discussed in the text, Weinberger called Shultz and told him
about an intelligence report.

     On May 22, Hill reported to Shultz that North was bringing a non-Iranian intermediary to
Cyprus, and that Catholic Relief Services was donating $10 million to poor Shias in Lebanon.
Shultz responded, ``This is to be [the]  cover story for our shipment of TOWs to Iranians.'' 124
Two days later, May 24, Raphel recorded in his notes that Quinn had told him about a ``transfer
today -- arms to Iran today.'' 125  Hill's notes from May 27 indicate that he told Shultz that
Poindexter had told Weinberger ``[d]eliveries g008are being made of our mil [military] equip
[equipment] -- may see action today on release.''  Hill also told Shultz that ``[the non-Iranian
intermediary] is in Beirut with 10m [$10 million].  We have commo [communications] to him
from ships (the cover).'' 126

     124 Hill Note, 5/22/86, ANS 0001459 (note headed ``g008Polecat''). This note was not
produced to the FBI, Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees
during 1986 or 1987.

     125 Raphel Note, 5/24/86, ALW 0062905.

     126 Hill Note, 5/22/86, ANS 0001462 (emphasis in original).

     As Hill understood at the time, of course, this information corresponded to real, ongoing
activities.  On May 28, 1986, Hill accurately reported to Shultz and Platt the unsuccessful
conclusion of McFarlane's trip to Iran with a cargo of HAWK missile battery parts:

     g008Polecat died.  M.O. [McFarlane 127] to Tehran.  Talks broke down + on way back.
[Non-Iranian intermediary] has left Lebanon.128

     127 Platt, who devised numerous nicknames for people and operations during his tenure as
executive secretary, began to refer privately to McFarlane as ``the morose one'' and, for that
reason, Platt and Hill each occasionally used the abbreviation ``M.O.'' in their notes to connote
McFarlane.

     128 Hill Note, 5/28/86, ANS 0001463. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Phase Three:  ``from May 4, 1986, . . .  until the revelations in the media beginning November
3, 1986 -- during this period I received no information indicating that an arms transfer to Iran had
occurred''

     Shultz's testimony that ``during this period I received no information indicating that an arms
transfer to Iran had taken place'' is most clearly incorrect with respect to the information about
arms transfers he received in May.  Shultz was warned by Armacost, Oakley and Raphel that the
arms-for-hostages initiative had not been abandoned after McFarlane's failed trip to Tehran.
There also is strong evidence that Shultz received information indicating arms transfers had taken
place in connection with the release of Father Lawrence Jenco in July 1986.

     On or about May 28, British counterterrorism counterparts confronted Oakley with the
accusation that the United States was violating its ``no concessions [to terrorists] policy.'' 129
Following this confrontation, Oakley wrote to Platt what appears to be the first official State
Department document complaining about the ongoing Iran initiative.  Oakley's June 2, 1986,
memorandum, which followed up on Armacost's May 30 report to Shultz,130 states that ``there
is no doubt as to what  was going on during the last ten days in May'' and complains that it ``was
in direct blatant violation of basic hostage policy approved, reapproved, stated and restated by the
President and the Secretary of State.''  Oakley warned that the negotiations were continuing, they
would eventually leak, the Administration would be damaged and he, therefore, urged the
department had to stop the initiative.131  Oakley expected that Platt, a good friend, would deliver
the memorandum to Shultz,132 but no contemporaneous record confirms that this occurred.133
Oakley recalled  that he received no feedback regarding his memorandum and said that, in
sending it, he effectively resigned from the Department of State.134

     129 Quinn Note, 5/28/86, ALV 002338; accord, Oakley, ``Agenda'' Calendar, 5/28/86, ALW
0043138.

     130 Hill's notes of Shultz's ``g008Welcome Home'' meeting with Whitehead and Armacost
include the following exchange:

     Arma [Armacost] -- g008Polecat petered out.  No Deal.  But it won't go away.

     (S) [Shultz] -- What does it take to get this to stop?  Pdx [Poindexter] sd [said] Bud
[McFarlane] was out there.

     Hill Note, 5/30/86, ALW 0053818. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     131 Memorandum from Oakley to Platt, 6/2/86, ALV 004620-21.

     132 Oakley, FBI 302, 1/6/92, p. 2.

     133 The Department of State was not able to locate any record indicating Platt's distribution
of Oakley's memorandum.  (Letter from James E. Baker to John Q. Barrett, 2/11/92, p. 2
(018147), ``The document appears to have been handled `outside the system' in accord with the
designation `eyes only.'  Such memoranda are typically not recorded or tracked.  They are kept or
destroyed at the recipient's discretion and do not become part of the official files of the
Department unless the recipient specifically brings them `within the system.' ''.)  During early
June 1986, the only substantive Hill and Platt notes regarding Oakley concern the possibility of
nominating him to serve as United States Ambassador in Honduras.  (Hill Note, 6/3/86,
ANS0001478; Platt Note, 6/2/86, ALW 0038142.)  Hill made an unexplained note regarding
``Iran -- arms sales,'' however, on the same day that Oakley sent his memorandum to Platt.  (Hill
Note, 6/2/86, ANS 0001472.)

     134 Oakley, FBI 302, 1/6/92, p. 3.

     Raphel next warned Shultz.  On June 12, he asked Quinn to report up the chain to Shultz three
significant new pieces of information:  First, Armitage told Raphel about an intelligence report
showing that the negotiations were continuing; second, Poindexter had just told Weinberger to
``implement the tilt (toward Iran),'' which would mean even more weapons sales would follow;
third, Assistant Secretary Richard W. Murphy had been given a cryptic message via his
counterpart in a third country from Rafsanjani, the speaker of the Iranian parliament, that
indicated that the initiative was continuing.  Raphel was convinced that the operation would
become public and embarrass the President.  Quinn's notes state that Raphel requested his views
be passed on.  He said:  ``Put [it] all together.  Secretary of State must go back to President.'' 135
Quinn passed Raphel's report to  Platt.136  Hill's notes show that Platt reported it to Hill, who
reported it to Shultz.137

     135 Quinn Note, 6/12/86, ALV 002339.

     136 Platt Note, 6/12/86, ALW 0038225.

     137 Hill Note, 6/13/86, ANS 0001494. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Armacost formally warned Shultz about the continuing arms-for-hostages negotiations in an
``eyes only'' memorandum dated July 2, 1986.  Armacost's memorandum, transmitted through
Platt, told Shultz that the National Security Council was engaged in ``sub rosa provision of arms''
to Iran, that ``a usually detached (and heretofore skeptical[)] source'' was ``upbeat'' about the
prospects for a hostage release in Lebanon the next day, and that word of this deal was getting
out, through Israeli official Amiram Nir, to arms dealers who were involved as middlemen, to
officials of another government and to newspaper columnist Jack Anderson.138  Like Oakley
and Raphel, Armacost warned Shultz about both the wrongness of the policy and the inevitability
of public disclosure.

     138 Memorandum from Armacost to Shultz, 7/2/86, ALV 005024.

     Clearly, as of early July 1986, Shultz was on notice that the initiative was not over, regardless
of what Poindexter may have told him, and that future arms transfers to Iran were likely.  Hill's
notes of July 2, 1986 -- the same day as Armacost's memorandum -- show that  Hill and Shultz
discussed a report of an impending hostage release:

       g008Polecat moves again?

     1800 EDT delivery of hostg [hostage] in Beirut set for Thursday

     (119th such prediction) 139

     139 Hill Note, 7/2/86, ANS 0001524. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Shultz later told Hill that the

     Iran business [is] very uncomfortable.  No one mentions it to me -- my own fault.  I sd [said]
if I didnt need to know dont tell me.  Casey said it was dead.  Its not.140

     140 Ibid., circa 7/3/86, ANS 0001528. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Shortly after Shultz received these warnings, Jenco was released on July 25.  Notes from Hill,
Platt, Raphel, Quinn and Ross all reflect an understanding that the release was part of an arms
deal.  The notes show that North told Oakley as much, and that the director of a Defense
Department intelligence component called Armacost and told him about intelligence reports that
indicated Jenco was released in return for arms.  On July 26, the day they received this news,
Platt and Armacost each had several conversations with Shultz, some by secure phone.141  And
Platt reported the news to Hill on Monday, July 28, 1986.142

     141 Platt Note, 7/26/86, ALW 0038556-58, ALW 0038560; Armacost, Grand Jury, 3/13/92,
pp. 117-20. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission
or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     142 Hill Note, 7/28/86, ANS 0001568. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Yet no Department of State official would say that he told Shultz about the arms deal for
Jenco's release.  Platt and Armacost testified in 1992 that, although it is certainly likely that they
told Shultz, neither could recall whether in fact they had done so.  Hill, on the other hand, stated
that he did not tell Shultz because he did not believe that the reports were true.143  Hill's notes
indicate that Hill regarded the reports as an interesting item; they do not in any way indicate that
Hill doubted their accuracy.144  But Hill's notes are replete with rumors that he reported to
Shultz.  Armacost, Platt, Quinn and Oakley each testified that any rumor or other indication that
Jenco was released in return for arms would have been, and in fact was, very significant at the
time, particularly given the warnings these officials had given Shultz in June and early July.  On
the eve of Shultz's congressional testimony in December 1986, they discussed Jenco as one the
``[a]reas of greatest vulnerability.'' 145  Yet, Platt and Hill did not provide their notes concerning
the Jenco release to the Department's legal adviser or investigators.

     143 E.g. Hill, OIC Interview, 2/24/92, p. 414.

     144 Hill Note, 7/28/86, ANS 0001568. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     145 Platt Note, 12/15/86, ALW 0039344. This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     The Aftermath:  State Responds to the November 1986 Exposure of Arms Sales to Iran

     Shortly after the news of the Iran initiative broke in early November 1986, senior State
Department officials began a two-part response.  The first, led by Shultz and Hill, was a
reexamination of what the department had known and done about the arms sales.  The second,
led by Shultz and L. Paul Bremer, the new ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism, was an
effort to stop any further sales to Iran and to take control of counterterrorism policy from the
NSC staff.

     According to Hill, Shultz and others at the State Department were surprised to learn in
November 1986 that the White House intended to continue its arms-for-hostages efforts even
after the 1985 and 1986 sales had been reported in the press.146  Shultz was determined to try to
persuade President Reagan to order an end to further sales.147

     146 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 22.

     147 Ibid.

     But from early November onward, it became clear that few if any other senior Administration
officials shared Shultz's views on how to respond to the growing criticism of the Iran arms sales.
While Shultz called for a full  public disclosure of the facts, Weinberger and Poindexter
advocated saying as little as possible.148

     148 Weinberger Diary, 11/5/86, ALZ 0040517 (``Called John Poindexter -- Shultz has
suggested `telling all' on attempts to deal with Iran to get their help -- strongly objected[.]  I sd
[said] we should simply say nothing -- John agrees.'').

     At a meeting on November 10, 1986, attended by Reagan, Bush, Shultz, Weinberger,
Attorney General Edwin Meese III, Regan, Poindexter, Casey and Poindexter's deputy Alton
Keel, the rift between Shultz and the others widened.  Shultz pressed for assurances that no more
arms would be sent to Iran; Reagan in response insisted that all present support his Iran policy
and refrain from making public statements.149  Shultz replied that he supported the President,
but could not support the policy.150  In light of Shultz's position, a press release issued by the
White House that day described only ``unanimous support for the President.'' 151

     149 Regan Meeting Notes, 11/10/86, ALU 024685; Keel Meeting Notes, 11/10/86, AKW
047253-55; Hill Note, 11/10/86, ANS 0001764-65.

     150 Keel Note, 11/10/86, AKW 047255; Hill Note, 11/10/86, ANS 0001768.

     151 ''Statement by Principal Deputy Press Secretary Speakes on the American Hostages in
Lebanon,'' 11/10/86, Public Papers of President Reagan, Vol. II (1986), p. 1539.

     Shultz's opposition to additional arms sales continued throughout November 1986.  Hill
prepared a set of talking points for Shultz to use in an attempt to persuade  President Reagan to
discontinue the sales.152  Though Shultz could not remember precisely when he used these
talking points with President Reagan, he remembers that talking points of this sort were his
``preoccupation'' in his efforts to convince Reagan that the shipments were a bad idea.153

     152 Talking Points, ALW 50420-25.

     153 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/13/92, p. 318.  Shultz met twice weekly with President Reagan,
on Wednesdays and Fridays.  (Ibid., pp. 327-28.)  Shultz could not remember whether he went
over these talking points with Reagan on Wednesday, November 12, 1986, or at another of these
regular meetings.  (Ibid., pp. 317, 326-27.)

     Shultz appeared on CBS-TV's ``Face the Nation'' on Sunday, November 16, 1986.  When
questioned about the Iran arms sales, Shultz voiced his opposition to any further transactions.
Asked whether he could speak for the entire Administration on this point, Shultz replied that he
could not.154

     154 Shultz, Face the Nation Transcript, 11/16/86, p. 12, ALW 0050352.

     On November 20, 1986, Shultz met with President Reagan to go over a list of erroneous
assertions Reagan had made during a nationally televised press conference the previous evening.
With Regan present, Shultz tried to convince the President that the public saw the Iran arms sales
as arms-for-hostages exchanges.  Shultz specifically mentioned the November 1985 HAWK
shipment, which McFarlane had described to Shultz as  arms-for-hostages at the time the
shipment took place.  Reagan replied that he knew about the November 1985 transaction, but that
it was not an arms-for-hostages deal.155

     155 E.g. Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001881.  Hill's notes also indicate that Shultz and
President Reagan discussed this same subject the previous day, at their regular Wednesday
meeting:  ``Bud [McFarlane] once told me [Shultz] about a plane of arms that wd [would] go if
hostg [hostages] released -- not if not.  P [President Reagan] knew of this -- but it didn't come
off.''  (Hill Note, 11/19/86, ANS 0001852.)

     That same day, Sofaer took action to remove what he believed to be a false statement
regarding the November 1985 HAWK shipment from the testimony that Casey was to give to the
intelligence committees on Friday, November 21, 1986.  By late afternoon on November 20, the
draft testimony stated that no one in the U.S. Government knew until early 1986 that the
November 1985 flight carried missiles instead of oil-drilling equipment.156  Sofaer knew this
was false based on Hill's note of McFarlane's November 19, 1985, call to Shultz in Geneva,
during which McFarlane outlined the upcoming shipment of HAWK missiles.157  Through a
series of phone calls to senior Justice Department officials, Sofaer alerted the attorney  general to
Hill's November 19, 1985, note, which was written proof that Casey's draft testimony contained a
false statement about the November 1985 HAWK shipment.158  Late in the evening on
November 20, 1986, Sofaer received confirmation from Assistant Attorney General Charles
Cooper that the false statement in Casey's testimony regarding November 1985 had been
corrected.159

     156 Sofaer, Select Committees Deposition, 6/18/87, p. 43.

     157 Hill Note, 11/19/85, ANS 001200.  Hill mistakenly wrote ``Tuesday, November 18'' on
the preceding page of notes.  Earlier notebook pages confirm, however, that Hill made the notes
on pages ANS 001199-1200 on Tuesday, November 19, 1985.

     158 Sofaer, Select Committees Deposition, 6/18/87, pp. 38-50.

     159 Ibid., pp. 49-50.

     On Friday, November 21, 1986, the day of Casey's testimony, President Reagan asked Meese
to conduct an inquiry into the Iran arms sales and to report his findings at a senior advisers'
meeting scheduled for Monday, November 24, 1986.160  As part of this inquiry, Meese and
Cooper interviewed Shultz on Saturday morning, November 22, with Hill present.  Hill and
Cooper took extensive notes of the interview.161  The November 1985 shipment was high on the
list of items discussed.  Shultz told Meese that President Reagan had recently acknowledged to
Shultz that he (Reagan) knew about the November 1985 shipment.162  Meese asserted later in
the same interview that President Reagan had not known about the November 1985 HAWKs
shipment, and that if Reagan had known and had not told Congress, it would be a violation of
law.163

     160 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 224-25.

     161 Cooper Notes, 11/22/86, ALV 71839-42; Hill Notes, 11/22/86, ANS 001882-89.

     162 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 001883.

     163 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 001888.

     Shultz's effort to get control of the Iran initiative seemingly failed in a senior advisers' meeting
on November 24, attended by President Reagan, Vice President Bush, Regan, Shultz,
Weinberger, Casey, Poindexter and Meese.  At this meeting, Meese denied Reagan's knowledge
of the 1985 HAWK shipment.  According to Weinberger's notes of the meeting, Meese advised
the group that the November 1985 HAWK shipment was ``[n]ot legal because no finding,'' but
``President g008not informed.'' 164

     164 Weinberger Meeting Notes, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669MM (emphasis in original).

     Events and revelations overtook the internal Administration debate on continuing the arms
sales.  On Tuesday, November 25, 1986, Meese announced during a nationally televised press
conference that proceeds from the Iran arms sales had been siphoned off to supply weapons for
the contras.  The furor over this diversion of funds became the focus of congressional
investigators.  In the aftermath of the disclosure of the diversion, President Reagan handed over
to Shultz and the State Department the responsibility for future dealings with Iran.165

     165 E.g. Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 31.

     Other matters required Shultz's attention during this period.  He learned on December 6, 1986,
that U.S. Ambassador to Lebanon John Kelly had circumvented the State Department chain of
authority by having multiple unreported contacts with McFarlane and North during the second
half of 1986.  In August 1986, Kelly had met with McFarlane, who briefed him on the Iran arms
sales.  Then, between October 30 and November 4, 1986, Kelly had numerous conversations
with North and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord on hostage-related arrangements
with Iran.  During the same period, Kelly sent and received several ``back channel'' messages to
and from Poindexter at the White House.  After discussing the matter with President Reagan,
Shultz summoned Kelly back to Washington and ordered him to follow the chain of authority at
all times in the future.166

     166 Ibid., pp. 29-31.

     Despite the public uproar over secret U.S. dealings with Iran, contacts with representatives of
Iran continued on December 13, 1986, with Shultz's knowledge.  CIA operative, George Cave,
accompanied by Charles Dunbar of the State Department, met with Iranian representatives in
Frankfurt, West Germany.  Shultz allowed the meeting to proceed with the understanding that the
Iranians would be told that American hostages must be released unconditionally and that no more
weapons could be sold until it negotiated an  end to its war with Iraq and stopped supporting
terrorism.167

     167 Ibid., p. 31.

     Dunbar called Shultz after the meeting, however, to report that the Iranians -- with Cave's
apparent agreement -- were insisting on adhering to a formal but unsigned nine-point plan
worked out earlier by North, Secord and Albert Hakim.168  In return for the eventual release of
all American hostages in Lebanon, the plan envisioned more arms shipments to Iran, as well as
U.S. efforts to cause the release of the Dawa prisoners held by Kuwait.169  Shultz alerted
President Reagan to the still-extant nine-point plan.  Reagan authorized Shultz to ignore ``any
unauthorized understandings that may have been reached,'' and to proceed according to Shultz's
understanding outlined in the preceding paragraph.170

     168 Ibid., pp. 31-32.

     169 Ibid., pp. 32-33.

     170 Ibid., p. 33.  On the morning of his December 16, 1986, SSCI testimony, Shultz learned
that Cave had an additional meeting with one of the Iranians after Dunbar left Frankfurt.  Shultz
was angry, and told SSCI he would work to remove Cave and the CIA from further contacts with
Iran.  (Ibid., pp. 35-36.)  Cave portrayed the additional meeting as Iranian-initiated, brief and
inconsequential -- and stated that he relayed to State the information he received at the second
meeting.  (Cave, Select Committees Deposition, 9/29/87, pp. 181-82.)

     How Shultz's Incorrect Testimony Was Prepared

     The admirable role that Shultz and others in the department (particularly Bremer and Sofaer)
played in November 1986, both in stopping the initiative and in urging disclosure of the events of
1985 and 1986, makes the misstatements in Shultz's testimony difficult to understand.  Unlike
the false testimony of Poindexter, Casey and Weinberger, the misstatements in Shultz's testimony
do not fit neatly into the framework of protecting the President.  To the contrary, on perhaps the
most significant subject on which the others gave false testimony to protect the President -- the
November 1985 HAWK shipment -- Shultz openly admitted being informed in advance and
suffered the wrath of Administration loyalists as a result.

     Shultz's December 1986 Testimony

     Shultz gave his first comprehensive testimony about his role in the Iran initiative to the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence in closed session on December 16, 1986.  Hill prepared the first
draft of an opening statement to be used in the testimony, based on a chronology binder he had
assembled.  Hill then gave the draft statement and the binder to Sofaer for review.  Shultz read
the prepared statement.171

     171 In his initial Iran/contra testimony, which occurred in public session, Shultz told the
House Committee on Foreign Affairs that he was ready to tell ``everything I knew at the time
about our sales of arms to Iran'' but would only be able to provide the ``classified details of my
knowledge and activities . . . based on documents that I have, cable traffic and notes that were
taken at the time,'' in a closed session of the Committee.  (Shultz, HFAC Testimony, 12/8/86, pp.
58-59, 66.)  Although Shultz's testimony in the December 8 public session concentrated ``on
looking forward,'' (Ibid., p. 59), he provided a brief summary concerning his knowledge of arms
transfers to Iran during 1985 and 1986, (Ibid., pp. 66-67.)  Shultz also told the committee that he
had ``already made all the information at my disposal available to the FBI.''  (Ibid., p. 58.)

     Shortly before this testimony by Shultz, Hill had given a copy of the documents in the binder
to the FBI. Both Sofaer and the FBI agent who received the copy understood that the binder
included all of the entries in Hill's notebooks that related to the Iran initiative.

     They were wrong.  In putting the chronological binder together, Hill omitted more Iran-related
notes than he included.  Among the omitted notes are nearly every one of his notes referred to in
this chapter, as itemized above.  Hill's omissions were consistent with Shultz's incorrect
testimony in December 1986 and thereafter.

     There is strong evidence that Hill intended to mislead.  First, Sofaer and the senior FBI agent
independently understood that the documents they received from Hill included all of his
notebook entries regarding the Iran initiative.172

     172 Sofaer was not present when Hill gave the agent the documents on December 4, 1986,
and the agent and Sofaer never discussed the documents or Hill's statements about the
documents.  It is unlikely that the agent and Sofaer would independently make such a significant
mistake, unless Hill gave them the wrong impression that the notes were complete.

     Second, the FBI agent who interviewed Hill and received his documents, pursuant to the
attorney general's request on December 4, 1986, was, by arrangement of the director of the FBI,
the senior agent on the Iran/contra investigation.  The agent was working on a criminal
investigation of the highest levels of Government that potentially implicated the survival of the
Reagan presidency.  The agent met with Hill to receive his documents, because Hill insisted on
dealing with the senior FBI agent involved.  Hill made no statement suggesting that he had more
relevant material than he was producing, or that for any reason his production was incomplete.  If
Hill had indicated in any way that he had not produced all of his relevant material, the agent
would have demanded compliance and, if necessary, deployed assisting agents to review Hill's
notes in their entirety.173

     173 See generally, Memorandum from FBI Special Agent Michael S. Foster re:  Coulson/OIC
Meeting, 3/5/92, 027774.

     Third, Sofaer and other State Department attorneys spent a significant amount of time
preparing Shultz to testify to Congress in 1986 and again in 1987.  Frequently they worked with
Shultz in Hill's presence.  If they had received any indication that there might be  additional
relevant notes in Hill notebooks, they would have done whatever work it took to find them.

     Fourth, the Department of State attorneys who worked most closely with Shultz, Sofaer and
Hill in preparing Shultz to testify stated that, throughout their preparation process, they all --
including Hill -- treated the binder as ``the Bible'' of Shultz's knowledge about the Iran
initiative.174  Thus, Hill well knew and perpetuated their misperception that the binder was
comprehensive.

     174 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 4/6/92, p. 42; Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, pp. 5, 7.

     Fifth, when Shultz was first interviewed in February 1992 after being advised of his status as
a ``subject'' of the OIC investigation, and before he was confronted with the evidence that his
testimony was wrong, Shultz defended that testimony by asserting that he was confident that it
was correct because Hill had gone over and over the notebooks, pulled out everything about the
Iran initiative, and given it to Sofaer and the FBI.175

     175 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 6-13; cf. Hill Note, 12/15/86, ANS 0002046 (``(S)
[Shultz] -- . . . CH [Charles Hill] [was] Quick off the mark to go over the papers for hours.'').

     Finally, there is significant evidence, discussed separately below, that Platt and Hill colluded
to withhold information from investigators and Sofaer.  This  evidence indicates a deceptive
intent by Hill in his dealings with the FBI and Sofaer.

     Both Hill and Shultz attempted to blame Sofaer and the Office of the Legal Adviser for
Shultz's erroneous testimony.  This attempt to lay the blame elsewhere is unworthy.  Shultz and
Hill, not Sofaer, had reason to know what Hill's notes would contain.  They formulated the
``three phases'' characterization of Shultz's arms sales knowledge in the chronology that became
his prepared statement.176  On December 7, 1986, it was Hill who objected that Sofaer had,
upon reviewing Hill's draft of the opening statement that Shultz was to make the next day before
the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, ``expanded your [Shultz's] record to include [what
Sofaer believed to be] virtually all the facts.''  Hill's own notes document his argument with
Sofaer that Shultz's testimony should contain ``characterizations and statements on behalf of
Shultz:''

     176 E.g. Hill Note, 12/7/86, ANS 0001992 (``(S) [Shultz] -- One method of summary is 3
periods.''); ibid., ANS 0001993-94 (``(S) -- . . . . I need a structure in the testimony that enables
me to handle Q [questions].  -- First phase. . . . -- 2 Phase starts w [with] Jan [January 7, 1986]
mtg [meeting]. . . . -- Then 3d period up to Jacobsen release where my record essentially
bg008lank.'') (emphasis in original).

     (CH -- Abe [Sofaer] is depriving (S) [Shultz] of the ability to make a stmt [statement] saying
how he saw the scene that in any way defends his own interest.

     i.e[.] Abe -- and (S) -- both saying that anythg [anything] explanatory  is exculpatory + so
shdnt [shouldn't] be used.

      -- Abe is playing to g008(S)'s weakness like ON [Oliver North] played to g722Reag P
[President Reagan's] weakness and Ledeen played to McF's [McFarlane's]

      -- So (S) can be induced to make g008no stmt [statement] in his own behalf.

     * * *

     CH [Charles Hill] yells -- gets

     characterizations +

     stmts in g722behaf

     behalf of g722self (S) 177

     177 Ibid., 12/7/86, ANS 0001995 (emphasis in original).

     Shultz's July 1987 Testimony to the Select Committees

     Sofaer and his staff prepared Shultz's July 1987 testimony before the Select Committees with
an eye toward the ``whole picture'' of Iran/contra -- not to a more narrow view such as Shultz's
role or what Shultz knew.178  An attorney on Sofaer's staff, Elizabeth Keefer, collected and
organized documents from other agencies relating to both the Iran arms sales and the contras.179
Keefer created back-up briefing books containing chronologies relating to both the arms sales
and the contras.180

     178 Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, p. 2.

     179 Ibid.

     180 Ibid.

     Keefer was certain she spoke with Hill about these chronologies, which she recalled were
cleared by Shultz's office prior to being released.181  Keefer viewed the chronologies as
important:  They were a list of events that were stipulated to by Congress and the State
Department, and were designed both to facilitate and limit the questioning of Shultz by
committee members.182

     181 Ibid., p. 3.

     182 Ibid.

     Keefer and others met with Shultz on several occasions to go over his upcoming testimony.
These meetings were attended by Shultz, Hill, Sofaer, Kozak and Keefer. Hill's notes were relied
upon as Shultz's memory of events.183 They were ``the Bible.'' 184

     183 Ibid.

     184 Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, pp. 5, 7.

     Sofaer confirmed Keefer's recollection that the preparation of Shultz's July 1987 testimony
was intended to be thorough and definitive.  Sofaer stated:

     [T]he most comprehensive collection of information that we engaged in was the last one for
the joint committee. . . .  That was the last and I think most authoritative.  . . .  [I]n those answers
there would be reflected every bit of  information that was brought to our attention.185

     185 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 2/20/92, p. 74.

     Sofaer's staff took a team approach to preparing sample answers for Shultz:

     It wouldn't be just one person.  Everybody -- this was like institutional testimony.  [Keefer]
worked on it, [Kozak] worked on it, everybody went over every answer and compared it to the
documents so that the answer would be accurate.186

     186 Ibid., p. 92.

     Sofaer confirmed Hill's significant participation.187

     187 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 4/6/92, pp. 65-66.

     Possible Collusion by Platt and Hill

     Several of the most obviously significant notebook entries that Hill did not produce
correspond directly to particular entries Platt also failed to include in the set of relevant notes he
compiled in early December 1986 at the request of the legal adviser's office.  It is unlikely that
Platt and Hill each, acting independently, would have omitted notes containing the same
significant information.

     The parallel omissions of Hill and Platt are the best evidence that the two acted together.
Foremost among the joint omissions are Platt and Hill's July 1986  notes stating that the Jenco
release ``was [a] result of Polecat.'' 188

     188 Hill Note, 7/28/86, ANS 0001568; Platt Note, 7/26/86, ALW 0038555.

     First, on the same page of notes about Jenco that Platt did provide to the legal adviser, he
redacted (that is, photocopied his full note and then cut off before recopying) the following
passage:  ``release of Hostages Jenco.  Result of Polecat negotiations.'' 189  He did not provide
any part of the next page in his notes, which contains the following statement:

     189 Ibid.

      -- Price:  ITOW, side winders, 155 mm ammo.  Weir was earnest money. . . .

      -- Armacost calls [Head of Defense Department component] -- real negotiation had been
whether it was 1 or 2.  24 million -- 4 mil [million] laundered through Israel -- rest is equipment,
for which, he implied, they are paying.190

     190 Ibid., ALW 0038556.

     Second, by the time Hill on November 8, 1986, began reviewing his 1985 and 1986 notebooks
for information, he was aware of press reports alleging that Jenco had been released as part of a
U.S. arms deal with Iran.191

     191 On November 6, 1986, Hill, who was in Europe with Shultz, made a notebook entry
regarding that morning's Washington Post story:

     Nov 6 g008Wash Post Pincus:  3 American Hostages Released During

     14 Months of Negos [Negotiations] + shipments to Iran.

      -- channel opened at Israeli initiative

     g008The Story -- McF [McFarlane] met in London w [with] Kimche

       g008is   -- McF then met Iranians in Eur [Europe] + Iran

     H)  g008out -- 1st US/Israeli shipment of arms was Sept 85 --

     + g008Weir Released

      -- 2d was July 86 + g008Jenco released

      -- 3d was this month, + Jacobsen released.

     (Hill Note, 11/6/86, ALW 0056323, emphasis in original.)  The next day, on a flight from
Paris to Vienna, Charles Redman, the assistant secretary of state for public affairs, told Shultz,
Hill and others that ``most [media] stories say 3 shipments, each related to 1 hostg [hostage].
And in meantime 3 more hostg taken.''  Shultz replied that, if these stories were true, ``Iran has
made chimps out of us.''  (Hill Note, 11/7/86, ANS 0001732.)

     Third, on a notebook page dated November 10, 1986, Hill referred back to his July 1986 note
about Jenco's release:

     g008from CH [Charles Hill] notebooks

     7/28 g008Jenco release (July) was Polecat  $24 m[illion] in wpns [weapons]  next will be
[Terry] Anderson

     8/11 Jack Anderson on it.

     9/16 Ledeen = CH [Charles Hill] -- wants to tell (S) [Shultz] what's going on at Casey's
request

     9/17 Casey = (S)  Nephew of Rafsj [Rafsanjani] will be brought in.  Has infor [information]
on Iran.  Only P [President Reagan] knows 192

     192 Ibid., 11/10/86, ANS 0001756.

     Hill, after the public revelations had begun, located the note he had made several months
earlier, and then withheld the note and the summary.193  The note showed that he had been told
at the time of the Jenco release in July 1986 that it had been part of a large weapons deal, and
that he  regarded this entry as particularly noteworthy.  Hill's November 10 note suggests that he
made an affirmative decision not to include the July 28, 1986, Jenco note in the chronological
binder of relevant documents that he was compiling.

     193 Hill's November 10 note also refers back to three other entries relating to arms shipments
to Iran that Hill had located in his earlier notebooks:  his August 11, 1986, note (labeled
``Polecat'') quoting Jack Anderson's column in that morning's Washington Post, (Hill Note,
8/11/86, ANS 0001591); Hill's September 16, 1986, notes of a telephone call from Michael
Ledeen, an NSC consultant who said he wanted to brief Shultz at Casey's request about what the
United States and Israel ``have been doing'' with Iran, (Hill note, 9/16/86, ANS 0001610); and
Hill's September 17, 1986, note of Shultz's secure telephone call to Casey, who told Shultz that
United States representatives would be meeting with Rafsanjani's nephew, (Hill Note, 9/17/86,
ANS 0001613.)  Of these three notes, only the top half of Hill's September 16, 1986, note
regarding Ledeen was produced to the FBI, Independent Counsel, the Tower Commission or the
Select Committees during 1986 or 1987; the second half of Hill's Ledeen note, which he did not
produce, states:

      -- Involved at outset with the Israeli (Kimche) approach on getting us into rel. [relationship]
w[ith] Iran. -- for intel [intelligence], then for hostg [hostages].  McF [McFarlane] picked up on
it.

      -- (S) [Shultz] opposed Polecat op [operation] + told P [President Reagan] -- so didnt want to
be part of it or informed about it.  This all at the very start.

     The awareness of Anderson's column, the full substance of Ledeen's call to Hill and Casey's
report to Shultz regarding the so-called second channel also were not addressed by Shultz in his
December 16, 1986, testimony before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, or in the
``Iran Chronology I'' that he presented to the Select Committees in July 1987.

     There is more to this Hill note.  In 1987, Iran/contra investigators asked the department for a
complete set of Hill's November-December 1986 ``post-revelation'' notes.  Hill supposedly
complied with this request by giving the Office of the Legal Adviser a set of photocopies that
Hill described as his complete notes for November 3-December 31, 1986, and the legal adviser
provided the copies to Independent Counsel and the Select Committees.  Although this set of
Hill's unnumbered notebook pages included 24 pages of notes that he had created on November
10, 1986, the set did not include the above-quoted single page, which referred back to Hill's July
28, 1986, note regarding an arms-for-Jenco deal.  In other words, Hill failed to produce the page
that might have revealed that his chronology binder was not the comprehensive set of notes that
the FBI and the legal adviser believed it to be.

     On December 15, 1986, the eve of Shultz's testimony before the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, there is a Platt note that shows that he and Hill discussed their  concerns about the
Jenco issue.194  By then, Platt and Hill had gone back through their notes to identify relevant
material.  The note shows that they discussed the July 1986 Jenco release as one of the ``[a]reas
of greatest vulnerability.'' 195  They knew Shultz was going to -- and did -- testify that, from May
to November 1986, he had no indications that any arms were shipped to Iran, yet both Platt and
Hill's notes showed that they and Armacost, who spoke with Shultz on a daily basis, had been
told about a weapons deal that produced the Jenco release.

     194 Platt Note, 12/15/86, ALW 0039344.

     195 Ibid.

     The Platt notebook entry appears at the end of the day on December 15, 1986.  Hill's notebook
shows that, at 7:00 p.m. that evening, he and Platt were discussing Iran/contra events.196  Both
sets of notes show that they discussed Congress's request for testimony from Kelly,  the
ambassador to Lebanon.197  Platt's notes then continue as follows:

     196 Hill Note, 12/15/86, ANS 0002048.

     197 Ibid. (``g008Kelly + g008Congress.  Standing invitation for him to go up.  We
g722are (NP [Platt]) are saying he can't go until issue resolved.  They say ok, but don't let him
go back w/o [without] seeing us.  This will blow up.  -- leak that P [President Reagan] says
admonish, but (S) [Shultz] wants to fire.  -- Evans + Novak will do a column.  -- WH [White
House] will realize JK [Kelly] a hostage to release/clnc [clearance] of the instructions.'') (original
emphasis); Platt Note, 12/15/86, ALW 0039344 (`` -- Kelly + the Congress -- '').

     Areas of greatest vulnerability.

      -- Jenco -- released well before Jacobsen.  How did he think that had occurred.

     What did you think.

      -- Why did you avert your gaze.198

     198 Ibid.

     The notes appear to reflect concerns about possible questions Shultz might confront in the
next day's testimony before SSCI.  But Hill and Platt each professed not to remember this
conversation when they were shown Platt's contemporaneous note.199  Neither attempted to
offer an innocent explanation.  Hill, who was the first to be confronted about the conversation
and had never seen the Platt note, was visibly shaken.  Platt, who had spoken to Hill and
reviewed the note privately before he was questioned about it  by the OIC,200 simply stated, ``I
have no explanation for this.'' 201

     199 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/24/92, pp. 386-88; Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, pp. 138-40.

     200 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, pp. 23-24.

     201 Ibid., p. 130.

     Platt and Hill made other significant parallel omissions in their note productions to
investigators.  Contrary to Shultz's repeated testimony that he was not told about a proposed trade
of HAWK missiles for hostages until McFarlane told him in Geneva on November 18 or 19,
1985, when it was too late to stop it,202 Platt and Hill's notes show that Shultz was informed on
November 14, 1985, before he left from Washington.  Platt's note recorded the basic information:

     202 E.g. Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 17; accord, generally, Shultz, HFAC
Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 66.

      -- Small mtg [meeting] -- P [Armacost],

     D [Whitehead], CH [Hill], S [Shultz]

      -- 600 hawks  200 phoenix  missiles for

     Iran -- Bud [McFarlane] asks Cap

     [Weinberger].203

     203 Platt Note, 11/14/85, ALW 0036734.

     Hill's note, which he marked with a star and his symbol for ``interesting'' information,
recorded:

     g008after

     g008Arma [Armacost] = [meeting with] (S) [Shultz]  in last few days Bud [McFarlane]
asked Cap [Weinberger] how to get 600 Hawks + 200 Phoenix to  Iran.  Its highly illegal.  Cap
wont do it Im sure.  Purpose not clear.  Another sign of funny stuff on Iran issue.  PDX
[Poindexter] not levelling w [with] me.  Framed in term of long-term rel. [relations] w mod.
[moderate] els [elements] in Iran.204

     204 Hill Note, 11/14/85, ANS 0001187.

     Second, Platt and Hill also failed to produce their respective notes of January 4, 1986, which
show that Poindexter briefed Shultz on a January 2, 1986, meeting with Israeli counterterrorism
adviser Amiram Nir and the latest proposal to trade arms for hostages.  Platt's note reads:

     Mtg [Meeting] II w [with] S [Shultz] 1140.

     Another issue.  Israeli -- Iranians -- issue not dead.  Peres has 2 track approach -- comes to me
on some issues -- goes to NSC for others.205

     205 Platt Note, 1/4/86, ALW 0037024.

     Hill's note recorded the detailed discussion that occurred:

     g008(S) [Shultz] = Arma [Armacost]   POLECAT

     Pdx [Poindexter] sd [said] NiR came to see him to revive hostg [hostage] idea.  Wd [Would]
id [identify] Hizbollah prisoners held by Lahad who not bloody + offer to release -- and 3000
TOWS for hostg [hostages].

     I sd [said] all same probls [problems] as before.  A payment.  Blows our policy.  Isr [Israel]
has an interest in leaking such a deal.

     So its not dead.  Peres [Shimon Peres, Israeli Prime Minister] comes to me on some things +
to NSC on others.

     g722Neww Newsweek had the McF [McFarlane]-Kimche meetings but didnt run it.
Kimche seems to have leaked it deliberately.

     I think Pdx [Poindexter] was negative twd [toward] Nir.206

     206 Hill Note, 1/4/86, ANS 0001255-56.

     Platt and Hill also did not produce their respective notes of February 21, 1986, which show
Shultz's knowledge of an impending arms-for-hostages trade and his belief that weapons had
previously been delivered to Iran. Each set of notes is lengthy and detailed.  Platt wrote the
following:

     Hostage deal.  Have not wanted to know much.  Getting g722fuc screwed up to a fare the
[sic] well

      -- Israelis have screwed up

      -- Jack Anderson has wind

      -- g008turnover to take place this weekend

      -- French have paid penalty -- have not gotten people out.  Spaniards got a deal.

      -- Asked PDX [Poindexter] to shut it down if it doesn't work.

      -- Agreed that in respect to Qs [questions] CT [State's Office of Counterterrorism] et al
stonewall, but we will get g722crucifiee crucified.207

     207 Platt Note, 2/21/86, ALW 0037404-05.

     Hill's notes, which correspond exactly, identify Shultz as the speaker and document his belief
that weapons had been  delivered by February 1986 in an effort to free the hostages in Lebanon:

     g008(S) [Shultz] = CH [Hill], NP [Platt]

     (S) -- hostage deal getting screwed up.  Jack Anderson is on to it.  Turnover supposed to be
g008this weekend.  I pleaded w [with] Pdx [Poindexter] that if not pls [please] shut it down.  Fr
[France] got stung.  Spaniards too.  I think we have already turned over some wpns [weapons].

     At F4 [the family group lunch] we agreed no comment on any Qs [questions].  But we will get
crucified.208

     208 Hill Note, 2/21/86, ANS 0001321.

     Platt and Hill also did not produce their respective notes of April 3, 1986, which show that
Poindexter told Shultz that an Iranian intermediary (Ghorbanifar) was in the United States at that
time to buy TOW missiles, and of the expectation that the hostages would be released during
McFarlane's trip to Iran.  Platt recorded much of the detail until his notetaking stopped in
mid-sentence:

      -- Asked PDX [Poindexter] about Iranian caper -- man he dealing with is in town today --
supposed to have money up front for tows -- if they get the money -- will next go McF
[McFarlane] mtg [meeting] w [with] inside Iranians -- + hostages will be released during mtg.

     S [Shultz] g722Said horrified -- said he horrified -- everyone petrified of Iran.   If it leaks
out that we helping -- there'l [sic] 209

     209 Platt note, 4/3/86, ALW 0037725.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Hill's note, which appears at the top of a notebook page, is consistent:

     g008Polecat VI Money man in town w

     [with] $ [money] to pay

     for TOWS.  If he pays, They'll

     set the McF [McFarlane] mtg [meeting].  During that mtg our hostg [hostages] supposed to be
released.  I [Shultz] sd [said] this all has me horrified.  Region petrified that Iran will win + we
are helping them.  He [Poindexter] said TOWS are defensive wpns [weapons].  I sd [said] ``so's
yr [your] old man.'' 210

     210 Hill Note, 4/3/86, ANS 0001399.  This note was not produced to the FBI, Independent
Counsel, the Tower Commission or the Select Committees during 1986 or 1987.

     Unlike Hill, Platt's position was that he meant to provide all relevant notes to the legal
adviser.  Platt explained the omissions as the result of innocent oversight.  Hill, on the other
hand, explained that he never made a comprehensive review of his notes and that he cannot
understand why so many people -- Shultz, Sofaer, other Department of State lawyers, the senior
FBI agent and Iran/contra investigators -- had such a wrong idea.  He only went through his
notes, he explained, to find the notes that documented the things that Shultz independently
remembered in  early November 1986.  He did not go through the notes, he said, to find things
that Shultz did not remember.

     Confronting Shultz, Hill and Platt With the Evidence

     Questioning Shultz

     In his December 16, 1986, appearance before SSCI, Shultz described his knowledge of events
relating to arms shipments to Iran.  Just six weeks after public exposure, this testimony was
Shultz's first opportunity to testify in a closed classified setting regarding those events.  Shultz
testified, under oath, that his opening statement

     represents an effort on my part . . . to research out what I knew about all this.  . . .

     I propose to proceed chronologically.  My purpose here is to pass on the information in my
possession.  I strongly agree with the President that the sooner all available information is made
available to Congress through appropriate investigating bodies and to the public, the sooner we
will put all this behind us.  . . .

     I rely heavily in this review on documentary materials.  My recollection of these events is far
from perfect, especially because . . . my information and participation was sporadic and
fragmentary.  Nor have I consulted with any other participant in these events, so as to avoid any
appearance of impropriety.

     As the evidence unfolds in public, my recollection of certain events has from time to time
been refreshed.  This will certainly continue to happen.  So I  cannot claim to be presenting a
totally complete and accurate recitation.  On the other hand, I can and do promise as full and
accurate a recitation as my present recollection permits.  Moreover, by sticking to the written
materials that reflect what information was available to me when the relevant events occurred, I
feel reasonably confident that the facts you receive from me are accurately reported.211

     211 Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, pp. 4-5.

     Chairman Durenberger interrupted to ask Shultz ``to just share with us your habit of keeping
notes and how you have refreshed your recollection on this.'' 212  Shultz identified Hill as his
notetaker and testified that ``we have researched through these [notes] very painstakingly to see
what we can find on this subject.'' 213

     212 Ibid., p. 18.

     213 Ibid., p. 19.  Later, in response to a question from Senator Cohen, Shultz stated his
reluctance to produce copies of his notes, but he assured the Committee that ``the notes have
been turned over to the FBI for investigative purposes.''  (Ibid., p. 102.)

     In 1991, the OIC determined, after reviewing a full set of Hill's notes regarding Iran that they
were inconsistent with Shultz's testimony about his own lack of knowledge, that many of these
notes had not been produced in response to earlier document requests, and that Platt had not
produced corresponding notes of many of the same events.

     Shultz voluntarily came to Washington in February 1992 for an interview with the OIC,
lasting over a day and a half.214  These sessions focused on the contrast between Shultz's
testimony asserting his lack of knowledge of arms shipments during the so-called ``three phases''
and the contemporaneous notes.215  Over the course of the interviews, Shultz's attitude evolved
from combative to contrite.  In the end, after confronting the evidence contained in
contemporaneous notes created by his closest aides, he repeatedly admitted that significant parts
of his testimony to Congress had been completely wrong.  He denied that these errors had been
deliberate, stating that he always  had testified to the best of his recollection.  He also initially
denied that relevant notes were deliberately withheld from Independent Counsel or the Select
Committees and he defended Hill's integrity.

     214 At the time it requested the interviews, the OIC advised Shultz that, based upon
information that had not been provided during 1986 and 1987, his status had changed from
prospective witness to a subject of the investigation.  Shultz subsequently retained counsel, who
worked with him and with Hill prior to the interviews.  Shultz's counsel was provided access to
all of Shultz's prior statements and it was agreed that the interview would be limited to
questioning about Shultz's December 16, 1986, testimony in closed session before SSCI.

     215 Because the Department of State notes that were obtained for the first time by
Independent Counsel in 1990 and 1991 were not used as trial evidence or otherwise publicized,
they are largely unknown publicly.  As recently as May of 1993, for example, Arthur L. Liman,
who served as chief counsel to the Senate Select Committee in 1987, testified that Congress
``had the full story from Secretary Shultz.''  (Liman, Senate Governmental Affairs Committee
Testimony, 5/14/93, NEXIS Transcript, p. 22; accord Prepared Testimony of Arthur L. Liman to
the Committee of Governmental Affairs of the United States Senate, 5/14/93, pp. 12-13, ``the
House and Senate Committees . . . served demands . . . for any notes or diaries . . . relating to
Iran-Contra. . . .  [Shultz] made available to us the relevant excerpts of his diaries.'')  This view
is, by Shultz's own admission, mistaken.

     At the start of the 1992 interview, before he had reviewed significant Department of State
notes or been informed that many of them had not been produced to investigators in a timely
fashion, Shultz vigorously defended the completeness of Hill's document production to
Iran/contra investigators 216 and, consequently, the accuracy of Shultz's own testimony.  He said
he had ``very painstakingly'' researched the notes and provided ``the information in [his]
possession'' regarding ``what [he] knew.''  Shultz stated that, although he had not participated
personally in the document-review process during late 1986,217 he recalled that Hill ``spent
several hours on a couple of days going through'' his notebooks.218  Shultz said that, ``[i]n terms
of time allocation, busy as we were,  that was a big amount of time to allocate.'' 219  He
minimized the nature of his directive that Hill review his notebooks and extract relevant notes in
preparation for the December 1986 testimony.220  Shultz also suggested at times that the
responsibility to make relevant information available was that of Sofaer and the Office of the
Legal Adviser, not Shultz (or, implicitly, Hill).221

     216 Shultz stated that, because it had not occurred to him in 1986 that Platt's notes could
contain information independent of Hill's notebooks, he was not referring to Platt's notes when he
testified that he had turned over all of his records in December 1986.  (Shultz, OIC Interview,
2/12/92, p. 14.)

     217 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 8.

     218 Ibid., p. 7.

     219 Ibid., pp. 7-8.  Beginning with this statement, Shultz repeatedly tried to excuse Hill's
omissions by stating that Hill was too busy with his regular job responsibilities to identify the
entries in his notebooks that were relevant to Iran/contra.  (See, e.g., ibid., p. 13, ``the process of
gathering information . . . wasn't something that Mr. Hill could do'', pp. 14-15 ``in the time he
had available'', p. 19 ``Bear in mind we were struggling hard with our operational duties'', pp.
24-25 ``Mr. Hill . . . did his best in the time he had available.''.)

     220 E.g. Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 10.  (``There wasn't any necessity to try and pin
down something in a highly specific way.'').

     221 E.g. ibid., p. 11 (``this was basically something that I turned over to the legal adviser,
Judge Sofaer, and his associates''), pp. 12-13, 31.

     Shultz primarily blamed the investigators for not reviewing Hill's complete notebooks, which
Shultz claimed were readily available to anyone who was interested.222  Yet, Hill's notebooks
themselves demonstrate that Shultz  always was reluctant to permit outsiders to review this
comprehensive and ``remorselessly precise record'' of Shultz's private comments and personal
reflections and communications with the President and others, including remarks regarding Vice
President Bush 223 and Weinberger.224

     222 E.g. Ibid., pp. 14-15 (``The effort of Mr. Hill in the time he had available was to find
everything in his notes that had to do with this subject.  His notebooks were there.  All the
investigating authorities knew they were there.  There was never any effort to prevent people
from looking at them themselves if they wished to do so. . . .  I think your phraseology . . . carries
an implication that . . . they had been withheld before that [the summer of 1990], which they
weren't.  They were available.''), pp. 16-17.

     223 E.g. Hill Note, 11/9/86, ANS 0001748 (``(S) [Shultz]:  g008Nick Brady called me last
night about whether I wd [would] resign.  I sd [said] what concerns me is g008Bush on TV
saying it ridiculous to even consider selling arms to Iran.  VP was part of it.  In that mtg
[meeting].  Getting drawn into web of lies.  Blows his integrity.  He's finished then.  Shd
[Should] be v. [very] careful how he plays the loyal lieutenant role now.''); Hill Note, 11/10/86,
ANS 0001771 (Shultz:  ``They are trying by this [press] guidance to get me to lie.  What are they
trying to pull on me[?]  Taking the P [President] down the drain.  VP, Sec Def. Sec State shd
[should] on such occasions prevail on P.  They aren't -- So I'm alone.''); Hill Note, 12/2/86, ANS
0001948 (``The VP has had a thing about wanting to be a hero about hostgs [hostages].  He
wanted in ME [Middle East] trip to go to Syria.  Wanted to have a hostg come back on his
plane[.]  There's a superficiality there.''); Hill Note, 12/2/86, ANS 0001949 (``(S) [Shultz] has
just read [intelligence report] summary -- can't believe VP in it -- if so he's fing008ished.  Up to
his neck in it.  A lot in here. . . .  (S):  To extent there is truth to this, my warning to VP was
ludicrous.  Washed him out of politics.  Cd. [Could] cause him to have to g008resign.  It really
is getting like Watergate.''); Hill Note, 12/3/86, ANS 0001953 (Shultz:  ``Big event today is VP
speech I guess. -- [Intelligence reports] show he in collaborative pattern w [with] ON [Oliver
North].  An action officer[.] -- If not careful he'll dissemble + it will come out that he was
deceiving people.''); Hill Note, 12/28/86, ANS 0002108 (``g008Bush has lost his chance.  The
[intelligence report] material.  Full of VP references.  He always tempted to lurch to Right.
Contra + Iran tempted him.  So he will cont. [continue] to aspire to Presidency w [with] money +
name recognition -- but whose star is fading.  Dems [Democrats] maybe love to have him
nominated.''); Hill Note, 1/3/87, ANS 0002116 (Shultz:  ``The whole thing crushes Bush.  I'll
stop saying that to people.  His only hope wd [would] be if P [President] ceases to be P.  I don't
think he can get elected now on his own.''); Hill Note, 1/4/87, ANS 0002125, ANS 0002130
(Shultz:  ``And it includes g008Bush.  He is up to his ears in Iran.  His name [is] sprinkled all
thru it. . . . Thats why I shut out of it.  . . .  g008VP is deeply into Iran thing + has big
problem'').

     224 E.g. Hill Note, 6/27/84, ANS 0000705 (``(S) [Shultz] -- I sd [said] [to President Reagan] I
upset w [with] quality of disc [discussion] [at June 25, 1984, NSPG meeting regarding
Nicaragua].  Cap [Weinberger] close to unacceptable as interlocutor (in contrast to Kirkp
[Kirkpatrick]).  Misstates facts.  Many battles since I been here''); Hill Note, 7/16/86, ANS
0001552-53 (Shultz:  ``Its tiresome.  Wbgr [Weinberger] dishonest.  Says these outrageous
things.  Says ABM ty [treaty] prohibits deployment.  I sd [said] it doesnt -- req [requires] 6 mos
[months] notice.  But Pdx [Poindexter] showing no signs like Bud [McFarlane] did of getting
frustrated w [with] Cap.  He's strong + in the center of things.  You don't have to sit in these
meetings + listen to Cap.  He's either stupid or dishonest, one or the other.''); Hill Note, 12/28/86,
ANS 0002110 (``Probl [Problem] is y [you] can't engage Wbgr [Weinberger] in discussion.  He
makes up mind + that's that.''); but, cf., e.g., Hill Note, 12/19/86, ANS 0002078 (``Cap is an ally
in some ways.  A real guy.  Bill Clark has no substance.  An influence peddler.  McF
[McFarlane] + Pdx [Poindexter] [have] substance but no stature apart from job they hold.
Carlucci will have it.'').

     A few examples drawn from Hill's notebooks illustrate Shultz and Hill's consistently
restrictive attitude regarding dissemination of Hill's notes:

      -- In November 1986, it was Sofaer, acting on his own initiative, who told the Department of
Justice about Hill's note establishing contemporaneous U.S. Government knowledge of the plan
to ship HAWK missiles to Iran one year earlier in exchange for hostages.225   Hill was reluctant
to provide a copy of that single note to the Justice Department.226

     225 E.g. Hill Note, 11/24/86, ANS 0001909 (Hill's ``g008Historical Notes'' at end of the day
include ``Key point -- Sofaer blurted out CH [Charles Hill's note] of 11/18/85 [sic] to DOJ
Cooper, who got Meese alarmed.''); Hill Note, 11/25/86, ANS 0001916 (``g008The trigger of
the turning point[:]  It was (S) [Shultz] pounding on P [President Reagan] last Thursday about
NSC not giving all the facts.  It made g008some impression -- so he asked/agreed to Meese
investigation, gen'l attitude, trg008iggered by Abe [Sofaer] blurting out CH notebook facts that
contradicted ON [Oliver North] statement[.]  And that turned up ON g722ill wrongdoing.'').
Hill was upset because Sofaer's disclosure to DoJ could ``be read as GPS [Shultz] fingering McF
[McFarlane] on something that cd [could] get him prison.''  (Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001879.)

     226 Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001878 (Platt secure telephone call to Hill in Ottawa, Canada;
Platt reports that ``Abe [Sofaer] sd [said] DOJ has asked for all records -- specifically the Nov
18, 1985 [sic] conversation.  g008P [President Reagan] auth [authorized] the investigation[.]
And they want our records.''  Hill's response:  ``CH [Charles Hill] Raises hell.  Stop Abe for shits
sake!''); cf. (Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001879) (Sofaer subsequently calls Hill in Ottawa to
reassure him regarding DOJ's request for Hill's ``notebooks -- wd [would] not have to be taken
out of your [Hill's] possession.'').

      -- In early December 1986, after Meese and Sofaer had ordered the gathering of all relevant
notes, Hill insisted on providing meager excerpts only to the senior FBI agent.

      -- On December 8, 1986, during his public testimony, Shultz informed the House Committee
on Foreign Affairs that he had prepared a classified statement ``based on documents that I have,
cable traffic and notes that were taken at the time,'' and would testify about their contents in
closed session.227  When counsel to President Reagan and Vice President Bush subsequently
requested a copy of this classified  statement, Hill said that ``drag feet is the way'' and told Platt
to ``[t]ell Sofaer to do nothing[.]'' 228

     227 Shultz, HFAC Testimony, 12/8/86, p. 66.

     228 Hill Note, 12/10/86, ANS 0002008.  Platt's corresponding notes state that ``CH [Charles
Hill] does not want to hand over his testimony[.]  Does not believe lawyers will hold
confidentially. -- Didn't  -- What would FBI think about handing over? -- What would Congress
think about sharing? -- Do nothing for now  -- [.]'' (Platt Note, 12/10/86, ALW 0039314.)

      -- Hill also opposed a proposal by State Department lawyers that would have urged the
Senate to seek Iran/contra documents directly from State, not from Department of Justice
investigators:

      -- SSCI [Senate Select Committee on Intelligence] wants all docs [documents] A/G [Attorney
General Meese] had gathered during first weekend of Iran investigation.  L [Office of the Legal
Adviser] proposes SSCI deal directly w [with] State. . . .  This is dumb.  Q [Question] is not
docs, or evid [evidence], but docs gathered by A/G.  [Therefore] SSCI shd [should] get copies of
1. (S) [Shultz] reply to draft NSDD [National Security Decision Directive] [and] 2. CH [Charles
Hill] note of 11/18/86 McF = (S) sectelcon [secure telephone conversation] -- and ng008othing
else.  To deal directly w [with] SSCI wd [would] open up possibility of requests for all kinds of
og008ther docs.229

     229 Hill Note, 12/12/86, ANS 0002021.  Later Hill notes indicate Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence staff members requested a copy of Shultz's ``calendar'' before his testimony in
December 1986.  (Hill Note, 12/14/86, ANS 0002032.)

      -- At the end of December 1986, Platt told Hill, who noted the information with pleasure, that
SSCI's initial Iran/contra report, which had been sent  to the State Department for
declassification, contained ``no ref [reference] to notes in any way. . . .'' 230

     230 Hill Note, 12/31/86, ANS 0002113.

      -- In 1987, Hill's ``relevant'' note excerpts were provided to the Select Committees' counsel
under extraordinary restrictions.  Hill's notes of a July 21, 1987, meeting of the Department of
State legal team that was preparing Shultz for his testimony before the Select Committees
document these restrictions and Shultz's attitude regarding Hill's notes:

     0915g008 (S) [Shultz] = [meeting with] MK [Michael Kozak], LK [Libby Keefer], Abe
[Sofaer]

     MK -- Cmte [Committee] will have 7 books of docs [documents] for (S)

     {3 vols [volumes] of CH [Charles

     Hill] notes

     {2 exhibit books (IR [Iran] +

     Contra)

     {1 classified docs books (NSPG

     [National Security Planning

     Group] notes)

     None of which we have been given yet

     Abe -- They will only refer to books a few times

     (S) -- CH notes surfaced.  He spent large amt [amount] of time mining them.  Not public yet.
Devastating if they become g722knowed known.  And totally ag. [against] the agmt
[agreement] by which we provided them.

     * * *

     Abe -- we have to keep notes out of the room or they will be tempted to make them part of the
record.

     (S) -- when do we get the notes back?

     LK -- As soon as yr [your] test [testimony] [is] over. Belnick[ 231] will collect.

     231 Mark A. Belnick, Esq., Executive Assistant to Arthur L. Liman, Esq., the chief counsel of
the Senate Select Committee.

     * * *

     (S) -- . . .  CH notes on post-revelation [period].  If published as a book, worth 5m [$5
million] at least.  A fascinating tale.  But terrible to have them be made public.  All kinds of
speculation in there.232

     232 Hill Note, 7/21/87, ANS 0002699-700.  Shortly before Shultz testified publicly before the
Select Committees, a congressional staff attorney asked to see Hill's original notes.  Hill, who
was advised by a State Department attorney that the requester was questionable, personally
denied the request for access.  (Ibid., 7/16/87, ANS 0002658.)

      -- When members and staff attorneys from the Select Committees interviewed Shultz at
length on July 18, 1987, in preparation for his public testimony the next week, many of their
questions were explicitly based on the excerpts from Hill's notebooks that had been made
available to them. 233  After the interview, Shultz told Sofaer and Hill that

     233 Ibid., 7/18/87, ANS 0002667-81.

     [t]hese guys . . . have a glimpse of my life + activities as w [with] no one else they have called
[to testify] -- bec. [because] of CH [Charles Hill] notes.  They poring over them.234

     234 Ibid., ANS 0002688.

     The next day, during a private meeting with Hill at Shultz's home, Shultz voiced additional
concerns about outsiders reviewing Hill's notebooks:

     (S):  I've read yr [your] notes on post-revelation [period].  Astonishing story; Our behavior
strong.  But to have it up their on [Capitol] Hill for staff + lawyers to read -- devastating for WH
[White House].  If [Hill's notes] were to be published . . .  Nothing like it in history of the
Republic.235

     235 Ibid., 7/19/87, ANS 0002691 (ellipses in original).

      -- With the cooperation of the Select Committees members and staff, almost none of Hill's
notes were used as exhibits or mentioned during Shultz's public testimony before the Select
Committees.  When Representative Fascell referred during Shultz's testimony to a single Hill
note, the occurrence was unusual enough that Hill recorded it in his notebook.236

     236 Ibid., 7/24/87, ANS 0002724 (``Fascell passes (S) [Shultz] a page of CH [Charles Hill]
notes Nov 24, 1986'').

      -- On August 7, 1987, after Shultz had completed his testimony and received Hill's note
excerpts back from the Select Committees, he made his position abundantly clear:

     CH [Charles Hill] notes.  They personal.  We have retrieved them from the Cmte
[Committee].  Not giving them out anymore.237

     237 Ibid., 8/7/87, ANS 002776.  The next line of Hill's notes suggests that Shultz contrasted
his behavior with Weinberger's: ``Cap takes notes but never referred to them so never had to
cough them up.''  (Ibid.)

     In his February 1992 interview with the OIC, Shultz indignantly denied that any information
was withheld deliberately.238  He stated that he had always cooperated fully and directed his
subordinates to cooperate fully with investigators.239  He said,

     238 When asked if he and Hill in the past four weeks had discussed whether relevant Iran
notes had not been turned over to investigators in December 1986, Shultz called the question
``outrageous'' and asked, ``Do I have to answer a question about whether I stopped beating my
wife?''  (Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 26.)

     239 Ibid., pp. 34-35, 39, 56-57.

     as far as I know, but you may have some other things, all of the fundamental and important
information was placed in front of people and it turned out to be very important.240

     240 Ibid., p. 25.

     The OIC then confronted Shultz with handwritten notes and other documents reflecting
information brought to his attention and private statements he made during the period he had
labeled ``phase one'' of the Iran initiative (June through November 1985).  He had described this
in his December 1986 testimony as a period when he ``learned of two proposed arms transfers,
but was not informed that either was consummated.'' 241  Shultz was combative throughout this
segment of the interview and did not acknowledge that his testimony regarding ``phase one'' had
been incorrect.

     241 Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 6.

     Despite the notes suggesting otherwise, Shultz adhered to his previous statements that he had
not known of Israel's August and September 1985 TOW missile shipments to Iran, which
produced the freedom of hostage Weir.  He repeated his belief that Weir was released to deliver a
message from the Hezbollah terrorists who had held him hostage in Lebanon, demanding the
release of the Dawa prisoners in Kuwait.242  Shultz said he had ``accept[ed] Weir's statement
and the rationale that it contained at face value'' 243 and that, consequently, any broader deal
involving an arms shipment ``did not come off.'' 244

     242 E.g. Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 60-61, 70-73, 77, 79, 90, 113, 115, 172-73.

     243 Ibid., p. 71.

     244 Ibid., p. 73; accord, ibid., pp. 81-82 (``There was something that apparently was supposed
to happen [in September 1985] that didn't and so it was an effort that didn't work.''), p. 92 (``other
things that I was aware of . . . didn't come to pass'').

     Shultz dismissed various handwritten notes that appeared inconsistent with his testimony.
Shultz said that Hill's September 11, 1985, note anticipating hostage releases and ``a bill for arms
for IR [Iran] from Israel'' was  speculation by Hill.245  Hill's September 16 note -- ``McF
[McFarlane] + Ollie [North] are getting us into deal where we will have to pay off Isr [Israel], IR
[Iran] + Syr [Syria] for what we wd [would] get from Syria for nothing following Atlit release'' --
which Hill made after Weir had been released but while ``op [operation] still going on,'' also was
dismissed by Shultz as ``Charlie's speculation. . . .'' 246

     245 Ibid., pp. 54-55.

     246 Ibid., p. 66.

     Shultz was hard-pressed to explain other notes.  He claimed, incredibly, that Hill's September
17, 1985, note reporting the NBC story regarding a plane flying arms from Israel to Iran, The
Washington Post story regarding Weir's release and Hill's observation that reporters ``[h]ave not
yet put the two together'' did not necessarily indicate that g008Hill, himself, had ``put the two
things together.'' -- even though Hill noted that in the margin.247  Shultz speculated that his
telling answer to Whitehead's question on September 21 -- Whitehead:  ``Do you think they tell
the President?''  Shultz:  ``Yes, but he doesn't appreciate the problems with arms sales to Iran.'' --
referred not to an actual arms sale that had just occurred,  but the Israeli proposal a month
earlier.248  According to Shultz, Raphel's November 12, 1985, note of his meeting with
Armacost, Oakley, Borg and Ross -- ``Iranian/Israeli connection -- got Weir released'' -- was the
speculation of that senior group, not something he in 1992 agreed with in fact.249  Shultz
explained that, while he could not recall in 1992 what he thought at particular points during fall
1985,250 ``I testified what I thought in December [1986] when I testified before the Senate.'' 251

     247 Ibid., p. 101.

     248 Ibid., pp. 113-14, 117-18.

     249 Ibid., p. 132.  Oakley's November 18 memorandum -- which was electronically
transmitted to Shultz at the Geneva summit and reported that ``[t]hrough other sources and
connections, those used for the release of Reverend Weir, there is an expectation of a possible
breakthrough on the hostages on November 20 or 21'' -- similarly was dismissed as a ``phrase . . .
which I may or may not have focused on.''  (Ibid., p. 163.)

     250 E.g. Ibid., pp. 69, 105.

     251 Ibid., p. 152.

     Shultz also tried to square his knowledge of Israel's shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran in
late November 1985 with his testimony that he ``was not informed'' during the first ``phase'' that
an arms transfer to Iran ``was consummated.''  Although Shultz admitted that he had known of
the HAWK missile shipment by December 6, 1985,252  Shultz claimed that his knowledge of a
HAWK missile  delivery to Iran did not mean that he knew that a delivery had been
``consummated'':

     252 Ibid., pp. 165-66; accord, Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 20.

     Q: When you said not consummated, an arms transfer in fact did take place.

     A: That's right.

     Q: Why the use of the term consummated since you were aware that an arms transfer had
taken place in November of '85?

     A: Well, it had not taken place in the sense that the arms were not accepted by Iran and they
were rejected so it hadn't taken place.  That's what I said.

     Q: They were ultimately returned but you were aware that they went there and that it was
some period of time when they were returned.  Is that correct?

     A: Basically that's what I testified before the Senate.253

     253 Ibid., pp. 166-67.

     After learning that Hill had not produced numerous Iran/contra notes, Shultz repeatedly and
emphatically declared that he and the legal adviser's office had directed Department of State
personnel to produce all relevant information to investigators and denied that there had been any
process of selecting which relevant notes were to be produced.254  Shultz said that, because Hill
is a person of great integrity, intellect and competence,255 his failure to produce certain notes
must be attributed to honest mistakes he made during the limited time he had to review his
notebooks.256

     254 E.g. ibid., pp. 8-9.  Shultz also said that the relevance of a Platt note -- which
recommended that Shultz talk to McFarlane in October 1985 about the ``Iranian connection,''
based on intelligence connecting the White House to a ``$100 million for spare parts for Iran,''
and which was not produced in 1986 or 1987 -- is determined not by the content of the note, but
by ``whether or not [the information] is available elsewhere''; to determine relevance, ``you have
to be Nick Platt and say where did this come from and is that something I should provide.''
(Ibid., p. 122.)  Shultz seemed to be suggesting that notetakers did not have to produce any notes
that they regarded as cumulative of available information or containing information from an
unreliable source.

     255 E.g. Ibid., pp. 84, 142-45.

     256 E.g. Ibid., p. 57 (``Well, you found something [in his September 11, 1985, notes] that
Charlie probably missed.  That's about the way I could express it.''), p. 84 (``again I think what
Mr. Hill did was make a good faith effort to find everything in his notes he could find and that
doesn't necessarily mean that he found everything that was there''), p. 136 (``all I can think about
is that this [November 14, 1985, note] is something that Charlie Hill missed'').

     As to his statements regarding ``phase two'' (December 1985 through April 1986),257 Shultz
initially explained that his testimony that the United States had been ``unwilling'' to sell arms to
Iran during this period was a description, in hindsight, of his knowledge at the end of the
phase.258  He said he had testified to his understanding of what actually had happened.259
Shultz attributed  particular inconsistencies with contemporaneous documents to his own
oversights, his failures of recollection and his aides' failures to bring specific notes to his
attention before he testified in December 1986.  Thus, although Hill's December 7, 1985, note
indicates that Shultz was told at the White House meeting that morning that ``Isr [Israel] sent 60
I-hawks,'' Shultz said he ``must have overlooked that in some manner.'' 260

     257 Ibid., pp. 166-68.

     258 Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 6.

     259 See Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 182-83 (``My summary statement is covering the
period and reflects what I knew about what happened.''), p. 186 (``[A]s with all these things, you
don't know what a person is ready to do until you actually do it and that's what you have to judge.
You have to judge by what happens.''), p. 188 (``that statement [that the U.S. was unwilling to
sell arms during phase two] was intended as a summary of the behavior that I observed during
the period that I identified'').

     260 Ibid., p. 173; accord, ibid., p. 174 (``This does say that there was an actual shipment by
Israel so somehow I missed that'').

     Shultz said his understanding that the United States was unwilling to sell arms during this
period was based on two factors:  First, he claimed to be unaware of a presidential Finding
legally authorizing arms shipments to Iran and, because he believed that such shipments would
be illegal without a Finding, the lack of a Finding meant the United States was unwilling to ship
arms to Iran; 261 second, Poindexter showed Shultz talking points on February 28, 1986, for a
meeting that McFarlane was to have  with Iranians that would result in the release of the
hostages, and the talking points did not mention arms.262

     261 Ibid., pp. 181, 199.

     262 Ibid., pp. 196-97 (``I put these things together, I think quite understandably, as meaning
that when people came right up to it, they were approaching this issue of creating a better
relationship with Iran on a basis to which I had no objection and which is characterized properly
by the phraseology that I used [in my December 1986 testimony].'').

     Although Hill's February 28, 1986, notes regarding this episode do not mention arms,
Independent Counsel located no copy of the McFarlane ``terms of reference'' in NSC records that
does not mention arms.

     Shultz was then shown several notes -- none of which had been produced to Congress or
Independent Counsel in 1986 or 1987 -- that documented his knowledge of U.S. willingness to
sell arms to Iran during phase two, December 1985 through April 1986.

     Shultz had no explanation to offer when he saw Weinberger's notes of the February 11, 1986,
family group lunch, which contain a detailed timeline for transferring TOW missiles from the
United States through Israel to Iran within the next seven days:

     A: Well, I'm surprised by this because I don't recall that being set out.

     Q: Can you think of any explanation why these notes would indicate such an elaborate
description of the delivery of the TOWs in light of your testimony on December the 16th[,
1986]?

     A: Well, the only explanation I can think of is that this represented some sort of side
conversation between Weinberger and Casey as frequently  happened in these meetings but I'm
not remembering this.

     * * *

     Q: Any other remarks about that [note] before we move on?

     A: No.  I don't know quite what to say about it.  I am surprised by it and I don't remember it.

     * * *

     [Shultz:] What does this [``French dropped some demand''] refer to at the top [of Weinberger's
note] then?

     Q: I don't mean to be flip but I wasn't at the meeting.

     A: I feel as though I wasn't either.263

     263 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 204-07.

     Shultz saw that Hill's February 21, 1986, note of Shultz's report on that day's family group
lunch included his statement that ``I think we have already turned over some wpns [weapons].''
He was asked what his statement had meant:

     A: It must have been just a supposition, an instinct.

     Q: During this period of time in your testimony you were stating that you had strong evidence
of a dialogue but [we] were unwilling to sell arms and this [note] indicates that your thoughts
were at the time that ``we have already turned over weapons.''

     A: Just that I was -- it must be that having had this described, I was uneasy that that might
already have happened,  but I don't know any more than what this says.

     Mr. Cutler: May we have a recess?

     Mr. Gillen: Just one more point before we take off.

     Do you feel that this note would have been helpful to investigators in '86 and '87 if it had been
turned over?

     A: Well, it sure would have been helpful to me in preparing my testimony.264

     264 Ibid., pp. 208-9.

     After taking a break, Shultz began with a statement before questioning resumed:

     I'd like to say there[,] if there were shipments and I had known about them in my mind at the
time I testified, I certainly would have testified to that effect.  There was no reason for me not to
set out what I knew, no reason not to, so I'm puzzled by this.265

     265 Ibid., p. 209.

     Shultz agreed that Hill and Platt's April 3, 1986, notes -- ``Money man in town w [with] $ to
pay for TOWs. . . . This all has me horrified.  Region [is] petrified that Iran will win + we are
helping them.'' 266 -- would have helped him prepare his testimony in December 1986 because it
is ``further evidence of arms being traded.'' 267  He said, ``I  think if I had this note I would have
not testified the same way.'' 268

     266 Hill Note, 4/3/86, ANS 0001399.

     267 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 211-12.

     268 Ibid., p. 215; accord, ibid., p. 230 (``I said some things today that are -- earlier today --
that are inconsistent, and I said some things in my testimony that are inconsistent with things you
have shown me.  So I'm perfectly glad to see -- I'm not glad to see but I would look at things that
are written on the record and regard that as more convincing than what I remember and what I
told you earlier.''), p. 236 (``if I had [a recollection of conversations from February through May
1986 regarding TOW missile shipments or sales to Iran], I would not have testified the way I
did''), p. 244 (``I can't imagine I knew these things when I testified or I wouldn't have testified the
way I did'').

     During the examination regarding phase two, Shultz offered an explanation for his apparent
failure in December 1986 to recall events that apparently had been quite striking at the times they
occurred less than a year earlier:

     Q: Would the impact of a man coming to the United States ``in town to pay for TOW
missiles,'' is that something that irrespective of any notes, is that something that you could have
forgotten about, having that kind of knowledge in the spring of 1986 when you testified in
December of '86?

     A: Well, I think in December '86 in trying to construct this testimony I basically relied on the
information that we got up and felt that the notes and the documents were the best evidence that I
had at the time and I went ahead on that.  . . .  Basically I relied on the notes that we had.269

     269 Ibid., p. 213; accord, ibid., p. 244 (``I think I had convinced myself way back when I was
involved in the testimony and so on that my best approach was to take the materials, the notes,
the documents and so forth, and use them as a basis for my testimony because that's what I felt I
knew'').

     In contrast to the examination regarding phase one, Shultz offered no opinions during the
phase-two examination regarding Hill's integrity, his efforts to produce relevant notes or reasons
why relevant notes may not have been produced to Independent Counsel or the Select
Committees.

     Shultz was then confronted with handwritten notes and other documents reflecting
information brought to his attention and statements that he made during ``phase three'' (May 1986
until the revelations of early November 1986), which he had described in his December 1986
testimony as a period when ``I received no information indicating that an arms transfer to Iran
had occurred.'' 270

     270 Shultz, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, pp. 6-7.

     After reviewing notes showing his awareness in May 1986 that McFarlane had delivered
HAWK spare parts to Iran, Shultz first explained that his December 1986 testimony had
incorrectly drawn the date line between phases two and three in early May 1986, when he should
have started phase three some time in or after early June 1986.  Shultz reiterated that Poindexter
and Casey had told him ``that the whole operation was going to stand down or some phrase like
that.'' 271  Shultz said that he had meant to draw the line  between phases two and three at the
point he received that information:

     271 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 229.  Although Shultz asserted that there is no note on
this point, (ibid., p. 229) in fact Hill's July 2, 1986, note quotes Shultz as saying, ``Casey said it
was dead.''  Hill's note also includes Shultz's rejoinder, however:  ``It's not.''  (Hill Note, 7/2/86,
ANS 0001528.)

     I'm just trying to . . . get a dating for the third phase; namely, when I was told that the
operation was standing down.  It was the period of time from then until the release of Jacobson
[sic] and that I didn't have any information.  That's what I testified to.  That's the dating that I had
in mind.272

     272 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 231

     Shultz then acknowledged that his information that McFarlane had delivered weapons parts to
Iran was not consistent with his testimony that the United States was not willing to sell arms to
Iran during phase two.273  Shultz said that

     273 Ibid., pp. 231-32.

     [t]he only reason that I can think is that I was not aware in my mind at the time that I testified
that that was so; this is, my purpose was to be as informative as I could be and I had no reason or
incentive to hold anything back.274

     274 Ibid., p. 232.

     After an overnight recess, Shultz reflected on the previous day's session.  He did not contest
the accuracy of the documents he had reviewed.275  He said that the notes had surprised him
because they were not consistent  with, and did not refresh, his present recollection of events.276
Shultz stated that he also had not remembered these events at the time of his testimony in
December 1986 and stated categorically that, if he had recalled or if he had had these notes
before him at that time, his testimony would have been different:

     275 E.g. Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/13/92, p. 252.

     276 Ibid., pp. 248, 272.  Shultz added, ``I don't have pinned down in my own mind even after
our discussion yesterday my specific knowledge of an actual delivery of arms. . . . I am not able
to pin down in my own mind right now what I must have known or not known about an actual
delivery.''  (Ibid., pp. 254-55.)

     At the time that I testified . . . I was not aware, I didn't remember and my memory hadn't been
refreshed by written material, some materials that you showed to me, and I'm certain that if I had
that material in front of me, my testimony would have been different and it would have reflected
that.

     I also recognize that there were times when apparently from the things that you showed me,
which I'm not doubting, I knew about some planned events and I didn't renew my protest to the
President.  I don't know why that is. . . .277

     277 Ibid., p. 252; accord, ibid., p. 256 (``Well, I have trouble in light of the things that you
brought out in explaining to myself why I didn't go back at the President, but I didn't.'').

     Shultz then discussed his understanding of the July 1986 release of hostage Jenco, which
occurred during ``phase three.''  Shultz initially stated that he had no present recollection
regarding Jenco's  release.278  After reviewing the contemporaneous documents showing that
most of his senior aides (Hill, Platt, Armacost, Ross and Raphel) had been informed at the time
that the release of Jenco in July 1986 was a result of a $24 million arms deal with Iran, Shultz
said flatly that he was not similarly informed.279  He admitted, however, that he would not have
expected Armacost, Platt and Hill to keep such information from him.280  Shultz also did not
recall reading a series of talking points that Hill had prepared for him to use with President
Reagan on or about November 12, 1986, which includes Hill's handwritten note, ``g008July
1986:  g008Jenco released, then arms shipped to Iran ($20 million U.S.  $4 million Israeli).''
281

     278 Ibid., p. 286.

     279 Ibid., p. 287.

     280 Ibid., p. 290.

     281 Ibid., p. 321 (referring to Hill's Talking Points, circa 11/12/86, ALW 0050420).

     Shultz said that, although he did not recall discussing Jenco's release with Hill in July 1986 or
later during the preparation of testimony,282 he did not believe that Hill would have withheld the
Jenco information.283  If Shultz had recalled that information, he added, his testimony would
have been different:

     282 Ibid., p. 297.

     283 Ibid., p. 324.

     Q: . . .  When you were preparing with Mr. Hill based upon his review of his records, did he
remind you of the Jenco release as a result of the Polecat $24 million in weapons?

     A: I think if I knew this to be a fact when I testified, I would have testified to it.

     Q: What you did testify was that ``I received no information [during phase three] indicating
that an arms transfer to Iran had occurred.''  This [November 10, 1986, Hill] note indicates that
on the summary review of Mr. Hill that ``the Jenco release was Polecat, $24 millon in weapons.''

     A: Well, as I said, if I knew that to be a fact I wouldn't have testified the way I did.284

     284 Ibid., pp. 310-11.  Shultz accordingly did not agree with Platt's December 15, 1986, note
calling Jenco an ``[a]rea[] of greatest vulnerability.'' Shultz said:  ``My attitude was, is now and
was then[,] that that's not the way to look at it.  The way to look at it is that we should say, or I
should say as carefully and completely as I can what I knew contemporaneously with the flow of
events to the intelligence committee.''  (Ibid., p. 330.)

     Questioning Hill

     Shortly after the OIC interviewed Shultz on February 12-13, 1992, it conducted a two-day
interview of Hill on February 21 and February 24, 1992.  The questioning focused on his
handwritten notes and their nonproduction.

     Prior to interviewing Hill, the OIC had already obtained some information about Hill's actions
in the weeks  after the November 1986 exposure of the Iran arms sales.  The State Department in
1988 had produced copies of most of his notes from November and December 1986.  He had
been interviewed on several occasions by the FBI and the OIC.285  He had answered written
questions from OIC on January 22, 1992.286

     285 Hill, FBI 302s, 12/4/86 (two interviews), 5/7/87, 7/13/87, 12/18/87, 7/23/88, 12/10/90
and 12/12/90.

     286 Letter from Craig A. Gillen to Charles Hill, 1/7/92, 017948; Letter from Charles Hill to
Lawrence E. Walsh, 1/22/92, 018034.

     The OIC had also obtained from the State Department in February 1992 a handwritten
chronology prepared by Hill on November 8, 1986,287 which appeared to record information
that Shultz had received regarding the arms sales.  The chronology is incomplete in subtle but
important ways.  For example, a May 22, 1986, entry in the chronology discusses (1) North going
to Cyprus with a non-Iranian intermediary, (2) a $10 million donation by Catholic Relief Services
to poor Shia Moslems in Lebanon, and the release of all hostages within a week.288  But Hill's
actual notes from May 22, 1986 -- which were not produced to the FBI or to Congress in 1986 or
1987 -- go on to quote Shultz as stating that ``[t]his is to be cover story for our shipment of
TOWs to Iranians.'' 289  The omitted quote  reveals Shultz's awareness of an arms-for-hostages
exchange in May 1986 that is inconsistent with Shultz's disclaimers of Iran arms sales knowledge
in his testimony.

     287 Hill Chronology, 11/8/86, ALW 50552-58.  Hill had referred to this chronology in the
written answers he provided to Independent Counsel on January 22, 1992.

     288 Ibid., ALW 50558.

     289 Hill Note, 5/22/86, ANS 001459.

     Finally, the OIC knew that Hill had limited the excerpts from his notes provided to State
Department lawyers and to the FBI prior to Shultz's December 16, 1986, testimony,290 to those
consistent with the ``three-phase'' description given by Shultz in his testimony.

     290 Hill, FBI 302 (Special Agent Beane), 12/4/86, p. 1; Sofaer, OIC Interview, 2/20/92, p. 23.

     At the outset of his February 1992 OIC interview, Hill acknowledged that he had spoken with
Shultz and his lawyers about the questions the OIC had asked Shultz just ten days earlier.291
Throughout the interview, Hill denied having intentionally withheld any notes from investigators.
Hill offered a multi-layered explanation for his failure to include certain relevant notes among the
excerpts he gathered in preparation for Shultz's December 1986 testimony.  Hill repeatedly
downplayed the significance or credibility of the information in notes he had omitted from these
excerpts.  Hill said that he had played only a minor role in preparing Shultz for his December
1986 testimony.292

     291 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 5-9.

     292 Hill's story is inconsistent in several key respects with the recollection of Sofaer.

     Hill's basic position during the interview was that he was never asked to review all of his
notes for all entries relevant to the Iran arms sales, and that he never undertook a review of his
notes for this purpose.  In early November 1986, as the Iran arms sales were first becoming
public, Shultz and Hill traveled to Vienna, Austria.293  During their travel, Shultz and Hill
discussed the history of the arms sales but were unable to recall many of the details of what had
occurred.294  Upon their return to the United States, Hill spent a dozen or more hours on
Saturday, November 8, 1986, reviewing his notes.  This review provided the basis for his
November 8, 1986, chronology.295

     293 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 18-19.

     294 Ibid., p. 20.

     295 Ibid., pp. 19, 21.

     According to Hill, however, Shultz rejected the chronology the very next day, because it
contained some information he had learned only after the public revelation of the arms sales.
Shultz believed that the chronology did not accurately reflect what Shultz had known at specific
points during the course of the arms sales.296  Hill told the OIC that he then became preoccupied
with assisting Shultz's efforts to quash the ongoing efforts to engage Iran  in arms-for-hostages
transactions.297  Accordingly, he did not conduct any further review of his notebooks until late
November or early December 1986, when he searched for information that would aid in the
preparation of Shultz's upcoming congressional testimony.298

     296 Ibid., pp. 21-22.

     297 Ibid., pp. 22-23.

     298 Ibid., p. 19.

     As Hill explained it, even this review had only a limited purpose.  Hill was not searching for
all notations relevant to the Iran arms sales.  Rather, he was attempting ``to go and get what in
[Shultz's] view were the key -- as best we could recall it then -- what were the key elements in his
effort to stop [the Iran arms sales] in the past.'' 299  In other words, Hill reviewed his notes not to
refresh Shultz's memory by identifying all relevant notes, but to provide support for those events
that Shultz actually remembered.300

     299 Ibid., pp. 23-24.

     300 Ibid., pp. 25-27.

     Even with this qualification, Hill was at a loss to explain why certain notes were not provided,
Hill admitted that he should have included specific notes in his excerpts and had made a mistake
by not doing so.  These included:

      -- A November 14, 1985, note of Armacost telling Shultz that McFarlane had recently asked
Weinberger how to get HAWK and Phoenix missiles to Iran --  Hill said, ``This one simply
escaped me.'' 301

     301 Ibid., p. 111.  Hill was asked if he checked his notes to verify Shultz's testimony that he
was unable to protest the November 1985 HAWK shipment because he had no advance notice of
the shipment.  Hill's November 14 note shows that Shultz and the Department of State did have
advance notice.  Hill said he did not check his notes on this point:  ``Looking back at it, that's an
error on my part.''  (Ibid., p. 115.)

      -- An April 3, 1986, note of a ``horrified'' Shultz telling Hill there is a ``money man'' in town
to pay for TOW missiles, and that the McFarlane Tehran meeting -- during which the hostages
will be released -- will be set once payment is made -- Hill said, ``if I had seen this and focused
on it, it would have been relevant and I would have brought it to his [Shultz's] attention in that
[December 1986] period.  I did not do so and I fault myself for that.'' 302

     302 Ibid., pp. 164-69.

      -- An April 15, 1986, note indicating that Hill and Shultz discussed a report that North and
McFarlane were going to Tehran in late April to work on ``hostages for arms'' -- Hill said, ``I
don't know why I didn't catch it.  I didn't catch it.'' 303

     303 Ibid., pp. 174-75.

      -- A July 16, 1986, note about Shultz and Hill discussing the possibility of using an official of
another country to pursue contacts with Iran and serve as a ``[w]ay out of Polecat'' -- Hill said he
``entirely missed it in the review,'' called that ``a lapse on my part'' and said ``as part of the great
blank of whiteness out there, it was just not there.'' 304

     304 Ibid., pp. 223-24.

      -- A July 28, 1986, note reporting that Jenco was released as a result of Polecat -- specifically,
a $24 million weapons deal between the U.S. and Iran -- Hill said this was ``a major error on my
part of misjudgment;'' ``[m]y analytical and judgmental abilities simply weren't functioning.'' 305

     305 Ibid., p. 226.

     Hill claimed that in omitting the July 28, 1986, note regarding the Jenco release, he ``simply
missed this period in terms of significance.  It was a great gap which I now see but I did not see
at that time.'' 306  But a note Hill wrote on November 10, 1986, plainly shows that Hill did not
miss this note.  He summarized it during his November 1986 review of his notes:

     306 Ibid., p. 231.

     g008from CH [Charles Hill] notebooks

     7/28 g008Jenco release (July) was Polecat  $24 m [$24 million] in wpns [weapons.]  next
will be [Terry] Anderson 307

     307 Hill Note, 11/10/86, ANS 001756.

     Hill also referred to the Jenco information when preparing materials for Shultz to use during a
November 12, 1986, meeting with President Reagan.308  In addition to  written talking
points,309 Hill made several handwritten notations on a page that contained a copy of a
November 12, 1986, Washington Post compilation of ``Administration Statements on Iran.''  This
page was stapled to the typed talking points when the OIC found these documents at the State
Department in 1992.  Hill's fifth handwritten notation on this page reads:

     308 Shultz's calendar for November 12, 1986, reflects a meeting with President Reagan from
1:30 p.m. to 2:00 p.m.  (Shultz, Record of Schedule, 11/12/86, ALW 49611.)  Shultz identified
the typed talking points for his meeting with President Reagan and explained that his goal during
this meeting was to prevent any further arms sales from taking place.  (Shultz, OIC Interview,
2/13/92, pp. 316-18.)

     309 Hill, Talking Points, circa 11/12/86, ALW 50420-25.

     g008July 1986:  g008Jenco released, then

     arms shipped to Iran ($20

     million U.S., $4 million

     Israeli).310

     310 Ibid., ALW 50420.

     Hill claimed that in 1987 he turned over all of his notes from the ``after the revelation''
period.311  But the November 10 note, which summarized the July 28 Jenco note, was not
among the package he produced in 1987.  Hill produced 24 pages of notes he had taken on
November 10, 1986, including the pages immediately before and immediately after  the original
page that referred to the July 28, 1986, Jenco note, but not that page itself.

     311 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 245.

     He also reformulated his basic explanation of the limited purpose for which he reviewed his
notes prior to Shultz's December 1986 testimony.  He said he did not review his notes to buttress
all of the points that Shultz remembered, but only to identify a narrow category of information:

     I went to my notebooks and went to the time periods that we had thought in Vienna were the
key periods in Shultz's reconstruction of this at which he felt that he had enough direct
information and the ability to deal with the principals of this [], that is Poindexter or whomever,
and to throw himself into it and to try and he thought make a fundamental shift in the way things
were going.312

     312 Ibid., pp. 24-25.

     Later, Hill offered another narrow formulation of the purpose of his search:

     What [Shultz] wanted to do was to talk about or to convey to the Senate what on key events
when he was unmistakably confronted with a situation, what action he took in general outline,
again given the objective that he set for himself with regard to the December testimony.313

     313 Ibid., p. 110.  Hill later offered another version:

     What [Shultz] wanted to do was simply go through the basics as he understood it in his own
mind of what he had done and those related to occasions when he was in his mind presented with
evidence that arms for hostages -- an operation that was underway, without any doubt was taking
place or on the verge of taking place, not rumor, not talked about in terms of someone is heading
someplace else, or someone says somebody is in town, but actually was underway because he had
to harbor the occasions at which he could take on the others.

     (Ibid., pp. 178-79.)

     Hill claimed that he was looking for only those notes that reflected times when Shultz was
``unmistakably confronted'' with ``direct evidence'' under circumstances where he could ``deal
with the principals'' in order to cause a ``fundamental shift'' in U.S. policy toward Iran. With
these quoted phrases, Hill exposed the selective nature of Shultz's testimony, as well as Hill's
document production.

     Asked about specific relevant notes that he did not include in the excerpts he provided to
Sofaer's office and to the FBI.  Hill observed variously, that the actual events differed from
certain notes that anticipated them,314 did not directly involve Shultz,315 that Shultz and he had
not really understood the information at the time they received it,316 that the information  passed
on to Shultz was not sufficiently reliable,317 that he (Hill) did not believe the information he
recorded in his notes.318

     314 E.g. Ibid., pp. 85-101, 205-7.

     315 E.g. Ibid., pp. 107-8.

     316 E.g. Ibid., pp. 198-203.

     317 E.g. Ibid., pp. 214-15.

     318 E.g. Ibid., pp. 135-36, 181.

     The events recorded in some of the withheld notes were of such significance that it is difficult
to believe that Hill overlooked these notes in the production process. For example, Hill noted on
September 17, 1985, separate press reports that (1) Israeli arms had been sent to Iran, and (2)
Weir had been released. Hill noted that ``Bud's folly is out,'' and Shultz's reaction: ``Well,
sometimes you have to try things.'' 319

     319 Hill Note, 9/17/85, ANS 001126.

     Hill recalled ``virtually running into [Shultz's] office to tell him . . . [that] we've caught the
guy,'' that is, that McFarlane's arms-for-hostages ``folly'' is now exposed.  Shultz was ``totally
surprised and in a sense disbelieving,'' and responded that ``sometimes you've got to try things.''
Shultz felt ``resigned'' and ``defeated'' to learn of these arms shipments.320  Hill's explanation for
not  producing the notes: the events later appeared not to have happened exactly as described in
the note.  Nonetheless, Hill and Shultz discussed it prior to Shultz's testimony.321

     320 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 99.

     321 Ibid., p. 101.  At a later point, Hill was asked if he had discussed the substance of this
Weir note during Meese's interview of Shultz on November 22, 1986.  Hill replied, ``No, I'm
quite sure I didn't go into that kind of detail at this kind of meeting.''  (Ibid., p. 281.)  Hill was
then confronted with notes that Assistant Attorney General Cooper had taken during the
November 22, 1986 Shultz interview.  Cooper's notes indicate that Hill had recited the details
from his September 17, 1985 note.  (Cooper Note, 11/22/86, ALV 071843.)  Hill then reversed
his prior answer and acknowledged that he did discuss the details.  (Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92,
p. 281.)

     Hill also did not include in his excerpts a May 22, 1986, note describing (1) Ollie North and a
non-Iranian intermediary traveling to Cyprus, (2) a $10 million Catholic Relief Services donation
to poor Shia Muslims in Lebanon, and (3) the concomitant release of all hostages.322
Immediately after listing these three events, the note quotes Shultz as saying, ``This is to be cover
story for our shipment of TOWs to Iranians.'' 323  Though plainly relevant to what Shultz knew
about the Iran arms sales, Hill did not provide this note to investigators.  He explained:

     322 Hill Note, 5/22/86, ANS 001459.  Hill recorded this note just three days after describing
in a note Weinberger telling Shultz of intelligence reports that McFarlane was taking arms to
Tehran as part of the arms-for-hostages operation.  (Hill Note, 5/19/86, ANS 0001453.)

     323 Hill Note, 5/22/86, ANS 001459.

     [T]his is in the category of things that do not happen, stories that prove to be false, false starts,
rumors, assertions that are not borne out, claims that something is going on that seems not to be
going on, and therefore it is not in the realm of something where he [Shultz] has taken action.324

     324 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 211.  The nonproduction of this note is even harder to
understand in light of Hill's recollection that Shultz was in ``agony'' after hearing of this
arms-for-hostages episode.  (Ibid., p. 207.)  Hill continues: ``. . . I think [Shultz] believes this for
whatever it is, a few hours, and we leave him to his agony, and then shortly thereafter, once again
the indications are that this has been a false alarm.''  (Ibid., p. 211.)

     Actually, the note refers to a cover story for the expected release of hostages after McFarlane's
mission to Tehran. The failure of the mission does not negate Shultz's knowledge of it.325

     325 Hill claimed as late as February 1992 that he did not know that McFarlane had gone to
Tehran.  (Ibid., p. 211.)  Hill admitted, however, that he was aware of public statements in
November 1986 that such a trip had occurred and stated that, in retrospect, he should have
produced to investigators notes about McFarlane's mission.  (Ibid., p. 212.)

     Hill explained his failure to include certain notes from September 1985 by stating that the
events described were not ones in which Shultz participated in a meaningful way.326  As Hill
phrased it:

     326 Hill Note, 9/11/85, ANS 001117; Hill Note, 9/16/85, ANS 001123; Hill Note, 9/17/85,
ANS 001125-26; Hill Note, 9/21/85, ANS 001131-33.

     [T]he outcome of this September event to us . . . was that this was a zero and if there was an
outcome it was that our suspicions are heightened but it was not part of what the Secretary -- it
did not make the cutoff in terms of the Secretary wanting to say what his specific role was to be.

     My impression before the testimony was that he wanted to confine himself to what he had
actually done, taken steps to do when he was confronted with the opportunity to make an
impact.327

     327 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 107-8 (emphasis added).

     Hill claimed he omitted notes about McFarlane's trip to Tehran because Shultz and he did not
fully understand the information.  On Monday, May 19, 1986, five days before the trip, Hill
asked Shultz if the Iran arms sales were discussed at a lunch with Casey, Weinberger and
Poindexter.  According to Hill's note, Weinberger told Shultz about an intelligence report that
McFarlane ``wd [would] get arms there [to Iran]'' and ``then they would see about hostg
[hostages].'' The note identifies the arms as anti-missile system parts.328

     328 Hill Note, 5/19/86, ANS 001453.

     The note plainly refers to McFarlane's mission.  Yet Hill claimed that he did not include this
note because he did not understand it:

     Again, I don't understand this note.  I didn't understand it then and because it's not in verbatim
language, I can only  speculate of [sic] what it might be and I hesitate to do that because I don't
find enough in this, I didn't find enough in this to make anything even close to a stab in the dark
about it.329

     329 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 199-200.  Hill admitted that the note deals with
Weinberger informing Shultz of intelligence reports that McFarlane would get arms to Iran.
(Ibid., pp. 200-1.)  But Hill would not acknowledge that this shipment of arms related to the
hostage situation, despite the phrasing, ``Bud w[oul]d get arms there and g008then they see
about host[age]s.''  (Ibid., p. 201.)

     Hill claimed that he omitted notes as not sufficiently reliable -- just ``a story we hear'' 330 --
even when the sources were Poindexter and Weinberger.  On May 22, 1986, Hill wrote:  ``Pdx =
Wbger. [Poindexter-Weinberger]'' and then ``Deliveries g008are being made of our mil
[military] equip [equipment] -- may see action today on release.'' 331  Hill admitted that Shultz
should be informed at the time, because ``it's the principals, that is Poindexter and Weinberger,
talking. . . .'' 332  But he omitted the note from his excerpts:

     330 Ibid., p. 215.

     331 Hill Note, 5/22/86, ANS 001462.

     332 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 215.

     I don't think that I would have [brought this note to the attention of those who were preparing
Shultz for his testimony], given what I was looking for because, again, this was -- it fits with the
one we just discussed, a story we hear.  It's not direct, the Secretary cannot credit it although I
think that he  feels that there is something going on here and he has to freeze and very shortly it
doesn't happen, there is no immediate release of all the hostages.333

     333 Ibid., p. 215.

     Hill failed to produce some notes, even though given to Shultz before his testimony.  For
example, a note taken on January 14, 1986:

     Arma [Armacost] g008= [meeting with] S [Shultz].  g008Hostg [Hostage] dealing still
going on.  Ollie [North] under pressure to produce before St [State] of Union speech. . . .  (S):
WH [White House] is running this.  No comment 334

     334 Hill Note, 1/14/86, ANS 001270.

     Hill said he omitted it because the information was just another unreliable story about North's
actions.  ``This document to me was part of the -- I don't mean to be impertinent at all but on the
laughable cavorting of North.'' 335  Yet, he nonetheless included this document in the
chronology he  initially tendered to Shultz on November 8, 1986, because he ``was not making
judgments of significance'' about the material he included in the chronology.336

     335 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 150.

     336 Ibid.  Hill also found humorous the information contained in an April 21, 1986, note
quoting Armacost telling Shultz that ``Bud [McFarlane] may show up in Tehran on Wednesday.''
(Hill Note, 4/21/86, ANS 001423.)  This note was not included because ``I treated this with
levity and I didn't believe it.''  (Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 181.)

     Lastly, there are instances where Hill downplayed the significance of information relayed to
him by Shultz, claiming that Hill did not believe the information.  After a January 7, 1986,
meeting with the President, Shultz reported the following information to Hill, who recorded it in
his notes:

     g008Iran Polecat.  g008P [President Reagan] decided go ahead. Only Cap [Weinberger] &
I opposed.  I won't debf [debrief] anybody about it.  (TOWS for hostages) 337

     337 Hill Note, 1/7/86, ANS 001263.

     Hill testified that even though Shultz had told him that President Reagan had decided to go
forward on ``Polecat,'' Hill did not believe that Reagan had decided any such thing:

     I didn't read it that way.  . . .  The national security adviser [Poindexter] would never allow the
President to make a decision at an NSC or NSPG meeting.  The President would give his views .
. . and then go away and make a decision at some later point.  . . .  I said [to Shultz],  ``It's awful,''
but I wasn't reading this as an official decision.338

     338 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 135-36.

     Hill also asserted that even though this note depicts Shultz's knowledge of important events
relating to the Iran arms sales, this was not the precise type of information Hill was seeking
during his notes review:

     [I]t's because with the Secretary's view of what the important points were, they were points at
which he felt that there would be clear knowledge that an operation was taking place and that he
could do something about it.  That would be his recounting of what were his actions, not his
recounting of what were other people's actions.339

     339 Ibid., p. 139.

     The note reflects a meeting with the President at which Shultz argued against the Iran
initiative and lost.  Hill said it did not reflect Shultz's actions, but ``other people's actions.''

     Hill struggled to explain why he included this information in the chronology he prepared for
Shultz on November 8, 1986, but excluded the information from the excerpts he later turned over
to Sofaer's office and to outside investigators.

     Clearly it is a matter of some significance.  I feel that what we were -- when the testimony was
going forward, what he [Shultz] was looking for was something that he felt he knew in terms of
an operation as in the case of McFarlane's  call to him [in] Geneva that he could actually take
action upon.

     I am now saying my own interpretation of this note at the time and it was something where he
wasn't going to talk about it, therefore we did not discuss it, which was that the President at this
time -- and this is my own recollection of my own thoughts -- had given an indication at this
meeting that he was willing to consider anything to get the hostages out and that we could expect
people to be running around, probably Ollie North and McFarlane, trying to cook up some kind
of an operation, some kind of an arrangement -- again I'm speaking for myself -- that would come
back, that they would take back to the President to say okay or not.

     That's the kind of event that the Secretary felt -- when those events came forward, that's when
he could do something himself where he was involved and not simply a listener and not simply
letting someone else do something.340

     340 Ibid., pp. 143-44.

     Hill also claimed that the ``TOWS for hostages'' language was not a note of what Shultz said,
but rather was Hill's guess as to what was going to happen.341  But Hill could not explain where
he learned what type of weapons were involved, if not from Shultz.342

     341 Ibid., pp. 136-37.

     342 Ibid., p. 137.

     Whatever the credibility of Hill's various explanations, the excuses all share a fundamental
problem:  Hill received a memorandum from Sofaer and Bouchard on November 29, 1986,
calling for the production of all documents -- including personal notes -- relevant to the Iran arms
sales.

     The plain terms of this memorandum from the chief legal and administrative officials at State
required Hill to produce all of his notes that contain information relevant to the Iran arms sales.
Hill had a simple explanation why he did not turn over all relevant notes.  According to  Hill,
Sofaer orally told him that he did not have to comply with the terms of the November 29, 1986,
memorandum.  As Hill explained it, he had a conversation with Sofaer before the memorandum
came out:

     [Sofaer] had told me that I would have to obtain the [notes], have them in a secure place, have
them close at hand, be ready to produce them as requested, and that because it already had been
gathered together, they should be retained right where they were which was a few yards from his
office and I should just hold myself ready which is the situation that I agreed to.343

     343 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 41-42.  Hill repeated this description of Sofaer's oral
instructions regarding Hill's notes numerous times during the interview.  E.g. ibid., pp. 44, 50-51,
62-63.

     Because of this understanding, Hill asserted in 1992 that ``[n]o one ever asked me to produce
any note,'' the November 29, 1986, memorandum notwithstanding.344  Phrasing things slightly
differently, Hill elsewhere stated that by following Sofaer's instructions about keeping his notes
ready and available, ``constructively [his notes] were turned over to the legal adviser's office
although they remained in the safe where they were held.'' 345  Hill claimed he assumed that
Sofaer and others in the legal adviser's  office informed investigators that Hill's excerpts did not
contain all relevant passages from his notes.346

     344 Ibid., p. 43.

     345 Ibid., p. 50; accord, ibid., p. 60 (where Hill described his ``constructive compliance'' with
Sofaer and Bouchard's November 29, 1986, memorandum).

     346 Ibid., pp. 66-67, 70.

     Hill went so far as to assert that holding on to his notes, instead of turning them over to
Department of State legal counsel and to the FBI, affirmatively helped the investigation into the
Iran arms sales:

     Q: Mr. Hill, how many documents do you think law enforcement officials would have
received if everyone constructively produced [their] notes such as you did?

     A: Well, everyone shouldn't do that.  That would be a terrible mistake.  They should produce
their documents.  I fully agree with that.

     I felt that what was being done here would be more effective and a superior way to serve the
investigation, which I certainly wanted to serve. . . .347

     347 Ibid., pp. 63-64.

     Sofaer directly and sharply contradicted Hill's explanation.  Sofaer acknowledged that Hill
was supposed to retain his original notebooks, but that is where Hill and Sofaer's recollections
diverged.  According to Sofaer:

     It was also true that [Hill] was required by [the November 29, 1986] memorandum, and I
never excused this in any way, shape, or form, to review those notes and to provide me, among
others, with information in those notes that was responsive to these demands.

     You know, there are things you might forget after all the years, but that is not one of them.348

     348 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 4/6/92, pp. 8-9.

     During this same interview, Sofaer restated the point even more forcefully:

     Every single person had a total duty, an absolute duty, to supply everything called for by [the
November 29, 1986] memo and thereafter to supply everything relevant to Shultz's testimony so
the Secretary wouldn't make a mistake in his testimony.349

     349 Ibid., p. 28.

     Sofaer explained that the reason he allowed Hill to retain possession of his notes ``was
because he [Hill] would be trusted to give us all the relevant information.'' 350  Sofaer ``fully
assumed that a thorough review had been made.'' 351  Hill never informed Sofaer that he was
forwarding only those notes that matched Shultz's recollection.352  In fact, Sofaer stated that

     350 Ibid., p. 39.

     351 Ibid., p. 41.

     352 Ibid., pp. 9-10.

     the thing that enabled me to authorize Shultz to testify [only] to what he knew was that
everything he didn't know that we had within our power and control we were going to give to the
FBI, to the Tower Board, whatever we had then, to the Iran-contra committee on the Hill, to the
Independent Counsel.353

     353 Ibid., pp. 43-44.

     Thus, Hill's claim that he and the legal adviser had an understanding about the limited scope
of Hill's notebook review 354 was flatly contradicted by Sofaer.

     354 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 71-72.

     One point of conflict between Hill and Sofaer -- Hill's participation in the preparation of
Shultz's testimony -- was resolved.  Hill at first claimed he never compared his notes with
Shultz's testimony, did not review Shultz's testimony before Shultz delivered it, never read
Shultz's testimony, and did not know what that testimony was.355  Sofaer had a different
recollection of the preparation of Shultz's summer 1987 testimony:

     355 Ibid., pp. 102-4.

     [Hill] would sit in on the meetings and watch things, read the drafts, comment on them.  He
played a substantial role. . . .  He would comment on what the evidence showed about what the
Secretary knew, how we ought to express it, how he understood it as a result.  He was a full
participant in preparing the Secretary for his testimony on each occasion that the Secretary
testified.356

     356 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 4/6/92, pp. 65-66.

     When confronted with his December 7, 1986, note on Shultz's December 8, 1986, testimony,
stating ``ok, I /s/ [sign] off'' on Shultz's December 8, 1986 testimony,357 Hill  acknowledged that
his earlier recollection was incorrect.358

     357 Hill Note, 12/7/86, ANS 001995.

     358 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/24/92, pp. 337-38.

     Testimony from two State Department lawyers involved in the Department's response to
congressional and criminal investigators corroborates Sofaer's recollection.  Neither Elizabeth
Keefer nor Michael Kozak, who were on the staff of the legal adviser's office, understood that
Hill reviewed his notes for the limited purpose of supporting Shultz's memory of events.  Both
believed that Hill conducted a complete review of all of his notes in advance of Shultz's
December 1986 testimony for the purpose of identifying all information relevant to the Iran arms
sales.359  Both understood that Hill was fully obligated to comply with the terms of Sofaer's
November 29, 1986, memorandum calling for the production of all relevant documents.  Neither
Keefer nor Kozak had excused Hill from complying with its production instructions; and, so far
as they knew, neither had anyone.360  Each was under the impression that Hill had fully
complied.361

     359 Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, pp. 6, 10; Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, pp. 3, 7, 11.

     360 Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, pp. 14-15; Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, p. 6.

     361 Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, p. 14; Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, p. 6.

     Keefer described Hill's role in preparing Shultz for his congressional testimony as
substantive.362  Kozak recalled that State Department legal counsel relied on Hill for the
substance of the testimony.363

     362 Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, p. 13.

     363 Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, p. 5.

     In the meetings where Shultz's testimony was being prepared, Hill's notes were considered
Shultz's recollection -- even though Shultz took part in the meetings.364  Kozak recalled that the
binder of notes that Hill had identified as relevant to Iran/contra was referred to as ``the Bible.''
365  Everyone viewed this binder of notes as the primary source of information concerning
Shultz's knowledge of the Iran/contra matter, and used it to cross-check the factual accuracy of
the testimony.  Even Hill referred to this binder of notes as ``the Bible.'' 366

     364 Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, p. 3.

     365 E.g. Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, p. 7.

     366 Ibid., p. 5.

     Overall, Hill's explanations as to why specific relevant notes were not turned over either to
Sofaer's office or to the FBI were a combination of admitted errors and strained, inconsistent
rationalizations.  None of his stated excuses can be squared with Sofaer, Keefer and Kozak's
clear memories that Hill, like everyone else, was required  by Sofaer's November 29, 1986,
memorandum to produce all notes in his possession that were relevant to the Iran arms sales.
Hill alone asserted that he was called upon to identify only those notes that supported selected
events recalled by Shultz, and that he was exempted from the production requirements of Sofaer's
memorandum.

     For the most part, Hill's state of mind and intentions in November and December of 1986
must be inferred from the notes that he did not produce and his various excuses for not producing
them.  But a more telling source exists in Hill's own notes.  On November 21, 1986, Hill and
Platt had a secure conversation in which Platt told Hill about a conversation Sofaer had with
McFarlane:

     MO [McFarlane] called Abe [Sofaer] + sd [said] he understood there are records in Dept [the
Department of State] that cover the period & that they had been sent to Justice.  Abe sd no
records sent to DOJ [Justice], but he had been told some ``alleged facts'' from records & he had
told DOJ in order to protect P [President Reagan].  Abe sd MO [McFarlane] shd [should] keep
all g008his records.  Abe sd DOJ has asked for all records -- specifically the Nov [November]
18, 1985 conversation.  g008P auth [authorized] the investigation and they want our records.

     CH [Charles Hill] raises hell.

     Stop Abe for shit's sake! 367

     367 Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 001878.

     Hill claimed that his ``intemperate outburst'' meant only that ``[i]t sounded like Sofaer was
doing the  wrong thing and so I was saying slow Sofaer down.'' 368  Hill denied being concerned
about turning over all of his records, claiming instead that ``I was concerned about things being
said that were not well documented and . . . that Sofaer might conceivably be going off and
giving `alleged facts.' '' 369

     368 Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, p. 271.

     369 Ibid.

     Questioning Platt

     Nicholas Platt appeared before the Grand Jury on March 27, 1992.370  He had first been
interviewed by Shultz's lawyers.  The OIC asked Platt general questions about his actions in 1985
and 1986, and then reviewed specific notes he took during that period.  Unlike Hill but like
Shultz, Platt claimed that he had virtually no independent memory of the events of 1985 and
1986.  Platt stated that his notes were his memory.371

     370 Prior to Platt's appearance before the Grand Jury, he was interviewed voluntarily at the
OIC.  (Platt, FBI 302, 3/26/92.)

     371 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, pp. 17-18.

     Despite this disclaimer, Platt did recall a few relevant points.  First, Platt said he passed on
``virtually everything'' he heard about the Iran arms sales to Shultz.372  This did not always mean
speaking with Shultz directly.  Platt would most often communicate the information to Hill.373
Platt believed that ``passing information to Charles Hill was the equivalent of passing it to the
Secretary.'' 374

     372 Ibid., p. 12.

     373 Ibid., p. 8.

     374 Ibid., pp. 10-11.

     Platt had limited involvement in the preparation of Shultz's December 1986 congressional
testimony.  He ``did  sit in on meetings that [Shultz] had about his testimony with other advisors
who were charged with preparing it.'' 375  According to Platt, Hill was one of those charged with
preparing Shultz's testimony, working in conjunction with Sofaer and others.376

     375 Ibid., p. 18.

     376 Ibid., pp. 18-19.  Platt's memory (like Sofaer's, Shultz's, Keefer's and Kozak's) conflicts
with Hill's memory on this point.  Hill claimed that he had little involvement in the preparation
of Shultz's testimony.  (Compare Hill, OIC Interview, 2/21/92, pp. 102-4, with Sofaer, OIC
Interview, 4/6/92, pp. 65-66; Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, p. 151; Keefer, FBI 302, 3/10/92, p.
13; Kozak, FBI 302, 3/4/92, p. 5.)

     Platt recalled receiving Sofaer's November 29, 1986, memorandum directing him and others
to turn over all relevant documents, including notes.377  Beyond this basic recollection, Platt's
memory of the document-production process was, by his own admission, ``flawed.'' 378  He did
not remember what guidance he received on how to handle his personal notes.379  He recalled
reviewing his notes and marking relevant passages with paper clips.380  But Platt could not
remember when he provided copies of these relevant  notes to Sofaer's office.381  Platt made no
claim that Sofaer or anyone else had exempted him from the production required by the
November 29, 1986, memorandum.

     377 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, p. 22.

     378 Ibid., p. 32.

     379 Ibid., pp. 27, 33.  Platt remembered that there were discussions of how notes were to be
treated, but could not recall the substance of those discussions.  (Ibid.)

     380 Ibid., p. 34.

     381 Ibid., pp. 39-42.

     Platt claimed to recall that he produced a limited number of notes on a specific subject on
December 3 or 4, 1986,382 but he acknowledged that a recent telephone conversation with Hill
had ``refreshed'' Platt's memory of this production.383  Platt could not recall the purpose of this
limited production or the subject matter.384  Independent of Hill's reminder, Platt could not
recall producing any notes.385

     382 Ibid., p. 23.

     383 Ibid., pp. 23-24.

     384 Ibid., pp. 27-28.

     385 Ibid., p. 29.

     Platt acknowledged that he and Hill had discussed the areas of concern that had arisen in
Hill's February 1992 OIC interview.386  Hill also reminded Platt of the various ``phases'' of the
State Department's awareness of the Iran arms sales.387  Hill told Platt that, as a result of Hill's
interview with the OIC, Hill  felt that Shultz's testimony ``in one place . . . [s]hould have been
worded differently.'' 388

     386 Ibid., p. 24.

     387 Ibid., pp. 24-25.

     388 Ibid., pp. 26-27.

     Platt was questioned about several specific notes of his that were not produced to any
investigators prior to the spring of 1991.  Platt admitted in almost every instance that (1) the note
appeared to be relevant, (2) he did not know why it was not produced, and (3) he may have
overlooked the information under the pressure of the burgeoning crisis that ensued after the arms
sales were publicly disclosed.

     For example, Platt was asked about a note he took on September 16, 1985, regarding the Weir
release.389  The note discusses conversations among Oakley, McFarlane and North regarding the
mechanics of the hostage release and potential problems.  Platt did not deny the relevance of the
note, and could not explain why it was not produced:

     389 Platt Note, 9/16/85, ALW 0036349.

     Q: Why did you not produce this note, pursuant to the November the 29th, '86 memorandum?

     A: I can't -- I cannot explain, other than to say that it related to -- this is a note that relates to
the fact of Weir's having been released.  It doesn't refer to arms for hostages, although it does
mention Bud and Ollie.  Anyway, I made it available later [in 1991].  I don't know why it wasn't
released then.  It was overlooked.

     * * *

     Q: You believe now it should have been produced?

     A: Yes, I would think so.390

     390 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, pp. 70-71.

     Platt did not defend the omission of an October 4, 1985 note, which quotes Shultz as saying
that he intends to speak with McFarlane about intelligence that points ``toward 100 mil. [$100
million] deal for spare parts for Iran to be delivered in Spain.'' 391  Platt acknowledged that this
was a significant note relating to the Iran arms sales:

     391 Platt Note, 10/4/85, ALW 0036463.

     I can only conjecture or speculate that it was -- that I overlooked it.  I have no recollection of
having decided not to send it.  All I can say is that I was motivated by a desire to comply with the
desires of the law enforcement agencies and did the best that I could at the time.392

     392 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, p. 80.  Platt admitted that this note contradicted statements
made by Shultz during his testimony that the State Department did not have access to intelligence
reports regarding the Iran arms sales:  ``[the note] does indicate that the Secretary knew that [the
intelligence reports] existed.''  (Ibid., p. 81.)

     Likewise, Platt could not explain the non-production of a June 1, 1985, note that discusses
NSC consultant Michael Ledeen's presence in Israel seeking ``Israeli cooperation on Iran
intelligence'': 393

     393 Platt Note, 6/1/85, ALW 0035751.

     I can't recall why it wasn't produced.  I can only speculate from the context and the appearance
that the reference was hidden and there isn't a specific link between Iran and arms.  There's no
mention of arms here.

     But I can't recall why it's not there.  It may just have been overlooked.394

     394 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, p. 49; accord, ibid., p. 51 (regarding the 6/4/85 Note, ALW
0035767), p. 60 (regarding the 9/13/85 Note, ALW 0036332); p. 85 (regarding the 11/14/85
Note, ALW 0036734), pp. 91-92 (regarding the 11/26/85 Note, ALW 0036809); pp. 100-1
(regarding the 1/4/86 Note, ALW 0037024), pp. 101-2 (regarding the 1/14/86 Note, ALW
0037124); pp. 102-4 (regarding the 2/21/86 Note, ALW 0037404), pp. 112-13 (regarding the
4/3/86 Note, ALW 0037725).

     As to some specific notes, including the two just discussed, Platt suggested that the
information was hidden or obscure.395  As to others, Platt asserted that the hectic circumstances
of November and December 1986 made it impossible for him to do the kind of careful review
done by the OIC after it acquired a complete set of Platt's notes in 1991:

     395 Ibid., pp. 70, 49; accord, ibid., p. 91 (regarding a November 26, 1985 note (ALW
0036809):  ``let me say that from the context of it, it's pretty well hidden''), p. 92 (regarding
another November 26 note (ALW 0036813):  ``I believe it's hidden, and I missed it.'').

     The milieu we were living in was one of very high pressure, a lot of events, a lot of activity,
and review of notes -- it was very difficult for any of us to get the time off to do the kind of
careful review of notes that this investigation suggests that we should have been able to do.396

     396 Ibid., p. 109.

     Elsewhere, Platt stated:

     Well, I can only say that there were a lot of things going on.  There was a huge amount of
material to screen.  . . .  All I'm saying is, when I was going through the review process, I was
preoccupied with a lot of other things.397

     397 Ibid., p. 85.

     But Platt acknowledged that some notes he omitted were obviously significant and should not
have been overlooked.

     Platt, no less than Hill, had his greatest difficulty explaining the omission of passages of notes
containing critical information about the release of Jenco in July of 1986.  The Department of
State in 1987 produced a Platt note segment from July 26, 1986, that discussed some basic
aspects of the Jenco release:

     g008July 26, 1986Informal working group set up

      -- Jencko out. Now with Amb / 10:50 plane arrives in Syria will 1330 Frankfurt leave via US
Aircraft for Wiesbaden tomorrow 27th 9:00 AM.

     ALDAC [All Diplomatic and Consular Posts]  Sec [Shultz] approved Press Statement release
this AM.  Condolence message. --

     ALDAC 398

     398 Platt Note, 7/26/86, ALV 002739. The bottom portion of this note that Platt produced in
response to Iran/contra investigators in 1986 and 1987, which mentions a ``Condolence
message,'' apparently does not relate to Iran/contra.  W. Averell Harriman, the former diplomat,
Assistant Secretary of State and Governor of New York, died on July 26, 1986, and the
Department of State released a condolence statement from Shultz later that day.  (The New York
Times, 7/27/86.)

     The photocopy that the Department produced was cropped to remove the remainder of this
page of Platt's notes, obliterating the following additional information:

      -- Release of Hostage Jenco -- result of Polecat negotiations.

      -- Presidential statement thanking Syrians arranged.

      -- next one will be Anderson.

      -- Dick [Murphy] calling Don Gregg.  VP [Bush] may delay departure 399

     399 Platt Note, 7/26/86, ALW 0038555.  Platt's July 26 notes discuss an unrelated matter in
between the Iran arms sales information Platt produced from this page and these redacted points.

     The note continues on the top of the following page which was not produced at all:

     from Frankfurt so he can.

      -- Price.  ITOW, side winders, 155 mm ammo. [ammunition] via the Israelis.

      -- Weir was earnest money.

     Charley Allen & Dewey Clarridge at the mtg

      -- Armacost calls [Head of Defense Department component] -- real negotiation had been
whether it was 1 or 2.  24 million -- 4 mil laundered thru Israel -- rest in equipment, for which, he
implied, they are paying.

     Ollie flying out tonight 400

     400 Platt Note, 7/26/86, ALW 0038556.

     When shown the information that had been cut off from the first page of his July 26, 1986,
notes, Platt was nonplussed:

     Q: Can you please tell us, Ambassador, why you chose to make a determination that that
should be redacted?

     A: I have no recollection of why it was redacted.  I can only speculate that when the page -- I
mean, the subject changed, and I didn't carefully read on to the rest of the page.  There is
absolutely no reason, I don't think, why -- I mean, on the face of it, one would -- would want to
cut this out.

     Q: ``Result of Polecat negotiations.''  It shows us that Jenco was released because of Oliver
North, does it not, Ambassador?

     A: I have no idea why I would want to hide that.  Why would I want to hide that? 401

     401 Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, p. 129.

     Platt later acknowledged:  ``It came to me as a surprise that it was cut off where it was --
looked to me as if it looked like I had something to hide.'' 402

     402 Ibid., p. 141.

     He was confronted with the note taken on December 15, 1986, the day before Shultz's
testimony before the SSCI, discussing ``Jenco'' as an area of ``greatest vulnerability,'' apparently
for Shultz, which then asks, ``Why did you avert your gaze.'' 403

     403 Platt Note, 12/15/86, ALW 039344.  Earlier in the testimony, Platt said he could not
recall whether he told Shultz during a July 26, 1986, telephone call about the information Platt
had learned concerning the true reason for Jenco's release.  (Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, p. 134.)

     Asked to explain, he testified:

     Q: To whom are these questions [in the note] directed?

     A: I don't know.  I can't remember.  I can't tell from the context of the note.  It's obviously
something that was discussed, and I don't know who was saying what to who here.  I'm hearing it.

     Q: Well, let us look at it from another angle.  You were not going to testify the next day, were
you?

     A: No.

     Q: Charlie Hill was not going to testify the next day, was he?

     A: No.

     Q: Secretary Shultz was going to testify the next day.  Right?

     A: Yes.

     Q: So, when questions concerning, ``What did you think?  Why did you avert your gaze?'' --
are you referring to anyone other than Secretary Shultz?

     A: It's a question that's asked by somebody in the meeting, but I don't know who.

     Q: I see.  And so, why are people concerned on the eve of Secretary Shultz's testimony that
Jenco is one of the areas of greatest vulnerability?

     A: I can't tell.  I don't recall.404

     404 Ibid., pp. 139-40.

     An obvious interpretation of the December 15, 1986, note is that Shultz was indeed told in
July 1986 about the arms-for-hostages basis for Jenco's release.  His advisers, in a meeting on the
eve of Shultz's December 16, 1986, SSCI testimony, threw out hypothetical questions that Shultz
might be asked about his reaction to Jenco's release:  How did you think the Jenco release
occurred?  Why did you avert your gaze?  Production of the note to investigators would invite
additional questions.

     Platt did not subscribe to this interpretation.  He testified that (1) he had no idea why he would
want to hide the Jenco information in the July 26th note, (2) he did not know why this
information was redacted or omitted, and (3) he did not recall the meaning of the December 15th
note.405

     405 Ibid., pp. 129, 139-40.

     Platt acknowledged that he had recently discussed the Jenco issue with Hill.406  Hill told him
that he had found the July 1986 information about Jenco ``hard to believe'' at the time he heard
it.407  Hill told him that  he had overlooked his note on the real reasons behind the Jenco
release.408

     406 Ibid., p. 135.

     407 Ibid., pp. 136-37.

     408 Ibid., p. 137.

     When asked whether he had recently discussed the Jenco matter with anyone other than Hill,
Platt invoked the attorney/client privilege.409  Asserting a joint defense with Shultz, Platt
asserted this privilege with respect to conversations with persons other than his own attorney,
including Shultz's counsel.410

     409 Ibid., p. 135.

     410 Ibid.  Subsequent correspondence revealed that Platt had an oral joint defense agreement
with Shultz as to Iran/contra matters.  (Letter from Platt's counsel, R. Kenly Webster, to Craig A.
Gillen, 4/2/92, 018655.)  Platt refused to waive the joint privilege.  (Letter from R. Kenly
Webster to Craig A. Gillen, 4/16/92, 018754.)  Following Platt's refusal, Shultz's attorney stated
that he could not waive the joint privilege unilaterally.  As a result of this assertion of privilege,
Platt never disclosed anything about the conversations he had in 1992 with Shultz or Shultz's
counsel on the Jenco issue.

     Independent Counsel decided that contesting Platt's assertion of a joint privilege was not an
efficient use of limited resources.  Platt's testimony showed signs  of rehearsal.411  Even a
successful attack upon the claim of privilege was unlikely to produce new information.

     411 For example, near the start of his Grand Jury appearance in March 1992, Platt testified
that it had been his practice during 1985 and 1986 to pass along to Shultz ``virtually everything''
he (Platt) heard on the subject of arms shipments to Iran.  (Platt, Grand Jury, 3/27/92, p. 12.)
Platt acknowledged that he did not attempt to evaluate the reliability or credibility of a piece of
information on this subject before passing it along.  But he then attempted to volunteer a
distinction lessening the likelihood that he would report ``wild rumors:''

     As I recall -- as I recall, that would be -- that would be correct.  I mean, I -- there might be
wild rumors that would come out; I would -- normally, I would share those at least with Mr. Hill
-- unless he already knew them or was telling them to me.

     Q: Give us an example of what you had determined to be a ``wild rumor.''

     A: Well, we had a report, as I remember, that a hostage had been released and that someone
paid $24 million for the release of this one guy.  I mean, it was a rumor.  That's an example.

     (Ibid., p. 13.)  Platt, himself, had not yet been asked about ``the Jenco ``[a]rea[] of greatest
vulnerability'' note.  Platt attempted to reduce to a ``wild rumor'' his July 1986 note stating that
Jenco had been released as part of a $24 million arms deal, even though his December 1986 note
on the eve of Shultz's testimony characterized Jenco one of the ``[a]reas of greatest
vulnerability.''

     Conclusion

     Shultz's Testimony Was Incorrect, But It Could Not Be Proven That It Was Willfully False

     Independent Counsel's investigation established that central and important aspects of Shultz's
testimony to  congressional committees in late 1986 and 1987 regarding his knowledge of arms
shipments to Iran were incorrect.

     Shultz's carefully prepared testimony stated that he received no information regarding arms
transfers to Iran during 1985 and 1986.  It conveyed the impression that, because of his steadfast
opposition to proposals to transfer arms to Iran, National Security Advisers McFarlane and
Poindexter and the NSC staff had successfully concealed information from Shultz and the
Department of State regarding actual arms transfers to Iran.

     The contemporaneous handwritten notes of Hill and Platt demonstrate the inaccuracy of
Shultz's assertions and the popular impression regarding his knowledge.  Shultz was aware of
Israel's TOW and HAWK missile transfers to Iran during 1985.  He was aware of direct arms
transfers from the United States to Iran during 1986.  The notes also demonstrate that, to the
extent Shultz did not have complete information regarding the arms transfers, his situation was
caused as much by his desire not to know more as it was by efforts at the NSC staff to conceal
information from him.412

     412 E.g. Hill Note, 12/9/85, ANS 0001246 (``g008NIGHTOWL . . .  -- P [President Reagan]
annoyed.  McF [McFarlane] had him sold on it.  Saw hostg [hostages] out + new stratg [strategic]
rels [relationship].  So he annoyed w [with] me [Shultz] + Cap [Weinberger].  -- I will let them
post me.  I will not pursue or ask.  But will take it over when it gets messy.''); cf. Hill Note,
11/19/86, ALW 0056348 ``(S) [Shultz] -- We knew they [the NSC staff] [were] doing somethg
[something].  Not totally innocent.'').

     In his 1992 interviews with the OIC, Shultz did not contest the accuracy of these notes and
ultimately acknowledged that his testimony had been incorrect.

     Notwithstanding the gravity of Shultz's errors while testifying before Congress in 1986 and
1987, Independent Counsel declined to prosecute because the evidence did not establish beyond a
reasonable doubt that his testimony was willfully false.  Contemporaneous notes exposed the
inaccuracy of Shultz's assertions.  However difficult it may be to believe that Shultz could forget
events that troubled him so deeply, it was significant that none of the contemporaneous notes
created in November and December 1986 suggest that Shultz in fact remembered more or
different information than that to which he testified.

     Hill Deliberately Withheld Key Notes and Prepared Inaccurate Testimony Regarding Shultz's
Knowledge of Arms Transfers to Iran

     Although Hill claimed a variety of explanations for his failure to produce relevant notes to
Iran/contra investigators, the evidence indicates that Hill withheld these notes deliberately, in
conjunction with his preparation of testimony portraying Shultz as uninformed of arms shipments
to Iran and victimized by the NSC staff.

     Hill withheld his notes deliberately.  He was clearly instructed in 1986 to locate and produce
relevant entries in his notebooks, and he was not exempted from this obligation by the legal
adviser.

     The direct correlation between notes not produced by Hill and Shultz's disclaimers of
knowledge in official testimony also is too powerful to be an accident.  Although Hill claimed
that Shultz had directed him to locate only those notes that corroborated Shultz's recollections,
the record suggests otherwise.  Shultz instructed Hill, as he instructed all Department of State
employees, to locate and produce all relevant information to investigators.  Sofaer, Kozak and
Keefer each corroborated Shultz's recollection on this point.

     Hill's notes are also too legible, and his relevant notes too easy to locate, to support his
explanation for their non-production.  Shultz voiced the best criticism of Hill's failure to produce
obviously relevant notes:

     Well, I think I'd have to put it into the context but when you have the word Polecat
underlined, I should think that's the kind of thing that would attract your attention.413

     413 Shultz, OIC Interview, 2/12/92, pp. 58-59.

     Although the evidence demonstrated beyond a reasonable doubt that Hill withheld relevant
notes and helped prepare inaccurate testimony, Independent Counsel  concluded it would not be
appropriate to prosecute Hill, a subordinate to Shultz who had delivered that testimony and who
was not the subject of a prosecution himself.  Additionally, Hill's assertion that he was given an
oral waiver from full document production by Sofaer could raise an issue of fact regarding events
several years old that might create a reasonable doubt in the minds of jurors.  Finally, the passage
of time itself weighed against the prosecution of Hill, who promised little in the way of further
investigative developments beyond what was contained in his extensive notes.

     The Evidence That Platt Deliberately Withheld Relevant Notes Is Inconclusive

     Independent Counsel's investigation in 1991 and 1992 also determined that Platt failed to
produce a significant quantity of relevant handwritten notes to Iran/contra investigators.  Platt's
omissions are not as blatant as Hill's.  His notes are more fragmentary and more difficult to
review.  Platt did review his notes repeatedly and made supplemental production to the legal
adviser's office throughout the first few months of 1987.414  Most  importantly, in the spring of
1987, Platt left his position as executive secretary and was preparing to become United States
ambassador to the Philippines.  He was not involved in the continuing process of preparing
Shultz's testimony and so, unlike Hill, he was not as aware of the degree to which the notes that
had been produced in December 1986 became ``the Bible'' that defined Shultz's, and the entire
Department of State's, information and knowledge regarding arms transfers to Iran.

     414 Memorandum from Platt to Executive Secretary Levitsky, 4/23/87, ALV 002717 (``I
attach personal notes I have found which relate to the NDR [contras].  All the notes fall into the
period Jan 1-July 1, 1985, . . .  My personal notes on the contra issue for the period July
1985-November 1986 are already in Mike Kozak's possession, part of the collection made in
connection with the Iran-hostages arms investigation.''); Memorandum from Platt to Levitsky,
5/7/87, ALV 002712 (producing additional Platt notes regarding the contras); Memorandum
from Quinn to Kozak, 5/11/87, ALV 002711 (``transmit[ting] additional notes from Ambassador
Nicholas Platt in response to your request for documents relating to the Iran/Contra
investigation'').

     Still, the non-production of Platt's highly relevant notes is troubling.  In 1987, the Department
produced an innocuous Platt note reflecting Jenco's release.  The redacted portion, not discovered
by investigators until 1991, reveals information linking Jenco's release to the NSC Iran initiative,
weapons and ammunition.  Platt had no explanation for this redaction.  Whether it was done by
Platt or someone else in the State Department document-production process is unsettled.

     Finally, there is the question whether Platt and Hill colluded to withhold corresponding
portions of their notes.  Coincidence is unlikely.  Platt's notes were produced to the FBI in
December 1986 through Hill.  Given  Hill's more central role in the preparation of Shultz's
testimony, even at that early date, it is possible that Platt's proposed note production in December
1986 was reviewed by Hill.  Given the passage of time, the absence of direct evidence of
collusion, and Platt's minimal role in the preparation of Shultz's testimony, it was determined not
to seek criminal charges against him.

Chapter 25

     United States v. Elliott Abrams

     Elliott Abrams in January 1981 joined the Reagan Administration as an assistant secretary of
state for international organization affairs and later became assistant secretary for human rights.
On April 19, 1985, Secretary of State George P. Shultz offered Abrams the position of assistant
secretary of state for inter-American affairs (ARA), overseeing South and Central American and
Caribbean issues.  Shultz explained that it would be a difficult job, but Abrams quickly accepted.
Shultz promised to ``manage the emergence of E[lliott] A[brams] as King of L[atin] A[merica].''
1

     1 Hill Note, 4/19/85, ANS 0001039.

     Abrams assumed his position at ARA in July 1985.  Under Shultz, he was responsible for
Central American issues and became the Reagan Administration's chief advocate on Capitol Hill
for U.S. aid to the contra rebels in Nicaragua, which had been cut off in October 1984 by the
Boland Amendment.  During Abrams' tenure at ARA, humanitarian aid for the contras and later
lethal aid were lawfully resumed.

     Abrams worked closely with Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the National Security Council Staff
and Alan D. Fiers, Jr., the chief of the CIA's Central American Task Force.  Together they
comprised the principal members of a Restricted Interagency Group (RIG), which worked on
Central American issues for the Reagan Administration.

     In the course of his work, Abrams became aware of North's efforts to assist the contras
militarily, despite the Boland prohibition on U.S. aid.2  Abrams also was directly involved in
secretly seeking third-country contributions to the contras.

     2 It was Abrams' ``working assumption'' that the Boland Amendment applied to the NSC
staff.  Abrams, Select Committees Testimony, 6/2/87, p. 8.

     On October 7, 1991, Abrams pleaded guilty to two misdemeanor charges of withholding
information from Congress.  Abrams admitted that he withheld from the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee and the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) in
October 1986 his knowledge of North's contra-assistance activities.  In support of his guilty plea,
Abrams admitted that it was his belief ``that disclosure of Lt. Col. North's activities in the
resupply of the Contras would jeopardize final enactment'' of a $100 million appropriation
pending in Congress at the time of his testimony.3  He also admitted that he withheld from
HPSCI information that he had solicited $10 million in aid for the contras from the Sultan of
Brunei.

     3 Government's Statement of the Factual Basis for the Guilty Plea, 10/7/91, p. 4. Abrams'
guilty plea was obtained by Deputy Independent Counsel Craig A. Gillen and Associate Counsel
Thomas  E. Baker and John Q. Barrett.

     Abrams' Knowledge of North's Activities

     After Abrams assumed the position of assistant secretary of state for ARA, he began to orient
himself to his new responsibilities.  On September 4, 1985, Abrams met with Shultz to discuss
Central American issues.  Also present were M. Charles Hill, Shultz's executive assistant, and
Nicholas Platt, the executive secretary.  They discussed North's contra-support activities.
Abrams' notes of that meeting reflect Shultz's instruction to him to ``monitor Ollie.'' 4

     4 Abrams Note, 9/4/85, ALW 0041285.

     During his testimony before the Select Iran/contra Committees in the summer of 1987,
Abrams explained his ``monitor Ollie'' notebook entry as follows:

     ``. . . All these accusations about Colonel North, you want me to try to find out whether they
are true and what he is up to, or do you want me to sort of leave?''

     And [Shultz] said, ``No, you have got to know.'' 5

     5 Abrams, Select Committees Testimony, 6/2/87, p. 34.  By September 1985, Abrams was
aware of the public allegations that North was involved in soliciting funds for the contras and
assisting in providing lethal aid. (Ibid., pp. 82-83.)

     In later congressional testimony, Abrams explained that he believed that he carried out
Shultz's directive by obtaining North's assurances that he was not soliciting funds for the contras
and by McFarlane's similar assurances to Congress.  Abrams said because he and North worked
together in RIG meetings, he believed that he had a good understanding of what North was
doing.6

     6 Ibid., p. 84; Abrams, Select Committees Testimony, 6/3/87, pp. 30-33.

     Hill's contemporaneous notes of the September 4, 1985, meeting are more detailed:

     [ABRAMS]: -- fundraising continues, arms shipments going up.  I have not asked Ollie for
any info[rmation] about fundraising for lethal aid.

     [Shultz]:  We don't want to be in the dark.  You suppose to be mgr [manager] of overall C.A.
[Central America] picture.  Contras are integral part of it.  So y[ou] need to know how they
getting arms.  So don't just say go see the WH [White House].  It's very risky for WH.7

     7 Hill Note, 9/4/85, ANS 0001130.

     Platt's notes of the September 4th meeting are even more detailed and instructive on the extent
of Abrams' knowledge of North's involvement on behalf of the contras:

     [Shultz]:  What is happening on other support for Contras for lethal aid etc. -- E. Abrams
doesn't have the answer.  Stayed away let Ollie North do it.  Fundraising continuing -- weapons
stocks are high.  We have had nothing to do with private aid.  Should we continue?

     Hate to be in position, [Shultz] says, of not knowing what's going on.  You are supposed to be
managing overall Central American picture.  Ollie  can go on doing his thing, but you, [Abrams],
should know what's happening.8

     8 Platt Note, 9/4/85, ALW 0036260.  Platt's note was not produced until 1991.  It raised more
doubts about the veracity of Abrams' 1987 testimony that he did not believe the allegations about
North's Contra activities.

     Platt's notes reflect that, by September 4, 1985, Abrams knew North was involved in lethal
assistance to the contras and that he informed Shultz.

     As assistant secretary of state for ARA, Abrams assumed the chairmanship of the RIG, which
was a senior-level working group that focused on policy in Central America.  It was comprised of
Abrams and his assistants, and representatives of the CIA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Department
of Defense and the NSC staff.  At the time of Abrams' swearing-in, the RIG member with the
most seniority was North of the NSC staff.

     Abrams' senior management team included James H. Michel as his principal deputy assistant
secretary of state, and William G. Walker as his deputy assistant secretary of state for Central
American affairs.  On occasion, both Michel and Walker accompanied Abrams to RIG meetings.

     Abrams, North and NHAO

     After Abrams took control of ARA, North continued to raise funds and assist in coordinating
the provision of weapons to the contras. In September 1985, North induced former CIA officer
Felix Rodriguez to assist the contra-resupply effort by setting up the servicing of aircraft at
Ilopango air base in El Salvador.9  Rodriguez had been working out of Ilopango air base,
assisting the Salvadoran Air Force in counter-insurgency actions.  Donald P. Gregg, Vice
President Bush's national security adviser, had been instrumental in placing Rodriguez in El
Salvador.  While at the air base, Rodriguez used the alias ``Maximo (Max) Gomez.''  He
established an excellent relationship with General Juan Rafael Bustillo, the Salvadoran
commander of the base.

     9 Letter from North to Rodriguez, 9/20/85, AKW 022740-43.

     In August 1985, one month after Abrams' swearing-in as assistant secretary of state for ARA,
Congress modified the Boland Amendment by appropriating $27 million for humanitarian
assistance to the contras.  On August 29, 1985, President Reagan created the Nicaraguan
Humanitarian  Assistance Office (NHAO) in the State Department for the purpose of
administering the appropriated $27 million.

     Ambassador Robert W. Duemling set up NHAO within the State Department to administer
the humanitarian assistance.  A NHAO organizational meeting was held October 1, 1985,
attended by Abrams' two senior aides, Walker and Michel.  Duemling's notes reflect that North
volunteered the services of Rodriguez to assist in the humanitarian resupply.10

     10 Duemling Notes, 10/1/85, GP 0025171.

     North intruded in the NHAO operations in at least two other ways:  (1) He insisted that
Richard B. Gadd, who was assisting retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and North in
lethal resupply, be the contractor to transport NHAO flights; (2) With Abrams, he persuaded
Duemling to add to the NHAO staff North's Central American courier, Robert W. Owen.

     Initially, it was planned that the humanitarian supplies would be flown from the United States
into Honduras, off-loaded there and delivered in private resupply planes to the contra forces.  On
October 10, 1985, a NHAO aircraft flying directly from the United States to Honduras arrived
with a television crew documenting the  effort.  This angered the Honduran government, and it
rescinded its permission for NHAO planes to fly directly there from the United States.  During
RIG meetings on this topic, North suggested that the Ilopango air base in San Salvador be used as
a transshipment point:  NHAO planes would fly from the United States to Ilopango air base,
unload, and the supplies would be flown into Honduras in smaller aircraft.11

     11 Fiers, George Trial Testimony, 7/28/92, pp. 1141-42.

     On December 30, 1985, a meeting was held at Ilopango air base in El Salvador to discuss
coordination of the NHAO flights there.  Walker, North, Fiers, U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador
Edwin G. Corr and U.S. Army Col. James J. Steele, among others, represented the United States
in meeting with Salvadoran General Bustillo.  Rodriguez was also present.12

     12 Corr Notes, 2/9/86, ALV 001400.  Although Corr's notes indicate the meeting was held on
December 28, 1986, the meeting was held on December 30, 1985.  (See North Notebook,
12/30/85, AMX 001948.)

     In early 1986, the NHAO resupply operation at Ilopango became merged with the
North-Secord operation there supplying weapons to the contras.  The same flight crews that
delivered the NHAO humanitarian aid also flew the lethal resupply flights.  The same aircraft
were used, and the U.S. Government-sponsored humanitarian supplies were stored in the same
warehouse as the weapons at the Ilopango airport.  Rodriguez was the manager of the resupply
effort at Ilopango.  He coordinated the arrival and departure of both the lethal and humanitarian
resupply flights, controlled the resupply material in the warehouse and arranged for housing for
the flight crews.13

     13 CIA Officer #7, George Trial Testimony, 10/30/92, pp. 1637-39; Rodriguez, George Trial
Testimony, 8/4/92, p. 1915.

     As the NHAO flights began arriving at Ilopango in late January and early February 1986,
concern was expressed within the CIA and Department of State about North and Rodriguez's
coordination of these flights.  On February 7, 1986, a senior CIA officer in Central America
cabled Washington, stating:

     Minutes ago [Embassy] Charge [David] Passage came to [me] with story that presumed
NHAO-chartered Caribou aircraft on ill-fated supply run to Ilopango via Mexico made
emergency landing yesterday, 6 February, on road in southwest El Salvador.  Charge said his
source was Felix Rodrigues [sic] who apparently has been ``coordinating'' all of this with Ollie
North (one supposes on open phone).  [I] had to say, honestly, that [I] knew nothing of this
Caribou and indeed had not heard anything from [Fiers] on the subject for two weeks.

     Rodrigues [sic] has just called Charge to advise that UPI is on the downed Caribou and wants
a story.  Charge's position is that he has no knowledge re this A/C [aircraft].  God knows what
Felix Rodrigues [sic] is saying.14

     14 CIA Cable, 2/7/86, DO 58911.

     Ambassador Corr's notes reflect that on the following day, February 8, 1986, Corr and Walker
discussed the same concerns:

     Bill [Walker] said:

     COM [Chief of Mission, Ambassador John A. Ferch] in Hond[uras] knows about flight.  This
part of effort to restab[lish] Hond[uras] connection seems to be falling apart because Max
[Gomez, an alias for Felix Rodriguez] has intervened and trying to check everything w/Ollie or
others.  Ollie and Max are to have nothing to do w/humanitarian assistance deliveries, etc.

     I asked if I should have DCM [deputy chief of mission Passage] tell Max to release items to
UNO [contra] rep[resentative].

     Walker said yes.

     Note

     DCM passed ``word'' to Max, and he said he would comply.15

     15 Corr Note, 2/8/86, ALV 001398.

     Another Corr note dated February 8, 1986, attributes the following statement to Walker:

     Bill [Walker] said I should impress on Fiers 16 that we cannot proceed in this ``fouled up
manner.''  This is the 3d recent screw up & Washington being surprised by unknown &
uncoordinated activities.17

     16 Fiers traveled to Ilopango on February 8th in response to the CIA cable regarding
Rodriguez/North.

     17 Corr Note, 2/8/86.  Walker said he does not remember these conversations or whether he
imparted this information to Abrams.  Indeed, Walker testified that he was not aware of the name
Felix Rodriguez until an August 12, 1986 meeting with Gregg.  (Walker, Grand Jury, 7/31/91,
pp. 69-71.)

     Abrams, North and the RIG

     As the Reagan Administration's principal advocate of support for the contras, Abrams in 1986
continued to request that the U.S. Congress appropriate $100 million for the contras, including
military aid.  In March 1986 this request was narrowly defeated in the House of Representatives.
Abrams, North, Fiers and other RIG members traveled to Central America on March 21, 1986, to
assure the Central American governments that the Reagan Administration was still intent on
pursuing funding for contra assistance.

     On occasion, Abrams, North and Fiers met either before RIG meetings or immediately after to
discuss sensitive contra matters that they did not want discussed with the other RIG members.
An April 25, 1986 North notebook entry reflects the topics (North, Fiers and Abrams discussed
with each other:18

     18 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 25-27; North Notebook, 4/25/86, AMX 1084-85.  Although
North does not have a specific recollection of meeting with Abrams on April 25, 1986, these
issues are generally topics which he discussed with Abrams.  (North, Grand Jury, 2/22/91, pp.
4-5.)

     Meeting w/Elliott:

     .

     .

     .

      -- Support for S [Southern]. Front.19

     19 This note was 14 days following the first successful lethal drop to the southern front.

      -- Air base open in C.R. [Costa Rica] 20

     20 This entry reflects the progress of the opening of the airstrip at Santa Elena in Costa Rica.

      -- A/C for Arias 21

     21 This entry is a reference to an unsuccessful attempt to get an aircraft for the brother of
newly elected Costa Rican President Oscar Arias Sanchez.

      -- [Classified] operation.

      -- 100 BP's [Blowpipes] fm. Chile 22

     22 North Notebook, 4/25/86, AMX 001084-85.  This entry references North's attempts to
obtain 100 blowpipe missiles from Chile for the contras.

     On May 16, 1986, Abrams attended a National Security Planning Group meeting on Central
America at the White House.  The principals attending the meeting were President Reagan, Vice
President Bush, Shultz, Treasury Secretary James A. Baker, Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, CIA Director William J. Casey and White House  Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan.
In addition, Fiers, North and supporting personnel from the various agencies attended the
meeting.  NSC staff member Raymond F. Burghardt's minutes of the meeting reflect that North
reminded the group that the fiscal 1986 Intelligence Authorization Bill permitted the State
Department to approach other governments for non-military aid for the contras.  A brief
discussion ensued concerning the solicitation of other countries for contra assistance.
Burghardt's minutes reflect that Reagan posed the following questions:

     What about the private groups who pay for ads for the contras?  Have they been contacted?
Can they do more than ads? 23

     23 Memorandum from Burghardt to McDaniel re:  May 16, 1986, NSPG Meeting, 6/4/86,
AKW 018812.

     Fiers' recollection of this meeting differed from the Burghardt minutes.  Fiers vividly recalled
Reagan asking about ``Ollie's people'' and inquiring whether they could help.  Fiers remembers a
nervous tension and then a quick response to the effect of ``that's being worked on.''24

     24 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, p. 39.

     Prior to this NSPG meeting, North had been circumspect within the RIG in describing the
specific activities he was undertaking on behalf of the contras.  Following the meeting, he was
more outspoken.

     During RIG meetings in the summer of 1986, North went over, ``item by item,'' actions that he
was directing or coordinating on behalf of the contra resupply effort.25  North referred to the
supply effort being run by him and Secord as ``Project Democracy.''  Fiers remembered a July
1986 RIG meeting, chaired by Abrams at the State Department, wherein North listed the many
activities -- including aircraft descriptions and salaries being paid -- that he was causing to be
conducted on behalf of the contras.  North inquired whether these activities should continue or be
terminated.  North made it very clear that he could cause Project Democracy to respond as he
directed.26  There was an awkward silence.  No one responded.  Finally Fiers answered either in
the affirmative or negative as to each of the items listed by North.27

     25 North, Grand Jury, 3/8/91, pp. 71-73.

     26 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, p. 75.

     27 Ibid., pp. 72-76.

     Abrams was aware that North could obtain funds for the contras from Project Democracy.  By
July 1986, the $27 million appropriated for humanitarian assistance had been spent and it
appeared there would be a considerable gap in funding before the $100 million would be
appropriated by for the contras.  Abrams and Fiers requested that North cause Project Democracy
to contribute $2 million for food to keep the contra resistance forces intact.28  A July 24, 1986
computer note from North to Poindexter reflected the request:  ``Given our lack of movement on
other funding options, and Elliott/Allen's [sic] plea for PRODEM [Project Democracy] to get
food to the resistance ASAP, PRODEM will have to borrow at least $2M to pay for the food.'' 29
During the RIG meeting, North informed Abrams and Fiers that he could arrange for the
requested money.30

     28 Ibid., p. 73.

     29 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 7/24/86, AKW 018917.

     30 Ibid.; Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91 p. 75.

     North testified before the Select Iran/contra Committees in 1987 that the members of the RIG
were aware of what he was doing on behalf of the contras.  North stated the RIG members were
knowledgeable that a covert operation was being conducted by the U.S. Government to support
the Nicaraguan resistance.31  North remembered a meeting in the Pentagon with RIG members
where he went down, item by item, a checklist of the activities he was directing each  month or
each quarter to support the contras and he asked the RIG members ``point blank'' whether this
activity should continue.32  North's notes of an August 28, 1986, meeting at the Pentagon reflect
such a list of activities:

     31 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/7/87, pp. 231-32.

     32 Ibid., p. 231.

      -- UNO [contras]   60K/QTR

      -- UNO U.S. travel   30K/mo

      -- Cruz   10K

      -- Robello   10K

      -- Calero [FDN] food   500K/mo.

      -- [Classified Project]   20K

      -- Hospital

      -- Air Ops

     2 C-7's

     2 C-123's  = 132K/mo

     3 Maules 33

     33 North Notebook, 8/28/86, AMX 001442.

     Present at the August 28, 1986, meeting were Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard L.
Armitage, Lt. Gen. John Moellering, Fiers, Abrams aide Michel and Nestor Sanchez, a DoD
officer assigned to the NSC staff. Abrams did not attend.

     Armitage gave deposition testimony to the staff of the Select Committees on July 22, 1987.
The staff followed up on North's assertion that he had informed the RIG members of his
activities and requested whether they should or should not continue.  Armitage was asked ``do
you recall, regardless of what dates, regardless of where it was, regardless of whether it had
exactly the players he said -- because he could have gotten all that wrong -- do you recall  any
meeting at which he did anything close to what his testimony suggests?'' His answer was:  ``I do
not.''34

     34 Armitage, Select Committees Deposition, 7/22/87, p. 242.

     Moellering, during a November 13, 1990, interview with the Office of Independent Counsel,
reviewed North's notebook entry of August 28, 1986, and stated he did not recall any meeting
when North made disclosures concerning the contra-resupply operation or the Iran initiative.
Moellering stated he never knew about North's personal involvement with the resupply operation
before it was reported by the press in November 1986.35

     35 Moellering, FBI 302, 11/13/90, p. 10.

     Michel denied the North allegations in a written  memorandum, stating that he had no
recollection of North indicating that he was the source of contra funding or was in control of such
funding.  Michel added, ``[h]ad he done so, I would have considered it an amazing revelation
requiring immediate attention.'' 36

     36 Memorandum from Michel to Shultz, 7/20/87, ALW 0032400.

     During the congressional investigation, no member of the RIG corroborated North's testimony
that he openly discussed his contra-resupply activities with the ``private benefactors'' during RIG
meetings.  It was not until the Fiers' plea in July 1991 that a RIG member affirmed North's 1987
testimony by acknowledging that North, in RIG meetings in July, August and September 1986,
discussed item-by-item the activities being conducted on behalf of the contras and  requested
whether the activity should continue.  The testimony of North and Fiers about widespread
interdepartmental knowledge of North's activities on behalf of the contras during the summer of
1986 was significantly reinforced by the belated discovery of a handwritten note of a debriefing
of Moellering by Colonel Stephen Croker shortly after the August 28th meeting.  In pertinent
part, the note reads:

     $1 M/month 32 people -- private ops.

     flying planes for resupply in country

     do we want to keep it going or choke off 37

     37 Croker Notes, 9/2/86, ALZ 0034813-14.  Croker, who was Moellering's aide on the Joint
Chiefs staff, told the Grand Jury that these notes referred to the cost of running the private
benefactors operation and whether the RIG should ``do something.''  Having not attended the
meeting recounted by Moellering, Croker did not wish to speculate about what was under
consideration.  (Croker, Grand Jury, 9/13/91, pp. 29-43, 46-54.)

     During what was perceived as a transitional phase in later summer 1986 from private support
to official U.S. Government support for the contras, North continued to seek guidance from the
RIG about the continuation of private resupply efforts.  Another meeting occurred in Armitage's
office on September 19, 1986.  Abrams, North and Fiers were among those in attendance.  Again,
North went over the items being conducted on behalf  of the contras and asked whether they
should continue.38  Then, North raised a new, dramatic proposition.  Manuel Noriega, dictator of
Panama, had offered to have sabotage conducted inside Nicaragua for $1 million in cash; the
funds would not be from the U.S. Government.  Fiers understood that the funds would be from
Project Democracy.39

     38 Fiers, Grand Jury, 8/14/91, pp. 116-18.

     39 Ibid., pp. 118-19.

     On September 20, 1986, Abrams met with Platt and Hill and discussed North's proposal.
Hill's notes reflect Abrams' explanation:

     Noriega offers to do some sabotage (electric pylons) that we training contras to do but which
they can't do for 18 mos.  Wd [would] get us on the map fast -- by Oct.

     Do it via mercenaries who may not know who employers are.  Brits.

     Wd do it for cash (not from USG [U.S. Government]).  Wants our go-ahead.  Ollie will meet
him w/approval of Pdx. [Poindexter] 40

     40 Hill Note, 9/20/86, ANS 0001617.

     Ultimately, the decision was made not to have North cause the $1 million to be paid to
Noriega.

     Abrams' Knowledge of the Costa Rican Airstrip and the Southern Front

     Before Lewis A. Tambs became U.S. ambassador to Costa Rica in the summer of 1985, North
instructed Tambs to assist in opening a ``southern front'' for contra forces in Nicaragua. Tambs
believed that his instructions to open a southern front came from the Restricted Interagency
Group chaired by Abrams.

     When Tambs arrived in Costa Rica, he met with his Deputy Chief of Mission James Tull, and
Joseph F. Fernandez, the CIA chief of station, to discuss ideas for opening a southern front in
Nicaragua for the contras.41  A small group of contras were located in northern Costa Rica, and
both Tambs and the Costa Rican government wanted them out.  But it was necessary to ensure
that they would receive supplies once inside Nicaragua.42  At the suggestion of Fernandez,
Tambs approached Costa Rican President Monge to discuss the development of an airstrip in
northern Costa Rica by ``private benefactors'' (the North-Secord Enterprise), which could be used
to resupply 43 contra rebels inside Nicaragua.44

     41 Tambs, Grand Jury, 3/23/90, pp. 27-28.

     42 Ibid., p. 30.

     43 The flights from Ilopango to Southern Nicaragua usually were routed over the Pacific
Ocean for safety.  The landing strip was intended for refueling empty aircraft for the return trip
and for emergency landing.

     44 Tambs, Grand Jury, 3/23/90, p. 31.

     Tambs met with Monge on August 12, 1985.  On August 13, Fernandez sent Fiers a cable
stating that Monge told  Tambs an airfield and resupply depot could be established as long as
they were located well inside Costa Rica and away from the border area.45

     45 San Jose Cable, 8/13/85, DO 189740-38.  Other details of Monge's discussion with Tambs
-- details that Fiers later conveyed to Abrams -- are set forth in the Classified Appendix to this
chapter.

     Within days after Shultz directed Abrams to ``monitor Ollie,'' Abrams, North and Fiers met in
Abrams' office.  Fiers briefed Abrams on the recent developments concerning the secret Costa
Rican airfield.46  During the discussion, Abrams asked ``Why is Monge doing this?,'' referring to
the airstrip.  Fiers explained Tambs' discussion with Monge.47

     46 Ibid.

     47 Ibid.  During Abrams' testimony before the Select Committees in the summer of 1987, he
testified that although he learned of the existence of the airstrip in August or September 1985, he
was unaware of Tambs' involvement with the Costa Rican government regarding the airstrip until
Tambs' public testimony before the Committees in the summer of 1987.  (Abrams, Select
Committees Testimony, 6/2/87, p. 51.)  When asked whether he learned that the U.S.
Government or any U.S. officials were involved in the airstrip project, Abrams responded:
``Well, it was pretty clear from the way it was told to me that no U. S. Government officials were
involved in the project.  That would have been illegal.''  (Ibid., p. 52.)

     With knowledge of the Embassy's involvement in the negotiations on the secret airstrip,
Abrams attended a Chiefs of Mission meeting in Panama to discuss policy with U.S.
ambassadors in his region.48  Tambs and Abrams briefly  discussed the airstrip in the hallway
outside of the meeting.49  They discussed the agreement regarding the airstrip and its purpose to
supply the southern front.50

     48 During the meeting, the topic of the agreement reached with the Costa Ricans regarding
the secret airstrip was not discussed openly.  (Tambs, Grand Jury, 3/23/90, p. 37.)

     49 Ibid.

     50 Ibid., p. 39.  Tambs claims he did not participate further in the negotiations for the
purchase of the property or other arrangements with the Costa Rican government for the
construction of the airstrip, which was built at Santa Elena, Costa Rica.  (Ibid., p. 35.)

     Another person at the Panama meeting was Corr, ambassador to El Salvador.  Corr assumed
his post in the summer of 1985.  Corr had a habit of organizing his thoughts for important
meetings by preparing written notes.  His note prior to the Chiefs of Mission conference reads as
follows:

     g008To discuss w/Elliott [Abrams] and Bill [Walker]

     * * *

     Other Subjects

     * * *

     (3)  Contras -- 3 contacts; FDN talk w/Steele

     (No)

     (4)  Rodriguez.

     (5)  Ollie North conversation -- S[outhern] Front 51

     51 Corr Note, ALW 0033600.

     On his note, Corr bracketed these three topics together and placed check marks next to each
one, indicating it was discussed. Although Corr said he does not have a specific recollection  of
discussing these topics at a meeting, he acknowledged that all three were contra-related.52

     52 Corr, Grand Jury, 5/29/91, p. 31.

     Ultimately, the secret airstrip was constructed at Santa Elena, Costa Rica, by one of Secord's
companies, Udall Corporation, and was known as ``Point West.'' It became a matter of public
focus in September 1986.  When Monge's successor, Oscar Arias, became president of Costa
Rica in the spring of 1986, he was briefed about the airstrip.   He was outraged and directed that
it not be used for contra resupply.  On September 6, 1986, in a series of late night telephone calls,
Fernandez informed North and Fiers that the Costa Rican security minister planned to hold a
press conference the following day and make public the Udall Corporation's role with the Point
West airstrip, alleging violations of Costa Rican laws by Udall, North, Secord, and others.53
North discussed this impending crisis in conference calls with Abrams, Tambs and Fiers.  They
discussed whether to tell Arias that he would never set foot in the White House and that he
would never get five cents of the $80 million promised to him by the U.S. Agency for
International Development if the airstrip were revealed.54

     53 North Notebook, 9/6/86, AMX 001458.

     54 Ibid.

     After Tambs interceded with the Arias administration, the Costa Rican press conference was
cancelled.  Fiers acknowledged that he, Abrams and North were concerned that public revelation
of the airstrip would expose the linkage of North and the White House to the contra-resupply
operation.55  Two weeks later, in spite of Tambs's intervention, on September 24, 1986, the
Costa Rican public security minister held a press conference and announced the discovery of a
secret airstrip in Costa Rica, which had been built and used by Udall for support to the contras.56
False guidance for the press regarding the Costa Rican airstrip was prepared by North and
coordinated with Fiers and Abrams.  The press guidance was consistent with a previously
concocted cover story regarding the airstrip.  The press guidance was intentionally misleading,
denying U.S. Government knowledge of the origins and purpose of the airstrip.  It was clear to
Fiers that Abrams was aware of North's connection to the airstrip.57  Following the Costa Rican
announcement of the airstrip, Abrams drafted a harshly worded cable to be sent to the Costa
Rican government. A cable containing Abrams' message was stopped by Shultz aide Hill before
it was sent.58

     55 Fiers, FBI 302, 8/1/91, p. 6. Abrams testified that the consternation over the public
revelation of the airstrip only had to do with the embarrassment of the previous Costa Rican
administration.  (Abrams, Select Committees Testimony, 6/2/87, p. 65.)

     56 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 9/25/86, AKW 018884.

     57 Fiers, FBI 302, 8/1/91, p. 9.

     58 Hill, FBI 302, 12/10/90, p. 17.

     The Hasenfus Shootdown

     On October 5, 1986, less than two weeks after the exposure of the airstrip, a C-123 aircraft
carrying weapons and supplies to the contras was shot down in Nicaragua.  Two American pilots,
William H. Cooper and Wallace B. Sawyer, Jr., and one Latin crew member were killed.  A third
American crew member, Eugene Hasenfus, parachuted out but was captured by the Nicaraguans.
Over the course of the next few days, Abrams was the senior U.S. spokesman responding to the
incident.  He coordinated his statements with Ambassador Corr in El Salvador, talked with North
and chaired a RIG meeting concerning the incident.

     Corr's notes reflect a telephone conversation with Abrams in the early morning of October 8,
1986, regarding the downed plane in Nicaragua.

     . . . Nica[ragua] said [Hasenfus said] that he got instr[uction] & support from Gen. Bustillo.
He said 5 airplanes -- gave tail numbers.  Cooper had ID card plus something from humanitarian
office (NHAO)

     Appears that Hazenful [sic] was an mbr [member] of something called:  Grupo USA-para mil
grp.

     Ollie out of country.  Back this afternoon & Elliott will get info from him.59

     59 Corr Note, 10/8/86, ALV 001402.

     Corr's notes of the conversation with Abrams continue, relating how the U.S. Government
planned to proceed and whether an upcoming presidential summit in Iceland would cause news
focus to shift from the downed airplane to other  events.  Corr's notes also indicate that
Salvadoran General Bustillo, who ran Ilopango air base where the Hasenfus flight originated,
would ``deny all'' connection to the flight and that Salvadoran President Duarte would not
comment on it.

     Corr's notes focus on what should be said about the Salvadoran role:

     ACTION:  Must say something about Salv role when we are asked

     I told him [Abrams] of my 10/7 conversation w/Vides & Bustillo 60  Elliott replied might be
better if Salv brazenly deny all.  Agreed w/Bustillo thesis.  Simpler if Salv Mil[itary] puts out
statement denying all, & [Salvadoran President] Duarte says he accepts FFAA [Salvadoran
military]  statement

     60 Before calling Abrams, Corr met with General Vides, the Salvadoran minister of defense.
They agreed to say as little as possible but not to lie, because they could not be certain what
Hasenfus might eventually say.  Nor could they be certain about what might come out in the
United States.  Bustillo joined the meeting and advocated saying nothing, and if it was necessary
to say something, to deny everything.  Vides then agreed with Bustillo.  (Corr Note, 10/7/86,
ALV 001432.)

     Only alt[ernative] is if D[uarte] comes out of closet & ready to support openly a support role
against Sandinistas.61

     61 Corr Note, 10/8/86, ALV 001403.

     The Corr note continues concerning the inevitability of leaks:

     There will be leaks.  Cannot keep Salvadoran link wholly SECRET.  Would be done as tactic.
But eventually someone in USG will finally acknowledge some ``winking.''  Salv role now more
public.  This would be a tactic.  All will know they (GOES) [Government of El Salvador] lying,
but perhaps soon forget & get on w/things

     I said the key on this would be D[uarte], who has view of himself as never lying.  I said I'd
talk w/Salv & get back.62

     62 Ibid.

     Later, on October 8, Abrams chaired a RIG meeting concerning the downed aircraft.  North
did not attend.  Issues such as demand for access to Hasenfus, Salvadoran denial of contra
support, press guidance, and legal counsel for Hasenfus were discussed.  It was agreed that
Abrams would follow up with North to request that UNO (the contra umbrella organization)
assume responsibility for the flight.63

     63 PROFs Note from Cannistraro to Poindexter, 10/8/86, AKW 021747; Fiers, FBI 302,
7/22/91, pp. 18-19.

     Additionally, Fiers said it was reported at the RIG meeting that the contra-resupply planes had
been moved from Ilopango to Aguacate, Honduras.64  There was discussion about news reports
linking the downed plane to Southern Air Transport (SAT), a Miami-based airline that had, in
fact, contracted to service the resupply network's airplanes and to perform other duties.  Fiers was
concerned because SAT had been used for the NHAO delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
contras.65

     64 Ibid.

     65 Fiers, FBI 302, 7/23/91, p. 5.

     Felix Rodriguez also was discussed. It was said that Rodriguez was lying low in Miami and
the press couldn't find him.  There was discussion about the possibility of supporting Rodriguez
financially.66

     66 Ibid., p. 9.

     Abrams acknowledged phoning North regarding the Hasenfus shootdown.  Abrams asked
about retrieval of the bodies of Cooper and Sawyer, and North informed Abrams that the
employers of Hasenfus would continue to pay the families.67  Abrams did not explicitly ask
North if he was connected with the downed aircraft.  North later explained ``he didn't have to ask
me.'' 68

     67 Abrams, Select Committees, 6/2/87, pp. 169-170; Abrams, FBI 302, 9/28/91, pp. 33-34.

     68 North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/8/87, p. 233.

     On October 9, 1986, Hasenfus, then in Nicaraguan custody, publicly stated he had made 10
trips to supply the contras -- six out of Ilopango airfield in El Salvador -- and had worked with
``Max Gomez'' and ``Ramon Medina,'' whom he alleged were CIA employees.  Hasenfus stated
that Gomez and Medina oversaw the housing for the crews, transportation, refueling and flight
plans.69  On the same day, Nicaraguan officials claimed that one of the crew members of the
aircraft carried cards issued by the Salvadoran Air Force, identifying them as U.S. advisers.  They
said that one of the crew members had carried a business card of a NHAO official.

     69 Managua 06587, 10/9/86, ALW 0026774.

     On October 10, 1986, The San Francisco Examiner reported that Vice President Bush, not the
CIA, was the U.S. Government link to the Hasenfus flight.  The newspaper said Max Gomez,
whose real name was Felix Rodriguez, was assigned to Ilopango by Gregg, the national security
adviser to Bush.

     Later, Abrams assured Congress that the resupply operation was conducted without any
coordination from the U.S. Government; that there was no direct or indirect U.S. Government
involvement in contra resupply; and that no one in the U.S. Government knew who organized
and paid for the Hasenfus flight.

     Between October 10 and October 15, 1986, Abrams appeared three times before
congressional committees as the Reagan Administration spokesman concerning the downed
aircraft.  Abrams was confronted with a number of questions:  Who was behind the aircraft?
Who was financing the resupply operation?  Was the U.S. Government involved, either directly
or indirectly, in contra resupply?  Who was Max Gomez?  What was Max Gomez's role in contra
resupply?  What was Gomez's relationship to the Office of the Vice President?  Were foreign
governments assisting the contras?

     On October 10, 1986, Abrams appeared in closed session before the Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations.  The chairman, Sen.  Richard Lugar, said Congress was intent on learning
whether there was any Government involvement with the downed aircraft:  ``[V]ery clearly,
members are going to want to know if not CIA, if not State Department, then who.'' 70  Lugar
sought additional information regarding a Los Angeles Times story on October 9, which reported
an elaborate system supplying the contras, and that the downed cargo plane was only one of 19
aircraft flying in support of the guerrilla war, apparently out of El Salvador.71  Abrams
responded to Lugar's inquiry in his opening statement:

     70 Abrams, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Transcript, 10/10/86, p. 3.

     71 Ibid., p. 4.

     It seems to me, on the question of the ``L.A. Times'' article on there being an elaborate supply
system, it seems that there clearly is an elaborate supply system.

     In the last two years, since Congress cut off support to the resistance [contras], this supply
system has kept them alive.

     It is not our supply system.  It is one that grew up after we were forbidden from supplying the
resistance, and we have been kind of careful not to get closely involved with it and to stay away
from it.

     I think that people who are supplying the Contras believe that we generally approve of what
they are doing -- and they are right.  We do generally approve of what they are doing, because
they are keeping the Contras alive while Congress takes [sic] its decision, which each House has
separately, though obviously final legislation is not yet ready.

     So, the notion that we are generally in favor of people helping the Contras is correct.

     We do not encourage people to do this.  We don't round up people, we don't write letters, we
don't have conversations, we don't tell them to do this, we don't ask them to do it.  But I think it
is quite clear, from the attitude of the administration, the attitude of the administration is that
these people are doing a very good thing, and if they think they are doing something that we like,
then, in a general sense, they are right.  But that is without any encouragement and coordination
from us, other than a public speech by the President, that kind of thing, on the public record.72

     72 Ibid., pp. 10-11.  (Emphasis added.)

     Four days later, on October 14, 1986, before a closed session of the House Permanent Select
Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI), Abrams continued to assure Congress that the U.S.
Government was not involved in the supply of contras:

     CHAIRMAN HAMILTON:  Can anybody assure us that the United States Government was
not involved, indirectly or directly, in any way in supply of the contras?

     MR. ABRAMS:  I believe we have already done that, that is, I think, the President has done it,
the Secretary has done it, and I have done it.

     CHAIRMAN HAMILTON:  So the answer is the United States Government was not involved
in any way.

     MR. ABRAMS:  In the supply.  Now again, this normal intelligence monitoring is there, but
the answer to your question is yes.73

     73 Abrams, HPSCI Testimony, 10/14/86, p. 17.  (Emphasis added.)

     Later in the hearing, the chairman revisited the issue of U.S. Government assistance:

     CHAIRMAN HAMILTON:  We will begin another round.

     Just to be clear, the United States Government has not done anything to facilitate the activities
of these private groups, is that a fair statement?  We have not furnished any money.  We have not
furnished any arms.  We have not furnished any advice.  We have not furnished logistics.

     MR. GEORGE:  Mr. Chairman, I cannot speak for the entire United States Government.

     CHAIRMAN HAMILTON:  Can you, Mr. Abrams?

     MR. ABRAMS:  Yes, to the extent of my knowledge that I feel to be complete, other than the
general public encouragement that we like this kind of activity.74

     74 Ibid., p. 48.  (Emphasis added.)

     The following day, in a public hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on
Western Hemisphere Affairs, Abrams reaffirmed his prior statements that there was no U.S.
Government involvement with the downed aircraft.75  Abrams added that no one in the U.S.
Government knew who organized and paid for the Hasenfus flight or other flights like it:

     75 Abrams, House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee Testimony, 10/15/86, p. 31.

     MR. ABRAMS:  I do not know the answer to the question who organized and paid for this
flight.  I don't mean to suggest that the U.S. Government as a whole knows absolutely nothing
about the fact that there is material getting in.  For 2 years the Contras have been kept alive by
this material, so it is clear it is getting in, but I still don't know --  --

     MR. BARNES:  Who organized this and who paid for it?

     MR. ABRAMS:  That is correct.

     MR. KOSTMAYER:  You have not been told by our Government, if indeed our  Government
knows, who organized and who paid for this particular flight?

     MR. ABRAMS:  I wouldn't separate myself from the Government.  We don't know.

     MR. KOSTMAYER:  Do you think there is anyone in the Government who does know?

     MR. ABRAMS:  No, because we don't track this kind of activity.76

     76 Ibid., p. 33.  (Emphasis added.)

     Abrams was not truthful with the congressional committees.  He was aware that North was
encouraging, coordinating and directing the activities of the contra-resupply operation and that
North was in contact with the private citizens who were behind the lethal resupply fights.
Additionally, Abrams did not inform Congress of his knowledge of the activities of the U.S.
Embassy in Costa Rica to help construct a secret contra-resupply airstrip in Costa Rica.

     Max Gomez/Felix Rodriguez Inquiry

     Because of Hasenfus's public statements on October 9 identifying ``Max Gomez'' as a
resupply manager, and because of press reports linking Gomez to the Office of the Vice
President, Members of Congress were especially interested in information about Gomez.  When
Abrams appeared before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on October 10, 1986, the
committee was interested in knowing the extent of U.S. Government knowledge about the
Hasenfus allegations concerning Max Gomez.  Clair George stated that the CIA was running the
names Gomez and Medina  through their information system and would respond accordingly.77

     77 George, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Testimony, 10/10/86, pp. 55-56.

     Senator John Kerry pressed the inquiry about the alleged connection between Gomez and the
Office of the Vice President:

     SENATOR KERRY: . . . Mr. Gomez, Max Gomez, do you know whether or not he reports to
or was hired by the Vice President of the United States?

     MR. FIERS:  Max Gomez is the individual -- he is not in our records -- I think it is an alias for
an individual who was previously employed with us.  But I don't know.  If that, in fact, is the
case, I don't know who he is reporting to.

     This is one of the two names.

     SENATOR KERRY:  You don't know whether or not he reports to the Vice President of the
United States?

     MR. GEORGE:  The Vice President?  I don't know.

     SENATOR KERRY:  You don't know anything about that?

     MR. ABRAMS:  I have never heard any suggestion of that.

     SENATOR KERRY:  The suggestion comes from the Hearst newspapers in a story that
started last night.  A copy of the article I will have in about half an hour from now.  It apparently
says that Max Gomez was placed in this position by the Vice President of the United States and
reports directly to him.  That is the story.

     MR. ABRAMS:  What position?

     SENATOR KERRY:  I don't know.  That is the story.

     MR. GEORGE:  That is one of the two names that Mr. Hasenfus said were the two CIA men
who were running this whole thing.

     MR. ABRAMS:  It really stretches credulity.

     SENATOR KERRY:  Now, I don't know.  I am just asking.  I got a piece of paper that said
this is out there and I know nothing about it, any more than you do.  I just asked the question.78

     78 Ibid., pp. 125-26 (Emphasis added).

     On October 11, 1986, The Washington Post quoted Abrams as stating ``What's kept the
resistance alive has been private help.  Some Members of Congress accuse us of approving of
this with a wink and a nod.  A wink and a nod, hell.  We think it's been fine.'' 79

     79 ``Bush Is Linked to Head of Contra Aid Network,'' The Washington Post, 10/11/86, p. 2.

     On October 11, 12 and 13, 1986, media reports identified Gomez as Felix Rodriguez, a
Cuban-American who fought in the CIA's failed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961.80
Vice President Bush publicly acknowledged that he had met Rodriguez two or three times, but
refused to state what their relationship was. Unidentified sources were cited, stating that
Rodriguez reported his activities to Vice President Bush and Bush approved of them.  On
October 14, 1986, The Washington Post quoted Vice President Bush stating three days earlier in
Charleston, South Carolina, as stating that Rodriguez was a U.S. counter-insurgency adviser
working directly with the Salvadoran government. The article stated that Salvadoran officials
denied this.81

     80 Ibid., ``Singlaub Played Double Role in Aid to Contras,'' The Los Angeles Times,
10/13/86, p. 2.

     81 ``Salvadoran General Disputes Bush on Role of U.S. Advisor,'' The Washington Post,
10/13/86, p. 1.

     During Abrams' appearance before HPSCI on October 14, 1986, he was asked about the press
allegations relating to Vice President Bush and Felix Rodriguez:

     MR. STOKES:  . . .  Secretary Abrams, going back to your statement to the Chairman with
reference to the fact that there was no involvement on the part of the U.S. Government, taking
into account the allegations with reference to Vice President Bush, you are familiar with those.

     MR. ABRAMS:  Yes.

     MR. STOKES:  Does that statement also categorically include him when you say there was no
involvement on the part of our Government?

     MR. ABRAMS:  Yes.  I am going to just expand on that.

     MR. STOKES:  Sure.  Go ahead, please.

     MR. ABRAMS:  My understanding of it -- and it comes from the Vice President's staff -- is
that, as I think he has said publicly, Mr. Gregg knew Mr. Rodriguez and introduced him to the
Salvadorans, in I think 1984, for work with the Salvadoran armed forces, particularly the
Salvadoran air force.

     What he was supposed to be a specialist in was air-ground helicopter operations, and he did
work with the Salvadoran air force on that, and apparently very well, and he was a great help to
them.

     And that is what the Vice President was aware of his doing and the Vice President has said
that.  But there was no knowledge that he was, or at what point he had moved off into doing
some other things which apparently he has done with the resistance.  But that was the initial
involvement there.

     MR. STOKES:  That was the extent of it to your knowledge?

     MR. ABRAMS:  That was the extent of it to my knowledge, that is right.82

     82 Abrams, HPSCI Testimony, 10/14/86, pp. 23-24 (emphasis added).  Two months later,
appearing before the House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, Abrams stated that
``. . . prior to all of this [the Iran/Contra revelations] I don't think I ever heard of Felix Rodriguez,
. . .''  (Abrams, House Foreign Affairs Committee Testimony, 12/17/86, p. 79.)

     When Abrams became assistant secretary of state for ARA in July 1985, Rodriguez was
already situated at Ilopango air base, having been placed there with the assistance of Gregg.  The
first indication of Abrams' knowledge of Rodriguez in El Salvador appears from a Corr note to
himself made in preparation for the State Department chiefs of mission meeting in Panama in
September 1985.  Corr's note reflects topics he planned to address with Abrams.  Rodriguez was
one of three contra-related issues Corr wished to discuss with Abrams.83

     83 Corr Note, ALW 0033600.  Corr does not remember if he had such a meeting with
Abrams.

     Following the Honduran refusal to permit direct NHAO flights from the United States to
Honduras, it was agreed within the RIG to use Ilopango as a transshipment point for off-loading
supplies onto smaller aircraft.  During December 1985, Rodriguez was openly discussed within
the RIG as an individual who could be of assistance to the NHAO flights into Ilopango because
of his personal relationship with Bustillo, who controlled the Ilopango air base.  The fact that
Rodriguez was using the alias Maximo (Max) Gomez while in El Salvador was also openly
discussed within the RIG.84

     84 Fiers, FBI 302, 8/2/91, p. 5.

     During January and February 1986, Rodriguez's involvement in coordinating NHAO flights
into Ilopango with North became of concern to the State Department and the CIA.  CIA
personnel in Central America cabled concern to Fiers in Washington about Rodriguez and North
supposedly having coordinated a Caribou aircraft carrying NHAO supplies that crashed in
Salvador, causing press inquiries about the flight.  The next day, Corr and Walker discussed the
same incident by phone and expressed concern about Gomez's (Rodriguez's) intervention with
NHAO flights and his coordination with North.85

     85 Corr Note, 2/8/86, ALV 001398.

     In the summer of 1986, after the Administration's request for $100 million in contra aid
passed both Houses of Congress, there was concern about what should be done with the Secord
operation's assets, principally the airplanes, after the anticipated funding was approved.  North
advocated to the RIG that the CIA should purchase the airplanes from the operation.  Rodriguez
and Bustillo believed that the airplanes belonged to the contras, not to the Secord operation.

     Rodriguez's concern that the Secord operation was selling shoddy goods at high prices to
contras resulted in his traveling to Washington, D.C., in August 1986 to air his complaints to
Gregg.  After meeting with Rodriguez, Gregg organized a meeting with other Administration
officials to discuss Rodriguez's complaints.  Abrams'  assistant Walker, Corr, Fiers and North's
assistant Lt. Col. Robert L. Earl, among others, met with Gregg in his office on August 12,
1986.86  Abrams did not attend.

     86 For a more complete discussion of this meeting, see Gregg Chapter.

     Rodriguez's role in the resupply effort at Ilopango, his relationship with Bustillo and his
claims of working for the CIA with the blessing of the Vice President were among the topics
discussed.  Earl noted this during the meeting:

     12 Aug

     Corr

     Concerned on transition

     Busti[ll]o concerned FDN [contras] getting screwed

     (re A/C).

     Equip being g008taken?

     Urgent need for resupply of [the] southern front.

      -- 123 Miami c

     Felix Rodriguez -- compadres w/ Busti[ll]o.

     .

     .

     .

     bottom line = sell A/C & money to FDN.

     Corr recommends this.

     Or, ON [North] to explain who owns A/C to

     Busti[ll]o --

     Corr doesn't think this will work.

     Felix needs to be eased out w/ honor.

     Corr doesn't mind either way, but Corr thinks

     he's been instrumental -- 3 months

     Ilopango = [Classified -- g008continuation

     Information Withheld]

     not 1st choice

     Felix claims working w/VP blessing for CIA.

     .

     .

     .

     Corr sees no g008legal alternative to Felix ([CIA]

     & Steele can't g722tough touch it)

     Corr can't see any way to operate

     Mario Delameco, Miami = Felix contact (Cuban

     c cut this link.

     Calero -- Martin link = a problem too.

     . . .87

     87 Earl Note, 8/12/86 (emphasis in original).

     After the shootdown on October 5, 1986, Felix Rodriguez became a major concern.  He was
discussed in the RIG meeting on October 8, chaired by Abrams, and the next day Hasenfus
named him, using his alias Gomez, as a supervisor of the resupply operation at Ilopango.

     On October 10, 1986, during the hearing before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations,
Abrams, George and Fiers were pressed concerning their knowledge about ``Gomez'' and his
reputed relationship to Vice President Bush.88  Later that afternoon, Abrams was interviewed by
Rowland Evans and Robert Novak.  The videotape of that interview was aired on October 11 and
12, 1986.  Abrams was asked about Max Gomez:

     88 Senate Foreign Relations Committee Transcript, 10/10/86, pp. 125-26.  (Emphasis added.)

     MR. NOVAK:  All right, now, just on Friday the San Francisco Examiner reported that, no,
quoting intelligence sources, said there was no CIA connection, but there was connection, of all
places, from Vice President Bush's office.  That Vice President Bush's security aid, Mr. Don
Gregg, had hired this Max Gomez, who Mr. Hasenfus described as a CIA agent.  Do you know
anything about that?

     MR. ABRAMS:  Not a lot.  I first heard about it on Friday morning as well.  I can say first of
all there's no Max Gomez.  Whoever that gentleman is, he certainly isn't named Max Gomez.  So
we need, first of all, to find out who he is.  Secondly, I know nothing about any connection to the
Vice President's office whatsoever.  And thirdly, in his capacity down there in Central America
helping  whoever he is, he is not on the U.S. government payroll in any way.

     MR. NOVAK:  Now, when you say gave categorical assurance, we're not playing word games
that are so common in Washington.  You're not talking about the NCS [sic], or something else?

     MR. ABRAMS:  I am not playing games.

     MR. NOVAK:  National Security Council?

     MR. ABRAMS:  No government agencies, none.89

     89 Transcript of Evans & Novak Interview, 10/10/86, AKW 000964-65.  During his Select
Committees testimony on June 3, 1987, Abrams admitted that he knew by the time of his Evans
and Novak interview that Gomez was an assumed name.  (Abrams, Select Committees
Testimony, 6/3/87, pp. 21-22.)

     Questions about Rodriguez's role in contra resupply persisted.  Hours before his appearance
before HPSCI on October 14, 1986, Abrams called Corr to discuss the role of Rodriguez in El
Salvador.  Corr's note of that telephone conversation reads:

     g008Elliott Abrams TELCON -- 10/14/86

     Elliott has

     House Intel. Cmte in a couple hours.  g008Role of Salv, Felix [Emphasis added]

     Why are Salv saying nothing coming90

     90 Corr Note, 10/14/86, ALW 0032906. Corr withheld this note from Independent Counsel
until he received immunity in 1991. See Corr chapter.

     Corr was fully aware of Rodriguez's role in the resupply operation located at the Ilopango
airport.  Corr does not remember discussing Rodriguez with Abrams on October 14, 1986.91
However, Corr testified that if Abrams ever  asked about Rodriguez, he would have given a full
and candid explanation of what he knew about Rodriguez's activities.92

     91 Corr, Grand Jury, 6/14/91, pp. 82-83.

     92 Ibid., p. 25.

     Abrams did not inform HPSCI of Rodriguez's role at Ilopango.93  Two days after his HPSCI
appearance on October 16, 1986, Abrams discussed Rodriguez with Shultz while they were
flying to El Salvador. Hill's notes of Abrams' statement to Shultz read as follows:

     93 Abrams was accompanied by Walker during his appearance before the Senate Foreign
Affairs Committee and HPSCI.  Walker had attended the August 12, 1986, meeting in Gregg's
office where Rodriguez's role in the private resupply effort at Ilopango was extensively
discussed.  He did not attempt to correct the testimony of any of the witnesses.

     Felix Rodrigues [sic] -- Bush did know him from CIA days.  FR [Rodriguez] is ex-CIA.  In El
Salv[ador] he goes around to bars saying he is buddy of Bush.  A y[ea]r ago Pdx [Poindexter] &
Ollie [North] told VP staff stop protecting FR as a friend -- we want to get rid of him from his
involvnt [sic] w[ith] private ops.  Nothing was done so he still is there shooting his mouth off.94

     94 Hill Note, 10/16/86, ANS 001661.

     The Brunei Solicitation

     Following a May 16, 1986, National Security Planning Group meeting, in which the need for
further assistance to the contras was discussed, Abrams raised with Shultz the issue of soliciting
third countries for funding.  Shultz  instructed Abrams that he did not want a country solicited
that was a large recipient of U.S. aid, fearing that a contra donation would look like a kickback
from U.S. foreign aid.  Additionally, Shultz did not want any right-wing dictatorships, such as
Taiwan and South Korea, to be solicited because it would create an unfortunate link between
those dictatorships and the contras.95

     95 Abrams, House Foreign Affairs Committee Testimony, 12/17/86, pp. 5-6.

     Abrams suggested to Shultz that the Sultan of Brunei, an oil-rich Southeast Asian country, be
approached during Shultz's upcoming visit to Brunei in late June 1986.  Abrams discussed with
North where money should be sent in the event a solicitation was successful.  North told Abrams
to ``do nothing, to send no papers and to talk to no one further about this until he [North] talks to
[Poindexter].'' 96  North informed Poindexter that he had ``the accounts and the means by which
this thing [transfer of solicited funds] needs to be accomplished.'' 97

     96 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 6/10/86, AKW 021427.

     97 Ibid.

     On June 11, 1986, Abrams had lunch with Poindexter and they discussed Brunei as a possible
donor for the contras.98  They discussed possible methods of transferring the funds.

     98 Abrams, Grand Jury, 2/26/88, pp. 26-28.

     In June 1986, Abrams obtained bank account information from North on a card typed by his
secretary, Fawn Hall.  Two account numbers were transposed, ultimately resulting in the transfer
of the funds into the wrong account.  During his trip to Asia on June 23 and 24, 1986, Shultz
took with him this index card but on the advice of U.S. Ambassador Barrington King, Shultz did
not ask the Sultan of Brunei for assistance to the contras.

     During July 1986, Abrams discussed the solicitation of a foreign country with Fiers.  He asked
Fiers for an off-shore bank account number for the transfer of funds.  Abrams and Hill discussed
which account to use for the Brunei solicitation and settled on the account provided by North.
North told Abrams that the use of the account North provided would permit more control by the
U.S. Government.99

     99 Hill Note, 8/6/86, ANS 0001587.

     A meeting was arranged for Abrams with General Ibnu, the Bruneian defense minister, in
London on August 9, 1986, to discuss a $10 million contribution to the contras.  Ibnu was
informed that the U.S. emissary would call him using the name ``Kenilworth.'' 100  Abrams,
using this name, called Ibnu and met with him in London on August 9th, solicited funds for the
contras and gave Ibnu the account information provided by North.  On August 19, 1986, the
Sultan of Brunei ordered the transfer of $10  million from his Citibank account via Citibank
Zurich branch to Credit Suisse, Eaux Vives Branch, Geneva, account 368430-22-1, attention:
Jacob Steger. On September 15, 1986, Ambassador King cabled State Department with the
message:  ``This is to confirm that General Ibnu assures me arrangements have been
consummated.'' 101 The same date, September 15, 1986, North's notebook entry reads:

     100 State 244548 re: Brunei Project, 8/5/86, ALV 000394.

     101 Bandar 01158 re: Brunei Project, 9/15/86, ALV 000383-84.

     g008Gaston  Amb says

     g008Elliott talked w/

      -- $ was deposited

      -- 1 wk ago.

      -- Mtg w/Sultan tomorrow 102

     102 North Notebook, 9/15/86, AMX 001471 (emphasis in original).

     On September 16, 1986, Washington cabled King stating that ``[t]hose on the receiving end
here cannot confirm consummation of arrangements.  But they tell us that this is not unusual in
view of the process involved.  If you are asked on this point, we suggest that simply say that the
material is apparently still in the pipe-line.'' 103

     103 State 289965 re: Brunei Project, 9/16/86, ALV 000382.

     On September 19th, Washington cabled King and requested that Brunei have the bank trace
the funds.104  Four days later, King replied that Ibnu was surprised at the non-receipt because he
understood the procedures and the recipient bank.  Ibnu  indicated that he would run tracers on
the funds.105  On September 26, 1986, Ibnu informed King that the Sultan of Brunei had
personally handled the transfer and that the recipient was quite clear.  The Sultan of Brunei added
that ``because of the procedures that had been used we might have to wait for a short while more
before the transaction is completed.'' 106

     104 State 296219 re: Brunei Project, 9/19/86, ALV 000379.

     105 Bandar 01195 re: Brunei Project, 9/23/86, ALV 000378.

     106 Bandar 01212 re: Brunei Project, 9/26/86, ALV 000376-77.

     Congress was concerned as to the extent of the U.S. Government knowledge about foreign
government assistance to the contras.  At the time of Abrams' testimony in October 1986, he had
personally solicited $10 million from Brunei for the contras.  Although the $10 million had not
arrived in the Swiss bank account recommended by North because of Hall's typing error, the
State Department had been assured that the money was sent and that the transaction had been
handled personally by the Sultan of Brunei.

     On October 10, 1986, a Washington Post article stated that Saudi Arabia might be funding the
contra resupply through Secord.  During Abrams's appearance before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee on October 10, Senator Kerry inquired whether Abrams or the CIA
representatives with him (including Clair George and Fiers) were aware of Saudi Arabia or any
other foreign government supplying weapons or providing assistance to the contras.

     SENATOR KERRY:  Are you aware, any of you, of any deal by which, as part of the
AWACS transaction or subsequent to the AWACS transaction, Saudi Arabia is supplying
weapons or assistance to the Contras on our behalf?

     MR. ABRAMS:  No.

     MR. GEORGE:  No.

     MR. FIERS:  No, sir.

     MR. ABRAMS:  I think I can say that while I have been Assistant Secretary, which is about
15 months, we have not received a dime from a foreign government, not a dime, from any
foreign government.

     SENATOR KERRY:  ``We'' being who?

     MR. ABRAMS:  The United States.

     SENATOR KERRY:  How about the Contras?

     MR. ABRAMS:  I don't know.  But not that I am aware of and not through us.

     The thing is I think I would know about it because if they went to a foreign government, a
foreign government would want credit for helping the contras and they would come to us to say
you want us to do this, do you, and I would know about that.

     SENATOR EVANS:  Elliott, when you said ``not a dime,'' I did not hear the rest of what you
said.

     MR. ABRAMS:  From any foreign government to the Contras.  It would not be to us, it would
be to the Contras.

     I suspect that we would know about it, though.107

     107 Abrams, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Testimony, 10/10/86, pp. 75-76.
(Emphasis added.)

     Four days later, on October 14th, the issue of foreign government assistance to the contras
arose again during Abrams' appearance before HPSCI:

     THE CHAIRMAN:  Do you know if any foreign government is helping to supply the contras?
There is a report in the LA paper, for example, that the Saudis are.

     MR. GEORGE:  No, sir, we have no intelligence of that.

     MR. ABRAMS:  I can only speak on that question for the last fifteen months when I have
been in this job, and that story about the Saudis to my knowledge is false.  I personally cannot tell
you about pre-1985, but in 1985-1986, when I have been around, no.

     THE CHAIRMAN:  Is it also false with respect to other governments as well?

     MR. ABRAMS:  Yes, it is also false.108

     108 Abrams, HPSCI Testimony, 10/14/86, p. 21.  (Emphasis added.)

     Following public disclosure of the Iran/contra diversion on November 25, 1986, Abrams
appeared along with Fiers before SSCI for a briefing on Nicaragua.  Abrams was questioned
about his knowledge of the mechanics of how money was diverted from arms sales to the
contras.  He replied as follows:

     MR. ABRAMS:  Well, we -- after the Hasenfus shootdown we were asked about, you know,
what did you know about the funding of Hasenfus and his operation.  And the answer here is the
same answer.  That is, that we knew there were private contributions coming in, because they
sure weren't surviving on the money that we were giving them, which at one time was nothing
and then the 27 million came along.  So there was money coming in.  But there was no reason to
think it was coming from foreign governments, and I certainly did not inquire as to which
individuals it was coming from.109

     109 Abrams, SSCI Testimony, 11/25/86, pp. 8-9. (Emphasis added.)

     The questioning persisted on the issue of fundraising:

     SENATOR BRADLEY:  So let me ask it again.  Did either one of you ever discuss the
problems of fundraising by the contras with members of the NSC staff?

     MR. ABRAMS:  No, I can't remember.

     SENATOR BRADLEY:  Well, you would say gee, they got a lot of problems, they don't have
any money.  Then you would just sit there and say, what are we going to do?  They don't have
any money.  You never said, you know, maybe we could get the money this way?

     MR. ABRAMS:  No.  Other than the conversation I have -- other than the Middle Eastern
thing which I recounted to you.  We're not -- you know, we're not in the fundraising business.110

     110 Ibid., pp. 14-15. (Emphasis added.)

     Later, Abrams assured the Committee, that until the Meese press conference, he was ``fairly
confident that there was no foreign government contributing [to the contras].'' 111

     111 Ibid., p. 18.

     Later, on December 8, 1986, after consultation with senior State Department officials, Abrams
corrected his testimony.  However, he did not alter his October statements regarding
third-country contra funding to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.  These statements were
the basis for Count Two of the information to which he pleaded guilty.

     Later, when confronted about his failure to tell Congress about the Brunei solicitation during
his October testimony, Abrams claimed that he was acting under instructions not to divulge the
Brunei solicitation at all.  To the contrary, during his testimony on October 10, 1986,  before the
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Abrams informed the Committee:  ``I can only tell you
that my injunction from the Secretary of State is never to lie.'' 112

     112 Abrams, Senate Foreign Relations Committee Testimony, 10/10/86, p. 49.

     Abrams Pleads Guilty

     Independent Counsel's investigation focused on the veracity of Abrams' October 1986
statements to Congress concerning his knowledge of U.S. Government involvement in the
contra-resupply operation, his knowledge of the role of Felix Rodriguez in contra resupply and
his failure to inform Congress of the Brunei solicitation when he was asked about foreign
government assistance to the contras.

     The facts concerning the Brunei solicitation had been publicly exposed during the
congressional hearings in the summer of 1987.  The extent of Abrams' knowledge of North and
Rodriguez's role in contra resupply was greatly amplified as the OIC investigation progressed.
North had publicly testified in the summer of 1987 that Abrams was aware of his ``full service
operation'' to the contras and that he discussed many of his contra-related activities within the
RIG, but it was not until 1990 and 1991 that independent evidence was produced that
corroborated North's assertions.  In 1990 and early 1991 North was compelled to testify in greater
detail about his communications with Abrams and to explain contemporaneously  made notebook
entries that related to Abrams.  In 1990 and 1991, notes of Hill, Platt, Walker and Corr, were
produced for the first time.  These notes recorded conversations within the State Department
regarding Abrams' knowledge of North's activities.

     The ``Croker note,'' produced by the Defense Department in 1991, corroborated North's
assertion that in 1986 he had listed within the RIG, item-by-item, the activities that he was
causing to happen on behalf of the contras through the private network.  The 1991 production of
Corr's previously withheld notes supplied details of telephone conversations between Corr and
Abrams about the Hasenfus shootdown and conversations about Rodriguez's role in Salvador.

     Fiers, after his plea in July 1991, supplied additional facts about the extent of Abrams'
knowledge of North's involvement in the resupply effort and Abrams' knowledge about the
Embassy involvement in the Costa Rican airstrip.

     Independent Counsel was prepared to present a multi-count felony indictment against Abrams
to the Grand Jury for its consideration in early October 1991.  Abrams, through his counsel, was
invited to consider a plea of guilty.  Before an indictment was presented, Abrams entered into a
plea agreement on October 7, 1991, and pleaded guilty to two counts of withholding information
from Congress.  He pleaded guilty to unlawfully withholding material information concerning
North's contact with and encouragement of the  people supplying the contras from the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee on October 10, 1986.  Additionally, he pleaded guilty to unlawfully
withholding material information from HPSCI on October 14, 1986, concerning his participation
in the Brunei solicitation and his expectation, as of October 14, that the $10 million from the
Sultan of Brunei was on its way to the Swiss bank account he had provided.

Chapter 26

   Edwin G. Corr

     Independent Counsel began his investigation of former U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador
Edwin G. Corr in the fall of 1990, based on new information obtained from U.S. Army Col.
James J. Steele that raised questions about the truthfulness of some of Corr's prior testimony.
Corr gave voluntary interviews to Independent Counsel in January 1991 before ending his
cooperation and invoking his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.  Independent
Counsel subsequently obtained a judicial order compelling Corr's testimony in April 1991 and
forcing him to produce documents, under grants of immunity.  The Grand Jury's subpoena
resulted in production in May 1991 of hundreds of pages of relevant documents previously
withheld from Independent Counsel.1  The grant of immunity did not, however, lead Corr to
change his prior false testimony.

     1 An April 1987 request from Independent Counsel to the State Department called for Corr to
produce ``[a]ll correspondence, memoranda, working papers, telexes, telegrams, cables,
telecopies, messages and other documents,'' however made, which were prepared by, received by,
routed through or maintained by Corr on ``the provision or coordination of support for persons or
entities engaged as military insurgents in armed conflict with the Government of Nicaragua since
1984.''  Independent Counsel also requested all of Corr's ``individual appointment calendars and
schedules, card files, diaries, telephone logs, records or evidence of incoming and outgoing
telephone calls, indices of correspondence, itineraries and activity reports. . . .''  (Letter from
Stewart to Kozak, 4/24/87; Letter from Stewart to Kozak, 4/23/87, specifically including
handwritten materials in its definition of ``documents'').  Corr told Independent Counsel in 1991
that he and his secretary were responsible for reviewing his documents for materials demanded
by the State Department on behalf of Iran/contra investigators.  (Corr, FBI 302, 1/9/91, pp. 1-2.)

     When compelled to produce materials in April 1991, Corr delivered 175 pages of new
documents to the Grand Jury.  Corr first explained that these materials, plus others previously
produced to the Select Committees, constituted his relevant Iran/contra documents for July 1985
through July 1987, but he later admitted that he had omitted items demanded by the Grand Jury.
(Corr, Grand Jury, 4/26/91, pp. 8-18; ALW 32449-623.)  Two weeks later, after Independent
Counsel had consulted with Corr's attorney, Corr produced an additional 1,480 pages of new
notes and documents to the Grand Jury.  (ALW 32671-34196.)  Independent Counsel's review of
these materials required Corr to appear three more times before the Grand Jury in late May and
mid-June 1991.

     Because of Corr's continuing and unbelievable assertions in the Grand Jury, after his final
Grand Jury appearance in June 1991, Independent Counsel focused more intensely on Corr's false
statements in the Grand Jury about an April 20, 1986, meeting that he had with retired Air Force
Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the National Security Council staff
at the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador.  Independent Counsel's investigation of Corr concluded in
January 1992 with a decision not to indict.

     This chapter discusses the evidence collected during Independent Counsel's investigation of
Corr, his false statements in the Grand Jury, and Independent Counsel's reasons for not
prosecuting the ambassador.

     Corr and the Private Contra Resupply Effort

     Edwin G. Corr joined the U.S. foreign service in 1961.  His long career included
ambassadorships in Peru and Bolivia, before becoming U.S. ambassador to El Salvador in
August 1985.  Corr's arrival in El Salvador coincided with a significant change in the nature of
covert U.S. Government support to the Nicaraguan contra rebels. That summer, North had asked
Secord to set up a private airlift operation that would carry privately purchased materials,
including arms, to the contras.  Through the fall of 1985, Secord endeavored to set up this
operation, choosing the Ilopango air base just outside of San Salvador to be the locus of his
operation's transshipment and local warehousing efforts.  Secord and North also worked to
establish facilities that would assist in the resupply of contra forces on a resurgent ``southern
front'' on the Costa Rican border with Nicaragua.

     Early in his new post, Corr became aware of allegations that North was tied to contra
operations.  Corr noted in a meeting with four State Department officials prior to leaving for San
Salvador that North ``is the NSC man for Central America.  Allegedly `man who has run the
``g008contras.'' ' '' 2  North's tie to the contras was reinforced in Corr's mind by events that
occurred around the time of a September 1985 State Department chiefs of mission conference
held in Panama -- a conference that both North and Corr attended.  Before going to the
conference, Corr's deputy chief of mission (DCM), David Passage, wrote Corr that he had to alert
Elliott Abrams, the assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, to three recent
approaches by contra officials to Embassy officers and to Col. Steele, the commander of the U.S.
Military Group in El Salvador.  Passage requested guidance on these contacts, so the Embassy
could maintain ``squeaky-clean'' operations.3

     2 Corr Notes, 8/19/85, ALW 0033531 (emphasis in original).

     3 Memorandum from DP to AMB, 9/7/85, ALV 001407 (bearing Corr's handwritten notes);
Passage, FBI 302, 3/7/91, pp. 3-4.

     After receiving Passage's memorandum, Corr made a list of items that he intended to discuss
in Panama with Abrams and his deputy, William Walker.  The third item on Corr's list spoke
directly of Passage's concerns.  The fourth and fifth items, checked off by Corr and bracketed
with Passage's item, also addressed the contras:

     (3) Contras -- 3 contacts; FDN [contra] talk w/ Steele (NO)

     (4) Rodriguez.

     (5) Ollie North conversation -- S.[Southern] Front 4

     4 Corr Notes, ALW 0033600.  Corr testified under immunity that he normally checked off
items either when he had done them or when he had gone over them with someone else.  (Corr,
Grand Jury, 5/29/91, pp. 52-53; Corr, Grand Jury, 6/12/91, p. 149.)

     On September 20, 1985, North had requested Felix Rodriguez, a U.S. citizen who was
assisting the Salvadoran government's counter-insurgency efforts, to intercede with Salvadoran
Air Force General Juan Bustillo to allow Enterprise planes to be based at Ilopango air base in El
Salvador, as part of an operation to resupply contra forces.5  Rodriguez worked in the coming
months with Steele and Rafael Quintero, an associate of Secord's, to ensure that North-Secord
contra-resupply operations did not run afoul of the Salvadoran military at Ilopango.6

     5 Letter from North to Rodriguez, 9/20/85, AKW 22740-41.  Corr had heard of Rodriguez as
early as July 1985 from Corr's predecessor in San Salvador, Thomas G. Pickering.  Corr was also
aware of Rodriguez's work with the Salvadoran military.  (Corr, Select Committees Deposition,
4/30/87, pp. 4-6.)

     6 See Underlying Facts, Gregg and Fiers chapters; Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, pp. 38-39.

     Smooth relations at Ilopango became critical in late 1985.  In October 1985, the Honduran
government decided to limit sharply official and unofficial U.S. efforts from that country to
provide supplies by air to the contras.  After two months of negotiations, the Hondurans agreed
to admit planes carrying U.S. Government-provided non-lethal  supplies into the country, on the
condition that the planes enter from El Salvador.  In late December 1985, Corr met a delegation
from Washington that included North, Walker, and the chief of the CIA's Central American Task
Force, Alan D. Fiers, Jr., that had flown to Central America to complete work on the new
non-lethal contra-supply arrangements, being administered through the State Department's
Nicaraguan Humanitarian Assistance Office (NHAO). Corr learned that Bustillo gave his
approval for U.S. Government-sponsored transshipment operations at Ilopango, allowing large
planes to unload their cargo there for transfer onto smaller aircraft making supply drops to the
contras.7  The NHAO humanitarian-resupply operations at Ilopango gave a major boost to
North's own private lethal-resupply efforts in Central America.8

     7 Corr Notes, 2/9/86, ALV 001399-401 (describing December 1985 meeting); Corr, FBI 302,
1/10/91, p. 5 (adopting notes as accurate record of December meeting).

     8 For a fuller description of the mingling of official and unofficial contra aid operations at
Ilopango, see Fiers chapter.

     The combination of official and unofficial contra aid efforts at Ilopango became too great a
strain on base resources and the tolerance of Salvadoran officials.  By January 23, 1986, Corr had
learned that Bustillo had become alarmed about the visibility of the expanded  operations at
Ilopango.9  During a swing through Washington in early February 1986, Corr attempted to get
North and Fiers and his superiors at the State Department to agree to reduce CIA contact with the
contra-resupply efforts.  Corr wanted to, in his words, ``in effect become `desk officer' '' on the
``contra question,'' 10  referring to NHAO activity. Corr returned to San Salvador only to learn
that Rodriguez was interfering in humanitarian-aid efforts, with North's help.  Rodriguez's
actions prompted Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Walker to phone Corr and tell him that
``Ollie and Max [Rodriguez's alias] are to have nothing to do [with] humanitarian assistance
deliveries . . .'' 11  Walker also instructed Corr to meet with Fiers in El Salvador and ``impress on
Fiers that we cannot proceed in this []fouled-up manner.'' 12  Corr did as he was told, reminding
Fiers in a meeting at Corr's residence that Corr  was to be ``the coordinator & director of
everything on this matter'' until Washington determined otherwise.13

     9 Corr Notes, 1/23/86, ALV 001396 (note of telephone conversation with Walker).

     10 Corr Notes, 2/5/86, ALW 0033716.  While he could not recall meeting with Corr on this
trip, Fiers did recall that Corr wanted to coordinate resupply activities at Ilopango and keep both
Steele and CIA officers in the area under his control.  (Fiers, FBI 302 morning session, 7/18/91,
p. 10.)

     11 Corr Notes, 2/8/86, ALV 001398 (notes of telephone conversation with Walker).

     12 Corr Notes, 2/8/86, ALV 001397; Corr, FBI 302, 1/10/91, p. 7 (recalling incident).

     13 Corr Notes, 2/9/86, ALV 001399; Fiers, FBI 302 morning session, 7/18/91, pp. 12-13
(recalling meeting).  For additional background on Fiers' visit to El Salvador, see Fiers chapter.

     North and Secord's covert-action business, known as the Enterprise, was having difficulties of
its own at Ilopango.  Deliveries were behind schedule and over budget.  Corr was apprised of
some of these problems through Steele.  On April 10, 1986, Quintero reported to Secord that
``Col. Steele briefed U.S. Ambassador on all ongoing operations.  Ambassador is on [sic] total
support of our position regarding L-100, 707 and Lopez FDN [contra] attitude.'' 14  Nevertheless,
by early April 1986, Secord had concluded that a ``summit meeting'' of the principals at Ilopango
-- including the Salvadoran military, the contras, and the Enterprise's operatives -- was needed to
speed up deliveries and achieve Enterprise resupply objectives.15

     14 KL-43 Message from Quintero to Secord, 4/10/86; Steele, Grand Jury, 2/6/91, pp. 59-60,
77 (Steele kept Corr informed of important contra details); Ibid., pp. 92-94 (Corr briefed on
L-100 flight in April 1986).

     15 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, pp. 90-91, 93-95; KL-43 Message from Secord to North,
4/8/86, AKW 004417.

     The April 20, 1986, Meetings

     On April 20, 1986, North and Secord flew with Enterprise air operations chief Richard Gadd
and others by private jet from  Washington, D.C., to Ilopango air base.  After important meetings
in Salvador -- including one with Corr in his office -- the passengers flew back to Washington,
their mission complete.16

     16 On the way back, the Jetstar made an intermediate stop in Miami, where it dropped off
some passengers, refueled and cleared United States Customs.  (Private Aircraft Inspection
Report, 4/23/86, AOT 0000004, Customs form filled out by Jetstar crew, including passenger
manifest).

     Evidence of these meetings came from a number of sources, many of which were not supplied
when the Department of State first directed Corr to provide information to Iran/contra
investigators in late 1986. Corr insisted that when he met with Secord in April 1986, North was
not present and contra issues were not discussed.  Only when key witnesses -- including North,
Secord and Steele -- testified did the real story emerge.  Backed by circumstantial eyewitness
accounts and contemporaneous documents -- some of which were withheld by Corr himself --
these witnesses told a different tale about Corr's April 20, 1986, meeting with the principals of
the Enterprise in Central America.

     Secord

     Secord spoke frankly about his April 1986 trip to El Salvador.  He revealed his meeting there
with Corr in his earliest testimony.17  Before Congress in 1987, Secord stated that Corr was one
of the U.S. Government officials from whom he had received ``moral support, certainly'' on the
contra-resupply project.18  When asked to specify this support, Secord testified:

     17 See, for example, Secord, OIC Deposition, 4/29/87, p. 65; see also Secord, OIC
Deposition, 5/14/87, pp. 371-72 (recounting contra air commander Juan Gomez's criticisms of
private benefactor Caribou aircraft at the Ilopango meeting that preceded Secord's meeting with
Corr).

     18 Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/5/87, p. 191.

     I can't say that we had anything other than moral support from him.  I did speak with him
personally during my brief trip to El Salvador in April of '86.  I know that he was sympathetic
with our operation, and I know that he kept track of it.19

     19 Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/6/87, p. 147.  The next day's Washington Post,
after quoting this testimony, reported that ``[a] senior embassy official in El Salvador said
yesterday that Corr has previously stated that `he would not be doing his job if he did not know
about' the operation, but the official added that Corr did not play any active role.''  (``Contra
Corruption Said to Worry North,'' The Washington Post, 5/7/87, p. A30.)  Corr told Independent
Counsel that he ``didn't watch'' Secord's testimony about his meeting with Corr.  (Corr, FBI 302,
1/9/91, p. 6.)

     Secord did not, however, mention North's presence on this trip or in Secord's meeting with
Corr.  Indeed, at one  point Secord gave the impression that no Government officials
accompanied him to El Salvador:

     Mr. Sarbanes: The help you were getting from the CIA people in Central America or the
ambassadors in Central America, do you explain that simply that you came along as a private
person doing, wanting to do this project and they were ready to help you, or they perceived that
you were carrying out a policy supported by the Administration?

     Mr. Secord: The answer is both.  We were in touch with them and they perceived that they
were carrying out the policy of this Administration.

     Mr. Sarbanes: Which is what you perceived?

     Mr. Secord: Indeed.20

     20 Secord, Select Committees Testimony, 5/8/87, p. 82.  Secord gave his brief account of his
trip at a time when it was uncertain whether North would receive immunity and testify before
Congress.

     A more complete account of Secord's trip to El Salvador emerged in his appearance before the
Grand Jury in January 1991.  According to Secord, after he and North arrived at Ilopango, they
met on the base with Salvadoran Air Force General Bustillo; two contra commanders, Enrique
Bermudez and Juan Gomez; Steele; Quintero; and Rodriguez.21  The topic of this meeting was
improving private contra-resupply operations in  El Salvador -- or, in Secord's words, a summit
meeting, ``operationally speaking.'' 22  After lunch, Secord, North and Steele were flown in a
helicopter piloted (poorly) by Rodriguez to a landing zone near the U.S. Embassy in San
Salvador.23  While Rodriguez remained with the helicopter, Secord, North and Steele then had a
meeting, which had been scheduled in advance, with Corr in his Embassy office.  Secord recalled
that Corr had to come in especially for the meeting, which suggested to Secord that the day was a
Sunday.  Secord testified that Corr ``was very interested in how it went with Bustillo because
Bustillo was truly vital to our operations as well as the operations in El Salvador.'' 24  According
to Secord, Steele gave a ``resume AE1  of the [Bustillo] meeting, and I spoke giving my view of
the meeting.  North spoke . . . more than any of us.'' 25  Corr ``was very interested, asked detailed
questions, was very supportive.'' 26

     21 Gadd left the group to meet with Enterprise pilots and was not present in any of the
meetings that followed involving North and Secord.  (Gadd, FBI 302, 7/6-7/87, pp. 19-21;
Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 14-15; Posada, FBI 302, 2/3/92, p. 10.)

     22 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, pp. 91-95; Secord and Wurts, Honored and Betrayed, p. 273
(John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1992) (hereafter, ``Honored'').  See also Bustillo, Grand Jury, 5/15/91,
pp. 16-18, 34-36, 77-83 (confirming meeting and all attendees except Quintero; topics included
problems with maintenance of contra-owned planes and provision of end-user certificates for
Chilean Blowpipe missiles; Bustillo authorized Rodriguez to fly the party by a Salvadoran
helicopter to downtown San Salvador); Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 13-15, 20-34
(Rodriguez arranged for Bermudez and Gomez to join Bustillo at the meeting; Rodriguez and
Quintero met the Jetstar when it arrived; topics included Blowpipes, unhappiness with contras'
airplanes, and training of contra pilots).

     23 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, pp. 95-98; Secord and Wurts, Honored, p. 273.  See also
Quintero, FBI 302, 4/9/91, p. 12 (Rodriguez piloted North, Secord, and Steele to San Salvador
for a meeting with Corr; Rodriguez reported on meeting in scant detail to Quintero afterwards);
Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 34-38 (same).

     24 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, pp. 102-04; Secord and Wurts, Honored, p. 273.  The
significance of the Bustillo meeting may have been reinforced further in Corr's mind a few days
later, when Rodriguez announced to him that he was leaving El Salvador for good.  Rodriguez
believed he may have told Corr at that time that the participation in contra-resupply operations of
Secord and others whom Rodriguez associated with convicted arms trafficker Edwin Wilson
gave Rodriguez ``a sixth feeling, . . . a hunch'' that he should abandon the operation.  (Rodriguez,
Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 42-55.)

     25 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/16/91, p. 104.

     26 Ibid., p. 108.  See also Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, p. 81 (``Corr knew who to expect
when I met him.  He knew who I was.'').

     After Corr's first compelled Grand Jury appearance, where he adhered to his prior testimony
that his meeting with Secord did not involve North or contra-resupply, Independent Counsel
reinterviewed Secord.  Secord repeated his sworn testimony without equivocation.  He also
added new detail about the day in El Salvador:

      -- Bustillo provided the helicopter for the flight from Ilopango into San Salvador, and thus
knew they were going to meet with Corr;

      -- the helicopter had no doors, which made it too noisy to talk during the flight into San
Salvador;

      -- the helicopter was met by an Embassy car, which Steele had arranged, that took North,
Secord and Steele to the Embassy;

      -- the car was driven by an American, and during the ride Steele used a walkie-talkie to tell
the Embassy that they were coming;

      -- during the meeting in Corr's office (which Secord diagrammed), Corr wore slacks and a
short-sleeved shirt;

      -- Corr, North, Secord and Steele were present for the entire meeting;

      -- Secord spoke less than the others, and Corr did the most talking; ``it was his meeting;'' 27
and,

     27 As mentioned previously, Secord had testified that North was the principal speaker.

      -- during the meeting, they reviewed the situation in Nicaragua and the importance of the
airlift operation; they also talked of the just-concluded Ilopango meeting concerning ways to
improve the operation, Secord's plan to put more money into the operation, the need for weather
reports and Sandinista order-of-battle information, the military needs of the southern front, the
need for the FDN contra faction to share supplies with the southern front, and the Costa Rican
airstrip.28

     28 Secord, FBI 302, 5/9/91, pp. 3-7.

     North

     Although North did not testify about any aspect of his April 1986 trip to El Salvador until he
was compelled to appear before the Grand Jury in 1990, his notes suggested that he met with
Corr on or about April 20, 1986.  North's notebook contains no entries for the weekend of April
19-20, 1986, but he wrote this on April 21:

     Mtg w/ Ed C

      -- Debt Relief.29

     29 North Notes, 4/21/86, AMX 001074.

     North initially called this ``a very thrifty note'' that ``[c]ould well have been'' taken the day
after a late night trip.30  North stated that the ``Ed C'' in the note ``[c]ould be [Corr], I guess.
Debt relief is certainly an issue that the Salvadorans were very concerned about.  . . .  I just don't
remember the conversation.'' 31  Although never confronted with North's note, Corr testified
under immunity that debt relief for the Salvadoran government was one of the major issues he
dealt with as ambassador,32 and Corr's notes from this period -- including a list of topics he
made for an April 21, 1986, ``Core Country Team Meeting'' -- refer to debt relief immediately
after mentioning his role as ``action officer'' on contra issues.33

     30 North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, p. 102.

     31 Ibid. North later testified, however, that he ``would be inclined to think that's not the same
Ed Corr . . . I would be inclined to think that since this [note] is the 21st, that's not it.'' (Ibid.,
1/30/91, p. 20.)

     32 Corr, Grand Jury, 5/29/91, p. 125.

     33 See Corr Notes, 4/21/86, ALW 0032813, and text below.

     North's testimony about the meeting with Corr was evasive and imprecise.  Although he
remembered traveling on the private jet, North claimed to have great difficulty differentiating
that trip from other trips to Central  America.  Regarding the meeting with Corr, he testified
initially as follows:

     I think that I may have had a meeting on this trip or it may be another one that I'm confused
with with Colonel Steele, and perhaps even the ambassador although I just can't associate which
trip was which.

     * * *

     If I'm remembering the right trip and the right set of meetings associated with the trip, this
dealt with aid to the southern front and the military operations along the southern part of
Nicaragua, I think.

     * * *

     Somehow I recall -- whether it was this trip or another one -- General Secord and I going to
the embassy itself for a brief meeting with the ambassador, just saying hi.  I don't recall whether
it was this trip or not.

     * * *

     I have this recollection of walking through the embassy because it was a very secure
compound that had been attacked a number of times by the guerillas and just commenting -- I
think it was General Secord -- it might have been Colonel Gadd -- about that kind of thing.34

     34 North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, pp. 88-96, 100-01.

     In his next appearance, North testified that he had:

     a general recollection of bringing General Secord to the embassy, although not a specific
meeting with Ambassador Corr that day other than to introduce General Secord.  I remember
generally doing that.

     I don't recall with anybody saying this is Dick Secord and here's all the  things we're doing
together . . . other than to say that these are people that have the sanction of what I thought was
the President of the United States to do these kinds of activities.

     I don't recall a meeting with Ambassador Corr, or even Jim Steele, to say here's the long list of
things that General Secord and I are doing together.

     * * *

     Q: Tell me how it [the President's approval] came up, what context it was that you
communicated it to someone like Ambassador Corr.

     A: It would come up in the context of, ``This is Dick Secord.  He's supporting the Nicaraguan
resistance operation.  He's not one of these other groups that we're now familiar with that were
operating in and out of the Central American region.  He has our endorsement,'' our meaning the
U.S. government endorsement, ``for what he's doing.  There are going to be airplanes flying in
and out of here supporting the resistance.'' 35

     35 Ibid., 7/13/90, pp. 14-15, 17.

     North gave this testimony when his criminal case was still pending in the court of appeals.  In
his Grand Jury appearances after his criminal convictions had been vacated, North testified that
he had no specific recollection of meeting with Corr in the Embassy.36

     36 Ibid., 1/30/91, p. 21; Ibid., 2/15/91, pp. 85-86.

     Steele

     In Steele's earliest testimony, which contained numerous false and misleading statements
concerning his own activities,37 he revealed the Corr-Secord meeting:

     37 See History of the Investigation section.

     I met Secord one time in Salvador. . . .  It was early '86 is the best I can say.  I am not sure
what month it was.

     * * *

     He didn't discuss the purpose of his trip with me.  I know that he came in and he was on -- he
was there, it appeared, just for a very short period of time.  I know he made a courtesy call on the
ambassador and he left.

     * * *

     I am not aware of anybody [else with whom Secord met].  But again, I wasn't with him the
whole time he was there. . . .

     The only thing that I can remember saying to Secord when he was there was it was a pretty
snazzy airplane that he landed in, an executive aircraft.

     * * *

     But I know he went into the city and then he had a meeting -- I am told he had a meeting there
with the ambassador.38

     38 Steele, SSCI Testimony, 12/18/86, pp. 26-27.

     Steele did not mention, however: North's presence; the meeting with Bustillo, Bermudez and
others at Ilopango immediately preceding the Corr meeting; the helicopter ride into San
Salvador; or his own involvement in setting up and attending Corr's meeting with Secord.

     In his April 1987 Select Committees deposition, Steele suggested the possibility of North's
presence during Corr's meeting with Secord, but he disclosed nothing about the substance of the
meeting:

     [Secord] came through there on a quick trip.  He was only on the ground, I would guess, for a
very short time.  And he met with the Ambassador, kind of a courtesy call thing.  I can't
remember if North was with him or not.  I think he was though.  That's my recollection that
North was with him and that he met with the Ambassador very short and he was gone.

     * * *

     No [I never learned that Secord was involved with the private resupply organization].  I had
the sense that he was, but I never -- I never pinned -- he certainly didn't say he was, as I recall.
And, you know, that was the only time that he came to El Salvador.39

     39 Steele, Select Committees Deposition, 4/21/87, pp. 109-10.  See also Ibid., pp. 120-21
(misdirecting a question about a North-Secord-Corr meeting at Ilopango to a December 30, 1985,
meeting at Ilopango that Secord did not attend).

     The next day, in his first interview with Independent Counsel, Steele was more definite, at
least about the meeting with Corr.  Steele said that Secord came to El Salvador once in early
1986 with North, that the party flew in on a private jet, and that they met with Corr for about one
hour before departing.40

     40 Steele, FBI 302, 4/22/87, p. 2.

     Over time, and after many interviews with Independent Counsel, Steele's testimony coalesced
on these points:

      -- North and Secord came into Ilopango on a private jet;

      -- Rodriguez told Steele that one of the things that Secord wanted to do in El Salvador was
meet with Corr;

      -- contra leaders did come to Ilopango for a meeting, but Steele is not sure whether it was at
the same time that North and Secord came there together, and Steele does not recall whether they
were in the meeting with the contras;

      -- Rodriguez flew North, Secord and Steele by helicopter into San Salvador, and Secord
criticized Rodriguez's flying abilities;

      -- Steele, Secord and North met with Corr in his Embassy office; and

      -- Steele could not recall anything about the substance of that meeting.41

     41 Steele, Grand Jury, 2/6/91, pp. 94-103.

     Corr

     Apart from a few admissions made in the years following his initial false statements about his
meeting with Secord, Corr made two relevant statements after the Iran/contra revelations of late
1986.  The first showed Corr's early effort to deny; the  second reflected Corr's concern. First, in
December 1986, Sen. Christopher Dodd traveled to El Salvador and privately met with Corr at
his residence.  Dodd told Independent Counsel that in response to questions about
contra-resupply activity at Ilopango, Corr basically denied knowing about it and answered ``no''
to all of Dodd's questions.  Corr said he had met with North in El Salvador but said nothing about
them working together.  Dodd also did not recall Corr saying that he had met in the Embassy
with Secord.42

     42 Dodd, FBI 302, 2/19/91, p. 2.  See also Memorandum from FitzGerald to Abrams,
undated, ALW 030446 (reporting Dodd's visit); San Salvador 15919, 12/20/86, ALW 030459-68
(same); Dlouhy, FBI 302, 5/23/91, p. 7 (recalling that Corr had a ``heated meeting'' with Dodd,
after which Corr was very upset and said that Dodd had asked a lot of questions about contra
resupply).  Dodd believed, however, that he did not ask Corr directly about his meetings with
persons involved in private resupply efforts.  (Dodd, FBI 302, 2/19/91, p. 2.)

     In January 1987, Jon Wiant, then director of coordination in the Department of State's Bureau
of Intelligence & Research, traveled to El Salvador as part of a ``flying RIG.''   In two interviews,
Wiant described to Independent Counsel a conversation with Corr in the Ambassador's residence.
According to Wiant, Corr was ``shaky, scared'' and asked to speak privately to Wiant as a larger
meeting was breaking up and the visitors were about to go to the airport.  Wiant recalled the
conversation specifically.  He reported that Corr said:

     Am I in trouble?  This stuff has ended up on my door step, they . . . Oliver North and someone
else -- have been down here to the Embassy and have done things at Ilopango, I've called and
they said its okay -- they meaning either Elliott Abrams or Bill Walker . . .43

     43 Wiant, FBI 302, 12/9/91, pp. 6-7.  See also Wiant, FBI 302, 9/19/91, pp. 6-7.  In the
September 1991 interview, the FBI agent's report states that Wiant ``remembered being called
aside by Corr and discussing a meeting that Corr had had with Richard Secord and Oliver North
in April of 1986.  Wiant said that Corr was upset because he didn't like the fact that North and
Secord as private benefactors, were coming into the Embassy.''  (Ibid., pp. 6-7.)  After reading
this report in December 1991, Wiant stated that the only thing he was not ``positively sure about''
was his statement regarding Secord being at the Embassy with North.  (Wiant, FBI 302, 12/9/91,
p. 7.)

     In response to the Grand Jury's subpoena, Corr produced one contemporaneous document that
related to the April 20, 1986, meeting.  Corr's handwritten list of items to discuss at a meeting of
top Embassy officials on Monday, April 21, 1986, included this item, which Corr had checked
off:

     [ck] (2) FDR -- help w/in guidelines; monitor -- Repeat my enjoinder that I am g008``action
officer'' on this! 44

     44 Corr Notes, 4/21/86, ALW 032813 (emphasis in original). Despite Corr's checking off this
item, no witness recalled Corr discussing the issue in the April 21, 1986, team meeting.

     Corr's former deputy, David B. Dlouhy, identified the acronym ``FDR'' as referring to the
Salvadoran Democratic Revolutionary Front, the civilian wing of the Salvadoran guerrillas,45
``FDR'' also was an acronym for the contras -- one that Corr used often.46

     45 See, for example, Dlouhy, Grand Jury, 11/1/91, pp. 98, 102.

     46 Ibid., p. 99.  See, for example, Corr Notes, 2/9/86, ALV 001399 (``3.  We also discussed
coordination among Front Office, . . . Steele, Felix & UNO/g008FDR'').  Corr confirmed this
under immunity.  (Corr, Grand Jury, 5/29/91, p. 124.)

     The Dlouhy Allegations

     Independent Counsel obtained what appeared at first to be extremely damaging evidence
against Corr in late 1991 from Corr's former deputy chief of mission (DCM) in El Salvador,
Dlouhy.  From 1985 to mid-1986, Dlouhy was deputy director of the Office of Central American
Affairs within the State Department's Bureau of Inter-American Affairs.  Dlouhy departed for El
Salvador to become DCM in July 1986.  During the course of his tour there, Dlouhy  developed a
close relationship with Corr, one that continued long after Dlouhy's assignment ended.47

     47 Dlouhy, FBI 302, 5/23/91, p. 9.  Dlouhy called Corr after his first telephone interview with
the Independent Counsel.  Dlouhy was posted to Luxembourg at the time.

     Dlouhy's first interviews with Independent Counsel occurred in May 1991.  In the first
interview, which was conducted by phone because Dlouhy was overseas, Dlouhy said that he had
taken a trip to El Salvador in March or April 1986 and had met with Corr and another Embassy
officer.  Dlouhy said that no one discussed the contras with him on this trip, which concerned
American-Salvadoran cooperation on police matters, but that at some point later he heard that
Corr had met with North out at Ilopango when North had stopped briefly there.  Dlouhy stated
that Corr never told him that Corr had met Secord.48  During a second telephone interview with
OIC, Dlouhy reported that it became clear to him after early October 1986, from conversations
with Corr or Steele, that North had come to Ilopango -- but not San Salvador -- and had visited
Bustillo and Rodriguez but not Corr.49

     48 Dlouhy, FBI 302, 5/22/91, p. 6.  See also Transcript of 5/22/91 Interview, pp. 8-9, 19-20.

     49 Dlouhy, FBI 302, 5/23/91, pp. 3-4; Transcript of 5/23/91 Interview, pp. 37-38.

     During a second round of questioning of Dlouhy in the fall of 1991, subsequent to receiving
Corr's notes, Dlouhy recalled a second trip he had made to El Salvador in April 1986. Dlouhy
believed that he arrived in El Salvador some time during the week of April 14, 1986, and stayed
through Sunday, April 20, 1986 -- the date of the Corr-Secord-North meeting.  Dlouhy told
Independent Counsel he recalled that:

      -- Steele had said that Rodriguez had flown North and Secord to downtown San Salvador,
almost hitting a flagpole with his helicopter and killing everyone aboard the aircraft.  Dlouhy said
that he thought Steele had told him this story shortly after the incident occurred, when Dlouhy
was not yet deputy chief of the mission.  Dlouhy may have learned of it while talking with Steele
and Corr on the terrace of Corr's residence in San Salvador.

      -- Dlouhy believed that the purpose of the trip was for the people in the helicopter to go to the
Embassy and visit Corr, and that before the flagpole incident, the visitors had met at Ilopango
with Bustillo and the contras.

      -- Steele told Dlouhy that he, North, and Secord had met in Corr's office, but did not say what
was discussed.  Dlouhy assumed that the purpose of the meeting was a briefing on what had
transpired at Ilopango that day.50

     50 Dlouhy, FBI 302, 10/31/91, pp. 14-20.

     Dlouhy repeated this story before the Grand Jury on November 1, 1991.51

     51 Dlouhy, Grand Jury, 11/1/91, pp. 43-96, 100.  Dlouhy added a few details during this
appearance.  He testified that he arrived in El Salvador on April 16, 1986, (Ibid., pp. 43-44); he
placed the terrace conversation after Corr had gone to church and had worked, (Ibid., p. 84);
while certain that North met with Corr, he was less certain that Steele and Secord were present,
(Ibid., p. 93-94); the party discussed with Corr a recent drop of lethal supplies by an
Enterprise-leased L-100 aircraft, (Ibid., p. 94); and that the last incident he recalled from the trip
was the terrace conversation, (Ibid., p. 100).

     Independent Counsel re-interviewed Steele on November 12, 1991, in an attempt to
corroborate Dlouhy's story.  Steele did not recall Dlouhy being present the weekend of April
19-20, 1986, or discussing any subject with Dlouhy at that time.52  Almost two months later,
Dlouhy provided Independent Counsel with a photocopy of his expired passport for the 1982-87
period.  The passport indicated that Dlouhy arrived in San Salvador on April 16, 1986, and
departed on April 20, 1986.53  Independent Counsel also obtained Dlouhy's travel vouchers for
the trip, which were ambiguous.54  Nevertheless, Dlouhy  declared in a letter to the Independent
Counsel that he wished to ``restrict[]'' the record of his direct knowledge of events in San
Salvador to the period April 16-19, 1986, stating that he may have learned about the events on
April 20, 1986, from other sources, or may have confused the event with later ones.55

     52 Steele, FBI 302, 11/12/91, pp. 9-10.

     53 Dlouhy Passport, 3/15/82, ALW 048735.

     54 Dlouhy's description of his itinerary stated that he left San Salvador at 9:00 am on April
20, 1986.  His travel authorization indicated, however, that Dlouhy planned to return on or about
April 21, 1986, and Dlouhy attached an airline receipt indicating that Dlouhy was ticketed on a
TACA Airlines flight that left at 9:00 am on April 21, 1986.  (Travel Reimbursement Voucher,
4/11/86, ALW 47505-10.)  Independent Counsel attempted to confirm Dlouhy's re-entry into the
United States through the U.S. Customs Service, but was informed that customs declarations
forms filed in the Miami District -- Dlouhy's stated point of re-entry -- had been destroyed.
(Letter from Schmitz to SA Buckley, 1/15/92, 018022.)

     55 Letter from Dlouhy to Barrett, 1/6/92, 017949.

     Corr's False Testimony

     Corr consistently took the position, first in response to inquiries from the Department of State
and subsequently in sworn testimony, that his only contact with the party that traveled to El
Salvador was a brief meeting of no substance with Secord, at which North was not present.  On
December 3, 1986, in conjunction with an official request from Attorney General Edwin Meese
III, the Department of State directed various diplomatic posts, including San Salvador, to search
for relevant ``materials.'' 56  On December 13, 1986, San Salvador responded with an artfully
worded cable.57  In  it Corr reported to the Department, and through it to the FBI, that

     56 State 374730, 12/12/86, ALV 004986-87.

     57 Corr would later testify that, while ``every cable that leaves the embassy has the
ambassador's name on it,'' he ``probably wrote [this cable]'' himself.  (Corr, Grand Jury, 5/29/91,
pp. 144-45.)

     LtCol. Oliver North . . . transited briefly San Salvador enroute to Honduras on December 30,
1985 with an [sic] NHAO official 58 in connection with humanitarian assistance to the
Nicaraguan resistance, as well as brief stopovers on one or two other occasions.  There was no
activity by LtCol. North of which I or anyone else at this Post are aware of in connection with
financial aid activities related to Iran or Israel or the Nicaraguan resistance movement.  Retired
General Richard V. Secord was in San Salvador at least once and made a very brief courtesy call
on me on a Saturday [sic] morning at which nothing of substance was discussed.  I do not have
the dates of LtCol. North's other brief stopovers nor of Secord's courtesy call because my
calendars were lost in the October 10, 1986 San Salvador earthquake.59

     58 This official was Cresencio Arcos, the deputy director of the State Department's
Nicaraguan Humanitarian Assistance Office, NHAO.

     59 San Salvador 15584, 12/13/86, ALV 004119-20 (emphasis added).  Corr's reference to the
loss of his calendars was inexact.  Corr himself produced appointment calendars kept by his
secretary for him to the State Department in 1987.

     Corr's cabled response revealed that he had met Secord but explicitly denied that the meeting
concerned anything of substance.  Corr also suggested implicitly, by separating his mentions of
Secord and North, that North was not present when Corr met with Secord.  Finally, by limiting
his statement on lack of awareness of North's contra activity to ``financial aid activities,'' Corr's
cable avoided revealing what he knew of North's involvement in the contra-resupply  operation
based in El Salvador.60  At the time Corr wrote his cable, North and Secord had invoked the
Fifth Amendment before congressional committees, and their refusals to testify had been widely
reported by the media.

     60 Almost five months after the December 1986 cable, when explaining his ignorance of the
financial arrangements underlying contra-support activities in El Salvador, Corr volunteered that
the questions in the ``initial'' exchange of cables had focused upon financing:

     [At] least from where I sat, things that came, or may have gone through Ilopango, it was
something that had been consummated and transacted elsewhere.  And at the Ilopango or at the
Salvador end, you are really down to materiel . . . In Salvador it was materiel.

     I remember concentrating on that very much in the initial questions that came down for us to
answer in writing, the stress in the language and the cables was on funding, on funding.  For El
Salvador, it was boots.

     (Corr, Select Committees Deposition, 4/30/87, pp. 83-84.)  Indeed, Meese's original request
for materials focused on the activities of North and Secord only to the extent that they related to,
among other things, ``all financial aid activities involving the Nicaraguan resistance movement
which are related to Iran or Israel.''  (State 374730, 12/12/86, ALV 004987 (emphasis added).)
On the other hand, Corr was not disposed in late 1986 to be too helpful to Iran/contra
investigators.  (See Corr Notes, 11/28/86, ALW 0033747, telling Steele prior to his appearing
before a congressional committee in December 1986 ``we have nothing to hide, but we are not
anxious to speak.  If insists we should do.'').

     Corr's first recorded contact with Iran/contra investigators occurred on April 1, 1987, when he
was interviewed by the FBI at Homestead Air Force Base in Florida.61  The agents' report of this
interview states that  Corr said that North came to El Salvador two to four times, twice after
Congress approved humanitarian aid to the contras in 1985, each time for a stop of one to four
hours.62  Corr did not mention Secord or any visit by him to El Salvador.  Corr was not asked
about documents.63

     61 At some point prior to April 30, 1987, Corr was interviewed in San Salvador by Senate
Select Committee staff, (See Corr, Select Committees Deposition, 4/30/87, p. 44.)  He may have
had a second meeting with one staffer prior to his April 30 deposition.  (Ibid., pp. 91, 93, 94,
109.)  During the deposition, a questioner said that an earlier meeting between them included
discussion of Secord's visit to the Embassy.  (Ibid., p. 96.)  Independent Counsel did not obtain
records of these interviews.

     Corr also referred occasionally to his responses to Tower Commission inquiries.  (See, for
example, Corr, FBI 302, 4/1/87, p. 1; Corr, Grand Jury, 5/29/91, p. 151.)  Independent Counsel's
search of the Commission's records uncovered no trace of these responses.

     62 Corr, FBI 302, 4/1/87, p. 3.

     63 The FBI Form 302 of the interview suggests that the agents were unaware of Corr's cables
regarding Iran/contra, including the December 13, 1986, cable quoted above.

     On April 30, 1987, Corr gave a sworn deposition to staff members of the Select Committees.
In response to a series of questions about trips to El Salvador by North, by Secord, and by them
together, Corr made a number of false statements:

     Q: First of all, tell me if you can how many times to your recollection Oliver North actually
travelled to El Salvador during the time you have been Ambassador to El Salvador, that you
know of.

     A: I told you last time, I don't know whether it was three or four.  I know it was two.  Every
time he came, it was with a group of people. . . .  I just can't tell you exactly.

     Q: What about any times that Oliver North came down where he wasn't a part of a contingent,
an official contingency, but was either by himself or with a group of private individuals?  Do you
know anything about that?

     A: No, I don't think so.

     * * *

     Q: I'm asking for your best recollection.  That's all I can get from you.

     A: Well, that's the best I can give you.  I don't recall it.  I certainly don't remember him
travelling with private people.

     * * *

     Q: I asked you last time about General Richard Secord, and you described one time in which
General Secord came by I believe your residence.

     A: No.

     Q: The Embassy?  The Embassy.  And I believe you described about a half-hour meeting, and
you could not recall it.

     A: It was a very innocuous meeting.  He had either gotten in touch with Jim Steele, but
anyway Jim Steele called and said that this guy was in town, did I want to meet with him.  If
they've got two heads, I meet with them.  I said sure, you know, come on in.

     And I remember him coming into the office.  I remember it being very much a non-meeting,
what I call a ``non-meeting.''  We chatted a little bit about his having been the Deputy Assistant
Secretary in ISA, and how are you, and how are you, and that was kind of as I recall the meeting.

     Q: Do you know what he was doing in El Salvador?

     A: No.

     Q: Did he ask you to do anything for him?

     A: He did not.

     Q: Did he describe in any way his involvement in assisting the contras?

     A: No.  I think there was -- [Corr interrupted by counsel, who then confers with Corr] -- [o]ne
thing that I think that it's important to note is that he was there as a retired military officer, as far
as I was concerned, on private business.  I don't think I'm capable of saying that I did not think
that it might have something to do with contras, but we certainly didn't discuss it.

     * * *

     Q: Were you aware when you met with General Secord that he had any type of relationship
with Oliver North?

     A: I don't think so. . . .

     * * *

     Q: Were you ever aware of a trip to El Salvador by Colonel North in which General Secord
accompanied him?

     A: I don't think so, no.

     * * *

     Q: Did any of your meetings. . .with North, or at any time you came in touch with North in
Washington, ever deal with private resupply to the contras?

     A: I'm sure we talked about private resupply to the contras.  I mean, there was private resupply
going through Ilopango.  There was this general kind of thing that Ollie repeated a lot, you know,
that we're going to get through this period; there are very admira[b]l[e] Americans and foreigners
who are providing funds, you know, the world will  long note what these people have done.  But
in terms of any details, no.64

     64 Corr, Select Committees Deposition, 4/30/87, pp. 94, 95, 96-97, 100, 101, 109-10
(emphasis added).

     In subsequent interviews, Corr amplified slightly his description of his meeting with Secord in
El Salvador.  On June 18, 1987, Corr told Independent Counsel  ``they may have had some
general discussions about maintaining pressure on the Sandinistas.  The discussion did not last
long and Corr could not really remember their conversation.'' 65  On February 15, 1988, Corr
stated that Col. Steele also was present for the meeting with Secord; that ``they just talked about
how bad communists were;'' that Corr was ``anxious to get Secord in and out because he had
things to do;'' and that Corr was ``pretty certain he knew Secord met Bustillo.'' 66  On January 9,
1991, Corr said that he and Secord ``talked about how there was no support for the Contras in the
U.S. Congress.'' 67  In these interviews, however, Corr never modified or wavered from his
original deposition testimony that North did not accompany Secord to El Salvador.

     65 Corr, FBI 302, 6/18/87, p. 2.  See also Tylicki, Grand Jury, 12/7/87, p. 12 (interviewing
agent, reiterating Corr's remarks).

     66 Corr, FBI 302, 2/15/88, p. 5.

     67 Corr, FBI 302, 1/9/91, p. 6.

     On April 26, 1991 -- after he had claimed the privilege under the Fifth Amendment -- Corr
was  compelled to give immunized testimony before the Grand Jury.  On this occasion, and again
during a second Grand Jury appearance on May 29, 1991, Corr repeated his earlier false
statements, insisting that only he and Secord (and, briefly, Steele) met in April 1986.68

     68 Corr, Grand Jury, 4/26/91, pp. 201-05, 209-11, 213; Ibid., 5/29/91, pp. 6-7, 129, 142-43,
145-46, 153-54.

     The Decision Not to Prosecute

     By the fall of 1991, Independent Counsel had determined that he could prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that Corr's testimony about the April 20, 1986, meeting was false.  Although
each of the central witnesses (North, Secord and Steele) had an imperfect recollection of the
meeting and was subject to impeachment on the basis of his own false statements in prior
Iran/contra proceedings, the weight of the evidence compensated for these deficiencies.
Independent Counsel also determined that the evidence showed beyond a reasonable doubt that
Corr recalled meeting with North and discussing contra-resupply issues on April 20, 1986. Corr's
motive for not admitting the meeting with North and Secord was, as he indicated to Wiant, his
obvious concern that it showed knowledge of a clear violation of the Boland Amendment, with
North on the NSC staff and Secord -- the  operating head of contra resupply -- discussing their
activities with a State Department officer.  Having lied in 1987, he was constrained not to change
his testimony.

     In November 1991, Dlouhy's Grand Jury testimony provided additional evidence that Corr's
testimony about the April 20 meeting was false. Accordingly, after analyzing the proposed
evidence, Independent Counsel decided to propose an indictment of Corr to the Grand Jury.

     Shortly thereafter, events caused reconsideration of that decision.  First, Independent Counsel
located Dlouhy's passport and travel vouchers for his April 1986 trip to El Salvador, which raised
doubts that he could have been in San Salvador for the April 20, 1986, conversation with Corr
and Steele, to which Dlouhy had testified about in the Grand Jury. With this problematic
evidence, Dlouhy recanted his Grand Jury testimony.

     In light of these developments, Independent Counsel re-evaluated the other evidence against
Corr. North's equivocation and a recent interview with Steele, who did not remember Dlouhy's
presence, posed additional uncertainty.

     At that time, both Clair George and Duane Clarridge had been indicted and were proceeding
toward trial.  There was no prospect that Corr would provide evidence that would assist
Independent Counsel's investigation significantly. Elliott Abrams, against whom Corr would
have been a witness for the Government, had resolved his situation by pleading guilty.

     Finally, at this time, Independent Counsel recently had acquired former Defense Secretary
Caspar Weinberger's voluminous handwritten notes and highly relevant Department of State
notes. Independent Counsel believed that both the Weinberger and State Department
investigations presented a more worthwhile use of his resources than a prosecution of Corr.

Part VIII

Officers of the Department of Defense (U.S. v. Caspar W. Weinberger and Related
Investigations)

     Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger lied to investigators to conceal his knowledge of the
Iran arms sales. Contrary to Weinberger's assertions, a small group of senior civilian officials and
military officers in the Department of Defense (DoD), comprised of Secretary of Defense Caspar
W. Weinberger and his closest aides, was consistently informed of the arms shipments to Iran in
1985 and 1986.

     The OIC uncovered documents and notes and obtained testimony, which had been withheld
from the Tower Commission and the Select Committees. The most important new evidence was
Weinberger's own detailed daily diary notes and his notes of significant White House and other
meetings regarding arms shipments to Iran.  These notes, along with withheld notes of other
Administration officials and additional documents that were obtained from DoD, revealed that
Weinberger and other high-level Administration officials were much more knowledgeable about
details of the  Iran arms sales than they had indicated in their early testimony and statements.

     This evidence formed the basis for the 1992 indictment of Weinberger.  It also provided
Independent Counsel with valuable, contemporaneous information concerning high-level
participation in Iran/contra activities.

     Senior officials outside the DoD, including National Security Advisers Robert C. McFarlane
and his successor John M. Poindexter, kept Weinberger informed of proposals and
developments.  Weinberger also participated in meetings on this topic with President Reagan and
other members of the National Security Council.  In addition, beginning in September 1985,
Weinberger, along with McFarlane and Director of Central Intelligence William J. Casey,
regularly received highly  classified intelligence reports containing detailed information on the
negotiations and activities of Iranian government officials, private Iranian intermediaries,
representatives of Israel, and the terrorists who were holding American citizens hostage.
Weinberger's aides gave him additional information, which they acquired by reading the
intelligence reports, from meetings and primarily from informed counterparts at the CIA, the
Department of State and the NSC staff.

     Throughout 1986, Weinberger continued to receive intelligence reports regarding
arms-for-hostages negotiations and arms deliveries, and he continued to discuss these activities
with other senior officials.1

     1 After the revelation of the Iran intiative, Weinberger stated that he had ``seriously
contemplated resignation'' in January 1986 but decided against it. (Weinberger, Fighting for
Peace:  Seven Critical Years in the Pentagon (Warner Books, 1990), pp. 383-84 (hereafter,
``Weinberger, Fighting for Peace''). No contemporaneous document corroborates this claim.

     Origins of the Arms Shipments

     On June 17, 1985, McFarlane sent a draft memorandum -- a proposed National Security
Decision Directive (NSDD) by President Reagan titled ``U.S. Policy Toward Iran'' -- for review
and comment to Secretary of State George P. Shultz and to Weinberger.2  Among other things,
the proposed presidential memorandum stated that the first component of new U.S. policy would
be to

     2  Memorandum from McFarlane to Shultz and Weinberger, ``Subject:  U.S. Policy Toward
Iran,'' 6/17/85, AKW 001713-20.

     [e]ncourage Western allies and friends to help Iran meet its import requirements so as to
reduce the attractiveness of Soviet assistance and trade offers, while demonstrating the value of
correct relations with the West.  This includes [the] provision of selected military equipment as
determined on a case-by-case basis.3

     3 Ibid., AKW 001719.

     After reading the memorandum, Weinberger scrawled a covering note to his senior military
assistant, U.S. Army Major General Colin L. Powell:

     This is almost too absurd to comment on -- By all means pass it on to Rich[ 4] -- but the
assumption here is 1) that Iran is about to fall; + 2) we can deal with them on a rational basis --
It's like asking Quadhaffi to Washington for a cozy chat 5

     4 Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.

     5 Weinberger Note, circa 6/18/85, ALZ 0049658.  Powell also delivered a copy of the draft
NSDD, with a typed version of Weinberger's note, to Deputy Secretary of Defense William
Howard Taft IV, who reviewed it on June 20, 1985. (ALZ 004401 (``DEP SEC HAS SEEN'').)

     Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Richard L. Armitage
subsequently drafted a response with input from Fred Ikle, the under secretary of defense for
policy.6  On July 16, 1985, Weinberger sent McFarlane a memorandum that opposed issuing the
draft NSDD and stated that ``[u]nder no  circumstances . . . should we now ease our restriction on
arms sales to Iran.'' 7

     6 Memorandum from Armitage to Ikle, 7/13/85, ALZ 0071353-62 (transmitting alternative
draft memoranda for Weinberger's consideration in responding to McFarlane); Memorandum
from Armitage to Weinberger, 7/16/85, ALZ 004400.

     7 Memorandum from Weinberger to McFarlane, 7/16/85, AKW 001710.  Shultz had sent
McFarlane a similar response to the draft NSDD.  (Memorandum from Shultz to McFarlane,
6/29/85, AKW 005357 (``I . . . disagree with the suggestion that our efforts to reduce arms flows
to Iran should be ended.'').)

     During July 1985, Weinberger learned from McFarlane of Israeli intelligence information
regarding Iranians who were interested in opening a dialogue with the west.  On July 13, 1985 --
the day of President Reagan's surgery at Bethesda Naval Hospital -- he informed Shultz and
Weinberger. McFarlane sent an ``eyes only'' back-channel cable to Shultz that he had met with an
Israeli emissary, who had identified the Iranian contacts as Ayatollah Karoubi and an adviser to
the Prime Minister named Manucher Ghorbanifar. The Israeli emissary reported that the Iranians
were confident that they could achieve quickly the release of seven U.S. citizens held hostage in
Lebanon.  They wanted delivery of 100 TOW missiles from Israel so that they (the Iranians)
could show some gain from their dealings with the west.8  McFarlane gave the same report to
Weinberger, who was at his home in Washington.9

     8 Cable from McFarlane to Shultz, 7/13/85, ALV 005092-95 (Shultz file copy).

     9 In his 1990 book, Weinberger noted McFarlane's testimony regarding his July 13 briefings
of Shultz and Weinberger, but dismissed it sarcastically:

     His ``recollection'' . . . exceeds mine on this, as it did on many other points.  I recall no such
meeting.  July 13 was the Saturday the President was operated on for abdominal cancer; and I
was going over office papers in the garden at our home in McLean, Virginia, and not being
briefed by McFarlane.

     (Weinberger, Fighting for Peace, p. 366.)  In fact, Weinberger's diary entries for July 13, 1985
-- which are part of the voluminous Weinberger note collection that the OIC first located in 1991
-- memorialize five separate conversations, apparently by telephone, with McFarlane, plus
Weinberger's conversation with General Powell, regarding a conversation Powell had had with
McFarlane.  (Weinberger Diary, 7/13/85, ALZ 0039537H-37J.)

     Although none of these diary entries record substantive information regarding hostages, Israel
or Iran, that omission could reflect Weinberger's apparent decision to make no detailed notes
during July and early August 1985 regarding this activity. (See, e.g., Weinberger Diary, 8/6/85,
ALZ 0039585-87 (no notes of a White House meeting on Iran, which Weinberger later testified
he attended on this date)).  On Monday, July 15, 1985, Weinberger did make a cryptic diary entry
-- ``Saw Colin Powell -- re proposed Iran'' -- that is consistent with McFarlane's testimony about
his disclosures to Weinberger two days earlier.  (Weinberger Diary, 7/15/85, ALZ 0039539.)

     In late July and August 1985, Weinberger attended meetings of senior Reagan Administration
officials where this opening to Iran, through Israel, was discussed in detail.  General John W.
Vessey, Jr., the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), recalled that Weinberger told him
incredulously, after attending a White House meeting in the summer of 1985, that someone had
proposed contacts with Iran.10  Weinberger himself testified that he recalled  attending a White
House meeting in August 1985 regarding the proposed NSDD on a new policy toward Iran.11

     10 Vessey, Select Committees Deposition, 4/17/87, pp. 30-31.  In a subsequent interview,
Vessey elaborated, explaining that Weinberger had first offered Vessey a ride to the White House
meeting and then, after checking, had to tell Vessey that he was not invited.  The next day,
Weinberger told Vessey that he `` `wouldn't believe what was being proposed,' namely,
negotiation with the Iranians.''  (Vessey, FBI 302, 6/11/92, p. 1.)

     11 Weinberger, Select Committees Testimony, 7/31/87, pp. 88-89; cf. Weinberger, Tower
Commission Testimony, 1/14/87, p. 5 (``I do not have memory of an August [1985] meeting as
such, but I gather that there was an August [1985] meeting, and there was certainly a meeting
with the President upstairs in the residence after he got out of the hospital.'').

     According to McFarlane, President Reagan, after meeting with his senior advisers in July and
August 1985 and hearing the objections raised by Weinberger and Shultz, gave McFarlane oral
authorization for Israel to transfer U.S.-made arms to Iran, which the United States would
replenish, to get the hostages released.12  McFarlane recalled communicating the President's
decisions to Weinberger.13

     12 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, p. 2.  In President Reagan's August 23, 1985, diary entry,
which he made available for review to Independent Counsel, in excerpted form, he wrote that he
had ``received `secret phone' call from Bud McFarlane -- seems a man high-up in the Iranian
govt. believes he can deliver all or part of the 7 kidnap victims -- I had some decisions to make
about a few points -- but they were easy to make -- now we must wait.''

     13 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, pp. 3, 5, 6, 7, 9.

     Israel's Initial TOW Missile Shipments and the September 1985 Release of the Reverend Weir

     In late August 1985, after McFarlane learned that Israel and Iran had agreed on a shipment of
100 TOW missiles,14 he met with Weinberger at the Pentagon.15  Powell, who attended the
meeting,16 recalled that McFarlane gave Weinberger ``a sort of history of how we got where we
were on that particular day'' 17 and reported that there ``was to be a transfer of some limited
amount of materiel.'' 18  Weinberger's diary shows that, in a subsequent conversation with
McFarlane, Weinberger advocated an agreement with  the Iranians that would release all U.S.
citizens being held hostage in Lebanon.19  Weinberger's diary also shows that he and his senior
aides devoted significant time during late August and September of 1985 to planning for the
release of hostages,20 and that he approved a plan for a senior military officer 21 to represent the
DoD at a meeting with Iranian representatives in Europe during that period.22

     14 Ibid., p. 3.

     15 Weinberger Diary, 8/22/85, ALZ 0039605 (``Bud McFarlane fm [from] AF1 [Air Force
One] -- wants to meet with me tonight -- ''); Powell, Select Committees Deposition, 6/19/87, pp.
5-8, 52.

     16 Powell, FBI 302, 12/5/86, p. 1; Powell, Select Committees Interview Memorandum,
4/17/87, p. 2, AMY 000561.  Although Powell could not supply a precise date for this meeting
(Powell, Select Committees Deposition, 6/19/87, p. 39, placing this meeting ``in the summer'' of
1985), Weinberger's diary indicates that the meeting occurred in his office on August 22, 1985,
and was attended by Weinberger, McFarlane, Powell and General Charles Gabriel, the Acting
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Weinberger Diary, 8/22/85, ALZ 0039606-07).
Weinberger's typed calendar, which corroborates the attendees and the location, indicates that the
meeting lasted from approximately 7:30 until 8:10 p.m.  (Weinberger Calendar, 8/22/85,
LC-007474.)

     17 Powell, Select Committees Deposition, 6/19/87, p. 5.

     18 Powell, FBI Interview Transcript, 12/5/86, ALZ 0047719-20; accord Powell, Select
Committees Deposition, 6/19/87, p. 5; see also Weinberger Diary, 8/22/85, ALZ 0039606-07
(``Bud McFarlane, Charles Gabriel, CP [Powell] in office.  Peres sent Israeli Envoy to tell us 2
Iranians offered to return g008some of our kidnappees -- want us to have better attitude toward
Iran after Khomeni -- I argued that we tell them we wanted g008all hostages back'') (emphasis
in original).

     19 Ibid., 8/23/85, ALZ 0039608 (``Conference call -- with Bud McFarlane + General Gabriel -- on Iranian proposal to let us have our Kidnappees -- agreed we should deal directly with
Iranians + not thru Israelis + that we should get guarantees that we'll get them all -- + take them
off w helos fm Tripoli Beach'').

     20 See, e.g., ibid., 8/24/85, ALZ 0039611A; bid., 8/26/85, ALZ 0039613; ibid., 8/29/85, ALZ
0039621-22; ibid., 9/3/85, ALZ 0039627, ALZ 0039630; ibid., 9/11/85, ALZ 0039647-48.

     21 The DoD determined in 1993 that the senior military officer's name and all details relating
to this subject continue to be classified.  See Classified Appendix to this chapter.

     22 Weinberger Diary, 8/29/85, ALZ 0039621-22.  The senior military officer said that he was
not aware that he had ever been considered for a meeting with Iranians and, notwithstanding
Weinberger's diary notes, he stated emphatically that he had no knowledge of any dealings with
Iranians.  (Senior Military Officer, FBI 302, 1/28/92, p. 3.)  The senior military officer also said
that he never dealt with Oliver North and never heard his name mentioned in connection with the
hostage Benjamin Weir's release; he described North as ``simply a staff officer on the periphery. .
. .''  (Ibid., pp. 2-3.)

     The senior military officer's account conflicts with the contemporaneous evidence.
Weinberger's diary relates that the officer embarked on a mission involving travel to Vienna,
Austria -- at McFarlane's request and with the approval of Weinberger and General Vessey -- in
early September 1985 ``to see if Iranians will release our hostages. . . .''  (Weinberger Diary,
9/6/85, ALZ 0039637; accord Ibid., 8/29/85, ALZ 0039621-22; ibid., 9/3/85, ALZ 0039627,
ALZ 0039630; ibid., 9/4/85, ALZ 0039632.)  North's notebook quotes Adm. Moreau, who
supervised the officer in the JCS chain of command (Senior Military Officer, FBI 302, 1/28/92,
p. 2), as reporting on Wednesday, August 28, 1985, that ``[senior military officer]'' had been
``briefed Monday.'' (North Note, 8/28/85, AMX 001340.)  On September 4, 1985, he applied for
and received a ten-year passport in a false name. (Department of State Passport Application,
9/4/85, ALW 015697 (signed by ``[alias]'' and bearing the Senior Military Officer's photograph);
accord ALW 015698 (identification page of passport).)  Contemporaneous notes show that North
sought a false passport for himself and a second false passport for the Senior Military Officer;
that North invoked Moreau's name while making this request; that North was going to Europe
with the military officer; that they would be using the aliases; and that their reservations were in
the latter alias.  (Quinn Note, 8/30/85, ALV 002319 (``Secure call -- Ollie North -- . . . Asked for
false passport for trip to Europe -- ''); Ibid., 9/4/85, ALV 002320 (``OLLIE -- One more passport
-- DoD -- ''); Raphel Note, 9/10/85, ALW 0045285 (North/[Senior Military Officer] -- to
Europe); Platt Note, 9/10/85, ALW 0036312 (``Ollie North, [Senior Military Officer] -- Goode,
[false name]''); North Note, 9/4/85, AMX 001723 (``TICKETS & HOTEL:  [false name]''); see
also Platt Note, 9/10/85, ALW 0036317 (``Armacost heard from Pdx [Poindexter] . . . -- That
Ollie + friend going nowhere''); see generally Memorandum for the Record from Martel,
``Subject:  Request for Passport Retrieval,'' 11/25/86, ALW 015668 (passport believed issued for
Senior Military Officer at the request of Ambassador Robert B. Oakley); Memorandum from
Coburn to George, 10/16/87, ALW 015667; Coburn, FBI 302, 10/30/87, p. 3.)

     After the Reverend Benjamin Weir was released on September 15, 1985, Weinberger's diary
refers to ``a delivery I have for our prisoners.'' 23  Weinberger's notes show that on September
17, 1985, at a  ``Family Group'' lunch at the White House with McFarlane, Shultz and Casey, he
discussed David Kimche, director general of Israel's Foreign Ministry, who was acting as the ``go
between'' in contacts with Iranians.24

     23 Weinberger Diary, 9/15/85, ALZ 0039653F.

     24 Ibid., 9/17/85, ALZ 0039659.

     Weinberger, along with McFarlane and Casey, began to receive intelligence reports that
provided further detailed information about dealings with Iran in exchange for hostages.  Before
September 17, 1985, the Pentagon copies of the first six intelligence reports on this activity were
delivered to Adm. Arthur Moreau, assistant to the chairman of the JCS, rather than to
Weinberger; 25 Moreau brought his copies to Weinberger's office, however, where they were
read by Weinberger and Powell.26  On September 17, Weinberger, through Powell, complained
to the originating intelligence agency about not receiving direct delivery of its intelligence
reports on this topic.27  Thereafter, and continuing through the end of 1986, these reports, which
were issued frequently and on a current basis, were delivered directly to Weinberger.  Later in
September 1985, these reports disclosed that arms were the currency of United States dealings
with Iran.28  In early October 1985, Weinberger noted that the dealings with Iran involved ``arms
transfers.'' 29  Weinberger also knew by early October 1985 that NSC staff member Lt. Col.
Oliver L. North was involved in these negotiations with Iranians.30

     25 AMW 0001918-40.  The apparent reason for delivering the Pentagon copy of these
intelligence reports to Adm. Moreau during the first weeks of September 1985 was the fact that
the senior military officer who was to meet with Iranian representatives during that period
reported to the Joint Staff.  (Senior Military Officer, FBI 302, 1/28/92, p. 2.)  The intelligence
reports, in short, were initially delivered to the senior military officer's commanding officers,
Moreau and Gen. Vessey, who in turn reported with him to Weinberger.  (Ibid., p. 3.)
Independent Counsel was not able to obtain additional information regarding Moreau's handling
of the initial intelligence reports because he died shortly before Independent Counsel was
appointed in December 1986.

     26 Powell, FBI 302, 2/24/92, p. 5.

     27 Weinberger Diary, 9/17/85, ALZ 0039659.

     28 Ibid., 9/20/85, ALZ 0039671; accord Intelligence Report, AMW 0001937.

     29 Weinberger Diary, 10/3/85, ALZ 0039703.

     30 Ibid., 10/4/85, ALZ 0039704.

     Israel's November 1985 HAWK Missile Shipment

     In November 1985, McFarlane informed Weinberger that negotiations involving Israelis,
Iranians and Americans for proposed weapons transfers in return for hostage releases had
resumed.31  Although Weinberger objected, the activity continued.  McFarlane specifically
informed Weinberger that HAWK missiles were the proposed currency.32

     31 Ibid., 11/9/85, ALZ 0039774.

     32 Ibid., 11/10/85, ALZ 0039775; ibid., 11/19/85, ALZ 0039795.

     In late November 1985, when McFarlane was in Geneva with President Reagan for a summit
meeting with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, he gave Weinberger reports regarding this
proposed transaction.  On November 19, McFarlane asked Weinberger to get 500 HAWK
missiles for sale from the United States to Israel, which would transfer them to Iran in exchange
for the release of five hostages on November 21, 1985.33  Weinberger passed this request to
Powell,34 who discussed it with Noel C. Koch, the acting assistant secretary of defense for
International Security Affairs.35  Powell and Koch directed Henry H. Gaffney, the acting director
of the DoD's Defense Security Assistance Agency (DSAA),36 to gather information about the
availability of HAWK missiles and the legal restrictions that would apply to the proposed
transfer from Israel to Iran.37  Gaffney  gave Powell a negative oral report on the proposed
shipment,38 and Powell passed this information to Weinberger later that same day.  Weinberger's
diary entry reads:

     33 Ibid., 11/19/85, ALZ 0039795.

     34 Powell, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 57-58.

     35 Koch, FBI 302, 3/23/92, p. 9. Koch was acting assistant secretary of defense because
Armitage was traveling from November 15 to November 23, 1985.  After Armitage returned to
the United States in late November, Powell informed him of the activity that had occurred during
his foreign trip.  (Ibid., pp. 10-11.)

     36 Gaffney, who was DSAA's director of plans at the time, was acting director of DSAA
during the week of November 18, 1985, because the director, Lt. Gen. Philip Gast, was traveling
with the Armitage delegation, and the deputy director, Glenn A. Rudd, was out of town.
(Gaffney, FBI 302, 4/9/92, p. 2; Gaffney, Select Committees Interview Memorandum, 4/10/87,
pp. 3, 5-6, AMY 000542, AMY 000545-46.)

     37 Gaffney, Select Committees Deposition, 6/16/87, pp. 62-63, 73.

     38 Ibid., p. 81; Gaffney, Select Committees Interview Memorandum, 4/10/87, p. 8.

     Colin Powell in office re data on Hawks -- can't be given to Israel or Iran w/o Cong.
notification, -- breaking them up into several packages of 28 Hawks to keep each package under
$14 million is a clear violation 39

     Weinberger promptly passed this information to McFarlane in Geneva. McFarlane's response
was non-committal.40

     39 Weinberger Diary, 11/19/85, ALZ 0039797.

     40 Ibid.

     The next day, McFarlane told Weinberger that, notwithstanding the legal problems raised by
Weinberger, President Reagan had decided to send HAWK missiles to Iran through Israel.41
McFarlane later advised Weinberger that only 120 HAWK missiles would be sent, that they
would be ``older models,'' and that the hostage release would occur on Friday, November 22,
1985.42

     41 Ibid., 11/20/85, ALZ 0039799.  There is no record that Weinberger attempted to contact
the President to voice his opposition or to seek reconsideration of this decision.

     42 Ibid., 11/20/85, ALZ 0039801.

     Weinberger continued to discuss this planned HAWK shipment with Powell.43  Powell
provided him a succinct ``point paper'' written by Gaffney concerning the practical, legal and
political difficulties with the proposed shipment.44  Weinberger's diary shows that he and Powell
watched for a hostage release, which did not occur,  on November 22, 1985.45  Early the next
week, Weinberger received an intelligence report confirming that weapons had been shipped to
Iran on November 24, 1985.46  Subsequent reports made clear that these weapons had been
HAWK missiles.47

     43 Ibid.; ibid., 11/21/85, ALZ 0039802.

     44 ``Point Paper:  Hawk Missiles for Iran,'' ALZ 000353-54. A second copy of Gaffney's point
paper, which is labeled ``REVISED'' in his handwriting but in fact contains only one less word,
apparently was located in Weinberger's office complex during an April 1987 search for
Iran/contra documents.  On April 17, 1987, Col. James F. Lemon, the executive secretary in the
Office of the Secretary of Defense, transmitted this version of Gaffney's point paper to the DoD
general counsel and the assistant general counsel who were collecting Iran/contra documents,
with a cover memorandum explaining that the point paper had been located during a search,
conducted at the general counsel's instruction in response to document requests from the Select
Committees, of ``the Immediate Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Office of the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, and the Office of the Executive Secretariat.''  (Memorandum from Lemon
to Garrett and Shapiro, with attached ``Point Paper:  Hawk Missiles for Iran,'' 4/17/87, ALZ
0058446-48.)

     Although the revised Gaffney point paper and Lemon's cover memorandum were responsive
to Independent Counsel's 1987 omnibus requests for DoD documents, they were not made
available to the OIC until 1992.  There also is no record that the DoD Office of General Counsel
ever provided this version of Gaffney's point paper or the information regarding its location in
Weinberger's office to the Select Committees.  When the Select Committees questioned
Weinberger using Gaffney's file copy of the point paper, Weinberger said he did not recall seeing
the document contemporaneously.  (Weinberger, Select Committees Testimony, 6/17/87, pp. 22,
41.)

     45 Weinberger Diary, 11/23/85, ALZ 0039806A (``Colin Powell -- . . . no hostage release last
night'').

     46 Intelligence report, 11/25/85, AMW 0002001-03 (``Subj:  Lebanese Kidnappings: . . .
Delivery Made on 24 November 1985'').

     47 Intelligence reports, AMW 0002010-12 (12/11/85), AMW 002016-17 (12/12/85).

     December 1985 Meetings Regarding Proposals to Transfer Additional Weapons to Iran

     During the first week of December 1985, senior DoD officials addressed a proposal to ship
additional missiles to Iran in exchange for hostages.  On December 2, Assistant Secretary
Richard L. Armitage discussed this topic with Menachem Meron, the director general of Israel's
Ministry of Defense, who was visiting the United States.48  The next  day, Armitage discussed
these proposals with North.49  On December 5, Armitage met with retired U.S. Air Force Major
General Richard V. Secord, who had just returned from Israel and had been deeply involved in
the HAWK missile shipment of late November 1985.50  North prepared a detailed paper for
Poindexter that same day which discussed Israel's September 1985 TOW missile shipment to Iran
and urged additional Israeli arms shipments to Iran with replenishment by the United States.51

     48 Armitage, Meeting Log, 12/2/85, ALZ 016436. Two days after Meron's meeting with
Armitage, the Director of DSAA's Israel desk, Diana Blundell, sent an information paper on
Israel's HAWK missile systems through DSAA Deputy Director Rudd to Lt. Gen. Gast, the
director of DSAA.  (Information Paper  SUBJECT:  Israel -- HAWK Missile System, circa
12/4/85, ALZ 0044276.)  Blundell's paper contains detailed information on the status and
schedule for improving Israel's HAWK missile batteries, the anticipated schedule for delivering
modified missiles to Israel that would be compatible with the improved batteries, and the
numbers of basic and improved HAWK missiles that Israel had received from the U.S. in the
past. Blundell's cover note transmitting the information paper to Rudd and Gast says that they
had requested a paper ``on I-HAWK deliveries to Israel.''  (Memorandum from Blundell through
Rudd to Gast, 12/4/85, ALZ 0044275.)  Rudd's schedule indicates that, after he, Gast and
Blundell had received a farewell ``courtesy call'' from Gen. Meron on December 2, 1985; Rudd,
Gast, Blundell and others met the next afternoon ``re:  I-HAWK. . . .''  (Rudd Schedule, 12/2/85,
ALZ 0044110; ibid., 12/3/85, ALZ 0044110.)  This meeting preceded Blundell's paper on
I-HAWK deliveries to Israel.

     Blundell's information paper and the related Rudd schedule documents are consistent with a
response to an Israeli request during the first week of December 1985 for prompt replenishment
of the 18 HAWK missiles that Israel had transferred to Iran the previous week. Armitage, one
possible source of such a request, did not recall possessing knowledge in early December 1985 of
Israel's HAWK shipment.  Because the Blundell and Rudd documents were not produced by
DoD to the OIC until 1992 (and apparently never were produced to the Select Committees), the
OIC did not pursue the matter after Blundell stated in 1992 that she had no recollection
whatsoever of the events that prompted her 1985 information paper.  (Blundell, FBI 302,
5/29/92, pp. 4-5.)

     49 Armitage Meeting Log, 12/3/85, ALZ 016437 (``1230-1345 Ollie North -- Lunch in
office'').

     50 Ibid., 12/5/85, ALZ 016439 (``1300 -- Gen Secord'').

     51 See Armitage section below.

     On or about December 5-6, Armitage obtained an information paper from DSAA regarding
the proposed shipment outlined in North's paper.  This paper, a one-page analysis titled
``Prospects for Immediate Shipment of I-HAWK and I-TOW Missiles,'' was drafted by DSAA
Deputy Director Glenn A. Rudd and Gaffney.52  The paper reported that up to 75 I-HAWK
missiles were available in the United States for foreign shipment and quoted a ``total package
price'' of $22.5 million ``for [shipping] 50. . . .''  It reported that ``3,300 I-TOWs'' could be
shipped from U.S. Army stocks ``immediately. . . .'' 53  Armitage, in collaboration with State
Department official Arnold L. Raphel, 54 also created a second information paper, using a draft
by Rudd and Gaffney, titled ``Possibility for Leaks.''  The ``Leaks'' paper addresses the legal
implications of transferring ``I-HAWKs in the quantity contemplated'' and ``the I-TOW
quantities'' and says that ``[t]here is no good way to keep this project from ultimately being made
public.'' 55

     52 Gaffney, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87, p. 24 (joint deposition with Rudd).

     53 Prospects for Immediate Shipment of I-HAWK and I-TOW Missiles, ALZ 0058747.

     54 Raphel served as the principal deputy assistant secretary of state in the Bureau of Near
Eastern and Asian Affairs (NEA) during 1985 and 1986.

     55 Possibility for Leaks, ALZ 004343.

     By Thursday, December 5, 1985, Weinberger had learned that President Reagan would be
meeting with his  senior advisers on Saturday, December 7 to discuss this proposal.56
Weinberger and Powell, who had been out of the country from December 2 to 6, 1985,57 met
with Armitage early that Saturday morning to discuss the information papers Armitage had
assembled in preparation for Weinberger's meeting with the President.58

     56 Weinberger Diary, 12/5/85, ALZ 0039827 (``Colin Powell in room -- re meeting Saturday
with President on Iran hostages + TOW's'').

     57 Ibid., 12/2/85, ALZ 0039818 (departure for Europe); ibid., 12/6/85, ALZ 0039829 (return
to U.S.).

     58 Ibid., 12/7/85, ALZ 0039830 (``Met with Colin Powell + Rich Armitage -- re NSC Plan to
let Israelis give Iranians 50 Hawks + 3300 TOWs in return for 5 hostages -- NSC will present it
as a means of helping group that wants to overthrow gov't -- But no g722assu assurance that
any of this g722goes -- weapons will go to Iranian Army.'').

     At the White House meeting, Weinberger -- supported by Shultz and White House Chief of
Staff Donald T. Regan -- argued against any more arms shipments to Iran.59  Weinberger
specifically told President Reagan that he could not violate the United States embargo on arms
shipments to Iran, and that ``washing'' an arms transfer through Israel would not make it legal.60
The President  rejected these legal arguments,61 but he announced no decision by the end of the
meeting.  Later that day, McFarlane advised Weinberger that the President had decided not to
trade more arms for hostages, but instead was sending McFarlane to London to meet with the
Iranians and to discuss the possibility of Great Britain selling arms to them.62

     59 Ibid., 12/7/85, ALZ 0039831.

     60 Ibid. (``I argued strongly that we have an embargo that makes arms sales to Iran illegal +
President couldn't violate it --  + that `washing' transaction thru Israel wouldn't make it legal.
Shultz, Don Regan agreed.'').

     61 Ibid. (``President sd. he could answer charges of illegality but he couldn't answer charge
that `big strong President Reagan passed up a chance to free hostages'.'').

     62 Ibid., ALZ 0039832, ALZ 0039838 (``Called McFarlane in Washington -- he is going to
London to advise President's decision that we will g008not ransom our hostages -- he will
discuss with UK Possibility of their selling some arms to negotiators.'') (emphasis in original).

     Early the next week, after McFarlane had returned from London, Weinberger attended another
White House meeting with the President and senior officials to discuss proposed arms shipments
to Iran.  Weinberger took detailed notes during this December 10, 1985, meeting. McFarlane told
the group that the United States had an outstanding commitment to supply 500 replacement
TOW missiles to Israel.63  The meeting ended with an apparent decision by President Reagan
not to send additional arms to Iran at  that time but to pursue diplomatic contacts in an attempt to
free the hostages.64

     63 Weinberger Meeting Notes, 12/10/85, ALZ 0040645 (``We still must replace 500 TOWs to
Israel'').

     64 Weinberger Diary, 12/10/85, ALZ 0039840 (``President still wants to try to get hostage
released -- But forcible storming would mean many deaths -- decided to send Dick Walters to
Damascus [with classified message].'').

     January 1986 Meetings and President Reagan's Decision To Proceed With Direct Weapons
Transfers From the United States to Iran

     In January 1986, Israel proposed additional weapons shipments to Iran.  On January 6,
Poindexter briefed Weinberger regarding Israel's proposal to transfer 4,000 TOW missiles from
Israel to Iran, with a commitment from the United States to replenish Israel's TOW-missile
stocks.65  The next day, Weinberger attended a White House meeting with President Reagan and
other senior officials.  Weinberger voiced his continuing objections to this proposal.66  The next
week, Weinberger received a briefing from Koch, the principal deputy assistant secretary of
defense for International Security Affairs, who had been negotiating details relating to these
shipments with an Israeli arms procurement official.67  After hearing Koch's progress report,
Weinberger commented that somebody was going to go to jail.68

     65 Weinberger Meeting Note, 1/6/86, ALZ 0042650-51 (``Nir proposed selling 4000 TOWs
(unimp. [unimproved]) -- No launchers -- + Israelis would deliver 500 via Israeli plane -- if all 5
US hostages released -- then Israelis want 4000 TOW replacements, + If they are g722cauget
caught they would want us to acknowledge that we kneg008w of it + did not object.'')
(emphasis in original). Weinberger Diary, 1/6/86, ALZ 0039880 (``John Poindexter in office.
Another Israeli-Iranian scheme offering freedom to hostages in return for TOW missiles -- Told
him I opposed it.'').

     66 Weinberger Meeting Note, 1/7/86, ALZ 0042655; Weinberger Diary, 1/7/86, ALZ
0039883 (``Met with President, Shultz, Poindexter, Bill Casey, Ed Meese, in Oval Office --
President decided to go with Israeli-Iranian offer to release our 5 hostages in return for sale of
4000 TOWs to Iran by Israel -- George Shultz + I opposed -- Bill Casey, Ed Meese + VP favored
-- as did Poindexter.'').

     67 Ibid., 1/14/86, ALZ 0039901 (``Colin Powell + Noel Cook [sic -- Koch] in office -- re
changes in Iran offer on hostages -- '').

     68 Koch, Select Committees Testimony, 6/23/87, pp. 76, 187-88 (``I said to him -- and I did
not say it in a very serious way -- it may not sound in context as an opportunity for levity, but I
said, do we have a legal problem with this, is somebody going to go to jail, and his response was
in the affirmative.  But I didn't take that seriously.  . . .  I hadn't intended it seriously when I asked
the question.  We had the shared background of Watergate to bounce some of these perceptions
off of, so there was that.  Chiefly I assumed if there was any prospect of it being illegal, that he
would have stopped it. . . . [S]ince he didn't leave, I assumed it was legal.'').

     President Reagan ultimately decided that the United States would deal with Iran directly,
rather than through Israel.  On January 16, 1986, Weinberger attended a White House meeting
with Casey, Attorney General Edwin Meese III and CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin
regarding a proposed presidential Finding that would authorize covert arms shipments from the
CIA to Iran.69  Although  Weinberger continued to offer legal objections,70 President Reagan
signed the Finding the next day.  Weinberger, through General Powell, then directed the DoD
bureaucracy to make missiles available to the CIA.71  Weinberger explicitly directed
subordinates that DoD was not to be involved in shipping arms to Iran beyond selling the
missiles to CIA.72

     69 Weinberger Diary, 1/16/86, ALZ 0039906A (``Met with John Poindexter, McLaughlin --
re ways to increase aid + financing for Lebanon -- Bill Casey -- Ed Meese -- Stanley Sorkin [sic -- Sporkin]''); Sporkin, Select Committees Testimony, 6/24/87, pp. 126-28.

     70 Weinberger Diary, 1/17/86, ALZ 0039906D (``Saw Colin Powell -- re acts prohibiting
sales to Iran[;] Colin Powell (2) to Car -- citation to statute above[;] Lunch with Shultz, Bill
Casey, John Poindexter in W.H. [White House] Family Dining Room, re attempts to get hostages
back from Hizballah -- Told him of Statutes forbidding sales to Iran.'').

     71 Powell, FBI 302, 7/6/87 & 7/9/87, p. 1.

     72 Weinberger Diary, 1/24/86, ALZ 0039919 (``Noel Koch -- in office -- with Colin Powell --
re Iranian-Hizbollah hostage release -- we are not to be involved in this beyond selling to CIA'').

     DoD Knowledge of Weapons Transfers to Iran During 1986

     Throughout 1986, Weinberger received periodic but detailed reports, which he recorded in his
handwritten notes, concerning arms shipments to Iran to recover the hostages.  In February 1986,
at a ``Family Group'' lunch with Casey, Shultz and Poindexter, Weinberger was briefed on the
schedule for sequential TOW missile shipments and hostage releases.73  In March 1986,
Weinberger learned of a  proposal to send McFarlane to meet with the Iranians.74  In April 1986,
Weinberger learned that, in addition to the TOW missiles that had already been sent, HAWK
missile parts would now be transferred to Iran, and that McFarlane and North would be traveling
to Iran.75  In May 1986, Weinberger discussed with Shultz intelligence reports demonstrating
that McFarlane would be bringing military equipment to Iran without a commitment that all U.S.
hostages would be released.76  Near the end of May 1986, Weinberger learned that McFarlane's
trip to Iran had ended in failure.77  In July 1986, Weinberger received a briefing from Michael
Ledeen, the former NSC and DoD consultant who had participated in the 1985 negotiations with
Israelis and Iranians before his dismissal by Poindexter.78  In late July 1986, Weinberger was
informed that hostage Father Lawrence Martin Jenco had been released in Lebanon due to Iran's
intervention and in an effort to obtain ``more US  weapons.'' 79  In October 1986, Poindexter
informed Weinberger of a new channel to Iran through Rafsanjani's nephew.80

     73 Weinberger Meeting Note, 2/11/86, ALZ 0040652D-52E.

     74 Weinberger Diary, 3/4/86, ALZ 0040006B (``Attended lunch with John Poindexter -- in
his WH [White House] office -- re Iran hostages. (About delays and demands -- McFarlane will
go as rep. to meeting if they agree.)'').

     75 Ibid., 4/10/86, ALZ 0040065 (``Saw Don Jones -- re cables fm [from] Will Taft -- on addl
[additional] attempts to buy our kidnappees' release -- with g722sp Hawk equipment -- '');
Weinberger Diary, 4/13/86, ALZ 0040072 (``[Saw] Will Taft -- . . . also re g722sam Iran
hostages -- McFarlane, North going to Iran -- idiocy -- '').

     76 Ibid., 5/13/86, ALZ 0040147-48.

     77 Ibid., 5/29/86, ALZ 0040165.

     78 Ibid., 7/24/86, ALZ 0040303.

     79 Ibid., 7/30/86, ALZ 0040312.

     80 Ibid., 10/3/86, ALZ 0040458.

     Weinberger complied with President Reagan's decision by selling weapons and weapons parts
from DoD to CIA for onward shipment to Iran on three occasions.  In February 1986, TOW
missiles were sold to CIA and ultimately transferred to Iran.  In May 1986, HAWK missile parts
were sold by DoD to CIA and ultimately, in a partial shipment with McFarlane that month and in
a second shipment in early August, transferred to Iran.  In October 1986, additional TOW
missiles were sold by DoD to CIA and ultimately transferred to Israel, which retained some as
replenishment for earlier shipments and transferred others to Iran, producing the release of
hostage David Jacobsen.  Weinberger's senior military assistant informed him at the time each of
these transfers to the CIA took place.81  Weinberger also continued to receive intelligence
reports on this activity throughout 1986, which provided detailed information on dealings with
Iran and arms shipments in exchange for hostages.82

     81 Jones, FBI 302, 3/24/92, pp. 2, 6.

     82 Weinberger Diary, 5/13/86, ALZ 0040146-48; ibid., 10/30/86, ALZ 0040506.

     Independent Counsel's Investigation

     Investigation of the DoD, 1986-1990

     Before the discovery of Weinberger's notes in 1991, Independent Counsel's investigation had
focused primarily on DoD's sale of missiles and missile parts to the CIA in 1986, and on the
involvement of military officials in contra resupply activity.  The inquiry into the 1986 Iran arms
sales was intended primarily to obtain a thorough understanding of the mechanics of the
transactions, the pricing of the TOW missiles, and whether DoD officials involved in the pricing
or transfer had knowledge of the diversion of profits from the arms sales.  No prosecutions
resulted from this aspect of the investigation.

     Weinberger was interviewed twice as a witness.83

     83 Weinberger, FBI 302, 12/1/86; Weinberger, FBI 302, 4/7/88.

     Discovery of Weinberger's Notes

     Beginning in 1987, congressional investigators and the OIC repeatedly requested notes,
calendars, telephone logs, diaries and other materials relevant to the Iran/contra matter from
Weinberger and other high Administration officials.  Weinberger produced a typewritten
memorandum of one meeting, a few documents containing his handwritten marginalia, and
official calendars and activity logs that were maintained by his staff.  It was not until the late
summer of 1990 that OIC obtained a document suggesting that he had withheld relevant
handwritten notes.

     An August 7, 1987, note by Secretary of State Shultz's executive assistant, M. Charles Hill,
led investigators to reexamine earlier Weinberger statements regarding notes.84 In one OIC
interview, Weinberger had referred to ``a habit of making notes on any piece of paper he could
get his hands on.'' 85

     84 Shultz told Hill that ``Cap takes notes but never referred to them so never had to cough
them up.''  (Hill Note, 8/7/87, ALW 0056370.)

     85 Weinberger, FBI 302, 4/7/88, p. 2.

     In late August 1990, Weinberger was subpoenaed to produce relevant documents, including
any handwritten notes, to the Grand Jury.  On September 13, 1990, his attorney assured the OIC
that Weinberger had previously turned over his notes to the congressional committees
investigating the Iran/contra matter or to the Library of Congress.  Subsequently, Weinberger
agreed to be interviewed.  On September 28, 1990, in arranging the interview, Weinberger's
attorney was told that two sources of information -- Weinberger's previous interview with the
OIC and a newly discovered document 86 -- indicated that Weinberger had not turned over
relevant notes to Congress.

     86 The August 7, 1987, Charles Hill note.

     On October 10, 1990, Weinberger, accompanied by his counsel, was interviewed by OIC
attorneys in the presence of an FBI Special Agent.87  At that time, his counsel asked to see a
record of the April 7, 1988, interview.  After reviewing it, Weinberger said that he disagreed with
that portion of the report that stated:  ``he had a habit of making notes on any piece of paper he
could get his hands on.''  Weinberger characterized the statement as ``misleading'' because it
implied that it was his habit to make notes throughout his seven years as secretary of defense,
which he said was not the case.  Weinberger stated that during his first year as secretary of
defense he had taken notes on the backs of pages in his briefing books.  He said his personal
secretaries initially had saved these notes for him so that he could dictate memoranda.  He said
he discontinued that practice after about a year, when it became apparent that he would not have
time to dictate memoranda.88  Weinberger stated that, after his first year in office, he did not
regularly take notes at meetings or make a record of meetings  when he returned to his office; he
did not take notes of his phone calls; and he had not deliberately withheld anything from
Iran/contra investigators.  During the interview, Weinberger was told that a document,
contemporaneously written by someone Weinberger would consider credible, said that
Weinberger had withheld some of his relevant Iran/contra notes.89  Weinberger denied the
allegation and stated he was distrustful of the author and his motivations.

     87 The following account of the OIC's October 10, 1990, interview of Weinberger is based
upon the FBI Record of Interview, also referred to as a ``302.''

     88 At the beginning of the October 10, 1990, interview, Weinberger produced an October 1,
1990, memorandum by Kay D. Leisz, his executive assistant at that time and throughout his
tenure at the DoD, regarding the OIC's request for Weinberger's notes.  Leisz's memo echoed
Weinberger's assertion that, other than notes he took in his briefing books during his first year as
Secretary of Defense, no notes were retained.  (Memorandum for the Record by Leisz, 10/1/90,
ALZ 0051360.)

     89 The August 7, 1987, Hill note.

     Weinberger and his counsel were permitted to review the FBI agent's October 10, 1990,
interview report when they returned to the Office of Independent Counsel for another interview
on December 3, 1990.90  Both Weinberger and his counsel complimented the report's accuracy
and thoroughness and contrasted it favorably with the report of the 1988 interview, which had
suggested he was an avid notetaker.

     90 Weinberger's counsel had asked to review the FBI report of the October 10, 1990,
interview because of Weinberger's criticisms of the earlier FBI report.

     Between the October and December 1990 interviews, the OIC obtained Weinberger's
permission to review his papers at the Library of Congress.  Assuming that any documents
relating to Iran/contra were classified 91 and  relying on Weinberger's statements that the few
notes he took were scribbled on the backs and margins of documents in his briefing books, OIC
investigators asked both DoD and Library of Congress personnel where such materials would be
located.  The investigators were directed to the classified subject list in the Library's index to the
Weinberger collection.92  Investigators found no collection of notes among the materials they
examined.

     91 Almost all high-level documents regarding the Iran arms sales and the Reagan
Administration's efforts to obtain foreign support for the contras are highly classified.

     92 In what may have been a misunderstanding, the OIC investigators did not believe they
were at liberty to examine other parts of the index and therefore did not see the references to
diary and meeting notes in the description of unclassified material.

     When OIC investigators returned to the Library of Congress in November 1991, they
reviewed the entire index and found thousands of pages of diary and meeting notes that
Weinberger had created as secretary of defense.  These notes, which contained highly classified
information, had been stored in the unclassified section of the Weinberger collection.93

     93 The OIC immediately informed the Library of Congress and the Department of Defense of
the security breach.  After reviewing Weinberger's notes, the DoD determined that ``classified
information [had] inadvertently been included in the unclassified portion of the Weinberger
collection at the Library of Congress'' and recalled Weinberger's diary notes and activity logs to
the Pentagon pending a formal security review.  (Letter from Sterlacci to Stansbury, 6/12/92,
019316.)

     Weinberger's notes proved to be an invaluable contemporaneous record of the views and
activities of the  highest officials regarding those sales.94  They revealed, among other things,
that contrary to his sworn testimony, Weinberger knew in advance that U.S. arms were to be
shipped to Iran through Israel in November 1985 without congressional notification, in an effort
to obtain the release of U.S. hostages, and that Israel expected the United States to replenish the
weapons Israel shipped to Iran.  Weinberger's notes also disclosed that, contrary to his sworn
testimony, he knew that Saudi Arabia was secretly providing $25 million in assistance to the
contras during a ban on U.S. aid.

     94 During his interview with the Tower Commission, Weinberger lamented the fact that there
were not ``accurate minutes taken of all [NSC and NSPG] meetings.''  (Weinberger, Tower
Commission Interview, 1/14/87, pp. 43-44.)  He conceded that someone might have taken notes
of the relevant meetings but said, ``I don't know of any.''  (Ibid., p. 46.)  Weinberger
recommended strongly that accurate records be kept of such meetings in the future to show ``who
said what to whom and when.''  (Ibid., pp. 44, 46.)

     Investigation, Indictment and Pretrial Proceedings in United States v. Weinberger

     By late January 1992, Weinberger's conduct had become a focus of the OIC's investigation.95

     95 In the course of the Weinberger investigation, the OIC requested and reviewed numerous
DoD documents relating to the Iran arms sales and DoD's document-production efforts, and
questioned more than 25 witnesses in interviews and in the Grand Jury.  The central witnesses
included Weinberger's personal secretaries at DoD, Kay D. Leisz and Thelma Stubbs Smith;
former DoD General Counsel H. Lawrence Garrett III; former DoD Assistant General Counsel
Edward J. Shapiro; former DoD officials Richard L. Armitage and William H. Taft IV; General
Colin L. Powell; and Library of Congress personnel.

     On March 30, 1992, the OIC notified Weinberger that he was a target of a federal Grand Jury
investigation of possible crimes, including obstruction, false statements and perjury. Independent
Counsel invited Weinberger's voluntary testimony before the Grand Jury.  Although Weinberger
ultimately declined to appear before the Grand Jury or make any statements before an FBI Agent,
he did, at his request, make his own presentation to Independent Counsel and other OIC attorneys
on May 12, 1992.  In addition, in extended efforts to resolve the matter, OIC attorneys met
frequently and at length over a 10-week period with Weinberger's counsel.96

     96 Independent Counsel recognized that Weinberger had a distinguished public career and
that he had strongly opposed the Iran arms sales.  OIC representatives met with Weinberger's
attorneys on at least 12 separate occasions between April 1 and May 13, 1992.  After
Weinberger's counsel requested additional time to work with their client, Independent Counsel
agreed not to present a proposed indictment to the special Iran/contra Grand Jury whose two-year
term expired on May 15, 1992.  Independent Counsel met with Weinberger's attorneys on June 2,
1992, to permit a final presentation by them.  Subsequently an indictment was presented to and
returned by a different Grand Jury.

     In the course of these discussions, Independent Counsel asked Weinberger to provide
complete and truthful information on a range of topics, including positions that Reagan
Administration officials took before Congress and the  public in November 1986.  Weinberger
and his counsel insisted, however, that Weinberger had no information to provide that went
beyond his previous statements.  Weinberger and his counsel claimed that Weinberger had never
associated his diary notes with Iran/contra document requests because his note-taking was as
habitual and unconscious as brushing his teeth.  They also claimed that none of Weinberger's
aides had asked him to produce his notes.  Weinberger denied present knowledge of the
information recorded in his handwritten diary and meeting notes and would not acknowledge the
inconsistencies between his notes and his testimony.  In an effort to demonstrate that Weinberger
lacked criminal intent, his attorneys also submitted to the OIC a report of a private polygraph
examination of Weinberger and a psychologist's report regarding Weinberger's memory.  Both
concluded that Weinberger had not intentionally concealed his notes from Congress or the
OIC.97

     97 The polygraph report concluded that no deception was indicated when Weinberger denied
having intentionally misled or lied to Iran/contra investigators about his diary notes, denied
having deliberately withheld his diary notes, and denied misleading investigators about his
knowledge of arms transfers to Iran from August through November 1985.  (Polygraph
Examination Report, 5/5/92, ALZ 0046855-56.)  The psychologist's report concluded that
Weinberger's note-taking was so ``routine, compulsive and habitual'' that it was not ``stored in
memory for easy retrieval'' and that the questioning of Weinberger ``lacked sufficient specificity''
to trigger a recollection of his notes.  (Letter from Fishburne to Bennett, 6/1/92, pp. 3-4, ALZ
0047613-14.)  Although Fishburne apparently reviewed Weinberger's congressional deposition,
in which Weinberger was questioned about his note-taking (Ibid., p. 1), he did not review other
evidence the Government would have used at trial to show Weinberger's consciousness of his
notes.

     The district court later ruled that neither the polygraph examination result nor expert
testimony on memory could be admitted at trial.  (Memorandum Opinion and Pretrial Order No.
15, United States v. Weinberger, Crim. No. 92-0235-TFH (D.D.C. Dec. 21, 1992).)

     The OIC found Weinberger's presentations unconvincing.  Independent Counsel thereafter
presented an indictment to the Grand Jury, which was returned on June 16, 1992.

     The indictment contained five felony counts charging Weinberger with:

      -- Count One, obstruction of a congressional investigation by concealing and withholding
relevant notes;

      -- Count Two, making false statements to Congress regarding his knowledge of Saudi
Arabia's funding of the contras;

      -- Count Three, perjury before Congress about his knowledge of the planned shipment of
HAWK missiles to Iran in November 1985;

      -- Count Four, perjury before Congress about his knowledge of the issue of replenishing
missiles that Israel had shipped to Iran; and

      -- Count Five, false statements to the Office of Independent Counsel and the FBI regarding
his note-taking.98

     98 Indictment, United States v. Caspar W. Weinberger, Criminal No. 92-0235-TFH (D.D.C.
June 16, 1992).

     Weinberger was arraigned on June 19, 1992, and pleaded not guilty to all charges.  The case
was ultimately set for  trial on January 5, 1993.  Hearings to resolve classified information issues
under the Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA) were scheduled for December 7, 1992,
with a November 2 deadline for the Government to produce the documents it intended to use in
its case-in-chief.

     On September 29, 1992, the district court granted Weinberger's motion to dismiss Count
One.99  The court held that Count One, in effect, charged Weinberger with lying to Congress,
which did not constitute obstruction under the decision in United States v. Poindexter.100
Rather than appeal the district court's decision, Independent Counsel sought a new indictment
charging Weinberger under  18 U.S.C.  1001 with the same false statements to Congress that
had been alleged in the original Count One.  The new indictment was returned on October 30,
1992.101  On December 11, 1992, the district court granted Weinberger's motion to dismiss the
new indictment on statute-of-limitation grounds.102  On December 24, 1992, President Bush
pardoned Weinberger. At the time of President Bush's pardon, Independent Counsel had not yet
decided whether to appeal the district court's ruling.

     99 Memorandum Opinion and Pretrial Order No. 6, United States v. Weinberger, Crim. No.
92-0235-TFH, pp. 4-5 (D.D.C. Sept. 29, 1992).

     100 951 F.2d 369 (D.C. Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 656 (1992).  The obstruction
statute outlaws, among other things, ``corruptly'' ``obstruct[ing]'' or ``imped[ing]'' a congressional
inquiry. (18 U.S.C.  1505.)  The Court of Appeals held in Poindexter that the term ``corruptly''
implies that a defendant must cause another knowingly to violate a legal duty and found that the
term was therefore unconstitutionally vague as applied to a defendant charged with lying to
Congress himself rather than causing another to do so.  (951 F.2d at 379, 385-86.)

     The OIC had argued that Poindexter did not preclude the obstruction charge against
Weinberger because the indictment alleged that Weinberger had obstructed Congress not merely
by lying but also by withholding and concealing his relevant notes.  The Poindexter decision left
open the possibility that concealing or destroying documents could be considered analogous to
causing a witness to lie or withhold testimony and therefore would satisfy the court's
interpretation of the term ``corruptly.''  (Ibid. at 384, citing United States v. Walasek, 527 F.2d
676, 679 & n.11 (3d Cir. 1975); cf. United States v. Rasheed, 663 F.2d 843, 852 (9th Cir. 1981),
cert. denied, 454 U.S. 1157 (1982)).

     101 Indictment, United States v. Caspar W. Weinberger, Criminal No. 92-0416-TFH (D.D.C.
Oct. 30, 1992).  Weinberger had moved on August 3, 1992, to disqualify Deputy Independent
Counsel Craig A. Gillen  from trying the case on the ground that Gillen was a witness to
Weinberger's October 10, 1990, interview. Gillen withdrew voluntarily from the case on October
9, 1992, following the District Court's preliminary ruling on this issue.  Substitute trial counsel
James J. Brosnahan was appointed on October 15, 1992. Brosnahan would have tried the case
with Associate Counsel John Q. Barrett, George C. Harris, and Christina A. Spaulding.

     102 Memorandum Opinion and Pretrial Order No. 12, United States v. Weinberger, Crim. No.
92-0235-TFH (D.D.C. Dec. 11, 1992).  Although the charged statement was beyond the five-year
statute of limitations, 18 U.S.C.  3288 provides that when a count is dismissed for ``any reason''
after the statute of limitations has run, the prosecution may bring a new indictment based upon
the same facts within six months of the dismissal.  To be proper under section 3288, the new
indictment must be based on ``essentially the same facts as those alleged in the old indictment''
so that the defendant is on notice, within the statute of limitations, of the basis for the new
charges.  (Pretrial Order No. 12, at 4 quoting United States v. George, 1992 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
9618 (D.D.C. July 8, 1992).)

     The District Court acknowledged that, under this standard, Weinberger ``clearly had notice of
the factual basis for the charges'' in the new indictment.  (Ibid.)  The court expressed ``concern''
that the specific statements alleged to be false had not been underlined in the first indictment but
did not find this point dispositive.  (Ibid., pp. 4, 6.)  Rather, the court went on to hold that even
though the new indictment was premised on the same facts as the first indictment, it
impermissibly broadened the original charges because the obstruction statute, as construed in
Poindexter, does not include false statements.  (Ibid., pp. 5-6.)

     The Government's Case Against Weinberger

     The Government's trial evidence would have demonstrated that, contrary to the impression
created by his false testimony before Congress, Weinberger was a knowing participant in the
initiative to send arms to Iran in return for the release of Americans held hostage in Lebanon.  In
the summer of 1985, Weinberger knew of President Reagan's decision to authorize Israel to send
missiles to Iran and his commitment to replenish Israel's missile stocks.  Beginning in late
September 1985 and continuing through the end of 1986, Weinberger also received a sizeable
quantity of highly classified intelligence reports regarding the Iran initiative.103  These
intelligence reports provided detailed information regarding the pricing and delivery of missiles
sold to Iran and the release of American hostages in Lebanon.  In particular, in very late
November and early December 1985, the reports revealed that HAWK  missiles were shipped to
Iran from Israel in connection with hostage-recovery efforts.

     103 In his testimony before congressional committees, Weinberger falsely claimed that he had
been cut off ``to a large extent'' from this intelligence until shortly before December 7, 1985,
when he first received one of these reports. (Weinberger, SSCI Testimony, 12/17/86, pp. 6-9, 51;
Weinberger, HPSCI Testimony, 12/18/86, pp. 39-41; Weinberger, Select Committees Testimony,
7/31/87, pp. 92-94.)

     The Government's evidence also would have shown that Weinberger deliberately concealed
from Iran/contra investigators his diary and meeting notes, which would have demonstrated the
falsity of his testimony.

     For simplicity of discussing the evidence supporting the individual counts, this Report begins
with the evidence proving the falsity of Weinberger's denial of the existence of his notes, which
was charged in the original Count One and Count Five. Because Count One was dismissed, this
discussion begins with Count Five.

     Count Five:  Weinberger's Denial of the Existence of His Notes

     Count Five charged Weinberger with making false statements in the October 10, 1990,
interview with members of Independent Counsel's staff and a special agent of the FBI.
Weinberger's attorney had been advised beforehand that the purpose of the interview was to
discuss Weinberger's notes, and Weinberger brought to the interview a memorandum from his
personal secretary that addressed this very issue.  During the interview, Weinberger was asked
repeatedly, in several different ways, about his note-taking practices.  He insisted that he rarely
took notes; that, as a rule, he did not take any notes when he met with the President or other
Cabinet members; and that he specifically did not take any notes during meetings concerning the
Iran arms sales.  Weinberger also stated that he did not make a record of his meetings when he
returned to the Pentagon and did not take notes of telephone conversations.  He stated that he had
always followed President Reagan's instructions to turn everything over to  Iran/contra
investigators and said that he was not aware of any relevant notes that had not been turned over.
He insisted he had not deliberately withheld anything from Iran/contra investigators.104

     104 Weinberger, FBI 302, 10/10/90.  Weinberger later claimed that he believed the OIC was
inquiring only about notes he took during meetings and therefore did not understand the
questions to include his diary notes.  (Weinberger Interview, ABC ``This Week with David
Brinkley,'' 12/27/92, NEXIS Tr. at 12).  This explanation is disingenuous, because Weinberger
stated in his October 10, 1990, interview that he very rarely took notes during meetings -- which
was, in itself, false -- and also denied that he made any other record of meetings when he
returned to his office or that he took notes of telephone conversations.  In fact, Weinberger's
diary notes consist primarily of notes of telephone conversations and of meetings, made after the
fact.

     To establish the deliberate falsity of Weinberger's statements, the Government would have
proved at trial that (1) Weinberger  maintained voluminous notes of meetings and phone calls,
many of which were relevant to Iran/contra; (2) Weinberger knew in 1987 of congressional
requests for his notes and diaries but produced none of them, and went so far as to lie under oath
to conceal their existence from congressional investigators; 105 and (3) on his retirement as
secretary of defense, Weinberger  privately deposited his notes in the Library of Congress where
no one could see them without his permission.

     105 Weinberger filed a motion in limine on December 14, 1992, seeking to prevent the
Government from introducing at trial any evidence regarding the Select Committees' requests for
Weinberger's notes and diaries.  The Government opposed this motion on the ground that
evidence that Weinberger had deliberately concealed his notes from Congress was admissible as
intrinsic evidence of the falsity of his statements to the OIC and as extrinsic evidence under
Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b) to show Weinberger's motive to lie to the OIC.  The district
court had not yet ruled on the motion at the time of the pardon.

     Weinberger's Note-Taking Practices

     Throughout his career, Weinberger regularly took detailed notes, primarily in pencil, of his
daily activities, including summaries of his meetings and telephone conversations.  While
secretary of defense, Weinberger took more than 7,000 pages of these daily ``diary notes'' on 5" x
7" government-issue note pads.106  He took nearly 1,700 pages of such notes in 1985 and 1986
alone.  During the same period, Weinberger compiled hundreds of pages of notes taken during
White House and Cabinet meetings.  More than 150 pages of these diary and meeting notes
contain information relevant to Iran/contra, including information that contradicts Weinberger's
sworn testimony concerning his knowledge of the Iran arms sales and of Saudi Arabian
contributions to the contras.

     106 The term ``diary notes'' was adopted by the Library of Congress archivists to describe
Weinberger's daily notes.  Although Weinberger apparently referred to these documents as his
``telephone logs,'' (Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 34-35), this report uses the Library of Congress
terminology.

     According to General Powell, who served as Weinberger's senior military assistant from July
1983 to March 1986, Weinberger kept the 5" x 7" note pads on his desk and jotted down entries
throughout the day.  Weinberger stored completed note pads in his desk drawer  and transferred
them to the bedroom attached to his office when the drawer was full.107  Powell's successor,
Admiral Donald S. Jones, said there were ``better than one or two linear feet'' of papers, bound
together with rubber bands, on the shelf in Weinberger's bedroom at DoD.108  Several witnesses
stated that Weinberger intended to use his diary notes to write his memoirs.109  In 1988, while
working on  his book Fighting for Peace, Weinberger and his research assistant John C. Duncan
reviewed some of the Weinberger diary notes that had been deposited at the Library of
Congress.110  Duncan recalled that they joked about the illegibility of Weinberger's handwriting.
They decided that Weinberger's handwritten notes would be too difficult to use as a source for
Fighting for Peace but agreed that the notes would be useful when Weinberger wrote a more
comprehensive memoir that tracked his daily experiences.111

     107 General Powell described Weinberger's note-taking in detail in an affidavit obtained by
Weinberger's attorneys before the indictment.  (Powell, Affidavit, 4/21/92,

 3-4, ALZ 0045089.)  Powell also stated that he regarded these notes as Weinberger's personal
diaries and expressed the opinion that ``it is entirely possible that it would not have occurred to
[Weinberger] to associate or link these private notes on the 5 x 7 pads with a governmental
request for `notes' in the context of the Iran-Contra matter.''  (Ibid.,

 3.)  On two separate occasions in 1987, however, Powell told congressional Iran/contra
investigators that he had no knowledge of Weinberger maintaining a ``diary.''  (Powell, Select
Committees Interview Memorandum, 4/20/87, p. 9, AMY 000568; Powell, Select Committees
Deposition, 6/19/87, pp. 54-55.)  The inconsistencies in Powell's testimony are discussed below.

     108 Jones, FBI 302, 12/22/92, p. 4.  On one occasion, Jones noticed that Weinberger was
taking notes of their conversation as they were talking.  (Ibid.)

     109 Smith, Affidavit, 4/29/92,

 5, ALZ 0045122; Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, p. 35; Duncan, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 25-26; Taft,
FBI 302, 4/8/92, p. 2; accord Weinberger, Fighting for Peace, p. 17 (expressing hope to write
later book covering on a ``day-to-day basis'' his seven years as secretary of defense).

     Weinberger's 1981 diary notes contain repeated references to discussions with the British
scholar and biographer Janet Morgan regarding his ``biography + diaries.''  (Weinberger Diary,
3/16/81, ALZ 0060966; ibid., 3/17/81, ALZ 0060969; ibid., 3/27/81, ALZ 0060995; ibid.,
3/30/81, ALZ 0061001; ibid., 4/4/81, ALZ 0061022; ibid., 4/9/81, ALZ 0061033; ibid., 10/24/81,
ALZ 0061542.)  Pentagon spokesperson Henry E. Catto, Jr. publicly identified Morgan in
February 1982 as a prospective biographer of Weinberger.  (DoD News Briefing, 2/2/82, pp. 1-2,
ALZ 0070079-80.)  Morgan denied in October 1992 that she had ever seen Weinberger's diary
notes or discussed the notes with him as a possible basis for a biography or autobiography.
(Morgan, FBI 302, 10/12/92, pp. 11-13; Morgan FBI 302, 10/14/92, pp. 2, 8. )

     110 Weinberger signed the Manuscript Reading Room register on July 20, 1988.  (AOZ
0000036.)  Library call slips show that on the same day Duncan checked out boxes 580-85,
which contain Weinberger's diary notes from his tenure as secretary of defense.  (ALZ 0042861
(7-20-88, call slip); Memorandum from Teichroew to Wigdor, 12/22/92, AOZ 0000183-84
(explaining that 1980-87 diary notes were located in boxes 579-85 in 1988).)

     111 Duncan, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 25-26, 34-35.  Fighting for Peace nevertheless contains
some references to Weinberger's notes.  (See, for example, Weinberger, Fighting for Peace, pp.
96, 381.)

     Weinberger also regularly took notes of meetings on White House note pads, on the backs of
documents, and on other stray pieces of paper.  In addition to his own meeting notes, many of
which are identified by typed or handwritten notations made by Weinberger's secretaries,
Weinberger saved notes and doodles passed to him by others, which he  labeled and dated
himself.  Some of Weinberger's meeting notes were kept in a ``Handwritten Notes'' file
maintained by his secretaries.112  The remainder, which include most of Weinberger's meeting
notes relevant to Iran/contra, were maintained by Weinberger himself in the same manner as his
diary notes.

     112 See, for example, Smith, Affidavit, 4/29/92,

 7, ALZ 0045122-23.

     At trial, the Government would have shown that the sheer volume of Weinberger's notes, and
the care he took in maintaining them for posterity, belied his contention that his notetaking was
so habitual that he never thought of his notes.113  The Government also would have
demonstrated that Weinberger could not have forgotten his notes, having recorded in his diary
the very meetings in which he was asked by Iran/contra investigators about his notes or diaries.

     113 Following the summary of a meeting in his diary notes, Weinberger would sometimes
cross-reference his meeting notes by indicating parenthetically ``see separate memo.''
(Weinberger Diary, 9/28/84, ALZ 0063118; ibid., 6/24/85, ALZ 0039500; ibid., 10/27/86, ALZ
0040497; ibid., 11/10/86, ALZ 0040525; ibid., 11/12/86, ALZ 0040531; ibid., 11/25/86, ALZ
0040562; ibid., 9/15/87, ALZ 0046894.)  These references further demonstrate Weinberger's
consciousness of his notes.

     Weinberger's Knowledge of Congressional Requests for His Notes and Diaries

     Weinberger's notes and other contemporaneous documents show that he knew of the Select
Committees'  requests for handwritten notes and diaries.  Despite his direction to others to
cooperate fully with the congressional investigation, Weinberger deliberately withheld his own
notes from Congress and falsely denied to congressional investigators that he had
contemporaneous notes of meetings and phone calls.114

     114 Both the House and Senate Select Committees considered contemporaneous notes to be
particularly important to their investigation of Iran/contra.  In a statement appended to the Select
Committees' report on the Iran/contra investigation, Senators Inouye and Rudman -- the
Chairman and Vice Chairman, respectively, of the Senate Select Committee -- praised President
Reagan for making excerpts of his personal diaries available to the Select Committees and for
instructing other executive branch officials similarly to make all of their relevant records
available.  Rudman and Inouye noted that administration officials had been asked to disclose
personal documents and remarked that ``[t]hose of us who keep diaries appreciate the intensely
personal and private nature of the entries we make in such books, confiding our innermost
concerns, aspirations and thoughts.''  (Majority Report, p. 637.)

     During Weinberger's March 11, 1987, interview with the staff of the Senate Select
Committee, Chief Counsel Arthur L. Liman told him that President Reagan's diary excerpts had
been very useful to the Select Committees' investigation and remarked that he hoped to use these
diary excerpts at the hearings.115  Weinberger stated that his own record-keeping habits were
poor and said that he regretted he did not keep copious records of meetings as  Henry Kissinger
had done.116  As staff counsel noted in a memorandum of the interview, Weinberger left the
clear impression that he did not keep diaries or dictate his thoughts about a day's events.117
When the interview was over, Weinberger made the following entry in his daily diary notes:  ``2
Senate staff of Special Iran Committee in office -- with Larry Garrett -- re my recollections of
Iran events.'' 118

     115 Weinberger, Select Committees Interview Memorandum, 3/11/87, p. 2, AMY 00205.

     116 Ibid., pp. 4-5, AMY 00207-8.  Weinberger repeated his Kissinger analogy when asked
again about notes during his June 17, 1987, congressional deposition.  (Weinberger, Select
Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, p. 79.)

     117 Weinberger, Select Committees Interview Memorandum, 3/11/87, p. 5, AMY 00208.

     118 Weinberger Diary, 3/11/87, ALZ 0042242.

     The Senate and House Select Committees made formal written requests on April 4 and April
13, 1987, respectively, for Weinberger's notes and diaries.119  The DoD General Counsel's office
relayed these requests to DoD officials in a series of internal memoranda.  At least one of these --
an April 14 memorandum regarding the Senate Select Committee's document request -- reached
Weinberger's desk and was stamped ``SEC DEF HAS SEEN  APR 20 1987.'' 120

     119 Letter from Belnick to Shapiro, 4/4/87, ALZ 0041455-64; Letter from Naughton to
Shapiro, 4/13/87, ALT 0001378-79.

     120 Memorandum from Garrett to Under Secretary of Defense (Policy) [Ikle], Assistant
Secretary of Defense (ISA) [Armitage], Assistant General Counsels (OSD), Assistants to the
Secretary of Defense, et al., 4/14/87, p. 1, ALZ 0047336-51.  Documents were stamped ``SEC
DEF HAS SEEN,'' with the date, after Weinberger's secretary removed them from the out box on
his desk. (Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, p. 8.)

     A singularly incriminating document is an April 17, 1987, ``Action Memorandum'' from DoD
General Counsel H. Lawrence Garrett III to Weinberger that described the Senate and House
requests for notes and diaries.121  Garrett advised Weinberger:

     121 Action Memorandum from Garrett to Weinberger Re:  Document Request from
Congressional Select Committee on Iran, 4/17/87, ALZ 0064947-48.

     I know you understand the nature of the obligations placed upon us by this request.  I
understand that these materials, if any such exist, are highly personal and sensitive.  Accordingly,
I would of course insist that any provision of these materials to the Committees be conducted in
as discreet and limited a manner as you wish.

     The memorandum further advised Weinberger that Garrett would determine what ``the
arrangements currently are for the review of any similar records of other top-ranking officials.''  It
concluded by stating that Garrett would ``await further information/instructions from''
Weinberger.  Weinberger underlined the reference to other officials and wrote a note below:
``Larry -- let's have a meeting after you hear what others are doing.'' 122

     122 Ibid.  The Garrett memorandum was stamped ``SEC DEF HAS SEEN'' on June 17, 1987,
indicating that Weinberger placed the document in his out box on the same day that he stated
falsely in his congressional deposition that he rarely took notes.

     The Garrett memorandum discredits any claim that Weinberger's subordinates simply failed to
ask him for his  notes.  In fact, Garrett told Weinberger, specifically and in writing, that Congress
had requested his handwritten notes and diaries.123  The memorandum also belies Weinberger's
claim that he had no reason to believe that the congressional document requests encompassed
personal documents such as his diary notes.124  Not only did Garrett tell him that the requests
included ``highly  personal and sensitive'' papers, but Weinberger focused specifically on that
part of the memorandum in asking Garrett to find out what other officials ``are doing.'' 125

     123 Garrett's April 17, 1987, memorandum contradicts his 1992 affidavit, which asserted that
he did not discuss with Weinberger ``the specific details'' of any Iran/contra document request
and did not ask Weinberger ``about the existence of personal notes or diaries.''  (Garrett,
Affidavit, 4/28/92,

 7, 11, ALZ 0045034-36.)  Similarly, although Weinberger's senior military assistant at that time,
Gen. Gordon Fornell, asserted in an affidavit that he was ``unaware of anyone ever asking
Secretary Weinberger to produce his informal jottings to any body investigating the Iran-contra
affair,'' Fornell later identified his handwritten initial ``F'' in the margin of Garrett's April 17,
1987, memorandum to Weinberger, next to the paragraph noting that the House Select
Committee ``has requested all . . . diaries . . . and handwritten notes kept by you'' relating to
various topics, including Iran.  (Compare Fornell, Affidavit, 4/24/92,

 6, ALZ 0045025-26, with Fornell, Grand Jury, 10/28/92, p. 31.)

     124 Weinberger, CNN Interview, 12/28/92, NEXIS Transcript p. 6; Weinberger, Fox Morning
News Interview, 12/29/92, NEXIS Transcript p. 2.

     Weinberger's secretary, Kay Leisz, said she had a general recollection that in connection with
the Iran/contra document production ``someone'' told Weinberger that there was a distinction
between ``personal'' and ``official'' documents, and it was her ``feeling'' that personal documents
did not have to be produced.  (Leisz, OIC Interview, 6/15/92, pp. 26-28.)  Neither Weinberger
nor his attorneys ever claimed that he had been advised that personal documents did not have to
be produced to Iran/contra investigators.  Garrett's memorandum reached the opposite
conclusion, and he testified that he specifically advised Smith, in Leisz's presence, that the
document requests included ``personal notes.''  (Garrett, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 18-19.)  Garrett
did not recall giving Weinberger advice to the contrary.  (Garrett, Grand Jury, 10/28/92, p. 32.)

     125 President Reagan's agreement to allow congressional investigators limited access to his
personal diaries was also widely publicized.  It also was widely known, at least by the time the
congressional hearings were underway, that other Administration officials, including Shultz's
executive assistant Charles Hill, had produced some of their relevant, personal notes to
congressional investigators.

     Weinberger's diary notes indicate that Garrett raised this subject with him again in a meeting
on April 21, 1987, after which Weinberger wrote:  ``Larry Garrett in office -- re demands by Sen
-- House Committees for briefings on black programs --  + their demand for my diary[.]'' 126

     126 Weinberger Diary, 4/21/87, ALZ 0042343.  Weinberger's attorneys claimed that this note
actually reads ``demand for my choices'' and refers not to Iran/contra but to some unspecified
matter regarding ``black programs'' that may have been pending before the Senate and House
intelligence committees in April 1987.  They submitted a report from a private handwriting
expert who concluded that it was ``highly probable'' that the disputed word was ``choices.''
(Document Examination Report, 5/27/92, ALZ 0047624.)  The OIC would have established at
trial, based on comparisons to other samples of Weinberger's handwriting, that the disputed word
is ``diary.''  The ``black programs'' mentioned in Weinberger's note refers to an April 1, 1987,
request from the staff of the Senate Select Committee for briefings on limited access (``black'')
programs.  (Letter from Saxon to Shapiro, 4/1/87, ALZ 0054812.)

     There is also circumstantial evidence that Garrett raised the issue with Weinberger a third
time, on April 30, 1987, and may have advised him of the arrangements that had been made for
Iran/contra investigators to review President Reagan's diaries.  On April 29, 1987, Garrett  and
Assistant General Counsel Edward J. Shapiro attended a White House meeting of the general
counsels' group that coordinated Administration responses to the congressional and OIC
Iran/contra investigations.  The attorneys discussed the terms on which the Select Committees
and the OIC were permitted to review excerpts of President Reagan's personal diaries.127  The
same day, Garrett sent an ``Information Memorandum'' to Deputy Secretary of Defense William
H. Taft IV regarding ``Congressional Request for Excerpts of Relevant Portions of the Diaries of
the SecDef.''  The memorandum advised Taft that ``[w]e have been asked again by the senior
legal staff of the Senate Select Committee on Iran whether the SecDef keeps diaries. . . .''  The
memorandum then related to Taft that White House counsel had made transcribed excerpts of
President Reagan's diaries available to the Select Committees and the OIC, subject to certain
restrictions.  The memorandum concluded:  ``I do not know whether the Secretary keeps a diary,
but it is obviously necessary to pursue this.'' 128

     127 General Counsels' Coordinating Group Meeting Minutes, 4/29/87, ALU 140159-64.

     128 Memorandum from Garrett to Taft Re:  Congressional Request for Excerpts of Relevant
Portions of the Diaries of the SecDef, 4/29/87, ALZ 0058007.

     Taft recalled that he had told Garrett during the Iran/contra investigation that Weinberger had
regularly kept notes during the Nixon Administration, and Taft had  advised Garrett to go to
Leisz and Weinberger to be sure that, if Weinberger still kept such notes, everything was
produced to Iran/contra investigators.129  Although Taft could not fix the date of this
conversation, Garrett's April 29 memorandum to Taft was stamped ``DEP SEC HAS SEEN'' on
April 30, 1987.  On the same day, Weinberger made the following entry in his daily diary notes:
``Larry Garrett in office re preparation for Senate House staff interview on Iran hgs -- also re
papers to be turned over.'' 130

     129 Taft, FBI 302, 4/8/92, p. 2; Taft, Grand Jury, 10/28/92,  pp. 27-29.  Taft said he also
advised Garrett that Smith and Leisz would know if Weinberger kept notes.  (Taft, FBI 302,
4/8/92, p. 2.)  Garrett recalled a conversation in which he told Smith and Leisz that the document
requests included personal notes and he was told that Weinberger had no notes.  (Garrett, Grand
Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 18-19.)  Garrett purported not to recall such a conversation with Taft, however.

     130 Weinberger Diary, 4/30/87, ALZ 0042366.

     The day after Garrett's conversation with Weinberger, on May 1, 1987, Mark A. Belnick,
executive assistant to the chief counsel of the Senate Select Committee, spoke to Shapiro and
recorded in a file memorandum that Shapiro ``had been informed by Secretary Weinberger's
office'' that Weinberger had ``no entries in his diaries responsive to [the Senate] requests,'' and
that Weinberger had some ``but not many'' notes responsive to the requests.131

     131 Memorandum from Belnick to the File, 5/1/87, AMY 000361 (emphasis added). The
House Select Committee continued separately to pursue Weinberger's notes and diaries.  On May
22, 1987, Joseph H. Saba, staff counsel to the House Select Committee, wrote to Garrett, noting
that the House Committee had received few documents from Weinberger and asking for
Weinberger's ``diaries, appointment books, records of meetings, and handwritten notes. . . .''  The
letter further advised that the request ``is inclusive of [Weinberger's] personal diary entries made
from October 1984 through 1987, pertaining to the Boland Amendment, Iran, Nicaragua, and the
Contras.''  (Letter from Saba to Garrett, 5/22/87, ALZ 0054598-600.)

     On June 10, 1987, Saba wrote again to Shapiro, reiterating the House Committee's request for
access to Weinberger's calendars and diaries, ``and all other schedule-type records of the
occurrence of meetings, events, and telephone conversations for the period July 1, 1985, through
December 31, 1986.''  (Letter from Saba to Shapiro, 6/10/87, ALZ 0058754.)  According to
Weinberger's own diary notes,  Gen. Fornell consulted him on June 15, 1987, two days before
Weinberger's deposition, about ``data on my calendar to be turned over to Jt. Iran Committee[.]''
(Weinberger Diary, 6/15/87, ALZ 0042472.)  The next day, Weinberger's official calendars and
activity logs, but none of his diary or meeting notes, were produced to the House Select
Committee.  (Letter from Shapiro to Saxon, 6/18/87, ALZ 0055135-36 (enclosing documents
produced to House Select Committee on 6/16/87 and memorandum describing documents)).

     In his June 17, 1987, congressional deposition Weinberger testified falsely that he rarely made
notes of meetings -- either contemporaneously or after the fact -- and had no records that could
supplement his memory regarding Iran/contra events.132  As he made these statements under
oath in his office, Weinberger was sitting only four feet from the desk drawer that contained his
diary notes.  After the deposition, Weinberger made the following entry in his daily diary notes:
``Gave deposition to Senate + House staff members on Joint Iran investigation. -- 10:35 AM --
1:10 PM Larry Garrett & Mr. Shapiro there.'' 133  That same day, Weinberger also placed
Garrett's April 17, 1987, memorandum regarding the congressional document requests into his
out box.134

     132 Weinberger, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, pp. 79-80.  Ironically, given
Weinberger's subsequent contention that he did not understand his ``jottings'' to be within the
scope of congressional requests for ``notes,'' (Weinberger, CNN Interview, 12/28/92, NEXIS
Transcript p. 6), the following exchange occurred during Weinberger's congressional deposition:

     Q: Do you ever take notes that are not dictated or make jottings when you get back [from
meetings]?

     A: Yes, occasionally, but comparatively rarely.  I don't know that we kept those in any formal
way.  I don't think they have been filed or labeled. . . .

     Q: If there is any chance there are --  --

     A: I think we made this examination and whatever there is is in our so-called C&D,
correspondence and directives.  They have been asked to paw through everything.

     Weinberger, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, pp. 79-80. (emphasis added).)  As
discussed further below, the Government would have shown at trial that Weinberger was well
aware that hundreds of pages of his diary notes and scores of pages of his meeting notes were
stored in his desk and office bedroom and were not in the C&D files.

     133 Weinberger Diary, 6/17/87, ALZ 0042476.

     134 Memorandum from Garrett to Weinberger Re:  Document Request from congressional
Select Committee on Iran, 4/17/87, ALZ 0064947 (stamped ``SEC DEF HAS SEEN JUN 17,
1987'').

     Weinberger's Deposit of His Notes at the Library of Congress

     Weinberger personally packed his diary notes as he was preparing to leave office in
November 1987.  On that day, Roger Sandler, a free-lance photographer, was present to take
photos for a magazine profile of Weinberger.  These photos show Weinberger handling large
stacks of his diary notes, neatly bundled together with binder clips and rubber bands.  As
Weinberger was taping boxes, he commented on his daily diary notes, and he and Sandler briefly
discussed the fact that they both kept diaries.135  Weinberger's diary notes subsequently were
transferred to the Library of Congress without being submitted for classification review.136

     135 Sandler, FBI 302, 7/28/92, p. 3.

     136 Receipt for 99 Unclassified Boxes of Secretary Weinberger's Personal Papers, 4/5/88,
attaching Index of 14 Miscellaneous Boxes, including ``Telephone Logs 1980; 1981-87,'' (Grand
Jury Exhibit No. 326, 5/8/92.)

     Weinberger's meeting notes were transferred from the Pentagon to the Library of Congress in
two sets.  The ``set A'' notes arrived at the Library in April 1988 along with Weinberger's
1980-87 diary notes.  The set A notes consist of original meeting notes by Weinberger and notes
and doodles from others that were labeled and dated by Weinberger.137  These notes, which
include most of Weinberger's meeting notes relevant to Iran/contra, were kept by Weinberger
himself and were not submitted for  classification review before being transferred to the
Library.138

     137 The index of 14 miscellaneous boxes included in the April 1988 accession also listed one
box of ``Blank Note Pads; Notes from Meetings.'' (Ibid.)

     138 The following evidence indicates that Weinberger maintained the set A notes himself,
separately from his secretaries' handwritten notes file:  (1) none of the notes is stamped ``SecDef
Has Seen,'' indicating that they were never placed in his out box; (2) according to the Library of
Congress archivist, these notes were bundled together under handwritten cover notes by
Weinberger (ALZ 0040718-19) identifying them as miscellaneous notes of Cabinet and NSC
meetings (Teichroew, OIC Deposition, 4/21/92, p. 37); and (3) the notes were not labeled or
dated by anyone other than Weinberger.  (Compare description of set B notes below.)  Like the
diary notes, the set A meeting notes are all originals and have no classification markings, even
though they contain classified information.

     The set A notes contain Weinberger's notes of the most significant Iran/contra meetings,
including the December 10, 1985, White House meeting at which arms sales to Iran were
discussed, the January 6 and 7, 1986, meetings on the Iran arms sales, a February 11, 1986,
``Family Group'' lunch meeting at which a schedule of arms transfers and hostage releases was
outlined and the November 24, 1986, NSPG meeting regarding the Administration's response to
public disclosure of the arms sales.

     The ``set B'' notes, which arrived at the Library in August 1988, consist of copies of
Weinberger's notes of other meetings.139  Many of the set B notes are identified by typed or
handwritten notations made by Weinberger's secretaries at the top of the first page.  Unlike the
set A notes, the set B notes were individually indexed and reviewed for classified information
before they left DoD for the Library of Congress.  The index is titled ``SECRETARY
Weinberger's HANDWRITTEN NOTES'' and identifies the source  of the notes as ``VAULT.''
140  Thelma Stubbs Smith, Weinberger's second personal secretary, described how the
handwritten notes file maintained by Weinberger's secretaries (set B) was transferred to the vault
in his inner office and that she packed these notes at the end of Weinberger's term, leaving the
boxes with Defense Department C&D personnel to transfer to the Library of Congress.141
Boxes containing meeting notes were subsequently sent to the Executive Secretariat where they
were copied, sorted and indexed for transmittal to the Library.142  Thus, contrary to
Weinberger's suggestion  during his congressional deposition, it appears that none of his meeting
notes were stored in Defense Department C&D's files.143  Rather, both the set A and set B
meeting notes were maintained outside DoD's recordkeeping system until Weinberger left office.

     139 There is no overlap between the set A and set B meeting notes.

     140 ALZ 0040721 (3 pages) (index to 1985 set B meeting notes); ALZ 0040722 (3 pages)
(index to 1986 set B meeting notes); ALZ 0040723 (3 pages) (1985 index showing classified
items removed); ALZ 0040766 (1986 index showing classified items removed).  The August
1988 Library of Congress accession included the ``SecDef's Personal Library Vaulted Files
(1981-87) and Complete Index.''  (ALZ 0042825 (8/9/88) (receipt for classified material).)

     141 Smith, Affidavit, 4/29/92,

 7, 8, 10, ALZ 0045122-24.  Smith suggested that the meeting notes listed on the index of 14
miscellaneous boxes included in the April 1988 Library of Congress accession (which contained
the set A notes) were from the handwritten notes file in the office vault.  (Ibid.,

 8.)  The circumstantial evidence demonstrates, however, that the set B notes, rather than the set
A notes, correspond to the handwritten notes file that Smith recalls packing:  (1) only the set B
notes were labeled by the secretaries; (2) only the set B notes contain documents stamped ``SEC
DEF HAS SEEN,'' indicating that Smith or Leisz had originally retrieved them from
Weinberger's out box; and (3) the set B notes include a cover note by Leisz, attaching a set of
notes on the TWA hijacking (ALZ 0060091) and a cover note by Powell to Leisz, attaching
another set of notes ``for your file'' (ALZ 0060174).

     142 Lt. Col. Andrew Krepinevich, who worked in the Executive Secretariat in 1987-88,
recalled receiving one or more boxes of material from Weinberger's vault, including a significant
number of his handwritten meeting notes, to be processed for transfer to the Library.
(Krepinevich, FBI 302, 3/16/92, pp. 2-3.)  Krepinevich's description of these notes dovetails with
Smith's description of the notes she packed, and the indices that accompanied the set B notes are
identical to other indices generated by the Executive Secretariat.  Although the OIC was not able
to confirm the location of the original notes, Krepinevich said they would have been sent to
storage at the National Archives and Records Administration's Washington National Records
Center in Suitland, Maryland.  (Ibid., p. 3.)

     143 Weinberger, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, p. 80.  The indices prepared by DoD
list individual documents with their C&D-assigned number, which has an X prefix; documents
that do not have a C&D number have a blank space next to the X prefix.  (See, e.g., DoD 1985
Subject Index A-I, ALZ 0043111-233.)  None of the 1985 and 1986 set B meeting notes has a
C&D number.  ALZ 0040721 (3 pages) (index to 1985 set B meeting notes); ALZ 0040722 (3
pages) (index to 1986 set B meeting notes).

     All of Weinberger's diary and meeting notes were deposited with the Manuscript Division of
the Library of Congress as Weinberger's private property, under an agreement that provided
expressly that no one could have access to Weinberger's papers without his permission.144
Weinberger's repeated public assertions that his notes were deposited in ``the most public
depository in the United States'' 145 are therefore grossly misleading.  In fact,  Weinberger
refused in February 1990 to allow even the General Accounting Office access to the papers when
it was attempting to monitor former agency heads' compliance with laws governing the removal
of Government records.146

     144 Agreement of Deposit, 8/7/87, ALZ 0040904-6.

     145 Weinberger, Press Conference, 12/24/92, NEXIS Transcript, p. 39.

     146 General Accounting Office, Federal Records -- Document Removal by Agency Heads
Needs Independent Oversight, August 1991, pp. 23-25.

     In summary regarding Count Five of the Indictment, the Government would have proven at
trial that Weinberger had, since 1987, deliberately concealed his notes from Iran/contra
investigators and that his false statements to the OIC in October 1990 were simply a continuation
of those efforts.  The Government also would have shown that Weinberger's motive for
concealing his notes was simple:  The notes disclosed that, contrary to his sworn testimony,
Weinberger had contemporaneous knowledge of the Reagan Administration's involvement in
arms sales to Iran in 1985, which Weinberger himself had argued at the time was illegal, and that
he had greater knowledge of the Iran arms sales in 1986 than he had disclosed in his testimony.

     Weinberger's notes also reflect frank and potentially embarrassing exchanges between
President Reagan and his advisers, including President Reagan's sweeping rejection of concerns
about illegality at the December 7, 1985, meeting.  They also record the Administration's efforts
in  November 1986 to insulate President Reagan from knowledge of the 1985 arms sales to
Iran.147

     147 See, e.g. Weinberger NSPG Meeting Notes, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669 (20 pages).

     Count Two:  Weinberger's Denial of His Knowledge of Saudi Arabia's Financial Support for
the Contras

     Count Two of the Indictment charged Weinberger with making false statements to the Select
Committees denying his knowledge that Saudi Arabia had contributed to the support of the
Nicaraguan contras at a time when Congress had forbidden the use of appropriated funds for this
purpose.  One of the chief concerns of the congressional Iran/contra investigations was
third-country assistance to the Nicaraguan contras.148  Weinberger's daily diary notes and other
contemporaneous documents reveal that he knew in the spring of 1984 that foreign countries
including Saudi Arabia were being solicited to provide funds for the contras, and that he knew in
the spring of 1985 that Saudi Arabia was providing $25 million in assistance to the contras.  Yet
on June 17, 1987, when he appeared as a witness before the staff of the Select Committees,
Weinberger made the following statement under oath:

     148 See, e.g., Majority Report, pp. 15-16, 38-39, 44-47, 63, 69-71, 120-21.

     Q: Do you recall learning at some point that the Saudis or some people connected with the
Saudis provided funds for the contras?

     A: No.  I don't have any memory of any contra funding or of anything connected with [the
Saudis] that I can remember now.149

     149 Weinberger, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, p. 74.

     The Importance to Weinberger of U.S. Relations With Saudi Arabia and the Survival of the
Contras

     Weinberger's daily diary notes during his nearly seven years as secretary of defense
demonstrate that Saudi Arabia and Nicaragua were foreign policy matters of great concern to
him.

     During the period 1984-1987, Weinberger's daily diary notes record at least 64 separate
contacts with Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the Saudi Ambassador to the United States.  These
include 16 meetings, mostly private, in Weinberger's office; 150 telephone conversations on 18
separate days; 151 and 10 social events at which both men were present.152  The subjects of
Weinberger's dealings with  Bandar, as recorded in Weinberger's daily diary, range from the birth
of one of Bandar's children 153 to political strategy for handling the revelation of the Iran arms
sales,154 and include discussions of helping Saudi Arabia acquire United States weapon
systems.155

     150 Weinberger Diary, 1/6/84, ALZ 0062780; ibid., 5/21/84, ALZ 0062949; ibid., 6/27/84,
ALZ 0063000; ibid., 8/17/84, ALZ 0063062; ibid., 10/9/84, ALZ 0063133; ibid., 11/2/84, ALZ
0063161; ibid., 1/10/85, ALZ 0039233; ibid., 5/1/85, ALZ 0039404; ibid., 6/18/85, ALZ
0039488; ibid., 9/11/85, ALZ 0039648; ibid., 6/2/86, ALZ 0040174; ibid., 10/31/86, ALZ
0040508; ibid., 11/23/86, ALZ 0040556; ibid., 2/9/87, ALZ 0042167; ibid., 6/30/87, ALZ
0042496.

     151 Ibid., 2/6/84, ALZ 0062819; ibid., 2/9/84, ALZ 0062826; ibid., 5/20/84, ALZ 0062948;
ibid., 6/5/84, ALZ 0062969; ibid., 10/8/84, ALZ 0063131; ibid., 11/5/84, ALZ 0063166; ibid.,
7/29/85, ALZ 0039565; ibid., 10/9/85, ALZ 0039713A; ibid., 1/8/86, ALZ 0039887; ibid.,
5/15/86, ALZ 0040157; ibid., 6/23/86, ALZ 0040228; ibid., 6/27/86, ALZ 0040243; ibid., 1/6/87,
ALZ 0042084; ibid., 5/20/87, ALZ 0042416; ibid., 6/11/87, ALZ 0042462; ibid., 7/23/87, ALZ
0042551; ibid., 7/24/87, ALZ 0042555; ibid., 8/2/87, ALZ 0042574.

     152 Ibid., 1/31/84, ALZ 0062811; ibid., 5/6/84, ALZ 0062935; ibid., 9/24/84, ALZ 0063111;
ibid., 1/20/85, ALZ 0039248; ibid., 2/13/85, ALZ 0039276; ibid., 12/10/85, ALZ 0039842; ibid.,
2/5/86, ALZ 0039948; ibid., 3/4/86, ALZ 0040006D; ibid., 7/1/86, ALZ 0040254; ibid., 4/3/87,
ALZ 0042295; ibid., 7/26/87, ALZ 0042559.

     153 Ibid., 7/11/87, ALZ 0042520.

     154 For example, as the Iran/contra scandal was breaking publicly, Weinberger's diary
contains these notes regarding his private meeting with Prince Bandar on Sunday, November 23,
1986:

     Prince Bandar in office -- Nancy Reagan --

     in a 11/2 hr. talk Friday with him -- he invited President to dinner at his Embassy -- sd [said]
she thinks Shultz should go -- that he has been disloyal to the President -- he sd he recommended
to her that I be named Secretary of State; that I could negotiate an agreement with Soviets
because no one could say I was soft on them -- She feels that very few are being loyal to
President + that Shultz should not have gone to Canada Friday + should support President -- She
would like Baker to go in as Secretary of Defense!

     (Ibid., 11/23/86, ALZ 0040556.)

     155 E.g., 5/25/84, ALZ 0062956-57; ibid., 1/8/86, ALZ 0039887; ibid., 5/15/86, ALZ
0040157; ibid., 6/2/86, ALZ 0040174; ibid., 2/9/87, ALZ 0042167; ibid., 6/30/87, ALZ 0042496;
ibid., 9/2/87, ALZ 0046865; ibid., 9/26/87, ALZ 0046921.

     Weinberger's daily diary similarly records his concern for the Nicaraguan contras and events
in Central America.  On hundreds of separate occasions during 1985 and 1986, he made daily
diary entries about formal meetings  within the Administration, telephone calls or private
meetings at the Pentagon concerning such things as the latest military and political developments
in the region, the prospects for obtaining funding from Congress for the contras, recent trips to
Central America by other officials and his own dealings with contra leaders.156

     156 Weinberger's diary does not indicate, however, that he had any awareness of the contra
resupply network in Central America or its connection to Oliver North during 1985 and 1986.

     Weinberger's congressional testimony and statements regarding Saudi funding for the contras
consistently protected the false position taken by the Saudi Arabian Government:  total denial of
such support.  On October 21, 1986, Prince Bandar issued the following press release from the
Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Washington, D.C.:

     Saudi Ambassador Denies

     Nicaraguan Involvement

     The Ambassador of Saudi Arabia to the United States today issued the following statement in
response to press inquiries.

     ``Saudi Arabia is not and has not been involved either directly or indirectly in any military or
other support activity of any kind for or in connection with any group or groups concerned with
Nicaragua.'' 157

     157 Press Release from Bandar, 10/21/86, ALW 0063258.  In 1987, Prince Bandar refused
Independent Counsel's request for a personal interview and declined to provide answers to
Independent Counsel's interrogatories regarding financial support for the contras.  (Letter from
Bandar to Shultz, 5/1/87, ALW 0063255-57.)  In his letter to Secretary of State Shultz
communicating this refusal to cooperate, Prince Bandar said that Saudi Arabia's ``confidences
and commitments, like our friendship, are given for not just the moment but the long run.''
(Ibid.)  Prince Bandar also attached a copy of his October 21, 1986, public statement regarding
the contras and asserted that ``it would not be appropriate or constructive in a diplomatic or other
sense to elaborate further on that clear position.''  (Ibid.)  To Independent Counsel's knowledge,
no official representative of the Saudi Kingdom ever admitted publicly that it provided money to
the contras during 1984 and 1985.

     Weinberger's Knowledge of Saudi Arabia's Support for the Contras

     Weinberger's notes and other contemporaneous documents reveal his direct knowledge that
Saudi Arabia had agreed to give financial support to the Nicaraguan contras during the period
when U.S. funds for the contras were virtually exhausted and Congress had refused to
appropriate additional funds.158

     158 For a more complete discussion of third-country funding for the contras, see McFarlane
chapter.

     In May 1984, Prince Bandar informed National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane that
Bandar would provide $1 million per month to the contras.159  Weinberger's diary notes show
that, on Sunday, May 20, 1984, Prince Bandar asked Weinberger for an appointment.160
Weinberger's very next diary note states that he

     159 E.g. McFarlane, FBI 302, 4/15/87 (morning session), p. 3 (placing Bandar's
announcement in ``June 1984''); McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/11/87, pp. 34-36.

     160 Weinberger Diary, 5/20/84, ALZ 0062948.

     Called Bud McFarlane -- re g722agreed f above -- he wants to be sure there's no gap. . . .161

     161 Ibid.

     Although Weinberger's diary entry regarding his meeting with Prince Bandar shows
discussion of topics other than the contras, Weinberger's diary the next day shows that he and
McFarlane spoke about U.S. officials soliciting foreign countries to aid ``Central America:''

     Called Bud McFarlane -- rhc [returned his call] -- he doesn't want [Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy Fred] Ikle working to get any Israeli, etc. aid for Cent Am

     Called Colin Powell -- re above 162

     162 Ibid., 5/22/84, ALZ 0062950.

     On June 20, 1984, during a ``Contra Money'' meeting at the Department of State that was
attended by senior Reagan Administration officials,163 Weinberger stated his views on ensuring
the survival of the contras:

     163 Charles Hill, the executive assistant to Secretary of State Shultz, took detailed notes
during this meeting.  Hill's notes indicate that the meeting was attended by Shultz, Weinberger,
Ikle AE1, Kirkpatrick, Casey, McMahon, McFarlane, Poindexter and North, among others, and
that Shultz, Weinberger, Kirkpatrick and McFarlane had a private meeting after the larger
meeting had ended.  (Hill Notes, 6/20/84, ANS 0000679-81.)

     Don't give up on the Congr chance, altho slim.  But plan for other sources for $.  Keep US
fingerprints off.

     * * *

     g008even if Congr turns us down, we g008must not let collapse happen 164

     164 Ibid., 6/20/84, ANS 0000680 (emphasis in original).  Weinberger's corresponding diary
entry is the following:  ``Attended meeting w/ Shultz, Jeane Kirkpatrick -- Bill Casey, Bud
McFarlane[,] Ikle -- at State -- re funding for Nicaragua -- urged that we tell the Senate to stand
fast on their vote despite Speaker's refusal to go along with George's requests for less. + then try
to get the best we can in conference.''  (Weinberger Diary, 6/20/84, ALZ 0062989.)

     Weinberger's diary notes also show his knowledge of Saudi Arabia's continuing, and
expanded, support for the contras during 1985.  On March 13, 1985, Weinberger made the
following entries in his daily notes after a private meeting with General John W. Vessey, Jr.,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

     Jack Vessey in office alone -- after meeting [with others] -- Bandar is giving $25 million to
Contras -- so all we need is non-lethal aid

     Called Bud McFarlane -- out; l.w. [left word]

     * * *

     Called Bud McFarlane -- passed on to him Jack Vessey's report that Bandar is giving $25
million to Contras --  + suggested that if so -- we go for covert non-lethal aid of $14 mil.165

     165 Ibid., 3/13/85, ALZ 0039320B-C.

     Weinberger's daily notes indicate that he spoke with McFarlane again the following day about
Saudi aid to the contras:

     Called Bud McFarlane -- No further news on Saudis gifts to Contras 166

     166 Ibid., 3/14/85, ALZ 0039323.

     The following morning, March 15, 1985, Weinberger and Deputy Secretary of Defense
William Howard Taft IV had their regular Friday breakfast with CIA Director Casey and Deputy
Director John N. McMahon.  McMahon's memorandum for the record, created that same day,
documents the following discussion of the contras, including Saudi support:

     Question of the support to the Contras came up.  The Director [Casey] noted that we should
have another meeting on it but following last week's meeting of the LSG [Legislative Strategy
Group] we tended to be leaning towards non-lethal aid.  I [McMahon] described the assignment
given to [Assistant Secretary of State] Motley to develop different options which could be
packaged and then played against Senators Lugar and Durenberger to see what combination of
options in a single package might be acceptable to Congress.  But I noted at the meeting that
there was no agreement that we would be limited to non-lethal aid.  The Director [Casey] said
that McFarlane was to meet with Lugar and Durenberger today.  In closing the Secretary
[Weinberger] stated that he had heard that Bandar, Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, had earmarked
$25 million for the contras in $5 million increments.167

     167 Memorandum for the Record from McMahon, 3/15/85, ER 26,187-88 & ER
92-00116-17.

     Credible witnesses corroborated Weinberger's knowledge of Saudi Arabia's support for the
contras.  General Vessey, who served as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until he retired in
September 1985, recalled that Bandar informed him on two occasions that the Saudis were
funding  the contras.168  On each occasion, Vessey immediately reported Bandar's statements to
Weinberger, who responded that he did not want this issue to become public.169  Vessey recalls
that he or Weinberger, during a White House conversation they had with McFarlane, urged
McFarlane to support a proposed arms sale to Saudi Arabia because the Saudis were funding the
contras.170  McMahon  confirmed two meetings in which Weinberger reported to McMahon and
Casey that the Saudis were funding the contras.171  McFarlane recalled a number of discussions
with Weinberger regarding the Saudi contributions to the contras during 1984 and 1985.
McFarlane testified that in May 1984, he told Weinberger and Shultz that an unnamed foreign
country had agreed to ``provide for'' the contras through the end of the year.172  McFarlane also
recalled Weinberger telling him in spring 1985 that Weinberger had received information that
Prince Bandar had given $25 million to the contras.173

     168 Vessey, FBI 302, 6/11/92, pp. 6-7; accord Vessey, Select Committees Deposition,
4/17/87, pp. 5-8 (testimony regarding one occasion when Bandar told Vessey, who then reported
to Weinberger, of a contribution to the contras).

     169 Vessey,  FBI 302,  6/11/92,  p. 7;  Vessey, FBI 302,  2/11/87, p. 1.

     170 Vessey, FBI 302, 6/11/92, p. 7; cf. Vessey, Select Committees Deposition, 4/17/87, pp.
8-9 (``. . . . I have wracked my mind trying to think of a conversation with McFarlane.  And it
seems to me that at one time we came out of a National Security Council or National Security
Planning Group meeting in the NSC wing of the White House, and that some conversation with
McFarlane took place about the Saudis, about them helping the contras.  But I don't recall the
substance of it or anything other than it being sort of a casual thing as we went out.'').  Although
General Vessey stated in 1992 that this incident at the White House had occurred after Prince
Bandar had informed him for the second time that the Saudis were funding the contras, Vessey
also recalled that the subject of his and Weinberger's meeting with McFarlane was a specific
classified proposal involving arms sales to the Saudis.  (Vessey, FBI 302, 6/11/92, p. 7; see also
Classified Appendix.)  Based upon Vessey's recollection of the subject matter, contemporaneous
records indicate that this conversation occurred on the morning of May 25, 1984, when Vessey
accompanied Weinberger to a White House meeting on this subject.  (Weinberger Diary, 5/25/84,
ALZ 0062956 (``Jack Vessey in office -- wants to go to meeting with President -- also re
[Classified Arms Sale Proposal]  . . .  Attended Meeting in Oval Office -- with President, Bud
McFarlane, g722Shultz, Vice President, Shultz, Ed Meese, Baker -- [specific classified
weapons systems] OK for Saudi -- '').)

     171 McMahon, FBI 302, 5/23/88, p. 4.

     172 McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/11/87, pp. 38-39; accord generally
McFarlane, FBI 302, 4/15/87 (morning session), pp. 3-5; McFarlane, Select Committees
Testimony, 5/12/87, p. 133.  This probably occurred on May 24, 1984.  Weinberger's diary notes
indicate that he, McFarlane and Shultz discussed a classified arms sale proposal to Saudi Arabia
that was pending at that time.  (Weinberger Diary, 5/24/84, ALZ 0062955 (``Breakfast with Bud
McFarlane, Shultz, Rich Armitage -- etc -- at State -- re [Classified Arms Sale Proposal] for
Saudi''); see also Classified Appendix.)  Other evidence indicates that Prince Bandar made his
decision to support the contras in the second half of May 1984.

     173 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/10/87, p. 10; McFarlane, FBI 302, 4/15/87 (morning session), p.
5; accord Weinberger Diary, 3/13/85, ALZ 0039320C.

     Throughout the 1987 period when Weinberger was testifying that he had no recollection that
the Saudis had supported the contras, specific events continued to give Weinberger vivid
reminders on that very subject.  On January 14, 1987, for example, a reporter drew an angry
response when he publicly confronted Weinberger, who denied knowing about Saudi aid to the
contras.174  Similarly, Vessey told Weinberger on February 11, 1987, that he had just told an
FBI Agent of his conversations with Bandar and Weinberger about Saudi aid to the contras.
Weinberger replied that he had forgotten about the conversations but agreed with Vessey's
recollection.175  Weinberger recorded this meeting in his daily diary as follows:

     174 Ibid., 1/14/87, ALZ 0042107.

     175 Vessey, FBI 302, 6/11/92, p. 8.

     Jack Vessey in office -- he remembers telling McFarlane about Saudi claim they had sent
funds to contras -- also he has been asked to do a mission to Hanoi on POW's by Frank
[Carlucci] -- OK

     Discussed Secretary of Navy vacancy 176

     176 Weinberger Diary, 2/11/87, ALZ 0042173. Less than three weeks after this meeting with
Vessey and their discussion of the information they had received in 1985 regarding Saudi
assistance to the contras, Weinberger made a curious diary entry:

     Jack Vessey -- re reference to Tower Report to Saudis helping contras -- neither of us know
anything about that

     (Ibid., 2/27/87, ALZ 0042210.)  Weinberger's note appears to refer to McFarlane's written
statement, which is quoted in the Tower Commission Report issued the previous day, that he
``was separately informed by the Secretary of Defense and General Vessey that the total amount
of the contribution [by a ``foreign official'' (Prince Bandar) to the contras] during 1985 was 25
million.''  (Report of the President's Special Review Board, 2/26/87, p. C-5.)

     When Vessey was confronted with Weinberger's note in 1992, he said that he had no idea
what it referred to and denied that he and Weinberger ever agreed to cover up their knowledge of
the Saudi contribution.  (Vessey, FBI 302, 6/11/92, p. 9.)  Vessey also pointed out that he would
not have told Weinberger on February 27, 1987, that he (Vessey) had no knowledge of the Saudi
contribution because he had told the FBI, and then Weinberger, exactly the opposite only a few
weeks earlier.  (Ibid.)

     Weinberger's Previous False Testimony Regarding the Saudi Contribution

     As early as the summer of 1986 Weinberger concealed from Congress his knowledge of Saudi
Arabian support for the contras.  On September 4, 1986, in response to a letter of inquiry from
Representative Dante B. Fascell, Chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Weinberger wrote that he ``regarded [a press] allegation of Saudi funding of U.S. assistance to
anti-government forces in Nicaragua as so outlandish as to be unworthy of comment from the
Department [of Defense].'' 177

     177 Letter from Weinberger to Fascell, 9/4/86, ALZ 012492.  The press report that prompted
Fascell's letter alleged that a slush fund, built into the Airborne Warning and Control Systems
(AWACS) sale to Saudi Arabia, provided funds for the contras.  (Ibid.)

     Later in 1986, Weinberger continued to conceal his knowledge from Congress.  On December
17, 1986, during sworn testimony in closed session before the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, Weinberger gave the following answers to Sen. Bill Bradley's detailed and persistent
questions:

     Q: Have you been in any meeting since December -- well, in the last 2 years -- that discussed
the funding  for the contras outside of a direct congressional act?

     A: No.  I did spend a lot of time trying to persuade various Members of the Senate and House
that the $100 million was required, and --  --

     Q: But outside of --  --

     A: Not outside; no, sir.  No.

     Q: You've had no discussions with any third party about provision of equipment or money to
the contras?

     A: No, sir.

     Q: You've been in no meeting where it was discussed?

     A: To get -- from outside assistance?

     Q: Uh-huh.

     A: No, I don't have any recollection of that.  I know that there were a lot of attempts to get aid
to the contras, but my efforts were concentrated entirely on trying to get the $100 million bill
passed.

     Q: But prior to that, in 1985 or early 1986 you had no discussions with anyone about
providing funds or equipment to the contras?

     A: I have no recollection of anything of that kind at all, Senator; no.  I concentrated, as I said,
entirely on the trying to get the Congress to approve the $100 million appropriation, which I
thought then and think now was very necessary.

     Q: You were in no meeting in which this was discussed?

     A: I don't have any recollection of it, Senator, I really don't; no.178

     178 Weinberger, SSCI Testimony, 12/17/86, pp. 67-68.

     By the time that Independent Counsel had discovered Weinberger's notes and the falsity of his
testimony, the five-year statute of limitations had run on this testimony, so it was not, in itself, a
basis for prosecution.179

     179 At Weinberger's trial, evidence of this false testimony would have been admissible under
Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b) and on other bases to show the motive and intent for his later
lies on the same topic.

     In Weinberger's public testimony before the Select Committees on July 31, 1987, his denial of
knowledge of Saudi support to the contras was categorical:

     Q: . . .  Mr. McFarlane testified that in the spring of 1985 there was a large contribution from
[Saudi Arabia].  You were asked in your deposition whether you were aware at or about that time
of the contribution.  Do you recall being aware?

     A: No.  I was not aware.

     Q: Let me just ask you, . . . if you would turn to . . . a memorandum for the record by John
McMahon.  It is dated March 15, 1985, and on the second page in paragraph 7 it refers to a
meeting that you had with Director Casey at or about that time.  It indicates, ``Question of the
support the contras came up.''  This is reporting on a meeting that had taken place between
yourself and Director Casey.  The very last line reads, ``In closing, the Sec -- '' -- meaning the
Secretary of Defense -- `` -- stated that he had heard that -- '' -- I will tell you what is under  [the
black redaction mark] there is an official [Prince Bandar] -- `` -- had earmarked 25 million for the
contras in $5 million increments.''  Do you have any recollection of seeing --  --

     A: Well, I don't really.  These were regular breakfast meetings that I had every week with the
Director of CIA and they were very free-form discussions and meetings.  The Director [Casey]
and his Deputy [McMahon] and Mr. Taft and I went to these breakfasts every week and there was
a lot of discussion back and forth and reports passed on and this statement that I had heard that, I
don't remember saying it, but I did frequently joke with Mr. Casey to the effect that I frequently
picked up things from his rival intelligence agency, which was one of the morning radio stations,
and I may very well, simply been passing on that kind of report.  I don't have any specific
memory of it, but John McMahon is a good reporter so he probably heard this statement made.

     Q: John McMahon was Deputy Director of the CIA at the time?

     A: He was indeed.

     Q: But you don't have any recollection of being advised by Mr. McFarlane or --  --

     A: No.

     Q: --  -- the President or anyone else that there had been such a large contribution from [Saudi
Arabia]?

     A: No.  The reason I am quite sure about it is that we were all making major efforts at that
time to get funding for the contras from the Congress and I think probably many of the gentlemen
here remember that  I made lots of calls in support of various bills and particularly trying to get
the $100 million appropriation which ultimately was voted.180

     180 Weinberger, Select Committees Testimony, 7/31/87, pp. 133-35.  Although Weinberger's
attorneys later claimed that this testimony showed that Weinberger did not deny making the
statement recorded in McMahon's contemporaneous memorandum, the full transcript
demonstrates Weinberger's calculated denial that he knew anything about Saudi assistance to the
contras.  The core of the testimony was Weinberger's statement that he was ``quite sure'' that no
one had advised him of the Saudi contribution to the contras.  The OIC verified the exact
phrasing of the questions and Weinberger's answers throughout his testimony from videotape
recordings of the Select Committee proceedings.

     This testimony in July 1987 simply repeated Weinberger's false testimony from the June 17,
1987, deposition.  To avoid unnecessary proliferation it was not included in the indictment as a
separate charge.

     Count Three:  Weinberger's Denial of His Knowledge of the Planned HAWK Missile
Shipment in November 1985

     Count Three of the Indictment charged Weinberger with perjury for stating falsely under oath
that he had no knowledge that the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran was to take
place.  Weinberger repeatedly denied to congressional investigators and to the OIC that he had
contemporaneous knowledge of the planning for the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment.
Yet his daily diary notes demonstrate his detailed and contemporaneous knowledge.  Although
Weinberger opposed the shipment and warned that it would be illegal under the Arms Export
Control Act, his notes indicate that, in furtherance of President Reagan's decision to proceed,
Weinberger took steps to identify adequate U.S. HAWK missile inventories to replenish the
Israelis.

     As the Indictment states, Weinberger was asked directly about the HAWK shipment while
testifying under oath before the Select Committees on July 31, 1987:

     Mr. Eggleston:  The Committee has also received testimony that on that weekend of
November 23 and November 24, [1985,] there was a shipment of 18 HAWK missiles from Israel
to Iran.  This [exhibit] was a paper that was written immediately prior to that time.  Let me just
ask you: Did you have any knowledge that that transfer was to take place?

     Secretary Weinberger:  No, I did not.

     But his contemporaneous notes reveal that Weinberger was notified on November 9, 1985, by
McFarlane of a new phase in the arms-for-hostages plan.  After their conversation, Weinberger
made the following note in his diary:

     Bud McFarlane . . . wants to start ``negot.'' exploration with Iranians (+ Israelis) to give
Iranians weapons for our hostages -- I objected -- we'll talk later on secure.181

     181 Weinberger Diary, 11/9/85, ALZ 0039774.

     The next day, after speaking again with McFarlane, Weinberger made this diary note:

     Bud McFarlane . . . -- negotiations are with 3 Iranian dissidents who say they want to
overthrow government. We'll demand release of all hostages.  Then we might give them -- thru
Israelis -- Hawks but no Phoenix.182

     182 Ibid., 11/10/85, ALZ 0039775.

     One week later -- when McFarlane was in Geneva with President Reagan for a summit
meeting with Gorbachev, and Weinberger was in Washington -- McFarlane again telephoned
Weinberger.  Weinberger made a diary note of McFarlane's specific request for 500 HAWK
missiles from DoD stocks:

     Bud McFarlane fm [from] Geneva -- update on [summit] meetings -- all OK so far -- Also
wants us to try to get 500 Hawks for sale to Israel to pass on to Iran for release of 5 hostages
Thurs.183

     183 Ibid., 11/19/85, ALZ 0039795.

     Weinberger informed Powell of McFarlane's request.184  Powell promptly obtained the
requested information and reported back to Weinberger, who made the following diary note:

     184 Powell, FBI 302, 2/24/92, pp. 7-8.

     Colin Powell in office re data on Hawks -- can't be given to Israel or Iran w/o Cong.
notification, -- breaking them up into several packages of 28 Hawks to keep each package under
$14 million is a clear violation 185

     185 Weinberger Diary, 11/19/85, ALZ 0039797.

     Weinberger, in turn, relayed Powell's information to McFarlane in Geneva. Weinberger made
the following diary entry regarding McFarlane's non-committal response:

     Called McFarlane in Geneva -- re above -- he ``thanks me for call'' --  186

     186 Ibid.  Powell later explained, after reviewing this note by Weinberger, that

     [t]his is Mr. Weinberger's way of expressing his frustration in dealing with Mr. McFarlane.
Mr. McFarlane had a habit of concluding conversations with the statement, ``Thanks for the call.''
It was also a way of dismissing any concerns that might have been expressed in the call.

     So whereas Mr. Weinberger was calling back to Mr. McFarlane to tell him this is illegal, it's a
bad idea, you shouldn't be doing this, he was getting back from Mr. McFarlane something along
the lines, ``Thanks for the call,'' rather than ``I agree'' or ``I don't agree.''  It was just ``Thanks for
the call.''

     So Mr. Weinberger is expressing his anxiety and frustration here that he has given
information that should kill this idea right in its crib and instead of getting agreement, he's
getting once again a ``Thanks for the call'' answer.

     I am confident that this way of entering it in his personal notes was a way of expressing his
annoyance and frustration that he did not succeed in killing this or he didn't know if he succeeded
in killing this.

     (Powell, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, p. 62.)

     The next day, McFarlane informed Weinberger that, notwithstanding the legal restrictions that
Weinberger had identified, President Reagan had decided to approve the proposed HAWK
missile shipment to Iran.  Weinberger recorded the President's decision in his diary as follows:

     Bud McFarlane rmc. [returned my call] fm [from] Geneva (2) -- he hasn't heard of request for
logistical support for hostages -- return -- Told him we shouldn't pay Iranians anything -- he sd
[said] President has decided to do it thru Israelis.187

     187 Weinberger Diary, 11/20/85, ALZ 0039799.

     Later that day, McFarlane called to give Weinberger the latest details on the planned HAWK
missile shipment, which Weinberger again recorded in his diary:

     Bud McFarlane fm [from] Geneva -- working on broad agreement language -- Israelis will sell
120 Hawks, older models to Iranians -- Friday [hostage] release

     Called Colin Powell -- re above 188

     188 Ibid., 11/20/85, ALZ 0039801.

     On Thursday, November 21, 1985, Weinberger made additional diary entries regarding this
arms-for-hostages initiative:

     g008In office 720 Am -- 105 Pm

     Saw Colin Powell -- full statements of Geneva meetings, agreements, -- etc -- OK -- also re
Hawks for Israel-Iran

     * * *

     Admiral Crowe in office -- re President's decisions at Geneva -- hostage rescue attempts --
189

     189 Ibid., 11/21/85, ALZ 0039802-03.

     On Saturday, November 23, Weinberger made a diary note of his call from his home to
General Powell:

     Colin Powell -- . . . no hostage release last night 190

     190 Ibid., 11/23/85, ALZ 0039806A.  This diary note and the subsequent November 25, 1985,
diary note showing that Weinberger was watching for a hostage release at the time contradict his
assertion, offered for the first time after he was pardoned, that he did not believe McFarlane's
statements to him and thus did not ``know'' that a shipment of HAWK missiles was to take place.

     On Monday, November 25, 1985, Weinberger's diary contains a final note regarding this
phase of the Iran arms sales:

     Admiral Crowe in office -- . . . also re Iranian g722host held hostages 191

     191 Ibid., 11/25/85, ALZ 0039808.

     Because Count Three focused on Weinberger's denial of knowledge that the November 1985
HAWK missile shipment to Iran ``was to take place,'' it was not essential to prove his knowledge
of the actual shipment.  Nevertheless, Weinberger did receive intelligence reports shortly after
the shipment confirming that weapons had been shipped to Iran on November 24, 1985.
Subsequent intelligence reports, which also were delivered to Weinberger, specified that these
weapons had been HAWK missiles.192

     192 In his statements to various Iran/contra investigators, Weinberger adamantly denied
receiving actual copies of these intelligence reports regarding arms-for-hostages transactions with
Iran during 1985-86.  (E.g. Weinberger, FBI 302, 12/3/90, p. 3.)  Weinberger's statements were
contradicted by numerous witnesses, including Powell and Armitage. Independent Counsel was
unable to prosecute Weinberger for these false statements because the Executive Branch would
not have declassified even Weinberger's statements for inclusion in a proposed indictment, much
less the underlying documentary evidence and testimony that would have been necessary to prove
the case.

     Count Four:  Weinberger's Denial of Knowledge of the Replenishment Issue

     Count Four charged Weinberger with perjury for stating falsely under oath that he had no
knowledge of the ``replenishment issue'' that was created by Israel's arms shipments to Iran in
1985.  The crux of that issue was that Israel wanted the United States to replenish its weapons
stocks for missiles it had sent to Iran.  On July 31, 1987,  in sworn testimony before the Select
Committees, Weinberger gave the following false answer:

     Q. And in addition there are various documents which are in evidence before the Committee
which refer to the Israeli desire and need for replenishment of weapons that the Israelis were
sending.  Did you know that replenishment was an issue?

     A. No, I have no memory of that.193

     193 Weinberger, Select Committees Testimony, 7/31/87, p. 99.  As published by the Select
Committees, the transcript of Weinberger's testimony erroneously reports the question quoted in
the text above as, ``Do you know that replenishment was an issue?''

     This testimony conformed to Weinberger's previous false statements to Iran/contra
investigators regarding Israel's role in arms shipments to Iran.194

     194 For example, during his December 17, 1986, testimony in closed session before the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Weinberger gave the following answer to a question
from Senator Cohen:

     Q: So to the best of your recollection there was no discussion about the Israelis transferring
arms and us possibly resupplying them?

     A: Not in my presence; no.  I heard about that only much later after these things started to
come out and as I say I heard -- only heard that statements were being made, not that that had
actually happened.

     (Weinberger, SSCI Testimony, 12/17/86, p. 58.)  This answer was not the subject of
prosecution because the statute of limitations had run before the OIC obtained Weinberger's
notes.

     Weinberger knew of the replenishment issue throughout 1985 and into 1986.  According to
McFarlane, he  informed Weinberger in July and August 1985 first of Israel's proposal to send
arms to Iran to achieve the release of Americans held hostage in Lebanon,195 and then of
President Reagan's decision to approve that proposal, including his agreement to replenish
Israel's weapons stocks after shipments to Iran.196  McFarlane also reminded Weinberger in
December 1985 that Israel had shipped TOW missiles to Iran in August and September 1985,
and that the United States had to replenish Israel's stocks.197  From September 1985 through the
end of 1986, Weinberger received intelligence reports concerning past and proposed arms
shipments to Iran in return for the release of American hostages, including the initial TOW
missile shipments and a delivery of HAWKs on November 24, 1985.  As discussed above,
Weinberger's own notes show that, in November 1985, McFarlane advised Weinberger of
President Reagan's decision to provide HAWK missiles to Iran through Israel, and that
McFarlane asked Weinberger ``to try to get 500 Hawks for sale to Israel to pass on to Iran for
release of 5 hostages . . . .'' 198

     195 McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, pp. 5-7; ibid., 12/3/86, pp. 2-3.

     196 Ibid., 3/20/92, pp. 3, 5-6, 9; ibid., 3/13/87, p. 4; ibid., 12/3/86, pp. 2-3.

     197 Ibid., 3/20/92, pp. 19-22; ibid., 3/31/92, pp. 2-3, 5.

     198 Weinberger Diary, 11/19/85, ALZ 0039795.

     On Saturday, December 7, 1985, Weinberger attended a meeting at the White House of
President Reagan and his senior national security advisers. According to McFarlane, he reviewed
the development of the Iran arms sales to that point, including Israel's August-September 1985
TOW missile shipments and the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment.199

     199 E.g. McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/20/92, pp. 19-22; McFarlane, FBI 302, 3/31/92, p. 3. Shultz,
who also attended, told his aides after the meeting that McFarlane and Poindexter had reported
that ``Isr [Israel] sent 60 I-hawks for [the] release of Weir'' in September 1985. (Hill Note,
12/7/85, ANS 0001242.)

     On Tuesday, December 10, 1985, Weinberger attended another meeting at the White House
with the President and senior advisers.  On the back of his DoD daily press clippings,
Weinberger took two full pages of handwritten notes during the meeting, including the following
statements by McFarlane:

     Bud

     Sales of arms only in connection with establishment of better gov't --

     Hostages only g722infren indirectly linked

     ---------

     Separate hostage issue --

     We tried that + they rejected it

     We may lose a hostage this weekend

     * * *

     g008Options

     I accept original plan might lead to disclosure + more hostages

     II -- US Raid to release hostages [] in Beirut -- some casualties inevitable

     III -- Continue to stand away fm it -- Israeli's will go on delivering weapons + they might get
hostages back

     IV -- Do nothing

     (V -- US deal with Iranians + give up Israeli cover)

     covert operation to get arms to overthrow elements

     * * *

     Bud

     [Classified proposed message for Syria]

     ---------

     We still must replace  500 TOWs to Israel

     ---------

     President -- worried about hostages -- let Israelis go ahead with arms sales -- we'll get
hostages back --

     --------- 200

     200 Weinberger Meeting Notes, 12/10/85, ALZ 0040644B-45B.

     Weinberger's note -- ``We still must replace 500 TOWs to Israel'' -- shows that he knew of the
replenishment issue that had been created by Israel's 1985 TOW missile shipments to Iran.201

     201 Other phrases -- the prediction that, if the United States stood away from Iran, the Israelis
would ``go on'' delivering weapons, and the statement that dealing with Iran directly would
require the United States to ``give up'' Israeli cover -- also show Weinberger was informed of
past missile shipments from Israel to Iran.

     In January 1986, after President Reagan had decided to cut out Israel by shipping arms
directly from United States stocks to Iran, Weinberger received additional information about the
replenishment issue. Koch reported to Weinberger on January 14, 1986, that an Israeli arms
procurement official had agreed to postpone, until the hostages had been released, the needed
replenishment of the TOW missiles Israel had sent to Iran in 1985.202  At a later point, the CIA
asked Powell to increase its order for  the purchase of TOWs from DoD stocks by an increment
of approximately 500 missiles.203  Powell understood that the added increment was to replenish
an earlier Israeli shipment of TOW missiles to Iran, and he discussed replenishment with
Weinberger at that time.204

     202 Koch, FBI 302, 4/2/92, pp. 9-10.

     203 E.g. Powell, Select Committees Deposition, 6/19/87, pp. 80-81.

     204 Powell, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 93-97; accord generally Powell, FBI Interview
Transcript, 12/5/86, ALZ 0047715 (``every step along the way I kept the Secretary [Weinberger]
informed as to the progress of this activity''); Powell, OIC Interview Transcript, 11/5/92, pp. 13,
24-25, ALZ 0075329-30 (``I'm sure I discussed it [replenishment] with him [Weinberger].  . . .
The only thing I have a recollection of is at some point the issue of replenishment came up and
I'm quite confident I had [a] fairly good memory of having made him aware of it.  . . .  I'm sure
that we discussed the fact at that time that there was a replenishment issue or replenishment
problem associated with this deal and it had to be dealt with.'').

     Independent Counsel's Investigations of DoD Personnel Not Prosecuted

     General Colin L. Powell

     As Weinberger's senior military assistant from 1983 until March 1986, General Powell was
one of the handful of senior DoD officials who were privy to detailed information regarding arms
shipments to Iran during 1985 and 1986.  When the arms shipments were publicly revealed in
late 1986, investigators quickly learned that Powell was a knowledgeable party and interviewed
him repeatedly regarding these events.

     In 1992, after the OIC discovered Weinberger's voluminous notes and other withheld
information, Powell was reinterviewed and gave additional testimony as part of Independent
Counsel's investigation of Weinberger. During his February 1992 interview with the OIC, Powell
read Weinberger's relevant diary and meeting notes for the first time.205  Powell agreed that
Weinberger's notes were accurate and found that they assisted his own recollection and
understanding of events.206

     205 Powell, FBI 302, 2/24/92, p. 2.

     206 E.g. Ibid., pp. 11-12.

     Although Independent Counsel conducted no formal investigation at any time of General
Powell's conduct or his testimony and regarded him as merely a prospective witness,207 the OIC
did thoroughly reevaluate the conduct and prior statements of Powell and other senior DoD
officials as part of its investigation of Weinberger and its preparation for his trial.  On the basis
of this evaluation, Independent Counsel determined that most of  Powell's early statements
regarding the Iran initiative were forthright and consistent.  But some were questionable and
seem generally designed to protect Wein-berger.208  Because Independent Counsel had no direct
evidence that Powell intentionally made false statements, however, these matters were not
pursued.

     207 On December 9, 1986, prior to Independent Counsel's appointment, the FBI advised the
White House, in response to its request for information, that Powell had been interviewed as a
witness and was not considered a subject of investigation.  (Letter from Clarke to Wallison,
12/9/86 ALU 010963; cf. Weinberger Diary, 12/10/86, ALZ 0040584 (``Saw Frank Carlucci -- . .
. Also Frank wants me to call Peter Wallison WH Counsel -- to tell them Colin had no
connection with Iran arms sales -- except to carry out President's order. . . .  Called Peter
Wallison -- Told him Colin Powell had only minimum involvement on Iran'').)

     208 Powell's statements to congressional investigators in 1987 regarding Weinberger's notes
and diary are addressed below in a separate section.

     Richard L. Armitage

     Armitage served as assistant secretary of defense for International Security Affairs (ISA) from
May 1983 until January 1989.  As the head of ISA, which frequently is described as the ``little
Department of State'' within DoD, Armitage had responsibility for all DoD programs and
political and military relationships outside of NATO Europe.209  During his tenure at the DoD,
Armitage became a ``major player'' within the Pentagon and one of Weinberger's most trusted
assistants.210  Armitage also was an active figure throughout the executive branch who
maintained extensive, daily contacts with key officials at the Department of State, the CIA and
the NSC staff.211

     209 Armitage, Grand Jury, 4/29/92, p. 7.  In May 1986, Armitage also assumed responsibility
for counterterrorism policy, including security assistance, counterintelligence and special forces
operations.  (Ibid., p. 7.)

     210 Armitage typically would see Weinberger every day, and sometimes as often as three to
four times a day.  (Ibid., p. 9.)

     211 Armitage readily admitted that he was ``a terrible gossip'' and trader of information
throughout the Government regarding political, bureaucratic and policy developments.  (Ibid., p.
22; accord Armitage, Select Committees Deposition, 7/22/87, p. 145).

     From his extensive sources and contacts throughout the Government, Armitage acquired
information regarding Israeli and U.S. arms sales to Iran during 1985 and 1986.   During the
ensuing Iran/contra investigations, Armitage was questioned in detail on numerous occasions.212

     212 This section of the report focuses only on Armitage's knowledge and testimony regarding
the Iran arms sales.  Armitage also acquired direct knowledge of North's contra-support
activities.  See Abrams chapter.

     Armitage's Statements Regarding Israel's 1985 Missile Shipments

     In his early testimony, Armitage claimed ignorance of Israel's shipments of TOW missiles to
Iran in August and September 1985, and its shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran in November
1985.  He testified that he first knew that Israel had transferred missiles to Iran in 1985 when he
heard CIA Director Casey testify on November 21, 1986, that the United States had replenished
Israel's TOW missile stocks.213  Regarding the November 1985 Israeli HAWK shipment,
Armitage testified that although there were rumors and possibly intelligence reports ``of some
HAWK missiles to Israel [sic],'' 214 the testimony of Casey on  November 21, 1986, ``was the
first that I really knew of a shipment to Iran.'' 215

     213 Armitage, SSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, pp. 58, 70; Armitage, Tower Commission
Interview, 12/18/86, pp. 14-15, 33; Armitage, DAIG Interview, 12/24/86, p. 8.

     214 Armitage, SSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, p. 43.  Armitage subsequently recalled hearing the
rumor that the HAWK missiles that went from Israel to Iran were rejected ``because they had the
Star of David on them.''  (Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, p. 32.)  He also
stated that this information may have been contained in an intelligence report.  (Armitage, FBI
302, 1/31/91, pp. 1, 6.)

     215 Armitage, SSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, p. 43.

     The Tower Commission and Congress asked Armitage about meetings that he had with
various principals in the Iran arms shipments.  During the first week in December 1985,
Armitage met separately with Israeli General Menachem (Mendi) Meron, the director general of
Israel's Ministry of Defense, with Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the NSC staff, and with retired U.S.
Air Force Major General Richard V. Secord.

     Armitage's records show three separate contacts with Meron in the first week of December
1985.216 Armitage's account of these contacts was that they imparted no hard information to him
regarding the 1985 Israeli shipments or any information on a pending proposal for Israel to sell
additional missiles to Iran.  When the Tower Commission asked Armitage about his
conversations with Israelis, he stated that

     216 On Monday, December 2, they met at 3 p.m. in Armitage's office.  (Armitage Meeting
Log, 12/2/85, ALZ 016436.)  The next day, after Armitage had lunch with North to discuss his
activities relating to Iran, Meron returned to Armitage's office for a late afternoon meeting.
(Armitage Meeting Log, 12/3/85, ALZ 016437.)  On December 5, Meron called Armitage on the
phone.  (Armitage Telephone Log, 12/5/85, ALZ 015341.)

     [w]hen Mandy Marone [sic -- Mendi Meron] was around as the Director General of the
Defense Ministry, I once said to him, I don't know what's going on, but I know  you guys are
involved, and I hear Iranians are real sleazebags and you shouldn't be involved in this kind of
thing, Mandy [sic].  And he, well,   other people make decisions.  That was it.  That's the only
discussion I remember having, until after this broke.217

     217 Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, p. 29.

     In deposition testimony to staff members of the Select Committees in 1987, Armitage denied
discussing U.S. replenishment of Israeli TOW missiles with Meron.218

     218 Armitage, Select Committees Deposition, 5/26/87, pp. 32-33, 118-19.  Armitage agreed
that he thought he would remember if he had discussed the replenishment issue with Meron.
(Ibid., p. 33.)

     North and Armitage met in Armitage's office for lunch on December 3, 1985.219  Armitage
volunteered in his earliest statement to the FBI that his meeting with North was triggered by his
review of intelligence reports in late November 1985 that Iranians were speaking with someone
in the White House.220  Armitage said that based upon the intelligence reports and after
discussing his suspicions with Weinberger, Powell and Arnold Raphel of the State Department,
he confronted North and asked whether  he was part of discussions with Iranians.221  According
to Armitage, North responded that he had met with Iranians in Europe and, although North did
not mention it, Armitage said he supposed that the meetings dealt with the hostages.222
Armitage said he also told North that because Weinberger knew nothing about this, ``[y]our ass
is way out,'' and Armitage said he urged North to inform all of the principal national security
officials.223  Armitage said that his reaction seemed to shock North, and that President Reagan
called a White House meeting on this topic and invited Weinberger to attend shortly after
Armitage's lunch with North.224

     219 Armitage Meeting Log, 12/3/85, ALZ 016437 (``1230-1345 Ollie North -- Lunch in
office'').  North's meeting immediately prior to the Armitage lunch was a meeting with Secord at
11:30 a.m. in North's office.  (North Appointment Calendar, 12/3/85, AKW 003914.)

     220 Armitage, FBI 302, 12/10/86, p. 4.

     221 Ibid., p. 4.  In his congressional testimony the next day, Armitage stated that Weinberger,
after reading intelligence reports suggesting that Iranians were contacting U.S. officials through
the White House switchboard, had assigned him to find out which officials were talking to the
Iranians.  (Armitage, SSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, pp. 5, 40.)  The next week in his Tower
Commission interview, Armitage gave a more active description of Weinberger's role:  ``the
Secretary [Weinberger] had shown me [intelligence] that indicated somebody in the White
House, quote, unquote, was meeting with Iranians.''  (Armitage, Tower Commission Interview,
12/18/86, p. 4.)

     222 Armitage, FBI 302, 12/10/86, p. 4; accord Armitage, SSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, pp. 5,
12-13, 41; Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, pp. 4-5.

     223 Armitage, FBI 302, 12/10/86, p. 4; accord Armitage, SSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, pp. 5-7;
Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, pp. 4-5 (``I said to him [North], I don't think
my boss knows anything about this.  I doubt that Secretary of State Shultz knows anything about
[this].  I think your ass is way out on a limb and you best get all the elephants together to discuss
this issue.'')

     224 Ibid., p. 5.

     Armitage's meeting logs indicate that he met with Secord on December 5 and again on
December 27, 1985,225 but Armitage professed in a variety of inconsistent ways to recall
nothing about these meetings.  During his first FBI interview in December 1986, Armitage said
he had last seen Secord ``over one year ago'' and did not know of any role Secord had played in
the Iranian arms initiative.226  Just eight days after the FBI interview, Armitage told a different
story to the Tower Commission:  ``I found out midway, I would say roughly midway in '86 that
Secord in some fashion was working with Ollie [North] on the Iranian side of this.'' 227  During
his May 1987 congressional deposition, Armitage testified that, although he did not actually
recall, ``it had to be after -- sometime after February of 1986'' when he learned, perhaps from
North or from some unidentified ``Israelis,'' that Secord was involved in arms shipments to
Iran.228

     225 Armitage Meeting Log, 12/5/85, ALZ 016439 (``1300 -- Gen Secord''); ibid., 12/27/85,
ALZ 016457 (2:50 p.m.).

     226 Armitage, FBI 302, 12/10/86, p. 4; accord Armitage, Tower Commission Interview,
12/18/86, p. 27.

     227 Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, p. 26.

     228 Armitage, Select Committees Deposition, 5/26/87, pp. 65-67; accord ibid., pp. 83-84.

     Armitage's statements regarding his lack of knowledge about the Israeli 1985 TOW and
HAWK missile shipments to Iran and the issue of U.S. replenishment of  those Israeli missile
stocks -- and his claimed failure to recall discussing these topics during his conversations with
Meron, North and Secord during the first week of December 1985 -- were significant in two
respects.  First, they removed Armitage from a list of people who could have provided
investigators with important information on the origins of the Iran arms sales and who, among
the President's top national security advisers, was witting and involved.  Second, by asserting
personal ignorance and failure to recall the 1985 shipments, Armitage's testimony neatly
dovetailed with and made more credible Weinberger's false statements regarding his own
purported ignorance of the Israeli arms shipments.

     Armitage's Knowledge of Israel's 1985 Missile Shipments

     Armitage claimed that he first learned that Israel had shipped missiles to Iran in 1985 when he
heard Casey testify on November 21, 1986, that the United States had replenished Israel's TOW
missile stocks.  Significant evidence from a variety of sources shows that Armitage's knowledge
predated Casey's testimony.  For instance, a North notebook entry of November 18, 1986,
documents a discussion with Armitage about Israel's 1985 arms shipments to Iran -- three days
before Armitage supposedly learned for the first time that such shipments had occurred:

     1800

     [] Call from Armitage -- g008Lawyers

     Israeli shipments in 1985

      -- Did we know about it?

      -- g722D When did we promise to

     replenish the Israelis? 229

     229 North Note, 11/18/86, AMX 001696.

     Armitage's knowledge about the 1985 Israeli missile shipments went back a year earlier, to his
contacts with North, Meron and Secord in the first week of December 1985. During that week,
the Reagan Administration and the Israelis were trying to decide whether to proceed with the Iran
arms sales in the wake of the botched shipment of 18 HAWK missiles in late November 1985.
The Israelis were concerned about obtaining replenishment for the HAWK missiles and 504
TOW missiles sent to Iran in August and September 1985.  Another arms transfer was being
contemplated.230  Among other things, Armitage's task was to prepare briefing materials for
Weinberger in advance of a December 7, 1985, White House meeting where the future of the Iran
initiative was to be debated.

     230 Memorandum by North, ``Special Project Re Iran,'' 12/5/85, ALZ 0041745-52.

     The December 2, 1985, Armitage-Meron Meeting

     Classified evidence obtained from the Government of Israel, which is set forth in the
Classified Appendix to this chapter, and evidence from North and Secord show that during the
period Meron met with Armitage, Meron was discussing arms shipments to Iran and Israel's need
for replenishment. Secord and North, on separate occasions, directed Meron to discuss these
issues with Armitage.  According to Secord, when Meron told him during their meeting in Israel
in late November 1985 about the previous TOW missile shipments to Iran and the need for
replenishment, Secord told him to talk to Armitage and to Lt. Gen. Philip Gast, director of the
Defense Security Assistance Agency (DSAA), about getting the missiles replenished.231
Secord's recollection is consistent with North's contemporaneous note of a telephone call he
received from Secord on November 26, 1985:

     231 Secord, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 8.

     1230 -- Call from Dick [Secord]

      -- Can we supply later serial #s for Hawks?

      -- How difficult is it to procure these items.

      -- Met w/ D.K. [Kimche] & Mindy [sic] [Meron]

      -- Mindy coming to meet w/ Rich [Armitage] & Phil [Gast] 232

     232 North Note, 11/26/85, AMX 001911.  Secord recalled reporting this information to
North.  (Secord, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 8.)

     North, Secord and Meron met on the evening of December 2.233  The next night (December
3), North sent Poindexter a lengthy PROFs computer note outlining a program for sending arms
to Iran. It mentioned ``discussions with Mendy Meron here in Washington which are continuing''
and the problem of ``replenishing Israeli stocks. . . .'' 234

     233 North Note, 12/2/85, AMX 001920 (``Mtg [Meeting] w/ Moron [sic]'') (final entry of the
day).

     234 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 12/4/85, AKW 002070-73.

     The December 3, 1985, Armitage-North Lunch

     On December 3, 1985, North had lunch with Armitage at Armitage's Pentagon office.
Armitage's claim that the meeting was triggered by Weinberger's request to check an intelligence
report that someone at the White House was meeting with Iranians is simply not true.  The one
report containing a White House telephone  number -- was delivered to Weinberger on October 2
or 3, 1985.235  By December 3, 1985, North's involvement in dealings with Iran was no mystery
to Weinberger.  His diary demonstrates that by October 4, 1985, he knew that North was
involved in negotiations with Iranians.236

     235 Intelligence Report, 10/2/85, AMW 0001955-57; accord Weinberger Diary, 10/3/85, ALZ
0039703.

     236 Weinberger Diary, 10/4/85, ALZ 0039704 (``Breakfast with Bill Casey + John McMahon
+ Will Taft -- re Israeli bombing of Tunis -- + UN resolution; Ollie North's negot. with Iranians --
Told them g008no US arms to be sold or given to Iran.'').

     There is strong circumstantial evidence that the discussion topics at the luncheon were past
Israeli arms shipments to Iran, proposals for future shipments and the issue of replenishing Israeli
missile stocks.  Secord had just completed meetings in Israel with Meron and Kimche regarding
replenishment and had mentioned Armitage as the DoD contact on that issue.  Meron had
discussed the Israeli missile shipments and the need for replenishment with Armitage the
previous day.  At their meeting the night before, North, Meron and Secord had also discussed
replenishment.237

     237 State of Israel, The Iranian Transactions -- A Historical Chronology, Part One, 7/29/87, p.
54, AOW 0000067, as released in Majority Report, pp. 194, 210 n. 11.

     Independent Counsel was unable to obtain a dispositive account of the Armitage-North
luncheon.  Arnold Raphel, the deputy assistant secretary of state with whom Armitage regularly
discussed the Iran initiative, took notes of a telephone call he received from Armitage
immediately following the lunch with North.238   But Raphel died in 1988.  Powell, who spoke
to Armitage by telephone from Brussels, Belgium, during or immediately following Armitage's
lunch with North,239 recalled nothing more than Armitage's account of the lunch.240

     238 Armitage Telephone Log, 12/3/85, ALZ 015337 (Armitage called and spoke to Raphel at
2:05 p.m.).  Raphel's handwritten notes contain the following:

      -- g008Ollie

      -- Scapegoat if it goes wrong

      -- Iranians are sleazeballs

      -- Ollie -- we've lost little

      -- Bud should get them all together + brief --

     (Raphel Note, 12/3/85, ALW 0062382.) Ralphel's 1987 typed narration of his notes identified
Armitage as the source of Raphel's information:

     December 3 -- Assistant Secretary Armitage told me that Col. North had said that he would be
made the scapegoat if the operation goes wrong, but that we have lost little by trying. Reportedly,
Col. North added that the Iranians involved are disreputable. Mr. Armitage said he suggested to
Col. North that Mr. McFarlane should get all the principals together to brief on the operation.

     (Raphel Chronology, 1987, p. 2, ALW 0056727.)

     239 Armitage Telephone Log, 12/3/85, ALZ 015337 (Armitage takes incoming call from
Powell at 12:45 p.m.).

     240 Powell, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 84-85.

     The December 5, 1985, Armitage-Secord Meeting

     Armitage said he had no recollection of a meeting with Secord in December 1985 although
his own meeting log indicated they met twice in that month.  Raphel's notes, which do not
identify the source of the information, contain a contemporaneous report on Armitage's meeting
with Secord:

      -- Secord involved

     Mtg. w/ Pres. -- 1000 Sat -- w/ Pres. + arms if: --

     1 -- no more terrorism

     2 -- moderate govt in Tehan Tehran

     3 -- Iran wins war

     4 -- hostages released 241

     241 Raphel Note, 12/5/85, ALW 0062388.  Although Raphel spoke to Armitage on a daily
basis, he was not questioned about this note because Independent Counsel did not acquire it until
after Raphel's death in 1988.

     In the preceding weeks, Secord had been operationally involved in the shipment of 18 HAWK
missiles from Israel to Iran. He had returned to the United States shortly before his meeting with
Armitage.242 Secord called Armitage at 11:15 a.m. on December 5.243

     242 North Appointment Calendars, 12/2/85 & 12/3/85, AKW 003914; Memorandum for the
Record by Secord, ``Meeting with O. North in OEB, 4 Dec  1930,'' AQT 0000050.

     243 Armitage Telephone Log, 12/5/85, ALZ 015341.

     In contrast to Armitage's failure to recall the December 5 meeting, Secord never equivocated
regarding its substance.244  Secord consistently stated that he went to see Armitage with North's
permission 245 after hearing North's report that Weinberger was opposing the arms shipments to
Iran.246  Secord thought that he might be  able to convince Armitage, with whom he had worked
closely in the past, of the need for such an initiative,247 and that Armitage in turn might be able
to convince Weinberger.248  Secord recalled that he was unsuccessful:  Armitage remained
opposed to the Iran arms sales.249

     244 See, for example, Secord, OIC Deposition, 3/9/88, p. 99 (``I didn't have any contact with
the Defense Department save one meeting with Rich Armitage early on and then another one
quite by accident with Noel Koch'').

     245 Secord, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 14.

     246 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, p. 94.

     247 Ibid.

     248 Secord, FBI 302, 3/11/92, pp. 10, 13.

     249 Secord, Grand Jury, 1/25/91, pp. 94-95.

     Secord was uncertain about the date of his discussion with Armitage. After reviewing
Armitage's meeting log, Secord said that while it was ``quite possible'' that he talked to Armitage
in December 1985, his logic still suggested the meeting occurred ``later, such as in January or
February, 1986. . . .'' 250

     250 Secord, FBI 302, 3/11/92, p. 11.

     It is reasonably clear that North, having heard Armitage's account of Weinberger's opposition
to the Iran arms sales during his December 3, 1985, luncheon with Armitage, produced Secord,
who was trusted by Armitage,  as a means of vouching for the operation.251

     251 Armitage recalled that North invoked Secord's name as part of North's defense for the
Iran operation.  (Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, pp. 26-27: ``And Ollie told
me[,] roughly, when I said [`] this is a bad deal ['] -- it was my usual talking point with Ollie
when we were alone -- and he said [`] and Secord's in it[']. . . . His response to me was [`] Dick
Secord is really doing the Lord's work and that he's going to get the Medal of  Freedom from the
President, and he deserves it.[']''.)

     Armitage's Receipt of North's December 5, 1985, ``Special Project re Iran'' Paper

     There is strong circumstantial evidence that Armitage on December 5 or 6, 1985, received a
paper prepared by North containing significant information regarding the 1985 Iran arms sales
and proposals for future sales.252  The paper states explicitly that Israel, after receiving a U.S.
commitment to sell replacement missiles, shipped 500 [sic] TOW missiles to Iran on September
14, 1985, two days before Reverend Benjamin Weir was released by terrorists in Lebanon.  The
paper describes a proposal to deliver 3,300 TOW missiles and 50 Improved HAWK missiles
from Israel to Iran in exchange for the release of five remaining U.S. citizen hostages plus one
French citizen hostage and a cessation of terrorism against  U.S. property or personnel.  The
paper declares, without using Secord's name, that ``a U.S. businessman acting privately on behalf
of the USG [U.S. Government]'' has been negotiating this deal with the Iranians and Israelis.  It
states that such shipments would ``significantly degrade Israeli stockpiles and require very
prompt replenishment'' by the United States.  In an emotional summation, North's paper declares
that the U.S. ``must make one last try or we will risk condemning some or all of the hostages to
death and undergoing a renewed wave of Islamic Jihad terrorism.'' For this reason alone, North's
paper immediately became widely known throughout the Executive Branch.253

     252 Special Project Re Iran, 12/5/85, ALZ 0041745-52. This paper refines a PROFs message
that North sent Poindexter on December 4, 1986. (PROFs Note from North to Poindexter,
12/4/85, AKW002070-73.

     253 E.g. Platt Note, 12/5/85, ALW 0036859 (``Message from North to Iran via Israelis[:]  Our
arms deliveries predicated on following:  1. no more terrorism[;] 2. moderate gov[;] 3. Iran must
not lose the war w Iraq.[;] 4. Release of hostages.''); Ross Note, 12/5/85, ALW 0047062 (noting
Raphel's report on ``ON [Oliver North] message to Iran;'' same four points as Platt note); Hill
Note, 12/6/85, ANS 0001236 (``how they will argue [ -- ] NP [Platt]:  Ollie [North]:  we shd
[should] go ahead for long term stratg [strategic] int. [interest] w Iran + if we reneg [sic], there
will be 4 dead hostg [hostages] + we may have to mount rescue''); Platt Note, 12/6/85, ALW
0036863 (``Arms for Hostages -- Israel has been trading arms for Jews for years.  Ship arms.  Get
40 Iranian Jews.  . . .  Meron runs it[.]  This specific deal -- Israeli sends Hawks -- Phoenix --
replaced by 3300 I TOWs.  Ollie has done memo to Pres [President Reagan] for 10 o clock. --
should go ahead because of longer term strategic benefit -- if we renege will have 4 dead
hostages in 10 days -- will have to move''); Hill Note, 12/6/85, ANS 0001238 (``Arma
[Armacost] -- Ollie told Iranians that as part of g008Night Owl deal -- They shd give up t'ism
[terrorism] [;] -- install moderate govt[;] -- win war w IQ [Iraq] } (!)  g008ha ha Ollie is
laughable.'').

     North's paper apparently was the basis of a detailed briefing that Poindexter gave Shultz over
secure telephone the afternoon of December 5, 1985.  (Hill Note, 12/5/85, ANS 0001228-29
(``3300 TOW.  60 Hawks  Emph [Emphasis] is on rel [relations] w post-Kh. [Khomeini] Iran
more than on hostages.  . . .'').)  Independent Counsel was not able to determine whether a copy
was provided to President Reagan, as Platt's note reports.

     If Armitage reviewed North's paper on or about December 5-6, 1985, this would establish the
falsity of Armitage's statements that he was unaware until November 1986 of Israel's 1985 arms
shipments to Iran and the U.S. commitment to replenish Israel's stocks.  If the North paper was
used by Armitage as a basis of briefing Weinberger for the December 7, 1985, White House
meeting this would have been powerful evidence that Weinberger's professed lack of early
knowledge of the 1985 Israeli shipments was false.

     There is no question that Armitage and Weinberger received North's December 5, 1985, paper
at some point.  Armitage placed a copy of the paper in Weinberger's briefing book before the
November 10, 1986, meeting of President Reagan and his senior advisers to discuss the Iran arms
sales.254  OIC obtained no testimonial evidence as to who delivered the North paper to Armitage
or when it was delivered, but circumstantial evidence  indicates that Armitage received North's
paper on December 5 or 6, 1985: 255

     254 During the November 10, 1986, meeting, Weinberger made extensive notes on the backs
of the pages of North's December 1985 paper.  After the meeting, the briefing book apparently
was returned to ISA, ``broken down'' and refiled. Although Armitage obviously returned this
document to the files, it was not produced to Congress or Independent Counsel in 1987.  The
OIC first located the copy of North's paper with Weinberger's notes when it reviewed a
segregated collection of Iran/contra material at ISA in 1992.

     255 Armitage's logs show that North placed a telephone call to Armitage's office at 6:50 p.m.
on December 5, 1985, but they apparently did not speak.  The next morning, North called again
and spoke to Armitage at 8:30 a.m.  North arrived at Armitage's office at 9:00 a.m., and he called
and spoke to Armitage by telephone at 10:05 a.m.  (Armitage Telephone Log, 12/5/85, ALZ
015341; ibid., 12/6/85, ALZ 015342; Armitage Meeting Log, 12/6/85, ALZ 016441.)  Although
no witness explained this series of contacts, the sequence of events suggests that North called
Armitage to tell him of the paper, then dropped off a copy at Armitage's office, and then called
back an hour later to get Armitage's views after he had read the document.

      -- the North paper was closely related to the series of meetings and conversations regarding
arms shipments that Armitage had during that week with Meron, North and Secord;

      -- because Weinberger and Powell were in Europe until the night of December 6, 1985,
Armitage was the senior DoD official at the Pentagon who was familiar with the Iran arms sales;
he was the logical person to be informed of the North paper.  By his own description, Armitage
was the person who was gathering information as part of the effort to prepare Weinberger for the
December 7, 1985, White House meeting; 256

     256 Armitage, FBI 302, 1/30/92, p. 5.

      -- Poindexter briefed Shultz by secure telephone on the substance of North's paper before
their December 7, 1985, White House meeting.257  It is unlikely that the NSC staff would brief
the Department of State of the proposal but not brief the DoD, which had the missiles.

     257 Hill Notes, 12/5/85, ANS 0001228-29.

      -- Raphel took these notes during a telephone call from Armitage at 10:05 on December 6,
1985,258 shortly after North's visit to Armitage's office, regarding the substance of North's paper:

     258 Armitage, Telephone Log, 12/6/85, ALZ 015342.

      -- arms for Jews

      -- David Kimche

      -- Mendy [Meron]/Ben Josef -- procurement

      -- replace g722300 3300 I-TOWs in IDF [Israeli Defense Forces] 259

     259 Raphel Note, 12/6/85, ALW 0062391; Raphel Chronology, 1987, p. 2, ALW 0056727.

      -- an information paper that Armitage commissioned from DSAA officials Rudd and Gaffney
prior to the December 7 meeting refers to a proposal to transfer 50 Improved HAWKs and 3,300
TOWs to Iran 260 -- the exact numbers specified in North's paper; and

     260 Prospects for Immediate Shipment of I-HAWK and I-TOW Missiles, ALZ 0058747.

      -- North brought a copy of his paper when he met with Israelis in New York City on
December 6, 1985, just before North travelled to London to meet with the Iranians and Israelis in
connection with the initiative.261 It is implausible that North shared the paper with the Israelis
but withheld it from Armitage.262

     261 State of Israel, The Iranian Transactions -- A Historical Chronology, Part One, 7/29/87, p.
55, AOW 0000068, as released in Majority Report, p. 197.

     262 See Classified Appendix.

     Armitage made misleading statements regarding his preparation of Weinberger for the
December 7, 1985, White House meeting. Armitage told the Tower Commission that he prepared
Weinberger for the meeting ``orally without any paper trail.'' 263  In June 1987, however, the
DoD belatedly produced to the Select Committees and to Independent Counsel two December
1985 briefing papers prepared by Rudd and Gaffney regarding missile shipments to Iran.
Armitage ultimately stated that he probably provided these papers to Weinberger, or at least gave
him an oral briefing from the papers, in preparation for the December 7 White House
meeting.264

     263 Armitage, Tower Commission Interview, 12/18/86, p. 5.

     264 Armitage, FBI 302, 3/3/92, p. 1; Armitage, Grand Jury, 4/29/92, p. 86.

     These papers clearly related to the North proposal. The first of the Rudd-Gaffney papers, a
two-page analysis titled ``Possibility for Leaks,'' was created in response to Armitage's request for
information on ``the legal ramifications of the possible sale of Hawk and TOW missiles, either
directly to Iran or as replacement for an Israeli shipment to Iran.'' 265  Although the ``Leaks''
paper mentions neither Israel nor Iran by name and does not itemize quantities of missiles or say
that missile shipments are planned, it transparently refers to Israel as ``the country involved,''
refers to another ``country we do not sell to ourselves'' (Iran), speaks of ``I-HAWKS in the
quantity contemplated'' and ``the I-TOW quantities,'' and reports, in its very first line, that
``[t]here is no good way to keep this project from ultimately being made public.'' 266  Rudd
specifically recalled providing this paper to Armitage on  December 6, 1985.267  Rudd also
recalled that Armitage instructed him to retain no copies of the paper, and that he (Rudd)
complied.268

     265 Rudd, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87, p. 3 (joint deposition with Gaffney).

     266 Possibility for Leaks, ALZ 004343-44.

     267 Rudd, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87, pp. 3, 18 (joint deposition with Gaffney).

     268 Ibid., pp. 18-19.

     The second paper, a one-page analysis titled ``Prospects for Immediate Shipment of I-HAWK
and I-TOW Missiles,'' also was created by Rudd, with Gaffney providing some of the information
as a follow-on to his November 1985 point paper regarding HAWK missiles.269  The
``Prospects for Immediate Shipment'' paper reported that up to 75 I-HAWK missiles, although
intended for shipment to the United Arab Emirates, were still being tested in the U.S. and could
be shipped elsewhere without impact and quotes a ``total package price'' of $22.5 million ``for
[shipping] 50. . . .'' 270  This paper also reported that ``the impact on Army of shipping 3,300
I-TOWs immediately would be serious but not intolerable.'' 271 50 HAWKs and 3,300 TOWs
were the quantities and types of missiles in the proposed shipment outlined in North's December
5, 1985, ``Special Project Re Iran'' paper.

     269 Gaffney, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87, p. 24 (joint deposition with Rudd).
Rudd accepted the logic of Gaffney's account but could not specifically recall the ``Prospects for
Immediate Shipment'' paper.  (Ibid., pp. 24-25.)

     270 Prospects for Immediate Shipment of I-HAWK and I-TOW Missiles, ALZ 0058747.

     271 Ibid.

     Armitage's false statement to the Tower Commission that he prepared Weinberger for the
December 7, 1985, meeting ``orally without any paper trail,'' suggests that the DoD's initial
failure to produce the Rudd-Gaffney papers was no accident.  Notwithstanding numerous
requests from investigators in late 1986 and early 1987, these two papers were not produced to
the Select Committees until the weekend of June 20-21, 1987 -- after the Tower Commission had
completed its work and after the Select Committees had obtained initial testimony from
numerous DoD witnesses, including Weinberger and Armitage.

     On June 16, 1987, Gaffney reminded Rudd that they had created a paper for Armitage
regarding TOW missiles in early December 1985,272  and that Rudd had promptly delivered this
paper to Armitage, who instructed Gaffney to destroy all copies and drafts.273  During a
deposition on the afternoon of June 16, 1987, Select Committee staff members informed Rudd
that a 1986 handwritten note by Koch indicated that this ``TOW paper [was] locked in RLA
[Armitage's] safe, wouldn't let Rudd keep copy.'' 274  The next day, Rudd discussed the matter
with Armitage.275  In Rudd's presence, Armitage pulled a copy of the ``Leaks'' paper out of his
office safe.276  Then DoD provided both the ``Leaks'' paper and the ``Prospects for Immediate
Shipment'' paper to the Select Committees.277

     272 Rudd, Select Committees Deposition, 6/16/87, pp. 25, 36, 40, 45, 48-49.

     273 Gaffney, Select Committees Deposition, 6/16/87, pp. 125, 128-32.

     274 Rudd, Select Committees Deposition, 6/16/87, p. 26; Koch Note, AOX 000812.

     275 Rudd, Select Committees Deposition, 6/16/87, p. 45 (``I have no idea where it [the TOW
paper] is'' and have not made any inquiry to Armitage about its existence).

     276 Rudd, Select Committee Deposition, 6/22/87, pp. 19-20, 26-28 (joint deposition with
Gaffney).

     277 Gaffney & Rudd, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87, Exhibits 1-2.

     Armitage claimed that he had at the outset of the Iran/contra investigations directed his aide,
Lincoln P. Bloomfield, Jr., to review Armitage's files and produce all requested, relevant
documents.278  Bloomfield corroborated Armitage's account.279  There was no evidence that
Armitage and Bloomfield collaborated with anyone else to withhold documents.  Independent
Counsel could not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the initial non-production and
Armitage's false testimony were deliberate.

     278 Armitage, FBI 302, 1/30/92, p. 3.

     279 Bloomfield, Grand Jury, 5/1/92, pp. 62-63.

     Individuals Knowledgeable of or Involved in the Production of Weinberger's Notes

     Of the chief witnesses interviewed by the OIC about the withholding of Weinberger's notes,
four merit separate discussion:  (1) H. Lawrence Garrett, III, DoD general counsel during the
congressional Iran/contra investigation, (2) General Colin L. Powell, Weinberger's former senior
military assistant, (3) Kay D. Leisz, Weinberger's confidential assistant at DoD and in his
subsequent legal practice, and (4) Thelma Stubbs Smith, secretary to Weinberger at the DoD.

     H. Lawrence Garrett III

     Garrett testified in the Grand Jury that he told Weinberger's secretaries, Thelma Stubbs Smith
and Kay Leisz, that the Iran/contra document requests included personal notes and that Smith
told him Weinberger had no notes.280  Garrett had not personally observed Weinberger taking
notes, other than scribbling marginalia on documents during meetings,281 and had not seen
Weinberger's diary notes until he was shown them by OIC investigators in March 1992.282
When specific Weinberger notes were described to Garrett, he stated that he would have
considered them relevant to Iran/contra and said, ``[h]ad I known of them at the time, I would
have so advised the Secretary.'' 283

     280 Garrett, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, p. 19 (Garrett indicated to Thelma Stubbs Smith, in the
presence of Kay Leisz, ``that [the requests] would include personal notes and her [Smith's]
response to me was `I don't believe there are any notes.'''); accord Garrett, Affidavit, 4/28/92,

 11, ALZ 00400536.

     281 Garrett, Affidavit, 4/28/92,

 11, ALZ 0045036; Garrett, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, p. 59 (Weinberger's deposition responses
``would have been consistent with [Garrett's] belief from the outset, and, as I said, I did not
observe the Secretary to be a copious notetaker at all of the meetings that I attended with him so
it didn't trouble me.  . .  .'')

     282 Garrett, FBI 302, 4/8/92, p. 6; Garrett, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, p. 17; accord ibid., pp. 67-68
(Garrett was not aware that at the time of Weinberger's congressional deposition, Weinberger had
``several hundred pages possibly'' of notes in his desk).

     283 Ibid., pp. 74-75.

     Garrett also implied that the failure to produce Weinberger's notes had been because of
Garrett's own lack of vigilance.  He asserted on several occasions that he had never asked
Weinberger directly whether he had notes or diaries 284 and stated in his affidavit that he was
``confident that if [he] or members of [his] staff had asked [Weinberger] specifically whether he
kept diary notes, [Weinberger] would have provided them so that any relevant portions'' could be
produced.285

     284 Garrett, Affidavit, 4/28/92,

 11, ALZ 0045036 (Garrett ``did not personally question Secretary Weinberger about the
existence of personal notes or diaries.''); accord Garrett, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 58, 66, 77
(Garrett did not follow up on the inquiries about notes and records raised in Weinberger's
congressional deposition.).

     285 Garrett, Affidavit, 4/28/92,

 11-13, ALZ 0045036-37.

     Garrett's April 17, 1987, memorandum to Weinberger and his April 29, 1987, memorandum
to Taft -- both of which DoD produced after the indictment, despite having been asked for such
documents much earlier -- indicate that, contrary to the impression conveyed by his affidavit,
Garrett was diligent in attempting to obtain Weinberger's notes and diaries.  When Garrett was
questioned about these documents, he nevertheless insisted he had no recollection of discussing
the production of notes and diaries with either Weinberger or Taft.286

     286 Garrett, Grand Jury, 10/28/92, pp. 20-21, 22, 24, 35 (Weinberger); ibid., pp. 10-11 (Taft).

     Although Garrett's purported inability to recall anything about his efforts to obtain
Weinberger's notes was sufficiently implausible to undermine Garrett's credibility, it would have
been difficult to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Garrett had intentionally perjured himself
five years after writing his April 1987 memorandum.  The evidence indicated that Garrett was
not a witting accomplice in withholding Weinberger's notes from Congress.

     Colin L. Powell

     Although Powell generally was a cooperative witness, his 1992 statements describing
Weinberger's notes in detail and characterizing them as a ``personal diary'' 287 necessarily raise
questions about Powell's 1987 statements  to congressional investigators.  Powell told the staff of
the Senate Select Committee on April 17, 1987, that he did not know whether Weinberger kept a
diary.288  During Powell's June 19, 1987 deposition, the following exchange took place:

     287 In an affidavit submitted by Weinberger's attorneys, Powell stated that he regarded
Weinberger's daily notes as a ``personal diary'' and thought it ``entirely possible'' that Weinberger
would not have understood these personal notes to be within the scope of congressional or OIC
document requests.  (Powell, Affidavit, 4/21/92,

 3, ALZ 0045089.)  Powell's detailed 1992 account of Weinberger's note-taking, while quite
helpful to the OIC, was also consistent with a defense strategy to demonstrate that Weinberger
was not secretive about his notes.  Indeed, Powell, who cooperated extensively with Weinberger's
counsel, provided increasingly vivid descriptions of Weinberger's notes as the investigation
progressed.  (Compare Powell, FBI 302, 2/24/92, p. 2 with Powell, Affidavit, 4/21/92,

 3-4, ALZ 0045089 and Powell, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 19-20, 23.)

     288 Powell, Select Committees Interview Memorandum, 4/20/87, p. 9, AMY 000568.

     Q: Maybe I should know this, but did the Secretary keep a diary?

     A: The Secretary, to my knowledge, did not keep a diary.  Whatever notes he kept, I don't
know how he uses them or what he does with them.

     Q: Did he --

     A: He does not have a diary of this ilk, no.

     Q:  -- did he dictate memos, as some people do, so that if they ever get around to writing their
-- a book on the era, they have some aids; they have memoirs?

     A: No, the Secretary did not dictate his daily activities, to the best of my knowledge.  I've
never seen it.   He didn't do it and I was with him every day.

     Whatever notes he took in the course of a day, I don't know what he did with them.289

     289 Powell, Select Committees Deposition, 6/19/87, p. 54-55.  Powell's reference to ``a diary
of this ilk'' may refer to the notebook that Powell began to maintain when he became deputy
national security adviser in January 1987.  (Powell, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, pp. 14-15.)

     In light of his statements in 1992, Powell's 1987 deposition testimony was at least misleading.
Although Powell qualified his denial that Weinberger kept a ``diary'' by distinguishing that kind
of record from ``whatever notes [Weinberger] kept,'' this oblique reference to Weinberger's notes
hardly constituted full disclosure.290  Powell apparently understood that congressional
investigators wanted to know whether Weinberger kept contemporaneous records of his daily
activities but failed to  disclose that Weinberger's notes were a running, daily log of telephone
calls and meetings. He also claimed that he did not know what Weinberger did with his notes.291

     290 As one example of Powell's contemporaneous familiarity with Weinberger's diary notes,
Powell actually helped to create Weinberger's daily diary entries for October 10, 1985, the day
that U.S. military forces captured the hijackers of the Achille Lauro cruise ship in the
Mediterranean.  Weinberger, who had been flying from Canada to Maine and made an
unscheduled return to Washington as the military action unfolded, apparently was too busy to
create his typical log of calls and activities and asked Powell to create a chronology of the day's
events for him.  Later that day, Powell gave Weinberger a cover note (``Sec Def, Chronologies.
Does not include all your calls.  VR [very respectfully], CP'') and two handwritten pages on
which Powell had noted Weinberger's afternoon and evening activities.  Weinberger
subsequently annotated Powell's entries and filed all three pages with his daily diary notes.
Weinberger's accompanying diary entry says ``See attached slips for calls from + to plane.''
(Weinberger Diary, 10/10/85, ALZ 0039713c-13g.)

     291 In a trial preparation interview with the OIC in late 1992, by contrast, Powell stated that
Weinberger, ``[m]ore often than not,'' made notes on his 5'' x 7'' pad while working at his ``stand
up desk,'' and that Weinberger ``put them in his desk on the right side. . . .''  (Powell, OIC
Interview Transcript, 11/5/92, p. 3, ALZ 0075308.)

     Nevertheless, it would have been difficult to prove that his deposition testimony was
intentionally false.292  Similarly, there was no direct evidence that Powell and Weinberger
colluded to conceal Weinberger's notes from congressional investigators.  Thus, while Powell's
prior inconsistent statements could have been used to impeach his credibility, they did not
warrant prosecution.

     292 Powell's vague references to Weinberger's ``notes,'' as opposed to his ``diary,'' may have
been calculated to avoid giving overtly false testimony while providing as little information as
possible.

     Kay D. Leisz

     Leisz was interviewed by the OIC on February 3, 1992, and appeared before the Grand Jury
on March 6 and April 24, 1992.  On the latter occasion, Leisz, who had been advised that she was
a subject of the Grand Jury's investigation and had retained counsel, invoked the Fifth
Amendment.  On June 15, 1992, in return for an immunity  agreement, Leisz gave a deposition in
lieu of a Grand Jury appearance but added little to her prior testimony.

     Leisz asserted in an October 1, 1990, memorandum that she had stopped maintaining
Weinberger's handwritten meeting notes after his first year as secretary of defense.293  Leisz
later elaborated that she simply left Weinberger's loose meeting notes in his briefing books,
which were forwarded to the Correspondence & Directives (C&D) section to be broken down
and filed.294

     293 Memorandum from Leisz for the Record, 10/1/90, ALZ 0051360.

     294 Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, p. 16.

     Leisz adhered to this story, which Weinberger had echoed in his October 10, 1990, interview,
despite overwhelming evidence that it was false.295  For example, Weinberger's other secretary,
Thelma Stubbs Smith, stated that she and Leisz had maintained a handwritten-notes file
throughout Weinberger's tenure at DoD and that these notes were later transferred from Leisz's
safe to the vault in Weinberger's office.296  In addition, Leisz identified her handwritten
notations on some of Weinberger's meeting notes from 1985-86.297  Leisz had also referred to
``your hand-written notes file'' in a 1987 note to Weinberger; 298 another cover note by Leisz
identified a collection of Weinberger's notes taken during the TWA hijacking in June 1985; 299
and a 1985 cover note from Powell to Leisz attached a set of Weinberger's meeting notes ``For
your File.'' 300  Even when confronted with this evidence, Leisz insisted that she could not recall
having maintained a file of Weinberger's handwritten notes after his first year at DoD.301

     295 Leisz, FBI 302, 2/3/92, p. 2; Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 17-18; Leisz, OIC Interview,
6/15/92, p. 14.

     296 Smith, Affidavit, 4/29/92,

 7, ALZ 0045122-23.  Also, as discussed above, none of Weinberger's meeting notes has a C&D
file number.

     297 Leisz, OIC Interview, 6/15/92, p. 22.

     298 Leisz's typed, undated note was attached to Weinberger's notes of the November 10,
1986, White House meeting.  Although the context for Leisz's note remains a mystery, she typed
``I looked through your hand-written notes file and the only file I keep on dictated notes from
meetings.  Attached is all we have.''  (ALZ 0058999.)  Leisz's handwritten note at the bottom says
``P.S. There are no copies.''  (Ibid.)

     299 Leisz Note, ALZ 0060091 (covering Weinberger notes of 6/15/85, 6/16/85 and 6/24/85).

     300 Note from Powell to Leisz, 9/24/85, ALZ 0060174.

     301 Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 42-43, 44 (note to Weinberger); ibid., pp. 47-48, 49 (notes
on TWA hijacking); Leisz, OIC Interview, 6/15/92, pp. 20-21 (note from Powell); ibid., p. 22
(Leisz handwriting on meeting notes).

     Leisz also insisted that she was unaware of Weinberger's diary notes while at DoD and that
she had not heard Weinberger refer to them as his ``telephone logs'' until she went with him to
review the notes at the Library of Congress in December 1991.302  Most other Weinberger aides
who had  similar daily contact with Weinberger eventually said they had been aware of his diary
notes.303

     Leisz's testimony, particularly about the meeting notes, was flagrantly incredible.  Although
the immunity agreement did not preclude prosecuting Leisz for giving subsequent false testimony
in her June 15, 1992, deposition, the OIC determined that pursuing such collateral charges was
not an effective use of resources.

     302 Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 25-26.  Weinberger's former senior military assistant,
Admiral Donald S. Jones, recalled, however, that one of Weinberger's secretaries (he could not
remember if it was Smith or Leisz) had identified papers on the shelf in the bedroom adjacent to
Weinberger's office as ``Weinberger's notes.''  (Jones, FBI 302, 12/22/92, p. 4.)

     303 The latter admissions were consistent with the apparent defense strategy to emphasize
that Weinberger had made no effort to hide his notes from those around him.

     Leisz also testified that when she and Weinberger went to the Library in December 1991 to
review the notes the OIC had found there, both she and Weinberger were surprised to find that
his diary and meeting notes were at the Library.  (Leisz, Grand Jury, 3/6/92, pp. 31, 34-35.)
Leisz said Weinberger had remarked about his diary notes, ``these are my telephone logs; I didn't
know where they were.''  (Ibid., p. 35.)

     Weinberger's comments are odd given that he and Duncan had looked at the diary notes in the
Library in July 1988 and that Weinberger had packed his diary notes and at least some of his
meeting notes himself for transfer to the Library.  Weinberger's attorneys, who claimed that
Weinberger was well aware his diary notes were at the Library when he gave the OIC permission
to review his papers there, tried to minimize this episode in a pre-indictment meeting with the
OIC, explaining that Weinberger was simply suprised at the way his notes had been neatly
archived in individual plastic sleeves.

     Thelma Stubbs Smith

     In her first interview on March 5, 1992, Smith was shown examples of Weinberger's diary
notes and stated that she had never seen them before.  Smith also stated that she had seen
Weinberger's meeting notes only when Weinberger used them to dictate memoranda, which he
did infrequently, and she had thrown the corresponding notes away when a memorandum was
completed.  Smith further stated that she had no knowledge where any notes Weinberger may
have made would have been kept.  Smith said she had talked to Leisz before the interview, and
Leisz had told her of the OIC's interest in the notes discovered at the Library of Congress.304

     304 Smith, FBI 302, 3/5/92, pp. 2, 3.

     In Smith's second interview, on April 28, 1992, she was again shown examples of
Weinberger's diary notes.  This time, she said she had occasionally seen such notes on
Weinberger's desk and assumed he intended to use them to write a book.  Smith also disclosed, in
contradiction to her earlier statement, that she and Leisz maintained a file of Weinberger's
handwritten notes in a safe by Leisz's desk.305

     305 Smith, FBI 302, 3/23/92, p. 3.

     In an affidavit executed the next day for Weinberger's counsel, Smith provided even more
detailed information about Weinberger's notes.  Smith stated that  she had been ``aware that
Secretary Weinberger kept a pad on his desk on which he scribbled notes reflecting the date, time
and other references to telephone calls and meetings.''  Smith also expanded her description of
the handwritten notes file but said she did not believe Weinberger was aware that she and Leisz
kept such a file.  Smith said she did not recall being asked by anyone to gather ``documents''
relevant to Iran/contra and said that, even if she had been asked, she ``would not have thought of
the handwritten notes'' because she did not consider them to be ``documents.'' 306

     306 Smith Affidavit, 4/29/92,

 5, 7, 11, ALZ 0045122-24.

     When questioned later before the Grand Jury about the inconsistency in her statements about
the diary notes, Smith insisted that she simply had not remembered them when they were shown
to her in the first interview.307

     307 Smith, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, p. 31. Following Smith's Grand Jury appearance, her attorney
wrote an indignant letter to the OIC objecting to the suggestion that his client had shaded her
initial statements to the OIC after talking to Leisz. (Letter from Banoun to Baker, 5/8/92,
018977.) Later, Weinberger's counsel attached to a court pleading an affidavit from Smith's
husband, alleging that the OIC had deliberately falsified the record of the first interview.
(Affidavit of Edwin E. Smith, 12/14/92,

 5, attached to Defendant's Memorandum in Opposition to OIC's Motion In Limine to Exclude
Extraneous Evidence Concerning the OIC, 12/16/92, 024526.) The FBI agents who conducted
the interview each unequivocally denied Mr. Smith's allegations. (Government's Motion to Strike
Affidavit of Edwin E. Smith from Defendant's Pleadings, 12/17/92, 024558.)

     Smith's statements conflict with Garrett's Grand Jury testimony.  Garrett said he told Smith
and Leisz specifically that the document requests included ``personal notes.'' 308 If Smith told
Garrett in 1987 that Weinberger had no notes, her statement was deliberately false. Because of
Garrett's own credibility problems, and the lack of direct proof that Smith had colluded with
Weinberger and/or Leisz, the OIC did not charge Smith with complicity in withholding
Weinberger's notes.

     308 Garrett, Grand Jury, 4/22/92, p. 19.  In the affidavit that Weinberger's counsel procured
and submitted to the OIC after Garrett's Grand Jury testimony, his account of his conversation
with Smith and Leisz is phrased more narrowly:  ``I do recall that early on in the process I told
[Weinberger's] secretaries that a document request had been received and asked them whether
Secretary Weinberger had any notes regarding the Iran-Contra affair.  They said he did not have
any such notes.''  (Garrett, Affidavit, 4/28/92,

 11, ALZ 0045036, emphasis added.)  In a subsequent interview, however, Garrett again
characterized Smith's statement to him as a categorical assertion that ``there weren't any notes.''
(Garrett, OIC Interview, 5/13/92, pp. 10-11, 24-25.)

     The DoD's Lack of Cooperation With the OIC's Investigation of Weinberger

     The OIC's experience with the DoD during the Weinberger investigation illustrates the unique
problems Independent Counsel encountered investigating possible wrongdoing by high-level
officials.  DoD withheld documents even in 1992. DoD employees gave defense counsel
confidential communications between DoD and OIC -- the Government's counsel. DoD
employees improperly allowed defense counsel to review evidence being held for the OIC.

     In April and May of 1992, the OIC asked the DoD to produce documents from the Office of
General Counsel (OGC) and Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) regarding DoD's
responses to Iran/contra document requests.  The OGC files containing most of the information
relating to DoD's Iran/contra document production, including Garrett's 1987 memoranda to
Weinberger and Taft, were not produced to the OIC until after the indictment.309  In response to
additional, specific requests and subpoenas, DoD produced from OSD files another copy, and the
original, of Garrett's memorandum to Weinberger, bearing the ``SEC DEF HAS SEEN'' stamp
and a handwritten note by Weinberger -- neither of  which had been produced in response to
previous document requests.310

     309 The OIC had determined that there was sufficient evidence from Weinberger's own diary
notes, his false statements to congressional investigators and the few documents produced by
DoD to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Weinberger had intentionally withheld his notes
from Congress.  The new documents, however, strengthened the evidence of Weinberger's intent.

     310 Garrett's chronological files and a number of relevant subject files from his tenure as DoD
general counsel similarly were not produced until October 1992, in response to a Grand Jury
subpoena, despite a specific request for such files in May 1992.  These files contained additional
copies of Garrett's memoranda to Weinberger and Taft.  Garrett had previously told the OIC that
he had no chronological files.  (Garrett, FBI 302, 4/8/92, p. 10.)  DoD Deputy General Counsel
Michael A. Sterlacci testified, however, that the files had been obtained from Garrett's former
office (Garrett had recently resigned as Secretary of the Navy).  (Sterlacci, Grand Jury, 10/28/92,
p. 7.)  Sterlacci also conceded that, although the OGC had forwarded the earlier OIC document
request to Garrett, the OGC had made no effort to follow up on the matter when Garrett failed to
respond.  (Ibid., pp. 11-13.)

     Although  the OIC found no conclusive proof that a DoD official had deliberately withheld
these documents, the OIC received an anonymous telephone call on May 21, 1992, suggesting
that investigators look in the office of Deputy General Counsel Michael A. Sterlacci for
information regarding Weinberger. Several of the files produced belatedly by DoD had been
stored in Sterlacci's office.311

     311 According to one OGC attorney, the files had been scattered among three different
offices, including Sterlacci's, before mid-1992. The attorney said that the missing files had been
located when old files were being reviewed to be sent to storage, not in response to the OIC's
document requests. (White, FBI 302, 9/4/92, p. 1.)

     During the investigation, the OIC discovered that DoD officials had faxed to Weinberger's
counsel copies of at least one OIC document request to DoD, which the OIC regarded as
confidential.  DoD's Acting General Counsel later conceded that it was not consistent with DoD
policy to disclose such documents relating to an ongoing criminal investigation without at least
consulting the prosecutor beforehand.312

     312 Letter from Chester Paul Beach, Jr., DoD Acting General Counsel, to Gillen, 8/8/92
(020209).

     OIC discovered after Weinberger's indictment that DoD personnel had given Weinberger's
defense counsel apparently unsupervised access to documents the OIC had identified as evidence
and left, by agreement with DoD, temporarily in DoD custody.313  This jeopardized the integrity
of original evidence  in a pending criminal case and also allowed Weinberger's counsel to
circumvent ordinary discovery procedures. DoD's general counsel later conceded that this
conduct was not consistent with DoD policy, which provides that the Department of Justice, (in
this case, the OIC) should be consulted before DoD discloses official information to a criminal
defendant or other litigant.314

     313 This discovery was accidental.  An OIC attorney arrived at the Pentagon to take custody
of the documents and found that one of Weinberger's attorneys was photocopying the documents
in the OGC's offices without any visible supervision by DoD personnel.

     314 DoD Directive 5405.2, 7/23/85.

     Independent Counsel decided in 1992 not to commit resources to an investigation into
ongoing obstruction by the Department of Defense.

Part IX

     Investigations of the White House

     The Iran/contra affair flowed from decisions made and actions taken in the White House by
President Reagan and his closest advisers.

     The operational aspects of Iran/contra were carried out by the national security adviser to the
President and the National Security Council staff, who were aided by private operatives they
recruited.  Their criminal activities are related in earlier sections of this report.

     This part of the report covers the actions and decisions relative to Iran/contra of President
Reagan; White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan; Attorney General Edwin Meese III, in so
far as Meese acted in his capacity as friend and adviser to the President; Vice President George
Bush; Bush's national security adviser Donald P. Gregg; and Gregg's deputy, Col. Samuel J.
Watson III.

     The criminal investigation established that President Reagan, with the support of Vice
President Bush, promulgated the two policies that drove Iran/contra:

      -- that the contras would be kept viable as an insurgent force during the Boland cut-off period
from October 1984 to October 1986, and

      -- that arms would be sold to Iran, first from Israeli stocks and later directly from the United
States, in exchange for the release of  Americans held hostage in the Middle East.

     The investigation also established that the President, Vice President and Regan were briefed
regularly and in considerable detail as to the operations being conducted to carry out those
policies.  Independent Counsel found no credible evidence that the President authorized or was
aware of the diversion of profits from the Iran arms sales to assist the contras, or that Regan,
Bush, or Meese was aware of the diversion.

     Similarly, Independent Counsel found no convincing evidence that Reagan formally or
specifically authorized the National Security Council staff in general or Lt. Col. Oliver L. North
in particular to establish a U.S. Government-coordinated covert, full-scale contra-resupply
organization to replace the CIA during the Boland cut-off period. President Reagan and Vice
President Bush did receive regular reports on the strengths and problems of the contras and knew
that North was the Government official charged in the first instance with trying to find solutions
to their problems.

     The OIC found considerable evidence that the President and the Vice President knew about
and, in some instances, directly participated in contra-funding efforts during this period --
including third-country donations, quid-pro-quo arrangements to encourage third-country
support, and contributions from private citizens.  In addition, there was evidence that Bush's
aides Gregg and Watson had information on North's direction of the contra-resupply effort
through Gregg's close relationship with Felix Rodriguez, a former CIA operative whom North
enlisted as a part of his contra-supply organization. Gregg claimed that, notwithstanding the
Administration's interest in the success of the contras, he never mentioned any information
regarding contra resupply to Vice President Bush, the person he was advising on national security
matters.

     A principal focus of this section centers on the activities of the President, the Vice President,
Regan and  Meese during November 1986 when the public disclosure of the Iran arms sales
created a political furor, generating demands for a congressional investigation and the
appointment of an independent counsel.  Of particular interest to congressional leaders was
whether the Iran arms sales, in the face of a U.S.-supported embargo on such sales, were in
violation of any statutes, and whether the failure of the Administration to disclose the Iran arms
sales to Congress was in violation of the Arms Export Control Act, the National Security Act or
any other statute.

     Independent Counsel concluded that President Reagan, Vice President Bush, Regan, Meese
and other senior Administration officials in November 1986 undertook to ``rearrange the record,''
as Secretary of State George P. Shultz put it in a conversation with his senior advisers, in an
effort to protect the President and themselves from accusations of possible violations of law.  A
particular concern was that the 1985 Iran arms sales from Israeli stocks violated the
congressional notification requirement of the Arms Export Control Act.  Evidence to support this
conclusion was obtained by Independent Counsel in 1991 and 1992 from notes, diaries and
documents previously withheld from the Tower Commission, the congressional Select
Committees and the OIC.  The withheld evidence demonstrated that:

      -- President Reagan authorized the 1985 sale of TOW and HAWK missiles from Israeli
stocks in an effort to free Americans held hostage even though he was warned such sales were in
violation of the Arms Export Control Act.

      -- The President's senior national security advisers -- Vice President Bush, Shultz, Secretary
of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, CIA Director William J. Casey, and Regan -- were informed
in 1985 of presidential approval of the transactions.

     One year later, in November 1986, when Congress tried to learn the facts about the Iran arms
sales, the Administration first tried to withhold information about the 1985 sales from Israeli
stocks.  Thereafter, Poindexter and Meese stated that the President was unaware of and had not
authorized the November 1985 shipment of 18 HAWK missiles from Israel to Iran -- that the
initiative had been handled by former National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane without
presidential authorization.  The evidence demonstrates that Poindexter and Meese, as well as the
President and his other senior advisers, knew that to be false, but they at least tentatively
accommodated that position.

     Independent Counsel concluded that no criminal charges should be brought against President
Reagan, Vice President Bush, Meese or Regan because the belated production of notes and other
documents delayed the investigation beyond the point where it could be effective.

Chapter 27

     President Reagan

     The President is the only individual granted power and responsibility by the Constitution.  In
other delegations of power and authority, the Constitution deals with entities -- the Congress, the
courts, the states.  In cases of conduct involving political objectives rather than venal objectives,
the procedure of impeachment, which brings into play the political judgment of both houses of
Congress, would ordinarily be preferred over criminal charges and a trial by jury.

     Further, the President's awesome responsibility for policy decisions necessary to our national
safety was not intended to be belittled by requiring him to deal personally with the thicket of
statutes, regulations, and orders that regulate Government activity.  He ordinarily would be
entitled to rely on his staff and Cabinet to see that his decisions are carried out in a legal manner.

     But because a President, and certainly a past President, is subject to prosecution in appropriate
cases, the conduct of President Reagan in the Iran/contra matter was reviewed by Independent
Counsel against the applicable statutes.  It was concluded that President Reagan's conduct fell
well short of criminality which could be successfully prosecuted.  Fundamentally, it could not be
proved beyond a  reasonable doubt that President Reagan knew of the underlying facts of
Iran/contra that were criminal or that he made criminal misrepresentations regarding them.

     President Reagan created the conditions which made possible the crimes committed by others
by his secret deviations from announced national policy as to Iran and hostages and by his open
determination to keep the contras together ``body and soul'' despite a statutory ban on contra
aid.1

     1 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, p. 3946.

     In the Iran initiative, President Reagan chose to proceed in the utmost secrecy, disregarding
the Administration's public policy prohibiting arms sales to nations supporting terrorism.  He also
chose to forgo congressional notification under the National Security Act and the Arms Export
Control Act.2  Having bypassed accountability to Congress, the President failed either to
establish an effective system of accountability within the Administration or to monitor the series
of activities he authorized.3  Working in a climate of extreme secrecy and  operating without
accountability, National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter, Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the
National Security Council staff and others associated with the initiative invited criminal acts
including profiteering on the Iranian arms sales, the diversion of some of those proceeds to aid
the contras, destroying documents, and lying to Congress to cover up their criminal activities.

     2 See discussion on ``The Iran Hostage Initiative, 1985-1986'' later in this chapter.

     3 In his written answers to interrogatories requested by Independent Counsel and the Grand
Jury, Reagan stated that he did not monitor the details of the Iran arms sales and had no specific
knowledge of such key matters as North's role or Secord's role. The President said he did not
authorize any profits from the sale of arms to Iran and that he was unaware that there were excess
proceeds and that some of them were diverted to aid the contras.

     When the Iran initiative was exposed on November 3, 1986, the President convened a series
of meetings with his top national security advisers and permitted the creation of a false account
of the Iran arms sales to be disseminated to members of Congress and the American people.4
These false accounts denied the President's knowledge and authorization of the initial sales from
Israeli stocks of U.S.-made TOW and HAWK missiles to Iran in August, September and
November of 1985.  Attorney General Edwin Meese III and others were concerned that those
sales violated the Arms Export Control  Act and the National Security Act of 1947.5  Previously
withheld notes by participants in the November 12 and November 24, 1986, meetings constituted
evidence of an effort to cover up the true facts of the President's authorization of the 1985 Iran
arms sales.  But the discovery of the notes by Independent Counsel came too late to investigate
effectively and to prosecute the false statements involved.6  The passage of time, claims of
dimmed recollections and the running of the statute of limitations protected the underlying acts.

     4 Two of the key meetings were on November 10 and November 12, where the principal
account of the Iran initiative, given by Poindexter, left out the 1985 arms sales from Israeli
stocks. At a meeting on November 24, Attorney General Meese said that the November 1985
HAWK shipment was possibly illegal but, he said, the President ``didn't know.''

     5 Later, the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel developed a purported defense for
these sales.  The participants in the November 24, 1986, meeting were concerned, however, with
the question of legality, rightly or wrongly.

     6 Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was indicted by a federal Grand Jury on
June 16, 1992, on five counts of obstruction, perjury and false statements.  He was to be tried on
January 5, 1993.  Weinberger was pardoned by President Bush on December 24, 1992.

     No direct evidence was developed that the President authorized or was informed of the
profiteering on the Iran arms sales or of the diversion of proceeds to aid the contras.7  Yet, it was
doubtful that President Reagan would  tolerate the successive Iranian affronts during 1986 unless
he knew that the arms sales continued to supply funds to the contras to bridge the gap before the
anticipated congressional appropriations became effective.  Only Poindexter could supply direct
evidence, and he denied passing on this information.  The wide destruction of records by North
eliminated any possible documentary proof.

     7 Two of the key persons involved in the operations said they believed the President either
had approved of their actions or would have approved of them had he been asked.  Poindexter,
who testified that he did not inform the President of the diversion, said he nevertheless believed
the President would have approved it had it been presented to him.  (Poindexter, Select
Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp. 70-72.)  North testified that he believed that the President
had authorized the diversion. (North, Select Committees Testimony, 7/7/87, pp. 23-25.)

     As with the Iran initiative, President Reagan was apparently unconcerned as to the details of
how his policy objectives for contra support were being carried out by subordinates who were
operating virtually free from oversight or accountability.  President Reagan made it clear to his
national security advisers Robert C. McFarlane and Poindexter that he wanted to keep the contra
resistance alive ``body and soul.''  He said he told them to stay within the law, including the
Boland Amendment restrictions on U.S. aid to the contras.  In doing so, he confronted his staff
with two virtually incompatible objectives.

     This determination to surmount Boland was seized on by North and others as a justification
for violating Boland and later lying to Congress about such violations.   Independent Counsel
found no prosecutable evidence that the President expressly authorized or was informed of the
illegal features of North's operational participation in the covert contra-resupply operation and his
financing of the operation.  President Reagan was aware of and even encouraged some aspects of
external funding for the contras, such as solicitation of aid from third countries and contributions
from private benefactors.  He also was aware that North was the NSC's action officer on the
contras, and he was regularly briefed on the growth of the contra movement during the period
when funds to assist the contras were cut off by Boland.8

     8 Answers of the President of the United States to Interrogatories, Answer to Question 10, In
Re Grand Jury Investigation (hereafter, ``Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories'').

     President Reagan supplied information regarding his knowledge of these activities in sworn
answers to written interrogatories posed by Independent Counsel and the Grand Jury, his
testimony during the Poindexter trial, and a deposition by Independent Counsel in July 1992.  In
addition, North, Poindexter and other central figures testified during the investigation and in
various trials.  Documents were also produced after the Select Iran/contra Committees had
completed their investigation in 1987.

     President Reagan's activities were analyzed in four broad aspects:  (1) the military and
paramilitary support of the contras from 1984 to 1986; (2) the Iran arms sales in 1985 and 1986;
(3) the October-November 1986 cover-up of these activities from mounting congressional
inquiries; and (4) the President's responses and testimony to the Tower Commission and to
Independent Counsel.

     Military and Paramilitary Support to the Contras, October 1984 to October 1986

     Financial Support

     From the congressional cut off of contra military aid until October 1986, when Congress again
appropriated funds for contra assistance, there were three sources of funding developed by NSC
officials to carry out President Reagan's generalized admonition to keep the contras together
``body and soul'': third-country grants; donations from so-called ``private benefactors''; and
proceeds diverted from the Iran arms sales.  Of the three, third-country funding, particularly from
the Saudis, was by far the biggest source, amounting to $32 million.  The Taiwanese government
contributed $2 million.  Other governments, at the request of the Administration, made available
weapons, documentation to disguise the origin of weapon shipments, and facilities to
accommodate contra camps  and provide logistical support. Some $1.7 million in private
contributions flowed through the tax-exempt National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty
(NEPL) to accounts controlled by North, and approximately $4 million from the Iran arms
proceeds diversion, also controlled by North.9

     9 See Flow of Funds chapter.

     The Administration was advised by the attorney general that, absent a quid-pro-quo
arrangement, soliciting third-country contributions which would be paid directly to the contras
would not violate Boland restrictions.10  It  would obviously be difficult to proceed criminally
against a President who operated on the basis of what he considered sound legal advice.  The
President held a similar view that he and his subordinates could publicly encourage private
citizens to contribute directly to the contras without running afoul of Boland.11

     10 See Minutes from National Security Planning Group Meeting, 6/25/84, ALU 007863-76.
Although Vice President Bush and CIA Director William J. Casey felt third-country assistance
would be legal absent any quid-pro-quo arrangement, Secretary of State George P. Shultz felt
that a legal opinion should be obtained; and Casey agreed.  The day after the NSPG meeting,
Casey and CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin met with Attorney General William French
Smith and two of his assistants and were told by the attorney general that

     he saw no legal concern if the United States Government discussed this matter with other
nations so long as it was made clear that they would be using their own funds to support the
contras and no U.S. appropriated funds would be used for this purpose.  The Attorney General
also said that any nation agreeing to supply aid could not look to the United States to repay that
commitment in the future.

     An assistant to the attorney general, Mary Lawton, suggested that

     a specific written statement might be developed to make clear to cooperating nations that any
decision to provide further assistance to the resistance in Nicaragua would be made without any
monetary promises or inducements from the United States Government which would expect
them to take steps to assure that no U.S. appropriated funds would be involved in the program.

     (Memorandum from Sporkin to the Record, 6/26/84, ER 21615.)

     11 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answers to Questions 1-4.

     The President denied unequivocally that he was aware of the diversion of funds from the
proceeds of the Iran arms sales, or that he authorized it.12  Independent Counsel could not prove
the contrary.  Poindexter testified that he did not inform the President of the diversion, and
Meese and White House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan testified that the President was
``shocked'' when he learned about it on November 24, 1986.13

     12 The President denied knowledge of the diversion to the Tower Commission, in his sworn
answers to Grand Jury Interrogatories, in his testimony in Poindexter, and in numerous public
statements following the disclosure of the diversion by Attorney General Meese on November
25, 1986. (See, e.g. Reagan, Remarks at a Meeting with the President's Special Review Board,
12/1/86, Public Papers of the Presidents, 1986 Vol. II, 1986, p. 1591; Reagan, Address to Nation
on Iran Arms and Contra Aid Controversy, 3/4/87, Ibid., p. 208-11; Reagan, Interview with
White House Newspaper Correspondents, 4/28/87, Ibid., pp. 424-29; Reagan, Address to Nation,
8/12/87, Ibid., p. 942-45.)

     13 Meese, Grand Jury, 2/17/88, pp. 51-56;  Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, pp. 43-47.

     Domestic fundraising for the contras presented a  more complicated picture.  There is no
doubt that, at least beginning with his appearance at a dinner for the Nicaraguan Refugee Fund in
April 1985 and continuing through mid-1986, President Reagan, like North, was a frequent and
enthusiastic fundraiser for contra-related causes.  The President's appeals seem to have been
confined to non-lethal, ``humanitarian'' aid.  North, in contrast, participated in direct appeals,
mainly through the tax-exempt NEPL, for funds to buy weapons, a fact that Poindexter did not
recall telling the President.14  President Reagan was unquestionably aware of NEPL.  He held
meetings and exchanged commendatory correspondence with its officials and big contributors,
often at North's request.  President Reagan stated that he did not know that North wound up with
actual control of the funds raised through NEPL and passed them through to the secret Swiss
accounts managed by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim.15
Independent Counsel could not prove that the President was aware of the misused tax-exempt
status of NEPL, or that he was aware that contributions to it were used to purchase lethal
materials for the contras.

     14 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 11/28/90, p. 115.

     15 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 18.  Alan D. Fiers, Jr., former
head of the CIA's Central American Task Force, had a vivid memory of the NSPG meeting on
May 16, 1986.  According to Fiers, during a discussion of the need for funds to keep contras in
the field until an expected congressional appropriation became available, President Reagan said:
``Can't some of Ollie's people help out?''  Regan quickly changed the subject.  (Fiers, Grand Jury,
8/14/91, p. 39.) The  official NSPG minutes record Reagan's remarks as: ``What about the private
groups who pay for ads for the contras.  Have they been contacted?  Could they do more than
ads?''  (Minutes of the May 16, 1986, NSPG Meeting, 6/4/86, AKW 018802-13.)

     In describing his understanding of NEPL, the President said in his Grand Jury Interrogatory
Answer 19:

     I understand that NEPL was engaged in building grass-roots support for legislation to provide
military support to the NFF [contras] including the funding of a public awareness campaign.

     My understanding came from briefing papers provided to me by my staff and by
correspondence I received from NEPL . . .  Moreover, NEPL engaged in similar public
information programs for other national security issues, e.g., the Strategic Defense Initiative.  I
thought of their effort on behalf of the NFF as identical to these other information programs.

     North stated in a May 1986 computer note to Poindexter that ``the President obviously knows
why he has been meeting with several select people to thank them for their `support for
Democracy' in CentAm.'' 16  Independent Counsel could not prove, however, that the President
had more than the generalized awareness of private U.S. support for  the contras reflected in his
Answer to Grand Jury Interrogatories 14-17:

     16 PROFs Note from North to Poindexter, 5/16/86, Poindexter GX 66.

     I was generally aware that some assistance was flowing from the private sources to the NFF
and that some of this assistance would have included military support.  This information was
public knowledge as early as 1985 and was even mentioned in Congressional debate about a
request for funding in August 1985.  Until the plane carrying Mr. Hasenfus was shot down in
October 1986, I do not recall knowing of specific individuals or groups engaged in this activity
and was unaware of any connection with the U.S. Government.  I believed such activity to be
similar to the efforts by Americans in other conflicts.  Even after Mr. Hasenfus was shot down, I
was told that he was not participating in a U.S. sponsored operation, and I was not informed of
any particulars of that operation beyond what was in the news media.  It was not until after
November 25, 1986, when the full details of these operations became public, that I learned the
nature and extent of the private support network and the role of certain U.S. officials in it.

     Although I did not seek or directly encourage private citizens to provide military support, I did
encourage William Simon and others to provide humanitarian assistance through the Nicaraguan
Freedom Fund (Tab 14A).  I also knew, as had been previously reported in the press, that Mrs.
Garwood had contributed money to refurbish a Medevac helicopter.  I understood her
contributions to be of a humanitarian nature, and when I met Mrs. Garwood, this subject was not
discussed.

     The President's knowledge was much more complete  regarding the obtaining of funds for the
contras from foreign governments.  But Independent Counsel found no evidence that he knew
that, after North had set up his secret contra-resupply operation, control over most of those
contributions also passed to North.  Both McFarlane and CIA Director William J. Casey sought
aid from foreign governments for the contras during the first six months of 1984.17  There is no
doubt that the President was informed of the first successful effort to secure third-country
funding.  In May or June 1984, McFarlane advised the President that the Saudi Arabian
ambassador, Prince Bandar, volunteered to deliver $1 million-per-month to a contra bank
account.  According to McFarlane, the President responded to this information with the words
``Good news'' or ``That's fine.'' 18

     17 See McFarlane and Casey chapters; see also Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answers
to Questions 11-13.

     18 McFarlane, Grand Jury, 4/29/87, pp. 36-37.

     On June 25, 1984, third-country solicitation was discussed at a meeting of the National
Security Planning Group (NSPG).  CIA Director Casey reported that the CIA was down to
$250,000 remaining from the Fiscal 1984 appropriation for the contras, and that the contras had
arms and ammunition to last only until August.  Casey brought up the subject of third-country
funding, prompting a debate between Secretary  of State George P. Shultz and Casey over
whether or not White House Chief of Staff James Baker, who was not at the meeting, believed
that solicitation of third-country funding for the contras would be an ``impeachable offense.''  It
was decided that Attorney General William French Smith would be consulted to resolve that
issue.  Those who were aware of the Saudi $1 million-per-month commitment did not mention it.
According to the minutes, the meeting concluded with the following exchange:

     Vice President Bush:  How can anyone object to the U.S. encouraging third parties to provide
help to the anti-Sandinistas under the finding?  The only problem that might come up is if the
United States were to promise to give these third parties something in return so that some people
could interpret this as some kind of exchange.

     Mr. Casey:  Jim Baker changed his mind as soon as he saw the finding and saw the language.

     Mr. McFarlane:  I propose that there be no authority for anyone to seek third party support for
the anti-Sandinistas until we have the information we need, and I certainly hope none of this
discussion will be made public in any way.

     President Reagan:  If such a story gets out, we'll all be hanging by our thumbs in front of the
White House until we find out who did it.19

     19 Minutes from National Security Planning Group Meeting, 6/25/84, ALU 007863-76.

     McFarlane interpreted the President's final comment as a command that Congress not be
notified of third-country contributions, but not a direction to lie to Congress if asked.20

     20 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/10/89, pp. 3941-30; Ibid., 3/15/89, pp. 4626-29.

     The President himself received promise of the next major foreign contribution to the contras,
which also came from Saudi Arabia.  During a February 1985 visit to Washington by King Fahd,
the king volunteered to double the Saudis' contribution to the contras to $2 million per month.
Reagan later informed McFarlane and, according to McFarlane, directed that the information not
be shared with others.21

     21 Ibid., 3/13/89, pp. 4201-6.

     The NSC staff aided efforts to obtain both financial and other support for the contras from
other third countries as well.  The Republic of Korea was solicited through retired Army Maj.
Gen. John K. Singlaub; no contribution resulted.  Taiwan was solicited through a number of
intermediaries; two donations of $1 million each were eventually received.  Poindexter suspected
that the President was informed of Taiwan's contribution.22

     22 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, pp. 268-69. For discussion of
McFarlane and North involvement in solicitation of third-country funds for the contras, see
McFarlane chapter.

     Finally, with regard to the contras' never-ending search for anti-aircraft missiles, the President
was at least generally familiar with North's efforts to obtain foreign approvals necessary for the
contras to obtain British-made Blowpipe missiles.23  Poindexter recalled, albeit vaguely,
discussing with the President efforts to get Blowpipes or Chinese-made SA-7s for the contras.24

     23 Ibid., pp. 76-79.

     24 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 3/6/91, pp. 52-54.

     During 1985 and early 1986, the President and other Administration officials were called
upon to send frequent messages to Central American countries to bolster their support for the
contras and to remind them of the importance of their security and aid relationships with the
United States.  The President personally participated in flurries of this type of activity involving
Honduras in February 1985, April 1985, May 1985, and March 1986.  The most graphic example
was an April 25, 1985, call from Reagan to President Roberto Suazo Cordova of Honduras, in
which Reagan aksed on Suazo to persuade the Honduran military to release a contra weapons
shipment which had been seized by the Honduran army.25  A briefing memo for Reagan's use in
a subsequent May meeting with President Suazo states:

     25 Recommended Telephone Call, 4/25/85, ALU 0097413-14.

     In your meeting it will be important to reiterate to Suazo the importance we attach to his
continued cooperation in enabling the FDN [contras] to remain a viable element of pressure on
the Sandinistas.  Without making the linkage too explicit, it would be useful to remind Suazo that
in return for our help -- in the form of security assurances as well as aid -- we do expect
cooperation in pursuit of our mutual objectives.  In this regard, you could underline the
seriousness of security commitment, which the Hondurans seem to regard as the main
quid-pro-quo for cooperating with the FDN.26

     26 Memorandum from McFarlane Re:  ``Meeting with Honduran President Suazo'', 5/21/85,
ALU 0086547-60.

     When asked to explain this passage in his deposition at the trial of Poindexter, President
Reagan said:

     A: Well, again, I think it is the same tone.  That we don't want to press them to go so far that
they challenge the Sandinista government and wind up in open hostilities with them.  And the --
it would be useful however to remind them that in return for our help in the form of security
assurances as well as aid that we do expect cooperation. That we feel that there is an obligation
on their part, too.

     Q: Right.  So, in other words, if some aid and assistance is given to them, you would expect
some aid and assistance back from them -- .

     A: Yes.

     Q: . . . in combating the spread of the Sandinistas?

     A: Yeah.27

     27 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, p. 109.

     There is little doubt from the record that in their dealings with the Central American
countries, the Administration, including the President, reminded the military and political leaders
of those countries, who were dependent on U.S. aid and support, that support for the contras was
a tacit condition for continuation of financial and other support.

     The Resupply Organization

     The President was regularly briefed by McFarlane and Poindexter on the progress and growth
of the contra force and its operations during the 1984-86 period.28   At times the President
almost seemed to claim responsibility for their activities.29  But in his answers to the Grand
Jury's  interrogatories, he denied either authorizing or approving a transfer of contra-support
functions from the CIA to the NSC:

     28 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 11/28/90, pp. 60-63.

     29 Reagan, Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Southeast Regional Editors
and Broadcasters, 5/15/87, Public Papers of the Presidents, 1987, Vol. I, p. 514: ``These [the
contras] are people who are fighting for democracy and freedom in their country.  And here
there's no question about my being informed.  I've known what's going on there.  As a matter of
fact, for quite a long time now, a matter of years, I have been publicly speaking of the necessity
of the American people to support our program of aid to those freedom fighters down there in
order to prevent there being established a Soviet beachhead here in the Western Hemisphere, in
addition to the one we already have in Cuba.  And to suggest that I am just finding out or that
things are being exposed that I didn't know about -- no.  Yes, I was kept briefed on that.  As a
matter of fact, I was very definitely involved in the decisions on the support to the freedom
fighters.  It was my idea to begin with.''

     I did not authorize or approve of the transfer to the NSC or any of its staff any function or
operation performed by the CIA with respect to the Nicaraguan Freedom Fighters.  I do not recall
anyone ever asking me to approve or authorize the transfer of any function or operation from the
CIA to the NSC, and I do not recall ever discussing such transfer.30

     30 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 8.

     * * *

     Beyond [Presidential Findings, National Security Decision Directives, and advocacy of
third-country assistance], my instructions with regard to the support for the Freedom Fighters
were usually of a general nature, and I do not now recall any authorization or approvals of
specific actions with respect to the Freedom Fighters.

     With regard to Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim, I do not recall approving or authorizing
any action concerning them with regard to the Freedom Fighters or of meeting either individual
during this time frame.31

     31 Ibid., Answer to Question 9.

     * * *

     I knew that Lt. Col. North's responsibilities included work related to  Central America and,
specifically, Nicaragua.  However, prior to my conversations with Attorney General Meese on
November 24 and 25, 1986 concerning what has come to be known as the ``diversion'', I did not
know that Lt. Col. North participated in planning, directing or advising NFF military or
paramilitary operations or logistical support for such operations.  Although I heard about
allegations in the press that Lt. Col. North was engaged in such activities, I understood that these
allegations were incorrect.32

     32 Ibid., Answer to Question 10.

     In his testimony in United States v. Poindexter, the President said he generally recalled North
as a ``communicator'' between the U.S. Government and the contras.33  The President said he did
not have ``any inkling'' that the NSC staff was guiding the contras' strategy or that North was
participating in planning and directing and advising the contras' military activities, including
giving logistical support to them.34  Elaborating on his Interrogatory Answers, Reagan testified
that he had ``heard reports about'' Secord and Hakim in connection with contra assistance 35 and
he recalled that Secord had ``some kind of aero business'' or ``delivery business'' and ``might
have been  involved with delivering some aid to the contras when it was legal to provide such
aid.'' 36  The President also recalled being informed by Poindexter about a Costa Rican airstrip,
which Mr. Reagan said he ``hoped that it would be used in the delivery of when once again we
could supply, keep the contras supplied, that it could be involved in the -- used there, if there was
need for a refueling or anything of that kind of plane.'' 37  The President went on to speculate that
the aircraft using the airstrip would have been ``some of those that weren't officially planes of
ours that had been helping in the past in deliveries to the contras.''  He added it seemed ``logical''
that Secord would have been involved in that.38

     33 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, pp.131-38.

     34 Ibid., 2/17/90, p. 170.

     35 Ibid., p. 192.

     36 Ibid., 2/16/90, p. 21.

     37 Ibid., p. 121.

     38 Ibid., p. 122.

     The President to this extent admitted to a good basic understanding of the logistics of
supplying the contras' southern front from Ilopango air base in El Salvador: planes that were not
``officially'' U.S. government, using an airstrip in a neutral country to refuel for the long round
trip from Ilopango, along the Pacific to Nicaragua near the Costa Rican border to avoid
overflying Nicaragua.

     McFarlane testified that he kept the President apprised of what he was doing with respect to
the contras, including what was ``close to the line.'' 39 Poindexter believed that the President
would certainly have known that North was the NSC's action officer on Central America, and
that the NSC was keeping close track of the situation in that region.  Poindexter did not recall any
conversation with the President about the breadth of these actions.40   In a Grand Jury
appearance, Poindexter recalled that he did tell President Reagan that Secord was ``heading up
the private operations to actually provide the logistics support to the contras.''41  Poindexter did
not recall whether the President was told about the June 1985 Miami meeting in which North
with Secord assumed control of the resupply operation.42

     39 McFarlane, Select Committees Testimony, 5/13/87, p. 98.

     40 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, pp.  221-22; Ibid., 6/17/87, pp. 315-16;
Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 138-41; Ibid., 7/20/87 pp. 3, 10.

     41 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 11/28/90, p. 72.

     42 Ibid., pp. 71-73.

     That the documentary record of precisely what was passed along to the President regarding
the details of  North's secret resupply operation is sparse is not surprising, considering the
wholesale destruction of records by North.  One surviving North document that reached the
President was an October 30, 1985, memorandum requesting presidential approval of U.S.
reconnaissance flights over Nicaragua.43  It is initialed ``approve'' by Poindexter, and also bears
the words ``President Approved.''   Poindexter said this meant that he briefed the President orally
on the content of the document rather than giving him the document to read.44  Poindexter did
not recall whether he briefed the President on an attached, supplementary note from North which
says in part:

     43 Memorandum from North to McFarlane, 10/30/85, ALU 0060483-86.

     44 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 11/28/90, p. 86-87.

     You should also tell the President that we intend to air-drop [the intelligence obtained from
the reconnaissance flights] to two Resistance [contra] units deployed along the Rio Escondito,
along with two Honduran provided 106 mm recoilless rifles which will be used to sink one or
both of the arms carriers which show up in photograph at Tab I.

     Accordingly, there is some evidence indicating that the President was exposed to information
about North's activities both in briefings from McFarlane and Poindexter and from documents.
The President attached great importance during this period to the success of the contra effort.
His personal diary is replete with references to the contra-aid struggle with Congress.45  It
showed he followed the debate on the various contra-aid proposals on Capitol Hill very closely.
There were frequent references to poll results regarding the lack of public support for the contra
cause.  Both McFarlane and Poindexter reported regularly to Reagan on the state of the contras.
The question of how to continue their financial support was discussed at several NSPG sessions.

     45 The OIC was permitted to read excepts from the President's diary entries from 1984-87
deemed relevant to Iran/contra by White House counsel. The OIC reviewers were not permitted
to make copies, so the references to President Reagan's Diary quoted here, except where
otherwise attributed, reflect OIC attorneys' notes of the excerpts.

     There is no question that within the Administration, President Reagan's support for the
success of the contras assured high-level guidance for North from  Casey, McFarlane and
Poindexter.46  North's requests for assistance received warm and generous responses from
working groups within the national security community.47  Ambassadors, assistant secretaries,
CIA experts, and high-ranking military and intelligence officers responded to North's requests
with alacrity.  Only the impression, right or wrong, that North had the tacit authorization of the
chief executive can explain this degree of support and cooperation in an area of manifest
congressional hostility.

     46 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 9.  When asked whether he
authorized Casey, among others, to take action with respect to the contras during the Boland
cut-off period, the President said the question was too broad to be answered specifically.  He
conceded that Administration policy was to support the contras. ``Thus, Administration officials
were generally authorized to implement that policy.'' (Ibid.)

     47 See North chapter.

     In spite of his insulation from North and his activities by McFarlane and Poindexter, President
Reagan had to know the contras were being held together, as he directed.  He knew that the funds
from the Saudis had run out, but somehow other sources of funding were not only enabling the
contras to survive, but to grow.  When the press or Congress raised questions about the scope of
the NSC and North's involvement, the President relied on McFarlane and Poindexter to respond
to these allegations.  The President, having issued generalized instructions to his subordinates
that they stay within the law, relied upon the generalized assurances from McFarlane and
Poindexter that his instructions were being followed.48

     48 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, pp. 53-54.

     Proof of President Reagan's authorization or knowledge of North's illegal activities, beyond a
reasonable doubt, would have required more than the non-specific testimony that McFarlane and
Poindexter were willing to give and that the few surviving documents would establish. The
President's own activities on behalf of the contras were not on the face of it activities forbidden
by criminal law.

     Procuring foreign assistance for the pursuit of objectives approved by Congress, such as the
recent war with Iraq, is quite different from procuring foreign assistance for an objective rejected
or prohibited by Congress.  But diplomatic intercourse with the heads of foreign states is an
essential presidential function.  Even statutory restrictions in this field may be questionable.  The
constitutional remedy is impeachment.  It is hardly a field for the application of criminal law.  No
criminal statute attempts to deal with this problem.

     The Iran Hostage Initiative, 1985-1986

     In an effort to convince elements in Iran to use their influence to obtain the release of U.S.
hostages in Lebanon, the President and his advisers in 1985 embarked upon the sale of arms to
Iran, first through Israel, and subsequently directly through the CIA, under the operating direction
of North, and using the Secord-Hakim ``Enterprise'' as a cut-out to disguise CIA involvement.  In
both phases, the President directed that Congress not be notified.49

     49 Ibid., 2/17/90, p. 235.

     In the first phase, beginning in mid-1985, the President was informed of and approved in
advance an Israeli shipment of 504 Israeli-owned U.S.-made TOW antitank missiles to Iran in
August and September and a November shipment of Israeli-owned U.S. HAWK anti-aircraft
missiles.50  The weapons were to be paid for by Iran and the Israeli stocks were to be replenished
by the United States, which originally sold the weapons to Israel.

     50 The President was briefed in advance on each group of weapons sold to Iran. With respect
to the November 1985 HAWK shipment, the President was also told what happened to it (see
Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, p. 61-64; see also Poindexter Notes, 11/25/85, 000037-38).  On
December 5, 1985, President Reagan signed a Finding to validate it retroactively.

     The second phase in which the United States itself  transferred weapons to Iran through the
CIA and the Enterprise included 1,000 TOW missiles sent to Iran in February 1986 and 240
spare parts for HAWK missile systems sent in May and August 1986.  In May 1986, the United
States also sent 508 TOW missiles to Israel as part of the promised replenishment.  In October
1986 a second group of 500 TOW missiles from the United States was delivered through the CIA
and the Enterprise to Israel.  The older-model TOWs the Israelis had received in May were then
shipped to Iran.

     The Iranian representatives paid the Enterprise in advance for each 1986 shipment.  The
Enterprise reimbursed the CIA.  During 1986 there was a substantial difference, aggregating
roughly $16 million, after costs of delivery, between amounts collected by the Enterprise from
Iran and the amounts transmitted by the Enterprise to the CIA to pay the Department of Defense
for the weapons.  The President's Finding authorizing the transaction specified the initiative's
purposes;  they did not include funding the contras or profiteering by Government agents.51

     51 The January 17, 1986, Iran arms Finding listed three purposes: ``(1) establishing a more
moderate government in Iran; (2) obtaining from [elements in Iran] significant intelligence not
otherwise obtainable, to determine the current Iranian Government's intentions with respect to its
neighbors and with respect to terrorist acts, and (3) furthering the release of the American
hostages held in Beirut and preventing additional terrorist acts by these groups.'' (Presidential
Finding, 1/17/86, AKW 001921.)

     The facts of the ill-fated Iran arms sales have been widely covered since the secret initiative
began unraveling publicly in early November 1986. The question here is whether President
Reagan violated any criminal law with respect to approving the arms sales to Iran, by failing to
execute an appropriate Finding or a written determination authorizing NSC involvement, or by
ordering that the arms sales not be reported to Congress.

     In the case of the two 1985 Israeli arms transfers, President Reagan knew from the outset that
he was acting in conflict with his own announced policies of not rewarding hostage takers and of
not selling arms to nations sponsoring terrorism.  He knew this activity was politically and
legally questionable.52  Two of his principal advisers, Secretary of Defense Casper W.
Weinberger and Secretary of State Shultz, both opposed the initiative for those and other reasons.
Nonetheless, the President decided to proceed, and he directed that Congress not be notified.53

     52 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, p. 16-19.

     53 See the December 5, 1985, retroactive Finding referred to in footnote 50.

     There was no way in which President Reagan's action could be squared with the Arms Export
Control Act (AECA).  The AECA forbade the retransfer of U.S. arms to a third  country unless
the United States itself could make the transfer directly.  It required certifications from the
recipient country concerning further transfer.  Finally, it required reports to the Speaker of the
House and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee concerning retransfer agreements and notice
to Congress 30 days after the end of each quarter of a transfer of more than $1 million of major
defense equipment.54

     54 22 U.S.C.  2753(a).

     These requirements were raised forcefully by Weinberger in November 1985 telephone
conversations with McFarlane and in the December 7, 1985, meeting of Shultz and Weinberger
with the President and others.  On December 7, President Reagan was defiant.  Poindexter had
apparently passed to him North's prediction that the American hostages would likely be killed if
the arms transfers did not proceed.  President Reagan said he could explain to the American
people a violation of the statute, but could not explain letting the hostages be killed for fear of
violating a statute.

     When interviewed by Independent Counsel on July 24, 1992, President Reagan, although no
longer remembering the December 1985 conversation itself, confirmed it in the sense that he
believed that it was what he would have said, and that the views expressed were still held by him.
President Reagan's  defiance, if it had been public, would have presented an outright
constitutional confrontation with Congress.  The question would have been the validity of a
statutory restriction upon President Reagan's view of his constitutional powers as
commander-in-chief and as the officer responsible for dealing with foreign nations.

     Without any criminal sanction specifically provided for AECA violations, the question was
whether this secret non-compliance with the AECA could be said to be a conspiracy to defraud
the United States by the President and those assisting him in carrying out the transaction.  In
Independent Counsel's judgment, prosecution for such non-compliance would not have been
appropriate.  Right or wrong, the President's determination that secrecy was necessary to protect
the hostages from murder was a matter for him to decide.  Certainly, it was not a frivolous
concern, nor was his view of his constitutional powers and responsibilities.

     The second statute relative to the Iranian arms sales was the National Security Act of 1947, as
amended.55  This Act was considered first in connection with the 1986 arms sales but also, after
the November 1986 exposure, as a retroactive validation of the 1985 arms sales.  These opinions
will be  discussed in the chronological order in which they were given.

     55 50 U.S.C.  413. The Foreign Assistance Act, 22 U.S.C.  2314, is arguably inapplicable.
It concerns government-to-government transfers, not sales to individuals.

     In January 1986, the President was informed by Attorney General Meese that he could avoid
the Arms Export Control Act.  This opinion was based upon an October 5, 1981, opinion of
Attorney General William French Smith that if the President determined that neither the Foreign
Assistance Act nor the Arms Export Control Act could be used, he could approve a transfer
outside the context of these statutes if he determined that the authorities of the Economy Act and
the National Security Act should be utilized in order to achieve ``a significant intelligence
objective.''  Whereas Attorney General Smith advised that reporting requirements imposed by the
Intelligence Oversight Act of 1980 required that the House and Senate Intelligence Committees
be informed of the President's determination, Attorney General Meese took a more extreme view
that the National Security Act implicitly authorized the President to withhold any prior or
contemporaneous notice to Congress, even the limited notice to the leadership of the intelligence
committees and the leadership of the two houses of Congress.56

     56 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 6, 26; ibid., 7/29/87, pp. 45-46.

     Section 501(a) of the National Security Act of  1947, as amended, provides

     To the extent consistent with all applicable authorities and duties, including those conferred
by the Constitution upon the executive and legislative branches of the Government, and to the
extent consistent with due regard for the protection from unauthorized disclosure of classified
information and information relating to intelligence sources and methods, the Director of Central
Intelligence and the heads of all departments, agencies, and other entities of the United States
involved in intelligence activities shall --

     (1) keep the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and Permanent Committee on
Intelligence of the House of Representatives . . . fully and currently informed of all intelligence
activities . . . including any significant anticipated intelligence activity, except that . . . (B) if the
President determines it is essential to limit prior notice to meet extraordinary circumstances
affecting vital interests of the United States, such notice shall be limited to the chairman and
ranking minority members of the intelligence committees, the Speaker and minority leader of the
House of Representatives, and the majority and minority leaders of the Senate[.]

     For the purposes of this section, the transfer of defense articles exceeding $1 million value by
an intelligence agency to a recipient outside that agency was defined as a ``significant anticipated
intelligence activity'' by the Fiscal Year 1986 Intelligence Authorization Act.57

     57 P.L. 99-169,  502(b).

     Section 501(b) provides

     The President shall fully inform the intelligence committees in a timely fashion of intelligence
operations in foreign countries . . . for which prior notice was not given under subsection (a) of
this section and shall provide a statement of the reasons for not giving prior notice.

     Meese and the general counsel of the CIA advised President Reagan in 1986 that he could
direct that notice not be given to any member of Congress.  They reasoned that subsection (b)
implied that the President, under certain circumstances, could avoid any notice to Congress, even
the limited notice provided in  501(a)(1)(B).  They supported this conclusion by the introductory
language of subsection (a), which is a lengthy expression of deference to the President's other
duties and constitutional powers.

     Section 501(b) could well be read more straightforwardly as a requirement that, in timely
fashion, the eight specified representatives and senators be informed of intelligence operations
specified in  501(a)(1)(B) which permitted notice limited to eight persons.  Nevertheless,
Meese's more extreme view that the President could forbid any notice whatsoever to any member
of Congress had been expounded previously within the CIA and could not in a criminal case be
treated as legally insupportable or frivolous.  Under these circumstances,  501 of the National
Security Act, with its deferential concern for the President's status in national security matters,
would be poor support for criminal prosecution.  In itself, it provided no criminal penalty for
violation and, ordinarily, a President relying upon an opinion of the attorney general interpreting
its deferential language could hardly be said to be conspiring to defraud the United States.

     After Meese learned in 1986 of the November 1985 shipments, he had the problem of legality
analyzed by Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper, the head of the Office of Legal Counsel
in the Department of Justice.  In a December 17, 1986, memorandum to Meese, Cooper
reconfirmed that the AECA did not apply to the 1986 arms sales to Iran.  He concluded that the
National Security Act implicitly recognizes the President's discretion to authorize weapons
transfers outside the AECA as part of an activity conducted by an ``intelligence agency,'' such as
the CIA.58

     58 Memorandum from Cooper to Meese, 12/17/86, pp. 5-6, ALV 077747-48.

     The Hughes-Ryan Amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act required that before the CIA
might engage in such operations in a foreign country the President must ``find'' that the operation
is ``important to the national security of the United States.'' 59

     59 22 U.S.C.  662.

     The Israeli arms shipments in 1985, which the U.S. had approved, presented a problem.  If the
CIA was involved, there had to be a presidential Finding or the AECA would apply.  Since there
was no Finding, the AECA appeared to apply.  In his memorandum dated more than three weeks
after Meese's weekend investigation, Cooper ultimately took the position that the 1985 arms sales
were legal under the President's inherent powers as implicitly recognized by the National
Security Act.60

     60 Memorandum from Cooper to Meese, 12/17/86, p. 17, ALV 007760.

     With respect to the August and September 1985 TOW shipments, Cooper explained that only
the NSC, not the CIA, was involved.  Therefore, no Finding was necessary.  Assuming the NSC
is an ``intelligence agency'' for these purposes, which Cooper found ``clear,'' the shipments would
be legal under the National Security Act.61  This disregards Executive Order 12333.  Before an
agency other than the CIA could undertake a covert action outside the United States, that order
specified that the President make a determination that the  agency was more appropriate than the
CIA to discharge the covert action.  National Security Decision Directive (NSDD) No. 159
provided that the presidential determination under Executive Order 12333 must be made in
writing.

     61 Ibid., p. 5, ALV 007748.  Ironically, Meese maintained that the Boland Amendment, which
restricted actions of ``intelligence agencies,'' did not apply to the NSC because it was not an
``intelligence agency.''  Meese testified that ``certainly the NSC is not an intelligence agency'' and
in his ``opinion the NSC staff would not be considered an intelligence agency within the general
meaning of the term.  (Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, p. 33.)

     Because the CIA was involved in the November 1985 HAWK shipment, however, the
Hughes-Ryan Amendment required a presidential Finding.  Cooper elided that problem with an
``oral finding'' theory. McFarlane had testified that the President had orally authorized the
November 1985 HAWK shipment in advance.  According to Cooper, that satisfied the
Hughes-Ryan requirement that the President ``find'' the operation ``important to the national
security of the United States.''  There remained the question of congressional notification.  The
National Security Act required the President to give Congress ``timely'' notice of ``intelligence
operations in foreign countries.'' 62  The Administration took the position that because the lives
of the hostages were at risk, it was not ``timely'' to notify Congress until the hostages were
safe.63  President Reagan did not comply with Executive Order 12333 and NSDD 159.  Whether
a president is subject to his own Executive Order that had no criminal penalties was not a
question to be settled by criminal prosecution.

     62 50 U.S.C.  413(b).

     63 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 197-98.

     The November 1985 HAWK shipment had been significantly aided by the CIA: first, by its
effort to use intelligence resources abroad to clear the snarled Israeli transportation effort; and,
second, by using its own proprietary -- an airline that it owned -- to carry the HAWKs from Israel
to Iran.  The National Security Act required a Finding for such CIA involvement.  CIA General
Counsel Sporkin concluded that this Finding could be signed retroactively.  Accordingly, on
December 5, 1985, ten days after the HAWK shipment, President Reagan signed a Finding that it
was in the national interest to further the sale of weapons to appropriate persons in order to
facilitate the release of American hostages, and retroactively authorizing the CIA to aid such an
effort.64  There was no evidence that the President knew in advance that the CIA was going to
participate in the HAWK transaction.

     64 President Reagan has said he does not recall signing the December 1985 Finding, but
Poindexter testified that the President signed it on December 5.  Poindexter testified that it was
kept in his office safe until he destroyed it on or about November 21, 1986.  North testified in his
trial that he and Commander Paul Thompson, the NSC's legal counsel, witnessed the destruction
of the Finding.

     None of the above statutes, the Executive Order, or the NSDD, provided for a criminal
penalty.  Thus their violation rises to a level of criminality only in the event of a criminal
conspiracy.  Independent Counsel has taken the  position, and the District Court agreed, that a
charge under the conspiracy statute, 18 U.S.C.  371, may be based upon a conspiracy, through
deceitful and dishonest means, to violate a federal civil law or to prevent the Government from
conducting its operations and implementing its policies honestly and faithfully.  While such a
charge was applicable under the facts in the North conspiracy count, involving unauthorized arms
proceeds hidden in secret Swiss accounts to be used for other unauthorized activities, this hardly
applied to the facts surrounding the President's initial decision to proceed with the arms sales to
Iran.  Congress was ultimately deceived, but the President's professed motive for secrecy -- a
desire to protect the lives of the hostages and to effect their release -- had at least a surface
plausibility.

     The October-November 1986 Cover-up of Iran/Contra

     With the downing of one of the Enterprise contra-resupply planes by the Nicaraguans on
October 5, 1986, and their capture of the surviving crew member, American Eugene Hasenfus,
the unraveling of the NSC's secret contra-resupply operation began.

     Despite immediate U.S. denials that either Hasenfus or the aircraft was connected to the U.S.
Government or working under the direction of any American official or agency, evidence began
piling up that the elaborate resupply network was being directed by North out of his NSC office.

     The Hasenfus shootdown did not create much of a stir with the President.  On October 7,
Poindexter briefed Reagan, telling him that the Hasenfus operation was not connected with the
Government.65  The President did not even record the Hasenfus shootdown or the press reaction
to it in his personal diary.  In the President's Grand Jury Interrogatory Answers (45-47) Reagan
gives this account:

     65 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 3/6/91, pp. 140-41.

     Admiral Poindexter assured me that the Hasenfus operation had no connection to the United
States Government whatsoever.  When I asked whether General John Singlaub might be involved
in this operation as had been reported in the press, I was told ``no'' by Admiral Poindexter.  On
the following day, October 8, 1986, also at an NSB [National Security Briefing], Admiral
Poindexter confirmed there had been no U.S. Government involvement.  Consequently,
immediately following this NSB, when I departed the South Lawn en route to Raleigh, North
Carolina, I answered in the negative when asked by a reporter whether there had been any U.S.
involvement in this operation. (Tab 45-47B).

     Though the subject was not raised in my November 19, 1986, press conference, I was given
talking points in preparation  for that conference which stated that the downed aircraft was not a
U.S. Government aircraft or involved in any U.S. Government operation (Tab 45-47C).

     Independent Counsel could not prove that President Reagan knew there was Government
involvement in the Hasenfus operation.  He apparently had been told by Poindexter on several
occasions that there was none.  The press and some members of Congress were skeptical as
contrary evidence accumulated.  But spokesmen for the State and Defense departments and the
CIA continued the denials.  Leading them was Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, who
steadfastly denied before Congress and the public that the United States was involved in the
resupply effort.66  As far as is known, no one on the inside sought to protect the President's
credibility by telling him the truth or warning him against falsely denying a U.S. connection.

     66 Abrams pleaded guilty October 7, 1991, to two misdemeanor counts of withholding
information from Congress about secret Government efforts to support the contras during the
Boland period.  He was pardoned by President Bush on December 24, 1992.

     The Unraveling of the Iran Initiative

     Hostage David Jacobsen was released November 2, 1986. Poindexter and North were hopeful
that a second hostage would also be released and discussions with Iranian  contacts were still
going on.  When the story broke on November 3, 1986, that McFarlane had led a U.S. mission to
Tehran and that the U.S. Government had sold weapons to Iran in exchange for hostages, a
shocked Congress and national press corps began questioning the stark disparity between the
reported secret arms sales and the Administration's public policies calling for a boycott of arms
sales to Iran and the refusal to reward terrorism.  The angry public reaction stunned the
Administration, which spent the next three weeks trying to stem the protest, first by stonewalling
and attempting to deny the story, then by making highly selective admissions aimed at stanching
the flow of politically damaging information as much as possible.

     The initial reaction to stonewall is reflected in the notes of Rodney McDaniel, executive
secretary of the NSC, taken during the President's daily national security briefings for November
6 and November 7, 1986.  The notes reflect that a ``no comment'' posture was adopted.67  The
President's initial public statements embodied the stonewall.  On November 6, the President
answered a press question as follows:

     67 McDaniel Notes, 11/6/86, ALU 0128263-64.

     Q: Mr. President, do we have a deal going with Iran of some sort?

     The President:  No comment, but could I suggest an appeal to all of you with regard to this:
that the speculation, the commenting and all, on a story that came out of the Middle East, and
that to us has no foundation, that all of that is making it more difficult for us in our effort to get
the other hostages free.68

     68 ``Remarks on Signing the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986,'' 11/6/86, Public
Papers of the Presidents, Ronald Reagan, 1986, Vol. II, pp. 1521-22.

     On the next day, the President tried again to silence the controversy, as he was questioned by
the press on his meeting with Jacobsen, who was at a White House ceremony celebrating his
release:

     Q: Mr. President, the Iranians are saying that if you'll release some of those weapons, they'll
intercede to free the rest of the hostages.  Will you?

     The President:  Bill, I think in view of this statement, this is exactly what I tried to tell you last
night.  There's no way that we can answer questions having anything to do with this without
endangering the people we're trying to rescue.69

     69 ``Remarks and an Informal Exchange with Reporters Prior to a Meeting with David
Jacobsen,'' 11/7/86, Public Papers of the Presidents, Ronald Reagan, 1986, Vol. II, pp. 1533-34.

     On November 7, there was the first reference in a national security briefing to the need to
discuss Iran with congressional leaders.70  At about the same time, Poindexter directed North to
develop a chronology of the  Iran initiative.71

     70 McDaniel Note, 11/7/86, ALU 0128264.

     71 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/7/89, pp. 7032, 7036-37.

     The Presidential diary entry for November 7, 1986, contains the following passage:
``Discussion of how [to] handle press who are off on wild story originating in Beirut -- I've
proposed message be we can't and won't answer Q's [questions] because would endanger those
we are trying to help.''  In his 1990 book An American Life, Reagan published that entry in this
form:

     Usual meetings.  Discussion of how to handle press who are off on a wild story built on
unfounded story originating in Beirut that we bought hostage Jacobsen's freedom with weapons
to Iran.  We've tried `no comment.'  I've proposed and our message will be: `We can't and won't
answer any questions on this subject because to do so will endanger the lives of those we are
trying to help.' 72

     72 Reagan, An American Life, p. 527 (Simon & Schuster 1990).

     Over the next few days, there were a number of White House discussions about whether to
reveal more about the Iran matter, with the White House staff arguing for greater disclosure and
Poindexter and Casey advising a continued ``no comment.'' 73

     73 Regan, Grand Jury, 2/26/88, pp. 32-34.

     On November 10, 1986, President Reagan, Vice President Bush, Poindexter, White House
Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan, Shultz, Weinberger, Casey, Meese, and Deputy National
Security  Adviser Alton Keel held a 90-minute meeting about both the Iran initiative and its
disclosure.74  OIC obtained copies of notes taken by Regan, Weinberger, Meese, and Keel
concerning what was said at this meeting.75  In Shultz's case, the OIC has a transcription of his
notes by his aide M. Charles Hill, as well as Hill's notes of Shultz's after-the-fact ``read-out'' or
recounting of the meeting.76  The various notes differ in some ways, but they share one attribute
that is striking:  All of them reflect a purported description of the Iran initiative by Poindexter
which began with the January 17, 1986, Finding; they refer to a 1985 Israeli shipment of 500
TOWs that the United States had found out about ``after the fact'' and agreed to replenish; they
make no mention of the November 1985 HAWK transaction or the December 1985 Finding.

     74 DCI (Casey) schedule, 11/10/86, ER 326-27.

     75 Regan Notes, 11/10/86, ALU 024673-87; Memorandum from Weinberger to the Record,
11/10/86, ALZ 0041725-27; Meese Notes, 11/10/86, ALV 065209-12; Keel Note, 11/10/86,
AKW 047247-55.

     76 Hill Notes, 11/10/86, ANS 0001766-67, 0001762-64.

     Neither the President nor any of the others corrected Poindexter's false account.  Much of the
meeting was spent debating whether to issue any sort of public statement about the Iran matter; a
part of that discussion,  as captured in Regan's notes, is as follows:

     Pres  We must say something but not much.

     John [Poindexter] If we go with this [a proposed brief statement drafted by Casey] we end our
Iranian contacts.

     DTR    [Regan] Must get a statement out now, we are being attacked, and we are being hurt.
Losing credibility.

     Pres  Must say something because I'm being held out to dry.  Have not dealt with terrorists,
don't know who they are.  This is long range Iranian policy.  No further speculation or answers so
as not to endanger hostages.  We won't pay any money, or give anything to terrorists.

     JP   [Poindexter] Say less about what we are doing, more about what we are not doing.77

     77 Regan Note, 11/10/86, ALU 024673-87.

     After the meeting, work continued on a statement; according to Regan's notes, that afternoon
``A lot of info [was] cut out by Ollie [North] and others at NSC due to their conversations with
Iranians in Geneva over weekend.''  Weinberger, Meese, Casey, and the President signed off on a
statement for release that evening.78  The statement said:

     78 Ibid., ALU 024687.

     The President today met with his senior national security advisers regarding the status of the
American hostages in Lebanon.  The meeting was prompted by the  President's concern for the
safety of the remaining hostages and his fear that the spate of speculative stories which have
arisen since the release of David Jacobsen may put them and others at risk.

     During the meeting, the President reviewed ongoing efforts to achieve the release of all the
hostages, as well as our other broad policy concerns in the Middle East and Persian Gulf.  As has
been the case in similar meetings with the President and his senior advisors on this matter, there
was unanimous support for the President.  While specific decisions discussed at the meeting
cannot be divulged, the President did ask that it be reemphasized that no U.S. laws have been or
will be violated and that our policy of not making concessions to terrorists remains intact.

     At the conclusion of the meeting, the President made it clear to all that he appreciated their
support and efforts to gain the safe release of all the hostages.  Stressing the fact that hostage
lives are at stake, the President asked his advisers to ensure that their departments refrain from
making comments or speculating about these matters.79

     79 Statement by Principal Deputy Press Secretary Speakes on the American Hostages in
Lebanon, 11/10/86, Public Papers of the Presidents, Ronald Reagan, 1986, Vol. II, p. 1539.

     The Initial Briefings of Congress

     On November 12, 1986, the Administration held a briefing for Senate Majority Leader Robert
Dole, Senate Minority Leader Robert Byrd, House Majority Leader Jim Wright, and House
Minority Whip Richard Cheney.   According to NSC counsel Paul Thompson's notes 80 and
Meese's notes,81 the Administration was represented at this meeting by the President, the Vice
President, Shultz, Weinberger, Meese, Casey, Regan, Poindexter, Keel, Will Ball, Larry Speakes,
and Thompson.  The meeting began with a preliminary statement by the President, which
Thompson recorded as follows:

     80 Thompson Notes, 11/12/86, 11/13/86, 11/21/86, AKW 001390-463.

     81 Meese Note, 11/12/86, ALV 065197-99.

     1) principally a cov[ert] intell[igence]      op[eration]

     2) not a rogue op

     3) no nego[tiation]s terrorists

     4) enhance position in ME [Middle East]

     The President's description ignored the two 1985 Israeli shipments.

     Then, according to both sets of notes, Poindexter took over with a lengthy narrative.
Poindexter again began with the January 17, 1986, Finding, and then described the McFarlane
trip to Tehran, listed the 1986 weapons shipments to Iran (omitting the October 1986 shipment),
and concluded with the statement ``Mr. [President], those are all the facts.'' 82  The only
references to the 1985 phase of the  initiative are oblique; Thompson's notes show Poindexter
stating that ``Israelis are [probably] still shipping to Iran,'' 83 which Meese's notes expand into a
statement that ``Israelis may be continuing to ship arms to Iran (w/o [without] our authorization)
as they did before our contacts began.'' 84

     82 Thompson Note, 11/12/86, AKW 001402.

     83 Ibid.

     84 Meese Note, 11/12/86, ALU 065197-99.

     According to Regan's notes, later in the meeting Sen. Byrd asked when the initial contact was
made, and Poindexter replied:  ``in 1985 but no transfer of material -- took time to assess contact
& issue finding[.]'' 85

     85 Regan Note, 11/12/86, ALU 0139141.

     The President and the other Administration principals in attendance, said nothing to correct
the false report to the congressional leaders -- that the Finding preceded all arms shipments.

     In his diary entry for November 12, 1986, President Reagan did not mention the meeting with
congressional leaders:

     This whole irresponsible press bilge about hostages and Iran has gotten totally out of hand.
The media looks like it's trying to create another Watergate.  I laid down the law in the morning
meetings.  I want to go public personally and tell the people the truth.  We're trying to  arrange it
for tomorrow. 86

     86 Reagan, An American Life, p. 528.

     The President's televised speech to the nation on November 13, 1986, did not ``tell the people
the truth'' about the Iran initiative.87  Instead, it reflected the new version of the facts that the
Administration had settled on for public-relations purposes.  It stressed four main points:

     87 Reagan, Address By the President to the Nation,  11/13/86, ALU 018811-14.

      -- the weapons shipments were not ransom for the hostages,

      -- the quantities of weapons involved in the initiative were small,

      -- the weapons were ``defensive'' in nature, and

      -- the goals of the initiative went beyond arms for hostages and included renewing the United
States' relationship with Iran, bringing an honorable end to the Iran/Iraq war, eliminating
state-sponsored terrorism, and obtaining the safe return of the hostages.

     The President was silent about the 1985 Israeli shipments of U.S. arms to Iran.

     It was against this background that Poindexter and Casey prepared for their testimony before
the congressional intelligence committees, which were embarking upon an inquiry into the Iran
initiative. There is no suggestion that the President told them what to say -- but if they told the
truth about the 1985 shipments their testimony would be inconsistent with what congressional
leaders were told in their briefing by the President and Poindexter. And it was to provide the
essential facts for this crucial testimony  that McFarlane, North and other officials were
assembling a chronology of the Iran initiative.  McFarlane, Poindexter, North and others sought
to falsify an original CIA chronology -- which was reasonably accurate except that it failed to
mention the diversion -- by distancing the Administration from the two 1985 Israeli shipments.

     As facts about the arms sales were dribbling out from a variety of sources, Administration
officials continued to resist divulging additional information.  In a briefing of reporters before the
President's November 13 televised address, Poindexter fielded a series of questions about a
possible connection between the September 1985 release of American hostage Benjamin Weir
and a shipment of arms to Israel:

     Q: Could you say then what prompted the release of Benjamin Weir then in September of '85?
What event do you think was related to his release?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL [Poindexter]:  Well, I think that it was a matter of
our talking to the contacts through our channel, making the case as to what our long-range
objectives were, demonstrating our good faith --

     Q: How did you do that?

     Q: How was that done?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  Well, that was one of the motivations behind  the
small amount of stuff that we transferred to them.

     Q: But that was done later?

     Q: But where -- before this January document was signed?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  The problem is -- and don't draw any inferences
from this -- but there are other countries involved, but I don't want to confirm what countries
those are and -- because I think that it is still important that that be protected.  And going back to
the question you asked me earlier, there was one shipment that was made not by us, but by a third
country prior to the signing of that document.

     Q: This shipment to Israel?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  I'm not confirming that, George.

     Q: Was that on our behalf?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  It was done in our interests.

     Q: Sir, what --

     Q: Was that before Weir was released?

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  I honestly don't know.  And if I knew, I don't
think I would tell you precisely.

     Q: You just said previously that you did not condone any shipments.

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  I went back and corrected -- there was one
exception and that was the one I just described.

     Q: And that was --

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  That was it.

     Q: And that was around the time of Weir's release.  When you said demonstrating our good
faith we have to assume -- infer from what you've said that there was some kind of quid pro quo.

     SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL:  It was in the general time frame.88

     88 Background Briefing by Senior Administration Official, 11/13/86, AKW 028978-79.

     Regan subsequently admitted to reporters that ``we had condoned a shipment of arms by Israel
to Iran and had replenished it.''89  The admissions by Poindexter and Regan concerning U.S.
approval of the 1985 Israeli TOW shipment left the November 1985 HAWK shipment, the
related December 1985 Finding, and the diversion as the major remaining undisclosed facts
concerning the Iran initiative.  The week of November 17, 1986, saw drastic changes in the NSC
Iran chronology -- which omitted the diversion throughout, but which up to then contained a
relatively truthful, if incomplete, account of the November 1985 HAWK shipment similar to that
contain in the early versions of the CIA chronology. 90  First, Administration officials moved
toward omission of the November shipment  entirely and, later in the week, toward the
affirmatively false statement that the United States had believed that the shipment contained
oil-drilling parts.91

     89 Regan, Grand Jury, 2/26/88, p. 41.

     90 Subject:  Background and Chronology of Special Project, AKW 010038-40; Index of Logs
Used By Poindexter, Poindexter GX 124.

     91 U.S./Iranian contacts and the American Hostages, 11/20/86, AKW 000151-73.

     On the afternoon of November 19, the President received a personally delivered warning from
Secretary Shultz that ``[w]e've been deceived and lied to and you have to watch out about saying
no arms for hostages.'' 92  Despite this cautionary warning, the President that night made yet one
more effort to quell public criticism in a nationally televised press conference.  During the
questioning the President flatly denied the 1985 phase of the Iran initiative or any involvement by
third countries. In follow-up questioning, the President was asked:

     92 Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, p. 110.

     Q: Mr. President, going back over your answers tonight about the arms shipments and the
numbers of them, are you telling us tonight that the only shipments with which we were involved
were the one or two that followed your January 17th finding and that, whatever your aides have
said on background or on the record, there are no other shipments with which the U.S.
condoned?

     THE PRESIDENT:  That's right. I'm saying nothing but the missiles that we sold -- and
remember, there are too many people  that are saying ``gave.''  They bought them.

     Andrea?

     Q: Mr. President, to follow up on that, we've been told by the Chief of Staff Donald Regan
that we condoned, this government condoned an Israeli shipment in September of 1985, shortly
before the release of hostage Benjamin Weir.  That was four months before your intelligence
finding on January 17th that you say gave you the legal authority not to notify Congress.  Can
you clear that up why we were not -- why this government was not in violation of its arms
embargo and of the notification to Congress for having condoned American-made weapons
shipped to Iran in September 1985?

     THE PRESIDENT:  No, that -- I've never heard Mr. Regan say that and I'll ask him about that,
because . . . we waived it for a specific purpose, in fact, with four goals in mind.93

     93 News Conference by the President, 11/19/86, ALU 016823.

     Immediately after the press conference, the President's aides tried to bring the President's
comments into conformance with the earlier Poindexter/Regan remarks by issuing the following
correction in the President's name:

     There may be some misunderstanding of one of my answers tonight.  There was a third
country involved in our secret project with Iran.  But taking this into account, all of the shipments
of the token amounts of defensive arms and parts that I have authorized or condoned taken in
total could be placed aboard a single cargo  aircraft.  This includes all shipments by the United
States or any third country.  Any other shipments by third countries were not authorized by the
U.S. government.94

     94 Statement by the President, 11/19/86, ALU 016815.

     Secretary Shultz called the President following the press conference and warned him that he
had made many wrong or misleading statements.  Shultz asked for a meeting with the President
the next day to discuss the matter further.  The evening of November 20, 1986, Shultz and Regan
met with the President in the family quarters.  Shultz told the President that he was being briefed
with information that was not correct.95  Regan recalled that Shultz told the President that
Abraham Sofaer, the State Department legal adviser, was worried about what Casey was going to
say in his testimony the next day.  Sofaer was specifically concerned about the likelihood of a
public discrepancy between Casey's testimony about the 1985 HAWK shipment and Shultz's
recollection that he was briefed about the planned HAWK shipment by McFarlane during the
Geneva summit meeting with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.96

     95 Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, pp. 111-14.

     96 Regan, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 39-42.

     The President's recollection of the meeting,  according to his Grand Jury Interrogatory
Answers, was that:  ``On Thursday evening, November 20, 1986, Secretary Shultz informed me
of discrepancies between his recollection and what he understood would be the testimony of
Director Casey the following morning on arms shipments to Iran.'' 97   But the most detailed
account of what Shultz told the President is contained in Charles Hill's notes of Shultz's
statement to Meese during Meese's ``fact finding,'' on November 22.  According to Hill's notes,
Shultz told Meese:

     97 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 49.

     You should know I went to [President] on Thurs. night.  Asked to go see him.  Went w/DR
[Regan] to family qtrs.  I had called after press conf. to tell him he did fine job but a lot of yr
stmts. won't stand up to scrutiny & I'll come tell you what you sd [said] was wrong.  How you
have those ideas I don't know but it's wrong -- and I described Bud [McFarlane] talk to me in
Geneva [in which McFarlane briefed Shultz on the upcoming Israeli HAWK shipment].
[President] sd oh I kn[ew] about that -- but that wasn't arms for hostages!  I sd no one looking at
the record will believe that.98

     98 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001883.

     The next day the President directed Meese to conduct an inquiry to gather the facts about the
Iran initiative.  President Reagan, in response to Grand Jury  Interrogatory 49, gave this account
of his decision:

     The next morning, Friday, November 21, at 11:32 a.m., according to my records, the Attorney
General met with me and reported his concerns about the need for an accurate account,
particularly in view of upcoming testimony to Congressional Committees.  It was at this meeting
that I directed Attorney General Meese to gather the facts over the weekend and report his
findings to me by Monday, November 24.

     By the time the President was directing Meese to conduct the inquiry, both Casey and
Poindexter had begun giving their false accounts of the Iran initiative to congressional
committees, the very thing Shultz had sought to head off.99  President Reagan, in the Poindexter
trial, testified that he did not authorize Poindexter to make any false statement to Congress.100
The President made a similar statement regarding Casey's testimony in answer to Grand Jury
Interrogatory 49.

     99 See Poindexter and Casey chapters.

     100 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/17/90, pp. 250-51.

     When Meese began the weekend inquiry on November 21, the big problem was to resolve
discrepancies between various accounts of the 1985 Israeli shipments and the legal problems
those shipments posed, particularly the HAWK missile shipment in November.  In his interview
with Shultz on Saturday, November 22, Meese told Shultz:

     Certain things cd [could] be violation of a law.  [President] didn't know about HAWK in Nov.
If it happened & [President] didn't report to Congress, it's a violation.  He [the President] sd to
me if it happened I want to tell Congress not have them tell me.101

     101 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001888.

     After Meese's aides found a copy of the North diversion memo in North's files on November
22, the 1985 Israeli arms shipments receded in importance, according to Meese.102  In his
testimony in the North trial, Meese conceded that upon learning of the Iran/contra diversion he
feared that the merger of two controversial Administration activities -- support of the contras and
the sale of arms to Iran which the President had ordered be kept secret from Congress -- could
lead to impeachment.  Meese made the admission in cross examination by North's attorney:

     102 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, pp. 55-56.

     Q: And you sense immediately, when you heard that [the diversion], that could create an
enormous political problem because it merged or married together two separate problems that the
Administration had; One, support of the Freedom Fighters which was hotly contested, and two,
the sale of arms to Iran which had been by order of the Finding kept from Congress.  Correct?

     A: Yes.  I was concerned that the two major policy issues within the  Administration at the
time would be merged together and this would -- could complicate the ability of the President in
both of the issues.

     Q: In fact, your assessment at the time was that unless something was done, a strong response,
that the merging of those two factors could very well cause the possible toppling of the President
himself.  Correct?

     A: Yes.

     Q: And there was discussion, in fact, that on the days November 23 and 24th that unless the
Administration, unless you and the President himself, put out to the public the facts of the use of
residuals for the Freedom Fighters, unless you got it out the door first, it could possibly lead to
impeachment by the Congress, correct?

     A: Yes. That was a concern, that political opponents might try that kind of tactic.

     The Court: And you discussed that with the President?  He [North attorney Brendan Sullivan]
is asking you.

     A: I believe I discussed it with the President.  I certainly discussed it with others in
high-ranking positions such as the Chief of Staff.103

     103 Meese, North Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, p. 5750.

     Poindexter and North recognized the problems that would flow from the disclosure of the
diversion, which North called the ``secret within the secret.'' 104  Discovery of the  diversion
would have in turn exposed the entire, apparently unauthorized and illegal NSC contra-resupply
program that North directed from late 1984 to October 1986.  Poindexter had succeeded in
keeping the diversion under wraps by the simple expedient of instructing North to leave it out of
the NSC's accounts of the Iran matter and making no reference to it himself in response to the
Congressional and press demands for an explanation of the Iran initiative.105  Poindexter
testified that as late as November 19, 1986, when the President made his second public
appearance to answer questions about the Iran initiative, he was still determined to keep
knowledge of the diversion away from the President 106 -- despite McFarlane's reminder to
Poindexter on that same day that ``you have a problem about the use of the Iranian money.'' 107

     104 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/13/89, p. 7669.

     105 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 7/2/87, pp. 12-13; Poindexter, Select
Committees Testimony, 7/20/87, p. 127.

     106 Ibid., pp. 188-89.

     107 McFarlane, North Trial Testimony, 3/14/89, p. 4277.

     In addition, Poindexter testified that he neither sought nor received the President's
authorization to destroy the December 1985 Iran Finding.108  In his Grand Jury testimony,
Poindexter stated he recalls no discussion with President  Reagan of the destruction of any Iran or
contra-related document during October or November 1986.109  President Reagan testified at his
deposition that he did not authorize Poindexter to destroy any document related to
Iran/contra.110  Regarding the destruction of documents by North or others at the NSC, the
President's Grand Jury Interrogatory Answer states:

     108 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 50, 53.

     109 Poindexter, Grand Jury, 11/14/90, pp. 88-91.

     110 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, p. 160; Ibid., 2/17/90, p. 267.

     At no time did I authorize or approve of the destruction or alteration of documents, relating to
Iranian arms transactions or relating to the NFF [contras], by LtCol North or any other officer or
employee of the United States or by anyone else.  I did not learn of any such destruction or
alteration prior to November 26, 1986.  I do not possess any independent knowledge of these
activities.111

     111 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 50.

     After ascertaining from Poindexter that he was aware of the diversion and had not told the
President about it, Meese informed the President along with Regan about North's account of the
diversion and Poindexter's acknowledgement of it on November 24.  Both Meese and Regan
testified that the President appeared ``shocked'' and ``surprised.'' 112

     112 Meese, Grand Jury, 2/17/88, pp. 51-56;  Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, pp. 43-47.

     Later on November 24, when Meese briefed the other top national security officials at a senior
advisers' meeting about the results of his inquiry, he did not mention the diversion.  Instead, the
meeting developed into a dispute between Poindexter and Shultz as to the continuation of the
initiative and a response by Poindexter and Meese to Regan's question about President Reagan's
knowledge of the 1985 HAWK shipment.  Meese reported that there was a legal problem with
the November 1985 HAWK shipment, but he stated that the President ``did not know.'' 113  This
was at odds with Shultz's account to Meese just two days before that the President did recall
having contemporaneous knowledge of the HAWK shipment.  Additionally, Poindexter asserted
that McFarlane conducted the 1985 transactions all alone, without documentation.114  No one
spoke up to correct these misstatements, although most of those at the meeting knew they were
wrong.

     113 Regan Note, 11/24/86, ALU 0139379.

     114 Weinberger Meeting Note, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669LL.

     The morning of the next day, November 25, Meese and the President briefed Cabinet
members about the diversion.  Then the President and Meese, accompanied by  Shultz, Casey and
Regan, briefed congressional leaders at a White House meeting. The discussion focused upon the
diversion, the current status of the Iran initiative, and future inquiries and investigations into the
Iran matter.  The subject of the 1985 Israeli shipments did not come up.115

     115 Richardson Note, 11/25/86, Cong. Ex. EM-53.

     At noon, the President and Meese held a press conference.  In a brief initial statement, the
President said that Meese's weekend review of the Iran initiative had turned up information that
``I was not fully informed on the nature of one of the activities undertaken,'' which raised
``serious questions of propriety.'' 116  The President announced the resignation of Poindexter, the
firing of North, the appointment of a special review board to determine the role of the NSC in the
matter, and a continuation of the Justice Department review.  The President turned the podium
over to Meese to announce the diversion and then left the briefing room, declining to  answer
questions.117

     116 ``Remarks Announcing the Review of the National Security Council's Role in the Iran
Arms and Contra Aid Controversy,'' 11/25/86, Public Papers of the Presidents, 1986, Vol. II, p.
1587.

     117 Ibid.

     Meese laid out a somewhat garbled account of the diversion, which, partly as a result of
North's description of it, seemed to put the Israelis, not the Secord-Hakim ``Enterprise,'' at the
center of the profiteering and secret Swiss accounts.  Then Meese faced a barrage of questions,
including questions about the 1985 Israeli shipments, to which he gave erroneous and misleading
answers.118

     118 Transcript of Meese's News Conference, 11/25/86.

     That evening, President Reagan telephoned North.  In his Grand Jury Interrogatory Answer,
the President described the call as follows:

     On November 25, 1986, I telephoned LtCol North.  Our records reflect that my phone call
lasted 2 minutes, from 6:43 p.m. to 6:45 p.m., and was placed to the Sheraton Hotel in Tyson's
Corner, Virginia.

     I told LtCol North generally that I regretted the circumstances surrounding his departure from
the NSC staff and that I had no personal animus against him.  I may have referred to LtCol North
as a national hero (referring to his military service).  I do not recall discussing the substance of
any of the events that had given rise to his departure.  I do not recall specifically LtCol North's
replies.

     No one suggested that I make this call.  I do not recall anyone being present with  me when I
spoke to LtCol North and, to my knowledge, the two of us were the only parties to the
conversation.  I did it solely out of personal compassion for LtCol North.119

     119 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 51.

     Robert Earl, North's assistant, said that North told him that the President had said it was
important that the President not know.120  North testified that Earl was mistaken.  North said he
told Earl that the President had said, ``I just didn't know.'' 121

     120 Earl, Grand Jury, 5/1/87, pp. 117-19.  (``Colonel North turned and confided, `And you
know what' -- again I don't have the exact wording so I'm just going to relay the thrust of what he
said -- that the President had told him that it was important that he not know; that he was told
that it was important that he not know.'')

     121 North, Select Committees Deposition, 7/1/87, pp. 17-18.

     The President's Culpability for November 1986 Crimes

     The question of whether the President, in the discharge of his constitutional office, is
criminally liable for false statements and obstruction of congressional inquiries regarding his
activities is not a ready field for criminal prosecution.  The President is quite different from any
subordinate in his relationship with Congress.  But the fundamental reason for lack of
prosecutorial effort was the  absence of proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the President knew
that the statements being made to Congress were false, or that acts of obstruction were being
committed by Poindexter, North and others.

     President Reagan has testified that he did not and would not authorize any false statement to
Congress by Poindexter in connection with the Iran initiative.122  Similarly, he denied
knowledge of Casey's incomplete and inaccurate testimony on November 21, 1986.  Reagan's
answer to Grand Jury Interrogatory 49 acknowledges that the President was aware that Casey was
scheduled to testify and that Shultz was concerned with his testimony the next morning.  But the
President went on to state:

     122 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/17/90, p. 152.

     I did not know of, authorize, or approve any statements made to Congress by Director Casey
concerning any Iranian arms transaction or concerning aid to the NFF [contras].  It is not my
practice to review the Congressional testimony of my senior officials.  Director Casey did write
me a letter, dated November 23, 1986, and attached with it a copy of his written remarks before
the House and Senate Intelligence Committees on November 21, 1986. In his letter he described
his testimony in general terms.123

     123 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 49.

     The state of the President's knowledge of the 1985  Israeli shipments as of November 1986 is
a difficult matter to ascertain.  The President's early statements regarding that shipment wandered
from an outright denial of knowledge to an account which ultimately resembled McFarlane's
testimony that the President had approved that Israeli action in advance and agreed to
replenishment of Israeli weapons stocks.124  At his deposition in Poindexter, President Reagan
stated that he could not recall whether he remembered the November 1985 HAWK shipment at
the time he met with congressional leaders on November 12, 1986, or even whether he had heard
about it before the Lebanese newspaper article revealed secret U.S. arms sales to Iran on
November 3, 1986.125

     124 Tower Commission Report at III-7.

     125 Reagan, Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, pp. 37-38.

     On the other hand, his diary contained a number of entries regarding the early days of the
initiative, starting July 17, 1985, when, while in the hospital, he noted ``strange sounds coming
from some Iranians -- Bud M. [McFarlane] will be here tomorrow to talk about it -- could be a
breakthrough on 7 kidnap victims -- evidently Iranian economy disintegrating fast under strains
of war.''  The next day, the President's diary records his meeting with McFarlane:  ``Bud came by
-- seems 2 members of the Iranian  govt. want to establish talks with us -- I'm sending Bud to
meet with them in a neutral country.''  On August 6, he simply noted ``Rumors of 5 to 7 hostages
to be released no confirmation.''  On August 23, although cryptically written, the President's diary
notation suggests his approval for the Israeli TOW shipment:  ``Received `secret phone' call from
Bud McFarlane -- seems a man high up in the Iranian govt. believes he can deliver all or part of
the 7 kidnap victims -- I had a few decisions to make about a few points -- but they were easy to
make -- now we must wait.''  On September 15, President Reagan noted in his diary:  ``Release of
Rev. Weir; told by mystery man in Beirut others will follow.''

     The President's entries in November 1985 do not refer specifically to HAWKs, but clearly he
was following the course of the initiative.  The pertinent entries are as follows:

     11/22/85  brief NSC on hostages in Beirut -- we have an undercover thing going by way of an
Iranian which could get them sprung momentarily

     11/23/85  still sweating out our undercover effort to get hostages out of Beirut

     12/5/85  NSC Briefing -- probably Buds last -- subject our undercover effort to free our 5
hostages -- complex undertaking with only a few in on it-won't even write in this diary what
we're up to

     12/7/85  meeting with Regan,  Weinberger, McFarlane, Poindexter, Shultz & Mahan [sic, CIA
Deputy Director John McMahon] of CIA-complex plan which could return our 5 hostages & help
some officials in Iran who want better relationship with us -- Israel would sell weapons to Iran,
hostages released as soon as delivered in installments by air -- weapons go to moderate leaders in
army who are essential if to be change[d] to more stable govt -- we then sell Israel replacements -- none of this is a gift. 126

     126 OIC Review of Reagan Diary, 1987.

     In his autobiography, Reagan rendered this same diary entry as follows:

     Saturday, Dec. 7 -- Pearl Harbor Day:  I . . . had a meeting with Don R, Cap W, Bud M, John
P, George S and McMahon of CIA.  This has to do with the complex plan which could return our
five hostages and help some officials in Iran who want to turn that country from its present
course and onto a better relationship with us.  It calls for Israel selling some weapons to Iran.  As
they are delivered in installments by air, our hostages will be released.  The weapons will go to
the moderate leaders in the army who are essential if there is to be a change to a more stable
government.  We then sell Israel replacements for the delivered weapons. None of this is a gift.
The Iranians pay cash for the weapons -- so does Israel.

     George Shultz, Cap and Don are opposed.  Congress has imposed a law on us that we can't
sell Iran weapons or sell any other country weapons for resale to Iran.  George also thinks this
violates our policy of not paying off terrorists.  I claim the weapons are for those who want to
change the government of Iran and no  ransom is being paid for the hostages.  No direct sale
would be made by us to Iran but we would be replacing the weapons sold by Israel.

     We're at a stalemate.  Bud is flying to London where the Israelis and Iranian agents are.
Britain has no embargo on selling to Iran. . . . The plan is set for Wednesday.127

     127 An American Life, p. 510.

     The President's subsequent diary entries reflect his disappointment with the London meeting,
but his decision to go ahead with direct U.S. sales under the January 17, 1986, Finding:

     12/9/85  Bud back from London but not in office yet -- his meeting with Iranians did not
achieve its purpose to persuade them to free our hostages first -- their top man said he believed if
he took that proposal to the terrorists they would kill our people

     12/10/85  Iranian ``go between'' turns out to [sic] a devious character -- our plan regarding the
hostages is a ``no go''

     1/17/86  only thing waiting was N.S.C. wanting decisions on our effort to get our 5 hostages
out of Lebanon -- involves selling TOW anti-tank missiles to Iran -- I gave a go ahead.128

     128 OIC Review of Reagan Diary, 1987.

     In addition to having his diary entries of the previous year to help his staff refresh his
recollection, the President on November 19 and November 20, 1986, received direct information
from Shultz regarding Shultz's contemporaneous knowledge of the November 1985 HAWK
shipment.  Shultz said he told the President that McFarlane reported on the HAWK shipment
during the summit meeting with Gorbachev in Geneva.  According to Shultz, President Reagan
responded that ``oh I kn[ew] about that.'' 129

     129 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001883.

     The foregoing facts would suggest that the President, during the first three weeks in
November 1986, knowingly participated or at least acquiesced in the efforts of Casey, Poindexter
and North to minimize or hide his advance approval of and participation in the 1985 Israeli arms
shipments to Iran without notice to Congress.

     Yet, such a conclusion runs against President Reagan's seeming blindness to reality when it
came to the rationalization of some of his Iran and hostage policies.  The portrayal of President
Reagan in the notes of Regan and Weinberger, and Shultz's read outs to Hill, not only the
November 24, 1986, meeting but beginning at least on December 7, 1985, show a consistent
reiteration of the President's position.  The simple fact is that President Reagan seems not to have
been ashamed of what he had done.  He had convinced himself that he was not trading arms for
hostages, that he was selling arms to develop a new opening with Iran, and that the recovery of
the hostages was incidental to a broader purpose.  He disdained the restrictions of the Arms
Export Control Act.  He made that clear as he brushed off Weinberger's concerns  about illegality
on December 7, 1985.  At the November 24, 1986, meeting he was ``v[ery] hot under the collar
& determined he is totally right.'' 130

     130 Hill Note, 11/24/86, ANS 0001894-909.

     In his deposition given to Independent Counsel in July 1992, his responses were still
consistent with that position.  His memory had obviously failed.  He had little recollection of the
meetings and the details of the transactions.  When his diary notes or other documents were
presented to him which expressed his 1985 and 1986 position, he was again firm in his
statements that they sounded like something he would have said and that he still believed them to
be true.

     The President's Responses to Formal Inquiries

     This final section considers whether the President committed any crimes in his responses to
two principal investigations that followed the November 25, 1986, disclosure of the Iran/contra
diversion.  He provided statements or testimony to both the Tower Commission inquiry and the
criminal investigation conducted by OIC.131  President Reagan was not asked to testify before
the hearings conducted by the congressional Iran/contra Select Committees  or to provide the
Committees with a deposition or statement.

     131 Reagan was interviewed by the Tower Commission on January 26, 1987 and on February
11, 1987, and by OIC on July 24, 1992, and he provided interrogatory answers to the Grand Jury
in late 1987.

     President Reagan's Statements to the Tower Commission

     President Reagan signed Executive Order 12575 on December 1, 1986, which established a
Special Review Board ``to review activities of the National Security Council'' in the wake of the
Iran/contra disclosures.  President Reagan named former Sen. John Tower as chairman and
appointed former Sen. Edmund Muskie and retired Gen. Brent Scowcroft as members of the
board which became known as the Tower Commission.  The President directed the board to
submit its findings and recommendations to him at the conclusion of its inquiry.  The Tower
Commission conducted numerous interviews and reviewed hundreds of documents in its
three-month inquiry.  In its letter submitting its report to President Reagan on February 26, 1987,
the Commission stated that in addition to the evaluative mission described in the Executive
Order, ``[a]t your direction, we also focused on the Iran/Contra matter and sought to follow your
injunction that `all the facts come out.' ''

     The Tower Commission conducted two interviews with President Reagan and was provided
excerpts from his diary.  The Commission also received a letter from the President correcting one
aspect of his accounts at those interviews.   The Commission's Report sought to draw
conclusions concerning the President's knowledge and authorization of the Iran initiative in
general, and of four controversial Iran/contra events in particular:  (1) the August-September
1985 Israeli TOW shipment; (2) the November 1985 Israeli HAWK shipment; (3) the diversion;
and (4) NSC staff assistance to the contras during the Boland period.  President Reagan's
responses to the Commission in these four areas are summarized in the Tower report as follows:

     The August/September 1985 TOW Shipment

     In his meeting with the Board on January 26, 1987, the President said that sometime in
August he approved the shipment of arms by Israel to Iran.  He was uncertain as to the precise
date.  The President also said that he approved replenishment of any arms transferred by Israel to
Iran.  Mr. McFarlane's testimony of January 16, 1986, before the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, which the President embraced, takes the same position.  This portion of Mr.
McFarlane's testimony was specifically highlighted on the copy of testimony given by the
President to the Board.

     In his meeting with the Board on February 11, the President said that he and Mr. Regan had
gone over the matter a number of times and that Mr. Regan had a firm recollection that the
President had not authorized the August shipment in advance.  The President said he did not
recall authorizing the August shipment in advance.  He noted that very possibly, the transfer was
brought to him as already completed.  He said that subsequently there were arms shipments he
authorized that may have had to do with replenishment, and that this approval for replenishment
could have taken place in September.  The President stated that he had been ``surprised'' that the
Israelis had shipped arms to Iran, and that this fact caused the President to conclude that he had
not approved the transfer in advance.

     In a subsequent letter to the Board received on February 20, 1987, the President wrote:  ``In
trying to recall events that happened eighteen months ago I'm afraid that I let myself be
influenced by others' recollections, not my own . . .''

     ``. . . I have no personal notes or records to help my recollection on this matter.  The only
honest answer is to state that try as I might, I cannot recall anything whatsoever about whether I
approved an Israeli sale in advance or whether I approved replenishment of Israeli stocks around
August of 1985.  My answer therefore and the simple truth is, `I don't remember -- period.' ''

     The Board tried to resolve the question of whether the President gave prior approval to Israel's
transfer of arms to Iran.  We could not do so conclusively.

     We believe that an Israeli request for approval of such a transfer was discussed before the
President in early August.  We believe that Secretary Shultz and Secretary Weinberger expressed
at times vigorous opposition to the proposal.  The President agreed to replenish Israeli stocks.
We are persuaded that he most likely provided  this approval prior to the first shipment by Israel.

     In coming to this conclusion, it is of paramount importance that the President never opposed
the idea of Israel transferring arms to Iran.  Indeed, four months after the August shipment, the
President authorized the United States government to undertake directly the very same operation
that Israel had proposed.  Even if Mr. McFarlane did not have the President's explicit prior
approval, he clearly had his full support.132

     132 Tower Commission Report at III-7-8; see also ibid. at B-19-20.

     The November 1985 HAWK Shipment

     In his first meeting with the Board on January 16, 1987, the President said he did not
remember how the November shipment came about.  The President said he objected to the
shipment, and that, as a result of that objection, the shipment was returned to Israel.

     In his second meeting with the Board on February 11, 1987, the President stated that both he
and Mr. Regan agreed that they cannot remember any meeting or conversation in general about a
HAWK shipment.  The President said he did not remember anything about a call-back of the
HAWKs.133

     133 Ibid., p. III-9; ibid., at B-37.

     The Diversion

     The President said he had no knowledge of the diversion prior to his conversation with
Attorney General Meese on November 25, [sic] 1986.  No evidence has come to light to suggest
otherwise.  Contemporaneous Justice Department staff notes of LtCol North's interview with
Attorney General Meese on November 23, 1986, show North telling the Attorney General that
only he, Mr. McFarlane, and VADM Poindexter were aware of the diversion.134

     134 Ibid., p. III-21.

     The NSC Staff and Support for the Contras

     The President told the Board on January 26, 1987, that he did not know that the NSC staff
was engaged in helping the contras.  The Board is aware of no evidence to suggest that the
President was aware of LtCol North's activities.135

     135 Ibid., III-24; ibid., at C-14.

     False statements to the Tower Commission could be punishable under 18 U.S.C.  1001
(penalizing material false statements to a department or agency of the United States in a matter
within its jurisdiction).

     Of the President's statements to the Tower Commission on the four key subjects, only the
President's claimed lack of knowledge of the diversion remains totally unimpeached.
Nevertheless, the fundamental barrier to concluding that any of the President's various statements
to the Tower Commission was criminally false is that it was virtually impossible to prove beyond
a reasonable doubt what  the President remembered in January and February of 1987.136 The
Tower Commission interviews were not recorded or transcribed; only notes were taken.
Although it seems obvious that President Reagan made hopelessly conflicting statements to the
Commission, it would be impossible to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that any misstatement
was intentional or willful.137

     136 In an extensive interview of Reagan conducted in Los Angeles in July 1992, Independent
Counsel satisfied himself that President Reagan's memory of the Iran initiative and much of his
memory of contra support during the Boland cut-off period is now very faded.

     137 Additionally, a diary kept by White House Counsel Peter Wallison indicates President
Reagan's state of confusion as his staff tried to prepare him for the Tower Commission interview.
See Regan chapter.

     The President's Sworn Answers to Grand Jury Interrogatories and His Deposition at the Trial
of Admiral Poindexter

     In his Grand Jury Interrogatory answers and at his deposition, the President again provided
information regarding the four key areas of his knowledge and authorization that have been
identified above.  In response to written interrogatories, the President in November 1987 made
these key statements:

     The August/September 1985 TOW Shipment

     Mr. McFarlane briefed me about an approach by individuals in Iran while I was in the hospital
in July 1985, but I  do not specifically recall any discussion of the sale of arms by Israel as being
part of that initiative at that time.  I do recall that later in the summer or fall of 1985 I was
advised that Israel sought to ship TOWs to individuals in Iran who would influence the
Hazballah to free our hostages.  It was part of Israel's plan that it would abort the sale if it became
apparent that the hostages would not be released.  My best recollection is that, at that time, I
agreed that Israel should be permitted to purchase replacement TOWs from the United States.  I
am aware that Robert McFarlane has testified that I was briefed on all of these matters while I
was in the hospital.  I do not recall, however, the precise date on which I was told of the delivery
of TOW missiles by Israel to Iran, nor the precise date on which I authorized the replenishment
of the TOWs by the United States to Israel.  I do not recall any discussion of price
whatsoever.138

     138 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 23; see also Reagan, Poindexter
Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, pp. 16-20; ibid., 2/17/90, pp. 226-28.

     The November 1985 HAWK Shipment

     At the time of the shipment of HAWKs by Israel to Iran, I was in Geneva meeting Secretary
General Gorbachev and discussing with him United States-Soviet relations.

     I was told at that time that there was a possibility that the hostages might be released, but I do
not recall that the shipment of HAWK missiles was involved.  I have no recollection today
whether I authorized or approved the shipment of HAWKs by Israel to Iran in November 1985,
nor do I recall undertaking at that time a commitment to replenish those HAWKs  from United
States inventory.  While I initially told the Tower Board that I disapproved the transfer, I later
advised the Board that I simply had no recollection on this issue.  I am aware that Don Regan has
stated that in November 1985 in Geneva we were told to expect a shipment of HAWKs by Israel
to Iran and that I approved such a transfer but made no commitment on replenishment.  I am also
aware that Robert McFarlane has stated that he advised me of the shipment but said that the
shipment was comprised of oil drilling equipment.  I have no current recollection whatsoever of
approving or disapproving this shipment or replenishment.  I do not recall any discussion of
prices at all, but I recall that any weapons involved in the initiative generally were to be paid for
by the recipient country.139

     139 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 24; see also Reagan, Poindexter
Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, pp. 35-37; ibid., 2/17/90, p. 229.

     * * *

     I do not recall signing a Finding relating to Iranian arms transactions in November or
December 1985.  I am aware that an unsigned version of such a Finding exists . . . although I am
told that a signed version has not been found.  I have been advised that the CIA was told
contemporaneously that on December 5, 1985, I signed a Finding relating to this initiative.
While I do not deny having signed such a Finding, I have no current recollection of doing so.

     In November and December 1985, I was briefed on an initiative involving Israel's attempts to
secure the return of our hostages and an initiative to facilitate a dialogue between our
Government and moderate leaders in Iran.   I approved of such a initiative and directed my
National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane to take part in such a dialogue.  My review of the
unsigned Finding . . . leads me to believe that I would have understood it to relate to such an
initiative.140

     140 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Question 27; see also Reagan, Poindexter
Trial Testimony, 2/17/90, pp. 231-32.

     The Diversion

     The first time I learned that the proceeds of any Iranian arms transactions might have been
paid to any account used to provide weapons and military aid to the Nicaraguan Freedom
Fighters -- what has been termed the ``diversion'' -- was on November 24, 1986, when Attorney
General Edwin Meese reported to me that a memorandum had been found referring to such a use.
I immediately instructed that the NSC, the leadership in Congress and the general public be told
of this development.

     I never authorized nor approved the ``diversion,'' nor was I ever asked to authorize or approve
it.  I can recall no conversation or discussion whatsoever of any such idea prior to my
conversation with the Attorney General.  As noted above, I was unaware that any profits or
``residual funds'' were to be generated by such sales.

     It was only as the investigation by the Tower Board got underway that I learned of the
operational roles of North, Secord or Hakim.  I do not recall authorizing or approving, nor do I
believe I was ever asked to authorize or to approve, operational details, such as what accounts
were to receive payments.

     It was only in my discussions with Attorney General Meese on November 24, 1986, and after
that I learned any details of any bank accounts into which the proceeds of arms shipments were
paid, or the retention of these proceeds by anyone other than the U.S. Government.  I do not
recall any discussion prior to that time concerning the proceeds of such sales, nor do I recall
being asked for authority by anyone to use, control or retain these funds.141

     141 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Questions 36-38; see also Reagan,
Poindexter Trial Testimony, 2/16/90, pp. 29, 155-57; ibid., 2/17/90, pp. 236-37, 243-44, 276-82,
289-90.

     NSC Staff Assistance to the Contras

     I was generally aware that some assistance was flowing from the private sources to the NFF
[contras] and that some of this assistance would have included military support.  This
information was public knowledge as early as 1985 and was even mentioned in Congressional
debate about a request for funding in August 1985.  Until the plane carrying Mr. Hasenfus was
shot down in October 1986, I do not recall knowing of specific individuals or groups engaged in
this activity and was unaware of any connection with the U.S. Government.  I believed such
activity to be similar to efforts by Americans in other conflicts.  Even after Mr. Hasenfus was
shot down, I was told that he was not participating in a U.S. sponsored operation, and I was not
informed of any particulars of that operation beyond what was in the news media.  It was not
until after November 25, 1986, when the full details of these operations became public, that I
learned the nature and extent of the private support network and the role of certain U.S. officials
in it.

     * * *

     Although I did not seek or directly encourage private citizens to provide military support, I did
encourage William Simon and others to provide humanitarian assistance through the Nicaraguan
Freedom Fund. . . . I also knew, as had been previously reported in the press, that Mrs. Garwood
had contributed money to refurbish a Medevac helicopter.  I understood her contributions to be of
a humanitarian nature, and, when I met with Mrs. Garwood, this subject was not discussed.142

     142 Reagan, Grand Jury Interrogatories, Answer to Questions 14-17.

     Regarding his knowledge of the North-run contra-resupply operation, the President said:

     I did not authorize or approve of the transfer to the NSC or any of its staff any function or
operation performed by the CIA with respect to the Nicaraguan Freedom Fighters. I do not recall
anyone ever asking me to approve or authorize the transfer of any function or operation from the
CIA to the NSC, and I do not recall ever discussing such transfer.143

     143 Ibid., Answer to Question 8.

     * * *

     Beyond [Presidential Findings, NSDDs, and advocacy of third-country assistance], my
instructions with regard to support for the Freedom Fighters were usually of a general nature, and
I do not now recall any authorizations or approvals of specific actions with respect to the
Freedom Fighters.

     With regard to Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim, I do not recall approving or authorizing
any action concerning them with regard to the Freedom Fighters or of meeting either individual
during this timeframe.144

     144 Ibid., Answer to Question 9.

     I knew that LtCol North's responsibilities included work related to Central America and,
specifically, Nicaragua. However, prior to my conversations with Attorney General Meese on
November 24 and 25, 1986, concerning what has come to be known as the ``diversion,'' I did not
know that LtCol North participated in planning, directing or advising NFF military or
paramilitary operations or logistical support for such operations.  Although I heard about
allegations in the press that LtCol North was engaged in such activities, I understood that these
allegations were incorrect. . . .145

     145 Ibid., Answer to Question 10.

     This office is not aware of evidence to prove that President Reagan intentionally made
material false statements or committed perjury in his answers to this office's Interrogatories,
which were submitted as sworn testimony to the Grand Jury, or in his deposition in the
Poindexter trial.  The President's responses to the Interrogatories were carefully and
professionally crafted, unlike his presentation to the Tower Commission.  While there is a
substantial amount of failure to recall and vagueness in the President's  responses, both to the
Interrogatories and in his later deposition in the Poindexter Trial, this standing alone does not
warrant a criminal charge.146  By July 1992, when Reagan agreed to a final, extensive interview
with Independent Counsel, it was obvious that the former President truly lacked specific
recollection of even the major Iran/contra events which took place in 1984-1987.

     146 For a full account of the President's testimony in Poindexter, see Poindexter chapter.

Chapter 28

     George Bush

     George Bush served as vice president through the Reagan presidency from 1981 to 1989.  In
January 1989, he succeeded Reagan as President.  It was in his capacity as President that Bush
committed what will likely become his most memorable act in connection with Iran/contra.  On
December 24, 1992, twelve days before former Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger was
to go to trial, Bush pardoned him.1  In issuing pardons to Weinberger and five  other Iran/contra
defendants, President Bush charged that Independent Counsel's prosecutions represented the
``criminalization of policy differences.''

     1 President Bush also pardoned former National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane,
former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, former CIA Central American Task Force
Chief Alan D. Fiers, Jr., former CIA Deputy Director for Operations Clair E. George, and former
CIA Counter-Terrorism Chief Duane R. Clarridge.  The Weinberger pardon marked the first time
a President ever pardoned someone in whose trial he might have been called as a witness,
because the President was knowledgeable of factual events underlying the case.

     The criminal investigation of Bush was regrettably incomplete.  Before Bush's election as
President, the investigation was primarily concerned with the operational conspiracy and the
careful evaluation of the cases against former National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter and
Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the National Security Council staff, prior to their indictment in March
1988.  This included a review of any exculpatory material that might have shown authorization
for their conduct.  In the course of this investigation, Vice President Bush was deposed on
January 11, 1988.

     A year later Bush was President-elect, and OIC was engaged in the intensive preparation for
the trial of North, which began on January 31, 1989.  After the completion of the trials of North
and Poindexter and the pleas of guilty of retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and
Albert Hakim, OIC broadened its investigation to those supporting and supervising Poindexter
and North. This investigation developed a large amount of new material with  which it intended
to question President Bush.  His interrogation was left to the end because, as President, he
obviously could not be questioned repeatedly.  It was Independent Counsel's expectation that he
would be available after the completion of the 1992 Presidential election campaign.

     In light of his access to information, Bush would have been an important witness.  In an early
interview with the FBI in December 1986 and in the OIC deposition in January 1988, Bush
acknowledged that he was regularly informed of events connected with the Iran arms sales,
including the 1985 Israeli missile shipments.2   These statements conflicted with his more
extreme public assertions that he was ``out of the loop'' regarding the operational details of the
Iran initiative and was generally unaware of the strong opposition to the arms sales by Secretary
of Defense Weinberger and Secretary of State George P. Shultz. He denied knowledge of the
diversion of proceeds from the arms sales to assist the contras.3  He also denied knowledge of
the secret contra-resupply operation supervised by North.4

     2 Bush, FBI 302, 12/12/86; Bush, OIC Deposition, 1/11/88.  But Bush's recollection was very
general and he did not recall specific details of meetings in which the Iran arms sales were
discussed.

     3 Bush, FBI 302, 12/12/86, p. 3; Bush, OIC Deposition, 1/11/88, p. 17.  During his interview
with the FBI, Bush said he would be willing to take a polygraph examination concerning his lack
of prior knowledge of the diversion.

     4 Bush, OIC Deposition, 1/11/88, p. 154.

     In 1991 and 1992, Independent Counsel uncovered important evidence in the form of
withheld documents and contemporaneous notes that raised significant questions about the
earlier accounts provided by high Administration officials.  The personal diary of Vice President
Bush was disclosed to Independent Counsel only in December 1992, despite early and repeated
requests for such documents. This late disclosure prompted a special investigation into why the
diary had not been produced previously, and the substance of the diary.

     Following the pardons, Bush refused to be interviewed unless the interview was limited to his
non-production of his diary and personal notes.  Because such a limited deposition would not
serve a basic investigative purpose and because its occurrence would give the misleading
impression of cooperation where there was none, Independent Counsel declined to accept these
conditions.  A Grand Jury subpoena was not issued because OIC did not believe there was an
appropriate likelihood of a criminal prosecution.  Bush's notes themselves proved not as
significant as those of Weinberger and Shultz aides Charles Hill and Nicholas Platt, and the
statute of limitations had passed on most of the relevant acts and statements of Bush.

     The Bush Diary

     On December 11, 1992, Chester Paul Beach, Jr., associate counsel to President Bush,
informed the OIC that a diary, kept by Bush, dating back to his vice presidency, had  not been
produced to Independent Counsel.  It consisted of Bush's nightly dictation concerning the events
of the day.  Although the diary contained many personal and political observations, it also
contained a substantial number of references to the events surrounding the Iran/contra matter and
the subsequent investigation.  Accordingly, the diary was responsive to at least two document
requests sent to the White House by the OIC in 1987 and 1992.

     Bush began in November 1986 keeping a daily ``political diary'' tracking his bid for the
Presidency in 1988.5  Most of the dictation was transcribed by Betty Green, a secretary in the
Vice President's Houston, Texas, office.6  She believed she first started transcribing the dictation
in February 1987.7  Bush's Special Assistant, Don Rhodes, would receive cassette tapes from
Bush at his residence and deliver them to Green in  Houston.8  On a couple of occasions, Rhodes
received transcripts from Green and returned them to Bush.  Neither Rhodes nor Green knew
what Vice President Bush did with the transcripts once he received them.

     5 The first entry in the diary reads:  ``This is November 4, 1986, the beginning of what I hope
will be an accurate diary, with at least five and maybe 15 minutes a day on observations about
my run for the presidency in 1988.''  (Bush Diary, 11/4/86.)  Prior to November of 1986, Vice
President Bush did, on occasion, dictate his thoughts in conjunction with a particular historical
event, such as the hospitalization of President Reagan in July 1985.

     6 During his vice presidency, Bush had six offices in the following locations: the West Wing
of the White House; the Old Executive Office Building; the Dirksen Senate Office Building; the
Capitol; the Vice Presidential Residence; and Houston, Texas.  The primary function of the
Houston Office was to respond to public correspondence.  (Presock, FBI 302, 3/17/93, p. 1.)

     7 Green, FBI 302, 2/18/93, p. 2.

     8 Rhodes, FBI 302, 2/18/93, pp. 2-4.

     Jack Steel, the head of Bush's Houston office, knew Green was transcribing dictation for Bush
and that it was personal, but he was not aware of the substance.9  Other than Bush, Green,
Rhodes and Steel, there is no evidence that others knew of the existence of the diary prior to
September 1992.  Others knew that he would occasionally dictate his thoughts, but no one knew
that it was part of a daily diary.10

     9 Steel, FBI 302, 2/18/93, p. 2.

     10 OVP Chief of Staff Craig L. Fuller recalled observing Bush occasionally dictating when he
obviously was not working on correspondence.  (Fuller, FBI 302, 2/19/93, p. 2.)  Rose Zamaria,
Special Assistant to President Bush, was aware that Bush made ``sporadic'' dictation of his
thoughts, although she does not know when he began this practice.  (Zamaria, FBI 302, 2/17/93,
p. 2.)  Another special assistant, Susie Peake, transcribed some Bush dictation in 1989
concerning his trip to China and again in 1991 concerning the Gulf War.  (Peake, FBI 302,
2/18/93, p. 2.)  Zamaria and Peake were not aware of Bush dictating a diary that dated back to
November 1986.

     The White House Response to OIC's 1987 Document Request

     On March 27, 1987, OIC's request for the production of documents was circulated throughout
the White House complex, including the Office of the Vice President (OVP), by A.B.
Culvahouse, counsel to President Reagan.11  This document request represented the product of
negotiations between the White House, the congressional Select Committees and the OIC to
develop an omnibus document request.12  A cover memorandum attached to the document
request stated that the request included ``all personal and official records'' of the staff members of
the White House, NSC, and the Executive Office of the President.13  The attached request
explicitly identified relevant ``notes,'' ``diaries,'' and ``audio tapes'' among the materials required
to be produced.  As a result of the prior negotiations, the document request was limited to
material from the period January 20, 1981 to January 2, 1987.14

     11 Memorandum from Culvahouse to Assistants To The President, et al., 3/27/87, ARZ
003929-37.  This document was generated, in part, in response to a letter from Independent
Counsel to Culvahouse's predecessor, Peter J. Wallison, dated February 27, 1987.  This letter
forwarded the initial document request from the OIC to the Executive Branch.

     12 Letter from Friedman to Wallison, 2/27/87, ARZ 004369-70.

     13 Memorandum from Culvahouse to Assistants To The President, et al., 3/27/87, ARZ
003929-37.

     14 Ibid.

     Following the disclosure of the existence of the Bush diary, President Bush retained private
counsel.  In January 1993, his counsel conducted an internal investigation and reported that Bush
did not recall reviewing the 1987 document request and was not aware that it called for the
production of personal diaries.

     There was, however, substantial evidence that a copy of the March 1987 document request
was received by Vice President Bush, and that the requirements of the request, including the
demand for personal materials and documents, were communicated to Bush by his counsel, C.
Boyden Gray.

     The memorandum circulated by Culvahouse was received by Craig L. Fuller in his capacity of
chief of staff for the OVP.15  On April 1, 1987, he delegated responsibility to Gray and John P.
Schmitz, deputy counsel to the Vice President.16  On April 8, 1987, Gray and Schmitz circulated
a memorandum to the ``heads'' of the OVP offices.17  They stated that the document request
``covers all personal and official records of OVP staff members.''

     15 Memorandum from Fuller to Gray, 4/1/87, ARZ 003928.

     16 Ibid.

     17 Memorandum from Gray/Schmitz to Heads of OVP Offices, 4/8/87, ARZ 003486-95.

     The Vice President's West Wing Office contained the largest collection of what would be
considered Bush personal materials.  Patty Presock, an administrative assistant to Bush, was
considered the ``head'' of this office, with the only other staff person being Susie Peake.  On
April 8, 1987, Presock received a memorandum from Schmitz following up on an earlier
telephone conversation and forwarding a copy of the  document request.18  The last sentence of
the memorandum stated:

     18 Memorandum from Schmitz to Presock, 4/8/87, ARZ 004336.

     Boyden will talk to the Vice President about the extent to which this request applies to your
office's records.

     Beach, in an interview with the OIC, stated that Gray informed him on December 12, 1992
that he had this conversation with Bush in 1987.19

     19 Beach, FBI 302, 3/9/93, pp. 4-6.  Beach's recollection of the conversation with Gray is
memorialized in contemporaneous notes Beach made during the conversation on December 12,
1992. (Beach, ``Notes of Interviews Re V.P. Diary Excerpts.'')  This conversation, and the
corresponding notes, were the product of an ``internal investigation'' conducted by Beach
following the discovery of the Bush diary.

     Others support Beach.  Fuller said he understood that Bush reviewed the document request in
1987, although Gray was the one handling that issue.20  Fuller did not recall whether he, himself,
provided a copy of the document request to Bush or whether it was done through Gray.21  The
first Fuller learned that Bush did not recall seeing the document request was in his recent
interview with Bush's private lawyers.22

     20 Fuller, FBI 302, 2/19/93, pp. 3-4.

     21 Ibid.

     22 Ibid.

     Bush's general awareness of the problem of personal notes and diaries is documented in a
January 30, 1987,  Bush handwritten note, produced from a set of files known as his ``chron
files.'' 23  It includes the statement ``memo from counsel -- all notes, memos, documents etc.'' 24
This predated the March 1987 document request, but followed a narrower early document request
of the Attorney General.

     23 The ``chron files'' consist of chronologically sorted daily files of various documents and
were maintained by Susie Peake.  Chron file documents include correspondence, memoranda,
calendars, phone logs and personal notes written or typed by Vice President Bush.

     24 Bush Note, 1/30/87, ARZ 000772.

     This Bush note was followed by a February 2, 1987, memorandum from Fuller to White
House Chief of Staff Donald T. Regan concerning the production of the Reagan handwritten
notes and diary.  Fuller wrote ``it's only a matter of time until someone calls for the `diary.' '' 25
The memorandum discussed the need to develop a plan to ``satisfy'' the OIC and congressional
investigators.  The memorandum was initialed by Bush and stamped ``V.P. Has Seen.'' 26

     25 Memorandum from Fuller to Regan, 2/2/87, ARZ 000787.

     26 Collamore, FBI 302, 3/12/93, p. 2.

     Culvahouse did not recall Bush being present at any meetings relating to the 1987 document
request.27  Culvahouse did recall discussions with Gray concerning Bush ``notes.'' 28  According
to Culvahouse, the OVP was handling the production of Bush ``notes'' with the same  sensitivity,
and following the same procedures, as the White House was using to handle the Reagan diary.29

     27 Culvahouse, FBI 302, 3/19/93, p. 4-5.

     28 Ibid.

     29 Ibid.

     Jack Steel and Betty Green of the Houston office both recalled receiving the 1987 document
request but did not feel that the documents in the Houston office, including the tapes, were
relevant.30  Don Rhodes, head of Bush's Dirksen Building office, received a copy of the 1987
request, but did not believe that the tapes would be relevant.31

     30 Steel, FBI 302, 2/18/93, pp. 3-4; Green, FBI 302, 2/18/93, p. 3.

     31 Rhodes, FBI 302, 2/18/93, p. 5.

     Related to the issue of the diary was the production of the chron files.  When the Iran/contra
document request was circulated, Bush instructed Peake to ``just give them everything.'' 32
Peake boxed up the entire collection of chron files and put them in Gray's office.  Subsequently,
the personal notes were segregated from the other documents in the chron files in anticipation of
production of the chron files to the OIC.

     32 Peake, FBI 302, 2/18/93, p 3.

     Pursuant to negotiation between Gray and the OIC, Bush's November and December 1986
chron files, responsive to the 1987 document request (that cut off on January 2, 1987), were
made available for review just prior to Vice President Bush's  deposition in January 1988.33  The
relevant personal notes for this period were excerpted by Gray and were also made available at
this time.

     33 Prior to the discovery of the Bush diary, many of the members of Bush's staff referred to
the chron files as a ``diary.''  (Beach, FBI 302, 3/9/93, p. 7.)  In fact, prior to the disclosure of the
Bush diary, the White House Counsel had acknowledged that the chron file ``diary'' was
responsive to OIC document requests calling for production of a ``diary.''  (Memorandum from
Rehnquist to File, 7/10/92, ARZ 003193-94.)

     The White House Response to OIC's 1992 Document Request

     On June 30, 1992, the OIC transmitted a broader document request to the White House calling
for the production of any diaries kept by George Bush during the period May 1, 1985, through
December 1, 1987.34  The primary effect of the 1992 Request was to extend the earlier request
for diaries through December 1, 1987.  This request received considerable attention within the
White House during the summer of 1992.  Various members of the White House Counsel's office
wrote memoranda and held meetings discussing how the White House should respond.

     34 Letter from Barrett to Rehnquist, 6/30/92, ARZ 004164A-65.

     There is no evidence that anyone involved in formulating the White House response knew of
the existence of the Bush diaries at the time.  Each has stated that the discussions focused on the
chron files from the period January 3, 1987 through December 1, 1987.  These discussions
ended when the OIC, on September 15, 1992, delayed the response date until after the November
3, 1992 Presidential election.35

     35 Memorandum from Beach to Gray, 9/15/92, ARZ 003527-28.

     In a memorandum to Gray and Schmitz written on September 15, 1992, Beach told them of
the extension of time to respond to the 1992 request.36  It also stated:

     36 Ibid.

     [The OIC has] indicated, as a ``heads-up,'' that they have a ``wealth of new information'' since
they last interviewed the President four years ago, and that they would probably ask that he
respond to some additional interrogatories -- after the election.37

     37 Ibid. (emphasis in original).  The White House counsel never interpreted the September
15th call extending the document-request response date to imply that the OIC had dropped its
June 1992 request.  To the contrary, the White House understood that the request was ``deferred''
until after the election, when the White House was expecting the OIC to call about it.  (Beach,
FBI 302, 3/9/93, p. 12.)

     Prior to this call from the OIC, the OIC requested full access to whatever materials existed.
The White House wanted to provide only limited access to relevant extracts that had been agreed
upon in 1987 with respect to the Reagan diaries and the 1986 Bush chron files.38  The gist of
White House internal discussions was a decision that Gray should actually begin the process of
reviewing the 1987 chron files.  According to Bush counsel Janet Rehnquist, Gray was going to
conduct this review alone.

     38 Memorandum from Rehnquist to file, 7/10/92, ARZ 003193-94.

     Gray apparently began such a review of the 1987 chron files in the late summer of 1992.
Witnesses (including Beach, William Lytton and Rehnquist) stated that Gray had the 1987 chron
files in his office beginning some time during the summer of 1992.

     Discovery of the Dictated Diary Transcript

     The Bush diaries did not become known to anyone other than Bush, Rhodes, Steel and Green
prior to September 1992.  Sometime between September 18 and September 24, 1992, the diary
transcripts were discovered by Presock while she was conducting an inventory of the Bush family
safes located on the third floor of the White House residence.39  The diary consisted of a typed
transcript, which had been organized in binders.  Presock knew the diary notes were important to
Iran/contra investigators based on a request she had received a few months earlier for similar
documents.40

     39 Presock, FBI 302, 1/19/93, pp. 1-3.

     40 Presock recalled a search for a Bush diary in July 1992 by the White House Counsel's
office.  She believed it was in response to the OIC request.  Presock did not recall any diary being
found at that time.  (Presock, FBI 302, 1/19/93, pp. 4-5.)

     Presock told President Bush of her discovery early on the morning of September 25.  This
meeting took place in Rose Zamaria's office adjacent to the Oval Office.  Presock pointed out to
President Bush that the diary transcript made repeated references to Iran/contra.   President Bush
took little interest and stated ``let's call Boyden and he can sort it out.'' 41  Later that day, Gray
came to Presock's office and reviewed the diary transcript.42

     41 Ibid., p. 6.

     42 When interviewed by Beach in December 1992, Gray thought he recalled Presock saying
she found the diaries in August, before the Republican Convention, and thought he might have
learned of them prior to late September.  (Beach, FBI 302, 3/9/93, p. 7.)  However, Gray had no
precise memory of the dates, and Presock had documentary evidence, along with Rose Zamaria's
recollection, supporting the late-September date.  (Ibid.)

     Knowledge of the existence of the diary went no farther than Boyden Gray until December 1,
1992.  At a December 1, 1992, White House counsel meeting attended by Gray, Schmitz, Beach
and Lee Liberman, there was a brief discussion referring to document production.43  Gray did
not reveal that what had been discovered was a diary.  He did refer to newly discovered material
as containing Iran/contra ``stuff'' and new 1986 Bush ``stuff.''  At this meeting Gray asked Beach
if he had heard from the OIC on its outstanding request.  When Beach said no, Gray said that the
White House should probably ``goose them on it,'' because there were some 1986 materials that
had not been produced.44

     43 Liberman, FBI 302, 3/16/93, p. 7.

     44 Ibid., p. 6.

     Gray, himself, decided to delay notifying the Independent Counsel of the existence of the
diaries.45  Gray had his secretary type up diary excerpts relevant to Iran/contra for his staff to
review.46  These excerpts were reviewed on approximately Monday, December 7, 1992.  The
staff members concluded that the material was plainly relevant and should be produced.47

     45 Ibid., p. 11.  No discussion took place, to Beach's knowledge.  Clearly uncomfortable with
the question, Beach carefully stated that he and his colleagues ``recognized that Boyden had
made a difficult decision'' regarding delayed notification.

     46 Ibid., p. 4.

     47 Ibid.

     On December 9, 1992, the White House made its first attempt to inform the Independent
Counsel of the existence of the Bush diary.48  It was not until Friday, December 11, 1992, that
Independent Counsel actually received the information.

     48 Ibid.

     Production of Documents From the White House

     In 1993, the OIC requested certain documents relevant to the diary production and to
Iran/contra generally.  Bush's new private counsel took over the production of official documents
from the White House.  They adopted a very narrow approach to the OIC document request,
allowing production of only those materials that related to the production of the  diary.  They
claimed that all other documents requested were protected by the attorney-client privilege.49

     49 Letter from Sollers to Gillen, 1/27/93.

     The OIC also requested relevant documents of each witness interviewed regarding document
production.  Every witness complied except Schmitz, who asserted that his documents were
privileged work product.

     Bush's counsel asserted that the failure to produce Bush's November and December 1986
diary notes was inadvertent.  However, one Bush 1987 diary entry raises questions about Bush's
willingness to cooperate fully with investigators.  During 1987 Secretary of State George P.
Shultz had turned over to investigators certain notes detailing personal meetings with President
Reagan that were relevant to Iran/contra.  When Bush became aware of Shultz's note production,
he responded as follows in his personal diary:

     Howard Baker in the presence of the President, told me today that George Shultz had kept 700
pages of personal notes, dictated to his staff . . .  Notes on personal meetings he had with the
President.  I found this almost inconceivable.  Not only that he kept the notes, but that he'd turned
them all over to Congress . . .  I would never do it.  I would never surrender such documents and
I wouldn't keep such detailed notes.50

     50 Bush Diary, 7/20/87.

     This note, which was not among selected diary notes Bush released publicly in 1993, would
have been used to question  Bush about his cooperation with investigators if he had consented to
the requested Independent Counsel deposition in 1993.

     Request to Interview Boyden Gray and John Schmitz

     Much of the evidence relating to the failure to produce the diary focuses on Gray, Bush's
counsel as Vice President and as President, and his deputy, Schmitz.  On January 11, 1993, OIC
wrote Gray and Schmitz requesting production of relevant documents and requesting an
interview.51  Subject to a non-waiver agreement, Gray and Schmitz produced their appointment
calendars and a folder of documents.52  Schmitz kept a personal diary that covered the relevant
period (1987-1992), but he refused to produce it, asserting that any relevant excerpts were
protected as work-product.

     51 The document request was limited to ``personal and official documents and other materials
that relate in any way to your service in the Executive Branch from 1986 through the present as it
relates to any aspect of the Iran/contra matter, including document requests from this Office or
any other Iran/Contra investigation.''  (Letters from Harleston to Gray/Schmitz, 1/11/93.)

     52 The non-waiver agreement stated:

     This review will not waive and will be without prejudice to any privilege against disclosure
that may exist with respect to any of the documents, including the attorney-client privilege.

     (Letter From Harleston to Willard, 2/10/93.)

     Gray and Schmitz finally refused to be interviewed by Independent Counsel.  The OIC had
been willing to limit the scope of the their interviews to questions directly related to the timing of
the production to the OIC of President Bush's diary tapes and transcripts for periods prior to 1988
and the production of the chron files.53  In addition, the OIC agreed to a non-waiver of any
privilege of Bush, excepting the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.54

     53 Letter from Harleston to Willard, 3/23/93.

     54 Ibid.

     During the negotiations with Gray and Schmitz, the OIC learned that their lawyer, Richard
Willard, had been consulted regarding the production of Bush documents prior to Gray's
revelation of the Bush diary.55  Lee Liberman, an associate counsel to the  President, stated in an
interview, that she and Beach had consulted Willard in December 1992 concerning the
production of the diary.56

     55 The OIC's concern over a potential conflict with Willard serving as Gray's and Schmitz's
attorney stems primarily from a Janet Rehnquist note of a conversation she had with Willard.
The note reads:

     Richard Willard:

      -- Right to be concerned

      -- Obstructing

      -- Covering up

      -- process has been sloppy over the years

      -- not atty client or work product materials

      -- make this kind of material in a Special  way

      -- shakier

     (Rehnquist Note, ALU 0141477.)

     Rehnquist had a poor memory of this conversation; her note is not dated.  She believed it
related to the 1992 Request, but was essentially guessing when she tried to interpret the phrases.
But Rehnquist clearly remembered that she did not learn of the Bush diaries until she read about
them in the newspapers.  This conversation with Willard, then, does not relate to the diaries.
(Rehnquist, FBI 302, 3/17/93, pp. 12-13.)

     56 Liberman, FBI 302, 3/16/92, p.11.  In fact, Liberman stated that Gray put Willard in
contact with Beach and her.  (Ibid.)  It was from Willard that Liberman first learned that the
``stuff'' Gray had discovered was in fact the Bush diary. (Ibid.)

     Willard was thus potentially a witness.  The OIC asked to question Willard before he attended
the interviews of Gray and Schmitz to determine whether a conflict existed.  Willard refused to
be interviewed by the OIC and his clients refused to be interviewed without his presence as
counsel.57  Willard claimed that his involvement in the White House production of the diary was
solely as counsel to Gray and Schmitz,58 and subject to work-product protection.59

     57 Letter from Willard to Harleston, 3/29/93, 026101.

     58 Ibid.

     59 Ibid.

     The OIC then agreed to allow Willard to be present during the interviews of Gray and
Schmitz.60   Gray and Schmitz still refused to be interviewed,61 claiming that the
characterization of Willard as a potential witness could ``unfairly cast doubt on the legitimacy of
the proposed interviews.'' 62  Finally, they insisted upon a non-waiver provision that extended to
any privilege held by Gray and Schmitz as well as President Bush.63  Such a non-agreement
would have included the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and would
essentially allow Gray and Schmitz to testify under a grant of immunity.  The OIC refused to
agree.64  Gray and Schmitz refused to consent to an interview.65

     60 Letter from Harleston to Willard, 4/8/93.

     61 Letter from Willard to Harleston, 4/16/93, 026988.

     62 Ibid.

     63 Ibid.

     64 Letter from Parsigian to Willard, 4/21/93, 027075.

     65 This was not the OIC's first encounter with non-cooperation on the part of Gray. In a May
23, 1991, FBI interview regarding Donald Gregg, Gray asserted on behalf of President Bush
attorney-client privilege to many of the questions asked involving conversations between Gray
and other members of the OVP staff. (Gray, FBI 302, 5/23/91.)

     Interview of President Bush

     The OIC informed the White House in the summer of 1992 that based on new information it
had obtained since last interviewing Bush in 1988, the OIC anticipated the need to ask President
Bush to respond to further questioning.66    The  White House provided no response to this
statement.  While President Bush made numerous public statements extolling his cooperation
with the Independent Counsel's investigation,67 that, in fact, had not been the case: Inside the
White House it appears he had little intention of cooperating with Independent Counsel.  In
August 1992, there were discussions among White House counsel about not allowing the OIC to
interview President Bush.68  According to Janet Rehnquist:

     66 The OIC did indicate that the questioning would probably be in the form of interrogatories.
(Memorandum from Beach to Gray/Schmitz, 9/15/92, ARZ 003527-28.)

     67 For example, in a September 11, 1992, Los Angeles Times article, Bush was quoted as
stating:  ``I have nothing to explain.  I've given every bit of evidence I have to these thousands of
investigators.  And nobody has suggested that I've done anything wrong at all.''  (``Iran-Contra
Issue Haunts GOP Ticket,'' The Los Angeles Times, 9/11/92, p. A1.)

     In 1988, Bush stated publicly: ``The President and I cooperated fully with the various
investigations, turned over thousands of documents and directed our staffs to do the same.'' (``
`There Never Was a Formal Meeting' on Iran Initiative'' -- Vice President Bush's responses to
Mary McGrory's questions, The Washington Post, 1/14/88, p. 2.)

     In 1989, Bush stated publicly: ``Certainly, I would see that if any documents are in control of
this administration, relevant documents, that we would live assiduously by those guidelines . . .
set up to determine what documents would be made available.'' (``Bush Doubts Contra Files
Withheld,'' The Washington Times, 4/21/89, p. 5A.)

     68 Rehnquist, FBI 302, 3/17/93, p. 9.

     This matter was discussed among Lytton, Schmitz, Gray and Rehnquist.  Their position was
they were going to tell the OIC to ``pound sand'' on the Bush interview issue.  Their position was
that interviews had already been done, that an election was going on and that enough was
enough.  There was no discussion about how the newly-revealed Caspar Weinberger material that
had come to light might justify a new interview.69

     69 Ibid.

     The White House remained cognizant of Independent Counsel's interest in questioning Bush
through the fall of 1992.70  Following the disclosure of the Bush diary in December 1992, the
OIC reiterated that interest.71  In late February 1993, Bush informed Independent Counsel of his
unwillingness to be deposed.  Specifically, his counsel set forth six professed obstacles
preventing a deposition of the kind OIC sought.72  The most serious of his objections was his
unwillingness to answer questions except regarding non-production of his diary.  This position
essentially denied the OIC the opportunity to question Bush on issues pertaining to his
knowledge of Iran/contra.

     70 Memorandum from Beach to Gray/Schmitz, 11/4/92, ARZ 003525.

     71 On December 14, 1992, Deputy Independent Counsel Craig A. Gillen informed Paul
Beach, Associate Counsel to the President, that it would probably be necessary for the OIC to
depose President Bush. (Letter from Gillen to Sollers, 2/23/93.)  On January 5, 13 and 15 and
February 9, 1993, Gillen informed King & Spalding, counsel for President Bush, of the
outstanding request to depose the President. (Ibid.)

     72 The six reasons for not agreeing to a deposition addressed the following: (1) who would
conduct the deposition; (2) the scope of the deposition; (3) the imposition of a time limitation;
(4) the use of interrogatories in lieu of a deposition; (5) the location; and (6) assurances
concerning the purpose of the inquiry and Independent Counsel's intentions with regard to
President Bush.  (Letter from Sollers to Gillen, 2/24/93.)

     There remained the alternative of a Grand Jury subpoena.  Independent Counsel concluded
that this recourse should not be used unless it was reasonably likely to lead to a criminal
prosecution.  It was important to avoid the appearance of Grand Jury use to obtain material for a
report.  It was also important to avoid any appearance of retaliation for the  pardon of
Weinberger.  Under the circumstances, particularly because of the passage of time, it was decided
that a Grand Jury subpoena would be inappropriate.

     Remaining Questions for President Bush

     Independent Counsel's continuing investigation exposed evidence that called into question
previous statements made by Vice President Bush concerning his knowledge of and involvement
in the Iran/contra matter.  The purpose of a second interview with Bush was to resolve
inconsistencies.  The second interview would have focused primarily on these areas:

     1. The 1985 arms sales to Iran through the Israelis, particularly the presidential briefings
leading up to them, and the briefing and meetings leading to the January 7, 1986, meeting of the
President and his senior advisers regarding a continuation of the Iran arms sales.

     2. Bush's meeting with Israeli official Amiram Nir in July 1986, particularly focusing on
Secord's recollection that after Bush's report of this meeting, Reagan authorized the resumption
of the Iran arms sales.73

     73 Secord and Wurts, Honored and Betrayed (John Wiley & Sons 1992), p. 282.

     3. The November 1986 period in which the President and his advisers tried to deal with the
political uproar created by the public disclosure of the Iran arms sales.  Bush would have been
interrogated regarding contemporaneous notes of President Reagan's senior advisers, and his
conversations with Attorney General Meese on this subject.

     4. Bush's knowledge of or involvement in any quid-pro-quo arrangements with Central
American or other countries in exchange for their support of the contras.

     5. Bush diary entries concerning his national security adviser Donald P. Gregg and deputy
Samuel J. Watson's statements denying that they informed Bush of contra-support activities.

     6. The Vice President's contacts with North, particularly an August 6, 1986, meeting -- the
period when Gregg alleged that he learned of Felix Rodriguez's role in North's contra-resupply
operation -- and Gregg's August 8 and 12, 1986, meetings with representatives of agencies
connected to contra resupply.  Gregg denied reporting these meetings to Bush until December
1986, and Bush has stated that he did not learn of Rodriguez's role in the contra-resupply effort
until then.

     7. Bush's failure to produce until December 1992, the diary that Bush began creating in
November 1986.

     November 1986

     An area of special concern in questioning Bush would have been based on the recently
obtained notes of Weinberger, Regan, and others, which provided valuable insight into the
November 1986 period and the actions of the Reagan administration officials as they attempted
to deal with the disclosure of the Iran initiative.  The notes and Bush's diary also shed light on the
extent of the Vice President's involvement in those events.74

     74 For example, Bush on November 5, 1986, noted in his diary:

     On the news at this time is the question of the hostages. . . . [[D]iscussion of Bud McFarlane
having been held prisoner in Iran. . . . I'm one of the few people that know fully the details, and
there is a lot of flack and misinformation out there. It is not a subject we can talk about.

     (Bush Diary, 11/5/86, ALU 0140191)

     The question was whether high Administration officials in November 1986 sought to create a
false and  inaccurate account of the Iran arms sales to protect themselves and the President from
allegations of possible illegality and a confrontation with Congress regarding President Reagan's
deliberate disregard of statutory restrictions on arms sales to terrorist countries.

     On November 10, 1986, Bush was present at a meeting of the President with his senior
advisers when Poindexter described the Iran initiative as beginning in January 1986, not 1985.

     On November 12, Bush was present at a briefing of the congressional leadership on the facts
of the Iran initiative when Poindexter again repeated his false and incomplete account.  When
Sen. Robert Byrd asked Poindexter if any weapons had been shipped in 1985, Poindexter replied
that there had been contacts but that no materiel had been moved until 1986.75

     75 Regan Notes, 11/12/86, ALU 0139132-49.

     Bush had been present at McFarlane's 1985 intelligence briefings in advance of the November
1985 HAWK shipment.  In his interview with the FBI in December 1986, Bush recalled having
knowledge of 1985 shipment.76  In his 1988 deposition with the OIC, he recalled the Israeli
TOW  shipments and also appeared to allude to the November 1985 HAWK shipment, stating
that:

     76 Bush, FBI 302, 12/12/86, p. 2.

     I do recall a third country landing rights situation.  I remember that distinctly and what I
remember, and this is fairly vague, but that there was an airplane that was supposed to land, pick
up weapons, and fly to Israel -- I mean to Iran -- and once it was either airborne or landed over
there, why then you were going to have this other half of this deal that I described, some
facilitation of the release of hostages, not the actual release of them -- or more; I thought it was
supposed to be more.77

     77 Bush, OIC Deposition, 1/11/88, pp. 80-81.  Bush also stated that the President was
informed of the 1985 shipments.

     So when Bush heard Meese at the November 24, 1986, meeting of senior Administration
officials state that the November 1985 HAWK shipment was ``[n]ot legal because no finding,''
and add that the ``President g008not informed,'' 78 Bush was in a well-informed position to
know the President had known of this shipment.

     78 Weinberger Meeting Notes, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669MM (emphasis in original).

     Independent Counsel was also concerned whether in the November 1986 period there was an
effort to coerce Shultz into becoming more supportive of the President's Iran arms sales policy
and conforming his testimony to others', for example, President Reagan's insistence that the Iran
initiative was not an arms-for-hostages exchange.79

     Earlier that month, Shultz unsuccessfully tried to persuade Bush to refrain from denying that
the Iran initiative was an arms-for-hostages deal.  On November 9, Shultz met privately with
Bush and refuted Bush's public denial that there had been an arms-for-hostages exchange with
Iran.  In his book published in 1993, Shultz recalled the meeting and said he reminded Bush that
he had been present when arms-for-hostages had been discussed.80  Shultz recounted the
meeting as follows:

     79 Address by the President to the Nation, 11/13/86, ALU 018811-14.  News Conference by
the President, 11/19/86, ALU 016817-27.

     80 Shultz, Turmoil and Triumph (Chas. Scribner's Sons 1993), p. 809.

     I put my views to him:  I didn't know much about what had actually transpired, but I knew . . .
such an action would never stand up in public.  Bush admonished me, asking emphatically
whether I realized that there are major strategic objectives being pursued with Iran.  He said that
he was very careful about what he said.

     ``You can't be technically right; you have to be right,'' I responded.  I reminded him that he
had been present at a meeting [January 7, 1986] where arms for Iran and hostage releases had
been proposed and that he had made no objection, despite the opposition of both Cap and me.
``That's where you are,'' I said.  There was considerable tension between us when we parted.81

     81 Ibid. (emphasis in original).

     Bush noted the meeting with Shultz in his diary, stating that he was concerned about reports
that Shultz might resign and that he felt ``cut out'' on the Iran initiative.  Bush gave the following
account:

     Indeed, he [Shultz] had felt cut out.  And, he was dealing from less than a full deck on the Iran
situation.  He distrusts not only North, but he feels that I'm in jeopardy . . . myself.  He thought he
had heard me say something that later proved to be a lie, and his advice to me as a person
interested in my future, ``don't get involved in this.'' 82

     82 Bush Diary, 11/9/86, ALU 0140194.

     Bush's diary is replete with mentions of the behind-the-scenes intrigue regarding how to
handle the growing political crisis over the disclosure of the Iran arms sales, with Shultz pushing
for a public disclosure of the facts and Poindexter and Casey opposing this.  By November 14,
Bush and Regan were also pushing for a public disclosure of the facts.  Bush's diary entry on
November 14 notes:

     I keep urging total disclosure, and not making statements that are not accurate.  I know
George Shultz feels this way.  Also, being sure that our mechanical procedures inside the White
House are proper.  It leads me to feel, again, certainly for the future, that we should not have CIA
Director as part of the cabinet;  that all findings should be properly found.  There's friction -- a
little between Don [Regan] and Poindexter now.83

     83 Ibid., 11/14/86, ALU 0140198-99.

     By the next day, Bush observed in his diary that Shultz was again the topic of discussion.
``[S]hultz . . . Don Regan  whispered to me that we're having real problems with Shultz.  That
Shultz was not on board at all.  I told him that I'd call him [Shultz] on Sunday.'' 84  On
November 16, Bush called Regan regarding his comments about Shultz the previous day:

     84 Ibid., 11/15/86, ALU 0140200.

     I called him [Regan] today to see what he meant and he said that Shultz wanted to come out
and say, ``well, from now on, it would all be done in the State Department and no more arms of
any kind to Iran.''  Regan's point is that this makes the President look like he was ``wrong''. . . .
I'm not sure that we've [seen] the end of all of this.85

     85 Ibid., 11/16/86, ALU 0140201.

     By November 18, Bush recorded that two different sources were reporting that ``Howard
Baker would be willing to be Secretary of State, and that he wouldn't run from that post against
me [in the 1988 presidential race]. We'd been told this once before, a couple of years ago.  I love
Howard, but it does seem like the vultures are circling over George Shultz.'' 86

     86 Ibid., 11/18/86, ALU 0140202.

     Bush noted that he met with the President privately the next day.  ``We talked about the need
to get the Shultz resignation stories in shape.  In fact, there was friction between State and the
White House. Shultz feeling he was closed out.  The White House feeling that Shultz was
cutting and running . . . separating himself out.'' 87  On November 20, Bush again met privately
with the Reagan:

     87 Ibid., 11/19/86, ALU 0140203.

     The President tells me that at lunch, ``I really had a shocker.  Don Regan has just told me that
George Shultz has told him Poindexter has to go or he goes.''  It doesn't sound like George, this
kind of ultimatum.  We talked at length and I suggested to the President that the only thing he
could do was call a Monday meeting which he decided to do to get the key NSC players together
and to get them all to lay it on the table and to just simply say, ``we're going to hammer this thing
out and what are you upset about, George?  What are you upset about, Poindexter?''  The problem
is -- and I showed him certain clippings -- that Poindexter, Don Regan and George are all out
there with leaks and peddling their own line.  Regan, for example, says, ``I'm a team player.['']
Everybody at State rallies around George, and it gets him all upset.  And, when Regan says, or
uses the word ``negotiate'' or allegedly makes some comment about Israel, everybody -- State and
NSC -- gets upset with him.88

     88 Ibid., 11/20/86, ALU 0140204-05.

     Bush continued his discussion of this meeting with the President in his diary notes on the
following day.  He noted that when the President told him that about Shultz's ultimatum, ``I told
the President, `you simply cannot be held hostage.  I love George Shultz.  I want him to stay.  It
will hurt your short run.  But, no President can have a Cabinet set the terms under which he will
stay.  It is impossible.' ''   In the same diary entry, Bush expressed concern about Poindexter:
``On Poindexter, I'm concerned because today -- on Friday -- some new revelation that there were
arms shipped in September of '85.  The President having  said that none were and I don't know
what that's all about, but I walked into Don Regan's at lunch today and he said, `well, there's a
new bomb shell.' '' 89

     89 Ibid., 11/21/86, ALU 0140206.

     Bush and Regan had been aware of the September 1985 TOW shipment, as was the President.
Thus the ``bombshell'' was not the fact of the shipment, but that it had been made public.

     Bush's diary entry for November 24 described the afternoon meeting of the President and his
senior advisers.  Unlike the notes of Weinberger and Regan, he did not record the substance of
the meeting -- including Meese's report on his weekend inquiry and the possibility that the
November 1985 HAWK shipment was in violation of law.

     The Bush Diary

     Had a final Bush interview occurred, the questioning regarding the non-production of Bush's
diary would have focused on the decision of Bush and or Gray not to disclose the existence of the
diary initially in April 1987, in response to OIC's document request, and to delay its ultimate
production until December 1992.  The questioning would have addressed Bush's familiarity with
the 1987 OIC and congressional document requests, and his knowledge of the production of the
Reagan diary in 1987.  It would have sought an explanation of his previously described July 20,
1987, diary note condemning Shultz for  producing Charles Hill's daily notes of Shultz's
thoughts, discussions and activities.

     It also would have covered Bush's diary entry of November 25, 1986, regarding a telephone
call he had with North following his firing, and the substance of information he obtained from
North and relayed to President Reagan regarding the fact that Israeli officials were extremely
upset about the day's events.

Chapter 29

     Donald P. Gregg

     Donald P. Gregg in 1951 began a career of more than 30 years with the Central Intelligence
Agency.  That service included several overseas postings, including a tour in South Vietnam
during the war.  In 1979 Gregg was detailed by the CIA to the National Security Council staff,
where his responsibilities included Asian affairs and intelligence matters.  Following the election
of Ronald Reagan in 1980, the new Administration requested that Gregg remain at the NSC.
Until 1982, Gregg headed the NSC's Intelligence Directorate.  In August 1982, he resigned from
the CIA and accepted the position of national security adviser to Vice President George Bush,
holding that position until the end of the Reagan Administration.  In early 1989, President Bush
nominated Gregg to be U.S. ambassador to the Republic of South Korea.  Gregg was confirmed
by the Senate for this position on September 12, 1989, and served as ambassador until 1993.

     During the Vietnam War, Gregg supervised CIA officer Felix Rodriguez and they kept in
contact following the war.  Gregg introduced Rodriguez to Vice President Bush in January 1985,
and Rodriguez met with the Vice President again in Washington, D.C., in May 1986.  He also
met Vice President Bush briefly in Miami on May 20, 1986.  As a teenager, Rodriguez had
participated in the ill-fated  Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba and remained, following that debacle,
an ardent anti-communist.

     In 1985 and 1986, Rodriguez worked out of the Ilopango air base in El Salvador, where he
assisted the Salvadoran Air Force in anti-guerrilla counterinsurgency tactics.  In late 1985 and
during 1986, Rodriguez -- whose alias was ``Max Gomez'' -- became increasingly involved in the
contra-resupply effort that was based at Ilopango at that time.  Because of Rodriguez's close
association with General Juan Bustillo, who headed the Salvadoran Air Force, Rodriguez was
vital to Lt. Col. Oliver L. North's contra-resupply operation by coordinating flights based at
Ilopango.

     Following the shootdown of the contra-resupply aircraft carrying American Eugene Hasenfus
on October 5, 1986, Rodriguez became a center of public and congressional attention.  Because
of Rodriguez's close friendship with Gregg and his three personal meetings with Vice President
Bush, questions arose whether the contra-resupply operation was being directed by Gregg
through Rodriguez.  Questions also arose about when the Vice President's office became aware
of Rodriguez's and North's active participation in the contra-resupply operation at Ilopango.

     Both Gregg and his deputy, Col. Samuel J. Watson III, were investigated for possible false
testimony regarding their denial of knowledge of Rodriguez's involvement in North's
contra-resupply operation.  OIC obtained Watson's immunized testimony in an effort to further
its  investigation.  Despite unresolved conflicts between documentary evidence and the testimony
of the principal witnesses, OIC determined that it could not prove beyond a reasonable doubt a
criminal case against Gregg.

     Gregg, Rodriguez and North

     When Gregg assumed his position as assistant to the Vice President for national security
affairs in August 1982, he consciously disassociated himself from former colleagues with whom
he had worked during his CIA career.  The exception to that rule was Felix Rodriguez.  Gregg
testified: ``. . . I have made it a conscious decision really not to reach back into that part of my
life to bring other people forward.  Felix is the only exception I have made to that.'' 1  Gregg lost
track of Rodriguez for a period of time after Vietnam and did not see him until the early 1980s,
when Rodriguez came to Washington sporadically and talked with Gregg about old times.  Gregg
was not certain what Rodriguez was doing  at that time, and he did not inquire; however, they
remained friends.2

     1 Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/23/87, p. 18.

     2 Gregg, Senate Foreign Relations Committee (SFRC) Testimony, 5/12/89, pp. 72-73.

     Rodriguez visited Gregg in Washington in March 1983 and left him a proposal for helicopter
anti-guerrilla operations in Central America.3  Gregg forwarded Rodriguez's plan with a
favorable recommendation to Deputy National Security Adviser Robert C. McFarlane.4
McFarlane forwarded it on to North for his summary and recommendation.5  North did not recall
what action, if any, he took in response to McFarlane's directive.6

     3 Ibid., pp. 54-55, 73-74; Tactical Task Force Report, 3/4/82, AKW 027860-66.

     4 Memorandum from Gregg to McFarlane, 3/17/83, AKW 027859-66 (attaching Tactical
Task Force Report).

     5 Ibid.

     6 North, Grand Jury, 7/6/90, p. 17.

     North first met Rodriguez on December 21, 1984.7  Subsequently, North solicited Rodriguez
to assist him and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord in the contra-resupply operation
based out of Ilopango airfield in El Salvador.  What role, if any, Gregg played in the introduction
of Rodriguez to North and whether Gregg was aware of North's intentions to recruit Rodriguez
for the resupply  operation was relevant to Iran/contra investigators and was a matter of concern
to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (SFRC) conducting confirmation hearings on Gregg's
ambassadorial nomination in May 1989.

     7 North's schedule card in his handwriting reads:  ``1545 Felix Rodriguez (will be seeing
Gregg at 1600).''  North Schedule Card, 12/21/84, AKW 003167.

     One month before Gregg's confirmation hearings for the ambassadorship in May 1989, North
testified at his trial that Gregg was the person who introduced him to Rodriguez.8  In discussing
his formal solicitation letter to Rodriguez, dated September 20, 1985, North testified that ``I
believe that once I had talked to Mr. Gregg about it [the solicitation] I talked to Mr. McFarlane
about it, about the fact that he [Rodriguez] would be able to assist in that country.'' 9

     8 North, North Trial Testimony, 4/11/89, p. 7435.

     9 Ibid.

     During the confirmation proceedings, Gregg categorically denied North's trial assertions:  ``I
am mentioned, by North, for the first time, on page 7,345 of the trial record, and he makes two
assertions there, one, that I introduced him to Felix, and two, that he talked to me before he
recruited Felix.  And I regret to say that both of those are incorrect.'' 10  OIC obtained no
evidence contradicting Gregg's denials; North did not back up his trial assertions with further
evidence in the Grand Jury.

     10 Gregg, SFRC Confirmation Hearings, 5/12/89, p. 122.

     After the Rodriguez introduction became an issue at North's trial, William R. Bode, a former
Department of State  official, wrote an April 25, 1989, letter to Gregg based upon his review of
his calendar entries.  Bode's recollection was that he had referred Rodriguez to North on the
occasion of their initial meeting on December 21, 1984.11  This is corroborated by North's own
notebook entry.  On December 21, 1984, at 10:30 a.m. North writes ``Call from Bill Bode.''
Underneath that entry is the name ``Felix Rodriguez.'' 12  Rodriguez said it was Bode who made
the arrangements for him to meet North.

     11 Letter from Bode to Gregg, 4/25/89, ASX 0000003.

     12 North Notebook, 12/21/84, AMX 000267; North, Grand Jury, 7/6/90, p. 19.

     Rodriguez also met with Gregg on that day and expressed his interest in going to El Salvador
to work with the Salvadoran Air Force.  Gregg recommended meetings with several other
Administration officials.13

     13 Statement by OVP Press Secretary, 12/15/86, ALU 012418 (attaching summary of
Rodriguez contacts); Gregg, SFRC Testimony, 5/12/89, pp. 56-58, 75.

     Gregg promptly reported to Vice President Bush after his meeting with Rodriguez.  According
to Gregg, he said, ``My friend Felix, who was a remarkable former agency employee who was a
counterinsurgency expert[,] wants to go down and help with El Salvador.  And I am going to
introduce him to Tony Motley, Tom Pickering, and Nestor Sanchez and see if he  can sell himself
to those men.''  Gregg stated that the Vice President said ``Fine.'' 14

     14 Gregg, SFRC Testimony, 5/12/89, pp. 75-76.  Motley was the assistant secretary of state
for inter-American affairs; Thomas R. Pickering was U.S. ambassador in El Salvador; and Nestor
Sanchez, a former CIA official, was deputy assistant secretary of defense for international
security affairs.

     Although Rodriguez testified that his goal was to assist in the Salvadoran anti-guerrilla
program during late 1984 and early 1985, the evidence shows that he was also interested in
contra-related matters.

     At North's request, Rodriguez in January 1985 met Robert Owen, an associate of North, at the
Key Bridge Marriott Hotel in Rosslyn, Virginia.15  Owen wrote North a two-page letter
regarding his meeting with Rodriguez, mentioning ``FR's project'' and ``those who will be put
under FR's care.''  The letter reports that Rodriguez wanted information on communications,
command and control locations, which ideally would include ``primary and secondary targets,
both military and civilian.'' 16  Rodriguez acknowledged that the letter recounts their
conversation, which was based on problems Rodriguez had observed on visits to contra camps.17
Rodriguez testified that none of the projects he discussed  with Owen were implemented because
Rodriguez was mainly interested in El Salvador.18

     15 Owen, Select Committees Testimony, 5/19/87, p. 201; Rodriguez, Select Committees
Testimony, 5/28/87, pp. 119-21.

     16 Letter from Owen to North, 1/27/85, AKW 016393-94.

     17 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 12/4/87, pp. 23-24.

     18 Ibid., pp. 24-25.

     Gregg arranged for Rodriguez to meet Vice President Bush on January 22, 1985.  According
to Gregg, the purpose of the meeting was to inform Bush that Rodriguez wanted to work in El
Salvador against the guerrillas.19  The meeting occurred in the Vice President's Old Executive
Office Building office.  According to Rodriguez, he met briefly with the Vice President, showing
him his photo album, discussing Rodriguez's experiences in the CIA and watching a television
report on the Bush family.20

     19 Statement by Press Secretary attaching Summary of Contacts with Felix Rodriguez,
12/15/86, ALU 012418; Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/9/87, p. 52.

     20 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 12/4/87, pp. 19-20.  North's interest in Rodriguez continued.  A
1/28/85 North notebook entry reflects a telephone call from Clair George, Director of Operations
for the CIA:  ``Felix R w/ V.P.   feedback from Don.''  (North Notebook, 1/28/85, AMX 003918.)
Gregg's telephone log indicates that he had a secure telephone conversation with George on
January 24, 1985.  (Gregg Phone Log, 1/24/85, ALU 022016.)

     On January 24, 1985, Rodriguez first met General Adolfo Blandon, the Salvadoran military
chief of staff, and on January 30, 1985, he met with General Bustillo, commander of the
Salvadoran Air Force.  Both approved Rodriguez's planned assistance.  Bustillo told him he
could stay at Ilopango Military Air Base outside of  San Salvador and agreed to put him in
contact with air force officers.21

     21 Rodriguez and Weisman, Shadow Warrior, pp. 222-23 (1989) (hereafter, Shadow
Warrior).

     As Rodriguez was completing his consultations with U.S. and Salvadoran officials, Thomas
R. Pickering, the U.S. ambassador to El Salvador, learned of Rodriguez's planned mission.
Pickering immediately raised a number of questions with a senior CIA field officer in Central
America, who referred them to CIA headquarters.  The field officer's January 31, 1985, cable
says that Pickering wanted ``help in finding out who Felix Rodriguez is and what is behind his
apparent mission to El Salvador.''  CIA officers also reported that Pickering had been told that
NSC staff members Nestor Sanchez and Constantine Menges were sending Rodriguez there ``to
`solve the insurgency problems.' ''  Pickering wondered whether this had been coordinated with
CIA headquarters and, if not, Pickering wanted the CIA ``to learn about who is footing bill'' for
Rodriguez.22

     22 CIA Cable, 1/31/85, DO 166759.

     On February 2, CIA headquarters responded to Pickering's questions about Rodriguez.
Headquarters reported that Rodriguez had recently visited Langley, claiming that Salvadoran
generals Blandon and Bustillo had welcomed his offer to help fight the guerrillas and stating that
he had discussed this matter with Vice President  Bush, Motley, North, Sanchez and Gregg.  CIA
headquarters also stressed, however, that ``Rodriguez' visit is totally unrelated to [CIA]. . . .'' 23

     23 DIRECTOR 243316, 2/2/85, DO 166760.

     The day the CIA answered his query, Pickering sent a cable to General Paul Gorman, chief of
the U.S. Southern Command in Panama.  Pickering summarized his knowledge of Rodriguez, his
mission with the Salvadoran military and his high-level contacts in the U.S. Government.
Pickering also reiterated his concern about Rodriguez's proposed mission in El Salvador and
recommended that Gorman meet with Rodriguez to evaluate him and to clarify the U.S. approach
in El Salvador.

     On February 8, 1985, Gorman spoke with North about Rodriguez, the contras and U.S.
assistance to Salvadoran anti-guerrilla forces.24  In a subsequent cable to Pickering, Gorman
reported that Rodriguez ``has been put into play by Ollie North, and, while well acquainted, does
not have higher backing.''  Gorman also reported that North ``assures me that his intent was to
focus Rodriguez on forces operating elsewhere in CentAm'' and that, in response to Gorman's
view that the Salvadoran Air Force was getting more than enough advice at the moment, ``Ollie
rogered, and said that Rodriguez can be  much more useful in other places, where aid and advice
is much scarcer.'' 25

     24 North Notebook, 2/8/85, AMX 003963.

     25 San Salvador 01792, 2/12/85, ALV 000148.

     On February 14, 1985, Rodriguez met with Gorman in Panama City.  They discussed
Rodriguez's planned consulting role with the Salvadoran Air Force.  Rodriguez also told Gorman
of an immediate obligation to deliver equipment to contra forces, purchased with funds
Rodriguez had received from contra leader Adolfo Calero.  A few days later, Gorman told North
that he had instructed Rodriguez to make the contras his priority.26  Rodriguez later testified that
his short-term priority during early 1985 was the delivery of security equipment to facilitate night
supply drops to the contras, and that this must have been what Gorman was referring to in his
conversation with North.27

     26 North Notebook, 2/19/85, AMX 000466.

     27 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/3/91, pp. 54-55.

     On February 15, 1985, Gorman sent Rodriguez by military jet to El Salvador, where he met
Pickering and U.S. Army Col. James J. Steele, commander of the U.S. Military Group in El
Salvador. Rodriguez briefed them on his proposed helicopter counter-insurgency operations and
his short-term, higher-priority mission for the contras.  In his reporting cable to Gorman and back
to the Department of State, Pickering effectively approved Rodriguez's plan to work with
Bustillo, under the close  supervision of Steele and on the conditions that Rodriguez avoid
civilian casualties and not fly combat missions.28  Pickering also asked the State Department to
``brief Don Gregg in the VP's office for me.''

     28 US SOUTHCOM Cable, 2/14/85, AMY 001054-55.

     Rodriguez immediately traveled to Washington to report on his meetings in Central America.
On February 19, 1985, Rodriguez met with Gregg in his office and told him of his successful
meetings with Gorman, Pickering and Steele.29  Rodriguez also met with North, whose notes
show they discussed specific types of U.S. military assistance for El Salvador.30

     29 Shadow Warrior, p. 227; OVP Summary of Contacts with Felix Rodriguez, 12/15/86, ALU
012418.

     30 North Notebook, 2/19/85, AMX 000467.  Although North and Gregg spoke on February
26, 1985, there is no record of the substance of their conversation.  (Gregg Phone Log, 2/26/85,
ALU 22034.)

     In mid-March 1985, after first satisfying his obligation to deliver contra supplies to
Honduras,31 Rodriguez relocated to Ilopango air base.  The next month, he began flying
anti-guerrilla helicopter operations with the Salvadoran Air Force.

     31 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 12/4/87, p. 31.

     On April 20, 1985, after a helicopter operation succeeded in capturing a Salvadoran guerrilla
leader and obtaining valuable intelligence information,32 Rodriguez  wrote a letter thanking
Gregg for his and the Vice President's support and asking Gregg to write a note thanking Steele
for the support he had given Rodriguez.33  On April 29, Gregg sent a letter thanking Steele ``for
giving Felix your confidence and support, without which he feels he could not have gotten things
under way.'' 34  On June 5, 1985, Rodriguez introduced Gregg to Steele at the Key Bridge
Marriott Hotel in Rosslyn, Virginia.

     32 Shadow Warrior, pp. 231-33, 242.

     33 Letter from Rodriguez to Gregg, 4/20/85, ALU 012402-05.  On May 31, 1985, Rodriguez
signed a similar note, which he sent along with a photograph of himself to Gregg in Washington.
(Letter from Rodriguez to Gregg, 5/31/85, ALU 011618.)

     34 Letter from Gregg to Steele, 4/29/85, AKW 029991.

     The September 10, 1986, Meeting

     Congress in August 1985 authorized $27 million for humanitarian assistance to be
administered through a newly created State Department office, the Nicaraguan Humanitarian
Assistance Organization (NHAO).

     In September 1985, Rodriguez's name began to surface in Administration circles in the
context of the  contra-resupply effort.35  Similarly, Gregg appeared to be involved in discussions
concerning the contras.  A North notebook entry at 4:30 p.m. on September 10, 1985, seems to
reflect a meeting between North, Gregg and Steele relating to problems with contra resupply:

     35 See, for example, Abrams, Fiers, and Corr chapters.

     1630 -- Mtg w/ Jim Steele/Don Gregg

     Approached by

     g008Mario del Amico

     claims to be close to Aplicano

     claims to be close to FDN [contras]

     says radar coverage was prob.

     for flights out of Aguacate [Honduras]

     wants to use

     Talked to Blandon who

     said Tamarindo (near

     la Union) [in El Salvador] could be used

     Says Bermudez was prepared

     to devote a special ops [operations] unit

     astride FMLN [ 36] log lines.

     36 The guerrilla movement in El Salvador.

     Introduced by Wally Greshiemg807LLitton

     Calero/Bermudez visit to

     Ilopango to estab.

     log support./maint. for

      -- Del Amico convinced Blandon to

     give FDN 1K FN mags.

     Blandon never paid for mags. . . .37

     37 North Note, 9/10/85, AMX 001726-27.

     North's note appears to cast doubt upon Gregg's sworn testimony that he was unaware of
North's involvement  with contra-resupply prior to the summer of 1986.  The notes mention an
arms dealer in Central America, Mario Dellamico, who apparently claimed to be close to
Honduran Col. Hector Aplicano and to the contras.38  The notes reflect a discussion about the
problem of Nicaraguan radar coverage of contra flights out of Aguacate, Honduras.  The notes
also reflect a discussion about the contras creating a special operations unit to interdict
Salvadoran insurgents' supplies from Nicaragua into El Salvador.  Apparently contra leaders
Calero and Bermudez visited Ilopango to assess that location for logistical support for
unspecified military activities. The notes apparently reflect that Dellamico convinced Salvadoran
General Blandon to give the contras a thousand magazines for Belgian rifles, for which he was
never paid.

     38 For a more complete discussion of Dellamico's activities, see CIA Subject #1 chapter.

     In addition to North's notebook entry, his September 10, 1985, schedule card reflects a
handwritten entry at 4:30 p.m. for Gregg.  North explained that the addition of his handwritten
note to his already typed, prepared schedule would indicate that someone added a meeting with
him at the last minute.39

     39 North, Grand Jury, 7/6/90, p. 73-74.

     After reviewing his schedule card and notebook entry of the meeting with Steele/Gregg, North
testified  that this notebook entry appeared to reflect a scheduled meeting with Don Gregg at 4:30
p.m. on September 10, 1985.40  North, however, did not specifically remember having this
discussion with Steele or Gregg.41

     40 Ibid., p. 75.

     41 Ibid., p. 82.

     Gregg disputed this North notebook entry.  Gregg testified that he did not recall meeting with
North and Steele about the matters presented in the notes.  Steele also did not believe that he,
Gregg and North had discussions about contra resupply.  Steele said that following a meeting
with Gregg in September 1985, he possibly met with North to discuss these matters, but Steele
did not place Gregg in the meeting.42

     42 Steele, Grand Jury, 2/6/91, pp. 34-37.  Steele's continued denial of Gregg's involvement in
a September 10, 1985, meeting added credibility to Gregg's denials.  Steele in lengthy interviews
with OIC in 1990 and 1991 made incriminating statements about his own conduct.  In light of
Steele's candor about his own complicity in operational matters at Ilopango, his continued
insistence that he did not remember a substantive meeting with North and Gregg seemed
credible.  On the other hand, Steele failed a polygraph question that squarely addressed Gregg's
attendance at the September 1985 meeting with North.  (Polygraph Report of Steele, 9/18/90.)

     North Recruits Rodriguez

     On September 20, 1985, North wrote a ``Dear Felix'' letter formally requesting Rodriguez's
assistance at Ilopango to facilitate the operation of contra-resupply planes.  In the letter, North
asked Rodriguez  not to inform CIA field personnel or Dellamico about his request, and to
destroy the letter after reading it.  North informed Rodriguez that he would be contacted by an
individual who would identify himself as being sent by ``Mr. Green.'' 43

     43 Letter from North to Rodriguez, 9/20/85, AKW 022740-43.

     Rodriguez testified that when he met with North on October 17, 1985, in Washington, North
told him not to reveal Rodriguez's assistance to the resupply to anyone on the ``second floor,'' a
reference to the Office of the Vice President.  Rodriguez testified that he obeyed North's
instruction and did not discuss contra-resupply with Gregg until August 8, 1986.  Rodriguez said
he did not reveal to Gregg the North letter of solicitation until December 1986.44  North,
however, denied telling Rodriguez not to tell Gregg about the ``Dear Felix'' letter.45  Rather than
attempting to hide his association with Rodriguez, contemporaneously created documents
indicate that North willingly shared this information with other Administration officials.  North's
notebook of October 1, 1985, contains an entry which states:  ``Don Gregg:  Maximo Gomez
[Rodriguez] 27-31-59.'' 46

     44 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/3/91, p. 66.

     45 North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, p. 22.

     46 North Notebook, 10/1/85, AMX 001787.

     North did not remember whether this entry indicated that he obtained Rodriguez's Salvadoran
phone number from Gregg, or that he possibly supplied Gregg with the number.47  However, the
entry shows that North was not reluctant to discuss Rodriguez and his alias ``Gomez'' with Gregg
during this period.  Indeed, during a RIG meeting the same day to implement the NHAO funding,
North shared information regarding Rodriguez with other Administration officials from the
Department of State and the CIA.  The notes of Ambassador Robert Duemling, head of NHAO,
reflect the following:

     47 North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, pp. 15-17.

     (North) can use --

     Mr. Green said to call --

     Maximo Gomez [Rodriguez]

     273159 in San Salvador

     Will airlift the stuff from Salvador.48

     48 Duemling Note, 10/1/85, GP 0025170-78.

     Duemling's note reflects that Gomez (Rodriguez) would be awaiting a call from a
representative from Mr. Green, as North had indicated in the ``Dear Felix'' letter.  Additionally,
the Duemling note reflects the same telephone number attributed to Rodriguez in the earlier
North notebook entry.  North testified that he had no reason to conceal from other Government
officials his  knowledge of Rodriguez's alias, his telephone number, or the fact of his
availability.49

     49 North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, p. 31.  In the Grand Jury, North did not recall whether he
asked Gregg whether he could utilize Rodriguez in resupply efforts, contrary to his own trial
testimony.  (North, Grand Jury, 7/6/90, pp. 117-18, 122; North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, pp. 31-32.)

     In mid-December 1985, Rodriguez received a call from Rafael Quintero, an associate of
Secord.  Quintero said he was calling on behalf of ``Mr. Green.''  Rodriguez and Quintero had
known each other for some time but had a falling out because of Quintero's relationship with
former CIA officer and convicted felon Edwin Wilson, and with Thomas Clines and Frank
Terpil, who had been involved with Wilson.50  As a result of Quintero's call, Rodriguez arranged
for the landing of a 707 aircraft from Europe that brought weapons to Ilopango for the contras.

     50 Quintero, Grand Jury, 1/6/88, pp. 192-97; Quintero, North Trial Testimony, 3/2/89, pp.
2915-16; Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/3/91, pp. 119-21.

     Following news media coverage in October 1985, Honduras prohibited direct humanitarian
aid flights for the contras from the  United States to Honduras.  Arrangements were made
permitting the supplies to be flown to Ilopango in El Salvador and ultimately delivered to the
contras.  A number of U.S. officials flew to Ilopango and attended a meeting on December 30,
1985, to discuss the logistics of providing the NHAO aid.  Among others, North, CIA Central
American Task Force Chief Alan D. Fiers, Jr., State Department official William Walker, NHAO
official Cresencio Arcos and U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador Edwin G. Corr met with Bustillo
at Ilopango air base.  Rodriguez also was present.

     After receiving a mid-December 1985 State Department cable reflecting concern over the
Honduran situation, Gregg's deputy Watson bracketed for Gregg a segment of the cable
addressing alternative means of moving essential supplies to the contras.  At the top of the cable
Watson wrote:  ``Don -- Suggest you read carefully -- could have serious effect on our supplies to
Contras.'' 51

     51 State 388960, 12/23/85, ALU 011860.

     Rodriguez's resupply efforts became more concentrated in January and February 1986.  In
January, Rodriguez met Richard B. Gadd, a Secord associate, at Ilopango.  Gadd became
responsible for advising Rodriguez of the arriving planes.52  By this time, Rodriguez's use of the
alias ``Gomez'' was being openly discussed in Washington within the Restricted Interagency
Group (RIG),  which focused on Central American issues.  During late January and early
February 1986, Rodriguez's coordination of NHAO flights and his involvement with
lethal-resupply activities became an issue of concern to the CIA and Department of State
officials. There is no documentary evidence, however, that links CIA and State Department
concern about Rodriguez to Gregg or to any other member of the Office of the Vice President.53

     52 Rodriguez, FBI 302, 12/29/86.

     53 Gregg and Watson were not regular members of the RIG, which often specifically
discussed contra-related matters.  Although Watson, as an Office of the Vice President
representative, had asked to attend RIG meetings, Abrams denied him access.  (Gregg, Grand
Jury, 10/23/87, p. 25.)  Abrams nevertheless told the FBI that he believed that he told Gregg
about Rodriguez's activity in the private resupply network.  (Abrams, FBI 302, 6/15/88, p. 2.)

     Only one witness, Steele, told Independent Counsel that Gregg may have known of
Rodriguez's assistance to the contra-resupply effort during the January 1986 period.  Steele
recalled that during a visit to Washington in January 1986, he dropped by briefly to say hello to
Gregg.  At the end of the conversation, Gregg asked Steele `` `Is Felix taking a lot of risks
flying?' or `Is Felix still flying a lot?' ''  Steele responded, ``Felix is not doing a  lot of flying
because he's spending a lot of time helping the contras.'' 54

     54 Steele, FBI 302, 2/5/91, p. 2.

     The Watson February 1986 Memorandum

     In mid-January 1986, the Vice President's deputy national security adviser Watson went to
Central America to familiarize himself with the region.  For a portion of his trip, he was escorted
by Rodriguez.55  Both men denied that they discussed Rodriguez's involvement in contra
resupply. Nevertheless, on February 4, 1986, Watson wrote a memorandum regarding his trip to
Honduras and El Salvador and the state of the contras.  Watson's memorandum for Vice
President Bush was channeled through Gregg.  In his memorandum, Watson noted that he
``visited the DFR's [contras'] main aerial re-supply base [at Aguacate, Honduras] and looked at
their DC-6 (not the best for infiltration and flying in between mountains), their parachuting
packing and rigging facilities and their ammunition and supply warehouses.''  Gregg marked the
memorandum for Bush, noting at the top:  ``Good report from Sam.'' 56

     55 Watson schedule, 1/86, ALU 025485-86.

     56 Memorandum from Watson to Bush, 2/4/86, ALU 25448-50.

     One portion of the Watson memorandum, concerning the contras, particularly drew Gregg's
attention:

     What is lacking is our ability to provide outright logistical support, advice,  planning, or even
direction of cross-border operations.  As you know, we are proscribed by Congress from any of
these more active measures.

     Gregg underlined the portion of the paragraph which read ``to provide outright logistical
support, advice, planning, or even direction of cross-border operations.''  In the margin of the
memorandum Gregg wrote, ``Felix agrees with this -- It is a major shortcoming.'' 57  Gregg
testified that he and the Vice President never had a discussion about the logistical problems that
the contras faced, reiterating that he had never discussed contra-resupply with the Vice
President.58

     57 Ibid. Gregg, SFRC Testimony, 5/12/89, pp. 107-8.

     58 Ibid., p. 109.  Rodriguez testified in 1991 that he did not discuss the topics reflected in
Watson's memorandum with either Gregg or Watson, and that until August 8, 1986, he did not
discuss any of those subject matters with Gregg.  (Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/3/91, pp. 194, 196.)

     An additional Office of the Vice President document appears to contradict Gregg's testimony
that he never  discussed contra-resupply with Rodriguez or with the Vice President.  On March 6,
1986, Watson attached to a memo for Bush a note and a December 21, 1985, cable from the U.S.
Embassy in Managua, Nicaragua, regarding consolidation of Sandinista power.  On the first page
of the Embassy cable Gregg wrote:

     A sober analysis of the Sandinistas' hold on power.  The means suggested to counter this hold
will not be enough.  The central point is that Contra actions + internal political opposition need
to be coordinated.  Felix says we are doing nothing to direct the Contra planning. . . .59

     59 Briefing Memorandum, 3/6/86, ALU 025418-22.

     The May 1, 1986, Rodriguez/Bush Meeting: ``Resupply of the Contras''

     On April 11, 1986, Rodriguez assisted in the flight of an L-100 aircraft from Ilopango to drop
lethal supplies to contra forces on the southern military front in Nicaragua.  This was the first
lethal-resupply flight to the southern front forces.

     Rodriguez, however, was becoming disenchanted with his role in Salvador and on April 16,
1986, he called the Office of the Vice President to request a meeting with Vice President Bush.
That call resulted in the production of a scheduling memorandum detailing the purpose of
Rodriguez's meeting with Bush -- which ultimately took place May 1, 1986 -- as a discussion
regarding ``resupply of the Contras.''  This memorandum, which Gregg revealed to  investigators
in December 1986, cast doubt on testimony that Rodriguez did not discuss contra-resupply with
the Vice President.60

     60 Gregg brought this note to the attention of the investigators and focused on it during his
initial FBI interview on December 15, 1986.  Although this note creates concern about the
veracity of portions of Gregg's testimony, it is noteworthy that the document was produced and
focused upon by Gregg early in the investigation.

     Rodriguez called the Office of the Vice President on April 16, 1986, and spoke with secretary
Phyllis Byrne.  Byrne's shorthand notes of that conversation translate as follows:

     Felix: -- El Salvador

     503 27 1996 late night or early morning

     7-9:30 a.m.

     Late p.m. -- 235566

     Dinner -- stay 2-3 hours

     Sleep at air base.

     21st -- talk to the VP for a short time.61

     61 Note and Transcription from Byrne, 6/16/87.

     Byrne then prepared a scheduling proposal memorandum in Gregg's name for Debbie Hutton,
an OVP employee.  The memorandum requested a 15-minute meeting on April 22 or 23 for
``Felix Rodriguez, a counterinsurgency expert visiting from El Salvador . . . [t]o brief the Vice
President on the status of the war in El Salavador [sic] and resupply of the Contras.''  Byrne
penned in the initials ``DG'' next to Gregg's name on the  memorandum.  The proposed meeting
date range was altered by hand on the typed memorandum to read ``April 28 to May 2.'' 62

     62 Schedule Proposal, 4/16/86, ALU 012415.

     Rodriguez did not inform Byrne of the purpose of his meeting with the Vice President.  When
she was typing the proposed scheduling memorandum, she asked Watson what the purpose of the
meeting would be.  In response to Byrne's request, Watson provided her with the phrase ``To
brief the Vice President on the status of the war in El Salvador and resupply of the contras.'' 63

     63 Byrne, Grand Jury, 10/23/87, pp. 13-17.

     Watson repeatedly denied supplying Byrne with the wording in this phrase.  Byrne, however,
was not familiar with the term ``resupply'' and she testified that she had never used it or heard it
before she received the phrase from Watson for the scheduling memorandum.64  Gregg
speculated in congressional testimony that the phrase ``resupply of the Contras'' might actually
have meant ``resupply of the copters,'' and could have referred to needed supplies for helicopter
operations for the Salvadoran Air Force.65   However, in 1987, Col. Watson testified that as a
military man, ``resupply'' was a technical term with a very specific meaning -- the provision of
food, ammunition, batteries, water and bullets to troops, by way of truck, helicopter, airplane or
on foot.  Watson testified that he did not believe that the term ``resupply'' would apply to
obtaining helicopters or helicopter parts.66

     64 Ibid., p. 20.  Rodriguez testified that he did not mention resupply of the contras in his
conversation with Byrne.  (Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, p. 10.)

     65 Gregg, SFRC Testimony, 5/12/89, p. 104.  Gregg also referred to a June 1986
memorandum to the Vice President titled ``Subject:  Helicopters for El Salvador.''  The
memorandum states that ``Last month [May 1986] Felix Rodriguez raised with you a problem the
Salvadoran Air Force was having getting spare parts for their Hughes 500 helicopters. . . .''
(Memorandum from Gregg and Watson to Bush, 6/3/86, ALU 012376.)

     66 Watson, Grand Jury, 10/14/87, pp. 102-3.

     Stephanie VanDevander, Watson's secretary at the time, remembered hearing Byrne ask
Watson for language to use in the memorandum.  She remembered Watson giving a response that
she could not hear.  However, following Watson's response to Byrne's question, Byrne typed the
memorandum.  Subsequently, VanDevander became aware of the conflict of Watson's and
Byrne's recollection of this occasion.  On the day she left the Vice President's office in February
1988, she informed Gregg that Watson had not been completely forthcoming on the matter of the
scheduled proposal memorandum.67

     67 VanDevander, FBI 302, 11/30/90, pp. 7-9.

     In spite of the direct contradiction between Watson's testimony and that of two of the support
staff in the Office of the Vice President, Independent Counsel determined in the summer of 1991
that he would not seek an  indictment against Watson but rather would compel his testimony
before the Grand Jury through use immunity.  This was not productive.  During his appearances
before the Grand Jury in 1991 and 1992, Watson's testimony was heavily laced with answers of
``I do not recall'' and ``I do not remember.'' 68

     68 The futility of the Watson Grand Jury examination was illustrated by his response of ``I do
not recall'' when asked whether he ever chose deliberately to answer ``I do not recall'' to a
question about the ``resupply of the contras'' memo prepared by Byrne.  (Watson, Grand Jury,
1/24/92, pp. 112-16.)

     Following his call to the Office of the Vice President on April 16, Rodriguez participated in a
meeting on April 20, 1986, at Ilopango with North, Secord and others involved in the resupply
operation.  Rodriguez testified that he had misgivings about certain aspects of the resupply
operation.  He was concerned that the airplanes used in the resupply operations were being
purchased at a considerable profit to the individuals involved, and he did not believe North's
statement that the aircraft were actually donations from a European country.  Additionally,
Rodriguez was concerned about the role of Secord because he associated Secord with Quintero,
Clines and Edwin Wilson.  The linkage of those individuals with Qadhafi and Libya greatly
disturbed Rodriguez.69  A combination of factors led Rodriguez to inform Ambassador Corr on
April 24, 1986, that he was tired, and because he had been  separated from his family for a long
time, he planned on leaving.70

     69 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 43-59.

     70 Ibid., pp. 43, 45, 87-88.

     Watson remembered getting the briefing memorandum dated April 30 -- the day before the
meeting with the Vice President -- which repeated its planned purpose:  ``Briefing on the status
of the war in El Salvador, and resupply of the Contras.'' 71

     71 Watson, Grand Jury, 1/24/92, p. 81.

     The evening before the meeting with the Vice President, Rodriguez met Watson for drinks at
a Washington restaurant.  Watson and Rodriguez did not recall what was discussed.72

     72 Ibid., p. 92; Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, p. 62.

     The next day, on May 1, Rodriguez went to North's office prior to his meeting with the Vice
President.  Rodriguez informed North that he was tired and planned on leaving El Salvador.
North tried to convince Rodriguez to stay.73

     73 Ibid., pp. 69, 84-85.

     Rodriguez then met with the Vice President and, by all accounts, the topic of contra-resupply
was not discussed.  Rodriguez showed the Vice President photos from his helicopter project in El
Salvador.74  During most of the meeting the participants were the Vice President, Gregg,
Watson, Rodriguez and Nicholas Brady, whom the Vice President  asked to sit in because of his
interest in Central America.75  Toward the end of the meeting, North brought in Corr.  Corr
praised Rodriguez to the Vice President, saying he was doing a magnificent job and that he
would like Rodriguez to stay in El Salvador.  Rodriguez had not mentioned to the Vice President
his plans to depart; after Corr's praise, Rodriguez chose not to bring it up.76

     74 Ibid., p. 81.

     75 Ibid.

     76 Ibid., pp. 83-85.

     Following the meeting with Vice President Bush, Rodriguez returned to Salvador and in May
1986 met Robert Dutton, who replaced Gadd as Secord's principal supervisor of the resupply
operation.  During that meeting, Rodriguez told Dutton he had a very close relationship with the
Vice President and a number of his people.77  Rodriguez's boasting of his relationship with the
Vice President was a continual problem.78

     77 Dutton, Select Committees Testimony, 5/27/87, pp. 23-24, 44; Dutton, North Trial
Testimony, 3/6/89, pp. 3275-78, 3311-13, 3332.

     78 Abrams, Grand Jury, 11/6/91, pp. 45-46; Fiers, FBI 302, 7/18/91, p. 2; North Notebook,
1/9/86, AMX 000876 (``Felix talking too much about VP connection'').

     Rodriguez's June 25, 1986, Meetings With North and Watson

     In June 1986, North  asked Dutton to bring Rodriguez to Washington for a meeting, because
North had information that Rodriguez had been discussing contra-resupply plans over an open
telephone.  Rodriguez on June 25, 1986, met with North and Dutton in the Old Executive Office
Building.  During the meeting, there was a brief discussion about reorganization of the resupply
operation at Ilopango.  North then told Rodriguez that he had documented proof of Rodriguez
talking over open phone lines and was concerned he might compromise the entire operation.79
Rodriguez became angry and showed North a photocopy of a letter from one of the resupply
pilots describing the poor quality of the aircraft and the dangerous conditions that existed in the
resupply operation at Ilopango.80  Rodriguez asked if Dutton would leave the room and in
Dutton's absence Rodriguez complained that Secord's associate Thomas Clines was selling $3.50
hand grenades for $9.00 to $9.50 to the contras.81  Rodriguez testified that North said there had
been no money exchanged, the materials were a donation from a European  country, and Clines
was a patriot.  Finally Rodriguez stated that he had to leave to go to the Vice President's office to
pick up pictures taken of Bush and Bustillo's wife at a Miami event.82

     79 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 111-12; Dutton, Select Committees Testimony,
5/27/87, pp. 49-50; Dutton, North Trial Testimony, 3/6/89, p. 3286.

     80 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, p. 113.

     81 Ibid., p. 114.

     82 Ibid., p. 115.

     In the Vice President's office, Rodriguez ran into Watson, and they sat in Gregg's office and
had a brief conversation about helicopter parts.83  Shortly thereafter, North walked into the room
with Dutton.  Rodriguez remembers North stating that he arrived to escort Rodriguez back when
he was finished.  Watson's notes of a much later meeting, which were withheld until 1991,
suggest that North introduced Dutton as ``our man for resupply.'' Watson could not remember
this when he testified in 1992. Rodriguez denied it.84

     83 Ibid., p. 117.

     84 Ibid., pp. 118-20.

     In the Grand Jury, Watson was confronted with his own notes of a December 17, 1986,
meeting among Gregg, Watson, Byrne, and vice presidential lawyers C. Boyden Gray and John
Schmitz.85  The notes attribute the following remark to Watson during the meeting:  ``Was
Dutton the guy Earl or North brought in  one day -- `Our man for resupply'?'' 86  Watson's
recollection of the Dutton meeting was not refreshed by his own note.87

     85 Watson, Grand Jury, 2/7/92, p. 79.

     86 Watson Note, 12/17/86, ALU 0136580.

     87 Watson, Grand Jury, 2/7/92, p. 151.

     Gregg's August 8, 1986, Meeting With Rodriguez

     The conflict between North and Rodriguez intensified throughout the summer of 1986.
Rodriguez was concerned that the airplanes, which he believed had been donated to the contras,
would be claimed as an asset of Secord's resupply operation once Congress approved $100
million in contra aid, expected in the fall of 1986.  Because of this concern, Rodriguez arranged
to have armed guards  placed on the planes to ensure their return to Ilopango.88  On July 29,
1986, Watson, appearing at a White House meeting in place of Gregg, received a whispered
message from North concerning Rodriguez's interference with the resupply operation.  Watson's
initial notes read as follows:

     88 Rodriguez, Select Committees Testimony, 5/28/87, pp. 101-2.

     . . .  Max shut down pilots resupply . . .89

     89 Watson Note, 7/29/86, ALU 011950-51.  This note is another piece of evidence that
contradicts Rodriguez's assertion that North did not want the Office of the Vice President to
know about their activities.

     The same day, Secord sent a message to Dutton recommending that the operation be moved
out of Ilopango because of problems with Rodriguez.90  On July 31, 1986, either North or
North's assistant Robert Earl complained to Watson that Rodriguez had stolen two airplanes from
Miami and had taken them to El Salvador.  When Watson asked for additional information, he
was told, ``just tell Felix to cut `it' out.'' 91 The next day, North again complained to Watson
about Rodriguez, claiming Rodriguez has ``screwed up S [southern] front.'' 92

     90 KL-43 Message from Secord to Dutton, 7/29/86, 00360-61.

     91 Memorandum from Watson, 12/17/86, ALU 025490.

     92 Watson Note, 8/1/86, ALU 011952.

     The conflict between  Rodriguez and the North-Secord resupply operation reached a climax
following Rodriguez's flight from Miami to El Salvador on a C-123 loaded with spare parts for
planes at Ilopango.  Quintero called Rodriguez claiming that Rodriguez had stolen the plane and
demanded that it and its cargo be returned to Miami.93  North called Gregg and told him that
Rodriguez had stolen a plane.  Gregg called Rodriguez and asked him about the stolen plane.
Rodriguez called Gregg back and told him that he needed to talk with him.94  At 9:30 a.m. on
August 8, 1986, Rodriguez met with Gregg and Watson at the Old Executive Office Building.

     93 Rodriguez, FBI 302, 12/29/86, p. 8; Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 125-29.

     94 Ibid., p. 130.

     Following the Iran/contra revelations on November 25, 1986, the Office of the Vice President
on December 15, 1986, produced a chronology of meetings with Rodriguez.  According to the
chronology, during this August 8, 1986, meeting, Rodriguez expressed ``his concerns that the
informal contra supply organization which then existed might not survive until the United States
Government organization directed by CIA to implement delivery of funds and equipment
recently authorized by Congress could be established . . .'' 95  The chronology stated that this
meeting was the first time Rodriguez discussed contra resupply with anyone in the Office of the
Vice President.  The chronology further asserted that Rodriguez mentioned he was concerned
about the poor quality of the aircraft being used in the contra-resupply operation.96

     95 Summary of Contacts with Felix Rodriguez, 12/15/86, ALU 012419.

     96 Ibid.

     Gregg was questioned extensively about his meeting with Rodriguez on August 8, 1986.  He
was asked whether he informed the Vice President of Rodriguez's complaints.  During his first
investigative interview on Iran/contra matters on December 15, 1986, Gregg told the FBI that he
did not have direct knowledge from his conversation with Rodriguez in August 1986 that
Rodriguez was involved in the resupply operation.  Gregg only suspected Rodriguez had
knowledge of the operation because Rodriguez had worked at Ilopango air base where the
operation apparently was run.97  Gregg provided the FBI with a chronology of contacts with
Rodriguez, which did not describe Rodriguez's complaints about North during the August 8,
1986, meeting.  Additionally, the chronology stated it was not until November 7, 1986, that
Rodriguez met with Gregg and  Watson and indicated that he personally had assisted the
contra-resupply effort.98

     97 Gregg, FBI 302, 12/15/86, p. 4.

     98 Summary of Contacts with Felix Rodriguez, 12/15/86, ALU 012420.  Gregg also
maintained that he did not inform the Vice President about his August 8 meeting with Rodriguez.
(Gregg, FBI 302, 12/15/86, p. 4.)

     Later, Gregg testified in 1987 that in late December 1986 Rodriguez told him that he had been
formally solicited by North to assist and had been told not to tell Gregg about his activities.99
Gregg described Rodriguez's August revelations as ``the tip of the iceberg'' and stated he was not
fully aware of his involvement in contra resupply until he put the pieces together in December
1986.100

     99 Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/23/87, p. 68.

     100 Gregg, SFRC Testimony, 5/12/89, pp. 118-19.

     An analysis of Gregg and Watson's notes of the Rodriguez meeting, coupled with Rodriguez's
subsequent testimony, raised concerns about Gregg's assertions. Gregg's notes read:

     Felix -- 8 Aug '86

     Using Ed Wilson group for supplies.

     Felix used by Ollie [North] to get Contra

     planes repaired at Ilopango

     ``Mr. Green'' = Rafael Quintero

     Felix knew him at Bay of Pigs, also

     close to Tom Clines whom Felix

     used to know -- split over Libya.

     A swap of weapons for $

     was arranged to get aid for Contras

     Clines & General Secord tied in.

     Hand grenades bought for $3 --

     sold for $9.

     Felix planned to quit in May.

     DICK GADD purchases things

     got 1st Caribou -- big profit

     Clines is getting $ from Saudis

     or whoever:  buying things at great

     profit.  He hired pilots for Qadhafi with

     Wilson

     BOB DUTTON brought in as mgr [man- ager]

     for project after a flap.  He & Felix

     got into a conflict.  Tried to set up a

     proper org. to sell to CIA.

     CIA said no -- people involved said

     we'll keep what we have.

     [page 2:]

     Dick Gadd rip off $20,000 on

     a commo gear piece.

     Gadd getting rip off on two workers

     $650 a day.

     C-123 was seen as a donation

     by Bustillo.

     Was sitting in Miami with

     medicine Felix got from Mayor

     of W. Miami [Reboredo] IV's, spare parts

     Bermudez asked Mayor to come in

     to Contra base

     Southern Air Transport said plane

     OK to go.  Called Jim Steele.

     Rafael said NO

      --  --  --  --  --

     Quintero said ops ``finished''

     Bustillo angry -- feels plane is a

     donation -- was told so by Ollie

     C-123 & 2 others are held on the base

     by order of Bustillo

     Steele will not release planes

     Feels as Felix does.

     [page 3:]

     Bustillo feels US credibility

     at stake -- now feels it has been

     a $ making process.  He feels

     3 planes belong to Contras.

     He offered the base to Contras

     on his own.

     If planes pulled back, Bustillo

     will be angered & will close base

     down.

     Felix can get Bustillo to

     release the planes.101

     101 Gregg Notes, 8/8/86, AKW 029885-87.

     Rodriguez remembered telling Gregg about North being involved with the Edwin Wilson
group.  Rodriguez  thought that the effect could be worse than Watergate, because of North's
position as an NSC staff officer, his responsibility for anti-terrorism efforts, and his involvement
with a group of people connected to terrorists like Libya's Mu'ammar Qadhafi through
Wilson.102  Rodriguez explained that the only reason he told Gregg about these matters in
August 1986 is because North asked Gregg to use his influence with Rodriguez to release the
airplane.103

     102 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 140-41.  Rodriguez was aware of Quintero's
involvement in the resupply operation as early as December 1985 and that of Secord before his
May 1, 1986, meeting with the Vice President.

     103 Ibid., p. 142.

     Rodriguez was asked whether he told Gregg the contents of the September 20, 1985, ``Dear
Felix'' letter.  Rodriguez responded that Gregg had asked him how he got involved in the
operation and Rodriguez ``probably mentioned the fact that Oliver North had told me that a guy
by the name of Mr. Green was going to call him to help in this maintenance of the aircraft.'' 104
However, Rodriguez did not remember whether he specifically mentioned the letter.  Rodriguez
testified that he did not hold anything back from  Gregg during their meeting on August 8,
including his own role in the contra-resupply effort.105

     104 Ibid., p. 155.

     105 Ibid., pp. 158-59.  Additionally, Rodriguez did not recall ever using the phraseology
``swap of weapons for dollars.''  (Ibid., p. 160.) Rodriguez also said Quintero or someone in
Central America had mentioned that Saudi money was being pumped into the operation. (Ibid.,
5/10/91, p. 161.)

     Watson acknowledged the correlation between Gregg's notes and the ``Dear Felix'' letter.106
However, Watson did not recall Rodriguez mentioning the letter in the meeting, even though his
own notes of the meeting contain the word ``letter.'' 107  Gregg was so concerned over what
Rodriguez was telling him that he called and asked Earl, North's deputy, to join them in the
meeting.108

     106 Watson, Grand Jury, 4/10/92, p. 80.

     107 Ibid., p. 82; Watson Note, 8/8/86, ALU 0136944.  Watson's recollection is that Rodriguez
did not say anything about his own role with resupply during the August 8 meeting,
notwithstanding Gregg's note.  (Watson, Grand Jury, 4/10/92, p. 107.)

     108 Central to Gregg's concern was the involvement of Thomas Clines.  Earl's August 8, 1986
note attributes the following to Gregg:

     Don Gregg:

     Tom Clines = snake! (would sell his mother)

     (Earl Note, 8/8/86, AMT 00612.)  Clines testified that he saw Gregg in the OEOB in the
middle of June 1985, while Clines was walking with Secord and North.  Clines and Gregg knew
each other from their days at the CIA. Clines told Gregg he was ``with these guys [North and
Secord] working on the contra thing.''  (Clines, Grand Jury, 4/19/91, pp. 19-21.)

     Gregg's August 12, 1986, Meeting Regarding Rodriguez and the Contra-Resupply Operation

     Following the Rodriguez meeting, Gregg called a meeting of U.S. Government officials in his
office on August 12, 1986, to discuss issues raised by Rodriguez.  Gregg met with Raymond
Burghardt of the NSC staff, Corr, Earl, Fiers, Steele, Walker and Watson.  According to the
December 15, 1986, Office of the Vice President chronology, the purpose of the meeting was ``to
pass along the concerns mentioned by Mr. Rodriguez.'' 109

     109 Summary of Contacts with Felix Rodriguez, 12/15/86, ALU 012419.

     According to Burghardt, the topics discussed went beyond Rodriguez's concerns and included
what would happen to supplies stored for the contras at Ilopango after Congress authorized $100
million in assistance, what would happen to the old aircraft, and what role Rodriguez would play
in the further resupply operations.110  Earl's notes of the meeting reflect no detailed discussion
of the concerns described by Rodriguez to Gregg on August 8, 1986, involving Wilson, Quintero,
Clines, Secord and the  Libya connection to North.  Earl's notes reflect primarily operational
concerns about transition from the contra-resupply operation at Ilopango to
Government-authorized, CIA-directed resupply:

     110 Burghardt, FBI 302, 2/27/87, p. 6.

     Corr

     Concerned on transition

     Busti[ll]o concerned FDN [contras] getting screwed

     (re A/C) [aircraft].

     Equip being g008taken?

     Urgent need for resupply of [the] southern

     front.

      -- 123 Miami c

     Felix Rodriguez -- compadres w/ Busti[ll]o.

     * * *

     bottom line = sell A/C & money to FDN.

     Corr recommends this.

     Or, ON [North] to explain who owns A/C

     to Busti[ll]o --

     Corr doesn't think this will work.

     Felix needs to be eased out w/ honor.

     Corr doesn't mind either way, but Corr thinks

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

*** BOX HEAD *** *** BOX HEAD *** *** BOX HEAD ***

--------------------------------------------------------------------

     he's been instrumental.....q.....g0083 months

     .....q.....

     .....q.....

     Ilopango = [Classified.....q.....g008continuation

--------------------------------------------------------------------

     information withheld]

     not 1st choice

     Felix claims working w/ VP blessing for CIA.

     * * *

     Corr sees no g008legal alternative to Felix ([CIA]

     & Steele can't g722tough touch it)

     Corr can't see any way to operate

     Mario Delameco, Miami = Felix contact

     (Cuban

     c cut this link.

     Calero -- Martin link = a problem too. 111

     111 Earl Notes, 8/12/86 (emphasis in original).

     After the August 12, 1986 meeting, Rodriguez told Gregg  that everything was fine; the
resupply flights were continuing.112 Rodriguez continued his resupply activities until he
temporarily left El Salvador for medical reasons in September 1986.  Rodriguez was in Miami
when the Hasenfus plane was shot down on October 5, 1986.

     112 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, pp. 168-71; Gregg, SFRC Deposition, 5/12/89, p. 135.

     Abrams and North's General Recollections of Discussions With Gregg Regarding Rodriguez
and Contra Resupply

     After Elliott Abrams pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with Independent Counsel,
Abrams gave testimony relevant to whether Gregg was aware of Rodriguez's contra activities
prior to August 1986.

     Abrams remembered that he was concerned that Rodriguez, who went to El Salvador to be
involved in counterinsurgency efforts, became a part of the contra-resupply effort.  Abrams said
Rodriguez talked too much about the Vice President.113  Abrams' concern was that because
Rodriguez was a part of the resupply operation and was boasting of his vice presidential
connections, he would create the erroneous impression that the Office of the Vice  President had
some sort of linkage to the contra-resupply operation.114  Abrams believes he spoke at least once
to Gregg in person about this problem.115  Abrams did not specifically recall when this meeting
occurred, but he believed it occurred in the first half of 1986.116

     113 Abrams, Grand Jury, 11/6/91, p. 45.

     114 Ibid., pp. 47-48.

     115 Ibid., p. 46.

     116 Ibid., p. 47.

     North also had a general, but not specific, recollection of addressing the Rodriguez problem
with Gregg before August 1986.  North generally recalled discussing with Gregg Rodriguez's
boasting about his connection with the Office of the Vice President.117

     117 North, Grand Jury, 7/11/90, p. 20.  Gregg acknowledged that North called him to
complain that Rodriguez had ``too high a posture.''  (Gregg, FBI 302, 12/15/86, p. 3; Gregg,
Deposition, 5/18/87, p. 72.)

     The Hasenfus Shoot-Down

     On October 5, 1986, prior to the enactment of a pending authorization for CIA support for the
contras and a $100 million appropriation, an aircraft carrying weapons and other supplies to the
contras was shot down over Nicaragua.  Three crewmen were killed.  An American citizen,
Eugene Hasenfus, the sole survivor, was captured by the Nicaraguans.

     That day Rodriguez unsuccessfully attempted to call Gregg to inform him of the missing
plane.  He reached Watson, who in turn notified the  White House Situation Room.118  The
following day, Rodriguez called Watson again and told him that the airplane was one of North's.
Watson's notes of the calls from Rodriguez read as follows:

     118 White House Situation Room log entry, 10/6/86, 0250 hours, AKW 042275-76.

     10/6 c Good poss. [possibility] lost in water

     1.  Bad area

     2.  Friendly in S [South]

     3.  in water

      -- No radio =

      -- C-123 = Ollie's [North's]

     3  US -- William Cooper --

     1 NicCaptain

      -- Wallace Sawyer --

     Co-Pilot

      -- James Hardline [sic] --

     Kicker

      -- One national from

     Nic 119

     119 Watson Notes, 10/6/86, ALU 025478.

     Watson told Gregg of Rodriguez's call.  Gregg's immediate assumption was that the plane was
a part of the resupply operation Rodriguez had described to him and Watson in August 1986.
Gregg understood North to be ``acting as chairman of the board'' for the operation.120

     120 Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/23/87, pp. 77-78.

     According to Gregg's later testimony, he did not have contact with Rodriguez from the
summer of 1986 until November 7.121  Rodriguez, however, had a faint recollection of talking
with Gregg within 72 hours after the plane was shot down.122  Rodriguez said that when he
spoke with Gregg, he did not tell him the downed plane was one of North's because ``[h]e already
knew.'' 123  Gregg also told Craig L. Fuller, Vice President Bush's chief of staff, that Rodriguez
was hiding out in Miami and would not be talking to the press.124  Gregg reasserted this on
October 13, 1986, in a message that was cabled to Corr.125

     121 Gregg, Select Committees Deposition, 5/18/87, p. 80.

     122 Rodriguez, Grand Jury, 5/10/91, p. 175.

     123 Ibid., pp. 175-77.  See also Gregg Telephone Log, 10/15/86, ALU 022218 (indicating
Gregg took call from Rodriguez).

     124 Fuller, FBI 302, 12/14/90, p. 3.

     125 Memorandum from Gregg to Corr through the White House Situation Room, Re:  Vice
President's Statements Regarding Hasenfus/Gomez, 10/13/86, ALU 012377 (``FYI, I have talked
to Felix who I think intends to keep a low profile in Miami.  It might be well if [U.S. Army Col.]
Jim Steele [commander of the U.S. Military Group in El Salvador] keeps him informed of
developments in El Salvador as necessary.'').  Four days later, the Department of State
transmitted another copy of Gregg's memorandum to Corr.  (State 326682, 10/17/86, ALW
030376-83.)

     On October 9, 1986, Hasenfus, then in Nicaraguan custody, stated he had made 10 flights to
supply the contras -- six out of Ilopango airfield in El Salvador -- and had worked with ``Max
Gomez'' and ``Ramon Medina,'' whom he said were CIA employees.  Hasenfus stated that Gomez
and Medina oversaw the housing for the crews, transportation, refueling and flight plans.126

     126 State Cable, 10/9/86, ALW 0026774.

     On October 10, 1986, The San Francisco Examiner, citing an unidentified source, reported
that Gomez had received direction not from the CIA but from the White House, especially from
the NSC.  The story said that Gomez, also known as Felix Rodriguez, had been assigned to
Ilopango air base in El Salvador by Gregg.  According to the newspaper's source, ``the initial deal
(to place Gomez at Ilopango) was cut by Gregg after the fellow (Gomez) was introduced directly
to George Bush.''  The article cited Gomez's close connections with the Salvadoran military and
stated that he flew helicopters for the Salvadoran Air Force.127  Gayle Fisher, spokeswoman for
Bush, was quoted as saying that Gregg was not available for comment.  Fisher also said, ``Gregg
is not involved in any type of situation like that, like the weapons to the contras from El
Salvador.'' 128

     127 ``Contra Plane Linked to Bush,'' The San Francisco Examiner, 10/10/86, p. 1.

     128 Ibid.  Fisher remembered the call from The San Francisco Examiner.  One of the
questions asked was:  ``Did Don Gregg know Max Gomez?''  She personally asked Gregg the
question and ``Gregg gave her a flat `no' answer with no explanation.''  (Fisher, FBI 302, 5/17/91,
p. 3.)

     In response to the article, Bush's office issued a statement regarding the allegations:  ``There is
no one on the Vice President's staff who is directing or coordinating an operation in Central
America.  Allegations to that effect are simply not true.'' 129  The Vice President's statement was
approved by Gregg before it was issued.130

     129 Statement by the Press Secretary, 10/10/86, ALU 0134718.

     130 Fitzwater, FBI 302, 11/8/90, pp. 7-8.

     On October 10, 1986, Watson typed a page of talking points for guidance for Vice President
Bush on the subject of the downed plane and the Office of the Vice President's connection to
Rodriguez.  The document describes ``Felix'' as a great man, a hero, who has provided assistance
to El Salvador's fight against communism.  The  document adds:  ``Don't know Max Gomez.''
131  Watson had ``a feeling'' that the talking points never got to Vice President Bush but Watson
did not know ``whether I did it and gave it to Don [Gregg] or what.  I just don't know.'' 132

     131 Memorandum re:  Nicaragua, 10/10/86, ALU 025354.

     132 Watson, Grand Jury, 10/14/87, pp. 168-70.

     On October 11, 1986, The Los Angeles Times reported that Gomez had told associates he
reported to Vice President Bush about his activities as head of the secret air-supply operation that
lost a cargo plane in Nicaragua.  Gomez allegedly stated that he met with Bush twice and had
been operating in Nicaragua with the Vice President's knowledge and approval, the source said.
Similarly, sources close to Bush told The Washington Post that the Vice President acknowledged
meeting Gomez once or twice and expressing approval of his efforts to help the contras.
However, those sources stated they knew nothing of any direct assistance given to Gomez by
Bush or his staff.133

     133 ``Bush is Linked to Head of Contra Aid Network,'' The Washington Post, 10/11/86, p.
A1.

     On October 11, 1986,  Bush denied that he had any connection with the plane crash
whatsoever.  When asked about Gomez, Bush stated ``I know Felix Gomez,'' mixing Rodriguez's
true first name with his alias surname.  Bush acknowledged meeting Gomez twice, once in
January 1985 and again in May 1986.  Bush  stated that the only discussions he ever had with
him related to El Salvador.134  Bush stated that he did not speak directly or indirectly with
Gomez about Nicaragua.  When asked whether other branches of the Government had talked to
him, Bush responded ``Well, I don't know the facts on that.'' 135

     134 Excerpts of Press Conference Remarks by Bush, 10/11/86, ALU 009984-86, ALU
0138407-9.

     135 Ibid.

     On October 13, 1986, Gregg sent a message to Corr through the White House Situation
Room:

     Subject:  Vice President's Statements

     Regarding Hasenfus/Gomez.

     1. The Vice President wanted you to know what he had said about the Hasenfus/Gomez affair
on the record.  A transcript of his press conference follows:  (Note to Situation Room, please
send copy from attached press statement.)

     2. We have noted various denials of knowledgeability coming out of El Salvador regarding
Gomez's activities.  The Vice President and his staff will not be saying anything further  on the
record in hopes of keeping the story from getting more complicated.

     3. FYI, I have talked to Felix, who I think intends to keep a low profile in Miami.  It might be
well if Jim Steele keeps him informed of developments in El Salvador as necessary.136

     136 Memorandum from Gregg to Corr through the White House Situation Room, Re:  Vice
President's Statements Regarding Hasenfus/Gomez, 10/13/86, ALU 012377; accord State
326682, 10/13/86, ALW 030376-83 (Telegram from Gregg to Corr, transmitted 10/17/86).

     Because of the media stories linking Rodriguez/Gomez with the Vice President's office,
congressional committees investigating the Hasenfus shootdown in October 1986 asked Reagan
Administration officials about their knowledge of these allegations.  On October 14, 1986, before
the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott
Abrams, speaking for the Administration, stated that it was his understanding that Gregg knew
Rodriguez and introduced him to the Salvadorans in 1984 to work with the Salvadoran Air Force.
Abrams added that the Vice President was aware of Rodriguez's involvement on behalf of the
Salvadoran Air Force in their air/ground helicopter operations, but that there was no knowledge
that Rodriguez was or at what point he moved off into conducting activities on behalf of the
contras.137

     137 Abrams, HPSCI Testimony, 10/14/86, pp. 23-24.  Following the testimony, Gregg
actually sent manufactured buttons over to the CIA which read ``Who is Max Gomez?'' and ``I'm
Max Gomez.''  They were a source of great humor at CIA.  (Fiers, FBI 302, 7/23/91, p. 12;
George, George, Trial Testimony, 8/13/92, pp. 3404-5.)

     Abrams' statement was consistent with the public response by the Vice President's office to
the Rodriguez allegations.  However, on October 16, 1986, while in transit to El Salvador to
survey earthquake damage, Abrams reported to Shultz regarding the Rodriguez connection to the
Office of the Vice President:

     Felix Rodrigues [sic] -- Bush g008did know him from CIA days.  FR [Rodriguez] is
ex-CIA.  In El Salv [Salvador] he goes around to bars saying he is buddy of Bush.  A yr [year]
ago Pdx [Poindexter] + Ollie [North] told VP staff stop protecting FR as a friend -- we want to
get rid of him from his involvmt [involvement] w [with] private ops.  Nothing was done so he
still is there shooting his mouth off.138

     138 Hill Note, 10/16/86, ANS 001661.

     After landing in San Salvador, Shultz received the text of a letter from Bush, which had been
delivered to the Department of State, with information to be passed to President Duarte.  The
message addressed the conflict between the government of El Salvador's denials of Gomez's
involvement on their behalf in El Salvador and Bush's public statement on October 11 about
Gomez's involvement in the counter-insurgency.  Bush wanted Duarte to know that he only met
Gomez twice and never discussed anything with him but counterinsurgency against the guerrillas
in  El Salvador.  Bush extended his regrets that ``this has become public.'' 139

     139 Letter from Bush to Shultz, 10/16/86, ALW 0030249 (with handwritten note:  ``Passed to
the Secretary in El Salvador who told Duarte himself.''); STATE 324973, 10/16/86, ALW
0030246-47 (Department of State telegram, cabled to Shultz's aircraft); Note from Keith Eddins
to Shultz, 10/16/86, ALV 001412 (with handwritten postscript by Charles Hill); Hill Note,
10/16/86, ANS 0001661.  Elliott Abrams subsequently wrote to Under Secretary of State
Michael H. Armacost that Duarte and the Salvadoran high command were ``privately resentful
that our own government unwittingly put them in a difficult position.''  (Memorandum from
Abrams to Armacost, 10/21/86, ALW 0026749-51.)

     After public disclosure of the Iran/contra affair in November 1986, there was a new round of
questions about Felix Rodriguez and the Office of the Vice President. On December 2, 1986,
after being confronted by a television crew in the driveway of his home, Gregg stated that the
only thing that he'd talked to ``Max'' [Gomez/Rodriguez] about was ``his involvement in the
insurgency in El Salvador.'' 140  When the questions  persisted, the Office of the Vice President
on December 15, 1986, released a chronology detailing contacts between Rodriguez and
members of the Office of the Vice President, including Vice President Bush.141

     140 The CBS Evening News, 12/15/86 & 12/16/86.  Gregg did not reveal his August 8, 1986,
meeting with Rodriguez about contra-resupply.  In March 1987, Vice President Bush defended
Gregg by saying that he ``forgot'' about his August 8, 1986, meeting with Rodriguez when he told
reporters he had never talked with Rodriguez about contra resupply.  In response to a question
concerning the difference of forgetting and lying, Bush said ``Well, maybe it's the same.  I don't
know.  But I don't see it as a major felony case, frankly.''  (``Bush Is Mystery Man of Iran Affair,''
The Washington Post, 3/23/87, p. A1.)

     141 This chronology was amended on May 14, 1987, to include an aspect of the meeting
between Rodriguez and Watson that occurred on June 25, 1986.

     Gregg's Statements to Iran/Contra Investigators

     Beginning on December 15, 1986, until January 15, 1989, Gregg testified or gave formal
statements to the FBI, the Select Committees, the federal Grand Jury and the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee concerning his involvement in and knowledge of events relevant to
Iran/contra.  Gregg's testimony was essentially consistent.

     According to Gregg, he and Rodriguez maintained a close relationship since they worked
together for the CIA in South Vietnam.  Rodriguez came to Gregg in 1984 or 1985 with a
proposal to train the Salvadoran Air Force to conduct helicopter counter-insurgency operations
similar to those used by Rodriguez in Vietnam.  Because this particular technique had proved
effective in fighting guerrilla units in  Vietnam, Gregg believed Rodriguez's proposal was a good
one and assisted him in getting in touch with various U.S. officials who could approve
Rodriguez's involvement in El Salvador.

     In January 1985, Gregg introduced Rodriguez to Vice President Bush.  Rodriguez met with
the Vice President again on May 1, 1986, in Washington, D.C.  Gregg said that contra resupply
was not discussed during these meetings and that the topic of both sessions was the guerrilla
anti-insurgency effort in El Salvador.

     Gregg denied introducing Rodriguez to Oliver North and denied that he and North had a
conversation about Rodriguez prior to North's recruitment of Rodriguez for the resupply
operation at Ilopango Air Base.  In fact, Gregg testified that he was unaware until August 1986
that Rodriguez was involved in any way in activities relating to the support of the contras.

     Gregg testified that prior to August 1986, he and Rodriguez never discussed contra resupply.
Gregg testified that he did not inform Vice President Bush about anything that Rodriguez
informed him of on August 8, 1986.  Gregg said he believed that ``secondhand allegations of
corruption by some seedy Americans in an obscure air base in Central America'' in August 1986
were not worth elevating to the attention of the Vice President.142

     142 Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/23/87, pp. 63-65.

     Although Gregg said he knew that North had been involved as liaison with the resupply
network, Gregg said he was unaware that North was involved in helping facilitate the supply of
lethal aid to the contras prior to August 8, 1986, when Gregg met with Rodriguez.143  Even after
Rodriguez explained North's involvement in the resupply operation, Gregg testified that he did
not have a sense that anything was ``ipso facto'' against the law.144  Gregg denied that he or
anyone within the Office of the Vice President directed the resupply operation in any manner,
specifically by controlling Felix Rodriguez's activities regarding resupply.

     143 Gregg, Select Committees Deposition, 5/18/87, pp. 26-27.

     144 Ibid., p. 34.

     Independent Counsel's Investigation

     President Bush in early 1989 nominated Gregg to be U.S. Ambassador to the Republic of
South Korea.  During his confirmation hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
in May and June 1989, Gregg was confronted with various documents and  testimony which
seemed to contradict certain aspects of his prior testimony. Gregg's testimony, however, was
generally consistent with his previous statements to Iran/contra investigators.  In spite of concern
expressed by some of the senators on the committee, Gregg was confirmed.

     In the summer of 1990, OIC asked Gregg to submit to a polygraph examination regarding
certain aspects of his prior testimony.145

     145 Gregg had told the FBI in December 1986 that he would take a polygraph examination
regarding Iran/contra matters.  (Gregg, FBI 302, 12/15/86, p. 8.)

     On July 24, 1990, a polygraph examination was conducted by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation at its Washington Metropolitan Field Office.  Following a discussion with Gregg,
the polygraph examination was conducted using the following relevant questions:

     1. Prior to August 1986, did you know that Felix Rodriguez was assisting the Nicaraguan
contras?

     2. Prior to August 1986 were you aware that Felix Rodriguez was working with Oliver North
to assist the Nicaraguan contras?

     3. Were you ever involved in a plan to delay the release of the hostages in  Iran until after the
1980 Presidential election? 146

     146  The OIC reported this question and answer to the Department of Justice in 1990.  In
1992, in response to its omnibus request for information in the possession of the OIC, this aspect
of Gregg's polygraph examination also was disclosed to the House Committee investigating the
``October Surprise.''

     4. Prior to his media statement in October 1986, had you told then-Vice President Bush that
persons in the U.S. Government were covertly and/or illegally involved in providing military
supplies and assistance to the Nicaraguan contras?

     5. Have you deliberately provided any false or misleading information in your testimony
before Congress or a Federal Grand Jury?

     After the examination, it was the opinion of the FBI examiner that Gregg's negative responses
to each of the above questions indicated deception.  Gregg was informed of the examiner's
opinion.  He suggested that he be reexamined, amending the questions to read as follows:

     1. Have you ever given any false or misleading testimony about Felix Rodriguez to the Grand
Jury or the congressional investigating committees?

     2. Have you ever given any false or misleading testimony regarding Oliver North to the Grand
Jury or the congressional investigating committees?

     Following the completion and subsequent review, it was the opinion of the examiner that
Gregg's negative responses to the two  questions were indicative of deception.

     Gregg was asked if he wanted to be polygraphed by another examiner or to be reexamined
after a period of reflection.  He stated that he did not feel either to be necessary.147

     147 On August 22, 1990, Gregg's attorney provided Independent Counsel with a report of the
results of a polygraph examination conducted by a private examiner retained by Gregg.  That
examiner, who asked a different series of questions, concluded that Gregg's answers were
truthful.

     OIC's investigation reviewed a number of sworn statements by Gregg regarding his lack of
knowledge prior to August 1986 of the involvement of North and Rodriguez with the
contra-resupply effort.  Gregg testified that he was unaware prior to June 1986 of any
involvement by North with the contra resupply operation:

     Q: Now through June of '86, did you know whether he [North] had any involvement with the
contra resupply operation?

     A: ``He'' being North?

     Q: Colonel North.

     A: No.  I was out of the country for a fair part of June '86.

     Q: And you didn't know at any time prior to June '86?

     A: No.148

     148 Gregg, Select Committees Deposition, 5/18/87, p. 11.

     Similarly, Gregg testified that prior to August 8, 1986, he did not know that Rodriguez was
involved in contra-resupply:

     Q: And it's your testimony that prior to August 8, 1986, to be specific, you did not know that
Felix Rodriguez was also involved in the Contra resupply effort?

     A: That is correct.149

     149 Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/9/87, p. 48.

     Gregg testified during his confirmation hearings that in his many meetings with Rodriguez
prior to August 1986, Rodriguez never mentioned his efforts on behalf of Contra resupply:

     SENATOR CRANSTON: Is it still your testimony that prior to August 8th, 1986, Rodriguez
never mentioned the status of his Contra resupply efforts during his numerous face-to-face
meetings with you in Washington?

     MR. GREGG:  Never.150

     150 Gregg, SFRC, 5/12/89, p. 101.  See also Gregg, Grand Jury, 10/23/87, p. 64.

     During his Select Committees deposition in 1987, Gregg was asked why he did not report to
Vice President Bush what Rodriguez had told him in the August 8, 1986, meeting concerning the
resupply operation.  Gregg responded:

     Well, I felt that it was a very murky business.  I spend a great deal of my time trying to send
things to the Vice President that I think are really Vice Presidential.  I try to keep him focused,
help him keep focused on arms control or Mideast peace or things of that nature.  We had never
discussed the contras.  We  had no responsibility for it.  We had no expertise in it. . . .151

     151 Gregg, Select Committees Deposition, 5/18/87, pp. 30-31 (emphasis added).

     When confronted at his confirmation hearings in 1989 with documentary evidence that
seemed to contradict that testimony, Gregg testified that he meant that he had never discussed
contra-resupply with the Vice President.152

     152 Gregg, Confirmation Hearings, 5/12/89, p. 109.

     Conclusion

     There was no credible evidence obtained that the Vice President or any member of his staff
directed or actively participated in the contra-resupply effort that existed during the Boland
Amendment prohibition on military aid to the contras.  To the contrary, the Office of the Vice
President's staff was largely excluded from RIG meetings where contra matters were discussed
and during which, particularly in the summer of 1986, North openly discussed operational details
of his contra efforts.  During 1985 and 1986, when Abrams, North and Fiers met to discuss
Central American matters too sensitive for the  RIG, there is no evidence that the Office of the
Vice President's staff was included or even informed of their discussions.

     During his trial, North alleged that Gregg was the person who introduced him to Rodriguez
and that he contacted Gregg before recruiting Rodriguez to assist him in the contra-resupply
effort.  Gregg denied both assertions.  The evidence suggests that Gregg's denials are correct.  It
appears that William Bode of the State Department, not Gregg, introduced Rodriguez to North.
Additionally, there is no direct evidence that North sought Gregg's approval prior to writing his
``Dear Felix'' recruitment letter to Rodriguez in September 1985.

     The question of whether Gregg was aware of Rodriguez's role in contra resupply or whether
he was aware of North's involvement in resupply prior to August 1986 is more problematic.  A
recurring problem in the investigation of the Office of the Vice President was a conflict between
contemporaneously created documents -- which apparently impute knowledge of North and
Rodriguez's activities to the Office of the Vice President -- and subsequent testimony by Gregg,
Watson, Rodriguez and others which contradicted those documents.

     North's September 10, 1985, notebook entry reflecting an apparent discussion between North,
Gregg and Steele about operational contra-resupply issues is not  corroborated by a specific
recollection of the meeting by either North or Steele.

     North's notebook entry of October 1, 1985, and Duemling's NHAO meeting notes of the same
day show that North did not try to hide Rodriguez from other Government officials, contrary to
Rodriguez's claim that North asked him not to tell Gregg or the OVP of his contra-resupply
activities.

     Watson's note to Gregg on the top of a December 1985 State Department cable, ``Don --
Suggest you read carefully.  Could have serious effect on our supplies to the contras,'' conflicts
with Gregg's later assertions that the Office of the Vice President did not concern itself or have
any expertise in contra-resupply issues.  Gregg's handwritten note to Vice President Bush on a
February 4, 1986, Watson memorandum stating ``Felix agrees with this'' in reference to problems
in contra logistical support, appears to reflect conversations between Gregg and Rodriguez
regarding contra planning. Gregg's forwarding of that information to the Vice President reflects
his understanding that the Vice President was interested in contra resupply. The same is true of
Gregg's handwritten note to the Vice President on March 6, 1986, which expressed concern about
contra activity.

     The schedule memorandum detailing the purpose of Rodriguez's visit with the Vice President
on May 1, 1986, as a discussion regarding ``resupply of the contras'' is another example of a
contemporaneously created document that appears to be in conflict with the subsequent
testimony of Gregg and Watson.  Even Watson and Gregg's own notes of their August 8, 1986,
meeting with Rodriguez contradict in part their subsequent explanations of that meeting.  Yet,
Rodriguez supported Gregg's denials of any discussion with Rodriguez about his or North's
involvement in lethal contra-resupply operations prior to August 1986.

     These documents -- combined with the general, non-specific, recollections of Abrams, Steele
and North which contradict portions of Gregg's sworn testimony -- were insufficient to support a
prosecution requiring proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

     There was strong evidence that following the shootdown of the Hasenfus plane, Gregg and
Watson were aware of North's connection to the resupply operation.  Rodriguez informed them
of North's involvement in August 1986, and Rodriguez called Watson on October 6, 1986, to let
him know the downed plane was one of North's.  They remained silent as Administration
representatives publicly stated that there was no U.S. involvement in the flight.

     Despite these acts of concealment, the evidence did not prove that Watson or Gregg
committed a chargeable offense following the Hasenfus shootdown.  No chargeable offense
could be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

Chapter 30

     Donald T. Regan

     Donald T. Regan was White House chief of staff from February 1985 to February 1987.  He
was forced to resign because he was unable to contain the continuing political damage being
done to President Reagan by public exposure of the Iran/contra matters.  In the White House,
Regan controlled access to the President and oversaw his schedule.  He attended President
Reagan's national security briefings each morning and was present during the most significant
White House meetings among Iran/contra principals.

     Regan served the President throughout the Iran/contra period but he was not in a position to
authorize operations.  The area of inquiry, therefore, focused on actions he took in response to
the November 1986 exposure of Iran/contra matters and in subsequent testimony about those
matters.

     Throughout November and December 1986, after the Iran and contra matters became public,
Regan was in frequent contact with CIA Director William J. Casey, National Security Adviser
John M. Poindexter, Attorney General Edwin Meese III and Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger.  He was less frequently in contact with Secretary of State George P. Shultz.  There
are no  documented contacts between Regan and former National Security Adviser Robert C.
McFarlane or U.S. Marine Lt. Col. Oliver L. North of the NSC staff during this period.

     In early testimony about the November-December 1986 period, Regan recounted in colorful
anecdotal terms his and President Reagan's surprise and shock at the details of Iran/contra
matters as they purportedly became known to them.  But Regan did not explain in any depth the
steps that he and other top Administration aides took in response to the worst political crisis of
the Reagan presidency.

     Clearly Regan attempted to serve President Reagan's interests by protecting him from the
political and legal damage of Iran/contra.  The question was whether Regan, in concert with the
President's other top advisers, helped choreograph a cover-up by agreeing to a false version of the
arms sales to obscure legally questionable activity.

     Independent Counsel did not charge Regan with a crime.  Evidence of the apparent November
1986 cover-up of the President's knowledge and approval of the November 1985 HAWK missile
shipment -- and Regan's participation in it -- was not developed by Independent Counsel until
1992, when he obtained previously withheld notes from Weinberger and Regan indicating that
Meese appeared to have spearheaded an effort among top officials to falsely deny presidential
awareness of the HAWK transaction.  When Regan in 1992 was questioned about these events,
he was forthcoming and candid in his responses.  In addition, when Independent Counsel late in
1991 subpoenaed additional notes from Regan, he cooperated.

     The Regan Notes

     In 1991, Independent Counsel undertook a full review to determine whether Administration
officials had complied with document requests.  It was determined that White House production
of Regan documents had been late and incomplete.  There had been conflicting evidence whether
he had taken notes during his tenure as White House chief of staff.  He had stated in various
testimony that he did not take or keep notes of important meetings.  But his aides said he took
copious notes with the expectation that he would write a book about his White House
experiences.1

     1 In fact, Regan did write a book, For The Record (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich 1988), about
his experiences in the White House.  In his book (p. xiii) he stated:  ``All my life I have kept
detailed notes of my workaday actions and conversations, and I did the same while I worked for
the President.''

     Regan late in 1991 admitted that he had copies of relevant notes.2  When subpoenaed, he
granted  investigators access to them.  Of special interest to Independent Counsel were Regan's
notes of the November 24, 1986, meeting of the President and his senior national security
advisers in which Meese falsely stated that the President had no knowledge of the possibly illegal
November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran.  These late-produced Regan notes conformed
in crucial respects to Weinberger's notes of the same meeting, which also had been obtained only
recently.

     2 Regan admitted a life-long practice of taking notes.  (Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, pp. 5-22.)
He said Independent Counsel may not have seen the notes he took and kept in a ``book file'' in
preparation for writing a book.  But he denied any intention to withhold notes and any
conversations among Administration officials about not producing documents.  He said any
failure of his own to produce notes was due to inadvertence or misfiling.

     Because Regan said he had only copies -- not originals -- of his notes, Independent Counsel
on May 8, 1992, subpoenaed the White House for all original notes, notebooks and other
documents created by or for Regan.  The White House reported that it could not locate them,
either in its own files or in the files of the Reagan Presidential Library.3

     3 Letter from Rademaker to Barrett, 5/12/92, AKW 0086056-57.

     Regan's Response to Public Exposure of the Iran Arms Sales

     Regan repeatedly testified that he advocated full public disclosure of the facts of the Iran arms
sales, following the first press revelations in early November 1986.   But as November and
December 1986 played out, Regan and other senior officials were not so much disclosing new
information  as begrudgingly admitting to facts appearing in press reports and emanating from
congressional investigations.

     On November 6, 1986, Meese and Regan met briefly with President Reagan in the afternoon.
Regan did not recall the meeting.4  Regan's notes from that date suggest concerns about
impending congressional inquiries:

     4 Regan, Grand Jury, 8/12/92, p. 43.

     Demos will start in

     investigations

     Hollings -- textile

     Kennedy -- Meese

     Any skeletons will come 5

     5 Regan Note, 11/6/86, ALU 0139111.

     On November 7, 1986, Regan had breakfast with Poindexter.  In a computer note that evening
to McFarlane, Poindexter said Regan ``agreed that he would keep his mouth shut.'' 6

     6 PROFs Note from Poindexter to McFarlane, 11/7/86, AKW 021625.

     Several sets of notes of a White House meeting of President Reagan with his top national
security advisers on November 10, 1986, state that Regan urged the issuance of a public
statement on the arms sales because the Administration was losing credibility.

     In this November 10 meeting, Poindexter laid out a version of the Iran arms sales that
essentially omitted the 1985 transactions and falsely asserted that U.S. officials discovered the
early Israeli shipments by stumbling across a warehouse of Israeli-owned U.S. weapons in
Portugal.  Regan did not dispute Poindexter's version, even though he had directly contrary
information.  Regan said he did not question Poindexter's omission of the 1985 shipments
because other officials in the meeting also knew about them.  Regan said he assumed Poindexter
was addressing only those shipments that occurred after Poindexter became national security
adviser in December 1985.7

     7 Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, pp. 96-97.

     The public statement resulting from the meeting did not disclose any facts or even confirm
that arms sales had occurred; it merely asserted that no laws had been broken in U.S. efforts to
win the freedom of American hostages and that the President had the support of his advisers in
those efforts.8

     8 Statement by Principal Deputy Press Secretary Speakes on the American Hostages in
Lebanon, 11/10/86, Public Papers of the Presidents, Ronald Reagan, 1986, p. 1539.

     Regan did not specifically recall that Shultz disagreed with Poindexter after the November 10
meeting about the President's proposed public statement and that all of the President's advisers
supported the Iran policy.  Regan  said he did recall that ``Mrs. Reagan, Poindexter, and several
others were upset with George Shultz in and around this time because he was using or saying one
type of thing and the rest were saying something else and he seemed to be off making remarks
that indicated he was in disagreement with the President on some of these matters.'' 9

     9 Regan, Grand Jury, 8/12/92, p. 59.

     On November 12, 1986, Regan met with Shultz, shortly before President Reagan and
Poindexter briefed congressional leaders on the Iran arms deals.  According to Regan's notes,
Shultz expressed consternation over the Iran arms sales.  Regan, however, urged Shultz to ``stay
on board'':

     Shultz came in to see me re Iran.  Gave his side of why he disagrees with Pres' policies.  I
heard him out.  Denies he had a hand in drafting ``Finding'' of Jan. 17 '86 on Iran and overtures to
them.  JP [Poindexter] had told me he was in room when Bill [Casey], Ed Meese, & JP were
drafting.

     Says this is swapping arms for hostages no matter what we say, and undercuts our efforts with
allies, particularly Italians & [Italian Prime Minister] Craxi who want to sell arms.

     Is going to tell Pres of his feelings.  Urged him to stay on board.  We getting murdered in
Press. I want to go public.  Pres, VP & JP saying no -- too risky.

     He says I'm right, & he'll urge telling the story.10

     10 Regan Note, 11/12/86, ALU 0139130-31.

     In the November 12, 1986, briefing of congressional leaders, Regan noted that Poindexter, in
response to a  question from Senator Byrd, stated that there was ``no transfer of material'' in 1985
because it ``took time to assess contact & issue finding.'' This was contrary to Regan's own
knowledge of the 1985 shipments.11  Regan conceded that he knew this but said he was not
concerned about it at the time.12

     11 Ibid., ALU 0139132-49.

     12 Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, p. 105.

     Throughout November 1986, Regan was in frequent contact with Nancy Reagan, the
President's wife, about mounting public furor over the Iran arms sales.  On November 12, Regan
noted a morning phone call with Nancy Reagan:

     ``Pres[ident] + 1st Lady very upset.'' . . . McFarlane -- told her we're going to have to dump
hostages to save Pres[ident]'[s] reputation, if necessary  She agreed.  Risking Presidency.13

     13 Regan Note, 11/12/86, ALU 0138701.

     Regan explained:

     Q: When you have down here ``Risking presidency,'' what was that a reference to?

     A: That, similar to Watergate, he might be impeached; that we were risking the President's
tenure in office, his presidency and his reputation.  The longer this story persisted, the more the
fingers were pointing at Ronald Reagan as either being inept, devious, or all of the above, and
that we couldn't allow this situation to go on.  We  were going to have to end it somehow or
other.14

     14 Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, p. 99.

     Regan said the subject of impeachment was never openly discussed in the White House:

     . . . it was a no-no word. . . . You never used the word impeachment except to yourself
because that was something no one wanted to even think about, but as chief of staff I felt I should
at least look that beast in the eye to see, you know, were we going up here to another Watergate,
what are we doing here? 15

     15 Ibid., pp. 110-11.

     On November 13, 1986, President Reagan in a televised address admitted for the first time
that the United States had been selling arms to Iran.  The speech was short on details and
misleading regarding the nature of the weapons shipments.  Regan said the President's speech
``wasn't the whole truth,'' and it underscored Regan's growing concern about a lack of factual
information coming from the NSC staff to the President.16

     16 Ibid., p. 112.

     By mid-November, Regan and Poindexter were briefing the press on the arms deals,
essentially repeating the facts as given to congressional leaders on November 12 and in the
President's November 13 televised address, with some additional details.

     On November 16, 1986, The New York Times published an interview with Regan in which he
said he was part of the  White House ``shovel brigade that follow[s] parade down Main Street . .
.''  He boasted of successful damage control following other troubling incidents and suggested
that the Administration would also prevail over the Iran flap.17  Regan had begun publicly
blaming McFarlane for dragging the President into the arms deals.

     17 The New York Times, ``Criticism on Iran and Other Issues Put Reagan's Aides on
Defensive,'' 11/16/86, p. 1.

     As controversy over the arms sales persisted, the President decided to hold a news conference
on November 19, 1986, in an attempt to quell the turmoil.  Instead, the President's performance
only fueled the debate, particularly because he made several glaring factual misstatements about
the role of other countries in the arms sales.  Regan said the role of Israel was the ``centerpiece''
of Reagan's confusion

     because Poindexter and I think it was Al Keel, who was then his assistant -- it may have been
still Rod McDaniel, I'm not sure, but I have to think it was Keel -- were telling the President that
he shouldn't speak up about Israel, that Israel's role in this should be downplayed, we should not
feature it, and he should be cautious about acknowledging the Israeli role.18

     18 Regan, Grand Jury, 2/26/88, p. 39.

     Regan said the President was

     stumbling all over the place and looking very inept and weak and willful during that press
conference.  Why?  Well, he had had all the briefings but he was confused in his own mind
because he knew some things that he was being told, ``Don't say.''  Other things he was being told
``Say it this way,'' and still other things he was being told to ignore.  So the poor guy couldn't get
it straight.19

     19 Ibid., 5/8/92, p. 113.

     By the time of the President's news conference on November 19, 1986,  Regan had privately
briefed some reporters and told them that third countries had been involved in the early arms
shipments to Iran.  He said in a November 14, 1986, press briefing that the United States had
decided in the summer of 1985 to allow the shipment of defensive arms in response to a
``request'' by a third party:  ``And we agreed that if that third party wanted to sell weapons of that
same nature as we were discussing, we would not object to that.'' 20  This admission by Regan
caused reporters to challenge later statements made by President Reagan on November 19, when
he said there were no third countries involved in the arms shipments.  Consequently, the White
House was forced to issue a correction of the President's statements following his press
conference.

     20 Transcript of Press Briefing, 11/14/86, p. 5.

     Following the press conference, Shultz called Regan to schedule a meeting with the President
to discuss factual problems in the President's statements.  Regan arranged a meeting for Shultz
and the President for the following afternoon.

     In advance of his meeting with the President, Shultz met with Regan at 10:45 a.m. on
November 20, 1986, to discuss inaccuracies in the President's press conference.  Afterwards,
Shultz told Charles Hill, his executive assistant, that he had:

     A very g008hard conversation w DR [Regan].  g008Went through all the p[oin]ts, errors.
Bill Rogers to look into it. P [President], w [with] VP told Pdx [Poindexter] of my telling him
things were wrong -- sh[ould] convene a meeting to go over what everybody knows & get it
together.  On Monday.  P [President] will think it over at ranch.

     I s[ai]d that's a formula for catastrophe.  Have to make decisions.  Here they are.  Make them.
You can't wait around.  The longer you wait the worse it gets.  Not a matter of getting our lines
straight and work as a team.  Think of the future.

     Don [Regan] seemed v. subdued.  Feels maybe g008his staff work bad.  My comments
break into a sense of unity over there that they know what they are doing.

     Some NSC guy I overheard there scoffing at us saying we didn't know.  Pretty soon they'll say
we ran it all.

     After lunch I'll call him again.  What will you do.  Today.  Tonight.  At C.D. [Camp David]
this weekend

     * * *

     DR [Don Regan] not taking charge & VP dug in too.  Not taking strong role either.21

     21 Hill Note, 11/20/86, ANS 0001866 (emphasis in original).

     Later on November 20, Shultz met with the President and Regan in the White House
residence from 5:15 p.m. to 6 p.m.  Shultz complained that factual misstatements by the
President would not withstand scrutiny.  Shultz specifically mentioned the November 1985
HAWK  shipment as a clear arms-for-hostages swap.  President Reagan acknowledged that he
knew about the shipment but argued that it did not represent arms for hostages.

     Shultz's recounting of the White House meeting to Charles Hill indicates that Shultz made
little headway in impressing on the President the seriousness of his concerns:

     Hot & heavy.  Argued back & forth.  I didn't shake him one bit.  The press is the problem.
His material is diff.  he says.  We can straighten it all out Mon.  He refuses to see we have a
problem.  So I never got to what should be done.  Nancy was not there.  I had hoped she wd help.

     * * *

     I'll go to the mtg Monday, but then just make it clear I have to resign. . . .22

     22 Ibid., ANS 0001871.

     Regan played no visible role in the November 20, 1986, drafting of the congressional
testimony of Casey and Poindexter for the next day, although Casey told CIA Deputy Director
Robert Gates in a taped phone call during the week of November 18 that he planned to speak to
Regan about the testimony.23  Regan did have contact with both Casey and Poindexter on
November 20.  Regan met Casey briefly at 3 p.m.  He said Casey told him of financial
irregularities in the Iran arms transactions.24  Then after attending the meeting between Shultz
and President  Reagan, Regan met with Poindexter from 6:12 to 6:45 p.m.25

     23 PRT-250 Call from Gates to Casey, 11/18/86.

     24 Regan, FBI 302, 3/6/91.

     25 Poindexter Appointment Schedule, 11/20/86, AKW 044200.

     Regan said he finally got a copy of the NSC chronology from Poindexter on November 21,
1986.  David Chew, White House staff secretary, had alerted him after the November 19 press
conference that he had seen North with a chronology of the arms sales, but North had refused to
give Chew a copy.  Regan gave the chronology to White House Counsel Peter J. Wallison to
review, expressing doubts about its accuracy.

     Legal Concerns:  White House Counsel Questions the 1985 Shipments

     Throughout November 1986, White House Counsel Wallison, a close Regan adviser,
repeatedly raised with Regan his concerns about possible legal problems of the Iran arms sales.
As the facts of the shipments became clearer, Wallison's concerns intensified, peaking on
November 21 when he first learned of a possibly illegal November 1985 HAWK shipment.

     Wallison's diary reflects that he reported facts to Regan as he learned them, but Regan did not
share with Wallison his own knowledge of the transactions.  The diary shows that Meese was
firmly in charge of exploring the arms  sales and containing their legal ramifications. Wallison
was excluded.  Wallison was concerned that Meese was not the proper person to conduct the
investigation and that Regan was unwilling to intervene in the matter.

     Wallison wrote in his diary that on November 7, 1986, he first raised concerns with Regan
about the legality of the Iran arms sales under the Arms Export Control Act (AECA).  At that
time Wallison had not focused on the 1985 shipments, because he had no facts about them.
According to Wallison, Regan told him to review the AECA questions with Poindexter.  At a
meeting the same day, Poindexter told Wallison that ``the AG [Attorney General] had been
involved from the beginning in this matter and should be the lawyer consulted on any other
issues of legality.'' 26

     26 Wallison Diary, 11/7/86, ALU 0138211.

     On the morning of November 10, 1986, Wallison again raised his concerns with Regan.
Wallison wrote in his diary that he was ``unhappy'' with a public statement issued by the White
House that ``all laws had been complied with.  I was told that this is what the AG wanted said.''
27  On November 11, 1986, Wallison discussed some of his concerns with David Doherty, CIA
General Counsel, and gave Regan a memo outlining the legal questions.  On November 12, 1986,
Wallison told Regan that ``unless the  operation could be portrayed as a diplomatic move, it
would have had to have been reported as a covert action in advance.'' 28  Regan suggested that
Wallison raise the issue with Meese.

     27 Ibid., ALU 0138220.

     28 Ibid., ALU 0138221.

     Wallison called Meese on the morning of November 12, 1986, and found out he was in
Poindexter's office.  Wallison asked Poindexter's aide Paul Thompson, the NSC counsel, if he
could join the meeting.  After checking, Thompson ``returned in a minute with the statement that
Poindexter and Meese were `discussing something else.' '' 29

     29 Ibid., ALU 0138222.

     On November 13, 1986, Wallison told Regan he had concluded that the AECA placed an
``absolute prohibition'' on arms sales to Iran without prior notice to Congress.  At an early
afternoon meeting to prepare President Reagan's televised speech, Poindexter's deputy Alton
Keel ``exploded'' when Wallison tried to omit a line stating that all laws had been complied with;
Keel said that this is what the President, the attorney general and the national security adviser
wanted.  Wallison reached Meese late in the afternoon to discuss the AECA, and Meese said he
would have Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper call him.  When Cooper telephoned
Wallison, Cooper said he was ``relying on a theory developed by the State Dept. in 1981  that
there was no need to comply with the AECA at all if the export is part of an intelligence
operation.'' 30

     30 Ibid., ALU 0138223.

     At about this time, the White House made public the fact that the President in a covert-action
Finding in January 1986 had authorized the arms sales, in conformance with the legal theory
Cooper had expounded to Wallison.  On November 15, 1986, The Washington Post published an
interview with Poindexter in which he stated:  ``[The] finding only existed in its original form in
my safe.'' 31 The New York Times reported that, according to someone who had seen the order, a
classified executive order (presumably the Finding) explicitly said Congress was not to be told of
the Iran arms sales because of ``security risks.'' 32  Other news reports quoted White House
spokesman Larry Speakes confirming CIA involvement in the arms sales.

     31 The Washington Post, ``Reagan Ordered Casey to Keep Iran Mission from Congress;
Written Notice Conflicted with CIA Chief's Pledge,'' 11/15/86, p. A-1.

     32 The New York Times, ``White House Says CIA Had Role in Iran Operation,'' 11/15/86, p.
1.

     On November 18, 1986, Wallison convened a meeting of general counsel -- including
Thompson, Abraham Sofaer of the State Department, Lawrence Garrett of the Defense
Department, Cooper, David Doherty of the CIA and a Joint Chiefs of Staff lawyer -- to agree on
common legal theories  to support the arms sales in upcoming congressional testimony.
According to Wallison, Cooper was surprised to learn of a September 1985 Iran arms shipment
and said he would ask Meese for more facts.33  Wallison, Garrett and Sofaer wanted an NSC
chronology of events, but Thompson told them he doubted that one would be made available.34

     33 In fact, the Israeli sale of 504 U.S. TOW missiles to Iran occurred in two shipments, one in
August 1985 and a second in September 1985.

     34 Wallison Diary, 11/18/86, ALU 138227.

     The next day, in preparation for the President's November 19, 1986, press conference, Meese
said it would be best for President Reagan to cite the Attorney General as the authority on legal
issues, according to Wallison.35

     35 Ibid., 11/19/86, ALU 138231.

     On November 20, 1986, Wallison in the late afternoon met with Cooper and Thompson, who,
according to Wallison, appeared shaken after having reviewed a draft of Casey's congressional
testimony, which was to be given the following day.  Then Wallison received a call from Sofaer,
who asked Wallison whether he knew about the November 1985 HAWKs shipment;  Wallison
said he did not.  Wallison asked Cooper and Thompson whether they had heard about this, and
they said no.  Wallison considered this the most serious disclosure of all.36

     36 Ibid., ALU 0138235-36.

     Wallison told Regan of the November 1985 HAWKs shipment on the morning of November
21, 1986, noting that it meant that the arms shipments in which the United States was involved
pre-dated the January 1986 covert-action Finding, which authorized the later shipments. Regan
had known of the HAWK shipment; he was present with President Reagan in Geneva when
McFarlane alerted the President to expect it.  Regan apparently did not share with Wallison the
facts as he knew them, even though he was seeking Wallison's legal guidance.37

     37 Regan was with the President in Geneva in November 1985 when McFarlane briefed them
and Shultz on the HAWK shipment.

     Regan could not explain why he did not inform Wallison of his own knowledge of the
November 1985 HAWK shipment, but he denied attempting to hide that fact from Wallison.38
Asked whether in the November 1986 assembling of facts about the Iran arms sales he ever
volunteered to anyone his own knowledge of the HAWK shipment, Regan said he did not
because he was not asked.39

     38 Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, p. 133.

     39 Ibid., 8/12/92, pp. 61-62.

     The Weekend Probe

     Late on the morning of November 21, 1986, President Reagan, Regan, Meese and Poindexter
met in the Oval Office to discuss the need to reconcile differing versions of the facts of the Iran
arms sales.  By this time, it was obvious that there were serious discrepancies in the details of the
arms deals laid out by the principals.  It was also clear that the November 1985 HAWK shipment
posed serious legal problems.

     Regan said his memory of the Oval Office meeting was ``hazy,'' but ``[t]he gist of it was that
the thing didn't hang together.  Again every time you seemed to have one piece nailed down,
something else popped up that negated that or changed that.  It was a fluid situation.''  Regan said
Poindexter suggested that they let the matter blow over, but Meese wanted to investigate.  Regan
said he got angry and said, ``Let's get this thing buttoned up once and for all.'' 40

     40 Ibid., 2/26/88, pp. 52-53.

     Regan said the need for Meese's weekend investigation arose from factual discrepancies that
became apparent in the November 20, 1986, preparation of Casey and Poindexter's congressional
testimony.  But Regan also cited pricing information available in highly reliable intelligence
reports about the arms sales as a factor that prompted the investigation, just as Meese stated
several days later in his November 25, 1986, disclosure of the Iran/contra diversion.

     Regan in later testimony reasserted that highly reliable intelligence reports helped precipitate
the weekend investigation.  He said the intelligence ``was one of the things that was puzzling the
Attorney General from it and also the State Department.''  Regan said the intelligence reports

     gave the Attorney General the first clue that somebody wasn't telling the straight story because
we had [intelligence reports] that indicated the Iranians were paying X but we were only getting
Y and there was a difference, and the Attorney General was trying to reconcile why would the
Iranians be [paying] a price higher than we were showing they were getting and they couldn't do
that.41

     41 Regan, FBI 302, 7/14/87, pp. 69-70.

     This would support the view that Meese was looking for evidence of a funding diversion
when he initiated his weekend  probe.42  Independent Counsel could not find other supporting
proof of this.

     42 Meese, in disclosing the Iran-contra diversion at the November 25, 1986, press conference,
alluded to information in the highly reliable intelligence reports as a reason he undertook the
weekend investigation.  In fact, DOJ official John McGinniss spent the early morning hours of
November 22, 1986, reviewing the reports, after Meese and his top aides learned that Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence members had based some of their questioning of Casey on the
basis of this intelligence.  Further circumstantial evidence that Meese and his aides were looking
for reasons to explain pricing irregularities is the fact that rumors of a diversion were already
circulating at the CIA, that some CIA officials had knowledge of it, and that even State
Department officials before the diversion discovery were suspicious of Southern Air Transport's
role in both Iran and contra activities (according to Charles Hill's notes and a comment by Shultz
to Meese about a possible mixing of the two activities in a interview on the morning of
November 22, 1986).

     At 1:45 p.m. on November 21, 1986, Regan called Wallison into his office to tell him about
Meese's pending investigation. Wallison raised concerns about a conflict of interest in Meese
investigating a White House matter.  Regan gave Wallison a copy of the arms sales chronology
he had obtained from Poindexter and asked Wallison to review it and suggest questions for the
upcoming November 24 meeting at which Meese was to present his findings.  Wallison did so in
an unsigned, undated memo delivered to Regan's house on Friday, November 21, 1986.43

     43 Memorandum from Wallison, circa 11/21/86, ALU 0138936.

     Regan's Contacts During the November 22-23, 1986, Weekend

     Regan described his contacts with Casey and other top officials over the November 22-23,
1986, weekend only in vague terms:

     There were lots of phone calls back and forth, nothing specific with the Attorney General.
Casey had called me some point along the way here and I was unable to get him on Friday and
I'm not sure whether I went out Friday night or did something and therefore on Saturday tried to
get back to Casey and I recall missing him and then I'm not sure whether we finally did talk
about.  I'm inclined to say, yes we did talk over the weekend but it was strictly he wanted to tell
me that his testimony up on the Hill had gone well and he thought he had discussed the subject in
enough detail to satisfy the House Intelligence Committee.44

     44 Regan, FBI 302, 7/14/87, p. 61.

     Regan said he received calls over the weekend from officials who were going to appear on the
Sunday television talk shows, but ``I was no part of the investigation nor was I questioned.'' 45

     45 Regan, Select Committees Testimony, 7/30/87, p. 129.

     On Saturday, November 22, 1986, Regan called Casey at 2:45 p.m., and at 2:51 p.m. Casey
called Regan, apparently while Casey was having lunch with Poindexter and North in
Poindexter's office.46  According to  Regan's ``Chief of Staff Calls'' phone log, Regan called
Casey again on Saturday at 4:53 p.m. and at 6:45 p.m.  On Sunday, November 23, 1986 at 9:52
a.m. Regan called Casey.  At 12:35 p.m. Meese called Regan.47  The substance of these calls
could not be determined.

     46 The Select Committees asserted that Regan called Poindexter while Poindexter was having
lunch with Casey and North on November 22, 1986.  When asked about this by the Select
Committees, Regan said he probably called Poindexter to get the answer to a technical question
in anticipation of the Sunday talk shows.  (Regan, Select Committees Testimony, 7/30/87, p.
130.)  Records obtained by OIC, however, do not indicate that Regan called Poindexter at all; the
call by Regan to Poindexter's office may have been recorded as his 2:45 p.m./2:51 p.m. calls with
Casey.

     47 Meese Phone Notes, 11/23/86, AMS 000654.

     November 24:  Regan Learns of Meese's Discovery of the Diversion

     On November 24, 1986, Regan met throughout the day with the President and other senior
advisers.  Meese testified that he informed the President and Regan on November 24 of his
weekend discovery of the diversion.  But  November 24 proved to be significant in another
respect:  At an afternoon meeting of the President and his senior advisers (including Regan),
Meese informed the group that the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran was
possibly illegal.  He stated, falsely, that the President was not aware of the transaction.

     Regan's notes of the November 24, 1986, meeting, obtained early  in 1992, confirmed and
illuminated notes of the same meeting taken by Caspar Weinberger.  Regan asked the key
question at the meeting:  Did the President acquiesce in the November 1985 HAWK shipment?
It was one of a list of questions prepared for him by Wallison.

     Regan's notes reflect ``DTR [Regan] asked about shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran in
Nov.'' 48  Weinberger's notes are more specific:  ``Don Regan:  Did we object to Israeli sending
Hawks shipment missiles to Iran?'' 49  Weinberger's notes reflect an initial response by
Poindexter that ``From July '85 to Dec. 7 McFarlane handled this all alone -- no documentation .
. .''  Regan's notes do not reflect Poindexter's response.  But both sets of notes indicate that Meese
gave a lengthy answer to Regan's question, informing the group:

     48 Regan Note, 11/24/86, ALU 0139378.

     49 Weinberger Meeting Note, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669KK.

     Shultz told in Geneva by Bud [McFarlane] -- delivery of weapons & maybe hostages out.
Didn't approve.  Pres only told maybe hostages out in short order.

     Plane unable to land in Iran.  Smaller plane arranged only 18 missiles aboard -- wrong ones.
No specific ok for HAWKS [.]  Returned in Feb. from Israeli stocks.

     Bud told Geo. [Shultz] hostages out first, then arms in.  Did not take place.

     Maybe a violation of law if arms shipped w/o [without] a finding.  But Pres did not know --
Cap [Weinberger] denies knowing.  Israelis may have  done this on their own.  But it was a low
level contact that did this, probably using Pres' name.50

     50 Regan Note, 11/24/86, ALU 0139378-79.

     Independent Counsel questioned whether Regan had agreed with any of the other participants
before the meeting to ask the question that prompted Meese's response.  Regan denied that he
had.51

     51 Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, p. 136.

     Regan already knew the true answer to the question that he asked, from his direct participation
in the November 1985 briefing in Geneva that McFarlane gave the President about the
impending HAWKs shipment.  Regan said he did not remember whether he told Wallison he
already knew the answer.52  Regan said virtually all of the other meeting participants knew
Meese's statements regarding the state of President Reagan's knowledge to be incorrect.53  Regan
said he, the President, Vice President Bush, Shultz, Poindexter, and probably Casey knew the
statements were wrong; he was uncertain about Meese's knowledge: 54

     52 Ibid., p. 135.  In the Grand Jury on 8/12/92 (p. 87-88) Regan said he may have discussed
with Wallison ``some of the possible answers'' to the questions Wallison prepared for the
November 24, 1986, meeting.

     53 Ibid., 5/8/92, pp. 141-54.

     54 Ibid., 8/12/92, pp. 94-97.

     Q: Can you explain to us why people who were witting about the Presidential knowledge and
approval of the November Hawk shipment did not speak up during this meeting to correct the
record on a matter that the Attorney General focused on as possibly dealing with a violation of
American law?

     A: I can only describe as best I can the mental attitude of one of them, to wit, myself; why
didn't I speak up at that point.  First of all, he said it's a possible violation.  Wallison had told me
a possible violation.  We had not had an opinion that yes, it is a violation for this, this, and this
reason.  Obviously we were waiting to be told specifically is this a violation.  That's my attitude
now, right or wrong.  Second, I was very concerned about the diversion of funds, what is this all
about?  What new turn is this Iranian arms shipment going to take with diversion of funds?  So
that was on my mind.  Before I start an outburst in this meeting and getting everybody upset, let's
get the rest of the facts.  Maybe we have found why we had been so puzzled as to why we
couldn't get a chronology.  So I was waiting for the Meese meeting with the President before
speaking up on that particular subject, that is the Hawk missiles in '85. . . .

     Q: Was your attitude that until we know that this was not a violation of the law, I'm not going
to be the one to announce to this group that the President knew and approved it?

     A: Very probable.55

     55 Ibid., 5/8/92, pp. 154-57.

     Regan on November 25, 1986

     On November 25, 1986, Regan's day revolved around public disclosure of the Iran/contra
diversion and deciding  how to contain the public firestorm that was sure to follow.56

     56 Regan called Meese at 6:30 a.m.  Meese received the message from his driver while he was
at Casey's home, and Meese returned the call from there.  Meese testified that Regan told him he
had determined overnight that he wanted to talk to Poindexter at 8 a.m. and tell him he should
resign.  Meese said he did not tell Regan he would be meeting with Poindexter before then.
Meese said that on November 24, 1986, Poindexter had expressed a desire to hear from Meese
whether he would have to resign, and ``so I felt an obligation, him having told me that and Don
having told me what his views were, to impart that information to Admiral Poindexter before Mr.
Regan talked to him.''  (Meese, Grand Jury, 2/17/88, pp. 80-84.)

     According to Poindexter, Meese told Poindexter at their Justice Department meeting to
submit his letter of resignation.  Poindexter went back to the White House, left a message in
Regan's office that he wanted to meet with him, went back to his own office to eat his breakfast,
``and a few minutes later Don Regan came in, and I told him that I was going to resign.''
Poindexter said he does not recall Regan asking him whether he told the President about the
diversion.  Poindexter testified there was no scolding or reprimand.  (Poindexter, Select
Committees Testimony, 7/16/87, pp. 88-89.)

     There are no known notes of President Reagan's 9:00 a.m. meeting with Vice President Bush,
Regan and Meese, or of President Reagan's 9:38-9:55 a.m. meeting with Vice President Bush,
Regan and Meese and Poindexter, at which Poindexter resigned.

     According to Wallison, Regan told him and another Regan aide, Dennis Thomas, on
November 24, 1986, that the diverted payments had been made in November 1985 for the
HAWKs, and he asked Wallison whether that was unlawful.   Wallison said if the money were
U.S. money it would be illegal, but if it were Israeli money the situation was not as clear.57

     57 Wallison Diary, 11/24/86, ALU 0138242.

     On November 25, 1986, Wallison noted a significant change in the story from what Regan
had told him the previous day.  In a meeting with congressional leaders at 11 a.m., Meese
described the transaction unclearly, dating the diversion as taking place in 1986.  Dennis Thomas
asked Wallison to pass a note to Meese to the effect that he should specify that the money was
deposited in the Swiss account in the fall of 1985.  Wallison handed the note to Regan for Meese,
but Regan returned the note saying the events occurred in 1986.  ``This was not what Regan had
told us yesterday, nor was the fact that the arms involved -- according to the AG's account -- were
US rather than Israeli arms,'' Wallison wrote.  ``Thomas and I vividly recalled Regan's talking
yesterday about Hawk missiles with the Star of David on them.'' 58  Wallison later told OIC that
he did not follow up on the issue of whether the diversion had occurred in relation to the
HAWKs shipment.59

     58 Ibid., 11/25/86, ALU 0138244.

     59 Wallison, FBI 302, 10/5/92, p. 12.

     Regan's notes of the briefing of congressional leaders on the morning of November 25, 1986,
show that  Meese made no mention of 1985 shipments in connection with the diversion:

     In 1986 -- 4 arms shipments Feb, May, July, Oct 29. Israel sent arms to Iran  who previously
had deposited  money in bank acct.  Israel  overcharged.  Iran paid to  Israel -- Israel put over
charge into Swiss acct (3 of them)  Calero of Contras established  these.  Contras drew funds
total value $10-$30 myn [million]  from 3 shipments. Ollie North knew of this --  Poindexter had
suspicions  did not investigate.  Did  not question it.  Happened 3 times in 1986.60

     60 Regan Note, 11/25/86, ALU 139169.

     President Reagan opened a press briefing to announce the Iran/contra diversion shortly after
noon on November 25, 1986.  After stating that he did not know certain unspecified details of the
arms sales and that North had been fired and Poindexter had resigned, the President turned the
floor over to Meese, who disclosed the diversion.  Reagan, Regan and Weinberger watched
Meese's briefing on television in a room off the Oval Office.

     Regan's Changing Testimony About His Contacts With Casey

     Regan testified that he did not learn of the Iran/contra diversion until Meese told him about it
on  November 24, 1986.  The record is murky, however, regarding when Regan learned of
financial problems in the Iran arms sales.  Regan testified repeatedly that Casey informed him of
the problems generally.  But Regan's testimony regarding the timing and specifics of his
knowledge was inconsistent, placing it as early as October 1986 or as late as November 20, 1986:

      -- Asked by OIC on July 14, 1987, whether he had any conversations with Casey in October
1986 about Roy Furmark,61 Regan said no.  ``Casey did tell me on or about the time that the
story was breaking in Lebanon that he had had a Canadian contact who was telling him that this
story was getting around in the Middle East.'' 62  Regan said Casey did not initially mention
money worries in connection with the Canadian:  ``It was only later that I became aware that it
was the Furmark story, the name Furmark, and that fact that the Canadians were actually looking
for money.63 . . .''

     61 Furmark, a long-time Casey acquaintance, was the New York businessman and partner of
financier Adnan Khashoggi who personally communicated to Casey in October 1986 threats of
exposure of the Iran arms sales by disgruntled Canadian investors.

     62 Regan, FBI 302, 7/14/87, p. 92.

     63 Ibid., pp. 93-94.

      -- Regan in a congressional deposition on July 15, 1987, said Casey told him about an
unnamed Canadian contact on November 3 or 4, 1986:  ``Casey had told me without using the
name Furmark that a Canadian friend of his had told him that the news of McFarlane's visit and
arms shipments by us and Israel to Iran was pretty well known in certain circles, and that this
thing was coming unglued.'' 64

     64 Regan, Select Committees Deposition, 7/15/87, p. 76.

      -- Regan in the Grand Jury on February 3, 1988, said Casey mentioned Furmark's
involvement  in the arms deals to him in late October 1986.65

     65 Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, p. 38.  Regan told the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
on December 16, 1986, that Casey contacted him in late October 1986 about the arms sales, but
Regan said the contact centered on Casey's request for a copy of the arms-sales Finding.  Regan
said he told Casey he did not have a copy of the Finding but Poindexter might.  ``So, later I said
to Poindexter, how come we don't have a copy of that Finding?'' Regan testified.  ``And he said
I'll tell you why.  He said, there's only an original and it's in my safe.  I never made a copy of it.''
(Regan, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 31.) Regan later told OIC that Casey wanted the Finding
in late October 1986 because of an impending arms shipment to Iran. (Regan, FBI 302, 7/14/87,
p. 92.)

      -- In an interview with OIC on March 6, 1991, Regan said he met with Casey on November
20, 1986, and Casey at that time told him about financial problems and the involvement of
Furmark and Khashoggi in the Iran initiative.  Regan said that he probably shared what he
learned from Casey with Wallison.66

     66 Regan, FBI 302, 3/6/91, p. 7.  Wallison's diary does not reflect a conversation with Regan
about Furmark and Khassoghi on November 20, 1986.

     There is evidence that Regan was Casey's choice as the person who should be informed about
Iran arms sale money problems.  Furmark said he met on November 24, 1986, with Casey at the
CIA and told him that arms financier Adnan Khashoggi had invested $25 million in the Iran
transactions, and that millions of dollars were unaccounted for.  Furmark told Casey that arms
dealer Manucher Ghorbanifar believed the excess money had gone to the contras.  According to
Furmark, an excited Casey tried to call Donald Regan but he was not in, so Casey called
North.67

     67 Furmark, FBI 302, 2/22/88, pp. 12-13.

     Independent Counsel obtained no documentary evidence clarifying when Casey informed
Regan of financial  irregularities in the Iran arms sales. Regan was initially untruthful about at
least one significant meeting with Casey on the evening of November 24, 1986, but Regan later
corrected the record:  He initially denied having discussed with Casey the discovery of the
Iran/contra diversion on November 24 but later admitted he had.

     On the evening of November 24, 1986, Regan met with Casey at CIA headquarters, at Casey's
urgent insistence.  Regan in his Select Committees Deposition of March 3, 1987, was asked
whether he discussed the diversion with Casey at their meeting:

     A: Only to the effect that there were -- no, I didn't. Let me back up.  I did not discuss the
precise nature of what Ed Meese, the Attorney General, had told the President.

     Q: Why was that?

     A: Well, at this point I didn't know who knew what, or who was guilty of what, and I thought
the less I talk about it, the better off the Attorney General and his investigators would be.

     Q: But didn't you want to know what your friend, William Casey, knew of this?

     A: I knew that Ed Meese had been talking to him.68

     68 Regan, Select Committees Deposition, 3/3/87, pp. 13-14.

     But Casey, who died in May 1987, told the House Intelligence Committee on December 11,
1986, that Regan told him on November 24, 1986, that he had

     . . . some evidence of a diversion. . . . Don Regan stopped in to see me on the way home.  This
had been arranged over the weekend when I was supposed to see if we were able to meet; and we
were not able to meet, so that was the first I had any inkling of a diversion.69

     69 Casey, HPSCI Testimony, 12/11/86, pp. 77-78.

     Meese complicated the matter for Regan in a Select Committees deposition on July 8, 1987.
Meese testified that when he saw Casey privately early on November 25, 1986, Casey was
already aware of the diversion:

     He heard about it, I believe, from Don Regan the previous evening, I believe. . . . Well, he had
heard from Don Regan that there had been a diversion and that Poindexter was planning to resign
and that Don Regan felt that Poindexter should resign immediately and probably -- I don't know
whether North was discussed, too, or not.70

     70 Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, p. 126.

     Regan in an interview with OIC on July 14, 1987, for the first time said he discussed with
Casey on the evening of November 24, 1986, Meese's discovery of the diversion and the fact that
it would have to be made public.71  On July 15, 1987, Regan in a deposition to the Select
Committees said he told Casey about the diversion on the evening of November 24, 1986.  He
told the Committees  that Casey's general reaction was that public disclosure would harm
prospects for contra aid and would upset Middle Eastern friends and Israel.72

     71 Regan, FBI 302, 7/14/87, pp. 19-23.

     72 Regan, Select Committees Deposition, 7/15/87, pp. 73-75.

     In congressional testimony on July 30, 1987, Regan said his earlier misstatements stemmed
from the fact that he was questioned in a ``confusing period,'' following his resignation.73

     73 Ibid., 7/30/87, pp. 109-12.

     Regan told the Grand Jury on February 3, 1988, that his November 24, 1986, meeting with
Casey lasted about 25 minutes, that they discussed the diversion and the consequences of
publicly disclosing it, and that Casey reminded Regan he had told him earlier about a Canadian
threatening to expose the arms sales.74

     74 Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, pp. 34-38.

     Late November-December 1986:  The Fallout Continues

     In the aftermath of the Iran/contra disclosures, Regan's job became increasingly complicated.
He attempted to distance the President from the NSC staff members who had been most directly
involved in the operations.75  He was confronted with Nancy Reagan's growing alarm over the
political beating her husband was taking.  He and other senior Presidential aides sought to expel
Shultz from the Cabinet, because of his continued public dissent.  But perhaps the most difficult
task Regan had to endure was the demands by Members of Congress and others that he be
removed as White House Chief of Staff, so that the President could start the last two years of his
Administration with a clean slate.

     75 Despite Regan's efforts, the President called North after his firing.  Regan testified that
when he learned of the call, he asked the President why he did it and told him ``Well, I hope you
did the right thing.''  (Regan, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, p. 108.)

     In an undated memo titled ``Plan of Action,'' Regan on November 24, 1986, laid out a series
of steps to be taken in response to the public disclosure of the Iran/contra diversion.  Regan's
overall strategy, in fact, was adopted by the White House.  Among other things, he proposed that
Poindexter resign and that North be reassigned, that Poindexter's deputy Alton Keel temporarily
replace Poindexter, and that the President announce the appointment  of a special review board to
examine NSC actions.  The memo states in part:

     Tough as it seems[,] blame must be put at NSC's door -- rogue operation, going on without
President's knowledge or sanction.  When suspicions arose he took charge, ordered investigation,
had meeting of top advisors to get at facts, and find out who knew what.  Try to make the best of
a sensational story. Anticipate charges of ``out of control'', ``President doesn't know what's going
on,'' ``Who's in charge'', ``State Department is right in its suspicions of NSC'', ``secret dealing
with nefarious characters'', ``Should break off any contacts with:  a) Iranians, b) Contras'' 76

     76 Memorandum from Regan, circa 11/24/86, ALU 010205.

     Regan was partly successful in distancing the President from the actions of the NSC staff, but
he could not escape criticism.  On November 25, 1986, Vice President Bush privately told the
President that ``I really felt that Regan should go, Shultz should go, and that he ought to get this
all behind him in the next couple of months.'' 77  The Vice President and others would succeed in
removing Regan after only three more months of turmoil.

     77 Bush Diary, 11/25/86, ALU 0140213.

     Throughout December 1986, Regan's notes record meetings with members of Congress on
Iran/contra.  One set of notes -- written in past tense, unlike other Regan notes -- suggest
continued concern about the pre-1986 arms shipments,  but do not illuminate whether the
President told Congress the truth about his knowledge of them:

     12/2/86  Pres, VP, Dole, Michel, Simpson, Lott

     Pres. outlined Iran situation

     Read his TV statement on  Independent Counsel, and  Frank Carlucci.

     Some conversation on how  Congress should handle investigation.

     g008Then DTR [Regan] asked Pres point  blank -- what happened, Mr.  Pres what did you
know -- when did you know it?  That's the question on these fellows mind.  Tell them what  you
know.

     g008He did -- for 10 minutes

     g008Then they asked questions  about arms shipments before  Jan '86.

     Also lack of support by  GS [Shultz], Bud McF, & revelation of  contras.

     Pres reassured them on  where he stood.

     Tried to tell him not to  beat up on press.

     They emphasized the magnitude of the issue.  Opponents  and press are after Presidency.

     Make sweeping changes.

     Carlucci is not enough; they  said.

     Lott, Cheyney [sic], Simpson, all  said they needed answers.

     Pres told them he knew  nothing of fund as far as he  knows only North & Poindexter

     It is now a domestic  political program, not a  foreign policy matter.

     May be a public apology is  needed.78

     78 Regan notes, 12/2/86, ALU 0139177-78 (emphasis added).

     On December 1, 1986, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence began a preliminary
investigation into Iran/contra.  On December 5, 1986, Regan noted two phone conversations with
Casey reflecting behind-the-scenes contacts with the committee to try to defuse the problem.
Casey called Regan to inform him of a conversation he had just had with SSCI staff director
Robert Bernard McMahon:

     Staff director -- Durenberger `Wants to demolish this molehill'

     so does most of committee

     Bernie McMahon -- is  staff director

     Casey called him back -- told  him he'd be hearing from someone representing me shortly

     Quote above is from McMahon

     * * *

     Casey -- secure phone -- just got an  ``offer of surrender'' from  Intell Comm counsel  who
says  Some Sens feel nothing  there -- ``dry hole'' in hearings

     How to get out of it?

     g008Suggestion

     Have Pres announce some morning soon  that North violated law on contras  funding

     did not tell us.  Also Pres say  Poindexter had knowledge of this  should have reported it to
Pres.  Both of them want to tell story  to public.  Put them on TV  Let them tell story and then
Pres pardon.

     [at side]: DTR [Regan] to take   this on

     Paul Laxalt as  intermediary . . .79

     79 Ibid., 12/5/86, ALU 0139195-96.

     According to Wallison's diary, Regan instructed Wallison on December 5, 1986, to invite
McMahon to the White House for a talk.  Wallison told McMahon that a presidential pardon was
a political ``non-starter,'' and Wallison suggested that the President might be willing to endorse
immunity for North and Poindexter to testify before Congress.  McMahon told Wallison that the
SSCI would resist granting immunity because of possible problems it would pose to an
independent counsel.80

     80 Wallison Diary, 12/5/86, ALU 0138266.

     On Saturday, December 6, 1986, Casey called Wallison to ask about his conversation with
McMahon, and Wallison discussed immunity with Casey.  Wallison then called Regan and
discussed immunity with him.  Wallison called Associate Attorney General Steven Trott on
December 7, 1986, to discuss the immunity matter, because Meese was not available.81

     81 Ibid., 12/6/86, ALU 0138267.

     As December wore on, Regan and other Presidential advisers tried to remedy the fact that
both North and Poindexter were refusing to testify before Congress, citing their Fifth
Amendment right against self-incrimination.  Their silence fueled continuing speculation about
the President's involvement in Iran/contra.  The consensus in the White House was that Congress
should be asked to grant  limited or ``use'' immunity from prosecution to North and Poindexter so
that each of these men could effectively clear the President by stating that they did not inform
him of the narrow issue of the Iran/contra diversion.

     On December 16, 1986, President Reagan called on SSCI to grant North and Poindexter use
immunity because, ``We must get on with the business at hand and put this issue behind us.  It is
my desire to have the full story about Iran come out now -- the alleged transfer of funds, the
Swiss bank accounts, who was involved -- everything.'' 82  President Reagan stated that the
granting of use immunity would not prevent the Independent Counsel, who had not yet been
appointed, from bringing anyone to justice.

     82 Statement on the Iran Arms and Contra Aid Controversy, 12/16/86, Public Papers of the
President, Ronald Reagan, 1986, p. 1631.

     On December 16, 1986, Regan testified before SSCI.  On December 17, 1986, Regan's notes
from a meeting with the President reflect continuing concern over the committee's investigative
findings:

     4.  Iran --

     Durenberger says only Ollie North knew.

     RR [Reagan] didn't

     Immunity asked by RR.83

     83 Regan Note, 12/17/86, ALU 0139214.

     On December 18, 1986, Regan testified before the House Intelligence Committee.  At a
meeting with the  President that morning before testifying, Regan noted that they discussed
``Dispute between testimony of DTR [Regan] and Bud [McFarlane].'' 84  On December 19,
Regan noted again that he and the President in their morning meeting discussed the fact that
``DTR -- Regan] McFarlane differ over Israeli arms shipments in Aug. 1985.'' 85  The dispute, as
outlined in news reports of McFarlane and Regan's congressional testimony, was over
McFarlane's assertion that President Reagan had approved the August 1985 shipment in advance
and Regan's contention that the President learned about it only after the fact.86

     84 Ibid., 12/18/86, ALU 0139216.

     85 Ibid., 12/19/88, ALU 01389218.

     86 1986 Facts on File, 12/26/86.

     Regan notes apparently taken on December 18, 1986, describe the broad outlines of SSCI's
anticipated findings, and how they cut in favor of the President:

     Comm (Sen. Intel) wants to give us report in 10/14 days  Not just a chronology but  outline a
scam by arms dealers  & gvt [sic] govt's involved.  Hood-winked our people.

     W[ou]ld brief Pres or anyone  else so he knows whats [illegible word]

     Can take notes -- no exec  summary.  No interpretats  No questioning of Pres -- No desire to
add him to witness  list.  Keep meeting conf. [confidential] -- No press back door to Oval 87

     On December 19, 1986, Durenberger and committee staff director Bernard McMahon secretly
briefed the President, Regan, Keel and Wallison about SSCI's findings.  This was done without
the knowledge of the committee.88

     Regan's Testimony on the 1985 Arms Shipments

     Unlike Shultz and Weinberger, Regan did not deny knowledge of the August-September 1985
arms shipments to Iran.  But his testimony shifted factually in several key respects, leaving the
record unclear about the President's  authorization of the early shipment and the promise to
replenish Israeli stocks.  Regan at first asserted that the President learned about the two-part
shipment after the fact and did not approve replenishment; later, Regan testified that the
President learned of the shipments in mid-transaction -- after the first shipment in August but
before the second in September -- and that he did approve replenishment.89

     XXXX

     87 Regan Note, 12/18/86, ALU 0139217.

     88 In its preliminary report issued January 29, 1987, SSCI noted:

     According to testimony received by the Committee, on December 19 Senator Dave
Durenberger, Chairman of the Intelligence Committee, and Bernard McMahon, the Committee's
staff director, met with the President, Peter Wallison, Don Regan, and Alton Keel, at the request
of the White House to discuss matters relating to the sale of arms to Iran and possible diversion
of funds to the Contras.  The Committee was not informed of this meeting until January 20,
1987.

     According to testimony received by the Committee, on December 20 Senator Dave
Durenberger and Bernard McMahon met with the Vice President, Craig Fuller and a second
member of his staff to discuss matters relating to the sale of arms to Iran and possible diversion
of funds to the Contras.  The Committee was not informed of this meeting until January 20,
1987.

     (SSCI Report on Preliminary Inquiry, 1/29/87, ALU 003546.)

     89 Regan's first testimony on the subject was before the SSCI on December 16, 1986.  He
testified that in August 1985 President Reagan told McFarlane that he didn't want to authorize
Israeli arms shipments.  In September 1985, according to Regan, McFarlane told the President
about the Israeli TOW missile shipment after the fact, and the President was ``quite upset'' about
it.  Regan said the President told McFarlane to let the Israelis know of ``our displeasure . . . in no
uncertain terms. Period.''  Asked whether the President approved of the replenishment of Israeli
stocks, Regan said no.  (Regan, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, pp. 12-13.)

     In an FBI interview on December 18, 1986, Regan said McFarlane in August 1985 briefed the
President on the fact that Israel wanted to sell TOWs to Iran.  While the President agreed with the
desirability of a dialogue with Iran, he did not approve the arms sale or replenishment, according
to Regan.  Regan said the only arms sales to Iran specifically authorized by the President took
place in 1986.  (Regan, FBI 302, 12/18/86, p. 8.)

     Regan told the Tower Board on January 7, 1987, that McFarlane informed the President after
Labor Day in September 1985 that the Israelis had sold arms to Iran.  He said the President was
upset, but ``at that time did not indicate that he wanted to make a big deal out of it.  It was done.
It had been done.  There was a possibility of a hostage coming out.  He decided to leave it alone,
just accept the fact that it was done, leave it there.  I don't recall anything else happening, except I
believe that [hostage] Benjamin Weir did come out at that time, if I'm not mistaken, or shortly
thereafter.''  Regan said there was no specific request for replenishment at that time.  (Regan,
Tower Commission Interview, 1/7/87, p. 9.)

     In a Select Committees deposition on March 3, 1987, Regan said he could not recall the
President ever telling him that he had told McFarlane he would replenish Israeli weapons stocks.
(Regan, Select Committees Deposition, 3/3/87, p. 55.)  In a second deposition on July 30, 1987,
Regan reaffirmed his earlier statements and added Poindexter's November 10, 1986, inaccurate
recounting of events as supporting evidence:

     Q:  Does it sound reasonable or plausible to you knowing the Israelis they would go forward
and deplete -- not deplete, but diminish this inventory of TOW missiles without some sort of a
guarantee that they would, in fact, be replaced at a future time?

     A:  I can't answer that.  I don't know what was in the minds of the Israelis.  What I was
looking for here in my notes, I have notes somewhere that the -- John Poindexter, at the
November 10th meeting giving the background to everybody, in there described the fact that the
Israelis had gone ahead without our permission.  This is Poindexter now, who is the deputy at the
time the incident happened, describing it to the rest of us and saying the same thing.  So there
was no presidential knowledge, no presidential concept. So the Israelis apparently took a chance
that if they did something that pleased us, we would replace them.

     (Regan, Select Committees Deposition, 7/30/87, pp. 117-18.)

     Also on July 30, 1987, Regan said the President said when he learned in September 1985 of
the shipment:  ``As far as any replenishment is concerned, we will cross that bridge later.  I am
not going to do anything about that now.''  Regan said he knew at the time that the Israeli delivery
of TOWs was tied to the release of Weir.  (Ibid., pp. 30-31.)

     Regan in the Grand Jury on February 3, 1988, said about the August-September 1985
shipment: ``I have always claimed and I will claim today that it was after the fact that we were
notified.  I don't recall being told in advance that that was happening.  If I recall it, it was that we
were notified by McFarlane along these lines, and I'm paraphrasing, `Guess what those damn
Israelis have done.  They've already shipped TOWs to Iran, and now they're asking us to replace
them.' ''  Regan, however, directly contradicted his earlier testimony regarding President Reagan's
stand on replenishment:

     Q:  And after you learned of that shipment, was the issue of replenishment raised at that time?

     A:  Yes -- toward the end of August and in September.

     Q:  What was your understanding, if any, of how replenishment would operate?

     A:  Well, at that point we were faced with a fait accompli.  The deed was done.  And Israel is
a staunch ally of ours, and the President said, ``Well, I guess we'll have to replace them.''  So he
authorized the replenishment.

     (Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, pp. 55-56.)

     In his February 3, 1988, Grand Jury appearance, Regan indicated that the President learned of
the August-September 1985 shipments in mid-transaction.  Asked whether he and the President
were informed in advance of the mid-September 1985 shipment, he said:  ``I believe we were,
because that was tied in with the original shipment.  That -- okay, when we replenish we'll have
to replenish both the 500 and 100.''  (Ibid., p. 57.)

     Regan's shifting testimony paralleled generalized legal worries among Administration
officials about the 1985 Israeli shipments.  Before Regan made his early statements about the
August-September 1985 arms shipments, White House Counsel Wallison had raised with him
serious concerns about their legality under the Arms Export Control Act (AECA).

     Regan's testimony on the November 1985 HAWK missile shipment to Iran has been
consistent, acknowledging that McFarlane briefed the President in Geneva on the HAWKs
shipment as it was about to take place.90

     90 Since his earliest testimony before the SSCI on December 16, 1986, Regan repeatedly
stated that McFarlane briefed the President during the November 1985 Geneva summit on a
shipment of arms from Israel to Iran via a European country.

     Independent Counsel questioned Regan also about the possibility that he spoke to North about
the HAWK shipment, because of a series of documented phone calls between North, Poindexter
and Regan in the same time frame.  Regan has testified repeatedly that the only time he ever
spoke to North on the phone was on November 24, 1985, but he consistently maintained that this
conversation concerned the hijacking of an Egyptian airliner.  Asked by the FBI on March 6,
1991, to explain a list of calls between November 25-December 1, 1985, including some from
Poindexter, Regan stated that he doesn't remember receiving any calls about the HAWK
shipment.  (Regan, FBI 302, 3/6/91, p. 6.)  On November 23, 1985, Regan received a call from
an unidentified ``secure voice'' at 11:44 p.m., 10 minutes before Poindexter called the President.
Poindexter told the Grand jury he could not remember the purpose of this late-night call.
(Poindexter, Grand Jury, 3/6/91, pp. 8-9.)

     In an apparent contradiction with other Administration officials who early on maintained that
President Reagan didn't learn about the true cargo of the November 1985 HAWK shipment until
1986, Regan told SSCI that a meeting in the White House residence of the principals on
December 7, 1985, involved ``much discussion about the shipment of those HAWK missiles.''
(Regan, SSCI Testimony, 12/16/86, p. 20.)  Regan in his Select Committees deposition of July
15, 1987, recalled there was talk at the meeting of a need for a Finding if the initiative proceeded,
but he didn't recall anyone saying one was already drafted.  (Regan, Select Committees
Deposition, 7/15/87, pp. 15-16.)

     Regan in the Grand Jury on February 3, 1988, was shown a memo by Deputy CIA Director
John McMahon, written December 7, 1985, stating that a Finding had been signed to cover the
November 1985 HAWK shipment.  With refreshed memory, Regan testified that he ``probably
did'' discuss the Finding with Casey:  ``Because I recall that, after this event had taken place --
that is, the HAWK shipments -- that Casey did discuss with me the fact that there was no finding,
but such a finding would be needed for the record; and he would get together with McFarlane
and see that one was prepared.''  (Regan, Grand Jury, 2/3/88, pp. 70-71.)

     Correcting the President

     Starting with his testimony before SSCI in December 1986 up until his Grand Jury appearance
in February 1988, Regan maintained that President Reagan had not known about the
August-September 1985 TOW shipments until after the fact and had not approved the
replenishment of weapons to Israel.  This put him in direct conflict with McFarlane, who had
testified that President Reagan explicitly approved, in advance, the shipments and replenishment.

     These contradictory claims did not cause a real problem for the White House until the
presidentially appointed Tower Board in late 1986 and early 1987 interviewed McFarlane, Regan
and President Reagan; the President wavered between the two versions of events, ultimately
informing the Board he could not recall what had actually happened.

     McFarlane gave his first interview to the Tower Board on December 11, 1986, with
subsequent interviews on February 19 and 21, 1987.  Regan spoke to the Board on January 7,
1986.  By the time President Reagan testified about the August-September 1985 arms shipments,
there was a  stark factual conflict regarding his actions that only he could resolve.

     The Tower Board reported that President Reagan in his first interview on January 26, 1987,
said he had approved the arms shipments in August 1985.  In his second interview on February
11, 1987, ``the president said that he and Regan had gone over the matter repeatedly and that
Regan had a firm recollection that the President had not authorized the August shipment in
advance.'' 91  The Board noted that President Reagan relied heavily in his second interview on a
memorandum prepared by Wallison, which stated that the President had been ``surprised'' by the
August-September 1985 shipments.  Finally, on February 20, 1987, President Reagan in a letter
to the Board stated: ``I let myself be influenced by others' recollections, not my own.''  President
Reagan said he had no personal notes or records to refresh his memory and he ``cannot recall
anything whatsoever'' about whether he approved the shipment or replenishment in August 1985.
``My answer therefore and the simple truth is, `I don't remember -- period.' '' 92

     91 Tower Commission Report, 2/26/87, p. B-19.

     92 Ibid., p. B-19-20.

     In his book Consequences, John Tower, the Chairman of the Tower Board, described the
Board's shock and suspicion over President Reagan's changed testimony.   Tower said when he
asked the President clarifying questions, the President at one point ``picked up a sheet of paper
and . . . said to the board, `This is what I am supposed to say,' and proceeded to read us an answer
prepared by Peter Wallison, the White House counsel.''  Tower wrote:

     . . . we were left with a major contradiction to deal with, which bore all the earmarks of a
deliberate effort to conceal White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan's involvement in the
Iran-contra affair.  By convincing the president that he, the president, had not authorized the arms
shipment, Regan was buttressing his own contention that he had been completely unaware of the
transaction despite a reputation for tightly controlling the chain of command within the White
House staff.  It appeared that Regan was putting his own interests ahead of those of the president,
who had promised the American people a ``full and complete airing of all the facts.''  Given the
Wallison memo, this seemed to us to be the only logical explanation for the altered testimony.93

     93 Tower, Consequences (Little, Brown & Co., 1991), pp. 283-284.

     In his diary, Wallison described preparing President Reagan for his initial testimony to the
Tower Board, in a meeting on January 22, 1987, that included Vice President Bush, Regan and
Special Counsel David Abshire.  Wallison said the President used a chronology of events that
Wallison had prepared and had apparently gone back to his diary to flesh it out.  While the
President's diary was ``relatively complete,'' according to Wallison, it contained ``no
confirmation that he had approved arms sales in Aug. or Sept. of 1985.''  Wallison said the
President had virtually no independent recollection of any of the 1985 arms shipments  except for
diary notes.  Another preparatory meeting was held January 23, 1987.94

     94 Wallison Diary, 1/22/87, ALU 0138553.

     Wallison was present during President Reagan's January 26, 1987, Tower Board interview.
He noted in his diary that the President said he thought he had approved the August 1985
shipment in advance.  ``This really surprised me,'' Wallison wrote.  ``In our earlier discussions
the Pres. had no recollection of having approved this sale, and now he seemed to have a pretty
clear recollection that he had done so.  I could not figure out how he had come to that view,
which put him at odds with Regan, the rest of the cabinet, and the written record.'' 95

     95 Ibid., 1/26/87, ALU 0138304-05.

     After the Tower interview, President Reagan met with Wallison in the Oval Office and
showed him that he had found a North chronology of November 19, 1986, which Wallison told
him was false.  According to Wallison, the chronology helped explain President Reagan's
recollection about the November 1985 HAWK shipment, but the chronology stated that he had
not approved the Israeli shipment in advance ``so his statements that he had approved had not
come from that source.'' 96

     96 Ibid., ALU 0138305.

     On January 28, 1987, Wallison gave President Reagan a memorandum on what he had earlier
told the Tower Board.  Reagan read the memorandum and said it seemed complete.  Wallison
told the President he wanted to discuss with him some of his answers.  On January 30, 1987,
Wallison, Regan and Abshire met with the President and asked him whether he remembered
approving the August 1985 shipment, or just the fact of replenishment some time in 1986.  The
President ``seemed at first to have no recollection,'' according to Wallison.

     Then Regan said that he (Regan) remembered McF. [McFarlane] telling the Pres. that the
Israelis had sent the weapons without our approval, and that the Pres. was surprised and
displeased.  Regan said the Pres. said something like ``What's done is done,'' but was not happy.
As he listened to this, the Pres. seemed to have a recollection of this event.  He said to me ``You
know, he's right'' referring to Regan.  I think at that point he genuinely had a recollection of this
sequence of events, and that he had not approved the sale in advance.97

     97 Ibid., 1/30/87, ALU 0138310.

     In early February 1987, Wallison managed to set up a second interview for the President with
the Tower Board.  On February 9, 1987, Wallison, Regan and Abshire met with the President to
prepare him for his second interview.

     Wallison advised the President to tell the Board only what he seemed to recall, according to
Wallison, about the 1985 shipments:  That he was ``surprised'' to learn after  the fact of the
summer 1985 transactions, and that he had no memory of the November 1985 HAWK
shipments.98  A second preparatory session was held the morning of February 11, 1987.
Wallison in his diary stated that he gave the President a memo ``setting out what I understood to
be his revised recollection concerning whether he had initially authorized the sale of TOWs by
Israel to Iran.''  Wallison said the President ``seemed to see the issue as a dispute between Regan
and McFarlane, and did not want to take sides.'' 99

     98 Ibid., 2/9/87, ALU 0138319.

     99 Ibid., 2/11/87, ALU 0138321-22.

     In his second interview with the Tower Board, President Reagan read from the Wallison
memorandum.  ``Unfortunately, it was written in the second person, and so he flubbed a
summary of it,'' Wallison noted.  ``In all, it was a weak performance, and left the unfortunate
impression that he might have been influenced to this view against his best recollection.'' 100

     100 Ibid., ALU 01388322-323.

     Wallison said after the interview he became ``quite concerned'' that the Board might believe
``we had tried to sway his recollection, perhaps in order to buttress Regan's view of events.''  But,
Wallison said,

     It was an attempt to set the historical record straight.  I had twice heard him say that he had
been surprised to learn of the Israeli shipment; his notes do not disclose and [sic] approval;
Shultz, Weinberger and Regan do not know of any approval; the record shows that North was not
able to get replenishment of the Israelis before the Jan 17, 1986 finding was signed.  All this
leads to the conclusion that the Pres. did not in fact approve.  Only McF. says he did, but McF.'s
credibility is subject to question and he could have been protecting the Pres. by adopting the idea
of an oral finding.101

     101 Ibid., ALU 0138323.

     On February 13, 1987, The Washington Post reported that the Tower Board was now looking
into a ``cover-up'' by the White House to keep the Iran arms sales from becoming public.102  On
February 14, 1987, Wallison met with the Tower Board staff about their concerns over the
President's changing statements about the August 1985 shipment.  The same day Wallison started
to get press inquiries about a change in Reagan's testimony.  The story became public in the press
on February 19, 1987, and Regan was directly blamed for the President's changed testimony.103

     102 ``Tower Panel Probing Whether Iran Cover-Up Was Attempted,'' The Washington Post,
2/13/87, p. A1.

     103 ``President Changed Statement on 1985 Iran Arms Approval,'' The Washington Post,
2/19/87, p. A1; ``Conflicts in Reagan Iran Remarks Cited,'' The Los Angeles Times, 2/19/87, p.
1.

     In the meantime, Wallison had gathered three computer messages from McFarlane to
Poindexter that  confused the issue further:  one dated November 7, 1986, stating that the
President had not authorized the August 1985 arms shipment in advance; the second on
November 18, 1986, also stating that the President did not approve a weapons transfer; and one
written on November 21, 1986, in which McFarlane described a meeting with Meese and noting
that Meese would be ``relieved'' if the President had approved the 1985 Israeli shipments in
advance.104  Wallison showed the computer notes to Regan on February 19, 1987, suggesting
that McFarlane changed his version of events and that Regan's recollection was the true one.105

     104 PROFs Notes from McFarlane to Poindexter: 11/7/86, AKW 021626-27; 11/18/86, AKW
021672-74; 11/21/86, AKW 021677.

     105 Wallison Diary, 2/19/87, ALU 0138337-39.

     Later on, Abshire and Wallison met with President Reagan and showed him the McFarlane
notes.  The President read the November 18, 1986, computer message and ``seemed angry about
it,'' according to Wallison.  The President said his recollection was closer to McFarlane's
testimony, which he had recently re-read -- that he had approved the shipment in advance.
President Reagan said he had no recollection of being surprised at learning of the shipment.
When Wallison and Abshire pressed him, ``he finally said that he really could recall nothing of
any of this -- that the whole period was a blank.''  Abshire  subsequently called Tower and told
him to talk to President Reagan on the phone to hear his statement; Tower asked for a letter
instead.106

     106 Ibid., ALU 0138339.

     On February 20, 1987, President Reagan sent his letter to the Tower Board.  Regan, upon
learning that the President said he let himself be ``influenced by others' recollections,'' became
angry, according to Wallison, and blamed the wording of the letter on Nancy Reagan.107

     107 Ibid., ALU 0138571-72.

     Regan's Forced Resignation

     The Tower Board controversy led to Donald Regan's ultimate dismissal as White House chief
of staff, after pressure on the President to remove him had been building for months.  On
February 20, 1987, Vice President Bush confronted Regan about resigning, citing continuing
trouble among staff and in the press.  Regan, according to the Vice President, agreed to leave
following the issuance of the Tower Board report.

     Vice President Bush wrote:  ``I went in to see the President after the talk with Don Regan.
The President was very, very pleased.  He thanked me about three times.  I gave him a full report.
He was concerned that Don would walk in and see us talking, so I left after about 15 minutes.''
According to Vice President Bush, he and the President  agreed that their discussion about Regan
should be considered a ``non-conversation.'' 108

     108 Bush diary, 2/20/87, ARZ 002847-48.

     Vice President Bush saw Regan again February 26, 1987, and Regan informed Bush he would
leave the following week.  Again, the Vice President informed President Reagan of the
conversation.109

     109 Ibid., 2/26/87, ARZ 002849.  Don Regan described in his book For The Record a more
elliptical exchange with the Vice President.  According to Regan, the Vice President on February
23, 1987, called him into his office and said, ``Don, why don't you stick your head into the Oval
Office and talk to the President about your situation?''  Regan said the Vice President explained
that the President had asked him what Regan's plans were.  According to Regan, the President
suggested that he leave that day, before the Tower Board report came out.  Regan convinced the
President to allow him to stay until the following week, after it was issued.  (Regan, For The
Record, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich 1988, pp. 96-99.)

     On February 27, 1987, Regan resigned.  Wallison followed him shortly thereafter.

     Decision Not To Prosecute

     There were three areas of Regan's conduct that invited investigation.  Independent Counsel
attempted to determine whether there was a conspiracy to cover up President Reagan's possible
violation of the Arms Export Control Act by the 1985 arms transactions; second, whether Regan,
on his own or with Wallison, deprived the Tower Board of President Reagan's honest
recollection regarding his authorization of the 1985 arms transactions; and third,  whether Regan
willfully withheld his notes from the congressional committees and the Office of Independent
Counsel.

     As more extensively discussed in the section dealing with Meese, there is little doubt that
Meese's November 21-24, 1986 ``fact-finding'' effort was, in fact, a damage-control effort.
Wallison was concerned that the President had violated the Arms Export Control Act, and raised
these concerns with Regan.  Regan admitted to Independent Counsel his own concerns over
possible impeachment of the President.110

     110 The Justice Department's later rationalizations that the Arms Export Control Act did not
apply were at best tenuous.  Whether or not the arms transactions were illegal, they presented a
clear confrontation with the statute and, accordingly, they invited consideration of harsh
congressional reaction and possible impeachment, as Regan admitted.

     Although Regan was in frequent contact with Meese and Casey during this critical period,
Independent Counsel obtained no usable evidence that he was attempting to orchestrate a story,
or that he was helping Meese do it.  His notes, when ultimately produced, substantially helped
develop Independent Counsel's knowledge of the facts.  When Regan testified before the Grand
Jury, he gave every appearance of being forthright.  His testimony would have been used against
Weinberger and was available against Meese.  Under the circumstances, it was decided that,
although the delay in the production of his notes had damaged OIC's investigation, its
investigative purposes would be better served by developing him as a witness rather than a target.

     Regarding the President's vacillating statements to the Tower Board, there is no direct
evidence of obstruction by Regan or Wallison.  Based on Wallison's diary, there seems to have
been genuine confusion over the issue, and the President appeared genuinely confused about his
recollection.

     Regarding Regan's notes, Independent Counsel believed that primary responsibility for
production rested with the White House.  Regan produced copies of his notes when they were
subpoenaed.

Chapter 31

     Edwin Meese III:  November 1986

     Attorney General Edwin Meese III became directly involved in the Reagan Administration's
secret plan to sell weapons to Iran in January 1986, when he was asked for a legal opinion to
support the plan.1  When the secret arms sales became exposed in November 1986, raising
questions of legality and prompting congressional and public scrutiny, Meese became the point
man for the Reagan Administration's effort, in Meese's words, ``to limit the damage.'' 2

     1 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 2-9; 21-36.  Meese also supported the
plan.  (Ibid., pp. 5-7.)

     2 Meese, North Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, pp. 5747-48.

     Meese began with an attempt to justify legally President Reagan's failure to notify Congress of
the arms sales for more than a year.  His efforts led to a November 21-24 fact-finding
investigation focused on the President's involvement in the November 1985 HAWK missile
shipment to Iran.

     The Select Iran/contra Committees criticized Meese for departing from ``standard
investigative techniques'' in his fact-finding mission because he failed to protect National
Security Council documents, many of which were altered or destroyed as he conducted
one-on-one interviews with senior  Administration officials without taking notes.3  The Select
Committees also faulted Meese for ``incorrectly'' stating in his November 25, 1986, press
conference, at which he disclosed the Iran/contra diversion, that President Reagan did not learn
of the 1985 shipment until February 1986.  The Select Committees viewed this as an isolated
error.  It was not.

     3 Select Committees Report, pp. 10-11, pp. 20-21, pp. 306-07, p. 311, pp. 317-18.

     Meese was conducting the November 21-24 investigation as ``counselor'' and ``friend'' to the
President, not as the nation's chief law enforcement officer.  Independent Counsel concluded that
he was not so much searching for the truth about the November 1985 HAWK shipment, as he
was building a case of deniability for his client-in-fact, President Reagan.  By this time, Meese
knew that the 1985 HAWK transaction, in which the National Security Council staff and the
Central Intelligence Agency were directly involved without a presidential covert-action Finding
authorizing their involvement, raised serious legal questions.  The President was potentially
exposed to charges of illegal conduct if he was knowledgeable of the shipment and had not
reported it to Congress, under the requirements of the Arms Export Control Act (AECA) and in
the absence of a Finding.  But Meese apparently never questioned the President himself about
whether he approved or knew about  the November 1985 HAWK shipment.  When Meese got
answers in his inquiry that did not support his defense of the President, he apparently ignored
them, as he did with Secretary of State George P. Shultz's revelation on November 22 that the
President had told him that he had known of the HAWK shipment in advance.

     In the course of the weekend inquiry, Meese and his aides discovered in the National Security
Council Office of Lt. Col. Oliver L. North a politically explosive document:  An undated
memorandum, apparently drafted in early April 1986, that outlined a planned diversion of $12
million in proceeds from the Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan contras.  This discovery caused
the Meese inquiry to veer off onto two tracks -- while facts about the 1985 HAWK shipment
were still being gathered, there was a second effort to determine who knew about and who
approved the diversion.  After receiving confirmation from North that an Iran/contra diversion
had occurred, Meese quietly imparted the news to the President, White House Chief of Staff
Donald T. Regan and Vice President Bush on November 24, sounding them out privately on their
personal knowledge of it.  He did not inform a senior advisers' meeting that afternoon.  He
informed the Cabinet on the next day.

     Meese attempted to resolve the separate but continuing problem of the HAWK shipment --
particularly the President's contemporaneous knowledge -- at the senior  advisers' meeting on
Monday, November 24, attended by President Reagan, Vice President Bush, Regan, National
Security Adviser John M. Poindexter, Shultz, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, and
CIA Director William J. Casey.  In response to a question about the November 1985 HAWK
shipment, Poindexter falsely claimed that before December 1985, McFarlane handled the Iran
arms sales ``all alone'' with ``no documentation.'' 4  Meese then added that the November 1985
HAWK shipment ``[m]ay be a violation of law if arms shipped w/o a finding.  But President did
not know.'' 5  At least Meese, President Reagan, Regan, Shultz, Weinberger, Bush, and
Poindexter knew that Meese's version was false, but no one spoke up to correct him.  After the
meeting, Shultz told his aide M. Charles Hill, ``They may lay all this off on Bud [McFarlane] . . .
They rearranging the record.'' 6

     4 Weinberger Note, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669LL.

     5 Regan Note, 11/24/86, ALU 0139379.

     6 Hill Note, 11/24/86, ANS 00001898.

     Because Congress had already announced its intention to hold hearings on the Iran arms sales,
Meese's apparent attempt to signal other Cabinet members that the party line should be that the
President did not have contemporaneous knowledge of the November 1985 HAWK shipment
required evaluation as an effort to obstruct a congressional inquiry.

     The OIC did not learn of Meese's statements at the November 24, 1986, meeting until late
1991 and 1992, when it finally obtained notes of the meeting taken by Weinberger and Regan.
Six years after the pivotal events had occurred, the trail was cold.  With the principals professing
no memory of often critical events, the OIC did not uncover sufficient evidence of an obstruction
to justify a prosecution.

     November 1-19, 1986

     On November 3, 1986, the secret U.S. arms sales to Iran were first exposed in the press,
setting off inquiries that resulted in a series of false denials by the White House.  On November
5, 1986, Poindexter asked Meese for some ``legal advice'' on the arms sales to Iran, in
anticipation of questions from Congress.7  Two days later, Meese asked Assistant Attorney
General Charles Cooper, the head of the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel, to
research the matter, with assistance from ``one other trusted person.'' 8  Meese told Cooper that
NSC counsel Paul Thompson would be his White House contact.9  Cooper understood that he
was to research the relevant statutes and  to provide an analysis of whether the arms shipments
were legal.10

     7 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, pp. 62-66.

     8 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 42-43; Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp.
8-11.

     9 Ibid., pp. 22-23.

     10 Ibid., pp. 13, 15-16.

     On the morning of November 10, President Reagan met in the Oval Office with his senior
national security advisers, including Meese, Poindexter, Vice President Bush, Shultz,
Weinberger, Casey, Regan, and Poindexter's deputy, Alton Keel, to discuss issuing a public
statement on the Iran arms sales.  Poindexter gave a presentation on the arms sales to Iran in
which he described U.S. involvement as beginning with the January 17, 1986, presidential
Finding.  He omitted any mention of U.S. approval of or involvement in the 1985 shipments of
arms from Israeli stocks.  Instead, he asserted falsely that U.S. officials first learned of the 1985
Israeli shipments to Iran when they confronted Israeli officials after discovering a warehouse of
U.S.-made arms in Portugal in 1986.  According to Poindexter, Israel had responded that they
were trying to get Iranian Jews out of Iran.11

     11 Hill Note, 11/10/86, ANS 0001762; Regan Note, 11/10/86, ALU 0139114; Keel Note,
11/10/86, AKW 047247.

     Virtually everyone at the November 10 meeting knew that Poindexter's story was false, but no
one spoke up to correct it.  President Reagan, Shultz, Weinberger, Regan, Vice President Bush,
and Casey all knew that at least since June 1985 Israel had proposed  selling U.S. arms to Iran in
an attempt to free U.S. hostages, not Iranian Jews.  They also knew that the Administration had
learned about the Israeli efforts directly, not from stumbling on a warehouse of weapons in
Portugal.  President Reagan, Regan, Shultz, Vice President Bush, and Weinberger all had
advance notice of the November 1985 HAWK shipment and its purpose -- to free the hostages.
Casey definitely knew within a few days after the shipment and may have known in advance as
well.  There is no direct evidence that Meese knew about the 1985 shipments prior to this
meeting.12

     12 Meese denied that a September 1985 TOW missile shipment was discussed at the
November 10 meeting and maintained that he did not learn of the 1985 shipments until
approximately November 18, when Cooper told him about the NSC chronology.  Meese's own
notes of the meeting, however, belie his claim: ``508 [TOWs] shipped by Israel -- [U.S.] told
after the fact  . . . Results: . . . 3 hostages ret'd: Weir, Jako [sic, Jenco] Jacobsen.''  The reference
to Weir's release being one of the ``results'' of the shipments is significant because he was
released in September 1985.

     After Poindexter's presentation, the group reviewed a draft press statement prepared by Casey.
Poindexter opposed issuing a public statement because it would terminate ongoing negotiations
with Iran.  Regan urged they issue a statement, because ``we are being hung out to dry'' and
``[o]ur credibility is at stake.'' 13  President Reagan favored a statement emphasizing that the
United States had not dealt with terrorists but was pursuing a long-range policy toward Iran.14
Meese wanted the statement to include the assertion that no U.S. laws or policy had been
violated, even though he had not yet received any assurance from Cooper, who was still
researching the matter.15  Meese testified that as late as November 20, 1985, he was not ``fully
informed'' on the legal issues and was relying on Cooper.16

     13 Weinberger Memo, 11/10/86, ALZ 0041727.

     14 Regan Note, 11/10/86, ALU 0139114; Keel Note, 11/10/86, AKW 047247.

     15 Regan Note, 11/10/86, ALU 0139114.

     16 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, p. 112.  Meese's prior analysis in January 1986 that the plan
was legal was based on his understanding that shipments would be authorized by a Finding
signed by the President.  Having just been told that in September 1985, weapons were shipped
before any Finding, Meese, at that point, had no basis for asserting that no laws had been
violated.  Even if Israel had shipped the weapons without U.S. approval there would have been a
violation of the Arms Export Control Act because the President had failed to report such a
third-country the shipment to Congress ``immediately'' after learning of it.

     Near the end of the meeting, Shultz demanded to know whether there would be further arms
sales to Iran.   President Reagan responded by insisting that his advisers support the policy and to
not say anything else publicly.  Shultz replied that he supported the President, but not the
policy.17

     17 Regan Note, 11/10/86, ALU 0139126; Keel Note, 11/10/86, AKW 047255; Hill Note,
11/10/86, ANS 0001764.

     The press statement released later that day did not confirm or deny any arms sales to Iran.  It
simply announced that the President had met with his senior national security  advisers to discuss
the hostages held in Lebanon, and that no laws had been broken:

     As has been the case in similar meetings with the President and his senior advisers on this
matter, there was unanimous support for the President.  While specific decisions discussed at the
meeting cannot be divulged, the President did ask that it be reemphasized that no U.S. laws have
been or will be violated and that our policy of not making concessions to terrorists remains
intact.18

     18 White House Press Statement, 11/10/86.

     When White House Counsel Peter J. Wallison received a copy of the statement he ``was
unhappy to note that it said that all laws had been complied with.  I was told that this is what the
AG [attorney general] wanted said.'' 19  Wallison had previously expressed to Regan his concern
that the arms sales may have violated the Arm Export Control Act (AECA).  Wallison's efforts to
look into the matter had been thwarted, however, by Poindexter's unwillingness to provide him
with the facts.

     19 Wallison Diary, 11/14/86, ALU 0138220, p. 251.

     On November 12, 1986, a story in The New York Times questioned the legality of the arms
sales to Iran.  After learning of the report, Nancy Reagan told Don Regan that she was ``very
upset'' by the press reports and that the policy of refusing comment on the arms sales was
``[r]isking presidency.'' 20  Regan testified that as the Iran arms sales continued to dominate the
news and the President's  approval ratings plummeted, he and other officials were concerned that
the scandal would become another Watergate and lead to calls for President Reagan's
impeachment.21

     20 Regan Note, 11/12/86, ALU 0138701.

     21 Regan, Grand Jury, 5/8/92, pp. 98-100.

     Later on November 12, President Reagan and his top advisers, including Vice President Bush,
Shultz, Weinberger, Meese, and Poindexter met with Senate leaders Robert Byrd and Robert
Dole, House Speaker Jim Wright and Rep. Richard Cheney to brief them on the Iran arms
sales.22  According to Regan's notes of the meeting, Poindexter once again provided the false
cover story that ``Israel's participation in arms selling led us to discover arms in Portugal which
Israel [was] selling to get Jews out of Iran.'' 23  When Sen. Byrd demanded to know when the
Administration's contacts with Iran began, Poindexter responded falsely that, although the
Administration had begun to explore contacts with Iran in 1985, there had been ``no transfer of
material'' before the Finding was signed in January 1986.24

     22 Regan Note, 11/12/86, ALU 0139132.

     23 Ibid., pp. 4-5, ALU 0139135-36.

     24 Ibid., p. 10, ALU 0139141.

     On November 13, 1986, Cooper gave Meese the memorandum justifying the 1986 arms
shipments under the National Security Act.  That evening, President Reagan delivered a
nationally televised address, purporting to set  out the facts of U.S. involvement in the arms sales
to Iran.  He publicly admitted for the first time that he had authorized ``the transfer of small
amounts of defensive weapons and spare parts for defensive systems to Iran.''  He insisted,
however, that ``[t]hese modest deliveries, taken together, could easily fit into a single cargo
plane.''  He denied reports of dissension within the Administration and asserted that ``all
appropriate Cabinet officers were fully consulted.''  The President also reiterated his earlier
statement that no federal laws had been broken and assured the public that ``the relevant
committees of Congress are being, and will be, fully informed.''  He did not mention the 1985
arms sales to Iran.25

     25 Transcript of President's Address to the Nation on the Iran Arms and Contra Aid
Controversy, 11/13/86, pp. 1546-48.

     At a meeting that morning to draft the President's address, Poindexter's deputy Alton Keel
proposed inserting a sentence that all laws had been complied with.  Wallison, who had been
researching the question for Regan but was unable to get the facts from Poindexter, stated that
the legality of the shipments had not yet been confirmed.  According to Wallison, ``Keel
exploded, telling me that this is what the President wanted, this is what the AG [attorney general]
wants, and this is what the National Security Adviser wants; that the Pres. [President] had already
said as much earlier in the week; that this  statute was the AG's to interpret, and I should not go
around expressing disagreement with the AG's conclusions.''  The sentence that all laws had been
complied with was inserted in the President's address over Wallison's objection.26

     26 Wallison Diary, 11/14/86, ALU 0138222-23, pp. 253-54.

     Wallison remained concerned about the legality of the shipments and tried repeatedly to
discuss the subject with Meese.  When Wallison finally spoke with Meese on the afternoon of
November 13, Meese said he would have Cooper contact him.  That evening, Cooper explained
his theory on the legality of the arms shipments as set forth in the memorandum he had delivered
to Meese, based on the January 1986 Finding authorizing the shipments as a covert action under
the National Security Act.  Cooper argued that the President had inherent constitutional powers,
recognized in the National Security Act, to conduct the arms sales without notifying Congress.
Wallison responded that Cooper's approach would ``provoke a constitutional confrontation that
we have tried to avoid in the context of the War Powers Resolution.'' 27

     27 Ibid., p. 254, ALU 0138223.

     Wallison also asked Cooper how long he had been working on this project.  Cooper
responded, ``about a day.''  Wallison noted in his diary that ``[i]t thus appeared that the Pres.
[President] was going to state in his speech that no laws had been violated but the Justice Dept.,
which  supposedly had given him that advice had not even begun to research the question in any
depth.'' 28  The problem was even greater than Wallison suspected:  The 1985 shipments,
particularly the November HAWK shipment in which the NSC and CIA acted without a Finding,
had yet to be acknowledged by Administration officials.

     28 Ibid., p. 255, ALU 0138224.

     Dissidence about the arms sales among the President's top advisers broke into the open on
Sunday, November 16, when Shultz appeared on CBS-TV's  ``Face the Nation.''  Shultz stated
that he opposed any further arms sales to Iran but, when pressed, conceded that he could not
speak for the Administration.29

     29 Weinberger's diary notes for the day reflect that he spoke to Poindexter later that day ``re
Shultz `distancing himself' '' from the Iran arms sales.  (Weinberger Note, 11/15/86, ALZ
0040539.)

     On November 18, Wallison called a meeting of the general counsel of the agencies involved
in the Iran arms sales.  Present at the meeting were Wallison, Paul Thompson from the NSC,
Cooper, Abraham D. Sofaer from State, H. Lawrence Garrett III from the Defense Department,
David Doherty from the CIA, and an attorney from the staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.30  The
purpose of the meeting, according to Wallison, ``was to see if . . . [they] could agree to a
common set of theories to support the position  that the Administration would take in testimony
and briefings on the Hill.'' 31

     30 Wallison Note, 11/18/86, p. 258, ALU 0138204.

     31 Ibid.

     Cooper explained his theory that the 1986 shipments were legal pursuant to the President's
inherent constitutional authority as recognized by the National Security Act, and that the
reporting requirements of the AECA did not apply.  Cooper noted that the failure to notify
Congress of the 1986 arms sales, which were authorized by the January 17 Finding, was
defensible because there were precedents for delayed congressional notification of covert
operations.32  Wallison questioned whether Cooper's ``exception'' to the AECA could ``swallow
up the statute,'' but everyone else supported Cooper's view.33

     32 Ibid., p. 259; Sofaer Note, 11/18/86, ALV 000309.

     33 Wallison Note, 11/18/86, ALV 0138228, p. 259.

     Paul Thompson, general counsel to the NSC staff, briefed the group on the September 1985
TOW shipment, explaining that Israel had shipped the TOWs to Iran and that the United States
replenished Israel's stocks after the January 17, 1986, Finding was signed.34  According to
Sofaer, Cooper -- apparently relying on a draft chronology of the arms sales prepared by the NSC
staff that  he had been given the day before 35 -- said that the United States had no advance
knowledge of the TOW shipment but learned about it after the fact and later replenished Israel's
stocks.36   Wallison understood that U.S. officials had known about the shipment, but had not
approved it.37  In any event, no one had a viable legal theory for justifying the failure to report
the September 1985 shipment to Congress, as required by the AECA.38  Wallison questioned
whether Meese had known of the pre-Finding shipments before telling the President everything
was legal, and Cooper agreed to check with Meese.39  Curiously, the November 1985 HAWK
shipment was not discussed at the meeting, even though it was listed on the draft NSC
chronology Cooper had obtained the previous day.40

     34 Cooper Note, 11/18/86, ALV 077953; Cooper, FBI 302, 1/6/88,  pp. 2, 5.

     35 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 23-24.

     36 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 9/29/92, pp. 8-9, 15; Sofaer Note, 11/18/86, ALV 000309.

     37 Wallison Note, 11/18/86, ALU 0138228, p. 269.

     38 Ibid.  Even Cooper was concerned, at that time, that the pre-Finding shipments might
violate the AECA.  (Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, p. 44.)  Ultimately, however, Cooper
determined that the AECA did not apply to even the pre-Finding shipments.

     39 Wallison Note, 11/18/86, ALU 0138228, p. 259.  Cooper could not recall agreeing to
check with Meese.  (Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, p. 50.)

     40 Ibid., pp. 24-25.  The Wallison and Sofaer notes of the meeting do not reflect any
discussion of the November 1985 shipment.

     Also at the meeting, Sofaer, Garrett, Wallison, and Cooper complained to Thompson that the
NSC staff was ``stiffing everybody'' by withholding factual information.41  Sofaer and Wallison
stated that without the facts they could not advise their clients and Meese would have to be the
sole spokesperson on the legal issues.42  Thompson nevertheless refused to provide additional
facts.43

     41 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, p. 32; Wallison Note, 11/18/86, pp. 258-59; Sofaer Note,
11/18/86, ALV 000309-10.

     42 Wallison Note, 11/18/86, ALU 0138227-28, pp. 258-59; Sofaer Note, 11/18/86, ALV
000309-10.

     43 Ibid., 259.

     Sofaer met that afternoon with Shultz's executive assistant, M. Charles Hill, to debrief him
about the general counsel meeting.  Sofaer told Hill that Thompson and the CIA were refusing to
give the other lawyers the facts.  Sofaer explained the legal rationale for the 1986 arms transfers,
pursuant to the January 17 Finding and noted that there were two problems with the
Administration's position.  First, Sofaer noted, one of the transfers occurred after an August 1986
amendment to the AECA which ``g008absolutely prohibit[ed] shipments to Iran.'' 44  The
second and ``more serious'' problem Sofaer identified was the ``Sept[ember] 1985 Israeli transfer
of arms to Iran'' and the subsequent replenishment of those arms by the United States,45 because
there was no Finding authorizing either action.  Sofaer added that ``If Admin claims we did
g008not approve Sept 85 transfer + it can be proved we g008did, its a Watergate style thing.''
46  Sofaer had ``suspicions'' that people were ``trying to hide the facts'' and was concerned that
Poindexter and Meese were ``shutting . . . [him] out'' because they already had their legal
arguments set and didn't want him involved because he would ``only permit arguments within
certain parameters.'' 47

     44 Hill Note, 11/18/86, ANS 0001837 (emphasis in original).  The amendment, Section 509
of the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-399 (1986),
prohibits sending weapons to any country the Secretary of State has identified as a supporter of
international terrorism.  Secretary Shultz declared Iran a supporter of terrorism in 1984.  (49 Fed.
Reg. 2836 (1984).)  The amendment was troublesome because it appears to absolutely prohibit
arms shipments to Iran unless the President (1) determines the shipment is ``important to the
national interests of the United States'' and (2) submits a report to Congress ``justifying that
determination'' and describing the proposed shipment.''  Cooper ultimately decided the
amendment was irrelevant to the Iran arms sales because the AECA itself did not apply to
shipments made pursuant to the President's inherent authority as implicitly recognized by the
National Security Act.  (Memorandum for the Attorney General, 12/17/86, p. 13, ALV 077743.)

     45 Ibid.

     46 Hill Note, 11/18/86, ANS 0001837 (emphasis in original).

     47 Sofaer, OIC Interview, 9/29/92 pp. 23-31.

     Sofaer and Under Secretary of State Michael Armacost, who was to be the State Department's
representative at the November 21 hearings before the Senate and House intelligence
committees, met later on November 18 with Poindexter for a further briefing on the arms sales.
According to Sofaer's memorandum of the meeting, Poindexter said that McFarlane had ``refused
expressly to sanction'' in advance Israel's September 1985 TOW shipment to Iran but had
indicated that the United States would continue to sell weapons to Israel even if it proceeded with
the transfer.48  Poindexter's presentation to Sofaer and Armacost once again omitted any
mention of the November 1985 HAWK shipment.  According to Sofaer's memorandum, he and
Armacost ``emphasized the need to prepare all witnesses carefully, and to answer correctly all
questions, especially those related to activities prior to January 17.'' 49

     48 Memorandum of Conversation from Sofaer, 11/18/86, ALV 000329.

     49 Ibid., ALV 000333.

     The morning of November 19, Shultz met with Hill, Armacost, and Deputy Secretary of State
John C. Whitehead to discuss the possibility of resigning.  The three agreed that Shultz and the
State Department had been put in an untenable position by the public revelation that the
Administration had been secretly selling arms to Iran while Shultz, who had known about the
arms sales, had been promoting the official U.S. policy of discouraging arms sales to Iran and
refusing to make concessions to terrorists.50   Armacost complained that the NSC staff was ``not
telling . . . [State] the truth.'' 51

     50 Hill Note, 11/19/86, ANS 0001847.

     51 Ibid.

     Meanwhile, President Reagan was preparing for his press conference scheduled for that
evening.  Shultz met with the President that afternoon to attempt to persuade him to announce
publicly that all aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward Iran would be returned to the State
Department.  Shultz argued that the President had been misled by his other advisers regarding
Iran's role in terrorism and advised him to ``watch out about saying [there had been] no deals for
host[a]g[es].'' 52  According to Hill's notes of Shultz's report on the meeting, Shultz also told the
President his understanding of the November 1985 HAWK shipment at that meeting: ``Bud once
told me about a plane of arms that w[oul]d go if host[a]g[es] released -- not if not.  P[resident]
knew of this -- but it didn't come off.'' 53

     52 Hill Note, 11/19/86, ANS 0001852.

     53 Ibid.

     Meese did not participate in preparing President Reagan for the November 19 press
conference, but he and Wallison agreed that the President should say he relied on Meese's advice
that all the shipments were legal.54  Wallison advised the President to ``cite the AG'' 55 if legal
questions arose.

     54 Wallison Note, 11/19/86, ALU 0138231, p. 262.

     55 Ibid.

     Despite Shultz's warning, President Reagan insisted in his press conference that evening that
there had been no exchange of arms for hostages.  To dispel this ``widespread but mistaken
perception'' of the policy, Reagan pledged that there would be no further arms sales to Iran and
promised again that ``all information will be provided to the appropriate members of Congress.''
In response to questions, President Reagan stated that no third countries had been involved in the
arms sales.  He also denied that there had been any U.S. involvement in arms sales to Iran before
the January 17, 1986, Finding, even though he had just that afternoon told Shultz he knew of the
November 1985 HAWK shipment.

     Because Donald Regan had told reporters in an earlier briefing that the United States had
acquiesced in an Israeli shipment of arms to Iran, the White House was compelled to issue a
correction of the President's statement.56

     56 Ibid., ALU 0138232, p. 263.

     Shultz, who watched the press conference with Hill and another aide, was alarmed by
President Reagan's inaccurate statements and asked the aide to review the transcript and identify
the factual errors.57  He immediately called Regan to schedule an appointment with the President
the following day.

     57 Hill Note, 11/19/86, ANS 0001862.

     Conflicting Stories on the November 1985 HAWK Shipment

     On November 20, 1986, Meese and Cooper met for about two hours with Casey, CIA Deputy
Director Robert Gates, Poindexter, Thompson, and North in Poindexter's office to prepare
Casey's congressional testimony and Poindexter's congressional briefing scheduled for the next
day.  Meese's role in the meeting is unclear, largely because of his own conflicting testimony.  In
December 1987 Meese told the Grand Jury he ``had been there primarily to be available in case
any legal matters came up.  I don't remember that any did particularly.  I think we may have
talked about the Arms Export Control Act.'' 58  In testimony before the Senate Intelligence
Committee in December 1986, however, Meese indicated that discussion of the legal issues
dominated, explaining that he had been present to ensure ``they had properly represented the
Findings in the chronology, and if I remember correctly we discussed the nature of the Findings,
the legal theories that were involved, and it was that more than any factual basis.'' 59  Poindexter
testified that Meese flagged the 1985 shipments as the key legal problem: ``And sometime in that
conversation Ed said that on both the September shipment of TOWs and the November shipment
of HAWKs, that -- I don't want to put words in his mouth, but it was something along the line
that it  would make a difference whether the President approved it ahead of time or afterwards, or
words to that effect.'' 60  This would become the theme of Meese's November 21-24
investigation as he sought to shield President Reagan from any question of illegal actions.

     58 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, p. 163.

     59 Meese, SSCI Testimony, 12/17/86, p. 17 (emphasis added).

     60 Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 6/17/87, pp. 347-49.

     The meeting focused on preparing Casey's testimony on the CIA's role in the November 1985
HAWK shipment.61  According to the draft of Casey's testimony, ``We in CIA did not find out
that our airline had hauled HAWK missiles into Iran until mid-January [1986] when we were
told by the Iranians.'' 62  In fact, North and Poindexter, as well as many CIA personnel, knew in
advance that the November 1985 shipment contained weapons.  Casey had been told by
McFarlane on November 14, 1985, that the Israelis were planning a weapons shipment to Iran; he
was receiving intelligence reports which made clear the cargo was weapons, and he had seen the
Finding CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin had prepared shortly after the shipment, which
sought to retroactively authorize CIA involvement in it.  Nevertheless, everyone in the meeting
apparently remained silent while North revised the draft testimony to include the broader
assertion that ``no one in the USG [U.S. Government]'' knew before January 1986 that the cargo
was weapons.63

     61 Cooper, FBI 302, 11/21/90, p. 8.  Thompson testified that the HAWKs were an issue
during the preparation session, because it ``was still a dangling paragraph to have the CIA
suddenly receiving a call from somebody, a U.S. Government person or other, and then
responding to it by having a CIA aircraft made available for this.  It just didn't seem very
characteristic of the way the CIA normally does operations, and so I think it called a lot of
attention to itself. . . . I know that was certainly a concern of the Justice Department, that why
would the CIA get involved in an airplane shipment and not know more about it, the basis for it.''
(Thompson, Grand Jury, 5/20/87, p. 157.)

     62 Draft Memorandum Re: CIA Airline Involvement, 11/20/86, AMY 000732; Cooper,
Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87, pp. 239-42.

     63 Cooper, Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87, pp. 45-46; Draft Memorandum Re: CIA
Airline Involvement, AMY 000732.

     North also changed a statement about why the HAWKs were returned to Israel -- from an
accurate account that the Iranians were dissatisfied with the type of missiles they were sold to a
false account that the United States was upset about the arms shipment and ``jaw-boned'' the
Iranians into returning the HAWKs.64  Again, no one challenged North's change.  Cooper
testified that he had ``no reason whatsoever not to accept'' North's version of the return of the
HAWK missiles.65

     64 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 70, 39-40.

     65 Ibid., p. 40.

     Cooper said that no one objected to North's changes because, ``[i]n fact, the meeting was such
that with respect to all these changes . . . North seemed to be the person who had a basis for
knowing what the facts were.  It  was my impression that Poindexter didn't know one way or the
other on this.  It was my impression that Casey didn't know one way or the other on these
changes, and that he was, like I was, accepting of North's information because North appeared to
know what he was talking about. . . .'' 66

     66 Cooper, Grand Jury, 1/11/88, pp. 55-56.

     North, on the other hand, suggested that Casey, Thompson, Poindexter and Meese did not
object to his changes, because ``they had a darned good reason for not putting the straight story
out, and their reasons might have been the same as mine.'' 67

     67 North, Select Committee Testimony, 7/8/87, p. 93.  North's basis for including Meese
among those who knew that the United States had approved the November HAWK shipment in
advance is unclear.

     While North was shaping Casey's testimony, Hill at the State Department was briefing Sofaer
and Armacost on the Iran arms sales from his contemporaneous notes to prepare for Armacost's
testimony the next day.  Hill disclosed that while in Geneva on November 18, 1985, McFarlane
had told Shultz about a planned shipment of HAWK missiles to Iran in exchange for the release
of the hostages.68  During the briefing, Sofaer received a draft of Casey's proposed testimony.69
Because he had just  learned that Shultz knew of the November 1985 HAWK shipment in
advance, Sofaer was skeptical of the assertion in Casey's draft testimony that the CIA did not
learn the nature of the cargo of the November 1985 HAWK shipment until January 1986.70
Sofaer told Hill that he was going to tell Meese and Wallison about his ``concern about
g008pre-Jan 17 '86 activities.'' 71

     68 Sofaer Note, 11/20/86, ALV 000334.

     69 Sofaer Chronology, 5/19/87, ALV 000306.

     70 Ibid.; Sofaer, Select Committees Deposition, 6/18/87, pp. 31-37.

     71 Hill Note, 11/20/86, ANS 0001867 (emphasis in original).  Sofaer explained: ``A/G &
P[resident] in vulnerable position.  A/G gave his opinion -- but probably g008not aware of
pre-Jan/post-Aug activities.  Yet now is being asked to support such activities.  So I tho[ugh]t I'd
call the A/G secure.  To bring these facts to his attn, because P[resident] doesn't know the facts.
And A/G opinion on post-Jan 17 acts as a wash for all arms shipments.  Get every channel
working to send enzyme into the system to eat away at it.''  (Ibid., ANS 0001867-68.)

     At about 2:30 p.m. on November 20, Sofaer placed a secure call to Meese.  Meese was still in
the White House meeting preparing Casey's testimony, so Sofaer spoke to Deputy Attorney
General Arnold Burns.72  According to Sofaer, he told Burns that he did not believe Casey's
proposed testimony that everyone in the CIA thought the November 1985 shipment had
contained oil-drilling parts because Shultz had contemporaneous notes that McFarlane knew the
shipment was HAWK missiles.73  After exchanging  messages, Sofaer spoke again to Burns
shortly before 4:00 pm.  Burns said that Meese had spent the afternoon with Poindexter and
Casey and ``was fully aware of the facts [Sofaer] mentioned.  [Burns] said the A.G. [attorney
general] was profuse in his thanks for [Sofaer's] warning, and appreciated [Sofaer's] motives, but
that he (the AG) knew of certain facts that explained all these matters and that laid to rest all the
problems [Sofaer] might perceive.''  According to Sofaer, Burns said ``the AG did not give him
any facts, and that he was simply passing on the `mysterious' assurance that all was well.'' 74

     72 Sofaer, Select Committees Deposition, 6/18/87, pp. 37-40.

     73 Ibid., pp. 38-39.  Burns could not recall the details of what Sofaer told him, but did not
question Sofaer's version.  (Burns, FBI 302, 10/29/87, p. 5.)

     74 Sofaer Note, 11/20/86, ALV 000347-48.  Burns said that, although he did not understand
the information Sofaer had related, he relayed it immediately to Meese.  (Burns, FBI 302,
10/29/87, pp. 5-6.) Burns vividly recalls walking upstairs to Meese's office and telling him in
person as Meese was preparing to leave for the airport.  Meese testified that Burns called him on
his car phone while he was en route to Andrews Air Force Base.  Meese said he ``advised Mr.
Burns that this matter was being taken care of because we just had been going through putting
together what was, to the best of my knowledge at that time, an accurate description of what had
occurred.''  (Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, p. 67.)

     After the Casey testimony preparation session, Thompson and Cooper met with Wallison at
Wallison's request.75  According to Wallison, they discussed the summer 1985 TOW shipment
by Israel, which, they believed, the United States subsequently condoned:

     75 Wallison Note, 11/20/86, ALU 0138235-36, pp. 266-67; Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp.
60-61.

     Under the law this sale -- a violation of the AECA -- should have been reported to Congress
but was not.  Neither Cooper nor Thompson could think of any way to justify this lapse, and
neither could I, but I suggested that we give some consideration to arguing that when the Israelis
told us they had done this, the availability of the channel thus opened made the ensuing events
part of an intelligence activity.  This was a little farfetched in terms of the real facts, it turned out
. . . and so we were thrown back to arguing that under the Const. [Constitution] the Pres.
[President] has the inherent power to permit third countries to sell arms without reporting to
Cong. [Congress]76

     76 Ibid., ALU 0138235, p. 266.

     While the meeting was in progress, Sofaer, unsatisfied with Meese's assurance that all was
well, called Wallison to discuss the discrepancy between Casey's proposed testimony and Hill's
notes.  According to Wallison, Sofaer ``was worried that the Pres. [President] had not told the
truth last night [at the press conference], and hoped that the Pres. had not been informed fully.''
Sofaer ``then asked . . . whether [Wallison] knew about the sale of Hawk missiles by Israel to
Iran in November.'' 77  When Wallison said he did not, Sofaer told him that McFarlane had
informed Shultz in Geneva in November 1985 that Israel would be shipping HAWK missiles to
Iran as part of an effort to free the hostages.  Sofaer also told Wallison that North had worked
with the CIA to arrange for the CIA proprietary airline to deliver the missiles.  This, Sofaer said,
made Casey's proposed testimony that the CIA did not learn that the cargo was  weapons until
January 1986 highly dubious and he suggested Wallison ``look into it.'' 78

     77 Ibid., ALU 0138236, p. 267.

     78 Sofaer, Select Committees Testimony, 6/18/87 pp. 42-43.  Sofaer had not yet learned that
Casey's testimony had been broadened to say that ``no one in the USG'' knew the cargo was
weapons until January 1986.

     According to Sofaer, Wallison was ``in shock'' after these disclosures.79  Wallison described
his reaction as follows:

     79 Sofaer Chronology, 5/19/87,  ALV 000306.

     Since Cooper and Thompson were sitting right there, I asked them whether they had heard
this story, and they confirmed that they had.  Of course, if I had not asked they undoubtedly
would not have told me voluntarity [sic].

     This was perhaps the most serious disclosure of all.  It indicates that well before the finding in
January 1986 there had been in existence a plan to seek release of all the hostages by trading
them for arms to Iran. . . . If the story is true, then everything the Pres. [President] had said about
the foundations of our policy was incorrect -- if he was aware of these facts.  Otherwise, if the
Pres. was not aware, there had been a clear violation of the export laws which had not been
reported to Congress.  One could hardly argue that the Pres. had invoked his constitutional
powers when he was not aware of what had been planned.80

     80 Wallison Note, 11/20/86, p. 267, ALU 0138236.

     Cooper recalls that while he knew of the November 1985 HAWK shipment, he was
immediately concerned about the accuracy of Casey's proposed testimony that ``no one in the
USG'' learned that the cargo was weapons until January 1986.81  According to Cooper, upon
hearing of Shultz's  conversation with McFarlane, he ``turned to Paul Thompson and in very
manly terms told him that he needed to get with North and McFarlane immediately and clear this
up because that obviously was inconsistent with the information that North had just told us in
Poindexter's office. . . .'' 82

     81 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 62-63.

     82 Ibid., p. 65.

     Cooper then went to his office, where he spoke with Sofaer directly.83  He told Sofaer that
Casey's testimony had been changed to include the broader denial that ``no one in the USG''
knew that the shipment contained weapons until January 1986.  Sofaer told Cooper he knew that
assertion was impossible because McFarlane had informed Shultz in November 1985 that the
cargo would be HAWK missiles.84  Cooper asked if Sofaer was certain, and Sofaer told him of
Hill's contemporaneous notes, which  indicated that McFarlane specifically told Shultz the cargo
was HAWKs.  Cooper felt that lent ``a lot of credibility'' to Shultz's story and that the ``gravity of
the inconsistency'' between Shultz's recollection and the NSC version of events was greatly
increased.85

     83 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, p. 65.  Sofaer recalled that Wallison passed the phone to
Cooper during their meeting and that Sofaer told Cooper what he had told Wallison.  (Sofaer,
Select Committees Deposition, 6/18/87, pp. 42-43.)  He recalls having a second conversation
with Cooper at approximately 6:00 p.m. during which they discussed the subject in more detail.
(Ibid., pp. 45-49.)  Cooper did not recall speaking with Sofaer directly until the second call.
(Cooper, Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87, pp. 59-61.)

     84 Sofaer, Select Committees Deposition, 6/18/87, pp. 47-49.  Sofaer also told Cooper that he
thought the CIA's version of its involvement in the November HAWK shipment was ``untenable
as a matter of logic.''  (Ibid., pp. 43-44.)  Sofaer did not believe the CIA would have made such a
substantial effort to support a shipment of oil-drilling equipment.  He analogized the oil-drilling
equipment story to the type of cover story used by drug dealers who never mention drugs by
name in conversations, referring to them euphemistically as ``shirts'' or other objects.  (Ibid.)

     85 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 65-66.

     Sofaer told Cooper that if Casey's testimony was not corrected, he would advise Armacost to
tell Congress there was contemporaneous U.S. Government knowledge of the November 1985
HAWK shipment, taking a direct stand against Casey.86  Sofaer also threatened to resign if
Casey's testimony was not corrected.  Cooper assured Sofaer that he shared Sofaer's concerns and
that he would also resign if Casey gave false testimony to Congress.87  Cooper then tried to
contact Meese.

     86 Cooper, Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87, p. 64.

     87 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 80-81; Cooper, Select Committees Testimony, 6/25/87,
pp. 64-65.

     Meanwhile, Shultz went to the White House late in the afternoon on November 20 with a list
of factual errors the President had made in his press conference.88  In the presence of Regan,
Shultz attempted to persuade the President that the public would never believe that the Iran  arms
sales were not an ``arms-for-hostages'' swap.89  Shultz again raised the November 1985 HAWK
shipment as an example and argued that the plan McFarlane had outlined to Shultz in Geneva
was described expressly as an arms-for-hostages deal.90  President Reagan responded that he
knew about the November 1985 shipment, ``but that wasn't arms for hostages.'' 91

     88   Hill Note, 11/20/86, ALW 0059427.  Weinberger, in contrast, noted that he ``[w]atched
President's press conference'' and then ``[c]alled President -- to congratulate him on his press
conference.''  (Weinberger Note, 11/19/86, ALZ 0040547.)

     89 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ALW 0059429-30.

     90 Ibid.

     91 Ibid.  Shultz had briefly met with the President on November 19, before the press
conference, but could not recall in his testimony whether he discussed the November 1985
shipment on the 19th or on the 20th.  (Shultz, Select Committees Testimony, 7/23/87, pp.
110-12.)  Hill's notes of November 19 reflect that Shultz told the President his version of the
1985 HAWK shipment discussions: ``Bud once told me about a plane of arms that w[oul]d go if
host[a]g[es] released -- not if not.  P[resident] knew of this -- but it didn't come off.''  (Hill Note,
11/19/86, ANS 0001852.)  On November 22, Shultz told Hill ``I told P[resident] Thursday
[November 20] of what Bud told me about Nov 85.  He s[ai]d he knew it.  When dug into -- will
be shown that P[resident] pushed these people.''  (Hill Note, 11/22/86, ALW 0059428.)  When
Shultz was interviewed by Meese, he reiterated that story.  (Ibid., ALW 005929-30.)  Hill's notes
thus suggest that Shultz discussed the 1985 HAWK shipment with the President on both
November 19 and November 20.

     Cooper finally reached Meese at West Point at 10:30 p.m. and told him about the factual
dispute over the HAWKs.92  According to Meese, Cooper told him ``there were concerns in the
State Department that there was a good deal more knowledge within the Government about the
fact of HAWKS being shipped in November 1985 that was known then than  anything we had
been led to believe earlier that afternoon.'' 93  Meese paid attention to Cooper's concerns; Meese
agreed that nothing should be said about the HAWK shipment until the facts were clear.94
Meese told Cooper to contact David Doherty, general counsel of the CIA, and to go to the CIA in
the  morning to make sure Casey's testimony was changed.95  At Cooper's urging, Meese decided
to return to Washington the next day, cancelling a planned appearance at Harvard University.96

     92 Cooper Chronology, 11/86, ALV 077959.

     93 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/8/87, p. 69.

     94 Although Meese could not recall any specifics about his conversation with Burns, he
generally recalled that Burns informed him about ``possible inconsistencies or inaccuracies in the
proposed testimony of Mr. Casey.''  (Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, p. 68.)
Meese said he ``assumed'' these ``inconsistencies or inaccuracies'' had been resolved by the
changes and corrections made in the preparation session that afternoon.  (Meese, Select
Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, p. 68.)  It is difficult to believe that Meese could reasonably
have thought that any of those changes would have resolved whatever ``inconsistency or
inaccuracy'' could have prompted an urgent call from Sofaer.

     In a vague and circular response, Meese explained that the information Cooper gave him
``differed -- it was much -- a whole new area of information that was beyond what I had assumed
Mr. Burns was telling me because it went beyond the corrections that we had made in the
testimony . . . in Mr. Poindexter's office.''  (Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, p. 72.
Emphasis added.)  One plausible explanation for Meese's changed reaction could be that Cooper
apparently did not think the changes in the testimony made in Poindexter's office had corrected
the problem Sofaer had raised.  It is worth noting, however, that while Burns apparently did not
tell Meese about any documentation of the inaccuracies or inconsistencies Sofaer had mentioned,
(Ibid., p. 70,) Cooper told him that the State Department had a contemporaneous note that
George Shultz had been informed in November 1985 by McFarlane that there were HAWKs on
the shipment.  (Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, p. 66.)  As became apparent later in Meese's
investigation, deniability of the President's involvement in the November 1985 HAWK shipment
could be maintained if there were inconsistencies in memory; a contemporaneous note made it
much more difficult.

     95 Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, pp. 74-75; Cooper, Select Committees
Testimony, 6/25/87, p. 66.

     96 Ibid., p. 66.

     After speaking to Poindexter at 11:00 p.m., Cooper called Doherty to tell him to delete the
reference in Casey's testimony to U.S. knowledge of the HAWKs shipment; Doherty advised
Cooper it already had been deleted.97  Cooper then called Sofaer at 11:28 p.m. and told him that
Meese shared their concerns about the November 1985 shipment and that Meese had canceled
his Boston trip.98  According to Sofaer's notes, Cooper had ``[v]ery many questions about CH's
[Charles Hill's] notes.  When taken?  What written?  AG [attorney general] very interested.''
Cooper told Sofaer that Thompson had spoken to North, who adhered to his story, and that
Poindexter had tried to reach McFarlane but had been unable to do so.  Cooper told Sofaer that
Casey's testimony had been ``[a]djusted correctly to avoid [the] issue'' of the November 1985
HAWK shipment.  Sofaer congratulated Cooper, and they ``agreed P[resident] should  not be
placed at risk till truth is known.  Worst outcome is `self-immolation.'  Can deal w/ legal
difficulties.'' 99

     97 Ibid., pp. 71-72.

     98 Sofaer Note, 11/20/86, ALV 000350.

     99 Ibid.

     Although the broad assertion that ``no one'' in the U.S. Government knew about the shipment
was deleted from Casey's opening statement to the intelligence committees on November 21,
Casey did not disclose that the Administration had participated in the November 1985 HAWK
shipment.100  Casey also failed to disclose the existence of the December 1985 presidential
Finding to authorize retroactively CIA participation in the transfer.101  Casey was well aware of
that Finding, which identified the November shipment as an ``arms for hostages'' deal, because he
had sent it to Poindexter for President Reagan's signature.102

     100 Casey, SSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, pp. 8-9, 31-32; HPSCI Testimony, 11/21/86, pp. 5-7.

     101 Poindexter later testified that it was on this day that he destroyed the December 1985
Finding because it described a straight arms-for-hostages exchange and would be politically
embarrassing.  (Poindexter, Select Committees Testimony, 7/15/87, pp. 44, 123.)

     102 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 6/17/87, pp. 370-71.

     Developing a ``Coherent Overview''

     On Friday morning, November 21, 1986, Meese returned to Washington and met with
Cooper, Burns, Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds, and chief of staff John
Richardson.103  According to Cooper, the group discussed the plan he and Meese had agreed to
on the night before over the phone:  that Meese would meet with the President and offer to take
responsibility to investigate ``the President's, the  Government's knowledge'' of the Iran arms
sales ``as accurately as possible, and completely as possible in as short a period of time as
possible before some error was made.'' 104  During the meeting, Cooper made a preliminary list
of persons to interview -- McFarlane, Shultz, Sporkin, North, Poindexter, Weinberger, Vice
President Bush, President Reagan, Regan, and Casey.105

     103 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 73-77; Meese Schedule, 11/21/86, ALV 080343.

     104 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92 pp. 73-76.

     105 Cooper Note, 11/21/86, ALV 077958; Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 77-78.  Cooper
was not certain whether he made his list before the meeting or during it, but it reflected his
thoughts about ``who should be talked to and roughly the order in which they should be talked
to.''  (Ibid. pp. 77-78.)

     Cooper took only two notes from his morning meeting with Meese:  ``Any legal problems.
Are there other facts that would raise crim[inal] problems.'' 106  Cooper testified that there was a
general concern about legal problems, including possible crimes.  Cooper, at least, believed at
that time that North and Poindexter had known that ``there were HAWKs on the plane'' and that
the day before,  ``they were saying something to me and others in the room that they knew to be
untrue and were suggesting that information should go to Congress.'' 107

     106 Cooper Note, 11/21/86, ALV 077958.

     107 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92 pp. 78-82.  Cooper had previously testified, when not
confronted with his note, that while there was concern about contemporaneous knowledge by
U.S. officials of the HAWK shipment, there was no concern about possible criminal violations.
(Cooper, FBI 302, 1/6/88, p. 8; Cooper, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87 p. 126 (not a
``suggestion or hint'' of criminal violation at that point).)

     Meese, on the other hand, denied that the legality of the November HAWK shipment was a
concern in his investigation.  He testified that his inquiry was premised on the ``assumption that
everything was legal,'' and he did not ``believe the question of legality ever came up until the
memorandum was found [on November 22] regarding the diversion.''  Asked when the issue of
the legality of the November HAWK shipment arose, Meese responded, ``I don't know that it
ever did come up.'' 108

     108 Meese,  OIC Interview, 5/11/92  pp. 35-36.   Cooper had  taken a similar position before
being confronted with his contemporaneous notes.  At the 8:30 a.m. staff meeting on November
21, 1986, which Meese did not attend because his flight did not arrive from West Point until
8:30, the third item on the agenda was ``Iran -- > Legality -- ''  (Meeting Agenda, 11/21/86, ALV
033705.)  John Richardson, Meese's chief of staff and one of the three trusted aides Meese chose
to conduct the weekend investigation, explained, ``The big problem for us was what laws might
have been kicked in to focus or violated by the Administration by shipping these arms in '85,
before there was a Finding in '86, and that was the entire focus [of the investigation], whether the
U.S. Government knew about it and authorized it.''  (Richardson, Grand Jury, 12/11/87, p. 43.)

     While Meese was meeting with his staff, Regan was meeting with Wallison, who had been
alarmed by Sofaer's revelation that McFarlane had briefed Shultz about the November 1985
HAWK shipment in advance.109  Wallison told Regan that this shipment ``raised serious legal
questions because a shipment like that would either have to be reported as a shipment by the US
or as a violation of the AECA by Israel, and neither was done.'' 110

     109 Wallison Note, 11/20/86, p. 268, ALU 0138237.

     110 Ibid.

     After conferring with his staff, Meese met with the President, Poindexter, and Regan at 11:30
a.m. at the White House.111  Meese explained that a problem had arisen with Casey's proposed
testimony because ``the CIA was doing some things, the Department of Defense was doing other
things, the NSC staff had certain responsibilities, and so on, and because of the highly
compartmentalized nature of the whole initiative . . . people had not talked to each other, you did
not have the normal documentation and reporting, and . . . therefore there was a great deal of
confusion . . .'' 112  Meese told the President it was ``absolutely necessary'' that ``someone look
into the matter . . . to develop a coherent overview of the facts,'' and offered to do it himself.113
The President accepted Meese's offer to ``look into the matter,'' and asked him to report his
findings at a senior advisers meeting set for November 24, 1986.114

     111 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87 pp. 75-76; Meese Schedule, 11/21/86,
ALV 080343.

     112 Ibid., p. 76.

     113 Ibid., pp. 76-77.  Meese maintains that he was not acting in his capacity as attorney
general in conducting an investigation, but rather was operating as any other Cabinet member
might in compiling a factual ``overview.''  (Meese, OIC interview, 5/11/92, p. 36.)  In the North
trial, Meese testified that he was acting as the President's counselor and friend.  (Meese, North
Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, pp. 5746-47.)

     114 Ibid., pp. 77-78.

     Meese said he did not ask President Reagan -- or Poindexter or Regan -- about his knowledge
of the arms sales because it ``didn't seem very important'' at that stage of the inquiry.  Cooper
testified, however, that he and Meese had ``resolved'' in their telephone conversation the night
before that Meese ``was going to go in and talk to the President about the state of the President's,
the Government's knowledge of the Iran matter and advise him that somebody needed to take
responsibility for . . . collecting the facts as accurately and completely as possible.'' 115  Cooper
included President Reagan on his list of persons  to interview,116 but Meese, on a similar list,
did not.117  In Cooper's mind, what the President knew about the November HAWK shipment
and when he knew it was a ``primary concern'' of the investigation at that point.118  Meese,
however, has testified that he never got around to asking the President what he knew about the
HAWK shipment.119

     115 Cooper, Select Committees Deposition, 6/22/87, p. 122 (emphasis added); Cooper, Grand
Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 75-76.

     116 Cooper Note, 11/21/86, ALV 077958.

     117 Meese Note, 11/21/86, ALV 015778.

     118 Cooper, Grand Jury testimony, 7/15/92, p. 94.

     119 Meese, OIC interview, 5/11/92, p. 72.

     At 12:30 p.m., following his meeting with the President, Meese returned to the Justice
Department, where he met over lunch with his investigative team, all trusted political appointees
-- Cooper, Reynolds and Richardson.120  Meese wrote down a list of people to be interviewed,
including McFarlane, Shultz, North, Thompson, Weinberger, Vice President Bush, and a number
of CIA officials who had been involved in the November 1985 shipment.  On a separate list
entitled ``Action,''  Meese listed questions to ask various people.  Next to Poindexter's initials,
Meese wrote ``Every document, telephone logs, etc.[;] Contact person -- Paul Thompson?[;  and]
What did GPS [(Shultz)] give to or show RR [Ronald Reagan]?''  Later that afternoon, Meese
telephoned Poindexter and checked off each of the three questions.121

     120 The choice of political appointees reflected Meese's concern that the President's ``political
opponents . . . might try to claim that there was some kind of a cover-up and that would be a
position of vulnerability even though there was absolutely no cover-up going on.''  (Meese, North
Trial Testimony, 3/29/89, pp. 5854-55.)

     121 Meese Note, 11/21/86, ALV 015779; Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp.
82-84.

     Poindexter later testified that following this conversation with Meese, Poindexter called Paul
Thompson and asked him to pull together the Iran documents.  Later that afternoon, Thompson
showed Poindexter the December 1985 Finding signed by the President, which sought to
retroactively authorize the CIA's involvement in the November HAWK shipment.  Poindexter
then destroyed the only known signed version of that Finding.122

     122 Poindexter, Select Committees Deposition, 5/2/87, p. 108.

     Meanwhile, McFarlane, who apparently had learned that the State Department had
contemporaneous records relating to the November 1985 shipment, called Sofaer.  Sofaer
confirmed that the State Department had such records but did not disclose their contents.
McFarlane asked whether Sofaer had given the records to the Justice Department, and Sofaer
responded that he ``had passed on some alleged facts to protect P[resident].''  Sofaer advised
McFarlane to keep all his records, and McFarlane agreed.123

     123 Sofaer Chronology, 5/17/87, ALV 000308.  Sofaer testified that he ``assumed'' McFarlane
had learned of the Hill note from Meese during a Meese-McFarlane interview on November 21.
(Sofaer, Select Committee Deposition, 6/18/87, p. 62.)  Sofaer's chronology, however, places the
call from McFarlane before 3:00 p.m., while McFarlane's interview with Meese did not begin
until 3:30 p.m.

     Cooper called Sofaer at 3:00 p.m. to confirm that the President had authorized Meese to
investigate.  Cooper asked Sofaer to provide him with ``all info.''  Charles Hill, who distrusted
Meese, was reluctant to relinquish his notes to Cooper, but Sofaer told him he had no choice.124
Hill was also concerned that Sofaer's disclosure of Hill's November 18, 1985, note, revealing a
planned ``arms-hostages swap'' before the January 17, 1986, Finding, could ``be read as GPS
[Shultz] fingering McF[arlane] for something that c[oul]d get him prison.'' 125

     124 Sofaer Chronology, 5/17/87, ALV 000308; Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001878-79.  Hill,
who was traveling with Shultz to Canada on the 21st, wrote in his opening observations for the
day that ``g008Casey testimony has been changed.  With recognition that Nov 85 shipment
illegal, CIA & NSC both trying to say they g008didn't manage it -- & didn't know what was in
it.''  (Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001873.)  Recording a report of the congressional briefings later
that day, Hill noted ``Leahy focusing on g008Nov '85 flt [flight] & why no one knew cargo.''
(Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001877, emphasis in original.)

     125 Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001879.

     At 3:30 p.m., Cooper and Meese interviewed McFarlane.  According to Cooper's notes of the
interview, McFarlane told Cooper and Meese that he thought ``he first learned of [the November
1985 HAWK shipment] when briefed for trip to Iran in May [1986].  Iran sent back HAWKs
be/[cause] couldn't reach hi-altitude bomber.  N[orth] -- briefed  M[cFarlane] -- he was
action-officer on this beginning Oct or Nov.''  The notes indicate that McFarlane then told Meese
that he learned in Geneva on November 17 or 18, 1985, ``that Isr[ael] had shipped oil
equipment.''  McFarlane claimed Israeli Defense Minister ``Rabine [sic] called from N.Y. and
said they have problem w/ shipmt to Iran'' and McFarlane asked North ``to assist.''  McFarlane
said North reported that the shipment ``hit snag in customs in [a European country],'' and
McFarlane subsequently called the European officials to ask for assistance.  McFarlane,
according to Cooper's notes, said he ``remember[ed] no mention in all this of arms'' and ``doesn't
g008remember chat w/ GS [George Shultz], but probably had one.'' 126

     126 Cooper Note, 11/21/86, ALV 071809-10 (emphasis in original).

     At the end of the interview, Cooper left and McFarlane and Meese had a brief private
conversation.  Meese testified that McFarlane ``said something to the effect that I have been
taking a lot of this on my shoulders 127 . . . but I want you to know -- it was something to the
effect he wanted me to know that the President was generally in favor of pursuing the Israelis'
ideas all along.'' 128  Meese said he responded by telling McFarlane to ``not try to think how to
protect the  President, just tell exactly what happened.''  Meese added, ``I think I said something
like `If the President knew earlier, it might even be helpful as a legal matter . . .'' 129

     127 McFarlane had by that time already made public statements in which he took
responsibility for the Administration's Iran policy.  (Cooper, Grand Jury, 8/5/92, p. 11.)

     128 Meese, Select Committee Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 92-93.

     129 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, p. 60.

     Cooper's notes do not reflect any question or answer regarding what McFarlane told the
President about the November 1985 HAWK shipment.  Cooper testified that because the
President's knowledge of the November 1985 shipment was a ``primary concern'' at that point of
the investigation, it would have been ``logical'' to ask McFarlane whether he had told the
President about the shipment.130  Meese, who testified that ``what the President knew was not
an issue at that time,'' 131 said he did not ask McFarlane about what he had told the President
about the November 1985 shipment.132

     130 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, pp. 94-95.

     131 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, pp. 37-38.

     132 Cooper, Grand Jury, 7/15/92, p. 101.  Cooper thought McFarlane was ``overwrought and
nervous'' and did not believe his story.  (Ibid., p. 106.)

     Following his interview, McFarlane sent a computer note to Poindexter stating:

     [i]t appears that the matter of not notifying about the Israeli transfers can be covered if the
President made a ``mental finding'' before the transfers took place.  Well on that score we ought
to be ok because he was all for letting the Israelis do anything they wanted at  the very first
briefing in the hospital.  Ed seemed relieved at that.133

     133 PROFs Note from McFarlane to Poindexter, 11/21/86, AKW 019148.  McFarlane relayed
a similar message to North by telephone immediately after the interview.  (McFarlane, Select
Committees Deposition, 7/2/87, p. 11; North Note, 11/21/86, AMX 001707.)

     Meese testified, however, that he did not recall having discussed the concept of an oral or
mental finding with McFarlane.134

     134 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/29/87, p. 12.

     Cooper called Sofaer at about 6:30 p.m. to arrange an interview with Shultz the following
morning.  When Sofaer called Shultz to schedule the interview, Shultz told Sofaer that he had
received a message that McFarlane had asked Shultz to call him.135  Sofaer advised Shultz
against talking to McFarlane because it could ``create an appearance that he is Coordinating his
position with you'' and ``cause the A.G. [attorney general] to feel that he is not getting your views
without any effects that might result from a discussion with McFarlane.'' 136  Shultz spoke to
Hill at 8:00 p.m., apparently to tell him about the interview with Meese the next morning.  Hill
suggested to Shultz that ``Meese wants to see [you] to get  the info on g008Nov '85 to show --
this weekend -- that P[resident] was mislead [sic].  So he can tell P[resident] on Monday.'' 137
Hill testified that this comment reflected his suspicion that Meese had an agenda to insulate the
President from responsibility for the November 1985 shipment.138

     135 Sofaer Chronology, 5/17/87, ALV 000308; Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001878.  It
appears from Hill's notes that McFarlane called before his interview with Meese.

     136 Memorandum from Sofaer to Shultz, 11/21/86, ALV 000358; see also Hill Note,
11/21/86, ANS 0001879 (note of 5:20 pm conversation with Sofaer).

     137 Hill Note, 11/21/86, ANS 0001880.

     138 Hill, Grand Jury, 7/10/92, pp. 157-60.

     Meese called Weinberger at 7:00 that evening.  Weinberger wrote in his diary notes: ``Ed
Meese [called] -- President has asked him to put together paper covering whole Iran Episode.''
139  Meese later testified that he determined quickly that Weinberger (whose department was
responsible for producing the weapons) could not contribute much information and that there
was no need to interview him further.140  Contrary to Meese's conclusion, Weinberger had much
valuable information, none of which was discovered until 1991, when the OIC uncovered
thousands of pages of Weinberger's daily notes and high-level meeting notes.141

     139 Weinberger Note, 11/21/86, ALZ 0040553.

     140 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, pp. 61-64.

     141 See Weinberger section of report.

     At 7:30 a.m. on Saturday, November 22, before the interview with Meese, Shultz and Hill met
at the State Department.  Shultz told Hill: ``I told P[resident] Thursday [November 20] of what
Bud [McFarlane] told me  about Nov 85.  He s[ai]d he knew it.  When dug into -- will be shown
that P[resident] pushed these people.'' 142

     142 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ALW 0059428.

     The Shultz interview began at 8:05 a.m.  Present were Shultz, Hill, Meese, and Cooper.  Hill
and Cooper took notes.  According to Hill's notes of the interview, Meese remarked, ``Abe's
[Sofaer's] intervention fortuitous.  Key revolving around Nov 85.  18 Hawks from Isr[ael] to
Ir[an].  Then returned in Feb 86.  I understand y[ou] had talk w[ith] Bud [McFarlane] about it.''
Shultz told Meese that during the summit in Geneva on November 18, 1985, McFarlane told him
about deal in which HAWK missiles would go to Iran and the hostages would be released.  Hill,
who stepped in to provide additional detail, described it as a ``complex deal'' with the arms
routed through an Asian country and the hostages coming out before the arms were delivered to
Iran.143  At that point, Cooper's notes record Meese as interjecting, ``[I] recall vaguely that the
plan described, perhaps at Jan 7 [1986] meeting, was to not provide any arms until the hostages
were released.'' 144

     143 Ibid., ANS 0001882; Cooper Note, 11/22/86, ALV 071839.  Cooper, Grand Jury, 8/5/92,
p. 65.

     144 Cooper Note, 11/22/86, ALV 071839.

     After the interjection by Meese, Shultz began again:  ``g008You sh[oul]d know I went to
P[resident] Thurs. night [November 20].  Asked to go see him.  Went w[ith] DR  [Regan] to
family qtrs. . . .  And I described Bud [McFarlane] talk to me in Geneva.  P[resident] s[ai]d oh I
kn [knew or know] about that -- but that wasn't arms for hostg!  I sd [said] no one looking at the
record will believe that.'' 145

     145 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001883.  Cooper, who also took notes, recorded Shultz
statement as ``G.S. advised that M. [McFarlane] came to G.S. + told of deal.  Pres. said he knew
of it -- but didn't understand it as arms for hostages, but as part of larger plan.''  (Cooper Note,
11/21/86, ALV 071840.)

     Meese, who has repeatedly claimed that he never asked the President about his knowledge of
the November 1985 shipment,146 responded that the ``P[resident] didn't make notes.  He had
trouble remembering mtgs [meetings].''  Meese then asked, ``[a]s to Nov [November 1985] talk
with Bud, no contact y[ou] know of that Bud had w[ith] P[resident] then?''  Shultz replied, ``not
to my knowledge.  Tho[ugh] I don't know.'' 147

     146 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, p. 41.

     147 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001883.  Meese's question to Shultz is noteworthy in light of
Meese's failure to ask McFarlane directly whether he had informed President Reagan of the
November 1985 HAWK shipment.

     Later in the interview, having established that (1) Shultz did not know whether McFarlane had
told the President in November 1985 about the HAWK shipment, and (2) whatever the President
had said to Shultz on Thursday night was suspect because the President ``didn't make notes'' and
``had trouble remembering mtgs,'' Meese told Shultz that ``[c]ertain things c[oul]d be violation of
a law.  P[resident]  didn't know about HAWKs in Nov[ember 1985].  If it happened &
P[resident] didn't report to Congress, it's a violation.'' 148

     148 Ibid., ANS 0001888.

     Cooper's notes include Shultz's statement that the President knew about the November 1985
HAWK shipment, but they omit Meese's remarks regarding legality and the President's
knowledge.  Cooper's notes generally track Hill's, but are less detailed:  ``G.S. [George Shultz]
advised [President Reagan] that M[cFarlane] came to GS & told of deal[.]  Pres. said he knew of
it -- but didn't understand it as arms for hostages, but as part of larger plan.'' 149  Cooper resisted
interpreting his and Hill's notes as meaning that the President had said he knew of the November
HAWK shipment.  Even though he conceded that the entire discussion to that point in the
interview concerned the November HAWK shipment and that the topic of discussion after
Shultz's statement that the ``Pres. said he knew of it'' was the HAWK shipment, Cooper
maintained that the ``it'' the President knew of was the Iran arms sales plan generally, not the
HAWK shipment specifically.150  According to Cooper, it would have struck him like a
``lightning bolt'' if he had understood Shultz to be saying that the President had said he knew
about the November 1985 HAWK shipment.   Cooper added, however, that he would have taken
such a revelation ``with some grain of salt'' because the President could be forgetful.151
Ultimately, Cooper conceded that the ``logical'' interpretation of his and Hill's notes was that
Shultz had told Meese that the President said he knew about the HAWK shipment in
advance.152

     149 Cooper Note, 11/22/86, ALV 071840.

     150 Cooper, Grand Jury, 8/5/92, pp. 105-08.

     151 Ibid., pp. 83-85.

     152 Ibid., pp. 82, 95.

     Hill and Shultz told Sofaer, Nicholas Platt, Armacost, and Whitehead about the interview
immediately afterward.153  Shultz first asked Sofaer to clarify his role:  Was he the President's
lawyer or Shultz's lawyer?  Sofaer responded that he could serve both Shultz and the President
and explained that he felt an obligation to come forward with ``info if indicates someone broke
the law.''  Drawing an analogy to Watergate, Sofaer told Shultz he could not simply ``step away
from'' evidence of wrongdoing by other officials ``just bec[ause] y[ou] are a nice guy.'' 154
Shultz replied that he had ``no trouble w[ith] being completely open about g008any possible
violation of law,'' but he did have reservations about ``dealing w[ith] the W[ite]H[ouse] in
circ[umstance]s like this.''  Shultz  recounted how Poindexter had provided certain false
information in the November 10, 1986, meeting and cautioned Sofaer to ``be careful'' about
providing information to the White House.155

     153 Sofaer's notes indicate that he had been excluded because Platt and Hill believed that
Sofaer was acting as the President's lawyer rather than protecting the State Department's interests.

     154 Hill Note, 11/22/86, ANS 0001890-91.

     155 Ibid., ANS 0001891.

     Sofaer assured Shultz that ``[i]n terms of the law you are out of it,'' but ``[t]he P[resident] is in
the hands of people who are lying.''  Shultz noted that ``P[resident] says that A/G [attorney
general] sh[oul]d find out if people telling him things that not true.  But it is that people telling
him wrong characterization. . . .''  Hill remarked ``[t]he P[resident] just discovered the way out --
he was mislead [sic].'' 156

     156 Ibid., ANS 0001892.

     Shultz directed Hill to review with Sofaer his notes of the Meese interview.  Hill's notes of the
briefing quote Sofaer as saying, ``when I told Meese about what you told me about McF[arlane]
talk w[ith] S[hultz] in Geneva Nov 85, Meese told the P[resident] who said `I didn't know about
that.  I never approved it.' '' 157

     157 Ibid., ANS 0001893. Sofaer testified that he never spoke directly with Meese on this
issue, but dealt only with Cooper.  He could not recall making the statement to Hill.  (Sofaer,
OIC Interview, 9/29/92, pp. 49-50.)  On November 25, 1986, Hill's notes indicate that Sofaer said
he ``got [the] impression from Meese'' that the P[resident] ``didn't know'' about the November
1985 HAWK shipment.  To which Shultz responded, ``Everybody running away from it.''  (Hill
Note, 11/25/86, ANS 0001920.)

     While Meese and Cooper were conducting interviews, Reynolds and Richardson were
reviewing documents at the NSC.  On the morning of November 22, 1986, they discovered in
North's office files a memorandum that indicated that profits from the arms sales to Iran had been
diverted to aid the contras.  Reynolds and Richardson informed Meese of their discovery over
lunch at the Old Ebbitt Grill.158  At this point, the focus of the Meese inquiry became twofold:
The continuing investigation of the HAWKs, and the question of whether an Iran/contra
diversion had occurred and who had known about and approved it.

     158 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/28/87, pp. 105-6.

     After lunch, Meese and Cooper interviewed former CIA General Counsel Stanley Sporkin
about the HAWK shipments.159  This interview apparently was the first detailed account Meese
and Cooper received of the existence of a retroactive Finding for the November 1985 HAWK
shipment, which Sporkin had drafted.  According to Cooper's notes, Sporkin disclosed that the
``two guys from operations'' at the CIA who had briefed him shortly after the shipment told him
the operation was, in essence, an arms-for-hostages trade; Sporkin said the draft Finding reflected
that fact.  Sporkin's interview therefore made clear that CIA officials knew at the time of the
November 1985 shipment, or at least immediately thereafter, that the shipment contained
weapons,  not oil-drilling equipment as had been claimed in the NSC chronology and in Casey's
original draft testimony.  Cooper's handwritten notes of the Sporkin interview do not reflect
whether Sporkin told them the Finding had been signed.  Although Sporkin told Meese that the
purpose of the December 1985 draft Finding was ``to ratify anything that had already been done,''
Meese did not ask whether the President had signed the Finding to make it effective.160

     159 Cooper Chronology, ALV 077961.

     160 Cooper Note, 11/22/86, ALV 071859-61.

     Following the Sporkin interview, Cooper arranged to meet with the two men from the CIA
Operations Directorate who had briefed Sporkin shortly after the 1985 HAWKs shipment.
Cooper spent the evening at the CIA conducting additional interviews.161

     161 Cooper Chronology, ALV 077961.

     On Sunday, November 23, from 2:00 p.m. to 5:45 p.m., Meese, Cooper, Richardson, and
Reynolds interviewed North at the Justice Department.  A list of questions drafted by Cooper
aide John McGinniss focused on the November 1985 HAWK shipment.  McGinniss's questions
for North contained a section titled ``Presidential Knowledge'' that included five questions
covering the President's knowledge and approval of the HAWK shipment, whether any  legal
advice had been sought regarding the requirements of the Arms Export Control Act, and whether
the President had made a decision not to report the shipment.162  As in his interview of
McFarlane, Meese apparently did not ask North about the President's knowledge of the
November HAWK shipment.

     162 ``Questions for Oliver North,''  ALV 014311-13.

     It was in this interview that Meese, in addition to questioning North about the arms sales,
planned to confront him with the Iran/contra diversion memo that had been found in North's
office the day before.

     Meese opened by cautioning North that the ``[w]orst thing [that] can happen is if someone try
to conceal something to protect selves, RR [Reagan], put good spin on it.  Want nothing anyone
can call a coverup.''  North nevertheless dissembled about his knowledge that the November
1985 shipment contained HAWK missiles.  North claimed that Rabin told him the shipment
contained ``oil related equipment,'' and he only learned later, from retired U.S. Air Force Maj.
Gen. Richard V. Secord, that the shipment contained HAWK missiles.163  North said he
informed the  CIA in late November or early December 1985 that the shipment had contained
``arms + not oil drilling equipment.'' 164

     163 Richardson Note, 11/23/86, ALV 071893-94.

     164 Ibid., ALV 014607.

     North denied knowledge of a retroactive Finding authorizing specifically ``for Hawks or
future Hawks,'' explaining there had been ``one draft re: all previous acts'' that had been worked
on in mid-December 1985.  Meese apparently did not ask, and North did not volunteer, whether a
Finding covering ``all previous acts'' had ever been signed.165  North seemed to suggest it had
been, however, by stating ``someone ought to step up and say this [the shipment] was authorized
in Nov.''

     165 Ibid., ALV 014612.  The draft of the December 1985 retroactive Finding that survives
approves ``[a]ll prior actions'' involving trading ``munitions'' to Iran to ``obtain the release of
Americans held hostage in the Middle East.''  ALV 014320.

     As in his interview with Shultz, Meese contradicted North at one point, disagreeing with
North's assertion that President Reagan was not motivated by the desire to establish a strategic
relationship with Iran but rather ``wanted the hostages.''  Meese insisted that Reagan ``talked
about both.'' 166  Meese told North, ``Concern protect RR [Reagan] but we need to know facts.''
167

     166 Richardson Note, 11/23/86, ALV 014619.

     167 Ibid., ALV 014618.

     North recognized the seriousness of the HAWKs issue, even after being confronted with the
diversion memo.   North confirmed for Meese that an Iran/contra diversion had taken place, and
told Meese that the only other U.S. Government officials who knew of it were Poindexter and
McFarlane.  North said:  ``If this [the diversion] doesn't come out, only other [problem] is the
Nov. Hawks deal.'' 168

     168 Ibid., ALV 014625.

     After an hour of questioning North, Meese left the interview.  Cooper, Richardson and
Reynolds remained and there was further discussion of ``who knew 508/Hawks?'' and of the
contradictions between Shultz and McFarlane's memories of their conversation in Geneva in
November 1985.169  By this point, however, at least Cooper was convinced that Shultz was
telling the truth and that the President knew of, and may have approved, the pre-Finding
shipments.170

     169 The ``508'' appears to be a reference to the 504 TOW missiles transferred to Iran in
August and September 1985.  The ``Hawks'' refers to the November 1985 shipment.

     170 Cooper, Grand Jury, 8/5/92, p. 124.

     From 9:00 a.m.-10:15 a.m., on Monday, November 24, Cooper met with Sofaer and Hill at
the State Department, and Hill read Cooper a chronology of Shultz-State Department knowledge
of the arms sales, prepared from Hill's notes.  Hill's chronology revealed not only that McFarlane
had told Shultz of the November 1985 HAWK shipment in advance but also that Poindexter had
called Shultz on December 5, 1985, and told him that the  shipment had ``misfir[ed]'' when Iran
rejected the arms as too old.  According to Hill's chronology, Poindexter also said he had gone to
the President and urged him to stop the operation, ``but the President did not want to stop.'' 171

     171 Cooper Note, ALV 071943-45; Hill handwritten chronology ALW 50566 (prepared
11/8/86).

     Meese, meanwhile, met privately with McFarlane from 10:00 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. on Monday,
November 24, 1986, to question him about the diversion.  McFarlane confirmed that North had
told him about the diversion.  Meese did not take notes of the interview.  After the interview,
McFarlane prepared a three-page letter for Meese in which he set forth his views on the Iran
situation and on U.S.-Soviet relations.  With respect to the Iran arms sales, McFarlane wrote, ``I
have written an accurate description of those events that that [sic] I believe might meet with the
President's approval.  I will be glad to pass it along if you wish.'' 172  According to McFarlane,
Meese never requested a copy of the ``accurate description'' and McFarlane never provided it.173

     172 Letter from McFarlane to Meese, 11/24/86, ALV 049175.  Although the letter is not
dated, McFarlane told the OIC that after his morning interview with Meese, he prepared the letter
and dropped it off at Meese's house.

     173 Untranscribed OIC interview of McFarlane.  McFarlane could not recall what he stated in
the ``accurate description'' of events.  He did not retain a copy of the description. (McFarlane,
OIC Interview, 10/2/92.)

     After questioning McFarlane on November 24, Meese went to the White House to meet with
Regan and President Reagan.  Regan and Meese have given inconsistent testimony as to whether
Meese advised President Reagan of the diversion during this morning meeting or simply alerted
him to the fact that the weekend investigation had turned up evidence they needed to discuss.
Meese also met privately with Vice President Bush some time before the 2:00 p.m. senior
advisers' meeting where Meese was to report the findings of his investigation.  Meese took no
notes of the discussion but he has testified that they discussed the diversion, and Vice President
Bush indicated that he hadn't known about it.174

     174 Bush Diary, 11/24/86, ALU 0140210;  Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/29/87,
pp. 119-20.

     The Senior Advisers' Meeting

     The senior advisers' meeting on the afternoon of November 24, 1986, included President
Reagan, Vice President Bush, Shultz, Weinberger, Meese, Casey, Regan, and Poindexter.  The
discussion began with a review of the Iran arms sales by CIA official George Cave, who left the
meeting after his presentation.  In the second portion of the meeting, Meese did not announce the
discovery of the diversion; he did, however, talk about the November 1985 HAWK shipment.

     According to Weinberger's notes of the meeting, Donald Regan asked whether ``we object[ed]
to'' the November 1985 HAWK shipment.175  Poindexter falsely responded that, before
December 7, 1985, McFarlane handled the Iran arms sales ``all alone'' with ``no documentation.''
176

     175 Weinberger Note, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669KK.  Regan had called Wallison into his office
on the afternoon of the 21st to tell him that Meese had been asked to investigate the Iran arms
sales.  Regan gave Wallison a copy of the NSC chronology of the arms sales, prepared by North,
and asked Wallison to review it and provide Regan with a list of questions to ask at the
November 24 senior advisers' meeting.  Wallison's memorandum, which he delivered to Regan at
home on Friday night, focused on what the President knew about the November 1985 HAWK
shipment and when he knew it. (See Regan chapter.)

     176 Weinberger Note, 11/24/86, ALZ 0040669LL.  As mentioned earlier, Poindexter on
November 21 had destroyed the signed 1985 Finding that sought to retroactively authorize the
HAWKs shipment.

     Meese then told the group that McFarlane had outlined the planned shipment to Shultz in
Geneva in November 1985, and briefly recounted how the shipment had gone awry, resulting in
the missiles being returned to Israel in February 1986.  According to Weinberger's notes, Meese
advised the group that the shipment was ``[n]ot legal because no Finding,'' but ``President
g008not informed.'' 177  Regan's notes similarly show that Meese stated ``[m]ay be a violation
of law if arms shipped w/o [without] a Finding  But Pres[ident] did not know -- Cap
[Weinberger] denies knowing.  Israelis may have done this . . . probably using Pres'  [President's]
name.'' 178  Regan's notes also reflect Meese saying that the ``Pres. [President] only told may be
hostages out in short order.'' 179

     177 Ibid., ALZ 0040669LL-MM (emphasis in original).

     178 Regan Note, 11/24/86, ALU 0139379.

     179 Ibid., ALU 0139378.

     Assuming Meese testified truthfully when he said he did not discuss the November 1985
HAWK shipment with the President,180 there appeared to be no factual basis for his statement.
Meese's assertion that the President did not know of the November HAWK shipment directly
contradicted the information Shultz had provided Meese in their Saturday interview, as well as
McFarlane's assertion to Meese that the President supported and approved the arms sales from
the beginning in the summer of 1985, and North's similar assertion regarding the HAWKs
shipment specifically.

     180 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, p. 41.

     Cooper, who did not attend the November 24 senior advisers' meeting, had concluded from
the weekend investigation that the President knew of the HAWK shipment and may have even
approved it.181  According to Cooper, however, he and Meese did not discuss their respective
conclusions about the President's knowledge of the HAWK shipment.182  He said they did not
discuss what Meese would say at the senior advisers' meeting in reporting on the
investigation.183  Cooper said he felt there was no point in sharing his thoughts and conclusions
with Meese because they had together interviewed McFarlane, Shultz, and North, so Meese knew
what Cooper knew.184

     181 Cooper, Grand Jury, 8/5/92, p. 124.

     182 Ibid., p. 128.

     183 Ibid., pp. 130-31.

     184 Ibid., p. 128.

     In addition to Shultz and Meese, virtually everyone else present at the senior advisers meeting
knew or should have known that Meese's claim that the President was ``not informed'' was false,
but no one corrected Meese.  Meese concluded the meeting by asking, ``anyone know anything
else that hasn't been revealed.'' 185  Again, no one had anything to add.  In addition, although
Meese had informed at least Vice President Bush and Regan and President Reagan of the
diversion by this time, no one apparently wanted to discuss that information in the group.

     185 Regan Note, 11/24/86, ALU 0139383.  President Reagan had told Shultz and Regan only
a few days earlier that he knew about the November 1985 shipment.  Regan had not only been
present for that conversation but had also been present when McFarlane briefed the President
about the plan on two separate occasions in November 1985.  McFarlane told Weinberger in
November 1985 that the President has decided to implement the transaction through the Israelis.
Casey and Poindexter both knew at least that President Reagan had attempted in December 1985
to validate retroactively the CIA's support for an arms-for-hostages transaction.  Vice President
Bush later said he had been present for a national security briefing in 1985 at which McFarlane
explained the HAWK shipment.

     Shultz had remarked to Hill in the morning, before the senior advisers' meeting: ``They may
lay all this  off on Bud [McFarlane].  That won't be enough.'' 186  Reporting to his aides after the
senior advisers' meeting, Shultz said it ``was the damndest meeting.''  Shultz, who had expected
Meese to report fully on his weekend inquiry, said Meese had ``s[ai]d nothing'' at the meeting.
Shultz was astounded that the meeting had instead addressed the possibility of continuing the
ill-fated arms-sale plan.  Shultz characterized President Reagan as ``v[ery] hot under the collar +
determined he is totally right.'' 187

     186 Hill Note, 11/24/86, ANS 0001898.  Hill also recorded his concerns about Shultz's
position, noting that the facts in Shultz's possession ``point the finger at McF[arlane] + Pdx
[Poindexter] and make him [Shultz] the star witness for the prosecution.  So the day he testifies
is his last day in office.''  (Ibid., ANS 0001899.)

     187 Ibid., ANS 0001894-909.

     Shultz also reported to Hill after the meeting that Poindexter said ``McF[arlane] ran it all by
himself until Dec 4 '85 + no one knows what he did.  I s[ai]d I know something of what he did.
An Aug. 85 mtg w P[resident] + me + Bud [McFarlane].  Bud sd all deniable.  I sd impossible.
They rearranging the record.'' 188  Shultz added that the President is ``now saying he didn't know
anything about Bud's Nov '85 activities'' -- in contrast to what the President had told Shultz just
four days earlier.189  Hill  hypothesized that the White House was carrying out ``thru Meese'' a
``carefully thought out strategy'' to insulate the President and ``blame it on Bud [McFarlane].''
190

     188 Ibid., ANS 0001902.

     189 Platt Note, 11/24/86, ALW 0039195; see also Hill Note, 11/24/86, ANS 0001904
(``P[resident] now saying he didn't know what Bud [McFarlane] was up to.'').

     190 Platt Note, 11/24/86, ALW 0039196.

     At his November 25, 1986, press conference -- in which he announced the diversion of profits
from the Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan contras -- Meese reiterated the false story that the
President did not learn of the November 1985 HAWK shipment until February 1986.191  He did
not, however, publicly state the conclusion he had shared privately first with Shultz and later at
the senior advisers' meeting -- that the November 1985 HAWK shipment was illegal because
there was no Finding.  In fact, he now declared all the shipments ``legal.'' 192

     191 Transcript of Meese Press Conference, 11/25/86, ALV 022208.

     192 Ibid., ALV 022210-11.

     In response to a question regarding the propriety of Shultz's public criticism of the arms sales,
Meese stated at the press briefing: ``I think every member of the administration owes it to the
President to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with him and support the policies that he has -- the policy
decisions he has made[.]'' 193

     193 The pressure on Shultz to resign was coming from all sides.  Weinberger wrote in his
diary notes on November 25:

     Bill Casey -- on secure -- thinks Shultz should go to[o] . . .

     ***

     [Called] Bill Clark in San Luis Obisbo [sic] -- Bill Fr. Smith + Pete Wilson both will call
President & urge that he dump Shultz[.]

     (Weinberger Note, 11/25/86, ALZ 0040561-64.)

     Was There a Cover-Up?

     Although the Select Iran/contra Committees questioned Meese closely in 1987 about his
November 21-24, 1986 inquiry, they did not question him about his remarks regarding the
HAWK shipment at the November 24 meeting.  Their focus was on the Iran/contra diversion.
The Select Committees had only two contemporaneous records of the meeting -- Meese's notes
and Hill's notes of Shultz's recollections immediately after the meeting.  Meese's notes reflect
Regan's question about the HAWK shipment and Poindexter's initial response, but they omit
Meese's own lengthy presentation as to illegality and President Reagan's lack of knowledge.
Hill's November 24, 1986 notes, which show that Shultz and his aides were concerned that the
White House was presenting an inaccurate account of the November 1985 shipment, apparently
were never explored fully by the Select Committees.  They did not have the Regan and
Weinberger notes cited above, which the OIC only obtained in 1992, despite having sent
comprehensive document requests to both the White House and the Department of Defense in
early 1987.

     During their public hearings, the Select Committees did focus on the fact that Shultz had told
Meese in the November 22, 1986, interview that the President knew of the November 1985
HAWK shipment.  They questioned Meese closely about his assertion to the contrary at his
November 25, 1986, press conference.  Although they had Hill's notes, the Select Committees
did not question Meese about why he had contradicted Shultz during the November 22, 1986,
interview itself.  They did not explore this subject with Shultz, either.  The State Department,
however, had anticipated such questions and prepared the following responses:

     Q: On Saturday, November 22, 1986, Mr. Meese said to you that the President did not know
about the 1985 HAWK shipment when it occurred.

     A: Yes.  Mr. Meese said that to me at that meeting.  But I had already told Mr. Meese in that
same Saturday, November 22, 1986 meeting that the President had told me he knew.

     Q: Was Mr. Meese trying to get you to change your recollection?

     A: You'll have to ask Mr. Meese.194

     194 ALW 0051382.

     Both Shultz and Hill testified in 1992 that Meese's assertion in the interview that the President
did not have contemporaneous knowledge of the November 1985 HAWK shipment struck them
as peculiar at the time, given that Shultz had just told Meese the President did know.  Shultz said
he had simply assumed Meese had more  information.195  Hill, however, was more skeptical.
He thought Meese was trying to get Shultz to back off of his claim that the President had
admitted knowing about the HAWK shipment.196  Hill described Meese's style of questioning as
``leading,'' and said Meese had stood over Shultz during the interview, in a ``back on your heels''
manner.197

     195 Shultz, OIC Interview, 6/4/92, pp. 85-86.

     196 Hill, Grand Jury, 7/10/92, pp. 165-66.

     197 Ibid., pp. 167-69.

     In May 1992, the OIC questioned Meese about the newly discovered evidence of his activities
in November 1986.  He admitted that Shultz had told him that the President said he knew about
the November 1985 HAWK shipment,198 but he denied that he ever had any legal concerns
about the HAWK shipment.199  When confronted with the Hill, Regan, and Weinberger notes
from November 1986, he denied ever having said that the November 1985 HAWK shipment
violated the law or that the President did not know about the shipment:

     198 Meese, OIC Interview, 5/11/92, pp. 67, 70.

     199 Ibid., pp. 35, 41, 67-71.

     Q: Did you express a concern to Mr. Shultz that it was important that the President not know
about the '85 shipments because they could potentially be a violation of law?

     A: No.  I'm positive I didn't say that.

     * * *

     Q: [Reading from Hill's notes of Meese's November 22, 1986, interview of Shultz]  ``Certain
things could  be violation of a law.  President didn't know about HAWKS in November.  If it
happened and President didn't report it to Congress, it's a violation.''

     Do you remember making such a statement to Mr.    Shultz?

     A: No, I don't.  I don't remember that about violation of law and that sort of thing. . . . I don't
know whether he misunderstood me or what I was trying to say there.

     Q: Then it says ``President didn't know about HAWKS in November.''  Apparently you're
telling Mr. Shultz that the President didn't know about HAWKS.

     A: I'm sure I would not have said that.  It seems strange to have me saying that.  I'm not sure
what that means.

     Q: Because Mr. Shultz --  --

     A: He had told me.

     Q:  --  -- told you that the President did know.

     A: Yes, so that doesn't make any sense.200

     200 Ibid., pp. 67-70 (emphasis added).

     Meese did not flatly deny making the statements to Shultz, but he claimed to have ``no
recollection of that portion of the conversation at all or whether that's accurate[.]'' 201

     201 Ibid., pp. 70-71.

     Meese had a similar reaction to the Weinberger and Regan notes of his comments at the
November 24, 1986, senior advisers' meeting.  He again claimed not to recall any concern or
statement about the legality of the November 1985 HAWK shipment or any statement that the
President did not  know about the shipment.202  Ultimately, Meese said only, ``I can't explain it.''
203

     202 Ibid., pp. 80-86.

     203 Ibid., p. 86.

     When confronted with his statement in the November 25, 1986, press briefing that the
President did not learn about the HAWK shipment until February 1986, Meese responded, ``I'm
confused now.'' 204

     204 Ibid., pp. 92-93.

     If Meese testified truthfully when he said he did not ask President Reagan whether he knew
about the November 1985 HAWK shipment,205 then Meese had no factual basis for
contradicting Shultz on November 22, 1986, by stating that the President did not learn of the
HAWK shipment until after the fact.  To the contrary, even North and McFarlane had each
suggested that the President had approved the November 1985 HAWK shipment.  The most
plausible explanation for Meese's conduct is that he was trying to get Shultz to change his
recollection.  In the November 24 senior advisers' meeting, it appears Meese was trying to signal
the other senior advisers that the official position should be that the President didn't know.
Meese's motives for misrepresenting the President's knowledge are implicit in the preface to his
statement to Shultz:  ``certain things could be a violation of law.''  Meese, in effect, signaled
Shultz  that to disclose the President's knowledge of the November 1985 HAWK shipment would
implicate the President in an illegal activity.

     205 Ibid., p. 41.

     According to Weinberger and Regan's notes, Meese communicated a similar message at the
November 24, 1986, senior advisers' meeting, asserting again that the November 1985 shipment
may have been illegal, but that the President was ``not informed.''  Meese and Poindexter's
statements at the November 24 meeting placed responsibility solely on McFarlane's shoulders, by
suggesting that he had acted alone and exceeded his authority in operating without the knowledge
or approval of the President.  By asserting that McFarlane had ``handled this all alone'' with ``no
documentation,'' Poindexter suggested that McFarlane would not be able to prove otherwise.206

     206 Meese had already made sure that Shultz was not aware of any direct contact by
McFarlane with the President in Geneva regarding the HAWK shipment.

     In 1992 Grand Jury testimony, Donald Regan conceded that he knew Meese's assertion that
the President did not know about the 1985 shipment was false, and that Vice President Bush as
well as Secretary Shultz also knew it was false.  Regan admitted frankly that, in light of Meese's
statement that the shipment may have been illegal, he was not willing to speak up to correct the
record regarding  the President's knowledge until a final determination was made regarding the
legality of the shipment.207

     207 See Regan chapter.

     Three weeks later, Cooper drew out legal theories justifying all the arms shipments.  With the
legal rationale in place, the need to insulate the President from knowledge of the HAWK
shipment was diminished although the problem of convincing Congress of the after-the-fact
rationalization remained.  Over time, Administration officials acknowledged certain facts of the
President's knowledge, although the record remained extremely confused because some officials,
most prominently Weinberger, lied to Congress about their own knowledge of the HAWKs and
continued to obfuscate in subsequent testimony.  The short life of the effort to insulate the
President, coupled with the passage of more than five years before the Regan and Weinberger
notes were uncovered, made further pursuit of a possible conspiracy futile.  The passage of time
also effectively killed a case against Meese for falsely claiming in 1992 not to recall that he had
legal concerns about the November 1985 HAWK shipment or that he had stated at the senior
advisers' meeting that President Reagan had not known of the November 1985 HAWK shipment.
The sheer passage of time made Meese's claimed failure to recall the interchange at a meeting
over five years in the past, dramatic and important though it was, too difficult to refute beyond a
reasonable doubt.

     Other Meese Problems

     Independent Counsel investigated other aspects of Meese's conduct but decided against
prosecution. There follows a brief summary of these investigations.

     Meese's early testimony was marked by a conspicuous lack of recollection about significant
events, even in the face of contemporaneously made records and other evidence.  OIC concerns
were heightened when Meese in the North trial was able to assist the defendant by clearly
recalling in 1989 information he had failed to recall much earlier, at a time nearer the events in
question.  The evidence against Meese for his North trial testimony, however, never quite
supported a perjury case against him.

     In a series of Grand Jury appearances and FBI interviews in 1987 and 1988, Meese was
questioned extensively about a number of areas, particularly  the extent of his contacts with and
his knowledge of North's contra-support activities, and whether Meese sought to delay federal
investigations that might have exposed those activities.

     Knowledge of North's Contra-Support Activities

     Meese initially testified that he had only a ``general recollection'' that North ``was involved in
working on that whole project, the support for and assistance to the freedom fighters [contras] in
Nicaragua as a part of his general responsibilities in the military office of the NSC staff.'' 208  He
said he did not recall any conversation with North about his fundraising activities or his
provision of military supplies or tactical support for the contras.  Meese was unapologetic about
his repeated claims of memory loss.  When asked directly why he could not recall whether he
knew that North was providing tactical advice to the contras, Meese said:

     208 Meese, Grand Jury, 11/18/87, p. 91.

     Well, I can't tell you in sworn testimony here -- and this is why many questions I have to say I
don't have any recollection.  I want to be sure that I'm not testifying in any way that could be
possibly subject to contradiction later on.209

     209 Ibid., 11/20/87, p. 10.

     Meese was asked repeatedly if he ever had any discussions with North about the contras and
repeatedly side-stepped the question, saying he could not recall any. But he stopped short of
actually denying that he did.  For instance, when asked the question before the Grand Jury,
Meese said:

     Well, again, I told you that maybe a dozen times in the course of a year, it could have been as
many as twenty, I would pass him [North] in the hall or see him on the street.  He might have
said something about that in passing but I can't recall at this time.   It certainly was not anything
significant.  I can assure you of that.210

     210 Ibid., pp. 38-39.

     Although Meese had a close relationship with CIA Director Casey and shared with Casey a
desire to see the contras survive during the Boland cut-off period, Meese consistently failed to
recall any conversation with Casey regarding North's activities or the CIA director's relationship
with North.  In his Select Committees deposition, Meese said he could not recall any discussions
with Casey about North and he didn't know  ``how closely or remotely they happened to work
together.'' 211  He testified four months later that he was not aware of any special relationship
between North and Casey.212  In later Grand Jury testimony, Meese admitted to a ``dim
recollection'' that Casey asked him in May 1984 to intercede with the Marine Corps' decision to
reassign North out of the NSC staff and back into the Marines.213  ``As I recall that was a time
in which Mr. Casey indicated he thought very highly of Colonel North and what he was doing
with regard to Central America,'' Meese said. Asked whether he knew what North was doing in
this regard, Meese answered, ``Again it's a very dim recollection, but my recollection is that he
was talking  about Ollie [North] knowing the situation there and doing a good job, or words to
that effect.'' 214

     211 Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, pp. 123-24.

     212 Meese, Grand Jury, 11/11/87, p. 29.

     213 Ibid., 11/18/87, p. 97.

     214 Ibid., pp. 97-98.

     Meese's notes of May 15, 1984, indicate that he discussed with Casey North's possible transfer
and took immediate action to check North's status with the Marines.215  Meese's recollection of
Casey's call for help was much clearer almost 18 months later when he testified under cross
examination in the North trial:

     215 Meese Notes, 5/15/84, 55301467.

     I had my assistant check with Admiral Poindexter or his deputy in the National Security
Council staff, and received a report that the National Security Council -- the head of the National
Security Council staff had approved the re-assignment in deference to Colonel North's career
because the transfer back to the Marine Corps would have given him the opportunity to
command a battalion at Camp Lejeune.216

     216 Meese, North Trial Testimony, 3/28/89, p. 5741.

     Asked whether he dropped the matter at that point, Meese responded:

     At that time, I notified Mr. Casey of the situation, indicated we didn't want to do anything to
interfere with Colonel North's career, but I said that if he wanted me to go ahead and go further
and talk to General Kelley, the commandant of the Marine Corps, I would be glad to do so if he
felt further action was necessary.217

     217 Ibid.

     Advice on Whether Boland Restricted the NSC Staff

     Meese testified before Congress that he did not believe that the National Security Council
staff was restricted by the Boland Amendment prohibition on military aid to the contras.218  He
gave similar testimony before the Grand Jury.219  He also testified that he did not recall giving
advice to President Reagan or other Administration officials, either informally or in written
opinions, regarding the Boland restrictions and which agencies were subject to them.  For
instance, in a Grand Jury appearance in November 1987, when Meese was asked about that, the
following exchange occurred:

     218 Meese, Select Committees Testimony, 7/29/87, p. 310.

     219 Meese, Grand Jury, 11/18/87, pp. 108-9.

     Q:  Well, let me ask you then specifically, between the time you became Attorney General in
February of 1985 and November 25th, 1986, were you ever asked to give an official Department
of Justice Opinion on the Boland Amendment, what activity was or was not prohibited, and to
whom it applied?

     A:  I don't believe we were, and I have no recollection that we were.  It's possible, again, that
there could have been requests that I wouldn't see in the normal course of business.  But I don't
have any recollection of that happening.220

     220 Ibid., p. 113.

     The question was then extended to include any oral, informal opinion, even in general
conversation:

     Q:  Now you mentioned that on occasion you would see Colonel North in the hallways over at
the White House and have conversations with him.  To your knowledge -- well, did you ever
have any conversation with him about the Boland Amendment and about whether it applied to
the NSC staff or what was prohibited by it?

     A:  I can't ever recall having such a conversation with Colonel North.221

     221 Ibid., pp. 113-14.

     To try to nail down the point completely regarding Meese's assertion that he gave no advice to
anyone regarding the Boland restrictions, the following exchange occurred:

     Q:  So just to make it clear, when [Associate Counsel] Ms. Hetherton used the term ``oral
opinion'', sometimes when we use the word ``opinion'' as lawyers we are talking about something
fairly formal even if it is oral.  Do you recall any conversations or discussions or advice or
something short of advice that you had with anybody before November of 1986 on the matter of
the Boland Amendment?

     A:  No.

     Q:  (By Associate Counsel Judith Hetherton):  So we are broadening the question now beyond
Colonel North to include the President, the Vice President, the Chief of Staff, Mr. Regan, Mr.
Casey, Mr. McFarlane, Admiral Poindexter, Cdr. Thompson, Craig Coy, Robert Earl, anyone
else.  To your knowledge, did you have any conversations with any of them about the Boland
Amendment, to whom it applied, and what it restricted?

     A:  I don't recall ever having such a conversation.222

     222 Ibid., p. 114.

     Although President Reagan both publicly and in answer to written interrogatories posed by
Independent Counsel stated that he did not believe that the Boland restrictions applied to NSC
staff, the OIC found no evidence  that the White House ever sought from the Justice Department
a written opinion on Boland.

     In the North trial, however, Meese had a distinctly different recollection on this subject under
cross examination by North's attorney:

     Q:  Mr. Meese, during the timeframe 1984, did you ever have a discussion with the President
in which you indicated to him what your views were with regard to whether Boland applied to
the National Security Council?

     A:  I participated in meetings of the National Security Planning Group in which this was
discussed, to the best of my recollection.

     The Court:  The question is --  --

     Meese:  And the President was there, and there was such a discussion.

     The Court:  The question is: Did you give any advice, not what anybody else said but did you
give any advice as to whether it applied or not?

     Meese:  Yes, your honor.

     The Court:  What was your advice?  This is the question.

     Mr. Keker [Associate Counsel John Keker]:  Could we have the date?

     The Court:  We will get the date.

     Meese:  I have a general recollection, your honor, of giving my opinion in those meetings, in
at least one meeting, and my opinion was, and my view then and now was that the Boland
Amendment did not apply to the National Security Council staff.

     The Court:  And when did you give that view?

     Meese:  That would be in National Security Planning Group meetings, and I believe during
1984 when this was under discussion.223

     223 Meese, North Trial Testimony, 3/29/89, pp. 5823-24.

     The Nature of Meese's Investigation

     Meese was called as a Government witness in the North trial because two of the charges were
based on North's false account of the Iran arms sales diversion and other lies he told the attorney
general during a November 23, 1986, interview.

     Under cross examination, Meese agreed with North's counsel that his questioning of North as
part of his November 21-24 weekend inquiry was ``almost like coworkers in the Administration .
. . trying to understand what the basic facts'' were.  To the defense counsel's assertion that his
inquiry, with three of his most senior assistants present, was more or less a chat among
colleagues, Meese responded, ``That's correct.'' 224  Similarly, Meese agreed when defense
counsel gave this description of his mission in questioning North:

     224 Ibid., 3/28/89, p. 5758.

     . . . And your focus was not really the focus of an attorney general wearing the attorney
general's hat but it was basically to try to gather information to protect the President as best you
could and deal with this enormous political problem brewing in the Congress, correct?

     A:  Yes.225

     225 Ibid., p. 5749.

     Trial Judge Gerhard A. Gesell interrupted:

     The Court:  Are you saying then that Lieutenant Colonel North had no obligation to answer
your questions?

     Meese:  He would have had no obligation other than as a loyal member of the Administration
and a person in the White House.  In other words, there was no legal compulsion in the normal
sense as there would be perhaps in a criminal investigation.

     The Court:  So he could have said, I would rather not answer?

     Meese:  He could have said that, yes.226

     226 Ibid.

     Meese's Awareness of Third-Country Contra Funding

     On the question of the Reagan Administration's efforts to solicit third-country contributions to
support the contras, Meese changed his testimony between the time he was first asked about it by
the FBI in December 1986 and his appearance in the North trial, more than two years later. In his
initial FBI interview, Meese said he had no knowledge of third-country funding for the
contras.227  Following public revelations about the misplaced $10 million Brunei contribution,
Meese told the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) that he had no
``personal knowledge'' of U.S. Government solicitations of third countries other  than Brunei,
``nor was it discussed in any NSC meetings that I can recall.'' 228

     227 Meese, FBI 302, 12/4/86, p. 5.

     228 Meese, HPSCI Testimony, 12/19/86, pp. 95-96.

     After Saudi Arabia's contributions were publicly disclosed in the Select Committees hearings,
Meese was asked in July 1987 by congressional investigators about his knowledge of meetings of
President Reagan with King Fahd of Saudi Arabia or Prince Bandar, the Saudi ambassador to the
United States.  ``I don't have any recollection of knowing about those meetings at the time.  I
think that was during 1985 and 1986; . . . Maybe it was in 1984.  I don't have any -- I don't recall
at this time that I knew about it.  It is possible that I did.'' 229

     229 Meese, Select Committees Deposition, 7/8/87, p. 159.

     Confronted with the minutes of the National Security Planning Group (NSPG) meeting on
June 25, 1984, at which third-country funding for the contras was debated, Meese said: ``I don't
recall the meeting, no, but again the minutes here are not inconsistent with anything I generally
recall.'' 230  The minutes quote Meese as interjecting:

     230 Meese, Grand Jury, 11/18/87, pp. 79-80.

     As another non-practicing lawyer I want to emphasize that it's important to tell the
Department of Justice that we want them to find the proper and legal basis which will permit the
United States to assist in obtaining third party resources for the anti-Sandinistas [contras].  You
have to give  lawyers guidance when asking them a question.231

     231 Minutes of the June 24, 1984 NSPG Meeting, ALU 007874.

     McFarlane testified publicly at the Select Iran/contra Committee hearings that the initial Saudi
donation to the contras occurred in the spring or summer of 1984, following discussions by him
with Prince Bandar.  Meese recalled June 1984 discussions with the Saudis, but when asked what
he knew about third-country funding, he said, ``I don't recall anything that I knew at that time.''
Asked if he remembered any approaches to foreign countries while counselor to the President, he
said: ``Again I have a general recollection that those activities took place but I can't specifically
recall anything.'' 232

     232 Ibid., pp. 87-88.

     Meese's wavering recollection of what and when he knew about third-country funding for the
contras solidified by the time he testified in the North trial:

     Q:  Now, in the National Security Council, as a result of your participation on the Council and
as as result of your position as counselor to the president, did you learn in 1984, Mr. Meese, that
Saudia [sic] Arabia was giving assistance to the United States to fund the freedom fighters
[contras]?

     A:  I recall learning that more in my position as counselor to the president.

     Q:  Yes, that's what I mean, as counselor to the president.

     A:  Yes.

     Q:  Would that have been in early 1984 that you first learned about that, sir?

     A:  I can't place it exactly, but that sounds about right.

     Q:  Did you learn specifically that Mr. McFarlane was dealing with an official of the Saudi
Arabian government in working out arrangements so that they would provide a million dollars a
month to the freedom fighters?

     A:  I don't believe I knew the exact amount or the detail, but I did know generally that that
was going on, yes.233

     233 Meese, North Trial Testimony, 3/29/89, p. 5824.

     Posey-Corvo Investigation

     Independent Counsel investigated the circumstances surrounding Meese's intrusion in two
federal investigations that could have exposed North's contra-support activities.  Independent
Counsel found no direct evidence that Meese obstructed either of these investigations, although
he openly  admitted seeking a delay in one to avoid exposure of the Iran hostage-recovery efforts.

     The Posey-Corvo case was being investigated by the U.S. Attorney's Office in Miami.  It
involved allegations of contra-related gun-running, drug trafficking and Neutrality Act violations.
Among the allegations surrounding the case were an attempted assassination plot against a U.S.
ambassador.  Meese and others in Washington who expressed special interest in the Posey-Corvo
case cited the assassination allegations as the cause for their interest.

     Jeffrey Feldman, an assistant U.S. attorney in Miami, began in early 1986 investigating the
Posey-Corvo matter, based in part on allegations by Jesus Garcia, who had been convicted in
December 1985 for illegal possession of a machine gun.  Garcia claimed that a pro-contra
mercenary group led by Thomas Posey had plotted to assassinate U.S. Ambassador to Costa Rica
Lewis A. Tambs to collect a bounty placed on Tambs' head by a drug kingpin, and then to blame
the assassination on Nicaragua's Sandinista government to build public support for the contras.
At the same time, other sources told federal investigators that North, Robert W. Owen, and John
Hull, an American rancher living in Costa Rica, were involved in gun-running.

     The OIC declined to take over the Posey-Corvo case but did investigate a possible obstruction
of justice regarding it.  It was determined that the allegations were not supported by the evidence.

     In the course of his investigation, Feldman reported hearing rumors about a contra-resupply
network run by North.  On a trip to Costa Rica, Feldman on March 31, 1986, laid out the
assassination allegations to Tambs and CIA Costa Rican Station Chief Joseph F. Fernandez.234
North's notebooks reflect a call from Fernandez noting Feldman's  visit to Costa Rica with FBI
agents.235 On April 7, 1986, North received a memo from Owen in which he identified the
investigators who came to Costa Rica and quoted Feldman as stating he was not only looking at
Neutrality Act violations but also the unauthorized use of Government funds.236

     234 Feldman during his presentation on the gun-running allegations showed Tambs a chart
that listed North, Owen and Hull; Tambs appeared shaken, according to Feldman. (Feldman,
Select Committees Deposition, 4/30/87, p. 50.) Feldman did not know that he was speaking to
two Government officials who were assisting North in contra-support efforts.

     235 North Note, 3/31/86, AMX 001042-43.

     236 Memorandum from Owen to North, 4/7/86.

     On April 4, 1986, Feldman briefed Kellner and several other members of the U.S. Attorney's
Office in Miami.  Assistant U.S. Attorney David Leiwant, who was present for part of the
meeting, said that Kellner received a phone call from Washington during the meeting, in which
an unknown official told Kellner to go slow on the investigation.237  Neither Feldman nor
anyone else in the meeting corroborated Leiwant's allegations.

     237 Leiwant, FBI 302, 4/6/87, pp. 1-2, 4.

     Meese's most direct involvement in the Posey-Corvo matter came during a trip with Assistant
Attorney General Lowell Jensen and FBI official Oliver ``Buck'' Revell to Miami on April 12,
1986.

     Meese inquired about the Posey-Corvo case, and Kellner said he told Meese that no credible
information had been found to support either the assassination or gun-running allegations.238
Meese denied that he asked Kellner to slow down the investigation or that he instructed anyone
else to do so.239

     238 Kellner, FBI 302, 4/7/87, p. 2

     239 Meese, Grand Jury, 11/18/87, pp. 146-47.

     After a series of delays, on October 6, 1986 -- one day after a contra-resupply plane carrying
Eugene Hasenfus was shot down in Nicaragua -- a decision was made in the U.S. Attorney's
Office in Miami to send the Posey-Corvo matter to a Grand Jury.

     Independent Counsel determined that the heightened interest in the case by Washington
officials was understandable in light of the alleged assassination plot.  In Miami, delays in
presenting the case to a Grand Jury were attributable to the fact that Feldman's superiors
considered it a routine gun-running case and that the matter was not sufficiently developed.
There was a large volume of serious drug and weapons cases based in Miami.  During the first
half of 1986, no one in the U.S. Attorney's Office was aware of North's actual involvement with
the contras.  When Feldman stumbled onto North's contra-resupply network in early 1986, his
focus was on the gun-running and assassination aspects of the case.

     The evidence did not support an obstruction charge.

     Role in Delaying FBI and Customs Investigations Into Southern Air Transport Following the
Hasenfus Shootdown

     Meese admitted that he sought to delay the FBI and Customs Service investigations of
Southern Air Transport (SAT) in the wake of the Hasenfus shootdown on October 5, 1986.  He
testified that he did so at Poindexter's request  and possibly also spoke to North about the
matter.240  Meese said his purpose in delaying the investigations into Southern Air Transport --
which was involved in both the Iran and contra operations -- was to keep Iran arms sales from
being publicly exposed while hostage-rescue efforts were underway.  Although there was
circumstantial evidence that Meese was aware of North's contra-support activities, Independent
Counsel determined that the evidence did not prove that Meese delayed the investigations of
SAT for a purpose other than to protect the hostage-rescue operation.

     240 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, pp. 103-4.

     Robert Dutton of the contra-resupply operation said North told him on October 9, 1986, that
he had talked to Meese about the Customs investigation of SAT and that the matter would be
taken care of.241  A North notebook entry suggests that North at least intended to bring it to
Meese's attention:

     241 Dutton, Select Committees Testimony, 5/11/87, pp. 87-88.

     [box] g008Ed Meese

      -- SAT EXPOSURE =

     IRAN/HOSTAGE EXPOSURE 242

     242 North Note, 10/10/86, AMX 001582.

     Meese said he had little awareness of the Hasenfus shootdown in early October 1986 and did
not recall discussing it with other Administration officials.243

     243 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, p. 27.

     On October 13, 1986, North noted continuing concern over exposure of the SAT matter, this
time apparently connecting it to exposure of Secord's Iran involvement:

     [box] Ed Meese

      -- SAT/RVS [Richard V. Secord] --

     IRAN 244

     244 North Note, 10/13/86, AMX 001586.

     Meese said his involvement in the SAT investigations began October 30, 1986, when
Poindexter called him to request a delay in the investigation of SAT by FBI and Customs.  Meese
said Poindexter told him

     . . . the FBI was seeking to interview people at the Southern Air Transport or to get some
records from Southern Air Transport, something along that line, and that the people they were
supposed to talk with at Southern Air Transport were involved in the Iran initiative project and
they were needed to be away during a certain period of time therefore, I think it was about 10
days, and would it be possible to delay the FBI interviews or contacts with them for a short time.
And I said I would find out if it was, and if that would not interfere with the investigation that
was being conducted, I would see if that could be done.245

     245 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, pp. 41-42.

     Meese added that it was possible that Poindexter said to get back to him or North if he had
any questions.246  Meese said Poindexter probably also mentioned the Customs probe as well as
the FBI probe.247  Meese said he did not  discuss with Poindexter SAT's connection to the
Hasenfus case, despite a prominent story in The Washington Post that day reporting on the
connection.248

     246 Ibid., p. 43.

     247 Ibid., pp. 41-42, 46.

     248 Ibid., pp. 45-46.

     Meese characterized the delay in the SAT investigations as a brief one: 10 days.  The FBI
investigation, however, was not resumed until November 26, 1986, after the Iran/contra diversion
had been exposed.  After receiving Poindexter's request for a delay in the investigations, Meese
turned the matter over to Assistant Attorney General Stephen Trott.  Trott called FBI Director
William Webster on October 30, 1986, asking that all non-urgent investigations be stopped to
keep from jeopardizing the hostage operation, and Webster agreed.

     Meese spoke with Baker about the Customs investigation of SAT generally, but their
recollections differ.249 Baker said that Meese at an uncertain date approached him at a White
House meeting and said he wanted to talk about an overzealous Customs investigation.250
According to Baker, Meese said national security matters were involved but Meese did not go
into specifics.251

     249 Meese, FBI 302, 12/19/86, p. 1.

     250 Baker, FBI 302, 12/18/86, p. 1.

     251 Ibid.

     A memo for the record by North on November 14, 1986, describes a conversation North had
with Revell of the FBI about the investigation delay.  According to the memo, Revell told him
that 10 days before he

     . . . received guidance from Attorney General Meese to ``suspend'' the investigation of Major
General Secord's involvement in support of the Nicaraguan resistance and that the Attorney
General had discussed the Customs' investigation of SAT with Treasury Secretary Jim Baker.
On Mr. Revell's advice, North called Associate Attorney General Stephan [sic] Trott to solicit his
advice on the matter.

     At 12:10 p.m. on November 14, Trott advised North by secure phone that the Secord and SAT
involvement with the Iran covert action had been the subject of a discussion between Trott and
the Attorney General and a separate discourse between the Attorney General and Treasury
Secretary Baker.  Trott indicated that Secretary Baker had planned to advise Customs regarding
sensitivity to SAT's involvement in sensitive U.S. government operations.

     Trott informed that he would discuss this matter immediately with Attorney General Meese
and indicated that he (Trott) fully understood the need not to divulge SAT or Secord's roles in
support of the Iran covert action.  Trott indicated that he would advise us of the results.252

     252 North memo to the Record, 11/14/86, AKW 006105.

     Revell confirmed that he and North in the second week of November 1986 discussed the SAT
matter and Secord.253  Revell said he told North the FBI would continue its investigation.
Revell said North's memo is accurate  except that he did not tell North he had received guidance
from Meese.254

     253 Revell, FBI 302, 12/16/86, p. 3.

     254 Ibid.

     Trott said North called him and asked that Meese intervene in the Customs investigation
through Baker, to slow down the investigation or narrow the Customs subpoena for SAT
documents.255  Trott said he discussed North's call with Meese, and Meese later told him he had
discussed the matter with Baker.256  Trott's notes of the phone call with North on November 14
indicate the concerns were Iran-related:

     255 Trott, FBI 302, 12/15/86, pp. 2-3.

     256 Ibid., 3/29/88, p. 5.

     O.N. . . . Legit covert action . . . J.P. Customs Florida S.A.T. -- 6 missions into Tehran --
sanctions [noted in margin: ``sensitive stuff''] . . . NOT down south connected . . . SEACORD =
Customs g008all S.A.T. records . . .257

     257 Trott Note, 11/14/86, ALV 011083 (emphasis in original).

     During the second week in November 1986, FBI officials asked DOJ whether the SAT
investigation could be resumed.  Trott asked Meese.  Meese said he called Poindexter on
November 14, 1986, to asked whether the FBI could resume its inquiry of SAT; Meese said
Poindexter told him on November 18 that the investigation could proceed.258  On November 20,
1986, Trott advised Revell that the FBI investigation of SAT should resume.

     258 Meese, Grand Jury, 12/16/87, pp. 53-56.

     Although these investigations threatened the exposure of the contra-resupply operation as well
as the Iran arms sales, OIC obtained no convincing evidence that Meese sought the delay for
reasons other than those he claimed:  keeping secret the hostage-rescue operation.

Part X

     Political Oversight and the Rule of Law

     The Iran/contra prosecutions illustrate in an especially stark fashion the tension between
political oversight and enforcement of existing law.  Congress's decision to compel immunized
testimony from a number of Iran/contra figures pursuant to 18 U.S.C.  6002 -- most notably Lt.
Col. Oliver L. North and Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter -- was thought important both to
address an immediate crisis of political confidence and to shed light on flaws in the functioning
of the national security apparatus.  Ultimately, however, that decision also was fatal to the
prosecutions of North and Poindexter, and made a full and equitable accounting for criminal
wrongdoing impossible.  That outcome holds important lessons for the future.

     Background

     It was apparent from the outset of the Iran/contra investigation that congressional grants of use
immunity to the principals in the affair would make prosecution of those persons problematic.
The Office of Independent Counsel noted that concern in its first Interim Report, issued in April
1987, explaining that the award of immunity ``will have a serious and possibly destructive
impact upon a subsequent prosecution'' and ``might preclude future prosecution of those
[immunized] individuals.''  The Office pointed out that, under Kastigar v. United States, 406 U.S.
441, 458 (1972), a grant of use immunity results in ``a sweeping proscription of any use, direct or
indirect, of the compelled testimony and any information derived therefrom.''  The Office
accordingly took extensive steps to avoid this danger.  It expedited the elements of its
investigation most  likely to be the subject of congressional inquiry.  It memorialized the
statements of potential trial witnesses -- in the vernacular, ``canning'' them -- that were made
prior to the time that immunized testimony became publicly available.  It implemented
prophylactic procedures designed to shield prosecutors and investigators from exposure to
immunized disclosures.  And it urged Congress to be conservative in granting immunity.

     When Congress nevertheless chose to compel testimony from North and Poindexter, these
prophylactic procedures continued before the Grand Jury and at the North and Poindexter trials.
Grand Jury witnesses were instructed by the Government to ``make sure that your answers to our
questions are based solely on your own personal knowledge and recollection of the events in
question.  Do not relate to us anything which you learned for the first time as a result of listening
to or reading or hearing about immunized testimony.''  The district judge gave a similar
instruction to all witnesses at the North trial.

     The district judge presiding in the Poindexter case took even more extensive precautions.
Prior to trial he reviewed statements made by potential trial witnesses before Poindexter's
immunized testimony became publicly available, finding that all of the proposed testimony of
most of these witnesses had been memorialized by that date.  As for those witnesses whose trial
testimony would not be limited to that ``canned'' prior to Poindexter's congressional appearance,
the  district judge found that the proposed trial testimony of most of them concerned subjects that
Poindexter did not address in his immunized statements.

     This left the Government still to prove that five of its potential witnesses were free of taint.
The district judge ordered these witnesses to appear at a pretrial hearing.  Of the three of these
witnesses who subsequently testified at trial, two credibly affirmed at the hearing that their
anticipated trial testimony would not be affected in any way by Poindexter's immunized
statements.

     The third witness, North, took a different tack.  He stated at the hearing that he was unable,
with respect to any relevant subject, to distinguish between what he had personally done,
observed or experienced and what he had heard about the events by way of Poindexter's
immunized testimony.  As for Poindexter's destruction of the December 1985 presidential
Finding, North acknowledged that he had seen Poindexter destroy a piece of paper, but insisted
that he did not know that the document was the Finding until Poindexter stated that fact before
Congress.

     The district court, however, rejected North's testimony at the hearing as incredible.  Basing its
ruling on North's demeanor, on inconsistencies in North's testimony, and on other objective
indicia that North had an untainted memory of events, the court found that North ``appears to
have been embarked at that time upon the calculated course of attempting to assist his  former
colleague and co-defendant . . . by prevaricating on various issues, including most notably the
issue whether he had to rely for his recollection of events on Poindexter's immunized testimony.''
North accordingly was permitted to testify.

     The North and Poindexter Decisions

     Both convictions were set aside by divided panels on appeal.  In the North case, the appeals
court concluded that receipt of testimony from witnesses whose memories had been refreshed by
exposure to North's immunized disclosures constituted improper ``evidentiary use'' of North's
statements.  The majority accordingly directed the district court to determine on remand as to
each witness whether it was possible to separate out ``unspoiled memory'' from that influenced
by North's testimony and, if not, to exclude evidence presented by such witnesses.

     The court of appeals also concluded that the trial judge's instructions to witnesses were
inadequate to prevent them from testifying to matters that they had first learned from North's
immunized disclosures, accepting North's argument that such witnesses could not filter their
answers through the district court's ``prior knowledge'' test.  The court therefore held that the trial
judge was obligated, on remand, to hold a full hearing ``that will inquire into the content as well
as the sources of the Grand Jury and trial witnesses' testimony.  That inquiry must proceed
witness-by-witness; if necessary, it will proceed line-by-line and item-by-item.''  The court
explained that the district  judge was required to ``make express findings that the government has
carried [its] heavy burden as to the content of all of the testimony of each witness.''

     Then-Chief Judge Patricia M. Wald dissented, declining to find that the district judge's
``prodigious and conscientious efforts to protect North's Fifth Amendment rights were in any way
so ineffectual as to require reversal on the formalistic grounds the majority advances.''  She noted
that virtually all of the Grand Jury evidence relating to the counts on which North was convicted
had been presented prior to North's congressional appearance.  And she found it ``indeed striking
that North's counsel cannot point to a single instance of alleged witness testimony tainted by
exposure to North's immunized testimony.''  In all, she observed that the procedural regime
imposed by the majority ``makes a subsequent trial of any congressionally immunized witness
virtually impossible.'' 1

     1 The court reaffirmed its initial conclusions when it denied rehearing.  It did, however,
appear to modify its opinion in two respects.  It retreated somewhat from the suggestion in its
initial opinion that the Government could establish a lack of taint only by showing that a witness
never had been exposed to the immunized testimony, or that all of his evidence had been
``canned'' prior to exposure.  At the same time, however, the court added another element to the
showing required on remand:  whether Government witnesses were motivated to testify by the
immunized disclosures.  Chief Judge Wald again dissented.  She concluded that the procedures
used by the district court -- under which the Government effectively made a showing that no
illegal use of the immunized testimony was made -- were adequate; she suggested that the
majority's contrary conclusion ``represents an unneeded and unprecedented incursion into the
trial court's discretion in managing a fair trial.''  She also faulted the majority for failing to realize
that any use of the tainted evidence may have been too attenuated to raise constitutional
concerns, noting that the question ``is a deep and unsettled one in current constitutional law.''

     On remand, the prosecution of North was dismissed when Independent Counsel concluded
that satisfaction of the court of appeals' requirements would be both very difficult and
enormously burdensome.

     A different panel of the appeals court reversed Poindexter's convictions.  The majority
concluded that all of the convictions had to be set aside because, in its view, the trial court's
measures failed to ensure that Poindexter's immunized testimony was not used against him at
trial.  In reaching this conclusion, the court of appeals restated the standard set out in North:
``that a prohibited `use' [of immunized testimony] occurs if a witness' recollection is refreshed by
exposure to the defendant's immunized testimony, or if his testimony is in any way `shaped,
altered, or affected,' by such exposure.''  Under this standard, the court explained, `` `the
Government must demonstrate affirmatively that the immunized testimony did not . . . [have] an
influence on [the trial witnesses'] thinking, even one for which they cannot at this time
consciously account.' ''

     Although the Poindexter case was tried prior to the decision in North, the court of appeals
declined to remand for new findings under the North standard.  Focusing on North's testimony at
the Poindexter trial, the court held that the district judge's finding that North lied when he denied
having an independent recollection could not be used to support the proposition that  North did
have an untainted memory.  The court of appeals also went on to reason that the district judge's
finding of differences between North's account and Poindexter's immunized testimony was
irrelevant, opining that a ``substantially exposed witness'' who has not ``canned'' his testimony
may give evidence at trial only when he ``persuasively claim[s] that he can segregate the effects
of his exposure.''

     Chief Judge Abner J. Mikva dissented in part.  Although he did not take issue with the North
standard, he complained that in North ``the Court changed the standards the special prosecutor
had to meet; today we refuse to let him try to meet them.''  The majority's failure to accord any
weight to the district judge's credibility findings, Chief Judge Mikva added, ``tells future
defendants that all they need to evade responsibility [to testify at trial] is a well timed case of
amnesia.'' 2

     2 There are grounds to doubt the correctness of the court of appeals' decisions in North and
Poindexter.  There is considerable authority for the proposition that a finding that a witness lied
may be used to establish `` `that the truth is the opposite of his story''' (NLRB v. Walton Mfg.
Co., 369 U.S. 404, 408 (1962) (per curiam), quoting Dyer v. MacDougall, 201 F.2d 265, 269 (2d
Cir. 1952) (L. Hand. J.)) -- which means that the finding that North lied when he denied having
an untainted memory could have been used to establish that he did have an untainted memory.
And the Supreme Court repeatedly has applied attenuation concepts in deciding whether
evidence must be excluded under the Fourth or Fifth Amendments -- concepts that were rejected
by the court of appeals in North and Poindexter.  See, e.g., Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 442
(1984); United States v. Crews, 445 U.S. 463, 471 (1980).  The Supreme Court denied
Independent Counsel's petitions for certiorari in both cases, however, and further analysis of the
constitutional issues is beyond the scope of this report.

     The Implications of North and Poindexter

     The decisions in North and Poindexter have significant implications for the interplay between
congressional oversight and law enforcement.  While it may affect any case in which immunity is
granted, the holding in North will have its most profound impact on prosecutions involving
public immunized testimony -- in particular, testimony before Congress -- that is widely
disseminated.  In such cases, the court of appeals' ruling on refreshed recollection will require a
complex psychological inquiry into the thought processes and memory of every witness.  At the
same time, the large number of witnesses potentially exposed to immunized testimony in cases
involving newsworthy events means that the court of appeals' draconian procedural requirements
will, as Judge Wald observed, ``consume[] countless extra weeks or months of trial.''  In all, then,
the North ruling may, again in Judge Wald's words, amount to ``an absolute deterrent of any
prosecution after a grant of immunity in a high-profile case.''

     The decision in Poindexter took the North ruling a step further.  The court purported to state
its procedural holding in modest terms:  focusing on North's testimony at the Poindexter trial, the
court said ``only that where a substantially exposed witness does not persuasively claim that he
can segregate the effects of his exposure, the prosecution does not meet its burden merely by
pointing to other statements of the same witness that were not themselves shown to be
untainted.''  But while it is  difficult to quarrel with that statement in the abstract, the real effect
of the court's holding is dramatically broader.  In fact, the court held that the Government could
not carry its burden by pointing either to persuasive evidence that a witness was lying when he
denied having an untainted recollection of the relevant events or to other forms of circumstantial
indicia that the witness had not been affected by the immunized testimony.  It bears emphasis
that the court of appeals decided more than that the district judge applied the wrong standard in
assessing such evidence; by refusing to remand the case, the court concluded as a matter of law
that such evidence never may be used to carry the Government's burden.  It thus is manifest that,
unless the court retreats from its rule, a witness whose testimony has not been ``canned'' and who
asserts that he has been affected by exposure to immunized disclosures will not be permitted to
testify at trial, no matter how improbable or internally inconsistent his claim.

     These rules will have obvious practical consequences.  They will make almost impossible the
prosecution of any case involving public immunized statements that requires testimony by
persons sympathetic to the accused, such as co-conspirators or other associates.  And the dangers
of abuse and manipulation are magnified by the court of appeals' view, expressed in North, that a
witness inclined to assist the defense may become disqualified from testifying at trial by the
simple expedient of soaking  himself in the defendant's immunized statements.3  As the outcome
of the North and Poindexter prosecutions makes graphically clear, these consequences have
particular importance because the cases most sharply affected by the court of appeals' new rules
will, by definition, be prosecutions involving conduct that has far-flung implications for national
policy -- those where Congress has determined that the national interest requires an immediate
public examination of the activity at issue.

     3 As the court of appeals put it, persons sympathetic to the defense ``could have held evening
classes in `the Parsing and Deconstruction of Kastigar' for the very purpose of `derailing' the
[Independent Counsel's] prosecution, and such a curriculum would have been simply irrelevant to
the question of whether or not the prosecution's case made use of North's compelled testimony.''

     The Competing Roles of Congress and the Independent Counsel

     With this as background, the competing roles of Congress and the Executive (here represented
by Independent Counsel) must be borne in mind.  As Independent Counsel recognized from the
outset of his investigation, it is Congress (in the case of the Iran/contra affair, its Select
Committees) that is primarily responsible for the accurate public disclosure of the facts
concerning transactions such as the Iran/contra matter.  Ultimately, it is Congress that is
empowered to legislate in a manner that not only will preclude future similar transactions in a
narrow sense, but that also will facilitate the effective management of foreign policy and that will
discourage disregard for existing legal strictures.

     Although the Independent Counsel also has a reporting function, his first responsibility, in
contrast, is the prosecution of criminal conduct.  Accordingly, it is not primarily his duty to
develop for the public a knowledge of what occurred.

     When a conflict between the oversight and prosecutorial roles develops -- as plainly occurred
in the Iran/contra affair -- the law is clear that it is Congress that must prevail.  This is no more
than a recognition of the high political importance of Congress's responsibility.  It also is the
appropriate place to strike the balance, as resolution of this conflict calls for the exercise of a
seasoned political judgment that must take a broad view of the national interest.

     In exercising this judgment, however, it is imperative that Congress be sensitive to the
dangers posed by grants of immunity to the successful prosecution of criminal conduct -- and that
it bear in mind, as well, the importance of the even-handed application of criminal justice.  In
recent years Congress has granted use immunity with some frequency, in cases including many of
the most notable examples of misconduct involving public officials or matters of public policy:
in addition to the Iran/contra affair, the list includes the Watergate, ``Koreagate,'' and ABSCAM
scandals; congressional ethics inquiries; impeachment proceedings against federal judges;
inquiries into narcotics trafficking, assassinations, and organized crime; investigations of fraud,
corruption, and mismanagement on Indian reservations;  and most recently, allegations of
misconduct at the Department of Housing and Urban Development and of improper favors for
savings and loan officials.  In all, Congress has conferred use immunity on more than 300
witnesses over the last two decades.

     In the past, members of Congress may have been of the view that the experience of the
Watergate cases suggests that grants of use immunity do not significantly impede successful
prosecution.  Even at the time, that would not have been the proper lesson to draw from
Watergate.  Although two immunized witnesses in the Watergate matter -- John Dean and
Charles Colson -- subsequently pleaded guilty, no immunized Watergate witness who refused to
plead guilty was successfully tried and convicted.  Gordon Strachan, the only immunized witness
who was charged in the Watergate cover-up indictment, never went to trial because the
Watergate Special Prosecutor concluded that there was a significant possibility that Strachan
eventually might prevail on his claim of taint.4  The same thing happened in the case of Felipe
De Diego, who was granted immunity by state authorities in connection with the break-in at the
office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist.5 But in any event, the decisions in North and Poindexter
should lay to rest any lingering sense that a congressional grant of use immunity is not a serious
bar to future prosecution.

     4 See Strachan, Self-Incrimination, Immunity and Watergate, 56 Tex. L. Rev. 791, 814-820
(1978).

     5 See United States v. De Diego, 511 F.2d 818, 822-825 (D.C. Cir. 1975).

     Congressional action that precludes prosecution -- or, as in Iran/contra, that makes it
impossible to sustain a successful prosecution -- imposes costs on society that far transcend the
failure to convict a few lawbreakers.  There is significant inequity when (again as in Iran/contra)
the more peripheral players are convicted while the central figures in the criminal enterprise
escape punishment.  And perhaps more fundamentally, the failure to punish governmental
lawbreakers feeds the perception that public officials are not wholly accountable for their actions.
It also may lead the public to believe that no real wrongdoing took place.  That is a danger in the
Iran/contra affair, where Oliver North hailed the ultimate dismissal of the prosecution against
him as a personal vindication.  While it was, of course, nothing of the sort -- North was found
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of serious criminal offenses, and the court of appeals' decision
setting aside his conviction cast no doubt on his factual guilt -- the risk of public confusion on
the point is substantial.

     This background strongly suggests that Congress should compel public testimony from a
Government official suspected of criminal misconduct only in the most extraordinary
circumstances.  Before doing so, it should determine whether there is substantial evidence that
the prospective witness was involved in a criminal transaction, whether he or she ordinarily
would be a logical subject for prosecutive consideration, and whether the prospective witness had
a leading or substantial role in the  criminal enterprise.  If so, Congress also should determine
whether a less culpable person could supply the evidence sought, and what the likelihood is that
the witness to be immunized will supply honest, useful and necessary information.  Only if no
less culpable person is available -- and if the need for obtaining the information is compelling --
should the prospective witness be granted immunity.

Part XI

     Concluding Observations

     The underlying facts of Iran/contra are that, regardless of criminality, President Reagan, the
secretary of state, the secretary of defense, and the director of central intelligence and their
necessary assistants committed themselves, however reluctantly, to two programs contrary to
congressional policy and contrary to national policy. They skirted the law, some of them broke
the law, and almost all of them tried to cover up the President's willful activities.

     What protection do the people of the United States have against such a concerted action by
such powerful officers? The Constitution provides for congressional oversight and congressional
control of appropriations, but if false information is given to Congress, these checks and balances
are of lessened value. Further, in the give and take of the political community, congressional
oversight is often overtaken and subordinated by the need to keep Government functioning, by
the need to anticipate the future, and by the ever-present requirement of maintaining consensus
among the elected officials who are the Government.

     The disrespect for Congress by a popular and powerful President and his appointees was
obscured when Congress accepted the tendered concept of a runaway conspiracy of subordinate
officers and avoided the unpleasant confrontation with a powerful President and his Cabinet. In
haste to display and conclude its investigation of this unwelcome issue, Congress destroyed the
most effective lines of inquiry by giving immunity to Oliver L. North and John M. Poindexter so
that they could exculpate and eliminate the need for the testimony of President Reagan and Vice
President Bush.

     Immunity is ordinarily given by a prosecutor to a witness who will incriminate someone more
important than himself. Congress gave immunity to North and Poindexter, who incriminated
only themselves and who largely exculpated those responsible for the initiation, supervision and
support of their activities. This delayed and infinitely complicated the effort to prosecute North
and Poindexter, and it largely destroyed the likelihood that their prompt conviction and
appropriate sentence would induce meaningful cooperation.

     These important political decisions were properly the responsibility of Congress. It was for
the Committees to decide whether the welfare of the nation was served or endangered by a
continuation of its investigation, a more deliberate effort to test the self-serving denials presented
by Cabinet officers and to search for the full ramifications of the activities in question. Having
made this decision, however, no one could gainsay the added difficulties thrust upon Independent
Counsel. These difficulties could be dealt with only by the investment of large amounts of
additional time and large amounts of expense.

     The role of Independent Counsel is not well understood. Comparisons to United States
attorneys, county district attorneys, or private law offices do not conceive the nature of
Independent Counsel. Independent Counsel is not an individual put in charge of an ongoing
agency as an acting U.S. attorney might be; he is a person taken from private practice and told to
create a new agency, to carry out the mission assigned by the court. It is not as though he were
told to step in and try a case on the calendar of an ongoing office with full support of the
Government behind him, as it would be behind the United States attorney. He is told to create an
office and to confront the Government without any expectation of real cooperation, and, indeed,
with the expectation of hostility, however veiled. That hostility will manifest itself in the failure
to declassify information, in the suppression of documents, and in all of the evasive techniques of
highly skilled and large, complex organizations.

     The investigation into Iran/contra nevertheless demonstrates that the rule of law upon which
our democratic system of government depends can be applied to the highest officials even when
they are operating in the secret areas of diplomacy and national security.

     Despite extraordinary difficulties imposed by the destruction and withholding of records, the
need to protect classified information, and the congressional grants of immunity to some of the
principals involved, Independent Counsel was able to bring criminal charges against nine
government officers and five private citizens involved in illegal activities growing out of the
Iran/contra affair.

     More importantly, the investigation and the prosecutions arising out of it have provided a
much more accurate picture of how two secret Administration policies -- keeping the contras
alive ``body and soul'' during the Boland cut-off period and seeking the release of Americans
held hostage by selling arms to Iran -- veered off into criminality.

     Evidence obtained by Independent Counsel establishes that the Iran/contra affair was not an
aberrational scheme carried out by a ``cabal of zealots'' on the National Security Council staff, as
the congressional  Select Committees concluded in their majority report.1  Instead, it was the
product of two foreign policy directives  by President Reagan which skirted the law and which
were executed by the NSC staff with the knowledge and support of high officials in the CIA,
State and Defense departments, and to a lesser extent, officials in other agencies.

     1 Majority Report, p. 22.

     Independent Counsel found no evidence of dissent among his Cabinet officers from the
President's determination to support the contras after federal law banned the use of appropriated
funds for that purpose in the Boland Amendment in October 1984.  Even the two Cabinet
officers who opposed the sale of arms to Iran on the grounds that it was illegal and bad policy --
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Secretary of State George P. Shultz -- either
cooperated with the decision once made, as in the case of Weinberger, or stood aloof from it
while being kept informed of its progress, as was the case of Shultz.

     In its report section titled ``Who Was Responsible,'' the Select Committees named CIA
Director William Casey, National Security Advisers Robert C. McFarlane and John M.
Poindexter, along with NSC staff member Oliver L. North, and private sector operatives Richard
V. Secord and Albert Hakim.  With the exception of Casey who died before he could be
questioned by the OIC, Independent Counsel charged and obtained criminal convictions of each
of  the men named by Congress.  There is little doubt that, operationally, these men were central
players.

     But the investigation and prosecutions have shown that these six were not out-of-control
mavericks who acted alone without the knowledge or assistance of others.  The evidence
establishes that the central NSC operatives kept their superiors -- including Reagan, Bush,
Shultz, Weinberger and other high officials -- informed of their efforts generally, if not in detail,
and their superiors either condoned or turned a blind eye to them.  When it was required, the
NSC principals and their private sector operatives received the assistance of high-ranking
officers in the CIA, the Defense Department, and the Department of State.

     Of the 14 persons charged criminally during the investigation, four were convicted of felony
charges after trial by jury, seven pleaded guilty either to felonies or misdemeanors, and one had
his case dismissed because the Administration refused to declassify information deemed
necessary to the defendant by the trial judge.  Two cases that were awaiting trial were aborted by
pardons granted by President Bush.  As this report explained earlier, many persons who
committed crimes were not charged.  Some minor crimes were never investigated and some that
were investigated were not solved.  But Independent Counsel believes that to the extent possible,
the central Iran/contra  crimes were vigorously prosecuted and the significant acts of obstruction
were fully charged.

     Fundamentally, the Iran/contra affair was the first known criminal assault on the
post-Watergate rules governing the activities of national security officials.  Reagan
Administration officials rendered these rules ineffective by creating private operations, supported
with privately generated funds that successfully evaded executive and legislative oversight and
control.  Congress was defrauded.  Its appropriations restrictions having been circumvented,
Congress was led to believe that the Administration was following the law.  Numerous
congressional inquiries were thwarted through false testimony and the destruction and
concealment of government records.

     The destruction and concealment of records and information, beginning at the twilight of
Iran/contra and continuing throughout subsequent investigations, should be of particular concern.
Oliver North's destruction of records in October and November 1986 caused an irretrievable loss
of information to the executive agencies responsible for regulating clandestine activities, to
Congress, and to Independent Counsel.  John Poindexter's efforts to destroy NSC electronic mail
nearly resulted in comparable damage. CIA Costa Rican Station Chief Joseph F. Fernandez
attempted to hide phone records that would have revealed his contacts with Enterprise activities.

     This sort of obstruction continued even after Independent Counsel's appointment.  In the
course of his work, Independent Counsel located large caches of handwritten notes and other
documents maintained by high officials that were never relinquished to investigators.  Major
aspects of Iran/contra would never have been uncovered had all of the officials who attempted to
destroy or withhold their records of the affair succeeded.  Had these contemporaneous records
been produced to investigators when they were initially requested, many of the troublesome
conflicts between key witnesses would have been resolved, and timely legal steps taken toward
those who feigned memory lapses or lied outright.

     All of this conduct -- the evasions of the Executive branch and the Congress, the lies, the
conspiracies, the acts of obstruction -- had to be addressed by the criminal justice system.

     The path Independent Counsel embarked upon in late 1986 has been a long and arduous one.
When he hired 10 attorneys in early 1987, Independent Counsel's conception of the operational
conspiracy -- with its array of Government officials and private contractors, its web of secret
foreign accounts, and its world-wide breadth -- was extremely hazy.  Outlining an investigation
of a runaway conspiracy disavowed by the President was quite different from the ultimate
investigation of the President and three major agencies, each with the power to frustrate an
investigation by persisting in the classification of non-secret but embarrassing information.
Completing the factual mosaic required examining pieces spread worldwide in activities that
occurred over a three-year period by officials from the largest agencies of government and a host
of private operatives who, by necessity, design and training, worked secretly and deceptively.

     The Role of Independent Counsel

     Given the enormous autonomous power of both the Legislative and Executive branches in the
modern state, the rightly celebrated constitutional checks and balances are inadequate, alone, to
preserve the rule of law upon which our democracy depends.

     As Watergate demonstrated, the checks and balances reach their limits in the case of criminal
wrongdoing by Executive branch officials.  The combination of an aggressive press, simple
crimes, the White House tapes, and principled defiance by Department of Justice-appointed
counsel all combined to bring Watergate to its conclusion without an independent counsel
statute.  It was apparent then, however, as it should be now in light of Iran/contra, that the
competing roles of the attorney general, as a member of the Cabinet and presidential adviser on
the one hand and chief law enforcement officer on the other, create an irreconcilable conflict of
interest.

     As Iran/contra demonstrated, congressional oversight alone cannot make up for deficiencies
that result when an attorney general abandons that law-enforcement role in cases of Executive
branch wrongdoing.  Well before Attorney General Meese sought an independent counsel in
December 1986, he had already become, in effect, the  President's defense lawyer, to the
exclusion of his responsibilities as the nation's top law enforcement officer.  By that time, crucial
documents had already been destroyed and false testimony given.

     Congress, with all the investigatory powers it wields in the oversight process, was not able to
uncover many of these documents or disprove much of that false testimony.  That inability is
structural, and does not result from ill will, impatience, or character flaw on the part of any
legislator.  With good reason, Congress's interest in investigating Executive branch wrongdoing
extends no farther than remedying perceived imbalances in its relations with the Executive
branch.  Except in the case of impeachment, Congress's interest does not, and should not, extend
to the law-enforcement goals of deterrence, retribution and punishment.

     In normal circumstances, these law-enforcement goals are the province of the Justice
Department, under the direction of the attorney general.  As the chief law enforcement officer of
the United States, the attorney general represents the people of the United States -- not the
President, the Cabinet or any political party.  When the attorney general cannot so represent the
people, the rule of law requires that another, independent institution assume that responsibility.
That is the historic role of the independent counsel.

     Problems Posed by Congressional Immunity Grants

     The magnitude of Iran/contra does not by itself explain why Independent Counsel took so
long to complete the task assigned by the Special Division which appointed him.  The word
``independent'' in Independent Counsel is not quite accurate as a description of his work.  Time
and again this Independent Counsel found himself at the mercy of political decisions of the
Congress and the Executive branch.  From the date of his appointment on December 19, 1986,
Independent Counsel had to race to protect his investigations and prosecutions from the
congressional grants of immunity to central Enterprise conspirators.  At the same time, he had to
wait almost one year for records from Swiss banks and financial organizations vital to his work.
Once Congress granted immunity, Independent Counsel had to insulate himself and his staff
from immunized disclosures, postponing the time he could get a wider view of the activities he
was investigating.

     Despite extraordinary efforts to shield the OIC from exposure to immunized testimony, the
North and Poindexter convictions were overturned on appeal on the immunity issue.  While the
appellate panels did not find the prosecution was ``tainted'' by improper exposure to the
immunized testimony of North or Poindexter, they ruled that the safeguards utilized by the trial
courts did not  ensure that witnesses' testimony was not affected by the immunized testimony.

     Although Independent Counsel warned the Select Committees of the possibility that granting
use immunity to principals in the Iran/contra matter might make it impossible to prosecute them
successfully, he has never contended that Congress should refrain from granting use immunity to
compel testimony in such important matters as Iran/contra.  In matters of great national concern,
Independent Counsel recognizes that intense public interest and the need for prompt and effective
congressional oversight of intelligence activities may well force the Congress to act swiftly and
grant immunity to principals.

     But, in light of the experience of Independent Counsel in the Iran/contra cases, Congress
should be aware of the fact that future immunity grants, at least in such highly publicized cases,
will likely rule out criminal prosecution.

     Congressional action that precludes, or makes it impossible to sustain, a prosecution has more
serious consequences than simply one less conviction.  There is a significant inequity when more
peripheral players are convicted while central figures in a criminal enterprise escape punishment.
And perhaps more fundamentally, the failure to punish governmental lawbreakers feeds the
perception that public officials are not wholly accountable for their actions.  In Iran/contra, it was
President Reagan  who first asked that North and Poindexter be given immunity so that they
could exculpate him from responsibility for the diversion.  A few months later, the Select
Committees did that -- granting immunity without any proffer to ensure honest testimony.

     The Classified Information Procedures Act

     After Independent Counsel brought the principal operational conspiracy cases, he was forced
to dismiss the central conspiracy charges against North, Poindexter, Hakim and Secord because
the Administration, which had opposed the charge in the first instance, refused to declassify the
information needed to proceed in the North case.  Later, the entire case against Joseph F.
Fernandez, the CIA's station chief in Costa Rica, was dismissed when the Administration
declined to declassify information necessary for the trial. In both instances, Independent Counsel
concluded that the classified information in question was already publicly known, but the
Administration declined to engage in meaningful consultation with Independent Counsel before
making its decision.

     In any prosecution of a national security official, a tension inevitably arises between the
Executive branch's duty to enforce the criminal law and its obligation to  safeguard the national
security through protecting classified information.  The Classified Information Procedures Act
(CIPA) was enacted in 1980 to assist the Department of Justice and other Executive branch
agencies in resolving this tension in a manner consistent with our nation's commitment to the
rule of law.  Under CIPA, only the attorney general has the authority to make the decision
between the Government's need to enforce the law and the Government's need to withhold
information for national security reasons.  If the intelligence agencies decline to declassify
information deemed necessary by the trial court for the fair trial of a case, only the attorney
general can overrule them.  Likewise, if the attorney general decides that the information should
not be disclosed, he is empowered to file a CIPA  6(e) affidavit to prohibit the disclosure.
Current law does not require that the attorney general's decision to withhold classified material
from disclosure at trial meet any objective or articulated standard.  No court can challenge the
substance of a  6(e) affidavit; no litigant has standing to contest the attorney general's decision
to file one.

     The Administration has the power to make the CIPA process work when it wants to, as in the
case of alleged spies or in the trial of former Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega.  Since CIPA
became law in 1980, no attorney general killed a prosecution by filing a  6(e)  affidavit until
Attorney General Richard Thornburgh forced the dismissal of the Fernandez case in November
1989.   As the Fernandez and North cases show, the Administration also has the power to derail
the CIPA process when, for reasons of its own, it chooses not to make it work.

     The attorney general's unrestricted  CIPA  6(e) authority becomes questionable when an
independent counsel, rather than the Justice Department, has jurisdiction over the prosecution.
An independent counsel is appointed only when the attorney general determines, after a
preliminary investigation, that high-level officials within the Executive branch may have been
involved in criminal activity or that the Department of Justice may be perceived to have a
conflict of interest.  The problems of conflict are compounded in CIPA because the issue
involves classified information controlled by an intelligence agency in a case charging one or
more of the officials of that agency in criminal activity.  Congress could not have intended that
CIPA -- a statute designed to facilitate trials involving classified information -- be used by the
attorney general to control prosecutions of independent counsel.

     Final Thoughts

     The Iran/contra investigation will not end the kind of abuse of power that it addressed any
more than the Watergate investigation did.  The criminality in both affairs did not arise primarily
out of ordinary venality or greed, although some of those charged were driven by both.  Instead,
the crimes committed in Iran/contra were motivated by the desire of persons in high office to
pursue controversial policies and goals even when the pursuit of those policies and goals was
inhibited or restricted by executive orders, statutes or the constitutional system of checks and
balances.

     The tone in Iran/contra was set by President Reagan.  He directed that the contras be
supported, despite a ban on contra aid imposed on him by Congress.  And he was willing to trade
arms to Iran for the release of Americans held hostage in the Middle East, even if doing so was
contrary to the nation's stated policy and possibly in violation of the law.

     The lesson of Iran/contra is that if our system of government is to function properly, the
branches of government must deal with one another honestly and cooperatively.  When disputes
arise between the Executive and Legislative branches, as they surely will, the laws that emerge
from such disputes must be obeyed.  When a President, even with good motive and intent,
chooses to skirt the laws or to circumvent them, it is incumbent upon his subordinates to resist,
not join in.  Their oath and fealty are to the Constitution and the rule of law, not to the man
temporarily occupying the Oval Office.  Congress has the duty and the power under our system
of checks and balances to ensure that the President and his Cabinet officers are faithful to their
oaths.

Index


     Abrams, Elliott -- chapter on, 375-392; 4, 7-10, 30, 39, 41-46, 53, 61, 166, 167, 190, 196,
197, 266, 268, 269, 276, 277, 281, 330, 331, 394, 399, 404, 473, 491, 497, 499, 500, 502, 503


     Abshire, David M. -- 27, 520-522


     Adkins, James L. -- chapter on, 309-310; 7, 36, 199, 295, 307, 309


     Allen, Charles E. -- 13, 17, 19-22, 71-73, 170, 206, 207, 209-211, 213, 214, 216-219, 221,
223-226, 230-232, 248, 251, 253-255, 259, 260, 262, 312, 314-316, 318, 319, 321, 322, 370, 379


     Anderson, Jack -- 339, 342, 348-350


     Anderson, Terry -- 11, 88, 348, 370


     Aplicano, Hector -- 296, 297, 489


     Arcos, Cresencio -- 265, 401, 490


     Arias, Oscar -- 269, 378, 381, 382


     Armacost, Michael -- 91, 215, 218, 312, 321, 325-327, 335, 336, 338, 340-343, 348-350, 356,
364, 370, 500, 530, 532, 534, 539


     Armitage, Richard L. -- 9, 215, 218, 313, 314, 330, 341, 342, 379, 380, 406, 408-410, 414,
418, 425, 428, 431-438


     Artiano, Martin L. -- 190, 191


     Baker, Howard -- 478, 482


     Baker, James A. -- 81, 202, 378, 424, 552


     Ball, Will -- 459


     Bandar, Prince (Saudi Arabia) -- 80, 81, 102, 422-426, 448, 549


     Barnes, Michael -- 5, 6, 83, 85-87, 102, 144, 385


     Bartholomew, Reginald -- 334


     Beach, Chester Paul, Jr. -- 474-479


     Belnick, Mark A. -- 354, 419


     Bermudez, Enrique -- 4, 59, 163, 296, 298, 300, 396, 398, 489, 496


     Blandon, Adolfo -- 487, 489


     Bloomfield, Lincoln P., Jr. -- 437, 438


     Blundell, Diana -- 409


     Bode, William R. -- 486, 503


     Borg, Parker -- 326, 336, 356


     Bouchard, Donald J. -- 327, 328, 330, 338, 365, 366


     Bradford, William -- 535


     Bradley, Bill -- 391, 425


     Brady, Nicholas -- 353, 493


     Bremer, L. Paul -- 343, 345


     Buckley, William -- 11, 13, 88-91, 95, 205-207, 239


     Burghardt, Raymond F. -- 82, 83, 118, 378, 379, 496, 497


     Burns, Arnold -- 532, 534, 535


     Bush, George -- chapter on, 473-483; 2, 3, 8, 12, 14, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, 38, 40, 41,
43, 44, 46, 48, 53, 72, 79-81, 90, 97, 101, 119, 126-128, 200, 204, 206, 209, 223, 234, 236, 242,
244, 248, 263, 343, 345, 353, 370, 376, 378, 383, 386, 388, 389, 415, 443, 444, 446, 447, 449,
457, 458, 485-487, 491-494, 498-503, 513, 514, 516, 520, 522, 526-528, 535, 536, 541-543, 545


     Bush, Prescott -- 206


     Bustillo, Juan Rafael -- 6, 8, 60, 166, 265, 267, 377, 382, 383, 387, 388, 394, 396, 398, 400,
403, 485, 487, 488, 490, 494, 496, 497


     Byrd, Robert -- 215, 313, 459, 480, 507, 528


     Byrne, Phyllis -- 492-494


     Calero, Adolfo -- 3, 4, 30, 59, 61, 71, 73, 82, 84, 112-114, 116, 159, 161, 163, 188, 190, 193,
194, 196, 203, 270, 296-300, 303, 379, 388, 488, 489, 497, 514


     Cannistraro, Vincent -- 14, 203, 227-230, 253, 254, 276


     Carlucci, Frank -- 431, 517


     Casey, William J. -- chapter on, 201-222; 1-3, 5-8, 11-18, 20-24, 26, 30, 48, 70, 73, 79-82, 85,
88, 89, 92, 94, 99-101, 103, 105, 106, 109, 114-116, 118, 130, 131, 139, 157, 166, 170, 171, 193,
194, 197, 199, 200, 225, 226, 228-233, 237-239, 253, 263, 264, 269, 277, 311-316, 318-324,
337, 339, 341, 343-345, 348, 349, 357, 359, 364, 378, 405, 407, 408, 411, 423, 424, 426, 431,
433, 434, 444, 447-449, 452, 458-460, 462-465, 467, 481, 505, 507, 509-517, 519, 523, 526,
527, 531-536, 540, 542, 543, 546, 547


     Cave, George W. -- 20-23, 72, 95, 96, 170, 210, 211, 213, 214, 216, 224, 238-240, 243, 316,
317, 322, 345


     Chamorro, Edgar -- 264


     Chamorro, Fernando -- 270-272, 274


     Channell, Carl R. -- chapter on, 187-192; 3, 7, 29, 33, 51, 61, 113, 158


     Cheney, Richard -- 459, 517, 528


     CIA Subject #1 -- chapter on, 295-308


     CIA Subject #2 -- 311-324


     Clarke, George -- 319, 320


     Clarridge, Duane R. -- chapter on, 247-262; 2, 14, 15, 17, 30, 39, 40, 44, 46, 48, 53, 89, 92,
93, 199, 200, 203, 204, 207, 210, 213, 216, 224, 331, 370, 404, 473


     Clines, Thomas G. -- chapter on, 181-184; 4, 8, 28, 31, 38, 52, 53, 58-60, 157, 158, 161, 163,
164, 172, 174, 177, 193, 235, 236, 269, 295, 297-299, 303-305, 307, 490, 493-497


     Coleman, Ron -- 9


     Comee, William C. -- 303


     Conrad, Daniel L. -- 61, 187, 188, 190, 191


     Cooper, Charles -- 23, 100, 115, 130, 140, 216, 217, 320, 321, 344, 363, 455, 456, 510,
526-542, 545


     Cooper, William H. -- 167, 196, 382, 383, 498


     Coors, Joseph -- 114, 205


     Corr, Edwin G. -- chapter on, 393-404; 4, 8, 9, 30, 41-44, 265, 266, 377, 378, 381-383,
387-389, 392, 490, 493, 497-499


     Coy, Craig -- 29, 148, 149, 151, 152, 547


     Croker, Stephen -- 45, 380, 392


     Cruz, Arturo, Jr. -- 270


     Culvahouse, A.B. -- 27, 474-476


     Cupp, John -- 268


     Davies, Glyn -- 331


     De Garay, Edward T. -- 165, 166


     Del Amico, Mario -- 296, 298, 302, 303, 489 -- See also Dellamico


     Delameco, Mario -- 388, 497


     Dellamico, Mario -- 296, 297, 299-303, 382, 489 -- See also Del Amico


     Dennis, Edward S.G., Jr. -- 110, 289


     DeValle, Enrique -- 296


     Diego, Wycliffe -- 297


     Dietel, Edward -- 319, 320


     Dlouhy, David B. -- 400, 401, 404


     Dodd, Christopher -- 399


     Doherty, David -- 212, 214, 216, 218, 312, 315-323, 510


     Dole, Robert -- 459, 517, 528


     Driscoll, Robert -- 190


     Duarte, President (El Salvador) -- 382, 383, 500


     Duemling, Robert W. -- 6, 377, 490, 503


     Dunbar, Charles -- 345


     Duncan, John C. -- 417


     Dunn, Bertram -- 315


     Dupart, Louis -- 237, 275, 277, 278


     Durenberger, David -- 65, 279, 312, 313, 352, 424, 517, 518


     Dutton, Robert C. -- 30, 60, 62, 165-167, 195, 286, 493-495, 551


     Dwyer (Representative Bernard J.) -- 219


     Eagleton, Thomas -- 248, 260, 261


     Earl, Robert L. -- chapter on, 151-154; 9, 29, 55, 72, 73, 148, 149, 212, 387, 465, 494, 496,
497, 547


     Eggleston -- 141, 248, 255, 427


     Erskine, Cynthia -- 317, 318, 320


     Evans, Rowland -- 349, 388


     Fahd, King (Saudi Arabia) -- 81, 132, 449, 549


     Farina, Roland -- 163, 172, 184


     Fascell, Dante -- 227, 355, 425


     Fawcett, John -- 127


     Feldman, Jeffrey -- 550, 551


     Ferch, John -- 300


     Fernandez, Joseph F. -- chapter on, 283-294; 5, 7, 9, 28, 36-39, 43, 52, 53, 55, 59, 60, 62, 67,
122, 125, 200, 203, 237, 264, 268-275, 278-280, 381, 550, 565


     Fiers, Alan D., Jr. -- chapter on, 263-282; 2-10, 22, 30, 39-41, 43-46, 53, 82, 166, 199, 200,
203-205, 212, 227-232, 235-238, 241, 242, 244, 298-303, 307, 331, 375, 377-383, 385, 387-392,
394, 395, 473, 490, 496, 502


     Fischer, David -- 187, 190, 191


     Fisher, Gayle -- 498, 499


     Fornell, Gordon -- 418, 420


     Fortier, Donald -- 18, 19, 81, 188, 209


     Fraser, Donald -- 169, 170


     Fuller, Craig L. -- 22, 474, 475, 498, 518


     Furmark, Roy -- 22, 73, 168, 170, 171, 213, 214, 216-218, 220, 221, 231, 238, 240, 315, 514,
515


     Gadd, Richard B. -- 6, 7, 30, 59, 60, 161, 165, 195, 264, 267-269, 301, 303, 377, 395, 396,
398, 490, 493, 495


     Gaffney, Henry H. -- 408, 409, 410, 436, 437


     Gardner, Norman N., Jr. -- 215, 218, 238, 240, 311, 312, 314-322, 324


     Garnel, Jose -- 182, 183


     Garrett, H. Lawrence, III -- 321, 414, 418-420, 438, 441, 510, 529


     Garwood, Ellen -- 190, 448, 471


     Gast, Philip -- 408, 409, 433


     Gates, Robert M. -- chapter on, 223-232; 8, 16, 19, 22, 23, 46, 73, 109, 115, 130, 166, 170,
200, 205, 210, 211, 213-216, 221, 233, 237, 277, 315, 316, 318-323, 509


     George, Clair E. -- chapter on, 233-246; 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 17-22, 39, 41, 45, 46, 53, 82, 139, 199,
200, 204, 205, 209-212, 215, 216, 218, 223, 227, 228, 230-232, 258-260, 262, 263, 266, 269,
277-281, 284, 311-319, 321, 322, 324, 385, 386, 388, 390, 391, 404, 487


     Gerner, George W. -- 312, 318


     Gesell, Gerhard A. -- 37, 52, 55, 56, 58, 106-112, 117-122, 124-126, 548


     Ghorbanifar, Manucher -- 12-14, 16-22, 31, 71-73, 88-95, 97, 99, 167-171, 174, 199,
207-211, 213, 214, 221, 223-226, 251, 259, 339, 351, 406, 515


     Godson, Roy -- 191


     Gomez, Max (alias Rodriguez) -- 10, 41, 45, 187, 188, 191, 234, 235, 237, 242, 244, 263,
265, 301, 306, 376, 378, 383-388, 395, 396, 485, 490, 498-500


     Gorbachev, Mikhail -- 15, 91, 92, 337, 408, 427, 462, 467, 470


     Gorman, Paul -- 82, 487, 488


     Gray, C. Boyden -- 475-479, 483, 494


     Green, Betty -- 474, 476, 477


     ``Green, Mister'' -- 489, 490, 495, 496


     Green, Thomas C. -- chapter on, 155-156; 84, 101, 116, 148, 149, 155, 161


     Greene, Harold H. -- 38, 71, 123-128, 134, 247


     Gregg, Donald P. -- chapter on, 485-504; 8, 9, 40-44, 267, 279, 331, 370, 376, 378, 383,
386-389, 443, 480, 499


     Gries, David -- 216, 218, 231, 232, 277, 312, 314


     Groening, Eva -- 287


     Hakim, Albert -- chapter on, 179-180; 19, 20, 22, 23, 26, 28, 31-36, 38, 52, 55, 56, 58, 59, 69,
72-75, 77, 84, 94, 103, 105-107, 116, 123-125, 129, 149, 157-159, 161, 163, 164, 166, 167,
169-177, 181-185, 193-196, 199, 210, 224, 225, 239, 240, 243, 345, 448, 451, 453, 471-473, 565


     Hall, Fawn -- chapter on, 147-150; 26, 29, 55, 61, 86, 113, 137, 147, 151-153, 155, 156, 194,
196, 197, 242, 243, 389, 390


     Hamilton, Lee -- 5, 6, 69, 84-87, 102, 130, 144, 145, 205, 227, 277, 311, 313, 384, 385


     Hardline, James -- 498


     Hasenfus, Eugene -- 10, 22, 41, 42, 45, 60, 62, 130, 166, 167, 174, 203, 213, 225, 230-232,
234, 235, 238, 241, 242, 267, 276-278, 287, 382, 383, 385, 386, 388, 391, 392, 448, 456, 457,
471, 485, 497-499, 503, 550


     Hashemi, Cyrus -- 206


     Haskell, William -- 59, 164, 166, 174, 195, 196, 285


     Helgerson, John -- 224, 225


     Hill, M. Charles -- chapter on, 325-374; 44-48, 91, 92, 99, 101, 104, 375, 376, 380, 382, 389,
392, 412, 419, 423, 458, 462, 467, 474, 483, 500, 508, 509, 511, 526, 529-541, 543, 544


     Hilton, Claude M. -- 37, 38, 288, 290-292


     Hogan (Judge Thomas F.) -- 53


     Hohing, Chimera -- 261


     Hull, John -- 9, 550


     Hunt, Bunker -- 190


     Hutton, Debbie -- 492


     Ibnu (General-Brunei) -- 389, 390


     Ikle, Fred -- 217, 406, 418, 423


     Inouye (Senator Daniel) -- 417


     Jacobsen, David -- 11, 23, 88, 318, 347-349, 359, 412, 457-459, 527


     Jameson, W. George -- 216, 218, 312, 318-320


     Jenco, Lawrence -- 11, 21, 22, 72, 88, 210, 341, 343, 348, 349, 360, 362, 370-373, 411, 527


     Jensen, Lowell -- 550


     Jones, Donald S. -- 417, 440


     Juchniewicz, Edward -- 15, 16, 251, 260-262, 313, 317, 318, 321, 322


     Kangarlu, Mohnsen -- 13, 19-22, 207, 210, 224, 226, 251, 259


     Karoubi, Hassan -- 13, 406


     Kashoggi -- 335 -- (see also Khashoggi)


     Kassar, Monzer Al -- 164, 171


     Keefer, Elizabeth -- 347, 348, 354, 367, 368


     Keel, Alton -- 98, 141, 214, 312, 343, 458, 459, 508, 510, 516, 518, 526, 528


     Kelley, P.X. -- 203


     Kellner (U.S. Atty) -- 550


     Kelly, John -- 345, 349


     Kennedy, Edward -- 278, 506


     Kerr, Richard -- 22, 170, 216, 223, 224, 226


     Kerry, John -- 241, 278, 385, 386, 390


     Khashoggi, Adnan -- 19, 21, 89, 99, 167-171, 195, 213, 514, 515


     Khomeini -- 88, 205, 335, 407, 435


     Kimche, David -- 11-14, 16, 17, 30, 89-93, 95, 100, 333-335, 348-350, 407, 433, 434, 436


     King, Barrington -- 389, 390


     King, May Dougherty -- 190


     Kinsinger, Paul -- 216, 228, 229


     Kirkpatrick, Jean -- 2, 215, 423


     Koch, Noel C. -- 18, 19, 408, 411, 430, 434, 437


     Kozak, Michael G. -- 329, 330, 347, 348, 354, 367, 368, 373


     Krepinevich, Andrew -- 421


     Lababidi, Oussama -- 169


     Lamberth, Royce C. -- 233


     Landers, William -- 110


     Laxalt, Paul -- 215, 517


     Leahy (Senator) -- 69, 213, 312, 313


     Ledeen, Michael A. -- 10-12, 14, 16, 17, 30, 70, 88, 100, 170, 206, 208, 330, 334, 348, 349,
369, 411


     Leisz, Kay D. -- 441


     Leiwant, David -- 550


     Lemon, James F. -- 409


     Leshinsky, Melvyn -- 183


     Liman, Arthur L. -- 352, 354


     Littledale, Krishna S. -- 187


     Litton -- 489


     Lopez -- 301, 395


     Lott -- 517


     Lugar, Richard -- 384, 424


     Lytton, William -- 476, 479


     Magruder, Jeb Stuart -- 32


     Makowka, Bernard -- 211, 316, 319-322


     Marin, Aquiles -- 167


     Markowitz, Dr. Joseph -- 251, 252


     Martin, Ron -- 4, 295-300, 303, 497


     McCoy, Col. James -- 296, 299, 300


     McDaniel, Rodney -- 141, 227, 508


     McFarlane, Ronald C. -- chapter on, 79-104; 1-3, 5, 6, 9-15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 25, 28-30, 36, 40,
52, 53, 55, 58, 62, 67, 69-73, 77, 105, 106, 112-115, 118, 122, 123, 128-131, 133, 137, 138, 142,
144, 145, 151, 167, 188, 194, 197, 201, 202, 205-208, 210, 212, 213, 215, 216, 219, 220, 224,
226, 234, 235, 239, 240, 249-253, 316, 327-330, 332-337, 339-341, 344, 345, 347-351, 353, 356,
357, 359, 363-365, 368, 369, 372, 376, 405-412, 423-429, 434, 446, 448-453, 456, 457, 459,
460, 462, 464, 466-471, 473, 481, 486, 505-508, 511-513, 515, 518-522, 526, 530-543, 545, 547,
549, 550


     McGinniss, John -- 511, 540


     McHugh, Matthew -- 242


     McMahon, John -- 14, 16, 19, 92, 93, 199, 206-210, 217-220, 233, 252, 255, 262, 313, 317,
321, 322, 423, 424, 426, 427, 434, 466, 517-519


     Medina, Ramon -- 166, 196, 242, 383, 385, 498


     Meese, Edwin III -- chapter on, 525-554; 2, 18, 23-26, 29, 41, 48, 51, 77, 81, 99-102, 110,
112, 113, 115, 119, 123, 130, 131, 139, 141, 197, 203, 206, 209, 212, 214-218, 220, 221, 238,
253, 279, 319, 327-330, 343-345, 353, 354, 391, 401, 402, 411, 424, 443, 444, 446, 447, 451,
454, 455, 458, 459, 462-465, 469, 471, 472, 480, 481, 483, 505-507, 509-517, 522, 523, 563


     Menges, Constantine -- 80, 487


     Meron, Menachem (Mendi) -- 409, 431-436


     Michel, Robert -- 313, 376, 377, 379, 380, 517


     Mikva, Abner -- 136, 557


     Miller, Ernie Walter -- 169, 170


     Miller, Johnathan -- 194


     Miller, Richard R. -- chapter on, 187-192; 3, 7, 29, 33, 51, 61, 113, 158, 196


     Mitchell, John -- 57


     Mizrahi, Edgar -- 195


     Moellering, John -- 45, 379, 380


     Monge, Luis -- 268, 381


     Morabia, David -- 174, 194, 195


     Morabia, Elliot -- 174, 194, 195


     Morabia, Nan -- 174, 194, 195


     Moreau, Arthur S., Jr. -- 13, 407, 408


     Morgan, Janet -- 417


     Motley, Anthony -- 424, 486, 487


     Murphy, Richard W. -- 218, 312, 326, 333, 337, 342, 370


     Muskie, Edmund -- 25, 468


     Newington, Barbara -- 190


     Neyroud, Phillippe -- 179, 185


     Nimrodi, Yaacov -- 12, 13, 16, 17, 88-91, 93, 335


     Nir, Amiram -- 17-22, 71, 72, 94-96, 99, 168-171, 174, 210, 211, 314, 338, 350, 480


     Noriega, Manuel -- 44, 45, 118, 380, 565


     North, Oliver L. -- chapter on, 105-122; 2-10, 13-16, 18-26, 28-46, 49, 51-53, 55-63, 65,
67-75, 77, 79-89, 91-104, 116, 123-145, 147-149, 151-153, 155-159, 161, 163-171, 173-176,
179, 180, 185, 187-191, 193-197, 199-217, 219-221, 223-232, 234-240, 242-244, 247-255,
259-261, 263-281, 283-288, 295-303, 305, 307, 312, 315, 317, 319-323, 327, 328, 330, 334-336,
340, 341, 343, 345, 347, 353, 356, 363-365, 369, 370, 375-383, 385, 387-390, 392-403, 407-409,
411, 423, 431-436, 443, 445-449, 451-454, 456-458, 460, 463-465, 467, 469, 471-473, 480, 481,
485-490, 493-498, 500-503, 505, 509, 512, 514-519, 521, 525, 526, 531-533, 535-538, 540-542,
545-548, 550-552, 555-559, 564, 565


     Novak, Robert -- 349, 388


     O'Connor, John -- 338


     Oakley, Robert -- 255, 326, 334-336, 338, 341-343, 356, 369, 407


     Owen, Richard -- 185


     Owen, Robert W. -- 6, 9, 30, 59, 61, 112, 191, 194-196, 285, 377, 487, 550


     Parlow, Thomas -- 164


     Passage, David -- 266, 394


     Pastora, Eden -- 4, 7, 265, 270-274, 279


     Peake, Susie -- 474-476


     Pearson, Robert -- 142, 143, 312


     Peres, Shimon -- 10, 11, 17, 89, 206, 333, 338, 350


     Perot, H. Ross -- 193, 196


     Pickering, Thomas R. -- 394, 486-488


     Piowaty, John -- 167


     Platt, Nicholas -- chapter on, 325-374; 46, 47, 91, 326-373, 375, 376, 380, 392, 435, 474, 539


     Poindexter, John M. -- chapter on, 123-136; 6, 7, 9, 14-26, 28-36, 38-41, 48, 51-53, 55-58, 62,
67, 69-75, 77, 79, 83, 84, 88, 90, 92-106, 114, 115, 117, 118, 120, 137-142, 144, 145, 147, 149,
157, 166, 169, 173, 175, 179, 185, 194, 201, 203, 206-221, 225-230, 237, 239, 244, 252-255,
288, 300, 311-317, 319, 320, 322, 323, 327, 329, 335-343, 345, 350, 351, 357, 359, 364, 365,
372, 379, 380, 389, 405, 409-411, 423, 433, 435, 436, 444-452, 454, 456-467, 469, 473,
480-482, 500, 505-519, 522, 526-537, 539, 541-543, 545, 547, 551, 552, 555-558, 564, 565


     Posada, Luis -- 166, 195


     Posey -- 550, 551


     Powell, Colin L. -- 70, 92, 341, 406-411, 414, 416, 417, 421, 423, 427, 428, 430-432, 434,
436, 438-440


     Presock, Patty -- 475, 477


     Price, Charles -- 340


     Qadhafi, Mu'ammar -- 493, 495, 496


     Quadhaffi -- 406


     Quinn, Kenneth M. -- 327, 331, 338, 339, 341-343


     Quintero, Rafael -- 161, 166, 167, 196, 274, 275, 279, 284-288, 295-299, 303-305, 307,
394-396, 490, 493, 495-497


     Rabin, Yitzhak -- 14, 70, 91, 92, 100, 138, 207, 249, 540


     Rafsanjani -- 19, 22, 23, 97, 211, 224, 239, 340, 342, 348, 412


     Ramsey, Norman P. -- 181, 184


     Raphel, Arnold -- 326-328, 331, 335, 336, 338, 339, 341-343, 356, 407, 410, 434, 436


     Rappaport, Bruce -- 197


     Reagan, Ronald -- chapter on, 445-472; 1-3, 5, 7, 10-12, 14-19, 21-25, 27-30, 32, 37-41, 43,
44, 48, 49, 51, 52, 55, 58, 61, 68, 70, 71, 74, 77, 79-83, 85, 86, 90-97, 99-102, 104-106, 109,
116-120, 123-128, 130-136, 138, 139, 148, 157, 158, 167, 168, 170, 189, 190, 199, 201, 203,
206, 208, 209, 213-216, 220, 226, 249, 311, 315, 322, 325, 329, 330, 335, 337, 338, 340,
343-349, 353, 359, 362, 364, 365, 368, 372, 377-379, 405-412, 415-419, 421, 422, 427-430, 432,
435, 443, 444, 473-476, 478, 480-482, 485, 505-511, 513, 514, 518-523, 525-528, 530, 531,
534-536, 539-543, 545, 547-549


     Redman, Charles -- 348


     Reed, Frank -- 22


     Regan, Donald T. -- chapter on, 505-524; 7, 12, 15-19, 21, 24, 26, 29, 48, 77, 90, 92-94, 97,
100, 101, 104, 139, 190, 206, 209, 212, 214, 216, 217, 220, 329, 340, 343-345, 378, 410, 443,
444, 447, 458-462, 464, 466-470, 475, 480-483, 526-528, 531, 534-536, 538, 541-545, 547


     Reger, Brenda -- 84, 142, 143, 145, 148, 152, 155


     Rehnquist, Janet -- 476, 478, 479


     Revell, Oliver ``Buck'' -- 550, 552, 553


     Reynolds, James S. -- 292, 536, 540, 541


     Reynolds, William Bradford -- 535


     Rhodes, Don -- 474, 476, 477


     Richardson, John -- 535, 536, 540, 541


     Robinette, Glenn A. -- 117, 176


     Robinson, Chief Judge Aubrey E. Jr. -- 27, 32, 124, 263


     Rodriguez, Felix -- 6-10, 196, 234-237, 242, 244, 263-269, 277, 279, 284, 288, 300-307,
376-378, 381, 383, 386-389, 392, 394-396, 399, 400, 443, 480, 485-503 (see also, Max Gomez)


     Ross, Christopher W.S. -- 327, 331, 336, 338, 341, 343, 356


     Rudd, Glenn A. -- 408-410, 436, 437


     Rudman, Sen. Warren -- 33, 417, 418


     Saba, Joseph H. -- 419, 420


     Sable, Ronald K. -- 137, 145, 312


     Sanchez, Nestor -- 379, 486, 487


     Sanchez, Oscar Arias -- 378


     Sawyer, Wallace B., Jr. -- 167, 238, 382, 383, 498


     Schmitz, John P. -- 475-479, 494


     Schwimmer, Adolf -- 11-17, 88-91, 93, 99


     Sciaroni, Bretton G. -- 143, 144


     Scowcroft, Brent -- 25, 288, 468


     Seccord -- 214


     Secord, Richard V. -- chapter on, 173-178; 14-22, 103, 105-107, 112, 114, 116, 117, 123-125,
128-130, 133, 135, 149, 157-159, 161, 163-172, 180-183, 185, 188, 193-196, 199, 201-203,
209-212, 214, 218, 220, 221, 224-226, 229, 230, 232, 234-236, 238, 239, 241-244, 249, 250,
255, 257, 258, 264, 268, 269, 272-274, 279, 283-285, 287, 295-305, 307, 312, 316, 319, 345,
377, 379, 382, 387, 390, 393-403, 409, 431-436, 445, 448, 451, 453, 471-473, 480, 486, 490,
493-497, 565


     Shackley, Theodore -- 88-90


     Shapiro, Edward J. -- 414, 419, 420


     Shultz -- chapter on, 325-374; 2, 7, 11-13, 15, 16, 18, 22-24, 26, 29, 44, 46-49, 79-83, 85,
89-93, 99-101, 139, 196, 202, 206-209, 211, 214, 215, 253, 311, 375, 376, 378, 389, 405-407,
410-412, 419, 422-425, 432, 435, 436, 444, 447, 449, 453, 454, 458, 459, 461-467, 469, 473,
477, 478, 481-483, 500, 505-509, 511-513, 516-518, 521, 525-545


     Singlaub, John K. -- 3, 4, 9, 84, 102, 112, 114, 230, 234, 236, 273


     Smith, Thelma Stubbs -- 421, 438, 440, 441


     Smith, William French -- 2, 81, 202, 419, 543


     Sofaer, Abraham -- 23, 101, 218, 253, 312, 320, 321, 327-330, 332, 338, 344-348, 351-355,
361, 363, 365-368, 373, 462, 510, 529, 530, 532-541


     Speakes, Larry -- 459, 510


     Sporkin, Stanley -- 2, 18, 19, 70, 139, 140, 202, 203, 205, 207, 209, 215-217, 219, 317-321,
323, 411, 447, 456, 531, 535, 540


     Steel, Jack -- 474, 476, 477


     Steele, James -- 6, 7, 9, 41, 42, 265, 266, 274, 301, 377, 381, 388, 393-404, 488, 489, 491,
496-499, 503


     Stephens, Jay -- 149, 155


     Stubbs -- 414 (Smith 421, 438, 440, 441)


     Suazo, Robert -- 3, 83, 449, 450


     Sultan of Brunei -- 389, 390, 392


     Sutherland, Thomas -- 11, 88


     Tambs, Lewis A. -- 4, 5, 30, 43, 59, 272, 275, 284, 380-382, 550


     Teicher, Howard -- 21, 80, 95, 96, 98, 227


     Thompson, Paul B. -- chapter on, 137-146; 19, 22-24, 29, 40, 41, 44, 84, 86, 115-117, 130,
214, 315, 320, 322, 456, 459, 510, 526, 529, 531-533, 535, 536, 547


     Thornburgh, Richard -- 109, 110, 119, 565


     Twetten, Thomas -- 19-21, 139, 199, 210, 211, 213, 214, 216, 239, 240, 243, 315-318


     Vessey, John -- 2, 83, 85, 118, 406-408, 424, 425


     Wald, Chief Judge Patricia M. -- 122, 556, 557


     Walker, William -- 4, 9, 265, 266, 376-378, 387, 389, 394, 395, 399, 490, 496


     Wallison, Peter -- 23, 44, 48, 145, 214, 315, 320, 431, 509-515, 517-523, 527-530, 532, 533,
536, 542


     Walsh, Lawrence -- 32, 34, 35, 51-53


     Watson, Samuel -- 43, 44, 443, 485, 490-496, 498-500, 503


     Webster, William H. -- 25, 110, 261, 328-330


     Weinberger, Caspar W. -- chapter on, 405-442; 2, 7, 11-13, 15-18, 23, 24, 26, 39, 44, 47-49,
53, 79, 81-83, 85, 89-94, 100, 101, 104, 109, 118, 139, 206-209, 214-216, 311, 329, 330,
338-343, 345, 350, 353, 355, 357, 363, 364, 372, 378, 404, 444, 446, 453, 454, 458, 459, 466,
467, 469, 473, 474, 479, 480, 483, 505, 506, 512-514, 518, 521, 526-529, 534-536, 538, 542-545


     Weir, Benjamin -- 11, 13, 17, 22, 69, 88, 91, 207, 249, 259, 262, 318, 334-337, 348, 355, 356,
363, 369, 370, 407, 435, 460-462, 466, 519, 527


     Whitehead, John C. -- 325, 326, 335, 350, 356, 530, 539


     Wilson, Edwin -- 173, 235, 396, 490, 493, 495-497


     Wright, James -- 215, 313, 459, 528


     Zucker, Willard I. -- 31, 34, 36, 58, 116, 158, 159, 163, 166, 172-174, 176, 177, 179-183,
185, 193-195

Iran/Contra Report of Indep. Counsel (IRAN_RPT)


GPO Access


                Federal Bulletin Board File Libraries


The Federal Bulletin Board (FBB) is a free electronic bulletin board service of the Superintendent of
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office (GPO). All file library documents can be downloaded for
free.


This File Library contains Volume 1 of the Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra
Matters, Lawrence E. Walsh.


IRAN_1.DOC    03/09/94      6245 bytes  (378 hits)
              Documentation for IRAN_1.EXE
              This ASCII text file provides information
              about the file IRAN_1.EXE, including
              instructions for decompressing the file.
              It also contains information for ordering
              paper or diskette copies of the
              Iran/Contra Report.
              documentation free ascii iran-contra-rept
              walsh-lawrence


IRAN_1.EXE    01/27/94    935854 bytes  (186 hits)
              Vol. 1 Iran/Contra Final Report
              This self-executing, compressed file
              contains an ASCII text file for Volume 1
              of the Final Report of the Independent
              Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters.  See the
              free IRAN_1.DOC file for additional
              information and instructions for
              decompressing the file.  Volumes 2 and 3
              are not available in electronic form.
              iran-contra-rept walsh-lawrence
              compressed ascii


This ASCII text file provides a summary of the contents of the

file IRAN_1.EXE.  IRAN_1.EXE is a self-executing, compressed file

containing a 2.5 MB ASCII text file for Volume 1 of the Final

Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters.


To decompress the file IRAN_1.EXE, download the file into a

subdirectory on your hard disk with at least 3.5 MB of free hard

disk space.  Then type IRAN_1 <enter>.


The decompressed file will contain only Volume 1 of the report.

Volume 2 and Volume 3 were printed from original exhibit

materials, and no electronic text file was created.


PURCHASING PAPER COPIES:


Paper copies of Volumes 1, 2 and 3 can be ordered from the

Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, by

calling (202) 783-3238 or by sending a FAX to (202) 512-2250.

Advancement payment is required and can be made with MasterCard,

VISA or a GPO Deposit Account.


     Volumes 1-3  Stock Number 028-004-00084-2    $60


Mail Orders can be sent to:  Superintendent of Documents, P.O.

Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15250-7954.


PURCHASING ELECTRONIC COPIES/ONLINE ORDERING OF PAPER AND

DISKETTE COPIES:


Paper copies of Volumes 1 through 3 and diskette copies of Volume

1 ($15) can be ordered through the Online Ordering Service of The

Federal Bulletin Board. Volume 1 can also be downloaded from The

Federal Buletin Board.  To access The Federal Bulletin Board,

call (202) 512-1387 using modem settings 8N1.


To go directly to the menu for the IRAN CONTRA materials, type

the command /GO IRAN_CONTRA <enter> at any place that you can

enter commands.  NOTE:  If you are not yet a Validated User and

you wish to download the files, you must go to the Registry by

entering 32 at the MAIN MENU (Additional instructions for

Validation are available in the Information Center by entering I

at the MAIN MENU).  Online Ordering does not require advance

validation.
