MASTER WALTER MAP'S BOOK DE NUGIS CURIALIUM (COURTIERS' TRIFLES)
Walter Map (c. 1140-1210), Englished by Frederick Tupper and Marbury Bladen Ogle
London: Chatto & Windus, 1924
========================================================================
PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): English translation after the 1924
Tupper/Ogle edition (public domain: published 1924; scan via Internet
Archive). The work is complete, ending with the notes and index. Walter Map's
"De nugis curialium" — the great 12th-century storehouse of marvels: King
Herla and the fairy host, the wild man, vampires, and courtier satire.
========================================================================

MASTER WALTER MAP’S BOOK

DE NUGIS CURIALIUM  (COURTIERS’ TRIFLES)

ENGLISHED BY  FREDERICK TUPPER, Pux.D.

PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH, UNIVERSITY OF VERMONT

AND

MARBURY BLADEN OGLE, Pu.D.

PROFESSOR OF LATIN, UNIVERSITY OF VERMONT

LONDON  CHATTO & WINDUS  1924

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY  T AND A, CONSTABLE LTD. EDINBURGH

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

TO OUR ENGLISH ALLY  SIR ISRAEL GOLLANCZ

SCHOLAR AND FRIEND OF SCHOLARS  WE NEW ENGLAND LOVERS OF OLD ENGLAND

DEDICATE THIS BOOK

Google

nglish key that seeks to open to the

reader of to-day that mediaeval Latin store-  house of curious facts and fancies which bears  the name of ‘ Master Walter Map’s Book De Nugis  Curialium’ (‘Courtiers’ Trifles’) will often stick  in the lock, or else turn with harsh and grating  sound. Map’s meaning is occasionally impene-  trable, his manner usually inimitable. At times  sense and substance and form bid common defiance  to the interpreters’ touch, for his conceits are no  less alien to our idiom than his logic to our thought  and his matter to our experience. The present  translators have tried, when possible, to compass  in English phrases Map’s word-plays and rhymes  and repetitions, but they have striven to resist  the lure of sacrificing accuracy to mannerisms.  The unriddling of Map is a fascinating but fear-  some adventure.

Dr. M. R. James’ excellent edition (1914) of the  single manuscript (Bodley 851) of the De Nugis  Curialitum has been the basis of this translation,  but occasionally the readings of Wright’s text  (1850) and recent emendations of Webb (1915)  and of Bradley (1917) have been followed. Only  under heavy stress has there been recourse to  textual reconstruction.

vil

Google

Vill DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

‘ Introduction’ and ‘ Annotations’ are greatly  limited in their scope by the design of such a  rendering as this, but they will fully serve their  modest purpose if they acquaint readers with  essential features of Map’s social environment and  literary background. Map is so eclectic a writer  that an index of references to his varied reading  is deemed by us requisite to any understanding of  his thought and expression. An adequate critical  commentary upon our author’s book would cover  more pages than the book itself.

Our grateful acknowledgments are due to several  scholars: to Sir Israel Gollancz, whose hearty en-  couragement and practical assistance have assured  to the translation its printed garb; to Professor  James Hinton, whose unmatched knowledge of  Map and his milieu has generously added to the  * Annotations’ several suggestive comments; and  lastly, to our colleague, Dr. Lester M. Prindle,  whose fine latinity has averted many a stumble  in the stony places of the text.

Google

INTRODUCTION

HE name of Walter Map, which even now

‘ carries perfume in the mention,’ had in the  past a greater potency than his words or his work.  He, the lover of traditions spiced with the un-  trustworthiness which renders them effective, be-  came himself as baseless, yet as vivid, a tradition  as his own Gerbert, the necromancer, or his Edric  Wilde, the winner of a fairy wife. What the man  actually wrote was denied him; what he never  wrote—indeed, never could have dreamed of writing  —was constantly coupled with his name. His  Dissuasion of Ruffinus from Matrimony, a separate  epistle proudly incorporated into the fourth division  of his De Nugis Curialium (Courtiers’ Trifles), was,  in his own words, ‘ eagerly seized, carefully copied,  read with huge enjoyment’; but this was even  by his contemporaries ‘ robbed of its author,’ and  by the many later centuries that fell into the trap  of the pen-name ‘ Valerius,’ it was confidently  attributed to ‘ Valerius Maximus,’ the Roman.  Dr. M. R. James, the second editor of the single  manuscript (Bodley 851, of the late fourteenth  century) of the De Nugis (1914), ° can adduce no  single instance of use of the treatise before the  seventeenth century,’ and unless Bothewald, the  Oxford canon, refers, in his diatribe against Map,  to the book through his double comment on * thy  trifles’’ (‘ nugas tuas’ and ‘ nugarum tuarum ’), it

Google

x DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

wins, in no mediaeval pages now extant, even passing  mention. Map’s truly prophetic soul derived large  comfort from the thought that he was thus ° safe  from envy.’ It could not foresee that he was in  imminent danger from the royal generosity of  Prince Posterity. To him, fine gentleman, polished  courtier, reverent churchman, trusted friend of  many good and great, coming ages lavishly ascribed  the scurrilous, indeed blasphemous mouthings of  the sham bishop, Golias—the very ribaldries that  Walter’s close friend, Giraldus Cambrensis (Gerald  of Wales), held in such horror. His dignified re-  bukes of the abuses of the monkish orders are  converted by the great camera obscura, tradition,  into gross indecencies; his elegant wit becomes a  pot-house humour as vinous as Sir Toby’s in lusty  championship of ‘ cakes and ale and ginger hot in  the mouth.’ As in Tennyson’s ‘ Becket,’ he is ever  ‘Goliasing and Goliathising. That Map was the  maker of a French poem of Lancelot is, many good  scholars think, not improbable. But the scribes  of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries seek to  enhance his claims to honour as an adopter and  adapter of romantic story, by fathering upon him  the huge progeny of prose romances of the Lancelot  cycle—a pious and prolific parenthood. Map’s fate  was, as has been already hinted, not altogether  undeserved. He, who never allowed dramatic  biography to suffer from the inopportune intrusion  of fact, could hardly cavil at his own conversion  into a vivid creation of the literary Apocrypha.  But modern scholarship, more scrupulous than the  man himself, has vindicated at last Map’s confident  prediction at the close of the Dissuaston from  Matrimony: ‘In the most remote future, its antiquity

Google

INTRODUCTION xl

will cause the authorship to be credited to me,  because then as now old copper will be preferred  to new gold.’ Through the love of the true, not  less than through the love of the old, the apocryphal  Map has finally yielded the stage to the actual Map ;  and the real figure delights us more than the  phantom.

Of the life of Walter Map we know perhaps as  - much as of the life of that kindred spirit, Chaucer,  whose activities fill the same years of the fourteenth  century as Map’s of the twelfth. Safe conjecture  places his birth about 1140. And though con-{  temporary records tantalize us by scattering men  of his exact name, a patronymic like the Scottish  Mac, as freely over twelfth-century Herefordshire,  as Shakesperes over sixteenth-century Warwick-  shire, there is small doubt that he was from the!  Hereford neighbourhood ; and hence, as he calls]  himself, a marcher of Wales,’ hailing Welshmen:  as ‘ our fellow-countrymen,’ but drawing of them,  a picture unflatteringly realistic. His parents wer  of gentle blood, rendering to Henry 1u1., bot  before and after his coronation, such cee as  to win the king’s high regard for their son (D.N pets  v., vi.). Among the clerks that flocked to the  Paris of Louis vi., soon after his marriage to a}  Spanish princess in 1154, he watched the clashes:  of town and gown, and of Jews and Christians—  spectacles all too common (v., v.). Map sat at the!  lectures of Gerard la Pucelle after 1160 (11, vii.).:  But he was back in England before 1162, for he  unfolded a parable to Thomas a Becket, still  Chancellor (u1., xxii.). As a man of action, Map  played in his time many parts. He became at  court one of the clerks of the royal household (a

Google

Xi DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

distinction that the next century coupled with  his name); in the state an itinerant justice, and  justice in Eyre, ‘ always excepting ’—-so Giraldus  tells us (Opera, Iv. 219)—‘ Jews and Cistercians  from his oath to do justice to all’; and in the  church, canon and precentor of Lincoln, parson  of Westbury-upon-Severn in Gloucestershire, preb-  endary of Mapesbury in the Willesden neighbour-  hood of London, and in later life (1197) Archdeacon  of Oxford. Nor, as we learn from the De Nugis,  did this cosmopolitan always bide in England.  In 1173 he received from King Henry at Limoges  the care of Peter of Tarentaise (11., ii1.). The  Lateran Council under Alexander 111. at Rome, to  which Map was sent by King Henry in 1179, is  the theme of several of his pages; and he dwells  with especial unction upon his exposure of the  scholarly pretensions of the Waldensians on that  great occasion of his life (1., xxxi.). Map was at  Saumur when young King Henry died at Martel  in June 1183 (Iv., 1.), and in 1199 he was again in  France, vainly seeking, with the support of the  chapter, to obtain the bishopric of Hereford, when  the second son of Henry 11., King Richard, met his  end. His active career seems to have closed with  the twelfth century—which he deemed the fixed  bound of ‘ modernitas’ or modern life—though  he did not die until some ten years later.

Of Map we fortunately know far more than his  offices and dates can tell us. Through frequent  friendly sketches of his engaging personality in the  pages of Giraldus Cambrensis, and through the  repeated revelations of self in the De Nugis, we  can mirror forth the man, his intimacies and pre-  judices, his sympathies and superstitions, his stand-

Google

INTRODUCTION xill

ards of living and of writing—indeed his full relation  to his environment. Welshman by blood, Walter  Map is an aristocrat of the true Norman breed.  Master of a household so great that he can liken  it to a petty court, he struggles futilely with the  servant problem of the twelfth century, and, much  against his will, is ruled by his own retainers.  Everywhere in his jottings he displays the pride  of a Norman noble—holding his corner of the social  world against townsmen, peasants, serfs, whom  ‘his very soul loathed,’ and protesting against  their rise in the world. With the haughtiness of  a feudal baron, like De Tankarville, he is in full!  sympathy. Not only arrogance, but other quali-'  ties of his class, which were then accounted strong  but now weak, pervade his pages. His credulity  is as childlike and gullible as that of his friend,  Giraldus Cambrensis, a Welshman true, who revelled  in marvels; his superstition as intense, his intoler-  ance as fierce. In his world demons are abroad,  making women their instruments and men their  prey. lLamias lurk in midday-groves, fairy ladies  dance at midnight on the shores of ponds or on  the edge of forests; damned souls walk unless  laid to rest by the sprinkling of holy water; angels  enter the cells of hermits, cope with vampires of  the night, and joust in knightly disguise. Preach-  ing ever that ° sincere devotion should be celebrated  in the quiet purity of the heart,’ and that ‘ nothing  can be done without God,’ he airs his antipathies  against Jews, heretics, Cistercians. Louis the  Young (or ‘ Pious’), his ideal of a Christian monarch,  wins from Map as large approval for his merciless  punishment of a Parisian Jew as for any of his  sovereign mercies, He pursues with scorn all

Google

X1V DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

dissent—vaunting his victory over the Waldensians  at the Lateran Council, and retailing foul calumnies  against the Paterines. Savage indignation lacer-  ates his heart when he recites many terrible in-  stances of the greed and cruelty of Cistercians,  whose prosperity he watches with agitation. He  hates their leader, St. Bernard, the opponent of  Abelard, hails him as Lucifer, and records with  ill-suppressed satisfaction the failure of his miracles.  Mastered by avarice, Templars and Hospitallers  are hardly in better case than the Cistercians; but  Carthusians and Grandmontines are thus far free  from blame. He believes in the power of clerks  and in the sway of ecclesiastical law, but deems  Rome thoroughly venal. Righteous indignation  dictates many of Walter’s ironies and permeates  his jests.

On the higher planes of social life, Walter’s likes  and dislikes are creditable to his heart and head.  He hates the court because it makes men base.  He exposes the vices of young Henry, the Absalom  of his story, though he has felt the power of his  charm; he marks the weakness of old Henry, the  father, amid the recital of his merits. He praises  the virtues of Louis vi1., and of Theobald, the  good count of Champagne. Despite his prejudices,  he is a teacher of sound morality—not the less  effective because he pleases while he teaches. His  cosmopolitanism and his career at court have taught  him urbanity. He is constantly in the company  of the great, hearing much and overhearing more  —delighting his readers as much by his vivid  reminiscences of the notable men with whom he  has lived and moved as by his happy illustrations,  entertaining anecdotes, and witty turns of speech,

Google

INTRODUCTION Xv

Like his own Welsh hero, Triunein, he early passed  beyond the bounds of his own land. His Parisian  training, his Latin scholarship, his Italian journey,  his life in the courts of kings, make him a citizen  of the world, seemingly as much at home in his  anecdotes of Hungary or Constantinople as in  tales of neighbouring Wales. That his most popular  piece of writing, the Dissuasion from Matrimony,  should have been so freely attributed to Latin  writers of a thousand years before shows the  looseness of its ties with place and time—though  it is, of course, frankly mediaeval in tone and  temper.

Walter Map was not only a man of the world—  he was also a man of letters, the reader of many  books. He is such a ‘ helluo librorum’ that he is  impeded by his authors. Like the Euphuists of  four centuries later, with whom he has not a little  in common, he can utter no commonplace without  literary precedents. His quotations from Scripture  and the classics resemble the miraculous draught  of fishes. His memory checks his invention; but  nothing can curb the fatal fluency of his writing,  the forgetfulness of the full stop, the heaping of  phrase upon phrase, the piling of figure upon figure,  until, like his own Ruffinus, we regard the schemata  and neglect the thought. Innocent of ‘ the art to  blot,’ he multiplies unnecessary examples and un-  assimilated citations, he dispenses allegories instead  of arguments, he is quite incapable of clear, concise  exposition. ‘ The muzzle is seldom in the nose-bag  of ideas,’ for he dislikes abstractions, general notions,  and traffics in the concrete with many periphrases  and involutions—a wordiness that recks naught  of restraint. n Mark the ceaseless flow of similes

b

Google

Xvi DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

with which he sustains his comparison of the court  to the inferno. These do anything but advance  the thought.

One great literary endowment Map possesses

in generous measure—he is a born story-teller,  Leisurely to diffuseness in exposition, he is a  master of brief narrative, discarding, as his critics  have noted, euphuistic balance, puns, alliteration,  classical mythology—of which he is elsewhere so  fond—and gaining rapidity of movement by the  suppression of unnecessary details, by the sequence  of short sentences, and by the choice of dynamic  words. Bardoux has observed very happily that  this little collection of tales is not framed in the  bright sunlight of the hillside of Fiesole, but be-  longs rather to the dark rooms of a Norman castle  or to the narrow cell of the monk, with the rain  and the wind noisy without—but, if these stories  lack warmth and colour, they may boast a dramatic  fitness and energy. Here Map might well have  given us more, not less—portrayal of background,  limning of character—but local colour is not essen-  tial to old romances, and his persons are often  vividly revealed through their works and words.  His narrative has a wide range: the things that he  has seen and heard while living with Henry 1,  ranging through the countryside as an itinerant  justice, visiting the near-by Wales, sojourning in  Paris in his youth, journeying to Italy ; and things  that he has read in old chronicles, saints’ lives,  jest-books; everywhere scraps of history, tradi-  tion, literature. The spirit of the age 1s vocal in  his anecdotes of men past and present—their  savageries, ardours, sentiment—frightfulness stalk-  ing through their blood-feuds and battles, super-

Google

INTRODUCTION XVil

stition rampant in their worship, lust and cruelty  mingling with their loves. The sword springs from  its scabbard to answer an ill-timed jest, the burning  stake confronts honest doubt, the gorgon’s head is  the fruit of ghoulish passion. Too little gentleness  in doing, too little judgment in thinking, too little  reason in believing—and the end of them all is a  brute force fatal to every one in its path. Here  and there soft lights flicker, as in the story of  the Templar who is true to his oath, or of Resus  who prefers his friend’s honour to his friend’s wife,  or of Theobald who befriends the lepers; but  these only make the darkness visible. Map, the  historian, finds his material in many places (Bar-  doux): (1) The court of Henry (1., i.-x.; Iv., xiii. ;  V., vil.); (2) Social life of Anglo-Normans (1., xii.,  XV., XXIV.; Iv., xiil.); (3) Church and religion (L.,  Xlll.-XX., XXIL-XXXll.; II, lL-1X., XXVIL-XXXIL; IV.,  x1.) ; (4) Anglo-Saxon Chronicles (I1., xvi; vV.,  ll., Iv.) ; (5) History of Eastern peoples (11., xviii.) ;  (6) French kings (v., v.). Into all these tradition,  that prefers romantic fitness and congruity to fact,  enters as freely as into Map’s stories of Wales  (II., Vill.-xill., xx.-xxvi.) or records of Brittany (Iv.,  xv.), so it is difficult to separate the false from  the true. Map has little skill in bringing order  into the confusion of scattered sources; hence the  inconsistencies of his account of Godwin in the  Fifth Division.

From the Gesta Romanorum to Gower the  mediaeval story-teller has generally a moral purpose.  And Map’s stories are designed to demonstrate  some argument—otherwise they would be to his  mind ‘ savourless and sapless trifles.’ The dangers  of avarice and envy, the necessity of subduing the

Google

XVIil DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

flesh, the power of the evil spirit, the strength of  friendship and the frailty of women, find repeated  illustration in his tales. As has been remarked,  there are in his narratives no feeling for local colour,  no circumstantial description, no attempt to clothe  his creations in flesh and blood; yet it would be  hard to surpass in rapid succession of incidents  and in vividness of dialogue two stories of very  different genre, ‘Sadius and Galo,’ and ‘ Sceva  and Ollo.’ The first in its knightly setting, its  amorous motive, its mingled themes of woman’s  jealousy and man’s friendship, might well provoke  a poet to a high romance of chivalry; the second  in its bourgeois figures, its petty trickery and con-  cealments, its prevailing lowness of tone, is in the  true vein of old Italian comedy ; yet they are alike  in their signal merits. The three stories that follow  ‘Sadius and Galo’ in the Third Division—the  counterpiece of Parius and Lausus, the sanguinary  tale of Raso and his Wife, and the chivalric legend  of Rollo and Resus (worthy to be embalmed in a  French la1)—are good examples of Map’s romantic  manner, while the tales of Eudo and the Demon,  Gerbert and the Fairy, Henno, Harlequin, and a  host of others illustrate his love of the supernatural,  of what he himself calls ‘ fatalitas.’ In Map’s.  narratives the modern reader will find, doubtless,  his chief interest.

Tennyson in his ‘ Becket’ does no injustice to  the style of Walter Map when he puts into his  mouth involved sentences, similes, learned refer-  ences, repetitions, alliterations, jingles. ‘ The lacry-  mation of a lamentation’ may be matched by a  hundred passages of the De Nugis Curialium.  Every trick of sound-correspondence (paramoion),

Google

INTRODUCTION XIX

of sentence-balance (parison), of likeness of stem  (polypteton), of likeness of ending (homoioteleuton),  of beginning- and end-rhymes, may be illustrated  from his text. But it is easy to fall into a double  mistake. First, to suppose that the use of the  various devices of the schemata is in any way  peculiar to our author. Nothing in Map himself  is more artificial than Giraldus’ description of  Map’s wit, ‘sales saporifero sapientiae sale conditos’  (Opera, Iv. 219), or than the opening sentences of  Giraldus’ long letter to his friend, ‘ correptionibus  tamen non utor, sed commotionibus, sed consilltis,  sed calcaribus ’ (1. 271). The hunting of the letter  and the lavish indulgence in repetition and rhyme  were well-established conventions of the scholarly  style. Secondly, to ignore this marked distinction  between Map’s manner and the euphuistic, the  estilo culto of sixteenth-century England, namely,  that his employment of alliteration and balance  is sporadic and not systematic. Any consistent  rendering of the De Nugis into the style of Lyly  would be as flagrantly misrepresentative of Map’s  language as it would be intolerably monotonous.  In his estimate of his author-self, Map assumes a  modesty far removed from the vaunting pride of  Giraldus. ‘ This is a dry and bloodless style of  writing,’ he says of his Dissuasion, almost in the  same breath with which he vaunts its wide popu-  larity. ‘ He is a layman having no skill with the  pen.’ He bemourns the meagreness of his know-  ledge and the feebleness of his tongue. He has  little sympathy with the long-eared public—in its  approval of all things of the past and its condemna-  tion of the present. ‘They will contemn me  because I am still alive.’ But it is easy to see his

Google

XX DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

delight in the apprehensions of his enemies, the  Cistercians, who have an inkling of the book and  disparage him by unhappy comparisons. He may  dub himself ‘ witless,’ but he is a truthful man  of letters (for this he uses ‘ poeta’), setting forth  ‘what things I know from seeing or believe from.  hearing.’

Whether or not we hold Walter Map responsible  for his title—which may have been derived by  him from the sub-title of John of Salisbury’s  Polycraticus, or which may have been supplied,  as Dr. Bradley suggests, by the editor, who pro-  vided the irregular and often inapt rubrics—the  De Nugis Curialium is not a Curiale, like those of  Alain Chartier, Guevara, or Breton. Its main  theme is surely not the wickedness or folly of the  court ; although the name finds this much warrant,  that these diverse jottings might well beguile the  idle hours of courtiers. Certain divisions of this  variegated book make, as Dr. James observes,  the profession of showing that modern times have  produced heroes as remarkable as those of antiquity,  but it cannot be said that the desultory author  adheres to this avowed purpose with any tenacity.  He acknowledges, indeed, his lack of definite design  when he tells us that he undertook this literary  adventure at the request of one Geoffrey, who had  urged him ‘to put down in writing sayings and  doings hitherto unrecorded or anything conspicu-  ously remarkable that had come to his knowledge.’  In the Prologue to the Third Division he says that  * men who are engaged in the cares of state often  delight to lay aside their burdens and bend to  conversation with the humble, refreshing them-  selves with light, amusing talk; hence he hopes

Google

INTRODUCTION xxl

his book will entertain.’ Courtiers’ Trifles, all men  agree, consists of fragments really written (‘ by  snatches’) by Map, but collected and arranged  after his death with little regard to chronology or  coherence. Professor James Hinton, who has made  the most detailed study of the relation of its parts,  divides the book into twenty fragments, and, with  full recognition of the uncertainties of sequence,  offers this tentative chronological order :—

Fragment. Date. Dist. Cap. Contents.

XX. 1181 V. vii. First Draft of Introduc-  tion. .

I. 1181, I. i.-xii. Introduction ; King

Sept. on Herla; King of Por-

tugal.

XIV. 1181, IV. | iib.-xvi. | Valerius to Ruffinus;

Sept. on Eudo; Cluniac Monk;

Sons of the Dead

Woman; Henno; Ed-

ric; Gerbert; Satalia;

Nicholaus Pipe; Her-

lething ; Salius; Alan  Rebrit; Sceva and  Ollo.

IV. 1182 I. | xvi.-xxxii. | MonasticOrders; Here-  tics; Three Hermits.

V. 1182 Il. i.-xvi. Miracles ; Wastin; Ed-  ric; Sons of the Dead  Woman; Witch; Paul  and Antony; Lou-  vain.

XII. | 1183, June | IV. i. Young King’s Death.  VII. | After 1185 | II. XViii. Andronicus Com-  nenus.

Google

git DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Fragment. Date. Dist. Cap. Contents.

ee ereneeennenemmemeemee [) geeneresnmmeetenremnememre-cunnentowemtemnenemepmeis fe ge

IX. | Before 1187 | II. | xx.-xxx. | Welsh Tales; Vam-  pires, etc.

XVII. | Before 1187 | V. iiib. -iv. Earl Godwin.

III. | 1187, Oct. I, XV, Fall of Jerusalem.  XVI. 1188 Ni. iiia. Omens of Captures of  Jerusalem.  XV. | Before 1189,| V. i-ii. Modern Heroes Pro-  July logue ; Appollonides.  XVIII. | Before 1189, | V. Vv Henry 1., Louis v1., etc.  July  XI. | Before 1189, | III. i.-v. Romantic Tales of  July Sadius and Galo, ete.  XIII. | About 1191, | IV. iia. Epilogue.  July  XIX. 1193 V. vi. English Kings.

Fragments II. (Dist. 1., cap. xuii.-xiv.), VI. (Dist. 11.,  cap. xvii.), VIII. (Dist. 11., cap. xix.), X. (Dist. 1.,  cap. xxxi.), all very short, cannot be dated even  approximately. ,

Walter’s cursory composition was, therefore, a  dozen years in the making—perhaps half the time  that his friend, Giraldus, had by him his ‘ Instruc-  tion of a Prince,’ likewise full of reminiscences of  Angevin royalty. But Courters’ Trifles includes  within its scope personal recollections of over thirty  years, from early youth to ripe middle age—young  days in the Paris schools amid the mélées of clerks  and citizens (about 1155), or at the feet of Girard  the Master (1160), or on English soil in the company  of Becket the Chancellor (before 1162); hours of  his prime at Limoges (1178) or at the great Lateran  Council in Rome (1179); later years, after the

Google

INTRODUCTION XXlll

passing of Henry (1189) and the assassination of  the Marquis of Montferrat (1192). In the scenes  that he pictures, the conversations that he recalls,  Map seldom occupies the centre of the stage. He  is not the rose, but he has lived near it. He writes  as a spectator, a listener, rather than as an actor ;  and, since in his time he saw and heard many not-  able men and things, his casual references to this  one, or his pointed anecdotes of that, have the  fresh zest and full weight of records at first hand.  A great churchman like William, Archbishop of  Rheims, tells him a story of graceless heretics; a  mighty captain like William of Braose portrays  for him the mingled piety and savagery of the  Welsh soldiery; his ideal monarch, Louis vu.,  illustrates for him the varied wealth of the kings  of earth in so happy a fashion that years later  Giraldus gladly repeats his words. Sometimes,  indeed, when he buckles on his wit, he is a greater  part of what he has seen, as when he puts to shame  by clever questioning the despised Waldensians at  the’ Lateran Council, or when, by quick repartee,  he raises a laugh at the expense of the king’s son,  Bishop Geoffrey. As a gentleman, an amateur  rather than as a professional author, he writes of  and for courtiers in courtly wise; and, for this  reason, all the upper-class life of his half-century  seems to be taking notes in his person. Nor need  we cavil at his title or themes. To our changed  perspective the trifles of that far-away world seem  as significant as its tragedies; and the lively gossip  and jest of its table-talkers, the airy traditions of  its romancers, as precious as the accurate annals of

its chroniclers. =  a

Google

n  Society, 1850.) |

M. R. James, Walter Map, De Nugis Curtalium. 1914. (Anec-  dota Oxoniensia, x1v.)

Reviewed, Athenaeum, No. 4554, February 6, 1915; C. C. J.  Webb, Classical Review, 29, 1915, pp. 121-128; The Nation,  N.Y., September 23, 1915; MWHenry Bradley, English  Historical Review, 82, 1917, pp. 393 f.

F. Liebermann, Short Extracts from D.N.C., Monumenta  Germaniae Historica, Scriptores, xxvi1. 61-74.

Valerius ad Ruffinum (Spurious Works of St. Jerome, Migne,  Patrologia Latina, xxx. 254 f.).

LIFE AND WORK OF WALTER MAP

Giraldus Cambrensis (Gerald of Wales), Opera in 8 vols. in  Rolls Series, 1861-1891, passim.

Thomas Wright, Biographia Britannica Literaria, 1846, 11.  295-310.

F. Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde, 1879, pp. 25-58.

H. L. D. Ward, Catalogue of Romances, MSS. in the British  Museum, 1., 1888, pp. 218, 845-866, 784-741.

Henry Morley, English Writers, 111., 1889, ch. vi., 120-174,

Arthur W. Colton, ‘ The First English Essayist : Walter Map,’  Poet Lore, v., 1893, pp. 537-550.

C. L. Kingsford, ‘Walter Map,’ Dictionary of National Bio-  graphy (D.N.B.).

J. Bardoux, De Walterio Mappio, 1900 (Paris Dissertation).

J. E. Sandys, ‘ English Scholars in Paris,’ Cambridge History  of English Literature, 1., ch. x., pp. 208-204, 503-509.

4XXV

Google

XXV1 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

James Hinton, ‘Walter Map and Ser Giovanni,’ Modern  Philology, xv., 1917, pp. 203-209.

James Hinton, ‘De Nugis Curialium: Its Plan and Composi-  tion,’ Publications of Modern Language Association of  America, 82, 1917, pp. 81-182.

CONTEMPORARY HISTORY AND LITERATURE

Thomas Wright, Latin Poems commonly attributed to Walter  Mapes. (Camden Society, 1841.)

F. J. Furnivall, La Queste de Saint-Graal in the French Poem  of (as is supposed) Gautiers Map or Walter Map. (Roz-  burghe Club, 1864.)

EF. Liebrecht, Gervase von Tilbury, Otia Imperialia, 1856.

Chronicles in the Rolls Series : Pseud6-Benedict’s Gesta Regis  Henrici Secundi, Roger of Hoveden, Ralph de Diceto,  William of Newburgh, Robert de Torigni, etc.

EK. A. Freeman, History of Norman Conquest. Third Edition.  Reign of William Rufus, 1882.

Kate Norgate, England under the Angevin Kings, 1887.

Google

II.  III,  IV.

VI.

Vill.  IX.  xX.  XI.  XII,  XIII,  XIV.  XV.  XVI.  XVII.  XVII.

XXI.

XXII.  XXIII.  XXIV.

CONTENTS  (MS. BODLEY 851)

First Division of Master Walter Map’s Book on

Courtiers’ Trifles

. Comparison of the Court to Hell

On Hell  On Tantalus  On Sisyphus

. On Ixion

On Tityus

. On the Daughters of Belus Lost

On Cerberus

On Charon

On Night-birds

About King Herla

Of a King of Portugal

About Guichard, a Monk of Cluny  About another Monk of Cluny  About the Capture of Jerusalem by Saladin  The Origin of the Carthusians

The Origin of the Grandmont Order  The Origin of the Templars

. A Certain Miracle  . A Second Miracle

Concerning the Son of the Sultan of Babylon  Concerning the Old Man of the Assassins  Concerning the Origin of the Hospitallers  Concerning the Origin of the Cistercians

XXxVii

Google

PAGE

Gr Or Ou

15  19  22  23  25  30  32  33  35  36  38  41  42  44,

XXVIII DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

PAGE

xxv. Passing Observations of Walter Map on the Life  of the Monks 51  xxvi. Recapitulation of the Grandmontines 68  xxvir. The Origin of Sempringham 70  xxviu. Recapitulation of the Carthusians 71  xxIx. Of a Certain Sect of Heretics 71  xxx. Of Another Sect of These 72  xxxr. Of the Sect of the Waldenses 76  xxx. Of Three Hermits and their Wonderful Penance 79  First Division Endeth, Second Beginneth.  1. Prologue 81  11. About Gregory, a Monk of Gloucester 81  ur. Of the Blessed Peter of Tarentaise 82  Iv. Likewise of the same Blessed Peter 84  v. Of the same Blessed Peter 85  vi. Of a Hermit 86  vit. Of Luke the Hungarian 87  vit. Of the Senseless Devotion af Welshmen 89  1x. Of Elias, the Welsh Hermit 89  x. Of Cadoc, the Welsh King 90  x1. Of the Appearance of Phantoms 91  xu. Likewise concerning the same Apparitions 94  xu. Of the same Apparitions 97  xiv. Of the same Apparitions 98  xv. Of the same Apparitions 99  xvi. Also of the same Apparitions 100  xvi. Of Gado, a most valiant Knight 101  xvui. Of Andronicus, the Emperor of Constantinople 107  xix. Of Gillescop, a most valiant Scot 109  xx. On the Character of the Welsh 112  xxi. On the Hospitality of the Welsh 112  xxir. On Llewelyn, King of the Welsh 114  xx. On the Same 115  xxiv. On Conan the Fearless 121

Google

CONTENTS XX1X  xxv. On the Thief Cheveslin 122  xxviI. On the Madness of the Welsh | 124  xxvi1. Concerning a Certain Marvel 125  xxvii. Another Marvel 126  xxix. Another Marvel 126  xxx, Another Marvel 127  xxxi. Concerning certain Proverbs 128  xxx. Conclusions of the Foregoing 129  Second Division Endeth. Third Beginneth.  1. Prologue 130  11. On the Comradeship of Sadius and Galo 131  111, On the Contrary Relation of Parius and Lausus 155  Iv. On Raso and his Wife 166  v. On Rollo and his Wife 172  Third Division Endeth. Fourth Beginneth.  I. Prologue 177  1. Epilogue 180  m1. The Advice of Valerius to Ruffinus the Philo-  sopher not to Marry 183  Iv. The Conclusion of the foregoing Epistle 196  v. The End of the foregoing Epistle 196  vi. Of the Youth Eudo in a Demon’s Snare 199  vii. Of a Monk of Cluny who fought in Camps, con-  trary to his Vow 215  vit. Also of the Appearance of Phantoms 218  1x. Also of Apparitions 218  x. Also of the same Apparitions 221  x1. On the Deception of Gerbert by a Phantom 221  xu. Of an Enchanted Shoemaker of Constantinople 229  xu, Of Nicholas Pipe, a Merman 232  xiv. Of Salius, the Son of an Emir 286  xv. Of Alan, King of the Bretons 237  xvi. Of Sceva and Ollo, Merchants 247

Google

XXX DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Fourth Division Endeth. Fifth Beginneth.  PAGE  1, Prologue 254  i. Of King Appollonides 256  11, Of the Origin of Earl Godwin, and his Character 257  Iv. Of Cnut, King of the Danes 268  v. Concerning Henry 1., King of the English, and  Louis, King of the French 272  vi. On the Death of William Rufus, King of Eng-  land, and the Deeds of Henry un. 290  vit. A Recapitulation of the Beginning of this Book,  with some difference of word but none of  meaning 812

Endeth the Fifth Division of Master Walter Map’s Book on

Courtiers’ Trifles.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

INDEX OF REFERENCES

Google

349

358

MASTER WALTER MAP’S BOOK  COURTIERS’ TRIFLES

FIRST DIVISION  Comparison of the Court to Hell. 1

‘JT AM in time, and I speak of time,’ said  Augustine, and straightway added, ‘I know  not what time is.’ With like wonderment can  I say that I am in the court, and speak of the  court, and know not—God alone knoweth—what  the court is. This I know withal that the court  is not time; it partaketh, indeed, of time’s temper,  a thing of flux and change, of a place, and yet of  subtle shifts, ‘never persisting in the same sub- 10  sistence.” At my withdrawal from it, I know it  through and through; on my return to it, I find  little or nothing that I have left there; having  become a stranger I view it as a thing altogether  strange. The court is the same, but the members  are changed. If I shall describe the court as  Porphyrius defineth * genus,’ perchance I shall not  lie in saying that it is a multitude which standeth  in some relation or other to one chief principle.  Certainly we are an unnumbered multitude, striv- 20  ing to please only one man, and to-day we are  one multitude, to-morrow we shall be another.  The court indeed is not changed, it is always  the same. It is a hundred-handed giant, utterly  maimed yet quite unaltered, and it is a hundred-  handed hydra of many heads which rendereth  futile and despiseth the labours of Hercules, and  feeleth not the taming hand of that most master-  ful champion, and, more fortunate than Antaeus,  hath for its mother earth, sea, and air; it will3o  A

Google

2 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

not be crushed to the breast of Hercules; to it  the whole universe furnisheth increased strength.  Whenever Hercules the omnipotent willeth, his  will be done. If what Boéthius asserteth truthfully  of fortune, we shall say of the court, our saying,  indeed, will be right in this too, ‘that it alone is  constant in its change.’ The court pleaseth only  those who attain its favour, for it giveth favour  arbitrarily ; it doth not indeed love the lovable or  10 those deserving to be loved, but presenteth those  unworthy of life with its favour. For this is the  favour which cometh without reason, which abideth  without desert, and which aideth the ignoble, for  reasons that do not appear. As ‘the mystical fan’  of God, by true judgment, by just winnowing,  separateth for its own purpose the wheat from the  chaff, so this fan of the court, with no less care,  separateth for its purpose the chaff from the wheat :  what the first wisely chooseth, the second unwisely  20 casteth out, and conversely, as very often happen-  eth. So many are the goads with which Avarice,  sovereign mistress of court, driveth us on that  laughter is cast out to make way for carking care.  He who laugheth is laughed at; he who sitteth  glum is deemed wise. Wherefore it cometh to pass  that even our judges punish joys and reward sorrow,  although the good, from their good conscience, have  just reasons for joy, and from their evil conscience  the bad are deservedly glum. Hence the hypo-  30 crites are sad, and the worshippers of God are ever  joyous. The judge who without distinction calleth  good evil and evil good is, according to his very  nature, thoroughly kind to the evil and evil to the  kind. The prime reason, however, for the continual  joy of the good is the indwelling of the Holy Spirit,  and the main reason for the sadness of the evil is  their inflation by the filthy spirit, who, in his wander-  ings over the breast of the evil thinker, plucketh  the garlic harmful to him, and this, though delight-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 3

ful in the eating, maketh when eaten a foul stench.  ‘That garlic is offered to us in court chiefly by him  who hath envied us from the beginning of things  —the devil. He who is delighted by the trap of the  devil is displeased by the training of God.

What reason is there, moreover, that we have  fallen from our original estate in strength and virtue,  and that all other living things in no way vary from  their earliest endowment? Adam was created a  giant in stature and in strength, he was made also an 10  angel in mind until he was overthrown; although  his immortality put on mortality, and his perfection  imperfection, his life was much soothed by the  solace of length of days. This happiness of morals,  strength, virtue, and life lasted long unto his pos-  terity ; but in the time of the prophet of the Lord,  David, he himself described as being of eighty years  that life which had formerly been eight hundred or  more without labour and sorrow. But we do not .  last seventy unharmed; nay, just as soon as we20 5, ©  have begun to be wise, we are forced to die or lose  our wits. Save man alone, all living things of earth,  sea, and air enjoy the life and powers with which  they were endowed at creation, as if they had not  fallen from the grace of their Creator. What reason  is there, unless it be that they observe the obedience  enjoined them and we have refused it from the be-  ginning? We have much the more reason for our  sore distress in that, whereas all things still stand,  the devils and we alone have fallen, in that we have 30  our tempters as our allies, and in that our wicked-  ness, arising from our imitation of the chief of  sinners, hath found its punishment in the shortness  of our day and strength.

Who discovered the boiling down of metals, the  reduction of one to another? Who turned the  hardest bodies into liquid ? Who taught man that  the solidness of marble is cut with molten lead ?  Who discovered that the diamond is dissolved with

Google

A DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

the blood of goats ? Who blew the hard rock into  glass? Surely not we: things of this sort man  learneth not in the course of seventy years. But  those who could give seven hundred or eight hundred  -years to wisdom, happy in the prospering of their  property and person, wist well how to search into  the abyss of nature, yea even draw forth its depths  into the light of day. These determined, in due  accordance with the course of the constellations, the

10 life of animals, of birds, and fish, nations and  treaties, the natural habits of grasses and seeds.  They allotted a hundred years to the crows, a  thousand to the stags, and to ravens length of days  surpassing belief. And yet it is befitting to believe  them, especially in their statements about wild  beasts, because these did abide with them, before  the eating of flesh, unafraid, just as with us dwell  now dogs, whose life and comradeship do never fail  us. Aye, many are the discoveries which they have

20 left for us in their writings, but the largest number  have descended to us from father to son from early  man, and have been transmitted to us not indeed by  any skill of our own, but by them in accordance  with our capacity.

I began with a discourse about the court, and to  what have I now come? Thus ever and anon do  occur things which, though they be not very per-  tinent to the present matter, yet are unwilling to  be put off; but it no wise mattereth provided they

30 end not (as the poet saith) in a black fish, and are  demanded by what is to follow.

On Hell. wu

ELL, they say, is a place of punishment. What

if I should boldly set forth the matter in a  word and bravely affirm that the court is not hell,  but is a place of punishment? And yet I cannot  assure me that I have read its meaning rightly ;  meseemeth, however, that it be a place, but it doth

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 5  not follow that it be hell; on the other hand, we may

surely define as a place whatever containeth in  itself some thing or things: let it be defined, there-  fore, as a place: let us see now whether it be a  place of punishment. |

What form of punishment doth hell provide  which is not here multiplied ?

On Tanialus. 1

HOU hast read, hast thou not, that Tantalus is  there, ‘ striving to reach the water which ever 10  floweth from his lips’? Here thou beholdest many  thirsting for the good things nighest to their mouths,  but never reaching them and, like would-be drinkers,  cheated by the slip from lip.

On Sisyphus. Iv

ISYPHUS is there who, from the bottom of a  valley, rolleth up to the top of a lofty moun-  tain a rock which falleth back again and ever will  fall back, and again must needs be carried up.  There are many here who, having scaled the mount 20  of riches, think that naught hath been accomplished;  their heart hath slipped back into the valley of  avarice and they endeavour to recall it to a still  higher mountain, where, indeed, it cannot rest,  because in the contemplation of things desired,  things attained are cheap. That heart is well com-  pared to the rock of Sisyphus, since it is written, ° I  shall pluck out their heart of stone, and shall give  them one of flesh.” May God give a heart of flesh  to the courtiers that on some part of the mountain 30  a pause may be possible !

On Ixion. Vv

ELDOM similar to self, now on the top, now on  the bottom, now on this side, now on that,  Ixion is there, turning on his wheel. Nor are there

Google

«  Sew UW

6 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

lacking Ixions here who are revolved on the turning  wheel of Fortune. They rise to glory, they rush  down to gloom and, although cast down, they still  hope, nor will there ever be a single day which doth  not witness the turn of the wheel; and although on  this wheel fear must assail them on all sides, yet  is there on it no hap without hope: totally terrify-  ing is its dread, it conquereth utterly all qualms of

9 conscience, nor is its alluring of less avail.

% * oS a * of

On Charon. Ix

HE hunters of men, however, to whom juris-  diction is given over the life or death of wild  beasts, these death-dealing men in comparison with  whom Minos is merciful, Rhadamanthus a lover of  reason, Aeacus fair, these men find no happiness  except in dealing unhappiness. Them, Hugh, Prior  of Selwood, now appointed Bishop of Lincoln, found  driven out from the king’s chamber, and behold-

20ing them cursing and indignant, he wondered and

asked them, ‘ Who are you?’ ‘ We are foresters,’  they replied. ‘ Let foresters, then,’ quoth he,  ‘stand far outside.’ The king, who was within,  heard this pun and with laughter came forth to  meet him. To him the prior said, ° This morality  doth apply to you, in that the poor, whom these  men maltreat, enter paradise, whereas you stand  far outside with the foresters.’ The king, however,  deemed the saying, which was serious, as a jest, and

30 just as Solomon ° did not displace false gods ’ so he

did not destroy these foresters; they still up to  this day, now that the King is dead, continue, in  the presence of the crooked serpent, to eat the flesh  of men and to drink their blood; they set up false  gods, which, if God in his strong hand doth not  destroy, will not be cast out. The master who is  present to them they fear and flatter: the Master

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 7

whom they do not see they fear not to offend. I  do not say that many devout men, good and upright,  are not mingled here in the court with us, nor that  here in this vale of misery are not some judges of  mercy, but I speak anent the greater and the  madder troop.

On Night-birds. x

HERE are in hell also children of the night,  the owl, night-hawk, vulture, bubo, whose

eyes the darkness love and hate the light. These 10  are bidden to go forth, to spy out cunningly and  report truthfully all the deeds of virtue which par-  take of the light, all the deeds of ill which have part  in the nature of darkness. They do carefully lay  their snares in every place, and do follow very  greedily the stench from the dead bodies upon  which they feed in the stillness of secrecy, and more-  over on their return they blame all things else except  those things which they stealthily appropriate to

themselves from their own piracy. There are sent 20  in like fashion from the court those whom it styleth  sheriffs, under-sheriffs, beadles, whose duty it is  to pry cunningly. These men leave nothing un-  touched, nothing untried, and, like bees, they  light on flowers to draw forth some of the honey :  they punish what is innocuous, but the belly goeth  clear of punishment. And yet, at the outset of  their office, in the presence of the highest judge,  they do swear to serve faithfully and honestly God

and their master, rendering to Caesar the things 30  that are Caesar’s, to God the things that are God’s ;  but bribes pervert them so that they tear the fleece  from the lambs, leaving the foxes unharmed, in-  asmuch as they win favour by their money, knowing

that ‘ giving requireth ingenuity.’

Among the justices whom I have mentioned are  oft found clerks harsher than the laity. The reason

Google

Jo cear fi go o

8 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

for this I understand not, unless it be that which I  gave to the noble Randolph de Glanville when he  set me this question: because, in sooth, the high-  born of our country disdain letters or delay to apply  their children to them, although to their children  only is it rightly permitted to study the arts, which,  indeed, from this very fact of free birth are called  liberal. Slaves, on the other hand—the which we  call peasants—are eager to nourish their base-born

io and degenerate children in the arts unfitted to their

station, not that they may rise from their rudeness,  but that they may revel in riches, and how much  the more drilled, so much the more dreaded are they.  For the arts are the swords of the mighty, which  vary according to the types of those who use them ;  in the hand of a kind king they make for peace, in  the hand of a tyrant, for death. Slaves ransom  their fellows from their masters, greed waxeth  rampant on both sides, and winneth the mastery

20 whenever freedom is made over to the enemy of

freedom. The words of that remarkable poet  (Claudian) make this clearly manifest: ‘ Nothing  is harder than the lowly whenever he riseth to high  degree, etc.’ and then, ‘ nor any wild beast deadlier  than is a slave’s madness let loose upon the backs  of the free.’ The man to whom he referreth attested  the truth of this verse.

It came to pass recently, moreover, that a certain  abbot took upon himself to become one of these

30 Justices, and he, more cruelly than any layman,

spurred on the spoiling of the poor, hoping per-  chance to win a bishopric through the favour gained  from his spoils; upon him, however, after a few  days, vengeance came, and made him turn his teeth  upon himself, and to die by gnawing off his hands.  I have seen crows suspended above seeds planted  in the earth, so that other crows, seeing them  hanging there, may be afraid and avoid becoming  such as they, and verily they do avoid it. Those,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 9

however, whom God calleth sons of the world,  and describeth as wiser than the children of light,  limiting them in their own generation, are not  afraid, nor do they fear to become like the abbot,  since they have before their greedy eyes yet others,  chiefly two chiefs, whom in sooth our same cycle  of years doth weaken sadly as they lie smitten  with palsy in their narrow beds.

Our testimony of the court hath to do with things  which we have seen. The rolling of flames, how- 10  ever, the thickness of the shadows, the rankness of  the rivers, the loud gnashing of the teeth of demons,  the shrill and woeful groans from troubled spirits,  the foul crawling of vermin, vipers, and snakes and  every manner of creeping thing, and the godless  roarings, the stench, the strident wailings, the awful-  ness—methinketh, should I try to set all these forth  one by one by means of allegory, I lack not com-  parisons among the courtiers, but this matter de-  mandeth a longer time than I see is at my service. 20

But to spare the court seemeth to be a trait of  the court, and it sufficeth after these aforesaid  reasons to conclude from them that the court is a

lace of punishment. I say not, however, that it is  hell (which doth not follow), but it is as nearly like  it as a horse’s shoe is like a mare’s.

Nor are we able to cast our sin upon our master  and ruler, because there is nothing quiet in the  universe, and because no one can rejoice very long  in any peace, since God in individual cases layeth 30  down proofs that ‘ not here must be sought that city  which will abide’: since, too, there is no man of such  wisdom that he can rule over one single house  without some sin or other bringing into it confusion.  I am master and ruler of a moderate number, and  ii of this, my moderate household, I am unable to

old the reins. My desire is to help all in any wise  I may, that nothing be lacking to them in the matter  of food and drink and raiment. Their anxiety is,

Google

10 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

however, to chisel out from my substance where-  with to increase theirs; whatever I have is ‘ ours ”  and whatever each one of them hath is ‘ his own.’  If I make a true accusation against any one of them,  he denieth it and he hath accomplices. If any one  of my household acteth as informant to me, the  others call him a flatterer. ‘ Thou standest in with  the master ; thou liest in order to please him; well  dost thou deserve his gifts; but we, at least, we  10 shall be truthful even though we displease him at  the time.’ These things they cry in my hearing.  What, then, is done or said to him apart ? Surely  he will be treated so vilely and so meanly that  henceforth he will dread the truth. They, however,  having no mercy for my dues and interest, strive to  flatter their bellies and their backs from my stores.  Among them he winneth praise who betrayeth his.  master to benefit a fellow-servant, and he findeth  favour for his faithful comradeship ; he who by lies  20 hath succeeded in deceit, laugheth among the others  that he hath been able to laugh at his master, and  whenever he maketh another to commit a fault he  praiseth the fault, and behind my back * putteth  his finger to his nose.’ If I take any wise action in  any wise burdensome to them, some one of them  forthwith cometh up to me with a sad countenance  and a long face, and feigning a sigh, doth remark,  * Pray be not displeased, dearest master; people  say that you have done this thing; it pleaseth me  30 passing well, God knoweth, and the action seemeth.:  proper, but they are upbraiding you exceedingly.’  After him cometh yet another separately and talketh  to the same purpose ; then a third followeth in the  same course, and they cease not until they make me  doubt or disbelieve the truth. None of them is  specific enough to say, ‘ He said thus and so of your  action,’ but always, ‘ people say thus and so.’  Whoever accuseth people, excuseth all; he nameth  not definitely any one against whom I can contend

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 11

lest his trick be discovered. Any steward who  striveth to please by his parsimony incurreth the  blame of all, and straightway they say to him, ‘ It  was well with our house before thou camest into it ;  thou hast turned it upside down, thou art a dis-  honour and a disgrace to dwelling and master both ;  ah, thou wilt see what return thou wilt get there-  from; oh, how reverent thou art to the master’s  purse! What profit thinkest thou will come from  this avarice ? And what will the master do with all 10  his income and wealth? ‘‘ Lay by a store” sayst  thou? Aye, but will he make thee the heir of any  of it? Or wilt thou cut his throat that thou mayst  carry it off? Surely the treasure thou hast won  for him is the censure of all his friends and the  hatred of those who hitherto regarded him as their  Lord. Thou art like the clown who spareth his soil  and dieth of hunger; thou weenest that God is not  on our master’s side or deceiveth him; thou art a  wise man in thine own eyes, and yet thou art a fool.’ 20  One of my servants who had been harassed with  these or similar upbraidings came to me with tears  in his eyes and made this complaint. ‘ Go thy way,  brother,’ said I; ‘ it is true that no man can serve  two masters ; thou hast God as thy guide and thou  art good and faithful, they have the devil as their  leader and have come to the pass of chiding fidelity ;  of these two no man who is wise leaveth the better  and chooseth the worse.’ To this he replied: ‘I  cannot alone withstand them all; I prefer to resign 30  all things to your hand rather than to be distracted  by such bickering; farewell!’ Owing to this  advice of mine I thus lost a good servant, and his  going made glad the household. Thereupon I,  seeing their subtlety, called them all to me openly,  and set forth to them how I had lost a good servant,  undone by the enmity of some one or other. Then  all began to make excuses, saying with an oath,  * He is a traitor to you who hath deprived you of a

Google

12 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

good servant.’ I therefore asked their counsel in  the choice of him to whom I could entrust the duty  and service of the former servant, not indeed that  I might select him whom they desired but him  whom they did not desire; for I felt sure that they  would give me the advice given by the dog. It is  an old and well-known fable about the quarrel  between a husband and wife over the part of the  bacon which should be put in the cooking-pot :  10 ‘ the side,’ said the wife; ‘ the bone,’ said the hus-  band ; with him the dog agreed, saying, ‘ the bone,  sir,’ Meaning, ‘ win your point—you are a man—  that I may have the better part to eat.’ I knew  that they would give me similar advice, with a view,  that is, to their own advantage, paying no heed to  mine. Seeing, therefore, what they wanted, I  deferred granting their requests, and I entrusted  to a boy, who was still at that time in fear of the  rod, the stewardship of them all, warning him more-  20 over to do naught without consulting me. He was  afraid at first, and was good. Then they began  against him with petty thefts, laying snares for him.  He sought for what was stolen, sighed much and  wept. I knew what was going on. They laid the  blame on me, saying that I had entrusted an im-  portant stewardship of many cares to a fool, and  added, ‘ All are surprised at you and grieve, if it  were only permitted us to speak out.’ ‘ Speak out,  ye have my permission.’ ‘ For example, people are  30 saying that you, an excellent man, have so suddenly  become changed and fallen into such remarkable  greed, that you wish to know everything and to keep  the strictest sort of guard. We are all confounded  in the face of what is being said of you.’ With these  words they adopted a plan which was heartless  enough. They ‘went out into the streets and lanes’  and said that they had been sent by me to compel  the loiterers to enter. Those who were at home  with me received them with much respect, saying

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 13

that I desired them exceedingly, and they begged  them to come frequently. Running then to me they  announced that honourable guests were present, and  they compelled me to greet them against my will.  They were lavish, therefore, with food and drink,  and because they knew that I was unwilling, they  gave free rein in my presence to their gluttonous  appetites, and busily urged the strong, the weak, the  willing, the unwilling to spare nothing, as if they  were doing this solely in deference to my honour ; 10  truly, also, according to the saying of the Master,  ‘they took no thought for the morrow,’ for they  made away with everything. When I accused them  of drunkenness they swore that they were happy,  not drunk, and that I had no mercy in blaming them  for what they had expended on pleasure in my  honour. As I was returning early one morning  from church, I saw a huge bonfire, with the guests  of yesterday, who I hoped had departed, standing  round it, and my servants said to me aside, ‘ They 20:  will ask for lunch, they think lodging is far away,  they know not what they will find. Throw the  handle after the axe, you have begun well, end well.  Do not be cast down, God hath not yet bestowed all  his gifts. You are weighed only in the balance of  your possessions, put your trust in God. There is a  rumour abroad that they will make you a bishop.  Away with all niggardliness! Set forth your all  without stint, dare without fear whatever you wish ;  fortune favoureth the bold. Such a loaf is forced 30.  from you because a crumb counteth for nothing.  Take on strength and courage; hold nothing back  lest you stand in the way of approaching success.’  Whenever these guests depart, they at once invite  others. Before those arrive, they come to me,  bewailing loudly that the crowd of guests is tiring  them too much, and they ruin me under the guise  of grieving about that which really giveth them  pleasure.

Google

14 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

In my household I have spendthrifts who lord it  over my affairs, nor is there any one who can stand  against them. These wage their war against me  more openly ; whatever I expend on them they say  is owed them, nor do they feel any gratitude to me  nor know any; shall I give to them all my substance,  holding back something, a mere pittance for their  advantage, they will say that naught hath been done,  nay, they will refuse it, and in their anger ‘ be turned

10 into a deceitful bow ’ as if I were born not for myself  but for them, and as if they were masters and I  slave, since I have acquired nothing for myself but  all for them. The paterfamilias in Terence who  had equally potent protectors of his property saith,  ‘Of all I have I only am mine own’—a remark which  can be made not merely by a father here and there,  but by many. For my part, at least, I have already  been overcome by mine own, or, to speak more truly,  by their own, since they are intent upon their own

20interests only. As long as they are new, they act  with much respect; after a time, however, they grow  careless. There is a certain paterfamilias here  among us who each year provideth for himself new  servants; hence the greater part of people charge  him with fickleness, but to my mind he displayeth  much wisdom and foresight, since he hath servants  who fear him and attend him fitly.

All this in behalf of our king; how can he quiet  thousands upon thousands and pilot them to peace,

30 when we, fathers of a few, cannot govern those few ?  Surely every house hath one servant and many  masters, since he who is at the head is servant to all :  those who are servants are, meseemeth, masters.  And yet our court, in comparison with the rest,  existeth in the midst of a dangerous whirlwind,  tossed and driven hither and yon. By no means,  however, dare I bring accusation against our king,  because in a hall of hearts, so many in number and  so diverse, there is many a mistake and many a

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 15

disturbance, seeing that neither he nor any other  can remember even names, to say nothing of know-  ing hearts; and no one can be strong enough to  guide satisfactorily a household of which he knoweth  not the thoughts or the language, 2.e. that which  their hearts speak.

God ° divided the waters from the waters, peoples  from peoples,’ a searcher out and cleanser of hearts,  sitting on high and ruling in power; but it seemeth  impossible that our giants do not groan in the 10  waters beneath the earth. Thou hast heard that  all courts are restless except that one only to which  we are called. The city of which God is king en-  joyeth peace, and that is a continuing city. And |

me, my dearest Geoffrey—a member of the court 2 .':: °°

(I speak not in jest— I am a child, and know not |  how to speak’—but I speak on), me, who am in |  bondage to this court and banished to it, thou |  biddest philosophize from this place, me, who con- |  fess myself the Tantalus of this hell? How can 120  who thirst give drink to others? To be a poet |  needeth a quiet mind and one turned to but one  thing at a time. Poets must needs be ever busy  and have no need to labour or to fear, and there is  no gain in the best state of the body and of fortune '  if the man’s soul be not at peace within him ; there-  fore thou askest of me no less a miracle—for I am  in sooth a layman, one having no skill with the pen |  —than if from the furnace of another Nebuchad- |  nezzar thou shouldst bid new children sing.

es

See asin s OE  - e==

About King Herla. x1 . Poe :

HAT there was but one court similar to this of  ours we learn from old stories. These tell us  that Herla, the king of the very ancient Britons, .  was led into a compact by another king, seemingly -  @ pigmy in the lowness of his stature, which did not  exceed that of an ape. As the story hath it, this ~

Google

16 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

dwarf drew near, sitting on a huge goat—just such  a man as Pan is pictured, with glowing face, enor-  mous head, and a red beard so long that it touched  his breast (which was brightly adorned with a  dappled fawn skin), a hairy belly, and thighs which  degenerated into goat-feet. Herla spake to him  with no one by. Quoth the pigmy: * I, the king of  many kings and chiefs and of a people numerous  beyond all count, come willingly, sent from them  10to thee, and though I am to thee unknown, yet I  glory in the fame which hath raised thee high above  other kings, since thou art the best and the nearest  to me in place and blood, and art moreover worthy  of having me grace with high honour thy wedding as  a guest, when the King of the French giveth his  daughter to thee—an arrangement concluded with-  out thy knowledge, and lo, his messengers come this  very day. Let there be an abiding compact be-  tween us, that I shall attend thy wedding, and thou  20 mine a year later to the day.’ With these words he  turned his back with more than a tiger’s swiftness  and vanished from the king’s sight. Then the king,  returning in amazement, received the ambassadors  and accepted their terms. As he was sitting in high  state at the wedding feast, the pigmy entered before  the first course with so great a multitude of his  fellows that the tables were filled and more had to  find places without than within, in the pigmy’s own  pavilions which were pitched in a moment. From  30 these tents servants sprang forth with vases made of  precious stones, perfect in form and fashioned with  inimitable art, and they filled the palace and pavil-  ions with gold and crystal vessels, nor did they  serve any food or drink in silver or in wood. They  were present wherever they were wanted, and  offered nothing from the royal or other stores, but  a bountiful entertainment only from their own, and  thus, from the supplies brought with them, they  outstripped the desires and requests of all.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 17  Everything which Herla had prepared was left

untouched. His servants sat in idleness, for they  were not called upon and hence rendered no service.  The pigmies were everywhere, winning everybody’s  thanks, aflame with the glory of their garments and  gems, like the sun and moon before other stars, a  burden to no one in word or deed, never in the way  and never out of the way. Their king, in the midst  of the ministrations of his servants, thus addressed  King Herla: ‘O best of kings, the Lord is my 10  witness that, according to our compact, I am present  at thy wedding. But if anything that thou cravest  besides what thou seest here can be asked of me, I  shall willingly supply it; but if not, thou must not  put off thy requital of this high honour when I shall  ask for it.’ Without pausing for an answer to these  words he suddenly returned to his pavilion and  departed with his men about the time of cock-crow.  But just a year later he suddenly appeared to Herla,  and sought from him the discharge of his compact. 20  Herla assented, and having provided himself with  the wherewithal for the discharge of his debt,  followed where he was led. He and his guide  entered a cavern in a very lofty cliff, and after a  space of darkness they passed into light, seemingly  not of sun or of moon but of many lamps, to the  home of the pigmies—a mansion in every way  glorious, like the palace of the sun in Ovid’s descrip-  tion. Having celebrated there the marriage, and  having discharged fittingly his debt to the pigmy, 30  Herla, with the sanction of his host, withdrew laden  with gifts and with presents of horses, dogs, hawks,  and all things befitting venery and falconry. The  pigmy conducted his guests to the darkness and at  parting gave to them a small bloodhound, to be  carried in arms, strictly forbidding any one of Herla’s___.  whole company to dismount until the dog should ~ °  leap forward from his bearer. Then, having said  farewell, he returned to his country. When Herla  B

Google

18 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

in a short time was restored to sunlight and to his  kingdom, he accosted an old shepherd and asked for  news of his queen by name. Then the shepherd,  regarding him with wonder, thus replied: ‘° My  lord, I scarce understand thy language, since I am  a Saxon and thou a Briton. But I have never  heard of the name of that queen, save that men tell  of one so called, a queen of the very ancient Britons,  and wife of King Herla, who is reported in legends

10 to have disappeared with a pigmy into this cliff and  to have been seen nevermore on earth. The Saxons,  having driven out the natives, have possessed this  kingdom for full two hundred years.’ The king,  who had deemed his stay to be of three days only,  could scarcely sit his horse for wonder. Some of  his fellows, forsooth, heedless of the pigmy’s warn-.  ings, dismounted before the descent of the dog, and  were immediately changed to dust. But the king,  understanding the reason for this change, pro-

20 hibited, by threat of like death, any one to touch  the earth before the descent of the dog. But the  dog never descended.

Hence the story hath it that King Herla, in end-  less wandering, maketh mad marches with his army  without stay or rest. Many have seen that army,  as they declare. But finally, in the first year of the  coronation of our King Henry, it ceased, so men  say, to visit our kingdom frequently as in the past.  And then it was seen by many Welsh sinking into

30 the river Wye at Hereford. But from that hour  that wild march ceased, just as if these rovers had  handed over their wanderings to us for their own  ; peace. Butif thou wishest to hear what a cause of  ‘grief is this wandering not only in this court, but in  ‘almost all others, thou wilt be pleased to observe a  ‘silence which will be at once my satisfaction and  my due. Dost thou now wish to give ear to recent  happenings ?

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 19

Of a King of Portugal. x11 : so  HEN a King of Portugal, still alive and reign-

ing according to his will, was attacked by  many enemies and brought almost to the point of  surrender, a youth, strong of body and graceful of  figure, came to his assistance. This young man,  tarrying with the monarch, shone forth so pre-  eminent in warlike courage that his deeds seemed  quite beyond one man’s compass. He restored  peace to the satisfaction both of king and kingdom, 10  and having become, as he deserved, his lord’s chief  associate, he was above all others cultivated by him,  frequently visited, rewarded in many ways; but  mark how his happiness changed to unhappiness !  For the lords of the court, feeling that they had lost  much wonted honour from the king, declared that  the new-comer had drawn away from them just so  much favour, and as much as they saw him advanced  deeper into love, so much they complained that he  had taken from their store of royal affection. And 20  driven to a frenzy of envy, they strove the more  eagerly to degrade by their malice him whom the  highest courage had raised tofavour. They dreaded  to attack him armed or in any way aware. They  therefore sank to the lowest kind of persecution,  that is, slander, and, where they knew their lord to  be naked and unarmed, they struck. Witting well  that he was wild with the weakness of jealousy, they  sent two of their number to the king to accuse the  innocent queen of sinning with the youth—yjust as 30  the elders of Babylon maligned Susanna. As a  result, the king, wounded to the heart in the spot  where the mail-coat of wisdom did not cover him,  grieved mightily, and gave orders with headlong  haste that the very authors of the heinous charge  against the youth should cruelly and most secretly  punish him though innocent. Thus innocence was  delivered to the snarer. The betrayers, who had

Google

20 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

been ordered to keep their crime secret, wormed  their way closer to the youth by vying with one  another in kind words, in services, and in every  manifestation of love, and they thus scaled the wall  of his favour on the ladder of a feigned friendship.  They led him, as if on a hunt, into a thick grove,  far from the habitations of men, and, slitting his  throat, they left him a prey to wolves and snakes.  They reported the deed only to him whom they had

10 tricked into ordering it. As the king’s fury had not

20

30

yet subsided, he hastened home, and hurrying into  bedrooms and secret bowers, hitherto unfamiliar to  him, he drove out all others, and rushed madly upon  the queen, who was enceinte and near her time.  Bruising her both with feet and fists, he committed  at one doleful stroke a double murder. Then he  called aside the crime-stained accomplices of his  guilt, and, just as if he had exacted a proper penalty  for a threefold fault, he indulged in mighty boasts.  As though he were a man of most courageous spirit,  they lavished upon him large treasures of praise,  that they might hold fast in his madness him whom  they first made mad. Sedition was silent just as  long as the deed was not bruited abroad; but  because secret murder cannot, as they say, long be  hidden, it came at length by stealth to the ears of  the people; and the closer their mouths were kept  shut by their fear of the tyrant, so much the more  did their oft-repeated mutterings keep open the sore’  of his ill-repute. Forbidden rumour, when it once  findeth vent, is swifter than sanctioned speech, and  the wonder groweth as the tale travelleth—the more  secret the whisper, the wider the publicity! The  outcome, however, is this, that every hearer passeth  on in confidence to his friend what he received with  injunctions of secrecy from his own informant.  When the king saw his court steeped in sadness and  in a silence new and strange, and, faring forth,  observed that the city was suffering with the court,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 21

the voice of conscience presently prompted him to  fear for his reputation. In our weak human way,  he, after his deeds, was well aware of what he had  done; and when, from many mouths, he learned of  the envy through which these betrayers had led  him astray, he grieved inconsolably ; and straight-  way visited his just wrath upon the creators and  perpetrators of the crime by condemning them,  through the loss of their eyes and privy parts, to an

endless night unrelieved by fleshly pleasure, and by 10

thus sending them forth to live in the likeness of  death.

Such are the pleasures of the court and such are  the snares of devils there ; so let him who delighteth

in seeing monstrosities of any and every sort visit |  the courts of princes. And dost thou, although our -

court is the stormy mother of afflictions and nurse  of angry passions above all the rest, dost thou bid me

amid such broils poetize? Thou seemest to be

Ce a ee

goading me with the very spurs with which Balaam 20

urged the ass to. speak. Pray, with what other  goads can any one be driven to poesy? But I:  greatly fear that to me, because of my folly, will :  happen just the reverse of what happened to the ass, :  and to thee, too, just the reverse of Balaam’s ex- .  perience, so that when thou forcest me to speak I .

shall begin to bray, just as the ass spake instead of

braying, and thou wilt have made an ass of a man —

of whom thou shouldst have made a poet. I shall,

however, become an ass by thy decree. But be- 30

ware, if the blast of my braying shall build of  me a buffoon, lest the irreverence of thy request

will prove thee a man without reverence. My fear —

is of divers sorts: the meagreness of my knowledge  will accuse me; the feebleness of my tongue will  condemn me; our modern time will contemn me,  because I am still alive. By ordering me to write,  thou dost pardon the first two fears ; I am unwilling  to be rid of the third, because I wish to live. Thou

Google

22 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

_ choosest such rich stuff for me that no toil can cope  with it, no industry can do it justice—to wit, words  and deeds which, as yet, have found no place on  ' ahy page—aye, and whatever else hath come within  my ken, so striking as to awaken wonder, treated  in such wise that the reading will amuse men and  the knowledge will mend their morals. Hence I  purpose to forge nothing new, to fashion nothing  false ; but to set forth as best I may what things I  0 know from seeing or believe from hearing.

Gilbert Foliot, now Bishop of London, a master  of three tongues, Latin, French, and English, in  each very facile and fluent, hath suffered, during  this old age of his, an almost total loss of sight.  Although he hath made in the past only a few small  and brilliant treatises, he now, as if in penance for  his wasted leisure, unfasteneth his bark from the  shore, and, having ventured forth upon the mighty  sea (of letters), hasteneth to retrieve his earlier

20 delay. He hath woven with hurrying thumb a new  work upon the Old and New Testaments. Bar-  tholomew, also, Bishop of Exeter, a man old and  eloquent, is writing in the present age. Baldwin,  too, Bishop of Worcester, a person of wide learning  and wise in those things which are of God, scorneth  [to take holiday from his pen. These scholars of our  ‘time who want nothing, since they have a rich  | abundance at home and peace abroad, have begun  ‘aright and will attain a worthy end. But where  3) lieth the port for such as I with but little leisure  ' even for living ?

i

ee ee

About Guichard, a Monk of Cluny. x1

UICHARD DE BEAUJEU, father of that  Humbert who is now at war with his son,  assumed in extreme old age a monk’s habit at Cluny,  and, having acquired wealth and leisure, he mustered  all his powers (of body and mind), and directed to

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 23

one high end the talents which had been dissipated  erstwhile during the time of his warfare in the world.  He suddenly felt himself a poet, and anon in his  own language, French, he blazed forth a shining  light, the Homer of the laity. Would that I had a|  like truce from this warfare, so that the shifting rays :  of my mind’s light might not lead my footsteps into/  error. Although this monk of Cluny barely won'  for his enterprise the sanction of the abbot and  convent, he restored with armed hand to the afore- 10  said Humbert, his son, all his land which this son  had lost through the power of his enemies and  through his own weakness. Returning to the con-  vent, he was ever devoutly constant to his vows and  closed his life with a fair ending.  7  About another Monk of Cluny. xiv |  UT others fare otherwise. Far more wretched  was the fate of a noble and mighty man who,  being likewise a monk of the same place, was re-  called to arms by the same unavoidable mischance. 20  Having suffered, with a brave and lofty mind, the  many misfortunes of war, he seemed after defeat  ever born anew to battle; and, as though kindled  with reviving rage, he rushed the more keenly upon  his foes and, whether they ran or whether they  resisted, he ‘unwearied stuck to them like glue.  Although his enemies had hoped to overwhelm him  with weight of numbers, they learned that victory  goeth to fortitude not multitude. With flaming  wrath and multiplied resources they attacked him 30  unawares in a ravine between two cliffs and they  almost penned him in. For him thus trapped and  cornered there seemed no hope, no safety; hence  his enemies acted with slowness proportioned to  their confidence. But the monk, in the midst of his  foes, like a whirlwind in the midst of dust, or rather  like a tempest venting its wrath, scattered his

Google

24 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

opponents and so stupefied them by his great valour  that they saw no safety save in flight. He hung  upon their rear unwearied, with his men so few in  comparison ; and the opposing soldiers, in the effort  to save their masters from him, all became the prey  of a single monk. But one of his chief enemies,  despite a clean escape, hastened by a roundabout  way, got in front of him, and mingling with his men  went back with him unrecognized, always keeping

10 close to the monk, recking the less of his own life if  he might take the life of the other. The monk,  almost stifled with toil and sun, calling his page,  entered an arbor and laid aside his armour; and,  while the army was passing, he, without a thought of  danger, exposed himself half naked to the air under  the shelter of a lofty vine. His betrayer, having  left the road and his fellow-marchers, glided up  stealthily with furtive step and, after piercing the  monk by the cast of a deadly dart, made off again.

20The monk, knowing that he was near to death,  confessed to his page, who alone was by, and asked  that penance be imposed upon him. The attendant,  being a layman, swore that he knew not how; but  the monk, ever keen im all endeavours, said in deep  penitence : ‘Impose upon me, by the mercy of  God, dearest son, that, in the name of Jesus Christ,  my soul may be in hell doing penance even to Dooms-  day, that then the Lord may have mercy upon me  so that I shall not, in the company of the damned,

30 see his countenance full of rage and wrath.’ Then  the squire, weeping, said to him: *O master, I impose  upon thee for penance that which thine own lips  have declared here in the presence of the Lord.’  And the monk assenting with words and look  devoutly received it and died.

Here may be recalled to memory the words of  mercy which He spoke: ‘ In whatever hour the  sinner mourneth, he shall be saved.’ In what wise  was this monk able to mourn and yet did not do so ?

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 25

Whether he really omitted anything from the fitting  accompaniments we may dispute among us; and  may God have mercy on his soul !

About the Capture of Jerusalem by Saladin. xv

B iypes as to our common knowledge years of  forgiveness or of rejoicing are called from for-  giveness or rejoicing, that is, years of forgiveness  and grace, security and peace, exultation and pardon,  glory and gladness, so the year from the incarnation

of the Lord, 1187, must be called by us stormy from 10 |: -

a storm, both a tempest of the time and the tene-  brous gloom of trouble. It is a year of fear and  fighting, of burden and bereavement, of sacrilege  and sorrow, a year which the winter floods have  unceasingly sullied from the middle of May until  Septuagesima, by denying to us the yearly yields,  by choking the fruits and by producing foul, harm-  ful, and useless growths, and by spreading broadcast  dire havoc among men and beasts. Although  Neptune often, if not always, relieveth with his 20  abundance the dearth of Cybele, this year the sea  hath shut off from the land its founts of compassion,  and hath denied to its sister the wonted contribution.  Moreover, the Lord, as if forgetting His sovereign  mercy, hath added to our pain from the moral base-  ness of the time the barreénness of the land, sea, and  air; and, after releasing from hell’s chains the angel  of discord, hath allowed him whom He had bound  by virtue of His incarnation and His crucifixion to  wanton throughout the world, and to make mock at 30  Christians to his foul heart’s full desire. ‘ Moab’s  iniquity is not yet complete,’ quoth the Lord, and  He delayed its destruction until the time of the  completeness of evil, but our cup of folly will seem  so full and running-over that not only doth ven-  geance for iniquity fall upon us and ours, but the  Lord Jesus, the Conqueror of sin, is supposed to

Google

26 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

permit the revenge of Satan against His own person.  For men report that, in this same year of unhappi-  ness, the Holy City of Jerusalem was captured and  led captive by Saladin the prince of the infidels, and  was depopulated with a bloodier destruction than  Jeremiah had bewailed in his Lamentations when  he said amid his tears: ‘Its priests are groaning  and its virgins are defiled.’ In that city, priests no  longer groan nor are virgins defiled, because there  loare none. ‘Titus, the avenger (though he knew it  not) of our Lord’s wrongs, had reduced the people  (of Jerusalem) to a few remnants; whereas Saladin  destroyed them utterly root and branch by blotting  out all the Christians in the city. The sepulchre  and the cross of Christ are the prey of dogs, so weary  from overmuch feeding, and so glutted with the  blood of martyrs, that they actually admitted many  to ransom, not so much from the love of money or  from the lack of malice as through the languid after-  20 math of their madness. There was no lack of necks  to bend beneath the strokes, but of swords to deal  the blow. Moreover, the ransomed did not gain  their freedom, but those who had bought their re-  demption were given over to soldiers for their pay,  becoming mere wages and wares. All the lamenta-  tions and calamities, deaths and destructions, which  the prophets predicted for that city of very many  afflictions, all these, by its recent misfortune, the  Lord seemeth to have fulfilled with interest. Often  30in the past hath the Lord delivered it, and, in every  mad attack upon its walls, hath not forgotten to be  gracious ; but now when there are no seeds for the  future, no remnants of the past, nothing at all left,  who is there now to free it, to whom may it now  look, from whom is there now hope of pity ?. Surely  the Lord Jesus; although no one can see whence .  help can come to a thing utterly destroyed. For He  who was at once a hearing to deafness, a sight  to blindness, a life to decaying death, hath also

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES a7

taught us, through many miracles, to despair in  nothing.

The Lord, the lover of His servant David, became  a seeming enemy to him on account of the number-  ing of the people which the king had made, on the  ground that he claimed for himself the glory and  reward of victories which belonged to God, and  ascribed to himself and to his own hosts the happy  outcome of battle ; hence God through His destroy-  ing angel slew 70,000 men. It was a punishment, 10  not a vengeance, in that it humbled pride, but did  not give victory to the foe or exalt the praise of  David’s enemies; nor did it stir up the hatred of  citizens against him, nor did it wound his self-  respect, nor did it inflict dishonour, nor did it take  away all that was left to him; nay, but it showed  moderation, it guided the king, it preserved the  people for the sake of posterity, and it made them  recognize in God a father, not a foe, a rod, not a  sword. There was in that city no destruction of 20  property, no alienation of wealth, no transfer of  power. The ark abode, the sacred things remained,  immunity from fear was granted to the survivors.  These numbered the dead, they bewailed and buried  them; and finally they rejoiced in the happy out-  come of unhappiness.

But what end can there ever be of this infinite  wretchedness, because the unashamed and untamed  demons, whose chains have been broken with our  Lord’s sanction, have wholly appropriated through 30  their agents or annihilated whatever there is of  honour, of good, of God? Whatever there is of  dishonour, whatever of evil, whatever is all their  . own, they have exalted and have established in the  highest security with the most permanent posses-  sion, so that their will may be done on earth as it is  in hell. The men of old time were punished, not  done to death, whereas our generation is done to  death, not punished. The feet of many have gone

Google

28 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

hence, and the steps of many more have slipped  because they were not aware that our Jerusalem is  neither hence nor here. We ourselves are not so,  but the more manifest the vileness of the world  1 becometh to us, who seek the heavenly Jerusalem,  ‘and the greater seem the afflictions of earth, with  ‘so much the more speed let us depart from this  \world for the next, and in the meantime let our hope  ifor the future be better and freer from the love of  16 earth.

The horse, the ox, the camel, the ass, indeed every  animal that is active, is in great haste to be freed  from the mire or to leap with every effort from the  ditch. But we shall remain stuck in the mud. It  is saner for us to be ruled by the reason of irrational  beings to whom instinct dictateth order better than  our wisdom to us. The beasts are wise; the wild  things indeed, the stag, the boar, the doe, the roe-  buck, have a fixed law and time of lying down and

20 lying together, of sleeping and watching; and they  do not transgress the times and seasons ordained.  They are never slow in sensing an enemy’s nearness,  they make their own tracks with the utmost caution  near their dens, just as if they had human wisdom,  since by these tracks they are trailed. Give them  the wisdom of Cato and of the whole Senate, they  could be no more cautious in regard to their flight.  If they are left to themselves, they live very long.  Their only food is leaf and herb, ready made by

30 nature, not softened by art. Their drink is water,  neither dear by rarity nor cheap by commonness.  Such is the unchanging course which the lives of  wild beasts run. And although the tame creatures —  who dwell with us, horses, bulls, hens, and doves,  live more unnaturally than the wild, just as if they  had contracted imperfection from us, yet by in-  stinct they observe the alternation of day and night.  Although they may indeed go frequently to excess  in the gratification of lust and in the craving for our

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 29

foods, and long for things that are unfit, yet we  exceed their excess. Wherefore (do we so err),  since brutes declare to us the virtue of abstinence,  and since there is no visible object through which  God doth not teach some kind of lesson? But  while we are habituating ourselves to the forbidden,  shunning at the same time things of large import,  we are buried in the sand, as Gregory saith, and  the multitude of our trivial offences assumeth the  semblance of serious faults. Moreover, despite the 10  unceasing instruction of Wisdom, who crieth all  precious things in the streets, we wander in un-  certain and aimless actions; and are thus carried  beyond the limits of our safety, both of soul and  body, waxing foolishly wise in the pleasures of the  flesh, although the flesh alone is ‘more unbearable  than a rich woman’ who approveth the useless and  reproveth the useful; for the flesh, together with  its confederates, the devils and the world, hath so  deluded us that we do not hold the precepts of 20  Christ for the eternal life nor the aphorisms of  Hippocrates for the temporal. By our neglect we  transgress the seasons due to both kinds of safety  (of this world and of the next), since rarely or never  do we achieve anything seasonable. We would  have been deservedly. excepted by him who  said: ‘To everything under heaven, its time and  seasons.’

We know that three persons have been raised  by God from the dead, indoors and outdoors, and 30  within the tomb—which happenings have been thus  expounded by Hildebert, Bishop of Le Mans, in a  short distich :—

‘A bad heart, death within; a bad act, death without ;

(a bad) habit, the tomb:  A girl, a boy, and Lazarus illustrate these things.’

Two women were enough to persuade the Lord, by  a few prayers, to raise one who had been dead for

Google

30 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

four days, but whom do so many thousand men and  women of the old and new order raise from the dead ?  Where is there among us that persistency in alms-  giving, fasts and prayers, with which the women,  sitting with Mary at the feet of the Lord, unceas-  ingly solicit Him, as men tell? But perchance, in  their desire to ‘ fulfil all righteousness’ in enter-  taining the Christ, they busy themselves, with  Martha, in constant service, so as to omit nothing,  10 while she alone really serveth Him, and they seek  that one thing needful less anxiously than it ought  to be sought by us. While, therefore, men are  ‘troubled about many things,’ with, as Paul saith,  ‘each one for himself,’ so, through God’s favour and  by His peculiar care, we shall be able to be raised  up, trusting in Him and not in man; and Christ,  the good man, will deliver us from the evil man.

The Origin of the Carthusians. XvI  é te Bishop of Grenoble had seen in dreams  20

seven suns come together from different  directions to the mountain called Chartreuse in the  valley of Grésivaudan and stop there. While he  was occupied in self-communing on the morrow,  with many conjectures but with no conclusion,  behold, six clerks, stately men, and a seventh, their  master, Bruno, eagerly sought this place to build  an oratory. The Bishop, rejoicing in their coming,  which seemed the happy outcome of his dream,  built for them, in the way that they wished, cells  30and a church, at his own expense, and installed  them therein with his blessings. Now, the mountain  is very lofty, and in the middle of the summit is a  valley, deep and wide, barren and uncultivated, yet  rich in springs. There are, in all, thirteen cells, one  for the prior and one for each of the other brothers.  The prior serveth to them, on the Sabbath, their  supplies for the whole sennight, bread and pulse and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 31

cole ; but on three days in the week they are content  "with only bread and water. They never eat flesh,  even when they are sick ; they do not buy fish, nor  do they eat them, unless these are given in sufficient  quantity to be distributed to all. Always in a habit  of haircloth, with a girdle, they are ever praying or  reading. No one, except the prior, is permitted to  put more than one foot outside his cell; the prior is  allowed to do so that he may visit the brothers.  On feast-days they gather in the church; they hear 10  mass, not every day, but on fixed days. They lay  no snares for their neighbours ; they neither quarrel  nor steal ; they allow no women to enter their doors,  nor do they go forth to meet women. At the re-  quest of a wealthy man within the bounds of the  bishopric, St. John de Maurienne, Chartreuse begat  from its own loins a home after its own likeness.  This, following the devil, through the promptings  of avarice, and remarking the softness and richness  of pastures, collected without mercy its wealth from 20  every possible source. It thus changed its charity  to the glow of greed, and, despite its abounding  wealth, it continued unceasingly to satisfy the  itching of its very evil intent. It encroached upon  its neighbours’ territory, and, ever on the alert to  filch a bit any or everywhere by force and theft, it  made money in every possible fashion and, whatever  the belly could contain or crave, the way thereto.  was made possible and procured the pelf. Although ,  many times chidden by the prior of Chartreuse, and 30  afterwards beaten with rods, it showed no restraint,  but, having ‘ waxed fat and grown thick,’ it kicked.  It withdrew from its allegiance and called to its aid  a mother like unto itself, the Cistercian house, which  opened to it the very heart of a most eager charity,  and, to the injury of its former mother, adopted it as  a dearest daughter, and holdeth it strenuously with  a strong hand.

Google

32 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

The Origin of the Grandmont Order. xvitI

A hae Grandmontines of Grandmont in Burgundy

trace their origin to Stephen, who imposed  upon them this condition, that the allotment of land  which they had at first received for their dwelling  should be held by them in eternal possession, but  no more; indeed they were permitted to lessen this,  but not to increase it. On this ground they should  remain encloistered. Their preceptor should be a

10 priest, who should not be allowed by any concession  to leave the enclosure. No one should go out alone.  The monks should have no possessions outside of  the monastery; and within its walls no living  creature except bees, which do not annoy the neigh-  bours. They eat what is given to them in charity  and what they are able to acquire by their own  labour within their estate. When their food is  entirely exhausted, they fast a day without food,  and then send to the nearest road two of their

20 number, who shall say to the first passer-by : ‘ The  brothers are hungry.’ If the Lord should hear  them, and thus render aid, they cease; but if not,  they continue their fast on that day, and they send  on the morrow a message to their chief priest. If he  doth not come to their aid, they cry to the Lord,  who hath not forgotten to have mercy. The lay-  brothers have duties out of doors, while the clerks  dwell indoors with Mary, recking naught of the  world. From this source a serious strife hath

30 arisen and hath reached the ears of His Holiness  the Pope: the clerks endeavour to rule both indoors  and out, the lay-brothers wish the statutes of  Stephen to stand. The strife is still undecided  by the judge, because the purse hath not won  judgment.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 33

The Origin of the Templars. xvit

KNIGHT, called Payns (Pagan) from a dis-

trict of Burgundy of the same name, came as  a pilgrim to Jerusalem. When he heard that the  Christians who watered their horses at a cistern not  far outside the gates of Jerusalem were constantly  attacked by the pagans, and that many of the  believers were slain in these ambuscades, he pitied  them, and, full of the zeal of right-doing, he tried to  protect them as far as he could. He frequently 10  sprang to their aid from well-chosen hiding places  and slew many of the enemy. In indignation at  this, the heathen stood on watch in such great  numbers that no one could face their assaults. The  Christians were therefore forced to abandon the  cistern. But Payns, who was neither sluggish nor  easy to subdue, obtained, by his prayers, aid for  God and himself, and contrived by every possible  device to acquire as his own a great dwelling within  the enclosure of the Lord’s temple from the regular 20  canons of the temple. Contenting himself with  mean garb and scanty food he, under a vow,  assumed for his fellows the full cost of horses and  armour. By preaching, by prayers, and by all  possible ways, he prevailed upon all pilgrims whom  he knew to be mighty men of arms to abide in per-  petual dedication to God’s service, or at least to live  in temporary consecration. He selected for himself  and his fellow-knights, in keeping with their arms  and their duties, the sign of the Cross and a kind of 30  shield with a distinctive device; and he enjoined  upon his companions chastity and temperance.

In these days of their beginnings, it came to pass  that a Christian knight of high distinction, and of  wide repute among the pagans, a man fiercely hated  by the kinsmen and friends of the many whom he  had slain, was, through ill-hap, captured by the  heathen and led to the stake. Among the nobles

¢

Google

34 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

present there were many bowmen eager to gain from  the king a talent apiece for each shot discharged in  revenge of the blood of their friends that the Chris-  tian had shed. The king stood near the victim,  wishing to win him to his side if he should recant,  hence he flattered him at every word and attempted  to lure him in every way; even when he saw that  the knight was unfaltering in his faith, he did not |  yet abandon his hope of winning him over, so he  10 ordered his bonds to be loosened and his person  cared for. After long efforts to make the Christian  forgo his vow, the pagan leader grieved at being  cheated of his hope. Because, however, God, for  whom the knight was suffering, had made the pagan  gracious to him, this heathen, seeking to free him  from the fear of such frightful torture, named a  pagan boy held captive by the Christians, in ex-  change for whom he promised to let him go back  under the condition of making his Lord God a  20 hostage for his return. Under this agreement the  knight went to Jerusalem, and told his king what he  had done. Then king and priest and people ren-  dered solemn praises to God for restoring to them  so distinguished an associate. But as soon as the  knight learned that the boy had died, he made ready  to return upon the appointed day. The king and  all the kingdom with one voice forbade this, and  they detained him with full absolution from the  Patriarch, all of them profusely promising masses,  30 alms, and whatever else can absolve a man from an  oath of this sort. But even though God could  seemingly be thus satisfied, the knight certainly was  not and he persisted in his arrangements for the  promised return. But his friends, when apprised  of his purpose, condemned him by common counsel  to a safe but honourable confinement until the day  of return should be past, so that, when once the  promise was broken, he should not be held further  responsible for its fulfilment. Because he hoped

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES | 35

either to escape by chance or to be released by some  special dispensation, he suffered this confinement  until he saw the day approach, when, resorting to  the device of a lie, he promised most faithfully to  remain if the Church would absolve him of his  broken pledge to the heathen. So he stepped forth  a free man amid the joy and congratulations of all ;  and on the very next night began his journey,  hastening with all his might so that the beloved  hostage (Christ) would not be held hable. Thus for 10  the nonce the knight became an especial and bound-  less cause of anxiety, since he was at once awaited  by his own king and sought by the avengers. And  although the pagan king brought upon himself that  secret derision which is the wonted lot of mighty  offenders, he had the hostage ever on his lips until  the end of the day and of his hope, when it was  granted him to greet, unexpectedly, the fleeing  knight, on foot, and completely exhausted by great  haste. The fugitive was scarcely able to speak, but 20  as soon as he found a tongue, he prayed for pardon  because he had been a laggard in fulfilling his word.  All were filled with amazement and compassion ;  and the king, delighted with the good faith of his  captive, sent him away a free man through the  grace of Christ.

A Certain Miracle. xtx

BOUT the same time a certain clerk was made  the target of the arrows of the Saracens that  he might deny the Christ. There was also standing 30  near a certain fellow who had denied Him. This  wight taunted the clerk for his foolish belief, asking  at each shot, ‘Is it good?’ The clerk, however,  made no reply. Then the man, when he observed  his fidelity, with one blow severed his head from his  body, again asking, ‘Is it good?’ And the head,  though severed from the body, yet spoke with its  own lips, and replied, © Now it is good.’

Google

36 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

These and things like them befell the early  Templars, as long as the love of God and loathing  of the world were in their hearts. When, however,  their love waned and their wealth waxed, straight-  way we heard other tales, the which also I subjoin ;  but in the first place let us hear of their earliest  lapses from poverty.

A Second Miracle. xx

CERTAIN soldier, Hamericus by name, great

10 in wealth, in reputation small, was on his  way to that military exercise which men call a  tournament. As he was faring along through a  deep grove, he heard, at the hour for morning mass,  the distant ringing of a bell, and although his com-  panions tried to dissuade him, he hastened, against  their will, to hear the mass, leaving with them his  squires and his armour. He came upon some  hermits. After the celebration of the mass, he  hurried to join his companions, hoping to overtake  20them at the second or third milestone, but, after  wandering aimlessly the whole day, at evening tide  he returned to the place of the mass. So also on the  morrow. On the third day, with a hermit acting as  his guide, he came upon his comrades on their home-  ward way, and was greeted with happy congratula-  tions. He was surprised that more than wonted  respect was shown him and suspected irony. He  therefore called aside his closest friend and asked  him how chance had favoured them in the tourna-  3o0ment. His friend replied: ‘ Well for us, thanks  to thine aid, but for our foes, ill; nevertheless they  returned to us to-day that they ‘might satisfy their  admiration for thy deeds by sight of thee; yester-  day, however, when we came back to the inn, no  one could give us any definite news of thee. Thy  squires even maintained that thou, with thy steed,  disappeared before their eyes after they had re-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 37

ceived thine armour from thee. If now thou art  eager to hear what people on the highway say of  thee, let us cover our heads and listen.’ From the  waytarers, then, they heard all round them eulogies  of Hamericus spoken by each mouth, and exceeding  praise of a man hitherto deemed none too valorous.  Great was his surprise, since he had no knowledge  of any merit, and only with difficulty did he at last  come to know that the Lord had given him a deputy,  so that his comrades might have no joy from their 10  irreverence of the mass or he have grief from his  reverence. He gave himself with all that he pos-  sessed to God and to the house of the Templars, and,  so it is said, increased them mightily.

After this, too, kings and princes, deeming their  purpose high and their life honourable, honoured  with the aid of popes and patriarchs the Templars  as defenders of Christianity, and heaped upon them  immeasurable possessions. They had what power  they would, and won whatever they wished. Nothing 20  did they lack except Jerusalem; there they took  up in defence of Christianity the sword which had  been denied to Peter in the defence of Christ. There  Peter had learned to pursue peace by patience:  some one or other taught them to defeat force by  fighting; they ‘took up the sword and they perished  by the sword.’ They tell us, however, ° All laws and  all statutes permit one to overcome force by force.’  Yes, but He abrogated that law, He who, when  Peter did strike, was not willing to command His 30  legions of angels. It seemeth, moreover, that they  did not choose the better part, since our boundaries  in those parts under their protection have ever been  narrowed, the enemy’s widened ; in the word of the  Lord, not in the speech of the sword, did the Apostles  win Damascus, Alexandria, and a great part of the  world which the sword hath lost. David, too, when  going out to Goliath, said, ‘ Thou comest to me with  arms, but I come to thee in the name of the Lord,

Google

38 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

that all the assembly may know that not with the  sword doth God save.’

No one of sound mind doubteth that the founding  of orders went forward at first in a fitting succession,  accompanied by humility ; but the greedy, in that  they eject humility, reject the teacher of virtues and  inject avarice and pride from the lake of sins. Many  endeavoured to escape with their possessions from  the poverty of their order, and when poverty was

10 put to flight, humility fled with it; among them is  the prince of pride (the devil), proud in his wealth,  whom Jesus, humble in His poverty, had cast out;  He who came not to Elijah in the ‘ wind breaking  the rocks in pieces,’ neither ‘in the earthquake,’ |  neither ‘ in the fire,’ but ‘ in the still, small voice’  for which Elijah, in the midst of his deep longing  after the scorning of His prophecies, was awaiting  with patience and with prayer. The former things  passed by, but ‘ the Lord was not in them’; the

20 voice followed after and the Lord was in it. To us  in our orders the voice hath come first : in it is the  Lord ; but those have followed in whom the Lord is  not—the Templars, with whom this chapter began ;  since they, because of their offices, are held dear by  prelates and by kings, and high in honour, they  carefully see to it that means for their exaltation are  not wanting. If‘ all the parts of the earth should  take heed and turn back to the Lord,’ according to  the prophet, what of them? If peace will come,

30 what will become of the sword ? Against peace of  this sort they are said in times past to have guarded  them well.

Concerning the Son of the Sultan of Babylon. xxt

OT long before these days, however, Nassaradin  the son of Habeis (Abecius), the Sultan of  Babylon, was captured by Knights Templars and  cast into prison—a gentle man, yea, and moreover

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 39

most renowned in various respects, in birth, soldierly  prowess, letters, and purity of mind. When he was  still free, in his own land, he was given to much  argument anent our belief and the errors of his  people, and since he saw that their rites had no firm  foundation or faith, he would have embraced Chris-  tianity had not his regard for his noble forbears  forbidden. And when he made this known with his  own lips to those who had him in chains, not only  did they not believe him, but they even turned 10  ‘deaf ears to his request for baptism. Nassaradin  promised them that, with his own forces, and with  his own plan of action, he would win for them  Babylon, the city, in sooth, of his birth, provided  only they would suffer him to be baptized. They  persisted in their hardness of heart, made of small  import the loss of his soul, and held their ears erect  for another matter. The news of this was carried  to the Babylonians, and they, recognizing their  most courageous comrade in the man who promised 20  to compass their surrender, were filled with a greater  fear, the greater their hatred had been of him as an  opponent of their law. They determined, if he were  put up for sale, as it were, to purchase him, no  matter how great the cost; they sent ambassadors,  and, when the price had been fixed, with pardonable  cunning they exchanged golden talents and golden  cups for a ware of great price (the youth), and, fear-  ing the unconquerable bravery of the man, they  received him, in accordance with the agreement, in 30  chains. In the midst of the city whither he came  he proclaimed himself a Christian and, in the face  of the revilings of the maddened citizens and their  blows, he did not fear to spread abroad the announce-  ment of his salvation. When, therefore, he was  carried to Babylon, the citizens came out to meet  him with glad acclaim, and they freed him from his  chains, honouring him as father of his country, their  lord and defender, and when they came to the centre

Google

40 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

of the city, the rest of the citizens, called by the  voice of a crier, came together in great crowds. In  a lofty spirit of harmonious exaltation they ceased  not giving to their God such thanks as if they had  been saved from the hands of the Christians, ex-  pecting to make him their commander in the defence  of the city, since they were without a leader. But  he did not suffer himself to be carried away either  by flattery or by fear of punishment, calling on the  10 Father and confessing himself a Christian, to the  great wonderment of the whole city. The leading  citizens, therefore, apart from the mob, stood as-  tounded in deep silence, and then considered with  much conflict of opinion the adoption of one of two  plans. Some there were among them who were  eager to do away with him at once, and others were.  not wanting who, out of respect for his person,  thought it most fitting to keep him shut up as one  who was mad for the nonce, but might some time  20 recover his senses. The neighbouring princes were  summoned and, learning of the occurrence, they,  too, gave voice to conflicting views. Foremost  were those who hoped that with him out of the way  they would be chosen for the defence and lordship  of the city; hence they said that, as a violator of  their law and an apostate, he should be crucified.  Those indeed who desired the welfare of the city  and its security were more prudent, and thought  that his friends and relatives should beseech him  30 out of reverence for the city, his kindly nurse, out  of regard for his noble birth, to give up his mad  belief and worship the gods of his fathers ; but this —  request, as commonly happeneth, they were able to  obtain neither by prayers nor by tears. Forth he  was led and tied to a stake; and in the same wise  as those noblest of martyrs, King Edmund and the  blessed Sebastian, he was made the mark for  missiles, and was dismissed to Christ. How he was  ‘reborn from water and the Holy Spirit’ is clear

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 41

enough, because blood is liquid and all liquid is  from water.

Concerning the Old Man of the Assassins. XXII

T likewise happened that a man of great influ-  ence—he was called Old Man of the Assassins,  because he was ruler over those who were settled  under the axis, and was also the source of the  religion and the faith of his people—asked the  Patriarch of Jerusalem for a book of the gospels,

which was sent him along with an interpreter of 10

them. The interpreter was received and the gospel  accepted with eagerness, and one from among  these people, a good and great man, was sent to  the Patriarch to bring back with him priests and  Levites at whose hands they might fully receive  baptism and the sacraments of the faith. This  man, as he was journeying homeward, was taken  in ambush by the Templars of the city and slain,  so the story hath it, lest the conversion of the

infidels result in the unity of peace. For the20

Assassins, they say, were the chief teachers of  infidelity and unbelief. The Old Man, however,  discovered the treachery, checked with the devil’s  rein his former devotion, and the Lord refrained  from doing that which he seemed to have promised.  The Patriarch could grieve and the king; neither  could punish; the Patriarch could not, because  Rome leadeth captivity to the purse and from all  places; the king could not, because their a  Templars’ ) little finger was greater than he.

The son of Jocelin, Bishop of Salisbury, Resmald  of Bath, was elected by violence to the bishopric  but not admitted to consecration by the Archbishop  of Canterbury. When he complained of this to his  father, Jocelin answered him : * Fool, fly in all haste  to the Pope with no fear or faltering, and deal him  a, good cuff with a heavy purse, and he will bend in

Google

.

pes

_ 5

AQ DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

whatever direction thou wishest.’ And so he went,  struck him, and he bent; down fell the Pope, up rose  the Pontifex (Bishop) and straightway wrote a lie  against God, at the beginning of all his letters; for  where she should have written, ° By the grace of the  purse,’ he wrote, ‘ By the grace of God.’ ‘He hath  done whatsoever he pleased.’  Let Rome, however, our mistress and our mother, ©  be the staff broken i in the water, and far be it from  ious to believe what we see. Likewise many lie  perchance concerning the lords Templars; let us  ask them and believe what we hear. What they  do in Jerusalem, I know not; with us they dwell  innocently enough.

Concerning the Origin of the Hospitallers. xxl

HE Hospitallers had a foundation of kindly  devotion, namely, to relieve the distress of  wayfarers. They began humbly; their house  seemed the especial habitation of charity; will-  2ingly they admitted strangers, and, following the  example of the Lord’s disciples, they were eager to  receive the passer-by and to shelter him. For long  they lived faithful to their trust. Without touching  the traveller’s purse they made generous contribu-  tion to him from their store, leaving naught lacking  to the desires of the sick which any attention could  gain for him, and after his recovery they restored  his money in full. Because of this reputation many  men and women contributed their property to them,  30 and very many came to them to devote their service  in tendance on the weak and the infirm. Whence  it was that a certain noble ‘ had come to minister,  although accustomed to be ministered unto.’ This  noble was washing the feet of a certain sick man  who was sorely afflicted with ulcers, and, becoming  nauseated by the offensive odour, drank without  hesitation of the very water he had used for the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES: 43

washing, that he might compel his stomach to grow  accustomed to that which had sickened it. These  caught the Lord ‘ in the still, small voice’; aye, but  there waxed great among them, owing to their  inheritances, that perverse stepmother of virtues,  greed, and behold ‘ the wind, breaking the rocks to  pieces, the earthquakes, the fire.’ In virtue of this  fire they sought their master, the Pope, and the  sacred synod of the Church at Rome, and returned  indulged with many injustices ‘ against the Lord 10  and against his anointed.’ In the Lateran Council,  held under Pope Alexander 11., the entire multitude  of bishops which this Pope had assembled, together  with the abbots and clergy, obtained with difficulty  for themselves, even though present in person, what  was little enough in the face of their privileges ;_ the  Hospitallers, on the other hand, held peace while in  our presence, but, when the Council had adjourned,  at once their lord, the purse, opened its wrinkled  lips—even though ‘ it is not love, still it overcometh 20  all things at Rome ’—and we were again made their  prey, and their privileges were more strongly en-  trenched. They prevailed, I shall not say by their  purse, but by their vestments, I shall not say by  their persons, but by their purposes in religion, over  the vestments of us priests and our purpose. ‘ For  they increase always, and we decrease.’ The life |  of the altars was first given to us by God, afterward |  it was granted by the patriarchs. We have not’!  succeeded to the inheritance of our fathers; play 80  the tradesman we may not, beg we can. The one, |  shame putteth from us, reverence doth forbid;  the other, shamefacedness denieth though our wills  consent. What compensation have we, therefore,’  and whence ? since nearly all the altars are held by  members of religious orders, scarcely any one altar  sufficing for any one clerk, and these are far greater '  in number than the altars. Although the monastery  is the prison of the clergy, and although the good

Google

Ad DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

‘Jerome saith, ‘ the axe is laid at the root of my life  unless I bring gifts to the altar,’ the orders have  changed conditions, and have obtained our means of  livelihood and all whereby we became tributaries to  ‘them from our sustenance. The monastery hath  ‘become the prison house of the monk, in which the  ‘clergy shall be confined because the monks wish it,  hunless they bring gifts to the altar. By many tricks  they supplant us and keep us from the churches.  10 When soldiers, to whom the rights of patronatus  (patronage) belong, are in actual want and seek for  aid from the stores of the Templars or the Hospit-  allers, these answer: ‘ We have the means to aid  you, but we may give nothing from the treasury of  the Templar or the Hospitaller except to our own  brothers ; nevertheless, if ye be willing to enter our  brotherhood, and to contribute somewhat of your  possessions to God’s house, ye will be freed.’ There-  fore these poor men, eager to be freed from the  20 chains in which they are fast bound, since they have,  as they think, no possession which they can lose  without hurt except the donations from the churches,  are glad to surrender these donations to the orders  that they may thus obtain their freedom. By  tricks, rather, should I say, by trifles of this sort,  they escape simony, that the Lord may not notice  by what means their houses are enriched ; the sons  and grandsons of the soldiers and, what seemeth  still more unjust, many worthy persons perish  30 sine personatu (without a benefice).

Concerning the Origin of the Cistercians. XXIV

IHE Cistercians started out from England from

a village called Sherburne. There a large  number of monks, garbed in black garments, served  under a strict abbot. Because he held them too -  closely in check, he began to be displeasing to some,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 45

and four of the malcontents fled away and sought  France, the mother of all evil. They went about,  associating with themselves seekers of privilege such  as France above all other countries doth ever breed ;  at length, during their wanderings, they fell into  want of food, and, suffering from pain and penury,  they debated for a long time what course to pursue.  They were unwilling to return; they could not live  without means. How should they seek these neces-  sities, how obtain them ? They determined finally 10  to live the life of hermits under the pretext of re-  ligion, not, however, as did Paul or Hilarion, in the  deserts of Africa or the pathless tracks of Nigra  Montana, not ‘in dens and caves of the earth,’  where there is none save God, but where those who  determine to worship mankind as God, might have  along with God kind men, and yet not have them  too close. They selected a place, therefore, suitable  for their habitation: not an uninhabitable place  did they select, but one uninhabited, fair, fertile, 20  rich in fruits, not unsuited for seeds, surrounded by  groves, bubbling with springs, a veritable horn of  plenty, a place without the world yet in the heart  of the world, far removed from men yet in the midst  of men, not wishing to know their generation but  wishing to be known by their generation, like the  maid who ‘ fleeth to the willows, aye, but is fain to  be seen ere she hideth there.’

A piece of land, therefore, poor and mean, lying  in the midst of a great grove, they obtained from a 30  certain rich man with many pretensions of innocence  and very lengthy prayers, adding God’s name to  each petition. They weeded out and cleaned the  grove, rooted out stumps and made the ground  completely level, forced furze to become fruits,  thickets to become thrifty fields, constrained rushes  to become rich-bearing vines, and in order to have  plenty of leisure for such occupations, they had to  be somewhat lax in their devotions. For a long

re

Google

46 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

time ere they came Mary remained seated as though  she had no pity for the toils of Martha ; among them  Mary was more kindly and rose to aid Martha in her  trouble. Other orders ‘ arise at midnight to give  thanks to God,’ as the Psalmist saith, and when  wearied, sleep after the hour (canonical hour); these,  on the other hand, imposing on themselves a harsher  and stricter rule, determined to be instant in watch-  ing and in prayer after the hour until daybreak.  10 However, after some time, this regulation seemed  to be too hard, and because it was base to change the  rule, they preferred to change the hour from mid-  night to dawn that one canonical hour might end  with the night, to avoid any tampering with the  rule. Others arise before the morning star, that  thus preferably, ° when the morning star ariseth, we  may praise God on high,’ and, having celebrated the  hours and the mass, gather together for the toil of  the day. These four monks decided upon a regula-  20 tion stricter and more exacting that that of the  blessed Basil or Benedict: they abstained from  covering of skins or linen or threads or any sort,  content with undyed wool, and so earnestly did they  differentiate themselves from the black monks that  they wore white garments (as the order still doth)  in contrast to their black. No monk fed upon flesh  or blood before the times of Charlemagne, who by  his earnest prayers won from Pope Leo permission  for the cismontane monks to use blood, obtaining  30 for them lard oil, because, unlike the transmontane,  they did not have laurel oil. Of this indul-  gence, however, these did not avail themselves, but  followed the narrowness of the old path, living  strangers to the taste of flesh ; swine, however, they  raise in many thousands, from which they sell the  hams, perchance not all; the heads, the shins, the  feet they neither give away, nor sell, nor cast out ;  what becometh of them God alone knoweth. In  regard to their fowls, also, in which they are passing

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES AY

rich, it is likewise a question between God and  them.

They refused the possessions of the Church and  all unjust acquisitions, living as they did like the  Apostle by the labour of the hand, putting from  them all greed, but only for the time; I know not  what aim they set themselves or what promises they  made in regard to fruits, but whatever their pro-  mises, they were followed by the fruits from which  grow the trees we fear. At that time they were 10  lowly and frugal in all things, doing naught out of  greed or self-seeking, and denying comfort to no  sort of misery ; to ‘no one did they do what they  would not have others do to them, rendering to  none evil for evil,’ but they guarded innocence from  defilement as they would balsam from the mire;  one and all they observed the Sabbath, and wished  others to do as they did. So they grew to be a very  great company, and came to have many monasteries.  Now the names of their monasteries always contain 20  some reference to divinity, for example, *‘ The-House-  of-God,’ ‘ The Lord’s Valley,’ ‘ Safe-Haven,’ ‘ Path-  way-to- Heaven,’ ‘ Valley - of- Miracles,’ ‘ Lamp,’  * Valley-of-Light.’

From this order came Bernard, who straight-  way waxed bright among his followers, or rather  above them, as Lucifer shineth among the stars of  night. He was a man ready of speech, who was  wont to have carriages go from city to city and from  castle to castle, so that in them true believers might 30  be brought to him in the cloister. By God’s spirit  was this man borne through all the land of France,  working those miracles of which Geoffrey of Auxerre  wrote and which are well worthy of your belief. I  was at table with the blessed Thomas, then Arch-  bishop of Canterbury. There sat with us two  abbots of the white monks (Cistercians) who re-  ported many miracles of the man I just mentioned  —Bernard, I mean. The discussion arose from the

Google

48 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

reading of a letter of Bernard’s on the condemnation  of master Peter (Abelard), the leader of the Nomin-  alists, whose errors were greater in the field of dia-  lectics than in that of Holy Writ ; for in the second  his heart was in his exposition whereas in the first  he was working against his inclination, and he led  many into the same difficulties. There was also  read a letter of Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, to  Pope Eugenius, who had been a monk of his, and the

10only one of his order to obtain the chair of Peter.  This letter contained a statement that master Peter  (Abelard) was as proud as Goliath, that Arnold of  Brescia was his standard-bearer, and much more  to the same evil import.

With this as a beginning, the abbots seized the  occasion to praise Bernard and to laud him to  the skies. Then John Planeta, a reluctant and  distressed listener to this praise of the good master,  said: ‘I saw at Montpellier a miracle at which

20many marvelled’; and on being pressed to tell  about it, he went on: ‘ To him who is, as you justly  say, a doer of wondrous works, there was brought at  Montpellier a man in chains possessed of a devil, that  he might heal him. The master sat on a large she-  ass, and he admonished the unclean spirit, amid the  silence of the people who had gathered there, and  finally said, ‘“‘ Loosen his bonds and let him go free.” |  But the man possessed of the devil, when he felt he  was free, began to cast stones at the Abbot (Bernard)  30 with all his might, and, when the Abbot at once took  to his heels, the other pursued through the streets as  far as he could, and, even when he was caught by  the people, he kept his eyes, since his hands were  tied, fast fixed on the Abbot.’ This tale displeased  the Archbishop, and he said to John almost threat-  eningly, ‘Is this the sort of miracles you tell about? ’  Then John replied, ‘ Those who were there at the  time said that this miracle was worth remembering,  because the sick man was kind and gentle to all, and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 49

dangerous to the hypocrite only, and this hath so  far been to me (an example of) the punishment of  presumption.’

In like manner two white abbots were conversing  about the aforesaid man in the presence of Gilbert  Foliot, Bishop of London, praising him for his  mighty miracles. After unfolding many of them,  one of the abbots remarked: ‘ Although these  tales which are told of Bernard are true, yet I was

present on one occasion when his miraculous power 10

failed him: a certain man from the borders of  Burgundy asked him to come and heal his son; we  came, and came upon him dead; Master Bernard  bade the body be carried into a private room, and  ‘‘shutting every one out he lay upon the boy,” and  after a prayer arose; but the boy did not arise, for  he lay there dead.’ Thereupon I remarked, ° He  was surely the most unlucky of monks; for never  have I heard of a monk lying down upon a boy

without the boy arising immediately after the monk.’ 20

The abbot blushed, and most of the company went  out for a laugh.

It is also public property that, after this lapse of  the power of the aforesaid Bernard, there happened  a second which did not add to his reputation.  Walter, Count of Nevers, died in Chartreuse and  was buried in that place. Thereupon Master Ber-  nard flew to the tomb and, when he had lain pros-  trate in prayer for a long time, the prior urged him

to come to lunch, for it was the hour. To him 30

Bernard said, ‘I shall not go hence until brother  Walter speaketh to me,’ and he cried out with a  loud voice saying, ‘ Walter, come forth.’ But  Walter, because he did not hear the voice of Jesus,  did not have the ears of Lazarus and failed to  come.

Since the name of Arnold of Brescia was men-  tioned above in our discourse, let us tell, if you  please, who he was, just as we heard the story from

D

Google

50 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

a man of his time—a great man too, and one of high  learning, Robert of Burneham. This Arnold was  summoned after Abelard by Pope Kugenius, was  allowed no defence, and, in his absence, was con-  demned, not for his writings, but for his ‘preaching.  In the matter of birth this Arnold was high-born and  noble, in the matter of learning he was without a  peer, in the matter of piety he was chief, permitting  himself no indulgence in food or raiment, save when  10 the strictest necessity compelled. He went about  preaching, ° seeking not the things which are his but  those which are God’s,’ and he came to be loved and  respected by all. When he went to Rome, the  Romans heard his teaching with reverence. He  finally came to the papal court and saw the tables of  the cardinals loaded with vessels of silver and gold,  and the dainties at their feasts; in the presence of  ‘their lord the Pope he chided them kindly, but they  ‘bore it unkindly and cast him out; he returned to  20 the city and began to teach without flagging. The  people of the city assembled to hear him and ‘ heard  (him gladly.’ It came to pass that the people heard  ithat Arnold had preached a sermon on the contempt  of rewards and riches into the ears of the cardinals  in the presence of their lord the Pope, and had been  - ,east out by the cardinals, so they gathered before  ... the court (Curia) and cried out against the Pope and  ~ ‘the cardinals, saying that Arnold was a good man  “ ‘and just, they greedy, unjust, and wicked, men who  eee not ° the light of the world’ but the lees, and  much else after the same manner, and scarcely did  they withhold their hands. After this outbreak had  been with difficulty quieted, ambassadors were sent  to the Emperor, with the. Pope’s denunciation of  Arnold as excommunicate and a heretic, and these  messengers did not withdraw until they had him  hanged.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 51

- Passing Observations of Walier Map on the Life  of the Monks. xxv

OTH the white and black monks recognize  their prey as a hawk recognizeth a frightened  lark; their prey is those soldiers whom they can  pluck, or those men who are prodigal of their pro-  perty, or who are shackled by debts. These they  entice, and at their own firesides, far from the noise,  far from the hostelries of good cheer, that is, the  public inns, they introduce them to abundant 10  dainties; they urge them with flattering words to  visit them often, and promise them daily sustenance  of the same sort, and a countenance always joyful ;  to the hungry they show their storehouses, and pour  forth before them for their seeing all they can of the  treasures of the monastery; they fill them with  hope, promise to supply their wants, hurry them to  the altars, teach them to whom they are dedicated,  and with how many celebrations they ceaselessly  honour these shrines; they make them their 20  brothers in the chapter and partners in their prayers,  thence lead them, as saith Virgil, ‘ into shelter if it  is winter, if harvest time, into the shade.’

The black monks (Benedictines) who consider the  blessed Saints Basil and Benedict their founders,  _ have found in our times new imitators who, although  they profess to be of the same order, have, in their  more fervent zeal, added of their own accord some  stricter rules; this order (Cistercian) we call white  or grey monks without distinction. The black 30  monks follow a rule that they must wear the cheap-  est garments of the region in which they live, and  only by special dispensation can they wear the skins  of lambs; the rule of the white order is that they  may wear the natural wool of sheep only, without  any artificial colouring, and although they deride the  black monks for their use of skins, they more than  match them by their use of a large number of soft

Go gle

2 pb  . vn or of" : :

~  a

52 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

shirts, which, if they were not kept from the hands  of dyers, would become precious scarlet for the  delight of kings and princes. The black monks  listen to the Master’s word as did Mary, sitting at  His feet, and are not permitted to go forth to toil ;  the white, although they sit at His feet, go forth to  work, performing with their own hands all sorts of  farm labour within their enclosure. Outside their  walls they are mechanics, weeders, shepherds,

10 traders, most efficient in each sphere; they do not

have a neatherd or a swineherd except he be one of  their own number, nor do they allow any, except  their own converts, to perform the lowest and mean-  est services, or even the women’s work, such as  milking and the like; to all duties they are all  things, whence ‘ the earth is full of their ownership,’  and although they should not, in accordance with  the Gospel, ‘ take thought for the morrow,’ they keep  this great accumulation of riches with the cautious

20 design of freeing themselves from worry and of thus

ascending the ark with Noah, to whom no hope was  left outside. They submit themselves to one auth-  ority, namely the Cistercian abbot, who hath the  power to change whatever he will according to his  pleasure. They refrain from setting before their  guests the food from which they abstain, but neither  do they allow to be brought within the enclosure  that which they do not give. Their abundant pos-  sessions are a proof of their abstinence, since one of

30 greed’s hands is niggardliness. They accept the

loan of oxen and plough, they cannot lend their own.  They are allowed to better their lot, but in no way to  make it worse; they are wards, they are servile to  their superiors, annoy their neighbours, confiscate  the possessions of those whom they have overcome,  attach, under the pretence of some virtue or other,  whatever may promote their own advantage. If  thou raisest a question concerning the trickery of  any one of them, such a ready reason is at hand that

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 53

it could convict the living gospel of falsehood. He  who out of pity hath invited them to share his land  should be, it seemeth, their closest friend, but he is  driven out. ‘Do not that to another which thou  dost not want done to thyself,’ this precept hath no  terror for them, and the same is true of many other  precepts.

They have for every act especial excuses which  they themselves know, but there is one which is of  universal application ; to give free play to violence 10  or robbery or to whatever passion their greed  prompteth, they say, “ We despoil the Egyptians,  enrich the Hebrews,’ as if they were the only ones  whom God led forth out of darkness. Exceeding  narrow do they make God’s sway if all except them-  selves are mad. If they, of whom the Prophets  spake not, nor the Lord Jesus, nor the Apostles,  have come upon a way untrod by these, either God  hath begrudged this to us, or knew it not, or it is  evil. And yet we must beware, saith the Lord, of 20  false prophets, who come, as these come, ‘ in sheep’s  clothing,’ but within are, even as these, ‘ ravening  wolves,’ who, standing, as these stand, praying ‘ on  the corners of the streets,’ ° make broad their phy-  lacteries,’ as do these, and ‘enlarge the borders of  their garments,’ as do these. But he who dwelleth  in heaven doth not make broad his phylactery, he  who said, ‘ God forbid that I should glory save in the  cross of our Lord Jesus Christ’: he doth not glory  in the cross of Christ who crucifieth others that he 30  may win glory from this act; but exceeding broad,  it seemeth, dothey make their phylacteries who claim  that they alone are Hebrews, all others Egyptians.

With the Pharisee they say, ‘ We are not as other  men are’; they do not say, ° Tithes of all we possess  we give.’ With him they say concerning each one  of us, ‘ not as this publican,’ and we say, ‘ God be  merciful to us sinners.’ If God hath harkened unto  pride and ‘ hath not regarded low estate,’ they are

Google

54 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

truly Hebrews and we Egyptians ; if, however, they  are Israelites indeed, in them is charity, 2.e. love for  God and for their neighbour; he who persecuteth  his neighbour, ‘ how dwelleth the love of God in  him?’ Twofold is this unity of love, and God hath  granted it to man and man to God, that it may  vaunt itself inseparably in respect to the human and  the divine, and that neither earthly love nor heavenly  love can please without the other. There is no one.  10 who doth not take delight in the kind act of another;  no one, therefore, who hath not a neighbour. How-  ever far away they who have taken them in may  keep them, still they have them as neighbours, and  if * they hate them, how can they love God ?’ But,  they say, they love in the Lord; and they define  this expression ‘ love in the Lord’ as the desire for  the salvation of their neighbour’s soul: they ex-  clude all help for his body. This is the way surely  in which I love all my enemies, because I would that  20° they would free themselves from their bodies and  be together with Christ.’ No one have I ever hated  so bitterly but that I forgave him all when he lay  dying. Hence, without fear I pray, ‘ Forgive us  our debts as we forgive our debtors,’ because in my  case my hatred hath departed with my enemy and  I forgive him all, so that I desire him to glory * in  Abraham’s bosom.’ But they, on the contrary,  persecute and still love. ‘ To shut up the bowels of  compassion when his brother hath need,’ what is  30this ? Is it not to torture him further in his afflic-  tion? ‘ How sitteth’ love in robbery, that love  which ‘ doth not behave itself unseemly’? How  abideth it in pride, since ‘it is not puffed up’?  How take violently for itself that which belongeth  to another, since ‘ it seeketh not its own’? How  be desirous of gain, since ‘it envieth not’? How  greedily keep its neighbours from their native  bounds, since ‘it is kind’? How endure not its  neighbour, since ‘it is long-suffermg’’? If they

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 55

have love, whence is it? Mean is the hospitality  they afford if they rob it of all its good qualities and  then take it under their roof. If they have not love,  as it seemeth—and God forbid that it be so—they  lack the root of virtue, and are dry twigs. But if  they do have love without kindliness (would that it  were not so), and without long-suffering, which are  its peculiar wings, love cannot, if robbed of the  beauty which is its own, reach the heavens, and the  ugliness of another, which it hath put on, will bring 10  to pass that its pudenda are revealed.

They say, ‘ The earth is the Lord’s,’ we alone * are  the children of the Highest,’ and except us there is  no one worthy to possess it! They do not say,  * Lord, I am not worthy to be called thy son, I am  not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof’ ;  they do not say, ‘ I am not worthy to stoop down and  unloose the latchet of thy shoes’; they do not say  that ‘ they were counted worthy to suffer shame for  His name,’ but to possess all things. They do not 20  say that they are those ‘ of whom the world is un-  worthy,’ but ‘ those who are worthy of the world.’  If they be ‘ peace-makers ’ they are ‘ sons of God’ ;  in what way ‘ peace-makers’ I fail to see, be-  cause peace doth not abide in robbery. If they be  ‘sons of God’ (and sons they are), they are, therefore,  gods, because ‘ I have said, ye are gods, and all of  you children of the Most High.’ At least they are  not gods of the Christians whom they despoil, but  of the Gentiles who alone with them continue to 30  persecute us, after the Jews, because of their im-  potence, have ceased. Let them learn, therefore,  what they are from the prophet who saith, * All the  gods of the nations are idols, but the Lord made the  heavens.’ In Him who made the heavens do we put  our trust, because He is a God who ‘ hateth all  workers of iniquity.’ Our God is not as theirs : our  God is ‘ the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the  God of Jacob,’ and is not a god newly made; but

Google

56 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

theirs is new. Ours saith, ‘ He who doth not leave  all for my sake, is not worthy of me’; their god  saith, ‘ He who doth not gain all for his own sake,  is not worthy of me’; ours saith, ‘ He that hath two  coats, let him impart to him that hath none,’ theirs,  ‘if thou hast not two coats, take from him that  hath’; ours, ‘ Blessed is he who considereth the  poor and needy ’; theirs, “ Blessed is he who maketh  the poor and needy.’ Ours saith, ‘ Take heed to  10 yourselves lest at any time your heart be over-  charged with the cares of this life, lest that day  come upon you unawares’; theirs saith, ‘ Take heed  to yourselves lest your purse be not overcharged in  the midst of the cares of this life, lest “‘ poverty as  one that travelleth ’? come upon you.’ Ours saith,  ‘No man can serve God and Mammon’; theirs saith,  * No man can serve God without Mammon.’  There are among them many contradictions of  this kind, meseemeth, which no one can explain.  20 They are ordered, among other things, to live in a  desert place, which, to be sure, they may either find  as such, or else make; whence it is that in whatever  region thou mayst have invited them, they seek out  a thickly populated spot and of this in a brief time  they forcibly make a desert, and * if not justly, then  do they so some other way.’ If an unrighteous lord,  contrary to the claims of orphans, widows, religious  orders, giveth them lands, they enter upon these  gladly ; their worry is not how to obtain them, but  30 how to keep them, and because the rule over parish-  ioners is forbidden by their rules, they tear down  dwellings, churches, cast out parishioners, overturn  the altars of God, are not ashamed to overthrow and  to level everything to the path of the plough, so that  if thou shouldst see the place which thou hadst  seen in times past, thou couldst say, ‘ Now is a field  of grain where Troy once stood,’ and that they may  have isolation, they cause desolation ; and although  they may not possess parishioners of their own, they

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 57

may ruin those of others; saving is not permitted  by their rule, destruction is prescribed. Every in-  vader in some measure showeth pity and forbear-  ance, for he either maketh his own that which he  doth invade and thus saveth it, or else, having  despoiled it, he leaveth it to the inhabitants for some  hope on their return; these Cistercians are careful  to see to it that there will never be a return. Ifa  heartless robber starteth a fire, iron surviveth, and  a wall, and the fields for their owners’ return ; what- 10  ever perisheth in a pit, whatever is devastated by a  flood, whatever is spoiled by taint of air, there is  still preserved in it some use for its owners; only  the inroad of this religion leaveth nothing. If a  king winneth a kingdom from a king, either by  sleight or by sword, no matter how much of a tyrant  he may be, the inhabitants of the kingdom abide,  he doth not cast them out; on the lands of their  fathers they may enjoy some happiness, and the

death of the tyrant or some other release from their 20 _

misery they can patiently await from God within  the bounds of their ancestral acres; those who are  caught in an invasion of these men can be sure that  an exile threateneth them which will last for ever.  At other times some persons, for definite reasons,  are deported, these men, without reason, exile all ;

whence it happeneth that those who are weak from  illness or old age decline, because of lack of food,

the more quickly, the less support there is remaining ~~  for them, for they are left alone, and, whithersoever 30 —

food calleth them in their hunger, they, leaving their  parents and their neighbours, seek it everywhere,  if they are able, and rush into every hazard, nor do  they in the dire distress of their starvation fear any  approach of death. Some of them are caught in  acts of plunder, others in thefts, and since they  despair of being rescued from their wretched state,  they scorn life, reckon little any punishment thou  mayst inflict upon them, and actually summon

Google

“4

58 | DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

death to cut the throat which hath so long thrust  them into all suffering, gladly leaving the light of  day which their complete penury with its bitter  pangs hath made most pernicious. How monstrous,  how savage, how devilish a pest is hunger! How  pitiless, how abominable, how execrable the com-  pulsion which, without reason, forceth Christians  into this prison! Dacian and Nero managed  matters with more gentleness, and, as bitter suffer-  10ing, endured for a space, cometh to an end more  quickly than a long line of ills, so, 1t seemeth, there  was more pity in their severity than in this which  causeth poverty—a poverty which holdeth nothing  In reverence and hath naught of virtue, which is  harrowing in its crimes, filthy in its vices, always  irreverent towards God, and which foolishly raveth  against every becoming thing; a poverty which  putteth swords in pirates’ hands, maketh cities base  with bandits, and groves thick with thieves in  20 armour, changeth lambs into wolves, driveth wives  from the marriage bed into whoredom. Since in it  are found all kinds of sin, it hath more injustices  than justice hath penalties, more offences than this  hath fulminations, more ‘ human targets than this  hath arrows.’ Good God! Of what sort are thy  sons who cause this thing in thy daughters and sons  of light ?  Possessions, inheritances, of monasteries and of  churches, which have been owned from the be-  30 ginning, one may say, and obtained justly, they  seize for themselves, declaring that these things  belong to them, since they ought to have ‘ all things  in common ’ with all Christians. Rome, then, they  praise as their benefactress ; to her they have given  freely that they may enjoy the indulgence of greed ;  * I have been young and am now old, yet have I not  seen ’ a poor man gain an indulgence, nor “ his seed ’  obtain special privilege contrary to the common  right, because ‘in whose hands is mischief, their

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 59

right hand is full of bribes,’ and because, ‘ if thou  bringest us no profit, Homer, off thou goest.? They  say that the Pope is master of all churches, and that  it is permitted him ‘ to root out and to destroy, to  build and to plant’; they assert that they, by his  authority, are the proper owners of the profits of  their pillaging: this argument, if it is an argument,  I have seen employed on other occasions. The lords  of Limoges refused to pay to their overlord, the  King of England, his just taxes and the services 10  they owed him. The king, therefore, brought in  his army and ordered the entire country to be laid  waste. Some out of charity spared the poor, others,  who took pleasure in this injustice, made every- |  thing their prey, saying, ‘ not pillage, not violence,  but peace and obedience are in our acts; the earth  is our lord the king’s, we are his instruments;  our reward is this: they are unworthy who dis-  parage the king unjustly, but we are worthy who,  in the sweat of our brow, carry out his orders.’ 20  Is not this the voice of those who carry off our  tithes, who call themselves Hebrews, us Egyptians,  themselves the children of light, us of darkness ?  We do certainly confess with tears that we are un-  worthy of all good, and knowing that ‘ our Master  eateth with publicans and sinners,’ and ‘ did not  come to call the righteous but sinners,’ we repent  and pray to Him for pardon. Since, therefore,  it is not permitted to do violence, even to the  heathen or to force them to faith, how ought they 30  whom God hath taken up be cast out and robbed ?  * A contrite heart, a broken spirit’ our * God doth  not despise,’ He who in His mercy said : ‘ joy shall  be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth more  than over ninety and nine just persons which need  not repentance.’ Our God calleth sinners to Him  and receiveth them; these men despise them and  cast them out; ‘ He casteth not out him that  cometh to Him,’ they turn away those who come.

Google

60 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Concerning them is it spoken in all truth, * by their  fruits shall ye know them.’ Let us hear of their  fruits, their excellent fruits: in the first place they  hold out to the poor open hands, but there is little  in them; ‘ they disperse indeed and give,’ but they  do not refresh, because each one receiveth only a  bit, and since they do not enrich the poor in accord-  ‘ance with their own wealth, or in accordance with  the poor’s need, their giving seemeth to be done

10 with their left hand, not with their right ; and yet,  granted that they act justly in all things, in nothing  for show, yet will they never recompense the Master  for what they have taken from Him, since, of all  their chapters there is none, or, at the least, only a  few, which hath not caused more poverty than it  hath relieved. They can be hospitable to each  other, that is, to those within their own order,  without a murmur, but ‘ not to us, O Lord our  God, not to us.’ Those whom they receive through

20 fear of their power or to plunder, they appease with  all the appurtenances of their pantry ; smiling faces  and happy words are there, and so kindly and so  generously do they open their bosoms, so unstint-  edly, so foolishly do they pour forth their all, that  thou wouldst believe them to be angels, not men,  and on thy departure thou wouldst sing their  praises. But we, Egyptians and wanderers, who  for God’s sake only are received, claiming nothing  except charity, we shall never of our own will return

30 to them as long as any portal or purse is open to us  anywhere else. After the vesper hymns they never  invite us, or lead us in, or permit us to enter their  hospice, although, after long journeying, all the  more necessary is rest and refreshment at such a  time, and refusal harder to bear.

In regard to their clothing and food and daily toil,  those to whom they are kind, because they can do  them no evil, say that their clothing is not sufficient  to protect them against cold, or their food against

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 61

hunger, that their toil, however, is unremitting.  And these friends of theirs use this argument to  convince me that they are not greedy, because their  acquisitions are not sought for their own ease.  QO, how easy the answer to such an argument !  Money-lenders and those who are slaves to greed,  do such not clothe themselves most cheaply and  support themselves meanly ? And it is their trea-  sure which the greedy clutch when death cometh,  they gather wealth not to gain ease with it, but to 10  gloat over it, not to use it, but to hoard it up. If  thou shouldst argue in regard to toil, cold, food, the  Waldenses are less indulgent to themselves in such  matters than are the Cistercians; the latter have  many shirts, the former none, neither of them have  skins; the Cistercians do not use linen, nor the  Waldenses wool except in their short and simple  cloaks; those have shoes and boots, these walk  about with bare feet and ankles; those do not eat  flesh, nor these bread; those give alms, these have no 20  one to whom to give, for, since they share their food  in common, no one among them asketh for food,  but helpeth himself without restriction; and yet  the Waldenses, with less respect and more open  violence than the Cistercians, entice men and slay  them; the former live always in tents or under the  open sky, the latter ‘make themselves glad in their  ivory palaces.’

And in regard to this scantiness of clothing, theirs  is a curious rule, meseemeth, concerning the use of 30  breeches; these they must wear in their service at  the altars, and, after they have withdrawn, they  lay them off; this is a respect which is shown to  sacred vestments, but these breeches are not sacred,  nor reckoned among the apparel of priest or levite,  nor are they blessed; they serve as an emblem,  however, and cover the privy parts, thus seeming  to mark the secrets of love and to prevent their  disclosure. Their reason for not always wearing

Google

62 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

breeches is, as a certain man explained to me, that  they may, forsooth, suffer from cold in those parts  that their passion be not aroused and they be not  impelled to adultery. God forbid! And _ their  undershirts are cut off short below the belt, leaving  the uppermost portion, and thus those regions of the  body which should be concealed are not covered by  an honourable garment in accordance with a religious  scruple which is approved elsewhere. Our lord  10 King Henry 11. not long ago was riding in front of  his endless number of soldiers and priests, talking  with Master Rericus, a great monk and an upright  man; the wind was blowing hard, and suddenly a  white monk, who was hastening his steps along the  street, saw them and made haste to turn aside; ‘ he  dashed his foot against a stone,’ nor on this occasion  ‘ was he borne up by the angels’; down he fell in  front of the king’s horse, the wind lifted his garment  round his neck, so that, before the unwilling eyes  20 of the king and of Rericus, was displayed the bare  truth of his privy parts. The king, as one with a  never-failing supply of good-breeding, pretended  not to see, turned his head away, and held his  peace. Rericus, however, exclaimed aside, ‘ Curses  on a religion that bareth the rump!’ I heard his  remark and was sorry that reverence was thus  derided, although the wind was within its rights  in falling upon regions exposed toit. If, however,  the Cistercians can endure scarcity of food, rough  30 clothing, hard toil, and such single inconveniences  as they describe, but cannot contain their lust, and  need the wind to act as a check for Venus, it is well  that they do without breeches and are exposed to  the breezes. I know that our flesh, although it is  of earth and not of heaven, doth not need such  shields for these battles, because, ‘ without Ceres  and Bacchus, our Venus is chilled’; but, perchance, —  the goddess hurleth her attack more boldly against  those enemies whom she knoweth are more firmly

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 63

guarded. However this may be, the fallen monk  would have arisen with more dignity if his body  had been more closely confined.

I cannot forget that they are Hebrews and we  Egyptians. In one respect, surely, we are Egypt-  lans, in that we are despoiled; yet they are  Egyptians of their own free will in that they them-  selves have handed over their possessions, we against  our will, in that with full knowledge and wisdom  we suffer pillage. But they in many respects are 10  Hebrews: in their despoiling, as in Egypt, in their  reviling, as at the rock Horeb, and again at the  ‘ waters of contradiction,’ in their greed, as when,  contrary to the command of Moses, they did not  save the gomer against the morrow, ‘in their suffo-  cating with their spittle the righteous Ur,’ and in  many other ways, whence the saying that * for forty  years long they do err in their hearts.’

Let us in addition add a few words concerning the  deeds of the Hebrews, passing over, however, mucho :‘  of the bitter chronicle. Let us pass over their re-  moval by night of the tree which marked the  boundary of their lands beyond the fields of their  neighbour, an Egyptian soldier at Coxwold—a story  told by Roger, Archbishop of York. Let us not  mention the meadow of another Egyptian which,  before the fall of the evening dew, these Hebrews  sprinkled with salt and let in their rams upon it;  these, in their greedy search for the salt, tore up  during the night all growing things by the roots, and 30  made the field barren for several years that it might  in the meantime be sold to them. Nor need I  mention how their Hebrew brothers of this same  region, a large band of them with many wagons,  one night scattered unexpectedly their nearest  neighbour’s field with dung, and how, when on the  morrow the Egyptian expressed surprise that so  many of their wagons had trespassed on a field that  had always been his, they jeered at him as one mad

Google

64 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

who dared to call his a field belonging to their  brother Hebrews who had worked it for many days  at the cost of unceasing toil. Since he had never  hitherto made accusation against them, they had  appearances on their side, and they made them-  selves secure from interference, these white-clad  squatters, before every judge, until the heir of the  soldier, driven on by his raging anger, employed fire  to wreak his vengeance on all of them and their

10 houses. Let us moreover say not a word concerning  the duplication, in exactly the same words, and  concerning the same acres, of a deed which they  fraudulently obtained from a foolish clerk without the  owner’s knowledge, to take the place of the original  which, they said, had been lost: they then rented  other fields in exchange for the first, but from the  same owner, and surrendered one of the duplicate  deeds, keeping the other; when-the man who had  sold the land, or rather rented it, died, they claimed

20 from the heir, on the strength of the remaining copy  of the bill, the property they had first obtained.  In the presence of our lord the king they were  convicted and showed their confusion in their usual  way by jesting when they should have wept; they  were let go by the king, for God’s sake, against God.  I must pass over also the discovery that they held  at Neath sixteen acres of land belonging to Earl  William of Gloucester which, after the delivery of  the deed, was increased to one hundred.

30 These acts we need not hold in our memory, be-  cause they are clever devices, and, to use their words,  deeds done with good intent ; for they do them not  to harm others but to profit themselves. Since,  however, the Egyptians must be despoiled by all  means, these acts are thus far pardonable, that the  story of them telleth nothing of bloodshed and hence  is less dreadful. At Woolaston Wood, however,  they hanged an Egyptian and, imitating Moses, hid  ‘him in the sand’; the poor fellow had crept up to

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 65

their fruit orchard to satisfy his hunger, and found  therefrom, at the hands of the brothers, eternal  respite. Of their later acts the following must not  be concealed, in order to show how little was their  dread of such deeds, and how little restraint they  put upon themselves in doing anything that might  result to their advantage. There was a neighbour  of these Hebrew brothers, a soldier of the Egyptians,  who had been settled on a part of their possessions,  and whom they could not remove either by prayers 10  or promises. They sent, therefore, to the soldier a  traitor armed with the pretext of seeking shelter in  the name of Christ ; by him they were admitted at  night, wearing long cloaks and armed with swords  and clubs; and they slew the Egyptian together  with his children and his whole household, except his  wife. He had defended her and her nursing babe  as long as he had power to stand, and thus had  enabled them to escape. She fled to her uncle—a  day’s journey away—and he, having gathered to- 20  gether her parents and neighbours, arrived on the  third day at the place whither often he had come  with his friends. Where there had been buildings,  gardens, and large trees, he found a level and well-  ploughed field, no sign and no traces of a human  habitation, ‘ because they were not.’ His suspicions,  however, were not allayed, and he forced an entrance  into the gate which ‘ did not open to them of its own  accord,’ and saw trees which had been torn up by  the roots and cut into great logs. Thus confirming 30  his former belief, he reported the affair to the judges.  The wife of the Egyptian soldier, moreover, gave  the names of several of the Hebrews, and, more  important, the name of the layman who had opened  the house tothem. This person was arrested by the  judges and, losing his self-control under the ordeal  of water, confessed to the truth of the charges. He  expressly named the Hebrews who had done the  deed, adding that they had given him for his part in  E

Google

66 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

it absolution from all his past sins, from the one in  question, and from all to come, and for the rest had  solemnly assured him that he could not possibly die  by water, fire, or the sword. He was hanged, there-  fore, unhappy wretch, paying a penalty due unto.  them all, whereas his masters, thanks to the will of  King Henry, because of their love for Christ, were  bidden to abide unharmed. It was the Hebrews of  Byland Abbey who did this thing.

10 The Hebrews of Pontigny had made from their  large hogs bacons, which we, using another term,  call gammons. They sold these, but held them as a  deposit until the traders could return with wagons  to carry them away. When the traders returned  with their wagons they found, to be sure, the same  piles of bacons which each had bought, with the  number intact, but the bacons which they had left  fat they were surprised to see lean, and merely skin  and bones. They therefore went to the Count of

20 Nevers, who was overlord of the region. On his  arrival at the monastery, he was told by a certain  shepherd that the Hebrews had squeezed the flitches  in a press until all the blood was forced out from  the meat, and had sealed this in new bottles wherein  never before had any wine been put. The truth of  this statement was established in the presence of  the abbot and the cloistered brothers. The Count  blushed and his companions were amazed : * Please,  please, Quintilian, give us some excuse, we ’re stuck,’ |

30 was all the monks could say. So their master the  abbot began: ‘ We who live inside the cloister are  not concerned in this; the whole thing was done  without our knowledge; those fools outside have  sinned through their ignorance, and they will be  soundly flogged.’ What aseemly excuse! To me,  at least, it seemeth not that this thing was done  through ignorance, but with a sure knowledge of  the evil thereof, and the fool, for all the cursing he  received, was all the more ready for further evil.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 67

And yet, by the above excuse, the cloistered brothers  exonerate themselves of the dishonesty which is  practised outside the walls, and lay it on their  brothers who without them can do nothing. There-  fore let the abbots take heed to the fate of Eli, since  ‘they do not chide their sons or correct them, but by  ‘their silence give consent and seem to spur them on.  ‘There is a similar situation in all robbers’ camps ;  “some sit idly at home while others go forth after  booty,’ but David speaketh no lie in his fair state- 10  ment that ‘he that goeth down to the battle and  he that tarrieth by the stuff, they shall part alike.’  And will it always be permitted to those within the  cloister to be represented with closed eyes? If they  ‘should ‘ hear the bleating of a kid,’ ought they not  to cry with Tobias, ‘See that it be not stolen goods’ ?  At any rate they surely were not born within the  cloister : let them call to mind the things they saw  outside.

The Church seemeth, doth it not, to be the prey 20  of its monastery ? Have the monks, therefore,  entered it as a cloister or as acamp? Since their |  rule preventeth them from possessing churches, they |  obtain from lawyers the right to the living, and, :  ‘sending in a deputy, they have not churches, but |  yearly pensions. Let them look to it that the law  be not cheated. But our protectors have sold us,  ‘to them: hence I think that we should say not a  word, lest * they increase the grief of the wounded,  adding iniquity to iniquity.’ 30

Already the Hebrews have had an inkling of this  book, and they call me a persecutor of religion : it is  their sins which I blame, not their character, their  hypocritical professors, not their well-founded order.  ‘Those who crucify the flesh to quench passion, who  feed the poor to win God’s mercy for themselves, who

“arise at midnight to give thanks,’ I do not blame,  but those who with all zeal search out every road  to gain and walk therein, who open every gate to

Google

Jen

68 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

greed and enter therein, who can imagine no bloody  ath to riches without treading therein; these are  the things which it is my glory to hate, and from my  knowledge of them I am forced to utter this com-  plaint. The doers of such deeds as these I despise,  , and I charge them especially not to be found in  these works. I see that on their lips my name hath  ! become a reproach and a by-word, so that they  { compare me to the poet Cluvienus, user of ‘ charcoal  1#and chalk,’ a witless and foolish writer. This I  : am, surely; but, whereas my song is of malice and  : worthy indeed of chalk and charcoal, I am also a  ‘fool: I cannot contrive, I cannot flatter ; and I am  , witless ; as salt is of no avail in a stench, I confess  } that I am a foolish and dull poet, but, on the other  hand, not a lying one, for he doth not lie who re-  \citeth facts, but he who imagineth them. Moreover,  (what I know of these men—these Hebrews, I mean  \-and what the Church bewaileth, and what I often  20fhear, of this I write, not without experience. If  they do not gain wisdom, those things ‘ will be  preached upon the house-tops ” which now lie hidden  ‘in the ear.’ But would that the Lord might stir  up a strong adversary against them and change  their ‘ vessels of dishonour’ into habitations of  mercy, so that they might see themselves with a  clearer vision, and judge themselves the less in  worth in comparison with the just and great, the  more they themselves mock the contrite and the  30 lowly.

Recapttulation of the Grandmontines. xxvi  Y ‘

big latter days have brought into being  these cults of religion. And there is yet another  sect, already mentioned, that of the Grandmontines,  which traceth its origin to one Stephen, who drew  his rules from the Gospel, with the wish to wipe out.  all avarice. They have one prior, who is always at

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 69

home, never for any reason going outside of the  walls, no matter what may be the summons, who is  feared in all places by those under him and who  guideth according to his will that which he hath  not seen or will never see. The clerks are always  cloistered—that Mary may be their sovereign joy—  because they are not allowed to go out. The lay  brethren open the door to guests. These receive  offerings, but do not exact them, and, what they  receive, they expend with gladness, discharging the 10  duties and business of the house, and, although they  seem masters in everything, they are (really) the  dispensers and servants of those within, since they  administer all things for them, in order that no  request for special favour may weigh a whit with the  cloistered clerks. Outside of their first foundation,  the Grandmontines rear or receive no dwelling-place,  nor do they take up their abode in any parish with-  out a full licence of the metropolitan bishop or arch-  deacon, or without a prior contract with the parish 20  priest to receive an annual pension derived from the  tithes and the revenues of the place. They keep no  living creatures except bees ; these Stephen granted  to them, because bees do not remove the fodder of  neighbours ; and because their produce is gathered  once and for all, for the good of all. In the posses-  sion of bees, too, the passion for private property  can find no pride, nor have they any beauty which  tempteth their acquisition. When the master call-  eth these monks out to any employment, two or 30  more straightway go forth—but no one among them  is without his companion, because ‘ woe to him that  is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to  help him up’! ‘They open the hand to every man  that asketh.? When there is no food remaining,  they fast for a day and then tell Him to whom be-  longeth the world. But if He doth not hear them,  two go forth on the morrow and announce to the  bishop the hunger of the brethren. But if he, too,

Google

70 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

doth not hearken, they fast until the Lord shall have  visited them through some agent. Within their  walls they hold secret converse, admitting no one  save the bishop and princes of the realm. But  when the visitors come forth, they have naught to  say of poverty among them. Our lord, that is,  King Henry the Second, to whom they fully disclose  everything, is, through his natural generosity, so  lavish in his bounty to them that they are nowhere

10in want. However, even at them doth Avarice  point its finger and refraineth not from touching  them. For they have recently arranged to have,  in each of the neighbouring cities, citizens whose  office it is to procure food and clothing for them  from the gifts already received, and they have won  for themselves from their princes complete freedom  from fiscal burdens. Hence it hath come to pass,  if we may believe rumour, that many men of rank.  offer themselves and their all, and are received into

20 the order. And I think we should fear that some  ill will come of it hereafter, for they join in the  counsels and have in their hands the business of  kings.

The Origin of Sempringham. xxvii

ASTER GILBERT of Sempringham, who is.  still alive, although now blind with age, for

he is more than a hundred years old, founded a new  religious order, which first won recognition from  Pope Eugenius—an order consisting of regular  30 canons, and of sisters too, who live with a wall  between them and the men so as not to see and be  seen. The men and women have no access to one  another, save when unction or viaticum is necessary  —and this is administered in the presence of many  spectators through a window most carefully con-  trived for that purpose. They have many houses.  already, but they have not yet gone beyond the  borders of England. No unfavourable report hath

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 71

as yet been made of them, but there is some reason  to fear, for frequently the wiles of Venus penetrate  the walls of Minerva and there is no collision be-  tween love and lore without collusion.

ao Recapitulation of the Carthusians. XXVIII

KT another kind of brotherhood, already de-  scribed by me, is found in Grésivaudan.  Dwelling together in one house, but distributed  among several cells, are twelve priests and their  prior, whose intercourse is very famous. Although 10  these later days endeavour to attract God in every  fashion, He seemeth less present to us now than  when men sought Him from the depths of a simple  heart without the contrivance of clothes or costly  adornment, for as He is a searcher of hearts and not  of clothes, also He is a lover of a well-disposed spirit  and not of well-arranged clothing. Let them there-  fore not despise us, who are poorly arrayed, because  He who ‘could not be entangled in His talk’ will  not be tricked by apparel. Our King, Henry the 20  Second—whose power is dreaded almost every-  where—although he is always in very costly array,  as befitteth his state, striveth not to be proud, nor  presumeth to be in any way high-minded nor indeed  doth his tongue swell with any elation; nor yet  doth he exalt himself above man, but the cleanness  which always appeareth in his apparel without is  ever in his mouth as well. Although no one to-day  is his equal or like, he preferreth to confess himself  contemptible than to conduct himself as a contemner. 30

Of a Certain Sect of Heretics. xxix

UR King, Henry 11., keepeth out of all his lands

a most damnable sect, the exponent of a new  heresy, which, to be sure, confesseth with its mouth  our own faith in Christ, but saith from the depths of  its heart, ‘ There is no God.’ These heretics have

Google

72 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

gathered throngs of many thousands, the so-called  Routiers (Ruttae), and arming themselves cap-a-pie,  with hide and metal, sticks and swords, have re-  duced to ashes monasteries, granges, and towns.  Moreover, they have violated women with a strong  hand and without discrimination. This sect arose  in Brabant, taking thence the name ‘ Brabancon,’  for at first, sallying forth as robbers, they made for  themselves a law against all law. Soon there were

10 associated with these in the breeding of sedition,  fugitives, false clerks, runaway monks; and de-  serters of God of every sort joined their nefarious  assemblage. They have now multiplied so im-  measurably and the hosts of Leviathan have waxed  so mighty that they abide in safety or wander  through lands and kingdoms amid the hatred of  God and of men.

Of Another Sect of These. xxx  f igen is, too, another old heresy which hath  20

recently increased beyond all measure. This  traceth its origin to those who have forsaken God,  when He speaketh of the eating of His flesh and the  drinking of His blood; and who declare ‘ This is a  hard saying.’ Going back (and walking no more  with Him), they are called Publicans or Paterines.  They, however, have lurked among Christians every-  where from the days of our Lord’s passion, and they  continue to wander from the truth (errant). At  first, indeed, they occupied single houses in the  30towns in which they dwelt, and from whatever  quarter each man may have come, ‘ he knew his  own house in the smoke,’ so to speak. They do not  accept St. John’s Gospel; and they deride our views  of the body and blood of Christ, the consecrated  bread. Men and women dwell together, but no sons  and daughters come from this union. Many who,  regaining wisdom, have returned to the true faith

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 73

tell us that, about the first watch of the night, each  group of these, closing all gates and doors and  windows, sitteth in expectant silence in each of their  synagogues. Then there cometh down by a rope,  which hangeth in their midst, a black cat of mar-  vellous size. At the appearance of this creature  they put out all lights. They neither sing hymns  nor even speak articulately, but they gnash with  clenched teeth, and they approach, feeling their  way, to the spot where they have seen their lord, 10  and, when they find him, they kiss him, each with  a measure of humility proportioned to the heat of  his frenzy, some his feet, many under the tail, and  very many his private parts and, just as if the  licence for lust had been received from the place of  stench, each seizeth the man or woman nearest, and  they mingle just as far as each one is able to carry  this mockery. Moreover, their masters say and  teach their novices that perfect charity is to do or  to suffer whatever brother or sister hath sought or 20  desired, that is, to extinguish the fires of their  common passions. Thus, from suffering, they are  called ‘ Paterines.’

They have not yet come into England with the  exception of some sixteen, and these, being either  branded or beaten with rods by the command of  King Henry u1., are no longer among us. Neither  in Normandy nor in Brittany are any found; in  Anjou there are many, while in Aquitaine and  Burgundy their numbers are infinite. Their fellow- 30  countrymen also say that they catch their guests in  some one of their dishes, and that those whom they  darenot tempt by the hidden meanings of their public  sermons thus become even as themselves. Hence  happened that incident which Lord William, Arch-  bishop of Rheims, brother of the Queen of France,  reported to me, corroborating the story by many  witnesses. A noble prince from the neighbourhood  of Vienne, in constant fear of this detestable rapine,

Google

74 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

always carried with him in his wallet hallowed salt,  not knowing whose house he was going to enter ;  and fearing everywhere the blandishment of the  enemy, was wont even at his own table to sprinkle  this on all foods. When it was reported to him that  two knights had misled his nephew, who was the  lord of many people and towns, behold him straight-  way at his nephew’s house! When they were:  ceremoniously feasting together, the nephew un-  10 wittingly caused to be placed before his uncle a  whole mullet, seemingly ‘ pleasant to the eyes and  good for food.’ Then the knight sprinkled the  salt thereon and suddenly the fish disappeared and  there on the dish was left some substance like pellets.  of hare dung. The knight was horrified, as were  those with him, and after revealing to his nephew  the miracle, he most devoutly preached to him  repentance, and taught him, with many tears, the  multitude of God’s mercies, showing him, moreover,  20 that all the efforts of demons are conquered by faith  alone as in the thing he had just seen. The nephew  took the speech ill, and withdrew to his bedroom.  Then the nobleman, indignant at the mockery  heaped upon him, led with him in chains the knights  who had seduced his nephew, and, in the sight of  many people, shut them up in a hut, where he  bound them fast to a stake; and he then burned  the whole building with a fire that he kindled be-  neath. But the fire did not touch them at all, nor  30 indeed was any trace of scorching found on their  garments. Then there arose against the nobleman.  an uproar of people crying, ‘ We have sinned against.  very just men, counter to the faith attested by their  true virtues.” The nobleman, wavering not a whit  nor faltering in his faith as a Christian even in the  face of so great a phenomenon, quieted the angry  voices of the crowd by compliments and strength-  ened their faith by gentle speeches. He consulted.  the Bishop of Vienne, who shut up the offenders,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 1S

bound as before, in a larger house, and, walking  around the whole building on the outside, sprinkled  it with holy water to counteract their magic. He  then ordered the torch to be applied ; but the fire,  despite all fanning and feeding, could catch or con-  sume nothing. The city consequently reviled the  bishop, and displayed such a loss of faith that many  openly taunted him with mad words, and, had they  not been checked by respect for their prince, they  would have cast the bishop himself into the flames 10  and would have freed the supposedly imnocent.  Then beating down the doors, the crowd rushed into  the house, and coming to the stake, found charcoal  and sparks where flesh and bones had been, and yet  they discovered that the chains were unhurt and  the stake intact, and that the very righteous flame  had turned only against those who had erred.  Thus a kind Lord changed the hearts of the erring  to penitence and blasphemy to praise.

These things have come to pass in our time. [20  call our time this modern period, the course of these  one hundred years, of which now only the final parts  remain. Of this period the recollection is suffi-  ciently fresh and clear, especially of those things  which are noteworthy—since there are yet alive  some centenarians and numberless sons who can  recall very definitely from the narratives of their  fathers and grandfathers things which they have  not themselves seen. I give the name of modern  period (modernity) to the hundred years which have 30-  passed, and not to those which are to come, although  they may have the same right to the name, by  reason of their nearness, since the past hath to do  with narration and the future with divination. In  the period of this century the Templars have  attained their highest strength and so have the  Hospitallers in Jerusalem, and in Spain the soldiers  who derive their name from the sword. The story  of these I have already told.

Google

76 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Of the Sect of the Waldenses. xXxxXI

| SAW in the Council at Rome under the cele-  brated Alexander, third Pope of the name,  Waldenses, illiterate laymen, called from their  founder Waldes (Waldo), a citizen of Lyons on the  Rhone. These presented to His Holiness a book  written in the French tongue, containing the text  and gloss of the Psalter and of very many books  of both Old and New Testaments. They besought  10 him with great importunity to confirm the licence  of their preaching, because they seemed to them-  selves experts, although they were mere smatterers.  For it usually happeneth that birds which do not  see the subtle snares or nets believe that there is  free passage everywhere. Do not those persons

- who are occupied all their days with sophistries—  men who can ensnare and yet can scarce be snared,  and who are ever delvers in the deep abyss—do not  those men, in fear of disfavour, profess with rever-  20ence to bring forth all things from God, whose  dignity is so lofty that no praises or no merits of  preachments can attain to that height, unless  sovereign mercy hath borne them aloft ? On every  dot of the divine page, noble thoughts are wafted  on sO many wings, and such wealth of wisdom is  amassed that he alone to whom God hath given  something (to draw with) may drink from the full  (well). Shall, therefore, in any wise pearls be cast  before swine, and the word given to laymen who, as  30 we know, receive it foolishly, to say nothing of their  giving what they have received? No more of this,  and let it be rooted out! ‘Let the precious ointment  run down from the head upon the beard and thence  upon the clothing’; ‘let clean waters be drawn from  the fountain, not muddy from the market-place.’ I,  the least of the many thousand who were called to  the council, derided them, because their petition  roduced so much higgling and hesitation, and when

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES TT

I was summoned by a certain great bishop, to whom  that mightiest of Popes had entrusted the charge of  confessions, I sat down, ‘a mark for their arrows.’  After many masters of the law and men of learning  had been admitted, there were brought before me  two Waldenses who seemed the chief of their sect,  eager to argue with me about the faith, not for the  love of seeking the truth, but that, by convicting  me of error, they might stop my mouth as of ‘ one  speaking lies.’ I sat full of fear—I confess—lest, 10  under pressure of my sins, the power of speech in so  great a council should be denied me. The bishop  ordered me, who was making ready to reply, to try  my eloquence against them. At the outset I sug-  gested the easiest questions, which anybody should  be able to answer, for I knew that when an ass is  eating thistles, its lips disdain lettuce: ‘Do you  believe in God the Father?’ They answered, ‘ We  believe.’ ‘And in the Son?’ They replied, ‘ We  believe.’ ‘ And in the Holy Spirit?’ Their reply 20  still was, ‘ We believe.’ I kept on, * In the Mother  of Christ ?’ And they again, ‘ We believe.’ Amid  the derisive shouts of all, they withdrew in dis-  comfiture, which was richly deserved, because they  were ruled by none, and sought to be made rulers,  like Phaethon who * did not know the names of his  horses.’

These have nowhere a fixed abode, but wander  about by two and two, barefooted, clad in sheep-  skins, possessing nothing, ‘having all things in 30  common’ like the apostles, naked following the naked  Christ. Now their beginnings are lowly because  they can find no entrance anywhere, for, should we )  let them in, we should be driven out. Let him who  doth not believe hear what hath already been said ©  of like sort. In these times of ours which we con-  demn and deride, there are doubtless those who  wish to keep faith, and should they be put to the  test, they would, as in times gone by, lay down their

Google

78 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

\lives for their shepherd, Lord Jesus, but because we  (have been led astray or lured away by a strange sort  ‘of zeal, our times have grown as base as though of  iron. Ancient days pleased as though they shone  with gold. We possess histories handed down from  the beginning to our times, we read old fables, and  we have understanding of the mystic meaning from  which cometh the pleasure we should find in them.  Bear in mind the envious Cain, the citizens of Sodom

19and Gomorrah—not one man, say I, but all men

wallowing in a sea of lust—Joseph, sold by his  brethren, Pharaoh punished by many plagues, a  people showing themselves, by their worship of the  golden calf, rebellious to God and to him who was  chosen by God through the clearest of signs in the  desert, the pride of Dathan, the impudence of  Zimri, the perjury of Achitophel, the avarice of

| Nabal, and innumerable prodigies of lust, in un-

broken series from the beginning to our times, and

- therefore do not shrink back with too great pride

' from things of our day like unto these or perhaps  ‘ even less base. But because endurance of evils is  ‘more severe than mere hearsay, we are silent over  what we hear and we wail over what we suffer.

Thus, bearing in mind that there have been worse  things, let us show restraint in those things that are

_ lighter. Indeed warning fables set before us Atreus

and Thyestes and Pelops and Lycaon and many  others like these that we may shun their fates. The

30 judgments of histories also are not without their

_value, for both kinds of narratives have the same

practice and design. For history, which is based on  truth, and fable, which weaveth a tissue of fancy,  both bless the good with a happy end so that virtue  may be loved, and damn the bad with a foul ending,

' wishing to render wickedness hateful. In narratives  _ adversity succeedeth in turn to prosperity and vice  _ versa, with frequent change of fortune, in order that,  ' Poth being always kept before our eyes, no forget-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 79

fulness of either may arise on account of the'  other, but that each may be kept in due bounds by  proper infusion of its opposite. Thus exaltation or  destruction will never pass the mean ; that is to say,  by the contemplation of things to come, meditation:  will neither be empty of hope nor free from fear—' |  I mean, of temporal things to come, because that  “perfect charity’ which is heavenly ‘ casteth out fear.’ 5

Of Three Hermits and their Wonderful  Penance. XXXII

HILIP of Naples, a man of mark, told me that  when he was returning from hunting in Nigra  Montana, he met a man of the woods, hairy and  deformed, lying by a fountain to drink, and that  he suddenly dragged him to his feet by his hair and  asked him who he was and what he was doing there.  The fellow begged in his humility to be released,  saying, ° Three of us came to this solitude in order  that, living here in penance, we might become  imitators of the Fathers of old: the first and best 20  of us was a Frank, the second, far braver and nobler  than I, was an Englishman, I am a Scot. The  Frank is of such perfection that I fear to speak of  his life, for it passeth belief; the Angle, or rather  angel, is bound with an iron chain only so long that  it can be stretched seven feet. He always beareth  ‘with him an iron hammer and a stake with which he  fasteneth his chain to the earth on the Sabbath, and  within these narrow bounds he prayeth throughout  the whole week, unfailing in hymns of joy. He is 30  never complaining or sad; eating what he findeth  there, he moveth his camp on the Sabbath, not  wandering aimlessly, but seeking a place pleasant  in its prospect, not plentiful in its products, a re-  treat not protected from the inclemency of the  ‘weather ; and wherever he findeth any food with  ‘water near-by, there with joy in his heart he staketh

Google

80 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

out his possession. If you want to see this man, he  is making his residence this week by the stream  which floweth from this spring.’ With these words  he ran away with the speed of a wild animal. A  little while after, the Neapolitan found the English-  man dead, and feeling such reverence for his virtues  that he did not presume to touch him nor anything  of his, he departed, entrusting to followers the due  rites of burial. This Englishman bore in his heart  10 Christ the fountain of joy, hence to him narrow  circumstances could bring no sadness. So, as the  Lord saith, let ‘ hypocrites be sad,’ because ‘ perfect  charity casteth out fear’ together with sadness.

Google

SECOND DIVISION

Prologue. 1

HE victory of the flesh is contrary to reason,  because man desireth less those things which  are of God and most those things which are of the  world. When reason, however, is observed, the soul  is triumphant, ‘ it rendereth to Caesar the things  that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are  God’s.’ I have put first two illustrations of ° the  mercy and judgment of God’ which, so far from.  giving pleasure, are ever tedious and are awaited :10  ‘with dread, just as the tales of poets and imitations:  of these are awaited with desire. Let these tales,:  however, be put off if they may not be put out, and  let us set forth those miracles which we know or |  believe.

About Gregory, a Monk of Gloucester. 1

SAW Gregory, a monk of Gloucester, already an

old man and, in addition to the infirmities of age,  afflicted with many other weaknesses : he had gall-  stones and was spongy in his shins and thighs, and 20  _ yet he was invariably cheerful and, although the  inroads of disease never ceased, he himself never  ceased from psalms. If it ever happened that sleep  crept upon him more softly after long labours, in  that hour he was wont to say that he was aban-  doned by God or given to oblivion; and when he  was the more grievously beset, he poured forth his  thanks the more effusively to the Highest, just as if  he were saying with St. Augustine: ‘ Burn here,  punish here, and do not accuse me in Thy wrath.’ 30

F

Google

82 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

I had commended myself to his prayers at the time  of my first voyage; and when a tempest grew so  strong that the ship was almost overwhelmed in the  |waves, I, having no other hope, pinned my highest  ‘faith to the merits of him to whom I had commended  lmyself. With that devoutness which those in  danger on a sinking ship are accustomed to display,  | I prayed God that, by His mercy and by the merits  ‘of this good Gregory, He should deliver us safe from  10the waves. In the middle of the storm I found a  little sleep, and lo, I saw Master Gregory walking  among the sailors, encouraging them and teaching  them and making all things right. Upon awaking  I found everywhere quiet and a great calm; I  rendered deserved thanks to God.

Some time after, I reported to Gregory’s Abbot,  Hamelin, this thing about him, which he himself  with many thanksgivings hath declared to many.  And hearing of this incident, Gilbert de Lacy, a man

200f mark who had become a Templar, followed my  example, and went with the prayers and the bless-  ing of the aforesaid Gregory when he journeyed to  Jerusalem, and afterwards reported that he had a  like experience in the Grecian sea.

Of the Blessed Peter of Tarentaise. 111

SAW afterwards the blessed Peter, Archbishop

of Tarentaise, which lieth among the Alps, a man

so full of merit and so famed for his miracles that he  may very properly be pronounced equal in virtue to  the ancient Fathers, whom we worship in church.  30 By the mere touch of Peter’s hand and by his prayer,  the Lord healed the sick and drove out demons; nor  did the Archbishop ever attempt anything that he  did not perform. He spent eleven days at Limoges  with the King of the English, Henry 11., who en-  trusted him to my care, for maintenance at the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 83

royal expense; I found the man to be of a joyous  nature and of laughing countenance in adversity,  clean, temperate, humble, in every way perfect, as  it seemed to me and to many others. I saw one  miracle which God wrought through his hand and  I heard of very many others. At a late hour one  day, a great throng of the citizens of Limoges came,  bringing with them a man possessed by the devil.  After them came the Bishop of Poitiers, who is now  Archbishop of Lyons, surnamed Albaemanus (‘ Aux 10  blanches mains’), of Canterbury birth, a man of  great eloquence and of the highest authority and  reputation, not in order to put Peter’s power to the!  test but to be able to know definitely what he was:  already inclined to credit. He accosted me with:  these words: ‘ Best beloved, call forth the Arch-  bishop that it may be possible for us to bear certain  witness to that of which all are talking. On several  occasions I have seen men suffering from illusions  which made them testify that they had seen miracles, 20  and I have always recognized the pretence but never  have I seen a real miracle.’ Then I brought out  Master Peter. Falling on his knees he laid his hand  upon the sick man, who was unquestionably foaming  and altogether frantic. Lord John the Bishop and  I listened secretly and heard him say, ‘“ While the  eleven disciples were sleeping,’’’ and so on. Men  were holding the demoniac down upon the bed, but  they had not bound him, because he was their fellow-  citizen. After saying a short prayer and reciting 30  a gospel, Peter ordered them to take their hands off  the sick man, who immediately wiped his mouth  with his right hand, saying, ‘ Mother of God, have  mercy!’ Then with a sudden backward leap, Lord  John the Bishop said in tears, ‘ Truly, the sick man  is healed, Peter alone is bishop ; but we are “‘ dogs  not fit to bark.”’’

Google

84. DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Likewise of the same Blessed Peter. 1v

ASTER SERLO of Wilton, the Abbot of  L’Aumone, told me that ‘this same good  Archbishop Peter, during his stay at a Cistercian  monastery, was asked by a monk of that cloister  whose foot was swollen and distorted from birth to  heal him by his intervention. Leading the monk  aside and seating him on a bench, he made him take  off his shoes; then Peter prayed on bended knees  10 with the naked foot in his hands. Master Serlo  drew near and, eavesdropping, heard these words  from the Archbishop, who had leaped back from the  monk as if from a blow, and was gazing at him in  wonder: ‘ Brother, it is “‘ better for thee to enter the  kingdom of heaven with but one foot, than with two  to be cast into hell fire,’’’ and then he sent the monk  away. When Peter caught sight of Serlo, he said,  ‘ Brother Serlo, if the Lord had allowed me to heal  this brother, He would have lost him.’ Serlo, in-  20 deed, imputed this outcome rather to his weakness  than to his wisdom ; but wishing to test what had  been done, he reported everything to the Cistercian  abbot, and urgently requested him to call the monk  aside at once, and to order him to make a full con-  fession. Under this command the monk said:  * Father, although I am of noble and famous parent-  age, yet when I saw myself unlike my kinsmen in  my foot, and so deformed as to be a byword, I came  hither driven by the shame of my debasement, but  _ 39 just now when Lord Peter was fondling my foot in  his hand, I seemed to feel the approach of health ;  and thus detecting the beginnings of a cure, I  thought of returning with keen delight to the world  which I had left in sorrow and shame.’

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 85

Of the same Blessed Peter. v

ERLO also told me that Peter had wrought  another miracle on the next day. At the  command of the Cistercian abbot, Master Peter was  preaching to the people when a woman interrupted  him with loud shrieks and complained that her lord’s _  purse had been cut off from her. Then the Arch- \  bishop, urging every one to be silent, poured forth  many prayers that whatever the tearful petitioner  had lost should be restored to her. Soon aware 10  that exhortations were all in vain, he said at length :  * Seize that big fellow with the white cap and take  the coins under his left arm-pit.?, When this money  had been found and restored, the thief’s master  asked the Archbishop what to do with him. He  answered, * Let him go, for though he can be caught  he cannot be corrected.’

Men say that this Peter turned water into wine  and fed men miraculously with a few loaves, hence  you may know that the prayers of the deserving fail 20  not to gain God’s grace even in these days of ours.

In the country of Burgundy one often heareth  the story of a soldier without sufficient fear of God,  who, after pertinacious persistence in the practice  of sin, suffered punishment in the form of a seizure ;  a lizard fastened on his shoulder-blade with teeth  and claws and, when it could not be removed either  by the art of Hippocrates or by the aid of prayers,  the Mother of Mercy miraculously magnified her  power. As often as the poor wretch entered any 30  church dedicated in her name, the lizard let go and  disappeared, but always clung again at his going  forth. When Peter knew of this, he heard the  soldier’s confession and enjoined penance. As soon  as the penance had been performed, the sufferer  was freed from his torture.

Google

86 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Of a Hermit. vi

OD showeth forth His mercies when penance  hath been done or begun, thus teaching that  the truly penitent heart is delivered by invisible and  hidden power. The Lord delivered a hermit. At  the supper hour there came to the solitary in his  retreat a small serpent, and after its entrance into  the cell, as though hungry, it kept itself in humble  fashion near the monk while he was eating, seeming  10 by means of its humility to be asking alms. The  hermit having * the zeal of God, but not according  to knowledge ’ had heard, ‘ Give to every man that  asketh thee,’ and ° the dogs eat of the crumbs.’ He  gave crumbs, and, every day, he most hospitably  received the guest at its coming, until at length it  waxed so great that it could not go forth by the  way it came. After a while, as time went on, the  stranger creature, by reason of the narrowness of  the little abode, enwrapped the place with its fiery  20 coils, so that this dwelling sufficed only for the  est. The nurse of this coiling Zabulon wept and  ‘lifted his whole heart to the Lord,’ full of repentance  now that he had learned how the charity which he  foolishly bestowed had been requited. The Lord,  who, through His sovereign mercy, cannot refrain  from pity, pitied this monk and sent him a messenger  of safety, a man inspired to visit him. When the  visitor had heard and seen the mockery, he advised  the penitent to tolerate the snake’s presence until  30 the fortieth day. He did so, and, on the given day,  was no longer found the creature which had hitherto  suffered the hermit to find nothing else in the hut  save itself. He who compelled the visible enemy  to disappear by invisible power hath the power and  surely the will to destroy those things which lie  hidden, unless He findeth us stubborn.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 87

Of Luke the Hungarian. vit

SAW at Paris, in the school of Master Gerard la

Pucelle, Luke of Hungary, a man of honour and  great culture, who shared his table with the poor in  such a way that they seemed invited guests, not  seekers of alms. Through the King of Hungary,  the clergy and people, the Lord called him to the  Archbishopric of Gran. Hugh, a native of Le Mans  and Bishop of Acre, told me of the life and conduct  of Luke after his consecration as Archbishop. The 10  aforesaid King of Hungary died, leaving as heir a  young son, a very little boy at the time. Then the  king’s brother came to Archbishop Luke, demanding  from him both installation and coronation. Luke  reproved this man and accused him of treachery for  ignoring law and custom and right, in his efforts to  disinherit the innocent, and he refused to consent.  But the uncle had himself made king by another  archbishop of the kingdom, who had no authority  for such a coronation. It was as if the usurper 20  had said :—

‘If I cannot move the powers of heaven, I will solicit

those of hell.’

He was immediately visited with anathema by Luke,  whom he forthwith urged with dreadful threats and  even with the menace of a naked sword to absolve  him ; but, receiving for an answer scorn and like-  Wise excommunication, he thrust the Archbishop  violently into prison and compelled the suspended  churches to disregard the interdict. Since Luke’s 30  imprisonment long continued, a friend of his brought  secretly to him in prison orders for his liberation  from Pope Alexander 111. addressed to the king, but  these Luke was utterly unwilling to use when he  heard that they had cost twelve deniers—the  wonted price for a bull—the good man declaring  that he would not be delivered by simony. But the

Google

88 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Lord opened his prison on Easter Day while the  king was at asolemn mass. Then Luke entered the  chapel with all men agape, and, having uncovered  the altar and cast aside its ornaments, he thus spoke  in the presence of the cross and in the hearing of  the king, who was dazed with fear: *O Lord Jesus,  whose resurrection no men but Christians proclaim,  through that sovereign virtue by which Thou arose  from the dead, if Thou deemest this king deserving  10 of Thy visitation, ‘‘overthrow the wicked that he be  no more”; but if not, at least let him feel, within  forty days in Thy strong right hand which smote  Pharaoh, the power of Him whom this man hath  pierced.’ Upon leaving the chapel he was com-  mitted by his evil keepers to closer confinements,  but bore all things with patience, never relaxing his  vigilance in prayers and in praise of the Lord. And  it came to pass that before the fortieth day the  king died impenitent. His only brother, his peer in  20 brutal passion, succeeded him. Luke granted to  this man too a forty day respite and then slew him  among his people ‘ with the spirit of his mouth.’  He then installed the youthful heir with all cere-  mony. Luke guided the boyhood of the young  king to a most peaceful conclusion, but he was less  successful during his youth. For when the king  became a young man, he entertained loftier projects  than he could possibly sustain, and, after the failure  of his own means, he refrained not from consuming  30 the possessions of the Church. When Luke, after  many tearful warnings, still found him wilful and  headstrong, he, weeping all the while, subjected the  youth to anathema. Finally, by many prayers  raised to Heaven, Luke gained for the king God’s  grace, so that he was turned to true repentance and  hastened to the church of Gran to give Luke the  satisfaction for which he yearned. Luke, attended  by all the clergy and a festive throng of people, came  to meet him with open joy and welcomed him with

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 89

full absolution. While others were merrily singing,  Luke wept in secret. Then the king asked: ‘ What  is it, dearest father, that maketh thee weep amid  such general rejoicing ?’ And Luke replied, ° How  can I rejoice, forsooth, when on this very day next  year, amid our passionate distress, thou wilt be |  borne into this very place a dead man?’ And so ©

it came to pass.

Of the Senseless Devotion of Welshmen. v111

“TN every nation,’ as hath been said elsewhere, 10  “he that feareth God is received of Him.’  Among our Welshmen, the fear of God is seldom  * according to knowledge.’ With Lord William de  Braose, a man well skilled in arms, was, as he him-  self told me, a Welshman of noble race, with such  zest for goodness that every night at the first cock-  crow he rose from his bed and, kneeling naked upon  the naked ground, persisted in prayer until morning  light. Moreover, he was so temperate and kept  such a strict guard over himself that any one who 20  knew him would think him above men and little  lower than the angels. But if you saw how sense- !  less he was in hostile encounters, how thirsty for|  blood, how careless of his own safety, how greedy i  for the death of others, how glad at the doing of any  crime or murder, you would never doubt that he  was inwardly given up to iniquity. So constant  and characteristic is this lack of finer feeling in  Welshmen, that if in one respect they seem tem-  perate, in many they appear tempestuous and 30  savage.

Of Elias, the Welsh Hermit. 1x

ONCE saw Elias, the Welsh hermit, a man of

exemplary faith and of praiseworthy life. With  him were his brother Walenfreit and very many  other persons in the forest which is called Dean, not .

as  ( toe

Google

90 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

from any connection with tithing but merely as a  proper name. These men, not at the suggestion of  Elias, but at their own instance, kept animals in the  pastures which abound there. It happened that a  mare was missing, and that despite a long search she  could not be found. The loss was reported to Elias,  who said, ‘ Richard, the tax-gatherer, hath carried  her off to Austclive, exhausted by much waking and  working; you will find her in the shed near his

10door.” Then he took out four pence which he  handed to them, saying, ‘Give the money to him  for the labour of his theft, lest the workman be de-  frauded of his hire.’ This was done and everything  was found to be as he had said. No one can doubt  that, in this case, Elias was a prophet. He ended  his life, and is now with Him in whom he put his  trust and who is a propitiation for us.

Of Cadoc, the Welsh King. x

Ore? King of Wales, heard the words of the  - 20 Lord, ‘He who leaveth not all things for  My sake is not worthy of Me,’ and leaving all things,  he lived alone in a retreat, eating with a happy  and healthy spirit of worship bread gained by the  labour of his hands and by the sweat of his brow.  It came to pass, after the passage of days and years,  that his successor, who had been chosen by lot,  journeyed into his neighbourhood and sent him  word that he awaited, at the hermit’s hands, bread.  for himself and his soldiers. Cadoc answered that he  30 had a bare pittance, not a plenty for so many, but  that he would give this if 1t was asked for in God’s  name. The other, however, sent back this word,

‘ If he send, I shall receive it; but if not, his house  and his bread and himself will be consumed in  flame.’ Cadoc answered, ‘ Better for him to have  the bread than for all of us to burn, but may a curse  fall on all who eat!’ While they ate with full

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 91

knowledge of the anathema, but with no restraint,  a knight named Iltut, standing in their midst,  abstained himself, and begged them to abstain.  While his stubborn fellows mocked him, they  ‘egrets in a chasm which opened beneath them,

ut the ground remained under the feet of Iltut  and thus preserved him. So much of Cadoc Brenin  (King).

Of the Appearance of Phantoms. x1

ELSHMEN tell us of another thing, not 10  a miracle but a marvel. They say that  Gwestin of Gwestiniog waited and watched near  Brecknock Mere (Llangorse Lake), which is some  two miles around, and saw, on three brilliant moon-  light nights, bands of dancing women in his fields of  oats, and that he followed these until they sank in  the water of the pond; and that, on the fourth  night, he detained one of the maidens. The  ravisher’s version of the incident was that on each

of the nights after they had sunk, he had heard 20  them murmuring under the water and saying, “ Had  he done thus and so, he would have caught one of  us’; and he said that he had thus been taught by  their lips how to capture this maiden, who yielded  and married him. Her first words to her husband  were: ‘I shall willingly serve thee with full obedi-  ence and devotion until that day when in your  eagerness to hasten to the shouting (clamores)  beyond Llyfni you will strike me with your bridle-

rein.’ Now Llyfni is a river near the pond. And 30  this thing came to pass. After the birth of many  children, she was struck by him with his bridle-rein  and, on his return from his ride, he found her fleeing  with all her offspring. Pursuing, he snatched away  with great difficulty one of his sons, Triunein  Nagelauc (Trinio Faglog) by name. Since this son  was of lofty spirit, he passed beyond the boundaries

Google

92 DE NUGIS CURIALIOM

of his own narrow possessions. He then chose the  King of Deheubarth, that is, of North Wales, as his  overlord. After a long stay at that court, he did  not brook the boasting of his master, who, beholding  from his seat at the dinner-table the size and power  of his retinue and its admirable equipment of  weapons, said arrogantly, ‘ There is no province  or kingdom under heaven from which I cannot  easily carry off booty and return without a battle,  10 for who can withstand me and my mighty following ?  Who, indeed, could easily escape from our sight ?’  Triunein, hearing these words and weighing the  worth and worthlessness of his compatriots, said :  ‘My lord king, without prejudice to your Royal  Majesty, our king Breauc is so pre-eminent in his  own valour and in that of his men that neither you  nor any other king can carry away from him by force  booty on that day on which, in the early morning,  the tops of the mountain are free from clouds and  20 the rivers of the valley are misty.’ The king, at  these bold words, angrily ordered him to be bound  and cast into prison. Upon this, a grandson of the  king, Madoc by name, who loved Triunein, said:  * My lord, you may not indeed, without injury to  your fair fame, bind or maltreat this man, even as a  jest, before he is proved a liar. When he said that  mists are hovering above the river and that the  mountain tops are free from clouds, these are signs  of clear weather; he wished to signify that, on a  30 clear day, no one is able to carry away booty from  that land. Let us test whether this boasting is true  and, when a clear day comes, let us make this  Triunein our leader, since he knoweth the best  places for entering and leaving that country.’ The  king assented, and his marauders entered the king-  dom of Brechein of Brecknock and collected much  booty. King Brechein was sitting in his bath and no  one told him of the raid. He was feared by reason of  this vice, that upon the first intelligence of evil, just

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 93

as if possessed of a devil, he was wont to strike  suddenly every messenger of evil report with what-  ever he had in his hand, stone, stick, or sword, and,  after the first cast or beating or blow, he was wont  to repent and to recall the messenger, whether hurt  or unhurt, in order to hear him through. He heard  loud shouts but, since a lance lay near his hand, no  one dared to tell him aught although his army was  mustered against the enemy. But at length a boy  of the noblest family among them, leaping into the 10  midst of the soldiers, said, ‘ I know that fear pre-  venteth every one of you from reporting this rumour  to our king, but, if you will all give me your blessing,  I will announce the danger to him.’ Then, having  bent his head and having been blessed by all of them  with both their hands and their tongues, he took his  place near the king in his bath and said, ‘ The men  of Reynuc, that is of Brecknock, will not join battle  now through dread of your anger.’ The king  sprang from his bath and, in the first onset of his 20  fury, he threw at the boy a stone that he found  near, but he did not pursue him. Later he char-  acteristically recalled him and, as soon as he had  heard the rumours, he snatched up his clothes and  weapons and jumped upon a hobbled horse. This  carried him easily, just as if it were not hobbled,  from Mount Cumeraic, where he then was, as far as  his own country. Here he was advised by a woman  to free his horse from the hobbles, so he straightway  stopped and did not go farther until he had taken 30  them off. Then, cursing the woman, he did not  check his pace until he met his own men. At the  sight of him, his soldiers, full of courage and zest,  rushed upon the enemy and destroyed them with  savage slaughter. After the massacre of almost the  entire army, the king next day ordered all the right  hands of the dead foes to be brought together in one  place, and into another place their privy parts, and  into a third, near the way of their flight, all the right

Google

94 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

_feet, and he made separate mounds over these  members in memory of his victory after all their  boastings. These remain until this day, and are  named according to the limbs that they contain.  But men say that Triunein was saved by his mother  and liveth with her in that lake above mentioned.  I think it all a lie, because a falsehood of this kind  is so likely, to account for his body not having

gibeen found.

eo  Likewise concerning the same Apparitions. xt

OT unlike this story is that of Edric Wilde, that

is, the man of the woods, so called from the  agility of his body and the charm of his words and  works, a man of great worth and lord of the manor  of North Ledbury. When he was returning late  from the hunt, he wandered in doubt about the  ways until midnight, accompanied only by one boy.  He chanced upon a great house on the edge of a  grove, such a house as the English have in each  20 parish for drinking, and call in their language ‘ guild-  house’ (ghildhus). When he drew near, attracted  by a light in the house, and looked in, he saw a great  band of many noble women. They were most  beautiful in appearance and clad most elegantly in  robes of the finest linen, and they were taller and  more stately than our women. The soldier noted  one among them far excelling the others in face and  form, more to be desired than all the darlings of  kings. They moved about with an airy motion,  30 pleasing gesture, and restrained voice, and the sound,  though melodious, was heard but faintly, and their  speech was beyond his ken. At the sight of her, the  soldier received a wound in his heart, and he could  scarcely endure the fires kindled by Cupid’s dart.  He is wholly consumed by all the flames of love and  winneth a mighty courage through the burning  passion for this fairest of plagues, for this golden

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 95

menace. He had heard of the wanderings of spirits,  and the troops of demons who appear by night, and  the sight of them which bringeth death, Dictinna,  and bands of dryads and spectral squadrons, and  he had learned of the vengeance inflicted by offended  _ divinities upon those who came upon them suddenly.  He had heard, too, how they preserve themselves  undefiled and how they secretly inhabit unknown  places apart from men and how they detest those  who strive to explore their counsels that they may 10  expose them and to pry into them that they may  publish them, and with how great care they conceal  themselves lest, once being visible, they should lose  their value. He had heard of their revenge and of’  instances of men whom they had punished, but,.  because Cupid is rightly painted blind, Edric, reck-  ing naught of all this, doth not weigh the danger of  the ghostly company, his eyes are closed to any  avenger and, because he hath no sight, he rashly  offendeth. He went around the house, and, finding 20  an entrance, he rushed in and seized her by whom  his heart had been seized; straightway he was seized.  by the others, and, being clutched close in the  fiercest of contests, he escaped after a while only  through the greatest of efforts of himself and his boy,  not altogether without injury, but bearing on his  feet and shins such marks as the teeth and nails of  women could inflict. He carried away with him,  however, the lady of his choice, and used her for his  pleasure during three days and nights, but in all 30  that time he was unable to get a word from her,  though she passively submitted to his love. Fin-  ally, on the fourth day, she spake these words :  “Save thee, dearest! and safe thou shalt be and  withal full of rejoicing in the happy lot of thee and  thine, until thou shalt cast in my teeth either the  sisters, from whom thou hast snatched me away,  or that ground or grove whence thou carried me or  anything else there anent these. From that day

Google

96 ~+~«S+DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

thou wilt fall from happiness, and, having lost me,  thou wilt suffer from many other losses, and, be-  cause thou hast failed to regard times and seasons,  thou wilt die before thy time.’ He promised with  all possible assurance to be firm and faithful in his  love. He called together the noblest far and near,  and, in the presence of a great throng of folk,  solemnly married the lady. William the Bastard,  recently crowned King of England, was then reign-

10ing ; and the monarch, hearing of this marvel, and  wishing to test openly its truth, summoned both the  man and wife to fare together to London. They  brought with them many witnesses, and also the  evidence of many who could not be present; and  indeed the woman herself, who was of a beauty  hitherto unseen and unheard of, was the chief proof  of her fairy nature. Amid the wonder of all, Edric  and his wife were sent back to their home. After  many years had passed, it happened that Edric, on

20 his return from hunting about the third hour of the  night, not finding her whom he sought, called and  bade others call her. And when she came tardily,  he looked angrily at her and said, “ Were you de-  tained by your sisters ?’ and he spoke the rest of  his reproof to the air, for she disappeared at the  hearing of the word ‘sisters.’ Then the man re-  gretted greatly his monstrous and calamitous error,  and betook himself to the very spot where he had  made her captive, but with no weepings nor wailings

30 could he win her back. Day and night he cried  aloud to his own undoing, for his life passed away  there in never-ending sorrow.

Yet he left an heir, his son and hers, for whom he  had died, Alnodus (Atlfnoth), a man of great sanctity  and sense who, at an advanced age, fell into a  paralysis and trembling of head and limbs. When  this was pronounced by all physicians incurable, he  learned from wise men that he should employ all  possible means to hasten to the apostles Peter and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES. 97

Paul and that he would certainly recover his health,  where their bodies are buried, at Rome. To this he  answered that he should never go, to the detriment of  St. Ethelbert, king and martyr, whose parishioner he  was, before presenting himself to that saint. And  he had himself carried to Hereford. Here on the  very first night, at the altar of the aforesaid martyr,  he was restored to health ; and, as a special deed of  grace, he gave for perpetual alms to God and to the  blessed Virgin and to the holy king his estate at Io  Ledbury, in the land of Wales, together with all  its appurtenances, an estate which is even now under  the rule of the Bishop of Hereford, and which is  reported to bring in thirty pounds a year to its lords.

We have heard of demons, incubi and succubi, and  of the peril of cohabiting with them, but we have  seldom or never read in old histories that their off-  spring are happy in their end, like Alnodus, who  gave his whole inheritance to Christ in return for  health, and passed in pilgrimages the rest of life 20  in His service.

Of the same Apparitions. x11

HANTOM is derived from ‘ phantasy,’ that is,

a passing apparition, for those forms which -  demons sometimes assume before men by their own ,  power, having first received God’s permission, pass —  either harmfully or harmlessly according to the will  of the Lord, for He who permitteth the appearance  of phantoms either preserveth men or deserteth  them, and alloweth them to be tempted. But what 30  can we say of those ghostly appearances which abide  and are perpetuated through worthy descendants  like the instance of Alnodus (4#lfnoth), or like that .  already cited example among the Britons, which is  the theme of the following story: A certain knight  buried his wife, who was dead beyond a doubt, and  got her again by snatching her from a band of

G

Google

98 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

dancers; and he was afterwards presented by her  with children and grandchildren. Their posterity  surviveth until this day, and those who thus derive  their origin have become a vast number, all of whom  are called ‘sons of the dead woman.’ We must  attend with all patience to the works of God and to  the rein that He giveth to evil, and we must praise  Him in all things because in such measure as He  Himself passeth our understanding, so His works

10 transcend our searchings and are beyond our dis-  putes ; and whatever we can conceive in regard to  His purity or know, if we can know aught—that  clearly He must possess, since He is the very  essence of true purity and pure truth.

Of the same Apparitions. xIv  CERTAIN knight found that his first-born of

a wife who was very dear to him, and a  worthy and well-born woman, had its throat cut  in its cradle on the first morning after its birth,

29and so with a second child a year later, and with  a third in a third year, despite all the watchings  of himself and his friends which proved lamentably  futile. He and his wife therefore anticipated the  fourth childbirth with many fasts and alms and  prayers and tears; and when a boy was born to  them, they environed the whole neighbourhood  with fires and lights, and all kept their eyes upon  the child. Just then arrived a stranger, weary as  from a long journey, who, seeking hospitality in  30 God’s name, was most devoutly welcomed. He  sat watching with them, and lo, after midnight,  when all the others were plunged in sleep, he, who  alone was very wakeful, suddenly saw a reverend  matron bending over the cradle and seizing the  child to cut its throat. He then sprang up all alert,  and held her fast in his grasp, until, when all were  aroused and gathered around, she was recognized

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 99

by many of them, and indeed soon by all, everybody  protesting that she was the noblest of all the matrons  of that city in birth, manners, wealth, and all  honour. But to her name and to various questions  she deigned no reply. And because the father him-  self and many others attributed this silence to her  shame at detection, they pleaded for her release ;  but the stranger, without yielding, declared that she  was a demon and held her tight, and with one of the  keys to the nearest church he branded her face as a 10  sign of her evil. Then her captor instructed them  to bring thither with all speed the lady for whom  she had been mistaken. And while he was still  holding his captive, the lady was led forward and  resembled her double in every way, even to the  mark of branding. Then the stranger said to the  others, who stood foolishly agape with wonder, ‘ I  opine that she who hath now come is very virtuous  and very dear to God, and that she hath provoked  by her good deeds the envy of demons against her, 20  whence it cometh to pass that this base messenger  of theirs, this baleful instrument of their wrath, hath  been moulded, as far as possible, in the likeness of  this good woman, that she may shed upon this  noble soul the disgrace of her wicked deeds. But  that you may have faith, see what she will do after  her release.’ Then the creature flew away through  the window with great weeping and wailing.

Of the same Apparitions. xv

HAT more can be said of these beings and their 30

behaviour? Paul and Antony, who were pro-  perly called ‘ hermits,’ because as roving dwellers in  a vast desert they sought God in solitude without  knowledge of each other, were admonished in spirit,  Antony to be an arriving guest, Paul a receiving  host, the one awaited, the other awaiting. But the  guest coming, and in doubt about the way, was met

Google

100 DE NUGIS COURIALIUM

by a galloping centaur who crossed his path—a  creature double in shape, man from the waist up,  horse below. This being replied to his questions  with neighs instead of words and pointed out the  way with hishand. After this creature, yet another  appeared of its own free will with the feet of a kid,  a hairy belly, and on its breast a dappled fawn skin,  moreover, with a glowing face, a bearded chin, and  horns upright. The ancients picture Pan as of  10this sort, for pan is interpreted all, whence he is  said to have in himself the form of all the world.  With careful words he showed the way, and when  asked who he was, replied that he was one of those  angels who were cast out with Lucifer and who have  been scattered through the world, each one’s pun-  ishment proportioned to the pitch of his pride.

Also of the same Apparitions. xXvI

S not this too a phantom ? At Louvain, on the  border of Lorraine and Flanders, in the place  20named Lata Quercus (° Big Oak’), many thousands  of knights had come together, as even now is their  wont, to contend in arms in knightly wise—in the  game which they call tournament, but which may  more fitly be called torment. Before the meeting  in the lists, there was seen sitting on a mighty |  charger a knight, beautiful of person, of more  than average height, and fitly accoutred in goodly  armour. Leaning upon his lance, he sighed so  heavily that many bystanders remarked it and  30 asked him the reason. But he answered them with  a deep breath, ° Good God! How great a task it is  for me to overcome all who have come hither.’ As  this answer passed from mouth to mouth, the  stranger was pointed out by every one in turn with  whispers of envy and indignation. But he, taking  the offensive, rushed with his lance upon his  opponents, and, the whole day long, he fought so

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 101

valiantly, and was so shining a mark in many  triumphant encounters, gloriously prevailing against  all comers, that no envy could hurtfully stifle his  praise, and the malice of hatred was turned through  admiration of him to love. But praise is chanted  rightly only when the end is achieved, and the day  is praised only when evening hath come. He  seemed a ‘child of fortune,’ but, at the very end,  when all were departing, he was pierced to the heart  and suddenly slain by an unworthy knight of little 10  reputation. Both divisions of fighters were re-  called, and when each and all had viewed him  without his armour, no one knew him; and until  this day no one hath ever learned his name.

Of G(r)ado, a most valiant Knight. xvu

DMIRE in due measure G(r)ado as a firm rock  among tempests, for he, in the midst of hope  and fear, balanced himself so evenly, while perform-  ing the labours of a Hercules, as not to fall with  shame into the reproach of either extreme. He 20  was the son of a king of the Vandals, whose kingdom  he had left in his boyhood, not fleeing the demands .  of his fatherland or the discipline of his father ; but  having a mind greater than the world, he scorned  the confinement of his paternal borders. After  attaining an adequate knowledge of books, he  turned him to arms and subdued the monsters of  the whole world. And although he was not a  prodigy like Hercules in regard to his giant stature,  nor like Achilles in regard to his nature half-divine, 30  he fully deserveth to be extolled not with lower  titles of praise, but, by reason of his prowess, with  even greater ones of valour and of strength. Thor-  oughly trained in battle and skilled in the chase of  fish and birds and beasts, he shone so brightly in  both war and peace that he was said to be ignorant  of nothing. Although a troop of armed men could

Google

102 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

hardly resist the sword in his right hand, he was a  lover of peace and ever its worthy champion. He  wandered through all the world, and took part  everywhere in far-famed contests, always carefully  weighing the claims of both sides, so as to redress  wrong and uphold right. And because he never  withdrew from any undertaking, nor, by ever re-  fusing to act, proved recreant to his vows, he was  said to have all wisdom by those of whatever king-  1i0dom he spoke the tongue. By the fortunate fre-  quency of the successes of his whole life, he seemed  to win obedience, just as if ‘every living and  moving thing ’ obeyed his will with full understand-  ing. Coming into our island of England, he saw  Offa, a most valiant king, of the age between  boyhood and youth—a most happy period, if one  could only recognize its happiness, but our whole  life glideth by in such wise that our eyes do not  perceive present happiness, but are open only to  209 the past. This king had shut up the Welshmen  in a small corner of their Wales and had surrounded  them with a ditch which is still called from his name  (Offa’s Dyke), and, crossing or passing which, they  were made to atone and to moan by the loss of a  foot. He had brought his kingdom, by the dint of  great toil and zeal, to the highest pitch of prosperity,  and had won as his wife the daughter of the Emperor  of the Romans. We have heard of many marriages  between Romans and English that ended in the  30 tears of both, and this match was one of these.  Romans on missions from the emperor had come  frequently to Offa, and, enriched by him, had re-  turned full of praise of king and kingdom. When  Rome beheld these in the shining glory of their  garments and gold, it was straightway aglow with  innate avarice. Nor need we marvel, for the name  * Roma’ is formed from the first letters of the defini-  tion both of avarice and of itself, that is, it is made  up of the letters R and O and M and A, and the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 103

definition, along with the word itself, is Radix  omnium malorum, avaricia. Covetous Romans sug-  gested, therefore, to their lord, the Emperor Cunnan  (Conrad)—of whom a monk had said, at the sight  of his deformity, *“ Lord Cunnanus is nothing except  Cunnus and anus ’—that, because Rome was de-  servedly the head of the world and the mistress of  all nations, England should be made a fief instead  of free; nor did they cease from inciting him to  that end until they finally brought him to their 10  own pitch of avarice. But only one thing restrained  them from beginning the attack—they were well  aware that Gado was still alive, the arch defender  of all innocence, and that it would be impossible  to begin so arduous an undertaking anywhere, either  far or near, without his being called in for the de-  fence of justice. The emperor sighed for a long  time for this consummation, and the Romans sighed  along with him, but they kept their counsel well.  In total ignorance of these plans, Offa sent away 20  Gado, whom he had kept near him for a very long  time in his constant regard and full reverence; and  Gado carried away with him not as much as he  could but as much as he would of wealth. With  this heavy meed of treasure he left England for the  farthest Indies, summoned thither by breathless  messengers and anxious letters just as if he were a  sword in the hand of the Lord, the avenger of all  injuries to which he was bidden. Since he was thus  dwelling in the uttermost parts of earth, the memory 30  of him waxed fainter among the Romans; and  there were even those who feigned to the emperor  the manner and place and time of Gado’s death,  to still his fear of attacking the English. Then the  forces of the empire were levied by the weightiest  proclamations, and a numerous, indeed innumer-  able, army was led in an unforeseen attack upon  Offa and his English—I mean, unforeseen by them,  but foreseen by God. For Gado, having speedily

Google

104 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

adjusted the difficulties of the Indi, was hastening  home by sea to his father’s kingdom, but since the  winds were contrary to his wishes, though favour-  able through God’s will to the aid of English, he,  as defender and friend, was borne on the same day  to the same shore as the assailants and enemies.  He presented himself to Offa, and, having gathered  forces, abode near by at Colchester, where it is  reported that Helen, the finder of the Cross of  10 Christ, was born; and hither his messengers re-  turned to him bearing a refusal of the peace which  he sought. Gado, therefore, seeing the battle im-  minent, perceived that he had been borne thither  by the Lord, and willingly obeyed His hest. Now he  prepared himself for the work in hand, and, putting  on the costly garments which he always wore, and  accompanied by a hundred picked knights, he hied  him to the tent of the emperor. The first who  beheld him was struck with all wonder, and, eager  20 to be his messenger to the emperor, announced the  approach of a man of might, grey-haired, silk-clad,  like unto the angels and already glorified by God, and  with him some hundred knights, the best, it seemed,  from all quarters of the world, the bravest and the  fairest. It must be noted that Gado always had  in his train at least a hundred. In great alarm at  these reports, the emperor, well aware of what  had happened, stood dumfounded, and accused  his councillors of betraying him into coming. And  .30lo, Gado, appearing in their midst, asked, ‘ Is the  coming of his Imperial Majesty peaceful?’ The  emperor replied, ‘ What is that to thee, who never  abidest at home ? But is thine own coming peace-  ful, thou who huntest strifes and contentions  throughout the world ?® Then Gado, ever a man  of the staunchest heart and of steadfast truth,  gently replied: ‘ Peaceful, because with the grace  and virtue of God, innocence will have peace. In  calling me “ hunter of strifes ’’ thou dost not err,

Go gle

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 105

for, ever ready at the summons, I eagerly track  them out, and when I find them, destroy them with  all my strength. I hate the makers of discords and  shall never be their friend, unless they cease from  fomenting them.’ With these words he left the  tent, and, joining those who were awaiting him  without, he saluted the Romans and departed.  He did not salute them because he loved them or  wished to be saluted in turn, but he took pleasure  in recalling the proper usage, for no consideration}10  of courteous habit must be omitted, lest there  result forgetfulness of good manners which so  easily slip away; whence it cometh about that  customary courtesy must be paid even where it!  is not due, and happy is he who preserveth good  manners by frequent use. The Romans wondered  and feared, because the knights of Gado were  famous for their lofty height and splendid presence  as well as for their rich dress, and were superior  not only to themselves but to all men whom they 20  had ever seen. Gado hastened at once to Offa,  bringing to him as much hope and security as he  had brought dread and distrust to the Romans,  and, apprised of his right and of the wrong done him  by the invaders, he put on his own armour and  then moved the army forward to a just combat.  He stationed the king and his whole host, with  the exception of five hundred picked men, in the  middle of the city in a large and empty place. He  himself with only his own men hastened straightway 30  to the gate which was first exposed to the attacks  of the enemy, and he put in command of the gate  next to him a youth of highest rank, the king’s  nephew, Suanus by name, with the aforesaid five  hundred picked men. When the first phalanx of  the Romans came, they avoided in fear Gado,  and concentrated all their attacks upon Suanus,  but he sustained these assaults with such valour,  and resisted them with such resolution, that,

Google

106 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

disbelieving the eyes with which they had seen Gado  elsewhere, they thought that they had found him  here in person; and they strove to overwhelm  with an excess of numbers the men whom all their  warlike efforts could not master. At length, of  their phalanxes two were put to flight in disorder,  and of the five hundred of Suanus, two hundred  had fallen. Before the three hundred survivors  could recover from their weariness, a fresh phalanx  10 of five hundred rushed upon them. When Suanus  sent a knight to Gado with a request for aid, he was  told to fight on bravely. He obeyed without pro-  test and rushed upon the enemy with so little regard  for them, and bore himself with such confidence  into their midst that it seemed not a conflict, but  the flight of lambs before wolves or of hares from  dogs; and he pressed on, going beyond the gate,  slaying them clear to their fourth line. Red with  mortification, however, because he had asked for  20 aid, Suanus counted life cheap, and was ashamed  to come back from the enemy, and, by his death,  he prepared to redeem the reproach of cowardice,  until Gado, in pity, commanded him to draw back.  Suanus, not consulting his own wishes but pru-  dently obeying his superior, left the gate at Gado’s  behest and hastened to his king. Then the enemy,  like a great ‘force of water at the breaking of a  dam,’ rushed into the gate, confident of triumph,  but Offa met them bravely in the market-place, and  30 they dashed against a mighty rock of resistance.  In the rear, Gado threatened them through the  same gate, and, like a sharp sickle among the reeds,  he rushed through the middle of the unhappy  wretches, leaving a wide swath wherever he went.  The Romans, caught in a trap, fell back and were  felled, and, because the conquered had no hope,  nor the conquerors any fear, the victors disdained  to pursue and Gado recalled the king. The Romans,  who had begun the war, were granted peace, and

Google |

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 107

in ships bestowed by the king they carried their  dead with them to Rome for burial.

Of Andronicus, the Emperor of Constantunople. XvitII

HEN Louis the Fat was reigning in France.

and Henry 1. in England, the ruler of Con-  stantinople was Andronicus, famous for his two  sons, Andronicus and Manuel. After Andronicus  had been sent by his father upon an expedition  and was tarrying there, the father passed away.

Then Manuel occupied the throne—illegally, since 10

he was the younger brother—and drove out An-  dronicus upon his return. The older, carrying  through provinces and towns his complaint of so  great a wrong, succeeded in arming against Manuel  almost half the world, and would have prevailed  against him; but Manuel, who was lavish of  treasure and greedy of honour, and who knew the  Greeks to be soft and effeminate, wily and loqua-  cious, faithless toward their enemies and cowardly,

used them to suit his purposes of the moment by 20

pouring forth wealth and feigning promises. More-  over, he brought in, as if for the protection of the  persons and property of the Greeks, men from this  side of the mountains, whom he really designed as  a protection against his own perils. Since he  spared no money, these starvelings filled the land  with their swarms, for, entering in hordes, they  grew by degrees to a great multitude. Conqueror  by their work and his wealth, Manuel, who pitied

his brother in the hour of total defeat and exile, 30

granted him a kingdom bordering on the land of  the Parthians (that is, the Turks), large in size  and value, but remote, exacting in return the  obligation of an oath of perpetual renunciation of  the empire, binding not only him but his son and  heir, a younger Andronicus. So Manuel thought  that he had satisfied justice in the matter of his

Google

108 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

usurpation, and piety by his unforced gift. After  the death of Andronicus the father, Andronicus the  son renewed the obligation exacted by Manuel.  Since this relation was faithfully observed even  to the times of Pope Lucius, who succeeded Pope  Alexander the Third, the aforesaid Manuel ruled  the empire most happily ; he accepted for his son,  Manuel, the daughter of Louis, King of France;  and he departed full of years and honours, happy  10 save in this, that he left a son barely seven years  old in the care of a Greek, who was called from his  office ‘ Protosalvator.’ When the news was brought,  Andronicus, being a man of the basest audacity,  who had already twice denied Christ in order to  wheedle aid from the Turks, even now denied Him  the third time, so to speak, and, gathering a huge  band of Saracens, carried his quarrel through the  neighbouring islands that belonged to Manuel and  the adjacent provinces. As a pretext, he alleged  20 that the Protosalvator wished to misuse the wife  of his lord and to lead her in marriage, and that the  two had conspired to kill the young Manuel or,  indeed, had already slain him, so as to rule together  with a seeming regard for virtue. Moreover, he  \ promised with tears to be a most faithful guardian  of the young prince, should the people deem him  worthy of attaining this end by their grace and aid,  thus disposing of all deceit and scandal. Still  weeping, he added to his promises presents and  30 every pretence of a righteous grief. All men be-  lieved him and accepted him as the boy’s guardian  and tutor. Then, coming in strong force, he  shattered the opposing battle lines under the  direction of the Protosalvator, for they were not  imbued with soldierly courage, but were sold by  ‘their leaders to a death of treachery. This is  ‘Greek faith. He finally reached the sea, which is  ‘ealled the ‘ Brace of St. George.’ Sending in ad-  vance certain Greek citizens of Constantinople, he

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 109

crossed the sea by the favour of Alexius and their  aid, and was admitted through the Gate of the  Danes upon paying a price and giving a promise  not to hang the citizens. Remaining in Constan-  tinople were men brought thither by Manuel, whom  the natives called Franks, foreigners of nearly  every nation; and these the Greeks hated heartily  by reason of envy, for to such an extent was the:  might of Greece exhausted by the Trojan war that!  since Ajax, against whose valour deceit unjustly 10  prevailed, there is nowhere to be found among the'  Greeks aught lofty or eminent; and to such an,  extent have they declined that they have become:  the hateful refuse of all peoples and the castaways ,  of every commonwealth. We know also that |  fugitive bands of the proscribed and the condemned -  have attached themselves to this country of Greece, .  and that those whose deep-seated baseness hath  exiled them from their own homes have acquired  among the Greeks such an authority that Grecian 20  envy can be as hotly kindled against them as it  would against the Trojans restored to life. I be-,

dge not their claims to that very holy virgin  (St. Katherine) whom the Lord, from her cradle to  the day of her death, hath followed with signs and  miracles. JI detract in no wise from those whom  the Lord hath chosen, I am speaking only of  soldiers, because this Grecian race hath declined  in the exercise of arms after the destruction of the  Trojan army, nor hath there been found among 30  them aught of military glory since Achilles, Ajax,  and the son of Tydeus (Diomede).

Of Gillescop, a most valiant Scot. xIx

MET once a man from Scotland who had won  in that country everlasting fame. His name  was Gillescop, that is to say, Bishop. Although  he had taken part in almost all the combats of dukes,

Google

110 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

chiefs, and kings of the lands, he carried off the  palm of both armies in each encounter, whether  he chanced to be with the victors or with the  vanquished, since he was, from youth to age, a man  of fortunate daring, who never basely fathered rash  presumption, although he rushed with seeming  blindness into every danger. Rarely or never was  this splendid daring denied success. He was called  Bishop not from the office, but from his crown of  10 baldness. Now near Scotland are many islands  ruled by petty kings, one of whom, governing a land  only two miles from the Scottish coast, was a man of  notorious boldness in arms. In the early dawn of  the Lord’s Day, he carried off the mistress of the  aforesaid Gillo, who, hearing of the abduction at  prime of the same day, took it so savagely that,  without consulting friends and without seeking or  bespeaking a boat, unarmed save for a sword and  entirely naked save for breeches split in the seat,  20 he dared to enter the deep, using himself as rudder,  oar, and sail, at once the ship and its helmsman,  at once army and leader. Although he rushed  headlong into every possible peril, he crossed safely  and reached land. He approached the home of the  abductor from the rear, and, entering unobserved  through a small door, he saw within, among three  hundred or more revellers, his mistress clinging in  the king’s embrace. At this sight, the unexpected  guest sprang madly in, and with one blow slew the  30 king and was gone. The revellers stood amazed ;  and some in grief for the dead, but more who were  more kindled by a wicked indignation into passion,  chose to chase him with weapons. Bearing in his  hand through the midst of the waves his bloody  sword, Gillo sought safety in swimming, like a  wild boar barked at from a safe distance by dogs  whom fear of wounds keepeth from close encounter,  but whom fierceness of spirit doth not permit to  give up the fight. Having stabbed two of his

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 111

enemies in the sea, he settled down safely at home,  the doer of a deed unparalleled in boldness, and  the bitterest of avengers.

This same person answered his lord, the King of  Scotland, when that monarch was prevented by  illness from going forth safely to meet the enemy :  * Sire, when you thus send me in your place, you  pray that I fight bravely. Be assured that, whether  you or your enemies be victorious in the war, I  shall triumph over the praises of all.’ And he1o  triumphed.

When the same Gillo, victor in the battle, had  put many of his enemies to flight, he himself was  wounded in the thighs with a broad spear; he  left his comrades to gather the spoils and, sup-  porting his steps by means of his spear, was re-  turning. When he was far from his companions  and their protection, three of the conquered army  suddenly leapt upon him, the first with a spear,  the second with a knife, the third with a bow. 20  Gillo was unarmed save for his spear, but to this  he soon added the aforesaid weapons. At the first  onslaught, he caught one of his foes on his spear  and pierced him to the heart, warding off with his  left hand his opponent’s spear; then, drawing out  his own from his enemy’s body, he stabbed the  second through the middle of the groin. The third  assailant found Gillo reeling, and hence, reckoning  him lightly, embraced him as if choosing for the  foe a death of his own selection. But Gillo speedily 30  drove the knife under his heart, receiving himself  a thrust between the shoulder-blades. The four  lay together on the ground, but he alone escaped  and was found by his friends and carried to a place  of safety. He lived to old age despite dangers of  very many different kinds; and perhaps from  experiences of this sort was framed the soldiers’  proverb: ‘Go thou where thou wilt, thou wilt die  where death is due,’ as if any one was able to rush

Google

112 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

upon every death, and yet not anticipate his end.  It is well for soldiers to believe this, and hence to  be stirred to emulation.

On the Character of the Welsh. xx

\ Y fellow-countrymen, the Welsh, although  they are in every wise faithless to every  ‘wight, to each other as well as to strangers, yet  ithey are good men—I do not say eminent in merit  or pre-eminent in manly strength, but biting in  i0their attack and bitter in their resistance: good,  that is, in their evil, lavish of their lives, greedy of  liberty, negligent of peace, warlike and wise in  arms, eager for revenge, generous of their property,  very sparing, each one of them, in his own eating,  but giving freely to any one else, so that each man’s  sustenance belongeth to everybody; and no one  ever asketh another for bread, but without question  taketh it wherever he cometh upon it and any other  food which he may find ready to his hand. And  20 so far from being open to the charge of greed, they  hold gerierosity and hospitality in such respect  that no host, before the third day, may ask of him  whom he hath received under his roof whence he  came or what his name, lest his guest be shamed  or gather the impression that his host suspecteth  him and feel obliged to reply to his host’s questions  in order to abide in safety from his power. On  the third day, however, the host may respectfully  29 question him.

On the Hospitality of the Welsh. xxi

ONTRARY to this practice, the followimg came  to pass. A certain man of those parts took  a stranger into his house, and, leaving him early  one morning, went forth, lance in hand, about his  own affairs, That night he passed elsewhere, and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 113

when he returned the second morning and could  not, after a search, find his guest, he asked his wife  what had become of him. She replied, ‘He was  lying abed at early dawn, and through the open  door saw the severe storm of wind and snow.  *““Good God!” he cried out, “ what a terrible  tempest !’’ I answered him, “‘ It only maketh it  pleasant for a slothful man to tarry in the house  of a wise one.” At this he gave a great groan and  said, “‘ Wicked woman, I will not tarry,’’ and out 10  he hurried with his lance and I was not able to  call him back.’ Her husband, crying out that he  had been deceived, pierced her to the heart with  his lance, and, sobbing bitterly, followed hard upon  the footsteps of his guest. After he had gone on  for some time he came upon a dead wolf, and eight  others prowling round the path in front of him, and  at length a broken lance. Farther on, some dis-  tance away, he saw the object of his’ search sitting  on the ground, and one wolf, but far larger than 20  the others, leaping at him from close range. He  hastened then, drove off the wolf, and, throwing  himself at the stranger’s feet, he begged him to  pardon his wife’s fault, telling him of the punish-  ment meted out to her. The poor fellow, almost  dying as he was, and seeing the wolf awaiting the  outcome, replied: ‘On this one condition will I  acquit thee of my death, that thou step aside, while  I have any strength and life remaining, until I meet  the attack of the wolf, which meseemeth is so evilly 30  clinging, as it were, to me, and can slay it.’ The  other thereupon withdrew as requested; the wolf  leaped upon the wounded man, who slew it with  the lance which he who stood by had lent him,  The host then carried his half-dead guest back to  his home and shortly afterwards laid his dead body  in the earth. This was the beginning of a feud  between the descendants of the living man and of  the dead, and of mutual revenge lasting even unto  H

Google

114 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

this day. And although the living kindred are  without blame, they are not without reproach,  because of the birth of suspicion owing to the  remark of an inhospitable wife. Since I have begun  to talk about the Welsh, let me bring to your  attention a case which hath been discussed and  debated for a long time.

On Llewelyn, King of the Welsh. xxl

LEWELYN, King of Wales, a faithless man,

10 as nearly all his forbears and descendants,  had a most beautiful wife whom he loved more  passionately than he was loved by her. He there-  fore armed himself in every way against assaults  upon her chastity, and, consumed by his suspicious  jealousy, made every effort to prevent another’s  intercourse with her. There came to his ears a  story that a young man of those parts, most ex-  cellent in reputation, report, character, birth, and  beauty, and most happy in the circumstances of  20 wealth and person, had dreamed that he had  ‘intercourse with her. The king explained this by  saying that the young man was the victim of  delusion, and yet, as if he were dealing with an  actual occurrence, he was wild with grief and by a  wile caught the guiltless youth; and, had he not  been hindered by the standing of the other’s kin-  dred and by fear of revenge, he would have tortured  the young man and put him to death. As is the  custom, all the youth’s relatives offered themselves  30as security for him, and urged him to beware  standing trial. He gainsaid them and demanded  an immediate judgment. Their offer thus refused, .  they complained of the refusal, and while he was  held in prison, they spread abroad the report of the  trial. Many kept thronging to the suit both at the  bidding of the king and at the invitation of the  other party, and when the second were worsted

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 115

on every point, they called to their aid wise men  from every possible quarter. Finally they consulted  a man whom report placed above them all, as he  was in fact. He replied to them: ‘ The practices  of our land ought to be followed, and the statutes  which our sires made and which have been fixed  by long habit we can in no way overthrow. Let  us follow them, and, until the public law decideth  to the contrary, let us bring forward nothing new.  By our most ancient laws it hath been set down 10  that he who doth violate the queen of a king of the  Welsh shall pay to the king a thousand cows, and  then go free unliable to any other penalty. Con-  cerning the wives of princes, likewise, and of any  of the chief men, the penalty consists in the pay-  ment of a definite number, according to the position  of each one individually. This man is accused of  having dreamed of intercourse with the queen, nor  doth he deny the accusation. In view of his con-  fession of the truth of the charge, it is clear that he20 |  must give a thousand cows. In view of his dream  we thus give judgment, that the young man shall  place his thousand cows in sight of the king in a  line on the bank of Lake Bethenium, in the sunlight,  when the shadow of each cow may be seen in the  water, and that the shadows shall belong to the  king, but the cows to their former owner, since a  dream is the shadow of reality.’ All expressed  their approval of this decision, and its execu-  tion was ordered despite the violent opposition of 30  the king.

On the Same. XXIII

HIS Llewelyn in his youth, during the lifetime

of his father, Griffin, was slothful and in-  active and always sitting in his father’s chimney-

corner, a trifling fellow and a weakling who went

forth seldom. His sister had taunted him freely,

Google

116 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and finally, on the night before the Feast of the  Circumcision, she went to him and, weeping bitterly,  said: ‘ Dearest brother, to the great annoyance of  the king and this kingdom, thou hast become the  laughing-stock and the byword of every one,  although thou art the only son and heir of the king.  Now, however, I beg thee to do what is most easy  to do and without danger in the doing. It is the  custom of this land for all the young men to go  10forth on this night, which is the first among the  nights of the year, to seek spoil, or to commit theft,  or at least to eavesdrop, that each may make by  this means proof of his prowess—to seek spoil,  as did Gestin, who journeyed far and whatever he  seized brought back easily and without trouble,  and for that year prospered in great undertakings ;  to commit theft, as did the bard Golen, who, from  a sty full of pigs, brought back the straw without  a grunt irom a single pig, and whatever he wanted  20 during that year he could steal without any com-  plaint or even a sound; to eavesdrop, or to listen,  as did Theudus (which in the Latin is Theodosius),  who went secretly up to the house of Meiler and  heard some one of those sitting within say, “‘ I saw  early this morning a * little cloud rising out of the  sea,’ and it became a very great cloud, so large  that it covered the entire sea.’’ Theudus therefore  concluded that these words signified the following  outcome: that he, a little cloud, that is, a small  30 child, having been born from the sea, namely Wales,  which is always in upheaval, would become a king ;  and this the future actually brought to him. Now,  dearest brother, go forth to eavesdrop, at least,  since this is without any danger.’ By these words  the boy was aroused, as if his spirit was awakening  from a heavy sleep, and he was thrown into a  passion which he had never before experienced ;  by a quick and ready will he became strong and  active. Gathering a band of several youths, he

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 117

took his stand beside the wall of a certain man’s  house, secretly listening with eager ears. Within,  many men were seated, and in their midst was a  dismembered ox which their cook was stirring in  a cauldron with a meat-hook. The cook spoke,  * There is one remarkable piece which I have found  here among the others, for, although I prod it  continually and force it to sink beneath the rest,  it immediately appeareth on top of them.’ ‘ This  saying doth apply to me,’ quoth Llewelyn, ‘ whom 10  many have tried, and will continue to try, to  oppress, and always, contrary to their hopes, I  shall rush furiously upon them.’ Happy, there-  fore, in such an unmistakable prophecy, he left  his father, declared war upon his neighbours, a  thief most clever of them all and a most eager  raider upon others’ wealth. In headlong zeal there  gathered about him all bands of iniquity, and in  a short time even his father feared him. After  the old king’s death he held under his sway all the 20  territory of Wales, and in peace except for such  persecution as he visited upon his own people.  For he was like Alexander of Macedon and all  those whom insatiable desire hath set free from all  check—prodigal, watchful, active, bold, quick-witted,  affable, lickerous, wicked, treacherous, and pitiless.  This man, whenever he saw any youth showing a  promise of goodness and strength, either treacher-  ously slew him, or else, with his own safety ever  in mind, weakened his body that he might not 30  grow into a strong man. Having suddenly become  supreme lord of all, he would say, ‘I slay no one,  but I dull the horns of the Welsh that they may  not harm their mother.’ His nephew, Llewelyn  Luare, was a boy of fine natural endowment,  slender and sightly, having many qualities in per-  fection, and showing many marks both of manly  might and merit; the king, therefore, foreseeing  his greatness, grew fearful for his own power, but

Google

cl

118 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

in spite of many blandishments he failed to catch  him in his snares. The occasion, however, which  he had long sought for he at last found without  danger to himself. When there was no need for  fear on the boy’s part, the king then said to him,  ‘Tell me, beloved, why dost thou avoid and shun  me, the safest refuge for thee and thine? Thou  art bringing dishonour upon thyself and upon thy  family, and there is no way of atoning for the bad

10repute into which thou art bringing them unless

between us, who are united by blood, thou estab-  lishest a pleasant intercourse; if thou hast any  fear, I shall give thee as sureties whomever thou  choosest.’ To this the boy replied, ‘Give me, I  pray you, Hoel as a surety, him whom you forced,  by your order, to suffocate his relative secretly,  and Rothericus, whom you treacherously received

- with kissing and clipping, and treacherously slew

with a knife, and Theodosius (Theudus), whom,

20 as he walked and talked with you, you tripped and

threw headlong from a steep cliff, and Meilinus,  your nephew, whom you secretly caught in a  snare and, having loaded him down with chains,  compelled him to die in captivity.’ And in this  way he cast up to him many others whom he had  destroyed.

Among all his works of wickedness there is one  noble and honourable deed by good report ac-  credited him. In his day he showed himself so

30 oppressive and dangerous to his neighbours that

King Edward, who then ruled the English, was  compelled to intercede in behalf of his people or  to take up arms for their defence. Ambassadors  were therefore dispatched from Edward to Llewelyn  across the river Severn, and the two kings carried  on a parley with the river between. Edward was  at Austclive, Llewelyn at Beachley. The am-  bassadors passed back and forth in small boats, and  after the exchange of several messages, there was a

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 119

long argument to decide which one of the princes  should cross over to the other. The crossing, more-  over, was difficult on account of the difficulty with  the waves, but the dispute was not on this account ;  Llewelyn claimed precedence, Edward equality ;  Llewelyn based his claim on the ground that his  ancestors had won from the giants all of England,  together with Cornwall, Scotland, and Wales, and  he maintained that he was their heir in direct  descent ; Edward based his on the ground that 10  his ancestors had won this territory from Llewelyn,  who had acquired it. Thereupon, after a lengthy  dispute, Edward entered a boat and hastened  across to Llewelyn. At this point the Severn is  a mile wide. Llewelyn, seeing and recognizing him,  cast off his state robes—for he had dressed himself  for the ceremony—went into the water up to his  waist, and, embracing the boat affectionately, cried :  * Wisest of monarchs, thy humility hath overcome  my pride, and thy wisdom hath triumphed over 20  my stupidity ; the neck which I in my folly raised  up against thee, thou wilt now mount, and thus  wilt thou enter the land which thine own kindliness  hath this day won for thee.” And he took him on  his shoulders and made him sit down on his own  cloak, and, joining hands, did him homage.

This was an excellent beginning of peace, but,  after the Welsh fashion, it was kept only until  chance arose for doing harm. This trait afforded me  an opportunity of answering by a parable a question 30  of the blessed Thomas, at that time the Chancellor:  of my master, King Henry 1. He asked me, since.  I live on the marches of Wales, what conception:  the Welsh have of loyalty, that is, of honour, and  how far they can be trusted. I replied: *° There  was living in exile in Gaul a knight from Germany  named Franko. As he was journeying through a  grove called Bihere he saw King Louis, the son of  Charles (the Great), sitting alone on a rock; his

Google

120 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

sons had captured a stag, and having caught sight  of another passing through the forest, had left the  king and followed in pursuit of the second stag.  The knight was on his way to speak with the  king, but did not know that this man was he, yet  he turned aside to him and asked him where King  Louis was. Louis, wishing to hide his identity,  replied, ‘‘ He will be here in a moment,” and as  the soldier prepared to dismount, the king stood

10up in front of him to hold his stirrup, as is cus-  tomary, in order to prevent the saddle from turning.  Noticing then that the knight wore a very long  sword he asked him to allow him to look at it.  While he was admiring its great size and its shape,  holding the naked sword in his hand, he forgot  his plan of hiding his identity and said in kingly  fashion, ‘‘ Fetch me a stone for a seat.”’ Franko,  in fear of the sword, brought it, and then asked  for his blade. When he had it in his hands again,

20“ Put back the stone,” he said, “‘in its place.”  The king, seeing the upraised sword, was afraid in  turn, and put the stone back. Now by this story I  have described for thee the honour of the Welsh;  as long as thou holdest the sword they will kneel  to thee, when they get hold of it they will command.  That thou mayst know something of the future  fortune of this Franko, I may add that the king,  when his attendants came up, and Franko was  about to flee in fear, stopped him and commended

30 him highly, telling his attendants how well and  cleverly he had made him put back the stone, and  gave him Crépy en Valois for an inheritance.’

In robbery and theft lieth the glory of the Welsh,  and such pleasure do they take in both that it is  a disgrace upon a son if his father dieth a peaceful  death. Hence it is that few live to white hairs,  and hence, too, the proverb, ‘ Death in youth or  destitution in old age,’ meaning that each rusheth  into death to avoid beggary in later life.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 121

On Conan the Fearless. xXxXIv |  ONAN THE FEARLESS, so called because he

never knew fear, a night-hawk and leader of  robbers, wished to rob a soldier who dwelt on the  banks of the Severn at Glamorgan, an active man  and rich. Conan went out alone from a grove  which commanded the whole region, after having  hidden a large band in the grove, and he laid for  the harmless man his harmful snare. When, about  evening, he saw that a knight was hastening to the 10  house of the aforesaid soldier, and that this traveller,  sending a page ahead of him, was received by the  host into his house, he returned to his companions  and said, ‘ The soldier whom we plan to rob must  be left in peace, for he hath received in hospitable  entertainment a knight who besought this in the  name of charity, as is our custom, and he hath in  the person of this knight God as his guest, against  whom any struggle is unequal.’ All laughed at  him and taunted him for this remark, saying, ‘ Ha, 20  how finely this fearless fellow talketh,’ and other  slurs of the same kind. He, preferring to die  rather than be convicted of cowardice, followed the  others until they arrived in the neighbourhood of  the soldier’s house. ‘They aroused the dogs which,  at the sight of the large crowd of men, rushed  out from the yard, as usual, barking loudly. The  soldier’s guest was lying in the hall, near some large  windows which were close to the ground ; he con-  cluded from the noisy barking without that a great 30  crowd of people had arrived; in all haste and  silence he put on his armour, took his lance in his  hand, stationed himself in the middle of the room  in front of the windows listening, and he heard the  crowd, even though it tried to hush the uproar.  And now a nephew of Conan, opening the window  stealthily, put in his foot to enter; but the ready  knight struck him with his lance to the heart and

Google

Fe  Wh bale

122 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

hurled him out. His brother, thinking that he  had leaped out through fear, cursed him heartily  and ran past him; but he too was wounded in a  similar way by the same knight, who cast him out.  Then Conan, having taken up. the dead bodies,  fled in haste, saying to his men, ‘ I knew that God  was within; I know also that J udas Maccabaeus,  God’s bravest champion, once said, “ Not in the  number of soldiers is victory in war, but courage

101s from heaven.”’ On this account I was afraid to  carry out this assault, nor hath the Master forgotten  to take vengeance upon my nephews for their  proud chidings.’

On the Thief Cheveslin. xxv

Bp egy of North Wales, carrying a bridle  about his neck, spurs in his belt, took lodg-  ing in South Wales in the house of Trahair. After  a sober and modest dinner they had been sitting  in silence for some time when he said to Trahair :  20‘ All of you are curious, and yet, owing to your  regard for our custom, no one asketh who I am or  whence I come. Since, however, each one of you  is very eager to learn this, know that I am from  the northern part of Wales, and have been led to  these southern parts by the fame of a blooded mare,  which a man who liveth on our common border  guardeth with such jealous care that now for a  month my plots have been at fault and my endeav-  ours have been futile, although I have always, as  30 was fitting, carefully hidden all signs of these spurs  and this bridle, as ye know I should. ’ Trahair gave  a laugh at this and replied, * Surely it is a well-  founded and fair opinion which our people have of  yours, when they call you faint-hearted and slow-  footed. Who of us, for reputation’s sake, would  not prefer, in the performance of a dangerous theft,  to be caught in an act of foolish rashness and end

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 123

our days rather than to sit idly for a month doing  nothing, with a very rich stake in sight; and see  how utterly lost to shame thou art in not blushing  to confess such a disgraceful thing. Explain to  me who owneth this mare and how it is guarded,  and then remain here with my wife and children  until the third day after my arrival there, so that  thou mayst hear of my glorious death or of my  wonderful return with the booty.’ The other re-  plied: ‘ We have heard that many bold boastings 10  of thy people have dwindled like a tamarisk to a  broom. Cadolan, whom thou knowest well, Uther’s  son, hath the mare in Gesligair; during the day it  feedeth surrounded by an army, during the night  it standeth in the inmost corner of his house, so  that the whole household lieth between it and any  enemy; moreover, in order to guard her closely,  four of his best slaves sleep, between her and the  fire, on a “ brachanum,” that is, a rare carpet;  if thou fetchest me this in addition to the mare, 20  ten cows will be thy reward for the mare and five  for the carpet.’ Trahair took the bridle and spurs,  and, although in Wales no one who is caught in a  theft is, as a general thing, arrested or ransomed,  but punished immediately with death, yet, as if  in no danger, he made his preparations at close  quarters, and found that things were as he had been  told. On the first night he took his stand close  by the house, with ears intently listening and eyes  wide open. It was, too, a night well suited for 30  his plan, very dark, and without stars. Having  found opportunity, he made, with as little noise  as possible, a hole near the door with his knife,  and through this hole he thrust his hand, unlocked  the door, opened it wide, and, going stealthily up  to the mare, unhitched her. Then, finding the  four slaves who were sleeping on the carpet, he  dared, in the mad recklessness of his courage, to  take the fringes of the carpet—they were very long

Google

124 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and strong—and to tie them securely to the beast’s  tail; and then through the hottest part of the fire,  which was smouldering there under its covering of  ashes, he dragged the four out of the door, and  left them unconscious. Raising a hue and cry, the  whole crowd was soon in pursuit, guided only by  the little sparks from the carpet that he was carry-  ing. Extinguishing these, he returned home un-  harmed, surrendered the mare and the carpet, and

10received the cows, winning for himself and his  people whatever glory there was in this bold act  in rivalry with the northerners.

On the Madness of the Welsh. xxvi

| HAT ye may know, moreover, how fatuous  and foolishly mad are the passions of the  Welsh, hear this tale. There was a boy of the  town known as Sepes Incisa (Hay ?), who went  forth to cross the stream called Wye. He was  carrying his bow and two arrows, and meeting  20two of those who were his enemies, he fled. One  of his pursuers followed so closely on his heels that  he was about to capture him, but the boy with one  of his arrows shot him through the breast. The  man, however, called to his companion, ‘ Follow  him, because I am dying, and fetch me my life  from him.’ The other pursued the boy as far as  the next town permitted him, and then returned  to his comrade. The boy thereupon followed him  at some distance on his return in order to learn  30 the end of the wounded man, and he noticed that,  when the unwounded man had come to the other  in a grove of trees, his fellow asked him whether  he had fetched him his life from the boy. On  receiving a negative reply, he said to him, ‘ Come  hither, that thou mayst receive a kiss from me to  carry to my wife and sons, for I am dying.’ As  the unwounded man was about to kiss his wounded

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 125

companion, bending over him as he lay on the  ground, the dying man stabbed him in the stomach  with his dagger, crying, ‘Give up thy life, since  thou didst not, owing to thy cowardice, fetch me  mine.’ The other, then, lying above him, likewise  thrust his dagger into the other’s stomach, saying  as he did so, ‘No boast wilt thou make of my  death, and only this ill hath befallen me, that I am  slain by wounds from thy hand before I can pierce  thy wife and sons with similar kisses.’ Behold  how foolish and unjust is the anger of the Welsh  and how ready they are for bloodshed !

HE greatest marvel that I know happened in  Wales. William Laudun, an English soldier,  sturdy in his strength and of established courage,  went to Gilbert Foliot, at that time Bishop of Here-  ford, but now of London, and said to him, ‘ Master,  I fly to thee for advice; a certain Welsh male-  factor died in my house not long ago, a non-believer ;  after an interval of four nights he hath never failed  to return each night, and hath not ceased summon-  ing forth, one by one and by name, all his fellow-  lodgers. As soon as they are summoned, they grow  ill and die within three days, so that now only a  few survive.’ The bishop in his wonderment re-  plied, “ Power, perchance, was given by God to the  evil angel of that wretch to render him restless in  his dead body. However, dig up the corpse, cut

; ‘ ope  Concerning a certain Marvel. XxXvil Rs

the neck, and besprinkle the body and the grave 30

with holy water, and then rebury it.’ Although  . this was done, none the less were the survivors  assailed by the restless spirit. On a certain night,  therefore, William himself, since now but a few  were left, was summoned thrice, and he, bold and  active as he was, knowing full well what the  summons signified, drew his sword and rushed out.

Google

126 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

As the demon fled he pursued it to the very grave,  and as it lay therein, he clave its head to the neck.  From that hour ceased the persecution from this  ghostly wanderer, nor henceforth did William or  any other suffer harm therefrom. The manner of  this thing we know, of its cause we are ignorant.

Another Marvel. XXVIII

E also know that, in the time of Bishop Roger  of Worcester, a certain man who, it was  10 said, died in unbelief, for a month or even longer,  both day and night, wandered about, seen of all,  in his hair-shirt, until he was surrounded in an  orchard by all the people of the neighbourhood.  He was seen there, it is said, for three days. We  know, moreover, that this same Bishop Roger bade  a cross be raised over the grave of this wretch and  his spirit to be laid. When the demon had come  to the grave, followed by a crowd of people, he  leaped back, seemingly at the sight of the cross,  20 and fled elsewhere. Then the people, acting upon  wise advice, removed the cross, and the demon fell  into the grave, covered himself with earth, and,  after the cross was raised again, lay in peace.

Another Marvel. xXxX1Ix

N the book of Turpin, Archbishop of Rheims,  dealing with the deeds of Charlemagne, whose  personal attendant he was up to the day of that  king’s death, I find it recorded that a soldier of  Charlemagne’s army, dying at Pampeluna, left all  his goods to a certain clerk, his dearest companion,  to be divided among the poor. The clerk, however,  after distributing all else in due order, was greedy  enough to keep for some time the soldier’s horse,  one of the best in all the army. Three times he  was warned by the soldier in a dream not to keep

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 127

for himself what had been left for the poor, but he  wrongfully paid no heed; the fourth time the  soldier appeared to him when awake and said:  * Now art thou condemned and God hath hardened  thy heart that thou mayst not repent. Since thou  hast mocked His patience and scorned His warnings,  and in thy pride denied God His honour, on the  third day from this, at the third hour, thy living  body will be carried off by demons into the air.’  When this saying was reported to Charles, he had 10  the clerk’s house surrounded by his whole army.  There were standing by also all the people, clerks  carrying crosses, reliquaries, and candles, laymen  armed with swords and other suitable weapons ;  in spite of all, however, in the midst of a mighty  yelling in the air, the clerk was seized out of  their hands, and on the fourth day, three days’  journey away, his mangled body was found among  the rocks. | 19

Another Marvel. xxx

SOLDIER from Northumbria was seated alone  in his house one day in summer after his  lunch about the tenth hour (or three o’clock), when,  lo, there appeared, clad in a cheap and ragged cloak,  his father who had died some time before. . The  soldier, thinking him a demon, drove him from the  door. ‘Then to him said his father: ‘ Dearest son,  have no fear, for I am thy father, and bring thee  no harm; but summon a priest that thou mayest  learn the reason for my coming.’ A priest was 30  thereupon called and came with a great crowd, and  the man, falling down at the priest’s feet, cried out,  ‘IT am that unhappy wretch on whom thou long  since didst lay a curse because I wrongfully held  back my tithes, and whom thou, without calling  me by name, didst excommunicate along with a  crowd of others; but of such avail to me have, by

Google

C AAthe 4 aircdes  a ae 3 4  Phat Ag} {  fea ne a

AOpe Crife fey  COMPA |

oa y Oc MESO,

the need Fn a-ate a

cred}.

128 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

God’s grace, been the general prayers of the Church  and the alms of the faithful that I may now seek  absolution.’ He was thereupon absolved, and, at-  tended by a great procession, he came to the grave  into which he fell and which of its own accord  { closed over him. This strange hap introduced a  new discussion of Holy Writ.

i  a

Concerning certain Proverbs. XXxXI  CERTAIN knight, Hereditary Seneschal of

10 France, at his last hour spake thus unto his  son: ° Best beloved son, by God’s grace thou art  dear to all, and God is clearly with thee. But now  these my last precepts do thou observe for the  good of thy health and for the firm foundation of  thy person and thy property, and that thy under-  takings may find joy in a happy outcome. Thou  shalt not free one who hath been justly condemned ;  thou shalt not drink stagnant water which doth not  make its own channel; thou shalt not exalt a slave ;

20 thou shalt not marry the daughter of an adulteress ;  thou shalt not trust a red-headed man of low birth.’  The son, after he had laid his father in the grave,  was received by the king into the inheritance ‘and  office of his father, dear at first to the king and  acceptable to all France, for he was a gentle man  and wise, who carefully moulded himself in the  morals of the good. And yet too little diligent was  he regarding his father’s precepts: he married the  daughter of an adulteress and, having a red-headed

30 Slave like a ‘ hungry Greek,’ and noticing his marked  attention, his diligence, his close application to  affairs, thought himself as lucky in his coming as  though with this fellow the blessing of God had  descended. This slave, therefore, he put in charge  of his household and his money as well as of all  his affairs.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 129

Conclusions of the Foregoing. XXXII

FOREST and timber—I do not say fictitious '  but factitious—I set before you; elegance in ‘|  the telling is not my aim, nor, if I should strive after  it, could I attain it; let the individual reader carve  the shapeless mass set before him that by his efforts  it may appear in pleasing form. I am your hunts-  man: I bring you the game, dress the dishes for |  yourselves. é

Google

Cx am ples say  % er ated ~ 4 fy

THIRD DIVISION  Prologue. 1

HEN our counsellors leave the business of

counselling, wearied by the greatness of a  king’s tasks, they take pleasure in unbending to  join converse with the lowly, and in lightening with  jests the weight of serious affairs. In this way  may it please thee, after thou hast rested from the  counsel of a book of philosophy, or, it may be, of  the divine book, to hear or to read for the sake  of pastime or pleasure the savourless and sapless  prt of this book. For it is not of the contests

fut

f the courts or of the magnitude of a philosopher’s  axims that I am going to treat; the stage and  the arena I now occupy, a naked boxer and unarmed,  whom in such wise thou hast, actually of thine own  motion, sent to face the well-armed tiers of hissing  | \spectators. And yet if this stage or this arena  should be visited by Cato or by Scipio or by both,  hope for their pardon, provided they do not judge  29me too critically. Thou biddest me write for those  who come after us exempla which will either pro-  voke a laugh or point a moral. Although it is  impossible for me to carry out thy bidding, because  ‘a poor poet knoweth not the caves of the Muses,’  ‘it is not difficult to collect or to write that which  ‘a good man’s goodness will make useful for him  \since ‘all things work together for good to the  good’), or to entrust to a rich soil seeds which shall  bring forth good fruit. But who can cultivate a  sqworthless and froward (warring) spirit, since, ac-  cording to the Scripture, *‘ Vinegar upon nitre is he  130

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 181

that singeth songs to an heavy heart.’ Here are

songs sung by Sadius; is it thy pleasure to hear  them ? we

On the Comradeship of Sadius and Galo. um}

pee and Galo, equal in character, youth,  and comeliness, well learned in the science of  arms, and of a long and noble lineage, loved each  other with warm and honourable affection in which  they stood proved amid adversity, and served far  and near as a pattern and a proverb. For faith- 10  ful friendships have this pleasure in their happiness,  that when they are fostered among the good they  force even the unfriendly to praise them. Sadius  was the nephew of the king of the Asiatics, in whose  palace both the young men served on equal footing  as soldiers, and he was loved so deeply by his uncle  that the king without Sadius would have been  without spirit or life; and rightly, too, because in  regard to virtue of mind and ability of body he was  such as thy very self wouldst wish to be. Galo, 20  although a stranger born, was rich in the same happi-  ness in all respects save the king’s deep affection,  and often he was wont to weep to himself over his  misfortune—which perchance another would have  deemed success—namely, that he was too passion-  ately loved by the queen. She was most pressing  in her attacks upon his heart, trying by words and  signs, by every means in her power, either to bend  him who was unyielding, or to soften him who was  hard, or to make him who was wise play the fool ; 30  with hands and eyes desiring but not desired,  tendered but not tenderly received. There were  gifts without end, necklaces, rings, girdles, Persian  garments, and in truth a passion which was not  slothful, not forgetful. No form of solicitation did  the queen leave untried, no form of persuasion ;  completely did she show herself a bawd by her

Google

182 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

immodesty, and whatever passion is wont to urge  to the love-crazed, this she attempted. Galo tried  in every way to act respectfully and modestly, and  without an uncompromising form of refusal, since  he desired to calm her without despair until she  could return to her senses, and he hoped to accom-  plish this by gentle reproof. She was in haste to  hold him back when she saw him slipping from her,  and ran with loose rein; he gave all his efforts  10° so to run as not to be overtaken,’ locking fast the  doors of his modesty, and—a thing which is of  no small merit with the Most High—he guarded  against the comeliness and carnal enticements of  the queen and against the campaign of her charming  body the camp of his chastity, and, in the wisdom  of one who doth not deceive nor is deceived, he  finally refused her gifts, rejected her letters, shut  out her messengers, and in every way endeavoured to  drive her to despair. Thou, Sadius, feltest at length  20 thy comrade’s carking care, and on being told of it  by him, thou madest it thine own. Sadius went into  the queen and, as if he knew nothing of her love-  lorn state, sang songs to a heavy heart ; he extolled  her high lineage, praised her for the beauty of her  body and her face, lauded also the virtues of her  character, and above all else magnified the marvel  of her chastity—that she, full of all the graces,  possessed as she was of all those qualities which  can excite the desires of even the most continent,  30 could escape from the pressing assaults of nobles  and of princes, and, although she was not one who  could refuse what her own spirit listed, yet was she  never slavishly lusted. ‘° Now,’ said he, ‘ Lucretia  would confess that she hath been outdone; but  there could be no man who dared hope to have  such constancy of spirit. And yet there is one,  and the only one I wot of, whom I can praise for  a like self-control, save that he is denied the  exercise of love by his impotence, But the quality

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 133

which others admire in him and marvel at, this I  am quite sure is entirely lacking to him.’ ‘ Who  is he?’ she asked. ‘ Surely he is one,’ he replied,  * who is far superior to all other men, but the Lord,  who hath donored and endowed him with every  happiness, hath denied him this one thing, and,  as he doth often assert, hath saved him.’ The  queen’s suspicions were aroused, and, thinking that  her own case was referred to in some way, she drew  nearer to him, asked eager questions, and tried with 10  all the flattery in her power to hear his name, to  know the person. Sadius besought her earnestly  to keep the secret, and most solemnly did she  promise. He then replied: ‘My comrade Galo,  although he can have his desire from any woman,  doth admit that he is sexless, but to me only is  this known.’ This information brought the queen  inward sorrow, nor could she, indeed, restrain her  tears. Sadius bade her farewell, thinking that he  had put a flea in her ear (given her a bone to pick), 20  and, receiving her permission, very gladly took his  departure. With all haste she sought seclusion ;  with all haste he told his story to his comrade,  who thanked him affectionately for this thoughtful  service in his behalf, and rejoiced in the escape  which he hoped and believed would result from  this act.

But it turned out otherwise; for she whom  Sadius had awakened to greater anguish did not  sleep. Turning over all the schemes which passion 30  could suggest, she determined to adopt one, and  this full of hazard. She made up her mind that,  through the agency of the best-born maid in the  palace, she would find out whether Sadius was  telling the truth or not—an attempt which she  did not dare, owing to her self-respect, to take  upon herself. She gave the maid her instructions,  and told her how to approach Galo so that she  could slip into his embrace, and bade her cling

Google

134 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

closely to him, when both were slightly clad, and  put her hand upon his privy parts, and to report,  without yielding her own honour, whether he could  or could not. She then sendeth forth the maid,  and straightway repenteth her of the sending, and  longeth to cast off the queen and become the maid,  and then, throwing herself on her bed, she thus  communeth: ‘So she hath gone and thither;  there her bedfellow, whom at least I do not love  10and will not name, hath come to meet her as he  is wont to meet me. O, how faithful and how  kind he hath always been to me, how pitying and  how patient, and how hard a Demea, he who hath  so often defeated me in my will, and, tearing him-  self from my embrace, would beguile me by his  words, flattering, yes, but surely poisoned. Queen,  and beauty of beauties, and mistress of all, he  would call me, and also his very own. His very  own? O, how well his own, whose slave I was, so  20 far as he would let me, and far more! How kindly  his reproaches when he would tell me that I was  married to the king and dedicated to him, that he  would keep his oath, and for my sake do all things  —and he would add, “ but this’?! O, kind God,  how big that “ this’?! Whatever I sought of him  was in that “ this’’; it was all things. Why then  did he say “all things but this”? rather “ all  things but all things,’”’ and this meaneth nothing ;  surely he would have said with greater truth, ““ My  30 lady, for thy sake I will not do all things,” and  would that he had not revealed his purpose to me  thus outspokenly and without pretence, and so  condemned me by an everlasting repulse! O God,  who hath ever so heartlessly turned himself from  such embraces, aye, and these so stark’? LEither  I am deceived by young men’s sighs and old men’s  too—my mirror is most truthful—or my beauty  should have power to urge any man to passion.  O, but I was forgetful! Honest, indeed, and truth-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES _ 185

ful is Sadius. He hath lost his sex; was Galo then  a fool in hiding from me his loss, in not allowing  me to fondle him, in denying me lest I deny him ?  If indeed he had yielded to me and I had clung to  him in close embrace, and if I had found him sloth-  ful, thither would my hand have wandered where  I could have learned whether he is female or male  or neither. QO, I cannot believe it! Sadius lieth.  He is male, he showeth it by the most unfailing  signs that he is a man, that he is unmaimed, that 10  he is without blemish. But O, what a poor fool  I to have sent a maid most fit and wise to perform  a task that belonged to me! Whither had fled  my mind, my will? She will slip in upon him, and  he will act too honourably, too carefully, until he  feeleth, and at the first touch recognizeth that it  is another than I, and if not, she will reveal it,  and to my sorrow will be received; once or twice  will this thing be ere she returneth, and then,  what if she will continue, if she will love and be 20  loved ? I cannot believe it, I cannot think it, I  am convinced, I have no doubt, that he and she  —he and I it would have been long since had not  I been consecrated as queen, and had not I been  a wife—yes, and his own honour held him back.  What hindereth in this case? These scruples ?  Surely not, and surely the deed is done. No word  now of “all things except this,’’ but “ this above  all things else.”” How glad she was, how quick  to seize my mission from my lips, and how un- 30  questioning! ‘Truly she was not slothful, she was  not afraid, there was no “ bear in the path,”’ no  ‘lion in the streets,’ when she went forth. But  even now the day hath dawned. O, how swift  was she in her going, how free from fear, how slow  in her return, how full of fear! Now “ there is a  bear in the path,’’ now a “lion in the streets.”  But he will use force and keep her by him that he  may make her his for ever. And how willingly,

Google

136 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

how willingly will she endure that force! But  what is my complaint ? Whom can I accuse, and  with what right ? I have proved my own undoing,  my own betrayer, my own ensnarer. She surely  was not; she did naught but what I, what all  would do. But doth Sadius speak the truth? No,  no, naught of the truth. It is clear that he can;  if he could not she would have returned. All signs  of strength are manifest in him, for now heavier  10 waxeth that sweet down upon his cheeks; in him  naught dull or cloddish; no weakness in his eyes,  in his heart no cowardice. Could he, if unsexed,  have power to cut his way through the cohorts of  armed men, to render of no avail the prowess of  all, to raise his own fame to the highest heights of  praise ? I am sure that Sadius spoke false. But  she whom so nicely I did drive on to my own hopes’  overthrow, who now boasteth in what is mine,  who is with him and heedless of me, who hath made  20no haste to come to me, who hath not shown the  willing obedience of yore, who was a ready volunteer  to her own volition, she surely hath reaped delights  that are mine. And what must I say except that  lovers are lorn of sense. But I shall find out when  and how, whether with garments neat, her hair |  well dressed and crowned, she did set forth. And  calling the girl’s companion she thus addressed her :  * Hearken, Lais, when did Ero depart?’ The girl  replied, ‘ Just now, at the first cock-crow.’ The  30 Queen: ‘She whom [I sent at twilight?’ Lais:  * The same.” The Queen: ° Why so late?’ Lais:  ‘Late gone, late return.’ The Queen: ° Dost thou  know our case and why I sent her?’ Lais: ‘ No,  but I know that she dressed with all haste and  departed late and gorgeously arrayed.’ The Queen:  °°Tis bad; how arrayed?’ Lais: ‘* With neck-  laces, rings, perfume, crimson, finest linen, hair  brooches, not a hairpin out of place.’ The Queen :  “'Woe’s me! the meaning?’ Lais: ‘ Really I

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 137

know not; but she had forgotten nothing that  could avail one going to see her lover; well  perfumed, well bathed, well rouged, well dressed,  well crowned. No need to complain of her for  having left behind gold, fine garments, or any aids  of that sort ; she paid regard to all things, but gave  no thought to a quick return.” The Queen: ‘ And  I thought her such a simpleton, such a fool in all  these wiles.’ Lais: ‘She a simpleton! O, how  very clever in the matter of a certain gentleman, 10  if it were only right for me to tell!’ The Queen:  * Kind Lais mine, tell me all.’ Lais: ‘ She is mak-  ing a set at Galo with all the means in her power.’  The Queen: ‘ What about him?’ Lais: ‘ He  feigneth that he is loved by another in order that  he may thus win love.’ The Queen: ‘ In saying  ** that he is loved ”’ thou sayest what is not possible.’  Lais: ‘ Ero now knoweth whether it is possible.’  The Queen: ‘Woe’s me! Ero?’ Lais: ‘ Yes,  Ero.’ The Queen: ‘Our Ero?’ Lais: ‘I know 20  no other.’ The Queen: ‘How knowest thou that  she knoweth this?’ Lais: ‘ We have recognized  it by unfailing signs.” The Queen: ‘ Appearances  are sometimes deceiving.’ Lais: ‘O, unhappy  love, mad above all madness! Try it never so  earnestly to conceal itself, before it knoweth it is  known by all, and if I dare speak > The  Queen: ‘ Kind Lais, dare what thou wilt.’ Lais:  * Galo, they say, was brought up among barbarians,  but his barbs reach the inmost heart.’ The Queen : 30  * Whose inmost heart?’ Lais: ‘I pray not thine,  dear lady, as some lying tongues do say, because  he hath filled my heart with every sorrow; and  yet whose heart escapeth ? But I hear the door.’  The Queen: ‘ Perchance it is she; depart, hasten,  lest she come upon us talking here. Ho, Ero, so  thou hast come!’ Ero: ‘I have.’ The Queen:  * What took place?’ Ero: ‘I came, I touched,  but I was repulsed. And yet, I doubt not of his

Google

138 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

power.’ The Queen: °* Why didst thou not return  at once? What pleasure foundst thou in delay ? ’  Ero: ‘ Desire feeleth delay in the shortest moment.  I left here just now and hastened with all my  might; how could I have come more quickly ?’  The Queen: ‘ From the time I sent thee on my  errand till now, thou couldst have returned from  a journey of ten miles, but thou wert unwilling  to go forth unless well arrayed. Wert thou going

10to be married?’ Ero: * It was well to have the  power to win his favour until I could know: and  I almost won his favour, and I felt that the man  was sound and ready, had he felt you; but when  he realized that it was an inferior, one less fit and  far less suitable than yourself, he cast me out.’  The Queen: ‘ Now I know that thou art a wanton  in thy love,’ and seizing her by the hair she threw  her on the floor, struck her with hands and feet,  and gave her almost lifeless to her companions

20to guard most carefully, that no liberty be allowed |  her. She then went off to her room, cast herself  upon her bed, and uttered all that baneful love  can teach dark hearts; finally she poured forth  all her passions upon Galo, and railed at him with  all the abuse that anger doth suggest.

Woman’s heartless anger and pitiless revenge  pursue a hated person to the utmost bounds. The  queen, thus sorely wounded, did not cease grieving  over the defeat of her plans, and she was carried

30on to wreak her fury both by the violence of her  love and by the virulence of her hate. Any injury  whatever is kindled into a blaze of passion, but  hate is made lasting only by those causes which  love furnisheth, when love is either stolen from one  by an eager rival or is mocked by an object of  eager desire. The queen felt that she had been  deceived, and, since her feelings were dulled by her  desires, she trusted not her feelings, but, against  all the warnings of her heart, she struggled, strange

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 139

to say, against her heart. Galo received her bidding  to come to her and came, and there ensued an open  struggle with attack on one side, defence on the  other. For she it was who attacked, he it was  who defended ; she hurled the javelins of wanton-  ness, he caught them on the breastplate of tem-  perance; she led Venus to the attack, he offered  Minerva for the defence. At length, however,  marshalling against her all his forces of strong  denial, he drove her to sure despair. The queen, 10  now no longer a queen but a tigress, aye, a terrible  bear, sank from love to hate, and, lamenting that  her frowardness was dulled by his firmness, she  determined to trap him in some way on the charge  of lése-mayesté, and swore that she would have her  revenge on Galo.

It was the birthday of the king of the Asiatics ;  there were gathered about the king, therefore, the  primates of the continent and the leading men,  who had come in accordance with his command 20  to the celebration. While all were feasting, Galo  alone sat with wondering gaze fixed fast upon the  table. The table of the king was in the form of a  large hemicycle, and the chairs of royalty were  placed in the centre, whereby all cause for jealousy  was removed since, sitting in a hemicycle, they were  all equally near the king’s chair, and no one could  be chagrined at his remoteness nor boast of his  proximity. Galo and Sadius sat together. But  the queen was on guard, she was ever watchful 30  against Galo, her heart had been set in flames by  Cupid’s dart, but now had been extinguished by a  leaden weight, and she was the first to note how  rapid and how troubled was Galo’s breathing, and  she did not doubt that Galo longed to enjoy his  dearest secret which filled his heart with such  passion even at the memory of it. Because he  believed this to be well hidden, and thought that  he was very surely concealing his purpose, all the

Google

140 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

more eagerly did she desire to bring him to a con-  fession of it, wishing to confound, in the presence  of this great assemblage, him whose repulse of her  and the red shame thereof rankled in her heart.

It was the king’s custom on each celebration of  his birthday to present the queen any gifts which  she might wish. She asked him, therefore—and  her lord granted her request—to give her for her  annual gift one which she need not name. The

10 king “swore and repented,’ because ‘the Lord did  not swear.’ She urged him to make Galo confess,  while they were at the table in the presence of all  the guests, the turn of his inmost thought—what  it was whereon he had been pondering during the  whole hour of the feast. The king grew pale and  trembled, and the whole table from one end to the ©  other was grieved. Greater, however, than any  one’s was the indignation which Sadius felt for  Galo, his beloved comrade, and he was the first

20to ask that the wish be changed. The king, too,  repenting now of his promise, felt that he was the  third person or party in the nameless gift. Thou  wouldst have seen the confusion of Herod and the  insistence of the dancing maid, the blush of Phoebus  and the obstinacy of Phaethon, the anguish of  this king and the mad impulse of his queen. The  gathering of princes with one voice begged for  lenience for Galo, but all in vain. The queen  strove with fell purpose for her revenge, and gave

30 all her efforts to gain her nefarious end, thinking  that it was her victory because it was won by her  own anger. Eager, therefore, was the insistence  of this foolish woman, as if her honour depended  on the dishonour of an innocent man. Galo sat  without movement, and because he was ignorant of  any guilt he feared no snares, nor paid any atten-  tion to what was being done. He finally noticed  the excitement of Sadius, and with a sigh, which  came from the bottom of his heart, he aroused

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 141

himself from his deep thought. Then, on being  told of the queen’s request and the consent of the  king, he uttered a groan, and begged to be excused  from the telling. Long was the dispute between  his earnest supporters and the dissenting queen,  but of no avail, and he began thus :—

* Just one year ago, on the day of the Pentecost,  when I was suffering from an attack of burning  fever that never left me for a day, I was sitting  on my couch at Salona on the fifth day of my illness 10  after the climacteric. It was a holiday, and my  attendants, wearied with their toil and tedious  watching, together with the rest of the household,  were taking part in the customary festivities. I  longed to go forth from the city with my armour  on, to try my strength, my horse, and my weapons.  I put on my coat of mail, my helmet; the rest of  my harness I could hardly bear, for I was weak.  I mounted my horse, which had waxed fat through  lack of exercise and more restive, and, leaving the 20  city, I took a road through a deep grove, and from  the morning until evening I never drew rein. My  swift-footed steed had carried me a long, long way,  and I paid no heed; when I did take count, I  desired to turn back, and I felt that love had led  me far astray ; for I was in love and my love was  not returned, and, ignorant of the way, I had been  brought to a large, wonderful abode. The lofty  palaces within high walls, the ivory homes, the  beauty rare and beyond compare of the works of 30  art, excited my wonderment; the inhabitants were  either keeping themselves concealed or there were  none. I made my way through the midst of the  city, my thoughts busied with my grief, and with-  out my consciousness or my consent, my horse  leading me rather than ridden by me, and I came  to a palace within the inner walls—a palace which  towered above all others, standing out most clearly  to my gaze. I drew my breath, looked long thereon

Google

142 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and wondered. I rode through the palace but  came upon no one, and, passing through a lofty  chamber and two others which lay beyond, I  entered a spacious garden, and in that garden en-  countered a maiden sitting beneath a blossom-  ing cherry tree, clad in queenly garments of  silk. I made ready to dismount, and, weak from  my fatigue, I fell, and rested for some time in a  sweet swoon at her feet. But she moved not,

10nor gave any sign that she saw me, or that she  was a living woman. I cast aside my shield and  spear, and as a suppliant kneeled before her, and  begged her saving aid. On her part, not a word.  I added some speech which should have won an  answer, but not a word did I force from her, and  she sat in silence like a statue. I was ashamed to  return without some token, and—the confession  is not to my honour—lI threw her on the ground,  and that I might take the firstfruits of her maiden-

20 hood, I made ready to outrage her with all violence.  When she saw that she could not protect herself,  she cried out, calling “‘ Rivius!’? Rivius hastened  at her cry. He was a giant of wondrous stature, of  enormous size, to cope with whom no knight, save  our lord the king and Sadius, was equal. He  appeared before me completely armed, sitting on  a horse up to his rider’s weight, and his eyes shone  through the eyelets in his helmet like lighted lamps.  I was afraid, I confess it, and I blushed—but now,

30 out of respect for our king and for his nobles who  are present here with him, may the queen have  mercy upon me, lest the story that is to come  bring me everlasting disgrace.’ The king, therefore,  and the entire assembly were moved with pity,  and in tears pled in Galo’s behalf, but this un-  conquered tigress could not be moved either to  notice any of them or to leave her folly, or to deign  any response; on Galo only did she fix her gaze,  urging him to continue with his tale.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 143

Again Galo began: ° The giant, although fierce  in his great fury, bade me take up my weapons,  scorning to fight me unarmed with all his might.  We met in a struggle far beyond my strength and  full of peril. For easily and without trouble, owing  to the great length of his spear, he cast me into the  fork of a near-by tree and held me firmly there,  cursing and reviling me, unable to move as I was,  that he might boast in his mighty strength and  his damsel have her revenge and enjoy my suffering. 10  Is this not yet enough, O queen?’ The king be-  sought her, all prayed to that deaf image, but she  was speechless to them all, save that she bade him  to proceed, and Galo went on: ‘God, in whom  was my hope, sent to my aid another damsel whom  I knew not, and who, falling before the feet of the  heartless maiden I have mentioned, bespoke pardon  for my offences ; she kissed her feet, watering them  with idle tears, for the giant’s lady, she of exalted  pride, with her foot bruised my helper’s tender 29  lips against her teeth. ’Tis enough, is it not, O  queen ? What mischance more portentous or more  pitiful ever fell to the portion of any man? But  I know that you have no pity. I shall confess all.  My love—and she is a damsel most worthy of one  far nobler than I—kissing the feet of the giant with  bloodstained lips—ah, the pity of it!—pleaded my  weakness resulting from my long illness, saying  that it was to his dishonour that a mighty man  had driven to single combat one lacking in strength 30  and weak from loss of blood. The giant blushed  but spared not; for he was awaiting the bidding  of her who sat there immovable and _ inflexible,  and he looked for mercy to one who showed no  mercy. Then, with sweet love, my champion,  for whom my heart was aching, weeping bitterly  because she could not win peace, sought for a  truce for one year, and gave herself as hostage,  that, when the year’s circle was complete, on the

Google

144 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

corresponding day she would produce me, did not  death interpose, to fight against Rivius in single com-  bat. And with her tears, which could have broken  the barriers of all wrath, and the hearts of all tyrants,  although she did not move the giant’s damsel,  she did indeed bend the giant’s self and made him  yield to her prayers. The day is at hand, and the  (sweet) source of my safety, attended by five  hundred knights, is at the gates; the giant, how-  10 ever, followeth with a band of five thousand. This  is the thought which made me dull at our feast  because it bringeth to me dread without end. Now,  however, best of kings, obtain excuse from the  sequel, which is full of shame.’ Then the queen:  ‘Surely the giant’s damsel, whom thou detractest  because she did not attract thee, is a maid of steady  purpose and firm, praiseworthy even in the things  for which thou blamest her ; but this is thy practice,  aye, thy besetting sin. Now weep on, and let thy  20tears outpour to move me who am not a giant,  or, if thou wilt, let her come, thy paragon, thy love,  who overcame the giant, at whose tears the dead  arise, the anger of devils is appeased. O, how well  thou praisest whom thou praisest; how far doth  her weeping surpass, so wouldst thou claim, the  songs of Orpheus which did not win Eurydice for  him except under a doubtful pact. What was  Amphion in comparison with her tears? These  would have built the walls of Thebes without need  300f song. By the sweat of his brow did Hercules,  conqueror of monsters, prove of service to the  whole world, and yet of more use, had she wished  it, would her tears have been. Let her now weep,  now let our great king command, and Galo pray ;  but hearken, counsellors, and surely I shall remain  victorious, in spite of your regard for the king and  for them. We will hear all.’ Then said Galo: ‘ Thou  wilt hear things yet more repellent and a disgrace  yet greater, in that I, while our lord the king and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 145

those sitting here with him were beseeching thee  and thou wert refusing their prayers, was pondering  deep within my soul my firm resolution that on  the appointed day, neither in behalf of my hostage,  whom thou revilest, nor for any other cause,  whether loss or gain, honour or dishonour, would  I go forth to meet the giant either with armour  or without. We had covenanted under oath that  our lord the king and the giant, each attended by  a large supporting army, would be present, but 10  this is now not to be, because I shall have no meet-  ing with the giant. Let Hercules be summoned,  and with his club let him mete punishment to  this monster meet for his prowess, this enigma  reserved for the sweat of his brow, a victory that  belongeth to God not to man. There you have  the whole tale, nor have I hidden one iota of my  baseness from you. The shame of past defeat  and my fears for the future I have now set forth ;  what more is there whereby the queen may wish 20  to do me harm or have the power? Now nothing  else remaineth for me save to make my dwelling  in lonely wastes and in regions strange to man,  to avoid the crowded haunts of my fellows. And  would that the memory of me might as far as pos-  sible be blotted off the face of the earth, that I  might leap, like Empedocles, into Aetna’s flames,  or fall upon the sword of Pyramus, or hand myself  over to the beasts of Ocean’s god, lest if I shall  live too long I may become a never-ending sign 30  of infamy and a monument of dishonour and a  base pointing of the finger. In this life, which I  shall quickly shuffle off, let those find joy to whom  is granted the freedom of being, who dare to speak  what pleaseth them and to leave unsaid _ that  which threateneth death. When I came hither I  was free, and now on my lips silence hath been  enjoined lest I speak too fully except what I would  not, or leave unsaid except what I ought not. O,  K

Google

146 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

deadly slavery and worse than death! Thought  is free even to those in bonds and to sinners, and  whither it will it passeth unrestrained, but I—I  have not the happy lot of even the basest slave:  my thought is in bonds and a knight hath been  made a hostage to a brazen brow, but late a knight,  now a monstrous prodigy among knights, and a  woman’s victim, to cleanse some sin I know not  what.’ He ceased and leaped from the table, but  10 not alone, for very many of the princes and a chosen  band of the royal household sorrowfully attended  him. But now the queen, wounded sore with her  burden of love, added insult to insult, screaming  out behind them, *‘ From Galo’s own lips we have  heard most certain proofs of his cowardice that  he will have no meeting with the giant. These  are the praises bought from the hireling crowd  with which they raised Galo to the stars; these  are the claims of his own tongue and his haughty  20 boastings. A giant he called his opponent: O,  would that we could summon him to see whether  he be a giant! We know beyond a doubt that all  the giants met death at the hands of Hercules.  This is the saying of a man in senseless fear and  a complete defeat, of one severely beaten and a  fool. Truly indeed is he a very giant who with a  single blow made him, who is taller than any giant,  a dwarf. Now let the gods be in fear of his weapon,  and with all care be on their guard lest the Titans  30 come to life again and cast their claws into them.  Under their master Mulciber let Steropes and  Pyragmon (the Cyclops) sweat at their tasks that  Jupiter may not be unprotected against the piling  up of mountains; let him take up his thunder-  bolts, Mars his helmet, Phoebus his arrows, Pallas  her aegis, Diana her quivers; or if there be giants  as huge as he describeth, let Stilbon range his  magic arts in the face of the hostile battle lines,  that they, in defence of their sire’s deity, may

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 147

make equal such battles as Galo hath pictured.  Rejoice, Sadius, thou who art now in grief, and be  glad that thy innocence hath been rescued from  disgrace.’

These and other taunts from the queen attended  Galo as he went forth as much a victor in the  quarrel by his silence as a conqueror over her incest  through his long endurance. As he hurried farther  and farther from the city the others returned, but A?  Sadius besought him with unfeigned tears and i" we  cried: ‘I know that the whole world is aflame  with deep passion for thy soldierly prowess, and  that thou hast a place in the love of kings and  princes; but no one will deny that thou owest  all to me, whose soul thou holdest in thy heart as  handmaid of thy soul; therefore the check-rein  of no power can restrain me from performing any  prayer of thine, no spurs can prick thee on to  avoid my presence or to escape from my comrade-  ship. I can well believe that in the entire story 20  which the queen wrung from thee thou toldest the  truth except in thy avowal of cowardice, for this  hath never found entrance into thy breast. It is  not my wish that thou enter into single combat  with the giant as thou forecastest; but let it be my  pleasure to take thine armour, and under pretence  of thy person to undergo the danger, so that, under  thy name, with no other privy to our plan, and with  thy soldier’s honour secure from stain, thou canst  not sorrow even if conquered, or, if I am victorious, |\30  be cheated of thy triumph ; and thus by no chance  hap can envy find delight in the severance of our  comradeship.’ Thus spoke Sadius with loyal tears  and a suppliant groan. Galo stopped therefore,  and because of his constant sobbing could hardly  make reply. When he could speak he said: ‘ Let  there be joy in the heart of gracious Faith, and let  her, now from ancient days in exile, gladly seek  again her native place, and let her cry aloud to the

Google

148 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

world that she is now secure by Sadius’ defence.

Best beloved, thy love hath found a path whereby

I may return, only let the manner of thy finding

e changed a little; let us secretly make an ex-  change of our armour, and I, clad in thine, may thus  trick the thought of all and meet the giant in  combat ; in this way, if I am slain, the true identity  of the slain will be made known, or, if I survive,  thine will be the glory of the victory, and when  we have laid our armour off in secret, thy fame  will be sung with transcendent praise. I add this  request also: that before the combat, thou hint to  our lord the king and to our lady the queen that

I have kept back from the fight by this agreement

with thee, namely, that thou in my behalf wouldst

undergo the danger of the meeting. This, too,  may thy friendship grant me, that when the fight  beginneth, and the crowd of spectators hath sur-  rounded us, thou call my protectress to thee, and

20 to her alone reveal the truth of our ruse, and that  throughout the duration of the combat thou have  thought for her comfort, if by chance there should  meet with her some ladies of our party or some  from our enemy’s. You will recognize her, close  in height to the tallest, taller than the average,  with slender neck, sloping shoulders, happy in her  slender grace, charming above all others, so that  her hidden beauty can be longingly desired from  those charms which are disclosed.’

30 Thus was the compact made and faithfully kept.  And lo, the lists, after the usual fashion, with due  regard to form, are occupied to the very centre  by attendants of the giant; the other side is re-  served for him called king of the Asiatics, and it is  filled with rich magnificence. Thereupon the giant’s  tent, of precious stuff, was raised, and at the door  of the tent, where all could see, there sat, clad in  queenly garments of silk, the damsel who had  bruised the lips of Galo’s damsel, garbed in the

pani

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 149

same array as when he had first seen her. Then  the giant in full armour came forth, and at his size  the whole assembly paled, and by a concerted  groan testified to their true wonderment. The  giant sat upon a horse the great size of which was  suited to his master’s weight, and, running and  circling here and there, he sharpened his spirit,  trained him in his duty to come, and by play, as  it were, made him ready for the real work that was  at hand. All who saw him marvelled at him and 10  waxed sore afraid, and in behalf of Sadius raised  their shouts, and the more they showed to him  their favour, the more they showed their hate for  Galo. These two heard but were not moved, and  played their parts amid the shouts of praise and  blame, Sadius with all constancy, Galo with all  confidence. The giant then rushed forth to meet  Galo, and each attacked the other with blows that  ended differently ; the giant broke his lance and  it clung to Galo’s shield, Galo clove the giant’s 20  horse from his head to his shoulder, and cast horse  and rider to the ground. When he saw that both  were fallen, like a lofty oak that is felled by the  last blow of the axe, he cried out: ° Because thou  didst give to Galo, although thou hadst him in  thy power, permission to take his armour, that  thou mightst not enter into unequal combat with  a man unarmed, I dismount that I may not have  unfair battle with one on foot.’ He dismounted,  they fought on their feet, and foined fiercely at 30  each other. The king, with many a groan, wept  for his nephew who was undergoing no danger ;  the queen hurled insult after insult into the face  of Sadius, and with taunt upon taunt she flayed  the absent Galo. Sadius, bearing all in silence,  rejoiced that she was deceived, and that she might  be the more jealous, he turned his back upon her,  and lovingly gave his care to her whom, in the  performance of the duty laid upon him, he had

Google

150 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

begun to comfort. The queen saw and was jealous,  thinking that the damsel had been chosen, herself  disdained, and, with her anger doubly kindled, she  doubled and trebled her wrathful words against  them both. As often as fortune brought some  mishap to Galo, all turned their eyes upon Sadius.  Their thoughts, their words were slurs for Galo,  but the expression of these slurs fell upon Sadius.  In regard to the size of the combatants it seemed  10an unequal contest, in regard to the blows the  equality was judged to be complete, and the smaller  fighter’s courage was the bolder. The giant pur-  posely gave ground in order to crush the onslaught  of his rushing foe by an unexpected and sudden  repulse, but so closely, so keenly, did Galo press  upon him, so boldly and so spiritedly, that the  giant was completely cheated of his hope and his  willing flight became a forced one, and now the giant  tottered upon the carpet of his damsel and Galo  20 leaped upon him with such sudden force that the  giant stumbled before her and fell in a heap. A  shout arose on the one side, and on the other there  were low whispered groans, and it was very clear  which party it was which was more disposed to  anger or more profuse in joy. The king and his  attendants long for the end, and—a concession  which respect for an established peace alloweth—  with nods for words encourage Sadius to rush upon  his enemy. Galo, however, with a fitting gracious- -  soness, biddeth the fallen giant arise and return to  the combat. Thereupon the giant arose quickly,  and seeing the tears of his beloved, forgot the mercy  which had just been meted to him; nor did he  now heed the dictates of graciousness or of just  gratitude, but with all the ardour of his passion  he threw himself upon his enemy; Galo resisted,  and the giant attacked him with the most un-  relenting fury and, by fighting well, he made his  enemy fight well. Finally, raising his arm on

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 151

high, with one blow he tried to end the combat,  but as the shield of Galo caught the strong blow  of the sword the weapon was broken at the hilt.  Then fear came over the giant, and he confessed  within his breast that he was all but overcome,  but Galo, following his usual custom, stepped back  that he might appear a good knight at all points,  and granted the giant a truce and permission to  seek another sword, saying, ‘ My aim is to win fame  by valour, not by luck.’ Glad then were the giant 10  and his supporters, but Sadius’ friends were sad,  and they complained that an easy victory had been  unadvisedly converted into a rash venture. This,  however, meseemeth, is a capital wrong, that when  one wittingly doeth a thing which causeth joy to  his enemy, his friends wax sad. The giant with-  drew to his tent, and from his chamberlain received  a sword, huge in its size and very fair to the sight ;  drawing it, he recognized that it was one the edge  of which neither wood, nor bone, nor steel, nor any 20  armour could withstand. He cried out that he  had been deceived by the bearer of the former  sword, and this bearer he then cleft in twain from  his neck down through his spine and reins to the  ground, saying, ‘ Base-born slave, this would have  given me the victory in the first exchange of blows,’  and he added, ‘ Look thou, who in Galo’s stead  hast joined in combat with me, thou who art for  a surety a better man than he, give thyself up to  my prison, if life is preferable in thy mind to death.’ 30  Galo replied, ‘ All the courage and the boasting  which this sword hath brought thee result not from  thine own valour, but from my sufferance, and I  suffer thee now to take from it any advantage  which it may bring. My assurance of safety  cometh from my strength of body and my soul’s  valour, not from the addition of armour; my  fame is my support.’ The giant, in anger at these  words, rushed upon him, and, with his first blow,

Google

152 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

cut like a thunderbolt whatever part of Galo’s  shield it reached, and, with the second, the greatest  part of his mail and shield. Galo was straight-  way aware and saw well that from this sort of a  sword no armour could protect him; he knew,  too, that protection must be sought in his strength  and skill, and in the face of the danger pressing  upon him he made ready not to flee but to put to  flight ; so rapidly did he move the sword in his  10right hand before his enemy’s face that in no wise,  without suffermg a wound, could the giant show  his hand between the shields. Galo pressed on,  in deep earnest now, and he compelled the giant  to give ground, and finally he cast him headlong  above his lady, she being the stumbling-block to  his feet. Then Galo stepped back, and, although  he was in fear for his own life, he made a dangerous  hazard of his safety. He bade the giant arise, and  urged him to have no fear, thus furnishing the  20 queen an opportunity of praising Sadius and of  indulging in her joyous taunts against him. The  giant, then, happy in this mercy, and skilfully  using the kindness extended to him, leaped un-  injured to his feet and brought his sword down  upon Galo’s shield with such force that the point  cut through the metal and made a severe wound  in his face. The blood gushed forth and stained  Galo’s armour down to his feet; wherever he re-  treated or advanced, he left footprints full of gore,  30a sight hateful to his friends and glorious to his  enemies. Galo—and no wonder—was afraid of  the sword, which he saw pierced everything it  met; he weakened the force of the blows by allow-  ing his shield to give before them, taking ever  great heed not to allow the sword to find any  resisting surface to which it could fasten itself.  The king feared for his nephew and was eager to  pledge his whole kingdom for his safety. The  queen put her hands to the reins, summoned

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 158

Sadius’ companions, bade them lead off the hostage,  and, without awaiting the fulfilment of her com-  mands, withdrew from the lists, uncertain whether  to rejoice in the discomfiture of Galo or to grieve  over the death of Sadius. Galo, seeing that his  enemy was more reckless than was his wont, and  without caution was rushing upon him, and that  his blows were aimed altogether blindly, laid a  cunning and careful snare for the giant’s hand,  and as it was in movement he caught it with a1o  swift blow and cut it off; then, quickly seizing the  sword, he put his own in its proper place and  mounted his horse. Galo was victorious and the  giant defeated, and the victor, speaking without  raising his helmet, under the name of Sadius,  presented his captive to the king, a gift most  acceptable and received with the expression of  heartfelt thanks. All surrounded the victor and  desired to see the wound in his face. The king,  more impatient than his wont, raised his hands 20  to remove the helmet, but Galo forbade him and  led Sadius and the damsel apart, to effect in secret  the exchange of armour. Galo, with the damsel,  remained at home; Sadius, eagerly awaited by  all, sought the court. The first question of the  king was about his wound, and his unmarred face  caused amazement in the soldiery. The queen  came quickly forward on whose lips had always  been insults to Galo, praise to Sadius. She offered  him golden boxes filled with precious ointment ; 30  to her said Sadius: ‘No need have I of thine  ointments; know that he hath conquered who!  still beareth the sign of his victory, who hath |  received the wound, who hath been proved to be  no dwarf, who hath shown himself greater than the  giant. I am he, the sign for thy mockery, who,  standing by the damsel, listened to praises from  thee that were not meant for me in person, and to  thy most unworthy insults to Galo who, thank

Google

154 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

God, by his incomparable valour, hath triumphed  over all thy plots.’ At these words the queen, as  though she saw the Gorgon’s head, stood petrified  in her surprise, and tried to disbelieve the truth  which she dreaded. Then no longer did any one  doubt of the victor ; all were assured of the trrumph  of Galo and of the loyalty of Sadius, and they  hastened to bear to the conqueror the victorious  eagles. Then the wound was seen, and humbly  10did the king beseech his Galo to pardon the  injury that had been done him. Since the whole  city rejoiced in its festivity, the queen alone suffered  on all sides such discomfiture that her bruised soul  grew sick. Like a serpent at the eventide, which,  when caught in the heat of the day, cannot find  shade from its severity, and, striking at every  obstacle, vomiteth all its poisons to no avail, and,  listless at even, hideth beneath the grass and lieth  in wait for the cattle returning from their pasturage,  20 desiring to slay them all and yet remaining power-  less, so the queen, deprived now of her power,  wasted away in empty longings, only retaining,  but all in vain, the wish to injure. Truly did Galo  enjoy a good end through the just judgment of  God, and, tried in the furnace of love, he shone  ‘forth the purest example of purity ; and the queen,  when her malicious acts were made known, wept as  she deserved to do, and became an object of ridicule  and the butt of every idle tale.

Foolish, perhaps, will this tale seem, and frivolous,  but only to the foolish and the frivolous, for whom  there is naught in what we say: concerning such

there may be a time when we shall speak, but not  ,for such. What ability we have and what know-  edge, we expend for the kind and the clear-minded,  knowing that the busy bee doth gather both worm-  fnot and thyme that it may contribute its honey,

30

choice product of the bitter and the sweet, to  the storehouse of wisdom. May one gather from

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 155

trifles such as these, and by a grace given by '  God, the power to choose and to love the bitter  paths of justice, as did Galo, and not perversely  strive with the queen to cling fast to evil delights; |  and it will prove to be a song sung to the wisest  heart.

On the Contrary Relation of Parius and Lausus. 111

ET the reader rejoice and the listener be  delighted that Galo and Sadius enjoyed a  comradeship calm and without a cloud, and then 10  let them wonder as much at the clouds of treachery  in the friendship of Partus and Lausus. Born from  the heart of Lucifer, Envy first did rage against  God, having dared the extreme crime, and, when  cast down from heaven, it crept into that first  and fairest part: of the world, into Paradise itself ;  whence, conquering and conquered, it was also  cast out, and, whatever it findeth in the world  without, it doth observe diligently, and ever mind-  ful of its high birth, whatever it seeth beneath it 20  it doth despise, and, directing its efforts above itself  and disdaining to degenerate, it always seeketh  loftier ends, as if, by mounting higher and higher,  it doth not despair of again reaching the place  of its birth. It maketh itself equal to all and  like all, even though its attack may be against  those unlike itself, for it always directeth itself  against the better. It is, moreover, humble among  the lowly, proud among the proud, in a hut poor,  in a palace rich. Every other fault seemeth to 30  have set limits, and because it is confined within  the limits of earth, it withereth away: this ex-  ceedeth all bounds; it hath its baneful dwelling  in all life of earth, sea, and air, so that, as we know,  worm envieth worm. It doth infect all that is  - said about both the best and the worst in life, and,  when received by the lower, it attacketh the higher,

Google

156 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and, because it is too weak to dare against God,  all that is divine and is, as it were, closest to God,  it doth belittle by blasphemy; an outcast from  heaven, a fugitive from Paradise, at first it lived  an exile among us, and soon out of the place of our  exile it made itself a native land.

This Envy made its way secretly into the royal  hall of Babylon, whose king, Ninus, it found envi-  able in everything and rendered envious: him

10 who had been a lover of the world and its peace,  it turned into a hater of the world and its scourge.  Concerning whose rule, how enviously he exercised  it, and how greedily against his neighbours, history  doth clearly tell. But Envy, who had infected  Ninus, in anger at his two chamberlains, Lausus  and Parius, who were friends to each other and in  accord in all things, because they were closest to  the king, determined to overthrow them after he  had been overthrown, and since it had no power

20 over the better of the two, it stained the worse  with the dye of its slander. Thereupon Parius in  secret envied Lausus, the evil the good, the per-  verse the gentle, and with filthy steps he dogged  him, ever watchful how and when and by what  artifice he might do him harm. Whatever in  Lausus’ character had pleased him before was  now distasteful, and there was nothing which he,  a base prophet, did not interpret to his own hurt.  That Lausus was devoted to his master’s interests,

30 that he was a careful and far-sighted steward, a  faithful servant, on the most happy terms with his  lord, that he was also a real friend to Parius him-  self, an aid to his advancement, all this he con-  strued as double-dealing, and him who was honest  in his efforts of well-doing he accused of deceit.  Lausus was as unconscious of this alteration in his  friend as he was of any altercation, and he displayed  to him his comradeship with kindly frankness. Each  outwardly was the same, and in their words was the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 157

same candid freedom; inwardly they were not the  same, and in their hearts there was a secret an-  tagonism. With the same deference love and envy  vied to please, and so very like true affection ia  this affectation that no one can detect the falsity  of the outward imitation. These two were admired  of men as were Nisus and Euryalus, in the eyes of  God they appeared as Pirithous and Theseus. No  longer now could Parius endure the flames of hate  which of his own accord he had kindled against 10  Lausus; now from the furnace in which he had  nursed them they violently burst forth, and to  find vent in action was the desire of the secret  design that had long seethed in his degenerate soul ;  now Parius in his unrestraint plotted all manner  of death against his friend, and although he prayed  for death of every kind, privily one only did he plot,  and this the most secret, in order that his baseness,  born of the night, might not burst forth into the  light and be known. The women of Scythia, he 20  knew, have double pupils in each eye, and slay Qu 4  whomsoever they look upon in anger; he knew  that the astrologers of Thrace, by the sole power  of their charms, kill those with whom they are at  enmity. What more secret than these destructive  forces ? What death less apt to arouse suspicion ?  In both he found reasons for suspicion, the very  agents of the crime inspired his fear, and that}  which he himself knew he believed was hidden’  from no one. He dared against God, from oe  eyes no shield protected him, before men’s report  he trembled although well armed; that he might!  blot out a man’s life and at the same time the  manner of his death, he debauched his soul en-  tirely, and gave himself up completely to strange|  thoughts to the end that he might be called by a  new name—not only a slayer of life, but also a  slayer of death. He determined on poison, but a  strange, a curious poison, most potent and also

Google

158 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

most secret, such as were not those of Scythia and  Thrace; Circe he passed by and Medea, and what-  ever poisons leave traces of the truth he passed  over. A deed unseen before and unheard of he  evised: he was troubled to leave no stone un-  urned ; and because he came upon nothing which

as not well known from long use, his persistency  fwas rebuffed and gave way, his mind, in want of  the new, but wanting in invention, returned to  19the old. Calling to mind, therefore, Hercules and  Deianira, he prepared for his friend the poison of  a Nessus; and, wrapped in deadly robes, his victim  died. The death of Lausus was the talk of all,  but people knew not the method of his death, nor  did they know anything to be said touching that  death; and since there was no suspicion of the  traitor, there was no mention of betrayal made  against the guilty man. Death and the man  departed together and no one discovered the cause  20 of death. All grieved and wept, but the tears of all  were outdone by the woeful wails of the traitor.  The murderer tore his hair and mauled himself  mightily, and strove by his piety to palliate his  cruelty ; under the covering of love he hid the  truthfulness of his hate, cast himself above the  corpse on the grave, and, with angry words and  threats, struggled against the resistance of those  who forbade his interment. It was for death, not  for a man, that Partus was arranging burial, and  3o'it was death itself which he cunningly laid in the  ‘earth in the presence of all the people. At length,  with seeming reluctance, he accepted outwardly  the consolation of which within he had no need,  sole occupant of his lofty seat on which he sat in  state, sharing his station with no other. Ninus,  on the other hand, to prove his true grief, brought  Lausus’ surviving son into the palace, a boy of  really lovable charm, noteworthy both in character  and beauty; he was handed over to his father’s

ae

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 159

murderer to be brought up under the protection of  a father; the wolf received the lamb into his keep-  ing, and, in spite of his soul’s desire, he showed  his exultation in his face. The fortunate boy was  brought up modestly and performed his duty be-  comingly, and straightway won such favour in the  sight of the king that he was ranked higher than  Lausus was and Parius is; soon there was free  intercourse between the boy and the king, none  between him and Parius. Soon the boy was in 10  regular service at the king’s toilet, caring for his  head and hands and feet. In great rage, there-  fore, was the ravager of men, and he rallied all his  ravenous fury; he is consumed by his cruelty,  which is now restored to life, and the doer of a  monstrous murder returneth to his former straits ;  he payeth no heed to any thought or feeling which  might make him pause, and, fresh from his triumph  over the father, taketh up his arms against the  son. The words of his mouth are those of him 20  who did bring envy into the world, for the author  of crime guideth his hosts of iniquity, and, lest they  may grow weary, when created, or wander from  the path and be lost, pointeth out the bypaths,  and giveth strength to their unholy steps. Parius  was his pupil and under his guidance, and is led  by him into a new deed of dire duplicity. Parius  summoned the boy whose guardian he was; he  began his discourse with praise of the beauty and  speech and character of the youth, and, that flattery 30  might sink to the level of the foulest lie, he told  him that he alone was worthy of the friendship of  such a king, was suitable for such secret service,  praised and avowed his anxious care; on one point,  however, and only one, did he completely correct  the falsity of his fair words, saying, ‘ Althoug  nature, my dearest son, hath blessed thee beyond  measure, and hath charmingly imprinted her own  fitness on all thy members, yet, lest she arouse the

Google

160 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

envy of the gods, she hath stopped short of per-  fection, and, lest the delicate flower of thy sweet  looks, both at sight and touch, upset all minds,  she hath suffered a stench to be born in thee. I  speak, beloved, as a father to his son, and I desire  to urge thee in every way that, when thou dost  assist in the king’s toilet, thou stand not too near ;  act with a little more self-restraint and caution,  lest, owing to thy frequent presence, thou be made  10a nuisance by this thing which he, through the  respect of his affection, hideth from thee, and,  although most patient, beareth with much diffi-  culty.’ Thus spoke Parius, and with his words his  [tears gushed forth, and although they are feigned,  fain was the boy to believe. Chill amazement  seized the poor lad; a flood of tears was checked  by the exceeding anxiety of his grief, his utterance  came brokenly, and the life-blood was driven from  his veins back to his heart. .At length he mastereth  20his emotion, and to his master expresseth all the  thanks that lie in his knowledge and power, falling  down in the excess of gratitude at the other’s feet.  How hard the evil that showeth no pity and know-  eth none! The stainless ariseth from before the  crime-stained, the low-bowed¥head of humility is  lifted from the feet of high-reared pride. The  sorrow of a sick mind affecteth the flesh, and the  anguish of a sore-tried soul is written in the body’s  suffering. The boy lieth upon his bed, he doth  30 not leave his couch. Ninus seeketh him whom he  hath lost, findeth him, sitteth sadly by him on the  bed, and, feeling deep compassion for him, offereth  him kindly comfort. The boy for shame turneth  aside his head lest the imagined stench may  offend his lord. The king, ignorant of the truth,  layeth this to the seriousness of his affliction, and  he provideth for the boy the best physicians pos-  sible, and after a lapse of time, not very short, he  receiveth him again as cured. The boy, although

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 161

restored to health and to his office, never presumed  to enter the presence of his master unless sum-  moned, he performed his service with bowed head  like a slave, and with averted gaze discharged his  full duty to the king. Ninus, noticing these things,  did not believe that he had completely regained  his health, and said that his mind was affected or  that he was still weak. For a long time he allowed  this behaviour to go unchallenged, without any  suspicion of mean dealing or trick, kindly inter- 10  preting the boy’s actions in the best light. Parius  then, having won fulfilment of his dastardly device,  often took the boy’s place; when the youth would  go, he kept him back, and whenever the boy was  summoned, he would hasten as if eager to make  up his delinquency, and by his chidings, his advice,  his substitution of self, he kept the other far,  found fault with him when he went, praised him  when he stayed away, and bespelled him by his  arts. No day passed but that the boy was com- 20  pletely dissolved in tears. This was a source of  wonderment and of grief to Ninus, who asked him  what it meant. The boy foolishly, out of respect  for him, held his peace. Thereupon, more privately,  the king addressed Parius, and bade him under  threat to confess the truth. This traitor, falling  down at the king’s feet, implored his pardon in  these words: ‘May mercy be shown me by my  most kindly king if I become the accuser of the  boy and the cause of the death of him whom [I have 30  brought up, and whom I, with the strong affection  of a father, have loved as I loved his father. This  story I have, owing, I confess, to my great love for  him, hidden from you: have mercy if you can,  and let his fault be pardoned. I deserve death  because of my silence, but I was influenced both  by my feeling for the boy and by my own ingenu-  ousness, and that which my master now compelleth|  me, in tears and against my will, to confess to him, !  L

Google

162 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

this with difficulty did I wrest from him by (violent)  threats without end. I knew most certainly that  he lied when, contrary to my own belief, he did  swear that at the king’s toilet, in his tendance of  your hair and face, he suffered much discomfort,  and he compared your breath, which beyond all  doubt excelleth in sweetness the ripe fruit of  summer and fresh balsam, to bilge; such is my  tale and I deserve the death which is now impend-

loing. This is why he avoideth my lord with such  strong dislike, why he turneth his face from him,  bendeth his head, holdeth his hand before his  mouth, shunneth all conversation with him.’ Who  could refuse to believe a story which bore such  close resemblance to truth ? What boy would not  avoid such a master? What master would not  become a bloody tyrant toward the imnocent ?  What crime more heartless hath ever been devised ?  What poisons more deadly have ever been imagined

20 by any one or heard of ? How dire to both, and  how cruel such a plot! How baneful and pitiless  is this evil in the house ‘ clothed in the scarlet’  of devils! And yet surely for all its clothing, ‘ it  will be afraid of the cold blasts of winter.’

The king believed Parius, and showed himself  merciless to him who loved him, and although  nothing is more unsparing than a king in his wrath,  he yet postponed his revenge, trying whether he  could be merciful, longing rather to pardon than

30to punish. There approached meanwhile the yearly  festival of the city in which the king himself was  obliged to take part, dressed in his royal robes and  wearing his crown, or else thus to array another  and to send him to take his place. He who was  chosen would receive from the king the highest  rank in the whole kingdom of Babylon for the  entire year. The king ordered the boy to array  himself for the festival, to mount a horse with  trappings suitable for the occasion, and gave him

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 168

power for all the year to come. Parius, on learning  this, ‘ thinking, too little done,’ quickly carried out  ‘what remaineth to be done.’ He did not dare  attack the king, he assailed the boy, and used  every resource to urge him to repay him all the  kindness he had shown him or would show him,  and besought him with tears, that now for the first  time were unfeigned, to transfer, unknown to  Ninus, his honour to him. Eager for the advance-  ment of his beloved guardian, the boy readily com- 10  plied. Partus, therefore, on the festive day went  forth from the palace wearing the king’s crown  and his robes, carrying his sceptre, and riding on  his horse. Ninus ascended his throne in a lofty  tower that he might view the results of his purposes  concerning the boy, and lo, Parius was at the gate,  marked above all, the goal of all eyes; he halted  in order that a longer wait might enhance the  brilliance of his entry and his majesty be not  lessened by an untimely haste, when suddenly a20  young man, who had placed himself in readiness, |  leaped out upon him, and to his undeserved majesty |  displayed a due and duly ordered contempt, and  into that bed of treacherous dealings, his heart, he  plunged his sword, that the steel’s chill might cool  the fire of all his passions. Parius fell dead from!  his horse, since * the sun had gone down upon his  wrath’; the young man sought the nearest altar  for refuge, the whole city hurried up, and now there  was not the confused murmur of men, but a mob. 30  The king, thinking that the mourning was for the  boy, came to look upon the agent of his wrong;  he recognized the dead body of Parius, saw the  boy lying upon it almost dead from grief, calling,  amid his tears, upon his dearly beloved guardian,  tearing his hair, beating his breast, and bewailing  the loss of such fond fostering care. Ninus saw  at once that his plans had miscarried, but he did  not know the explanation of the mistake; he

Google

164 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

summoned the boy apart from the crowd into an  inner room, and entered secretly; the boy, fol-  lowing out the instruction of the dead, bowed his  head, placed his hand before his mouth, and  kneeled before him. The king, waxing angry as  before, and already planning in his thought another  death, cried out, ° Why dost thou place thy hand  to thy nose? How cometh it that to thee only  I am an abomination? Is there any odour from

10my mouth so strong that thou canst not approach  nearer to me?’ ‘ Nay, my lord,’ replied the boy,  ‘ but from mine, and I would prevent your noticing  it.” The King: ‘ Who told thee of this?’ The  boy : ‘ Parius told me, whom he loved deeply, this  thing that all others have concealed from me,  namely, that from my mouth cometh a stench so  exceeding strong that you would be troubled by  my presence; hence I renounced the hope of closer  attendance upon you; hence I have always ob-

20 structed my breath with my hand, lest the stench  be a nuisance to you and my fault ruffle the serene  calm of your serenest countenance. In return, then,  for this forearming, and for his unfailing care dis-  played in other ways, he besought me for the  honour you bestowed upon me, and he received  it. Behold now here in your presence the complete  outpouring of my soul, and me abjectly kneeling  for your mercy, until I may suffer the penalty I  deserve or else rejoice in your pardon.’ Ninus,

30on hearing this, was deservedly affected, and for  a brief period he pondered over what had hap-  pened, and informed his courtiers of the twofold  treachery of the baneful Parius, and of the most  righteous vengeance which had befallen his envy,  for God was judge; the king restored the boy to  his former favour, and the dead body .of him who  was responsible for this misunderstanding he  ordered to be hanged upon a gibbet that in death  his evil life might be made manifest,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 165

Our merciful Father, by the rod and staff, correct-  eth His children, and by His correction preserveth  them from the avenger of wrath until they com-  pletely despise Him as did Parius. He, at the first  inception of his jealous feelings toward Lausus,  brooded over his hate, and then repressed not him-  self but pressed hard upon his friends with all his  might; all the adversity which might have be-  fallen him from Lausus’ prosperity, or all the abase-  ments from his advancements, all the painfulhio  emotions from his promotions, these he ought to  have understood as chastenings. On the contrary, |  in his perfect contempt of God, he drove God far  from him, and when He had turned from him on  account of his foul murder, the ‘ snarling lions’  cubs’ sought him from God as their prey and he  was given them, and they guarded him, and when  he would have his satisfaction to the full, that he  might slay Lausus’ son together with the father,  and be stuffed full with yet other wicked deeds, 20  they called him at their pleasure. In this manner  is he whom God hath completely forsaken, guarded  by the devil to whom God hath forsaken him, that  upon him the Evil One, to whom He hath aban-  doned the wretch, may abundantly vent his rage  without hindrance, and that the man may, by his  fatal successes, be fattened for his fate until the  cup. of his iniquity is filled to punishment. Let  the envious hearken unto these words and gain  wisdom from them, nor despise the way, poor as 30  it is, in which I have digested them, if there will  seem to be any advantage therein.

The bee alighteth on sweet and bitter flowers,  and winneth from each some wax or honey; the  lover of wisdom findeth in every poet something  deserving of his approbation, and riseth the wiser  from every page which he hath conned. For  he graspeth and holdeth fast to the letter, nor,  doth he condemn unless he hath considered, nor|

Google

166 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

thoughtlessly neglect what he hath not thoroughly  read. If any author is wise in the matter of his opin-  ions, he approveth; if, however (and God forbid !),  he findeth naught of profit, he doth not impute this  to the author’s folly but to his own dullness; and  often, while he vainly struggleth to win from what  he hath rejected something that will please or  profit him, he chanceth upon some fresh subtleties  and superior to those which the author hath

10employed. ‘ Not thus the unholy, not thus,’ but

-  ot  : Pa °  ie

20

they hate before they hear, they inveigh before  they weigh, like those of whom it is written, ‘ they  which are filthy, let them be filthy still.’

For this reason alone do I give pleasure because  my tale is an old one; will it please you, none the  less, to give ear for a moment to things which

happened recently ?

On Raso and his Wife. xv

ASO, a Christian, one of those who are com-  monly called sub-vassals, had a castle which

he had built as strong as possible owing to his need  of protection ; for he had frequent skirmishes with  the inhabitants of a city over which a certain  Emir—this was the name of the office—was the  ruler. Although Raso was not the equal of this  man either in strength or in numbers of his hosts,  yet by the activity of himself and of his only son  he held the upper hand. The youth’s mother died,  and Raso, desiring to gain new friends on his side

30 by marriage, placed a second wife in his late wife’s

bed, wedding a most beautiful lady and the mis-  tress of great riches. To her his soul was bound  so tightly that his jealousy made him vacillate for  a long time in serious and uncertain meditation,  whether it would profit him for guarding her wifely  honour to make her a Danae or a Procris. Danae,  he heard, had been deceived by gold, and any woman

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 167

who doth not love knoweth that she may love on  account of beauty, goodness, or gold; Procris he  praised for the love fetters which bound her to  Cephalus ; the wife-loving husband had wisely, he  said, granted to her liberal licence, and both were  happy, she because he was wife-loving, he because  she was for this reason chaste, 7.e. in accordance  with his deserts and reward. Raso saw that she  (Danae) who was shut up had gone astray, that she  who could stray had shut herself up, that wanton 10  passion claimed her who was guarded, whereas a  bulwark of chastity girded her who was unguarded,  that she who feared dared, that she who regarded  most disregarded most; he preferred to be loved  because of the grace of his worth than to be feared  because of the suffering of a prison, since fear is  troubled lest it fear, love anxious that it be loved.  He therefore let loose the rein from his mare that  she might seek her fodder whithersoever her hunger  bade her, eagerly praising her honour to the stars, 20  asserting that her chastity, whether assailed by  craft or power, was equal to the virtue of one  deprived of power. She, with an unwavering gaze,  together with the most solemn assurances, which,  since she added her tears, assured the matter, gav  him a full sense of security. He, eagerly greetin  the granting of his desires, mingled happy tears  with hers, and, noting the many proofs of her  loyalty, tempered his severity, and melted his  mood of stern husband to that of a wife-lover ; 30  there was nothing now which he entrusted to his  only and much beloved son—nay, he himself had  an excellent household, and was busy with his own  affairs—and whatever was adaptable for her hand  was put in her charge, nor did he wait for her to  prove herself worthy of his confidence.

The Emir came one day, led by chance, to the  gate, attended by a great retinue of soldiers; him,  Raso, in the presence of his wife, as if he were still

Google

168 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

her suitor, attacked so violently that he completely  vindicated himself from any charge of senility.  The Emir was captured, then, on that day by the  bravery of Raso and his son, and put into prison,  the key to which was in the lady’s hand. This  Emir was of an age where youth and boyhood meet,  his stature was of even length, he had an active  body and a kindly countenance, as far, at least,  s a Saracen’s could be. The lady ‘ was caught a  sot in his eyes,’ and since the stewardship of  everything was given over to her, 1t happened that  she was able very easily to gain fulfilment of her  will. She became bold from her liberty, checked  herself by no reproof, hoped to obtain from him  that which the old man failed to supply, made for  him a curious prison, gloomy and strong—the key  of which she hung from her own girdle; and by  he meagreness of food and drink she weakened  he prisoner, and the little she thought that he  20.\jought to enjoy she cast through a window as to a  ear. No one was allowed to approach, as if she  had no confidence in anybody; she who knew  that all pride is overcome by hunger, and that  Raso trusted her faithfulness without question,  yielded to a passion which was unjust to him.  She was trusted and was praised by him who gave  her his faith and praise; her husband was deceived,  and no marvel, because his deceitful wife expressed  for him the truest affection. Raso troubled or  30 vexed not himself but went forth on expeditions  and to wars, and fondly fancied, from the loyalty  of his wife while he was at home, that she was his  while he was away. Having found her freedom,  this wanton, adapting whatever precautions to pre-  serve her love that prudence bade, mounted horse,  and, with the Emir, eluded his guards and escaped.  The Emir perched himself upon the steed which  Raso loved best, and which was of the purest  breed and more than a match for all. After these

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 169

had been received into the city of their hopes,  Raso returned to his castle: he heard the news  with much grief, and said that in this especially  he had been mocked, that in the face of all tales  and stories, and the wisdom of all philosophers  from the beginning, he had put his faith in a woman ;  and yet it was not the loss of the Emir, nor of his  wife, nor of the things which they bore with them  that he bemoaned beyond all bounds, but ged  the loss of his horse, nor could his son nor histio  household give him comfort.

After several days he dressed in the garb of a  beggar and entered into the Emir’s city. While  sitting among the beggars asking for alms, he was  recognized by his wife, who, in order to make an  end of her fear, delivered him over to the Emir as  one deserving of hanging. The Emu, through a  herald, summoned the citizens that they might  behold Raso, their common enemy, and lead this  bane of their country to destruction. There as- 20  sembled a great crowd amid loud cries and blare  of trumpets and of horns. The noise and tumult  drew Raso’s son who was lurking near by, and,  when he learned the reason of the uproar, he betook  himself as quickly as possible with armed attend-  ants to a hiding-place in a neighbouring wood and  waited. And now, in the presence of the multitude,  the lady is hailed as saviour of the city, and is  escorted with great honour, the Emir arranging  and directing all. They were off their guard and 30  unarmed, the attack was swift, and Raso’s son  struck down the Emir with the first blow and  killed him. The lady, riding on the swiftest horse,  easily escaped; there ensued great slaughter of  horsemen and foot-soldiers, and a pitiless pillaging  of the whole people. Raso was returned to his  own, but amid the general rejoicing he sat in sorrow,  counting as little the booty and the spoils, the cap-  tives, and the death of the Emir, the annihilation

Google

170 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

of the citizens, and his own salvation, and what-  ever else was done; because his horse could not  be returned to him, he reckoned all else naught.  He therefore changed his countenance and his dress,  simulated, dissimulated, cared not to whom he  might be like provided he be unlike himself; he  played a part and departed as far as possible from  his usual mood. On the same day of his escape he  took his place among the poor, and when led into  10 the lady’s presence, he took care to keep his face  turned from her, and contrived to sit behind the  lofty throne on which she was sitting, his back  turned to hers. At the dinner hour the soldier  who was dining with the lady begged her to with-  draw with him, when night came, to his cities, in  which he was rich, assuring her that she could be  free from all fear of Raso, and enjoy the pleasures  of life to the full. She listened gladly to such  words and others of like import, and thus besought,  20}the woman, in love with novelty, was readily drawn  along to her own desires; the hour appointed was  that before the dawn, the place the south gate.  Raso carefully noted these arrangements, and he  went forth in joy, hastened to his castle, and,  putting on his armour, returned before nightfall,  and stood on guard at the south gate through  the night, ready to rush upon the soldier, if he  should come, and kill him; or if the lady should  come first, he, in the guise of the soldier, would  30 carry her off. But she was a woman who did not  sleep in her desires, and she anticipated the hour  of tryst; seeing a man in armour, she gave to his  hand that best of steeds which she had taken from  him, that by his aid she might mount it. But  he, seeing the goal of his hopes, very sensibly leaped  quickly to the ground, and, exchanging horses, they  rode away in gladness. The deceitful lady did not  realize that she was deceived, and, ignorant of her  destination, followed her empty hopes. Raso, who

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 171

was exhausted by his toil and long watch, fell  asleep upon his horse, and when he snored was  recognized by his wife. She besought him to turn  aside a little way until he could enjoy a nap; he  turned aside but feared to dismount, and propping  himself by his lance, snatched slumber. The soldier,  on his part, deceived by a ruse which he could not  overlook, aroused the whole city, reported that the  lady had fled, and now with an armed band was  near the spot where Raso was sleeping. The thor- 10  oughly evil woman, who did not cease wondering  how she had been carried off, saw the soldier  approaching, and summoned him with such signs  as she could. As they came nearer, Raso’s steed,}  which was usually restive before strangers, raised,  its head and neighed, and stamping its hoofs upon  the ground, warned his master of approaching  death. By this kind act Raso was awakened, and  bravely withstood the first onslaughts, and, as  loudly as he could, summoned his son who, he 20  hoped, was in a small wood close by with his  followers. ‘They did not disappoint his hopes and  quickly hurried up, and bravely pierced the oppos-  ing lines. Raso, by the speed of his horse, was  carried from one spot to another as he willed,  and he threatened whomever of the enemy he  desired ; he encouraged his followers, and bended  his whole endeavour to revenge. But his only  son, who centred on his father and none other al  his affections, was making every attempt to punish 30  her who was clearly the cause of their misfortunes  and when he had at last beheaded her, he withdrew  bearing her severed head. MRaso returned with his  men, carrying the happiest trophies of his victory.  For the rest, he said to the rest, ‘ Beware, for so I  say unto you, believe Raso: since birds which  have escaped from many nets are finally caught  by a little snare, so this bird.’ It is written ° In  vain is the net cast before the eyes of fowls’ ;

Google

172 DE NUGIS CURIALIUOM

before fowls of this sort rarely is it cast in vain,  for they have not eyes; this bird, this fox, this  woman, had seen many handsome faces and re-  Jmained loyal, she had heard and had not hearkened  to the suit of many rich men, and by the face of  | this Saracen, a lawless captive, and debased, she  \ was made a lawless captive and low, and an adulter-  sess: to the nets of the law and of her husband—  \I speak according to the laws of Venus—she denied  10 their dues, herself, and cast upon her neck a noose  ‘unbefitting her rank and reputation ; she had wings  ; since she flew away, she was without eyes because  ‘ she did not take heed, in that the sweeter her crime  ' appeared in her own eyes the more harmful it was,  the more baneful to Raso.  On the other hand, in a far different way from  Raso was Rollo injured by his mnocence.

SS 7 On Rollo and his Wife. v  eye OLLO, a man of great name and of great fame  90 in war, fortunate in his character and con-

dition, since he was not a jealous man, had a most  beautiful wife, for love of whom was pining a youth  of the neighbourhood, in beauty, race, wealth, and  noble character surpassing all the youth of those  parts. And yet ‘no future had his hopes’; his  bold attempts came to naught, he was refused, and  he earnestly asked himself, amid his tears, what  it was that he lacked to win the consummation of  love. Finally he considered Rollo, a soldier of the  30 most secure fame, whereas he, on the other hand,  was simply a boy who idly spent his time, still  wrapped in swaddling clothes, and had done nothing.  He deserved his repulse, he said, and unless he proved  himself above others, ought not to be preferred to  them; his suit was unfair, her refusal very fair.  At once he breathlessly turned every effort to feats  of arms, took part in every tournament wherever

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 173

held, and when thoroughly instructed in the arts  of war, in its changes and diverse haps, he received  at the hands of Rollo himself the belt of knight-  hood, so that henceforth he became more acceptable  to him, and could speak more intimately to his  lady, or even tell her of his grief; and if he ought  to do naught else but gaze at her, this, too, he could  do. He went forth, therefore, whithersoever his  master love called him, to all armed uprisings or  quarrellings, and whatever of them he found languid 10  or drowsy, he aroused and brought to consum-  mation, and, even without bringing them to con-  summation, he became the preferred of all and the  most powerful of all. He turned out in a short  time to excel every one in the neighbourhood in  brave deeds, and, although not exceeded, he was  fired to greater. ‘ He conquered bronze battle lines,’  walls, and towers; but the spirit which upbore  him in all his victories was of itself rendere  effeminate, aye, feminized, since it changed intq 20  a feminine lack of self-control, so that like a woma  he heedlessly hastened to gratify his hopes, a lamb  within and a lion without, and he who overthrew  the castles of strangers was unsexed by the worries  of his own heart; he became a weakling, wailed,  prayed, and wept. She, not like a maid or a mad  woman, but like a man, cursed him, spurned him  and by every means she could drove him to despair  It happened that one day Rollo was making a  journey with his dearly beloved wife at his side, 30  and he was met by our youth, whom he addressed  by name, Resus. The young man, directing, as  to his masters and superiors, a few courteous and  humble words, bade them farewell and departed.  The lady was proudly disdainful. Rollo, on the  other hand, gazed at the retreating youth for some  time with his entire attention fixed upon him, and  after a time turned back his gaze and went on in  silence. The lady, suspicious and afraid that he

Google

174 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

might have noticed something, asked him what was  the matter, why he had gazed back for so long a  time upon one who did not gaze back upon him.  To her Rollo made reply : ‘ Glad was I to look back  upon what I would I might see for ever, the sur-  passing marvel of our age, a man remarkable for  family, character, beauty, wealth, and reputation,  and the favours of the entire earth, and indeed  such a one as is not found, according to the poet,  10 “in every respect blessed.”’’ She, harbouring in  her soul from this high praise more than she ex-  pressed upon her lips, replied, ‘In my eyes he  neither seemeth handsome nor have I heard that  he is good.’ A different thought was busy in her  brain, namely, that Rollo was loyal and truthful,  and that what she had heard from others must, on  her husband’s word, be believed. She was sorry  then that she had repulsed the young man, and  despaired of her ability to undo what had been  20done; and he whom, as the humblest suitor, she  in her pride had scorned, was now the proudest of  the proud and she was humble and afraid even  to hope for him. When, on their return, she betook  herself to her room, she would fain weep, but could  not in the face of gossip; for tears that arise from  guilt need secrecy, and the daughters of the night  dwell even at the door of hidden chambers. She  hurried thence into the secrecy of her deepest  retreat, and exploring her thoughts by deploring  30 her sad state, she finally determined on a plan, a  bold one—to try by messenger whether he would  deign come to her. The ambassador of her passion  hurried forth, and in eager haste returned accom-  panied by the burning desire of her soul, and at  her bidding withdrew. She had arranged for Venus  and herself a secret chamber into which they entered  bent upon the attainment of their prayers, and once  within it she began: °* Thou art wondering, per-  chance, my best beloved, what sudden reason it

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 175

was which hath given me to thee after so many  heartless refusals; Rollo was the reason, for I  had not believed report, but him I knew to be most  truthful, and I was influenced by his assertion that  thou art more learned than Apollo, more lenient  than Jove, more leonine than Mars, in harmony  with time, place, and circumstance; nor is there  any other gift given by the gods except immor-  tality which he did not add to thy good qualities.  I believed then, I confess it, and I was made1o  prisoner, and see, the long desired delights I  gladly offer thee.’ And she fell back and drew him  to her, but he, putting a check upon his mad passion,  made answer: ‘° Never will Resus make to Rollof  a base return for his great kindness: it would be}  a caitiff’s act to violate his bed, which all the world}  denied me and he himself presented.’ Thus did  he withdraw and withstand; he had the power  and he did not sin: she had overcome herself  that she might indulge herself, he overcame him- 20  self that he might be without her: the former  victory was long delayed, the second quickly won :  the one was aggressive and gained only through  long watches, the other was elusive and won after  a short but brave watchfulness : the one was sweet  and delightful, the other bitter and doleful, but  the fruit of them will be found to have changed  their savour ‘ in the time of harvest.’

Thus, contrary to the belief of Ovid, from the  youth and his passion she was returned a virgin, 30  as far as in his power lay, but on her part in the  very heat of her passion, on the threshold of Dione,  on the brink of an easy fall, in despair of her self-  restraint. Who would not admire him and as far  as possible imitate him? MHe surely was able to  undertake escape by a preventing grace, and,  though caught, to escape by an attending grace.  He was strong, but in him, in both respects, the  Lord was strong; he was praiseworthy, but by

Google

176 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

\the Lord’s help. The slothful man will see these  things and will look for favour ; he will pardon and  he incurreth offence. We, however, are not now  so, but let us be sure that ‘without Him nothing  can be accomplished,’ and let us endeavour to have  he beginnings, as it were, to arise from us, and to  o endeavour let hope and prayer be lacking; let  us gird up our loins to force God to be on our side,  and let us feel assured that our force will be pleasing  ion His eyes. Virtue, when seized by her cloak,  never leaveth it in your grasp, but, whithersoever  you draw her willingly, doth she attend you, an  object of your desire. He who is master of his  flesh escapeth from wrath, and he who putteth  a bridle upon himself is guided by God’s hand. To  Him, from whom all favours come, be thanks.

Google

FOURTH DIVISION |

Prologue. 1 “  HE gain of us all in knowledge is enhanced  if no man among us liveth with closed eyes |  or ears, or indeed with any of the senses inactive;  and it is, moreover, meet and right for us to build  up ourselves within by means of things without.  Amid these things, to be sure, because we are blind  to the future, we see face to face certain happen-  ings of the present; let us hasten to see, too,  several happenings of the past which we have not 10  seen. Nor let us despise the things that have not  come to our ears, but, leaving the future in the  hands of God, let us lose no time in informing our-  selves from those things which the Lord hath set  for us to imitate or to avoid. Let us ever ask of  Him, who is our present help, to promote in us the  pursuit of the free choice of good and to offer a  refuge to us when fugitives from evil.

I see younger men either despising or disparaging  whatever they see and hear, and many men biding 20  sluggishly at home in an old age which is either  base or else doth not rise above the level of the  crowd. I once knew a lad, whom I am proud to  count among my kinsmen and who was educated  among us and by us, always ‘ hanging on the lips  of the speaker,’ clinging to his elders, seeking the  society of good men, assaying brave deeds, never  idle but indefatigably busy, ever so keen in his  quest of all honourable things that though, to my  regret, he was not a scholar, he could at least 30  transcribe any written page whatever. Before he

M

Google

178 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

was twenty, he left our mother and his, England,  and attached himself, a solitary foreigner, to  Philip, Count of Flanders, in order to gain from him  instruction in arms, and chose him as his lord;  nor was the choice unwise, for of all the princes  of this age, with the sole exception of our own,  this nobleman is the most valiant in war and  the strongest in government since the passing  of the young King Henry, the son of Henry][ our

10 King, who hath—God be thanked—no peer among  living men.

The aforesaid young Henry died at Martel  (Corréze) in the very month in which I wrote this  page at Saumur, on Saint Barnaby’s Day (June 11),  in the year of our Lord 1183, and of his age 27.  He was a man of unprecedented skill in arms, who  aroused an almost ‘somnolent soldiery,’ and led  it forth to the very greatest deeds. We (who  have known him as friends and intimates) can

2 describe his virtues and his graces. He was beauti-  ful above all others in both form and face, most  blessed in breathing courtesy, most happy in the  love of men and in their grace and favour, so  potently persuasive, that he beguiled almost all his  father’s trusted followers to rise against their liege  lord. You may compare him to Absalom (if,  indeed, he was not greater). The Hebrew prince  had one Achitophel, the young Henry, many and  no Hushai. This parallel the Lord hath to-day

30 made manifest, since He hath filled to the brim for  our sovereign lord, his father, ‘ the mercies of the  faithful David ’—that 1s, those which He showed  unto His faithful David—since the Lord ‘ hath  delivered him out of all trouble, and his eye looketh  with contempt upon the wrath of his enemies,’  His Absalom had aroused all Aquitaine, Burgundy,  and many of the French against his father, our  sovereign lord, and all the men of Maine, Anjou,  and Brittany; and indeed the greater number of

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 179

those who warred on our side wavered to him.  Indeed those of Maine and Anjou, disregarding |  our tears and supplications, openly deserted us!  during the siege of Limoges, and, returning to their  own lands, necessitated the disbanding of the army  because so few were left. But Absalom, to whom  all the forces of the world seemed forthwith to  flow, conspired against his father at Martel, and  mortally smitten, on that very day, by a hammer |, _  of death in a just avenger’s hand, perished; and10°—  sedition now yielded to sedateness. Then the  world became quiet ° with the passing of Python.’  Although the prince ordered his body to be buried  at Rouen, it was carried off by the men of Le Mans,  and kept by force in the Church of St. Julian, where  it was afterwards entombed; but now the king  his father hath ordered it to be transferred thence  to Rouen, so that this town should be for ever  linked with the memory of a man full of favour  and graces. In that he was rich, noble, lovable, 20  eloquent, beautiful, valiant, in every way charming,  ‘a little lower than the angels,’ he turned all to evil,  and, emboldened through the perversity of his good  fortune, became by reason of his baseness of temper  a parricide, so that he placed his father’s death  among his highest desires. It is said that Merlin  had prophesied of him: ‘ The lynx, penetrating  all places, will strive for the destruction of his own  race.’ He left ‘no place unpenetrated,’ he stirred  every stone, he befouled with his falseness the full- 30  ness of the world—he the prodigious betrayer,  always prodigal of evil, most serene source of sin,  fostering fuel of baseness, most comely court of  crime and the fairest kingdom thereof. Prepare  then to hear how he became the founder of the  sect of traitors. His father had done much to  restore the whole world to peace, free both at home  and abroad; but the young Henry brought about  by his wiles the breaking of treaties, and he who

Google

180 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

was in many ways a false son to his father, as I  ycan bear witness, turned against the peaceful king,  ‘In breach of oaths, the arms of those bound by  oath. He constantly set a stumbling-block in his  ‘father’s path ; but was wont to return to him after  defeat, being ever the more prone to errors the  more confidently he felt that paternal favour could  not be denied him. He never brought down upon  himself any wrath which he could not placate with

1ohis first tears; he desired nothing which he could  jnot extort with a few flatteries. He, forsooth,  succeeded in turning every man against his best  self, by leading him, against all conscience and  faith, to the abandonment of God. He, the  hammer, smitten mortally in Martel, died peni-  tent, so they say, but he could not be bent by any  warning to peace with his father. It was as if he  said, ‘ If I shall depart, I shall keep the peace; if  not, I shall fight on.’ ‘ War was in his heart.’ He

20 left as his heir his brother Richard, for whom he  had a consuming hatred, and died full of wrath.  Not in such wise did the Lord (of mercy) look upon  his end.

Epilogue. 1

AC the court of King Henry, I penned the pages  of this little book by snatches and divorced  it with all force from my heart, in the endeavour  to obey the bidding of my lord. I shrank from  my task, I strove to conquer the unconquerable.  30 For, although the Muses are exiles from all courts,  they have forsworn ours above all the rest, be-  cause it hath persistently turned its back on them  and hath turned its face far more on others, in that  ‘its fret and fury did not furnish sufficient respites  of repose for sleep, far less for study. I tried to  compel them, and they were disdainful. When,  however, the news of the death of my lord, the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 181  aforesaid king, was brought, I myself died daily’

with the tears attendant upon two years of mourn- -.  ing. But now I rise up for the business of life -  with a newborn sense of my inestimable gain in  being free from the court. Now that I am de-  livered from its bonds, I perceive, in my freshly  found quiet, my full wretchedness when in bondage  there. ‘In quiet,’ I say correctly, if it be quiet  to recognize, by certain proofs, one’s escape from  the prince of darkness and to rule, in every wise; 10  the kingdom of one’s own soul, with the consent.  of the Lord, who hath driven ‘the devil forth to  bondage. We are given into the hands of him  (the devil) to whose power the flesh and spirit of  the blessed Job submitted, and we behold him so  much the more severe and ourselves so much the  more sluggish in victory as we are the farther from  patience. The Ancient of Days scanneth and  turneth our sphere, he possesseth the hearts of all,  and glorieth in the sway of the world; ‘ the lying 20  serpent encircleth all in his coils,’ leaving little or  nothing without his folds. For a long time, wicked  deeds were wrought by evil-doers under the pre--  text of some reason, that at least baseness might  have the covering of justice or rather some sem-—  blance thereof. But now justice hath perished:  and its face will not be sought out. Nay even,  with the destruction of peace, a madness hath  been completely revealed in the midst of pillage,  and every forehead hath become so brazen that 30  shame and reverence no longer exist. Now no  injured man maketh plaint or plainly seeketh  whence his wrong, for there is nowhere a reason  and no one will give him answer. And now, for  the first time, I can be content with the business  of life, because the Muses are changed with the  world’s changes, and it no longer behoveth one to  speak from their caves nor to be bound in the rules  of arts. We do whatever we please, drawing no

Google

182 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

distinction between virtue and vice. If Cato shall  return, Numa be restored, the Fabii revive, the.  Curii be recalled, the Rusones be resurrected, things  will go on just the same, for where there is no vestige  of culture, Cato will not use his wisdom, Numa his  justice, Fabius his innocence, Curius his courtesy,  Ruso his piety. Whenever none of those virtues,  from which they derived worth, is held in high  esteem, such men forsooth are dull. If you should  10 resurrect Nero, Vitellius, Catiline, they would find  most people more monstrous than themselves. If  you should call up Mamertus (Claudian) from the  shades, Helicon and the Pierian Spring would avail  naught against the many Rufini of our time. Let  Virgil then sleep with Homer, Marsus with Catullus ;  let Cherulus and Cluvienus, Bavius and Maevius be  awake and sing, and naught will forbid my cackling  among them. To such poets do our times belong.  The Muses cannot chide, nor punish injuries, nor  20o\will they plead an excuse for the arts, because  everywhere the world is out of jomt. Therefore,  safe though weaponless, I approach that at which  I erstwhile trembled.  May my book now find such readers! They will  deem me a poet; but indeed ‘the impious read not  so, surely not so,’ and hence they will cast this poor  .' {little book as dust to the winds, for they hate  j it before they have heard it, they discount it

before they count its worth, they grudge it before  30 they greet it. Assault itself, if one may say so,  _. assaileth it.

Thad a friend, a man of philosophic regime, whom,  after long acquaintance and many visits, I found  on a time greatly altered in clothes, carriage, and  countenance, woefully sighing, pale of face and yet  in far better apparel, speaking fewer but weightier  words, arrogant with an unwonted dislike of other  men. His former wit had vanished, and he was  no longer merry as of old. He called himself a sick

"eet

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 183

man, and he was indeed far from well. I beheld  him seeking solitude and shunning my conversation  as far as his regard for me permitted. I saw him  possessed of Venus. For whatever was apparent  in him smacked wholly of the lover and in no wise:  of the philosopher. I felt a hope, however, that,  he would rise again after his fall. I was ready to,  pardon that of which I knew no part. I thought  it a jest and it was deadly earnest. He strove for  the treatment of a husband, not of a lover, and 10  yearned not to become Mars but Vulcan. And  yet my sense left me and, because he seemed on the  road to death, I was ready to go with him. I spoke  to him and was rebuffed. I sent others to speak  with him, and, as he would not listen to them, I  said, ‘ A most evil beast hath devoured my dearest  friend’; and, in order to fulfil all the conditions  of friendship, I wrote him a letter changing our  names, calling me who am Walter, Valerius, and  him who is John and red, Ruffinus. I headed the 20  letter thus :—

The Advice of Valerius to Ruffinus the Philosopher  not to Marry. wl

AM forbidden to speak and yet I cannot be silent.

I hate cranes and the voice of the owl, the bubo,  and other birds who forebode with doleful cries the  bitterness of a muddy winter, and so dost thou deride  the prophecies of loss to come—true prophecies, '  too, if thou continuest in thy course. Hence I am  forbidden to speak, being a prophet of truth, andj30  not a diviner of my own desire.

I love the nightingale and the merle, that herald  with gentle harmony the delight of the soft air,  and I love above all the swallow that filleth to the  brim the season of coveted joy with a rich plenty  of pleasures—nor am I wrong.

Thou lovest parasites and players who whisper

Google

184 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

of sugared baits to come, and especially Circe, who

doth cheat thee by pouring profusely sensual de-

lights that are redolent of the aroma of sweetness  ‘long drawn out. For fear that thou be made swine  ‘or ass, I cannot hold my peace.

Ministering Babel pledgeth thee in the honeyed  poison; it moveth itself aright, and awakeneth  delight in thee and leadeth thy spirit’s force whither  it will. Hence I am forbidden to speak.

10 I know that ‘ at the last, it will bite as a serpent,’  and will make a wound which will defy every  antidote (treacle). Hence I cannot keep silent.

Thou hast many advocates of thy pleasures,  most practised in pleading against thy well-being.  Shall I be the only one to hold the tongue—l,  who alone proclaim the bitter truth which thou  loathest ? Hence I am forbidden to speak.

The foolish ‘ voice of the goose among swans,’  which are trained only to give pleasure, hath been

20 blamed, yet the voice of the goose taught the  senators to save the city from burning, their trea-  sures from theft, themselves from the enemy’s  weapons. Perchance thou, too, wilt understand,  with the senators, because thou art wise, that the  swans chant death to you and the goose hisseth  safety. Hence I cannot keep silent.

Thou art all aflame with thy desires, and, being  ensnared by the beauty of a lovely person, thou  knowest not, poor wretch, that what thou seekest

301s a chimera. But thou art doomed to know that  this triform monster, although it is beautified with  the face of a noble lion, yet is blemished with the  belly of a reeking kid and is beweaponed with the  virulent tail of a viper. Therefore I am forbidden  to speak.

Ulysses was enticed by the song of the sirens,  but because ‘he knew the voices of the sirens  and the cups of Circe,’ he won for himself, by the  fetters of virtue, the power of shunning the abyss,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 185

Moreover, I, trusting in the Lord, predict that thou  wilt be the imitator of Ulysses, not of Empedocles,  who, under the power of his philosophy, to say  nothing of his melancholy, chose Etna as his tomb,  and that thou wilt hearken to the parable which  thou hearest; but of this I am afraid. Hence I  cannot keep silent.

Finally, stronger is that flame of thine by which  a part of thee hath become the foe of thyself, than  that flame in thee by which thou art kindled into 10  love of me. Lest the greater draw the lesser to  itself and I die, therefore I am forbidden to speak.

That I may speak with the spirit in which I am  thine, let the fires be weighed in any scale, equal  or unequal, and let whatever thou mayst do or  decide result in the danger of my life. Thou must  indulge me who, out of the impatience of my love,  cannot keep silent.

The first wife of the first man (Adam) after the °  first creation of man, by the first sin, relieved her 20  first hunger against God’s direct command. Great  hath been the spawn of Disobedience, which until  the end of the world will never cease from assailing  women and rendering them ever unwearied in  carrying to the fell consequences their chief in-  heritance from their mother. O friend, a man’s  highest reproach is a disobedient wife. Beware!

The truth of God, which cannot err, saith of the  blessed David: ‘I have found a man after mine  own heart.’ Yet even he is a signal instance of 30  descent, through the love of woman, from adultery  to homicide, that ‘ offences may never come singly.’  For every sin is rich in abundant company and  surrendereth whatever home it entereth to the  pollution of its fellow vices. O friend, Bathsheba  spake not a word and maligned no man, yet she  became the instigation of the overthrow of the  perfect man and the dart of death to her innocent  mate. Shall she be held guiltless who shall battle ’

Google

186 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

by her charm of speech as Samson’s Delilah, and  iby her grace of form as Bathsheba, although her  beauty alone may have triumphed without her.  will? If thou art not more after God’s heart than  David, doubt not that thou too mayst fall.

That sun of men, Solomon, treasure-house of the  Lord’s delights, chief dwelling-place of wisdom,  was darkened by the inky blackness of shadows  and lost the light of his soul, the fragrance of his

10fame, the glory of his home, by the witchery of  women. At the last, having bowed his knee to  Baal, he was degraded from a priest of the Lord  to a limb of the devil, so that he seemed to be  thrust over a yet greater precipice than Phoebus,  who, after Phaeton’s fall, was changed from the  Apollo of Jove into the shepherd of Admetus.  Friend, if thou art not wiser than Solomon—and  no man is that—thou art not greater than he who  can be bewitched by woman. ‘Open thine eyes  20 and see.’  Kven the very good woman, who is rarer than  , the phoenix, cannot be loved without the loath-  some bitterness of fear and worry and constant  - unhappiness. But bad women, of whom the swarm  -1s so large that no spot is without their malice,  ‘punish bitterly the bestowal of love, and devote  , themselves utterly to dealing distress, ‘to the divi-  sion of soul and body.’ O friend, a trite moral is,  ° Look to whom thou givest.’ True morality is,  30° Look to whom thou givest thyself.’

Lucretia and Penelope, as well as the Sabine  women, have borne aloft the banners of modesty  and they have brought back trophies with but few

tin their following. Friend, there is now no Lucretia,  “no Penelope, no Sabine woman. Fear all the sex.

Seylla, the daughter of Nisos, and Myrrha, the  daughter of Cinyras, have opposed the Sabine battle-  lines, and have led in their train great throngs  attended by an army of all the vices, so that they

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 187

dispense to their captives groanings and sighs, and,  in the end, hell itself. My friend, lest thou become  the prey of merciless pillages, thou must not slumber  while their army is passing.

Jupiter, king of earth, who was also called king  of heaven on account of his matchless might of  body and his peerless excellence of mind, compelled  himself to bellow for Europa. My friend, lo, him |  whom worth lifted above the heavens, a woman |  hath lowered to the level of brutes! A woman jo  will have the power to compel thee to bellow unless  thou art greater than Jupiter, to whose greatness  no one else was equal.

Phoebus, who first environed the round of the  whole world with the rays of his wisdom, so that  he might rightly win the sole honour of the name  of Sol, was infatuated with the love of Leucothoe,  to his own disgrace and her destruction; and,  through the repeated change of the eclipse, he  frequently came to lack his own light, of which the 20  whole world felt the loss. My friend, ‘lest the  light which is in thee be turned to darkness,’ flee  Leucothoe.

Then there was Mars, who attained the name of  * God of Battles’ through the well-known number  of victories, in which his ready valour stood him  greatly in stead. Although he knew no fear for  himself, he was bound with Venus by Vulcan in  chains, invisible, to be sure, but tangible—this too  amid the mocking applause and the derision of the 30  heavenly court. My friend, meditate at least upon  the chains which thou dost not see and yet already  in part feel, and snatch thyself away while they  are still breakable, lest that lame and loathsome  smith whom ‘no god ever honoured at his board  nor goddess with her bed’ shall chain thee in his’  fashion to his Venus and shall make thee like unto  himself, lame and loathsome, or, what I fear more,  shall render thee club-footed; in such wise that

Google

188 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

thou canst not have the saving grace of a cloven  hoof, but, bound to Venus, thou wilt become the  distress and laughing-stock of onlookers, while the  blind applaud thee and those with sight threaten.

Pallas was condemned by a false judge of god-  desses, since she promised to bestow not pleasure  but profit. Friend, dost thou, too, ever judge in  this wise ?

I mark that thou, in growing disgust of spirit,

10 art turning very rapidly the leaves before thee and  art not attending to the meaning, but art awaiting  the figures of rhetoric. In vain ‘thou waitest for  this muddy river’ to flow out or for these noisome  floods to pass and to yield to currents of pure water ;  since all streams must be like their source, either  muddy or clear. Thus the weakness of my speech  expresseth the ignorance of my heart, and the  swelling unevenness of my diction offendeth a  delicate spirit. Conscious as I am of this weakness,

20I should have abandoned gladly this task of dis-  suasion; but, because I could not hold my peace,  therefore I spake as well as I could. But if I  possessed as much merit of style as zest of writing,  I should send thee such fine words, mated in such  noble union, that each of them apart and all of  them together would seem to bless the author.  But because thou owest to me everything that a  lover as yet bare and unfruitful—I do not say  barren—can deserve from all men, lend me mean-

30 time thine ear in patience while I unfold what I  have enfolded. And do not exact from me the  rouge and white lead of the orator, my ignorance  of which I confess and bemourn, but accept the  will of the writer and the truth of his page.

Julius Caesar, ‘for whose greatness the world  was too narrow,’ on the day that too cruel Atropos  dared to break the thread of his noble life, bent his  ear humbly, at the doors of the Capitol, to Tongillus  —a poor man, indeed, but a prophet—when he

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 189

offered him tablets (of writing). Had he, instead,  bent his mind to the warning, his murderers and  not he would have paid the penalty. Thou indeed  inclinest thine ear to me, the sender of this writing,  as the asp to charmers ; but thou offerest thy mind  as a boar to dogs. Thou art as soothed as the  serpent, dipsas, upon which the sun shone with  equatorial rays. Thou art as thoughtful for thy-  self as was the betrayed Medea. Thou pitiest  thyself as the sea the shipwrecked. In that thou 10  restrainest thy hand, it 1s out of reverence to the  king’s peace. O my friend, the conqueror of the  world, although nearly perfect, bent himself humbly  to his faithful servant, and he almost escaped be-  cause he almost obeyed ; and he yielded to punish-  ment because he did not yield full obedience.  Much humility availed him naught, because it was  not full humility. What will thy wild savagery  and thy inflexible vigour and thy dreaded haughti-  ness avail thee, if thou voluntarily rushest unarmed 20  into the snares of robbers? Humble thyself,  prithee, to the measure of his humility, who  humbled under himself the whole world, and listen  to thy friend. And if thou thinkest that Caesar  erred, not hearkening to counsel, listen and mark  what hath happened to others, that their injury  may be to thy profit. Without hurt is the chas-.  tening to which these patterns persuade thee.  Thou art safe in some sanctuary or other, or thou  languishest in some asylum. Caesar looked upon 30  the merciless traitors and did not turn back. If  thou hast always evaded such self-discipline, thou  hast found the pious impious (7.e. thou hast not  been able to distinguish the pious from the impious).  King Phoroneus, who did not begrudge the trans-  mission of treasures of law to his people, but was  the first of the Greeks to make such studies precious,  on the day when he entered upon the way of all  flesh, said to Leontius his brother: ‘ I should have

Google

190 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

lacked naught that tendeth to the highest happi-  ness had I always lacked a wife.’ Leontius asked,  * And how did a wife stand in your way ?’ And he  replied, ‘ All husbands know how.’ My friend,  would that thou hadst marriage behind thee and  not before, that thou mightest know what hindereth  happiness.

When Emperor Valens—at eighty as chaste as  a maid—heard, on the day of his death, that his

19 triumphs, which had been numerous, were being  proclaimed anew, he said that he gloried in only  one victory ; and when asked, ‘ Which one ?’ re-  plied, * The one in which I tamed my basest enemy,  my flesh.’ My friend, this emperor would have  gone ingloriously out of the world had he not  bravely resisted that with which thou hast closely  contracted.

Cicero, after the divorce of Terentia, was un-  willing to marry, professing himself unable to give

20 his attention at once to a wife and to philosophy.  My friend, would that thy spirit would thus answer  thee, or thy tongue me, and thou wouldst deign  to imitate the master of eloquence at least in thy  speech, in order to give me hope, even though it  should prove vain !

Canius from Gades (the Columns of Hercules), a  poet of light and pleasing style, was reproved thus  by Livy of Aponus, the grave historian, who was  a married man, for delighting in the love of many

30ladies: ° Thou mayst not share our philosophy  while thou art shared by so many; for Tityus  doth not love Juno with that liver which many  vultures rend into many pieces.” And Canius  answered : ‘ If at any time I fall, I arise more care-  ful; if I am somewhat bowed down to earth, I  seek the upper air more briskly. The alternation  of nights rendereth the days brighter, as an endless  continuance of shadows is the likeness of hell. So  the first lilies of spring, which are clarified by the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 191

warm rays of the sun, delight in a larger joy under  the change of the north-east breeze and of the  western zephyr, but are destroyed by one breath  of the thunderous south wind. Hence Mars, break-  ing his cords, reclineth in the company of the gods,  at the heavenly table, while far away from this  the uxorious Vulcan is bound by his own rope.  Thus many threads bind more lightly than one  chain; and philosophy bringeth to me delights  and to thee a solace.’ My friend, I approve of the 10  words of both of these, but of the life of neither.  And yet, many maladies interrupted by the alter-  nation of health are less painful than one illness  which affecteth us with incurable pangs.

Pacuvius, in tears, said to his neighbour Arrius :  ‘My friend, I have in my garden a barren tree on  which my first wife hanged herself, and then my  second, and just now my third.’ Arrius answered  him: ‘I marvel that thou hast found cause for  tears in such a run of good luck,’ and again, ‘ Great 20  heavens, what heavy costs to thee hang from that  tree!’ and thirdly, ‘ My friend, give me of that tree  some branches to plant.’ And I say to thee, my  friend, I fear that thou too wilt have to beg  branches of that tree at a time when thou wilt  not be able to find them.

Sulpicius felt where his shoe pinched him, seeing  that he divorced a high-born and chaste wife. My  friend, beware of a pinching shoe which cannot be  pulled off. 30

Cato of Utica said, * If the world could exist  without women, our intercourse would not be  without gods.’ My friend, Cato spoke only of  what he had felt and known; nor doth any one  curse the mockery of women unless tricked and  tried by painful experiences. It is proper to trust  such witnesses, because they speak with all truth :  they know how enjoyment of love pleaseth and  how it pricketh the beloved; they know that the

Google

192 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

flower of Venus is a rose, because under its crimson  lurk many thorns.

Metellus answered to Marius, whose daughter he  would not marry, though she was of large dowry,  great beauty, high birth, and fair fame: ‘I prefer  to be mine own than hers.’ Marius replied to him :  ‘Nay, she will be thine.’ Then said Metellus:  * Not so, a man must needs belong to his wife, for  it is true to logic that “* the predicates will be such

10 as the subjects will permit.””’ Thus Metellus’ wit  in words saved his back from burdens. My friend,  if it is reasonable to marry, it is not expedient.  May thy love be neither blind in the case nor on  the basis of property, so that thou mayst choose  the face of a wife, not her dress, and her soul, not  her gold, and that a woman, not a dowry, may wed  thee. Thus, if it is any way possible, thou wilt be  able to predicate that thou art not making the  subject envious.

‘29 Lais of Corinth, renowned for great beauty,  deigned to accept the embraces only of kings and  lords; she tried, however, to share the couch of  Demosthenes the philosopher, so that, by solving  the miracle of his far-famed chastity, she would be  reputed to have moved stones with her lures as  Amphion with his lyre; and she drew him sweetly  into her arms, disarmed by her endearments.  When his self-control was slackened by the charm  of her bed, she craved of him, in return for her

30 favour, one hundred talents. But he said, lifting  eyes to heaven: ‘ I buy not repentance at any such  rate.’ My friend, would that thou, too, wouldst  ‘raise to heaven a keen mind, and escape that which  ‘must be redeemed with repentance.

Livia slew her husband, whom she hated over-  much; Lucilia hers, whom she overmuch loved.  The one of her own will mixed aconite; the other  by mistake mingled for her man a potion of madness,  instead of a cup of love. My friend, they strive

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 193

with opposite intent; neither, however, is cheated  of the goal of women’s wiles, that is, her own natural:  evil. Women journey by widely different ways,  but by whatever windings they may wander, and  through however many trackless regions they may  travel, there is only one outlet, one goal of all their  trails, one crown and common ground of all their  differences—wickedness. Find a warning against  them in the experience that a woman is bold for  _ the gratification of all her love or hate and is anio

adept at hurting when she will, which is always.  And frequently, when she is ready to assist, she  hindereth, hence it cometh to pass that she doeth  harm even against her own heart’s wish. Thou:  art placed in a furnace: if thou art gold, thou wilt  go forth gold.

Deianira dressed Tirynthius (Hercules) in a shirt,  and she drew vengeance upon the mauler of the  monsters through monsters’ blood, and she con-  cluded to her distress what she had conceived for 20  her delight. My friend, Thestias (Deianira) knew  that Nessus was pierced by the dart of Hercules,  indeed saw him with her own eyes, yet she believed  Nessus against Hercules; and, as if with her own  intent, she clothed in a shroud him whom she ought  to have clothed in a shirt. The unbalanced woman  of wrong head and rash spirit is ever willing to  settle upon the sovereign thing which is her wish,  not which is befitting; and, as she desireth, above  all, to please, she is wont to place her own plea4 39  sure before everything. Hercules achieved twelvé  labours, more than mortal; by the thirteenth,  which surpassed all immortals, he was consumed.  Thus the bravest of men met death, in like measure  lamented and lamenting, even he who without  lament bore on his shoulders the arch of heaven.

Pray what woman among thousands of thou-  sands ever hath saddened with perpetual repulse  the persistently solicitous suitor? What woman

N

Google

194 DE NUGIS CURIALIOUM

doth repeatedly reject the prayer of the petitioner ?

Her response hath a savour of favour, and however

hard she seemeth, she will always have in some

corner or other of her words some hidden kindling  ‘for thy craving. However much she may deny, she  ‘denieth not altogether.

Gold broke through the barriers of the tower of  Acrisius, and melted the virginity of Danae, which  was guarded by many a rampart. My friend, thus

10 the unchaste raineth from heaven upon the maiden  whose chastity hath triumphed over earth; thus  he from heaven overcometh her whom the lowly  enticeth not, thus the north wind overturneth the  tree which the west wind doth not budge. |

Perictione (Pennutia), a virgin verging on old  age, and renowned for her chastity, at length con-  ceived ‘ under the pressure of Apollo’s phantom,’  and bore Plato. My friend, lo, an apparition in  sleep hath deflowered her whom many watchings

20 have preserved undefiled, as every rose garden is  always robbed of its crimson by a whirlwind. But  to a good purpose—if anything of the sort can be  called good—because Plato waxed like unto his  father in wisdom, and became the heir of both the  name and fame of his mighty sire.

My friend, are you amazed or are you, the rather,  affronted, because in my parallels I point out  heathen as worthy of your imitation, idolatries to  a Christian, wolves to a lamb, evil men to a good.

301 wish you to be like unto the fruitful bee, which  draweth honey from the nettle, ‘so that you may  suck honey from the stone and oil from the hardest  rock.’ I know the superstition of the heathen ;  \but every one of God’s creatures furnisheth some  \honourable illustration, whence He himself is called  lion, or serpent, or ram. The unbelieving perform  very many things perversely; nevertheless they  do some things which, although barren in their  case, would in ours bring forth fruit abundantly, ©

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 195

But if those who lived without hope, without faith,  without charity, indeed without a preacher, made  coats of skins (in human wise), and, if we should  become asses or sows or brutes in some inhuman  form, of what reward of faith, of charity, of hope  should we be deemed worthy, although we might  behold prophets, apostles, and chief of all, Him,  the Lord of the pure heart, whom only pure eyes  are permitted to perceive? Or if they have  wearied themselves in the pursuit of their own de- 10  signs with no perception of future bliss, but only  with the hope of avoiding ignorant minds, what  shall we have in return for our neglect of the sacred  page, whose end is truth and whose illumination is  ‘a lamp unto the feet’ and ‘a light unto the path’  to eternal light? Would that thou mayst select this  sacred page, would that thou mayst peruse this,  would that ‘thou mayst bring this into thy chamber,’  that ‘the king may bring thee unto his’! Thou  hast already ploughed closely this field of Holy 20  Writ for the flowers of thy spring, in this thy  summer ‘He expecteth thee to make grapes’; to  the hurt of this do not marry another lest, in the  time of harvest, ‘ thou wilt make wild grapes.’ I  do not wish thee to be the bridegroom of Venus,  but of Pallas. She will adorn thee with precious  jewels; she will clothe thee in a marriage garment.  These nuptials will boast Apollo as the attendant ;  the Fescennine verses chanted there will be taught  by the married Stilbon to the cedars of Lebanon. 30  Devoutly but fearfully have I conceived the hope  of this solemn union, which I so greatly desire;  for this reason have I planned this whole reading ;  to this end, the whole discourse, albeit slowly, will  hasten. With the firmness of this dissuasion is  armed the whole man of me, whose dart, hardened  with many a point of steel, thou dost now feel.

Google

196 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

The Conclusion of the foregoing Epistle. Iv

ARD is the hand of the surgeon, but healing.  ‘ Hard is this speech also,’ but healthy; and  may thou find it as useful as it is devoted. My  friend, thou protestest that I inflict upon thee a  narrow rule of living. So be it! For ‘ narrow is  the way which leadeth to life,’ nor is the path plain  by which men proceed to a plenitude of joys. Nay,  leven to attain to moderate pleasures we must pass  10\through rough places. Jason heard that he must  voyage through a sea that up to this time had not  been deflowered by ships or oars and must make  his way by sulphur-breathing bulls and by the  post of a poisonous serpent to the golden fleece.  Employing a counsel that was sound but not sweet,  he departed, and returned bringing the desired  itreasure. Thus humility of mind accepteth the  ‘wormwood of surly truth; dutiful care doth fer-  \tilize it, and persistent service bringeth it to fruit.  20 Thus Auster, the south wind, cup-bearer of the rains,  bringeth up the seed, Aquilo (from the north),  sweeper of the ways, strengtheneth it, Zephyr, the  creator of flowers, advanceth it to a rich yield.  Thus stern beginnings are rewarded with a sweet  ending, thus a strait path leadeth to stately  mansions; thus a narrow road windeth to the  land of the living. But, to support belief in my  words by the testimony of the ancients, read the  Aureolus (° Little Golden Book’) of Theophrastus  30and the story of Jason’s Medea, and thou wilt  find almost nothing impossible to a woman.

The End of the foregoing Epistle. v

Y friend, may the omnipotent God grant thee  power not to be deceived by the deceit of

the omnipotent female, and may He illuminate  thy heart, that thou wilt not, with eyes bespelled,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 197

continue on the way I fear. But, that I may not  seem to thee the author of Orestes, farewell !

We know that this discourse hath delighted many ;:  it is eagerly seized, carefully copied, read with huge  enjoyment. Yet there are some, but of the baser :  sort, who deny that it is mine. For they envy the, ,._  epistle and rob it, by force, both of its honour and|  Hts author. My only fault is that I am alive. I,  have no intention, however, of correcting this fault |  by my death. In the title I have changed our bo  names to the names of dead men, for I knew that  this giveth pleasure. Otherwise men would have  rejected it, as they have me. Wishing, therefore,  to save this witless pamphlet from being thrown '  into the mud from the mantle, I shall bid it hide  in my company. I know what will happen after I  am gone. When I shall be decaying, then, for the  first time, it will be salted ; and every defect in it  will be remedied by my decease, and in the most  remote future its antiquity will cause the author- 20  ship to be credited to me, because, then as now,  old copper will be preferred to new gold. It will  be as now a time of apes, not of men; because they  will deride the things of their present, having no  patience with good men. In every century its aa  present hath been unpopular, and each age from the:  beginning hath preferred the past to itself, hence |  my times have despised me, because they could not  despise my epistle. My merit saveth me from being,  moved thereby. I glory only in this, that I — 30  from envy, which will find nothing in me worthy  to bite. For no dog gnaweth a dry bone, and ‘ no  leech clingeth to an empty vein.’ This dry and’  bloodless style of writing will be immune solely:  through its incongruity. If I should be moved to  anger, I should be the more astonished, because  Gilbert Foliot, now Bishop of London, a man of  lofty character and a treasure-house of wisdom,

Google

198 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

rich and renowned, the master of a most limpid  style, was called a raver because he was a writer ;  although naught could be found more fitting than  his work save what I have read from the words of  that wonderful cook (Martial) :— Ennius, O Rome,  thou readst during the lifetime of Virgil.’ Then,  lamenting Homer, he saith: ‘ And his own times  have laughed at Maeonides.’ Who is a greater  with the pen than Homer? Who more blest than  10 Virgil? Who, after listening to the detractors of  these, would not put up patiently with his own?  Who would be offended by the malice of his time,  when all ages have shown the like? Write, there-  fore, Gilbert, with ready confidence, that thou  mayst carry a light among the dark places of the  divine law, and that with thy honeyed eloquence  thou mayst soften and untie the knots. With thy  sweet calm open up paths of health, make smooth  the rough road, and make straight the winding  20 paths. Already old age and the constant use of  books bring blindness upon thee and make thy  sweetly-speaking latter time like that of Homer  when his light was failing. No longer with the  outward eyes, but with the inner vision with which  the angels see the Lord, mayst thou see and con-  template Him and His, so that He may lead thee  through this darkness to ‘His marvellous light ’—  He who with the Father and the Holy Ghost  ever liveth and reigneth as God, world without  soend, Amen.

Already the envious are beginning to wax weary ;  they recall, indeed, what he hath written; they  win wisdom and repent, being worthy indeed of  the pains of Empedocles or of the penitence of  Kudo. Who Empedocles was, and with what pangs  he died, old authors make clear; but if it please  thee, let us hear of Eudo.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 199

Of the Youth Eudo in a Demon’s Snare. VI  A CERTAIN knight from among those who bear

the name of damoiseaux in France and barons  in England left a splendidly rich inheritance of  castles and towns and large revenues to his only  son Kudo—a boy tall and handsome, but lazy and  dull and the waster of this great patrimony. Since  a fool and his money are soon parted, Eudo became  the laughing-stock of his neighbours and his in-  heritance their prey. When each of its parts was 10  snatched away and scattered to the winds, the  simpleton himself was cast out, and, leaving his  land perforce, he became a fugitive for very shame  and wandered an exile in foreign countries. It came  to pass that, after a long spell of begging, he was  resting with the fragments of the bread of his seek-  ing in the shade of a grove near a city. When  he gazed at the sordid scantiness of the basely won  food of his exile, and recalled how low he had fallen,  and how unfitting to his noble race was his poverty, 20  he burst into tears and abandoned himself to’  laments. He threw away the crusts and crumbs,  and, looking down upon his clothes, he sickened’  at their raggedness and grew pale at his paltry  portion (in life); and, knowing his vileness in the  sight of all men, he became vile and mean in his:  own eyes. If he could have escaped himself, he  would not have been slow. He sat in doubt,

wavering, until from this uncertainty his degraded! ae

mind was about to lose its baseness; when suddenly 30  there stood by his side a man of marvellous big-  ness, and dreadful through the monstrous foulness  of his face. In a very sweet and gentle voice, the  stranger ordered Eudo to pick up heart, and then,  divining the straits of his mind, pledged him assist-  ance, promising to restore his lost riches, and to  add others greater than his desires, on condition  that he bow to his dominion and enjoy his counsel.

Google

200 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Eudo was full of suspicions and shrank with amaze-  ment and horror at the sight of the strange monster.  From the word ‘dominion’ he suspected a demon,  and asked: ‘ Who art thou? Was it not thou,  who by thy counsels to Eve prompted the exile  of us all (from Eden), who armed Cain against  Abel, who by thy contrivings made Ham the  mocker of his father, Pharaoh a tyrant to the  people of Israel, the same people of Israel dis-  10 obedient to Moses, Dathan envious of Aaron,  Achitophel false to David, Absalom a parricide at  heart, Jezebel detestable in deed? But why do  I attempt to enumerate the long line of thy deceits,  since they are innumerable and since there is not  or hath ever been a single one which thou didst  not invent ? And who is ignorant of their baleful  end? Who doth not know the most evil outcomes  of thy counsels and the payments of thy promises ?  Who is not aware that the wages of all thy service  201s death? We know that thy nets fill all paths  and all thy bait is always upon the hooks. Lo,  this lure, too, cometh upon a hook, and if I shall  swallow it I am thy prey.’  He said this with a groan and then stood dazed  ‘with utmost dread. Nor was this fear surprising ;  for it is said that those shudder to whom in the  night-time thieves or hinds are very near. I know  not why, in the case of the hind; but it is not  the thieves who cause this bristling with fear, but  30 the demons who accompany them. He therefore  ‘rightly trembled when Satan did close beside  him stand ’ and speak unto him face to face. Thus  the wretched man long reasoned with himself:  ‘ If I carry out his orders I am caught fast, “‘ Hell  is my home”; but if not, “‘ I shall not then escape  his hand.”’ ’  Then that dread visitant, who hath with cunning  hand gleaned craftiness from all quarters from the  very beginning of things, guessing the reason for

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 201

his hesitation, broke in: ‘ Be not daunted by fear  of hell, because thou art long of life, and quite  enough time is left thee for repentance. I tell thee,  moreover, that before thy death I shall fortify  thee with three clear tokens, allowing thee, be-  tween the successive warnings, time enough for  repentance. But thou wilt not believe, for thou  sayest, “* If I shall swallow thy lure, I am thy prey.”’  From the fall of Lucifer, the Lord hath inflicted  upon us man’s hatred of our race and eternal dis- 10  honour, whence thou, ignoring a just distinction,  dost condemn with the same spirit of persecution  the innocent and the guilty. For in that primeval  pride, which our family, showing no gratitude to  God, derived from the fullness of our new honours, _  many followed that shining chief (Lucifer) “to the|  north,” some being the contrivers of disunion, others’  merely their assistants, some the seducers of other  men and yet others consenting thereto, some doubt-  ful what to do, but all full of pride against God, that'20  is, empty of wisdom. They have, therefore, been  cast down by the Avenger’s right hand, after being  balanced in so just a scale that ignorance did not  fail of pardon nor iniquity of punishment. It  therefore happeneth that those who are the more  tormented by reason of the enormity of their deserts,  strive the more to do harm by reason of their innate  baseness. Among these chiefs (of evil) there are  those whose monstrous nature craveth and can  create attractive temptations, which thou thinkest 30  should be shunned. Moreover, there are those—  and they are rightly feared—into whose hands are:  given the wicked, deeply damned by utter iniquity.  ‘These demons are adepts in establishing their  charges in abundance, in promoting their success,  in assuring their safety, and in granting them  ‘wisdom. But these things they do to those whose  prosperity is profitable to them, and whose damna- ,  tion is assured whenever they wish. They flatter

Google

202 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

jin order to destroy; they lift up in order to dash  down; they are deservedly denounced as detest-  able to the world. And alas, we innocent ones are  dyed with that infamy! Far from our thoughts are  the thefts of prosperity, the overthrow of cities,  the thirst for blood, the hunger for souls and the  desire for more of evil than we are capable of. All  our desires can find full satisfaction without man’s  ‘death. Fit for quips and cranks, I confess, we  10do cunning tricks, we fashion mental images, we  shape phantoms so that, by the concealing of the  true form, the false and laughable semblance may  appear. We are capable of everything which  tendeth to laughter, and of nothing which causeth  tears. I am among those exiles from heaven who,  without assistance or assent to Lucifer’s fault, were  borne in far and foolish farings after the furtherers  ‘of crime. But if an angry Lord casteth us forth  from heaven as undeserving, yet He showeth mercy  2in that He letteth some of us undergo our punish-  ment in the solitude of deserts; others amid the  dwellings of men, according as our sin deserved.  The people of antiquity mistakenly called us demi-  gods or demi-goddesses, and, in due accord with  the body’s form we assumed or the shape we took,  assigned us names distinctive of sex. From the  places of dwelling or from the functions granted  to us, we are called, more explicitly, Monticole or  mountain- dwellers, Silvans, Dryads, Oreads, Fauns,  30 Satyrs, Naiads, over whom, by the fancy of the  ancients, rule Ceres, Bacchus, Pan, Priapus, and  ‘Pales. Moreover, we have made note, from the  beginning, of those things which we have seen, and,  inasmuch as there hath been granted to us from  God the wisdom that cometh from experience, we  acquire insight into what is hidden, and the ability  jto forecast the future from the past. With the  {power of appearing anywhere, like that of a spirit,  wherever we bide and to whatever part of the world

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 203

we are borne, we know how to travel by the straight-  est route. We also make it our care to open the  eyes of those entrusted to our charge, that they  may henceforth know clearly the condition of all  men, and that, if they wish, they may have the  power to rush suddenly upon the unprepared, and  to overwhelm the enemy’s many with their few,  and to manage. all provinces after their desire ;  nor are we allowed to intervene, even if they bring!  accursed things to pass. We are able to reveal 10  to them; they, according to their natures, pity or:  destroy. But thou fearest us in accord with the  judgments of books, although we are not of those  whom thou art taught to shun. Nay indeed, by  my counsel and by that of my brothers, thy con-  dition will awaken evil hopes among the hunters of  souls, but we shall foretell to thee the fatal day,  ** lest thou sleep unto death,” as these desire. We  shall foresee thy day for thee for thy welfare, that  thou mayst anticipate it with repentance. Nor 20  shall we be mistaken, for we have acquired experi-  ence in all things, both in heaven and on earth—  namely, knowledge of the nature of the stars, of  forms, herbs, stones, and distinction of woods and  the causes of all things; and, just as thou knowest  that the sun will descend from the meridian and  art aware of its sinking to the west and notest the  hour of its setting, so the end of flesh which is  destroyed or destined to ruin cannot escape us.  Equipped with this knowledge and with our gentle- 30  ness of nature, we are of good counsel and, with  the Lord’s sanction, of great assistance. Why dost  thou delay or hesitate? That thou mayst be well  aware that our acts are neither wicked nor cruel,  hearken, if it please thee, to one punishment which  my brother Morpheus meted out to a monk, and  which we call cruel.

. * There was a painter, a monk, who was also sac-  ristan of his monastery. As often as it happened

Google

204 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

[that the monk was beset by nightly visions over  ~which he knew that Morpheus presided, so  often he heaped all curses upon him; and, when-  ever the opportunity offered, he painted him upon  walls, arches, and glass windows most disfiguringly  yand most faithfully. But Morpheus frequently  ‘exhorted and implored him in dreams not to despoil  him of charm and make him the laughing-stock of  the people; and at length warned him to desist,  10under threat of like injury. But the monk, es-  iteeming lightly threats and prayers and dreams,  did not leave off. Then Morpheus, in nightly  visions, persuaded the best men of that neighbour-  hood to send gifts of wine, food, silver, gold, rings,  deer-skins, stolen from their wives’ bosoms, to this  man, who was indeed one that laboured in those  things which pertain to the service of God, and  who was more often, in order that he might not be  able to feast with his brothers, busied with attend-  20ing to the adornment of altars, robes, and books.  Moreover, he was always praying in behalf of the  faithful. Hence it seemed as if his benefactors  were saying: “ Let not a man of such devoutness  lack food, nor a man of such artistic attainments  know any want of the materials with which to  work.”” Then in a short time the monk waxed  fat, and, “‘ having grown thick and being covered  with fatness, he proved recalcitrant ” to God, and,  not knowing whither he was being led by these  30 allurements, he went from wine to Venus by be-  coming enamoured of a very beautiful widow in  the nearest town. Since he knew himself unfit for  love, both by his lack of wit and his foulness of face,  he strove to arm his tricky purpose by gifts. These  are the darts which, after the defeat of beauty and  the darkening of the light of the countenance and  the repulse of the charm of words, after all Minerva’s  triumphs, are said to pierce her shield. The first  gifts found the lady stern in her resistance; but

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 205

wicked insistence at length prevailed. Their wishes  concurred, but no place was suitable for the in-  dulgence of these. At her house there stood in  the way the crowd of men and women, at his abode  reverence for the monastery. They both desired  the deeds of Venus, and they both feared disgrace.  When they are seeking a fit occasion to gratify  their longing, after carrying off treasures of the  church and the riches of the widow, the oppor-  tunity finally presenteth itself to them of escaping, 10  with their wealth, the presence of slanderers and  the noisy gossip of the people, so that, when men  speak against them, they will be far away. Let  everybody have his own wish! Provided they  hide together, they will not blush in their place of  silence. They fled by night as they had planned  todo. The monks awoke as usual at the canonical  hour and complained that the time of bell-ringing  had passed. Seeking the reason, they saw that  the altar was despoiled of its reliquaries. They 20  looked more closely, and missing the treasures, they  asked the whereabouts of the sacristan, and then  pursued and overtook him. The woman was al-  lowed to go, as with her they had naught to do.  But the wretched monk was cast into irons, and  was left in solitary confinement in the deepest  dungeon, getting, as his punishment, water in ex-  change for wine, hunger for food, the exiles’ fare  for the drop too much, nakedness for (rich) furs,  and atoning with the roughness of the ground for 30  the softness of beds, with an enforced sobriety for  drunkenness, with the pain of prison for the pleasure  of couches, with darkness for daylight, with griev-  ing for gladness. After much suffering, Morpheus  appeared at his side taunting him: “ This,” he  said, “‘is fit pay for thy picture; thou paintedst,  and I planned the retribution. Thou must know  and feel that this was perpetrated by my craft,  not through the perfection but through the

Google

206 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

permission of God. Iam permitted, if it be my will,  to visit severer wrath upon thee, because ‘ thou  hast taken the members of Christ and made them  the members of a harlot.’ Thou hast no defence  against my attacks, nor mayst thou, by reason of  thy chains, lift thy hands to fortify thyself with  the sign of the cross. But surely, because I am  the master and thou the mastered and miserably  enmeshed, I pity thee, and I shall save thee from  10 these bonds. Just as though thou wert not guilty  of great transgressions, I shall blot out belief in  thy guilt and shall restore thee to thy former good  repute, on condition that thou wilt swear never to  disgrace me in future with any picture.” The  monk pledged his word. Morpheus released him  by the application of herbs and by the power of  a charm, and he bound himself in the monk’s  semblance, with the same chains. Then the monk,  having been instructed by him what to do, lay down  20in his accustomed bed, prayed, groaned, coughed,  so that all might hear, and, marking the canonical  hour, arose and rang the bell; the monks were  called together and they came. He who had  succeeded him in his office after his flight was the  first to notice that he had returned from his bonds.  He informed the abbot and the monks of this.  In much amazement they ran to the spot and asked  him who had set him free. He asked ‘‘ From what  bonds?” The lord abbot cast in his face his flight  30and elopement with the widow, the theft of the  treasure, the chains and the prison. He denied  everything most stoutly. He had seen no widow,  he had felt no chains; he raised his hand and,  having made a great cross before his own person,  he pronounced them mad. He was carried then  by force to the prison, to be cast again into chains.  There his double, my brother, was found in bonds,  twisting his mouth, his nose and eye, and making  at them many sorts of contemptuous gestures.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 207

The monks looked first at one, then at the other,  they stared at the likeness of the free and the  bound, and they marvelled that they saw each in the  other, save that the monk was weeping and his  fellow was laughing and deriding them. That the  monk might no longer be disbelieved, Morpheus  broke his chains and leaped into the air with a  great opening of the roof. The abbot and the  congregation stood in amazement, and falling down  at the feet of the weeping and angry brother, they 10  asked pardon for their error; they declared that  they had been deceived by a figment of fancy.  They made haste to satisfy the widow also, and  henceforth they regarded them both the more  reverently—freed, as they were, from all suspicion  and more firmly established in reputation.

‘Know that Morpheus did this and that I am  his brother. Both of us frequently employ like  witty sport, but we never carry any one off to hell,  nor torture any one in the inferno, nor force men}20  to any sins except venial ones. We busy ourselves:  among the living with merry tricks or with gravely  humorous devices. We have nothing to do with  the dead or with the destruction of souls. Trust,  me only thus far as to promise, by joining thy: .  hands between mine, to remain faithful to me, and —  thou wilt be lord of all thine enemies.’

Misguided by these and the like stories, Eudo  willingly assenteth to the compact, receiving on  his part the firm pledge and promise that the 30  demon will announce to him, by three signs, his  death when it is very near. They went off in  company, and through whatever provinces they  passed they collected as their confederates wretches  beyond the pale of law. By day they slept, but!  by night, which is the friend of crimes and the  favourer of thefts, they wandered stealthily through  pathless ways, nor did they lose their way through  ignorance. For their leader was Olga, to whom no

Google

208 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

path was unknown. Indeed, after they had come  to their chosen ground of crime in the province of  Beauvais, he was regarded as the counsellor, ex-  plorer, promoter, and instigator of cruelty and of  every iniquity which troops of men are wont to  practise, who commit themselves to such a leader,  with the intent of committing evil. Moreover, the  inventor of deceit deceived very many bands into  banding with his familiars. Sons conspired against

10 fathers, young against old, friend against friend,  and in full liberty malice rushed headlong upon  innocence. Fully and finally the province fell to  their freebooting. They were feared above measure  because they were fierce beyond measure. All  things of all men they learned from Olga, Eudo’s  lord and master; and his teacher confessed to  him his very name. Though this demon was the  lover of lying and its sponsor, yet was he loyal to  his followers with that truth by which he could

24 work more evil than by trickery. Hence they knew  how to avoid all snares and to catch men every-  where unprepared. Wherever they projected a raid,  they returned laden like ants. Castles and towns  were therefore emptied at the sight of these raging  monsters, and fell into their hands.

Already Eudo possessed the full measure of his  own and foraged with force the possessions of others ;.  and he who had been languid and lazy became,  through frequent success, audacious and astute,

30 and in every crisis he expected the same success  that had crowned his former crimes. But though  he was as victorious as heart could wish, he was  pleased with no victory without slaughter; he  counted that day lost on which he could count  ‘the number of those lost. Above everything that  ‘brought him joy were the plunder of the clergy and  prey from the patrimony of Christ. Hence against  him were directed the most determined efforts  of the Bishop of Beauvais, the Metropolitan, and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 209

the Pope, and the hearty curse of the people. But  they ‘ placed a stumbling-block before the blind,  and they cursed the deaf,’ for through their midst  without their knowledge he passed with disdain,  * having eyes that see not, having ears that hear  not.’ The ‘ wretched servant ’ was therefore pleas-  ing to his impious lord, whom he satiated with  blood, enriched with corpses, rejoiced with the  severity of his rule, conciliated with the savagery  of his rage. Moreover, to satisfy his craving for 10  crime, he filled the camp with his accomplices.  Everywhere he gave to evil men most evil leaders ;  he augmented the strength and increased the  power of those who basely attacked the innocent ;  and he placed over them all men who knew not the  meaning of mercy. He spared no one of his men  who was willing to spare (others) ; he left ‘ no good  man unpunished, no bad one unrewarded,’ and,  whenever he found neither peer nor competitor on  earth, like Capaneus he challenged enemies from 20  heaven. He despoiled graveyards, he violated  _ churches, holding his hand neither for fear of the  living nor for reverence of the dead. It was,  moreover, eminently just that he who had no’  reverence for God should fear nothing before destruc- _  tion came upon him, but that his heart should be:  exalted ever until his downfall, so that his long-  continued baseness might be cut off by a sudden  stroke. He was smitten with anathema, yet did  not fear ; he was shunned by all, yet did not shrink ; 30  he fled fame and sought out infamy. He had  brought to nothing all the designs of all men; no  one any longer blamed him, no one punished him,  but, amid the silent despair of his friends, like a  stone that hath entirely slipped from the summit  of a cliff and falleth rapidly without return to the  lowest depths, so, without let or hindrance and  without company, he plunged with great bounds  to hell. And, as the sea by the winds, so he was  Oo

Google

210 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

lifted up and swollen by curses, thus threatening  a more stormy affliction upon all. And although  he took the things desired and seized the things  denied, no wealth could satisfy him, nor was his  ambition slaked though he had consumed all the  treasures of earth.

Olga, who was now very sure of his ground, for  he held the soul of his slave fettered by the fastest  bonds, met him one day alone in the shadow of a

10 grove. They sat together in conversation, running  over their own new-found schemes of wrongs and  crimes. Eudo won laughing praises from Olga, who  confessed his brother and himself and their disciples  outdone by the devices of such monstrous murders.  At length Olga heaved a heavy sigh and, after much  ‘Meditation, ‘ transforming himself into an angel of  light,’ found speech: ‘ My best beloved, wherever  these jests may tend, do not defer taking thought  of thy soul. I am displeased that thou art prac-

20 tising a larger baseness than befitteth my destiny ;  and although I may laugh at thee, it is not pleasing  that those also who strew snares for thy destruc-  tion should deride thee. These are the works of  Satan, Berith, and Leviathan. Know that the  Lord hideth from us and even from His angels the  judgments of His divine heart; but those things  ‘which are determined by fate or which are presaged  according to the compacts of the elements, which  ‘are signified by the rising and falling and movement

sdof the stars; which are preordained from all  [eternity in accord with their heavenly and earthly  nature, because they are held by a fixed order of  events and are united together immovably by the  icohesive power of eternal reason; those things  also which are about to happen in accord with the  iorder of the divine arrangement and which continue  conformably with the condition of creation—all of  these we know in some measure and are able to fore-  cast them from our knowledge of .the past and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 211

present. But those things which, fraught with  harm, and those which, fraught with good, God—in'  the one case in His mercy, in the other in His wrath.  —hath lovingly or justly decided to avert, these.  things have been hidden from the sons of earth and  heaven. These are the things that guide the stars  in their courses, rule the elements, and lie concealed  among the treasures of the Most High. Only the  spirit of God could foresee the grief and joy that  arose from the widely varying prayers of Elijah, 10  the fear of the Ninevites and their deliverance  from the ill-boding prophecy of Jonah, and the  twelve divisions of the Red Sea. Hence I fear  for thee, best beloved, that, while thou art pro-  voking the wrath of the Almighty, an unexpected  avenger will catch thee prematurely; and that  upon me, because I have no foreknowledge of this,’  will fall the disgrace and infamy of our compact.  Therefore, as the only resource, get absolution from  anathema, and as many times as thou hast sinned, 20  seek pardon, and do not deem the case hopeless,  because no crimes, however monstrous, can exceed  or even equal the mercy of God, provided only  that thou dost not despair.’ Eudo thus voiced  his wonder: ‘ Now, indeed, I call thee not demon  but angel of the Lord, not only my master but also  _ my father.’

They departed, each on his own way. Kudo lost  no time in seeking the prelate and in obtaining  absolution; he paused for a little while in his 30  career, but did not entirely recover his senses.  Then he began anew his old courses and was again  in the toils, and won absolution many times. At  length the bishop, after sad experience with these  mockeries, was overwhelmed with horror, and-  declared him a creature of greater evil in this  uncertainty than in his former persistent obstinacy ;  and unchanging rage. The bishop then cried to\  the Lord with tears and had the people freed from

Google

212 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

the ban (exorcized) when he prayed that the earth  might curse Eudo and called for an avenging hand  from heaven. By such wailings the Lord * was  aroused as if awaked from sleep,’ and He cast his  enemy down from a running horse and punished  his pride with a fractured thigh. And Eudo,  recognizing the first of Satan’s signs, won with  difficulty a hearing from the bishop and confessed  his crimes, concealing, however, the lordship of  10 Olga. Yet, when he had been restored to health,  he denied everything with contemptuous pride, and  he busied himself with punishing the bishop be-  cause that prelate was not afraid to exact the  penalties of his crimes and his broken oaths. A  liar, lying on an even lower plane than before, he  arose against Christ and against His elect. Yet  being, in some measure, mindful of the sign and of  the shortness of his life, he won a hearing by his  earnest prayers and again broke his oath. Now  20 he feared that he was very nigh unto death; then,  ‘when he considered that there were yet other signs to  come, he deluded himself into thinking that a long  enough lease of life remained, until his appointed  guardian put out his eye with an arrow shot by idle  chance from a boy’s hand. More truly penitent—  although even now in too small measure—on  account of his terror at the second warning, he  flew in all haste to the bishop, and, in the misery  of the fresh wound, won, even after such monstrous  30 perjuries, admittance to pardon. But as soon as  the pain of the wound decreased, his love of evil  increased, whence, falling lower than himself, . he  became the nausea of the whole church and the  contempt of the people. Then Olga, to whom he  had been entrusted, added the third and last of  his plagues of Egypt—the death of his first-born,  (who was) so very dear to him that, after the loss  of his boy, his own life seemed of little worth.  Clad in all the trappings of woe, he lay in a bed of

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 218

sackcloth and ashes, so very truly penitent, and  afflicting his utterly agonized mind with such  genuine contrition, that in a short time his attenu-  ated flesh clung closely to his bones and his spirit  hardly abode in his body. Now penitence pleased  him—no longer light of mood, but alas too late—  and he hastened to all whom he had offended ;  and, as he was a most persuasive pleader, he bent  every one of them to pity him, both by his masterly  eloquence and by his manifest misery. And at- 10  tended by all these, he hastened, with a very great  company, to Beauvais.

He found the bishop outside of the walls at a  huge pyre, which the judges of the city had kindled  to cast a witch therein. The prelate recognized  him from afar and felt his very hair standing on  end with icy horror. He closed his bowels of com-  passion lest he pity him, and he strengthened his  heart lest he heal the corrupt; he earnestly deter-  mined to be no longer deluded and he became as 20  hard as iron. Eudo presented himself, milder than  his wont and much humbler than any one could  hope, revealing his wretchedness not less through  the tears of the eye that he had kept than through  the loss of the eye that had been destroyed; he  threw himself at the feet of the bishop before the  pyre. The prayers of the nobles in his behalf—  though they ought rightly to have recited laments |  against him—and the grief of the people were of no  avail, they did not move or shake the prelate. He 30  remembered the string of deceptions. Eudo insisted  on belching forth from his mner being all his poison,  and he did not hesitate to reveal the lordship of  his seducer Olga, which he had always kept con-  cealed, and his other very evil secrets. He pleaded  at once for absolution and penance, and he pro-  mised to observe the penance, however hard or  difficult. With a solemn oath the bishop refused  this; the other maintained his plea with true

Google

214 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

contrition, weeping and wailing loudly all the while.  The bishop refused again and often, and persisted  in his complete denial. But Eudo pleaded on with  such a true heart and with such true tears that he  obtained pardon from all his enemies; and com-  passionate weeping came even from those eyes  which he had often forced to shed tears against  him before the Lord. He now wrested friendship  from the unfriendly, he placated earth, he opened  10 heaven, he bent the justice of God; and thus the  wretch received from pity the acceptance of his  confession. But the heart of the bishop was turned  far from him :—God heareth, restraineth His wrath,  and is humble; man disdaineth, and is seen to be  proud. And to the importunate insistence of  nobles and people, he replied that he was sure that  Eudo would keep neither his vows nor his promises,  and that so stubborn a tyrant should receive no  mercy. Then Eudo, void of mercy all his life  20 before this, and now, for the first time, most surely  worthy of mercy, rose from the feet of that merciless  bishop, who had not yet filled the measure of  “seventy times seven,’ and whose obstinacy grew  the fiercer, the greater the distress of all petitioners.  ‘Then (the wretch) pouring forth so many floods of  ‘weeping and bewailing with such grievous groans  ‘that none of the bystanders except the bishop  ‘could restrain the tears of heart and eyes, burst  jout: ‘ May the Lord surrender my soul into those  30 hands of Satan into which I confess that I have  given my body so that no mercy can ever redeem  my spirit, if I do not devoutly fulfil whatever  thou mayst impose as penance!’ Then the pre-  late, angrily incredulous and callous, as if in trial  of him and in mockery, hurled at him with foolish  lips this judgment: ‘I impose upon thee for thy  sins the penance of leaping into this fire.’ Then  the other, just as if the injunction brought him  life, joyfully sprang with such goodwill and speed

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 215

into the heart of the flames that no one was able  to follow and draw him out until he was entirely  burned to ashes.

Reader and hearer may well consider whether  the knight (Eudo) had zeal that was right and  * according to knowledge’ when he followed the  precipitate judgment of an indiscreet and angry  prelate. What shepherd denieth the sheepfold to  the sheep coming from the desert, and doth not  open before he heareth the bleating, doth not call 10  it his, recognize it and pardon it—nay, doth not  prevent its exclusion? The father meeteth the  prodigal son, embraceth him gently and receiveth  him, arrayeth him ‘in the best robe’ and feedeth  him with ‘ the fatted calf.’ This hard father re-  pelleth the prodigal returning, offereth ‘ a stone to  him seeking bread, and to him asking an egg, a  scorpion’; he tendereth neither the blows of a  father nor the fostering breast of a mother, but  the sword of a stepfather and the poison of a20  stepmother.

Of a Monk of Cluny who fought in Camps, contrary ,

to his Vow. vit (see I, x1v)

A QUESTION may be raised anent the (spiritual)  safety of a monk of Cluny who, despite of his  having betaken himself to that cloister, abandoning  to that end many castles and much wealth, was  sought out after a few years by his sons and by  all the nobles of his country. These urged him to  resume his old place of power in such wise that, 30  without doffing his monkish habit, he might aid  them in their military campaigns and counsels.  Yielding to much tearful importunity, he gave his  consent and was allowed by his abbot to go. He  was bidden depart‘under the interdict against arms  and with the understanding that, at the conclusion

Google

216 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

of peace, he would return for penance. His arrival  in camp occasioned whispers of fear among the  enemy, for he was a man of large judgment and of  the keenest worth. Having summoned his own  men and whatever others he could muster, he  rushed upon the enemy, who were skulkingly await-  ing his action, and frequently assailed them with  fierce and furious onslaughts, pressing onward, ever  onward, with persistent courage. Hence it came  10to pass that he often destroyed those whom he  found unequal (matches) to his strategy or to his  bravery. Day by day the ones whom he cham-  pioned progressed so far in their recovery from  distress that they feared to exchange the blessing  of invariable success for that peace and agreement  with their foes which they had desired at his coming.  The enemy, overpowered and brought almost to  the point of unconditional surrender, craftily asked  for a truce. (The monk) assented and gave and  20 received pledges of peace. The enemy, however,  stole a march ere the day of truce. Collecting  secretly whatever army they could gather, they  came stealthily and unexpectedly and threatened  ominously the monk’s forces, who were entirely  off their guard. The monk was aroused by the  clamour of troops and the clangour of trumpets, and  went forth with his men to meet the enemy. They  joined in an encounter fell but not fair, for, at the  hope of truce, the monk had sent back many of his  30 troops to their homes. Standing unarmed in the  midst of his men, who were now in doubtful case  and on the verge of flight, he cried out, encouraged,  commanded, chid, pleaded, implored, pushed back  those who fled. Having vainly assayed every  means by which an unarmed man may check those  in full array, he suddenly snatched from an armour-  bearer the armour which he had ordered to be  brought for just such unlucky chance (as this) ;  and, for this occasion, in disobedience to his vows

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 217

and in hope of amendment, he donned this, and he  urged again to the front his men, whose uncertainty  had now changed to certain flight. He shattered  many bands of the enemy with his single right hand,  he struck terror into their hearts, and belied the  outcome of the war, changing the enemies’ victory  into their complete vanquishment. After seizing  the spoils and sorting them as he wished, the monk  was returning to his own home with exultation ;  but on the way was almost suffocated by the heat 10  of the sun, by his own fatness, and by the weight  of the unwonted armour. In the company of a  page he entered an arbour aside from the line of  march, and, having laid off his harness, he was  taking the air with eagerness. Behold, an ambushed  foeman, bow in hand, crept from behind, and,  marking the monk’s unprotectedness, secretly and  suddenly pierced the unsuspecting man with a  deadly dart, and then stole away. The monk,  feeling that death was at the door, desired to 20  confess, but there was at hand no possible confessor  save the boy. He recognized the youth’s unfitness  for this duty, but, because he had no other resource,  he confessed to him, and in his presence he poured  out his whole heart, praying that penance be granted  him for his sins. The boy declared with an oath  that he had never seen or heard of such a thing.  The monk persisted in his prayers, and, falling at  the feet of the boy, he besought him to impose  punishment of some sort upon his sins of every 30  ind. When he did not succeed in wresting from  him a thing of which he had no knowledge, he gave  him these instructions, as the moment of death  drew nigh: * Dearest son, enjoin upon me that my  soul shall be punished in torment and places of  torture without cessation until Doomsday, provided  that it shall then be saved by the mercy of the  Christ.’ The boy yielded to his prayer and im-  posed this penance upon him in these very words.

Google |

218 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Then the monk departed in the faith of Christ,  and with the good hope and glowing zest of re-  pentance.

Also of the Appearance of Phantoms. vill (cf. II, x11)

OW that I am speaking of the deaths of those  whose fate at Doomsday is doubtful, I must  mention a knight of Little Britain, who found the  wife whom he had lost and long mourned from the  hour of her death in a great throng of women at  10 night, in the depths of a most lonely valley. He  was full of fear and wonder, and, seeing her alive  whom he had buried, he did not believe his eyes,  and was uncertain as to what the fates had wrought.  He preferred to snatch her with confidence whatever  the outcome, whether destined to rejoice in this  ravishment, if his sight were true, or to be defrauded  by a phantom; so that he could not in any case  be accused of cowardice in restraining his hand.  He seized her, therefore, and for many years derived  2 as notable delight from this union as in the years  before (her death). From her he had children,  whose offspring are numerous and bear the name of  ‘Sons of the dead.’ Indeed, a prodigious wrong  to nature, and quite incredible if sure proofs of its  truth were not extant !

Also of Apparitions. 1x

ENNO CUM DENTIBUS, so called from the

size of his teeth, found the loveliest of girls

in a leafy grove by the Norman coast at the noon  30hour. She was sitting alone, arrayed in silken  robes befitting a princess, and was woefully weeping  with never a sound—so fair a being that even her  tears became her. The youth straightway was all  aflame. He marvelled to see so precious a treasure

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 219

unguarded—as it were, a star fallen from heaven  bewailing its contact with earth. He looked about  him, in fear of an ambush in the covert, but finding  none he bent his knees before her, and thus rever-  ently made his prayer: ‘ Sweetest and brightest  ornament of all the world, whether the soft charm  of a face that challengeth such desire be of our  mortal lot or whether some divinity hath been  willing to reveal herself, wreathed with these  flowers, arrayed in this light, to her worshippers 10  on earth, I rejoice, and thou too mayest rightly  rejoice, that it befalleth thee to alight in my power.  Woe to me that I am foreordained to thy service;'  glory to thee that thou hast fallen, with prophetic  soul, just where thou art received with the great-  est desire!’ She replied so innocently and dove-  like that it might well be the word of an angel who  could seduce any son of light to her will. ‘ Lovable  flower of youths and desirable light of men, no plan  of my own hath brought me hither, but mere chance. 20  The ship which bore me, with my father, against  my will, to marriage with the King of France was  driven on this coast by the force of a storm—and,  when I had escaped, with the single companion  who standeth beside you ’—and lo, her maid was  there beside him!—‘a fair wind following the  tempest, the sailors and my father made off under  full sail. I know, of course, that, when they miss  me, they will return hither in tears. Nevertheless,  lest wolves devour me or evil men attack, if thou 30  wilt pledge regard for my honour from thee and  thine, I will abide with thee for the time; for it  is more to my safety and health to commend me to  thy keeping until the return of the ship.’ Henno,  who was, forsooth, no dull listener to her prayers,  granted straightway her full desire, and brought  back his treasure-trove with the greatest joy of  heart, winning for them both as much delight as  may be. He took into his house that noble pest

Google

220 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and married her, entrusted her to his mother’s care,  and had by her most beautiful offspring. The  mother was constantly at church, the daughter was  even more assiduous, and more attentive to orphans,  widows, and all in need of bread. That she might -  keep envy within desired bounds, she fulfilled every  office joyously in the sight of men, except that she  shunned sprinkling of holy water and carefully  avoided the consummation of the mass by alleging  10the crowd or some household matter. Henno’s  mother noticed this, and, fearing everything in the  anxiety of her just suspicion, set herself with the  strictest care to find out why. She knew that on  Sundays the lady went into church after the giving  of holy water, and came out before the consecra-  tion; and that she might know the cause of this,  she secretly made a little hole in the bedroom wall  and lay in wait. Thereupon, at the break of day  on Sunday, when Henno was gone out to church,  20she saw her go into her bath, and from a most  beautiful woman turn into a dragon and, after a  little, springing from the bath upon a new mantle  which her maid had spread for her, and tearing it  into the tiniest bits with her teeth, turn again into  her proper shape; and, after this, serve her maid at  every point to the like outcome. The mother told  the son what she had seen. Then summoning a  riest, they seized them without warning and  ‘sprinkled them with holy water. With a sudden  30 bound the demons passed through the roof, and  with a great shriek left their long-cherished abode.  ‘Nor marvel ye if God ascendeth corporeally, since  ‘He hath granted this power to the worst of His  :creatures, who must even be dragged down against  ‘their will. Many children of this demon-woman  iare still alive.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 221

Also of the Same Apparitions. x (see II, x11) _

W* know that in William the Conqueror’s days,  aman of great gifts, the master of Ledbury  North, snatched a very beautiful girl from a throng  of women dancing by night, and by his marriage  with her begat a son. The king, marvelling at the  wonder both of her beauty and of her ravishment,  caused her to be led into the midst of his council  at London, and, after she had told her tale, he sent  her back. Her son, Alnodus (A#lfnoth), best of 10  Christian men, who was partially paralysed in his  latter time—all the doctors declaring themselves  baffled—bade men take him to Hereford, and, in  the church of the blessed Ethelbert, king and  martyr, won absolution through the merits of the  saint. Hence, after the restoration of his former  health, he gave his land of Ledbury to God and  God’s mother and to the king and martyr Ethelbert  in perpetual possession; and this grant is held in  peace even until this day by the Bishop of Hereford, 20  the sixth in line from him, who received it at the  hands of A¢lfnoth, the man whose mother vanished  into thin air, in the clear sight of many, when her  husband angrily made it a reproach to her that he  had snatched her from the dead.

On the Deception of Gerbert by a Phantom. x1

WwW. is ignorant of the cheating of the famous \" .  Gerbert by a phantom? Gerbert, a youth  of Burgundy, noble in race, manners, and repute,  wrought earnestly at Rheims to win by thought 30  and word both natives and foreigners as his scholars,  and he obtained hisend. At that time the daughter  of the mayor of Rheims was, as it were, the glass  of fashion and mould of form of that fair city.  The sighs of all were wafted to her, rich in the

Google

222 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

wishes and longing of men. Gerbert heard of her  and lost no time. He came, saw, admired, desired,  and spoke, he heard and was charmed ; he drained  from this drug the madness of Scylla, and being  taught by the Metamorphoseos [sic] he consented  to forget his usual way of life, through poison of  his own administering. By the potency of this  potion he degenerated into an ass, became strong  under burdens, thick-skinned against blows, dull  i0!in his work, unfit for service, in every misery always  kicking against the pricks. He neither felt the  weight of calamity nor was moved by the whips  of punishment; torpid in action, unready of wit,  he ever gaped unwarily at his own sore. He played  the suppliant, fiercely pressed on, stubbornly per-  ‘sisted and, since all his keenness of mind had been  ‘dulled by excess, he was tortured by inevitable  despair. Forfeiting all quietness of spirit, he could,  in this immeasurable disturbance of self, neither  20 conduct his affairs nor provide for his maintenance.  Hence his property fell away, he was burdened  with debts, fleeced by moneylenders, abandoned by  his servants, shunned by his friends, and finally,  having lost all his substance, he abode at home  alone, careless of his person, hairy and dirty, un-  couth and ungroomed, yet happy in one phase of  ‘his misery, his extreme want, which absolved him  from the chief of miseries, love, and which did not  even allow him to remember that passion. These,  30 O Dyone, are the doles, both dolorous and deceitful,  which thou dealest out to thy knights as pay for  their services, that in the end they are rendered  ridiculous and are openly confounded—thus serving  as obvious illustrations of all thy wiles. This poor  wretch, the subject of our story, taking Lady  Poverty as his mistress and thus escaping from the  hook of Venus, was ungrateful to her who had freed  him, because past difficulties seemed light compared  with present, and he deemed his fasting worthy of

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 228

the pay of the lion who carried away the little doe  from wolves to devour it.

One day Gerbert left the city at noon as if for a  walk—all the while grievously tormented by hunger  —and, with all his thoughts far away, strolled deep  into a grove. There, in the very heart of the forest,  he found a woman of wondrous beauty, sitting upon  a great cloth of silk with a huge heap of money  before her. He tried to slink away undetected,  for he feared a phantom or a trick. But, calling 10  him by name, she bade him trust her, and, with the  appearance of pity, promised him the present sum,  and as large a store of wealth as his heart could  desire, if he would only disdain the mayor’s daughter  who had spurned so haughtily his suit, and would  attach himself to her, not as to a sovereign lady,  but as to a mistress of his own rank. She added:  * Meridiana by name and born of the best stock, I  have ever striven above all for this, to find a man  in every way my peer, so that I could count him 20  worthy to pluck the first flowers of my maidenhood ;  but, until thou camest, I had discovered no one  who did not lack something of what I craved.  Therefore, as thou pleasest me at every point, do  not delay to taste all the joy which God in the  Highest, thy master and mine, raineth down from  heaven upon thee. Unless thou provokest me to  just wrath, thou wilt be blest with all bounty of  money and rank ; only, when thou fully blossomest  forth once more through my care, thou must repel 30  thy lady disdain with the same scorn by which  she has made thee wretched. For I know that  she will repent and will turn again to what she  once despised, if she have the chance. If she had  shrunk from thy love through mere maidenly in-  stinct, her conquest of thee would have redounded  to her credit. But this alone was the reason for  her insolent rejection of thee, who, by general  opinion, wert the most lovable of all (her suitors),

Google

224 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

that she might smile on others without exciting any  distrust, thus veiling Aphrodite with the false robe  of Minerva. Under the cover of thy repulse others  marched on to mastery. Alas! Pallas is driven  away and under the shield lurketh a Gorgon. Thy  obvious overthrow hath given a shelter to the foul-  ness of a wanton; if thou shalt with proper spirit  declare this creature for ever unworthy of thy  embraces, I shall make thee pre-eminent among all

10 the lofty ones of the earth. Perhaps thou fearest  a cheat and thou art trying to shun the craft of  the incubus demon in me. Footless is this fear,  for those whom thou fearest are also on their guard  against the tricks of men, and they entrust them-  selves to no one unless ample security is given;  and never do men bring back anything but sin from  those demons whom they have deceived. For if  indeed, as seldom, the demons bring success or  wealth—these (seeming blessings) pass away in such

20 futility and vanity that they are of no account, or  else they lead to the distress and destruction of the  deceiver. But I exact from thee no security, for  I have learned to the full the nature of thy sincerity.  Nor am I trying to be made secure, but to make  thee secure. I am glad to give thee everything,  and I want thee to carry all this (money) away  before our union, and often to return for more  until thou shalt prove by discharging all thy debts  that it is not fairy gold, and thou shalt not fear

30 to make just return for the outlays of true love.  I desire love, not sovereignty, nor indeed do I wish  to be thy equal, but thy maid-servant ; 1n me thou  wilt find naught which will not to thy senses smack  of love; true judgment can detect in me no token  of enmity.’

Meridiana said these and many things to like  purpose, although needless, for Gerbert, greedy for  the things that he had lost, snatched her with hearty  assent almost in the midst of her words, eager to

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 225

escape through plenty the thraldom of poverty  and to enter with speed into the pleasing peril of  Venus. Hence the suppliant promised all, and  plighted his troth and—what was not asked—  joined to his oath kisses, leaving inviolate all else  that pertaineth to chastity.

Gerbert returned heavy-laden, pretending to his  creditors that he had received a remittance, and  he cleared himself of his debts slowly, to prevent  rumours of treasure-trove. From now on, free 10  (from embarrassment) and abounding in the gifts  of Meridiana, he grew rich in chattels, he increased  his staff of servants, he heaped up stores of clothing  and coins, he filled his cellars and larders, so that  his plenty at Rheims was like the glory of Solomon  in Jerusalem. Moreover, the full delight of his bed  was no less, though the great king was the lover  of many and he of one. Every night he was  taught by her, who had full knowledge of the past,  what to do during the day. These were nights like 20  those marvellous ‘ noctes’ of Numa, in which  Romans feigned that sacrifices were made and that  colloquies of the gods were in men’s ears, inasmuch  as he worshipped one (goddess) from whose teach-  ings he secretly sweated wisdom in nightly study.  Gerbert profited to the full from his double instruc-  tion, both of the bed and of the benches, and he rose  in glorious triumph to the highest pinnacles of fame ;  nor did the lore of the lecturer in his lesson advance  him less than that of the lecturess of his liaison— 30  the second in winning his way to heights of fame,  the first in acquiring those arts that produce sweet-  ness and light. In a short time he became every  one’s master, distancing all men—the bread of the  hungry, the robe of the needy, and the ready re-  demption from all oppression—and there was no  city that did not envy Rheims.

When the ‘ wretched daughter of Babylon’ who,  through her pride, had brought him into the depths

P

Google

226 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

heard and saw these things, she awaited with  eager ears the wonted messages and marvelled at  and chid the delay; and when at length she  realized that she was spurned, then she, for the first  time, ‘ glowed with fierce fires’ which she had  scornfully repelled. Now she lived more cleanly  and walked more meticulously and met him more_  modestly and spoke more reverently ; and because  she felt that she had altogether fallen into contempt  10 and dejection, she quaffed malice of mind from the  very beaker in which she had given her lover frenzy  to drink. She madly seized the bit, caring not  whither the reins guided or drew, but obedient  throughout the whole course to whatever spurs  urged her; and she strove to lure him to her hook  with the devices with which he had once tempted  her—that is, with every known bait. But in vain  did she lay her snares, stretch her nets, cast her  hooks. For the avenger of old hatred and flatterer  20 of new love denied what love is wont to give and  cast at her what hatred is wont to inflict. Having  wasted all its efforts, the woman’s love grew to  madness, and her bitter anguish exceeded her sense  of sorrow; and just as the stupor of the limbs  admitted no medicine, so the spirit of exhausted  hope felt no solace. An old woman living near  Gerbert aroused her one day, just as if she were  bringing the dead to life, and, through a hole in  her cottage wall, pointed him out walking alone  30 in his little orchard during the heat of the day after  his meal. In a little while they saw him lie down  under the shade of a branching oak and compose  himself in sleep. She could not compose herself,  but, casting aside her gown, she gave herself wholly  to him under his cloak in only her smock; and,  though veiled, excited him with kisses and embraces.  From the man, full of wine and food, she easily  obtained her wish; for the heat of youth and of  the season, and the warmth of wine and the fullness

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 227

here came together to one banquet of Venus. In  such wise, forsooth, Apollo and Pan, Ceres and  Bacchus, ever attend Venus, but, from the notable  gathering of these, Pallas (goddess of wisdom) is  ever excluded. The woman loaded Gerbert with  kisses and caresses, and, though sparing of words,  she bestowed flattering blandishment, until he re-  called Meridiana in the confusion of shame and  with the trepidation of a mighty fear. Wishing  ashamedly to escape (the amorous girl), he left her 10  with a promise to return, and in the accustomed  grove sought at the feet of Meridiana pardon for  his fault. She haughtily disdained him for a long  time, but finally she demanded and obtained of  him homage for security, because he had been  found wanting, and he safely continued in her  service.

In the meanwhile it happened that the Arch-  bishop of Rheims came to his end, and Gerbert, as  the reward of high repute, was enthroned in his 20  stead. Some time after that, when he was staying  in Rome in connection with the business of his  newly-found dignity, he was made by the Pope,  Cardinal and Archbishop of Ravenna; and after  a little while, upon the death of His Holiness, he  mounted by public election to his chair. During  the whole time of his priesthood, he did not once,  at the giving of the sacrament, partake of the Lord’s  body and blood (either because of fear or reverence),  but by dexterous stratagem pretended to do so. 30  Meridiana, however, appeared to him in the last  year of his papacy, assuring the pledge of his life  to him, until he should celebrate mass at Jerusalem ;  he thought to escape by his vow of biding at Rome.  But it came to pass that he was celebrating mass  in that church where, by popular report, was placed  that beam which Pilate had fastened upon the top  of the Lord’s Cross, inscribed with the record of  His passion—hence the church is called to this day

Google

228 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Jerusalem—and lo, he beheld opposite to him  Meridiana clapping her hands, as though in joyous  expectation of his next coming to her. Having  grasped the meaning of the vision, and having  learned the name of the place, he called together  all the cardinals, the clergy, and the people, and  made confession, leaving unrevealed no fault of  his whole life. He moreover decreed that to clergy  and people the mass should be given in the presence

100f all men. Hence many celebrate the mass on  an altar reared in the midst, while the Pope in his  chair partaketh with his face fixed on the faces of  them all.

Gerbert made truly holy the short remnant of  his life by constant and earnest repentance and  reverently made his last confession. He was buried  in the Church of St. John Lateran, in a marble tomb  which perpetually sweateth, but the drops do not  unite into a stream unless as a prophecy of the death

20 of some wealthy Roman. Men say that, when the  parting of a Pope is at hand, the stream floweth  to the ground, but when the death of some noble,  it poureth out even to the third or fourth or fifth  part of the other, as if indicating the dignity of each  man by its smaller or larger flow. Although Gerbert,  on account of his avarice, may have been long held  fast by the glue of the devil, yet he ruled with  splendour and with sureness of hand the Roman  Church; and it is said that some of his wealth

30 hath endured to the times of all his successors.

We have heard that Pope Leo initiated the con-  ditions under which the heirs of Peter Leonis, by  disinheriting St. Peter, still possess Castellum  Crescentii (Castel San Angelo). This Peter Leonis,  a Jew, was converted to our faith by the work of  Pope Leo, and took from him the name Leonis ;  and Pope Leo eagerly endowed him with revenues  and estates and entrusted to him the guard of the ©  aforesaid castle, to his great glory and honour,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 229

Moreover, he gave him as wife the daughter of a  most noble citizen, upon whom Peter begot twelve  sons, each of whom his wise care established in  special dignity and placed among the highest in  the state. To them he left the castle with these  instructions: he gave them twelve twigs, bound  by a strong chain, with the understanding that he  who could break the twigs in his unarmed hand  without loosening the chain would after that be  deemed the first in inheritance. After the failure 10  of their single efforts, he ordered the twigs to be  loosened, and each one to break his own—which  was done in a moment. Then he said: ‘ Thus,  my dearest children, as long as enmity findeth you  united by the bond of love, it will recoil conquered,  but, over you parted from one another, any strong  invading force will triumph.’ Thus through the  wisdom of Peter and his sons, and through the wari-  ness of his posterity, the patrimony of Christ re-  mained with them as an inheritance. In our times 20  Pope Alexander the Third discontinued that usage  of St. Peter’s gate which is called pedagium (toll  for passage), and surrendered the Lord’s altar of  his own church into the hands of a layman, that is,  the governor of Rome; and just now the Romans  have elected as successor of Alexander 111., Pope  Lucius, who, last year, was Hubald, Bishop of  Ostia and Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church.

Of an Enchanted Shoemaker of Constantinople. xt1

BOUT that time in which Gerbert flourished in 30

fairy felicity, a young shoemaker of Constant-  inople excelled all the masters of that art in new  and important inventions, and though he was wont  to do more in one day than anybody else in two,  his haste was neater than the studied care of the  masters. At the sight of any bare foot, lame or  straight, he fitted to it at once a shoe, nor did he

Google

230 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

work for any one except by seeing his foot ; whence,  becoming the fashion among nobles, he must dis-  pense with the trade of the poor. In all the spec-  tacles of the arena, as in throwing, wrestling, and  like exercises of strength, he was wont to carry off  the palm, hence he was everywhere proclaimed  admirable. So one day a very lovely girl, who  came to his window with a large retinue, showed  forth her naked foot, to be shod by him. The  10smitten shoemaker gazed upon this sight with  wide-open eyes, and, after making and selling the  ‘shoes, he began from the foot and received the  ‘whole woman into his heart, drinking in the deadly  ‘evil by which he was utterly undone. The slave  craved dainties worthy of a king, nor did he gain  any ground for hope. Abandoning his household  goods and selling his patrimony, he became a soldier  so that, by exchanging, however tardily, his base  condition for the standing of nobles, he might win  20 at least a kinder repulse. Before he presumed to  call (the lady) his love, he followed keenly the  military service which he had adopted, and since,  through his efforts, frequent success accompanied  him, he now took among knights the place which  he had held among cobblers. He then made his  attempt, and though he deemed himself worthy,  he did not obtain from her father the lady of his  seeking. He was now kindled to an excess of anger,  and, longing to carry off by force her whom his  30 lowness of birth and lack of estate denied to him,  he attached to himself a great band of pirates and  prepared to revenge in a sea battle his repulse upon  the land. Hence it happened that he was feared  both by land and sea, for success never deserted  him. While he was making these fierce raids of  his that never failed, he heard true reports of the  death of his lady; then, tearfully concluding a  truce, he hastened to her funeral, and, having wit-  nessed the interment and noted the place, he un-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 231

accompanied dug up the mound the next night and  lay with the dead woman just as if she were alive.  After the commission of this crime, he, rising from  the dead’s embrace, heard that at the time of the  dread birth he should return hither to carry off  what he had engendered. He obeyed the bidding,  and, returning after the lapse of sufficient time,  dug up the mound and received from the dead a  human head with the warning to let no one see it  except enemies whom he wished to destroy. Wrap- 10  ping this in many folds, he placed it in a box, and,  with full confidence in its power, he left the sea and  invaded the land. To whatever cities or towns he  laid siege, he offered the sight of the Gorgon; the  wretched (victims) turned to stone, beholding an  evil spell as great as that of Medusa. He was  feared immeasurably, and was received by all as  master, in dread lest they perish. No one under-  stood the reason of the hateful plague and sudden  death. In one moment, they saw and died without 20  a word or a groan; on the ramparts also, armed  men died with no wound; camps, cities, provinces  yielded, nothing resisted him; and every foe  grieved at being an easy victim of so cheap a  triumph. Some declared him a sorcerer, others a  god; whatever he sought they offered no refusal.  Among his successes men reckoned this one, that,  upon the death of the Emperor of Constantinople,  the ruler’s daughter and heiress was bequeathed to  him. He accepted this legacy ; who could refuse 30  the gift ? Conversing with him for some time, the  maiden put him to the question about the box and  did not rest until she had heard the truth. Having  learned this, she held the head before the face of the  man on his waking from sleep, thus taking him in  his own snares. Then the woman avenger of so  many crimes ordered the Medusa-like prodigy to  be carried out of the country and thrown into the  midst of the Grecian sea, with the originator of the

Google

232 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

horror as the companion of its ruin. The messen-  gers hastened in their galley and, coming to the  midst of the sea, cast the two monsters of the world  into its depths. At their disappearance, the sea  thrice boiled and bubbled with sand, as if the  wrenching of the ocean betokened the flight of  the waters leaping back with a sudden bound and  shrinking from the wrath of the Most High thus  manifest, and just as if the sea, sick with loathing,  10 was trying to reject what the sick land, recovering  from this monstrous birth, vomited into the deep.  The waves were raised to the stars and, like a flame,  sought the loftiest heights of air. But, after a few  days, the sentence upon the monsters was changed,  and the waters which had licked the heavens now  tended downward and produced with their whirling  the pit of an eternal whirlpool. What had been a  (mighty) heap was now an abyss. For the mud of  the depths, unable to bear the abomination and  20 the horror of the ocean, was voided forth; and,  giving ground in amaze, and gaping with a mighty  yawn, opened a way to the ‘spring of the sea.’  Hence this marvel of the deep was ever able to  swallow whatever might pour into its mouth, like  Charybdis under Messina. Whatever falleth therein  by chance or is drawn by its greedy jaws risketh  incurable ruin. Because the name of the maid was  Satalia, the whirlpool, which is shunned by all, is  called Satalie, or in the vernacular Gouffre de  30 Satalie.

Of Nicholas Pipe, a Merman. x11

ANY yet alive report to us that they have  seen in those waters a marvel, great beyond

all wonder, Nicholas Pipe, a merman, who, without  breathing, was wont to dwell without any harm a  long time, a month or even a year, on the floor of  the ocean with the fishes. Detecting the approach  of a storm, he forbade by his warning the sailing

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 233

of ships from port or bade a return to those already  under weigh. He was truly a man, with nothing  monstrous in his limbs, and nothing lacking in his  five senses, yet he had received, in addition to  human qualities, the endowment of fishes. But  when he went down into the waters to make a stay  there, he always carried with him pieces of old iron,  wrenched away from a cart or from horses’ hoofs  or from old furniture—for what reason I have not  yet heard. In this one respect he was weaker than 10  men and allied to fish, that he could not live without  water or the smell of the sea. When he was led  away some distance from it, he would run back  as if with failing breath. William, King of Sicily,  hearing of these things, wished to see him, and  ordered him to be brought into his presence; _ but,  when the men were dragging him along against  his will, he died in their hands on account of absence  from the sea. Although I have read and heard of  things not less wonderful, I know of nothing exactly 20  like this wonder.

In the air over Le Mans a huge flock of she-goats  appeared to many hundreds of men. In Lesser  Britain were seen ever passing by night soldiers  silently leading trains of booty, from which the  Bretons have frequently taken away horses and  cattle and have used these, some to their masters’  destruction, others without harm.

Gatherings of those troops of night-wanderers,  whom men call followers of Herla (Herlethingi), 30  were very famous in England up to the time of  Henry 11., our present king, an army of infinite  wandering, of the maddest meanderings, of insensate  silence, in which appeared alive many who were  known to be dead. This band of Herlething was  last seen on the borders of Wales and Hereford  in the first year of King Henry 1. at high noon,  in the same guise in which we wander abroad, with  chariots and beasts of burden, with pack-saddles and

Google

234 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

bread-baskets, with birds and dogs, with men and  women running side by side. Those who first saw  them aroused with shouts and trumpets the whole  neighbourhood against them. After the manner of  that most watchful nation (the Welsh), many bands  fully equipped with arms came at once, and because  they were unable to extort a word from the strange  troop in reply to their words, they prepared to  exact a reply with their darts. But the visitors,  10 rising into the air, suddenly disappeared.

From that day, this troop hath been nowhere  ‘seen, since seemingly it hath bequeathed to us  _ foolish folk its errant ways, through which we wear

out garments, lay waste provinces, break our bodies  ‘and those of our beasts, and are never free to find  ja cure for our sick souls; no benefit cometh to us  ‘unbought, no recompense availeth us, if losses are  requited ; we do naught in measure, naught at  leisure, so futile and fruitless is the haste by which  20;we madmen are borne onward; and since our rulers  confer always in secret corners, with approaches  barred and guarded, we gain nothing from this  ‘counsel. We are whirled along by storm and stress.  We give little or dull attention to the present; we  entrust the future to chance, and because, with  knowledge and caution, we strive always for our  destruction, wandering and dispersed, trembling, be-  -yond other men, we are sadly swept out of existence.  Others are wont to ask the cause of grief, because  soithey rarely grieve; we the cause of joy, because  iwe rarely rejoice. We know sometimes a relief  ‘from grief, we never know delight; we are sup-  ‘ported by consolation, we are never blessed by joy.  Mourning mounteth in us with riches, because, in  the exact measure of his greatness, each one is  shattered by the assault of his desire and falleth  .a prey to others.

I languish in this wretched and prying court,

sacrificing my own wishes to please other men.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 235

Though very few can help, any one can hurt. If I/  unassisted fail to satisfy the whole community, I:  am as nothing. If I shall so far outstrip the vir-.  tuous as to become an object of envy, men will  secretly disparage me, and they assert that my  champions are deceived by appearances. Men call  the simple foolish, the peaceful tame, the quiet’  worthless, the good speaker a mime, the kindly a  flatterer, the unsolicitous self-seeking, [the innocent]  noxious, the pious remiss, the rich avaricious, the 10  prayerful a hypocrite, the unprayerful a publican.  Those who are girded for such tumults of life  recognize the necessity of arming themselves with  vices and of keeping their virtues under; and of  carefully distinguishing the place of good and bad,  so as to seem upright to the upright, to villains  villainy made perfect. No one heedeth the salutary  counsel that the Trinity should always be wor-:  shipped in secret and that sincere devotion should  be celebrated in the pure heart’s holy of holies, so 20  that, if only this sacred rite hath been fittingly  observed and chastely kept, no matter how much  or little the Lord permitteth the bag of His bounty  to be loosened, outer circumstances may not affect’  the inner man, and the mere accident of fleeting.  things may not disturb the essential dwelling of  the soul in the Lord.

I should like to. lay bare this thing about our  court, because no court of the past hath yet been’  heard of like unto it, nor is a future one feared. [30  desire also to have the knighthood of days to come  remember its knavery and learn to endure the  tolerable, being instructed by us who have suffered  from intolerance. ‘ Arise,’ therefore, ‘let us go  hence,’ because amid the works of him whom we  renounced in baptism we have no leisure to appease  or please the Lord. Here every man is either  * taking a wife or testing yokes of oxen.’ Hearken  how Salius shunned such excuses.

Google

236 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Of Salius, the Son of an Emir. XIv

ALIUS, a heathen by nation and worship, the  son of an Emir, was admired by his father and  mother and the whole nation on account of his ripe  knowledge in boyhood. When he was concerned  about the safety of his soul, he did not find in the  law of the Gentiles (heathen) any ground for hope.  Then, after examining the traditions of the Fathers,  he turned to Christian truths, associating himself  10 with the Templars in baptism, faith, and com-  panionship. When, during a truce, his father and  mother and the nobles of his family were speaking  secretly to him in an effort to reclaim him from  error, he asked: ‘ Dearest father, who exceedest  others in wisdom, only tell me without further tears,  what reward of thy soul dost thou expect from the  gods in return for the services that it hath paid ?’  This was the answer: ‘ Dearest son, our gods have  prepared for us a paradise flowing with milk and  20 honey in two great streams, and we shall have in  the honey the savour of all desirable foods, and in  the milk the delight of every sweet liquor.’ Then  Salius said: ‘ If thou dost not hunger after them, |  they will not be dainties; but the more thou dost  hunger, thou wilt turn away after much satiety  to meet the simple needs of nature. For bodily  food or drink is no fleeting thing, it is necessary to  have necessities, and may the paradise perish which  cannot offer what every shepherd’s hut can furnish.’  30 Then his people, seeing that the law of his fathers  was the object of his mockery and that their insist-  ence was vain against his constancy, departed with  tears and curses. But he had neither ‘ taken a wife ’  nor ° tested oxen.’

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 237

Of Alan, King of the Bretons. xv  LAN REBRIT, that is to say, the King of the

Bretons, married under unhappy omen the  sister of the King of the Franks—he himself being  Count of Rennes and to all intents King of all Little  Britain (Brittany). At that time Remelin was  Count of St. Pol (Leon), and he, despite his oath of  fealty to Alan, conducted himself with insolence,  and held aloof from his overlord. But the wife of  Alan, who noticed this, tediously reproached him 10  in curtain lectures with being dull and cowardly,  because he did not exact in some fashion either his  vassal’s life or his full service. Alan answered at  length: ‘ It is easy enough to destroy him, but he  hath two sons, Wigan and Clodoan, alike in face,  very unlike in manners. Clodoan is well-read and  learned, but he hath degenerated into a mime, so  that he is now wholly occupied in rhymes and  jests, and succeedeth in them above the ordinary ;  but Wigan is tall and, above all men whom I have 20  seen, comely and wise, having moreover such know-  ledge of arms and such splendid prowess that he  may be deemed rather the superior of Achilles or  Hector than their equal. Through his wise counsel  his father and he never leave their land together  lest they should be together cut off.’ Then she  answered : ‘ Since such is their condition—lest the  son will become more hostile to us with his father  dead, let us strive to cut off the younger man if  not both. Make the father come.’ 30

He assented, and now entered Remelin, whom  the countess, counterfeiter of true love, adorned—  and all his men as well—with genuine honours, and  with generous gifts that were not counterfeit. They  returned to their country laden with presents of  gold and silver and with changes of garments; and  when the counsellors of Wigan saw them jetting  it in bright array, they were turned to evil, and

Google

238 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

complained that they had lost like things by not  being present at the king’s court. While they were  tortured and consumed by avarice, there came unto  them a messenger from Alan, a man of prominence  and of long training in deceit, who urged with all  insistence father and son to go to Alan, and, if not  both, the son, who was not with the father on his  previous visit. At first they deferred and con-  ferred, and avarice spoke loudly in the counsels of  19 both. They argued against any hesitation in faith-  fully attending together their lord in whom they  saw love clearly manifest everywhere, and no crafty  device apparent. Wigan, however, was startled and  would not start, but bode at home against the  opinion of his men and amid their deep mutterings.  They secretly accused him of useless timidity, and,  in so doing, they were liars at heart, because their  curses ran counter to their true knowledge. They  derided as base and cowardly him whom they knew  20 to be worthy of love and unworthy of blame. But  upon the second return of Remelin, bringing with  him garments and gold, horses and trappings, the  commendations of Alan, and the praises of the  queen, the fire of avarice glowed hotly, and those  yearning for like treasures thus insulted Wigan :  ‘An honour to Alan is the visit of his men, and  humility and love are shown him by them. In thy  biding at home, despite many summons, what else  dost thou than accuse him of treachery and blazon  30 thy contempt for his power and his pride? Come!  Humour his first commands, consult thy vanishing  fame, and wipe away the rust of past infamy.’  Wigan assented. The very danger of his life per-  suaded him; and now appeared messengers of the  king and queen. Clodoan met father and son going  together, and, marvelling at their temerity, dis-  suaded and detained Wigan.  Remelin was received by his king and queen with  even deeper reverence than was their wont. The

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 239

queen especially, who aimed more constantly at  his betrayal, made herself in every way agreeable to  him, led him to and fro in conversation, mingled  the grave with the gay, and covered her baseness  with all courtesy. When they were sitting in chat  upon the ramparts, they happened to see perched  on a carcass two white vultures of huge size and  great beauty, if deformity can be allowed such  fame, for this species of bird is badly put together ;  and behold a third vulture, small and black, struck 10  down the white creatures with a sudden attack and,  driving them away, captured the carcass. Remelin  laughed, and the queen asked why. He regretted  his laughter; and, though he wished to hide his  thought, the more he persisted in his silence the  more insistently he was put to the question. But  as the wind rageth at obstacles, so a woman rusheth  upon reflections that are concealed from her and  maketh no end of insistence until she hath prevailed.  Hence Remelin yielded and said: ‘ A great moun- 20  tain in my land produceth black vultures ; another  mountain opposite and outside my territory pro-  duceth many more that are white, and in every con-  flict one black defeateth two white, as thou hast just  seen. And because one of my soldiers prevaileth  in like fashion against two of thine in every meeting,  I laughed.’ She answered : ‘ If this be really true,  thou hast every right to laugh, and we to weep.’  And, presently changing the subject, she held him  with pleasing words until their parting. And by 30  reporting these things to Alan in harsher wise than  they had come from Remelin, she fed the flame of  their hatred, which was her own heart’s daughter.  She thus urged and won her suit that Alan became  with her the betrayer of innocence. The two  stationed a hundred French knights, who had been  secretly furnished forth with the arms of treachery,  in a hiding-place within the outer gate, ordering  them to surround Remelin and Wigan. The two

Google

240 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

victims were now summoned more solemnly than  usual by worthier messengers, and they accepted  the invitation. Then Clodoan, prophesying with  tears the evil that was in store, persuaded his  brother by much weeping to send him with their  father, since the resemblance between the brothers  was so very close that Clodoan, thus deceiving  the enemy, could die in Wigan’s place—a far lighter  loss. Wigan, following afar off, could enter if he

10 saw that all was well; but if he detected treachery,  he should speed back to his own country on relays  of horses placed a mile apart.

When Remelin and Clodoan had entered, the  gates were suddenly closed and Remelin was  snatched from his sons and his life. Clodoan  escaped by confessing his name. When the queen  saw that Wigan had escaped death, she sped her  soldiers forth, praying them on her knees to hasten.  She said everything, promised everything; they

2 hurried out to slay the innocent. But Wigan,  having changed five horses, and not finding the  sixth—for the servant who had held the horse  there, being careless and shiftless and foreseeing  no ill to his lord, had gone away to the nearest  village for food—put in fear the spurs to his fifth  horse, which he had spared in confident hope of  the sixth. When his steed’s strength was flagging  on the borders of a wood, he turned from his way  to accost a woman spinning before her house. He

sorevealed himself and his plight, and made huge  promises to her. She then gave him her son to  rock in the cradle indoors, and to soothe him so  that he would not cry, while she deceived the  pursuers. Hecomplied. The soldiers accosted her,  and, not disbelieving her report which they heard too  quickly, they hastened on; but, returning many  times, they examined everything about the hut  with the closest scrutiny. In the meantime, Wigan,  in order to soothe the boy who was crying, put in

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 241

his hands a knife with an ivory handle, and leaving  him when he was quiet, went about the inside  of the house, seeking a hiding-place and peering  anxiously through the windows. At last, hurrying  back at a shriek from the child, he found him lying  upon the knife, dead. What hope was there left ?  He who, though concealed, had already been in  fear through closeness of death, now waited con-  fidently with dry eyes, because his fear had departed  with the vanishing of hope. While those in search 10  of Wigan were still hunting in this quarter, the  mother, finding her dead son, fell as if lifeless upon  him, and then leapt forth madly to accuse Wigan.  Seizing her by the feet, he held her and promised  to be her son in place of the dead boy, persuading  her that no profit would come from her revenge and  arousing the hope of many riches as the result of  his favour. At length she gave way and hastened  to meet her husband, revealing to him all. Lured  by the hope of promises, they led Wigan, as the 20  soldiers were still lurking near, to safety by the  hidden ways of a secret path. Wigan then col-  lected his forces, and, having told his army the  story of his betrayal and his escape from fears, he  girded his deliverer, in the presence of them all, .  with the belt of knighthood, and endowed him with  large wealth and estates. Even to this day his  children possess the land and are called ‘Sons of  the naked,’ because their ancestor was raised from  poverty to wealth, as if clothed after nakedness. _ 30  But Wigan, to avenge his father’s injuries and  his own, rose against Alan Rebrit (which is inter-  preted King of the Bretons) with so great power  that, of very many cities and villages, he left not to  his enemies any place ‘ where they might rest their  heads,’ and so that there are still shown monu-  ments of that most cruel devastation, which the  overthrow of cities and the ruins of churches attest.  Then Alan, fleeing to his father-in-law, the King

Q

Google

242 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

of the Franks, gave, at the intervention of this  kinsman, his daughter, who was also his heiress,  to Wigan, and was peacefully restored to his throne.  That whole region was, through this alliance, calm  and quiet for a long time.

It came to pass that Wigan, while playing at  chess with his wife, was called to more important  business, and he left in his place a faithful knight  to finish the game with the lady. When the lady

10 had won, she said to the knight who was playing  with her: ‘ Not to thee, but to the son of the  mutilated, mate.’ Since Wigan could not bear  with equanimity this taunt, he hastened against  Alan Rebrit, catching him unawares. The defeated  king fled alone to the Church of St. Leu (Loup), and,  having closed the gate, he supplicated St. Leu to  guard one entrance by his merits while he himself  at the other would resist the enemy with his weapons,  for the church had two doors. Since the enemy

20could not pass in through the saint’s door, they  entered, although with difficulty, through Alan’s,  and, dragging him out, they deprived him of his  eyes and private parts in front of the church;  whence it hath come about that, in this parish of  St. Leu, no animals even to-day can bring forth  young, but, when ripe for bearing, they go outside  of the parish to deliver the offspring. Wigan, to  exult in complete revenge, carried off with him in his  left sleeve the eyes and genitals of Alan, and, con-

30 cealing both the deed and his intent with a merry,  laughing face, he sat down upon his return home  to a game of chess with his wife. Winning, he  threw upon the chess-board the genitals and eyes,  saying what he had learned from her: ‘ To the  daughter of the mutilated, I say mate.’ The woman  of heroic mould, seeing these and learning what had  happened, expressed her delight with the smoothest  laughter, although her spirit was smitten to the  death, and she feigned that her lord had done the

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 243

wittiest justice. Although her mind was armed for  vengeance by all possible efforts, she permitted none  of her inner plotting to show without.

There was in those days a count of Nantes, Hoel,  young and handsome and brave, well adapted to  please the lady without pains, but pleasing solely  as a tool for hurting Wigan. Exchanging mes-  sengers, they merged into one spirit of evil, she of  revenge, he of avarice, both of desire. They desired  each other and their own ends, and both of them 10  the death of Wigan. The wretched victim was  deceived and was beguiled away by the woman  under the pretext of arranging those affairs of his  which lie on the border of Nantes; and he was slain.  Hoel seized everything, and made the other man’s  wife his. He gave in marriage the daughter be-  gotten of her to a nobleman named Ylispon. Some  years later, he had of her a son named Salomon,  and then he died.

Ylispon succeeded him. By a powerful invasion 20  he made himself lord of all Brittany, and, to prevent  any aspersion on the ground of heredity, tried to  kill Salomon. But a noble and most loyal man of  those parts, Henno, pitying the child, stole him  away and hid him among the servants of his bake-  house, so as to conceal the lofty race of the boy by  rearing him among humble folk in servile condition  and lowly station. Only his foster-father and  foster-mother knew who he was.

But when he was fifteen years old, a boar which 30  had fled from the hunters of Ylispon burst by |  chance into a grove near the bakehouse in which  Salomon dwelt. Henno and his household leaped  out at the baying of the dogs. While they were  standing about with the hunters, no one having  the boldness to attack the boar, Salomon rushed  upon the animal, in a dirty tunic but with good  countenance, carrying a cloak in his left hand and  a small knife in his right. He received bravely with

Google

244 DE NUGIS CURIALIUOM

his left the creature bearing down upon him, and  slew him with his right hand, thus affording a  splendid spectacle of boyish prowess for all men to  admire. But while all eyes were turned by the  huge size of the boar first to him and then to the  boy, an old hunter who had been with his father  called him aside and asked his name and race.  He replied, “My name is Salomon. I do not know  my family, because Henno found me exposed and

10 fostered me.’ His questioner answered in tears,  ‘I know.’ But when the boy apprised Henno of  this, the foster-father, fearing, since his design had  been betrayed, that the boy would either be killed  or, at least, disinherited by Ylispon, fortified towns  and, casting aside all timidity, sent a plain confes-  sion of his purpose to all men, whether he knew  them or not. He begged of them assistance for  himself and his young lord. Then many great  chiefs of Brittany, provoked already to wrath by

20 the oppression and tyranny of Ylispon, now saw  the desired opportunity, and they came together  joyfully to Henno.

At these rumours, Ylispon was afraid and called  to his banner whomever he could. Among these  came Meinfelinus de Kimelec, a very wise man.  The wife of Ylispon had cast eyes upon a youth  of his court and, since they were in love with one  another, they feared Meinfelinus as a prophet and  soothsayer, dreading lest they be betrayed by his

3gocunning. The lady schemed to remove him from  the court either by open accusation or by throwing  out some shameful hint. Having discovered this,  the wise man instructed his eight sons and the rest  of the household to comport themselves just as  they saw him behaving. The foolish lover, who,  under instructions from the lady, made his way to  the wise man’s house, poured on the head of Mein-  felinus, who was drinking milk at table, a jar of  milk; but he, as if laughing at his folly, shook off

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 245

the milk upon the fool, and with smoothed and  quiet face awaited the punishment of Ylispon to  fall upon the offender, judging from appearances  that no indignity was intended him and that the  occurrence was merely a blunder of the fool. But  when the thing was unpunished and forgotten, he  departed with permission, as if intending to return  home. Coming to Henno, whom he found in dis-  tress, he rendered him most joyful by his arrival.  Henno said to him: ‘We fear that our victory, 10  which is sent to us with you and through you by  God, will be delayed by this alone, that our neighbour  Camo, a youth wise and brave, and happy in pos-  session of castles, had conceived from my per-  mission the hope of marrying my only daughter,  who hath not yet known man. Because he heareth  that I have changed my mind and am matching  her with Salomon, he fortifieth his towns, multi-  plieth his people, swelleth by every effort his forces,  and with visible fury burneth to avenge his wrongs. 20  And since the most persistent hate is that which  doth degenerate from love, we are lost unless he  is turned to our support.’ Then the wise man  replied: ‘Let Salomon and thy daughter come  with me, to win him over to us.’ They then fol-  lowed the wise man, as they were bidden, and Camo  met them, with a very great train of soldiers. The  sage addressed him: ‘ Our lord, Salomon, whom  the laws of our fathers and his rights put over us,  resigneth to thee his love, the virgin daughter of 30  Henno, so that thou, who hast fanned an earlier  flame for her, wilt not be cheated with frequent  desires, and he giveth up his own pleasure to satisfy  thine, preferring to be tortured or consumed rather  than to open to so great a friend a way full of  stumbling.’ Overcome by this generosity, Camo  exalted Salomon for such humility and for the  return of the lady, and promised to bring all his  power to aid.

Google

246 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Ylispon, getting wind of all these compacts,  collected his forces and, hastening against Salomon,  fixed a day for battle. That most vigilant old  man, de Kimelec, examined each night the battle-  field—that is, the situation of the place, the best  approach to it, the outposts, the way of escape.  He did this by night, lest the enemy should  observe his care and either change the place,  because so well surveyed, or else follow his

10example. On the night before the battle, he saw  a notable thing—that Ylispon came alone to a  tree on the aforesaid field and in his sight sacri-  ficed to the infernal gods, who, upon solicitation,  made reply that he who was first found there on  the morrow would be the victor. But while  Ylispon returned to his men to arrange the battle,  intending to come back here at once, the sage led  Salomon to the place before dawn that he might  win, and he was found there first. The sage, having

20 arranged the troop of Salomon for war, left an  auxiliary force of a hundred soldiers hidden in the  thickness of a little wood behind the ranks.

To tell the story briefly, the army of Ylispon was  overcome and put to flight, but the sage and seven.  of his sons were slain. Salomon was returning with  fifteen soldiers, having lost all the rest, when he  suddenly found at his side Leucius, one of his con-  federates, with thirty-six followers. Leucius, seeing  that he was stronger than Salomon, conceived in

30 his evil heart the idea that, were Salomon out of  the way, he being the most powerful man in the  kingdom could place the crown upon his own head.  By holding counsel apart with his men, he aroused  suspicion in Salomon, who prepared himself and  his followers for defence and escape. Leucius  ,rushed upon him with his troop and, through his  ‘greater force, compelled him to flee. The hundred  knights whom the sage had hidden, hearing this  tumult, suddenly fell upon Leucius, and, taking

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 247

him and his followers, punished them with hanging,  the traitors’ due. After this the whole of Brittany  submitted to Salomon and his heirs.

Whatever reader may have deigned to peruse  these pages will learn, from such many and varied  wrongs, to arm himself with a caution which he  will in no way be able to observe securely unless  he curbeth with the strongest rein avarice, which,  more insistently than hunger and thirst, more foully  than every necessity, driveth men to the depth of 10  baseness. For this vice was the cause of these  deaths of which I have told.

Of Sceva and Ollo, Merchanis. XvI

pecile and Ollo, of like ages but of unlike dis-  positions, boys of the common people, having  acquired a small substance, became in our own day  the sellers of small-wares at first, and later, after  many successes, of great merchandise. For from  packmen they became cart-pedlars ; from pedlars,  the lords of many drivers; but always faithful 20  companions. Then, with the increase of wares,  to use another’s phrase, ‘ the love of coin increased  in the measure of the money itself.” Now the bond  of companionship and the tie of fellowship became  irksome, separate property made its appeal, they  divided all things by lot, each took what fell to his  share, and they parted, after exchanging com-  pliments. Sceva, as he was noble and gracious  for his station, tearfully exhorted Ollo that, in the  future, there should be no scarcity of messages 30  passing between them, in whatever towns or cities  they dwelt, and that, even though separated in the  flesh, they should be united in the spirit by frequent  remembrances of love.

Sceva chose to remain in Ravenna, and, living  a bachelor’s life, long occupied himself with the  exchange of his wares. Ollo married a beautiful

Google

248 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

woman of Pavia. At first many messengers sweated  between them, but after a while they ceased. Sceva  went to Pavia to visit Ollo, with a great troop of  servants, well-apparelled, and lo, he met on the  way Ollo, hastening with heavy-laden wagons to a  distant fair (or market). When kisses had been ex-  changed, Ollo asked ‘ whence and whither,’ although  he ought rather, in keeping with past love, to return  and entertain so great a friend. But even when he  10 heard that he alone was the cause of his friend’s  coming, he excused himself, by reason of the fair,  from returning, and added that Sceva could not be  received into his house for many reasons. He then  left him and followed his carts. Sceva, deeply re-  gretting his disappointment, accidentally accosted  near Pavia a shepherd in Ollo’s employ without  knowing who he was, and, discovering his identity,  inquired anent Ollo’s fortune both in movables and  real estate, and, having learned from him all the  20 secrets of the house, bore to Ollo’s wife this infor-  mation as a warrant for the reception of hospitality.  Duly receiving this, he did not suffer either Ollo’s  retainers or his own to be content with the resources  of the house, though they were many ; he ordered  dainties to be bought outside, vaunting these as  proper to his wonted state, and prepared from his  own means a banquet so splendid and rich as to  arouse the wonder of even the neighbours. He  called in those ‘standing in the market-place,’  30 he detained the passers-by, and he poured out such  a profusion of food and drink that Ollo’s wife, as  well as everybody else, wished Ollo eternally absent  and Sceva ever present. During many days the  feasting steadily increased. All were invited ; those  who came were honoured with eager delight; the  stay-at-homes were loaded with gifts freely sent.  The whole region flew to see that of which it  heard—winged wonder sped through town and  country and overtook the hastening Ollo. The

Go gle

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 249

merchant was thunderstruck and determined not  to return until his fellow was turned off. And  since he raged with jealous concern about his wife  and pined quite as much with the fret of envy, he  naturally showed far less than his wonted ardour  in the exchange of goods. He grieved not over  losses and rejoiced not in gains; indeed he gave  little thought to the making or saving of money.  He was lavish of his wealth and greedy for his wife,  and while he was racked with curious conjecture 10  regarding her relations to Sceva, the wheel of chance  conveyed to him the truth. For Sceva justified  all his fears, and won by every art in his power the  lady to his wishes, and, even though she gratified  his unlawful desire, he was not satisfied with this  base triumph, but he asked something more: ‘ O  sweetest of ladies, choice of my heart, dearer than  my soul, thou canst, if it so please thee, appease  my spirit all astir and aflame with thy love, so that  in the future we may dwell safely together. I ask 20  but this, that thou admit not Ollo upon his return,  but, as if in utter wonder, disavow and disown him,  and “deny that thou knowest ”’ the man. I shall  succeed, through our neighbours and acquaintance,  in bringing the Viscount and all his counsellors to  this opinion, provided that thou favour me; and  whoever shall endeavour to make the judges or any  authority believe that Ollo is thy husband or the  possessor of this wealth will hold their peace after  hearing me, or, if occasion shall arise, will swear 30  to the contrary, so that he will doubt his own  identity and with a mind bewitched will think that  he is some other than Ollo.’ She assented to this  scheme, although she despaired of seeing 1t accom-  plished. Sceva then, by giving everywhere among  Ollo’s acquaintances rewards supplemented by  promises, obtained his point, for friendships are  not proof against such perversion of character. He  visited the ruler and the judges, and corrupted

Google

250 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

them by the usual methods of duping them. All  men thought this a good trick and a clever jest—  and moreover they deemed it of general advantage  that a barren fig-tree should be cut down and a  fruitful olive planted in its stead.

Sceva remained in the house with the wife like  a lawful husband, and this teacher of deceit never  ceased to instruct all in the answers which they  were to make to Ollo. Ollo waited cautiously, as

101t seemed to him, until his rival should go away,  so that he might play the avenger of his wrongs and  executioner upon his wife, with no one near to aid  her, and that he might not actually see the vast  waste of his property of which he had heard. For  the avaricious are hurt less by the unseen loss of  their goods than by the seen.

Seeing, finally, the delay (in departure), and  fearing the risk (of longer waiting), he made his  way home, he beat on the door, and, because he

20 who should open it was not at hand, he was in-  sistent, he grew clamorous, he waxed hot. In his  anger he added threats. He called arrogantly by  name Nicholas, whom he had made his porter.  This fellow appeared and replied with like heat:  ‘Who art thou? Why art thou raging? By  what demon art thou shaken? Why are we  punished by the ravings of thy brains? Why  dost thou disturb my master’s rest? Art thou  indeed a lunatic or merely raving like one? If

30 thou hast lost thy wits, we shall ere long restore  them. If thou art not quiet, rods will make thee  so.” Then Ollo asked, ‘ Slave of mine, am I not  I?’ Nicholas: ‘I know that thou art thou, and  yet thou dost not know it thyself.’ Ollo: ‘ And  dost thou not know that thou art my slave?’  Nicholas: ‘I know that thou art a slave. As  to owning me, that is sheer madness.’ Ollo:  ‘Open quickly my door.’ Nicholas: ‘ Thine?  Hath it not already been proved that thou art a

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 251

madman? By my faith, either thou shalt be  silent or else I shall impose upon thee lasting silence  with this key.’ Ollo: ‘ Base slave, am I not Ollo,  who created thee keeper of this court ?’ Nicholas:  Thou, wretched buffoon. Surely Ollo is here within,  and he lieth in his bed with my lady.’ Ollo: ° With  what lady, fiend?’ Nicholas: ‘ Certainly—and  it is thou who art the fiend—with my beautiful  lady, Byblis.’ Hearing the name ‘Bypblis,’ Ollo|  fell in a fury from his horse and suffered a fit of'10  some length. Then hesaid: ‘Come forth, Nicholas,  that, by seeing me more clearly, thou mayest re-  cover thy senses and know that I am thy master  and the husband of Byblis.’ Nicholas answered  with the loudest laughter: ‘ I see thee well enough  through my window, and perhaps thou art Ollo;  but not the Ollo who is married to Byblis.’ Ollo:  * In very truth, I am that Ollo who, in thy presence,  received her into marriage from her father Mela  and her mother Bala.’ Nicholas: ‘I have never 20  seen a drunkard or madman with so great a memory ;  thou keepest them well, ‘“‘ Mela ’’ and “ Bala” and  ** Nicholas.”” Hast thou never heard of our maid,  Christiana?’ Ollo: ‘ There is no need of hearing,  for I am her lord and thine and ruler of you all,  and I built these houses, and everything in them  is mine.’ Nicholas: ‘ Cristina, Cristina, ho, Cris-  tina! Come and see this man, most wretchedly  insane, who knoweth all, hath maintained all, is  lord of all, he is vexed by a witty mania which 30  hath made him king. Look, is it not the fellow  who lately was led to the cross for murder and  escaped into sanctuary ? And afterwards he saith  that he is our lord! What thinkest thou of him ?’  Cristina: ‘ I wished to tell thee this, because it is  that fellow; and we must spare him, whatever he  doth, for all things are permitted him on account  of the law and government of melancholy (mad-  ness).” QOllo said to himself: ‘How bold and

Google

252 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

stubborn is the arrogance of slaves! Being in  Sceva’s pay, they disown me, but when, gorged to  the full, that creature hath withdrawn from my  dainties, they will fall at my feet and crave favour,  swearing that they have erred through ignorance.  May Ollo die if he doth not show them a hairy  tooth!’ Nicholas: ‘Chew your cud, brainless  wretch; and if thou cravest not a whipping, get  thee gone quickly.’ Cristina: ‘Ho, thou who  10 callest thyself Ollo! Thou declarest that we are  not in our right senses, and we that thou art mad.  Call thy neighbours, and, when they speak to thee  just as we do, believe that thou art a runagate.’

He called his neighbours and related the injuries  that he had suffered. Denying that they had  ever seen or heard of the man, they laughed him  to scorn, and they exhorted each other in turn to  bind him and reform him—and, when he persisted,  they forced him with stones to leave the market-

20 place. He was, in like fashion, repulsed by the  judges later. When he found everywhere one  countenance towards him, and the same words,  and looked at himself through everybody else’s  eyes, and was asked by his own men who he was  and whence he came, and what all this meant, he  ke led, against his own opinion, to derive his  estimate of self less from himself than from other

en. But certain fellows among those corrupted >  by Sceva’s long purse accosted him. One of these  30named Baratus said: ‘O master, we know the  truth of the thing, but thou art so harsh and  showest us such a shaggy eyebrow that we who  know the truth must feign through fear. Thy  dwelling and Byblis, whom thou seekest here, are  at Ravenna. If it doth not displease thee, let  us go to find there what thou believest to have seen  here.’ They then left Pavia; and, on the first  night of the journey, being abandoned by his men,  he went almost mad for shame. He saw all his

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 253

great possessions lost save only those on which he  was lying down to rest. He went to his shepherds  and carried off from the sheep-folds the movables  upon which he was able to lay his empty hands.  Sceva, hearing rumours of this, pursued him with  hue and cry and carried him back bound as a thief  of his own property. Ollo, in dread of the judges  and for shame of the laughter in store for him, for-  swore all blame of Sceva. Believe me, ° generosity!  is the soul of wit.’ 10

Google

FIFTH DIVISION  Prologue. 1

HE diligent achievement of the ancients is

still in our possession; they make their own

past present to our times, and we ourselves wax  dumb: whence the memory of them liveth in us  and we are unmindful of ours. Notable miracle!  The dead live, the living are buried in their stead.  Our times offer perchance something not unworthy

f ‘the buskin of Sophocles.’ But the illustrious  mee of modern men of might are little valued,  and the castaway odds and ends of antiquity are  \exalted. This is surely because we know how to  ‘blame and because we know not how to write; we  seek to tear to pieces and we deserve to be torn.  ww} Thus the forked tongues of detractors are respon-  ~ ‘sible for the rarity of poets. Thus minds grow slack,  wits are undone; thus the native strength of this  time is unduly extinguished, and the lamp is  quenched, not indeed by lack of fuel, but craftsmen  20 wax inert and the record of the present is lightly  reckoned. So Caesar liveth in the praises of Lucan,  Aeneas in those of Virgil, not the more by their  great merits than by the watchfulness of poets.  Only the (trifling) of mimes in vulgar rhymes cele-  brateth among us the godlike nobility of the  Charleses and the Pepins—no one speaketh of  living Caesars ; but their characters, full of bravery  and self-control, and inviting everybody’s wonder,  are ready to the pen. Alexander of Macedon,  30 blaming the narrowness of the world open to his  conquest, said with a sigh, when he looked upon  the tomb of Achilles, “O thou happy youth, who

254

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 255

enjoyest so great a publisher of thy merits!’  meaning Homer. This mighty Alexander is my  witness that many who have deserved to live among '  men after death, live (only) by the interpretation  of poets. But to what purport the sighs of Alex-  ander—certainly this, that he was bemourning the  lack of a great poet to chant his merits, lest on his  last day he should wholly die. But who would  dare to put upon a page what is passing to-day, or  to pen even these names of ours? In fact, if any 10  new form of writing placeth upon record ‘ Henry ’  or ‘ Walter’ or even thine own name, thou dost  despise and deride this, but not for any fault of  theirs and, let us hope, not of thine. But if thou  lookest upon ‘ Hannibal’ or ‘ Menestratus,’ or any '  name of a sweetness hallowed by time, thou givest  all thine attention; and, eager to plunge into the  fabled cycles of the golden age, thou exultest in  their deeds. Thou embracest with all reverence  the tyranny of Nero and the avarice of Juba, and 20  whatever else antiquity doth offer; thou rejectest  the gentleness of Louis and the generosity of Henry.  Now, if thou refusest to accept but rejectest as a  fable the presence of ancient acts of virtue in this our  day, listen to our present versions of ancient deeds of  malice as thou often readest of Nero and his like; for  never will Envy so degenerate from its own nature !  that, while it denieth to moderns ancient nobility, it  will not freely concede to them ancient ignobility. °  On this page of mine thou wilt find portrayed 30  modern instances of goodness with its graces and  of baseness with its hateful crimes. We propose  to thee the avoidance of the second on account of  its poison, and the choice of the first on account of  its prizes, but thou must take thine eye from neither '  (the good nor the bad) until it is well scanned and  known. Thou must read and test every page.  which thou seest, nor must thou slight until thou  hast read all aright. Usula is a fish of the Danube

Google

256 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

which pursueth, even through the harpoons of its  enemies, the harmonies of music, nor do wounds  deter it, but, lavish of life and longing for the organ  sounds, it followeth even to death the honeyed  lures of its soul. This is a parable of the triumph  of a noble and zealous man, whom neither cough  nor consumption nor any other weaknesses restrain  from study. Upon his afflicted body he imposeth  the anguish of martyrs; for he wisely deemeth it

10 more glorious to pour out to God his spirit shining  in the light of wisdom than to cherish for himself  a life full-fed with sloth and ease. Thus let him  be an usula !

Of King Appollonides.

ING APPOLLONIDES in the West came home  with tremendous booty from his despoiled  enemies. To a priest who was crying at his back,  because he carried as plunder with him twenty of  the churchman’s animals, he said, accepting the  20 other’s oath of ownership: ‘ Take what are thine  and return in peace.’ When the priest, consulting  profit rather than probity, chose the best in the  whole herd, Appollonides, though not unaware of  his act, kept silence on account of reverence. And  while men were still wondering, lo, another priest  ran up and claimed twenty others in like fashion,  and departed a liar like the first, with no protest  from the now angered king. But when a third  appeared, offering to make his oath for only two  soanimals, the king said to him: ‘Swear for the  twenty like those who have just departed.’ But he  answered : ‘ Master, I will not be forsworn.’ Then  the king, wishing to reward his good faith, added  to his two one hundred more, saying: ‘ The one  who preferred to lack many than to swear falsely  is worthier of my cattle than those who preferred  to swear falsely than to lack.’ By my faith, I

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 257

think that this was said and done in a manner '  worthy of the pen of Homer, and that I am un-  worthy of such a splendid theme.

When this same monarch heard that his kingdom  was disturbed by a foreign king, he found out,  through his scouts, that the other monarch lived  most daintily on costly fare, and that in his whole  army nothing but wine was drunk, despite the  scarcity of wine in those parts. Then, expecting  water to suffice fully for himself and his people, 10  he said: ‘ The world hath never heard that wine  overcame water.’ And when, in a long conflict,  they drank wine and water, victory fell to water.  For the strangers returned to wine at home, when  the wine of that land failed.

I have met this king and, from my knowledge,  I hate him; but I am unwilling that my hatred  should blacken his virtue, nor have I the intention  of ever suppressing through envy any one’s good-  ness. The same monarch, when his enemies were 20  surrounded, and were compelled by the danger of  hunger to go under the spear (submit), granted  them supplies so as to conquer them by his force  and not by their failure of food; and he increased  the glory of his victory, although he postponed it.  The same king, mild and most moderate to his  own people, (frequently) brought to subjection  foreign peoples, like a hawk which never molesteth  any birds very near its own nest, but keepeth  off their enemies with peace-making talons, and 30  carrieth away as its prey those farthest distant.

Of the Origin of Earl Godwin, and his Character. 111

the year of our Lord 1054, Jerusalem was  taken by the Saracens and was kept by them  forty-five years. Twelve years after Jerusalem  had been reduced to slavery by the Saracens,  England yielded to the Normans.  R

Google

258 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Eleven hundred, eighty and seven  Giveth Jerusalem to Saladin’s sceptre.

In one thousand, sixty and six  England’s limits met the hair of a comet.

In eleven hundredth year, less one,  Was Jerusalem captured and Frank rule begun,

Thirty-three years before the capture of Jerusalem  from the Saracens, England was subdued and given  to the Normans through the wrath of the Most

10 High. About three years before this overthrow  of Jerusalem, Constantinople, which had grown  weak from long peace, was seized and held by the  innumerable wiles of Andronicus, a not unfit match  for Nero in baseness. Thus the two aforesaid  conquests were prophetesses and harbingers of the  overthrow of Jerusalem. But that posterity may  not lack reasons for these events, they must be  noted in a short digression.

Edgar, King of the English, very noble in race,

2 character, and kingly sway, had by his first wife  Edward, who inherited all his father’s traits, but,  when Edward’s mother died, Edgar had by a second  lawful union Ethelred. The mother of the young  son, envying Edward the kingdom, first gave him  poison, and, when this failed of its effect, had him  slain at Shaftesbury by the soldiers of his company.  Edgar was then succeeded by Ethelred, whom the  English called ‘ Redeless’ (‘ Unready ’), because he  never acted. He had, by the sister of the Earl or

30 Duke of Normandy, two sons, Alfred and Edward.  In the time of this inglorious Ethelred, the kings of  the neighbouring islands were enabled by his folly  and sloth to carry away booty from England, and  peaceful gifts from Ethelred himself.

At that time a certain man rose to high place in  this wise. Ethelred strayed from his companions  during a hunt. It was winter, and, wandering  alone by night, he came to the home of a keeper

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 259

of his cows, where he asked and received hospitality.  Then there came forward the energetic son of the  keeper, a boy named Godwin, handsomer and better  than his ancestry warranted. He drew off the  greaves, cleaned them and replaced them; washed  the horse, led him out and tended him, cleaned him  with the curry-comb and gave him straw and fodder;  he arranged all in good order, quickly and neatly.  Seemingly the favourite of his father and the  ruler of his narrow house, he placed over the fire 10  the fattest of geese and entrusted it to his sister’s  care. His father ordered one hen to be prepared ;  he straightway set three upon the fire. His father  put a piece of salt pork by the pot-herbs; he at  once added three, and, without the knowledge of  father and mother, he brought on a pig that had  no teeth as yet—that is, a young and untouched  sow. He fed the fire, lighted the candles, told  stories to prevent tedium; to the king he was a  mime, to his mother a flatterer, to his father a 20  stimulus; every want he carefully supplied; he  did not lie nor sit nor recline nor stand; he was  always in movement; he did not weigh labour,  he did not study and strain to be useful, he did not  aim at his own promotion, he gave his whole atten-  tion to the king and offered the whole of himself to  the king. And although he did not know the king,  he paid royal reverence in great plenty, he despised  himself and was regarded with favour, he neglected  himself and was selected, he did not understand 30  himself and was understood, he did not desire or  hope, he did not serve covetously nor in artifice,  that he might win something thereby; he gave  his whole self generously, and he sped with an open  heart not for the sake of gain or reward, and he  slipped unawares into reward and gain. The king  was taken by his work and adopted him as his own,  that he might make him the overseer of great works.  This is the way (of the world), that, where any one

Google

260 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

droppeth with greedy cunning the hook of anxious  care, he hooketh not (his fish); and favour raineth  unexpectedly from heaven upon simple earnestness.  For the king, although in other ways dull, observed,  drank in, accepted all things, and, though himself  sluggish, approved in him the busy care and the  ready service, as many praise what they do not  hasten to imitate.  The king took Godwin into his bedchamber, and,  10 in the course of time, raised him above all the nobles  of the realm, giving him, with the belt of knight-  hood, the earldom of Gloucester. He, indeed,  roamed through all the harbours of England, both  by land and sea, destroying all pirates; and  England became, through his efforts, the fear of all  neighbouring lands, she who had been their prey  and plunder. She rested and recovered her breath.  The earl himself, impatient of peace and quiet,  glowing to his heart’s core with the love of war,  20engaged in so many distant battles beyond the  - sea that he gained among Saracens as well as  Christians a most famous name, and everywhere  incomparable reputation. Full of joy, therefore,  was the realm on his return. The genial heart, the  witty head, the open hand, whatever men might  justly expect from any noble or king’s son, were  fully and gaily revealed to all by the son of the  cowherd. And what made all this more wonderful  was its unexpectedness. For who would believe  30 a rustic to be free from all boorishness and redolent  with such a sweet savour of gentleness? I say  not that he was a good man, but a man of large  capability of good and of evil. Goodness is the  daughter of generosity (of soul), and wisdom maketh  ‘even the base attain her height, but capability is  both of good and of evil. Goodness doth nothing  ‘except good, capability doth both. I call not this  ‘man good, for I know that he was base, but capable,  for he was strong in action, bold in dangers, rushing

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 261

upon opportunity, an invincible doer of deeds, a’  swift solver of doubts, a valiant champion both of  right and wrong. Therefore, by these lofty traits  of character, this earl, who was of a good and  comely aspect, concealed the shameful things which  were his by the right of birth, and he suppressed  the inborn militancy of malice with a worthy  strength; for not without a brave struggle doth’  a man tower over other men if he is at odds with:  nature. But he lifted himself high: his eager 10  desire—which was here very close to virtue’s side  —aided him to climb, and his covetousness crept  in to the aid of liberality, for he strove to turn  things to his gain in every way that he might in}  all ways abound in giving, and he was not ashamed’  to snatch what he could get for the asking, since:  liberality ought not to exceed the measure of one’s  faculty, nor is it fame to give what fraud hath  gained. Since he was incomparably the foremost  of all, and since a man strong for both good and'20  evil could easily get anything from a rich and  indolent master, he gained from his lord the king  an earldom and a grant of money, and in every  place (he got) from him and from others whatever  he pleased. |

Berkeley near Severn, a village of five hundred  pounds’ rent, was the property of resident nuns,  whose abbess was beautiful and of noble blood.  Now the man of whom we have been speaking,  after examining all things with subtle craftiness, 30  desired not the abbess herself but her property ;  sO, IN passing on a journey, he left with her until  his return his nephew, a youth of splendid presence,  on the plea that he was sick, and he instructed the  supposedly sick man not to get thoroughly well  until he had made the visitors (to his bedside),  the abbess and whatever nuns he was able, bear an  unwonted weight. And that the boy might win  from these the favour of visits, he gave him rings

Google

262 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and belts and deer-skins, dappled with gems, to  lavish upon them with intent to deceive. So he  gladly entered a way of pleasure thus freely sa  and, because * the descent to Avernus is easy,’  learned easily and he was wisely unwise in that  which smacked of his own wise. The youth pos-  sessed all things that were desired by ‘ the foolish  virgins,’ beauty, a wealth of dainties, charm; and  the devil took pains to give each her opportunity.

10 He therefore drove out Pallas and introduced  Venus, and made the holy church of the Saviour  and his saints an accursed pantheon, and the  temple a brothel; and so he converted the lambs  into she-wolves. When the bellies of the abbess  and of many nuns began to swell, the conqueror  on fields of pleasure, now languishing and over-  come, took his flight and straightway told his  lord of his conquering eagles that so well deserved  the reward of iniquity. The earl lost no time in

20 going to the king, and in reporting that the abbess  and her nuns were openly pregnant and were prosti-  tutes to all men; and he confirmed all this by  spies who were sent and quartered there. Having  evicted the nuns, he asked for Berkeley and received  it from his lord—or rather from his fool.

He saw Bosham under Chichester and took a  fancy to it. In the company of a great number  of men of rank, he said, amid laughter and jest, to  the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom the town

30 then belonged, * My lord, wilt thou give me Bosham ?’  The Archbishop, in amazement, said as if repeating  the question: ‘I give thee Bosham!? But he  straightway fell with his band of soldiers at the  prelate’s feet, just as if he had procured it, and,  ‘kissmg them with a large semblance of thanks,  withdrew to Bosham. He retained the town by  forceful occupation; and, with the supporting  testimony of his men, praised the Archbishop in  the presence of the king as the giver, and thus

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 263

possessed it in peace. From these things thou  mayest know the spirit of this man who was a  pest in gaining that he might be profuse in giving.  He was a hunter of all gain from all men that he  might have enough for all distributions. He was  the fear and hope of all, the grief and joy.

Of Cnut, King of the Danes. iv

T that time the richest and readiest of all  kings was Cnut, King of the Danes. He  was called to the throne by the nobles of England 10  and summoned by many letters. Since the English  were not unwilling but inviting and welcomed him  with joy, he slipped with a mighty army into  Danesia (Dengey), as it is called by the Danes  until this day. Scornful oppression brought this  to pass, for it is the fashion of kings that their  cruelty is in exact proportion to their cowardice. '  In such monstrous fashion, Ethelred, because he’  was most cowardly and feared all men, laid snares  for all, and suppressed the best men, not all at 20  once, but one by one, and reduced liberty to  slavery, and vice versa. He offered the necks of  nobles to the heels of slaves, since he was an over-!  thrower of law, a proclaimer of wrong, a sower of }  cruelty, fuel of harshness, never the avenger of  injuries nor the rewarder of well-doing. He loved  no one whom his (royal) anger could not convict  of servitude, or treachery, or some crime. He  fulfilled in his own person what hath been said :  ‘An unjust king hath all his ministers unjust.’ 30  Who was called kind, mild, or merciful ‘ did not  tarry in his sight.” * The haughty eye and in-  satiable heart’ of the slave ministered to his pleasure.  His joy was in the complaints and tears of his  nobles. He wedded well-born girls to peasants,}  and compelled sons of the loftiest families to  condescend to the daughters of slaves. He loved

Google

264 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

in his followers hearts like his own, and he armed  them for all the refinements of cruelty. As many  tyrants under him, so many kings! True in  threats, false in promises, he was everywhere the  hammer of the whole knighthood. His nobles put  up with him, in the beginning of his reign, that they  might not seem to fall away from their traditions,  but later those whom he had forcibly made de-  generates from the nobility sold him to a foreign  10 people. With the slaves whom he had chosen and  at whose nod he raged against freemen, he was in  his bedchamber at Westminster when the rumour  of the coming of Cnut resounded in his ears. When  he had fled in a boat he died of fear at London  town in the midst of slaves; and, abandoned by  them, was borne by the force of the river ‘ whither  Numa went before and Ancus.’  Although my spirit naturally hateth slaves, I am  \pleased with this trait of theirs, that they show not  20 only in the end but on all occasions how much they  os to be loved. There is an English proverb  about slaves: ‘ Haue hund to godsib ant steng  in thin oder hond,’ which is ‘ Take a dog as com-  panion and a stick in thine other hand.’  ~ Suddenly and unexpectedly, Cnut arrived, and  was immediately welcomed by those at London  who had bidden him come. He invaded the neigh-  bouring counties, and took as hostage Emma, the  sister of the Duke of Normandy, the newly-made  30 widow of Ethelred. But he was able by no inquiry  to discover their children, Alfred and Edward,  for a certain knight, in accord with the will of  the Highest, had snatched them away from the  tumult and the whirlwind. Placing them secretly  in a boat, he pushed them out upon the sea, and  entrusted them to divine wisdom after he had  decorated them with tokens of royalty, and had  put with them a brief relation of their identity and  relationship. On the second day, they were found

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES © 265

drifting by merchants of Pannonia and were ran-  somed by the King of Hungary, and sent back to  the duke, their uncle.

But what was Godwin doing at this time?  Levying a large and strong band of soldiers, he  summoned to his aid Edmund, son of Ethelred.  They met Cnut hastening against them at Deer-  hurst in the vale of Gloucester above the Severn.  The ranks and phalanxes of the armies were  arranged for battle—the superiority in numbers 10  being with Cnut, who had led the half of England  along with the Danes. But the Danes feared  their worthy and angry adversaries, and also the  unworthy cause which only their covetousness de-  fended. They brought Cnut to the opinion that  the death not of 4 whole army but of one man should  be the aim and end, by substituting a duel for a  battle, and that the victorious champion should  win for his lord the kingdom, all the rest departing  in peace. The decision pleased both sides, and 20  Edmund thought it best to take the risk himself,  and did not permit a champion to enter the lists  in his stead. Cnut, when informed of this, decided  to contend in his own person, so that there should  be no unworthy inequality but a well-matched  and becoming meeting of kings. When all which .  such a matter demanded had been done with due  solemnity, truce declared, the champions armed,  they came together in two boats from different  directions to an island of the Severn, equipped 30  with such proved and precious arms and horses  as prestige and protection prescribed. We cannot  linger upon their haps and hurts after the crash  of their meeting, from which we must pass to other  things. (Men could see) by the long silence on  either side during the changing fortunes of the  contest, what sad fears and joyful hopes were  distressing the two hosts which stood stockstill and  agape. It hath not been forgotten that, when the

Google

266 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

champions’ horses were slain, they fought on foot.  Cnut, tall and lean and long of arm, wore out  Edmund, who was large and rather fat, with such  a strong and vicious assault that, during a pause  for rest, Edmund stood with much gasping and  frequent drawing of breath. Then his rival said  —and he was heard by those around— O Edmund,  thy breath is too short.’ His opponent, blushing  modestly, held his peace; but im the very next  10assault he bore down upon Cnut’s helm with so  great a blow that the Dane fell upon his hands and  knees to the earth. Leaping back, Edmund did  not attack him prostrate nor hinder him in his  distress, but as revenge gave back word for word,  saying: ‘ Not too short of breath is he who casteth  \down at his feet so great a king.’ When the Danes  {saw that, in a conflict of so serious an outcome,  \Edmund held his hand from their lord, and that,  o so ready a victory, he forbore to conquer, they  20brought the two, by many prayers and tears, to a  ‘treaty of this tenor, that during their whole lives  the kingdom should be equally divided between  them, and that, after the death of one, his sur-  vivor should succeed to it all. They became, then,  brothers and friends, and were bound together by  \the firmest faith, so that neither the devil, the  sower of seed of wrath, nor his accomplices, the  odious razors of accusing and flattering tongues,  could dissolve their treaty or their friendship.  30 It happened that Edmund died first, in this  anner. Some kings follow the custom of granting  [the secrets of their chamber or bed to slaves and  ' of confidently entrusting to them their own free  heads; and so it came about that Robert, Earl of  Gloucester, the son of Henry the First, a man of  great wisdom and much culture, although, as is  oft the case, wanton, held frequent converse with  a man prone to the same fault, Stephen de Beau-  champ, thus seeming to despise all good knights.

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 267

In the crucial moment of a fight, when the trumpet  was shrilling and helmets were being tightened on  either side and spears were raised for the charge  and shields placed before breasts, the reins of horses  drawn, Robert was hastily seeking from good men  aid and counsel, passing by Stephen as useless.  But one of the good men said to him: ‘Call  Stephen.’ The earl, turning, reddened at the taunt  and said to all whom he had called into counsel :  * Pity me, nor be too inexorable to forgive me1o  after a (frank) confession. I am a man of large  desires. When my lady Venus calleth me, I call  her servant Stephen, who is a very ready minister  in this matter; but when Mars, I consult you, his  scholars. Because my ear almost always heark-  eneth to him, the mouth speaketh (to him), and  hence the truth is borne to you that I voluntarily  serve Venus, but under compulsion I serve Mars.’  With laughter, all granted forgiveness and offered  their aid. 20  Hence it is, I suppose, that some kings drive  away their freemen and entrust their secrets to  slaves, because they wish to serve the vices, and  they flee the freedom of the virtues; indeed, as  is commonly said, like seeketh like. Edmund  sought one with traits like his own, in pleasure, or  rather in vices; and he subjected the freemen of  his court to a man of servile and base condition.  This fellow, after acquiring large and unlooked-for  wealth, unsuited to his low estate, was finally 30  attracted by a little villa, belonging to the crown,  Minsterworth upon Severn, three miles from  Gloucester. He asked for this, and, in the reply  of the king, he heard not refusal but delay. He.  then gathered his wrath, rapidly and rabidly, and.  he whom the unjust favour of his lord had driven,  foolishly not to pride but to madness, *‘ now medi-  tated in his bed mischief,’ which a slighted person’  of free estate could not conceive even in return

Google

268 DE NUGIS CURIALIOUM

(for infinite injuries. The hearts of noble men are  nclosed in brazen walls which neither envy, nor  mbition, nor the acid of iniquity breaketh down ;  herefore they seldom seem ungrateful for kind-

nesses, although they may find patience under

injuries. But of servile souls there are either no  hedges or else they are pulled down; to thefts  and pillagings, and the other daughters of injustice,  they lie ever open. They scorn to weigh honour

l0and dishonour, content as they are with that  basest of verses :—

‘ Jupiter decreed that whatever is pleasing is pious.’

This is the Devil’s evangel, from Evan, v con-  sonant, which is rage (whence Bacchus is called  Evan), not the euuangel of Lord Jesus, reading two  u’s, from eu, which is ‘ good,’ because it teacheth  abstinence from evils and insistence upon good  things.

This slave, nursing his freshly-born hatred and

20 running over his memory of kings, whom he gauged  by the worst, at length drew the conclusion that  the survivor of the dead would become his heir.  He seemed, in his fancy, to make by his aid Cnut  the survivor, and he judged the king to be of his  own (base) mind, indeed so like himself that he  would set aside all honour and all regard for God  in his desire to unite the whole kingdom under his  rule. The slave concluded that, without difficulty  or delay, he would receive, as the reward of his

30 baseness, that which his lord had delayed to give.

This was the way of it. Cnut was holding  London and the regions beyond Icknield, Edmund  the rest. From here it chanced that Edmund  ‘came to that well-favoured Minsterworth, of which,  hanks be to God, I now possess the chapel by right

f the mother church of Westbury. The slave,  beholding its rich holdings and delights, flamed up  in passion for it, and, devil’s servant that he was,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 269

he put, for his master’s benefit, in the opening of  the latrine a long sharp spit. On his master’s  coming, the slave walked before him with the  light of many candles and he turned some of them  so that Edmund unawares fell upon the spit; aye,  he fell upon it and was pierced with a deadly wound.  He had himself borne thence, and at Ross, the  king’s village, which he had granted to Hereford  Church ‘and which it still possesseth, he died. In  haste the slave betook himself to Cnut and said: 10  * Hail, king complete, thou who yesterday wert but  demi-king; and mayest thou reward the author of  thy completeness by whose hand the enemy hath  been removed, completely uprooted from the  earth.’ Then the king, albeit deeply sad, with calm  countenance replied : ‘ Dear God, what man hath  proved such a friend to me, that I may make him  ‘exalted above his fellows”? ?’ ‘I,’ quoth the  slave. Thereupon the king had him raised aloft  and hung on the highest oak after the due and 20  well-deserved end of slaves.

Cnut, therefore, remained as sole monarch for  several seasons, and the Danes covered all the  provinces everywhere. Since they were stronger  than the English, they forced them to the meanest  slavery, even using wrongfully their wives and  daughters and granddaughters. This matter God-  win laid before Cnut with many tears, but his plea  availed naught for the deliverance of his people,  and, out of loyalty to his own, he became the 30  disloyal and bitter enemy of the King of the Danes ;  he withstood manfully the king’s power (in many  meetings even, they say that he proved the stronger),  ever seeking peace and freedom for the English.  When, however, Cnut found that Godwin was un-  conquerable in battle, he gave ear to his prayers,  in order that he might win by wile in time of  peace what he could not win by might or art of  arms ; they became friends to all appearances, and

Google

270 DE NUGIS CURIALIUOM

freedom was restored to England. Often the Danes  had made treaties in a fashion similar to this and  had broken them, falling back more cruelly than  their wont into their former lawlessness. For a  long time, however, this peace continued while  Cnut was laying snares for Godwin. By frequent  gifts and pretences of friendship, he won from him  both trust and affection. When the king had fully  marked this fact, he summoned Godwin, and, after  10 Many a sigh and repeated groans, he said, ‘ In the  matter of thy pardon of me I rest secure since I,  for my part, have pardoned in thee all that thy  part in our quarrels seemeth to have deserved ;  ** seemeth,”’ I say, and not “ have deserved,”’ be-  cause, whereas I was the unjust persecutor of thee  and thine, thy defence of them was ever praise-  worthy and just. If, however, any anxiety or  cloud from any fault still saddeneth thy heart, it  will be my pleasure to reassure thee in whatever  20 way thy censure may elect.’ The earl was mollified  by these words, deceitful though they were; his  mind was somewhat at ease, and he forgave him  all the wrongs of which he had formerly been  guilty. But Cnut, in order to ensnare him with  greater cunning, thus made answer: ‘My Lord  Earl, thou hast gladdened my heart, so that my  pleasure is to entrust to thee the stewardship of  both kingdoms. In the first place, I wish thee to  visit Denmark, there to make such arrangements  30and corrections as thou wilt see fit. My only  sister, most beautiful of damsels and most loyal,  is ruling there in my stead, and she will receive  my order from thy hand bidding her summon to  meet thee all the nobles of the kingdom; a second  letter thou shalt deliver to them, that they may be  subject unto thee with all reverence as to me.’  The earl assented, and, taking the letters and the  royal writ, he came in haste to the harbour whence  he had to set sail, On the advice of Brand, his

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 271

chaplain, whom he knew to be a most skilful crafts-  man in cunning tricks, he opened the seals of both  letters in order to assure himself of the falsity of  the king or of his good faith, very rightly fearing  ‘the Danes, even when bearing gifts.’ In the first  letter he found the order that all the Danes should  meet him; in the second these words: ‘ Be it  known to all my friends among the Danes, justly  most devoted to me because most loyal, that Earl  Godwin, to whom ye have come in obedience to 10  the summons in my letter, hath wrested from me,  employing both trickery and force, the rule of  Denmark for a space of three years, promising that  he would be a most loyal steward for the increase  of my revenues, for the success of all our affairs,  and for your defence—indeed, a better steward  than was Joseph in Egypt. In like manner the  wolf showed himself as a dog to the foolish shep-  herd, that, by dispelling his fears of attack from  without, he might win his confidence and alone 20  and unhindered fall upon his prey. His desire is  to avenge the disgrace of the people of England  and to gloat in your blood. I was conscious of  his trick and consented to his request, although  I pretended to be blind, that your hands might  visit upon the plotter of death the death he devised,  and his cunning know that by your knowledge it  hath been overcome. For, as long as he surviveth,  Iam not sole monarch of England and of Denmark.’  Godwin ordered this letter to be altered, and, acting 30  courageously in the face of the prayers of his  attendants, who out of fear urged him to return,  he thus rewrote the king’s command: ‘ Cnut,  King of the Danes and of the English, to the Danes,  sole lovers of his success, because in all times of  peace and of war they have served him with  loyalty and courage. It becometh you to know  that safely and unharmed I rule as monarch of  all England, a consummation pleasing, I trust, to

Google

272 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

God who guideth me as He guided Jacob whom  He loved. To Him I give thanks and to your  prayers ; to the bearer, indeed, of these presents,  the Earl of York and Lord of Lincoln, Notting-  ham, Leicester, Chester, Huntingdon, Northampton,  Gloucester, and of Hereford, which hath long stood  out against us, we are more duly beholden than  to any other living person; for his hand hath  brought about peace, his courage and wisdom have

10 restored calm to my turbulent realm. To him, as  to a most loyal follower, I have entrusted the care  and oversight of all Denmark, and have given  him my sister for a wife, and to his authority I  wish you to submit yourselves without resistance.  Farewell.’

Concerning Henry I., King of the English, and Louis,  King of the French. v

ENRY, King of England, the father of the  mother of this Henry who is now king, a

20 far-seeing man and a lover of peace, in a battle  near Gisors defeated Louis the Fat, King of the  French, and his proud army and forced him to  flee. Having won this victory, he returned to  England and pacified it, for although it had been  won by his father, William the Bastard, neither  he nor his son and successor, William Rufus, had  brought it to peace, since the old inhabitants did  not by any means submit tamely to their exile  and were hostile to the new-comers, and through-  30out the whole kingdom there had been the most  serious rebellion. But this Henry of whom I  speak, by intermarriages among their families, and  by every other possible means, jomed the two  peoples into a strong and harmonious union, and  for a long time enjoyed a successful rule over  England, Wales, Normandy, and Brittany, to the  glory of God and to the great prosperity and

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 273

unfailing joy of his subjects. He also completed  the monastery of Cluny from the foundations which  Alfonso, King of the Spaniards, had laid at his  own expense. After building them just above the  surface of the ground the Spaniard had, because  of his avarice, withdrawn from the undertaking.  Although this work was on a huge scale and very  beautiful, shortly after the finishing stroke had  been given to it, it fell into complete ruin. When  the monks of Cluny in their fear had announced 10  this catastrophe and were blaming the workmen,  the king excused them, saying that it had happened  by the hand of God, in order that His structures  might not rest upon the foundations laid by a  foreign king who had been overcome by his avarice.  He thereupon sent his leading workmen and had  them cast out of the ground whatever Alfonso  had cast into it, and he completely rebuilt a struc-  ture of wonderful magnificence and gave yearly a  hundred pounds sterling to the monks in per- 29  petuity to keep the structure free from injury.

Since he observed the mean between avarice and '  extravagance in such a way that it was impossible  for him to approach nearer to extravagance with-  out sin, he stood happily in the midst of his great.  abundance, and flourished amid the prosperous:  condition of persons and of things throughout his  whole kingdom. There were prescribed for his  household and for his retinue usages which he  himself had laid down: for his household, that it 30  was ever to abound in all sorts of supplies and have  very definite offices, carefully foreseen and generally  understood, both at home and on journeys, and  that, whenever there came thither those individuals  who are called the chief barons of the land, they  should have stated allowances from the generous  allotment of the king; for his retinue, that no one  was to be in want but each to receive definite gifts.  And it is said that, as far as this world alloweth,

S

Google

274 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

his court was without care, his palace without  riot or confusion, a condition which is rare. More-  over, if we may believe our fathers, we can say  that his was the age of Saturn, ours of Jove. There  gathered at his court, so they say, people from  everywhere, not only our countrymen, that they  might be relieved from their worry, but foreigners  also came, and there they came upon a great  assembly of merchants and of merchandise. For

10 with the king, whithersoever he moved his camp,  there was, so to speak, continuous market-day,  since his journeyings were well known and his  halting-places widely proclaimed. The ripe in  years or wisdom were always before lunch in the  court with the king, and, by the cry of the herald,  there were summoned to them those who desired  a hearing in regard to business; after midday  and the siesta those were admitted who sought  amusement. Hence this king’s court was a school

20 of virtue and wisdom all the morning, of courtesy  and decorous mirth all the afternoon.

Who, moreover, could allow to pass unnoticed  the light jestings of this witty and genial man,  not so much emperor or king as the father of  England, even though we cannot do justice to the  important ones? Following his wont, his Cham-  berlain, Payens Fitz-John, used to prepare every  night a pint of wine, ostensibly to relieve the king’s  thirst. Once or twice or (perhaps) never in the

30 year would he call for it; hence Payens and the  pages would often without fear drink up all the  wine at the beginning of the night. It fell out  that the king late one night looked for his wine,  and none was at hand. Payens got up, called  the pages, but found nothing. The king caught  them hunting for the wine and finding none. He  therefore called the trembling and frightened Payens  to him and said: ‘ What’s this? Have ye not  always wine with you?’ The other in great fright

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 275

replied, “ Yea, my lord, every night we prepare  a pint but, because you are never thirsty and never  call for the wine, we often drink it either late or  after you have fallen asleep, and we ask pardon  from your mercy, since we have confessed the  truth.’ Thereupon the king asked: ‘ Was it thy  habit to take only one pint for the night?’ ‘ Yea,’  replied Payens. ‘ That was very little for the two  of us; hereafter take two from the cup-bearer,  one for thyself, the other for me.’ Thus Payens’ 10  natural fear was allayed and the king’s anger  softened by his true confession. And it was  characteristic both of the king’s geniality and of  his generosity to dispense, instead of fault-findings  and anger, joy and gain. Such a king would be'  worthy of a better style and a much longer dis-  course, but he belongeth to these times and no  halo of antiquity is cast about him.

The King of France, the aforesaid Louis the Fat,  was a man great in body and not less in deeds and 20  intellect. Louis, the son of Charlemagne, suffered  the loss of nearly all the nobles of France and the  entire body of French soldiers at Evore, owing  to the foolish pride of Raoul de Cambrai, his grand-  son. From that day, with great difficulty, he  maintained his rule over the French until the  coming of Gurmund together with Ysembard,  against whom, with the remainder of the French,  he waged battle at Ponthieu. He defeated them  but returned with a very few of his retinue, having 30  slain in the battle the larger part of his enemies.  He died but a short time after his return, his  death hastened both by a wound and by the  hardships of the aforesaid battle, and all France  mourned and wept. After that Louis’ death, ‘ the  sword did not depart’ out of France until the  Lord took pity and sent this Louis. Since he, |  however, had not yet attained his majority, he  was not allowed to go outside the gates of Paris

Google

276 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

beyond the third milestone without the permission  or the escort of the leading nobles, but there was  no one of these who either respected or feared his  rule. His high spirit, therefore, took offence at  this, nor did it suffer itself to be constrained within  narrow bounds. The Lord * awoke him as one out  of sleep,’ and gave to him the arbitrament of war,  and the frequent favour of victory, and crowned his  efforts with the complete unification and pacification  1o/of all France.

Louis was succeeded by his son, most Christian  and most gentle of men, and the peace which his  father’s arms had won he maintained, by God’s  grace, all the days of his life, trusting unhesitatingly  in the Lord who never ‘ leaveth desolate him who  putteth his trust in Him.’ The things I have  seen or know, of these I speak. Although he was  a man of such kind-heartedness and of such un-  affected gentleness, so affable to any poor man

20 whom he met and to his own subjects as well as  to others, that he might possibly seem weak-  minded, yet he was the strictest judge, and his  decrees he enforced even though with tears, un-  yielding to the proud and to the mild not  unequal.

There happened, as I have heard from many  great men, a certain event so remarkable that there  is no wonder that it appeared beyond belief.  There was a man on the borders of Gaul, a power-

30 ful marquis, but exceeding cruel, who subjected  both neighbours and strangers to the severest  injuries; he hurried foreigners off to prison and  there put them to the torture until they died, or  else robbed them and sent them forth half-dead.  Although he was not inferior in treacherous wiles  to Catiline or in his wickedness to Nero, he had a  wife superior in birth, beauty, character, to all  living women far and near. Since her evil husband’s  tyranny horrified her, she so set the love of Christ

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 277

over against his dreadful deeds that she did not  fear, whenever opportunity offered, to loose the  bound, to lead forth the prisoners, to send forth all  into freedom, laden with whatever gifts she could  command, nor was she happy unless she sent them  forth happy. In the face of all her husband’s  cruelty she shed tears, and in her grief had, through  Christ’s love, such compassion upon the wretched  that, whatever was given her, no matter how  obtained, whether from the spoils of the tyrant 10  or from the rightful possessions of tenants, she  bestowed all of it upon the despoiled and others  who were in need. Whence it happened that,  whithersoever her husband’s cruelty and ill repute  were directed, thither these were attended by his  wife’s uprightness and good repute, which shone  forth the more brightly, the more her brightness  glowed amid the dark deeds of her husband.  This tyrant, since neither the advice of his good  wife nor the chidings of the most pious Louis 20  availed to repress his evil, was arrested by the  king, and, upon his confession, was judged guilty  and led out to be hanged. And now that good  woman of whom I have spoken, his wife, although  she was with child and her hour near at hand,  disdaining all danger as well to her fertile womb  as to the unborn offspring, cast herself at the feet  of the pious judge; with tearful cries she besought  him, and, by respect for her goodness, she implored  him, and he, a judge whom spears (armed men) 30  moved not nor gold corrupted, was overcome by  her tears of grief. And all the more conspicuous  was this wifely pleader, because, although soon to.  be free, soon to be loosed from her bonds to a bane-  ful tyrant, she was willing, because of her loyalty  to her marriage bed, to be bound again. And:  although she would be made happy by her release  and her seclusion, it was not the loss of her freedom,  not the wearisomeness of her slavery, not the burden

Google

278 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

of her punishment, which weighed upon her mind,  neither did she shrink from the prospect of being

‘ chastised with the former scorpions’ and of fall-  ing again beneath the scourges, but completely did  she embrace the complete hardship of her harassed _  loyalty. Her evil husband was led back, there-  fore, from the scaffold in bonds to the palace,

‘and, in order that his wickedness might not seem

‘entirely without reproof or punishment, the king

; 1¢ordered his right ear to be cut off. In this con-

| nection occurred what seemeth a noteworthy

prodigy : within four days there was born to the  | tyrant from his liberator a son lacking his right

..' ear. Less of a marvel would it be had he been  - conceived after the amputation of his father’s  -ear, but the fact that he was already alive and  completely formed in the womb and afterwards  ‘came into the world thus mutilated is a sign of  ithe highest mercy.

20 This was one of the merciful deeds of Louis;  the second, which I now relate, is as follows.  Galeran was a soldier from Effria, an untutored  man, yet of most pleasing wit, well known to the  king and dearto him. The king had three ministers  who were in charge of all France—Walter, the  Chamberlain, Buchard, the Molossian (dog), called  in French ‘ veautre’ (hound), William de Gurney,  Provost of Paris. Walter garnered nearly all the  incomes of France at will; Buchard, who was

30under him, considerable; William some; Louis,  because of his simple nature, those which they  allowed him. Galeran, seeing this and knowing  the extent of the evil, was indignant that the  treasury, owing to the power of subordinates, was  suffering great losses, and wrote a song in the  French tongue with these words :— :

‘Gauter vendenge et Buchard grape  Et Willelmus de Gurney hape ;  Lowis prent que que lur escape,’

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 279

When this song was made public, the three  realized that their thefts were uncovered, their  collusion bared; they were indignant, therefore,  and armed themselves for revenge; whatever  harmful measures they could command, they em-  ployed against Galeran; they laid plots and re-  ported him as an offender to the king, and, since  they often tried to persuade Louis, they finally  swayed him from his love. At length a certain  lady of high birth and great wealth, but of un- 10  certain reputation, giving free rein to her bitter  rancour and exceeding pride, accused Galeran, as  he stood near the king, of having sung filthy songs  about her and the monarch. The king was offended  by this and said, ‘ Galeran, the insults to me I can  bear patiently, but those to my cousin here it be-  cometh me not to pass over, since she is of my own  blood and a member of my own (family).’ Galeran  replied, ‘ In this member, then, you are diseased,’  or, as the French more wittily hath it, ‘De cest 20  membre es tu magrinez.’ The king, even in the  face of this remark, retained his dignity; the  others burst into laughter, but the lady, indignant  at the jest upon her, replied, ‘ Lord King, leave his  chastisement in my hands in order that I may do  my will upon him. I know what sort of a punish-  ment should be visited upon mimes; I shall seek  out three harlots, by whose lash he shall be chas-  tised after his own fashion.’ At this, Galeran  remarked, ‘ Lady, your trouble will be small, for 30  you need only two more.’ Thereupon with tears  she besought the king to avenge these insults ;  and the three men whom he had offended added  their complaints and succeeded in sending the  poor fellow into exile. Galeran, therefore, took  refuge at the court of our master, the King of  England, I mean, and was kindly received. Walter,  in the meanwhile, cast down his houses, destroyed  his vineyards, uprooted his shrubs, pillaged his

Google

280 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

crops, laid waste to everything. Moreover our  lord (Henry), although he, twice by letters, thrice  by word of mouth, besought lord Louis, was not  successful in his pleas to have him restored.  Galeran, therefore, seeing that restoration could  not be obtained by any intercession, and knowing  that Louis was a most pious man, sought to make  his piety an aid in his behalf. When the two kings  were holding a parley in the middle of a large field  10 surrounded by a great crowd of troops—our king  was privy to the scheme—up came Galeran,  mounted on a small, black horse, thin and ugly;  he was dressed in cheap clothing, with garments in  tatters from long use, unkempt and unwashed, his  spurs hanging loosely from his ankles, his shoes  heavy and full of holes, in all respects like the  meanest sort of a man. Desiring to be seen, he  appeared in the sight of Louis and our king, but  he was driven thence by rods, as was the wont  20 with beggars, and rode off. The two kings stood  alone in the circle, continuing their parley and  discussing the peace of their kingdoms. But Louis,  having marked the appearance of Galeran, was.  fearful that this which was wrought by a clever  ruse was being done without pretence from the  virtue of necessity. He was filled with dismay,  then, that he had gone so far as to fail in his kingly  allegiance to the King of heaven, and he hastened  to be reconciled with heaven, heeding not the  30matter of peace on earth. Our king waited  patiently, knowing what was going on; but Louis  went to his attendants and summoned Walter to  one side, and said: ‘I chose thee from among  the people and made thee leader, hoping that  thou wouldst prove a wise and faithful steward  of the whole kngdom; my ears I always opened  to thee, desiring that thou wouldst instil into  them the honey of thy wisdom for the peace of my  people and for my own safety. But thou hast

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 281

poured poison into them, advising me to sin against  my Lord and against my brother Galeran. He  should have been corrected by a word for his sin  in words, not flogged and banished. Alas, how  merciless I have found myself now, when I see  how miserable I, owing to thee, have made him!  He hath departed by that road; follow him swiftly  and bid him return.’ Walter, full of fear, hurried  into the crowd; he found him, brought him back  and completely restored him, and, lest he make 10  further complaint, he gave to him more than he  had taken away. And, when Galeran was ex-  pressing his thanks for his complete restoration,  the king, with very contrite and humble prayer,  won from him pardon for himself.

It was my good fortune to be spending some time  in Paris with Louis, and he was discussing with me  among other subjects the riches of kings. He said:  * Just as the resources of kings are diverse, so they  differ distinctly in kind. Precious stones, lions, 20  leopards, and elephants constitute the riches of  the King of the Indies; gold and silken garments  do the Emperor at Byzantium and the King of  Sicily boast; but men they have not who know  anything else than talk, for in things pertaining to  war they are fools. The Roman Emperor, who is  called Emperor of the Germans, hath men fit for arms  and war-horses, not gold, not silk, nor any other  luxury; for Charlemagne, when he had conquered  that land from the Saracens, gave all things, except 30  bulwarks and castles, for Christ’s sake to arch-  bishops and bishops, whom he appointed through-  out the destroyed cities. Thy master, however,  the King of England, to whom nothing is lacking,  possesseth men, horses, gold, and silk, gems, fruits,  wild beasts, and all things else. We in France  have nothing except bread and wine and joy.’  This remark I duly noted, because it was wittily  and truthfully spoken.

Google

282 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

About this time when, in obedience to the com-  {mand of the King of England, I was on my way to  ‘attend a council at Rome presided over by the  iPope, Alexander the Third, I was received under  the hospitable roof of the Count of Champagne,  Henry, the son of Theobald, of all men the most  generous, so much so, indeed, that to the eyes of  many he seemed prodigal, for ‘he gave to every  man that asked of him.’ During our conversation

10 he was praising Reginand de Mouzon, his nephew,  in all things except that he was extravagantly  generous. I, knowing that the Count himself was  so generous that he seemed prodigal, smiled, and  asked him whether he himself knew the bounds  of generosity. He answered, ‘ Where one lacketh  that which he can give, there lieth the bound;  for it is not generosity basely to seek, in order to  be able to give something.’ In my judgment  this surely was well said, for if you seek with

2o\difficulty something to give, you are greedy in  order to be generous.

This Louis of whom I have spoken and his father  ‘displayed much wisdom in their deeds, much  simple-mindedness in their words. He had such  reverence for God that, whenever some case arose  which affected his future and that of the Church,  he guided himself, like any one of the canons, by  the decision of the chapter, and appealed from  any injury or loss.

30 It was a custom of his, whenever he felt sleep  stealing upon him, to take his rest on the spot or  near by. As he was sleeping near a grove in the  shade, attended by only two soldiers—the rest  were off hunting—there came upon him Count  Theobald, whose sister he had married. The Count  reproved him for thus sleeping alone, saying that  it did not become a king. He answered, ‘1 sleep  free from danger, although alone, because no one  wisheth me ill.” A simple answer and the remark

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 283

of one of clear conscience. What other king  presumeth this of himself ?

He showed such kindly favour to the clergy that,  from all the ends of Christendom, clerics came  together under him at Paris; and, ‘ beneath the  shadow of his wings,’ they were both cherished  and protected, and have continued in the schools  even up to this day. While I, therefore, along with  the rest, was spending some time in the schools  there, the richest Jew of all in France rushed upor 10  a procession of priests during the Rogations (Gang  days), dragged forth a priest, and cast him into  the bilge of his house, because he had injured his;  son with a stone. When this became known to! ..:  the Christian king, he gave orders that the Jew  should be cast upon the pyre. Of no avail in his.  case were either the prayers of all France or all  the thousands of talents of the Jewish people.  The king replied to their prayers and tears, * I’  wish the Jews to know that dogs must be kept 20  from the processions of the Christians.’

These matters, it may be, are frivolous and un-  suited for a large page, but they are very well  suited for my small scrolls, and in my eyes, at  least, they seem greater than my pen. While I  was in Paris, there arose between clerks and lay-  men in the court of the king a quarrel, which soon  grew into an openfeud. The laymen got the upper  hand, and they handled roughly a great many of!  the clerks with fists and clubs; then, fearful of 30  the king’s justice, they fled to their hiding-places.  The king, nevertheless, ‘heard the cry of the  poor’ and came, and came upon the poorest of!  them, a mere youth, in a black cloak with the blood’  flowing from his broken crown. He asked the  youth who was responsible; the youth pointed out  to him the chief of the chamberlains of the queen  (Louis had recently married the daughter of the  King of Spain). This man, in the pride and

Google

284 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

assumption of special dignity, neither deigned to  flee nor, when called to account, to make denial ;  he merely answered that the youth had insulted  him. He was arrested, therefore, by the king’s  command, bound, and led out to the place of  punishment. This reached the ears of the as-  tounded queen; she hastened and ran to the  king, and, with hair dishevelled, cast herself down  before his feet, the whole multitude of the court  10 with her; and, with loud wailings, they begged  for mercy. She based her plea upon the good  birth of the man, and his wisdom, and she urged,  too, that her father had entrusted him to the  guardianship and protection of the king. It was  not strange that pity moved Louis to tears. None  ‘the less, he was compelled by justice to exact pun-  ishment, and he ordered the man’s right hand to  ‘be cut off, for this had broken the (clerk’s) crown.  ‘ This same king had ordered that Fontainebleau  20(the Fountain of Blaad) be marked as sacred and  be surrounded by walls, for on this very extensive  tract, embracing hills and valleys, springs and groves,  he meant to make a mansion for his own delight.  He had already constructed buildings, made pre-  serves and walls, moats and aqueducts, when a  peasant, who dwelt near, complained that some  part of his farm had been occupied by the walls  and houses. When this had been brought to the  ears of the king, he ordered the houses to be torn  30 down and the walls overthrown, making of such  importance an unimportant complaint that by  the majority he was accused of folly, instead of  ‘receiving the meed of praise due his mercy. Nor  was he satisfied until the peasant sought for a  far better holding and received one more useful  than the one he had sought.  His father, Louis the Fat, when he had conquered  France by his sword and had become master of it  in free and unshaken possession, made his first-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 285

born son, Philip, king. After he had been anointed  and had received the allegiance of all France, he  fell from the high standards of his sire and strayed  from the paths of conduct travelled by his father,  and, by his overweening pride and_ tyrannical  arrogance, made himself a burden to all. It came  about, however, under the direction of God, that  one day the king, attended by many knights, had  guided his horse to that part of Paris known as  Gréve, and, as he was galloping along on the bank 10  of the Seine, a black pig ran out from a dung-heap  and got between the legs of the running horse.  Down fell the horse, owing to this obstacle; his  rider’s neck was broken and he died, but the pig  suddenly disappeared into the Seine, and, as it  was seen by no man before, so henceforth it never  appeared. Thereupon his father, Louis the Fat,  nay, God rather, who snatched France from ‘ the  lion’s jaws,’ appointed the mild and gentle Louis  in his stead, as David followed Saul. 20  This king, Louis the Fat, had been defeated, as  I said above, by King Henry of England, and  had come to Pontoise. Here, not in the way or  with the woe of one conquered but with the exulta-  tion of a conqueror, he appeared at table among  all his guests. When they expressed surprise and  asked him the explanation of his great joy, although  there was such real reason for sorrow, he answered:  ‘I have often, in every part of France, had this  present experience, and, by the frequency of my 30  misfortunes, I am hardened and have little fear.  But this Henry, King of the English, who hath  this day defeated me, who hath enjoyed one success  after another, and who hath never yet suffered  any rebuff, if he had experienced my present  fortune would grieve immoderately and intem-  perately, and, through the excess of his grief,  might be driven to madness or to death, a good  king and indispensable to all Christendom. Hence

Google

286 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

I reckon his victory my success because otherwise  we might have lost him.’ Worthy of imitation  this reply, and without offence.

This same king, while his nobles were still strug-  gling against him, and had been joined by Theobald,  Count of Champagne, first and foremost of his  enemies, overcame Theobald in many engage-  ments, and thus, day by day, incurred more bitter  hatred. Moreover, support was given the count

10 by the Roman Emperor, who encouraged him to  make war and with him the nobles of the kingdom.  When it finally became clear that Louis was  superior in war, the Roman Emperor sent to  him ambassadors who bore this message: ‘ The  Emperor of the Romans ordereth and enjoineth  thee—as thou wishest to take joy in the condition  of thy kingdom and thine own safety—that within  the month thou make peace with Count Theobald,  and enter into a treaty with him in accordance

9 With his wish and dignity. If thou dost not, the  Emperor will, before the month passeth, lay siege  to Paris and to thee within it, if thou with pre-  sumptuous daring await his coming.’ To this the  king replied: ‘ Tpwrut Aleman!’ This reply is  considered by all Germans to be most insulting,  and, because of a taunt of this sort, many quarrels  often arise between them and strangers. Its use  on this occasion seems to me to have been the fruit  of a fearless heart and well-fortified spirit.

30 Again, since between the king and Theobald  there was not only mortal hatred, that is, hatred  to the death, but also immortal, because never  ending, no way to peace was discovered by the  ‘wise. But God, who, whenever and wherever He  -willeth, ‘ scourgeth every son whom he receiveth,’  cleverly put a check upon their madness in this  way. The king had hidden himself before Chartres  in a grove with a large band of armed soldiers,  with the purpose of sending forward skirmishers

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 287

and having the townspeople, who were hostile,  pursue them, and thus fall unexpectedly into his  trap. And now Count Theobald, riding along  heedless of any precaution for safety, was passing  close by the king. He, seeing that the count was’  given into his hands, and deeming of small account  such a success because it had chanced by luck,  and without his forethought and endeavour, made}  no move and, by messengers, admonished the  count that never would he go his way in safety 10  as long as he had personal enemies, and let him  go on unmolested. He who could not be influenced  by a conqueror was conquered by the scruple of  his enemy and was overcome by his kindness.  Again it happened that the king had come to  Blois with a great army. And, when he had  - prepared machines to attack the walls, knights to  assail the defences, and men to fire the villages,  he heard that the count was within the city with  a few men, and that it was the second day of his 20  blood-letting. On all sides was raised the cry to  gird the enemy with a fast siege and cut him off.  The king, however, thought otherwise; he with-  drew his knights, recalled his incendiaries, dis-  mantled his machines, and made ready to depart.  Then especially were those who deem themselves  wise filled with anger; they began to say openly  that, beyond all measure, was he a bringer of ill-  hap to them all, this king who without reason  neglected such an opportunity and refused the 30  proffered good fortune, a heedless avenger of their  wrongs, a lover of enmity and its supporter, and  the heartless rejector of an easy victory. To them  he made this mild reply: ‘If I have made any  mistake, by no means was the mistake due to  any of those reasons. Alas, ye know not that the  wisest of men since Solomon, old Cato, once said,  ‘Even though thou couldst win, yield sometimes  to thy comrade.” Would ye wish me to go

Google

288 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

contrary to his advice? However, there was still  another reason for restraint in this case. I took  care certainly that not through act of mine should  a great man, in the time of his stress, hear any  such unhappy news as could serve him as an excuse  for death.’ This remark brought jests and jeers  from his attendants, although not in his hearing ;  but the Lord, who seeth into the heart and who  bestowed upon him wisdom to act thus, also again  10 bestowed this same wisdom upon him to ‘ turn all  the swords of France into ploughshares,’ and by  His grace brought all into subjection beneath his  ‘sword. For Theobald, hearing of his words of  respect and his act of friendship, admired and  regarded highly his friendly enemy, and dispatched  this letter to him through the agency of loyal  messengers: ‘To His Majesty, Louis, King of the  French and the protector of his safety, Theobald,  Count of Champagne, sendeth, in the name of the  20 Lord, greetings. On the Feast of the Assumption  of the Virgin Mary I will, by God’s grace, be with  \you, ready to obey your command for the future  ‘in all things. I have been the author of enmity  iand I will make recompense to the lover of peace,  and to my conqueror I will surrender myself  ‘conquered, that for ever there may be peace among  us to your great honour and my disgrace. May  a long life be given in God’s name to a king who  iloveth peace!’ Having learned this, Louis gave  30 thanks to the Most High, and, on the appointed  day, Theobald rose from his knees to receive the  kiss; henceforth in true affection he loved the  king and was deeply loved by him to the unending  peace of his generation and his reign. So, accord-  ing to the word of the Lord, * Coals of fire he heaped  upon the head of his enemy, overturning the wicked  and he was not’ any more.  But why should I call Theobald wicked, save  that he had been one to whom God was late in

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 289

giving an unmistakable sign of His pleasure?  Surely (if I may digress) not for boasting but for  the light of good works did the count tell the  following story to Louis, son of the Fat, and until  his last day he demanded the suppression of this  testimony. In aiding the lepers he took more:  joy and care than in aiding the other poor, although’  he was a friend to all. They received kinder.  treatment because they are the more utterly:  despised and the more intolerantly abused, and.10  he hoped, therefore, that he would thus render the  kinder service to God and be the more acceptable’  in His eyes. He washed their feet and dried them,  and, mindful of the great Magdalene, he, in his  great love, performed on the members of the  Lord that which she wrought on His body. But  in her case there were the fragrance of life and a  sweetness which enticed the heart, and flesh free  from every stain; in his there were the stench of  death and a bitterness that brought corruption, and 20  matter filthy from running sores. He had homes  erected for the lepers throughout his own estates,  either together in groups or one apart from the  other, and to them he furnished food and raiment.  One, however, was the especial object of his care,  a man living alone in a hut, who, having, in the  season of his prosperity, measured up to the de-  mands of upright living and of lineage greatly  famed for its purple and fine linen, was, in the  hour of his disease, more worthy of both. For in 30  him was the deportment of high birth, so that  increase of wealth brought increase of humility  and its loss gave strength to his patience. The  count, whenever he passed that way, would always  visit this man, paying careful heed to his useful  wisdom. It chanced one day that, when the count,  following his habit, was visiting him, he found him  near unto death, and he instructed the one who had  charge of the little house how to exercise his care.  T

Google

290 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

After several days he bethought himself of the man  and returned to the hut; he found the door closed  and knocked in vain, but he then made further  delay until he had seen all the lepers who lived  farther away. This done, he dismounted and  again knocked, and called in a low voice: ‘° Thy  friend, Theobald, beggeth thee, if it can be, to  open the door to him.’ The man arose and, with  kind voice and a happy countenance, came out and

10 received him courteously ; and he, who was wont  to be discomforted by the stench of running sores,  was now comforted by the sweetest odour of oint-  ments. The count was surprised but kept his  surprise hidden and asked him whether he had  been well tended. He replied, ‘ Very well,’ and  begged the count earnestly to recompense the  caretaker, because he had shown such devotion  to him. Theobald was very happy and went out  accompanied by the man’s prayerful thanks. Meet-

20ing the caretaker, he commended his tireless care  of the sick man and assured him that it merited  large return. To him the caretaker replied: ‘My  lord, in obedience to your instruction, I was cease-  less in my care of the living, and the dead I buried  as befitted him; if it is your pleasure, let us see  this tomb.’ The count was amazed, and held his  ‘peace concerning what he had seen. After visiting  ‘the tomb, he returned to the hut; there he found  inothing but the empty house, and he was rejoiced

sf that he had seen Christ. This story our king was  ‘told, after the death of Theobald, by King Louis,  the son of Louis the Fat.

On the Death of Wiliam Rufus, King of England,  and the Deeds of Henry II. v1

ILLIAM the Second, King of England, basest  of kings, having driven. Anselm from the  see of Canterbury, was, by God’s just sentence,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 291

struck down by the ‘ flying arrow,’ because he had  surrendered himself to the demon of midday (‘ the  destruction that wasteth at noon-day ’), at whose  bidding he had lived; and by his death he relieved  the world of a sore, sore burden. Moreover, it  should be noted that his end came in the groves of  the New Forest, which he had stolen from God and  man in order to dedicate it to wild beasts and the  sport of dogs, and from which he had uprooted  thirty-six mother churches and had driven out the 10  people of the land. His adviser in this piece of  sinful folly was Walter Tyrel, a soldier from Achéres,  near Pontoise in France, and it was he who, not  of his own will, but acting under the direction of  God, slew him by a wound from an arrow which,  passing through a wild beast, found its mark in a  beast despised by God. In the early morning of  the day on which he was struck by the arrow, the'  king had a dream which he reported as follows to  Gundulph, Bishop of Rochester: ‘ I was in a most 20  beautiful forest, and, after a long chase of wild  beasts, I entered into a magnificent chapel. In  this I saw lying naked above the altar a man  whose countenance and whole body were so in-  viting to the sight that they would suffice for food  and drink for the entire world. The long finger  of his right hand I thereupon ate, an act which he  endured with the utmost patience and a calm  countenance; I returned immediately then to the  hunt, and, on coming back after a time and feeling 30  hungry, I took hold of the hand the finger of which  I had eaten before. But he, glorious above all  the angels in his beauty, withdrew his hand with  sudden violence and looked down upon me in anger ;  the angelic expression of his countenance changed  into one of such intolerable disgust, such inex-  pressible hate, that from the frowning of such a  brow it was possible to presage the fall not of one  man only but of the whole world. He spoke to  me saying, °° Thou shalt not eat of me henceforth,” ’

Google

292 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Thereupon Gundulph in tears replied: ‘ The forest  is the kingdom of England; the wild beasts are  the innocents whom God hath given to thee to  protect. Although thou hast by God been ap-  pointed His minister, that through thee there may  be peace and quiet to His praise and honour, thou,  by evil choice, albeit thou art not their master  but their slave, dost rend their sustenance, as  though apportioned to thee, and dost consume it  1oand waste it utterly. The chapel—what else is  that but the Church, into which thou dost wantonly  burst, dividing its possessions for thy soldiers’  pay certainly, but also for their display ? That  being fair ‘“‘ beyond the children of men is called  the son of the Most Highest,”’ whose finger thou  didst eat when that saintly man, Anselm, an im-  portant member of the body of the Master, thou  didst so devour that no longer is he seen in his  office. That thou didst go forth and return a  20second time hungry signifieth that thou still pro-  posest to rend the Lord in His members even  more. That He withdrew His hand violently from  thee and changed the expression of His countenance  from light to darkness, as it were—the light signi-  fieth that ‘‘ He is good and ready to forgive and  plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon  Him,” but thou hast not called upon Him, nay, as  far as in thee lay, thou hast stifled Him. Moreover,  that about His countenance “‘the golden light became  30 dim,”’ this thou didst deserve; against thee now He  reckoneth it, angry with thee and become terrible,  because thou didst unworthily scorn Him while He  was merciful. That He said, ‘‘ Thou shalt not  ieat’” signifieth that already thou art judged, and  the power of evil-doing is completely removed  from thee. Repent now even though late, because  \death is at thy gates!’ The king believed him  not, and, on that same day, in the forest which  he stole from God, he was killed by the aforesaid

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 293  Walter Tyrel, and by his own men he was stripped  down to the skin. He was then placed upon a  rough and rude cart by one who knew not who he  was, but was moved by pity, a humble peasant,  who decided to carry the corpse to Winchester.  On arriving there and deriving no knowledge con-  cerning his burden, the body, foul with the mud  of the pool in which he had found it as he passed  by, he bore out to burial. On the same day, to  Peter de Melvis, a man from the neighbourhood 10  of Exeter, there came in haste a certain mean and  filthy person carrying a bloodstained weapon, and  he said to him, ‘ This is the weapon which this  day pierced your king’s heart.’

This king laid hands on many possessions of the’  Church, casting out by unfair means the prelates  thereof; and, being one who held fast to his own  and gave freely of another’s, he bestowed them  upon his soldiers. On the day of his death, the  Abbot of Cluny foretold his passing to Anselm, 20  who was living with him in exile.

There was, also, a younger brother of this king  in London, Henry, who was anxiously using every  effort to gain the throne. He had no one of the  bishops to aid him in his attempts, first, because  Robert, his elder brother, was fighting at Jerusalem,  and, secondly, because Anselm was at that time  still in exile, and of him, with good reason, they  were afraid. Gerard of Hereford, however, a sorry  bishop, having made a bargain with him under 30  oath that the king would give the first vacant  archbishopric, crowned him. The people, seeing  this, and knowing that Henry was a righteous  man and active, approved, together with the  nobles who were there at the time, and assented  with acclaim, nor was there any one who dissented.  Then came the death of Ealdred, Archbishop of  York, an illustrious man and a strong opponent  of the aforesaid King William, and almost the

Google

294 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

only one to save his Church from injury and loss  at his hands, although others were ruined by him.  Thereupon Gerard came to King Henry and de-  manded the fulfilment of his bargain. The king,  however, repenting of this entrance of the practice  of simony, offered so to increase for him the in-  comes of the see of Hereford as to equal those of  the aforesaid archbishopric, and to bestow upon  it perpetual freedom such as the see of Durham  loenjoyeth, in which no minister of the king can  have any jurisdiction; in the bishop’s hands are  all functions and prerogatives. Gerard, however,  inspired by the devil, refused this with disdain  and was made archbishop, in which office he acted  often without mercy and pity. One day at South-  well, after his dinner, as he was reclining on a  purple pillow upon a magnificent couch among his  clerics, he fell asleep and breathed his last.  \ King Henry was successful as a ruler, and,  20 although he had made a bad beginning, he sur-  assed all his predecessors in the tranquillity of his  ee and in his wealth and largess throughout all  Christendom. Thrice in a year he invested with  robes Louis, King of France, and the majority of  hrs own nobles. He had a census taken of all  earls and barons of his land, and he allotted to  them, upon their arrival at court or during their  residence there, certain (definite) gifts with which  he honoured them, such as candles, bread, and  30 wine. Whenever he heard of any youth this side  of the Alps who was eager for the fame of good  leadership, he enrolled him in his household, and  to him who had too little income yearly, he allowed,  through his agent, a hundred shillings. And when-  ever it happened that he demanded service of any  one, he allotted to him for each day’s absence from  home a shilling a day.  The following was his method of procedure in  his rule. He planned most carefully beforehand,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 295

and made previous announcement of his journey-  ings and stopping-places, the number of days and  the names of the towns, so that any one whosoever  would be. able to know, without possibility of  mistake, the manner of his life month by month.  He took no action without forethought and always  carried it out with careful thought and never'  carelessly. He managed all things in a manner  befitting a king and with becoming restraint.  Whence it resulted that, from lands across the sea, 10  merchants with their wares and luxuries for sale  flocked to his court, and likewise from every part  of England, so that never elsewhere were there  such rich markets as around him, wheresoever he  sojourned. His greatest fame, however, lay in  the maintenance of peace and in the multitude of  those subject to him. There was no one whom he  desired to lack the blessings of justice or of peace.  Moreover, in order to assure the peace of all, he}  had made it a rule that on the days of his leisure, 20  whether in some large palace or under the open  sky, there should be until the sixth hour free}  access to him, attended by his counts, barons,;  and important vassals. The young men of his  household did not come into his presence before  lunch, nor did the old men after it, unless some,  of their own desire, joined him in order to receive  instruction or to give it. This sort of wise restraint}  became known throughout the world, and, in like  measure as other courts are avoided, this one was 30  eagerly sought, was famous, and visited by crowds.  Checks were put upon tyrants, whether master  or man. Fast bound was the hand of greed,  which even at that time was the fault of the  White Monks (Cistercians) and now is their rule.  No one was poor in those days, unless he was a!  fool. Food and drink were offered more freely.  than they were accepted. Whosoever made it his  purpose to live on another was everywhere received

Google

296 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

with such pleasure that he never felt ashamed of  his sorry life. Whenever any earl or one of the  great nobles was * sentenced to receive the king’s  mercy, so the saying went, he would often receive  a hundred shillings, which, however, he was to  repay within three years; and, instead of the  complaints which formerly arose in connection  with the king’s court, there was peace to whom-  soever came under the guardianship of his mercy.

10 For this reason many committed offences that  they might be subject to it and were glad to be  detained therein.

King Henry was, moreover, King of England,  Duke of Normandy, Count of Brittany, ruler of  Le Mans, of Scotland, of Galway, and lord of the  whole island of Britain. All these possessions he  ruled with authority and at the same time care-  fully, like as a good father ruleth his own house.  From the nunnery at Winchester he received to

20 his bed as his wife a consecrated and a sacred nun,  the sister of King David of Scotland, Rome neither  complying nor denying but passively permitting  the marriage. She bore him a son who, after  reaching manhood, was drowned in the waves of  Barfleur Bay, and a daughter Matilda, who married  Henry, Emperor of the Romans, who died without  issue. She was then given by her father to Geoffrey,  Count of Anjou, to whom she bore three sons,  Henry, Geoffrey, and William, all valiant men.

30 The two younger, however, were soon removed  from the scene.

Henry, the first-born of Geoffrey, was two years  old when his grandfather, King Henry, died. The  king was succeeded on the throne by Stephen, his  nephew, the son of his sister and Stephen, Count  of Blois. He was a man of great renown in the  practice of arms, but for the rest almost an in-  competent, except that he was rather inclined to  evil. Under him, for almost two years, the king-

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 297

dom was in peace, but, in the third year, Robert,  the son of King Henry, the Earl of Gloucester,  beholding the folly of the king and influenced  by the advice and wisdom of Miles, afterward  Earl of Hereford, summoned Matilda and her son  Henry from Anjou to the throne. They, by the  wise policy and activity of Miles, forced King  Stephen to make an agreement whereby, having  promised the throne to Henry, he was to hold it  until his death. Within the third year he died, 10  and, in the Abbey of Faversham, belonging to the  Black Monks, which he himself had built, he was  buried. He was succeeded by Henry, the son of  Matilda, and on him Eleanor, the Queen of France,  cast glances of unholy love. She was the wife of  that most pious King Louis, but she managed to  secure an unlawful divorce and married Henry,  and this in spite of the charge secretly made  against her that she had shared Louis’s bed with  Henry’s father, Geoffrey. Support for this charge 20  is found in the circumstance that their offspring  was cut off ‘on the steps of the throne’ and came  to nothing.

Henry, at the beginning of his reign, was about  twenty years old, and for thirty-six years he reigned  without defeat ‘and without embarrassment, ex-  cept for the sorrows which his sons caused him.  These, it is said, he did not bear patiently, and  he died because of their bitterness. Likewise, he  had aroused in most pious Louis strong distrust 30  on account of the aforesaid wrong, and the Lord  remembered this and exacted stern requital both  from him and his sons, so it is believed.

I witnessed the beginnings of Henry’s reign and  the years following, in which his life was in many  respects worthy of praise. He was somewhat  taller than the tallest of moderate height, a man  blest with soundness of body and charm of coun-  tenance, and one whom people, having looked at

Google

298 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

carefully a thousand times, would yet run to look  upon. He was a man inferior to none in bodily  activity, lacking in no endeavour which another  could perform, ignorant of nothing which befitteth  a gentleman, well-learned for all the demands of  social intercourse and practical affairs, having a  knowledge of all the languages which are spoken  from the Bay of Biscay to the Jordan, but making  use only of Latin and French. Im the establish-  10 ment of laws and in all reforms of government he  showed keen discernment and was skilful to dis-  cover unusual and secret ways of judgment; he was  affable, respectful, and humble; the inconvenience  of dust and mud he readily endured ; he was har-  assed by unseasonable complaints and sorely tried  by wrongs, yet he bore them in silence. He  travelled incessantly and in stages intolerable, like  a public carrier, and, in this matter, he showed  scant consideration for his retinue. In dogs and  20 birds he was most expert, and exceeding fond of  hunting. He passed nights without sleep and was  untiring in his activities. Whenever in his dreams  passion mocked him with vain shapes, he used  to curse his body, because neither toil nor fasting  was able to break or weaken it. I, however,  ascribe his activities not to his incontinence but  to his fear of becoming too fat.  His mother taught him, I have heard, to prolong  every case of every man, to hold fast for a long  30 tume whatever fell into his hand and thus to reap  its advantages, and to keep in suspense those  women who were high in hope, confirming this  opinion by the following heartless parable, to wit:  ‘An untamed hawk, when raw flesh is often offered  to it, and then withdrawn or hidden from it,  becometh more greedy, and is more ready to obey  and to remain.’ She used to tell him also to be  ‘free in bed, infrequent in business’; to see that  no one’s bequest, except of what he had seen or

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 299

known, should have validity, and other evil advice  of this sort. To her teaching, moreover, we may  confidently impute all those traits which rendered  him unpleasant.

At the outset of his reign there was put off upon  him by a common harlot, who stooped to all un-  cleanness, a boy whom she had borne to some  man of the people. Geoffrey the boy was named,  and the king, without reason and with too little  discernment, received him as his own and advanced}10  him to such a degree that he is to-day Archbishop  of York. His mother’s name was Ykenai. He’  made his the unpleasant habits of his supposed:  father, to which I have referred, but of the good  traits so few that unceasing hath been the un-  friendly attitude of his canons toward him and his  toward them, because he is full of faults and  lacking in character.

Let it be our pleasure now to hear about the  mother of our king aforesaid, because she was the 20  daughter of the best of princes and of the blessed  Queen Matilda, and the mother of a good king,  herself an evil, evil woman in the midst of the  good. Her father, Henry, gave her to be the wife  of the Emperor of the Romans, who had captured  his younger brother, the King of Italy, in battle  and had beheaded him with his own hand and,  in his greed for the crown, had driven his father  from the imperial throne, so that he afterwards  lived in poverty and was supported by a com- 30  munity of secular canons of the Empire. To  these sins of her aforesaid husband, Matilda added  this by her counsels that from all the leaders and  . nobles of the empire and from bishops and arch-  bishops he required cities and castles, to be held  by his own hand, and, whomever he could not  win over by reason, he endeavoured to crush by  war. There stood out against him only the Duke  of Bavaria and Saxony, who led out his lines

Google

300 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

against the forces of them all. In the battle  which ensued no quarter was given or asked, the  carnage continued from early morning on the  longest day of the year, about the end of June,  to midnight. Many thousands were completely  destroyed, and there survived on either side only  a few of the cowards and the base. Since, there-  fore, the few survivors despaired of burying the  dead bodies, they were left as food for wolves and

10 dogs and birds, and as decaying carrion, and the  stench arising from them made the surrounding  country an uninhabited waste.

The Lord, however, touched the heart of this  emperor on that day, and by His grace He brought  clearly before his eyes the knowledge that it was  greed which had driven him to the murder of his  brother and to the exile of his father and to the  present carnage which was beyond reckoning and  would be wept by the whole world. He deeply

20repented of his misdeeds and ‘ went forth and  wept bitterly.” With the aid of his chamberlain,  who was not incautious but wise and faithful, he  first feigned sickness and locked his doors; finally  his death was announced, and he then in his re-  pentance proscribed himself and went forth to  voluntary exile. Moreover, his chamberlain had  procured a dead body to take his place and had  embalmed it with sweet perfumes, arrayed it in  magnificent attire, and had it buried with royal  30pomp. The emperor, however, went on his way,  restless in body, in purpose firmly fixed; but it  was impossible to keep secret the benefit (goodness)  of such a trick, for it had been good (in intent)  and on the face of it the deception was due to  righteous motives. In many places there appeared  many a one who said that he was the emperor,  and maintained that his death had been counter-  feited, so that, after the emperor’s decease, or  rather his decession, this or that pretender was

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 301

held in honour; and many were proved to be  frauds. However, at Cluny, one was received who  was very like the emperor, so it was said, poor in  dress, very dark in his speech, so that, as far as  the man’s person was concerned, neither afforded  a possible clue. Moreover the abbot, as is the  custom at Cluny, received him honourably. It  chanced, however, that the lord prior of Cluny,  a German, came there, and him the lord abbot  sent to the supposed emperor to see him and to10  declare if he had ever seen him before. The  prior took with him his nephew who had been  with the emperor a long time, and, as soon as he  saw the man, he said that he was a pretender and  a fraud. But the man, quick and ready and  assured, gave him a resounding slap and said,  ‘Aye, thou hast been with me, but thou wert  always a traitor, thou wert caught in one of thy  traitorous attempts, but thou didst escape, al-  though one of my attendants shot at thee with 20  an arrow which passed through thy right foot,  where either the wound or the scar may still be  seen. Seize the trickster, men, and ye will see.’  Sure enough the scar was there, but the youth  replied: ‘My master, whom thou dost pretend  to be, had a right arm of such remarkable length  that, when standing to his full height, he could  cover his right knee with his hand.’ This the  man, arising at once to his feet, did. And, at the  sight, he was treated with greater respect for some 30  time, although he was finally found to be a fraud.  But to return to the matter from which I have  digressed, namely, to King Henry the Second.  The same King Henry was a giver of large and  goodly alms, but he gave secretly, lest his left  hand might know what his right gave. There was  sent to him from Jerusalem the Bishop of Acre to  seek his aid against Saladin. When the Kings of  the French and the English had met, together

Google

302 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

with their nobles, the bishop set forth the object  of his mission, asking for a tax in behalf of the land  referred to. The King of the French, since he  was a mere lad, in friendly fashion urged the King  of the English to speak first. He replied, ‘I have  determined, whenever I shall have the opportunity,  to visit the Holy Land and Christ’s sepulchre, but  until this can be done I shall aid Him to the best  of my ability; for it is clear that only a pressing  109and anxious need hath sent us this important  messenger. Sixty thousand marks for myself and  my subjects I shall send thither by his hand.’  This amount he provided within a month, neither  at that time nor afterward harassing any one by  taxation or vexation, as many are wont to do who |  rob from the lowly that which they give to their  prelates. The King of France, as if suddenly  smitten by an arrow, and all his nobles were struck  dumb, nor did the king himself or any other, after  20 the utterance of this climax, dare to make any  promise. These things took place at Senlis. The  sixty thousand marks the Bishop of Acre, which  was formerly called Acharon, bore to Sur (Tyre),  which had formerly been known as Syria; for  before his coming Jerusalem had been captured  and Acre also, and with this money Sur (Tyre) was  defended and the rest of the territory about Jeru-  salem, under the leadership of Boniface, Marquis  of Montferrat. This Boniface was afterwards slain,  30in the presence of Philip, King of the French,  and Richard, King of the English, in the assembly  of their armies, by two ‘ assassins’ who, by order  of King Richard, were themselves immediately  cut into pieces. The French say that Richard  had this done because of his jealousy of Boniface,

. and that he brought about his death.  King Henry 1., to resume, was famous. for many  ‘good qualities and infamous for some vices. The  lvicious was that which, as I have said, he drew

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 303

from the teaching of his mother. He was slow!  in settling the business of subjects, whence it  happened that many, before their affairs were  settled, died or departed from him dejected and  empty-handed under the compulsion of want. It  was another of his faults that, whenever he was  lounging, which happened rarely, he never allowed  approach to him, in answer to the prayers of the  good, but, remaining in inner chambers tightly  closed, he was accessible to those only who seemed 10  unworthy of such access. His third fault was that  he was impatient of peace, and felt no qualm in  harassing almost the half of Christendom. In  these three was his sin; in regard to the rest he  was strikingly good, and in all respects lovable,  for no one ever surpassed him in gentleness and  affability. Whenever he went forth, he was caught °  up by the crowd, carried from place to place and  forced to go ‘ whither he desired not’; and, what  is remarkable, he gave ear patiently to individuals, 20  and even when assaulted, now by general cries,  now by violent hauls and pushes, to none on this  account did he bring disgrace or make it serve as  a pretext for his anger. And when he was too,  sorely tried he held his peace and fled to spots of  peace. He was never haughty or puffed up; he  was sober and restrained and pious, loyal and '  far-seeing, generous and often victorious, and a  doer of honour to the good.

I once crossed the Channel with him with twenty- 30  five ships which were placed at his service for the  crossing without charge. <A storm, however, scat-  tered the ships and drove them all upon the rocks  and shores ill-suited for ships, except his alone,  which, by God’s grace, was brought safely to port.  He sent out in the morning, therefore, and, learning  from each sailor the estimated amount of his loss,  he reimbursed him, although he was not bound to  do this, and the entire sum amounted to a good

Google

304 DE NUGIS CURIALIUOM

deal. Perchance there are some kings who do

. not pay their just debts.

' It was a custom of our court that no charge  should be made for the drawing and return of  bills sealed for the officers of the court, if these  contained their names or their business. The  king’s steward, or ‘despencer,’ on one occasion  laid complaint against the keeper of the seal, that  he had refused to return to him without fee a brief

10 which contained his name and business. Thurstan  Fitz-Simon was the ‘ despencer,’ Adam of Yarmouth,  keeper of the seal. The charges were therefore  heard, and, since the court was in doubt, the king  was summoned. After he had listened to Thurstan,  he listened to the speech of Adam : ‘ I had received  guests and sent a messenger to Lord Thurstan to  ask him to give me two cakes from your royal  stores. He answered ‘“‘No.’? When, however, he  afterwards wanted his bill, I, remembering his

20 “‘ No,” likewise said ‘‘ No.”’ The king thereupon  judged him guilty who had first said ‘No’; then  he made Adam sit down upon a stool with the  seal and Thurstan’s bill before him; then he  compelled Thurstan to cast off his cloak and with  low courtesy to offer Adam two spice cakes from  the king’s own stores wrapped in a fair white  napkin; he bade Adam, having taken the gift,  to seal and deliver him his bill, and he thus made  them forget their quarrel. He added that not

30 only did his officers owe it to him to come to each  other’s aid from his own purse or from the treasury,  but also to come to the aid of individuals of the

_household, and of strangers who were suffering  from need. This I thought was the act of a  gentleman.

But nowadays these things are done in wittier  fashion, as they think whose province it is to do  them. William of Tankarville, Hereditary High  Chamberlain of Normandy, a man of noble birth,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 805

renowned in arms, splendid in his strength, and  fatal to evil characters, was accused by many to’  our king and thus fell under his suspicion. Yet he  was often described to the king as a victor in many  encounters, as one who was the very father of  knights and the bread of the hungry, and one who  could at his nod change the hearts of all excepting  only the hearts of the envious; as one who was  well received by the king of the French and dear  to him and to others of whom the king himself 10  stood in awe. Henry persecuted this good man  in many ways, destroyed all his townships as if  he were by this means dulling his horns, refused  him the just protection of the laws and freedom  of action, and to those who were exceeding envious  of William’s possessions he gave power over them.  William, indeed, gave no sign, fittingly submit-  ting to the inevitable. It chanced, however, that  wide announcement had been made concerning  the celebration of Christmas Day at Caen by the 20  lord king. There gathered, therefore, a large  number of people, both from abroad and from  home, of whom the chief personages were the  king and his admirable son, the famous King  Henry, and a third Henry, Duke of Saxony and  Bavaria, at this time living in exile, the son-in-  law of our king; Richard, Count of Poitou who is  now king; his brother Geoffrey, Duke of Brittany ;  and many bishops, with a full assembly of earls and  barons. When, therefore, on Christmas Day there 30  drew near to our king he who was to pour water  on his hands, behold, making his way through the  midst of the crowd, the aforesaid William, because  he was high chamberlain, attended, as was his  wont, by many knights; he threw his cloak upon  the ground, as is the custom of those serving,  seized the silver basins, and drew them forcibly  to himself. The bearer retained hold of them  with difficulty and looked up to the king, who  U

Google

306 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM  bade him let go of them, and patiently submitted  to the water after this violence. William, more-  over, after he had given the water to the king and  to his sons and to the Duke of Bavaria, handed it  to his own attendant and went to his seat. This  thing seemed strange to many, and, when the king’s  chamberlain urgently demanded the basins, the  king waved him aside, and bore the matter as if  no fault had been committed. There were present  100n the following night, especially about the king,  very many of William’s rivals, who said that his  outrage to that well-known day and to the king’s  table outdid all excesses, that the king was too  much a lover of peace and not an avenger of wrongs,  and whatever else might stir his wrath. Then they  went round among the lodgings of the nobles,  acting as they had acted before the king, nor had  they any wish to cease, nor the power, since envy  doth not rest and Judas doth not sleep. On the  20 following day, the nobles took their seats and the  seneschal of Normandy set forth to all the king’s  complaint against William, magnifying and ex-  aggerating it to the best of his ability. Then up  rose William, who, after denying the charge of  violence, continued: ‘ All of us know and no one  doubteth that our master and the court here  present take delight in justice and dislike all tur-  bulence; for, as avengers of crime and violence,  they hate that which they attack. Force, indeed,  30 I did employ, not violence. For what can be done  without force? And my force was just and I was  within my rights in taking the basins—I, the high  chamberlain of our lord the king—which that  proxy of mine endeavoured with violence, which  was unjust, to wrest from me. Moreover, that for  this reason I am a robber, as the seneschal of my  lord the king claimeth, this I deny, because what  the law giveth me I was within the law in bearing  off. When my father had erected in Tankarville

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 307

an abbey to Saint George, he placed in it basins  which he, by right and without litigation, received  from the hands of King Henry 1., a fact to which  they still bear witness, and to the same fact like-  wise other basins bear witness now in the monastery  of Saint Barbara. If, however, no credence is  placed in such implements, if any one will dare to  pose as the adversary of my right, I am ready to  vindicate this right by whatever act of might or  of prowess this court shall decide; I shall name 10  no one to act in my behalf, and I shall act in  my own person. That there are many who have  accused me wrongfully to my lord and have greatly -  ageravated his anger against me, maketh me not  afraid. I am sure that no passion can influence‘  his judgment of me. Perchance there are many  here who are secretly hatching plots against me.  Would that they would try openly, by a lawful  trial, to bring before this very estimable and select  court the charges which they now whisper in secret ! 20  Our lord the king knoweth full well, and his sub-  jects know, in what way, after he had brought  peace to Poitou after the death of that well-  known Patrick (Earl of Salisbury), I held that  province and shaped it according to his commands,  since he is wont to say ‘“‘ Not less courage than in  the seeking is in the protecting of what we have  won.” Moreover, always have I and mine served  in the army of our master at our own expense, and  all that he hath kindly offered us we have declined, 30  and, wherever necessity hath called us to attack  or to protect, there have we been in every clash  in the van of the leaders or at least in their line.  Let not this knightly company here, which hath  been put to many and great tests, believe that I  have raised my voice in arrogance or in pride.  But ye hear a man accused and, in the presence of  his rivals and detractors, speaking in anger, lauding  his own deserts, but not in arrogance, not for his

Google

308 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

own fame, not in boastfulness, but to challenge  to their very faces these caitiffs who sit here and  hear my words: if they have just deserts or real  cause for boasting let them speak out, and lay  claim, in their own behalf, to the good which  cannot be gainsaid; or, at least, let them cease  to attack in secret those whom in the open they  are afraid to follow or to hear.’ This speech was  received with loud murmurings, and all present  10 turned their gaze upon him. The king thereupon  spoke: ‘I desire this case to be decided justly in  accordance with the evidence we have just heard,  so that our decision may not be influenced either  by our love or our hate. Bear in mind, in this  instance, I beg you, that when in Paris, in my  hostelry, my lord King Louis and I had taken our  seats, with our cup-bearer standing in front of us,  suddenly into the house strode William, Earl of  Arundel, fresh from his return from Jerusalem,  20 whom no one of us had seen for three years past ;  with a brief greeting, he quickly threw from him  his rough coat which they call a slavin, laid firm  hold upon the wine-cup, and, when the cup-bearer  resisted, he, with a shove, for he was large and  strong, cast him aside, and on bended knees before  his lord, Louis, King of the French, he thus spoke:  ‘“* My lord king, this act of mine is not presumption  nor contempt of your majesty. My lord knoweth  well that, in accordance with the right of my  30 forefathers, I am the first and foremost of thy  cup-bearers; this man, however, whom I have  cast aside, layeth arrogant claim to my right in  withholding what he should have offered without  request from me.”’ Thus did and said that William,  and the whole court gave to his act the name of  wit, not arrogance. This I call to your minds  that, from the acts of others, you may learn that,  not from any one’s love, is the sentence of our court  in the case of this William to be more loose, nor,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 309

from any one’s hate, to be more strict ; in an equal  balance weigh what ye have heard that, although  this court may seem to be inferior to that, it may  not be judged more unjust.’ Since, therefore, no  one opposed his just right, William by unanimous  decision recovered it. This courteous act of our  king I have told in addition to the others, in order  that it may be clear to all that, even in the case of.  those whom he disliked, he held fast to mercy in.  the midst of anger. 10  A clever artisan had taken the shape of the royal

geal in bitumen, and had made one of copper so

exactly like the real seal that no one could dis-  tinguish between them. When the king was in-  formed of this, he ordered the fellow to be hanged,  and then, seeing an old man, one just and upright,  the brother of the guilty man, standing weeping  with covered head, he was immediately overcome  with pity, and allowed the goodness of the upright  to outweigh the badness of the accused, and, weep- 20  ing himself, he restored joy to the weeping brother.  However, when the thief had been released, lest  his tenderness of heart might seem to be too lax,  he ordered him to be sent into a monastery.

There was in service upon the aforesaid king  a clerk who hath written these things down for  us, whose name is Map. He was dear to the kin  and found favour in his eyes, not through any meri  of his own, but through that of his parents, who  had been the king’s loyal supporters both before|so  he had become king and after. The king had also’  a son, Geoffrey by name, born, if I may say so,  from a bawd whose name was Hikenai, as I have  remarked above in passing, and this Geoffrey the  king, contrary to the belief and the will of all, |  adopted as his own. Between him and Map there -  sometimes arose ready quarrels in the presence ,  of the king himself and also elsewhere. Through  the king Geoffrey was elected to the see of Lincoln,

Google

310 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and held that bishopric longer than was lawful,  although the Pope often urged that he give it up  " or be ordained a bishop; he hesitated a long time,  saying yea and saying nay to neither and to both.  The king, therefore, who noted with some worry  that much land was covered by such a fig tree,  forced him to do one thing or the other; he chose  to resign. He resigned at Marlborough, where is  'a@ spring of which, if one tasteth, they say, he  10 talketh barbarous French; hence, if one is faulty  in his use of this tongue, we say that he speaketh  French of Marlborough. Therefore, during his  speech of resignation, which Map heard him make  before the lord Richard of Canterbury, when the  Archbishop had asked him, ‘ What sayest thou ?’  wishing him to repeat his words for all to hear,  and when, since Geoffrey made no reply, the Arch-  bishop had asked him a second time, * What sayest  thou ?’ Map answered in his stead, ‘ French of Mar!-  20 borough.’ The others laughed at this, Geoffrey,  withdrew in anger.

In the year preceding his resignation, by a strict  regulation which was dictated not by a shepherd’s  love but by force, Geoffrey had exacted from all the  churches of his parish tithes of all their incomes,  and had taxed them individually, and, in accord-  ance with his own valuation, had forced them to  pay the tithes. Four marks was the sum which  Map’s church, called Ashwell, was ordered, in

30 peremptory and haughty manner, to pay to him,  by the same method by which he was robbing the  others. Map refused, but made complaint to the  king, who took his appointee into an inner chamber  and admonished him with suitable words and the  royal staff that for the future he was not to show  himself a nuisance to the clergy in any way. After  his sound chastisement, he returned and cast  threatening glances upon all the members of the  court, upon his accuser above all others, When

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 311

Map chanced to meet him, Geoffrey swore by the  loyalty which he owed to his father the king  that he would make him suffer. Map, however, '  knowing that, in his oaths, he swore by his real '  father but, out of his boasting, swore also by the }  king, remarked, ‘ My lord, the apostle Paul saith, '  ““Be ye imitators of God, as dear children”’:  however, the son of God, our Lord, respecting His!  more lowly side, often spoke of Himself as the. |  son of man, saying nothing about His divine Father. :10  Would that thou, with like humility, wouldst  sometimes swear with respect to your mother’s  position, and keep hidden the royalty of your  father! Thus it is fitting to imitate God, who|  was free from all arrogance.’ Then he, shaking’  his head in a kingly fashion, as was his wont,  thundered forth threats. Thereupon Map added,  ‘I conclude that I have corrected thee as an  archbishop did his wife.’ One of the bystanders  asked, *‘ How was that?’ And Map whispered in 20  his ear that the archbishop’s wife, while sleeping  by him, passed wind, and when the archbishop  shook her, she passed wind again in answer. When  the bishop-elect heard this from Map’s confidant,  as if he had received some sort of an insult, he  bellowed out curses upon Map.

On the day of the withdrawal of the aforesaid  Geoffrey, our lord the king gave him his blessing  in his chapel, and hung his seal about his neck,  much to his delight. This seal Geoffrey showed 30  to the aforesaid Map with the remark, ‘ Every  concession hath been made to thee without price  owing to the power of this seal, but henceforth  thou wilt not wrest even a tiny brief without  paying fourpence.’ Map replied, ‘ Thanks be to  God! to my good fortune hast thou reached this  pinnacle; the bad luck of some is the success  _of others; last year thou exacted four marks,  now fourpence.’

Google

312 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

| After this, again, when we were in Anjou and  ~ that favourite of kings had learned that Walter  of Coutances had been summoned before Richard,  Archbishop of Canterbury, to be consecrated in  the office of bishop from which he had resigned,  envy opened his eyes; he was dazed, and then,  collecting his wits, he appealed. The king mollified  him and promised him the income of the office  ‘which he had lost. Geoffrey, however, who then  10 for the first time realized that, with his bishopric,  ‘he had at the same time lost everything else and  was without hope, was eager to have it restored  to him. Then seeing Map, who was canon of the  prebend in London once held by him, he grumbled,  * Thou wilt give me back my prebend even against  thy will.’ Said Map, ‘ Aye, with my very good  twill, if all that thou hast lost for nothing thou  18 canst recover through some show of sense.’

A Recapitulation of the Beginning of this Book, with  some difference of word but none of meaning.

‘"— AM in time, and I speak of time,’ said Augus-  tine, ‘ and I know not what time is.’ With like  wonderment can I say that I am in the court, and  speak of the court, and yet I comprehend not what  it is. This I know withal that it is not time.  It partaketh, indeed, of time’s temper, a thing of  flux and change, of a place and yet of subtle shifts,  land a state of being that in its infinite variety is  joften unlike itself. Again and again we leave it, ever  30 to return as the needs of each case demand. At  our withdrawal we know it through and through ;  but after more than a year’s absence, we meet an  utterly new scene—and we, too, are new. We  find the folk of the home supplanted by strangers,  and masters by menials. Verily, the court is the  same but the members are changed,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 313

Porphyrius defineth * genus ’ as a multitude which  standeth in some relation or other to one chief  principle. The court surely is not a ° genus,’ yet  it is of like nature; for we are a multitude standing  in some relation to our lord the king, since we  strive to please only him.

Of fortune it is written that she alone is constant  in her change. The court is not fortune; yet it.  is invariably in variation.

Hell, they say, is a place of punishment; what- 10

ever containeth something in itself is a_place,

so the court also is a place; is it also a place of  punishment ? Surely a place of punishment and!  gentler than hell only in this, that those whom it:

tortureth can find death. Macrobius setteth down:  as the opinion of men of the oldest time that hell’

is naught else than the body of man into which  the soul hath been cast, to suffer the foulness of  darkness, the horror of filth; and whatsoever pun/

ishments old wives’ tales assign to hell, these,.20

each and all, wise men of old have endeavoured to  ascribe to the charnel-house of man’s body. We  pass this by, because it demandeth long discussion  and easily admitteth another opinion. But if the  body of man can, with some show of likeness, be  called the darksome prison-house of the soul, why’  cannot the court be called the same both of body  and soul? ‘The Styx which is hatred, Phlegethon  passion and Lethe forgetfulness, Cocytus sorrow

and Acheron lamentation ’—these are in our court. 30

In them are commingled all varieties of pains,  in them are punished all manners of crimes. There  is no sin for which, in them and their waves, a  fit recompense is not made ready. Here, too, all  evil findeth a like hammer, that ‘Thy wrath, God,  may be seen in these waves, and Thy anger in this  sea.’ The Styx of the court is the hatred which  is born in us through our own or another’s fault ;

Phlegethon is the passion of greed and wrath ; |

Google

‘

*

7 >  t .

314 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

(Lethe, the forgetfulness of our Maker’s kindness  and of the promise made at our baptism; Cocytus,  ithe sorrow visited upon us out of our excesses—  which by divers ways cometh to us, along with  that vile one whom they summon, as it seemeth,  and who is prompter of wiles and the maker of  idols among his own; Acheron, woe, that is,  repentance either of our words or deeds, or of  desires or of aims unattained.

10 Moreover, the scourges for scandalous acts and  the pangs for penalties we can place here, if  permitted. Charon, the ferryman of hell, who  transported no one on his skiff without a stipend  from the person’s mouth—from the mouth, it is  said, not from the hand, because our ferryman is  obsequious in view of a promised bribe, but the  bribe once given winneth for one no _ further  recognition. So, often and among others; in  the court the shadow is judged higher than the

20 body, hesitation than certainty, promise than  giving.

Tantalus is there, mocked by the withdrawal  of the stream; we here are tricked by the fleeting  goods which we touch with our finger-tips, and,  even if we now grasp them, their usefulness is  sped.

Sisyphus there rolleth a rock from the bottom of  a valley to the top of a mountain; whence he  followeth it down to carry it up again, though it

30 yet again will fall. There are many here who,  having gained the height of riches, think that naught  hath been accomplished; they follow their heart  that hath slipped back into the valley of avarice,  that they may recall it to a still higher mountain,  where, indeed, it is not granted them to rest,  because, in the hope of things desired, things  attained are ever cheap. But that heart is com-  pared to the rock, since the Lord saith: ‘I shall  pluck out their heart of stone, and shall give them

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 315

one of flesh.’ May God give it, ‘and so do with  our courtiers that, on some part of the mountains,  they may find a moment’s pause.

Ixion is there, turning on his wheel, seldom  similar to self, now on the top, now on the bottom,  hither and yon. We also have Ixions, whom  Fortune, after her fashion, turneth on her wheel.  They rise to glory, they rush down to gloom,  and, although cast down, they still hope: when  on high they rejoice, when below, they mourn; 10  and although, on this wheel, fear must assail them  on all sides, in no part of it is there a place without  hope; and although hope, fear, joy, and grief  share that wheel, hope alone maketh it her familiar  and holdeth it fast. Totally terrifying in its dread,  it conquereth utterly all qualms of conscience,  nor is it on this account less sought.

Tityus desired Juno at first sight, and more-  over sought to satisfy the longing of his foolish  heart, nor did he bridle his passion; wherefore 20  deservedly was he punished in that same heart  which was reborn for its own destruction. It  supported the greed of vultures, and, although  it did not give out, it was so tortured that it did  not hold out. Am I not a Tityus in the court,'  I and perchance some other, at whose greedy  heart vultures, that is, black desires, sit, plucking:  it to pieces because it doth not struggle, doth not:  resist evil appetite? But not the Tityus who did:  not hide from Juno the straits of his licentious’30  mind. He thought, spoke, acted against that good!  being, who hath ‘ neither walked nor stood nor’  sat.’

The daughters of Belus there strive with sieves  to fill leaky, indeed bottomless vessels, which  allow the water to run off and which thus waste  the endless draughts of Lethe’s stream. Belus  is interpreted as virile or virtuous; he is God our  Father. We are not his sons, because we are

Google

316 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

'not virtuous, not strong, but daughters; for we  have been made effeminate to the loss of our  restraint, and with the sieve which parteth the  grain from the chaff—that is, discrimination—we  toil to fill our leaky vessels, our insatiable desires.  Their bottom hath been defiled by ambition, they  drink up whatever is poured therein, like Charybdis,  and, with no sign of fullness, they waste unceasingly  the draughts that are all in vain. This sieve doth

10not filter the muddy from the clean, the thick  from the clear, although it was fashioned to that  end, nor doth it contain ‘ the water of the spring  which bubbleth forth for everlasting life,’ nor water  which, ‘if one drinketh, he will never thirst again,’  but water of Lethe, which the drinker recalleth not,  which maketh flat the throat, which causeth a  second thirst, which mingling with the soul com-  pelleth it to enter into deep slime.  Cerberus, the three-headed dog, is there as keeper  200f the door. If those whom he gently and quite  silently admitteth would fain depart, his three-  throated bay giveth dreadful refusal. He is a  doorkeeper who enricheth the hall of Dis by per-  mitting ready ingress; but in egress he hath no  part, he holdeth in, he poureth not forth. Like-  wise Dis of this court hath those whom he maketh  responsible for his prison—and they, in pretended  compassion of their prisoners, lead them to the  pit. But, whenever their charges would, through  30 the king’s mercy, depart, they bark out against  them with the three fears that are most insatiable,  the quest and craving of food, of drink, and of  raiment. And, although the victims are naked,  through the robbery of their all, the gaolers compel  these to promise that which they possess not.  Truly indeed are they Cerberi because they eat  the flesh of the fettered, and rightly are they dogs  who know how to stuff their threefold belly from  the afflicted. They ‘suffer hunger like dogs,’ and,

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 317

in utter disregard of due sanction, they distinguish  not whose food they seize, neither, between living  flesh and dead, do they separate the fresh from  the rotten, the sweet from the fetid.

In the darksome palace of dusky Dis, Minos,  Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus cast the lot into the  urn and sit as judges for the punishment of the  wretched. Bad acts they weigh at once, good  they put off or make of no avail. If the lot which  falleth is cruel, they punish more cruelly; if 10  gentle, they decry it, pervert it, so that virtue is  turned into vice; if neutral, they interpret it for  the worse. Praise for justice they surely deserve  from their unfair lord, since for evil-doing they  have not a jot of mercy. It is said, however,  that if those who pass by look kindly upon them  their hardness yieldeth, as though by a spell;  but, if not, the judges fasten upon the sins, weigh  the offences, and punish and destroy; they force  the ignoring of good actions, they appease the 20  tyranny of Dis by disrespect of God. And yet  up to a certain point these judges are excusable,  in that they imitate the cunning of their pitiless  master. We, too, have judges—but under a most:  merciful judge—and their (false) justice is dis-:  turbed by the justice of their lord, because, though:  they have sworn in his presence to judge with:  fairness, they resemble the three aforesaid cunning]  Judges of Pluto in this, that if a guilty one looketh.  kindly upon them, he is innocent; if an gn  man doth not look kindly upon them, he is guilty  This ‘ look kindly upon’ is to be interpreted after  the fashion of our lord, the Pope, who saith,  ‘ Neither in his own person nor through a mes-  senger did he visit us, nor did he look kindly upon  us,’ that is, he did not give.

These seem to send lots into an urn, that is,  the outcome of law cases mto a parchment-case,  for they encase the inexperienced with slanders,

Google

318 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

and judge their faults with the keenest scrutiny,  nor doth any one of these faults find pardon, unless  in its behalf a mother purse bareth her gums and  speaketh. It is she who is the mistress of all,  who pardoneth faults, * justifieth the godless,’ and  ‘wisheth not the death of smners,’ nor without  reason ‘ casteth out him who cometh to her,’ ‘ she  that dwelleth steadfast and giveth all other things  to be moved.’ But in one place, at least—the  10 exchequer—the purse worketh .no miracles, for  there our just king’s eye seemeth ever to be awake.  Hence it happened that, when I,.on a time, had  heard there a brief and just sentence against a  rich man, in behalf of a poor one, I remarked to  the Chief Justice, Randolph: ° Although justice  to that poor man might have been postponed by  many a pretence, he gained it by a speedy sentence  in his favour.’ Then said Randolph: ‘ Surely we  decide cases here much more quickly than your  20 bishops in the Church.’ Then said I: ‘ That is  true, but if our king were as far from you as the  Pope is from the bishops, ye, I think, would be  equally slow.’ He gave a laugh and did not say  me nay. I speak not of those bursars whom the  king hath chosen to be the highest of all but those  whom, on their own tribunal, greed and self-seeking  have led astray ; nor is it a matter of surprise  that they reckon as Simon’s those whom Simon  hath raised to power. It is the practice of traders  30 to sell what they buy.  \ It is strong evidence and proof of the justice of  our king that any one who hath a just case willeth  to have it tried in his presence; that whoever hath  ian unjust one never cometh before him unless  under compulsion. I am speaking of Henry 11.,  whom Spain chose as her arbiter of the old and  bloody contest existing between the Kings of  Toledo and Navarre, although from ancient times  the custom of all kingdoms was to choose the court

Google

COURTIERS’ TRIFLES 819

of France, and to prefer it to all others; now,  however, very rightly was the court of our king  preferred to all, and a case of long standing was  understandingly settled. And although he stand-  eth almost alone in the vale of misery as the ac-  cepted minister of justice, in the very shadow of  his wings there are selling and buying. To him,  however, is shown by his unjust servants a greater  reverence than to God ; wherefore what they cannot  lawfully keep undone, they will do, albeit against 10  their will; what they know is clear to God, they  fear not to overturn; for God is a slow avenger,  the king is swift. I speak not against all judges,  but against the greater and madder share.

Ye have heard of hell and of the parables of this ;  the rolling of its flames, its clouds and stench, the  hissing of snakes and vipers; the wailing and tears,  the filth and horror. If I may set forth all these,  one by one, by means of allegory, there is not lack-  ing matter to be told. But I must spare the court, 20  and they demand a longer space than I see I have  at my disposal. We can conclude, however, from  what hath been said, that the court is a place of  punishment; I say not, however, that it is hell,}  but it is as nearly like it as a horse’s shoe is like;  a mare’s.

The king of this court, however, if he knoweth  it well, is not free from slander, for he who guideth  is held to chide. But it chanceth that those about  the king’s person are unwilling to attack the court, 30  lest it be made purer by him, since in muddy waters  their catch is richer. They themselves know not  what is being done beneath them, nor doth the  king himself know what they are doing. ‘ They  who have power,’ saith the Lord, ‘ are called well-  doers ’—by their flatterers, be it understood. Surely  those who have power are more fittingly called  poisoners, since they oppress their inferiors and  trick their superiors, so that on this side and that

Google

320 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

they make their gain in some way or other. More-  over, all their base acts they conceal from the king,  lest, under his correction, they should reap less  profit, being restrained by arrest from distressing  those beneath them. Aye, the king in this court  is like the husband who is the last to know the  sin of his wife. The courtiers slily send him forth  to sport among birds and hounds to prevent his  seeing what they do within during his absence.  10 While they make him take his sport, they them-  selves are busy with serious matters; they sit  upon their tribunals and bring both righteousness  and unrighteousness to the same judgment. When,  however, the king returneth from his hunting or  his hawking, he showeth his spoils to them and  giveth them a share; they do not disclose theirs  to him. But on the very grounds on which they  praise his activity in the open, they condemn him  in secret. Is it surprising, then, that he is deceived  20who is over rich in intimate friends? Horace  saith :—  ‘That ’s a poor house, where there ’s not much to spare  Which masters never miss and servants wear.’

This giveth us to understand that the greater the

household, the greater the danger therein to person  {and property. Hence in the large households  \ aforesaid there is constant commotion and in-  {calculable confusion, which, in the ripeness of time,

He alone will calm who ‘ sitteth in the throne,  30 Judging right.’

Google

ANNOTATIONS

Captions —Our headings translate those of the original. But  in the rubrics of the manuscript, as Hinton suggests, the incorrect  spelling of Map’s name, ‘ Mahap’ (here and in five later titles,  while in the text and in Walter’s contemporaries it is always  ‘ Map’), and the lack of system and of correctness would seem to  indicate that ‘ the rubrication and consequently the compilation of  Map’s fragments were not accomplished until some time after his  generation. . . . These rubrics were once no more than marginal  annotations rubricated as chapter headings by a later copyist.’

P.1. The Court—Giraldus Cambrensis, writing some thirty years  later (1217) in the first Preface to his ‘ Instruction of a Prince’  (Works, vii. lvii), contrasts the court with the school: ‘The  Court is the mother of troubles as the School is of delights:  It smacks of the things of earth and craves them insatiably.  Swayed by sensual pleasures, stirred by the trifles of the hour,  catering to physical desire, full of the world’s fret and fury,  abounding in spite and spleen, the Court may be deemed a death  in life, a Hell on earth, etc.’ The curials of Alain Chartier, of  Aeneas Silvius, of Guevara (translated by Bryan), of Nicholas  Breton, all of them contrasting the intriguing restless life at -  court with the restfulness of the country, were popular at the.  time of the Renascence, and find an echo in the speeches of  Touchstone and the Duke in ‘ As You Like it,’ and of Belisarius  in ‘ Cymbeline.’

P. 3, 1.9. Stature of Adam.—The oriental tradition of Adam's  gigantic stature, discussed at length by Wright, appears in the prose  version of the Old English Salomon and Saturn (Kemble, p. 118),  where the First Man is described as 116 inches high.

P. 4, 1.13. Stags and Ravens.—The transposition of corvis and  cervis in the text is suggested by James and approved by Webb  in the Classical Review, xx1x. 1915, 122. Compare Pliny’s account |  of the longevity of these creatures, Natural History, vi11. 153, and |  Bede’s De Aetatibus.

Pp. 4-6. The pangs of Hell—A comparison of this world’s suffer.  ings to the tortures of Tantalus, Sisyphus, Tityus, and other famous  sinners is found in Lucretius, “ The Nature of Things,’ 11. 977 f.  Map’s source was no doubt some one of the Church Fathers, but :  the allegorical interpretation was popular, as we may conclude

Google

322 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

from its appearance in the fabulists. Compare Phaedrus, Appendix  of Perotti, v., and an article in Hermes, 41, 1906, 522-523.

P.6. Between the accounts of Ixion and Charon is missing a leaf  containing sketches of Tityus, the daughters of Belus, Cerberus,  and the first part of Charon. Portions of the text are doubtless  incorporated in the ‘ recapitulation,’ Dist. v. vii. (James).

P. 6, 1. 17. Hugh, Prior of Selwood.— The priory of Witham in  Somersetshire, commonly called the Charter-house in Selwood, was  the first house of the Carthusians in England. It was founded by  Henry u. (1178); and St. Hugh, made in 1187 Bishop of Lincoln,  was the first prior’ (Wright). See the Life of St. Hugh by  Giraldus Cambrensis (Works, vol. v11.), and The Great Life (Rolls  Ser. XXXVI.).

P. 8, 1. 2. Randolph de Glanville—He was Justiciar from 1180 to  1189, and reputed author of a famous legal treatise. Giraldus Cam-  brensis tells us that Randolph was interested in Welsh matters. He  accompanied Archbishop Baldwin and Giraldus on a crusade into  Wales. He objected to both Cluniacs and Cistercians, and opposed  the election of Geoffrey, Archbishop of York. No wonder that  Walter Map regarded him highly. Randolph was deprived at  the accession of Richard and died on the Crusade at the siege of  Acre (1190), whither he had preceded Richard 1.

P. 8, 1.26. The man to whom he referreth—The quotation is from  Claudian’s invective against his enemy, Eutropius (1. 181, 183).

P.15, 1.15. My dearest Geoffrey — Map undertook the De Nugis  at the instance of one Galfridus (15) who had asked him (21-22) to  put down in writing sayings and doings hitherto unrecorded or any-  thing conspicuously remarkable that had come to his knowledge.  Wright (p. x) will have it that Galfridus had asked him to write a  poem, but I think the “poetari” of 17 (21) and the “‘philosophari”  of 13 (15) are synonymous, and merely signify literary composition.  At any rate Map on page 18 (22) assumes that he is doing in his  work what he had been requested to do’ (James, p. xxiv.).

Pp.15-18. The word ‘ Harlequin’ appears as proper name invarious  forms, Herlequin, Hellekin, familia Harlequin, maisnée Herlequin,  in France before 1100 (Driesen, Der Ursprung des Harlekin, 1904).  Liebrecht (Zur Volkskunde, 1879, pp. 29-52) believes that Herlething  (D.N.C., p. 233) is a yet earlier form of the name, but Hinton,  in a letter, deems it a corruption of Herle-Kings. Ordericus  Vitalis (Ecclesiastical History, vit. cap. xvii.) tells the story of a  priest, Walkelin, who, in January 1091, saw, at Bonneval in the  church of St. Aubin of Anjou, the company of Harlequin, a black  troop with black horses and black banners, including people of all  classes—noble ladies, churchmen, and many of Walkelin’s former  acquaintances and friends. Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (Stally-  brass), pp. 741 f., cites many appearances of these ‘ shades of the  dead,’ and notes that, in Gervase of Tilbury’s time (Ota Imperialia,

Google

ANNOTATIONS 323  II. 12), the British woods already rang with ‘ King Arthur's mighty

hunt.’ Map’s comparison of courtiers to the followers of King  Herla may have been suggested by the fourteenth epistle of  Peter of Blois, written before 1175, which couples ‘ the disciples  of the court’ and ‘the soldiers of Herlewin.’ No other version  of Herla’s adventure with the King of the Dwarfs had been dis-  covered. For an interesting account of the evolution of Harlequin,  see Quarterly Review, 196, 1902, 462f. The reviewer notes that  a fairy tale entitled ‘The Reign of King Herla,’ by W. Canton,  published in 1900 (Dent), knows nothing of this mythic personage  beyond Map’s mention of him. Hartland paraphrases the story  of Herla, as well as the different account of the Herlething (D.N. Cc.  Iv. c. xiii.) in the excellent chapter on ‘ The supernatural lapse of  time in fairyland’ in The Science of Fairy Tales, cap. vit. 161-254.  See also Baring-Gould, Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, c. 1.  Grimm is of the opinion that ‘ hellequin’ may be a variant of  * hellekin,’ a diminutival form of the German ‘ Helle,’ the under-  world. Skeat suggests that the word may represent the old  Friesian helle-kin, the tribe of hell (cf. Anglo-Saxon helle-cynn).  If this be true, ‘ Herlething’ is not, as Liebrecht thinks, an older  form, but a survival and perversion. But the evidence of various  forms seems to show that ‘ the letter r is organic and an essential  part of the word.’

P. 16, 1. 1. Sitting on a huge goat.—Pliny, Nat. Hist. 1. 3, !  describes Pigmies as ‘ seated on the backs of rams and goats.’ :

P. 17, 1. 36. Forbidding to dismount.—With this punishment for  dismounting compare the fate of Nechton, Voyage of Bran, sec.  65, and of Guingamor, Schofield, Harvard Studies and Notes, v  221 f. and an Irish parallel cited by A. C. L. Brown, ed. vii. 41.

P.18,1.34. The Wanderings of the Court—On the evidence of the  vivid sketch by Peter of Blois of Henry’s erratic movements (Epistle  xiv.), Miss Norgate (England under the Angevin Kings, 1. 413) contrasts  * this bustling, scrambling, roving Pandemonium’ with the orderly,  well-disciplined court of the first King Henry, where everything  was done according to rule. For an elaboration of the comparison  between the wanderings of the Court and those of Herla’s followers,  see below, 233. Cf. Eyton, Itinerary of Henry II.

P.19. A king of Portugal—No such story seems to be told of  Sanchez 1., King of Portugal (1185-1211); or of his predecessor,  Alfonso, who married in 1146, Mathilde, daughter of Amadeus,  Count of Maurianna and Savoy. She died in 1158, leaving  one son and three daughters, the eldest of whom married Philip  of Flanders.

P. 22,1.11. Gilbert Foliot.—This prelate (d. 1187) was successively  Bishop of Hereford (1148) and of London (1163). In the mass of  materials on the Life of Becket (Rolls Series) there are abundant  notices of Foliot, his great antagonist. Such of his works as are

Google

824 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

known to us were all in Latin. His ‘ Treatise on Solomon’s Song’  belongs to his early period, and his letters against Becket to his  middle time.

P. 22, 1. 21. Bartholomenw, Bishop of Exeter —He was a native of  Brittany, who rose from rank of archdeacon to Bishop of Exeter in  1161. His ‘ Dialogue against Jews ’ was dedicated in his last years  to his friend, Baldwin. He wrote several other works, including one  on Thomas & Becket’s death. Giraldus Cambrensis devotes several  pages to an account of his life (vit. 62 f.). He died in 1184.

P.22,1.23. Baldwin, Bishop of Worcester —Baldwin was a Cistercian  monk, who held the bishopric of Worcester from 1180 to 1184, when  he became Archbishop of Canterbury. With Randolph de Glanville  and Giraldus Cambrensis he made a tour of Wales preaching the  crusade. Like Randolph, he died at Acre in 1190. His works  are printed by Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. cctv.

P.22,1.33. Guichard de Beaujeu.—Michaud, Biographte Universelle,  notes that Guichard 111., Sire de Beaujeu, began to figure in history  about 1115, that he took the habit of a monk and died in 1137, and  adds that he was called in youth ° Laicorum Homerus’ (Map  sponsored this), and was perhaps the author of a metrical sermon.  ' This has been denied him by later authorities. His successor was  Humbert 1. (de la Cavelle’s L’Hestoire de Beaujolais, 1. 50-64). As  Humbert died in 1174, this chapter, which declares that he was at this  time in conflict with his son, ‘cannot have been intended for De  Nugis, or else Map has confused Humbert with some other Bur-  gundian baron ’ (Hinton). Both Wright and James wrongly depart  from the MS. bellejoco and read belleloco (Beaulieu). Guichard de  Beaujeu (Beaujolais) lived only a few miles from Cluny.

P. 23. The story of the second militant monk of Cluny is repeated  D.N.C. tv. vii., with some difference of detail.

P.25. The capture of Jerusalem by Saladin.—Jerusalem was taken  by Saladin, Friday, Oct. 2, 1187, the same day of the week on which  it had been captured by the Christians eighty years before. ‘The  present chapter was probably written in the midst of the consterna-  tion which the news of that event caused among the Christians of  the West’ (Wright). Hinton remarks that ‘it has no mark of  transition between it and either contiguous chapter, nor is it related  in thought but is a unit of composition dissimilar in character to all  the other chapters of D.N.C.’ Later in the book (Dist. v. cap. iii.)  is a distich upon the fall of Jerusalem.

P. 25. * The chroniclers of the time say nothing of the physical  misfortunes of the year, but are more or less prolix on the different  political troubles which characterized the year 1187 ’ (Wright).

P.30. The Origin of the Carthustans.—The story of Hugh, Bishop of  Grenoble’s dream of Seven Stars (Suns) and of the coming of Bruno  and his six companions (1084) is told by Giraldus Cambrensis  (Speculum Ecclesiae, Opera tv. 248), who calls the Carthusians an

Google

ANNOTATIONS 825

example to all the orders in their moderation, in their hospitality  to the poor, and in their refusal to adopt lay attire even when  travelling. Map’s account of the mode of life of the early Car-  thusians accords very closely with the oft-quoted description by Peter  the Venerable, Abbot of Cluny (Migne, Patrologia Latina, clxxxix.  943 and Maitland’s translation, Dark Ages). See note to Dist. 1.  eap. ix. for brief mention of Witham in Selwood Forest, the first  Charterhouse established in England. Wright cites the pictures  of the Carthusians in the Speculum Stultorum of Nigel Wireker (1. 88).

P. 32. The Origin of the Grandmontines.—Giraldus (Speculum  Ecclesiae, Opera 1v. 254-260) tells us that this order was founded by  St. Stephen of Tierny at Grandmont near Limoges in Burgundy  ({c. 1076) as an offshoot of the Carthusians, that its rule is strict in  its insistence upon silence and fasting, and permits the brothers to  have no flocks and herds. Nigel Wireker (Speculum Stultorum, 1.  86-87) mocks at the austerities at Grandmont. Norgate (England  under the Angevin Kings, 11. 436, note) cites other accounts of both  Carthusians and Grandmontines. The ‘ Good Men’ of Grandmont  never set foot in Henry’s island realm. Heliot notes in his History  of the Religious Orders that the disputes between the priests and the  lay clerks of the order of Grandmont, to which Map refers, were  terminated by Pope Innocent 111. after 1198.

P. 33. The Origin of the Templars—Hugues de Payns (Hugo de  Paganis) and Godefroi de St. Omer in 1118 associated with them-  selves in the task of protecting pilgrims to Jerusalem seven (some  say six) other knights. For ten years after its first institution  (1118) the order remained in obscurity, fulfilling, besides the usual  evangelical vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, a fourth,  its protection of pilgrims, but existing only as a private society,  without statutes or knightly habits. In 1128, the Council of Troyes  fixed the rule and habit of the order, and installed Hugues de Payns  as first Grandmaster (Wilcke, Geschichte des Tempelherrenordens,  1826, 1. 8 f.). Matthew Paris marks the increase and degeneracy  of the order (11. 145); and Giraldus notes that Richard 1. married  to them his daughter, Pride (see D.N.C. 1. xx.). They quarrelled  often with two other great military orders, the Hospitallers and the  Teutonic Knights. Rome made, by a canon of the third Lateran  Council (a.p. 1179), a vain attempt to curb the arrogance of the  military orders (William of Newburgh, rt. iii. 3).

P 36, 1. 9. Hamericus—To this story of a supernatural proxy at  a tournament, Liebrecht (p. 29) points out such variants as the  “Marienritter’ (Legenda Aurea, C. 131, § 2, pp. 590 f., ed. by Graesse)  and Caesar von Heisterbach, Dialogue de Miraculis, 7,38. In several  versions the knight is called Walter. For a modern English  translation of one form of the story see Eugene Mason, Aucassin  and Nicolette, etc., in Everyman’s Library (1910).

P 38, 1.34. Nassaradsn, the son of the sultan of Babylon.—The

Google

326 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

story of Nassaradin, the son of Habeis, is told somewhat more briefly  by William of Tyre (xvi. 9)as illustrating the avarice of the Templars.  In William’s version, the unhappy youth was hewn to pieces (not  shot with arrows, as in Map) by his own people in 1155.

P. 41. The Old Man of the Assassins—The Assassins, a sect of  Moslem fanatics who were sent forth by their Sheikh, the ‘ Old  Man of the Mountains,’ to murder the Christian leaders, derived  their name, not, as Map explains, from the ‘ axis ’ but, as modern  etymologists suggest, from ‘ Hashish,’ the opiate made from the  juice of hemp leaves. Hammer-Piirgstall, in his History of the  Assassins (trans. of German), Bk. 11., traces theirname to their founder,  Hassan Sabah. The Grandmaster was commonly called ‘ Sheikh-al  Jabal,’ the Old Man or Supreme Master of the Mountain, because  the order always possessed themselves of castles in mountainous  regions (Marco Polo, Travels, c. xxii.) Hence Christian writers  often represent him as an old man. The story told by Map is  found in greater detail in William of Tyre’s History, xx. cc. xxxi. ff.

P. 41, 1. $1. The careers of Jocelin, Bishop of Salisbury, sus-

pended from his bishopric by Thomas & Becket (d. 1184), and his  son Reginald, Archdeacon and afterwards Bishop of Bath and Wells  (1174-1191) and Archbishop-elect of Canterbury, Becket’s supporter,  are traced in Materials for History of Thomas Becket (Rolls Series).  A letter from Peter of Blois (¢d. vi. 554) vindicates the character  of Reginald.  _ P. 42. The Hospitallers or Knights of the Hospital of St. John  of Jerusalem took their name from the house of their foundation,  established at the middle of the eleventh century by merchants  of Amalfi. Like the Templars, their society was organized for  the succour and protection of pilgrims, and became a wealthy  military fraternity. Giraldus (Speculum Ecclestae, 1v. 205) notes  that the Hospitallers were specially favoured by Alexander 11.,  and Nigel Wireker (Speculum, 1. 83) observes that they were allowed  to lie for the sake of vaunting their house.

P. 43, 1. 11. Lateran Council_—This Council of 1179 was attended  by Map (1. xxxi.; v. v.).

P. 44, ll. 10, 30. For definitions of patronatus and personatus,  see Du Cange, Glossarium.

P. 44, 1. 31. The Cistercians, established at Citeaux in 1098 by  Robert, Abbot of Molesme,in the diocese of Langres, for the purpose  of restoring the literal observance of therule of St. Benedict,developed  rapidly after the entrance of Bernard into the order in 1112, and  by the end of the twelfth century numbered five hundred houses.  Giraldus, in his Speculum Ecclestae, discusses their origin, clothing  (lack of breeches), food, and unremitting labour in the fields. Their  cupidity, stimulated by their hospitality, is their worst fault, and  to their order Richard 1. marries his daughter, Avarice. Giraldus  cites many instances of their greed and oppression and their skill  in overreaching their neighbours : their robbery of poor nunneries,

Google

ANNOTATIONS 827

extortions from the sick, cunning in making farmers’ fields sterile  with salt, so as to induce a sale. See Professor Brewer’s account  of the Cistercians in the introduction to this fourth volume of  Giraldus Cambrensis. Giraldus, in his Speculum Ecclesiae, notes  many jests of Walter Map against the Cistercians, and records, too,  the clever turning of the tables on Map by the sick abbot of Flaxley.  Of Map’s poems against the Cistercian monks only a single line  has survived, ‘ Lancea Longini, grex albus, ordo nefandus ’ (Latin  Poems, p.xxxv.), but his notorious antipathy to ‘the white-robed herd,  accursed order ’ has led to the ascription to him of another poem,  Discipulus Goliae Episcopi de grisis monachis (td. p. 54). Map traces  the English beginning of the order to Sherburne, whence came  Stephen Harding, the most famous of the early abbots of Citeaux  (1109-1134). For this Englishman’s part in the foundation of the  order, see William of Malmesbury, Gesta Regum, iv. 334 (Rolls  Series, 11. 880-385). Map’s invective recalls Gildas’ famous indict-  ment of the clergy in his History of the Britons, c. 66.

P. 47, 1.25. Bernard of Clairvauz—Map’s thinly veiled dislike  of Bernard, whom he hardly dares to attack openly, is due to the  great preacher's domination of the Cistercians and opposition to  Abelard and Arnold of Brescia.

P. 48, 1.8. The Epistle of Bernard.—The reference is to Epistle  189, addressed to Innocent in 1140, where Bernard says: ‘ Goliath  comes forward, huge of body, preceded by his squire, Arnold de  Brescia.’

P. 49, 1. 37. Arnold of Brescta.—Map writes with seeming sym-  pathy of Abelard’s follower, Arnold of Brescia, the reformer who,  some thirty years before, had perished at the hands of the Church,  whose abuses he had steadily denounced.

P. 50, 1. 2. Robert de Burneham.—Archdeacon of Buckingham  (1188), and a friend of Gilbert Foliot. He barters with Hamelin,  Abbot of Gloucester (below), for the possession of several churches  in that diocese (Cart. Mon. Gloucester, Rolls Ser. 11. 170).

P. 51, 1.9. For MS. publicibus, James suggests publicis, Bradley  pul(Dicibus (‘ far from fleas ’).

P. 53, 1. 1. Lewing.—For MS. videns read vivens.

P. 55, 1. 26. For second jilz, Bradley reads ali.

P. 56, 1. 32. For Det serere, Bradley reads deicere or Det detcere.

P. 57, 1.10. For materia, Bradley reads maceria.

P. 58,1.8. Dactan.—The harsh governor, under whom St. Vincent,  Deacon of Saragossa, suffered in the days of Diocletian, a.p. 304.

P. 59, 1.8. The sack of Limoges.—This occurred in June 1183.  * Judged by the chroniclers, Map exaggerates the looting, which was  probably small compared with that suffered at the hands of Young  Henry and Geoffrey of Brittany ’ (Hinton).

P. 61, 1. 13. Waldenses—The context establishes this reading,  in place of MS. Walenses (Welsh), which both Wright and James  retain.

Google

328 DE NUGIS CURIALIOM

P. 62. Nigel Wireker, Speculum, 1. 84, laughs over the wanton  tricks played by the wind with the single garment of these  Cistercian sans-culottes.

Pp. 63-67. Many of these illustrations of Cistercian encroachments  upon neighbouring farms, the salting of the meadow, the manuring  of the field, the removal of the boundary tree, are cited in detail  by Giraldus, Speculum (Works, tv. 225-228).

P. 63, 1.25. Roger, Archbishop of York (1154-1181), described by  William of Newburgh, Hist. m1. c. 5, as a great enemy of the monks.

P. 64, 1. 27. Earl William of Gloucester—Son of the Robert of  Gloucester of Stephen’s time (p. 297), and a benefactor of Neath  in Glamorganshire.

P. 64, 1. 37. Woolaston.—For MS. Wlanstune, Bradley reads  Wlauestune (Wollaston or Woolaston).

P. 65, 1. 36. Ordeal of water.—For many references to this form of  ordeal,see Glotz,L’Ordalie,p.57. “He who is let down into the water  for trial is to be fastened by a rope, that he may not be in danger if  the water receives him as innocent, but may be pulled out.’ In the  later Middle Ages this ordeal by ‘ swimming ’ or ‘ fleeting ’ became  the most approved means of trying a suspected witch.

P. 66, 1.9. Byland Abbey in Yorkshire.

P. 66, 1.10. Pontigny, a Cistercian abbey near Auxerre in France.

P. 66. Giraldus localizes (Speculum, tv. 231) this story of ‘ the  squeezed flitches * in a Lincolnshire abbey (James).

Pp. 67-68. Compare with this alleged detraction of Map, Bothe-  wald’s attack in elegiacs (Poems of Walter Mapes, xxxv.).

P. 69. 1. 6. Bradley inserts quare or ut before cum Maria.

P 70. The Origin of Sempringham (Simplingham).—Giraldus, in  his Speculum Ecclesiae (1v. 184-185), notes that Gilbert de Semp-  ringham (d. 1189), later canonized, founded an order of canons and  nuns, and that the order was almost entirely free from scandal.  Nigel in his Speculum Stultorum, 1. 94-95, derives the name and the  place of order (Simplingham) from ‘ simplicitate,’ and remarks that  a wall separated the bodies but not the voices of the monks and  nuns. ‘ Much scandal arose later from the juxtaposition of sexes ’  (Wright, Polt:cal Songs, p. 138).

P. 72, 1.2. Routzers—These Ruttae or Routiers are described by  Jacques de Vitry and other mediaeval church writers (cited by  Wright) as ‘ Brabantians, men of blood, incendiaries, Rutarians,  plunderers, who neither love God, nor are willing to know the way  of truth.’ William of Newburgh under 1173 (1. c. 27) tells us  that Henry 1. ‘ arraigned mercenary bands of men of Brabant,  which they call “ Rutae.”’’ Hinton reads, ruttas, ‘ bands.’

P. 72,1. 25. Publicans or Paterines.—Stubbs, Introduction to Roger  of Hoveden,11. liv.f.,sets by the side of Map’s account of the Publicans  or Paterines, that of William of Newburgh (Historta Rerum Angk-  carum, 11. c. xiii.). William tells us that the Publicans came over

Google

ANNOTATIONS 329

in 1160 to England, which had hitherto been free of them, and that  these thirty men and women (Map says, ‘sixteen ’) made one  convent. They were seized and brought before the Council of  Oxford in 1166, and were condemned to be branded and scourged  and driven out of town. Pitilessly outlawed, and denied shelter  everywhere, many of them ‘ miserably perished’ (according to  William); according to Map ‘ they disappeared into Normandy.’ |  As William mentions no burning, only branding and flogging, we  render ‘ adusti’ not ‘ burned’ but ‘ branded.’ As Stubbs points  out, Henry’s refusal to burn can only be interpreted in a way  creditable to his humanity.

P.73,1.35. William, Archbishop of Rheims (1176-1202), was fourth  son of Theobald rv., Count of Champagne, and therefore brother of  Adela, Queen of Louis vi. of France (Wright).

P. 75, 1. 38. The chapter, in which Map described the Order of  St. James of Compostella or of the Sword, founded a generation  before this time, seems to have disappeared.

P. 76. Waldenses—In 1170, less than a decade before the great  Lateran Council (1179) at which Map interrogated the Waldenses  to their great confusion, this sect had been established by Peter  Waldo, a rich merchant of Lyons. Waldo sought a reform in the  teaching of Christ, and had a translation of the New Testament  made into Provengal to which Map is referring here. The author —  of the Chronicle of Laon (Bouquet, Recueil des Histortens, x11. 682)  notes that Waldo himself was present at this Council and that the  Pope embraced him. Alexander 11. approved the poverty of the  Waldenses, but prohibited them from preaching without the  consent of the bishops. Their disobedience led to their excom-  munication in 1184.

P. 77, 1.17. Thistles—Read carduos for MS. cardones.

P.'77, 1.21. The answers of the Waldenses excited derision at the  Council, because, as Webb says (Classical Review, xxix. 122), they  “placed the Virgin Mary on a level with the persons of the Trinity.’

P. 82, 1. 16. Hamelin, Abbot of Gloucester (1148-1179).—His name  appears a hundred times in the History and Cartulary of St. Peter's  Monastery at Gloucester (Rolls Ser.). In this record Gregory the  Monk is nowhere found.

P. 82, 1.19. Gilbert de Lacy travelled from England to Palestine  {n 1158 or shortly after (Dict. Nat. Brog.).

Pp.82-85. Peter, Archbishop of Tarentaise (1141-1174), formerly a  Cistercian monk, upheld Alexander 111. against Frederick Barbarossa  and the Antipope, Victor rv. In 1173 he sought, at the mandate  of Alexander, to reconcile Henry 11. and Louis vi1., and performed  many miracles before the two kings. In the same year he was  present at the marriage of Prince John, in Auvergne, and it was  then that Map, who accompanied Henry to his son’s wedding, met  Peter at Limoges.

Google

330 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

P.83,1.9. John Albaemanus (Aux blanches mains), in 1173 Bishop  of Poitiers, was translated to Lyons in 1181 and resigned in 1193.

P. 84, 1. 2. Serlo of Wilton was Abbot of L’Aumiéne from 1170.

P. 86. Liebrecht (Zur Volkskunde, 29) finds a parallel to this story  of the snake in the tiny ‘lindorm’ of the Ragnar Lodbrokssaga,  which grew to such size that it filled the whole house and was  ultimately killed by Ragnar himself. This is a variant of a widely  spread fable (cf. Paris, Romania, xxv. 537 f.).

P.87,1.2. Gerard la Pucelle-—Gerard, like Gilbert Foliot, is best re-  vealed to us by his letters in the Becket Collection (Rolls Series). He  was an Englishman, who taught at Paris from 1160 to 1177, with many  interruptions, one of which was spent at Cologne, where he accepted  a benefice from the schismatic archbishop, and was excommunicated  by the Pope. In 1177 he came to England as a member of the  household of the Archbishop of Canterbury. From 1182 to 1184,  the date of his death, he was Bishop of Coventry.

Pp. 87-89. Geisa11., King of Hungary, died May 31, 1161, leaving  two sons. The elder, Stephen m1., died during the usurpation of  his uncles, Ladislas, who was crowned in 1171 and after a six-  months’ reign died February 1, 1172, and Stephen, who was defeated  on June 19 of this year and driven from the throne, dying April 13,  1173. Bela u1., the younger son of Geisa 11., who was now placed  on the throne of Hungary, did not die until 1196. History, there-  fore, does not sustain the dramatic climax of Map’s story of Luke.  Indeed, Bela 111. made suit to Henry 1. for the hand of his grand-  daughter, Matilda of Saxony, but in 1186 he married Margaret of  France, widow of the younger Henry.

P. 89, 1.13. Welltam de Braose.—Doubtless William Braose the  younger, owner of vast estates in England, Ireland, Wales, who  treacherously slew the Welshmen invited by him to a peaceful con-  ference at Abergavenny Castle, 1176. During John’s reign he was in  rebellion against the king. He died in France in 1211 (D.N.B.).  Testimony hostile to the Welsh might well be expected from him.

P. 89, 1.27. According to Giraldus (Description of Wales, vii.), the  chief faults of the Welsh people are perjury, robbery, rapine, homi-  cide, fratricide, adultery, and incest.

P.89,1.36. Forest of Dean.—Giraldus (Itnerary of Wales,1.v.) notes  that the noble forest of Dean (Danubia) in Gloucestershire supplies  Gloucester with venison and iron. It seems to have been the scene  of many robberies and outrages, and was in Map’s own Westbury  neighbourhood.

P. 90. Cadoc, King of the Welsh.—A fragment of saints’ legend.  Cadoc is St. Cattwg, son of Gwynel, a petty king of Wales. Lie-  brecht (p. 30) refers to part taken by Iltut in another story (Nennius,  §71). James finds the tale of Cadoc and the conversion of Iltut in  Rees’ Lives of the Cambro-British Saints, pp. 45, 160.

P.91. Rhys (Celtic Folklore,t. 71) calls the hero of this story Gwestin

Google

ANNOTATIONS 831

of Gwestiniog, notes that he dwelt by Brecknock Mere, that the  son’s name is Trinco Faglog, and that the King is Brychon of Brychein-  iog about the middle of fifth century. He remarks that another  Welsh Undine who imposes like conditions was the Lady of Lyn y  Fan Fach in Carmarthenshire. Rhys repeats the story of Margaret  Williams, a native of Drws y Coed, that a youth steals a lady from  a troop of fairies, and, after she has borne him two children, loses  her by striking her with the iron of his rein. The aversion of fairies  to iron is well known. See also Owen, Welsh Folk Lore, pp. 5-31.  Hartland (Science of Fatry Tales, p. 302) repeats our story and notes  its affinities with Maori Sagas.

P. 91, 1. 28. ‘ to the shouting (clamores) beyond Llyfni.'—Rhys, 1.c.,  remarks that the phrase of Giraldus ‘ that great and famous lake of  Brecknock, which they also call “ clamosus,” ’ was suggested by the  Welsh Llyn, Llefnt, so called from the river Liefni, misinterpreted  as if derived from llef, a ery. Dr. Evans, in a note on margin of  Bodleian copy of Wright's edition of D.N.C., would read Levem for  MS. Lenem.

P. 92, 1. 2. Deheubarth, still so spelt, is the Welsh name, not of  North, but of South Wales. Map is nodding here. But Bradley  points out that the king of North Wales ruled this province.

P.93,1.17. Men of Reynuc, etc.—The Latin is more than doubtful.  For ‘ vestra terre reynos, id est Brecheniauc, non pugnent amodo  quasi animalia desunt, Bradley would read ‘vestro terrore Reynos,  id est Brecheniauc, non pugnent amodo . . . nonnulla desunt (added  by scribe).

P. 94. Edric held lands both in the north of Herefordshire  and Shropshire (Domesday) and refused all submission to the  Conqueror, beating back many Norman incursions and ravaging  lands which had yielded to the invaders. He retained his inde-  pendence for four years. Freeman (Norman Conquest, tv. 738,  note 1) discusses Edric and his name, silvaticus or salvage. Lie-  brecht, in his essay ‘ Die Todten von Lustnau ’ (Zur Volkskunde,  54 f.), thinks that the wood in these old stories may be ‘ the dead,’  and that the winner of the lady is forbidden thus to mention death  or her home of spirits. This is sustained by Map’s later account  of the son of Edric’s lady (p. 221). But Hartland (Science of Fairy  Tales, p. 341) objects to this explanation of the tabu put by a fairy  and regards the later version, which deems her a demon, inde-  pendent and inconsistent. Parallels to the stories of Edric and  Gwestin are found not only in the Melusina romance and in Matthew  of Paris’ story of King Offa, but in the legends of all nations, as  Hartland shows in his last chapter.

P. 94, 1. 21. ghild-hus—This seems a nonce-usage. ‘The usual  Anglo-Saxon name is gist-hus ’ (Wright), which, perhaps, Map wrote.

P. 95, 1. 4. spectral squadrons—Perhaps MS. alares is for larvas,  a common word for vampires in female form.

Google

332 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

P. 95, 1. 16. Blind Cupid.—For a discussion of ‘The Lover's  Blindness ’ in mediaeval and classical literature, see M. B. Ogle,  American Journal of Philology, xu1., 1920, 240-252.

P.96,1.34. Alnodus (A:lfnoth).—Giraldus (James, Eng. Hist. Rev.  XXXII. 214-244) and Bromton (Giraldus, Opera 111. 422) place, with  greater probability, the bequest of the lands of Ledbury North in  the time of Offa, noting that the donor, one Edwin, was cured  through the intercession of St. Ethelbert of a chronic shaking of the  head.

P.97,1.15. Demons, incub, and succubt—This reference to incubi  and to the unhappy offspring of cohabitation with them may  have been suggested by Augustine’s ‘ City of God,’ bk. xv. c. xxiii.  Geoffrey of Monmouth (History, bk. vi. c. xviii.) supplements  Merlin’s mother’s account of his miraculous birth by citing Apuleius’  book concerning ‘The Demon of Socrates’ (De Deo Socratts) as his  authority for the statement that ‘ between the moon and the earth  inhabit those spirits which we call “incubi.”’ They are of the  nature partly of men and partly of angels, and, whenever they  please, assume human shapes and lie with women.

P.97,1. 34. ‘ already cited example among the Britons.'—This phrase  shows that Dist. rv. viii., in which the story is told at greater length,  preceded this passage in time of composition. It is possible that  we have to deal with a text corrupted from ‘hic Alnodi, de quo  superius, et ille Britonum ’ (the above instance of Alnodus, etc.)  Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde, 59, 504, cites analogues and references  to the ‘ sons of the dead ’ story.

Pp. 98-99. Compare Gervase of Tilbury’s account (Otia Imperialia,  p- 39) of lamias, so called, he claims, because they lacerate children :  *‘Jamiae vel laniae, quia laniant infantes.’ Liebrecht recalls the  superstition of the old wives who dare not trust a child in a cradle  by itself without a candle (notice the fires and lights of our story)  on account of fear of the night-hag (Brand, Popular Antiquities, ed.  Hazlitt, 1870, 11. 144). Cf. Etienne de Bourbon’s like story (364).

P. 99, 1. 31. Paul and Antony.—The story of Antony’s encounter  with strange monsters is told by Jerome in his Life of Paul the First  Hermit (228-342 a.p.), whose day is January 15. See Charles  Kingsley’s Hermits. Map discusses at greater length the fate of  the fallen angels, rv. vi. |

P.100, 1.23. ‘ Tournament which may more fitly be called torment.’—  At this time Alexander 111. fulminated against tournaments in his  Decrees of 1179 (Roger of Hoveden, 11. 176, cited by Wright).

Pp. 101-107. This chapter is possibly the abstract of some lost  Anglo-Saxon epic or later romance, of which the hero is the mythi-  cal Wade who rules the Haelsings in Widsith (1. 23) and is the Vadus  Gigas of the Wilkina Saga. Here alone is he connected with the  Old English Offa Saga (Edith Rickert, Modern Philology, 11., 1904,  44-46). In the Vitae Duorum Offarum, once ascribed to Matthew

Google

ANNOTATIONS 333

Paris, Sueno (Suanus) appears not as the nephew, but as the enemy  of Offa. Nowhere else do we meet the tradition of the invasion of  Offa's kingdom by the Romans. The historical Offa, King of the  Mercians (fl. 758-796), was a contemporary of Charles the Great,  with whom he corresponded freely (D.N.B.). History, of course,  knows nothing of an eighth-century Conrad or Cunnanus, Emperor  of Rome.

P. 102, 1.23. Offa's Dyke—As Wright remarks, ‘ Offa’s Dyke still  exists, one of the most remarkable earthworks in the island, stretch-  ing from the Dee to the Wye.’ John of Salisbury, Polycraticus,  vI. c. vi., notes that Earl Harold made the law mentioned by  Map, the transgressor of which was to lose the right hand, not  the foot.

Pp. 107-109. As Wright has pointed out, Map is somewhat at fault  in his account of relationship of the Emperors of Constantinople.  Manuel Comnenus (1143-1180), the son of John, was so distinguished  a warrior that he was nominated Emperor in preference to his elder  brother, who was not Andronicus, as Map tells us. His ten-year-  old son Alexius (not Manuel), who now married Agnes, the daughter  of Louis vir. of France, was under the guardianship of his mother,  the Empress Maria, daughter of Raymond of Antioch. Ralph  de Diceto tells us that the Empress had a lover, Alexius  Comnenus, Protosevastus, a nephew of Manuel, and_ that  she attempted to poison his son. The young Emperor's cousin,  the masterful Andronicus, who fills vivid pages in Gibbon,  now succeeded in having the mother done to death and in assuming  the control of the son. Having strangled his youthful victim, he  now became Emperor and married the young widow, Agnes of  France ; the usurper was killed by the people of his capital in 1185.

P. 109, 1. 23. Webb (Classical Review, xxix. 122) reads for MS.  origin, virgint (St. Catharine of Alexandria) and cites Sarum Missal,  *“cujus ortu decorata gloriatur Graecia.’

P. 109. ‘ It looks as if Map, starting to tell something about the  mercenaries in Constantinople, made a digression on the degeneracy  of modern Greeks and broke off without telling his anecdote ’  (Hinton).

Pp. 112-114. hospitality of the Welsh—See Giraldus, Description  of Wales, 1. x.

P. 114, 1.9. As Map’s ‘ Llewelyn ’ is called the son of Griffin, and  is a contemporary of Edward the Confessor (?), he can hardly be the  * Lewelin, son of Seisil,’ who died in 1023 (Annales Cambriae, p. 23),  unless tradition has had its way with him. It is possible that Map  may have had in mind this Llewelyn’s son, Gryffud, a mighty warrior  and opponent of Edward Confessor (D.N.B.).

Pp. 114-115. Llewelyn—Many a hero of folk-tales is a lounger  in the chimney-corner in his youth. Liebrecht (p. 33) cites distant  analogues to this story of the dream and its punishment. The

Google

334 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

most significant among these is the “Judgment of Bocchoris  (Clement of Alexandria, Stromata, tv. 115).

P.119,1.31. Thomas, at that time the Chancellor, etc. Before 1162.

P. 119, 1. 38. Louis, son of Charlemagne (d. 840).

Pp. 122-124. That the story of Cheveslin belongs to the cycle of the  Master Thief is pointed out by Liebrecht, p. 34, who gives Oriental  and Slavic parallels. Cf. Cox, Mythology of Aryan Nations, 1. iii. 120.

Pp. 125-126. William of Newburgh tells a similar story of corpses in  Bucks and in Berwick emerging from their graves (Historia Rerum  Anglicarum, v. xxii.-xxiv.). There are many Scandinavian parallels,  including the Glam episode in the Grettir story. Liebrecht,  pp. 35-36, cites analogues of vampires in many countries—Assyria,  Africa, Borneo. |

P. 126, 1. 25. This marvel is told of a knight, Romaricus at  Bayonne, in the Historia Turpint, cap. vii. The pseudo-Turpin  ‘ History of the Life of Charles the Great and Roland’ was hardly  a hundred years old when Map used this.

P. 128. That precepts of a father (often three counsels) were com-  mon in the Middle Ages is shown by Liebrecht’s references (p. 36)  to Straparola (Novella 17), Hans Sachs’ ‘Comedia von dem Marschall  Sophus,’ and La Tour Landry’s last chapter. See also the many -  examples of proverbs cited by Oesterley in his Notes to Gesta  Romanorum, cap. 108. Occurrences of the warnings against the  daughter of an adulteress and a red-headed man are noted by  Liebrecht. To these may be added illustrations of distrust of red  hair, Herrig’s Archiv. 114, 1905, p. 294, and Curry, Middle English  Ideal of Personal Beauty, pp. 18-19, 41, 50. Was a leaf of the arch-  type of our MS. wanting here (James), or was the story of the  Seneschal allowed to take, incomplete and unfit, this place in Map’s  book (Hinton) ?

P.130. Here Map confesses the influence of the person (Geoffrey)  for whom he is writing—evidently a youth approaching manhood.  Sadius is just such a one as he would like his young friend to  become. :

Pp. 131-155. Sadius and Galo.—This story is probably extracted  from some lost metrical romance, and has not a little in eommon  with the Graelent of Marie de France, and shares features with La  Chatelaine de Vergi. It is dramatized by Tunison (Dramatic  Traditions of the Dark Ages, pp. 221-235).

P. 134, 1.13. For James, durus tlle de mea, Bradley reads durus  tlle Demea, the old man in Terence’s Adelphi, which Map has  quoted a few lines before.

P. 139, 1. 36. percurrit.—The verb seems to demand the addition  of an object, perhaps cor.

P. 145, 1. 18. For MS. visit Bradley reads rightly visttet, compar-  ing Ps. Ixxxviii. 33.

P. 148, 1.31. For saluatum Bradley suggests sabulatum or sabletum,  ‘ arena.’

>

Google

ANNOTATIONS 335

Pp.155-166. Partus and Lausus.—This is the Fridolin story (James),  and a variant of the legend used by Schiller in ‘ Der Gang nach  dem Eisenhammer’ (Liebrecht). Oecesterley cites some forty or fifty  versions of ‘ the story of the bad breath,’ Gesta Romanorum, cap. 2838.

P.157,1.21. Double pupil.—In his address to the lena, Ovid(Amores,  1.8, 15) tells us that she has a double pupil in her eye. Kirby Smith  in his paper on the ‘ Pupula Duplex ’ (Studies in Honour of B. L.  Gildersleeve, 287-300) links this with the superstition of the Evil Eye.

Pp. 166-172. Raso and lus nife—Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde, p. 39,  finds analogues in stories of early India (Benfey, Pantschat, 1. 436 f.,  186), in Slavonic versions of the Walter-saga, and in Old Norse as  well (Halvssaga, c. viii., Fornaldarsogur, 11. 33 f.). With this ‘ Raso  cycle ’ Landau connects the tale of Parthenius, c. viii. (Die Quellen  des Boccaccio, p. 94).

Pp. 172-176. Rollo and lis nife—Hinton points out (Modern  Philology, 1917, 203 f.) that the first novella in Ser Giovanni's  Pecorone is not, as Liebrecht supposed (p. 58), derived from Map’s  story of Rollo, but has much more in common with the tale of  Reginald de Pumpuna in the Gemma Ecclestastica (11. xii.) of  Giraldus Cambrensis (Opera 11. 226-298).

P.177. Prologue.—This Prologue, which, as Hinton says, leads up  to nothing, was written, so Map declares, in July 1183, while the  Epilogue portion was written two years after the death of Henry 11.,  about July 1191. The Epilogue reads like a conclusion of the whole  work, but is unsuitable in its present place, for which Map himself  is surely not responsible.

P. 178, 1. 3. Philip, Count of Flanders, who plays a large part in  contemporary chronicles, was a mighty warrior and crusader,  dying at Acre in 1191.

P.178. In recording the death from dysentery of young Henry at  Martel in 1183 (not, as the De Nugis MS. reads, in 1182), Ralph of  Diceto (11. 19-20) moralizes over the death of rebellious sons.  Elsewhere (1. 356) he, like Map, points to the story of Absalom in  this connection.

P.179,1.13. The first burial of Henry was at Le Mans, the second,  on July 22, at Rouen. Many false reports were circulated of miracu-  lous cures at the young king’s tomb (William of Newburgh, 1. 234).  Map’s account of events is in close accord with the Gesta Regis  Henrict II. of Pseudo-Benedict (1. 300 f.).

P.179, 1.26. The lynx.—This ‘lynx’ prophecy of Merlin is found  in Geoffrey of Monmouth’s History, bk. vu. c. ii. Both Pseudo-  Benedict and his copyist, Roger Hoveden, apply the ‘ raging  whelps ’ of Geoffrey's Merlin to the rebellious children of Henry 11.

Pp. 180-183. Epilogue.—This reads like an epilogue to the whole  work, but serves poorly as introduction to the ‘Valerius’ tract. After  the mediaeval manner, it provides at the close of its original form  (p. 182, 1, 24) summary mention of the book’s unworthy readers, who  * hate it before they have heard it . . . and grudge it before they

Google

836 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

greet it.’ Map likewise includes in the prologue to the Fifth  Division of his book (p. 254) a saying with a traditional flavour,  * The forked tongues of detractors are responsible for the rarity  of poets. For the envy theme in prologues and epilogues,  see Tupper, Journal of English and Germanic Philology, xv1., 1917,  551-572.

P. 181, 1. 10. Bradley inserts principis after tenebrarum.

P. 182, 1. 14. Rufint—Map probably has in mind the ‘ Rufinus’  against whom Jerome wrote his famous tract.

P.182,]. 32. The paragraph, ‘I had a friend, was written expressly  to introduce the ‘ Epistle to Ruffinus’ into the De Nugis. Hinton  thinks that this part of the work to the end of the Division was  written directly after Fragment 1., about September 1181.

P. 183. Valerius to Ruffinus—Joseph Bédier, in his discussion of  the Fabliauz in which women play a sorry part, points to the stories  of conjugal misfortunes in the oldest papyri, and to the famous  fragment ‘About Women’ of the elder Simonides. See also  Ecclesiasticus, c. xxv. Juvenal’s Satire v1. remonstrates, like Map  in his ‘ Valerius’ and Chaucer in his ‘Envoy to Bukton,’ with a  friend about to be married. And St. Jerome, in his tract against  Jovinian, draws invectives against marriage from the lost books  of Theophrastus and Seneca. But ‘in the Middle Ages, the motif  assumes a fiercer aspect—a contemptuous wrath against woman  inspiring the definite dogma that women are not only inferior  but evil beings, essentially perverse, contradictory, obstinate,  the ruin of man.’ Vivid ara of the * querelle des femmes’ are  found in the Romance of the Rose, in the Exempla, in the Seven  Sages (particularly in the grim story of the Matron of Ephesus).  Both Richard de Bury in his Philobiblon (c. iv.) and Chaucer in the  ‘ Wife of Bath’s’ Prologue, cite together the books of Theophrastus  and ‘ Valerius.’ And with this ‘ Valerius ’ epistle of Map, compare  the Goliardic poem ‘ On not taking a wife’ (De conjuge non ducenda),  long attributed to our author when his genuine prose letter was.  denied him. Walter's contemporary, Peter of Blois, ‘ borrows  copiously from the Dissuasio Valeri, taking from it the instances  of Phoroneus, Marius and Metellus, Lucilia and Livia, Deianira,  Valentinian, Canius, Pacuvius, but we know that the Dissuasio was  current before and apart from the De Nugis ’ (James).

( Pp. 183f. As James notes, ‘much of the mythology i is ccnved  \from Ovid’s Metamorphoses, e.g. Circe, lib. xiv. ; Scylla, lib. viii.  ‘Myrrha, lib. x.3 J upiter, lib. vi. 103 ; Leucothoe, lib. iv. 190 f.;  Mars and Venus, lib. iv. 170 f.; Nessus and Deianira, ix. 110 f.’

P.184,1.10. See the * serpent i in treacle’ of Philobiblon xi., quoted  from ‘ Aristotle, De Pomo.’

P. 186, 1. 6. Salomon is called ‘sol hominum ’ (Richard of Bury’ S  Philotublon, iii.).

P. 186, 1. 26. ‘ punish bitterly . . . love.-—On like oxymora in con-

Google

ANNOTATIONS 837

nection with love, compare the article of M. B. Ogle, Modern  Language Notes, xx1x., 1914, 243-247. The ‘amantur amare’ of  the present passage there finds many illustrations.

P. 186, 1. 36. Scylla treacherously destroyed her father, Nisus,  by cutting off his golden lock, and Myrrha was enamoured of  her father, Cinyras. Ovid tells the story of both.

P. 188, 1. 38. Tongillus—Like James, I do not find the name  elsewhere. The diviner was Vestricius Spurinna; the man who  gave Caesar the letter was Artemidorus. Leontius (p. 189, 1. 39)  and Valens, Emperor of Rome (p. 190, 1. 8), are unidentifiable in  their present context.

P. 189, 1. 35. Phoroneus is mentioned as the earliest lawgiver of  Greece in the Historia Scholastica to Genesis, 15 (James), but the  story's source has not been traced.

P. 190, 1. 8. This story is told of ‘the Emperor Valentinian’ by  Gower (Confessio, v. 6396 f.; Mirour, 17089), and, like the pre-  ceding, appears in other collections. All derived from Map.

P. 190, 1. 18. Cicero—This story of Cicero is derived from  Jerome’s tract against Jovinian.

P. 190, 1. 28. Livy of Aponus—tThe fons Apont is near Livy’s  birthplace, Patavium (Padua). Canius of Gades is known to  Martial, 1. 61.

P. 191, 1. 15. Pacuvius and Attius (not Arrius) are coupled as  tragic poets by Aulus Gellius, xm. 2, and other Latin writers.  Map’s anecdote of the tree and the three wives had wide currency ‘  in the Middle Ages. In Chaucer’s ‘ Wife of Bath’s’ Prologue  (D. '758) it is connected with ‘ Latumius,’ in Gesta Romanorum, tale  33, with Paletinus. The story is really from Cicero, De Oratore, |  11. 69. o

P. 191, 1. 27. Sulpictus—Mentioned in the Jerome tract against  Jovinian.

P. 192, 1. 8. The opinions of Metellus Numidicus on the subject  of marriage are found in the Aitic Nights of Gellius, 1. c. 6 (Wright).

P. 192, 1. 23. The story of Lais of Corinth and Demosthenes is  found in the Attic Nights of Gellius, 1. c. 8, and was often cited.

P. 192, 1. 35. Livia and Lucilta.—Livia poisoned her husband  Drusus, son of Tiberius, at the instigation of Sejanus, a.p. 23 (ef.  Ben Jonson's Sejanus, 11.1). Lucilia was the imaginary wife of  Lucretius ; see Tennyson’s poem of ‘ Lucretius’ for the story  of the fatal love-philtre, which she caused to be brewed in the  hope of reviving the affection of her lord. Compare Chaucer’s ‘ Wife  of Bath’s ’ Prologue (D. 747). Map seems the sponsor of Lucilia.

P. 194, 1.12. To James’ mundus Webb prefers humilis of several  _ MSS. as a proper antithesis to sullimis. Bradley reads mundis and  sullinus.

P. 194, 1. 15. Perictione, the mother of Plato by Apollo’s  phantom, appears in Jerome Agaznst Jovinian, 1. 42 (James).

Y

Google

338 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

P. 195, 1. 30. The marrted Stilbon.—Mercury, under the name  of Stilbon, appears as the happy bridegroom of Philology in the  De Nuptus of Martianus Capella.

P. 196, 1. 29. The ‘ Aureolus’ of Theophrastus.—The passages  from this lost book which are cited by Jerome Against Jovintan are  found as a separate tract in several manuscripts (James), and  were well known to Chaucer and to Richard of Bury.

P. 197, 1. 15. For MS. fago, Bradley reads sago, citing Martial,  1. 3, 8, ‘ ibis ab excusso missus in astra Sago.

Pp. 199-215. As other mediaeval versions of ‘the story of a  knight who had wasted his patrimony being restored to riches by  the evil one,’ Wright cites a Latin tale in his Selection (p. 31), and a  French fabliau, ‘ Le dit du povre Chevalier’ (Jubinal, Nouv. Recuesl,  1. 188). One detects here the influence of the history of Kudo de  Stella, who practised marvellous deceptions by the aid of demons  and was finally seized by the Archbishop of Rheims, and condemned  by the council held in that city 1148 (William of Newburgh, Historia  Rerum Anglicarum, 1. xix.). The incident of ‘ the three warnings °  was a subject of popular monkish story. See Bromyard’s Summa  ' Predicantium, title ‘ Mors’ (Wright’s Selection, p. 35), and the  Speculum Latcorum, 191 (Ward, Catalogue of Romances, etc., 111. 381).

P. 200, 1. 27. Hinds—For the connection between the hind and  unseen powers, compare Ogle, ‘The Stag Messenger Episode ’  (American Journal of Philology, xxxvu1. 1916).

P. 202, 1. 9. For stories of the pranks of sundry mischievous but  ln malignant spirits who fell with Lucifer, see Giraldus Cambrensis,  {Itinerary of Wales, ¢. xii. (Wright).

Pp. 203-207. James notes that ‘ the story told here is a conflation  [found elsewhere] of two well-known mediaeval tales, the Painter  and the Devil (Wright’s Selection, p. 34 and notes), and the Sacristan  and the Lady, of which the best-known version is that by Rutebeuf.’

P. 205, 1.15. In their place of silence——Wright’s pointing, a  period after ‘ silentii,’ seems preferable to closing the sentence  with ‘ erubescent ’ (blush) as in James’ text.

P. 206, 1. 39. making contemptuous gestures —For MS. ingens  ycontas, Bradley reads pingens ciconias, pointing to D.N.C. 9 (10%),  and comparing Persius, 1. 58.

P. 207, 1. 25. by joining thy hands between mine.—Professor Arthur  B. Myrick calls the attention of the translators to a passage in Rute-  beuf’s Le Miracle de Théophile, ii. 242-244 (Giuvres, 11. 244) in which  the devil, as here, requires his victim ‘to join thy hands, and so  become my man.’ Myrick points to the popularity of the story  of ‘infernal homage’ in ecclesiastical sculpture. (See Male,  L’ Art Religieux en France au XIII® stécle.) Cf. D.N.C. 1197".

P. 209, 1.17. “no good man unpunished.’—If, as Bradley thinks,  this is a perversion of Pope Innocent u11.’s ‘ Contempt of the World,’  1. 15, ‘ He is a just judge who lets no evil man go unpunished,  no good man unrewarded,’ this part of ‘ Courtiers’ Trifles’ was

Google

ANNOTATIONS 339

written after 1191, the date of Innocent’s tract. This would hint  a doubt of the correctness of Hinton’s chronology (Introduction).

Pp. 215-218. The Story of the Monk of Cluny—Another version  of the story told in Dist. 1. xiv.

P. 218, 1. 28. Sons of the Dead Woman.— This story is not very  apt here and leads the author off to an entirely different subject,  marriages with supernatural beings ’ (Hinton). See above, 11. xiii.

Pp. 218-220. The present translation of the ‘Henno cum  Dentibus’ incident owes not a little to the happy rendering of the  passage by Baldwin, English Medieval Literature, 1914, pp. 60-62.

P. 218, 1.27. Henno mith the teeth—For the name, see William of  Malmesbury, Gesta Regum, 11. 286-287, ‘ Haimo dentatus,’ a Norman  baron, ancestor of the FitzHamons. Gervase, Otia Imperialia, p. 26,  localizes a somewhat similar story at the Castle of the Sparrowhawk  in the diocese of Valence, and Giraldus Cambrensis tells a like  tale of the demon-countess of Anjou (Works, v111. 301). See Gesta  Romanorum, 160. The motive figures also in the romance of  Mélusine, but the lady’s husband is there a Lusignan. In the  romance of Richard Ceur de Lion, the fairy mother of the king has  a like distaste of the sacred offices, and vanishes much in the same  fashion. See also Vincent of Beauvais, Speculum Naturale,  11. 127. Note the classical pedigree of Keats’ Lamia.

Pp. 221-229. Gerbert—Gerbert or Pope Sylvester 11. (999-1003)  ‘was often reputed a sorcerer in the Middle Ages (Olleris, Giwures de  Gerbert, clxxxviii.-cxcviii.). William of Malmesbury, Gesta Regum,  1. 193, makes him the possessor of a magical head that predicts his  death at ‘ Jerusalem’; and John of Bromton, 881-882, also tells of  his homage to the devil, of the opening of earth at his incantations,  of the glimpse of treasures which he was unable to touch and of  his end at the church of ‘Jerusalem in Lateran.’ Giraldus  {Gemma, 11.34) tells of his avoidance of the sacrament. No mediaeval  writer except Map mentions Gerbert’s association with a fairy  lady ; but Ordericus Vitalis (1. xxiv.) relates that, when Gerbert  ‘was master of a school, he had a conference with the devil and  learned that he would be ‘ translated from R. to R. and as pope  ‘would be R.’ (Rheims, Ravenna, Rome). His connection with  Meridiana recalls such lays as Desire, Graelent, Lanval. The  Jerusalem motive is adapted to Henry tv. (H. 1v., Pt. 1. Iv. iv.),  * It has been prophesied to me many years I should not die but at  Jerusalem.’

P. 222, 1. 5. Metamorphoseos.—Liebrecht, Zur Volkskunde, p. 48,  finds in the Maire morphoseos of the text a concealed reference to  the Metamorphoseos of Apuleius and points to ‘ the change to an ass.’  ‘The translation follows rather closely Webb's interpretation of this  ‘doubtful passage in The Classical Review, 1915, 122. The reference  to Scylla, Webb derives from Ovid, Metamorphoses, xiii. 967.

P. 223, 1. 18. Meridtana.—Henno with the Teeth finds his lady’  at midday in a grove (iv. ix.) and the followers of Herla are seen

Google

340 DE NUGIS CURIALIOM

(at midday (rv. xiii.). This superstition is mirrored in the Vulgate  demonio meridiano, ‘the destruction that wasteth at noonday’  (Ps. xci. 6), which is quoted by Map, 2911.

P. 229, 1.6. The bundle of twigs—This oriental story serves its  turn in the dumb show of the first English tragedy Gorboduc.

P. 229, 1. 26. Hinton shows that the passage refers to the arrival  in England of the news of the election of Lucius 111. (Hubald, Bishop  of Ostia), September 1, 1181, as the successor of Alexander m1.  (1159-1181).

P. 229, 1. 29. The Shoemaker of Constantinople.—This ‘ monstrous  instance of necrophilia,’ with its Medusa supplement, is connected  with the Gulf of Satalia by Gervase of Tilbury, p. 11 (Liebrecht’s  note, p. 92), by Roger of Hoveden, m1. 158 (who derives it from  Gesta Regis Henrict, 11. 196), by ‘ Sir John Mandeville,’ c. 1v., and by  John Bromton, col. 1216. The legend enters the Merlin story.

P. 232, 1.31. Necholas Pipe —Liebrecht (Zur Volkskunde, p. 49), in  the light of the later names of this merman (Cola Pesce and Fisch  Nicolas), who is the original of Schiller’s ‘ Diver,’ would read Pesce  for Pipe, but Gervase, who tells the story, O#a Impertalia, p. 11,  immediately after the Satalia marvel, calls him ‘ Nicholaus Papa.’  Gervase puts Nicholaus under Roger uw. of Sicily (1127-1154) and  Map under William 1. (1154-1166) or William 11. (1166-1189).

P. 233, 1.30. Followers of Herla.—Similarly Peter of Blois, speak-  ing of court life, compares the followers of the court to ‘ the soldiers  of Herlewin,’ Epistle 14 (James). Map may have been indebted  for this comparison to Peter, who wrote some years before him  (Hinton), but James deems the parallel a coincidence. Compare  this mention of Herla with Dist. 1. xi.

Pp. 237 f. Kings of Brittany—Map’'s confusion of the names  and dates of the early rulers of Brittany becomes apparent from  the chronology of Le Moyne de la Borderie, Histoire de Bretagne,  Ir. (1898), 533 :—

Nominée, Governor of Brittany and afterwards King

(841-851).

Erispoé (Map’s Ylispon), his son, King (851-857).

Salomon, his cousin (857-874).

Alain the Great (888-907).  Salomon slew Erispoé while invoking God in a church whither  he had fled, and was himself blinded and killed in the church of  L’Elorn (La Martyre) by his former lords, among them Wigon  (son of Rivelen, Count of Cornwall, 857-874), who had been loaded  with benefits by the King. Salomon becomes in legend a figure  of royal majesty and is connected by Jean Bodel, La Chanson de  Satsnes, with Charlemagne.

P. 237, 1. 17. msme.—On ‘ mime’ as a word of contempt in the  writings of church fathers and mediaeval ecclesiastics, compare  Reich, Der Mimus, 1. ii. pp. 803 f.

Google

ANNOTATIONS 341

P. 242, 1.6. The game of chess.—This introduction of chess is an  anachronism, as it was not played in Western Europe until two  centuries later. Quarrels over chess are frequent in the romances,  as in the story of Ogier the Dane (Wright, History of Domestic  Manners, etc., pp. 198 f.).

P. 243, 1. 4. Hoel, Count of Nantes, does not appear in the  chronology of Brittany until a century later.

Pp. 247-253. Sceva and Olla.—Liebrecht (Englische Studien, 11. 20 ;  Zur Volkskunde, 51-53) cites a lustspiel by Hieronymus J ustesen (1476-  1577) called Karrig Niding, edited by Birket Smith, Copenhagen,  1876. A miser, Niding, who grieves over food eaten in his house,  leaves home, and his place is taken by a beggar, Jep Skald, who  usurps his wife and prerogatives and persuades his man and maid-  servants and his neighbours to reject him. Finally Niding yields  and goes away to seek house and servants elsewhere. The rejection  of a paterfamilias by bribed servants is a common motive in the old  comedy (see Taming of the Shrew, Act v.).

Pp. 254-256. Prologue——With this prologue it is interesting to  compare Map’s account of his own reputation (Giraldus, Opera v.  410-411). His ‘ dicta,’ because they are in the vernacular, have, in  his opinion, won a greater recognition than the Latin writings of  his friend, Giraldus.

P. 255, 1. 15. Menestratus—Bradley rejects MS. Menestratem,  but notes the occurrence in Aelian of Menecrates, and in Pliny  of two distinguished sculptors Menestratus and Menecrates.

_P. 255, 1. 20. The avarice of Juba.—Juba, King of the Numidians  and ally of Pompey, committed suicide in 46 B.c.

P, 256, 1.14. Keng Appollonides—James suggests that the King is  possibly Henry 11. or some other King of England or of France, con-  temporary with Map. His reviewer (Athenaeum, Feb. 16, 1915)  prefers William the Lion, or Philip, Count of Flanders, and Webb  (Classical Review, xxix. 122), Richard 1. Bradley, p. 398, thinks  * Appollonides’ is young Henry, who is earlier (D.N.C. p. 1791)  called Phaethon [Python ?], the son of Apollo (Henry 11.). Probably  Hinton is right in thinking that ‘some Welsh chief is meant, since  the cattle-raid is more consonant with the martial adventures of  Wales than of any other nation with whose rulers Map was  acquainted well enough to feel personal hatred.’ The ‘ Ap’ of  Appollonides suggests to us the Welsh patronymic. Perhaps the  prince was David Ap-Owen of North Wales, who married the sister  of Henry 1.

P. 258, 1. 1. The lines on the omens of the several captures of  Jerusalem, which have been erroneously included here, were pro-  bably written soon after the fall of Jerusalem, but long enough  thereafter for the memorial couplet in that year to become current,  let us say, early in 1188 (Hinton). Bradley retains MS. a Sarracents  and renders ‘ from the Saracens.’

P. 258, 1. 28. Bradley reads nullum before MS. consilium as

Google

842 DE NUGIS GURIALIUM

Ethelred was so notorious for his unrded, lack of counsel, that he  was called ‘ The Unready.’

Pp. 258 f. Origin of Godnin.—Freeman, in a long note upon the  Origin of Earl Godwin (Norman Conquest, 1. Appendix, ZZ), weighs  the evidence of the Chronicles and concludes that he was not the  great nephew of the arch-traitor, Eadric, but was the son of Wulf-  noth—perhaps Child Wulfnoth, the South Saxon, perhaps Wulfnoth  the churl. In accord with the tradition preserved by Map, which  Freeman does not cite, is the statement of the minor chronicler,  Ralph the Black, that ‘ Godwin was the son of a cowherd ’ and the  story in the Knythnga Saga that Ulf, the Danish Earl, was taken  by Godwin to the house of his father, a rich farmer (Wulfnoth)  living in good style, where he was most comfortably entertained.  Ulf, delighted with the handsome countenance and ready speech  of the youth, treats him as his son, presents him to Canute, and  procures for him the dignity of Earl. On the other hand, the  Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (Canterbury) and Florence of Worcester  deem him of noble origin. Sharon Turner in his History of the  Anglo-Saxons seems to adopt both conflicting stories.

Pp. 261 f. The later part of the sketch of Godwin conflicts with the  earlier. The splendid youth of epic legend has become the subtle  and crafty and greedy politician of Norman calumnies.

Pp. 261-262. Map’s story of the destruction of Berkeley nunnery  is, according to Freeman (11. Appendix, note E), a legendary version  of the dissolution of Leominster after the love-affair of Earl Swegen  and the Abbess Eadgifu in 1046. Map’s tale is evidently mythical,  yet it is certain that there was a real suppression of a monastery  at Berkeley, and that Godwin profited by it in some way or other.

P. 262, 1. 26. Bosham.—‘ Walter Map follows up his story about  Berkeley with an absurd story of the way in which Godwin cheated  the Archbishop of Canterbury out of the lordship of Bosham, where  there seems to be a pun between Bosham and basium, “kiss ”’”  (Freeman, Norman Conquest, 11., 3d ed., 558).

P. 263, 1. 7. Cnut, the King of the Danes.— How utterly the real  story (of Cnut’s threefold election to the crown) and above all, how  utterly the true position of Cnut at the time of his father’s death  passed out of mind, is nowhere better shown than in the version  of Walter Map. The English, according to him, especially the  Londoners, were so tired of Ethelred that they sent for help to  Gnut, who, it would seem, had already founded the Northern  Empire ’ (Freeman, Norman Conquest, 1. 693).

P. 263, 1. 14. Danesta.— Where is Danesey?’ asks Freeman  (Norman Conquest, 1. 694). The context suggests the ‘ Danelagh.”  But Hinton, in a recent letter, answers, ‘Dengey Hundred in  Essex, and points to The Essex Domesday, pp. 21a, 24a, the  hundred Daneseia, and to the various forms, Dengey, Dansye, etc.  (Victoria History of Essex, 1. 372, 453, 457).

Google

ANNOTATIONS 343

P. 264, 1. 21. The English proverb—Bradley reads steng (stenc),  * staff,’ for MS. stent.

P. 264, 1. 31. Alfred and Edward.—These young princes became  the subjects of romance. According to Gaimar (Lestorte des Engles,  4785 f.), Edward, the elder brother, had gone into Hungary to help  his cousins; Alfred was killed by treason of Earl Godwin who  had him slain horribly at Ely, after Alfred at Guilford, on the top  of Geldesdone Hill, had promised to * set up good customs and love  well peace and right.’

Pp. 265-266. The Conference of Cnut and Edmund.—Freeman (1.  Appendix, WW) points out that ‘ the conference between Cnut and  Edmund has grown in the hands of many historians from Henry of  Huntingdon onwards into a single combat between the two kings,  which became in the course of time one of the established sensation  scenes of history.’ Neither Florence of Worcester nor the Knythnga  Saga knows of this story. In William of Malmesbury (11. 180),  Edmund proposes a single combat, but Cnut refuses on the  ground of his inferiority in strength, and a peaceful division of the  kingdom is effected. Henry of Huntingdon does not know whether  to describe a French tournament or Scandinavian holmgang ; lances  are broken, champions draw swords, the strength of Edmund is  prevailing, and Cnut, after a brave resistance, proposes that they  divide the kingdom and become sworn brothers ; the kiss of peace  is exchanged. Roger of Wendover (1. 457-459) tells substantially  the same story as Map. The Worcester Chronicle and Florence  place the meeting in an island of the Severn, Olney, near Deerhurst.

Pp. 266-267. Robert of Gloucester and Stephen Beauchamp.—This  story is paraphrased by Camden, Remaznes, 249.

Pp. 268-269. The death of Edmund.—A long list of English writers  accuse Eadric Streona of the deed. In William of Malmesbury,  the killing is accomplished in the manner narrated by Map, but by  two of Eadric’s chamberlains ; in Henry of Huntingdon by Eadric’s  son, Edmund’s nephew. Other versions tell the story of an archer  of wonderful workmanship, made by Eadric, whose bow launches  an arrow that kills the King (Freeman, 1. Appendix, WW). The  historians agree that Eadric, the murderer, was executed by Cnut,  but disagree regarding the mode of death. William of Malmesbury  has him choked and thrown through the window; Henry of  Huntingdon cuts off his head and sets it on a pole, Ethelred of  Rievaulx places it on the highest gate of London (Freeman, 1.  Appendix, DDD). Eadric Streona was a man of low birth and of  shrewd intellect, and thus corresponds well to Map’s unnamed  “man of servile and base condition.’ It was felt by many to be  * a great evil that such a man should rise to power.’

Pp. 269-272. The Story of Godin's Marriage—Freeman (1.  Appendix, note EEE) shows that Godwin is described by Map as  earl of exactly those parts of England of which he was never earl.

Google

344 DE NUGIS CORIALIUM

‘The imaginary warfare of Godwin after Edmund's death may  well be a confused remembrance of real warfare before the death  of Edmund, and one would like to know something about the  alleged resistance of Hereford to Canute. In the romantic Léfe  of Harold (Birch, Vita Haroldt, c. i. pp. 14-15), the tale of the  changing of the death-letter is thus concluded. All is done as  Godwin wishes, and Cnut puts the best face upon the matter by  receiving Godwin as a brother and giving him the rank of * consul ”’  or Earl. Ralph the Black refers to the same story and its happy  outcome ; but the authoritative historians tell us that the Earl  really married Gytha, the daughter of Thorgils and the sister of  Ulf. Interestingly enough, the same story is told by Saxo Gram-  maticus (194) of the way in which Ulf won his wife. The motive  of the letter-changing appears frequently in literature from the  story of the messenger of Pausanias (Thucydides, 1. 132) to that of  “* The Man who would be King” in William Morris’ Earthly Paradise.’

P. 272, 1. 21. Defeat of Louts the Fat by Henry I.—This is the  Battle of Brenneville fought in 1119 (Suger, Life of Louts, c. xxi.).

Pp. 272f. The character of Henry I—The character of Henry as  a ruler deeply impressed all his contemporaries. The Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle praises him frankly. Orderic, Henry of Huntingdon,  and Robert of Torigni give us favourable portraits. The Continental  writers extol him. Whatever his crimes or vices, he preserved  peace in his dominions, a firm rule, where no man dared hurt  another. Robert of Gloucester praises his learning and his zeal  for justice. ‘ His cruelties are isolated, his acts of beneficence are  systematic.’ (See Freeman, Norman Conquest, 1. Appendix, note X ;  Norgate, England under the Angevin Kings, 1. c. i.)

P. 273, 1. 2. The monastery of Cluny.—For an account of the  founding of Cluny in 910, of its early abbots from Berno and Odo to  Peter the Venerable, and of its strife with the Cistercians, who find  a voice in Bernard’s famous Apology, see Maitland, Dark Ages,  §§ xviii-xxvi. ‘Alfonso’ in the present passage is probably  Alfonso 1., King of Aragon. Abbot Peter confirms Map’s story.

Pp. 274-275. Henry I. and lus Chamberlain.—This story is trans-  lated by Camden, Remaznes, 247.

P. 275, 1. 27. Gurmund and Ysembard. — Bradley shows that  Geoffrey of Monmouth (xi. 8) absurdly transfers the stories of  Gurmund and Ysembard to the reign of another Louis in the sixth  century and makes Gurmund a king of Africans. Map’s authority  is certainly not Geoffrey. The story is told by Guido of Chélons  of Louis the Stammerer.

Pp. 276f. Louis VII—‘* The Anonymous History of Louis vn.,’  printed with Suger’s ‘ Life of Louis the Fat,’ discusses the early  acts of his reign and does justice to his virtues.

P. 278, 1. 30. The context demands that we read zonnullos for  nullos, to justify Galeran’s song. Effria seems to be Ivry.

Google

ANNOTATIONS 845

P. 278, 1.37. French verses —Here is a free rendering of the French  of Galeran (who left Ivry tower to Henry m1. in 1177) :—

* Walter plunders (the vines) and Buchard thieves,  And William de Gurney his pickings receives ;  King Louis takes what each man leaves.’

P. 281, 1. 18. The riches of kings——Giraldus repeats Walter’s  account of Louis’ conversation anent the riches of kings in his  * Instruction of a Prince ’ (Opera, v111. 370).

P. 282,1.5. Henry, Count of Champagne.—Henry the Liberal, one  of the escort that conducted the daughter of Louis on her ill-starred  betrothal to Constantinople (D.N.C. 1. xviii.), died in February,  1181. Jacques de Vitry exemplifies his generosity.

P. 282, 1. 36. Stster of Count Theobald—On October 4, 1160,  Louis vu. took as his third wife Adela of Champagne, daughter of  ‘Theobald tv. called the Great, of whom Map has much more to say,  and sister of Theobald v. Adela was the mother of Louis’ only  son, Philip Augustus, who succeeded him in 1180.

P. 283, 1.38. Louts’ recent marriage —As the marriage of Louis with  Constance, daughter of the King of Castile (1154), is described as  ‘recent,’ we know that the young Map was in Paris shortly after  that year.

P. 285,1.1. Philip, the son of Louts the Fat.—Suger, who tells the  story of young Philip’s death in his ‘ Life of Louis the Fat,’ calls  him ‘a child, in the flower of his age and of great sweetness of  temper, the hope of the good and the terror of the wicked.’

P. 285,1.21. Henry I.’s victory over Louts—The Battle of Brenne-  ville, 1119 (above, p. 272), was little more than a skirmish.

P. 286,1.5. Theobald, Count of Champagne——Theobald the Great,  Count of Blois, Chartres, and Champagne, was the elder brother of  King Stephen, and himself a possible successor to the English  throne at the death of his uncle, Henry 1., with whom he had allied  himself in wars against Louis the Fat. These wars fill many pages  of Suger’s ‘ Life of Louis.’

P. 286, 1. 24. ‘ Tpwrut, Aleman.’—A parallel to this oft-cited  taunt is to be found in the French scoff at the German followers  of the Emperor Conrad, when these were harassed by the Turkish  cavalry during the Second Crusade (1148), ‘ Pousse, pousse,  Allemand ’ (Ilovr(7 ’AAapave, cited by Michelet, 1. 317).

Pp. 289-290. Theobald and the Leper—tThis story is told at some  length by Giraldus in his ‘ Instruction of a Prince,’ 1. 20 (Works,  vit. 135-186). He praises the virtues of Theobald. The tale  creeps into many collections of exempla and of homilies.

Pp. 291-292. The dream of Willttam Rufus.—For full discussion of  the dream of the Red King see Freeman, William Rufus, 11.320 and  note SS. In the version of the dream by Benoit de Sainte More,  40528 f., Gundulph is the expounder of a dream in which the King

Google

346 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

sees upon an altar the dead body of a stag, later changing to that  of a man. Giraldus, in his ‘ Instruction of a Prince,’ does not:  mention the name of the Bishop who interprets William’s dream  and advises him to restore Anselm.

P. 291, 1. 11. Hinton, in a recent letter, suggests for a Chazar,  Achazar, Achéres.

P. 292, 1. 16. Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury (1093-1109).

P. 293, 1.29. Gerard of Hereford——Gerard was only a subdeacon  when he was appointed Bishop of Hereford, 1096. He was made  Archbishop of York on the decease of Thomas his predecessor (whom  Map wrongly calls ‘ Ealdred ’) in November 1100, and died in 1108.  Ordericus Vitalis (x. xv.) tells us that Henry was anointed by the  venerable Maurice, Bishop of London. There seems to be no  truth in Map’s story of Henry’s bargain with Gerard (D.N.B.).

Pp. 294 f. The character of Henry I.—Freeman has gathered  (Norman Conquest, v. note X) many contemporary tributes to the  character of Henry 1. Miss Norgate is largely indebted to these  pages of Map for her account of the court of this king (England  under the Angevin Kings, 1. 413). Freeman, consulting the manu-  script itinerary of Henry, shows that he journeyed freely through  Wessex and Mercia, but seldom beyond their borders.

P. 295,1.16. The maintenance of peace —— Good man he (Henry 1.)  was and great awe there was of him. No one durst misdo another  in his time. Peace he made for man and deer. Whoso bare his  burden of gold and silver, no man durst say to him aught but good’  (Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, A° 1135).

P. 296, 1.20. The marriage of Henry I.— And then soon hereafter  the King took to wife Matilda, daughter of King Malcolm of Scot-  land and the good Queen Margaret, King Edward’s kinswoman of  the right royal race of England ’ (Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, A° 1100).  Matilda was known as ‘ good Queen Maude.’

P.296,1.22. Henry's children Many chroniclers, Orderic, William  of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, and poets, Wace and Benoit,  tell the story of the drowning of William the Aetheling in the White  Ship in 1120, and of his father’s desperate grief at the loss of his  hopes. From the marriage of Matilda with Geoffrey of Anjou  sprang the Angevin Kings of England, Henry 11. and his sons.

Pp. 297 f. Personality of Henry II—Upon this account by Map,  blended with the sketches of Peter of Blois (Epistle lxvi., Giles, 1. 193)  and Giraldus Cambrensis (* Instruction of a Prince,’ 11. c. 29), Miss  Norgate bases her vivid picture of Henry’s person and habits (1. 409).  Of his sudden journeys, Peter gives a lively account, Epistle xiv.

P. 298, 1.28. Matilda, a bad adviser —Modern historians give us a  very different impression of the Empress Matilda. ‘ Henry’s chief  assistant in the management of his Continental affairs. was his  mother. Matilda had been a harsh, violent, impracticable woman,  but there was in her character an element of moral and intellectual

Google

ANNOTATIONS 347

grandeur. . . . She contributed not a little,.by warnings and  suggestions, to the success of her son ’ (Norgate, 1. 442-443).

P. 299, 1. 5. The mother of Geoffrey of York.—Dimock (Giraldus,  Works, vu1., Preface, p. xxxvii.) throws doubt on Map’s whole account  of Geoffrey’s mother save her name, and suggests that she may have  been an Akeny (Acquigny), a noble family of Normandy. ‘ Geoffrey  had the Angevin fearlessness, energy, persistence and thorough-  ness, with a fair share of the versatile capabilities of the family ’  (Norgate). Giraldus has given a detailed account of the life of  Henry’s most loyal son, the Archbishop of York (Works, tv. 357-431). }-" ~~  His quarrel with his canons, to which Map refers, came in 1193.

P.299,1.25. Henry, Emperor of the Romans.— Matilda, the daughter  of Henry 1., was betrothed to the Emperor Henry v. in 1110, and  married with great pomp at Mainz, January 6, 1114. Shortly  after this marriage, Henry was defeated at the battle of Welfisholz  (1115) by the Saxons, who left the bodies of their fallen opponents  on the field as being under the interdict of the Church (compare  Map’s version). Map’s story of his feigned death and exile seems  to be imaginary, though Giraldus and Hoveden mention the  tradition. He was, as Map says, a heartless son in his removal  of his grey-headed father (1106). There is no evidence that he  slew with his own hand his brother Conrad, King of Italy, who  died in 1101.

P. 301, 1. 38. Ralph de Diceto, 11. 10, places this conference in  April 1182, but does not mention our incident.

P. 302, 1. 34. The chroniclers note that the whole body of French  crusaders made common cause with the Germans and the partisans  of Conrad, Marquis of Montferrat, Lord of Tyre, in thwarting every  scheme that Richard proposed either for the settlement of the French  kingdom in Palestine or for the reconquest of its capital (Norgate,  11, 321). Hence the accusations against Richard, when Conrad,  whom Map, confusing him with his brother, calls ‘ Boniface,’ was  stabbed by assassins at Tyre, April 28, 1192. See Scott’s dramatic  version of Conrad's death in The Talisman.

P. 303, 1. 30. The Channel crossing.—Henry’s narrow escape from  shipwreck between Barfleur and Portsmouth occurred on March 3,  1170 (Gesta Henrict, u. i. 3; Roger Hoveden, 1. 5).

P. 304, 1. 3. Thurstan and Adam.—Camden renders this story,  Remaines, 246-247.

P. 304, 1.10. Thurstan Fitz-Simon.—Dr. J. H. Round in The King’s  Sergeants, 1911, p. 192, supplies the word Stmonis after fizus, and  a few lines later reads scannum (Wright, stannum) for stantium. He  also points out that Adam of Yarmouth was a justice in eyre in  1169 and 1173, and that Thurstan fil. Simonis was similarly employed  in 1173 and had for a colleague Map himself (James). The unjust  dealing of Thurstan with the church at Marcham is recorded,  Chron. Mon. de Abingdon, 11. 184-187 (Rolls Ser.).

Google

348 DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

P. 305, 1.20. Christmas at Caen.—The author of Gesta Henrics, 11. i.  291, notes that Henry kept Christmas 1182-1183 at Caen with his sons  Henry, Richard, and Geoffrey, his son-in-law the Duke of Saxony  and his Duchess, and many bishops, earls, and barons, but he says  nothing of the Tankarville incident. The Tankarvilles were  hereditary high-chamberlains of Normandy. This William had  sided against the King in his struggles with his sons.

P. 307, 1.24. Patrick.—Hinton reads for patricit, Patriciz, and indi-  cates Patrick, Earl of Salisbury, Governor of Aquitaine, murdered  at Poitiers by Guy de Lusignan, or more probably by his brother,  Geoffrey, in 1168 (Norgate, 11. 59).

P.308,1.18. William, Earl of Arundel.—This Earl was that William  of Albini (Aubigny) who married Adeliza, widow of Henryt. (d.1176).  In 1186, when Henry nu. kept Christmas at Guilford, we find his  son William, Earl of Sussex, serving at the table of the King, as  was his hereditary right at solemn feasts (Gesta Henrict, m1. ii. 3).

P.310,1.8. The resignation of Geoffrey —Geoffrey's resignation of  the see of Lincoln was formally completed at Marlborough on the  feast of Epiphany, 1182 (Diceto, 1. 10). The Ashwell incident  took place in the preceding year, 1181. But these pages were  written by Map several years after the death of Henry u., who  was devoted to his natural son. No other writer than Map hints  a doubt of Geoffrey’s paternity (D.N.B.).

P.310,1.12. Frenchof Marlborough.—Matzke, Modern Philology, 111.,  1905, 47-60, gives several instances of the ‘ French of Marlborough ”  —bad French spoken by Englishmen in Old French literature—  and discusses its vocabulary, phonetics, morphology, and syntax.

P.311,1.29. Geoffrey's seal—Camden, who paraphrases (Remaines,  251) Map’s story of his reply to Geoffrey, adds: “The Bishop  Geoffrey in all his instruments passing from him, used the style  of G. Archepiscopus Eborum, but, in the circumference of his seal,  to notify his royal parentage, Sigtllum Galfred: fils Regts Anglorum,  as I observed in his seals.’

P. 312,1.14. The prebend once held by Geoffrey The prebend of  Mapesbury in the cathedral church of St. Paul and in the parish  of Willesden ’ (James).

Pp. 312 f. Recapitulation —Hinton regards this section as a ‘rough  draft of the opening pages of the work,’ written after Randolph  de Glanville’s appointment as Justiciar (April 1180). It is probably  the first of all the fragments, and its last lines are certainly not  Map’s finishing touchy

P. 318, 1.36. The Spanish dispute .—This dispute, of which Henry  was chosen arbiter, was in 1177 (Giraldus, ‘ The Instruction of a  Prince,’ Works, viii. 159, 218).

Google

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

A

Aaron, 200.

Abecius (Habeis), Sultan of Baby-  lon, 38.

Abel, 200.

Abelard, Peter (1079-1142), 48, 50.

Abraham, 54, 55.

Absalom, 178 f., 200.

Achéres (near Pontoise), 291.

Acheron, 313, 314.

Achilles, 101, 109, 254.

Achitophel, 78, 178, 200.

Acre (Kehaeans. 301, 302.

Acrisius, 194.

Adam, 3, 185.

Adam of Yarmouth, Keeper of Seal,  304.

Admetus, 186.

Aeacus, 6, 317.

Aeneas, 254.

Africa, 45.

Ajax, 109.

Alan Rebrit, King of Brittany, 237-

247.

Albaemanus, John (Abp. of Lyons,  1181-1193), 83.

Aleman (German), 286.

Alexander u1., Pope (1159-1181),  43, 76, 87, 108, 229, 282.

Alexander of Macedon, 117,254-255.

Alexandria, 37.

Alexius, 109. |

Alfonso, King of Spain (Aragon,  1072), 273.

Alfred, son of Ethelred, 258, 264.

Alnodus (£lfnoth), son of Edric  Wilde, 96-97, 221.

Alps, 82, 294.

Amphion, 144, 192.

Ancus, 264.

Andronicus Comnenus (Emperor of  Constantinople, 1183-1185), 107,  258.

Andronicus, his grandfather, 107.

Andronicus, his father, 107.

Google

Anjou, 73, 178, 179, 312.

Anselm (Abp. of Canterbury, 1093-  1109), 290, 292, 293,

Antaeus, 1.

Antony, hermit, 99.

| Aphrodite, 224.

| Apollo, 175, 186, 194, 195, 227.

| Aponus, near Padua, 190.

| Appollonides, Welsh King, story of,

256-257.

Aquilo, 196.

Aquitaine, 73, 178.

Arnold of Brescia (c. 1100-1155),  48-50.

Arrius, 191.

Arundel, 308.

Ashwell, Herts, 310.

Asiatics, 131, 139, 148.

Assassins, sect of, 41.

Atreus, 78.

Atropos, 188.

Augustine, St. (Bishop of Hippo,  354-430), 1, 81, 312.

Aureolus of Theophrastus, Golden  Book, 196.

Austclive, Aust-ferry on Severn,.  90, 118.

Auster, 196.

Auxerre, 38.

Avernus, 262.

B  Baat, 186.  Babel, 184.  Babylon, 19, 38, 39, 156.  Bacchus, 62, 202, 227, 268.  Bala, 251.  Balaam, 21.  Baldwin (Bp. of Worcester, 1180-  1184), 22.  Baratus, 252.  Barbara, St., 307.  Barfleur Bay, 296.  Barnaby’s, St., day (June 11), 178.  Bartholomew (Bp. of Exeter, 1162-  1186), 22.  349

350 DE NUGIS  Basil, St., 46, 51.  Bath, 41.

Bathsheba, 185, 186.

Bavaria, Duke of, 299.

Bavius, 182.

Beachley, 118.

Beauchamp, Stephen de, 266-277.

Beaujeu, Guichard de (d. 1137), 22.

Beauvais, 208, 213.

Beauvais, Bishop of, 208, 213 f.

Becket. See Thomas, 47-48, 119.

Belus, 315.

Benedict, St., 46, 51.

Berith, 210.

Berkeley-on-Severn, 261, 262.

Bernard of Clairvaux, St. (1091-  1158), 47-49.

Bethenium, Lake, 115.

Bihere, 119.

Biscay, Bay of, 2

Bishop (Giltescop), 109-110.

Blois, 287.

Boethius, 2.

Boniface of Montferrat (mistake for  Conrad, d. 1192), 302.

Bosham, near Chichester, 262.

Brabancon, 72,

Brabant, 72.

Brace of St. George, 108.

Brand, chaplain to Godwin, 270.

Braose, William de (d. 1211), 89.

Breauc, 92.

Brechein, 92.

Brecknock, 92, 93.

Brecknock Mere (Llangorse Lake),  91.

Brenin, King, 91.

Britain, Little or Lesser, 218-2338,  237.

Briton, Breton, 15, 18, 97, 233, 2387,  241

Brittany, 73, 178, 237, 243-244,  272, 296.

Bruno, 30.

Buchard the Molossian (hound), 278.  (French official, 1165-1179).

Burgundy, 32, 33, 73, 85, 178, 221.

Burneham, Robert of, 50.

Byblis, 251-252.

Byland, Abbey in Yorkshire, 66.

Byzantium, 281.

C

Canpoc, Welsh King, 90-91.  Cadolan, 123.

Google

CURIALIUM

Caen, 305.

Caesar, 7, 188-189, 254.

Cain, 78, 200.

Camo, 245.

Canius, 190.

Canterbury, 47, 88, 262, 290, 310,  312.

Capaneus, 209.

Capitol, 188.

Carthusians, 30, 71.

Castellum Crescentii, San Angelo  in Rome, 228.

Catiline, 182, 276.

Cato (Dionysius), 28, 130, 182, 287.

Cato of Utica, 191.

Catullus, 182.

Cephalus, 167.

Cerberus, 316.

Ceres, 62, 202, 227.

Champagne, 282.

Charlemagne, 46, 119, 126-127, 275,  281.

Charles (the Great), 254.

Charon, 314.

Chartres, 286.

Chartreuse, 30, 31, 49.

Charybdis, 232, 316.

Cherulus, a bad poet, 182.

Chester, 272.

Cheveslin, Welsh thief, 122.

Chichester, 262.

Christiana (Cristina), 251.

Cicero, 190.

Cinyras, 186.

Circe, 184.

Cistercians, order of, 31, 44 f., 57f.,  B84, 85

Clairvaux, 48.

(Claudian) Mamertus, 182.

Clodoan, son of Remelin, 237 f.

Cluny, 22, 23, 215, 273, 298, 301.

Cluvienus, a bad poet, 68, 182.

Cnut, King of England (1014-1035),

263 f.

Cocytus, 313, 314.

Colchester, 104.

Conan the Fearless, a Welsh robber,  121 f.

Constantinople, 107-109, 229, 231,  258

Corinth, 192.

Cornwall, 119.

Coutances, Walter of, 312.  Coxwold, 63.

Crépy en Valois, 120.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

Cumeraic, Mt., 93.

Cunnan, Emperor (Conrad ?), 103.  Cupid, 94-95.

Curius, 182.

Cybele, 25.

Dacian, 58.

Damascus, 37.

Danaé, 166, 194.

Danes, 109, 263, 265-266, 269 f.

Danesia (Dengey), 263.

Danube, 255.

Dathan, 78, 200.

David, 3, 27, 37, 67, 178, 185-186,  200, 286.

David of Scotland (1124-1153), 296.

Dean, Forest of, 89.

Deerhurst, 265.

Deheubarth, South Wales, 92.

Deianira, 158, 193.

Delilah, 186.

Demea, 134.

Demosthenes, 192.

Denmark, 271, 272.

Diana, 146.

Dictinna, 94.

{Diomede) son of Tydeus, 109.

Dione, 175, 222.

Dis, 316-317.

Durham, 294.

E

Ea.prep (Abp. of York, 1060-1068),  mistake for Thomas (d. 1100),  293.

Edgar, King of England (959-975),  258

Edmund, St., King of East Anglia  (854-870), 40.

Edmund, Ironside, King of England  (Apr. to Nov. 1016), 265.

Edric Wilde, 94-96.

Edward the Martyr, King (975-979),  258.

Edward the Confessor (1042-1066),  118 f., 258, 264.

Effria (Ivry), 278.

Egypt, 212, 271.

Egyptians, 53 f.

Eleanor, Queen, wife of Henry 11.,  297

Eli, 67.

Google

351

Elias, Welsh hermit, 89-90.

Elijah, prophet, 38, 211.

Emma, Queen of Ethelred and  Cnut, 264.

Empedocles, 145, 185, 198.

Ennius, 198.

Ero, 136-138.

Ethelbert, St., King of East Anglia  (d. 793), 97, 221.

Ethelred the Unready (978-1016),  258, 263, 264, 265.

Etna (Aetna), 145, 185.

Euan, Evan (Bacchus), 268.

Eudo, story of, 198, 199-215.

Eugenius 1. (Pope, 1145-1153), 48,  50, 70.

Europa, 187.

Euryalus, 157.

Eurydice, 144,

Eve, 200.

Evore, 275.

Exeter, 22, 293.

F

Fasius, 182.

Faversham, 297.

Fescennine verses, 195.

Flanders, 100, 178.

Foliot, Gilbert (Bp. of London,  1163-1188), 22, 49.

Fontainebleau (Fountain of Blaad),  284,

France, 45, 47, 73, 128, 199, 219,  275 f., 297, 319.

Frank, 79, 109, 237, 242, 258.

Franko, a knight, 119-120.

French, 16, 272, 275f., 302, 305,  310.

G

Gaves (Columns of Hercules), 190.

Gado (Grado), story of, 101-107.

Galeran (of Ivry), 278-281.

Galo and Sadius, story of, 131-  155. :

Galway, 296.

Gate of the Danes, 109.

Gaul, 119, 276.

Geoffrey (dedicatee), 15.

Geoffrey of Auxerre, 47.

Geoffrey, Count of Anjou, father of  Henry u1., 296-297.

352

Geoffrey, brother of Henry 11.,  296.

Geoffrey, illegitimate son of Henry  11., 1153-1212 (Abp. of York),  299, 309 f.

Geoffrey of Brittany, son of Henry  11., 305.

George, St., Abbey of, 307.

George, St., Brace of, 108.

Gerard la Pucelle, 87.

Gerard (Bp. of Hereford, 1096-  1100; Abp. of York, 1100-1108),  293 f.

Gerbert (Pope Sylvester 11., 999-  1008), 221-229.

German, 281, 286, 301.

Germany, 119.

Gesligair, 123.

Gestin, 116.

Gilbert Foliot, Bp. of London, 22,  49, 125, 197-198.

Gilbert de Lacy, 82.

Gilbert of Sempringham (d. 1189),

70.

Gillescop (Gillo), 109 f.

Gisors, 272.

Glamorgan, 121.

Glanville, Randolph de, Justiciar  (d. 1191), 8, 318.

Gloucester, 81, 260, 265, 267, 272.

Godwin, Earl, story of, 257 f.

Golen, 116.

Goliath, 37, 48.

Gomorrah, 78.

Gorgon, 224, 231.

Gran, 87.

Grandmont, 32.

Grandmontines, order of, 32, 68-  70.

Grecian Sea, 82.

Greek, 107-109, 128, 189.

Gregory, St., 29.

Gregory, monk of Gloucester, 81-

Grenoble, Bishop of, 30.

Grésivaudan, 30, 71.

Gréve, a part of Paris, 285.

Griffin, Welsh King, 115.

Guichard de Beaujeu (d. 1137), 22.

Gundulph (Bp. of Rochester, 1077-  1108), 291-292.

Gurmund, 275.

Gurney, William de, provost of  Paris, 278.

Gwestin of Gwestiniog, 91.

Google

DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

H  Hasers (Abecius), Sultan of Baby-

lon, 38

Ham, 200.

Hamelin (Abbot of Gloucester, 1148-  1179), 82.

Hamericus, 36, 37.

Hannibal, 255.

Hay (Sepes Incisa), 124.

Hebrews, 53 f., 178.

Hector, 237.

Helen, St., born at Colchester,  104, |

Helicon, 182.

Henno cum Dentibus, story of,  218-220.

Henno, a nobleman of Brittany,  243-245.

Henry, 255.

Henry, son of Theobald of Cham-  pagne (d. 1181), 282.

Henry 1., King of England (1100-  a 107, 266, 272 f. , 285, 293 f.,

07.

Henry 1., King of England (1154-  1189), 18, 62, 66, 70, 71, 82,  178f., 238, 255, 280, 297f,  302 f., 318.

Henry of Bavaria and Saxony  (Henry the Lion), 305, 306.

Henry, son of Henry 1. (d. 1183),  178-180, 305.

nen v., Emperor (1106-1125),

Hercules, 1, 2, 101, 144, 145, 146,  158, 193.

Hereford, 18, 97, 125, 221, 2338,  269, 272, 293.

Herla, King of Britons, story of,  15, 16, 17, 283.

Herlethingi, troop of Herla, 233.

Herod, 140.

Hikenai (Ykenai), mother of Henry  11.'s son, Geoffrey of York, 309.

Hilarion, St., 45.

Hildebert of Le Mans (d. 1133),

29.  i pao 29, 85.  Hoel, a Welshman, 118.  Hoel, Count of Nantes, 243.  Holy Land, 302.  Homer, 23, 59, 182, 198, 255.  Horace, 320.  Horeb, 63.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

Hospitallers, order of, 42, 44, 75.

Hubald (Lucius 11., Pope, 1181-  1185), 229.

Hugh (Bp. of Acre), 87.

Hugh, St. (Bp. of Lincoln, 1186-  1200), 6.

Humbert of Beaujeu (d. 1174), 23.

Hungary, 87, 265.

Huntingdon, 272.

Hushai, 178.

I

IcKNIELD, 268.

Iltut, St., a Welsh soldier, 91.  Indi, 104.

Indies, 103, 281.

Isaac, 55.

Israel, 200.

Israelite, 54.

Italy, 299.

Ixion, 5, 6, 315.

Jacos, 55.

Jason, 196.

Jeremiah, 26.

Jerome, St., 44.

Jerusalem (capture by Saladin, 26,  258), 33, 34, 37, 75, 82, 225, 227,  257-258, 293, 301, 308.

Jerusalem (Rome), Santa Croce,  228

Jew, 228, 283.

Jezebel, 200.

Job, 181.

Jocelin (Bp. of Salisbury, 1142-  1189), 41.

John, 183.

John AJbaemanus (Abp. of Lyons,  1181-1193), 83.

John the Evangelist, 72.

John, St., Lateran (in Rome), 228.

John de Maurienne, St., 31.

John Planeta, 48.

Jonah, 211.

Jordan, 298.

Joseph, 78, 271.

Juba, 255.

Judas (Iscariot), 306.

Judas Maccabaeus, 122.

Julian, St., of Le Mans, 179.

Julius Caesar, 188, 189.

Juno, 191, 315.

Jupiter, Jove, 146, 175, 186, 187.

Google

353.  K  (KATHERINE, St.), 109.  Kimelec (Brittany), Meinfelinus

de, 244-246.  L

Lacy, Gilbert de (77. 1150), 82.

Lais, 186-137.

Lais, courtesan of Corinth, 192.

Lata Quercus (Big Oak) in Flanders,  100.

Lateran Council (1179), 48 (282).

ae William, English soldier,  125.

L’Aumone, abbot of, 84.

Lausus and Parius, story of, 155 f.

Lazarus, 29, 49.

Lebanon, 195.

Ledbury(Lydbury) North, in Shrop-.  shire, 97, 221.

Leicester, 272.

Le Mans, 29, 87, 179, 233, 296.

Leo, Pope (u1., 795-816), 46; (iv.,.  847-855), 182.

Leon (St. Pol), 237.

Leonis, Peter, 228.

Leontius, 189-190.

Lethe, 313, 314, 315, 316.

Leu, St. (Loup or Lupus), 242.

Leucius, 246.

Leucothoe, 187.

Leviathan (Satan), 72, 210.

Limoges, 59, 82, 83, 179.

Lincoln, 6, 272, 309.

Little Britain, 218 f.

Livia, 192.

Livy of Aponus, 190.

Llewelyn, a Welsh King, 115 f.

Llewelyn Luarc, his nephew, 117.

Llyfni, river in Wales, 91.

London, 22, 96, 125, 197, 221, 264,

68.

Lorraine, 100.

Louis, son of Charlemagne (d. 840),  120-121, 275.

Louis the Fat (v1., 1108-1137), 107,  272, 275-276, 284 f.

Louis the Young (vu1., 1137-1180),  108, 255, 276 f., 289, 297, 308.

Louvain, 100.

Lucan, 254.

Lucifer, 47, 155, 201-202.

Lucilia, the wife of Lucretius, 192.

Lucius, Pope (111., 1181-1185), 108,  229. |

354

Lucretia, 182, 186.

Luke of Hungary (Abp. of Gran,  c. 1175), 87-89.

Lycaon, 78.

Lyons, 76, 83.

M

MaccaBaeEus, Judas, 122.

Macrobius, 313.

Maeonides (Homer), 198.

Maevius, 182.

Maine, 178, 179.

Mamertus (Claudian), 182.

Manuel, Emperor of Constanti-  nople (1143-1180), 107-108.

Manuel, his son, 108.

Map, Walter, 309-312.

Marius, 192.

Marlborough, 310.

Mars, 146, 183, 187, 191, 267.

Marsus, 182.

Martel (Corréze), 178 f.

Martha, 30, 46.

(Martial), 198.

Mary, 30, 32, 46, 52, 69.

Mary Magdalene, 289.

Matilda, Queen, wife of Henry 1.,  299.

Matilda, Empress, mother of Henry  u. (d. 1167), 296 f.

Maurienne, St. John de, 31.

Medea, 189, 196.

Medusa, 231.

Meiler, 116.

Meilinus, 118.

Meinfelinus de Kimelec, a noble of  Brittany, 244 f.

Mela, 251.

Melvis, Peter de, 293.

Menestratus, 255.

Meridiana, a phantom, 223 f.

Merlin, 179.

Messina, 232.

Metamorphoseos, 222.

Metellus, 192.

Miles of Gloucester, Earl of Here-  ford (d. 1143), 297.

Minerva, 71, 139, 224.

Minos, 6, 317.

Minsterworth, near Westbury, 267-  268.

Moab, 25.

Molossian, 278.

Montferrat, Boniface (for Conrad,  d. 1192) de, 302.

Google

DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Montpellier, 48.

Morpheus, demon, story of, 203 f.  Moses, 62, 300.

Mouzon, Reginald de, 282.  Mulciber (Vulcan), 146.

Myrrha, 186.

N

NaBat, 78.

Nantes, 243.

Naples, Philip of, 79.

Nassaradin, 38, 39.

Navarre, King of, 318.

Neapolitan, 80.

Neath, 64.

Nebuchadnezzar, 15.

Neptune, 265.

Nero, 58, 182, 255, 258, 276.

Nessus, 158, 193.

Nevers, 49.

New Forest, 291.

Nicholas, 250-252.

Nicholas Pipe, a merman, 232.

Nigra Montana, 465, 79.

Ninevites, 211.

Ninus, 156, 158 f.

Nisos, father of Scylla, 186.

Noah, 52.

Nominailists, 48.

Norman, 218, 257.

Normandy, 73, 258, 264, 272, 296,  304 f.

North Ledbury (Lydbury), 94.

Northampton, 272.

Northumbria, 127.

North Wales, 92, 122.

Nottingham, 272.

Numa, 172, 225, 264.

O

Orra, King in England (eighth  century), 102 f.

(Offa’s Dyke), 102.

Olga, demon, 207 f.

Ollo and Sceva, story of, 247-253.

Orestes, 197.

Orpheus, 144.

Ostia, 229.

Ovid, 17, 175.

P

Pacvuvius, 191.  Pales, 202.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

Pallas, 146, 188, 195, 224, 227,  262

Pampeluna, 126.

Pan, 16, 100, 202, 227.

Pannonia, 265.

Papia (Pavia), 248, 252.

Paris, 87, 275, 278, 283, 285, 286.

Parius and Lausus, story of, 155 f.

Parthians (Turks), 107.

_ Paterines (Publicans), a sect of  heretics, 72 f.

Poe , Earl of Salisbury (d. 1168),  307.

Paul, apostle, 30, 97, 311.

Paul, the first hermit, 45, 99.

Payens, Hugo de, founder  Templars, 33.

Payens FitzJohn, chamberlain of  Henry 1., 274-275.

Pelops, 78.

Penelope, 186.

Pepin, 254.

Perictione (Pennutia), 194.

Persian, 131.

Peter, Apostle, 37, 96, 228, 229.

Peter (Abelard) (1079-1142), 48, 50.

Peter Leonis, 228-229.

Peter de Melvis, 293.

Peter (Abp. of Tarentaise, 1141-  1174), 82-85.

Phaethon, 140, 186.

Pharaoh, 78, 89, 200.

Pharisee, 53.

Philip, son of Louis vi., death of  (1131), 285.

Philip, Count of Flanders, 178.

Philip of Naples, 179.

Philip of France (Augustus, 1180-  1223), 302.

Phlegethon, 313.

Phoebus, 140, 146, 186, 187.

Phoroneus, 189.

Pierian Spring, 182.

Pilate, 227.

Pipe, Nicholas, a merman, 232.

Pirithous, 157.

Plato, 194.

Pluto, 317.

Poitiers, 83, 307.

Ponthieu, 275.

Pontigny, 66.

Pontoise, 285, 291.

Porphyrius, 1, 313.

Porta Dacorum at Constantinople  (Gate of Danes), 109.

of

Google

355

Portugal, story of King of, 19.

Priapus, 202.

Procris, 166, 167.

Publicans (Paterines), a sect of  heretics, 72 f.

Pyragmon (a Cyclops), 146.

Pyramus, 145.

Python, 179.

Q

QUINTILIAN, 66.

R

Ranpo.pH DE GLANVILLE, Justiciar,  8, 318.

Raoul de Cambrai, 2765.

Raso, story of, 166-172.

Ravenna, 227, 247, 252.

Red Sea, 211.

Reginald (Bp. of Bath and Wells,  1174-1192), 41.

Reginald de Mouzon, 282.

Remelin, Count of St. Pol. (c. 870),  237 f.

Rennes, 237.

Rericus, 62.

Resus, 173 f.

Reynuc, 93 f.

Rhadamanthus, 6, 317.

Rheims, 73, 126, 221.

Rhone, 76.

Richard, a tax-gatherer, 90.

Richard 1., King of England (1189-  1199), 180, 302, 305.

Richard (Abp. of Canterbury (1174-  1185), 310, 312.

Rivius, 142.

Robert of Burneham, 50.

Robert, Duke of Normandy, 293.

Robert, Earl of Gloucester, son of  Henry 1., 266-267, 297.

Roger (Abp. of York, 1154-1191),  63.

Roger (Bp. of Worcester, 1164-  1180), 126.

Rollo, story of, 172-176.

Rome, Romans, 41, 42, 43, 50, 58,  76, 97, 102 f., 225, 227, 281, 286,  296, 299.

Ross (Hereford), 269.

Rothericus, 118.

Rouen, 179.

Routiers (Ruttae), a sect of heretics,  72.

356

Ruffinus, Valerius to, 183-196.  Rufinus, 182.  Ruso, 182.

S

SasineE Women, 186,

Sadius and Galo, story of, 131-155.

Saladin, 25, 26, 301.

Salisbury, 41, 307.

Salius, story of, 235, 236.

Salomon of Brittany, story of, 243-  247.

Salona, 141.

Samson, 186,

Saracen, 35, 108, 168, 172, 257-258,  260.

Satalia, Gouffre de Satalie, 232.

Satan, 26, 200, 210, 212, 214.

Saturn, 274.

Saul, 285.

Saumur, 178.

Saxon, 18.

Saxony, 299.

Sceva and Ollo, story of, 247-253.

Scotland, 111, 119, 296.

acy 186, 221.  alias 157.

astian, St., 40.

canes 285.

Sempringham, Gilbert of, 55.

Sempringham, Order of (Gilbert-  ines), 70-71.

Senlis, 302.

Sepes Incisa (Hay), 1

Serloof Wilton Cbbote of L Aumone),  84, 85.

Severn, 117, 118, 121, 261, 265,  267.

Shaftesbury, 258.

Sherburne, 44.

Sicily, King of, 233, 281.

Silvester, see Gerbert, 221-229.

Simon, 318.

Sisyphus, 5, 314.

Sodom, 78.

Sel, 187.

Solomon, 6, 186, 225, 287.

Sophocles, 254.

Southwell, 294.

South Wales, 122.

Spain, 75, 283, 318.

Spaniard, 273.

Google

DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

St. Pol (Leon), 237.

Stephen de Beauchamp, 266-267.

Stephen of Grandmont, 32, 68.

eee King of England, 296-  297.

Stephen, Count of Blois, 296.  Steropes (Cyclops), 146.  Stilbon (Mercury), 146, 195.  Styx, 313.  Suanus, 105-106.  Sulpicius, 191.  Sur (Tyre), 302.  Susanna, 19.  Syria, 302.

T

TANKARVILLE, William of, 304 f.

Tantalus, 5, 15, 314.

Tarentaise, Peter of, 82-85.

Templars, 33, 36, 37, 41, 42, 44,  75, 82, 236.

Terence, 14.

Terentia, 190.

Thebes, 144.

Theobald (Count of Champagne,  1125-1152), 282, 286 f.

Theophrastus, Aureolus of, 196.

Theseus, 157.

Thestias (Deianira), 193.

Theudus or Theodosius, 116, 118.

Thomas of Canterbury (Becket),  (d. 1170), 47-48, 119.

Thrace, 157.

Thurstan Fitz-Simon, ‘ Despencer,’  304.

Thyestes, 78.

Tirynthius (Hercules), 193.

Titans, 146.

Titus, 26.

Tityus, 190, 315.

Tobias, 67.

Toledo, King of, 318.

Tongillus, 188.

Trahair, a thief in South Wales,  122 f.

Se Nagelauc (Trinio Faglog),  91 f.

Trojan, 109.

Troy, 56.

Turks, 107, 108.

Turpin (Abp. of Rheims), ‘ Deeds of  Charlemagne’ ascribed to, 126.

Tydeus, 109.

Tyre (Sur), 302.

Tyrel, Walter, 291, 293.

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES

U  Unysses, 184, 185.  Ur, 63.  Uther, 123.

Vv

Va.ens, Emperor, 190.

Valerius to Ruffinus, 183-196.

Vandals, 101.

Venus, 62, 71, 139, 172, 174, 183,  187 f., 204, 222, 225, 227, 262,  267.

Vienne, 73, 74.

Virgil, 182, 198, 254.

Vitellius, 182.

Vulcan (Mulciber), 146, 183, 187,  191.

WwW

W ave, see G(r)ado, 101-107.

Waldenses, 61, 76 f.

Waldes (Waldo), 76.

Walenfreit, 89.

Wales, 90, 114f., 238, 272.

Walter, 183, 255.

Walter, Count of Nevers (d. 1149),  49

Walter (Gauter), Chamberlain of  France, 278-280.

Walter Map, 309-312.

Walter of Coutances(Bp. of Lincoln,  1183 ; Abp. of Rouen, 1184), 312.

Walter Tyrel, 291, 293.

Welsh, 18, 89f., 102, 112 f., 234.

Westbury, 268.

Westminster, 264.

Wigan, 237 f.

357

Wilde, Edric, 94-96.

William, Earl of Gloucester, 64.

William (Abp. of Rheims, 1176-  1202), 73.

William de Braose, 89.

William the Bastard(the Conqueror,  1066-1087), 96, 221, 272.

William, Earl of Arundel, 308.

William Laudun, 125.

William, King of Sicily (1., d. 1166 ;  11., d. 1189), 233.

William Rufus (1087-1100), 272,  290 f.

William, brother of Henry u., 296.

William de Gurney, provost of  Paris, 278.

William of Tankarville, 304 f.

Wilton, Serlo of, 84.

Winchester, 293, 296.

Woolaston Wood, 64.

Worcester, Baldwin, Bp. of, 22.

Worcester, Robert, Bp. of, 126.

Wye, 18, 124.

Y

YarRMouTH, 304.

York, 63, 272, 299.

Ykenai, see Hikenai, 299.

Ylispon (Erispoe), duke of Brittany.  243-246.

Ysembard, 276.

Z

ZABULON (= Diabolus), 86.  Zephyr, 196.  Zimri, 78.

z2

Google

Pe 4,

INDEX OF REFERENCES

(Due tn large part to the marginal notes of Dr. James’ edition of Map.)  (References to the Bible are to the King James’ version.)

Ul. 2-3:

1.6:  1.9:

Wl. 17-18:  “1. 24:

1. 29:

Ul. 4-5:

i. 13:  15-16:

31:  3:  . 16-17:

i, 10-11:  ll. 27-28:

1. 33:  bis  é. 10:  358

St. Augustine,

- Conf. xi. 25.

2 Cor. xii. 2.

Job xiv. 2.

Porphyrius, Isa-  goge 2.

Horace, Od. ii.  17, 14,

Hymns for Matins

of the Hours of.

the Virgin ; cf.  Mone, Hymn.  Lat. ii. p. 128 ;  Stevenson, Lat.  Hymns of the  Anglo - Saxon  Church, p. 74.  Boethius, de Cons.  Phil. ii. pr. 1.

James iv. 6.

Virgil, Georg. i.  166.

Luke iii. 17;  Matt. iii. 12.

Is. v. 20.

Job xviii. 10.

Ps. xc. 10.

Pliny, N. H.  xxxvil. 59.

Cf. Josephus, Ant.  i. 3, 9, ap.  Petrus Comes-  tor, Hist. Schol.  36.

Hor. A. P. 4.

Hor. Serm. i. 1, 68.

Ezek. xi. 19.

1 Kings xv. 14.

Is. xxvii. 1.

1 John iv. 20.

John iii. 19.

Google

PTs

P. 8,  P. 9,

P. 17,

P. 25,

P. 26,

P, 27,  P. 28,

P. 29,

i.

30-31 :

l. 38:

lt.

il.

il.

ba]

Ul.

Ul.  it.

rrr re =

22-25 :

. 2-3:  . 31-32 :  23-24 :  . 24-25:  . 38:

. 36-38 :  ~ 12:  . 30:

9-10:

. 15:

9:

14:  16:  28:

11 sq.:  32-33 :

7-8:

L 31:

~ OO  SS Ver~rrere

36 :  og:

11-12  16-17

Matt. xxii. 21.

Ovid, Amores i.  8, 62.

Claudian,in Eutro-  pium,i. 181-183.

Luke xvi. 8.

Heb. xiii, 14.

Persius, Sat. i. 58.

Matt. vi. 24.

Luke xiv. 18;  Matt. xxvi. 72.

Luke xiv. 21-23.

Matt. vi. 34.

Virgil, Aen. x.  284; cf.Terence,  Phor. 203.

Ps. Ixxviii. 57.

Terence, Phor.  587.

Gen. i. 6.

Ps. vii. 9.

Job xxvi. 5.

Heb. xiii. 14.

Jer. i. 6.

Cf. Ovid, Meta-  morphoses ii.

1 sq.  Cf. Zeph. i. 153  Is. xxxvii, 3.  Gen. xv. 16.  Lam. i. 4.  Ps. evi. 43.  Ps. Ixxvii. 9.  Cf. Matt. vi. 10.  Ps. Ixxiii. 2.  Ps. Ixxiii. 2.  Ps. i. 4.  Heb. xiii. 4.  Prov. i. 20-21.  Juvenal, Sat. vi.  140.

ad

a

. 30, 26:

7:

INDEX OF REFERENCES

29, 1.27:  ii, 84-35 ; Hildebert,

ll. 8-9:

Uj. 12-18 :  . 13-14:

Eccles. iii. 1,

ed.

Beaugendre, p.

1227.

Luke x. 39.

Matt. iii. 15.

Luke x. 40.

Ib. x. 41.

Rom. xiv. 12.

Ps. exviii. 8.

Ps. cxl. 2.

Hor. Epist. i. 8,  66.

Deut. xxxii. 15.

Ps. lxxvii. 9.

Hor. Ars Poet.  78

: Matt. xxvi. §2-53.  : 1 Sam. xvii. 45-47.

1 Sam. xvii. 45-47.

. 1 Kings xix. 11-12.  : Ps. xxii. 27.  : Cf. Matt. x. 34.

John iii. 5.  Jer. xxix. 14.

1 Kings xii. 10.  Ps. cxv. 3. -

: Mark x. 45.  : 1 Kings xix. 11,  12

: Ps. ii. 2.  : Cf. Virg. Ecl. x.

69

: John iii. 30.

Luke xvi. 3.  St. Jerome, Ep.  xiv.

Heb. xi. 38.

: Virg. Eel. iii. 65.

Cf. Luke x. 38 sq.  Ps. cxix. 62.

: Hymnus ad Prim-

am; cf. Steven-  son, l.c. p. 9.  Jer. vi. 16.  Cf. 1 Cor. iv. 12.

: Cf. Matt. vii. 12.  : 1 Thess. v. 15.

Cf. Gen. i. 2.

Cf. Bernard ,Epist.  189 (ed. Paris  1719).

Mark v. 40;  Kings iv. 34.

John xi. 43.

Google

P, 50, di, 11-12:  Wi, 21-22 :

P. 51, Ui, 22-23:  P, 52, Ui. 15-16:

P. 53,

P, 54,

P. 56,

P, 58, Ui. 32-33:  ll. 36-37 :

4. 30:

4.18:  “4:

dl, 21-22:  Ul, 23-24 :  Ul. 24-25 :  ll, 28-29 :  Wl. 348q.:

i. 39:  2:  1.4:  4.214:

Wl. 20-21 :  ll, 23-24 :

1, 27:

Ul, 27-28 :

2. 31:

Ul. 32.8q.:

4.12:  1.138:

Wl. 15-16:

dl. 17-18:  i, 19-20:

4.21:  4. 23:

Ul, 27-28 :  Ul. 33-35 :  ll. 36-37 :  ll. 38-39 :

Wl. 1-2:  ll. 4-5:  Ul, 7-8:  Ul, 9-12:

il. 14-18:

“16:

ll. 25-26:  ll. 36-37 :

1. 38:

1, 39:

2)P. 59, 21:

“i, 1-2:

359

Phil. ii. 21.

Mark vi. 20.

Matt. v. 14.

Virgil, Ecl. v. 70.

1 Cor. ix. 22; Ps.  civ. 24,

Matt. vi. 34.

Cf. Matt. vii. 12.

Matt. vii. 165.

Matt. vi. 5.

Matt. xxiii. 5.

Gal. vi. 14.

Luke xviii. 11 sq.

Luke i. 48.

John i. 47.

1 John iii. 17.

1 John iv. 20.

Phil. i. 23.

Matt. vi. 12.

Luke xvi. 23.

1 John iii. 17.

Lam. i. 1.

Cf. 1 Cor. xiii. 4  sq.

Ps. xxiv. i.

Luke vi. 35.

Luke xv. 21;  Matt. viii. 8.

Mark i. 7.

Acts v. 41.

Heb. xi. 3&

Matt. v. 9.

Ps. lxxxii. 6.

Ps. xcvi. 5.

Ps. v. 5.

Cf. Exod. iii. 6;  Mark xii. 263  Luke xx. 37.

Matt. x. 37 sq.

Luke iii. 11.

Ps. xli. 1.

Luke xxi. 34.

Prov. vi. 11.

Matt. vi. 24.

Hor. Epist. i. 1,  60.

Ov. Her. i. 53.  Tacitus, Agr. 30:  >

Acts ii. 44.

Ps. xxxvii. 25.

Ps. xxvi. 10.

Ps. xxvi, 10.

Ov. Ars Am. ii.  280.

360

P.

or

a-ha)

ow

59, W. 4-5:

ul. 16-17:  ll. 25-26 :  li, 26-27 :  dl. 32-33:  Ul. 33-35 :  Ul. 38-39:

. 1-2:  l. 8:  117:

Zl. 18-19:  . 27-28 :  . 16-17:  ll. 36-37 :

. 13:

Wl. 15-16:

il. 17-18:  . 64, Ui.  . 65, U.

. 68, 29:  1

DE NUGIS CURIALIUM

Jer, i. 10.

Ps. xxiv. i.

Matt. ix. 11.

Luke v. 32.

Ps. li. 17.

Luke xv. 7.

John vi. 37.

Matt. vii. 16.

Ps. cxii. 9.

1 Pet. iv. 9.

Ps. exv. 1.

Ps. xlv. 8.

Ps. xci. 11-12.

Cf. Terence, Eun.  732.

Ps. lxxxi. 7.

Exod. (Migne,

Patr. Lat. 198, | P. 81,  l

col. 1189).  Ps. xev. 10.

: Exod. ii. 12.  : Cicero(?), Auctor

ad Heren. iii.  3, 4.

Matt. ii. 18.

: Acts xii. 10,  : Luke xxiii. 53.  : Juv. Sat. vi. 280.

John xv. 5.  Cf. Caesar, Bell.  Gall. iv. 1, 5.

: 1 Sam. xxx. 24.  : Tobias ii. 21.  : Ps. lxix. 27-28.

Ps. cxix. 62.

Cf. Juv. Sat, i. 80.

Hor. Serm. ii. 3,  246; cf. Pers.  Sat. v. 108.

: Matt. x. 27.

1 Kings xi. 24,  Rom. ix. 21 sq.

: Eccles. iv. 10.  : Luke vi. 30; cf.

Prov. xxxi. 20.  Matt. xxii. 15.  Rom. xi. 20.  Rom. x. 9.

Ps, xiv. 1.

: John vi. 60, 67.  : Gen. iii. 6.

: Cf. Dan. ili. 27.  . 29-30 :

Matt. vii. 6.

Google

P. 76,-W2. 38-36:  1, 86:

P.77, 2.3:  Ul. 9-10:  4.138:

ll. 16-17:

i. 26:

ll. 30-81 :  Petrus Comestor, | P. 79, 7.  Hist. Schol. in | P. 80, UW.

P. 82, 1.3:  Ul,

P. 83, U.  Ul.  P, 84, ii.  P. 86, UW.  413:  l.  P. 87, Ui.  P. 88, 2.  .

P. 89, I.  I

Ul, 29-30:

P. 90, 2.

d.  P. 97, U.

P.101, 2.8:

P. 102, U. 12-18:

P. 108, UW. 1-2:

: Matt.

: Ov.

i. 11-12:  il, 12-13 :

Ps. cxxxiii. 2.

Prov. v. 16.

Lam. ii. 12.

Ps. lxiii. 11.

Cf. Virg. Ecl. vii.  5

A fragment of  Lucilius (1299,  Marx) which  doubtless came  to Map from  Hieronymus,  Epist. xliii.  (Migne i. 340).

Ov. Met. ii. 192.

Acts ii. 44,

1 John iv. 18.

vi. 163  1 John iv. 14.

Matt. xxii. 21.

Ps. ci. 1.

Matt. viii. 24.

Ars Am. i,

389.

: Mark xvi. 14.  : Is. lvi. 10.  : Cf. Matt. xviii, 9.

Ps. xix. 12.  Rom. x, 2.  Luke vi. 30.  Matt. xv. 27.  Ps. xxv. 1.

: Virg. Aen. vii.  312.

: Prov. xii. 7.

John xix. 37.

2 Thess. ii. 8.  Acts x. 365.

Rom. x. 2.

Cf. 1 Peter ii. 18,

: Luke x. 7.  “. 16-17:  di, 20-21 :

2 Tim. i. 12.  Cf. Matt. x. 37.  Gen. iii. 19.

: Cf. St. Augustine,

de Civ. Dei xv.  23; Hierony. in  Is. xiii. 213  Geoff. of Mon.  vi. 18.

Hor. Serm.  6, 49.

Gen. i. 21.

1 Tim. vi. 10.

li.

P. 104, W. 31, 33: 1 Sam. xvi. 4.

P. 106,  P. 108,

ord

ros NMS

ro oD

ade

INDEX OF REFERENCES

P,

1, 27:

4.15:  1. 37:

l. 37:  i. 34:

l. 25:

4.18:  . 10-11:  1, 22:

I, 30:  . 18-19:

1. 25:

131:

1. 25:  17:

: Cf.

Virg. Georg. ii.  479-480.

Matt. xxvi. 34.

Cf. Plautus, Asin.  199 ; Ausonius,  Epist. xxii. 24;  x. 41.

Virg. Aen. i. 37.

Cf. Priscian i.  204.

1 Kings xviii. 44.

Virg. Aen. i. 475.

1 Mace. iii. 19.

Virg. Aen. xii.  754.

Juv. Sat. iii. 78.

Cf. Martial, Ep.  I., Praef. 16

8q.

Cf. Claud. de  Rapt. Pros. ii.,  Praef. 50 ; Hor.  Od. iii. 4, 40.

Rom. viii. 28.

Prov. xxv. 20.

1 Cor. ix. 24.

Prov. xxv. 20.

Terence, Adel.  228.

: Prov. xxvi. 138.

Cf. Virg. Aen.  iv. 1.  Ov. Met. i.  470-1.

: Ps. ex. 4.  : Virg. Aen. i. 475.  : Virg. Aen. iv. 1.

Cf. Rom. xiv. 13.  : Pliny, Nat. Hist.  vii. 16.

: Prov. xxxi. 21.

Lucan, Phar. ii.  657.  Eph. iv. 265.

Ps. xxiii. 4.

: Ps. civ. 21.

Ps. i. 4.

Rev. xxii. 11.

Judith x. 19.

Virg. Aen.  361.

Prov. i. 17.

Virg. Eel. ii. 2.

Virg. Aen. vii.  622.

xi.

Google

P.

174, 2.10:

“4. 26:

175, 1. 28:  . 176, Ul. 4-5:  177, Ul. 25-26 :  178, 1.17:

i. 20-21 :  il. 31-32 :  Ul, 33-36 :  . 179, 2.12:

fl, 22:

ll, 27-29:

. 180, 2 4:

19:

.181, 1.3:

“18:

dl, 21-22:

1. 38:  182, 1.3:

LAG:  1.16:

117:

Ul. 24-25 :  Ul, 25-26 :  . 183, 72. 16:  . 184, 1.7:

1.8:

1.10:  1.18:

ll. 37-38 :  . 185, J. 29:

l, 32:

. 186, 2 11:

4.19:

Ul. 27-28:  Wl. 29-30:

361

Hor. Od. ii. 16,  21.

Cf. Virg. Aen. vii.  331.

Matt. xiii. 30.

John xv. 5.

Virg. Aen, iv. 79.

Lucr. de Rerum  Nat. i. 20.

Ps. xlv. 2.

Is. lv. 3.

Cf. Ps. liv. 7.

Claud. in Rufi-  num, i. Praef.  15.

Ps. viii. 5.

Geoffrey of  Mon., Hist.  Brit. vii. 3.

Cf. Rom. xiv. 13.

Ps. xv. 21.

Hor. Serm. ii. 6,  35.

Dan. vii. 9.

Cf. Claud. in Ruf.  i. Praef. 3.

Cf. id. ib. 14;  Hor. Od. iii. 4,  40.

Cf, Martial, Ep.  v. 18, 3-4.

Cf. id. ib. v. 5-6.

Cf. Hor. A. P.  357; Juv. Sat.  i. 80; Virg. Ecl.  iii. 90.

Virg. Ecl. ix. 36.

Id. ib. ix. 32.

Ps. i. 4.

Gen. xxxvii. 33.

Prov. xxiii. 31.

Ezek. i. 12.

Prov. xxiii. 32.

Virg. Eel. ix. 36.

Hor. Epist. i. 2,  23.

Acts xiii. 225 cf.  1 Sam. xiii. 14.

Matt. xviii. 7;  Luke xvii. 1.

Cf. 1 Kings xix.  18.

2 Kings xix. 16.

Heb. iv. 12.

Didache, i. 6.

862  P. 187, e 21-22:  4. 35-36 :  P. 188, 72, 1-2:  HW. 12-18:  ll. 35-36 :

P. 189, 2. 5:  i. 35:

ll. 38-39:

P. 190, Ui.

U. 26 sq. :

P. 191, 2.  Ul, 22-23 :

26-27 :  30:

baa)  ~~~

P. 196, 2.3:  1. 6-  218:

Google

Luke xi, 35.  Virg. Ecl. iv. 63.  Cf. Lev. xi 3;  Deut. xiv. 7.  Hor. Epist. i. 2,

42.

Juvenal, Sat. x.  168 sq.

Cf. Ps. xlviii. 5.

Cf. St. Augustine,  de Civ. Dei.  xviii. 3; Hist.  Schol. in Gen.  xv.

Cf. Joshua xxiii.  13; 1 Kings  ii. 3.

: Cf. Hieronymus,

adv. Jovin. i.  48.

Cf. Mart. Ep. i.  61, 8-9.

Cf. Gell. Noctes  Att. xiii. 2.

Cf. Cic. de Orat.  ii, 278.

: Cf. Hieron. adv.

Jovin. i. 48.

: Cf. St. Augustine,

Serm. 194.

: Cf. Gell, l.c. i. 6.

2 Cor. xii. 1.

: Cf. Gell. Le. i. 8.

Mart. Ep. iv. 81.  Hieron. adv.  Jovin. i. 42.

: Deut. xxxii. 13.  : Gen. iii. 21.

Cf. Rom. x. 14.

Matt. v. 8; cf.  Clemens Rom.  Recogn. ii. 22.

Ps. cxix. 105.

Cf. Gen. xxiv.  6

Song of Solomon,  i, 4.

Is. v. 2.

Ib.

Is. lxi. 10.

Cf. Martianus  Capella, i. 26.

John vi. 61.

Matt. vii. 14.

Hor. Epist. i. 7, 8.

P.

a-ha”

. 198, Ul.

. 200, 7.  Ui, 84-35 :  . 201, b.  . 202, dl.

196, 4. 25-26 :

1.27:  197, %. 2:  $18:

do?  39:

~S

5-6 :  “. 7-8:

W, 15-18:

l. 27:  34 :

16:

U. 32-33 :

P. 203, /, 18:

a")

. 204, ii, 27-28:

P, 206, Wi. 2-4:

Sele

~~

UY

i, 39:  . 2-3:  . 6:  . 63  .1

209,

eee

210, J. 16:

. 211, H. 11 sq.

212, 2. 4:  214, 2. 23:  215, 2.6:

“. 14-15:  16-18:

229, 1. 4:  225, 1. 88:

296, 1.5:  17-18:

. 230, J. 16:

232, 1.9:  i. 22:

, 235, i. 34-85 :

l. 38:

236, Wl. 33-84:

241, 1.35:

247, Ul. 22-23 :

28 sq. :

7-18:

DE NUGIS CURIALIUM  P.

Cf. Matt.  13-14.

Ps. xxvii. 13.

Juv. Sat. i. 6.

Cf. Mart. Ep. i.

3, 8.

Hor. A. P. 476.

Cf. Pliny, Epist.  i. 22, 3.

Mart. Ep. v. 10, 7-

Mart. Ep. v. 10, 8..

Cf. Lucr. de Rer.  Nat. i. 932.

1 Pet. ii. 9.

Job, xvii. 13.

Dan. xi. 42.

Cf. Is. xiv. 13.

Cf. Apuleius, de  Deo Socr. xiii.  sq. ; St. August.  de Civ. Dei. ix.

Vii.

3.  Cf. 1 John i. 1.  Ps. xiii. 3.  Deut. xxxii. 15.  1 Cor. vi. 15.  Cf. Persius, Sat.  i. 58.  Lev. xix. 14.  Ps. cxv. 5-6.  Matt. xviii. 32.  Innocent iii.,  de Contemptu  Mundi iii. 18.  2 Cor. xi. 14.

: Cf, Jonah xiii.

Ps. lxxviii. 65.  Matt. xviii. 22.  Rom. x. 2.  Luke xv. 22-23.  Luke xi. 11-12.  Cf. Ov. Met. xiii.  967.  Ps. cxxxvii. 8.  Ov. Met. vii. 9.  Cf. Plaut. Truc.  42 sq.  Virg. Ecl. ii. 2.  Cf. Hab. iii. 8.  Job. xxxviii. 16.  John xiv. 31.  Luke xiv. 19-20.  Luke xiv. 19-20.  Matt. viii. 20.  Juv. Sat. xiv. 139.

he

~~

TOMS PP Poh hag

261, 1.

rrr yf

. 287, Ul.  . 288, Ul.  Il, 35-37 :

INDEX OF REFERENCES  P.

248, 1.7:  i.

249, J.

251, J.

253, Ul.  254, I.

23 :

ww)

9-10:

©

Ui, 31 sq.:

. 262, 1.4:

263, Ji.  264, 1.

266, Ul.  267, U.  268, i.  269, i.  271, 1. 5:  275, i.  276, Ul.

278, 1. 3:  282, U.  283, Ul.

285, J.  286, i.

Hor. Serm. ii. 4,1.  Matt. xx. 3.  Luke xxii. 34.  Matt. xviii. 32.  Ov. Am. i. 8, 62.  Virg. Ecl. viii. 10.  Cic. pro Archia  10; cf. Jul.  Valerius, i. 46.  Hor. Epist. i. 1,  66.  Virg. Aen. vi.  126.  Matt. xxv. 2.

: Ps. ci. 7.  Ul. 32-33:

Ps. ci. 5.  Tae Epist. i. 6,

: Cf. Ps. lii. 2.

: Ps. xxxvi. 4.

Ov. Her. iv. 183.  Ps. xlv. 7.

Virg. Aen. ii. 49.  2 Sam. xii. 10.  Ps. Ixxviii. 66.

: Ps. xxxiv. 22.

1 Kings xii. 11.  Luke vi. 30.

Ps. xvii. 83 lvii. 1.  Ps. ix. 12; x. 17.  Ps. xxii. 21.  Heb. xii. 6. |

: Cato, Dist. i. 34.  : Is. i. 4.

Rom. xii. 20;  Prov. xii. 7.

Google

a hele)

c:

7

a Ta- hehe he-he- Da)

289, Ui. 25 sq. :

290, di. 37 sq.:  292, ll. 14-15:

Ul, 26-27 :

t. 29:

. 297, 2. 22:

. 300, UW. 20-21:  . 801, U. 35-36:

303, 1.19:

. 807, Ul. 26-27 :

311, 2.6:

. 313, Ul. 15 sq. :

il. 35-36 :

l. 37:  314, 1. 39:

. 815, 1. 82:  . 816, Ui. 12-14:

l. 39:

. 818, Ul. 5-6:

1.7:  ll. 7-8:

319, Ul. 34-35 :

320, 2.1:  l. 22:  1. 29:

363

Cf. Gir. Cambr. de  Instruc. Prin. i.  20.

Ps. xci. 5-6.

Ps. xlv. 2; Luke  i. 32.

Ps. lxxxvi. 5.

Lam. iv. 1.

Cf. 1 Sam. i. 18,  25.

Matt. xxvi. 75.

Cf. Matt. vi. 3.

John xxi. 18.

Ov. A. A. ii. 13.

Eph. v. 8.

Cf. Macrobius, in  Somn. Scip. i  10, 9-10.

Hab. iii. 8.

Maer. L.c. 11.

Ezek. xxxvi. 26.

Ps. i. 1.

John iv. 13-14.

Ps. lix. 14.

Prov. xvii. 15 ; cf.  Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

John vi. 37.

Boethius,deCons.  Phil. iii. met.  9, 3.

Luke xxii. 265.

Hor. Epist. i. 1,  66.

Hor. Epist. i. 6,  45.

Ps. ix. 4.
