to the number of twelue
in the whole, all of them being in one
houſe: Nouember, 1589.

== Bout the tenth of Noucmber. which was in the pere
Ip 2 ' 7 1589. Miſtris lane one of the daughters of the ſayd

S R + preres, fell vpon 5 ſodaine into a ſtrange kind of ſick⸗
— nes and diſtemperature of body, the manner whereof
was as followeth, Sometimes ſhe would neeſe very lowde and
thicke fo2 the ſpacc ofhalfe an houre together, and pꝛeſently as one
ina great trance and ſwoune lay quietly as long: ſwne after ſhe
would begin to ſwell and heaue vp her belly ſo as none was able
to bend her, oz kepe her downe : ſometime ſhe would ſhake one
legge and no other part of her, as if the paulſie had been in it;ſometimes the other: pꝛeſently ſhe would ſhake one ol her armes, and
then the other, and ſone after her head, as if che bad ben infected
with the running paulſie: Continuing in this caſe two o2 thze
dates, amongſt other neighbours in the towne there came into the
Houle 'of Maſter Throckmorton, the fozeſapd Alice Samuel to viſite
this ſicke child, who dwelled in the next houſe on the No2thſide of
the ſayd Maſter Throckmorton. The childe when the old woman
came into the parlour was held in another womans armes by the
fire fide. ſo ſhe went into the chimney coꝛner and ſate downe hard
by the child, the Grandmother of the child, x themother beinglalſo
pꝛeſent, the had not been there long, but the child grew ſomething
woꝛſe then the was at her comming, and on the ſodaine cryed{(faying) Grandmother loke where the old witch ſitteth (popnting to
the ſayd mother Samuel) did pon ener ſee (ſapd the child) one moꝛe
like a witch then the is? take off her blacke thꝛumbd cap, foꝛ can
not abide to loke on her. The mother of the child little then ſuſpec975 my ſuch matter, (as afterwards * out) was very m_
| 3 wi

*
.
.
*
:
——

Paſter Throckmorton being niere the age of tenne

—

7
|

io.
_—

as: as hg

wich her child and rebakedher fo; apt
might p2ocede of ſome lightnes in the childs bꝛaine bp reaſonof
ber great neeſingand want offleepe, toke her and layd her downe
vpon a bed, and hanged curtaines againſt the windowes, thereby

hoping to bꝛing her into a ſlerpe, but much adoe they had to paciſie

and quiet the child. The old woman hearing this ſate ſtill, and
gane neuer a woꝛd, vet loked very rufully,as afterwards was re⸗
membꝛed by them that ſawe her. The childe ſtill continuing her
manner of ſicknes, rather woꝛſe then better, within t wo daies after her parents ſent the childs vꝛine to Cambridge to Doctoꝛ Barrow, a man well knowne to be excellent ſkilfull in Phificke, who
returned this anſwere: namelp, that he did perceiue no kind of di⸗
ſtemperature ſane onely that he thought ſhe might be troubled
with woꝛzmes, and therefoze ſent his medicine accoꝛdingly, but the
child was no whit the better: ſo within two dates after they ſent
againe to the ſame man, declaring vnto him the manner of her fits
moꝛe at large: he ſayd that the vꝛine which they then againe
bꝛought to him, ſhe wed no ſuch kind ol diſguietnes to be in her bo⸗
die: and to be the falling ſicknes (which the parents did ſuſpeck ts
be in the child) he would warrant her cleere from that diſeaſe, Th#
he ſent other p2eſcripts as he thought god to purge her bodte,
which toke no place noꝛ pꝛeuailed any thing in the child as he lo⸗
ked foz. Then the parents ſent to him the third time (as his deſire
was to vnderſtand how his Phificke w2ought) declaring that it
wꝛought nothing at all as he loked foꝛ, neither that the child was

any way amended. Then Paſter Doctoꝛ loking againe in the v⸗

rine, and perceiuing the childs body to be in god temper, (as he thẽ
ſayd foz any thing that he ſawe) demaunded whether there was no
ſozcerte oꝛ witchcraft ſuſpected in the child: anſwer was made no.
Then ſayd he, all ſurely cannot be well, fo it is not poſſible that
the childs bodie ſhould be diſtempered by any naturali cauſe as
then was declared to him, and no ſigne thereok at all to appeare in
the vꝛine: not withſtanding foꝛ their better aſſurance, if the meſ⸗
ſenger would goe to any other ſkilfall man in the towne to take
further aduiſe, he ſayd he would be very well con tented. Mhere⸗
vpon the meſſenger went to Pater Butler, who conſidering ot the
vꝛine, and hearing the manner of the childs trouble, ſayd, that he
thought it might be the woꝛmes, which pet he did not perceiue to

be be the bꝛine, and if it were the wozmes,that then it * very
range

— — — * — — ＋1— _ 2
-andf . * dY {fit TRICK 1

"2: oftheWitches ofWarboyſe.
ſtrange kind of griete tu be cauſed by them in that ſoꝛt, E appoin⸗
ted the ſame medicine and philicke (fo2 the remedie) which befoze
Do ctoꝛ Barrow had pꝛeſcribed: which being knowne was not ap⸗
plied to the childe, becauſe aſter Docto2 Barrow had ſapd that if
Maſter Ihrockmorton (to whomhe wiſhed very well, as he then
ſapd, by reaſon oł ancient acquaintance with him) would followe
— aduire, he chonld not ffrine any moꝛe there with by phiſick, noꝛ
ſpend any moꝛe money about it:foz he himſelfe ſapd, Þ he had ſome
experiẽte ot the malite ofſome witches, t he verily thought ß there
was ſome kind of ſoꝛcerie and witchcraft wꝛought towards his
child. After which anſwere from P. Docto2 Barrow, S. Throckmortonreſolued htmſelfe to reſt vpon Gods pleaſure, not ſtriuing
any further by Phiſicke to helpe his daughter: yet both himſelle
and his wife were free from any ſuch conteit of witchcraft which
Palter Doctoꝛ Barro did ſuſpect, vntfll within one iuſt moneth
after (the very dap and hapre almoſt obſerued) two moze of his
daughters elder then the other by two o2 thz& peares,fellintothe
ſame like extremities as the other ſiſter befoe them was in, and
tried out vpon Pother Samuel:ſaping,take her away, loke where
the ſtandeth here befoze vs in «blacks thzumbd cap, (which kind
of cap indeꝛde ſhe did vſually weare, but ſhe was not then pꝛeſent)
it is ſhe(ſapd they) that hath bewitched vs, and the will kill vs if
vou doe not take her away. This thing did ſomething mone the
Parents, and ſtrike into their minds a ſuſpition of witcheraft; yet
deutfing with themſelues foz what cauſe it ſhould be w2onght
bpon them oz their childꝛen, they could not imagine, fo2 they were
but newly come to the towne to inhabite, which was but atPtchaclmas befoꝛe, neither had they giuen any octaſton (to their
knowledge) either to her oꝛ any other, to pꝛactiſe any ſuch malite
againſt them. Mithin leſſe then a moneth after that, another ſi⸗
ſter ponger then any of the reſt, about the age of nine peares fell
into the like taſe, and cryed out of mother Samuel as the other did.
Sone after iſtris Toane the eldeſt ſiſter of them all, about the
age of fiftcene peares, was in the ſame caſe and woꝛſe .
deed then any ol p other ſiſters were, fo2 ſhehauingmoze ſkxengt
then they, and ſtriuing moꝛe with the Spirit then the reit, nof be
ing able to ouercome it, was the moꝛe grienonullie-tozmented? fo
it fozced her to neſe, ſch ich and groane verie fearefullte : ſome⸗

W it would heaue vp her bellie, and bounce vp her wit

.

„ EI.

PPP AO ans. 4
F —
—

. m —
PPP
— 3

The Arraighement and Execution
— ſuch violence, that had ſhe not bin kept vpon her bed, it could
not but haue greatly bꝛuſed her bodie, and many times ſitting in a
chaire hauing her fit, ſhe would with her often ſtarting, and hea⸗
ning, almoſt bꝛeake the chaire ſhe late in: yet was there no ſtri⸗

uing with the in this caſe,fo2 the moꝛe they laboured to helpe them

and to keepe them downe, the mo2e violently they were handled,
being depꝛiued of all vſe of their ſenſes during their fits, fo2 they
could neither ſee, heare, noꝛ feele any bodie, onely crying out of mother Samuel, deſiring to haue her taken away from them, who ne⸗
uer moꝛe came after the percetned her lelfe to be ſuſpected.

Theſe kinde of fits would hold them, ſometimes longer, ſome⸗
times ſhoꝛter, either an houre oꝛ two, ſometimes halfe the day, ven
the whole day, and manp times they had ſire oꝛ ſeauen fits in an
houre, vet when it pleaſed God to deliuer them of their fits, they
neither knew what they had ſaid, neither pet in what ſoꝛt they had
been delt withall, as hereafter ſhall be declared in particular.

After that iſtris Toane had been thus handled a while, the ſpi⸗
rit as it ſhould ſeme would ſound in her eares ſome thing which
the would declare in her fit, and amongl the reit, it ſhewed vnto
ber one time, that there ſhould be twelue of them which ſhould be
bewitched in that houſe, in one ſoꝛt oꝛ other, and named them all
vnto her, being al women kind, and ſeruants in the honſe, her ſelfe
and her ſiſkers being fine of the number, all which pꝛoued afterwards very true, foꝛ they had all their ſeuerall griefes, and moſt of
them afllicted in the ſame ſoꝛt x manner as theſe fine ſiſters were:
of whom and the manner of their faith, if it ſhould be wꝛitten in
particular how they were delt withall, there would be no end of
this boke. ++:

And this may ſuffice to be knowne concerning the ſeruants,
that whenthey firft fell into their fits, they all cried out ol mother
Samuel, as the childzen did, ſaying, take her away Miſtris, foz
Gods ſake take her away and burne her, foꝛ ſhe will kill vs all if
pon let her alone, hauing the ſame miſer ies and extremities that

the childzen had, and when they were out of their fits they knewe

no moꝛe then the childꝛen did, whagetther they had done oꝛ layd:
and pꝛeſentiy vpon their departure from Piſtris Throckmortons

boufe they were all very well, as at any time befoꝛe, and ſo haue
continued euer ſince without ſuſpition of any ſuch kind of vera⸗

tlons, and thoſe lergants that came in fpeir places foz the maſt

part

— — tt!
pon ryday being Saint Llalentines encn.therhiatenthof
Fedzuarie; intdetwoand thirtieth pere ol het Paleftiesraigne,
Gilbert Pickering of Titohmerth groue, in the Countieof'No:thhampton Eſquire, being vncle to the ſayd Child, and hearing how
ſtrangeiy they were vered nnd troubled, went to Warboyſe, aſwel
to viſite and ſe them, and alis to comfoꝛt their parents: comming
ts the honſe where they were, kound them all at that pzeſent very
wel, as any childꝛen could be: an about one halſe howꝛe after, the
ſayd ꝙ. Pickering was infoꝛmed that one ꝙ iſtris Andley,ę Mater
Whitile of Saint Jues, and others were gone to the houſe of Bo#
ther Samuel to perſwabde her to come ta i,” and to viſtte the ſaide
- childzen,and becauſe they tarryed long, it ſermes to the ſaid iPaſter
Pickering that they toni not bꝛing her, although that the ſaid Pother Samuel had often ſavd, the would come to the ſaide childzer.
whenſoeuer it pleaſed their Parents to ſend foꝛ her, and the. wouts
venture her life in water vp to the chin; andieeſeſome parte of her
beſtblod to doe them any god: but now tis tt med, her minde
was cleane altered, the cauſe was, asit wa ſuſpetted, ſoꝛ that all
the ſaid childzen (as it is layd befoze) intheir ſits cryed aut ot her,
ſaping that ſhe had bewitched them, and that ſhe alſo feared the chmon p:actife of ſcratching would be vſed on her, which nothing
leſle at that pꝛeſent wag intended, foꝛ both the parents and the ſaid
. Pickering — of god Dinines of the vmawful⸗
nes thereok, wherefoze the ſapd . Pickering went to Wother Samuels houſe, aſwell toleher as alſo to — — her that if ſhee
were any cauſe of the childzens trouble, that it might be amended;
who comming to the ſapdhoule, found there the fozeſtpyd Maſter
Whittle, Miſtris Andley, and others, perſwadingher to viſite the
ſayd childꝛatt, but the with lo tode ſpeeches vtterlyrefuſed the ſame:
wherenpon the ſayd maſter Pickering told Mother Samuel that he
vad authoꝛitie to bꝛing her, and if ſhe would not go with him wil⸗
lingly and ol her one acco2d., hee would fozce and compell her
han nai would oz no, which hee then did, together with her
Dd Agnes Samuel, and one Cicely Burder; who were all ſul⸗
peced to be witches, oz at the leaſt in the confederacie with Mo⸗
ther Samuel: and as they were going to the ſayd Paſter Throckmortons bouſe, P. Whittle, * Andley and others Wan be⸗
oze:

_—_— "The middle parte, and d the faide — —
ſaid maſter Pickering percetuing that olde mocher Samucl-withid

haue willingly talked with her daughter Agnes, but the ſaide Þ#-
fer Pickering followed ſo nere behinde them, that they could not
conferre, and when they came at the doꝛe of Wafter Ihrockmortõs
houſe, mother Samuel vſed curteſie to the ſayd . Nickering, offering him to goe into the houſe befoze her, which he reluled, E in the
entry of that ſame houſe (fo2 either then os not at ali) ſhe thought

that ſhe ſhould haue had time to ſpeak to her daughter: the ſam mo⸗

ther Samuel did thzuſt her head as neere as ſhe could to her daugh⸗
ters head, and ſaid theſe woꝛds. I charge ther do not confelle any
thing: which the ſald . Pickering being behinde thempercettring,
thzuſt his head as nere as he could between their heads whilſt the
wo2ds were ſpoken, and hearing them, pꝛelently replied to old mo⸗
ther Samuel, thou naughty woman, doeſt thou charge thy daughter
not to confeſle any thing: nay ſaith ſhe, A ſaid not ſo, but A charged
her to haſtẽ her ſelf home to get her Father his dinner. In p mean
time whilſt theſe woꝛds were in ſpeaking d. Whittle, nuſtris And.
ley and others went into the houſe, & thꝛee of the childzen the ſtan⸗
ding in the hal by the ire perfect wel, but no ſoner had mother Sa⸗
muel entred the hall, but at one moment the ſaid ther childꝛen fell
down vpon Þ ground ſtrangely toꝛmented, ſo p if they had bern let
lie ſtil on the ground, they would haue leaped a ſyʒung like a quick
Pickerel newly taken out of the water, their bellies heauing vp,
their head t their herles fill touching the ground as though they
had been tumblers, and would haue dꝛawen their heads and their

herles together back wards, thꝛowing out their armes, with great

grones molt ſtrangely to be heard, to the great griefe of the beholders: but not long after they were thus fallẽ to the ground, the ſaid
MW. Whittle toke vp one ol p ſapd childꝛen, which was lane Ihrockmorton, and carried her into an inward chamber, laying her vpon a
bed, and being a man ol as great ſtrength as moſt bee this day in
England, and the childe not aboue nine peares old, yet he could not
bold her down to the bed, but that ſhe would heaue vp her belly far
bigger and in higher meaſure foz ber 20po2tion,than any woman
with child ready to be deliuered, her belly being as hard as though
there had been foz the pꝛeſent time a great loafe in the ſame, and in
ſuch manner it wouldriſe and fal an hundged times in the ſpate of

an

1 ie —— IIIEE

— ten _ Hulle ot —
ati oasnotableto thingtheents —
Pickering went intothe Partour where the —

*

that ſide of the bed next to the ſayd . Pickering, 4 there ſcratchinę
the couering of the bed, ſayd theſe — often, Oh that
2 her, Oh that A dad her: wherenpon the ſatd . Pickering was
ion what the meaning of the ſaid wo2des Tents
oo: vnto,+ the rather foz that the ſayd M. Gilbert Pickering was
. 1 ſcratching was meerelp vnlatwfal; yet the
Mutter Pickering puthinun handto the — TINS
Wpeaking the woꝛds, butthe childe feeling his hand would not
ch it, but fozſwke his hand and ſtratched ul onthe bedde, her
face betn3tuened on the contrary ſide from the fapy P4Pickering,

her eyes being cloſed, and maſfer Whittle lying in amanner with

his whole body and walghtoner her- ta bold down her dan kes
ringthat the would haue hurſt her back.
NVNotwithtkanding, the occafſon being thus offered bythe childe,
03 rather by the ſpirit in the child, to diſcloſe ſome ſecret, whereby
the Witches might be by ſame means 02 token made mantſeſt and
xnolvei. , e ſald . Pickering went ints the hall and tate mother

Samuel by the hand who went as willing

lay ſcraping with her nailes on the bed couering, ſaping; Oh that
A had her: then the ſaid ꝙ. Pickering in very ſolte ſpeeches (ſo that
the childe could not heare) ſaid to mother Samuel, put your hand to
the childes hand, but the would not, then p ſaid P. Pickering foz ex⸗
amplesſake, put his hand to the childes hand, ſo did alſu Miſtreſſe
Andley and others at the ſame inſtant, but the childe would ſcarce
touch, "much ted ſcratch any of their hands, then the ſaid Maſter
Pickering without either malice to the woman, conſidente, oꝛ opi⸗
nion in — (onely to taſte by this experiment whereto the
childes woꝛds would tend) twke mother Samuels hand and thzult
it to the childes hande, whono ſ@nerfelt the ſame, but pꝛeſentiy

the childe ſcratched her, with ſuch vehemencie that her nayles
bꝛake into pilles with the foꝛce and earneſt deſire that ſhe had to
reuenge: whileſt the childe was thus ſcratching, the ſaide after

2 2 2 Pn

ding on the fartherſideof the bed from the 1 |
ol her, pzeſently the ſapd childe ſtretched ſoꝛth her right arme ta

vas a Beare to aue s
amd bꝛought her to the further fide of the bed from the chitde, who

rs Felerng dd touer — — with his of |
ts trie what the childe would dee in this extraozdinarie paſſion.
but the childe would nat ſcratch his hand, butfeitfoand fro vpen

OOO T IR, — —ͤy odour As. :
; d

childe, and foz bꝛeuſtie ſake, as the. ſaid maſter Pickering did with

p —— — — — —
4 — —
— 1

the bed fo2 that which ſhe mille, and if by any meanes ſhe coulde
come with her hand, oꝛ but with one of her fingers to touch Po⸗
ther Sanmels hand, ſhe would ſcratch that hand onely and none o⸗
ther: Vea, ſumetimes whiles the ſaide Paſter Pickering with his
hand did couer mother Samuels hand, the ſayd childe would put one
of her fingers betweene the fingers of the fayd Maſter Pickering,
and ſcratch mother Samuels hand that lay nethermoſt with that
one finger, all her other fingers lying on the hand ol the ſayd Paſter Pickering without mouing.
And in this paſſion if at anytime mother Samuels bandhan ben

and ſhewed apparant tokens afdiflike, as though there bad Vene
ſome great diſcourteſte offered, and this is to bee noted foz q moſt᷑
certaine trueth, fo2 ſo it was by the ſayd Maſter Pickering It the
Aſſiſes in Huntington ginen in enidence, that the childes eyes
were cloſed, ſo that ſhe could not ſe any perſon; fe2 ſo was the a2der of their Fittes;and though ſhe at that pꝛeſent could haue ſenc,

pet the childs head and neck were fo turned backward into aſter

Whittles boſome., who conered (as befoꝛe is ſayde) both her head,

face, and body, with his bodie, in ſuch ſoꝛte, and ſo cloſe, that it was
vnpoſſible fo the childe toſe the company which tode an the furs
This being done, the fayd Maſtcr. Pickering departed outof

that place into another Parlour, where there was a woman holding one of the other childꝛen, which childe, as the ſayde Maſter
Pickering paſſed by, ſcraped the womans Apꝛon that held her, ſaping: Db that J had her, Oh that A had her. Then the ſad maſter
Pickering went into the hall, and did haing Cicely Burder to the ſaid

mother Samuel to the firſt childe, ſo did he to Cicely Burder, and as
the firft childe did to mother Samuel, ſo this fecond chiive did to
Cicely Burder in all reipedos.

There was a third childe alſo at that pꝛelent in the ball, which
ſpake the ſame woꝛds, but the Father ofthe childzen, and maſter
Doctoꝛ Dorington, Parſon of the ſame partſh, came then into the
houſe, not allowing that which was done, by reaſon hang

ird

— he *

third was not put in p2ofe.
The ſame night atet ſupper, the childzen being all . wel,

and out of their ſittes, maſter Doctoꝛ Dorington made motion to
haue ſome pꝛapers befoze the company departed, the company the
kneling downe, Doctsz Doringtonbegan to pzay; but no ſoner
had he vttered thefirff woꝛd, but enenat one inſtant of time all the
childꝛen fell into their fits, with ſuch terrible ſcriches and ſtrange
neſings,ſo wonderfully tozmented, as though they ſhould haue
bene toꝛne in pckces, which canſed Docs? Dorington to ſtay in
the middeſt ol his pꝛayers, and ſayd theſe woꝛds, oz the like in effett, were we beſt to goe any further? but he had no foner made
ffay, and his bꝛeath ſtayed from pꝛaving, but the childzen were
quiet (but Fill in their Fittes)then he began to pꝛay agayne, + the
the childꝛen, oz rather the wicked ſpirit in thechildzenfozced them
as befoze, this was p2wned often iny time of pzaper,fo2 whe be had
made an ende of any one pꝛayer the childzenceaſedand were quiet:
wht he begã to pꝛap, they begi to ſcrike:iuhẽ he ended, they ended.
Che next day being S. Ualentines dap, the ſaide maſter Pickering bꝛought home to his houſe at Tichmerſh Grone afoꝛeſaid, one
of the ſayd childꝛen called Elizabeth Throckmorton being in her
fitte, who no .ſwner being on hoꝛſebacke, and aut of Warboyſe
Lowne, but ſhe was well, and ſo continued till the came into the
lald mater Pickerings houſe, but no ſoner had the entred into the
houſe, but that the fit toke-her ſodainly gaſping being not able to
ſpeake, onely thus it commeth, ſhe pitched. her ſelfe back wardes,
all the ioynts of her backe bone being as it wert dzawen together,
thꝛuſting out her belly ſo ſtrongty, that none could hend her backe
agayne, being very ſtrong and heauy, ſhakingherlianes, and often times her head when it riſeth ſo high, but ſpecially her armes,
like to thoſe which ſtruggle and plunge betwirt life and death, being both dumbe, deate and blinde, her eyes cloſed dp. A ow this held
her not a quarter of an houre, hut with a gaſpe ſhe came agapne to
her ſelfe, ſtroking her eyes as though ſhe had beene but allerpe.

Sometimes being taken in her fitte, ſhe is but deafeonely when
the tan ſpeake, oꝛ rather (as we thinke) the ſpirit in her, but very
vainely; and the can ſe alſo hut with a finall glanmeying, when it
vou loke vpon her, ve would derme her to haue nofight
Sometimes allo ſhe can heare onely, and not euerybody but lone

one whom ey and choſeth out from the reſt: ſometimes the

ſeth

r 1 7 $2.55 a
— * %
. 144 416

— — — eo rme rn —. — Raga.

wo dd that tended to God oz godlines, it raged all one as if any had

ſethonely, and as plainely as anyother but neither hearethnaz
ſpeakethany thing, her teeth being ſet in her head, ſomtimes both
hearing and ſeeing very well, and pet not able ta ſpeag e.
Aboue all things the delighteth in play: ſhe will picke out ſome
one body to play with her at cardes, and but one only, not hearing,

ſceing, oꝛ ſpeaking to any other, but being awake ſhe remembzeth

nothing that the did, heard, oz ſpake, affirming that chee was not

ſicke, but only flept.,

She continued well vntil night, and befoze Supper in time ok
thankſgiuing, it vexed her very ſtrangely, taking her at the very
name of grace, and holding her no longer thengrace wasin ſaying:
She late very wall at the Table, but no ſoner had the put vp her
knife, but it pitched her back wards, then being taken fromthe ta⸗
ble ſhe was well vntill thankſgiuing, all which time ſhe was moſt
grienouſlp vered and no longer. After wardes ſhe was very quiet
and well vntill motion was made of pꝛayers, all which time it ſees
med as though it would haue rent her in pieces, with ſuch ſcriching
and outcries, and vehement neeſing,as that it terriſted p whole cõ⸗
panp, hut pꝛapers being ended ſhe was quieted, but ſtill in her fit. :

Chen Maſter Pickering and others that were acquainted with y
manner of it, ſaid, that if any ſhould reade the Bible, oz any other
Godly boke vefoze her, it would rage as befoze, ſo long as they
read, but becauſe it was a thing very ſtrange, and therefoꝛe hardly
beleeued, one did take a Bible and read the firſt Chapter ol Saynt
John the firſt verſe; At the hearing wherof ſhe was as one beſides
her minde, when he that read held his peace ſhe was quiet: when
he read againe it fozmented her: when he ceaſed, it ceaſed: this
diuers did pꝛoue many times.

Nay, at the motion of any god woꝛde, as if any that ſtode by
chaunced to name God, oꝛ pꝛaped God to bleſſe her, oꝛ named any

read oʒ pꝛayed by her, and thus ſhe was carried to bed ſtill continu⸗

ing in her fif,

In the moꝛning being the Sabbaoth dap, ſhe came down into the
Hall towards pꝛaper time, t being aſked whether ſhe would tarry
i rs oꝛ not, ſhe anſwered that ſhe would ds as they
would haue her. Then was ſhe aſked whether ſhe couldreade, ſhe

ſayd that ſhe could once, but ſhe had almoſt foꝛgotten now: Then
being aſked further whether thee had pꝛayed that day, thee made

anſwere

* - a6) * * y „
o * 1 *
4 4 -
Toult notlufferhtr2then whetherth&bled: pat

— — would not᷑ gie her ſ much time.

Thene faive to her, ich it wil not ſafer yon to pʒaꝝ, no: mpo⸗
th er(ſeming to haue eares)pꝛay ta dur ſelle ſetretly in pour hart
and ſpirite, and beginning to teil her that God vnderftode the mz
ward ſighs and grones of the heart, as wel as the lowdeft cries ol
the mouth the ſodainely fell into her t being moꝛe ſtrongly and
ſtrangely to2mented than euer ſhe was beldꝛe, and being carried
nw w, her fit continued x increaſed all pꝛayer time, alboit ſhe was
out of the hearing, with ſuch vebement cries, ſcriching; and tonti⸗

nuall neſing, that many times pꝛayers were conſtrained tobecea- |
ſed fo2 the time, ſo much it amazed the whole companx:pꝛaiers be⸗

ing ended, ſher came to her elke with a gaſpe, wiping her enes, bo
ing pzeſently as well as any body, as though it had

Shecame downe to dinner, and during the tuns of gras db,

held her againe which was vſuall) yet will it ſuffer better another
to ſay grace than her ſelfe, but no body well: At dinner time it
plaide with her, foz ſometimes ſhre hath merry fits , putting her
hand beſides her meate, andhermeate befides her month, mocking her, and making her mille her mouth, whereat ſhe would
ſometimes ſmile, and ſometimes laugh exceedingly, and amongſt
many other things this is woꝛthy to be noted, that being in her fit
ſhe looked farre moꝛe ſweetely and cherefully than when ſher is awake: and althongb being foamentedmoſt pittifullp, that it would
haue grieued any too ſe it, pet being once awaked and out ol her fit,
ſhe is as well as any body. At length Maſter Gilbert Pickering
called to minde an experiment which was made at Warboy ſe,
which was, that if one toke any of thoſe'child2en in their fittes,
and carried them into the Churchyarde which is adiopning to the
hounſe, they pꝛeſently awaked, but bꝛing them in agame they were
as befoꝛe, carry them foꝛth, and they came to themſelues: goe into
the houſe, and immediately their fit toke them, and this was as ol⸗
ten found true as pꝛoued. Hereupon we pꝛoued the like with
this childe, and carried her out ol the houſe, and ſhe pꝛeſently reco⸗
tered, but within the houſe it toke ber againe. -

' bncertaine) yet fo2 th:e& dates ſpace. if ſhe were carried abꝛoad in
her fit,it wouldleaneher,and not take her againe vntill ſhe was

bꝛought into the houſe,

But the certainety of this failed vs ſone (as Hatdan is moſt

Hereaf .

: Hereof b n — with — to Tvodfozthe
childes releafe in ſome ſozt. Þereupon aroſe aqueffion-amongft
diuers that were pꝛeſent at that time what they thonght-thereof,
ſome ſayd one thing, ſome another, in the end it was thought p the
ſpirit had if not in commiſſion to moleſt her abꝛoad, becauſe he is
but a vaſſall to the wicked purpoſe of her that detayneth him.

As the Angel of God ſaid vnto Lot, Itan doe nothiug til thon be
come thither, much leſſe may the Angels of Satha go beyond their
commiſſion. But when this imagination was concluded vpon, x
once vttered foꝛzth, the ſayd expertment pꝛeſently pled : Foꝛ now
contrarily when ſhe was carvedab2oade,you would haue thought
the childe had been in danger of rending x 'vtter ſpopling, which did
greatly feare and amaze the beſt that did ſee it. But it would be to
long to ſhew all the trickes and colluſtons of Sathan in w2effing

and ouer - ruling all the parts c members of this childe, yet ſome of
the pꝛancks of his ne w- fangled nature ſhall be repoꝛted, who is
the pꝛince of this woꝛld, and a ring leader of new faſhions.

The obſeruations of certaine dates follow, from the firteenth of
Febꝛuary to the 26. of j moneth, ſhe was taken moſt commonly 5.
02 6. times a dap, ſometimes ten times, ſometimes twite, ſamtimes
once, æ not vntill night. On theſenententh of Febꝛuary ſhe could
not refraine from gaſping and gaping, and being demaunded the
cauſe, ſhe anſwered, that it fozced her thereunto. She was then
perſwaded to ſtriue agaynſt it, and to ſhut her mouth, oꝛ to ſtup it;
but Till ſhe could not refrayne, vntill in the end bymuch ſtrife and
contention ſhe ouercame it, vet not befo2e it was ſayd in her hea⸗
ring, that the ſpirit was thought to be a ſpirit of the ayze, entring
bya bꝛeath, t departing by a bꝛeath, becanſe it was an vſual ſigne
of her pꝛeſent awaking out ot her fitte xreconery, when ſhe ſtret⸗
ched her armes, often gaſping, and long, with a little rubbing of
her eves, and thus this continuall gaſping ceaſed with her, but only at (ach times, as when ſhe awaked out of her fitte,

On the 26. of Febꝛuary ſhe read and ſung Plalmes, being wel al
the day vntill the euening, when being in her fit ſhe tried out vpon
the foꝛeſapd mother Samuel, fearing and crying, that he would put
a mouſe inta her mouth, ſometimes a cat, à frog, and ſometimes a
Toad clapping her hads befoꝛe her month. Sodainly in this feare
the ſtart out of ones armes that held her, and ran awap out of the
doꝛes into another room, where ſodainly her legs failed her, was

catched

— mgm ene after whichtime

anyable tobendher ſtralgbt.

mayinatioy;eying,ay
all bentauned) ſaping, that now the Nlitches would till her Father, deſtroꝝ both her and all her ſiſters, this continned aboue two

aa ro es

tched bphy one that fallow bl crying away-with your
ſhe ha mouſe in her belly.

He

cniginndthat
1 bm a prof geln arte, he Dns partly eib pet in henfit all the

day long, being bedan awake, yet nodding at enery card word, as
if ſhe had hen dzotuſie, mauy times with meate in her mouth, o:
whatſoeuer ſhe dio, ſher gaue anod withthedead, andthat very
lower euerie minute. Tuladꝛomite fit: ſlerpingant vet awake,
continued ncretmabateg. | SE F 4656

The 18, wherens — — non it ben⸗
dedher foz wards coueting to tanch the grounde, as i ie would
haue ſtode vpon her head, turning her dands cleane backwards:
and if any moued her contrarte to her bending, all that pꝛeſent ſhe
would crie out: being in danger — lima, neither were

The iet dayofParchathimer timez che fell into fir b ſoꝛe nees
lng aboutfo2tie times together, and faſter then one could well
count them, in @ much that blend ifſted out efber noſe and mouth,
but all night being in bed,thefell into the moſt ſozrowfullfit ofal,”
weeping mith ſobs and ſighs moſtpittitullꝝ to heare with a ſtrong

deonjdnat be appeaſed ( foꝛ her ſenſes were

houres, after in a ſlep he tell into a ſoꝛe bleding, at the leaſfapint
at both the noſethzils and mouth.

0 are e eee.

their fits)
and that ſo hartely and exteſſtuelp, as that — —
eee
e ieſts of her own e
—— yncle atogse f0cards; with ber, As deſi»
rous therefoꝛe to ſe the — plaied fogether : fone after
there was a bon hꝛounht and laidbefoze her,whereat pꝛelentiy ſhe
ſtung ber ſelfe backwards, which being taken away, the pꝛeſently
recouered and ꝓlaied againe : this was often paoned and founde
trut. And thuaplaꝝins at ces leer eirs were abu cleane wut.
but the ſight ol her eies eee eee ani

Ll

— 8 — — —

nothingels; che kneln bi {bncleandnomanreli the h zeard and ans

ſwered him, and none other,theperceiued him whẽ he —

oꝛ did ſteale frain her, her counteũs v3 cards; ut any ther nig

take themout of her hands, the not ſering oz feeling. Sometimes

the would chwſe another, whom ſhe did ſee, and heare: ſometiines

4 little child, but euer one and no moꝛe in any one fit, Che fift day

of arch ſhe fell into a mourning fit, and longed to goe home to

her fathers; on the lixt day one of bet lathers men came ouer ta

Tichmerſh groue, whom lhe had often called foz in her fit to carries

her to Warboyſe to her fathers, ſaying, that if the were but halle

| way,the knew that the Would be well,deſronstherefozy to pꝛout

| it, he carried her on hozſebacke towards Warboyſe, x being ſcarce

gone a bow ſhot, at a pond ſide ſheawaked, marueiling where ſhe

was, not knowing any thing, but no ſoner p hozle head was tur⸗

# ned back, but ſhe fell into her fit againe. This was often pꝛoued at

. that time to be true, naw this alſo fell out infallible; fo2 the dates
| after, no longer, ſo often as the was carried tothe po

ſtrangers deſired to ſee her wel and out ol her fit) the: awaked, and

was very well, but returning her face onely the fell into it againe

The eight day of March ſhe caught a new kind di going antiqus

wile, ſhe could goe very well two ſteppes, bat the third ſhe halten

downe; right, giuing a becke with her head as low as her knees, x

as ſhe was ſiting by the fire, che ſodainly ſfart vp, ſaping, tbat e

would goe to Warboyſe, but ſhe was Taied at the poꝛtall dwze,

where going out witha nod, hit her foꝛehead againit Þ latch, which
raiſed a knob the bignefſe ofa walnut, 6being carried afterwards
to the pond, where awakingthe: Aked how her fare cue ſo hurt.
There the was left all day well, playing in the companie of other. .
childꝛen at bowles and other ſpozt : (fo2 the moze foliſh ſpoꝛt ſha
vleth, themoze the ſpirit ſpareth her) but ſo ſone as any motion
was made of comming into the houſe, it pꝛeſently toke her, ſothat
on was neuer out of her fit within dozes ſoꝛ rwelur dates toge⸗
5 — and dzinking in her lit, but neither ſering hearing, no
vet —.— ,cleane without memozte, pet ſpeaking, oz ra⸗
ther the ſpirit within her. The. ol arch che tould not goe but
hop, foꝛ the one leg was dzawne vp, & would not touch the ground
bya tote, and then being carried tothe pond, ſhe aked not, and
her leg was reſkoꝛed. This failed not foz Ee cr b fill:

He Wir bpon oneleg a the houle "=
e

Thente began — — ——
ſaying, that the ſpirit loued no godneſſe: therefoze the burned all
the cards that che rould comebp,the would reade-whenyou would |
haue thought that herouÞdnof baue-ſ@ne f boks; but ſametimes
it quite cloſed vy her eyes, ſametimes it tied her tangue ſometimes
tt ſet her teeth, ſametime it would fling away theboke, eſpeciallte
at any god woꝛd, if ſhe could catch the boke, and be able to hold it
Kill by ſtriuung, ſhe would clap it faſt to her face, vntill ſhe could
ſee, foꝛ ſametumes in her reading it would ſling her back ward, and
ſwell her bellie in ſuch ſoat and ſtrange wiſe, that two ſtrong men
were nat able to hold her dome, in ſa much that the would com⸗
plaine her ſelfe, ſaying, canno man held me do lone, yet the childe
was not then ten yeares old.

The eleuenth day ane chanced toafke ber,o2 rather the Spirit
in her:loue youthe woꝛd ol God: whereat ſhe was ſoꝛe troubled
and vered. But lone you Mitcheraſt e it ſeemed content: oꝛ ioue
pou the Bible: againe it ſhaked her: but lone yan Papiſtrie:it was
guiet. L oue pon pꝛaper: it raged.Loue you the Maſſe:it was ſtil,
Laue pou the Goſpell: againe it beaued vp her bellie: ſo that what
god thing ſoeuer you named, it miſined, hut whbatſoener toncer⸗
ning tde Popes paltrie, it med pleaſed and paciſſed:

The twelfth day che was carried vnta the pond, but the: halted
Kitt, fozthere is notrueth oz certaintie in the Authoꝛ of lyes.

The thirterne, fouretene and fiftene dayes he paſſed away the
time in a hennie fit: on the firteene day in the afternone ſhe ſtart
vp ſodainiy and ran out ot the place where ſhe was; aidawaked
in the way, but at ne at the rlucke it toke her againe, vntill the
next day th? ot the clacke : butat ſiue it twke her againe: t this
aifo failed the third day: yet ſitting at ſupper ſhe awaked, whereat
one ſayd, thankes be ta God: at which very wo2ds the fell backs
wards into ber fitagaine..: - ;

It followeth to declare, as it bath bern further verytraetpoky :
ered: im this: childe Eljzabeth, Throckmorton ,

Tixhunerſhiigrone; that euerie moneth from Parch to Julie —
hath had ſome: bexatton ol bodie, which is termed by the name ol

1 of the diuers manners "I ſo that ſhe was —
C clearg

: * . | * 1 * ” 8 * ' 4 p N PEN 2 2 23 *** * OR 22 * — . a 3 a _ e
{ 434 (3,01) of 1 1 1
* - *
tation; aithongh{n ones?" Ty bs Shchadbut'onely ine it.
- « b & Ld _w d !
* | „

gether: It wfllfurther aſcend vp into her head, and hake the ſame

ginea freſh vn, fetz und a newatarticular wiſe, how ſhe hath

*

tempt vpon her, we haue noted mp

been diuerſiy handled.

#

ch themannee of t;pouhancheardbefoze to be veryCrange;
tt s:fixff pert etued common to be in her belly, bythe greatſwelling t hrauing bp thereof, wom thente it ariirthj vp into her thpate

fopping the pallage of her bꝛeath, ſo that che isoftentimes forced
to dꝛawe the ſanie with greatdifficultic and ſtraightnes. Nemai⸗
ning there, it tieth her tongue many times, and ſetteth her teeth ta⸗

às it᷑ ſhe had the paulſie, benumming aul her parts, and depzining
her of the vle or her ſenſes: ſometimes it will be in her armes and
bands after the ſame manner, ſometimes in one plate, many times
in another, and ſometimes in all places at onte. 8
Foz the continuance ot it, it hathbæn either ſhoꝛt oꝛ longer, mild
oꝛ moꝛe vehement las it pleaſed God to permit) foꝛ it bath alwaies
from the beginning kept a very mutable and vncertaine courſe in
dealing with them. He 5 1950
Nou the 29. of July 1590. ſhe had a ſit from none vntil night
fleping the moſt part of the time: vpon the thirtie ſhe had th2ee ſe⸗
nerall ãts iu theafternone going to bed in her fit, but all of them
were verie milde and without any luch vehement plunges, and ex⸗
ceſũue neſing as in ſꝛmer times. F
Upon the ſecond ol Augult pꝛeſent lx after dinner ſhe kel very ſo⸗
dainely(as many times betoꝛe) into her ozdinartemaner ot fits, not
hauing lomuch liberty as to ſap it connneth, which woꝛns ſhe com⸗
monlie uled to utter in great haſt imediatin befoze the aſſault,
which was very ſkrong and trotibleſome at this time: et towards
the end, cher fell into a llpe, and ſo continued vntill ſuppex time,
when a waking ſhe was very ũcke, andromplatned that ſhaewas
griped at her heart and bellie, and indeed uo matnoll, foz it had ſoꝛe
vexed her. In this ſickly fit ſhe remained thethꝛte next dates fal⸗
lo wing, eating very litle, vet without any apparant ſigne ot ſwelung, od other tronbioſdme fits vnen the it var, when ſhe had ſome

few twit ches, und ſeone after aan tene 6, pet notceaſin ig to coui⸗ | th
plaineofgriefe and paint at her heart and bellie. But the next day
mozning all paine teaſed, and —

0 n A

* 0 _ 9 p

to bed, — — which cauſed many teares to
fall from her eies, as alis from them that fed by, andſo ſhee was

and ſo continued the whole dale, being in her fitte,and in her bed,

king very little, but ſometimes ſaping, that ſhe would goe to Warboyſe, fo there her filters were well(as the fade) and named ſome
of them, whereas when ſher is ont of her fitte, cher is loath to be
028ipne to — Tichmarſh 2 —

camfoztable to the hehalders.

Ther, af Auguſt ſhe was caried abzoad into tho open apꝛe to
ts if ſhe wouldcamet fe (as diners times in hex koꝛmer ũts
wwe had dene) but there es now ns change in her, +; is the lame
without thedoze-as withit,aud-nowhſhe: | eth ts complaine
on that ſide whereof the leg is dzawne bp, ifany i doe 4 exe her
thereon, cher will whimper and grone as it it were ſoze, pet there
tsno appearance of ontward hurt; if ou touch ber gn the other
ſide, ſher will laugbaſter a ieſting „and lake merxilie in
countenance: bet there inst one duo; de with her all the day long,
from this day vntül the eight of September, foz te was à whole

moneth together in this dzowſie fitte, Manie thiuges happened

woꝛthie the remembꝛance, as that ſometimes the would id n
the dan long. and mourne if her Noꝛke were takenfromber,fon
— ümĩ—ͤ— rndy but nez bf | — exe
5

all

caried to bed, The next morning ſhe was found to be in ber fitte,
{ping as one madzowſte fleepe;catingandd2iniing in her it, ſpea ·

Wm . RW

— — _ — n * 4 — —

el ( which will not ber koꝛgatten) it would Hake her bythe Houtchildiſh ſpoꝛtes — — and all
in her fit,as if the were as perfect as any of them,
. Sometimes againe Ye would ber ſo heauie and moping, that
thee could not ſit in her chapze, but would calf her ſelfe on the
ground, and ſo ly with a cuſhen oz pillow vnder her head halte the
day together, Sometimes ſhe would take a boke and reade either
chapters 02 pꝛaiers very well, but whenſoeuer ſher milfermed a
woꝛd, oꝛ flipped in any thing,ſhecouldnot heare that coꝛrected
her though he had ſpoken neuer ſo loude, vet if ha had pointed to
the place with his finger, oꝛ giuen ſome other ſigne, ſh& would
haue gone backe and reade ouer the place a gaine,ſometimes reads
ing it true, ſometimes not. Againe, when the came to this woꝛde
Sathan oꝛ the diuell, che ſhould haue much to doe to paſſe it quietty,o2 to kepe the boke in her hands. foꝛ it would ſhake her armes
and ſtraine her body very ſoze , inſomuch that ſhee would oftentimes ſay, wilt thou not ſuffer me toſay my pzapers 2 Ut thou
not ſuffer: metoreade? (anſwering) J will lay them, J will reade
with often and vehement repetition, and would in no caſefozfa
ber boke, except by great ſtrifeand violence, it cat it toꝛth of her
hands (as many times it did) pet would thee receiue it againe, be⸗
ing bꝛought vnto her, and many times fetch it her ſelfe ; and in the
end after much contention and much ſtriuings ſhe ſhould read qui⸗
etly: and thus ſher was vſed foꝛ the moſt part euery night wherr
the went to bed, but eſpecially in time ol her pꝛapers.
Further, fo: the ſpace of two oꝛ thꝛe dates, if Sathan had ben
named, oꝛ the diuell vnto her, it would haue tronbled her, and ſo

often as thoſe woꝛds bad been named, ſo many twitches, which

was very ſtrange to behold: Alſo at the namingof other Samudert and armes, as if it would ſhiuer her inpeces,giuing fignes of
great diflike thereot, and thzeatning as if there were ſome myſtery
in it. And ſometimes her very name would caſt her p2eſentlp into
her fit, and being in the middeſt thereof, cher would ſap, could you
not haue helde pour tongue?

J was weltinough befoꝛe vou named her, with many ſuch like
ſperches, and thus the continued long in this d2z6wſle maner, ſpea⸗
king very little all the time but that ſhe would ſay ſometimes that
the ſhould not be well vntill ſhe came to Warboyſe, oz a mile vpon

— —
*

i the ſhould be well. Ot netime ſhenſked the que;
„ hiv hav had
done, ſaying that it had bern along night with ber, fur the hadthen
continued lo flue dapes, and if euery bodyhadflept ſo long as ſhe
baddone (meaning the — of the houſe) why then A won⸗
der (quoth ſhe) howall the wozke could be done. |

_ Upon the laſt day ol Auguſt, che hada very ſodaine and ſoze fit
p:elently after dinner, fo ſhe cried out very grienonfly to heare,
that mother Samuel ſtsde befoze ber in a white ſhret, with a black
Child litting vpon her thoulders,ſaving: loke where ſhe is, lwke
where ſhe is, away with your Childe mother Samuel, J will none
of your Childe, trembling enery ioynt, and ſweating maruellouſ⸗
ane bponher Unclemaſter Pickering, and others to ſaue her
om mother Samucls Childe, and with ſuch lamentable ſpœches,
ne dul her, that it did greatly grieue thoſe
or werepzeſent, Alter this fitended, her teth were ſet in her
i by which meanes her ſpeech alſo was taken from her, it max
be becauſe the diſcloſed moꝛe than mother Samuel would vouch⸗

ne, afl er a while ſhe greatiy mourned inwardly
eryſoze,often her hand to her mouth, and ſhaclan gol her mouth did greatly affright vs
5 could not be that ſhe ſhauld naturally be pꝛeſerued
the ozdinarp meanes of fob, vet the often experience wer
had reteiued of Gods mertitull pꝛouidence and care towards the
Th{ld,bangui eddiſpaire in vs, pet could it not but greatiy griene
mercileſſe Tpꝛants hart but that the diuell hath no mercy))
ts le how be Chude e woyt and lamented, many times putting her
band to her month, and lifting vp her head, as giuing thirſting
ſignes ol an hungry deſire fo2 meate andd2inke, ID

Towards night when cher chould goe to bedde, it pleaſed « God
(whole helpe isalwates at hand, when hope was in greateſt di⸗
ftrefle) that this meanes was foundout,the Child wanted a toth,
whereat by thehelpe or a quill, the ſacked vp ſome milke, and
by the ſame meanes receiued her dꝛinke. After this was done,
cher greatly rciopced in countenance and outward ſignes, foꝛ
ſher could not ſpcake-, but clapping her bandes on her bꝛeaſt
and belly (as if may be thought) foz that ſhe had found out a
way- t9.deceing | the malice ot her enemy: Foz thechildzen-in 5
their allaultes, though they tooke the kople foz a 50 4 10

enſo⸗

— —⅛— — —— ——————

ally kept, fo2 though her toꝛments increated nener fo much vet

Womtbes e Epnen Enel eng dar in arki
yet wouldthey greatly irfiimph in wozds' ¶ they cout ſpenke, a;
to ſay, I delle ther thou witkedſpirite, dos what thon tank, cho
canſt doe me no hurt, thou ſeſt that God is ffkronger than thou,
thou art as god to let me alone, J am glad at my heart that thou
tanſt not ouercome me, with many ſuch like ſpeeches, thongh in
the very vttering ol them, the enemie ſermed ko checke and to toꝛ⸗
ment them koꝛ tt, byſtrayning their body, and ſtopping the tonrſe
of their ſpech,and if they could not ſpeake, then world they reidtte
in countenance, and out ward ſignes, and this kinde ol triumphing
after the extremitie of the fit be paſt, is true in them all, fromthe
eldeſt to the poungeſt.

To returne to this childe, who was caryed to bedde in her
Fitte, and in time of her pꝛapers, as tee inwardly

tn her minde, was excetdingly toꝛntented, yet would che not ceaſe
vntill the had finiſhed them, which rule koꝛ the moff part the vfite

would ſhe not long ſurceate her p2avers, but after ſome releaſe "468
quietr.esgiuento her of her enemte, che wonlo goefo2ward vntiit
the had ended them, which was (nodonbe)a gb motforr ofthefptrite and grate of God in the childe. |

The next moꝛning, which was the firff of Septertle thee
was taken vp in the ſame manner that thee lay downe, her teeth
fill remayning laſt ſet together:yet not ſo, but that ſhe might re⸗

ceiue milke by a quill as befoze; At dinner time theehavatittte

ſcrugling with her itte, in the end wherevfher teeth were lapped
one ouer the other, erte bende der were let but one againft
the other.

This was agaynea further degree of Sathans malttious enmitie.fo2 now hath he tloſed her terth and her month ſo falt Ws
ther that there is no vie and helpe left fo} the quill, this ſpꝛi
and mercileſſe dealing of Sathar with this Ehude had 15
moꝛe troubled vs than it did, but that wee were berity perfwavet
that the malice of the Dinell, and of his wicked Inſkruments
whoſoeuer were limited, and his mifchienons nav towardeg
the childe, ſo farre fo2th reſtrayned, as that alth j
danger herhealth {which many timeshe did) pet et thotilo bee
acrally endammage the ſame, and much lelle ber 1 - hereof wee

l baue had very comloztahle experiences. Foz oftentimes (as you

map

ea 6 Te
DEI Threats heautnir Ss fivellings th her betty; asf would
hntebJoHentvrbacke;d) rent her ioynts in ſunder, fachertreams;
neun, nnd that ſo thick und often together atter a lrrithing man⸗
ner; ling all the houſe with. her nople,as that hloud hath guſhed
out ol her note, and lone part at her mouth. Pkt foꝛ all his when
— at Was on And ſhe como againe tu her ſelfe, che hath
as ö sf vn, chetetnll in comunenance: fort yyn had aſned
che had done, thewotlbhane ſmilro vpon. vou: where he
—— nher common aufwere wats, la d pe v2 Mea. If a
ſtrongman in his perlen health had ſtrugled in ſuch a ſtoꝛme, and
= mn a bꝛunt but one houre, as ſhe did halfe adaytogether o:
t; itchad bern ne wonder if he had ben ſicke a moneth after:
— o& if deafhit fete had'folfowed p2eſetifiy vpon it: fo very.”
range things flferedthis chuld. But now ihs is let dettitute or
all out ward menties to relieue the dodie and to pꝛeſetue lile, be⸗
catiſe hermonth isclofed vp. It was hereupon therefoze thought
god by diners te malie ſome trials and experiments (as they had
oltent imes done bef620 in (eh likr reales) and chiell 5 flp betauſe the
child had malip times layd Hat ſhe ſhoulvnot be Well wntin he
came to nene dame öpon the wap. She there loꝛe accom⸗
panied with iniſtris Pickering der Hunt, Was taken vp and carried
to hoꝛſebaek, wWhereat ſhe pelentiy ioyed much: (as if the had perco 1 bern done) fo; es hands, the
ted to harre the hoiſe goe onfo;wards, - * - -- ©? 45
i: ol Wben che gas boite almoſt a mile onward; -ndtthe
+ dire way td Werboyſe, vet the lame wapthe batte Aothienes to
Dehner groue as | fell out, (foꝛ ff was vn ndwone to anp in the
companie at » pꝛeſent) ſhe began to cheare up her ſelle very much,
and her teeth were koꝛth with vntied: ſo that ſhe ſays, Jam not yet
gone amile, Ichull fraight way, and then hall be well; P2zeſently after this, when the had gone a gad mile (as it mur ber |
thought) ſhe rubbed her eyes and eum to her telle, and Was verte
wells ſhe ſuid, but marüeiled extending ly bdthhowthecame thr⸗
ther, and wherefoꝛe, at the companie allo, and the ſfrangenes ol
the place. Afterwards alighting fromthe hozſe; her legge was re⸗
cues to her, whereofthe had no vſe of thꝛes Werkes Before, and
Aut to] pꝛap to God ts bleſſe her. Thus the walked on
in very gwdand perfect * was meate bꝛought

foz

critie and theerefnlties.) W agar ps prayer

ptilafgit qt; fy iis ale 8;
oke i e ü
god ſpate, but when ſhe came at this woꝛd Sathan, it troubled her
ſoꝛe by ſhaking and wꝛinging of her ſhoulders. And to f& the ma⸗
lice of the diuell, there was no ſoner mention made of her going
home, but ſhe was ſtraight way ſnatched and ſhaken in her ſhoul⸗
ders, armes and bodie, as it would haue ſhuffled her together: a
little after the aroſe;+ in the very turning ot ber face homewards,
her eyes were ſhut, her legs were taken from her, her teeth laſt ſet
in her head, her bellie began to heaue and ſwell in maner as vſuallie befoze when her fit ſet vpon her. Nowſo long as ſhe is walk ⸗
ing fozwards from the groue as it were to Warboyſe, ſo that you

ſpeake not ot going backe againe, (fo2 tbe mation onelp will cauſe
her to ſtart) the is very well and merrie without any ligne of dif⸗
like ſo long as either pon are going on oz ſtanding ſtill: hut ſo ſone
as euer you ſhall turne her about to goe bomewarda, che p:eſently
ſinketh downe in pour armes as one fallen into a ſodaine ſwoune,
ſcrugling bet werne life and death, and fo continueth irfuing a,
little ſpace vntill he be cleane ouercome, it vou in the means time
turne not her face againe, which if von doe, as one awaking tram

ſleepe, the is returned to her foꝛmer estate. This was p28ned may ,

ny times at that pꝛeſent both on fote and on hozſebacke in ỹ ſight.
of many, but in the ende (there was no remedie) with great griefe
we bꝛought her backe againe the ſame way we carried her fozth:
A dead childe to loke vpon foꝛ any ſenſe oꝛ motion, but in counte⸗
nance very ſwert and amiable, foꝛ in all theſe extremities her con
plexion (which naturally is faire) was no whit altered. At night
it pleaſed God in deſpight of miſchiefe and malice, that ſhe recei⸗
ued milke againe by a quill in the ſame manner as befoꝛe, vet not
without ſome ſtraining and ftraightnes , becauſe the place was
cloſer ſhut then at the firſt: ſo that the childe euen then remained
as a ſuckling and ſucking child, foꝛ ſhe eateth no meate within the
houſe, which is ſubſtantiall and ſolide, but ſuch as pafſeth thꝛough
a quill: and if any meate be bzonght vnto her, ſhe wil make ſignes
to goe abꝛoad, poynting towards that place where ſhe was wont
to awake. The next day therefoꝛe after dinner, he was carried
foꝛth againe, where when ſhe came at the very ſelfe ſame place(as
one would think within the length of a pole) ſhe awakened, as one
9 out ol a log in ſhe! woutd rub her epesall little befoze,
and

— ttonr 4 es whe the nite ts to hernaturall —
thers the dio tate her meate very hatfely with a gad appetite, to
the-great top of her ſelfe,and df thoſe that were pꝛeſent : but when
che wasſatiſfiedandabout to giue thanks, then Sathan appeared
in his likenes, toꝛhe laboured to pꝛohibite and hinder that godererciſe, by ſnatching the woꝛd as it were out of her mouth, and cut ·
in the halle, by wzinging alſo and twiſting the parts and
members of the child, in ſuch ſozt, that che could not bzing out one
gwd woꝛd e the detter woꝛd, the greater was her trouble to vtter
it. After this done, it was thought god by ſome. that a little ſticke
ſhould be put into her mouth to kerpe her teth open, whenſoener
the was aſſailed againe, which was tried: ſo that whe ſhe was tur⸗
ned about (toꝛ it would not ſaffer her ſo much as to it — 35 with
her face home wards) che held the ficke faſt in her mouth, which
kept her teeth open, but ſhe her ſelle was as one in a dead leepe,gtuing ſmall ſignes of any ſtrength, oꝛ life, and ſo remained vntil ſhe
was turned about againe, which was not pꝛeſently done at ÿ time,
becauſe we were willing to ſ& the iſſue of it. After a little ſpacs
the ſtroue with her hands to plucke the ſficke out of her mouth,
mourning in wardly in her minde with an heauie countenance, as
il it han bren much griefe and trouble vnto her, but ſhe held it ſo last
with her teeth, that it could not as it may bee thought) without
great foꝛce haue bin pulled out, which appeared hy the great dints
or her terth made in the ſticke when ſhe was recouered. This we
dutſt not aduenture to doe the ſecond time, fearing other inconue⸗
niences, loꝛ the ſaid, whe ſhe was come to her ſelle, that her moulh
was very colde, fo2 that the ſticke (as wee thought) kept it open.
Now did we tell her ora quill, by which che vſed to reteiue her
meate at home, fo: che aſked whether the did eate meat any where
elſe but in that place onely: but it ſeemed very ſtrange vnto her to
heare ol a quill, and ſhe kne we of no ſuch thing, neither could we
bꝛing her to beleeue that ſhe could ſucke in a quill,” fo2 ſhe aſked
ananp queſtions about it,howandwbich way theſhoulddos it.
"Now inthe middeſt of this great heape, and 'wozld of wonders
(as weſap)appearing in this child, one thing farther by the wapis
thought godto be remembꝛed, which is a point wherein many mẽ
that i haue ſene it, hardiy beleue their own eves. It is a great que⸗
er va, and is not vet 9 Wan *
X chi

child in the preſent ti: ne or her agonie, doth-fear

the naming onely of God, oꝛ Jeſus, oꝛ anꝝ god moꝛd, which il vvu
had ſcene, vou could nat haue ſuffictently admired: alſd, at the gi⸗

ſibiie feele and par ndpan
take, either in.anguilh of mind, oꝛ griele of bodie, thoſe pangs and

toꝛments which to out ward iudgement ſhe dothappeare to daectt
is thought ſhe doth not, and ſome reaſons (hail be We wed that
may dꝛaw vs to bel ue it.

Firſt, the teſtunonie of the Child her ſelfe( when te ts recoue⸗
red) might bee ſufficient to perſwade the matter, i there were nothingels,fo2 why ould not ſhe rather by ſhe wing ber grief cauſe
vs to mone and pitie her (as al doth that ſœ her)if ſyefeltiany cauſe
why? The ſmiling and cherefull countenance which ſhehathatwates vſed, to thoſe that aſke her how ſhe doth pꝛeſently vpon her
fit ended, may ſomething alſo ſtrengthen this poynt. The earneſt
deſire ſhe hath alwaies had in time of her greateſt extremities, to
finich her pzaiers, oꝛ any ſuch god exerciſe, although her tozments

(as they appeared to be) were the moꝛe encreaſed thereby, as vſu⸗

* they were. Her erceding hartie and immodeſt laughter in
of her fits, and ſuch indeed as the childs modeſtie would haue

* ed at, and could not haue permitted, if ſhe had bern well. To
theſe may be added, that the not feeling of her blow and hurt, no2
knowingany thing of it, vntill ſhe was recouered, which. the reoa in her fozehead by the latch of a doꝛe, as pau map reade be⸗
foze, with many ſuch like arguments which might be alleadged.
And not to leaue out that which is of moſt foꝛce of all: her open
contempt at all times, and in all places, both in ſperch and gefture,
immediatly hefoꝛe her fit toke her: her boldnefſe and god courage
at all times to aduenture vpan it, though the knewe alluredlytt
would aſſault her: as namely, in the beginning of her viſitatton;at

uing of thankes after oz befoze meate receined, at the entring dpd
any god exerciſe, as reading oz pzaying, ſhe neuer once vſoth to
giue any ſigne of feare oꝛ diſcouragement, in any reſpett. And at the
naming of the diuell, mother Samuel, q any ſuch blacke woꝛd, chat
ke&peth the colour, as ſathan, oꝛ Ciceiy, (which is another womans
name, that is ſuſpected to be confederate in this wickod padile)
the neuer feared noꝛ would ſtick at them, but alwaies e wed her
ſelfe readie ( though ſhe very well knewe that ſhe ſhould haue her
fit foꝛ it) to caſt her ſelfe vpon the pꝛeſent danger. Andnowheve

in this place which is the open fields, ſhe is willing « foꝛ ward at

euerie

n 67 pat * — 7 * | Sf Short em Sire fefthee | * . ;

dards — — — — verpkewe
— wngken great giſts)if they had be ente frone the child
intbat piu plight and waful caſe, wherein ſhe hath been a hun⸗
dꝛed times, that mould vohurantih cat themiſe lues intoſd great
an extremitic and hazard of iife, xea, though then had retetued ſul⸗

ficient fecuritie and aſſured warrantiee both of life and health al⸗

ter wards, and mitkall foꝛ the;pzcſent lime allo to be without nas
turall ſenſe und tel ing of griefe;and veratiori of hodie 02 wunde, ſo
full of mead and terroʒ was this fearefuli pt arte tothe ſtauder⸗
by many times. And yet hath this littte rhild (ſuth is the pꝛehemi⸗
nence of Godtz ſpirit ver all ſpitits of wickedneffe)fienc many of
ber ſiſters and ſome others, diuers times in the ine cafe, 92 —
(if it might be) handled and tozmented;/

ꝓrt it cannot be denped, but ſhe hath been mg türe 'bery fad
in countenance; and ſhed ſome fee teares a'littlz: befoze her fit
hath come vpon her: yet withoutany:complatning at all, and of
late times alſs: ſo that it may be. rather imputeð (as it hath been
thought) to ſome other cauſes, as in part tu the couceit and imagi⸗
nation of her cruell dealing, when ſhe is in her fits: as it hath bern
repo2ted in her hearing. Alla, fd that ſhe is depoined (foz the tine)
cf the companie and fello wſhip ot her cozens, (other chien in
the houſe, whom te dearely laueth) tondat rat ſaʒro we und an⸗

guiſh of minde, which the ſinht ol her tamentable caſe enkozteth

vpon others: 02 if there be ſome other ſecret cauſe. vnknowne vn⸗
to vs, foꝛ the child her ſelfe neuer complaineth. And being deman⸗
ded thecaaiſe of her tearesſhe will anſwore, ſometimes that her
hend aketh; oꝛ that the hath ſome naynt in one part vf her bodie 63

aher: but it would bo toJlatge a thing to recitꝛ ane of un hundꝛed
ahmoſt, of thoſe memozable at idents which haue befallen to this

child, ſince the time that it uri pleaſc®Godto porinit her to be vi⸗
fited in tbis Gbr. 646

Eo outtt crefaze-fubat migbt bo turthet aw; che was carried
ontaf the.elds dache againe-nto the growe, botingmoze like the
weatarhilde; then (9 intivde in the
— aud v der nt hame as ahaoab, not eating a thing but
ſucu melting. meates as would paſte though a quitl, onely ſometimes ſhe would take ſome buttered meats very ſmall minced, and
a nettſide ot her teeth, and ſo ſucke in the iuyce and

D 3 moyſture

—— nm

ii _ moyſtnred K.

© —

. 2 - — — 2 1 .*
. —

* W
— Aa ³ ià——2 —ꝝ

— 2
. DD — —

* 2 0 c—_
- ——— MO Se were ey wi, |
— oy -
_

. — Y
— 4 i « — 2 0 « — — 1

were befoꝛe, which cauſed the greater ſoꝛrowe. Then the Lady

nn : „ af rr eie
dap, rich 1 A dhe 5 , oy

-Frdurthis]
vntill Tueſdap, which was the 8. af theſunemeuietd; toas the ca⸗
ried abz0aduito the fieldeuery day to eate het mente; here che
fayled nat ta awalie at the ver ſelle ſams place i not belt And

to peuſwade yon that ſhe would coine to her ſelle in no other plate

buf in that aneip , ſhle hath bren caried a moꝛe direct wap'to Warboyle, two oꝛ thʒie miles bpon the wan, but to ſmall purpoſe, fog

ſheconttuued in the ſinmne eſtate. Upon this tueſdaꝝ was ſhe cars

ried fram kickemerih grone ta Wrboyſe to het fathers, Houle;
where (the wp in Field, at n hedge cozner, which waste 033
dinarx place, the mizde therommongnes,+ pielertiy awaked cõ
tinuing al d wap in vetyhealthful ſoꝛte ⁊ mertv, onig her greateſt

care and griete mas that he was departed frõ Tichemerth groue.

Now that you haue heard the particular manner ol the fits of
thts childe, Miſtreiſle Elizabtati, pon map imagine andatme at the
maner of handling of the reit of her ſiſters, during this time, res
main places, who were no eſſe franglydeate withall;
than ſhe was, ol whom if it chonld particularly be obſerned;'ks is
done in her, as ſtrangei wonders. (if any thing hetherto ſeeme
ſtrange) belell euery one of them ſeuerally, as are theſe which you
haue already heard. And by ſome of them were hewed matters of
farre greater admiration, but this may ſuffice,lcaft in entrin 8 into
thereft;no end could he ſa und, ſo infimito is the matter.

It pleaſed the pꝛouidente of 'God;that not long after maſter Gil.
bert Pickering had carried. awaputhis child to his houſe, about a

moneth o: ſuch a thing, the Lady Cromwel, wife of Sir Henry

Cromwel Knight, (who, then lay in Ramſey, atowne two miles
diſtant from Warboyſe) came to Paſter Throckmortons houſe, toy
gether with her daughter in law Piſtreſſe Cromwel to vilit theſe
childꝛen t toicomfozt their parents, with whome ſhe was wellac⸗
2 ſhe had not lang ſtaid in the houſe, but the childꝛen which

were there, kel al into their fits, and were ſo grieuoully toꝛmented
fo the time, that it pittied that god Ladies heart to ſ them, in ſo
much, chat che touis not abſtaine from teares, wherevpon ſhe cau⸗
ſed the ald waman motherSamuel to be ſenttoꝛ, who dei nat dey
nyfoca her huſband was tenant to fir Henry Cromwel,
who alter cher was come, the childꝛen grewto be wozſe than thoy

Crommel toke mother Samuel _ and charged her depelp 106
is

I
N y Ig _ * a hs 4 . n Cr
e PTE TR AE IO 4 . 4 ˖

rex her that neither P:Throckmorton no: bis — — ber,
but the childꝛen themieluen in their fits did it, az rather the ſpirite
bythem. Oneat them, miſtris Loane by name; being than in her fit.
bearing che bis woman thus xleeringher ſells, doꝛſhe heard not
the Ladie not anp other) aa, that it wasſhetbatc 7
andfomething there ts laith doth nais teli me ie: aſking i
no body heard it but ſhe, affirming. thatit ſquealed very lowde in
her eares, and marueiled that no hadytould beare it; wiſhingube
old woman to liſtento it. But mother Samuel fill continued her:
denyall. Then the Lie Cromwell wnuld haue taben e
A chamber, to haue examined her mae narxo m ( Haſter Deco
Hall, a Dato of Diuinitie being pꝛeſent y but ſhs iy: no meanes
would goe with them, but rather fained many extuſes to go home.
In the ende, when the Ladie perceiued, that by no od ſperches
neither ſhe, noꝛ any other could pꝛeuaite with ber that fate ſhe
would haue ben gone, ſheſe damn pulled nt her kercher, i tab
apaiteof ſheres; ciinped nt a loche af ber aire, cane it piuſix
to miſtris Thtockmprtqpcomotbe? of: the chien, together with
ber hairtate, willing her to but them;Pother — ck wk
ber ſelle thus dealt-withall.ſpake ety the Lady thus.
doe yon bfe me thus 2A ntuer did you anp farme as pet. We
woꝛds were scterwards remembꝛed and were not at that meſent
timo taken hoid ol any. nene eee,
left the chudꝛen noh nhatos ſhe found. of

The lame night, alter the N. adie Crom 1 departed from 8
boyſe, ſhe ſuffered many things in her deams concerning mother
Samuel, and was very ſtrangely toꝛmentedin her de by a cat as
the imagined) which mother Samnel had ſent vnta hex, which 5
offered to plucke off albtheſnin andfleſh fram her armes4 bodig, ;
but ſuch was the ſtrugling and fritz ing ot the Ladie that night
her bed, and mournſull napſe which the made, ſpeaking to the cat
and to mother Samuel, that ſhe wakened her bedfellow, who was
Piltris Cromwell, bpfoxe named, wife to the wozſhipfull-Palter
Oliuer Cromwell ſomm and heine to fir Hentie Cromwell, who that
night was from ;home.;: :Piltrefſe Sromwell heing awakened,
and nd percetn{ngtheA.adle thys = ber alſo, ih

greatl

.

Mi vials e Actmawmram ond hn ftonbter int:
bi e mauynther cir1 cuniſtun t, Which fe did een elk remembennneithen neh!
4 takeagipnguiet reſt ozf@pe all: thatnighfſafter for fenre thereof.
„ Ad dong artri the Kats felivevy ſtrangely lick md a continued
ah vato herpplagay third was fome:yeargiandiquiarter after her
1 Waboyſe. Ihe magner of her fits was unurh Ike tothe!
= — — he had al was het perfect ſenſes: fra
i ſonuimie herpaine-wouldbetronearme; lame ime im t᷑de other:
now inthe — and byin the other, many times in her head:
5 vpea, ſometiuies it would tate her lurt in ont ſeuerali finger vꝛ tor,
by c alwateshake thegriened putt, as Hit han bien fhe malſie. Aud.
* that uche; or mother Satuckwhichtheuſetts her ata Vurboyſe)n
[| whioh Was; Wadumez mover uct powmoret)world araerout of
[1 her mind. "AndthusWwrnſng cut gd dd Abt in beauen c n,
f we will returne bo theſe child un. mm!
le Abdut Thziſtmas after, Amo ry toꝛ there ramnothing no⸗
ik ted all that time although there befellro0;wawers)mager Hen
\ rie Picketirjz,Viiclt to cheſe thjiiuũ, bonn then a Schaller of Can
i bridge; wentfarnafter Thidcknibeebaghoaſy; androntinwdthere:
4, ſonethy> 0xfoursdaiss; wisveffrdtwto ſpeake with mother Sa-:
i nwe,andtakitigatonnenient/time;heregnefrvttwo otherſthols'
lers of his acquaintante (then being in the to wne)to gor withHim,. =
ts whom they gramted, and pꝛeſentiy went without the knows:
lsdcge vent tina es Miromkefottotihunſe; Agtheywore gving,
the tame but df het ois bolte, mwbrcalſeptheſtrotebefo2ethem:* |
when they ſaw her, aybetermitudrather te taltow her whither |
b, ſhe Went then wehe ;beeaiſe her huſunnd was a fro
| ward man, nd would not ſuffet dor to talko with any; i he might
1 kno su it. She went toantigbbours haue fozſome Barme, car
ried alittle Wederet an ard her hand and er littte Bartey in her
lap, to exchange log ſhe Barme? when cho came to the hdale whi--
ther the purpoled to go; BdWholletsfollowed her dumedtatly, and
heard her tell her ertand tothe will vt tbe houſe who dad not that
foꝛ Which ſhe came. Weing readie te depart, the Schollets dellred
toſpeake with her, but He ſremed lothh er ap, pet they entring in⸗
toqueEſns wir het3{tares Wera here. Wudſhe Was verp lowdein er antwerzz ar ünpaktent, {dt nierung np tofpeake bat her
ele : neal hed vefixed her to kerpe the womans vertue, and be
moze

__ 4 2
F 8

PE RO" " POS TOE”

—— pf on — —
— * — .

ay R

d
. R
1
1
7
I
J

5

-

moze ſllent: the anſwered, that-ſhe was boꝛne in a mill, begot in a
kill, che muſt haue her will, ſhe could ſpeake no ſoftlier. Che grea⸗
teſt part ol her ſpeech was rapling woꝛds _ M. Throckniorton and his childꝛen, ſaping, that he did miſule her, in ſutfering his
childzen ſo to play the wantons in accuſing of her, bʒinging her
name into queſtion, often repeating, that the childzens fits was
nothing but wantonnefle in them, if they were her childzen, he
would not ſuffer them ſo to eſcape without puniſhment one after
the other. The ſchollers enquired about her ſeruice of God, 4 p20- *
feſſion of her faith. But all that they could get of her, was, that her
God would deliuer her, her God would defend her, and reuenge
her ol her enemie, alway vling the phꝛaſe of my God will do this
and that fo2 me: which being noted by one of them, he aſked her if
ſhe hada God alone, oꝛ if ſhedid not ſerue p ſame God that others
did! She anſwered, ves 5 the did: yet much adoe they had to bꝛing
her from the phzaſe ol my God, to ſay the God of heauen x earth.
In end ſhe would nerds be gone, ſaving, that her huſband would
beate her foꝛ her long tarrying. Then the vncle of thoſe childzen
being ſomewhat moze moued then the reſt, at the parting ſayd,
that if ſhe were the woman that had wzought this wickednes vps
thelſe childꝛen, the vengeanceof God would ſurely watt vpon her
vnto death, and howſoener ſhe might deceiue her ſelfe e the woꝛld
foꝛ a time, yet there was no way to pꝛeuent the iudgements of
God, but by her confeſſion and repentance: which il ſhe did not in
time, he hoped one day to ſer her burned at a ſtake, and he himſelle
would bzing ſtre and wo, k the childꝛen ſhould blow the coales.
Her anſwere to him was this, (fo2 they were then in the ſtreete
hard by a pond) had rather (aid ſhe)ſ& you dowſed ouer head and
earcs in this pond, and ſo they parted,

Now to come to the poynt, the eldeſt of Paſter Fxrockmortons
daughters was then in her fit, ſittingat home in a Parloz,her father and grandmother, with ſome other of her ſiſters in their fits
being pꝛeſent with her: On the ſodatne(ſayd ſhe)now is my vncle
(naming him) and thet wo other ( whom ſhe alſo named) going to
mother Samuel, we ſhall heare ſome ne wes by and by. P2eſently
ſhe ſaid, luke where mother Samuel goeth trotting in the ſtrætes
befoze them, with a wodden tankard in her hand, and her apꝛon
is tucked vp befoꝛe her, J belteue ſaith ſhe, there is ſome what in it.
Sheis gone into uh amn houſe thatkepethan Alehouſe, we

mans

— —

N n

N mans Fee the bit ol, „but deſcribed him byhts red head.
Harke, ſapd ſhe to her lickers, mother Samuel is verꝑ loude, and my
1 vncle bids her ſpeake ſoftly, but the ſayth ſhe cannot,repeating to
her father and the reſt the ſame woꝛds, (viz. that ſhe was boꝛne in
à mill, ⁊c.) after the ſame manner that mother Samuel ſpake them
to her vncle and the other Schollers. To be ſhoꝛt, the declared
particularly euery wozd that paſſed betwene mother Samuel and 1
thoſe Schollers at that time. And at the parting ſhe ſayd, there
mother Samuel mp vncle did touch pou Athinke, repeating againe
| the very ſame woꝛds that her vncle had done, wiſhing that that
. day were once come, fo2 Imp ſelfe (ſayd the) would blowe the
5 coales: but he had been as god he had ſayd nothing to her(ſaid ſhe)
.'_ - *oz He wiſhedhim ouer head and eares in the pond foz it. Maſter
Throckmorton ſtanding by and hearing all this, after that the child |
had ſaid, that now mother Samuel and the Schollers were parted,
enquiredfo2 his bꝛother the childs vncle,aſking ifany knew whe⸗
ther he was gone. Anſwer was made, that he came not home from
the Church ſince euening Pꝛaper, (fo2it was on a Satterdap) but
where he was no body knew. It may be (ſayd Palker Throckmorton) that he is with mother Samuel, and went imme diatly out of
his owne houſe, to ſee if he could perceiue where they were. As he |
went he met them in the Church-yard comming from mother Sa- |
muels. Where haue pou been 2 (ſaid he) They tolde him, J could
haue told you ſo much mp ſelfe, ſapd he: and repeated to them the
whole matter, as his daughter befoze had ſhewed. Whe they were
f come into the parlour where ſhe was, there was alſo another ol
1 her ſiſters in her fit ſitting by: and this her other fiffer could heare |
* | her ſapd vncle ſpeake vnto her, and no body els, r ſo by her mouth f
1 (foʒ they could foꝛ the moſt part heare one another in their fits) |
he enquired of her ſiſter all tholematters oner againe, which ſhe
did in his owne hearing repeate: but ſayd ſhe, the winde was ſo
great that J had much adoe to heare them, whereas indeede there
was then no wind ſtirring. After this the ſpirit(oꝛ the thing as the
childꝛen called it) would many times appeare vnto them in their ;
fits in ſome kind of ſhape oꝛ other, but moſt commonly in the likes
nes of a dun chicken, and would talke fanuliarly with them, ſay⸗ |
ing, that they came from mother Samuel, ( whom they called their
dame) and were ſent by her to the childꝛen to toꝛment and vexe
them in that ſozt, It would declare to the childzen many things
concers

rdncerning mother Samuel; infomtich that che could da nothing al/ |
moftathome fo2 a great time, but the ſpirit would diſcloſe it, if it
were required by the childzenin their fits: viz. as to knowe what
the was then in doing at home, oꝛ in what place of her houſe, oꝛ els
where ſhe was, the ſpirit would tell: which ( bya meſſenger pꝛe⸗
ſently ſent ol purpoſe) was pꝛoued true.

Now did the ſpirits manifeſtly begin to accuſe mother Samuel
to the childꝛen in their fits: ſaying, it was ſhe that had bewitched
them, and all thoſe ſeruants which were bewitched in the houſe,
t told them, that whenſoeuer they were in their fits, and were ei⸗
ther caried to Bother Samuels houſe, o2 the cauſed to come to the,
they ſhould be pꝛeſently well. This manptimes was pꝛoued true,
t neuer failed once:ſo that it the childꝛen at any time being in their
fits, had been carried to mother Samuels houſe, (foz it was a very
hard thing to get mother Samuel to . Throckmortons houſe) al⸗
though they were in ſuch a caſe, as that a ſtrõg man could ſcarcely.
hold them, (they would ſo ſtruggle, ſtart, ſpꝛawle inhis armes)
pet if they came but once toy thꝛeſhold of Mo. Samuels doe, they
would wipe their eyes,+xſay, Jam well, why ds pou carry me, ſet
me down, as though ſome ſhame had been offered them, in that they
were carried in the ſkretes, not knowing any thing in what caſe
they had been. While they confinued in the honſe they were verp
well, but determining once to come awap, x offering to come out
of ß doe, they fell pꝛeſently down onthe ground, were bꝛought
krom thence in the ſame caſe that they were carted thither: contrariwiſe, whenſoener Po. Samuel came to Þ. Throckmortons houſe,
in what kind ofertremity ſoener theſe childzen were in, (as it was
moſt wonderfull ſtrange fo ſe them many times) ſo ſone as ener
ſe had ſet fte into the Parlour oz Hall where they were, they

would all pꝛeſently tart vp vpon their fæt, and be as well as any
in the houſe, and ſo continue while ſhe was pꝛeſent: but when ſhe
offered to depart, they would all ſinke do wne as a ſtone vpon the
ground: if ſhe turned but her face againe and came towards them,
they would be well as befoze, which was tryed xx. times in one
houre. And when the departed from the houſe, ſhe left them in the
ſame eſtate wherein ſhe found them, ſo long as their fit continued
vpon them. After this, Maſter Throckmorton thought god to diſ⸗
perſe his childꝛen, and ſent them abꝛoad, ſome to one friends houſe,
ſome to another foz a time, to ſex halb * ſhould be dealt *
2 pet

— ace

Pickering Eſquire, dwelling at Tichmcrſh groue.

. ͤ;L—K Ser on ro 992-—-

petaltaies ;koping ſome one of them at hame with hem.

Ik it Gould be declared how theſe were all ſeuerally handled fo;
the time they were abꝛoad, it woutdaſke a long diſcourſe, æ longer
inderd then is thought meete at this time, although verp ſtrange
things, and ſuch as may ſerme woꝛth the noting befell cucry one
of thent, as this foꝛ one: They could tel being in their fits, in what
caſe o2 eſtate their other ſiſters were at that inſtant, being ſepara⸗
ted ſome of them eight, ten, oꝛ twelue miles aſunder, and haue ſaid,
now is my ſiſter (naming her and the place where the was in her
fit) very ſoꝛe handled, as ſhe her ſelfe alſo was at that inſtant. It

was pꝛoued to bee moſt true by the iuſt computation of times,

with many ſuch like things.

But this may ſuffice concerning them being abꝛoade, that they
were neuer altogether cle&ere and fre from their fit, although it be
true that ſome of them, whether at home oz abzoade, had not their
fits aboue once in a moneth, ſometimes once in halfe a peere, and

one of them was cleerea whole yeare together. And this alſo is

verified and true in ſome other of theſe ſiue ſiſters, that they were
neuer cleere noꝛ free from ſome kind of fit oꝛ other, thꝛee weekes
together: I thinke ſcarcely thꝛee dates ſince the firff day if tooke
them, except now ſince theſe laſt Aſſiſes in Lent, whereat theſe
Witches were executed.

To paſle ouer all that which might be ſpoken of them foꝛ a pere

and almoſt an halfe, we will come neerer vnto thele latter times,
wherein the Spirits, whether moued by their owne malice. (as it
paſlſeth the reach of man to ſound the depth of the diuels malice to
mankind) oꝛ moued bythe malice of the ſenders and ſetters on, oz
both, it is not knowne: o2 whether foꝛ the concluſton and conſummation of their parents patience in this popnt: it pleaſed the wiſe⸗
dome of God, who in his pꝛouidence had determined their ende, to
graunt them therefozemoze libertie fo2 the time, to exerciſe their
malice againſt theſe childꝛen, we leaue it to God, but trueth it is,
that they were moꝛe ſtrangely vered, and moꝛe grieuoully toꝛmẽ⸗
ted in their body now of late, and take them generally altogether,
then at any time almoſt from the beginning. And to begin this

time at Pichaetnaſſe laſt paſt, oꝛ thereabouts, foure of theſe childꝛen were altogetherat Warboyſe in their fathers houſe, and the
fift, which was the eldeſt of them, was at her vncles houle, Gilbert

About

childꝛen, the youngeft ſaue one, nerre vpon the age of fourtene
peares, was in a very ſtrange kind of fit, the maner whereof wag
as followeth: Enerp dayfoꝛ the ſpace ofth2e& werkes oz moze, ſhe
had a ſenceleſſe fitte,fonme one time ofthe day oꝛ other, and ſometimes many fittes in one day. In which fit the could neither heare,
ſc, noꝛ ſpeake to an body, beũdes her in warde griefes, that ſhee
wold heaue and ſtart, and ſwel vp her body, which was very trou⸗

bieſome to her foꝛ the time. When the was out of thele fittes, the

would goe vp and do wne the houſe very well, ſhe would eate and

dꝛinke, and ſometunes be very pleaſant in out ward geffure with
her ſiſters, ſne would doe anything, which by any ſigne ſhe did vn⸗

derſtand ſhould bee done, ſher would make areuerence as the paſ⸗

ſed by, vnto thoſe where ſhe ſaw it was due: inſomuch that any

man ignozant ot her eſtate, could perceiue nothing to be amiſſe in

her, yet would the neuer ſpeake to anp in particular, neither could

the heare any that ſpake to her during that time: except ſometimes

the would pꝛattle a little to an infant, which was newly bozne in
the houſe, wherin ſhe toke great delight.

At pleaſed God, about the beginning ol theſe kinde of fits in her,
an Amt ot hers being then in the houſe, was deliuered ok a childe,
bpon which occaſion many of her Uncles Aunts, and other kin⸗
ded and friends, reſozted to the houſe, and ſome of them ſtayed a
Werke oꝛ ten dayes together; all which time the childe was in theſe
kinde of ſits: and as it happened, mother Samuel amonglf the reſt
came to the houſe, and was bꝛought vp into the gentlewomans
thamber, where commonly the greateſt company was: ſo ſone as
the came in, this childe ( in queſtion) being there, eſpied her, 4 pꝛe⸗
ſently ſpake to her, bidding her welcome, and ſaying that ſhe was
à great Tranger there, ſhe fetched her vp both meat x dꝛinke, ard
would doe any thing readily that ſhe willed her to do. In the ende,
the aſked mother Samuel, whoſe that little childe was which ſhee
herſelfe had in her armes: the olde woman tolde her, and like wiſe

N E 3 no

— — any,

r ͤ—ů—!1½!käũ ] 5 —

no body but her and that little chulde, which the had in ber armes,
although che loked full in their faces. Pany ſuch like fraunge
things then fell out, which is to long to ſpeake ol. When the olde
Woman departed, the child loſt the vſe of al her ſences,and conti⸗
nued in the ſame caſe, wherin ſhe was when the old Woman came
into the houſe.

Vlhen ſhe had continued thus thick werkes oꝛ moze, ſhe came
one dap out of her Aunts chamber into the hall, andſhe had not
long ſtaped there, but ſhe fell into a moſt troubleſome fitte foꝛ the

time, but it continued not long: pzeſently the ſpake and ſayd, J am

glad, and very glad, repeating it often, on the ſodaine ſhee wiped
her epes, and came out ot her fit, Ber mother being in the Hall,
the aſked her blefſing , and inquired of many things, and amongſt
others, aſked how her Aunt did, from whome a little befoze ſhe
came, and knew ol nothing that was done, neither that any company had been there foꝛ the ſpace of thꝛeæ werkes befoze,

It followeth to ſpeake of the reſt of her ſiſters together with
her ſelfe, who all of them, as the peare grew towards an ende, ſg
their griefe and extremitie of troubles increaſed: inſomach, that e⸗
uery day bꝛought with it increaſe ol payne, and ſtrangenes in their
manner of fittes.

Towards Hollantide, the ſpirits grew very familiar with the
childꝛen, and commonly towards the ende of their fits, when the
greateſt trouble was ouer, would talke with thembalfe an houre
together, and ſometimes longer: The greateſt matter of their talk,
was about their manner of fits which they ſhould haue, 4 concer⸗
ning mother Samuel, whoſe pleaſure it was that they ſhuld be ſo vs
ſed, but the ſpirits ſayd many times, that they would bꝛing her to
ſhame foz it in the end. If in this time (being in their fits) they had

enquired of their ſpirit, when they ſhuld come out of that fit wherin then they were, and when they ſhonld haue another, it would

haue told them, and not miſſed any whit at all, |
If they had aſked how many fits they ſhould haue the next day
following, and the third day, oꝛ any day that weke, and how many fits they ſhould haue in one day, and what manner of fits they
ſhould be, whether moꝛe grienous oz leſe, howe long enery fitte
ſhould continue, and in what part ofthe day they ſhould beginne,
and when they ſhould end, it hath tolde them, and not failed in any
one popnt, foz it hath ben pꝛeſently ſet downe in * the
zen

child} zen haue ſpoken tt, fo tt was not poſſible t fo enter the
times foz them all) and pꝛoued wholly true.

The times and ſignes which the ſpirits did appoynt vnto them,
fo; the beginning oꝛ ending ol their fits, were vſually theſe. In the
moꝛning lo ſone as thep did offer to ariſe out of their beds: ſo ſone
as they were vp 02 ready: ſo ſone as they aſked their Father beſſing, oꝛ their other, oꝛ their Grandmother: ſo ſone as they toke
a boke in hand to pꝛap, oꝛ when they had ended their pꝛayers: ſo
ſone as they went to bꝛeakefaſt, ſo ſone as Dinner was ſet vpon
the boꝛde: oz fo ſone as they did offer to ſay grace either befoꝛe oꝛ
after dinner:ſo ſone as they themſelues were ſet downe to dinner,
oz at the firſt bit of meat they put in their mouthes: oꝛ ſo ſone as
dinner was ended, oꝛ they had pat vp their knife after dinner: the
ſame circumſtances at Supper alſo obſerued. D2 if it had been vp⸗
on the Sabbaoth day, oꝛ any day wherein the belles ought to ber
rung: ſo ſone as the firſt, ſecond, oz third peale ringeth, oꝛ haue
done ringing, with many ſuch like fignes (which would bee to
long to ſpeake of) appoynted by the ſpirit, fo the childzen to fall in
o2 out of their fittes, which they duelp obſerued, and fayled not a
minute, as map be thought.

After they had continued in this caſe about a moneth together oꝛ
ſuch a thing, whether the ſpirits were weary, (as they oftentimes
ſayd vnto the childꝛen in their fits, that they now wared weary or
their Dame mother Samuel) oꝛ whether that thꝛough the power of
Gods godneſſe, and ſpeciall pꝛotection of the childzen, the ſpirits
perceiued, that their owne malice, and the malice of their Dame
to the childꝛen was reſtrained and kept vnder in ſuch ſoꝛte, that
they could not kill the childzen as they deſired ; foz we map not
thinke, that it agreth with the nature of the euill ſpirite to ſpoꝛt
and play with man, as theſe ſpirites oftentimes did with theſe
little childꝛen: they ſayd to them, that nowe ere long, they
would bꝛing their Dame either to her confefſion oz confuſion. And
this was the greateſt ſtape of comfoꝛt and pꝛoppe of patience
which the Parents of theſe childꝛen and friends alwayes had:
namely, that when theſe childꝛen were in their greateſt toꝛment
and miſeries as might be deuiſed, in ſuch ſoꝛte as that it made the

heart ofthe beholders many times to melt in their bodies, being
without all hope euer in this woꝛld to ſer them aliue againe, pet

whendoeuer it pleaſed God to deliuer them out oftheir ow ow
ould

. — —
_— —

— ens 9

"Then

would whie their epes and be pt well, as ; if it had neuer
been they, not knowing any thing that had befallen them, ſo that
now it ſhould ſenie that God himſelfe would take the matter into
his ownehandes,and hauing in his counſell determined an ende
/ 188 thereof,ſohe would alſo appoynt the meanes to bꝛing it to paſſe,
1 which was euen by the ſpirits themſelues, the inſtruments of this
we wickednes, Fo2 now they began to accuſe mother Samuel openlp
mr, to her face, andſay that they ſhall not be well in any place, except
- 1 they continne in her houſe,o2 ſhe be bꝛought to continue with the :
1 and beſides that, they ſhal haue moꝛe troubleſome fittes then euer
they had, except one of thaſe two be bꝛought to paſſe,
Matter Throckmorton ffill thinking that the ſpirits might lye,
was contented to trie the vttermoſt foꝛ the werkes together, all
which time his childꝛen had very many moſt grieuous and troubleſome fits: inſomuch that when night came, there was neuer a
one of them able to goe to their beds alone, their legs were ſo full
of payne and ſoꝛes, beſides many other griefes they had in their bo⸗
dy (being out ok their fits) which was not vſuall with them: and
one of them alſo foꝛ all that time of thꝛee werkes, neuer had vſe of
her legs, except it were an houre oꝛ two in one dap, while mother
Samuel was in the houſe, and then ſhe was able to goe, and was
verp well, as the reſt alſo were: otherwiſe her legs were thꝛuſt vp
to her body as if they had beene tyed with ſtringes, and where your
ſet her downe, there you ſhould finde her, except ſhe crept away.
Maſter Throckmorton, perceining that by no meanes he could
get leaue of olde lohn Samuel, koꝛ the olde Woman to come to his
houſe, although he offered very largely foꝛ it, which was, to allow
him if it came to ten pounds in the peare foz the boꝛde and wages
of the beſt ſeruant in Huntington ſhire to do his buſines ( if hee
would) in her ſtead, beſides his pꝛomile and bond, ik hee would re⸗
quire it, fo2 the well vſing of his wife while ſhe was with him, he:
could finde no other remedy foz the health of his childzen, but to
carp tbem thither: which he did, who ſo ſone as they came into the
honſe were all pꝛeſently well: which he perceiuing, ſapd, that his
childꝛen ſhould dwel there, and out of the houſe they ſhould not go,
he would pꝛouide foꝛ their neceſſities. The man ſ&ing this, that
there was no ſtriuing with the company, quenched out the fire,
and it was a colde ſeaſon, ſaping that he would ſtarue them, bſides

very many euill woꝛds, which came from him and his — [|

£ — —— - : 4 # 6 4 * * 8 * 2 ”
that fime. All that day they c
4 EY & PF 8 123 114 P

PT ooo mm 8 |

rac = 4s 7 ton ß * | | |
* : 3 q „ . 1 P 0 pg We rd: - *
| FE E. * . 0 JOVITS ©
= A: L S # „ % 4 1 ; 644+ : 4 *
£ 4 % . / G 2 k , dl db oth

e und dzinke, and read in their bwke, and were verymerie. At

night whe the man (ohn Samuel) perceiued that they ſhauld lodge

there, he thought that they would be very troubleſome to him, and

therefo2e gaue hisfaithfull pꝛomiſe, that his Wife ſhould come to

aſter Throckmortons houle the next mozning, & continue with
bim: whereupon Palker Throckmorton twke home his childzen,
and they were in their fits ſo ſons as they came out of his dazes,

ind ſo continued all that night. The next mozning P. Throckmorton went foꝛ the old woman, but ſhe was gone no body knen

whither, ſo he ſent againe fo2 his childzen, who ſo ſone as they

came into the houſe, were well. Towards night, came in the old
woman, who ſapd that the had been 2,02 3. miles out of the town,
and her huſband knewe of her going, becauſe the ſhould not come

to Paſfer Throckmortons, which when he vnderſtod that ſhe had

ſpaken,(foz the ſpake it pziuatly,deſtring them to whom the ſpake
it, not to tell ber huſ hand) he vtterly foz\woze the matter, 4 pꝛe⸗
ſently fell vpon his wife,and beat her verp ſoze with a cudgel, mas
ny being pꝛeſent, beloꝛe the could be reſcued by them, In the ende,
when the man percetued maſter Throckmorton Kill to continue in
the ſame mind afozeſapd,he was contented to let his wife go home
with them tbat nigbt, who went all to P. Throckmottons houſe
very well together, & ſocontinued the ſpace of nine oz ten dapes

fallowing, without any manner of ſozenes, lamenes, oꝛ any maner

*

udging of fits, and in better caſe then they had been (as it was
vell knowne) all of them together, foꝛ the ſpate ot thz& whole
pres befoꝛe. This made the parents right glad, and to vſe the
woman as a welcome gueſt. At the ten dapes ende, the olde woman intreated Miſtris Throckmorton, foz her huſband was gone
foꝛth that moꝛning, that ihe might go home, making her excuſe to
fetch ſomething that ſhe wanted, Piſtris Throckmorton was very loth ta graunt it, pꝛomiſing that ſhe her ſelfe would rather fetch
what che would haue, then that ſhe ſhould go out of her houſe: yet
the old woman ſaying that no body could come by that thing that
the would haue but her ſelfe( which happily was true) and pꝛomi⸗
ſing her pꝛeſent returne, the peelded to her requeſt.
Dane alter ſhe was gone, ſome of the childꝛen fell into theyꝛ
Ats againe as befoze times, and the ſpirit then talking with them,
ſapd: that now mgther Samuel Wai e Wipe n
1 | — | ing

,

"The Ae and Exdk Mon

king a new league and compolitton with Ab Giada

though now the came agayne to the houſe, they ſhalbe no whitthe

etter, but rather the woꝛſe foꝛ her being there, becaufe ſhe wauld
not remapne any longer there: which thing ſeꝛmed to be true that
the childe ſpake,fo2 fo fone as ſhe came againe ( which was not be.
foꝛe the was ſent foꝛ foure oꝛ fine houres after ſhe went) the chil.
dꝛen which were in their fitsatthetr comming, fo continued, and
they that were not, after her comming fel into their fits,al of them
trying out, that now mother Samuel had made a new compoſition
with her ſpirits, and now they ſhould be no whit better fo her pꝛe⸗

- fence, but rather the wozſe.

Maſter Throckmorton when he came home, and perceiuing the
caſe otherwiſe with his childzevthen he left it, and the cauſe why,
could not be but heartily ſo2p: pet referred alt! to the god pleaſure
of God, and would not ſuffer the old woman to depart his houſe,
fo2 this cauſe chiefly, becauſe his childꝛen being in their fits, could
neither heare, ſe, no2 ſpeake to anybody, but to her, and ſome of
the childꝛen could take nothing, but that which thee- either gaue
them, oꝛ touched with her hands.

Mother Samuel remapning thus with the child} en, the could
not be in any place ofthe honſe alone, neither doing any thing about
the bouſe, but the childꝛen in their fits would rettale it, ſpectatly
when ſhe was feeding of her ſpirits, fo2 then the childzen would
fay: Now is mother Samuel in ſuch à place of the houſe fe ding of
ber ſpirits: when they went and loked, there they ſhould finde
her, but whether doing anyſuch thing oz not, God and ber contti⸗

ence are the beſt witncſles. |
Manytimes alſo as the ſate talking with theſe c<adzen, being

in their fits by the fire ſide, they would ſap vnto her: Loke ou

here mother Samuel, doe pou not ſee this thing that atteth here by
vs: ſhe would anſwere no, not ſhe : why they would ſap agayne,
I maruaile that you doe not ſee it, loke hom it leapeth, ſkippetb,
and plapeth vp and downe : pointing at it with theirfingers here
and there as it leaped, Sometimes alſo they would ſap; Marke
Mother Samuel, doe pou not heare it? harke how loude it is „IAmar⸗
naile pou do not heare it, nay you cannot but heare it. She would
denie it, and bid them aſke their father, oꝛ ſome other wheme thee
ſaw to ſtand by, whether they heard it oꝛ not. The thüldꝛen would

e that ther ſaw body although they fodhard *
Then

0 15 2 ; —

Chen would they tell mother Samuel that it telleth them, that cher nn.

both heareth it, ſeth it, and ſent it. The father ot theſe childzen,
. Throckmorton, to make à kinde of experience of this matter,

one nigbt willed mother Samuel, (as he might haue done to any o⸗
ther thenbeing pꝛeſent) to name howe manp fits thoſe th2e chil⸗
dzenthat then were in their fits, ſhould haue the next day follow⸗
ing, and what kinde of fits they ſhould haue, when they ſhould be⸗
gin, and how long they ſhould cantinue. Pother Samuel was ve⸗
xy loth to be bꝛought vnto it: yet in the end, their father ſapingy
the ſhould doe it. She ſayd,one of them ſhal baue the fits, naming
the childe, ſuch and ſuch fo2 the maner, namely, eaſie fits, appoyn⸗
ting the time koꝛ their beginnings and endings: the other ſhall
haue two in like ſozte, the time appoynted by her: and the third
chall haue none, but be well all the day. All wbich fits, pꝛoued ve⸗

xy iuſtly in euery one of them the next day, as ſhe had ſpoken.

At another time not long after, other Samuel ſitting by theſe
childꝛen being in their fits as befoze,, Pa. Throckmortoa their facher, and ſome other alſo being with him, demaunded of mother Samuell, ſaying, that he had heard, that thoſe that were acquainted

with theſe ſpirits (as the childꝛen ſay that ſhe is) and had retayned
them in their ſeruice, to doe foz. them as they tommaunded, that
they did fiede them, and reward them with ſome thing from them,
but molt vſually with their blond, and that euery day: now therefoze (ſapd he) make open confeſſion and ſhame the Diuel in telling
the trueth, whether pou doe any ſuch thing oꝛ not.

She molt vehementlydenyed it, with many bitter woꝛds and
eurſes vpon her lelfe,defiring the N oꝛd to ſhe w ſome pꝛeſent token

from heauen vpon her, that al the woꝛld might know that ſhe was
ſuch a kind of woman, as thep ſuſpectedher foꝛ, if ſhe vſed any ſuch
thing, oz rewarded them any ſuch war, o had anyſpirits, o knew
- what thep were,

Pꝛeſently after, Malter Throckmorton, and maſter Henry Pickering, vncle to the ſapd childzen, who was then with him, hearing
her vſe ſuch pꝛoteſtations, being half terriſied in their hearts (becauſe thep alway vehemetly ſuſpected her guiltines) that ſhe ſhuid

thus violentip with her own hands (as it were) pull downe the
| ſudgements of God vpon her head, went out ol the doꝛes, andbe-
- foze they were gone ten paces from the houſe, another goung gen⸗

tleman; Palker Tohn Lawrence (coſin to the ſapd chtlozen that
F 2 ſtaped

—

- whereupon they returned into the artour again where ſhe was,

r

Fayed bebinde in 9 to Pater Throckmorton Ant
ꝙ. Henry Pickering, and fapd that mother Samuels chin did bleede

and ſaw the napkin where with ſhe had wiped away the blod from
her chin, to be bloody to the guantitie ot eight oꝛ ten dꝛops. Then
M. Throckmorton, with the reſt, ioked vpon her chin, and there
was no moꝛe to be lene then vpon the backe ol a cleane hand, one⸗
ly there appeared ſome few little red ſpots, as if they had ben fleabitings. Then S. Throckmorton demaunded of her, whether her
chin vſed toblcede ſo oz not 2 She ſayd, that it did very often. He
aſked her, who could witneſle it but her ſclfe e She ſapd, no bodie,
foz it did alwates bleede when ſhe was alone, and ſhe neuer told a⸗
ny body of it.

This her bleeding at the chin, ſhe did confeffe fo the ſayd Paſter
Henry Pickering, after ſhe was condemned, that the ſpirits were
then ſucking at her chinne, when ſhe made that pꝛoteſtation to ꝙ.
Throckmorton and him, and that whe ſhe wiped them off with her
Hand, her chin bled, which ſomtimes it had done befoze, after their
ſucking,but not often,and neuer ſo much as then,nap,ſcarccly the
quantitte of one dꝛop at any time befoze.

And this by the wap, as a generall note th2onghout the Boke,

where there is one of theſe frange things ſet downe, i they ber

ſo accounted as ſtraunge) there are tenne omitted, which may as

well be put in, and (in the iudgement of them that heare of them)
are no leſſe ſtraunge then theſe: And fo2 that which this Boke
doth containe, it is ſet downe vpon the ſodaine, and as it commeth
to pꝛeſent memoꝛie, at the requeſt of diuers Right Moꝛſhipfull,
and eſpectally foꝛ the motion ſake ofthe Right Wozſhipfull, Pa⸗

Mer Juffice Fenner, one of the Patrons hereof. And fo2 the truth

of the moſt of theſe things herein contained, they were ginen in
euldence, and readfe to be giuen againſt the parties accuſed, if ei⸗
ther nerde ſhould haue required oꝛ time ſerued, vpon the oath of
diuers Gentlemen on the Alliſes dap at Huntington, bekoze the
ſapde partyes : And fo2 the reſt which were not then alleadged,

if any ſhall make doubt thereof, there are diuers Gentlemen of
honeſt repoꝛt, readie toconfirme the ſame vpon their oathes, if
ncede ſhould fo require, that were pꝛeſent, ſome at one time, and
fome at another, at all theſe ſeuerall Tragedies, (as they map ber
tearmed,) 11

a — —

being in their fits the olde woman alſo ſtanding by them) that tt
their Father Pater Tlrockmorton, mould then pꝛeſentiy goe to
Iohn Sachüblehdtife, his daughter Agnes Samuel, who thendwelt
at home with her father, x is not pet bꝛought into queſtion abont
any of theſe matters, would hide her ſelle, and not be ſ&ne of hun.
Maſter Throckmorton hearing them, ſaid, that he would goe pꝛe⸗
ſently and make triall thereof, Mhen her came to the houſe, Agnes Samuel, whether perteiuing after Throckmorton, oꝛ any of
his company, oz what ſo euer elſe it was, it is not knowne, but ſhe
went vp into the Chamber (there being but one in the houſe) the
ffay2es whereof ſtode in the ſame Parloꝛ belowe, where her father was, and the doꝛe thereof was a trap dwze : where vpon ſher
et fackes of coꝛne, and tubbes with ſome ſuch like things to keepe
it downe. Maſter Throckmorton hearing a noyſe in the houſe,
thought there was ſome ſuch matter in hand, and continued ſkill
knocking at the doze. Pꝛeſently Iohn Samuel aſked who was
there, and what her would, with ſome ſuch like queſtions, and in
the end, knowing what he was, ſatd, he ſhould not come in. Then
Maſter Throckmorton went on the other fide of the honſe, and
finding the back doze open, went in, md when her came into the
Parlo2 where the man was in his bed, being about eight of the
clocke oz ſomething befoꝛe, her afked foꝛ Agnes Samuel his daugh⸗
ter, and where ſhe was: Iohn Samuel had not his oathe to ſeke,
but pꝛeſentiy ſwoze as God fudge his ſoule (Which was his com⸗
mon oath, and vſed alſo diners times beloꝛe the Benche at his ar⸗
raignement, pea, and vntill the very time ot his execution) that her

knew not where ſhe was. | |
Mater Ihrockmorton aſked when heſaw her? Her anſwered,
that ſirce the euening ſhe was in the houſe, but where now ſhe is,
he could not tel. He aſked ſhe was not in the chamber duer them,
he ſwoꝛe hee could not tell, which thing he could not ( inder d) but
know, foꝛ it was a very low chamber, and ſhe could not ſturre her
fote in it, but he muſt nerdes heare her: beſides, her going vp into it.fo2 the ſtapꝛes tobe hard at his beddes fiete , and the noyſe
alſo ſher made in the hearing of Paſfer Throckmorton and the reſt
conminginto the houle,''"Baffer Throckmotton verciy ſuſpec⸗
ting that ſhe was there, called to her thꝛer oꝛ foure times, and willed her to anſwer il her were there, E was all that he _—
z to

At mother tame fene alter, the ſprites toldethechilvzen (then

„ re os a Ae K En As

to hav » where en but che would not anſwer t then Paſter
Throckmorton toke thecandie, and ſaid be wouldgoe vp and ſœ,
but uben he came to the ton of the ſtapꝛes the trap dage was fo
faſt, that be could not ſturre it, which be pereriuing, ſaid, that ſure⸗
ly be would bꝛeake open the dene, oꝛ bꝛeake vp the plancher of the
chamber, foꝛ he would goe into it befoze he went ont of the houle,
and willed one of the company to fetch him a barre of pꝛon oz ſome
ſuch like thing, foꝛ he would doe it indeꝛde.
The Paide bearing Paſter Throckmorton thus reſolute , an⸗
ſwered that ſhe was there: then Paſter Throckmorton willcd
her to come downe : which ſhe did, remaning thole things that befoze ſhe& had ſet vpon the doꝛe, ſa hee departed home to his houle,
challenging the man fo2 his naughty lie, which vet he ſcillie ſtode
in. But to let an hundꝛed of theſe things paſſe with their fellowes,
and to come ncrer the olde womans confeſſton, and the maner of -
it: vou ſhall vnderſtand, that mother Samuel grew now to be mer⸗
uailous weary of Malter Throckmortons houſe, both becauſe thee
conld do nothing inthe houſe, but the childꝛen in their fits would
reueale it, and eſpecially, becanſe the childꝛen in their fits likes
wiſe had told her twenty times to her face, that ſhe ſhould can⸗
feſle this matter befoze the Tueſdap after Twelfe day, and that
the ſpirits had told them, that they would enfoꝛce her to confeffe it
in deſpight ol her, and cher had often experience, that whatſoeuer
the ſpiritsfozetold,p 20ned moſt true.
| Now this —— . which the childꝛen ſo often named, was not
then thought vpon (or anꝝ that heard it) to be the Seſſfons day at
Huntington, as it is generally in moſt plates of England, no not
within a werke oꝛ moꝛe after the childꝛen had ſpoken of it: pet
were they often whiſpering with themſelues (al waies in their fits
as you muſt vnderſtand it) about that Tueſdap, wiſhing oftentimes, that it were once come, foꝛthat was ſome happy day (they
would ſay) belike foꝛ them, fo after that day the ſpirites had tolde
them, they ſhould neuer haue moe fittes: ſo that all their ioye in
their fits was foꝛ that dap, pet they would ſap to themſelues, that
toc ſpirits doth tell them, that it may W l be befoze that Tuel⸗
day: but on the Tneſday at the karthel br. = mu confefſe it, and
they muſt be well, but il ſhe wonldeonte ſeit betoze, they Hould
be well pꝛeſontly whenſoeuer che did confelle it.
Foz? this cauſe the 8 in their fits continually would er
dat

ozther foronfefſett; thaftheyHightbee well, which pet thee al
6 Rr: that this would! not confefſe that
ban Wy know r, i, Deine vnto: 2 55 dane
ouild an not to erſelfe
fo; mip! and 2 ae her fo-lwke to that in any re⸗
(ped, p. babe ud that theyenfoztedno moꝛe vpon her, then what
the ſpirits had kold them. Bet toſpeale the trueth of theſe childꝛen
and no moꝛe, ff any thing herein wztttenof them be ſtrange, this
fo2 ſkrangenelle goeth beyond all other, and foꝛ truth equall to the
reſt: (ach were the heanenly and diuine ſperches ol theſe childꝛen
in their fits, to this olde woman ſome at one time ſome at another
concerning her confeſffon of this kad, as that Ha man had heard it,
he would not haue thought himlelf better edifted at tenSermons.
The matter of their ſpeech was this, concerning chiefcly the
topes of heauen which thee ſhould{oſe 2 and the toꝛments of bell
which the could endure, il che being gullty would not pet conifes,
and the eſche wing of the one's enioping of the other, if the would
confeſſe and be ſoꝛp foꝛ that ſhe had done: they rehearſed likewiſe
vnto her, her naughty manner of lining, her vſtiall curfing and
banning of all that diſpleaſed her, andeſpecially ot their parents,
and of them Stack che could not deny) her negligent comming
et in Sand hire, all which the confeſſed
o them, but ſhe wou re Rath to amend ſhe ſaid, Herlewde
bꝛinging vp ol her Daughter, infuffering her to be her dame, both
in controuling ol her, and beating at her, which befoze bad been
pꝛoued to her face, and che bertel hab allo confeſſed. They remem⸗
bred. allo unto her, p which th ey had heart tome ſpeak ot, whe they
were out of their fits: namely that ther bad lade that their fits
were but wantonneſfe in them: they aſked her now „whether ſhe
was 0 of that minde oz not: She anſwered no: with manyſach.
to Gods 5 the ende, concluded with their hearty pꝛayer
12 wing tbat tbey would fo2gine her from the botTIN Wend d t that they might be wel,
1 that; that they would intreate their parents and their
friendes ( ſo much as in them lay) cle&rely to fozgine and fo2get all
that Kae. Their maner of behauioꝛ in this their exhoꝛtati⸗
on tu her was. ed in all fo the noſe they began with teares,

ſo they conti and alw with teares: in ſ mueb
that f there was not any that be beard them, conld auge
ing,

Ln * into the Game caſe as he bad been in the night 15

The
werping, ouelꝑ the old 5 aum

This kinde of behauioz in 175 e alled on until .
Cbꝛiſkmas, pet without any touch 0 ar of the old woman,
in the meane ſeaſon every day almott, this visold youu bad a flt of

hag nioned? :.

bleeding at the noſe, and bled very mich at a time (wich is not yſuall in olde age) lo that now the. wared fainte, and Lünen very
pale, inſomuch, that Malter Throckmorton & his wile, were verp
carefull foꝛ her, fearing ſome barme ſhauld come vnto ber in bis
houſe: and comfozted her by all the meanes they could, not lutfe⸗

ring her to want any thing that ſhe deſired, if poſſibly thep could

tome by it: fo that ſhe did confeſſe to all that came to her, that ſhe
was meruailous well vſed of Palter Throckmorton, and thought

herſelfe greatly bound to him, as truely ſhe had no other cauſe,

Foz as foz her buſineſſe, ſhe did nothing, but her owne wozke,
and foz her dyet, ſhe lat at his otwne bwꝛde, oz with his childzen, if

thep were in their fits, and could not fit do lone, and fo2 her lodging

the lay continually in his owne Chamber, and foz the moſt parte
with one of his childꝛen.

And to tell pon one thing moze ol her beloꝛe ber confeſffon, one
of theſe Childꝛen, Piſtreſle Elizabeth Throckmorton, was one day
not well at eaſe, and could not eate.any.meate : We hen night
tame and ſupper was ready, ſhe thought to make bet Rane ee
but when the was ready to ſit at the Table, che feli p⸗ Aer
her fit, and yet that was not all the puniſhment ſher had, but her
mouth was locked vp, that chte could neither eate, d:inke, noz
ſpeake, as it was an vſuall thing. with them all, to hane their
moutbes ſhut vp,eſpeciallyatmealetimes, and other whſles thut.
Aud open, halfe à dozen times in a dinner, ſo Wa lo i Rind
ſpoꝛte with them: but ſhe went ſo to bed 'veryſozrowtutlandweping, what her griefe was, none can tell, becauſe — was nat able
to vtter it: when the next dap came, ſh& was licke and ill: as the
day befoꝛe, (vet out of her fitte) and eate very little oz nothing at
all, when night came, ſhe ſaide je felt be er ſelfe well a tended, and
very hungry: not knowing foz her art but thatſhet d eaten ber

ſupper the night befoꝛe.

Then was ſhe councelled by them that feared the wort, fo eats
ſomething, but the ſaide ſhe wayld! not, purpoſin * eate ber part
at ſupper, when the tune tame, and meate was ſet vpon the boꝛde,

tobe ode wo

Saupe 9

mn anfwert rio,the was rather ſo⸗

f ol neither ente 1102 bꝛink,

.vntillſhec ,and th of N | 'Thtocl morton)

whileft He 8 oa ſhall a 00 tHeca

ente, b f Sen per e And:

"tinue? 7 | almoFetided,qnd the com-

-pante pon ore heren —
"Conld'r 4 Kette

The oe woman Gerretming chat nge 1 Was fir
godearneff with her, and that 3 of the
our: on the ſuddame, vpon what motion God' he knoweth,
(ES 1 fie ch dab bens Fall Supper

and ſpake, aptig: If Adee | ;Jeduldeate

krete Th rockmortbn (thochilds mother)hearingher ſpeake,
a didatfo all the reſt that were in the Paxlour, comm —

lently that meate ſhonld be giuen fo them both, the not
"gining notice to mother Samuel of the matter: ſo fell to
ſhetr mente very hartily, but cſpectally the vide wo o, as it

chould fieme, was their very hungrie, "als che had aas; good

ETomacke) and fru that time foꝛwards during the olde womans

tontinuing in the houſe, neilher that childe nod any of her fifers,

had thetr monthes Hut vp, at anytime wheii theythbuls kate

their meate, 02 if they not hc —— alah it was a tönnnbn cultome :

"After all theſematters were paſſed ouer, and as it j
dap niere and neerer to the fime appoynted, mother 5 Samuẽl 3
daß complapned of a newe griefe te befall Het * #4
would crye out of her backe that it was ſo full of 98

was not eb Arte ber (fe inder bed alt JD 16H HIPAE take
-atpreſt & t night. * — To
Sdmetimes the wou in ikke bot ceps bat gf: en otber
: whites of her ſtomacke: vet the would eate her meate faying tha

c had a guawing at her heat, and the next daß Mter it wot! Phe
TINY ſo thit he world WG6o halting Vpkitobolbiic
the

paine in mp belly on e ee *
be cauſed, Why ſaip he, what is the matter in paur belly.2 Obe
anſwered, that there een it, which as ſhe. thought
ſtirxed, and it wag as his às a penny loafe : and put her to maruci⸗
Jous paine: iuhere pen Mintrent Throcmotton .
bed, and went and felt vpon her belly, and there was indeꝛd a max⸗
ueilons ſwelling to the quantity pekoꝛe likened, hut fee feit it not
Kn — — Wh he 23 was ſo the heed bee

| haunt be giuen again ber as hercafter
whatſoeuer it was, ſhe cried aut to maſter 1
belly,and ſaid ſhe was full of paine: and further ſhe ſaid, that 175
had often tolde at ſhe thought there was ſomiceuill ſpirites
haunted his houſe , mhteh dd thus tozment his childzen, which
thing he told her that he did taſily helerue was true: and now faith
the, J verely boleeue that one of them is gatten ints my belly.
ſter Throcmorton ſaid, that all this might very well bee true.
che laid, that it was an enill houſe, and haunted. with ſpiritg, —
wiſhed! that ſhe had neuer come into it: hee told her that if there
were any ruill ſpirits haunted the houſe, they were ol her ſending,
and ſo he would grant all that e laid. In the znde the paſſed awapthat night with groaning and moning, and the next!

ſhe was verp euill at caſe hee ſaid, but her ſwelling in her belly
was gone, and where her greateſt paine was ſhe could not te
was in ſo manp places, but her ffemack was the beſt al any

part.andaſterthis the continnallpcomplainad of one part of ber
dy

(

thozt — after, one tds ben indes
aa ee eee e cher melee — zrienon epd her ko) Wo tine; as that 'nvither hee no) gaht her
fiffers has there oz the ſpate ora ven 02 (too befoge;
cfallp her nielg fitts was lo terrible and ttrontz vpn her as if -
it would haue caſed her eyes toffartout of ber heat, This itte
did greatip guayle mother — — Y—
that the theuly haue ſtene the bed ak tt |
this-wzvnig outof mother p : (6 that: Wehen
then foholpe her, and to pꝛelerug her 123 hee
hoped neuer to ſ her in the like again. Wu the-moze carne
— Samuel was in her pꝛayers, t he greater
feand kozment, andthe oftetier Wer nente G; 65 Je,
as Calf, the Fronger the chiles re: ng hi de. And
at that bery mat (as hervafter vou wants of the reli)
when the had this:contianed/fons ws douter-by mdr, tos ſpi⸗
rite 'p ake unto — tha there was aWozle fitts

rey on ade

fitto — ons
3 —

— 3 1 1 fo»
corſet viits, Their father mater 1 -Honvind
his: Childden and the olde Moman thus: tale wgre; ftp
ped in und lay Samuel peu heare what theſt cel lis;
nn W e
2 c

well, and they ſay that you muſt confeſſe it befoze it he long, 4-you
know that they haus not vſed to tell lpeg in their fits. Now theres
foze in the name of God, if there-beanyſuchmatter, confedle it: it
is neter to late to repent and to aſ ke foz mertie: hut ſhe made to
him the like anſwer that ſhe dad done to the childzen heloze. Chi
ſapd be, hut bat ſay vou to that griencus fit iuhich the Spirit of
late thzeatned to my daughter Iane J would faine knowe when
that chend he. Oh ſaith che (rememining the terro2 of it trust in
God Achall neuer ſe ber in ſuch a caſe againe, noʒ any ot them all.
Yes(ſaith . Throcmorton, J verelp thinke ſheſhal haue it, ł that
choꝛtly . foꝛthe ſpirit you know vſethnot to faile them in anp thing
he pꝛomiſeth. Oh ſaith che) A truſt in God ſhe thall neuer haue it.
ſpeaking marueilons confidently, Why(faith P. Throckmorton).
charge v ſpirit in the name ol God, p che may eſcape this fit which;
is thꝛestned She pꝛeſentiꝝ ſaid, charge ther ſpirit in the name of;
God, 9 mitris Iane nener hate this fit. Ebe child ſitt{ng-by,ſapd,;
truely the thing ſaith, A thank God, that I ſhal neuer haue this fitthat he hath foꝛetold me of, Saith P. Throckmorton, why, that is
well, thanks be to God, gu on mother Samuel, and charge the ſpirit
in the name ol God, e ſpeake from pour heart, that neither the noz,
any of them all haue their its anꝝ mæę, o ſhqe ſaid as M; Throglke;
motton willed ber, ſyeaking marnetlougheartiy. Che ſame ghilde

againe ſayd, truelp the thing ſaith, A tbanke God; that J shall ne⸗
ner haue it moze after the tueſdap after Twelfeday. Saith mater
Throckmorton, it is wel, thanks be to God, charge the ſpirit again
in the name er Gad and ſpeake from pour heart, ind he not afraid,
that he depart fam them all now at this pꝛelent, and that he na
uer returne to them againe, wich wozds the vttered very Jowhgg
and very boldiy. S ſone as ſhe had ended, then thoſe thzee chile
dꝛen that were then in their fits,andhadſo continued fox the ſpace:
of thꝛer werkes, wiped their eyes, and at that inſtant thʒuſt hace
the ſkoles whereon they ſat, and ſtod vpon their legges, being
as weill as ener they were in their lines;, Maſter Throekmoxe,
ton had his face nom towards the childzen, and his backe ta the;
olde woman, and ſewing themis to ſtart vp ſuddenly, ſavd;thankes;
be to God. While he was thus ſpeaking( little knowing oz thinks.

ing inderd ol any ſuch matter) theold woman tell do wn behind bim
on her kners, x ſaid god ꝙ . foꝛgiue me. He turned hun abont, and
nde downeJ aa, why mother Saronel has. ts ide wit

—

ſaid he,and A doe. 1
gem

5

ding the matter per

al .

ſter Throc

him to
thepcoulp

Chz

2255 "th if | oil.
72 = Tio ewe
or woman? alle cthe Nhe
SEES |

£7 own tt 58 alen, 735 wen
mother Samuel ſaw 1 5 = Pe a

would freely fazgine bert
imight neuer be ma

that tai told him al ß matt tex
cautozt ber, which a

at that pꝛeſent: pet cou
a 3

w — nd.
J I I
FE. |

1706000

—
4

. 1
; Het 1 4
| I t .
des ot 1
4 . *
1 p *
4 # ** 1 . -
#4 } U 4 - | 6 i N N
* | * 8 1
178 : | ö 5
$4 | 1
* 5
4 B
9
1

ia oe

re 0 Nr L
| gr 7 | t i 0 rr 160 =
berg leap 8 100

A

She an e
Tune At

thep all ia

11

3 *
L
1 A - 3
* 22

7 -
3

PI
1 or D

$ Fig

enen, .
in i I 1 ta;
e

nothing but even

e pen

' Axe 8 1 PLUG Ca} |
pa 74 Ap Me ies it 1554 le dp
110 1 on ttne ro her Samuel: d

« » THAI?

ne bonhols, ths
titled therefoze _

ume ton which
| © bod wHelfey:
10 God fo; ber,
vj Dorringron vn- |

17

1 LN
*

part ofthis Hhwke:both che mat
| = obferned in. all m (6,
e |

Gern ys pi; e e gon
nas no ſt dy 7
ferT!

90 re it Beko
ee n |

| on demand a
| 855 x ern ond i i bay 5
! bad hear 5 22485; 1 c

1 lg ts 7 * 10 ö
To — | 5

TEL 7 YI

T0 di

pee 755 watob be
4 £44 296 3 p 9 it,

don »:it
Tabea oz take
ber daughter ſhould th

— ein .
. |
655 .

Ar FT | ;
6 un 90 1675 , c 3
1

ve | mm
thi 199 "I tpi tconfeſen
tt wire

80 fb
wle in en

e died in the ſame cWe foꝛ nom euerie

after” hrockmotDT torcnfeſt that vn⸗

55
| sabont p;apers tit

1 id willed tbe vide wohan t
dig fo, favning Betting fo Her ihe 2 rh

out might eafilie heare all the woꝛds that paſſed
12 e en they had done, maſter Throckmorton on wrt
0 wap e parldur, and defired tbemts eee f
ep ke mie. there two all the neigbbortr c wbb |
Fen deten maltet Doty? to trade fn their peſen
A a hr confeffcd, but che Would fane —
28 ee her, it ts folate to dente a⸗
ey this with pur eares telling t to ber 5

1 ED as Fck or EO elf this ce

9s they were thlis in the houſe kogether. came ir folin Tame
the olde Womans huſband, who had vnderffod that there was
ſomething to doe in the houſe concerning his wife. When her
was come, Maſter Throckmorton tolde him that which his wife
had ag ayne confefſed, and with the reſt her ſayde, that his wife
would neuer haue denied that which the did but foz him and his
daughter. Paſt thou ſapdſo? ſayde her to his wife (giuing hera
koule terme) and with that would haue ſtriken her, had not o⸗
thers ſtod betwirt them. The olde Woman perceiuing her hul⸗
band thus fiercely comming towards her, fell downe pꝛeſently in
a counterfeit ſwoune b:foze them all. Piſtreſſe Throckmorton
ſtanding by, was on the ſodaine marueilsully amazed thereat,and
called foz aqua vite, fo2 her. When they take her vp, they percei⸗
ued her countenance nothing altered, but that ſhe loked chearefull
enough. One of her neighbours ſtanding by, peraduenture bet⸗
ter acquainted with her faſhions then the reſt, ſayd, if they would
let heralone, he wauld be their warrant, that ſhe would dee well
enough : ſo pꝛeſently after, ſhe came to her ſelf again, and all was
well. Theſecircu n ſtances abaut her confeſſion are therefoze the
moꝛe expꝛeſly ſet downe although thep be not fo pertinent to the
mutter, neither inderd ſhould haue bin declared at all, had it not bin
repoꝛted by ſome in the countrep, t thoſe that thottght themſelueg
wile, that this mother Samuel now in queſtion, was an olde ſim⸗
ple woman, and that one might make her by fapze woꝛds confclſe
what they would. But to leaue that to the iudgement of them
that knew her wel enough, Maſter Throckmorton continued on
his iourney, purpoſing to diſcharge himſelt of the matter, and cau⸗
ſed the olde Woman with her daughter to be carried the ſame day
tomy Loꝛd, the Biſhop of Lincolne, and there he examined her and

her daughter.

The Examination of Alice Samuel of Warbsys, in the Countie of
Huntington, taken at Buchden before the right reuerend Father in
God, William by Gods permiſſion Biſhop of Lincolne, the 26. of
December, 159 2.

* Eing aſked whether a dun chicken did euer ſuck on her
chin, and how often, the ſaid Examinat ſayth, that it
Iſucked twiſe x no moꝛe ſince Chꝛiſtmas euens euen laſt.
Being aſked whether it was a naturall chicken, ſhe faith

it was not,ſheknoweth it was no naturall chicken, becauſe when

it came to her chin ſhe did ſcarſe fle it, but when ſhee wiped it off
with her hand, her chin did bleed. She ſaith further, that the ſa(d

dun chicken did firſt come vnto her and ſucke on her chin bcfoze it

came to Paſter Throckmortons houſe, and that the ill and the trou⸗
ble that hath come to Maſter Throckmortons childꝛen, hath come
by meanes ofthe ſaid dun chicken, the which chicken ſhe knoweth
is naw both gone from them and from her. And further ſhe ſaith,
that P. Throckmorton and M. doctoꝛ Dorington ſhal bꝛing further

inkoꝛmation of ſuch things as yet ſhe hath not declared.

The Examination of Alice S imuel of Warboyt in the Countie of untington, taken at Buc den the 29. 3 of Deceniber 1592, before
the reuerend Father in God, William by Gods permiſſion Biſhop
of Lincolue, Francis Crum el, and Richard Tryce, Eſt quiers, luſtices
of her Maieſties peace within the Countie aforeſaid.

he laith,the neuer did hurt to any, ſauing ta the chil⸗
2 d2en in gueſtion. Being demaunded ho w lhe knoweth

ſayth, bocauſe the ſaiddun chicken with the reſt, are
nao come into her, and are now in the bottome of her
bellie, and make her ſo full, that thee is like to burſt, and this
moꝛning they cauſed her to be ſo full, that ſhe could ſcant lace her
cote, and that on the way as ſhe tame, they weighed ſo heauy, that
the hoꝛſe thee rid on did fall do one and was not able to carrie her.
And kurther ſhe ſaith, that the vpꝛight man of whome ſhe hath con⸗
feſled to maſter Throckmorton, told her that maſter Throckmorton
wafa hard man and would trouble her much, wherefoze he would
VN giue

A the ſai dun chicken is gone from the ſaid childꝛen: ſhe

_ xfae her fire ſpirits that ſhould vere and toꝛment bis childzen,and

ſo hee did: which ſpirits had reward of her by ſucking ol her blod
oftentimes when they were without her body, and that the ſaid
ſpirits did ſuck of her blod befoze ſhe ſent them fo2th any whither.
She laith fur ther, that whatſoeuer the childꝛen of P. Throgmorton didſpeak in their fits pꝛoued true and was true: as foꝛ example,
whenſocuer the ſaid childꝛen ſaid they did (ee the ſatd ſpirits, then
were the ſpirits there, ind the did alſoſee them. And ſhe ſaith, that
often times ſhce did giue a pꝛiuie becke oꝛ nod with her finger o:

head, and then the ſpirits did pꝛeſently ſtop the childzens mouth,

that they could not ſpeake vntill they came out againe: and then

would the childꝛen wipe their eyes and be wel againe. Further Ge

ſaith, thut it was taught her of a man that did come vnto her houſe,
but where he did dwell, oꝛ what his name was, ſhecanot tell, wha
told her that if ſhe would call the ſaid ſixe ſpirits they would co:: e:
and ſhee called thein, and they appeared in the likenes of dun chic⸗
kens, their names were as followeth : firſt, Pluck; ſecond, Catch,
the third White, and the other thꝛeꝛ ſhe called with her mouth with
thꝛee ſmacks: and t los of them, ſhe (this eraminate) ſent to Pa⸗
ſter Ro.Throci,morton of Warboys and his wife, and they returned
againe, and told her that God would not ſuffer them to pꝛeuaile.
Whyereupon ſhe (this examimate) ſent the ſaid ſpirits to the chil⸗
dzen ot the laid P. Throckmorton, by meanes whereof they haue
been ſo ſtrangly toꝛmented, as to the neighbours and country hath
been ſeene. She ſaith further, p what the childꝛen did ſpeak in their
fits in her hearing, that it was true, ⁊ ſo it fel out. Being aſked fur⸗
ther what the vpꝛight mans name was gaue her the diuels, ſhe
ſ1id ſhe could not tell: where vpon ſhe was moued to goe into ano⸗
ther chůber, t demand of her ſpirits what his name was, which the
pꝛeſentlp did,x there with a loud voice ſaid theſe woꝛds as followeth, Othou diuel, I charge thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy- ghoſt, that thou tel me the name ofthe vpright man which
paue me the diuels: which thing ſhe did th2c& times, and then retur⸗
ned ſaying, that her ſpirits had tolde her that his name was Langland. And being dem inded where the ſaid Langland dwelled, ſhe ſald
ſhe could not tel. Then was ſhe moued to go into the ſaid chaber a⸗
gatne,+ demande ot her ſpirits where p ſaid Langland dwelt: which
alſo ſhe pꝛeſently did, x there w a loud voice thꝛer times ſaid: O diuel

Icharge thee in the name of the Father, the Son, & the Holy- ghoſt, tel

H 2 me

bids. ati. {ns I i... bet *

— —— - — —

mee where the ſaide Lang land dwelleth, then cher returned and

ſaide that hee had no dwelling. Then was ſhee further moued to

goe againe and demannd where the ſaid Langland was at that pꝛe⸗
ſent, which alſo ſhee did, and demaunded as befoze, and returned
with this anſwere, That her ſpirits tolde her that he went the laſt
vopage beyond the ſeas, After theſe confeſſions thus made, mother
Samuel and her daughter were committed to the gaple of Huntington. Now that we haue bꝛought mother Samuel to the gayle, wer
will let her there reſt in Gods peace and the Qucenes, vntill the
next generall aſſiſes dap holden at Huntington, andalthough ma⸗
ny things fell out vnhappily concerning her, during her continu⸗
ance in the gayle, whereofſhe was greatly ſuſpected, as the death

ok one of the Gaplers ſeruants whom the thꝛeatned, the extreme

ſickneſſe of one of his childꝛen, with his pꝛeſent amending after

the ſcratching of her, and diuerſe other things which are ſhꝛewde

peeces ofenidence againlk her, if there had been nothing elſe laide
to her charge: vet becauſe they do not concerne the trouble of theſe
childꝛen, neither is a matter ſo perfectly knowne to the authoꝛs of
this boke, it is therefoꝛe but touched by the way.

And to come vnto the daughter Agnes Samuel, who now con
meth vpon the ſtage with her part in this tragedie, you ſhall vn⸗
derſtand that ſhe was left with her mother in the gavle vntill the
Selſfions day held at Huntington the ninth of Januarie following,
which day was the Tueſday that the childꝛen ſo often had ſpoken
ok to the old woman.

At dinner time aſter Throckmorton made his requeſt to the
high Sheriffe and the Juſtices to baile this maide, and to haue her
home to his houſe, to ſee, if it might pleaſe God, whether any ſuch
euidences of guiltineſſe would appeare againſt her, as had befoze
appeared in the childꝛen againſt the mother. This ſute was not
eaſily granted, koꝛ it was a demur amongſt the Juſtices whether
the maide was baylable by law in this caſe oꝛ no. In the end Pa⸗
ſter Throckmorton continuing his ſute, they being reſolued of the
doubt, graunted it: but it was almoſt the ok the clock in the afternone befoze,' as encrp body can Wwitnefle that were then pꝛe⸗
ſent : which time is therefoze here mentioned becauſe it hath

relation to the next pointe that hereafeer followeth, as you ſhall

heare.

3 The

The report of Wale backer bene of that which happened =

Warboys, on Tueſday which was the Seſſions day at Huntington,
the ninthof Ianuarie.

Bout twelue of the clock a little befoꝛe dinner, Marie,
E fits of lamenelle,blindnelle,deafnefſe, and want of feel⸗
ing, onely their voungeſt bꝛother Robert, of the age of nine peres,
might ſpeak vnto Iane with her vnderſtanding, and ſhe only might

ſpeake in the like maner to Marie and Grace. Immediatly after dinner their vncle Pa. Doctoꝛ Dorington parſon of Warboys, com⸗

ming to ſeꝛ them with a ſcholler of Cambridge, found them all thꝛee
in their fits, which ſermed not ſo grienous at that time as merrie

aͤnd plealant, repeating oftentimes theſe woꝛds, each one of them:

Iam glad, l am glad, none fo glad as I. The ſaid M. Doctoꝛ their vn⸗
cle, willed their bꝛother to aſke them wherefo2e they were ſo glad.

Iane anſwered him, we ſhall knowe within theſe two honres god
newes, fill wiſhing that two houres were ſpent, the two other
ſiſters affirmed the ſame. Mary and Iane whiſper ing ſecretly/one
in the others eare, ſpake thus much in our hearing oftentimes : A
maruell how ſhe ſhould know that thing, Jam ſure none of this

houſe told her, c therefoꝛe it cannot be but that the ſpirits told her.
The ſaid Robert was willed againe by his vncle the docto2.,to aſke
of lane, and lane to aſke of Mary and Grace, when they ſhould come
foꝛth of this fit, they all anſwered, Now by and by, and then we
ſhal go well al of vs into the hall, out of this parloz , and thence re⸗

turning quickly hither againe, we ſhal pꝛeſently enter into another
fit like vnto this, and then you ſhall heare newes, foꝛ by that time
the two houres will bee almoſt ſpent: vet after wer haue tolde the
news we ſhal haue a paying fit, but it ſhal be ſhoꝛt. Al theſe things
foꝛetold pꝛoued moſt true, fo2 they came out of their fit perfectly
well, they did ariſe off from their ſtwles themſelues, and all thꝛer
of them went firſt out of the great Parloz ints an inward leſſc
Parloz,to ſe how their mother did, then being net wel at eaſe, and
kteping her bed. Pꝛeſently they went from this into the hall, to
ſee their ſiſter Elizabeth then fitting by the fire, and being there,
they were willed by one ef their kin{fwomen in the houſe, not

93 ta

Ione, and Grace, the daughters of Robert Throckmorton
of Warboys afozeſaid, Eſquire, fell into their accuſtomed

WL — — . 23 2

that counſell, they would nedes goe all thꝛe into the parlour.
Thep were no ſoner entred into the ſayd place, but euery one of
them kell into their koꝛmer fits, lame, blinde, and deaffe,inſomach
as they muſt needs be carried to their ſtoles by the fire ſide: where
being once placed, they began to repeate agapne, Jam glad, Jam
glad, none ſo glad as J: and being demaunded why, they anſwered
all thꝛee, that Agnes Samuel fhould bee bꝛought to their fathers
houſe from Huntington, and they ſhould not heare Agnes Samuel
as they did her mother, in their fits, becauſe their father ſhould not
trouble her with any moe queſtions, and ſo the ſpirit telleth them.
Theſe Woꝛds vttered they allſenerally, being aſked one after the
other, and then they all togither fell p2cſentlp into extreame fits,
of bowing their bodies, their heads andfiete almoſt metingtogether, their bellies being higheſt with great groaning. But this endured not long, (thankes be to God) then rubbing their eyes t wiſe
oꝛ thꝛice, they ſeemed as waking out of a llepe, and ſo became per⸗
fectiy well as euer befoꝛe, lane vttering theſe woꝛds to the ſpirite,
which as it ſhould ſeeme ſhould ſap, we are gone: then niſtreſſe
Jane anſwered, farewell and be hanged. Their vncle Doct92 there
pꝛeſent with the reſt, giuing thankes to God, aſked them all how
they did, and they ſayd very well we thanke God : agayne being
aſked how they felt themſelues all this time of two houres paſt,
they ſayd that they had bern in a leepe. He aſked them further, if
they had dined, which thing he knew they had done, fo2 he found
them all at dinner merie and plealant, vet they anſwered, they had
not dined, and pet they had ns ſtomackes.

After Agnes Samuel was bꝛought to maſter Throckmortons
houſe, the childꝛen continued foꝛ th2& oꝛ foure dapes without as
ny fits at all, ſo that their parents were put in great comfozt that

their childꝛen ſhould then haue been cleane deliuered krom their

toꝛments:but it ſhouldſeme that the matter was not pet bꝛought
to an end, koꝛ the childꝛen fell all of them a freſh into their fits againe, and were as grieuoullp afflicted as euer they were in the old
womans time, and then the ſpirits did begin as plainly to accuſe
the daughter as euer they did the mother, and doe tell the childzen
that the old woman hath ſet oner her ſpirits to her daughter, and
that ſhe hath bewitched them all oner agayne, and that ſhe will
deale wozſe with them then euer her mother did. The childꝛen

| in

in their fits carried the ſame minde to the daughter and fo herlptrits, as they did to the mother befoze, ſaping, that they cared not

fo2 any thing that any of them all could doe vnto them foꝛ their
truft was in God, and he would deliner them out of her hands,
they ſayd. Many very ſtraunge things fell out amongſt them in

one moneth next after, which becauſe they were not particularix

committed to wꝛiting, they are therefoze here omitted.

Sone after, the maide was thus bꝛought as vou heare, to conti⸗
nue at maſter Throckmorcons houſe: miſtreſſe Ioane the eldeſt
daughter of the ſayd maſter Throckmorton , was bꝛought home
likewiſe frem Tichmerſh groue, where we left her, to Warboz s to
her fathers houſe: and if it ſhould particularly be declared how ſhe
was dealt wit hall fo2 the time ſhe there continued, it would adde
another third part vnto this boke, and pou would thinke alſo that
the matters which could bee ſpoken ol her, would bee nothing ſupertluous. But to let all that paſſe, let vs come vnto this pꝛeſent

matter, as it was particularly obſerued at Warboyſe.

Vpon Fridap which was the ninth of Febꝛuarie, 15 9 2. Mi⸗
ſtreſſe Ioane the eldeſt daughter of the ſapd maſter Throckmorton, fell into her fit as vſually befo2e ſhe had done, and complayned of great payne in her legges, which had bern ſoꝛe nine oꝛ ten
weekes befoze that, namelp, the moſt part of the time while ſhe
continuedat Tichmerſh grone, with her vncle maſter Gilberc Pickering. But after ſhe returned home to her ſiſters, the grewe
much woꝛſe in her legges then befoꝛe, nd foꝛ the ſpace of a full

foztnight befoꝛe this dap, her legges were ſo ful of ache and paine,

that the could neither walke noꝛ fit, but onely lye either vpon her
bed, oꝛ els vpon cuſhions by the fire fide. Continuing thus in her
fit all that day, towards night the ſpirit came vnto her, and ſhe
talked verp familiarly with it, as her con mon cuſtome was, de⸗
maunding of it from whence it tame, and what newes it bꝛought,
ſpeaking verp diſdainfully to it. The thing anſwered, that it
would not tell her from whence it came, but this was the
newes it bꝛought, that ſhe ſhould baue verie extreame fits here⸗
after, and bee wozſe handled then euer ſhe was: ſaying, that ſhe
ſhould now haue her fits,being in perfect memoꝛie, and hauing all
her ſenſes. She anſwered, that ſhe neither feared no2 cared foz

— 4

bim, fo the thing 9 withont a any » further talkte, ur and her
cent mued in her fit the Fn part of that night vntill che went to
bed.

The next dap which was Satterday, the tenth of Febꝛuarie,
f92 it would bee to long to ſpeake of euerie particular houre, although almoſt euerie houre bzought varietle with it) in the after⸗
none as ſhe lay groantng in her fit by the fire ſide, che fell ſodainly
iuto bleeding at the noſe, and bled very much, whereat ſhe maruei⸗
led (toꝛ ſhe dtd perceiue it) ſaping, J pꝛap God ſend me god newes
alter this, foꝛ it is ſkraunge with me to bleede, J bled not ſo much
this ſeuen peares befoze: when ſhe had much bloudied her hands
kercheffe, ſhe ſayd that it was a god deede to thꝛowe the handker⸗
cycff: into the fire and burne the Mitch, koꝛ ſhe knew ſhe ſapd,
that this bleeding came ot no god cauſe. After ſhe had talked thus
to her ſelfe a little, it ſhould ſeme the ſpirit came to her: foꝛ He
ſayd thus ſniling to her ſelfe, and caſting her eyes about her, what
is this in Gods name, that commeth thus tumbling to me 2 It
fumbleth like a fotball, I thinke it be ſome puppit-player, it is
much like his dames old thꝛumbd cap, What is your name J p2ap
you ſayd ſhe 2 The thing anſwered (as it ſhould ſeme) that his
name was Blew. Foz pꝛeſently vpon the queſtion demaunded of
his name, ſhe made anſwere againe her ſelfe ſaying : Maſter Blew
vou are welcome, J neuer ſaw pou befo2e, I thought ſapd che, that
my noſe bled not fo2 nothing, what ne wes baue pou bꝛought? It
told her as befoꝛe. What doeſt thou ſay, ſaith ſhe, that I ſhall be
woꝛſe handled then euer J was:? Ma, ſayth ſhe, what doeſt thou
ſay: (foꝛ ſhe would euer repeate the ſpirits woꝛds after him, as
they all would doe when they were talking with them, bending
their heads to the ground) that J ſhall now haue my fits, when
J ſhall both heare, ſe, and know enerte bodie, that is anewtricke
indeede, I thinke neuer anp of my ſiſters were ſo vſed, but J care
not foꝛ yon (ſapd ſhe) doe your woꝛſt, and when pou baue done,
you will make an end:theſe were her very woꝛds.
Then was ſhe ſilent a while, yet ſeemed to liſten to ſomething
that the ſpirit did ſay, and pꝛeſently called fo2 Agnes Samuel, and
aſked where che was, ſaying, that the had but to much libertie, and
that ſhe muſt be moze ftraightly loked vnto, foꝛ of late (fapd: the)
the was in the kitchin chamber talking with her Spirits, (fo2 ſo

Pater Blew had told her) and intreated him not to let me baue
anp

any cucheptreame flited, "when'® whom 1 plipeake
knowe euerie bodie, Bithe SE he d

in that ſozt,and not giue otier vnti he dame
ning Agnes Samuel) Unto her ende So Pik is
Toaneto her,(fo2 by that time the was catled to ON place to her)

vou haue ſpun a faire thie ead : your dinels(fo2 ſo then the called -

them) will be no longer at your commaundement: it will bee no
better with vs, ſaydthe, vntill you and your mother be both han-
— 4 1 Th andig by and bearing this, confcNet indck de
Sethe wasf kitchtnc chamber and alone: but He denied that

the talked with any hin no? pet knewe ol any ſuch things.
Miſtris foane hearing her ſay ſo, willed her not fo denpe it, foꝛ it
was ſurely ſo, ſhet onghf, ſaying, that ſhe knewe the Spirites

would not lye to her. Sone fob ſhe came aut of this fit, and

reatlyr med bf payne tr
Ke a rech che had e d what the had ſapd,ſhe-anſweredthatthe hab beenallepe,andhad ſaydnothing that ſhe knewe
of, marueiliig,muchhowy herhandkerchiffe which ſhe had inher
hand, thould.come to be ſo done, faꝛ(ſapd ſhe) it was not ſo euen
now, and I; ure that A vie not to bleed: A belæue(ſapd ſhe) ſame

N

hodie ke trom me and hldadied it, and bath giuen me it againe,
ts the lame handkierchitte J hat euen uo w, with manp ſuch

oz th
like ſperhes. pe
At night pꝛeſently vpon her father and mothers riſing from
ſupper , the fell into the-fit which befoze M.Blew had. thꝛeatned
ber, fo2 ſhe was moſt e w:onge twitched in euerp part

er budy: ſomtimes 1117 ould thꝛuſt fo2th her armes ſo ſtraight

400 ſo Kiffe, one it was Hot Poſſible to bow them: ſometimes a⸗
gayne ſhe would ſo 1wꝛeſt and waithe them cleane backwards, as
155 no man oꝛ woman wers able to doe the like by their naturall

ſtrength, ſhe her ſelfe crying out very pitifully: ſometimes of her

ſfomacke, ſaplng that ſhe was very ſicke, and oſtered to vomite:
ſometitnesoſher.head,andother whiles ok her belly, and neuer a
part oꝛ member of her was fre from extreame paine, ſhe: her ſelfe
euer calling vpon God to thinke vpon her, and deliuer her. Sometimes it would ſo ſtop her bꝛeath, and hold it ſo long, that when

the could recoucr it agayne, the fetched a marueilous deepe and

lo lud grone. And being oftentimes aſked in this fit by diuers that
ſod by bow ſhe did, ſhe made Oy that ſhe was marueilous
ſicke

er legges, and being pzeſently

cke and full of payne, atfirming that the both; heard and ſawe al?
that were pzeſeut. In this wolull caſe che continued the ſpace of
halke an haure and moze, th the great griefe of the beholders, (foz
thisls ons of the firſt fits that either lhe oz her ſiſters had, hauing
their perkect ſences.) Now en the ſodayn as ſhe was thus coplaypning, lhe fell into herſencelefſe fit, hauing her mouth alſo ſhut vp,
and now is the depꝛiued of all maner of ſence agapne. Remaining
thus quietly à little ſpace, ſhe fetched a great groan, wherupon her
mouth was opened, and the ſpake ſaying: Here is a rule inderde,
I pertetue that you are as god as your wozd with ne, tr whence.
come pdu nom, + what ne wes do you bꝛing no J pꝛay pou? The
thing anſwered, that ſhe muſt be pet woꝛſe handled then all this.
commeth vnto. Saith ſhe, God is absue the diuell, and doe what
pou can, foz pou ſhall not be able to hurt me. But tell me, why doe
pou punich me woꝛſe then all my ſiſters, hauing jiw u
can know euery body? The thing anſwered becauſe ſhe tolde tales
of their dame: who is pour dame(faith ſhe:)Þe anſkicred, Nan Sa
muel. And this you mult vnderſtand, in all their maner ol talking
tidether, that the childzen wouly'firit repeate the firlt ſpiritsanſwere, befo2e they wonldaſke any fyrthergitelFion of them. The.
ſapd che, ir Nan Samuel he pour dame, I will tell ntoze 2 her
yet, and J hope to tell ſuch a tale of her one day, that thelhall not
be able to anſwere it, noꝛ vou foꝛ her, The ting anſwered, that he
wouldthen puniſh her the moꝛe foz it. She ſaid that the cared not
foꝛ that. Then ſayd the thing, when was Smack with you: (thts.
Smack was another of the ſpirits names.) Sapth ſhe, Jknow no
ſuch fellow as Smack is: ves ſayth the thing, that yan doe: and heit
is that telleth you al theſe things; but J wil courſe himfo2 it. Hatth
He, doyour woꝛſt to him oꝛ to me, foꝛ I cate not foz yon, Fare wel,
ſapth the thing. Do you bid me fare wel, ſaith ſhe? fare you wel and
be hanged(foz pou ſhall haue the truth as ſhe ſpoke it) c come again
ſaith the, when pou are ſent foꝛ. Sone after this ſhe came foꝛth ol
her fit and was very ſicke, and full of payne in het legs, The next
day which was the Sabbaoth, ſhe was reaſonable wel al the fo2enone, às ſhe was al other daies, but her greateſt pangs x fits were
al wayes towards night, And thus leauing her vntill night, vou
ſhall heare what happened the ſame day, amongſt others of her ſi⸗
ſters. Sone after dinner was ended, there came vnto the houſe one
. Throckmorton of Brampton, to ſe how thele childꝛe n did k ary ;

*

by . — lo voie fell {6dainly info herfitinthelightofthemal,wh! was not lange fo |
anp, but tothegentteman;becanſoit was an vluallthitin wird her.

Coͤtinuing thus a little ſpace, q. Theockmorton, the childs father,
ſapd to the other M. Throckmorton his kinſman, wilt pda kecolin;
ſaythhe, a wonder Daiththe ie ntlenuitz haue not anyigze kater
1 then toe this ſighte Satt ———
great, foꝛ you ſhallſc this childe bidughit out ur thi vaſe where
now you — ney ofrrrtame woꝛds by niipde
in this houſe. Saith the gentleman, A would fain fe that,foz q am
ſozy to ſe this ſight. So Þ childes father called foꝛ Agnes Samuel ,t
willed her to ſay tu the child theſe:wozds,J charge th diuel in the
name of God ofhegauen r earth as A bite the, and am no witch,
noꝛ gulſty ofthis matter, that thdusepart from this child, 4 ſuſter
her to tome foꝛth af her ſit. This ſayd by the mayd, the child moued
not. Then the ichildeg.father:willed her to ſay thus, J charge
ther thou diuetz as J loue ther, and haue authoꝛitie oner the, and
ama Witch, and gnltie ofthismatter;that thou ſuffer thiscbilde; |
to be well at this pzolent;, Tele woꝛdes were no ſwner ended,
but the chilte-wiped her eyes, ann was as wellas any in the Par⸗
lour. As the gentleman was thus wond ung and talking iwith this
maydabout the matter, ſaping that ſhe Tould tell a pꝛetie tale fo2
her ſelfe;ansther of thoſethilozen, miſtris Iane, ſtanding by, fell
ae, intg her fit, and the ſame erperiener inas made by her,

hy her Offer betoꝛe. And this. was very vſuall a»
1; te had benp2whcddinerstimes; and was foze⸗
irit ta ng of themeintz in her t, afd2tnight before
this time:)thatwhenſoeuer AgnesSamucl ante theſe wo2ds,
they ſhould be pꝛeſently well.

To returne to miſpria Joane-whoman very ick and full of paine
all that day, and when nigbt tama pꝛeſentix after ſupper fell into
toc lame maner af fit, which ſhe had the nightbefoze,foa theo ion
molt grieuopily t wwitahnds wing, and tonnented in enery part ol
her body haning her perfes fences, foꝛ ſhe was able to ſc, heare, +
vnderſtand, euery thing that was aſked of her, and this kind of fit
continuing ſome certaine ſpace; ſhe fell on the ſodaine into a ſence⸗
lefle fit: and being ſilent a while; hauing her mouth ſhut vp, ſher
warde At ror Anya ſram n dente con por . Smack,

and

b - 8 "1 . X — — — — —_— Ra ä ß Oe. its n
— —ůů ů ů ¶ů¶ů¶ V Ee ee * * eee —

— — —

. mhe Atraignement and Execution — g
and what newes doe you bzing? The ſpirite anſwered, that har
came from fighting. From fighting ſayth the, with whome, J pꝛay
vou: The ſpirite anſwered with Pluck, ( which was another of the
ſpirits names.) Where did pou fight J pꝛap pou ſayd ſhe:? The ſpi⸗
rit anſwered, in his old dames backhouſe, which is an olde houſe
ſtanding in mother Samuels yarde, and they fought with great
cololſtaues, this laſt night. And who got the maſterte J pꝛay yon
ſayd ſhe? He anſweredz he bꝛoke Plucks head. Saith ſhe, J would
that he had bzoke panr necke alſo, Saith the ſpirite, is that all the
thanke that J ſhal haue foꝛ my labour? Why ſayth ſhe, do you lok
fo2 thanks at my hands? J would you were all hanged vp one agaynſt another, and your dame and all, feꝛ vou are all nought, but

it is no matter faith ſhe, J do not well to.curſe vou, foꝛ God I truſt

will defend me from pou all. So he departed and bad her farewell.
And being aſked by her when he would come againe, hee ſaide on
Medneſday at night: he was no ſoner gone but pꝛelently came
Pluck to her. Fo2 ſhe ſapd, from whence come pou Pluck, with pour
head hanging downe in that ſoꝛte? So he anſwered her in all re⸗
ſpects, accoꝛding as Smacke befoꝛe had tolde her. Then ſaid the ſpi⸗
rite to her, when ſaw pou Smacke? She anſwered, that ſhe knew
no ſuch fellow. He ſayd, yes that ſhe did, but ſhe. would not bee
knowne of him. Jt ſhould ſeeme ſapd ſhe,that you haue met with
your match, and with diners ſuch like ſpeeches betwixrt themhe de⸗
parted, Andſheſon after came out ofher fit,but was very ill, x co⸗
playned of payne in her legs. The next day being mundap, thee
was very ſick all the day, and in the afternone the fell into a mar⸗
ueilous extreame fit hauing perfect ſences,fox the ſpace of halle an
houre 02 moze. Agnes Samuel ſtanding by, and feingthe extremitie
thercof,ſemed to pꝛay with others very heartily koꝛ her: fo2 the
grieuouſnes of that ſight would haue moued any ſkony heart inthe
woꝛꝛld to pitie. And being aſked of the matter, what ſhe thought
of it, and whether it was wantonneſle oz not, as ſhe had often⸗
times ſayd befoꝛe, ſhe came to the houſe(as well as her mother had
dont) but now che could not denie, but that it was ſome ſuperna⸗
turall woꝛke in the patient. Pot withſtanding as may be thought,
the that was thus to2mented, neuer once concetued an euill
thought agavnlt her, all the time that ſhe had her perfect ſences:

this kind ol fit ended, ſhe was well, ertepting the payn in her legs.

After dapper, a lone as her arents were riſen with the ret the

fell into the ſane fit agapne hauing her ſences,and within halfe an
houre, ſhe was on the ſodapne ſnatched into her ſenceleſſe fit, and
p:efentlyſhehadher mouth opened and ſayd, will this geare neuer
be left? J hope it will be better one day with pou, from whence
come pon now Catch, (ſayth ſhe)limping in that ſazte? I hope pou

haue met with pour match. Catch anſwered, that Smack and he had

been fighting, and that Smacke had bzoken his leg. Sayd ſhe, that
Smac ke is a ſhꝛe wd fellow belike, J would J could once ſee him.
Pluck came peſter night (ſayd ſhe) with his head bꝛoken, and nowe
he hath bꝛoken pour legge, J hope ſayd ſhe, that he will bꝛeak both
pour neckes befoze he haue done with you. Catch anſwered, that
he would be euen with him befoꝛe he had done. Then ſayd the, put
foꝛth your other legge, let me ſæ if I can bꝛeake that alſo, foꝛ ſhee
had a ſticke in her hand, the ſpirit tolde her that ſhe could not hit
him, Can A not hit youſapd ſhe? let me trie. Then the ſpirit(as it
ſhould ſæme / put out his legge, foꝛ ſhe lifted vp her ſtick eaſily, and
ſodapnely gaue a great ſtroake on the ground. You haue not hurt
me ſapd the ſpirit. Haue J not hurt youſayd ſhe? no, but J would
if I could, fo2 then would J make ſome of you come ſhozte home,
So ſhe ſeemed diuers times to ſtrike at the ſpirit,butheleaped ouer
the ſficke as ſhe ſayd, as il it had been a Jack an Apes. So after ma⸗
ny ſuch toyes vſed betwirt them, the ſpirit departed, and ſhe came
foꝛth of yer fit, continuing all that night, and the next day very
ſicke, and full ol payne in her legs. At night when ſupper was en⸗
ded the fell into her ſenſible fit agayne, x continuing therin half an
houre, ſhe fell into another kind ol fit which is common to her and
the reſt of her ſiſters, and reſting ſo ſilent a little (pace, ſhe fetched

a great groan x ſaid, Ha ſirra, are vou come now with pour arme in
aſling Þ.Blew?who hath met with vou J pꝛay: The ſpirit anſwe⸗
red, You know well enough. Do J know(ſayd che) well enough?
how ſhould J know? Why (ſayd the ſpirit) Smack and J were
fighting, and he hath bꝛoken mine arme. Sayd ſhe, that Smack is a
ſtout fellow indeed belike, J hope he will bꝛeake all pour necks be⸗
cauſe you puniſh me without a cauſe. would ſayd ſhe that A could
once be acquainted with him. We wil be eue with him (ſaith Blew )
one day. Vlhy ſayd ſhe, what wil vou doe? The ſpirite ſayd, that

they would all fall vpon him and beate him. Sayd ſhe, Belike he

tareth not foꝛ vou all, foꝛ hee hath bzoken Plucks head, Catches

legge, and pour arme, now you 33 to doe, vou may

„ 2 | goe

pu heale pour arme. Dea( ald thelpirtt when — (whole
we will beate Smacke. So foꝛ that night they parted, and ſhe came
out ol her fit, ctomplaining ol manie partes of ber bodie, fo as it
ſhould ſeeme that ſhe was moꝛe heartie and better at eaſe while the
ſpirit talked with her by far, then ſhe was when ſhe came foꝛth of
her fit, foꝛ ſhe would greatly complaine of her legges all the day,
and the moſt part of the night in like ſoꝛte, ſo that the her ſelle twke
little reſt, and diſquieted them that lay nere her. The next day
which was Medneldap, ſhe was very ill, and when night came
and ſupper was ended, the ürſt fell into her ſenſible fit; and after
that was ended, ſhe fell into her ſenceleſle fit. Anon, fetching a
great ſigh, ſhe ſaid, Who ſent fozyou maſter Smack? He made an⸗
were that he was tome accoꝛding to his pꝛomiſe which he made
vnto her on Sunday at night. Belike ſaid ſhe, vou will kerpe pꝛo⸗
miſe, but J had rather ypu would kepe you awaie, and come when
Iſend foꝛ you : but what newes haue vou bꝛought: I tolde you
ſaide her, that 3 had been a fighting the laſt Sundaie night, but I
haue had manie battels ſince. Vea ſo it ſœmeth ſaith ſhee, foꝛ here
was both Pluck, Catch, and Blew, and they all came maimed vnto
mer. Mca ſaid her, J haue met with them all. But J maruel, ſaid
ſhe, that you could beate them, they are verie great, and you are
but a little one. Saide her, J am god enough koꝛ two, of the beit
of them together. But ſaide ſhe, J can tell vou newes. Mhat
is that, ſaid her: Thep will all at one time fall vpon you and beat
vou. He ſaid, he cared not foꝛ that, hee would beat t wo of the beſt
of them. And who ſhall beate the other two, ſaid ſhe? foꝛ there is
one that hath bene manie times ſpoken of, and her earrieth the
name of Hardname, foꝛ his name ſtandeth vpon eight letters, and
cuerp letter ſtandeth foꝛ a woꝛd, but what his name is we know
0 a Enclp Hardname ) Theſpirite anſwered that his colin Smacks
{3 help hin to beate the other two. There are alſo two other
8 n a as vou may reade in the olde womans conkeſſian. What
(ive Se, ſhall your coſins Smacks helpe ou: What, is there
kindꝛed amanalt diuels? J neuer heard of that thing befoze, that
tzevincls were toſins, GOD kepeme from that kindꝛed. Such
like kwliſh talke they had together at that time, In the end, the ſpi⸗
ritcſayde, Pen ſhall haue no moe ſuch fittes as vou haue had.
420, ſlapde ihc, that is well, but vou can doe nothing but ive.
Cab ſarde her, will you not belæue mer? No ſayd Mi, 4
| belcene

e n

* ore e "VV nes UV - 4158 ww

belteue theDtuel, who lte father of 2 But pou wall c
finde it true ſapd her. If J doe, then will I belckue you, ſapdſhe,
but not befoꝛe. A:p2zap GOD tt be true, but whether it be true 62
not, J care not a ruſh foꝛ you, No, ſayd he, will you not thank me?
Thank vou ſaid ſhe, hang pou and all your fellowes,foz Þ will not
delerue pou no farther than I ſee you, neither do J care foʒ any ok
you all.

This Smac ke hath oftentimes gone about to win her fauour,
. making very fayꝛe pꝛomiſes to her that he would doe any thing
fo2 her, if ſhe would loue him. But it hath pleaſed God by the wozk
of his god ſpirit, that ſhe hathalwates withſtod him, denving him,
and deſiyng him vnto the vttermoſt, wiſhing all euill to light vpon
him and his fellowes, foꝛ ſo toꝛmenting her and her ſiſters with⸗
out cauſe, alwaies deſiring the aſſiſtance of Gods holy ſpirit to pꝛe⸗
ſerue her and her ſiſters from ſuch temptations, In the ende, ſhe
ſayd, Vou haue tolde me many times that J ſhould ſcratch Agnes
Samuel, tel me now, whe ſhal I ſcratch her? The ſpirit anwered,
ſhe ſhuld ſcratch her befoze the Aſſiſes, What ſaid ſhe, ſhal ſhe ſtãd
befo2e the Judges with a ſcratcht face? Yea, ſayd the ſpirit, ſo it
ſhould be, She anſwered, that ſhe would ſet it on whenfocuer ſhe
did it: and ſayd ſhe, loke that pou be as god as pour woꝛd in this
matter, foꝛ J would faine ſcratch her, foꝛ whatſocuer the matter
is, ſayd the, A cannot abide her now adayes, and Jam ſicke when
I loke on her, (and ſo inderd ſhe was) foꝛ ſhe would not ſuffer her
wtllingly to ſtay in her company when ſhe was out of her ſit: and
being al ked the cauſe why, ſher ſayd, ſhe could not tell, foꝛ tHe
did beare her no malice noꝛ grudge in the wozld, neither did ſhee
giue her any euill woꝛdes, pet the ſayd, ſhe loathed her company.
In the parting the ſpirit told her that ſhe ſhouldhaue no moe fitsafter the Alliſes. No, ſayd ſhe, J am very glad of that. But ſaid
the ſpirite, if you haue, then woe be to Agnes Samuel, foꝛ J will
bzing her to her ende. And thus the ſpirite elt her not ſaping any
thing of his returne, e ſhe pꝛeſentlycame out of her fit, c was much
better then oꝛdinarily ſhe vſed to be, and the next day the was able
to goe very well on her legges, whereof thee had no ve a whole
moneth bekoze,

On MPunday next following, which was the twenticth of Fe⸗
b2uarte after ſnapper, ſhe began to talke againe, hauing bene in

her fit anhoure oz moze befoꝛe, foꝛ ſhe had eaten her ſupper in 3
| 8

FRA _—

tt, with two other alſoof her filkers that were in their tts. On

rcaonement 2nd Freevition

the ſuddaine ſhe ſaſd, What are you come now? J had thought you
would haue come no moꝛe, and that we ſhonldhaue been well rid
of you; but where haue pou been, ſaid ſhe? He anſwered, that his
colin Smack and hee, had been fighting with Pluck and Catch, and
they had beaten them both very much, ſo that they dare not come

to her any moze. So they had very much talke about fighting.

and ſuch other matters, which befo2e are ſet downe. In the ende
ſhe aſked when the ſhould ſcratch Agnes Samuel. The ſpirit an⸗
ſwered that if ſhe would now ſcratch her, then her face would ber
Whole befoꝛe the Aſſiſes, which muſt not be. So ſher willed him to
loke to that which he pꝛomiſed, fo2 ſhe would kerpe her nailes foꝛ
her. Mea, ſaith the ſpirit, and ſhee was alſo conſenting ta the death
of the Lady Crumwel. What, ſaith miſfreſſe Ioane, was ſhee alſo
conſenting to the death ol the Lady Crumwel? euen like enough, I
thought ſo, ſaith ſhx. Pea, ſaith the ſpirit, and to pꝛoue this to bee
true, whenſoeuer any ſtranger ſhall come into the houſe, you ſhall
fall into pour fit, and if then Agnes Samuel ſhal come vnto pou and
ſay, As J am a Mitch, and conſenting to the death of the Ladie
Crum wel, ſo I charge the to depart, and to let her come koꝛth of.
her fit, yon ſhall be pꝛeſently well. Do Piſtreſſe Ioane repeated
the ſame woꝛds after the ſpirite which were then ſet downe in
w2iting. Ik it beſo, ſaith miffreſſe Ioane, why then J hope ſhe thal
be hangedat the alſiſes as well as her mother, and that fir Henrie
Crumwel wil loke to that matter. In the ſhutting vp of the talke,
the ſpirit tolde her that ſhee ſhould haue her fits vpon the Aſſiſes
dap, and all maner of fits which at any time ſhe euer had, but after
the Aſliſes day ſhe ſhould haue no mo fits, but if ſhe had, then woe
be to AgnesSamuel,foz then (ſaith the ſpirit) J will make her pay
koꝛ it. .
Upon Friday following when ſupper was ended, ſhee fell into
her talking fit againe, hauing hada very ſolemne fit an howze be⸗
foꝛe that time. Dn the ſuddaine ſhee aide, Smacke where haue pou
ben all this time? and how chaunce Italked not with you hauing
been in my fits diuers times of late? Saith Smacke, J was not .
home, but now J bꝛing vou god newes, What is that, ſaide ſhee 2
The ſpirite ſaid, Pou ſhall haue no moe fits vntill this day ſeuen⸗
night, it you will arife betimes to mozraw moꝛning, other wiſe if
pou do not, you ſhall haue your ſit in the moꝛning which 1
inue

— —— 8 | »

tine all the day to pour trouble. Then ſapd the, If rifing earely
willpzenent my fit, I will (God willing) get vp fomozs
row moꝛning: which inderde he did, and eſcaped her fit that day.
Then che demanded why ſhe thonld baue no moe fits that werke.
The ſpirit anſwered, that Agnes Samuel intreated him that pot
chould haue no moe its, euen as I loned her: but (ſayd hee) I lou
her not, yet pon ſhall haue no moe fittes this weke, except ſome
rangers come, if pou will ariſeto mozrowe betimes. And why,
ſayd che, muſt J haue mp ſits it᷑ ſtraungers come? The ſpirit ans
ſwered, To bing her to ſhame. But ohen did pon talke with her,
ſayd ſhe: Euen now — the ſpirit) in the Church chamber, She
will denie that, ſayd n Ioane, when ſhe is aſked of it. Pea,
ſapd the ſpirit, ſoit ſandeth her in hand: and you mut haue one
whole werke of very ſicke fits, ſayd the ſpirit, befoze the Alſiſes.
Bulk J, ſayd the, foz whoſe foule 2 Agnes Samuel will haue it fo,
ſayd the ſpirit. Let meknow,ſayd ſhe, when that day ſhall be,You
tall know this day ſeuennight, ſayd he, and in what ſoꝛt likewiſe
pour fit ſhall be. Betoꝛe they parted, the ſpirit aſked how her legs
did. She ſayd, well thankes be o God, why doe you aſke? He
_ ſapd, becauſe he was glad of it. Be glad ſoꝛ pour ſelfe, ſapd ſhe, and
be not glad foʒ me,foz A will neuer thanke you foꝛ it, neither dw A
paſſe fo; pou a ruſh,foz God ( truſt) will deliuer me in deſpight of
pou. Sofoz that time he departed, and ſhe came out of her fit and
was very well, and ſocontinuedall the next dap, arifing betimes
in the moꝛning. On Sunday following, being the 25. of Febzua⸗
rie, P. Throckmorton of Brampton, whowas the firff ffrangerthat
camenert to the houſe, (t is befoꝛe named) withinoneHhalfchoure
after his comming, miſtreſſe loancfel into her fit, and had not long
ſo continued, but Smack came to her, to whom lhe ſaid: How chan⸗
teth it that J haue my fit now, and pou pꝛomiſed that I ſhould not
hate it befoꝛe Friday next: He fatd, that ſhe mee well enough.
She ſaid, ſhe did not: then he told her that Fraungers were come,
and now ſhe muſt haue hor fit to pꝛoue Agnes Samuel a Mitch.
Among other talke, the ſpirit told her againe, that there was a
very ſoꝛe werke ol ſicke fits to come ere it be long. She ſayd, ſhe
tared not foꝛ it, foꝛ ſhe hoped that God would and with her then,
as wel as he had done hitherto, As the ſate thus in her fit talking
with Smack, one or her lilfersſate by her, (being in d very quiet fit
alſo) on the ſuddaino te ſatd: Silter * (fo2 ſo was the chilbes
3 name

name that ſate dy her the thing tcllethme that you halhanea be⸗
ry ſoze fit by © by. The woꝛds were no ſoner ended, butter ſiſter
fell into a marueilous ſicke and troubleſome fit, ſwelling and hea⸗
ning in zer bodie, groning and crying out as their manner was.

Then ꝙ. Throckmorton, the childs father, called foz Agnes Samuel
# willed her to hold the child, foꝛ ( ſaid he) think you are beſt woꝛ⸗
thie to haue the trouble of it. After the child had been in her armes
ſtrugling x very troubleſome a certaine ſpace. her ſiſter that befoꝛe
had foꝛetold of Þ ſicke fit the had, ſpake, ſaying, Be ol god comfozt
ſiſter Tane,fo2 the thing telleth me that the wozft is paſt, x you ſhal
be well by and by: koꝛ the thing ſaith, that Nan Samuel is wearie
with holding of pou,x therefoze you ſhall be well, which pꝛeſently
pꝛoued true, foꝛ her troubleſome fit then ended, e ſhe continued in
a very quiet fit as befoze. Pꝛeſently vpon this . Throckmorton,
the childs father, tolde the other P. Throckmorton hig coſin, what
wozds his daughter Ioane befoze hadſpoken,namely, that when as
ny ſtrangers came, the ſhouldtherevpon fall into her fit, and then
if Nan Samuel thould ſpeake ſuch and ſuch woꝛds, ſhe ſhould come .
fozth of her fit to pꝛoue her a Mitch. M. Throckmorton the ſtran⸗
ger earneſtly deſired to make p2ofe thereol: So the childes father

bad Nan Samuel ſay after him, Euen as 3 ama Mitch, c conſented
to the death of the Lady Crom wel, ſo J charge ther ſpirit to depart,
and to let her be well. The mayde began to ſpeake them, but ei⸗
ther ſhe could not, oz elſe ſhe would not ſpeake them plapne, but
ſhe would alwaies ſay, Conſenting to our death ol our Lady Crõwell, and the would not after thꝛer oz foure times repeating ouer.
ſpeake the woꝛds plaine: ſo that ſhe that was in her fit ſayd, Here:
is ſomething telleth me, that ſhe will not ſpeake them aright. In
the ende after much ado? ſhe ſpake them, and pꝛeſently ſhe came:
out o her fit, and was very well. The ſame woꝛds were vſed to
another of them that then was in her fit, and pꝛeuailed as well
with her as with her ſiſter. The next day at dinner miſtreſſe Eliabeth being in her fit, was poynted vnto to ſay grace, and when the -
had halfe gone th2 ouch it, pꝛeſently her mouth was ſhut vp that

the could not finilh it. Then Maſter Throckmorton called fo2 Nan
Samuel, and willed her to charge the Spirit to open her mouth againe,that ſhe might finiſh her grace, which the maide did, and the
child went thꝛough her grace to the end ol it. And this vou ſhould
bape ſcene in common vle 2 among them, that if (thy 95 . ol

them

— ———

5474

theinhid fad together Nee to othyke arack” 0 Stehe fenE

them all taken ſuddainly in their fits one after the other as they
had begun to ſpeake, oꝛ at the furtheſt befoze they had ſpoken two
lines, and their mouthes alſo ſhut vp, that they could not ſpeake
at all. Then Paſter Throckmorton labonred to teach Agnes Samuel agrace of two oꝛ thꝛe lines, but he could by no meanes get
her to learne it by heart, although hecauſed his childꝛen to teach it
her diners times in a day. On Thurſday following, which was
the firſt ol March, miſtrelle Mary, who had been well and without
any fits euer ſince the Seſſions day laſt at Huntington, was ſome⸗
thing euill at eaſe all the moꝛning, and about nine of the clocke fell
into a marueilous great quaking and trembling, and could not
bold a ioynt of her, vet knewe no cauſe why. Sone after ſhe was
taken and fel inta a marueilous troubleſome fit, continuing there⸗
in about halle an houre: in the ende the wared a little better, and
ſayd, Is it true: do vou ſap, This is the day wherein A muſt ſcratch
the voung Witch? Jam heartily glad of it, foꝛ J will ſurely pay

ber home both loꝛ my ſelſeand'my ſiſters. Palker Edward Pickering and Paſter Henry Pickering, two of the childs vncles ſtanding
by, with diuers others, cauſed themalde to be bꝛought vp into the
chamber where the child was, to ſe what would be the iſſue ef it,
knowing very welt that the maide was able to Rœpe her ſelfe
from ſcratching, it thꝛee ſuch as the child was ſhould ſet vpon her
at once. So ſœne as the maide came into the chamber where the
child was, the child ſaßd, Art thoucome thou young Witch, who
halt done all this miſchicfe 2 The mayd ſemedto ſtand amazed at
thoſe woꝛds, foꝛ ſhe was not accuſtomed to heare any ſuch hard
fpeches fromthe childe. So sne in the compante willedthe maid
to take vp the childe and carrie her downe (oz her legges were 5
taken from her.)

Miſtreſſe Mary ſuffered her ſelfc verpquittly to be taken vp in
her armes, and claſped her hands about her net ke, bůt euen as the
maide began to lift her vp, ſhe fell on ſcratching of her ſo eagt rip.
and ſo fiercelp, as that it was a wonder to all that ſawe it ,ſaping,
I willſcratch) pou, you vong witch, and pan you home koꝛ this pu⸗
niching of me and my ſiſters: the thing telleth me, that J had been
well, and neuer ſhauld haue had my fits any moꝛs dnt foꝛ you.”
The: made ffote ſtill holding downeherhcay (oz thechilve knee⸗
1 EIN knees) and cried very pitifullte, yet either would not,

13.3 Is 2 92;

> noe ee > cone — —

: oz couldnotonce — — head. Kay, ald the ch, 3 know

vou crpe, but the ſpirit ſayd that Jſhouldnot heaxe you, becauſe 1
thouldnot pitie pou, and he it is that holdeth you now that paucan
not get away from me. So the child ſcratched her face vntill the
ſkinne came oft the bꝛeadth ofa ſhilling, but there came no bloud
at all but water, In the endthe mayd bzought her downe into the
Pariour, where the child fitting a while in ber ſtole, ſer med to ber
wonderfull ſoꝛie foʒ that ſhe had done, and ſayd, J would not haue
ſcratched Nan Samuel, but the thing told me that J ſhould doe it,
and foꝛced me thereunto, ſcretching foꝛth mine armes, and trays
ning my fingcrs whether J would oꝛ not, and made me to ſcrateb
her. And truely they that ſawe the manner of it, aud knewe the
mild diſpoſition of the childe, might eaſily ſee that ſhe was onerrus
led in the action, foz ſhe was carried with ach vehemencie and
crueltie fo2 the time, again the mayd, as that it appeared ta bee
altogether befides her nature. The child continued in ber fit till an
houre after dinner, and then being aſ ked of theſe matters, was altogether ignoꝛant ol any ſuch thing, and would not beleeue it, but
when ſhe lawe the erample in the maides face, and being told that
= had done it, ſhe bzake into teares,and was marneilous ſozie to
eit.

The next dar, being Fridap, miſtreſſe Mary was in a verymild
and ſolemne fit all the moꝛning, anda little befoze dinner ſhe ſayd
to her ſelfe and her ſiſters that were alſo in their fits : J am glad
and marueilous glad, but ſhe would not tell the cauſe why. Pꝛe⸗
ſentlp the ſapd to the thing that fwd by her, But T know pou wil
Ive to me as pou haue oftentimes. done. Nap,ſapd the thing, I vſe
not to lye. No doe, ſayd ſhe, who are pou J pꝛap vou? The thing
anſwered, Smack. What(ſapd ſhe) are pon that Smack that vſeth
to come fo my ſiſter Ioane, and telleth her ſo many things: Yea,
ſayd he, ſaping further, that he neuer told her ſiſter Ioane any lve
hitherto, neither was this a lye that he told her. Then miſtrefle
Mary declared to her ſiſtera, being all in their fits, j̊ which Smacke
had told her, which was, that after dinner ſhe ſhould come out of
Her fit, t neuer moꝛe haue any fir, becanſe ſhe had ſcratched Agnes
Samuel, 90 her ſiſters wiſhed that Smacke would come to them,
and tell them the ſame, So after dinner ſhe came fozthofher fit,

as ſhe ſayd, and neuer had mozefits afterward 82 dap to

thig(thankes he to 8
Ts

Theveryfame daybeingthe ſecond- of Febzuary miltree
tel in the moꝛning into her fit,andbeingin her bed, it ſhonld ſ@me
that Smack had been with her, and had told her ſomething, as afterward ſher did declare to her ſiſters, being in their fits: fo2 ſhes
ſaid, J will get vp and goe downe,andtell ſome newes. Whenthe

was come don into the parloz, and had ſate by the fire ſome little -

ſpace, ſhe ſpake on the ſuddaine tofomething that ſkad by her, ſav⸗
ing: J will nat vouchſafe tolwke an you, foz you.nener come but
pou bꝛing fome ili newes with yon, faz I was fick the laſt tims
pou were here, and J marueil whoſent foz you now 2 Che thing
anſwered her, You were fick in ded the laſt time J was here,
now pou ſhalt be much woꝛſe. Why, doe your wozft ſaid De
I paſſe not foz pon (ſxming ta ſpeake very angerię to him) f
God, ſaid ſhe, will pꝛeſerue me, Ifearepounot. I maruell ſaid ſhe
hom pour leg doth:? Ithinke Smacke ſpoke with you when
hake your leg, ſaid he, I p2ay you doe not tell Smacke that J
here: Do pou pꝛay me: ſaid ſhe, J dae notknow that Smacke, but
if I din, J would ſurely teil hun, that he might bzeake pour necke
alſo. The thing anſwered, yes youknow him well enough, fo;
vou made him bꝛeake my leg, hut A wauld not fo any thing; that
be ſhauld know that J was here ſaid the 1
pate fozall this werke that commeth in. Mill you? ſaith ſhe; 1
will lay with pou what vou mil, that I ſhal nat be fick this werke
if A litt, fo: one thing that Jknow. Yea ſaith hee, A know very
well that Smacke was with von this mo: ning, but doe both a vou
what von can, vou ſhall haue aficke weeke ol it, and that pon ſhall

finde,fo2

Smacke hath courſed me. Whyfaia ſhe;do-you renenge your ſeife
vpon me and not yon dmacke ? Hee ſaid that hee durſt not deale

with him, foꝛ he mas ta hard foꝛ him.

were like wiſe in their fittes, if they did not ſe: Catch who tatked
with her euen now? They anſwertt no. Why then ſaid ſhe, be⸗

like he is gone, fo2 neither doe A ſe him, then ſhee begun to talke

very ſoltly with them, as if no bodie ſhould beare them, ſaping;

bed, and tolde her that this next werke will bend marueilous ficke

e to ber, which he 22 ſo beate Pluck ro
"4 * 3 t

Joaneyon ſhall be ſo-ficke thismert merke, that your body thall
dee ſoꝛe all the nert werke after, fu I will courſe pou, aſwell as

Alter a little ſllence betwirt them; thee aſked her filters, that

That Smacke was with her in the moming when ſhe was tn her

- RY >

* 6 AE

bs told me that 2 wllln neuer come eat meragalne, and deter bs
conuneth againe, then he ſaith he will kill hun: but he ſaid to me, il
vou will goe fo ſome friendes houſe, and ſtaie there all the werke,
then cu hall be well, and eſcape this ſicke werke: but I tolde hun
ſaid ſhee, that J had no friends houſe to goe vnto, noꝛ to none Þ
would go to, do he what he would, then he willed me to goto Som .
merſom (which is a towne two miles from Warboys, where ſome⸗
times the hath been, with an vncle of hers, ſince her firſt viſitation
in this ſoꝛte and ben very well) but J maruell ſaid ſhee, how hee
knoweth Sommerſom, J think he knowech all the Countrep ouer,
but J told hun that 3 would not once ſtirre my fete ont of the
doꝛe foꝛ him, doe he what he could. Then her fi ſters acked when
Smack Would come againe. She ſaid, that he told her, that he would
come ſone at night after ſupper. In the meane time certaine ſtran⸗
gers came in, who were deſirous to ſe her out of her fit, which was
done by the charge ol Agnes Samuel: am?1y,as the was a Witch
and conſented tothe death of the Lady Crumwel, t. At night a lit⸗
tle befoꝛe ſupper ſhe fell into her fit againe, and ſo continued til ſup⸗
per was ended. When the company were riſen from the boꝛd, and
ſet by the fire, Smack came to her againe, and talked with her about
thoſe fits, which the ſhould haue the next werk, ſaping that he could
nat doe withall, except ſhe would goe from home. She ſaid that
ſhe would not, and therefoze willed him to doe his woꝛſk. Then
ſaid he, when was Catch with you:? She told him that Catch was
there to dap, and thꝛeatned to puntlh her the next week with won⸗
derfall ſick fits, becauſe he ſaid, that J had cauſed pon to bꝛeake his
leg, but J hope ſaid ſhe, that you wil bꝛeake his neck alſo, and ſome
body will bꝛeake pours, foꝛ vou are all naught. Smack anſwered,
that he would caurſe Catch foꝛ it, and warrant her that hee would |
neuer tome againe ta her when he had done with him. Then laid
ſhe, tell me when ſhall my fits begin, and when ſhall they end: he
ſaid, that on munday next in the moꝛning they mut begin, and end
that day ſennight in the moꝛning. You will haue a whole werk be⸗
Ike (laid che) pea ſaid he, it mult be ſo,x you ſhal be ſoꝛe in pour bo⸗
dy the next weeke after. On Saterday which was the next dap, ſge
had diuers fits, and was bꝛought out of them by Agnes Samuels :-
charge, ⁊ ſo likewiſe onthe Sunday. When Pundap came which
was the dap appointed fo2 the beginning eftheſe troubleſome fits,

it kept pz _ why her, foz in the moꝛning ſhe —
\ cke

ficke and euill at eaſe, hauing her perten ſences,as it was alſo foꝛe⸗
told that che ſhould haue, and ſa continued allthe wæke: the maner
whereof, hcreafter ſhall bee declared; becauſe certaine accidents
woꝛthy the remembzance-befell ſome other of her ſiſters in this
werke, which ſhall firſt haue their place. e

Piſtreſſe Elizabeth one of theſe childꝛen and befoꝛe ſpoken of,

was all this weeke troubled with very ſodaine and extrao2dinarte

fits, foꝛ ſhe was t witched and w2ong in her body moꝛe grienouſls

this werke, then ſhe was many moneths befoꝛe, which violent paſſlons in her made vs conied ure, that there was ſome extraoꝛdina⸗
ry matter in woꝛking: foꝛ it could not be that ſuch violence ſhould

continue long, foꝛ if it had, it could not but haue coſt her her life.

And to paſſe ouer many matters of ſtrangeneſſe, which befell in
that werke, wee will come to Saterday which was the tenth of
arch: on which dap as this child ſate at ſupper, it ſhould ſeeme by
the manifold ſignes ſhe made with her handes and head, and by her
humming with her vopte, that ſhee would faine haue ſpoken to
ſomething that #od on the table, but ſhe could not, her mouth was

hut vp. Then ſher began to lament marueilous bitterly a god

ſpate, yet tould not declare her griefe. Dane after, ſhe ſell into a

moſt troubleſome fit, which would not ſuffer her to ſit on her ſtwle.

Then the maide Agnes Samuel, was willed to hold her, which thee
did: and after a while hee beganne to growe moꝛe quiet. And
another of her ſiſters younger then thee, Grace hy name, was

moꝛe troubled then ſhes was, ſo Nan Samuel ſet do wne the one, and

todke vp the other, and as ſhee was holding this Piſtreſſe Grace:

in her armes, the other childe miſtreſle liz abech that late hard by

her, ſaid on the ſudden in amarueilousnger to her, now J can ſe@
the young Witch which J could neuer doe befoꝛe ſince ſhee came

to the houſe in mpfit, The company that ſate at ſapper, thought

that there was wane extraoꝛdinary matter in woꝛking, that the
childe ſhould call the yung maid Mitch, fo? it was neuer heard by

any body, that euer ſhes gaue either her oꝛ her mother, any eulil

woꝛd befaze, either in her fit oꝛout ot her fit: pꝛeſently che laid to
her, myſiſter Ioanes diuell told mee euen no was ſate at ſupper,
that J muff ſcratch the youg Witch, Se ſone as euer ſhe had ſaid
ſo, ſhee ſlipped from the bench whereon ſhe ſate, and fell vpon her

Knees, foꝛ ſhe was not able to ſtũd. t caught i maide by ß hand that

tod hard by her, holding ak her ſicter, r ſeratched one ol her hands
or! „ F

4
* **

«

.

' .
29

*

* 820 4
a *% — coed. — — —„VT ——y—ͤ—ͤ—. - - EOS
— 1 - A

; as «

yy — tet een — I. * »* "Ks we
Arai mente 2!

motk fiercely to ſer, with both her — we that it tons hs

that bad bewitched her and all her ſiffers, and ſhee had been well
long fince but foꝛ ber. O thou pong Witch, O thou pong Much,
fie vpon thee, ſte vpon thee, who euer heard ofa poung Witch bes
foze 2 and thus ſhee cryed with ſuch vehemencie of ſpeech, and ea⸗
gerneſſe ol ſcratching, as that both her bꝛeath and fkrength fayled
her. Mhen ſhe had bzeatheda while, ſhe fell vpon her againe, and
ſaid that this was her ſiſter Ioancs diuell who vſeth not to lye, that
made her to ſcratch her, fo2 ſaid ſhee, I would not haue ſcratched
vou, and it was full euill againſt my wil to doe it, but the diuel mas
keth me to ſcratch von, ſtretching toꝛth mine armes, and bending
my fingers, otherwiſe J would not doe it, but J muſk doe it, and
ſo muſt all my ſiſters ſcratch vou, though they bee neuer ſo vnwil⸗
ling to doe it, as my ſelle now am, theſe woꝛds ſhe vttered and ma⸗
ny moe, to the like ef d, in that time wherein ſhe ſcratched her. Al
this time the made held the other childe in her armes ſtill, neuer
once offering to pluck away her hand from her, but cried out very
pittifully, deſiring the Loꝛde to thinke vpon her. Then did one
that ſteod by, demaund of her, and willed her to ſpeake her minde
as the thought, whether the childe did ſcratch her of her owne will
and deſtre oꝛ not. She anſwwered, that ſhe thought ſhe did not, nav
ſäaith ſhee, Jknowe ſhee did not, and that it is no part of her will
thus to ſeratch me. The childe when ſhee was wearie the ſecond
time with ſcratehing of her, on the ſuddaine put fo2th both her
handes, and ſaide looke yon here, the dinell ſaith, that J muft
ſcratch her no moze now, fo2 my fingers are th2uft foozth ſo
fkratght, that I cannot bend them, andſo it appeared that thep
were, fo2 thee held foozth her hand, and her fingers were verie
ſcraight and ſkiffe, then thee rubbed her hand vpon the maides
hand that bled a little, and wiped the blood vpon her owne hands,
and this the childe did oftentimes, while thee talked with her.
P3zeſently vpon the ſcratching ended, the childe beganne to werpe,
inſemuch that many teares fell from her eyes, and cryed mar⸗
uellous bitterly, and ſaid to the maide, J would not in anp wiſe

haue ſcratched on, but the diuell made mee; and foꝛted mee whe⸗
ther J would oꝛ not, oh that vou neuer had deſerued to bee thus
vſed, and her manner of complaining was, as if thee had committed ſome great offence. When this weeping fit was ſomething
aTw:ged, th:ebeganne to erboꝛt her, __ vp her aa with

ſuch

verily thinke, the like was neuer heard to come foo2th of a childes
mouth, It is not pollible to ſet downs all the woꝛds of exhoꝛtati⸗
on ſhe ſpake vnto the maide at that time, but theſe were ſome of
them, and the veric woꝛds ſo nere as could bee remembꝛed. Oh

that thou hadſf grace to repent the ol thy wickedneſſe, that thy

ſoule might beſaued:fo2 thou haſt foꝛſaken thy God, and giuen thy
ſelt to the diuel. Oh that thou diddeſt knowe what a pꝛecious thing
thy ſoule was, thou wouldſt neuer then ſo lightly haue parted with
il:thou hadſt neede to pꝛay night and day, to get Gods fauour againe, other wiſe thy ſoule ſhal be damned in hel fire foz euer. Thou
ddeſt oftentimes pꝛay here at home, when we pꝛap, and like wiſe at
Church, but thou pꝛapeſt in vaine, becauſe thou pꝛayeſt not with
thy heart, but J will pꝛay foꝛ thee with all mine heart, and J will
foꝛgiue thee, and deſire all my ſiſters, and all my friends to foꝛgine
ther, ir thou wilt confele thy fault, but thou haſt an hard heart ſaid
ſhe) and the diuel holdeth thy heart, and will not ſuffer ther to con⸗
feſſe it, but thou muſt confelle it whether thou wilt oz no, when
thy time is come. But oh that thou wouldeſt now confeſſe it, that
thy ſoule might be ſaued. Theſe woꝛds when ſhe vſed them (as ſhe
did often) ſhee would thꝛer tines at the leaſt repeate them oucr,
with ſuch vehemẽcy, as that it was ſtrange to bedr, z ſhe would
neuer leaue vttering of them ſo long as her bzeath would ſerue.
Then did the tel her my ſiſter Ioanes diuel ſtandeth here befoꝛe my
fate, and pointed with her finger to the place, and telleth me that in
deſpight cf ther thou ſhalt one day confefle if, oꝛ elſe thou ſhalt bee
hariged,foz befoze thou daeſt confeſſett,0zbehanged, wee ſhall not
be well: but ifthou wouldeſt euen no w conkeſſe it, we ſhall be pꝛe⸗

ſently wel, deſie now therefoze the dinell, and confeſſeit, that God

may fozgiue thee, and that thy ſoule may be ſaued. Jf thou wouldſt
thinke (ſaid ſhee) ok the toꝛments ot hell, and that thy ſoule mul
burne in hell fire, except thou doſt tonteſle and repent, then thon
wouldft not now ſtand ſo ffiffely in the deniall of it as thou doeſt:

but thou art a wicked child, and thou haff bern a Mitch this foure
oꝛ fine peares and moꝛe, thou haſt done moꝛe hurt then to mee and
iny ſiſters, foꝛ thou haſt killed my Ladie Crumwel and moe. The
diuell that ſfandeth here telleth me lo, and thou wouldeſt haue kil⸗
led my ſiſter Ioane in this her ſick werke, but God wil not let thre,
what a wicked heart haſt thou that — will content the but

\

duch behernencleanddeſirefo2 heramendment, as that wee may |

*
.
-
vw _= .
3 — 2 —
— n . * —
—— ꝑ ! ( * —
1 ——— j—— . —
— 2 _ _
— — be A ů ů —
222 nat — K "a 42 — 2. _ _- _ =

our

- OV RISE > ˖ oye Sn

our death,thou, and thy father (ald thee) were the canſe why thy
mother did denie that, which ſhe didonceconfefſe, ſhee was in 4
god way, and would neuer haue gone fröͤ her wozds;had not vou
and pour father ben, and if your mothers ſoule be damned, vou and
pour father muſt anſwere foꝛ it, with many ſuch like ſperches, foz
pour mother (ſapd ſhe) had canfelled a truth, and was ſoꝛp foz her
naughtineſſe,cuery body had koꝛgiuen her, and would haue pꝛaped
foz her:oh that ſhe had neuer gone home, that her ſoule might haue
beene ſaued, thy mother is a Mitch, thy father is a Witch, and
thou art a Witch, but of all the thꝛer thou art the woꝛſt. Thy
mother would neuer haue done ſo much hurt as ſhe hath done, but
foꝛ the, and ſo the diuell hath tolde me, thou wicked childe, thou
art a wicked child, the Loꝛd gine thee grace toconfeſſe, and to repet
that thy ſoule may be ſaued. Oh that thy father were nowe here,
fo2 y diuel now ſaith that A ſhuld ſcratch him alſo, he is a witch a a
naughtie man, Oh that he were here, that he might heare me now
ſpeake to him. The two of the childes Uncles, . Iohn Pickering,
and M. Henry Pickering, being there pꝛeſent were intreated of the
childes father to ſe if they could by any meanes, pꝛocure olde Samuel to come to the houſe, but it was thought by the company to be
à labour loſt befoze they went, the mã was of ſo churliſh a nature,
and al waies ſo hardly dꝛawen! to the houſe: notwithfanding they
went, and when they had gone twentie paces from the houſe, they
did perceiue the ſame man to be comming alone very kaſt towards
the houſe, ſo they agreed to paſſe by him in ſilence, to ſee whether he
ment to goe, the man went directly to P. Throckmortons houſe,
which they perceiuing, followed him backe againe, and were as
readp to goe into the houſe as hee, when they were come into the
hal, and were euen at the doꝛe ready to goe into the parlour where
the child and the other company were: the childe ſayth of her ſelfe,
he is come, he is come, J will goe ſcrateh him, ſo ſhee pꝛeſſed foꝛ⸗
wards on her kners {fo2 the had no vſe ol her legges) towards the
parlour dwze as if ſhe would goe to him, pet this is moſt certaine,
that ſhe was then in ſuch a place of the parlour as that ſhee could
not ſ& anypart of the hall, and therefoꝛe not the man. Then .
Doctoꝛ Dorington being in pꝛeſence, perceiuing the childe ſo to goe
on her knees ſtayed her, and cauſed the man to be called into the
parlour, when he came in, the {fill pꝛeſlſed to goe towards him, and
laide J mult ſcratch him, J mutt ſcratch Pn the _ the
opped

TR _ , e a 8 EY . r 10 V v4 Tu . Jet 1. 4 1,9 ir 58 At 353 Ko f *
ckopped, ſaying, I muſt not ſcrateh him, joke you here, and ſhewed

her hands how her fingers were that vp cloſe together, it he has
been here euen now (ſayth ſhe) the diuell ſayth A ſhould haue ſcratched him, but now J muff not. Then Maſter Throckmorton, the
childs father, demaunded of the man Tohn Samuel, whp he came to
his houſe: he anſwered that one in 5ᷣ field told him that his daugh⸗

ter was ſicke and therefoꝛe he came. Then Maſter Throckmorton and Paſter Docto2 Dorington charged him to tell the trueth
who it was and not to lye, as he would anſwere it: he anſwered
that he would not tell them, notwithſtanding they vꝛged him: at
length he ſayd, that his bꝛothers daughter came to his houſe and

told him, that ſhe ſaw maffer Docoz Dorington ꝭ maſtr Throck-
- mortons man come to this houſe together, and then he thinking
that there was ſome thing to doe about his daughter, came there⸗
foꝛe to ſe the matter: but this was thought of the companie to be
no ſufficient cauſe to bʒing him to the houſe, whereas befo2e hee
could not be gotten to come without a pꝛecept from the Juſtices.
The childe continued ſtül crying out vpon him and ſayd, that he
was anaugbtie man, and a Mitch, and but foꝛ him and his daugh⸗

ter, his wines ſoule might haue ben laued, and therefoꝛe he muſt
anſwere fo? it befoꝛe GO D one dap, and ſo repeated ouer againe

many of her ſpeches to him, which befoze ſhee had ſaid to his
daughter, exhoꝛting him to pꝛapers, and to aſke God foꝛgiuenes.
The man was ſo rude in his behauiour, and ſo lowde in his (peches, that the child could not be heard foꝛ him: His anſwers to the
childe were, that ſhe lyed, and ſo did all the companie, in ſaying hee
was a Mitch, and he ſayd that ſhe had been taught her teſfons
well enough, and that ſhe was aboue ſeuen peares olde, though
tnd&ede ſhe was not twice ſcuen) with many ſuch like ſpeeches, and
would not bee ſilent, noꝛ ſuffer tbe childe to ſpeake fo2 any thing
vritill he was almoſt foꝛced vnto it by the childes father, although
he might perceiue very well, as alſo did all the tompanie, that the
childe could not heare him, noꝛ anſwere to any of his ſpeeches,
neither pet ſtayed her woꝛdes at his talking, in any thing ſhe iu⸗
tended to ſpeake to hun, although he greatly interrupted the ſanie,
if ſhe could haue heard him, bat the. neither heard him noꝛ ante

other in the companie, pet ſhee ſawe him and his daughter, and
not anie other. Towards the ende when the childe had thus er⸗

hoꝛted the father and the foz the ſpace of an hourc and
5 . an

——— ÜMů—J2—„—

—
PR. > ove,

”_
2 8 8 j 2 * -
2 — —Uü w — ——_. = — — en —
— = —_——

7 f ; f he. . oy & > i 1 TO 3 2 2 . 8 ; * :

an halfe: maſfer A ll the — s folde the man
Iohn Samuel, that his daughter Agnes, by a charge which ſhe had,
commaunded the Spirites to depart from his childzen, and they
had departed, he therefoze willedhim to vſe the ſame woꝛds which
bis daughter befoze had vſed, to ſee what would come of it: hee
ſayd that he would not, neither ſhould any make him to ſpeake
them,andhe wouldnot bebzought to it foz any thing. Then did
maſter Throckmorton tell him, that ſeeing he came to his honſe vnſent foꝛ, he ſhould not depart vntill he had ſpoken them, ſo long as
the child continued in her fit, if it were this werke befoze ſhe came
foꝛth. Then did maſter Dacto2 Doringron (the rather to bʒzing
him on) ſpeake the woꝛds befo2ze him, ſo did alſo two oz thꝛe of his
neighbours, honeſt men in the towne, that were then pꝛeſent and
ſawe all theſe matters in the childe, but this would not perſwade
the man, vntill in the ende he perceiued that maſter Throckmorton
was reſolute, not to ſuffer him to depart vntil he had ſpoken them,
then he begun to ſpeake them as he was taught by maſfer Throckmorton, the woꝛds were theſe: As J am a Mitch, and conſenting
to the death of the Ladie Cromwell, ſo J charge the ſpirit to depart
from Miſtreſſe Elizabeth Throckmorton at this pꝛeſent, and to ſuffer her to be well. The man had noſoner ſpoken the woꝛds, but
the childe pꝛeſently aroſe, and was very well, marueiling to ſer
ſuch companie there. Then was the child al kedif the knew of any thing which ſhe had done o2fapd, and diuers particutars were
named vnto her, dut ſhe knew of no ſuch thing, ſaving that ſhe had
been a flcepe , and was readie to weepe becauſe they charged her
with ſuch things:ſo the companie departed, and ſhe went to bed,
being very well.

It nob followeth to declare how miſtreſle Ioane Throckmorton
was handled in this pꝛeſent werke paſt, which was that ſicke
werke of fittes thꝛeatned to her beloꝛe by the Spirit. On Sunday
which was the day befoꝛe, ſhe was lightſome, and had no fit at all,
laping that ſhe was very well, vet no bodie would tell Her of the
ficke fits which was thꝛeatned to befall her the next dap: ſo ſhe
went to bed very merrte and chearefull, ſaving, that ſhe apled nos
thing at all, ſhe thanked GOD. The next moꝛning which was
Munday, when the awakened there was found a great change in
her, foꝛ then ſhe complapned of euerie part of her bodie, ſaving,

that ſhe was marueilous full ofpayne, elpeclally in her head and
ſto⸗

—— »mõu A.
ſTomack, and that there wasſome thing vnder her ſides which did
fo twitch and wzingher, that the could not fetch her bꝛeath. All
that dax, as likewiſe all y werke following ſhe was molt ſtrangely
tozmented, crying out of extreame payne in all parts ot her, her
ffomack was taken from her, ſo that ſhe eate al that werke ſcarce⸗

ty ſo much as might be thought ſuffictent ta ſuſtaine nature, her
legs were erceeding ſoze and full of payne, hauing littte oꝛ no vſe

of them all that werke, her hands were continually cold x benum⸗
med, but her greateſt and continuall payne lay in her head, which
cauſed her to take marueilous vnquiet reit, foꝛ ſhe did nothing but
crie and grone the moſt part of the nights thꝛoughout that werke,
neither reſting her ſclfe noꝛ ſuffering any others to reſt that lay
neere her. Now beſides this generall and continuall payne in her
bodp, ſhe had diners fits euery day, and like wiſe in the night time,
ſuch as wherein no man that ſawe her, thought ſhe ſhould haue
eſcaped with her life: fo2 ſhe would Ive vpon her bed ſcriching and
ſuddenly ſtarting an houre together, and ſometimes foure oz fine
houres without any infermiMon, other whiles ſhe would lve as
one in a ſwoune oꝛ trance, holding her bꝛeath a quarter ot an houre
and ſoinetimes longer, in ſuch ſoꝛt as that it could neither bee felt
no2 perceiued that ſhe bꝛeathed at all foꝛ the time, pet in the end ſhe
would ariſe vp with her belly, and fetch a maruellous derpe figh,
t a lowd doleful grone, as if ſhe had bin gaſping foꝛ her laſt bꝛeath:
and this kinde ol fit was moſt vſuall with her night and day, and
would hold her the longeſt of any other, ⁊ alwaies the longer whe
anpofher friends oz other company ſtode by and comipꝛted her:
ſometimes it would riſe vp into her head, and there reffing a while
it would rayſe vp her body, and her head very ſtrongly, vntill al⸗
moſt ſhe ſtode vpꝛight, yet with ſuch ſtrength, as that it was not
poſſible foꝛ any man to hold her downe. In which fit ſhe was de⸗
ſirous to haue her head holden, otherwiſe hee ſatde that it would

riue her head in ſunder, and al wayes a little befoꝛe ſhee felt the fit -

comming, the would ſay hold, and all the luhile ſhe was in riſing
with her body, it would hold her bꝛeath, vntil che came to the high⸗
eſt, and then would ſhe fetch a great groane, and with a ſodaine

downelall ſettle her ſelf in the chaire againe, andhowfoener al the

werke ſhe was in this continual daunger, and had her life in her
hands cuery houre ready to peld it vp, vet᷑on Saturday all the day
long, but eſpecially inthe night ſhe was in the greateſt hazard ther⸗

„„ L 3 of,

— — "-

— — ͤ6ᷓ—ͤJ— —„-„—½
EPP —— ——— — — — . —

e een oct
okt, foz then did her parents, and other that withed well vnto her?
think that the ſhould neuer haue feen the day light:ſuchand ſo ma⸗
ny were her ertreame fits + dangerous perplexities! inthat night,
but it pleaſed God, a little befoze moꝛning to giue her ſome better
reit, and this was ſome god hope, and comfoꝛt that her parents
and other her friends had in reſpec of the ſafety ok her life, foꝛ that
both ſhe her ſelfe, and otber alſo or her ſiſters had heretofoꝛe ſayde
being in their fits, that Nan Samuel would haue had the dinell to
kill her this werke, as the hath done the Lady Crum wel, bat God
wil not ſuffer him. But in al theſe extremittes this is moll certain,
that all the werke long ſhe had the perten vſe of her ſences as the
ſpirite had told her that ſhe ſhould haue, and was able to diſcerne
one thing from another, and to make anſwereto any queſtion that
was aſked at any time (except then when her bꝛeath was ſtopped
and while ſhe continued as one in a ſwoune:) but being aſked after wards if ſhe the heard, ſhe anſwered that ſhe did al waies heare,
but ſhe could not ſometimes ſpeake, becauſe her bꝛeath was ſtop
ped. And this was a thing noted in her that werke, that ſhee could
neuer abide that Nan Samuel ſhould abide in her company,o2 com?
into her ſight, oz once to heare her named, vet ſhe would ſay, that
ſhe could not tell foꝛ what cauſe it was, but it ſhould ſeeme there
was ſome ſecret matter in it, foꝛ whenſoeuer, and how long ſoeuer
the ſtaped with her ſhe was al waies the moze ſtrongly delt with⸗
all and the moꝛe grienouſly troubled.

When the ſennight was ended, and Munday moꝛning came a⸗
gaine, che ſapd that ſhe felt her ſelf reaſonable well, and all that day
the had no it at all, onely ſhe ſayd, that ſhee was very ſoꝛe in her
body and in her legs, as if ſhe had been beaten with ſtrokes. Al this
werke following ſhe continued reaſonable well, yet not without
manp fits and great ſoꝛenes in her legs, eſpecially towards night,
as it was common with them all to be alwates woꝛſt at night.

On Mundap after that which was the nintenth of March a lit⸗
tle befo2e ſupper ſhe fell into her fit, and when ſupper was ended,
Smack came vnto her againe, to whonrthe pꝛeſently ſapd, J truſt
God will one day reuenge me on pou, and all pour company, fo2
- thus puniſhing ol me and my Siffers : why ſayd he,hadyoua ſick
werke ok it? It is no matter to you ſaid ſhe:why I tolde pou ſaid he,
that J could not helpe it, except you woulde haue gone abꝛoad

_ toſoniefriends honſe: goe pou, ſayd the, whether you will, FG
wha

what yon can, will not ſtur my fote out ofvozes fo pour pleaſure,foz Jknow you would k fil me if vou could, and pou vſe al the
meanes vou can both to kill me and my ſiſtera, but J truſt G
will not giue pon leaue, and if he doth Jam well contented with⸗
all, foꝛ J had rather bee dead then to liue in this continuall paine,
and not able to ſtand oꝛ gae: many moe ſuch like ſperches they had
together, anon ſhe ſapd, vou haue often times tolde mee, that I
ſhould ſcratch the young witch befoze the Alliſes, now tel me when
ſhall it be? Foz J would faine ſcratch her, Jcannot abide her now
of late, whatſoeuer the matter is, J think God hath ſet my heart
againſt her, foꝛ I cannot eate mymeate, it ſhee ſtande befoze me,
it ſo goeth againſt my ſfomacke, and pet J cannot tell wherefoze,
but tel me laid ſhe, on what dap ſhall I ſcratch her;! he told her that
the ſhould ſcratch her two oꝛ thꝛe dayes befoze the Alliſes: tellme
ſaid ſhe, on which day ſhall it be? Foz J will neuer bel&ene vou: her
told her that it ſhould be on Punday befoze the Aſſiſes which was
that day foꝛtnight: well ſaid ſhe, loke khat it be,fo2 J will kerpe my
nailes vnpared foꝛ her, I will ſcratch one ſide foꝛ myſelfe ſaid ſhe,
and the other foz my Aunt Pickering, this her Aunt is wife to M.
Iohn Pickering of Ellington in the countie of Huntington, who was
one of the twelue, that. were bewitched, and hath been moſt grie⸗
noully tozmented with paine and bꝛeaking out in her legs, as that
the& is not able to go. Mell ſaid ꝙiſtreſle Ioane to Smacke, J will
ſurelp lay it on whenſoener I ſcratch her, that all the woꝛld may
ſe that ſhe is a Mitch. Then laid Smack, they that thinke other⸗
wiſe of her are deceiued, and that J will pꝛone: will you p2wne it,
ſaid ſhe: how will vou pꝛoue it? By compelling vou to ſcratch her.
Mill vou compel me, ſaid ſhe? why then J wil not ſcratch her. But
vou ſhall ſcratch her ſaid he: ſo they had many woꝛds about it, in
the end ſheſaid that inderde ſhe had a god will to ſcratch her, but
vet ſhe will not ſcratch her if ſhee can otherwiſe choſe , but
Smacke ſaide that ſhe muſt ſcratch her as well as her other ſiſters
had done andmulk doe, fo2 there are pet two behinde that muſt
ſcratch her. When they had ended their talke, ſhe called fo2 Agnes Samuel and ſaid that ſhe ſhould not come fo2th of her fit, vntill
ſhe had charged the ſpirit todepart,which the maiddid,and ſhe was
pꝛeſently wel. Mithin 2.dape safter , Miſtris Grace, the pongeſt
of all thoſe fine ſiſters, as ſhee ſate in the maides armes, in a very:
troubleſome fit,on the lodaine fell onſcratching ol the mais hand,
mars

— Pee

de Arrs Met ine To
marueflons fiercely to fie b but was FR ety Rake, her month
was ſhut vp: pet did ſhe grone and wepe greatlp as if ſhe had bin
doing of ſome thing againſt her wil, but ſuch was the childes ſhoꝛt
nailes and want ol ſtrength, that ſhe could not once ripple the ſkin
of the back of her hands, Ok this childe there are not many things
noted, becauſe foꝛ the moſt part her mouth was ſhut vp during the
time of her fits, pet had ſhe very many moſt grieuous t troubleſom
fits : fo ſhe hath ſic in a chaire, oꝛ on a ſtole by the fire ſide, ſome
times a whole day together, groning and weeping moſt lamenta⸗
ble to ſee, and was neuer cleare from her fits ſince the firſt begin⸗
ning.

On the next Sabbaoth dap which was the 25. ol Parch at night
when ſupper was ended, M iſtreſſe Ioan fell into her fit, as ſhe had
many fits that werke, but Smack neuer came vnto her to talke vn⸗
till now : So it ſhould ſceme that he talked with her a god while
befoze ſhe would either ſ&eme to liſten, oꝛ giue anſwere to him,
pet it might eaſily bee perceined by her countenance and geſture
that ſome thing talked with her, fo2 the would turne away her
face and ſhake her head, as if the liked not of it: on the ſodaine ſher
ſapd go to, if this be true that pou ſav, let vs ſe what pou will doe.
So miftris loane called foz her ſiſter Elizabeth who was likewiſe
in her fit, and told her that Smack was come, and will now tell her
many thingsſbefoze Nan Samuels face: Smack, faith ſhe, calleth her
nothing but pong Mitch to begin withall, belike he is angry with
her: Therfoꝛe ſhe called foꝛ Nan Samuel, and told her that ſhcmuſt
be pꝛeſent and heare what Smack will ſay to her, pet ſapth ſhee I
cannot heare pou, but I can ſe vou: By and by ſhe ſapd Smacke
ſapth that yon muſt ſay theſe woꝛdes, and J ſhal pꝛeſently come
fwꝛth of my fit, bat I ſhall fall into it agayne, and ſhall haue many
fits to night, and come foꝛthol them againe at pour ſpeeches, the
woꝛds which the mayde muſk firſt ſpeake are theſe: As J am a
Titch and would haue bewitched Pilfris loan Throckmorton to
death in her laſt werke of great ſickneſſe, ſo I charge the ſpirit to
depart and to ſuffer her to be well at this pꝛeſent: So ſone as ſhe
had vtteredthein, iſtris Joan came pꝛeſently out of her fit and
was well, and being ready to ariſe ſhe ſodaincly fell downe into
her fit gaine, ſo reſting a while ſhee ſapde fo her, the thing ſaith
that you muſt ſay, as Jam a Witch, and haue be witched Piſtris
Pickering of Elling gron ſincemp mother hath confeſſed, ſo to
the

and I ſhaltbe well fer the thine

- theſpirit to departe fromme, and
(fatd ſhe) that mine Aunt Pickering hould hane berne — befoze

this time, had not you bewitched herngaine ſince pour mother
confeſſed. Alas god Aunt Pickering (ſapd the). what b. barme bane
vou done toany of then that theydhould ble pouin this ſoꝛt, and
with that ſhe fell into bitter werping loꝛ her, inſomuch that they

weptn the willedthemapde to ble that charge, after which ved

the

in her fit againe : then faydPiftcelſeloanc to the mayde, the ſpi⸗
rit ſaith that pou muſt ſay, as would haue bewitched Piltrelte
Ioan Throckmorton lame, ſince Itnuld not be wilch her to death,
as J would haue done in her laſt werke ol great ficknes, ſo charge
the ſpirit to depart from me, and I ſhall be well, and pꝛeſentiy fall
into my fit agayne, all which was then done, and pzeſently found
true: Then ſayd miſtreſſe Ioan, the ſpirit ſt th that vou haue be⸗

witched all my Aﬀers ouer againe, ſince pour motherconfefſed;o2 ü

elſe they had been now well, and to pzwne this tobe true, vou mut
charge the ſpirit to depart fromme . haue bewitched chem al
ſeuerallp, and J mut hatte ſo many/feacrall fits, and rome out of
them at your ſeueral charges ſo che uu —— —
ter the other, ſaping, as J haue bew
_— ſince eee confeſſed lo

as well as my ſiſter Iane is, 12 — . to the
maide)ſhall name GO D; op Jeſus Thallt, 02 aygad worke,

although A cannot heare poli, pet hedvthheire pon, and hee: will
make me ſtarte. Then M. Throckmortod,with others that were

then in compante, perceining the ſpirtte to be willing toderlareſs
many things of the made. Wales her to- charge the ſpirite in the
name of God to anſwere her to certatne queſtions, which. cher
ſhould alle it and not to lye, the mapde gaue that charge to the ſpf>
rite, the ſpirtt ſapd to PiltreſeToan, the young witch (10: lo his
in all this talke + andſptd, bath talled her) chargeth me to tell thy
trueth in certaine I Hall alte me. J, 22 8

that ſtode by could not retraine from teares, when ſhe had dune
was wel, but didriofjonglocontinite,fos the was ſtraigbt way

. YI.

IM ttrelle joan, and ſ that you doe tell the truth, and not lye in a anp

one thing, the ſpirit anſwered that he doth not vſe to tell ſo manp
lves, as the young witch doth, which woꝛds iſtreſle loan repea⸗
ted ouer after the ſpirit. Then ſayd P. Throckmorton to the maid,
charge the ſptrite to tell vou in what parte of pour body Hiltreſſe
Ioan ſhall ſcratch pou, which the maid did,and the ſpirit ſaid to Pi⸗
ſtreſſe Ioan, the young witch would know in what part of her bo⸗
dy vou ſhal ſcratch her: Yea ſayd Piſtris Ioan, in what part of her
bodie ſhal I ſcratch her, the ſpirit anfwered,you ſhalſcratch her on
her face, the right cheeke fo2 pour ſelfe, and the left foz pour Aunt
Pickering ol Ellington: th ſaid Piſtris Ioan, J wil ſut̃elyſtratchthe
left cherke well 0 mine Aunt if that will doe her any god,
howſocuer J doe foꝛ my ſelfe : yea ſayd the ſpirit doe ſo, and the
young witch were as god to take it patientip at the firſt, foz pou
ſhall haue your pennywozth of her befoze you haue done: : Then
the mayd was willed to aſke the ſpirit whether her mother would
confeſſe at the Aſſiſes, all that ſhe hath already confeſſed; the ſpirit
ſayde the yormg witch aſketh ec. the anſwere which the ſpirite
made to this queſtion was, that the olde witch would confefſe al a⸗
gaine at the Aſliſes, if che badno euil counſell, and coufelle alſo that
this young witch ber daughter, is a wozſe witch then her ſelfe, foz
ſaid the ſpiritto Miſtteſſe Ioan: (which woꝛds the did in oꝛder re⸗
peate alter the ſpirit) when the old witch had bewitched the Lady
Crumwel, and wand haue vnwitched her againc and could not,
ſhe put it to her huſtemd, and hade him help her, and when he could
notzhe put iar this xvoung witch his daughter, and when ſhe could
ni hein ben neither, then ſhe eounſelled her mother to kil her, And
to pꝛoue ſayth the ſpirit to Miſtreſſe Ioan, that all this is true, wheſoeuer any ſtrangers come to this houſe befa2e the Aſſes, youſhal
fall into pour ſit, and yau ſhall haue thzee ſeyerall fittes, and ſhall
tome out of tbemat thꝛegſeuerall charges bythe poung witch: the
firſt charge that ſhe muſt vſe is, as ſhe is a witch, & a wozſer witch
then her mother in conſentin g to the death of the Ladie Crumwel,
ſo I charge the ſpirite ta depart, and you ſhall be well: the ſecond
ts,as hee hath bewitched Piffrefle Pickering of Ellington ſince
ber mother confeſſed: and the third is as ſhe would haue be wit⸗
ched Miſtreſſe Ioan Throckmorton to death, in her laſt werke of
great ſickneſſe, after which yon ſhall be well: So the mayde vſed
thoſe thꝛer ſeuerall charges to Piltrefſe Ioan at that time, 1
8 ET E

che kame fatty of thick ſeuerall fttes, and pieſehtls Mint
fitte againe. Thenthe mard was willedts-alke the Pult whe⸗
ther Miſtreſle loan ſhould haue thele fits b#foze the Lo2d 2 5
if the were carryed to the Alliſes: the ſpirit ſayd to Bittet
the young witch would know xc. yea ſaid ꝙiſtreſte Lean he
ſhall J haue nw ts befoze the Lozd 5 Kor — ä
ſwered that ſhe ſhould haue her ſüts dpon 1
the Judges und allthe fits Nam foe nf |
was the matd willedtoaſke whether miſfrislointhout6 hate any
moe fits after the Aſſiſes;theſptritanſiwered to Antes 1 itt
the ſame ſoꝛte which he vſcd zefo2 eee ed
ny fits after the 'Aiſgs, und thnt neither chte pduͤng
nd her mother; no an. kinn of thut val
her after the. Ales tap; ThebrMthapd' mas afl + .
the ſame queſtion foꝛ her ſiſtets h ihduld dee ee
Aſſuiſes, cbeſpirite ſaid that he would not imiwere to chat aue ktm,

*
*
155

ping that her ſiſter Ianes ſpirit ſhouſd dicse that chung then

the made mais allen ta aſkttheſpwitoHew l
mother hMattherfirſtg marhentume evg thenidll'fe ier And
which enery ane af thrchildaen hau auth it Ning other
The ſpirit crepeating ouet themes wozds aa eff BAY
anſwered direaly, thut the ald duoman W deen
them ola ſtrange man, ma mas vo dead ian m
not teil: ThenamesalthrPulngweter
Ioab underſtode theque tion thun Svexfywlotiwee!?
ber ſelke of te ſpiriv what cher thinight Ui 5 hebe Werr hi
which were called by the name of Smackes, thefoivthPhick, 1 e
fift, Ble w, the ſirt, Catch, thoſeuenth,White;thoelghth;CaHlics.theninth, Hardnamé. Miſtreſte dan; Thrücicrio it tab Hinifelfe,' fl
who was the firſt of the!Sarzticas; iI UI WIr he
Smacke, Miſtreſſe Hlirabeth Throckmottog had
Smacke, Miſtreſſe lane had Ble w. — — the
ode woman had Hardname till with her in the e, nb det
was become of the reſt he cauld rut telle Chen wwe mayde was wil⸗
led! tonſiᷣc whether the oido!womaradrewbthew with ane!
thing on nat, the ſpirit anſwered that hee nia tte Pi
day with hadi from her chin; ping dauthet dati het S Mnne dis
oner biredeofif ſelfe tu mam hrun Tuuteh, nen ih deten God

Ti

3
4
90
45 95

* wo ,

ane ** the⸗
x: pirit

. :

;
I -

ſpirite whether the man ( ohn Samuel) was a Witch oz note The
ſpirit anſwered that he was a Witch, and would be a wozſe then
either this poung Witch is, 62 theolde Witch her mother was,
when they two are banged, foꝛ then all the ſpirites will come to
him, and he will dae moꝛe hurt then any baue pct done, foz ſaith the
irit, he bath already be witched a man anda woman, and to pꝛoue
le the poung witch ſhall charge the diuel to depart from vou at
this pielent, euenas her father hath bewitched two partiss, you
be pꝛeſentiy well: ſo Nan Samuel did, and Piltreffe Ioan was:
well, and kel into her fit againe; then miſtrefſe Ioan aſked the ſpi⸗
rit, who thole two were that the man had be witched: The ſpirite
wineredthat-he wonld not tell, except the young witch went out
fine Parlour, fo2 ſhee'muftnot heare, ſa Miſtreſſe Ioan willed:
NanSamyel:togoe ont ofthe Partour, and the ſpirite ſayde, let
her bee watched, that thee doe not heare when the ts gone. The
ſpirit toldmiſtrefleloan that it was Chappel, and his wife, which
two parties were the olde mans nert neighbours, and were at
er e and did greatiy ſaſpect
of

(elfe; and the man was faz a itt oz tiwo in the ſame
kheſe ahildꝛen were in, vet lard the thing, if Chappel will

5 Ales al ucha matter; fs they! were both of thema little bes
85
e witch well, bee may peraduenture neuer be moꝛe

99 thurmarvellouliytroubledwithbleach, the womannot
to diere
b

haue wohewhbisnecke by giuing bona fall vponthe caufie in the
ſfr&te,ashemethim;f02 he tanled on the ſodainbothhis Pactens
to he broken il he had fallen on the ſtones, as he fetlin the myꝛe,
be had bone — this taft poynt of Chappels fall was not
knowen-toany in the houſe at: that time, and miſtreſſe Ioan being
aſtedofthoſame when ſhe tame lokth ot her ft, ſaid that ſhe neuer
h vſych thing: but when it was inquired of Chappel, her

confeſſed that he had onceſuch a fall, as he met with old Sauwel in

the ſtrertes, and both bis Patteus were bꝛoken at one inſtant, and
ee kalk vponthe cauſte on the ffones;becaſt hans

mipe, hereſnhe was marneflouſly foplen, and if anathernetghe

ber bid n ben twicbhin;dehadivningredteranger, .
Thie tale was tolne h the fpirite to ꝙitreſfe Ian, and MiKits loop by repenting the ſputes Lcynes declared to themthat

— RO

ſelf in tie falling beſides tbecauſie(fozit was but riarrow into the

— n n ——

ad by, then the mayd was called into the parlott

the way that ſhe went to the Aſſiſes oz not, and whether ſhe
ſhould be better at the Aſſiſes then at home, The ſpirit anſwered,
that ſhe ſhould be better there then at home, bat it ſhould be wozle

foz the young Witch, if miſfrefſe Ioane went, and ſhe ſhould bee

well all the way ſhe went, vntillſhe had taken her chamber, and
then che ſhould fall into her fit : how true all this fell out, you ſhall
beare hereafter. The Spirit told her then againe, that ſhe ſhould
haue thꝛie ſeuerall fits vpon the Aſſiſes dap, and the pong Witch
muſt bzing her out of them, by th2& ſeuerall charges: The firſt
mult be as ſhe is a woꝛſer Witch then her mother in bewitching
the Ladie Cromwell to death: The ſecond, as ſhe hath bewitched

miſtreſſe Pickering of Ellington, ſince her mother confeſſed : And

the third, as ſhe would hane bewitched miſtreſſe Ioane Throckmorton to death in her laſt werke of great ſickneſſe: and the Spi⸗

rit ſayd all this is true, and ſhall be pꝛoued true hereafter, and in
token thereof you (ſpeaking tomilſtreffe Ioane ) ſhall be very well
all the day tomozrow, and haue neuer a fit, let the young Witch
doe what ſhe can, except ſome ſtraunger tome, and then you mut
haue thꝛæ ſeuerall fits to pꝛoue her a Mitch, and fo ou ſhall haue
them whenſoener any ſtraungers come: but this ſayth the thing
ol himſelle ( ſpeaking to miſtreſſe Toane) vou mu remember in any caſe to pare your nayles when von haue ſcratched the young
Witch. Why muſt J doe ſo ſayd ſhe: Becauſe;ſapdhe,the young:
Witches blond will ſticke on your nayles, and pou muſt burne
her bloud, leaft you bee woꝛſe afterwards. Mhy (fapd Piſftreffs
Joane)put pou me in minde of it if I chance to . it? fo will
ſayd he: then the Spirit departed, and miſffreſſe Joane ſayd that He

muſt not come foꝛth ol her fit, except Nan Samuel helpe her aut by

one of her charges, which che did, and then ſhe went to bed being

very well, and the next day continued without any fits at all, nei⸗

ther came there any ſtraungers to the houſe, On Tueſday follows
ing there came maſter Doo; Dorington, and with him one of his
— Iohn Doringtona Londoner:p:cſently after their
comming into the houſe miſtreſſe Ioane fell into her fit; Then did
they call foꝛ the mayd Nan Samuel, and one ofthecompanie willed

her to ſap the Loꝛds mayer, and her Belefe, which the did, and

wbenſoeuer the named God, oz Jeſus Cs! oꝛ the holy Ghott,

=> c— 4 —

igain, and wil⸗
led to aſke the ſpirite, whether Piftrefle Ioanc ſhould ber well in

P 3 r

. rt apt.” > ßÜ.ẽtꝛẽ⁊ ͥ Q a cpa rue ALD 4 TEES ,

miſtreſſe Ioane did maxueilouſly ſtart and ſtruggle at if, fo that ſhe.
could ſcarcely ſit vpn her ſtole: and in the ende the maid bꝛought
her out of her fit thꝛet ſeuerall times, by her th: ſeuerall charges
as the ſpirit beloꝛe had ſayd. |
The next ſtratuꝛgers that came to the houſe were maſter Henry
Cromwell, ont of Sir Henry Cromwe!s ſonnes, and with hun one
of Sir Henrie his men, and this was vpon Thurſday following
being the 29. of arch, when they came into the houſe miſtreſſe
Ioane was wel, but they had not ſtayed there a quarter of an houre
but the fell into her fitte, and was very ſaꝛe wdly handled befoꝛe
them as was alſo her ſiſter Iane, whenſocuer the mapde named
God, oꝛ Chꝛiſt Jeſus, and in the ende ſhe was bꝛought out of her
fitth2ic ſeuerall times, by thꝛe ſeuerall charges as befoze : many
ſtraungers in that werke came to the houle, and ſhe had theſe ſeue⸗
rall fits as pou ſhall heare on Punday following which was the
day appoynted fo2 ſcratching. Miſtreſſe loane fell into hex fit a
little befoze ſupper, and ſo continued al ſupper time, not being able
to ſtand on her legges: ſo ſone as thankſgining after ſupper was
beginning to bee ſayd, ſhe ſtart vp vpon her feete and came to the
table ſide, and ſtod with her ſiſters that were ſapingof grace, and
pꝛeſently when grace was ended ſhe fell vpon the maide Nan Samuel, and toke her head vnder her armes, and firſt ſcratched the
right ſide ol her cherke, and when ſhe had done that, now e(ſa ſhe)
J muſt ſcratch the left fide loꝛ mine Aunt Pickering, and ſcratcht
that alſo vntill bloud came fw2th of both ſides very aboundantlp:
the maide ſfode ſtone ſtill, and neuer once moued to goe from her,
yet cried very pitifully, deſiring the Loꝛd to be mercifull vnto her:
when ſhe had done ſcratching, miſtreſſe Ioane ſet her ſelfe vpon a
ftole,andfared as though ſhe had been out of bꝛeath, foꝛ ſhee toke
her winde maruetlons thicke, yet the mapdeneuer ſtrugled with
her, ⁊ was able to hold neuer a ioynt ofher, but trembledas it had
been a leafe, and called foꝛ a pare ofſheeres to paire her naples, but
when ſhe had them ſhe was not able to hold them in her hands, ſo
the deſtred ſome bodie to doe it foꝛ her: then M. Doctoꝛ Doringtons
wife who was her Aunt, ſtanding by her toke the ſherres t pa⸗
red her nayles, but miſtreſſe Ioane her ſelfe ſaued the nayles as her
fingers were pared, and when ſhe had done thꝛew them into the
fire, and called foꝛ ſome water to wath her hands; which after ſhe.
had done, the thꝛew the water alſs info the fire: when this was

done this miſtreſſe Ioane fell vponher knes,and willed themayde
to come and knerle downe by her, and to pꝛay with her, they ſayd
the Lo2ds pꝛayer together and likewiſe the Crede, but it ſhould
ſceme that miſtreſſe Ioane could not heare the mad, foꝛ ſhe would
ſap amille many times, and then the compante would help her out,

but miffrefſe loane did not ſtay foꝛ her, ſo that ſhe had ended her

pꝛavers befoꝛe the maide hadhalfe done hers. After this maſter
Doctoꝛ Doringron toke ap2aper boke, and read certaine pzayers
which he thought god, and when he had done, the miſtrelle Ioane
fell to exhoꝛting of the maide, and gaue her many god erho2tations: and as ſhe was thus in ſpeaking to her ſhe fel into a maruei⸗
lous weeping, and ſobbed ſo greatly that ſhee could not well vtter ber woꝛds, ſaying, that ſhe would not haue ſcratehed her, but
that ſhe was foꝛced vnto it by the ſpirit. As ſhe was thus complay⸗
ning, on the ſudden miſtreſſe Eliz abeth Throckmorton, one of her
pounger ſiſters, being ſuddenly taken in her fitte (fo2 it was not
knowne'toany in the companie) came haſtely vpon the maide and
catched her by one of her hands, and faine would haue ſcratched
her, ſaving that the ſpirit ſaith, that ſhe mut alſo ſcratch her: but
the companie willed the maide to keepe her hand from her, which
ſhe did, ſo they ſtroue together a great while, vntill the child was
windleſſe. Then ſayd the child, will no bodie helpe me; repcating

the woꝛds twiſe oꝛ thꝛiſe: then ſayd her ſiſter miſtreſle Toane;be- .

ing till in ber fit,thall A helpe vou ſiſter Elizabeth? J(fapd the)foz
Gopslake god filter, SomiftreſſeToane tame, and twke one vr the
maddes hands and held it ta her iter Ela abeth, and the feratthed it
until] bloud came, and ſemed to be marueilous ioyfull that ſhe had
gotten bloud, ſhe pared her nayles alſo, and waſhed her hands and
thꝛe w all into the fire. After al this befoze the companie departed,
the mayd helped miſtreſle Ioanc out of her fit thꝛer ſeuerall times

one after the other, by thꝛæ ſeuerall charges as yon haue heard he⸗
foze: and likewile bꝛought miſtreſſe Elizabeth Throckmorton ont

of her fitte, by ſaying, as the hath be witched miſtrefſe Elizabeth
Throckmorton ſince her mother confeſſed, © - 5
e will now leaue miſtreſſe Ioane vnto the Afliſes day, and
retirealittle backe againe to miſtreſſe lane, who is the youngeſt of
maſter Throckmortons childzen ſane one, and hath dꝛuncke as
deepe of this cup of affliction as any of al her ſiſters hath done, and

as the fir ſt taſted of it, fo ſhe was the firff that diſliked, x diſcleſed

the

the authoz ofit, fo che i was that firſt cryrd out of mother 82. |
muel, and ſayd that it was the that had be witched her, befozeetther
her parents oꝛ any other that came towards her, fuſpected any
witcherie at all, ſince which time (as there hath been great cauſe to
thinke) that wheras the was the firſt that gaue octaſion to ſuſpect
the old wom mn, and indeededfd her fe openly accuſe her, ſo the

hath been therefoꝛe amangſt all thereft,themoſt extreamelp dealt
withall : foz there was neuer any of her ſiſters ( miſtreſſe Ioane ex⸗
tepted) that did abide ſuch heauie bꝛunts, ſuch daungerous and
moꝛtall temptations, as ſhe hath done, foz the bath ben often and
diuers times tempted to caſt her ſelfe into the fire, and into the
water, and to depꝛiue her elfe of life by cutting her th2oate with
her own knife. And theſe things haue thus appeared in her, name⸗
ly, that ſhe hath many times in her fits, ſuddenly pulled the knife
out of her ſheath, and if ſhe had been abꝛoad, ſhe hath thꝛowne it
from her ſo farre as the could: if within the houle ſitting at the
table, oꝛ in any other place, ſhe hath thzowne it vnder the table oꝛ
in ſome coꝛner ol the houſe, ſaving, that the ſpirit doth now tempt
her to kill her ſelfe, but ſhe will not,defiring the Loꝛd to ſtrengthẽ
her againſt them: and when the hath come out of her fit, the hath
acknowledged no ſuch matter, maructling who hath taken her
knife from her: and foz the daunger of fire, this thing hath alſo
been pzonedmanp times in her: foꝛ the hath pzeſſedfo2wards, and
Erained her ſelle to thʒuſt her head into the fire, and hath ben permitted tocomeſo nere the fire with her head and face, that reſting
onelp vpon the ſtrength ol one that did withhold her, has he been
let ». 5g ſhe had fallen flat into the fire, to her vtter 2 pe⸗
riſhing therein: and the ſame experience in her hath
made by water, ſaping alwaies that tbe diuell doth tempt her to
both: pet this hath been obſerned continnally in all theſe tempta⸗
tions, that ſhe was neuer tempted to any of theſe daungers (that
euer was knowne) being alone, but al waies when there were
ſome companie and afſiſtance by to helpe her: which thing thus
conſidered, whether it hath pꝛoceeded of the gracious pꝛouidence
and godneſſe of GDD, which cannot be denied but that it hath
ſhewed it ſells molt ſtrange and moſt wonderfull, both in the pꝛe⸗
ſeruation of her, as alſo in the reſt of her ſiſters in theſe their trou⸗
bleſome extremities, oꝛ whether it hath been ſome ſecret illuſiõ and
e of the diuell to decetue ſtanders by, it reſteth doubtfull,
and

-
:
o
4

ws Witch of | Above.
und cannot bee . amongſt _ "bar whether one oꝛ the
other, oz whatſoener,God deſerueth the glozy.

- Upon Friday which was thefiftenth of March 1592. This
miſtris Iane was very much troubled with her fit, fitting at the

table in dinner tune, as ſhe had been loꝛ a koꝛtnight oꝛ thze werks

befoze that, moze ertreamely vſed at meales , then at any cther time ofthe dap, loꝛ alwates a little befoze ſhe thould fit do wne
either in giuing of thankes, oꝛ pꝛeſentlp after her fit would ſurely
take her. On this dap as ſhe late at dinner, ſhe ſeemed that ſome
_ that ſate vpon the table, talked vnto her about Nan Samuel,
fo the would liſten a while vnto it, and then loke backe with an
| ds countenaunce vnto the maide, that ſtode bchinde her, ſha⸗
king her head as if ſome ſoꝛolwe were towards. Now this miſtris
Iane had ben often tolde, by her other ſiſters being in their fits,
that the ſpirit had told them, that ſh& ſhould alſo ſcratch Nan Samuel befoze the next Aſſiſes, happen when it ſhould, but ſhe would
alwaies make this anſwere: to them, that ſhee would not ſcratch
her, let the Diuell doe what he could againſt her, albeit the ſpirite
had tolde ſo much to her ſelfe as ſhe had oftentimes ſaid, but ſhe alwaies withſfode the ſpirite in woꝛds to his face, ſaving that the
would not doe it: on this night as ſher ſate at ſupper with the reit
of her ſiſters, ſher fell into a very extreame fit, bowing and bend⸗
ing ol her bod, as if ſhe would haue broken her backe, ſhaking ol
her hands, as that ſhee could not hold her knife ſtedfaſt, and many
times, it would thut it againſt her arme. When this fit was en⸗
ded. then the ſpirit ſermed to talke to her againe, as it did at dinner,
fo: ſhe vſled the ſame manner ol geſture to Agnes Samuel that ſtod
behinde her as befoze, and gaue rather greater ſignes of ſozrowe
then otherwiſe. On the ſuddaine ſhe aroſe from the table, and went
to the bpper end thercof, caſting a marueilous heauie, and diſcon⸗
tented lone to the maide, whereby it was perceiued that the child
had ſomething in her mind that ſhe could not vtter (fo2 her mouth
was ſhut vp which did greatly diſlike her) then the made was wil⸗
led to aſke her how ſhe did, the childs mouth was pꝛeſently opened
t ſhe made anſwer to her, ö Woꝛſe foꝛ vou, vou vong witch, turning
away her face from her, as if ſhe loathed to lok on her. This was
newes to the maide to be called yong witch at her hand, ſo ſhe con⸗
tinued queſtioning with her, as ſhe was willed, but the child tur⸗
ned away her fate, and ſtopped her eare which was nert _ her,
KN aving

re

je Arraſgnement and Execution
ſaying that ſhe could not abide to heare her oꝛ ſee her: then ð mars
was willed to aſke her what the matter was: the child anſwered,
that the Spirite ſaith that hee muſt ſcratch her: when muſt pou
ſcratch me, ſaith the maide: pꝛeſently the childs mouth was ſhut
vp that ſhe could make no anſwere. Then did the child begin to
- wepe, milk lamentable to ſee, yet ſo mired with anger towards
the maide, as that oftentimes loking vpon her, ſhe would ſuddenly
turne away her face fro her, with ſuch an perning vopce, her terth
being ſet together as if the euill ſpirit had ben whetting and kinds
ling her furie againſt the maide. Continuing thus a quarter of an
houre, the maid was moued to aſke again when ſhe ſhould ſcratch
her, the child anſwered by ſignes, fo2 ſhe could heare her, but not
ſpeake, holding vp her finger at (J) and holding it downe at(no)ſo
that it eaſily might be gathered, that ſhe ſhould ſcratch her pꝛeſent⸗
ly after ſupper ſo ſone as grace was ſapd: then the mayd aſked in
what part ſhe ſhould ſcratch her: ſhee anſwered by ſigne, that it
ſhould be vpon her right hand, which was the contrarie hand to
that, which her ſiſter Eliz abeth had ſcratched a werke befoze: then
maſter Throckmorton the childs father, cauſed maſter Doctoz Dorington and ſome other neighbours in the towne to be ſent fo2,to
whom when they were come he declared what the child had vttered concerning the maide. In this time befoze they were come to⸗
gether, there was halfe an houre ſpent, all which time the childe
continued marueilous penſiue and heauie, weeping very pittifullp, vet often fiercelp ſtarting out of p place where the ſate towards
the mapd, as if ſhe would haue fallen vpon her befoze the time: ſo
one of the childzen being in her fit gaue thankes, which ſo lone as
euer it was ended, the childe ſincking downe bpon her knees (foz
ſhe could not ſtand, fell vpon themapd with ſuch flerteneſſe and
rage, as if ſhe would haue pulled y fleſh of her hand from p bones,
pet was lhe ſcarcely able to race the ſkinne,ſaping to the maid. that
the ſpirit that ſtandeth there by her, telleth her, that Pluck holdeth
her heart and her hand meaning the maids ) and will not ſuffer the
ow to come. When the childe was wearie with ſcratching,the
bꝛeathed, and ſayd that ſhe muſt haue another fit at her. Then D.
Dorington moued the people to pꝛay with him, all which time ſhe
kneled very quietly, bat when p2ayers were ended the pꝛeſently
fell to woꝛke againe vpon the maide 3s befoze, faping theſe woꝛds
to ne teares n WIE cherks, 3 would not ſcratch
you,

ls © efthe Witehes of Warboßſe. |
pu, but the ſpirit compelleth me, ſaping, that muſt ſcratch pore;
aſwel as my other ſiſters haus done,x as my ſiſter Ioane alſo muſt
doe befo2e the Alſiſes, foꝛ this was (if the time bee marked) almoſt
the werkes befoze the Aſſiſes. R

_ _Themaidat the firſt ſcratching, ſeemed fo goe ſomething from

her, but the childfollowed ill vpon her knees, ſaving to her, that

the were as god to take tt now, as at another time, foꝛ ſhe muſt
etch blond onher,andſhe muſthaue her pennywo2ths ol her, ſav⸗
ing farther, that ſhe knew that ſhe did now crye,(which indeed He
did) but ſhe could not heare her (foꝛ fomuch the ſpirit told her be⸗
foze) becauſe ſhe ſhould not pitie her, when the childe was wearie
and windleſle ſhe left ſcratching, and wiped that little bloud and
water together, which came fromthe maids hand vpon her owne
hands. Then Doro? Dorington began to inſtrua themayd, and to
exhoꝛt her with many god ſperches, ſaying, that God would ſure⸗
ly not ſuFer her to be thus cryed out vpon by theſe wicked ſpirits,
and afflicted in this ſo2t by theſe innocent childꝛẽ contrary to their
wils, if ſhe were not conſenting, oꝛ at the leaſt concealing, and of
ſome knowledge of theſe wicked p2actiſes, which her mother had
confefſed. The mayd very ſtifly denied all that could bee ſayd,and
deſired God to ſhewe ſome pꝛeſent token vpon her, that they all
might know that the was guiltte of theſe matters:pꝛeſently after
theſe woꝛds, her noſe began to blede, and ſhe bled very much,
which thing whether it were a ſigne of Gods ſending at that time,

intokenof her guiltineſſe oꝛ not, that heknowethonlp: and mam
(A thinke)may without offence greatly ſuſpec. Yet this ſhe tous

lap, being charged withall, that ſhe had bled fonre times that day
befo2e, which thing was very true, bleeding very much euery
time, alwaves ſaying that ſhe had not bled ſo much to her remem⸗
b2ance in ſeauen peares befoꝛe, withing that this often bleeding

would fozxrthewno euill towards her. In the end the child ſayd of -

her ſeife, that the thing which now ſfandeth by her doth tell her,
that ſhe muſt not come fo2th of her fit, vntill the old man lobm Samuel the maides father, ſhall come and pꝛonounce certaine woꝛds
to her, which ſhe muſt tell him: then was ſhe aſked by the maide

and others that ſtond by, what thoſe woꝛds ſhould be, but the child

could not heare anybody: by and by ſhe ſaid of her ſelfe, what is her
tatber come into this reckoning now? e ſhal J neuer tome foꝛth of
my fit, vntil he ſpeak theſe woꝛds: euen as he is a witch, r

— ——— PIR Sol. va. | of n p — IE Sn” Tx — — .
« rr.

a- —— ——

| The Arraigneinent and Erecmion
to the death of theLadpCrumwel, ſo to charge the ſpirit to ae
from me, and then I ſhall be well and not befoze? I did thinke euen
ſo ſaid ſhe, that he was as bad as the woꝛſt, he loked ſo ilfauoured⸗
ly: then aſter Throckmorton hearing thoſe woꝛds of his daugh⸗
ter, deſired Paſter Henry Pickering the childes vncle, and two o⸗
ther ol the neighboꝛs, to goeſce if they could pꝛocure him to come,
but he refuſed to come, ſo the company foꝛ that night departed, and
the child went to bed in her fit, and ſo continued vntili the Aſſiſes
dap, as hereafter pou ſhall heare, her father pet not ceaſing to ſend
fo2 the man euery day, and to goe to him himſelle, pet could by no
meanes pꝛocure him to come to his houſe, Dn ſunday following,
which was the 18. ol March in the moꝛning, the ſpirit came againe
vato her, then ſaid the child, the thing ſaith that J ſhould now both
heare and ſe the young Witch if ſhee were here (fo2 ſo the ſpirites
alwaies called her) and ſer the thing alls which J neuer did befoze,
all of then together, then was the maide called foz, and aſked the
childe what the thing ſaith vnto her; ſhe anſwered that the thing
telleth her, that now ſhe muſt ſtart aſwcll as her ſiſter Ioane doth
whenſocuer ſhe nameth God, that ſhe muſt not come foꝛth of her
fit, this werke noꝛ the next, and peraduenture neuer, vntill one of.
theſe thꝛee things come to paſſe, which are, either pour father
(ſpeaking vnto the maide) muſt come and ſpeake theſe wozds to
me, euen as he is a Mitch, and hath conſented to the death of the
Lady Crumwel: oꝛ you muſt confeſſe that you are a Witch, and
haue bewitched me and my ſiſters:oꝛ elſe pou muſk be hanged: then
the maide was willed to aſke the childe whether ſhe ſhould come
fo2th ol her fit, whenſoener , oꝛ whereſoener her father did ſpeake
theſe woꝛds to her: then the childe aſked the ſpirite, and the ſpirite
anſwered, that ſhe ſhould, and ſo fo2 that time the thing departed
and ſhee continued in her fit, the manner whereof was as folioweth, ſhee would fit ſometimes in the houſe all the day toge⸗
ther, as one in a melancholike paſſion, not ſpeaking to any body, no2 deſirous of anycompany, ſometimes againe ſhee is very
lightſome and merrie, and will ſpoꝛte and play with her ſiſters a
great part of the dap, vet not hearing noꝛ ſ&ing any body, neither
ſpeaking to any particularly, when any paſſeth by her, ſhee will
ſap ponder goeth ſuch a coloured gowne, J meruaile how it goeth
alone: ponder is a papꝛe ofnether ſtocks of ſuch a colour, oz ponder is a . paire — 07 acloake, but I can (& nothing 1
I

Jena hcta — — finger, che
would ſay, vonder is a ring hangeth in the atre, J marueile how it

hangeth and no body hold it; many will thinke theſe matters in⸗
credible, but aſſuredlp they are moſt true. This thing alſo was
manv tunes pꝛoued whlle thoſe kinde of fffs continued vpon her,

that ſitting at dinner oꝛ ſupper, ſhe ſhould ſuddẽly haue her mouth
ſhut, and if Agnes Samuel had then come, and held a knife to her

mouth, and put it bet wixt her lippes, her mouth ſhould haue ben
pꝛeſentip opened, and not befoꝛe, and thus the ſpirit hath deit with
her fine oz fire times in a dinner while, and in this fit the conti⸗
— the weekes wanting one day, foz ſo long it toke her beloze
the Aſſiſes,

To come theref62zenow to the Aﬀiſes day latt paſt on Wednes:

day the fourth ol Apꝛill, iſtreſſe Ioane went to Huntington, and
as the went vpon the way was very well, as ſhe'was-ailb all the
moꝛuing, and ſo continued vntill within halle an houre after ſhe
had taken her chamber in the Inne: and then ſuddenly as ſhe ſate
by the fire ſhe fell into her fit, and hauing cötinued ſo alittle ſpace,
there came diners vp into the chamber to ſee her, who percetuing:
that ſhe ſate ſo quietly, would not be perſwaded ot any thing to be
. in her: many ol them toke her bythe hand, and ſpake to her
q they thought god, but ſhe neither heard noꝛ perteiued any thing
at all. Then ſome of the con panie turned them ts the mayd Agnes
Samuel, who ſtode by her, and came that mozning with Miſtreſle
loane from Warboy ſe, and enquiring of her concerning her faith

and ſeruice of God the anlwered that ſhce ſernedGDD as other
people did: when ſhe named God, miſtrcfſe Ioane began to ſtart

and ſtruggle with her armes, as ifs all had not been well, which the
tompanie perceiuing, bꝛought her ſomethingneerer, and wilted
her to ſay the Loꝛds p2aper and her belefe, which the matd began
to doe, but befoze ſhe went halle th2ongh,the companie deſired her
fo2 compaſſtorr fake to ſtav her pꝛapers: fo2 the Genttewoman
miſtreſſe Joane was ſogrtenouſlp toꝛmented in her bodie, as that

it ſet them all in amaze that ſaw'it, t were reſolued of that wheres

of befoze they fade doubtfull, namely, that miſtreſſe Ioane was
not in perfect eſtate: Do the compante continued their ſpeech to
the mayd, and euer as by occaſton ſhe named God o2 Jeſus Chꝛiſt,

miltreffe Ioane ſtarted and ſtrugled with her ſelke, ſhinerifMAnd
_— of her armes and ſhoulders in that manner, as that batt
| 3 odie

Ft bind. —⅛öñ );

— — DS IO $a Sr 2
_ —ñxññ ¾ͤ⸗k — —

——UU— — — —

| TheArraignementand Execution

body pertetued eaſlly 8 it wagnotpoMible foz any ſo ta do of them⸗
ſelues, vea and many times when nobody noted the name of God
to be vttered by the maid, yet would miſtris Ioan put them in mind
thereot by her ſtrugling. And if the maide chanced to double the
name ol God in her mouth, as ts ſap the God ot heauen and earth,
92 Jeſus Chꝛiſt the ſonne of God, it would not ſuffer her to fit
vpon her ſtale: But when the defired the God ol heauen and carth
to helpe her, oꝛ Jeſus Chꝛiſt the forme ol God to bee mert ifult to
ber, why then it would ſo ſtrangely tozment her, as that they that
ſaw it could not tell whether they ſhould moꝛe wonder to ſee the
ſight, then lament and pittie the Gentle wonꝛaus caſe:then a Gen⸗

tleman in the company well acquainted with thoſe maners) wil⸗

led the maydtaſav to Miſtreſſe Ioan, my GOD: helpe vou, oꝛ my

God pꝛeſerue and deliuer pon, oꝛ the God whome J ſerue defend
vou and be mertifull unto ou, which ſhe did, but miltreffe loan
neuer once moued thereat, but whenſhe was willed againe to ſay
Jeſus Chꝛiſt deliner yon, oꝛ the God of heauen and carth helpe

pou, then would ſhe ſo ſtruggle and grone, as that all the chamber
founded withall. And this was pꝛwued an hundzed times that day,
befoze ſiue hundꝛed men at ſeuerall times, and in the ſame cuening
after the Court was bꝛoken vp, Maſter Juſtice Fenner, who fo2

that time was Judge alone, had a deſtre to ſeœ muſtris Ioan Throckmorton, then being at the ſigne of the Crowne in Huntington, bes
ing the plate where the ſaid Judge then lodged, and went into the

garden to the ſaid Miſtreſſe Ioan, then being in the company with
other women, there the Judge with a great aſſembly of Juſtices
and Gentlemen mef the ſaid iſtreſſe Ioan Throcmorton in a faire
Alley, being at that pꝛeſent out of her fit, and perfed ly well, and
after ſome ſpeeches made by the ſaid Judge to miſtreſſe loan, ſhe fel
into one of her oꝛdinarp fits, her eyes cloſed vp, thaking her ſhoul⸗
ders and her armes ſtretched out right, ready to fall to the ground,
but that ſhe was aſliſted byher father, and not being alle to ſtand,
the was lead into an Arbour, whither alſo went both the Judge;
and the other company, there they ſaw the ſaid Miſtris Ioan grienoup toꝛmented moſt pitifull to behold, many god pꝛayers were
made both by the Judge and all the companv, but no eaſe appeared:
then the father of the ſayd ꝙiſtreſle Ioan told the Judge that there
was one in the company(naming Agnes Samuel) that if ſh& would
100 . waꝛdes in We: manner ol a charge, that then the
ſayde

1 ;
| | ES

„ of the Wunder of Warbovſe)

ſarde Bilkrefſe loan hall b preſently well/athvig deived/of all
the companp, therefoze the Audge cauſed the ſays Agnes Samael to
ſtand fo; ward, and to knowthe charge; which way repeated by
Malter Throckmorton fatherot᷑ the ſapd Piltrelle loan the wozds

were theſe: As Jama Witch, and a wozſe Witch then my mos

ther, and did conſent to the death of the Lady Cromwel, ſo I charge
the diuel to let miſfreffe loan Throckmorton: come out of her fit at

this pꝛeſent. But befoꝛe Agnes Samuel ſpoke the charge to make
ſonie trpall in othets ot the effect thereot, the Judge hunſelke, Do⸗

&o2 Darington, Maſter Throckmorton ànd others, ſpake the woꝛds
of the charge, but the laid Pifkreſle Ioan had ſmall eaſe by their
ſpeeches, neither would ſhe come out of her fit;then both the Judge
and the other company made many god pꝛapers and petitions to
God, but no amendment appeared: after this Agnes Samuel
was commaunded bythe Judge to make ſome god pꝛapers to God
fo the eaſe of the ſayd iſtris loan, which the did, at which time
if the ſaid Agnes Samuel had pꝛayed ts God 02 Jeſus Chꝛiſt, then
the ſaid miſtris loan was in ſhew moze troubled then bekoꝛe, and
the reaſon was foꝛetolde by the ſaid miſtreſſe Ioan, and al her other
ſiſters by the ſpirit, that whenſoeuer the leude Agnes did vſe the
name of God oꝛ Jeſus Chꝛiſt, they ſhould be wozle troubled then
whe any other ſpake the woꝛds, koꝛ he that is perfect God ahnigh⸗
ty will not ſuffer his name to bee vſed in the mouth of ſuch a wic⸗
ked creature, which was then pꝛoued true: then Agnes Samuel
was commanded to ſap, as J am no Wetch,netther did conſent to
the death of the Lady Cromwel, ſa Acharge the diuel to let miſtris
Ioan come out of her fit at this pꝛeſent, but alt this was to no pur⸗
poſe: laſtly the fapd Agnes Samuel was cummanded to ſapthe right
charge, which was, as Jama Mitth, and a woꝛſe witeh then ny
mother, and did conſent to the death of the Lady Cromwel, fo A
charge 9 dinetto let miſfris Ioan Throck. come out ofher fit at this
pꝛeſent. Theſe woꝛds were no ſoner ſpoken by the fapdAgnes Sa⸗
muel, but the ſaid miſtreſſe loan Throckmorton wiped her eyes and
tame out ot her fit, and made lowe reverence to the Judge, r ſo thee
remained absut halfe a quarter ot an houre, then the fei into ariother kind ot fit, ſirſt ſhaking one leg e after the other, then one arme
alter the other, then her head x ſhoulders, with other extraoꝛdi⸗
narie paſſions,to the great gricfof them "_ were ny
udg

Foune

rraldnement a cutie

Judge greatly lamenting the caſe. ben both hoy nat 7
had made ſame god p2ayers(and-finding noeaſe) cauſed the ſaid
Agnes Samuel to repeat another charme, vz. As J am a Witch £
Would haue bewitchen to death Piſtris Toane Throckmorton in
her laſt werke ol her great ſicknes, ſo I charge ther Diuel to let
Piſtris Ioane come out of her fit at this pꝛeſent:. which woꝛds being (aide by the ſaid Agnes Samuel, the ſaid Piſtris loane was pꝛe⸗
ſently well. Then the Judge alked her where che had been: Sher
aunſwered, J haue bene alleepe. I pꝛay god, ſaid the Judge, ſend
pou no moge ſuch ſlerpes. Sone after, ſhe fell into one of her other
oꝛdinarie fttes, with a moſt ſtrange x terrible kind of neeũng, & o⸗
ther paſſions, the which was ſo vehement x pittifull to be heard,
that it moued all the companie at one inſtant, to pzay to Godto
ſaue her, fearing that her head would haue burſt in ſunder, oꝛ her
eies ſtart out of the ſame, ſo p the Judge made ſmal delay, but cauſed the ſaid Agnes Samuel to ſpeak the other charme, which, was,
As Jama witch, and did bewitch Miſtris Pickering of Ellington,
ſince my mothers confeſſion: ſo I charge the diuel, to let Piſtris
Joane come out of her fit at this pꝛenſent: which woꝛds being ſpo⸗
ken, pꝛeſently the ſaid Piftfris Ioanc was wel as euer ſhe was in
ber life, eſo hath continued without any griefe oz fits til this day.
The Loꝛd be thanked thercfoze. 6

The next day being thurſday in the moꝛning, there were thꝛa ſe⸗
uerall Inditemens made, ⁊ deliuered to the great Inqueſt, whereof the one was againſt olde kather Samuel, old mother Samuel, and
Agnes their daughter, foꝛ bewitching vnto death the Ladye Cromwell, late-wife of Sir Henry Cromwell of Finchingbrook in the
countie ol Huntington Knight, contraryto Gods Lawes t the ſtatute made in the xv. peare ol the Queenes Maieſties reigne that
now is cc.

The other two Inditements were framed vpon the ſapd ſta⸗
tute fox bewitching of ꝙiſtreſſe Ioane Throckmorton, Miſtreſſe
Jane Throckmorton and others, contrarie to the ſayd ſtatute. The
Inditements being delinered to the grand Jury, the euidence was
giuen then pꝛiuatlv by maſter Dorington Doctoz of Diuinitie,
and Parſon ot the towne of Warboyſe afo:eſapd,by Gilbert Pickering of Tichmerſh in the Countie of Northampton Eſquire, by Robert Throckmorton Eſquire, father of the ſayd childꝛen, by Robert

Throckmorton ot Brampton in the ſaid C ountie cf Huntington Cfguire,

d 4 7 8 is wa * hy my” an; Fon 0 * * * *
f P, ba 4 * N X | * 500 £F .

quire, by Iohn Pickering and Henry Pickering Gentlemen, and by
Thomas Nut, maſter of Arte, and Uicar of Elingtòn. The graund
Jury made no great delay, but found them all guiltie. And about
eyght of the clocke, the euidence by the fozenamed Gent. was o⸗

penlyat large deliuered in the Court, to the Jury of life and death:

and with great patience of the Judge, it was continued till one or

theclocke in the alter none. So many of theſe pꝛofes, pꝛeſumpti⸗
ons, cirtuniſtances, ⁊ reaſons contained in this boke, was at large
deliuered, as that time would affs2d, which was 5, houres, with⸗
out intermiſſion oz interruption, vntill both the Judge, Juſtices,
and Jury ſaid openly that the cauſe was moſt apparant: their con⸗
ſciences were well ſatiſfied, that the ſayd Witches were guiltie,
x had deſerued death: and there withall the Gent. ceaſed to giue a⸗
ny further euidence. And this as no ſmal thing is to be remembꝛed,
that Miſtris Iane Throckmorton on Friday the xvi. of March laſt
paſt being in one of her accuſtomed fits, ſaide that the ſpirit tolde
her, ſhe ſhould neuer come out ok her fit, vntil olde father Samuel
had ſaid theſe woꝛdes: As Jam a Mitch, 4 conſented to the death
of the Lady Crum wel, ſo I charge the diuell, to ſuffer Miſtris Iane
to come out ot her fit, And this ſhe publiſhed openly in the hearing
of many: therefo2e her father ſought meanes, both by himſelfe and
others, to haue Iohn Samuel come to his houſe to the child, but they
could not pꝛeuaile: wherefo2e the ſaid Iane continued in her ſence⸗
les fits with many pangues and verations in euery parte, as they
are befoꝛe deſcribed, from the ſatde xvi, ol March, til the fourth of
Apꝛil, which was thze weeks wanting a day: which day alſo the
ſaid iſtris Iane was bꝛought to Huntington, and there in her fit
was ſet in the Court befoze the Judge, where many queffions
were demanded ok her, but the anſwered to none, foꝛ pᷣ diuel would
not ſuffer her to ſpeake: her eyes were open, vet ſuch a miſt was
befo2e the,y ſhe neither knew, neither did ſer her father, which was
next her, æ diuers of her vncles + friends. Then the Judge cauſed
olde Samuel to be bꝛought from amonaſt the other pꝛiſoners to the
vpper barre , nere vnto the place where the Clerkes ſate: where
alſo ſtode the ſaide lane. (And the Judge being befoꝛe tolde, that
if olde Samuel would ſpeake the woꝛdes befoze recited, the ſayd

Iane ſhould bee well.) The Judge therefoze aſked him whether
he by any means could cauſe the ſaid Tane to come foꝛth of her fitte,

who denied the ſame, Then the Judge ſayd, as he was 3
: | tya
j |

_ ATTa1PHET "ang mot
that hey ſaid Samuel hadacharme made of certaine woꝛds, which
if he would ſpeake them, the childe ſhould be well: therefoꝛe the
Judge recited the charme,and willed him to ſpeake the woꝛds: but
he refuſed the ſame and ſayd, J will not ſpeake them. The Judge
perſwaded him, and intreated him, inſomuch that the ſaide Judge,
the rather to incourage the ſaid Samuel, ſpake himſelfe openly the
charme, fo did alſo maſter Doctoꝛ Dorington, and others then pꝛe⸗
ſent(by the Judges appoyntment:) yet he refuſed the ſame, Many
god and godly pꝛayers were openly made to GOD, both by the
Judge and others, foz the ceaſe of the childe: whereat thechilde ſees
med nothing to be moued. Then the Judge willed Samuel to pꝛay
vnto God foz the comfozt of the Childe, which he did, but when he
named God oꝛ Jeſus Chꝛiſt, the childes head, ſhoulders, 4 armes

were ſoze ſhaken, and in ſhew moꝛe troubled then befoze. Then þ
Judge ſavd, that il he would not ſpeake the woꝛdes of the charme,
the court would hold him guiltie ofthe crunes whereof he was ac⸗
cuſed; and ſo at the length, with much adoe, the ſaid Samuel ( with
a loude voyce)ſatd in the hearing of all that were pꝛeſent: As Jam
a Mitch, and did conſent to the death of the Lady Cromwel, ſo J
charge the diuell to ſuffer Piſtris lane to come ont ofher fit at this
zeſent.

f Which woꝛds, being no ſoner ſpoken by the old Mitch, but the
ſaid miſtreſſe lane, as her accuſtomed oꝛder was, wiped her eyes,
and came out of her fit: and then ſing her father, kneeled downe,
and aſked him bleſſing, e made reuerence to her vncles that ode
neere her: which befoze ſhe toke ns ſhew of knowledge: and wondering ſaid: D Loꝛd, father where am J: Foz that as it ſemed ſhe
neither ſaw noꝛ heard befoꝛe, noꝛ knew how ſhe was bꝛought in⸗
to ſuch a pꝛeſence. Then the Judge ſayd: pon ſee all, ſhee is nowe
well: but not with the muſicke of Dauids harpe, alluding to the
place of Scripture, where King Saul being vexed by an euill ſpirit
receiued comfo2t and helpe when Dauid played on his harpe befoze
him. Then the conkeſſion ot old mother Samuel (befoꝛe ſpecified)
made the 2 6. day ol December 1592. laſt paſt at Burkden, befoꝛe
the reuerent father in God, William, Biſhop of Lincolne, was opt᷑⸗
ty red: So alſo was read the confeſſion of the ſaid mother Samuel
made at Burkden afoze ſaid the 29 dap af Deceber 1592. befoꝛe the
laid reuerend ſather in God, William, Biſhop of Lincolne, Frances
Crom wel, and Richard Tryce Eſquires, Juſtices of her Paicſties

peace

RY ofthe Wite ies of Warboyfe. * e
penee withinthocountiest Huntington; which allo u brfoze ſpertfied, After theſe confeſſions read and deliuered to the Juxp, it pleas
ſed God foꝛ the kurther pꝛole and ouerthꝛowe of theſe witked per⸗
ſons to reare vp moe witnelles at that tame vnexpegted, who ſpake

ſome things ol their owne knowledge. and ſome ok repoꝛte:the firſt

was Robert Poulter viear and Curat of Brampton afoze ſaſd, who
ſaid openly that one of his pariſhioners called Iohn Lahgley, at that
inſtant being very ſicke in his bed, had tolde hint, that one day he
being at Huntington at the ſigne of the crowne; did in the hearing
of olde mother Samuel foꝛbid maſter Knowles of Brampton afoꝛe⸗
ſaid, fo giue her any meate, foꝛ that ſhee was an olde Mitch: and
thereupon in the afternon,as he went from Huntington to Brampton, hauinga god hoꝛſe vnder him, he pzeſeritly died in the field :
t within two dayes after, by the pꝛouidence of God, he did eſcape
death, twice oꝛ thꝛice verydangeroully: and though it pleaſed God
not to ſuffer the diuel to haue the maſtery ol his body at that time,
pet p2eſentlyafter, he loſt as many god and ſound Cattell to all
mens iudgements, as were woꝛth twentie markes: himſelke, not
long after, in bodie extraoꝛdinarilp handled. And the ſame night of
the day of Aſſiſes, as after it pzoued true, the ſame John Langley
died. Alſo the foꝛenamed maſter Robert Throckmorton of Brampton, (which befoꝛe had giuen ſome euidence againſt the ſaid Mit⸗
ches in the childꝛens behalfe,)now he ſpake foꝛ himſelle, that her
likewiſe at Huntington + in other places hauing dealt very rough⸗

lv in ſpeches with the ſaide mother Samuel: On Friday the tenth

day following, had one of his two yere-olde beaſts dyed: and on
Sunday next after another beaſt of the ſame company and like
age died alſo. The next werke after on Friday, he had a pereling
Calfe died, and the next Sunday following, he had another calfe of
the ſame company and like age died alſo, The next werke after, on
Frridaphe had an Hog died, and the next Sunday after, hee had
fl Sowe hauing tenne Pigges ſucking on her died alſo, Mhere⸗
vpon aduice was giuen him, that whatſoeuer thing next dved, to
make a hole in the ground, + burne the ſame. Likewiſe the fourth
werke on Friday her had a very fayꝛe Cowe woꝛth foure markes
died, and his ſeruants made a hole in the ground e buried the ſame
Co we in it, and thꝛew faggots and fire on her and burnt her: and
affer that, all his cattell did well. Ok this laſt matter, mother Samuel being examined the night 3 her execution, ſhe 8
N 2 the

ce Arraignement and Execution <
** bewitching of the ſapd Cattell, in manner andfozinea as is des
ciared.

Then the Jaylo2 of Huntington gaue this euldence, That a man
ok his finding mother Samuel very vnruly whileſt ſhe was pꝛiſo⸗
ner, at a time chained her to a bed- poſt: wherefoze, not long after
his man fell ſicke, and in all reſpeus was handled as the fszenamed childꝛen were, with heauing vp and do wne ol his bodie, ſha⸗
king his armes, legges and head, hauing moꝛe ſtrength in him in
his fits, then any two men had, crying out of mother Samuel, ſaying
that che did be witch him: and thus remaining in this extraoꝛdina⸗
rie courſe of ſickneſle, about fine oꝛ ſire dates after dyed.

The ſayd Japloꝛ ſayd alſo, that not long after the death of his
ſeruant, hee had one ok his ſonnes fell ſicke, and was foꝛ the moſt
part handled as his ſeruant befoꝛe named was: ſo that it was moſt
apparant that he was bewitched : therefoꝛe the ſayd Jayloz went
into the pꝛiſon, and bꝛought mother Samuel to his ſonnes bed-ſide,
and there held her vntill his ſonne had ſcratched her, and ſo pꝛe⸗
ſently his ſonne amended, And to dꝛaw to ſome ende, the Jury of
life and death, in the afternone, found all the Inditements Villa
vera, which when old father Samuel heard, he ſaid to his wife in the
hearing of many: A plague of God light vpon thee, foz thou art
ſhe that hath bꝛought vs all to this, and wee map thanke the foz
it.

Then the Judge grew to ſentence, and aſked old father Samuel
what he had to ſay foꝛ himſelfe, why tudgementof death ſhoulde
not be pꝛonounced on him: Whereat he anſwered, that he had
nothing to ſap, but the Loꝛd haue mercie on him. Then the Judge
aſked olde mother Samuel what ſhe had to ſap foz her ſelfe, to ap
Judgement: Uhereat ſhe aunſwered, that ſhee was with
childe : which ſet all the company on a great laughing, andſhee
her ſelfemo2e than any other, becauſe as the thought, there ſhould
(fo2 that cauſe) no iudgement haue beene giuen. Mer age was
nere foureſcoꝛe, therefoꝛe the Judge moued her to ieaue that an⸗
ſwere: but in no caſe ſhe would be dꝛiuen from it, till at length, a
Jurp of women were en paneled, and ſwoꝛne to ſearch her: who
gaue vp their verdite, that ſhe was not with childe, vnlcſle (as
ſome ſaide) it was with the diuell, and no marueile: fo2 after ſhe
was found guiltie, there went the foꝛenamed Maiſter Henry
Pickering vnto her where thee ffaode amongſt the Wee

0

— — —

| ofthe Witches of Warboyfe.

to perſwade her fo confeffe the trueth, and amongſt other things
the confefſed, that the fozenamed William Langley, who gaue vnto

ber the Spirits, had carnall knowledge of her bodie, when the receiued them, Some are ol opinion, that it was the dinell in mans

likeneſſe.

After all this, the Judge aſked Agnes Samuel the daughter,

what ſhe had to ſay, why iudgement of Death ſhould not be giuen
her. At which time there was one (being a pziſoner) ſtanding by
her, that willed her to ſay that ſhe was alſo with child. Nay, ſayd
the, that will J nof doe: it ſhall neuer be ſayd, that J was both a
Mitch anda whoze. And ſo the Judge after verie ſound and di⸗
uine councell giuenſeuerally to themall,pzoceded to iudgement,
which was vnto death. The next dap, certaine godly men went
to the pꝛiſon to perſwade the condemned parties to repentance,
and to confeſſe their ſins to the woꝛld, and crane pardon at Gods
mercifull hands: at which time mother Samuel being aſked by
maſter lohn Dorington Eſquire, one of her Pailkies Juſtices of
the Countie of Huntington, whether ſhe did not bewitch the Ladie
Cromwell? She ſayd, no foꝛſoth 4 did not. Then her huſbandolde
father Samuel ſtanding behinde, and hearing her denie the ſame,
ſayd, denie it not, but confeſſe the trueth: fo2 thou didſt it one wap

92 other.

The confeſſion of the olde woman Alice Samuel, vnto certaine
ueſtions that were demaundeèd of her, by maſter Doctor Chamberlin, at the time and place of her execution being vpon the

ladder.

Irſt, being demaunded what the names of thoſe ſpirits (wheres
with thee bewitched) were called, ſhe ſayd, they were called
Pluck, Catch and White, the which names the often repeated. Be⸗

ing aſked whether ſhe had be witched the Lady Cromwell to death
o2 not: She anſwered. that ſhe had. Being aſked with which ol

her ſpirits the did bewitch the ſayd Ladie to death: She ſaid, with

Catch. And being demaunded fo2 what cauſe ſhe did it: She an⸗

ſwered: Foꝛ that the ſayd Ladie had cauſed ſome of her haire and
her haire · lace to be burned: and that ſhe ſayd, Catch willed her to
be reuenged of the ſayd Ladte: and that thereupon the ſayd mother
Samuel bidhimgoe anddo what he would. And being aſked, what

55 O 3 Catch

—— —

The Arraignement and Execution
Catch ſayd to her when he tame backe againe: She confeſſed that
he ſayd, that he had been reuenged of her. Bo2eouer ſhe confeſſed,
and vpon her death did ſay fo2 trueth, that the was guiltie of the
death of the Ladie Cromwell. Being demannded, whether ſhe had
bet witched maſter Throckmortons childꝛen: She conkeſled, that
ſhe had done it. Being aſked with which of her Spirits: She ſatd,
that it was Pluck. Being aſked what ſhe ſaid to him when ſhe ſent
him about that matter: She confeſſed, that ſhe willed him gos toꝛ⸗
ment them, but not hurt them. Being aſked, how long they thould
be in that caſe? She lapd, ſhe could not tell: and that ſhe did not
ſe Pluck ſince Chꝛiſtmas laſt. Being aſked, what ſhe did with
White? She ſayd, that ſhe neuer did hurt with him: and that thee
had ſent him to the ſea, and that he had ſucked vpon her chinne, but
the other two had not anp reward. And likewiſe ſhee confeſſed,
w_ ſhe had thoſe Spirits ofone, whoſe name(lhe ſaid) was Langy: where he dwelleth ſhe knewe not. And fo2 that her huſband
44 not confeſſe any thing of the witchcraft at the time of his
death, noꝛ of the pꝛiuitie of himſelfe oꝛ his daughter, as acceſſaries
to the lame: it was demaunded of her, whether her huſband was
pꝛiuie to the death of the Ladie Cromwell oz not: She anſwered,
he was, 1 |
Being demaunded, whether her huſband was a Ulitch,o2 had
any ſkillin witchcraft : She ſayd, he had, and could bath bewitch
and vnwitch: but touching her daughter, ſhee would in no ſozt
confeſſe any thing, but ſought by all meanes fo clere her. And koꝛ
her daughter her ſelfe, ſhe confeſſed nothing af all touching the
witchcraft ; but being willed by maſter Doctoꝛ Chamberlin toſap
the Loꝛds p2ayer and the Creede, when as the {fwd vpon the ladder readie to be executed, ſhe ſayd the Lo2ds paper, vntil ſhe came
to ſay, But deliuer vs from cuill, the which by no meanes the could
pꝛonounce: and in the Creedethe miſſed verp much, and could not
ſav, that ſhe belerued the Catholike Church.

After the execution was ended, and that theſethz& perlons were
thꝛoughly dead, the Japloꝛ (whoſe office it is to ſee them burped)
ſtripped off their clothes, and being naked, he found vpon the body
of the olde woman Alice Samuel, alittle lumpe of fleſh, in manner
ſticking ant as if it had ben a teate, to the length ol halfe an inch,
which both he and his wiſe perceiuing, at the firſt ſight thereof
meant nod to diſcloſe, becaule it was adioyning to ſo ſecret a wehe

c ich

£4
3

ofthe Witches of Warboyfe.”
which was not decent to be ſerne: pet in the ende, not willing to
conceale ſo ſtraunge a matter, and decently couering that pꝛiuie
place a little aboue which it grewe, they made open ſhewe thereof
vnto diuers that ifwd by. After this, the Japloꝛs wife tooke the

ſame teate in her hand, and ſerming to ſtraine it, there iſſued out at

the firſt as if it had been berſenings, (to vſe the-Japloꝛs wozde)
which is a mixture of yellow milke and water: at the ſecond time

there tame out in ſimilitude as clere milke, and in the ende very

bloud it ſelfe. Fo2 the trueth of this matter, it is not to be doubted
of any: foꝛ it is not onelythe Jaylo2s repoꝛt vnto all that require
of him, but there are fourtie others alſo in Huntington-ſhireof honeſt conucrſation, that are readie to confirme the ſame vpon their
owne fight,

And thus ye haue the ſtozie of theſe thꝛer Witches of Warboyſe,
ſo plainly and bziefely, as may be deliuered vnto pou, If any be
deſirous to know the pꝛeſent eſtate of theſe childꝛen, how they are
and haue bin ſince the death of theſe parties: you (hall vnderſtand,
that ſince their dap ol execution, not any ane of them haue had any
fit at all, neither yet grudging oꝛ complapning of any ſuch thing,

but haue all of them been in as god eſtate and as perfect health as

euer from their birth. Gods — name be euermoꝛe pꝛaiſed foz.
the ſame. Amen.

FINIS.
