Dynamic Sociology, Vol. 1 (Lester F. Ward, 1883)
==========================================================
Ward's Dynamic Sociology, Vol. 1: the first systematic American sociology — social forces and the critique of laissez-faire. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dynamicsociology01warduoft).

«♦<.*     t^^     'LJ    ***        *    '       *♦<;'«     ^'♦w     r    ?»        -.•'        -'    '       i4r

J**  #v



V^    ,^

=^V-T^


v^*  r;*,»^^«^

;**>*f

'     ,  .^  v*;^^^'  '*;./*  ♦$^^;'^^


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive

in  2007  witii  funding  from

IVIicrosoft  Corporation

Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/dynamicsociology01warduoft

DYNAMIC  SOCIOLOGY,

OB

APPLIED   SOCIAL  SCIENCE,

AS  BASED  UPON

STATICAL  SOCIOLOGY  AND   TEE  LESS
COMPLEX  SCIENCES.

vS:^

LESTER  if  WARD,  A.  M.

"T£   6ia(f>epsi   [laviag   djiadia;'*'' — Socrates.

IN  TWO    VOLUME,

VOLUME   I.

DATE

SEEN  BY
PRESERVATION
SERVICES
,FEB      5  1992

NEW  YORK:
D.   APPLETON    AND  COMPANY,

1,    8,  AND   5    BOND   STREET.
1883.

COPTKIGin   3T

D.   APPLETON   AND    COMPANY,

1883.

TO

MAJOR    POWELL,

EXPLOSEB,    GEOLOGIST,    ANTHROPOLOGIST,    AND    PHILOSOPHER,

WHOSE    GENEROUS   AID,

WARM    WORDS   OF   ENCOrEAGEMENT,    AND   FRIENDLY    INTERCOURSE

HATE   SUSTAINED    ME    IN    MY   PROLONGED    EFFORT,

THIS     WORK    IS     GRATEFULLY

PEEFAOE.

A  GROWING  sense  of  tlie  essential  sterility  of  all  that
has  thus  far  been  done  in  the  domain  of  social  science
has  furnished  the  chief  incentive  to  the  preparation  of
this  work.

While  this  sterility  is  certainly  very  manifest  in  the
superficial  and  unorganized  labors  of  those  who  especially
claim  that  field  as  their  own,  still  it  is  not  wholly  or
chiefly  such  that  are  open  to  this  impeachment,  but  also
and  equally  the  quite  opposite  class,  who  indeed  employ  »
scientific  methods  in  obtaining  the  true  data  of  social  sci-
ence, but  who  not  only  fail  to  apply  the  data  when  ob-

tained, but  persist  in  teaching  that  no  application  of  them
can  be  made.  Not  that  the  results  attained  by  either  of
these  classes  are  without  value ;  they  have  a  great  and
permanent  value,  but  it  is  thus  far  potential  only,  and
can  not  be  converted  into  actual  value  until  truer  views
shall  prevail  respecting  the  nature  of  social  phenomena
and  social  forces.

Just  as  Comte  could  complain  that  the  philosophy
of  Hobbes,  Locke,  and  Yoltaire  was  negative,  so  it  may
now  be  maintained  that  the  school  of  Mill,  Spencer,  and
Fiske  is  also  negative.  From  the  purely  statical  stage  of
the  former  the  latter  has  only  advanced  to  the  passively

vi  PREFACE.

dynamic  stage,  which  recognizes  only  the  changes  wrought
by  Nature,  unaided  by  Art ;  but,  before  the  science  of
society  can  be  truly  founded,  another  advance  must  be
made,  and  the  actively  dynamic  stage  reached,  in  which
social  phenomena  shall  be  contemplated  as  capable  of  in-
telligent control  by  society  itself  in  its  own  interest.

The  indictment  of  sterility  has  lain  against  all  the
great  systems  of  thought.  Theo-teleology  is  sterile,  be-
cause, however  viewed,  it  paralyzes  effort  (vol.  ii,  pp.  38,
301) ;  metaphysical  ontology  is  sterile  because  it  ignores
the  mediation  of  material  things  and  builds  on  pure  ideas ;
and  now  even  the  philosophy  of  evolution  thus  far  proves
sterile  also,  because,  while  justly  claiming  a  social  science,
it  falls  short  of  admitting  its  complete  homology  with  other
sciences,  and,  while  demonstrating  the  uniformity  of  social
as  of  physical  phenomena,  it  denies  to  the  former  that
susceptibility  to  artificial  modification  which,  applied  to
the  latter,  constitutes  the  only  practical  value  that  science
has  for  man.

Perhaps  it  is  more  correct  to  say  that  the  new  school
fail  to  comprehend  the  true  nature  of  art  as  applicable
to  all  departments  of  science. /jPerceiving  that  natural
processes  are  genetic,  they  erroneously  conclude  that  Nat-
ure's ways  should  be  man's  ways.  They  thus  confound
the  essential  idea  of  fine  art  with  that  of  useful  art,  the
imitation  of  Nature  with  the  control  of  Nature.  They
teach  the  natural  as  the  proper  human  method,  whereas
the  latter  is  necessarily  an  artificial  method.

Sociology  is  reproached,  even  by  those  who  admit  its
legitimacy,  with  being  impracticable  and  fruitless.  The
prevailing   methods   of    treating   it,    including   those   em-

PKEFACE.  vii

ployed  by  its  highest  living  advocates,  to  a  great  extent
justify  this  charge.  There  are  dead  sciences  as  well  as
dead  languages.  'The  real  object  of  science  is  to  benefit
man.  A  science  which  fails  to  do  this,  however  agreeable
its  study,  is  lifeless.  *  Sociology,  which  of  all  sciences
should  benefit  man  most,  is  in  danger  of  falling  into  the
class  of  polite  amusements,  or  dead  sciences.  It  is  the
object  of  this  work  to  point  out  a  method  by  which  the
breath  of  life  may  be  breathed  into  its  nostrils.

It  has  been  found  sufficiently  difficult  in  any  age  to
contribute  any  thing  new  to  the  thought  of  the  world.
In  the  present  age,  with  its  accumulations  of  learning  and
its  intense  intellectual  activity,  such  an  attempt  would,  in-
deed, be  presumptuous.  Henceforth  it  can  be  only  in  the
direction  of  improved  methods,  and  new  forms  of  pre-
senting old  truths,  that  novelty  and  successful  innovation,
in  any  but  the  domain  of  original  scientific  research,  are
to  be  expected.  The  only  positive  claim  here  made  is  of
this  nature — that  while  the  world's  present  stock  of  known
truth,  the  generous  tribute  of  many  great  minds,  has  been
freely  but  appreciatively  employed,  it  has  been  woven
into  a  unique  fabric,  and  one  by  which,  to  continue  the
figure,  society  may  be  completely  rehabilitated.

If,  in  the  detailed  unfolding  of  this  system,  any  com-
prehensive principles  have  been  announced,  to  which  at-
tention has  not  heretofore  been  specially  directed,  the
chief  of  these  will,  perhaps,  be  recognized  in —

1.  The  law  of  Aggregation,  as  distinguished  from  that
of  Evolution  proper.

2.  The   theory   of   the   Social   Forces,  and   the   funda-

viii  PREFACE.

mental  antithesis  which  they  implj  between  Feeling  and
Function.

3.  The  contrast  between  these  true  Social  Forces  and
the  guiding  influence  of  the  Intellect,  embodying  the
application  of  the  Indirect  Method  of  Conation  and  the
essential  nature  of  Invention,  of  Art,  and  of  Dynamic
Action.

4.  The  superiority  of  Artificial,  or  Teleological,  Proc-
esses over  Natural,  or  Genetic,  Processes  ;   and,  finally —

5.  The  recognition  and  demonstration  of  the  paramount
necessity  for  the  equal  and  universal  Distribution  of  the
extant  Knowledge  of  the  world,  which  last  is  the  crown
of  the  system  itself.

While  there  certainly  have  been  adumbrations  of  many
of  these  truths,  it  is  believed  that  thus  far  no  one  of  them
has  been  systematically  formulated  or  distinctly  recognized.

It  is  acknowledged  that  many  of  the  important  gen-
eralizations made  in  this  work  are  left  unsupported  by
much  necessary  illustration  which  was  at  hand  for  the
purpose.  Such  omission  has,  of  course,  been  intentional,
in  consequence  of  the  amount  of  space  which  these  ex-
amples would  occupy.  Indeed,  the  most  difficult  part  of
the  task  has  been  that  of  compressing  so  large  a  subject
into  reasonable  limits.  For  it  has  been  truly  said  that  it
is  easier  to  write  a  volume  than  an  essay ;  but  here  the
entire  treatise  practically  assumes  the  character  of  an  essay,
involving  the  increased  labor  of  condensation.  Kant  not
too  modestly  excuses  this  lack  of  popular  illustration,  in
his  "  Kritik  der  reinen  Yemunft,"  by  quoting  the  remark
of  the  Abbe  Terrasson,  that,  "  if  the  size  of  a  book  is  to

PREFACE.  ix

be  measured,  not  by  the  number  of  leaves,  but  by  the
time  required  to  understand  it,  it  could  be  said  of  many
a  treatise  that  it  would  be  much  shorter  if  it  were  not
so  short."  Yet,  after  all,  the  work  to  many  will,  L  fear,
seem  large.  To  such  it  can  only  be  answered  that  the
theme  is  also  large,  and  its  size  may  perhaps  find  a  par-
tial justification  in  the  words  of  M.  Littre,  applied  to  a
much  larger  as  well  as  greater  work — the  "  Philosophic
Positive  "  :

"  II  n'est  point  de  grande  doctrine  sans  grand  livre."

L.  r.  W.

"Washington,  January  20,  1883.

aoki^owledgme:^ts.

It  would  be  to  neglect  a  plain  duty  should  I  fail  to
acknowledge  the  assistance  which  I  have  received  from  a
few  friends  to  whom  the  nature  of  my  undertaking  has
been  made  known.

To  Professor  William  B.  Owen,  of  the  Faculty  of  La-
fayette College,  I  am  indebted  for  a  permanent  interest
in  the  work  dating  back  to  a  time  when  it  was  as  yet  in
embryo;  and,  as  it  progressed,  it  was  to  him  alone  that
I  felt  confidence  in  announcing  each  step,  and  in  apply-
ing for  advice  and  encouragement.  It  is  to  his  ripe  schol-
arship, and  always  moderate  counsels,  that  much  of  what-
ever literary  finish  or  conservatism  in  tone  the  work  pos-
sesses is  due.

When  the  work  of  publication  commenced,  I  found
myself  doubly  fortunate  in  securing  the  invaluable  aid  of
two  gentlemen — Mr.  Edward  T.  Peters  and  Dr.  Frank
Baker — well  informed  upon  the  subjects  discussed  and
well  disposed  toward  the  work,  who  volunteered  to  look
over  the  proofs,  and  who,  as  a  pure  labor  of  love,  have
persisted  in  this  service  to  the  end.  As  a  practical  eco-
nomic writer  and  thoughtful  student  of  society,  Mr.  Peters
was  able  to  offer  many  useful  suggestions  which  have  greatly
enhanced  the  value  of  the  discussion   of   social    questions.

xii  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

As  an  accomplished  physiologist,  Dr.  Baker  has  given  to
the  topics  within  his  profession  an  advanced  position  and
a  degree  of  accuracy  otherwise  unattainable.

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Mr.  David  Hutcheson,  of  the
Library  of  Congress,  for  much  valuable  assistance  as  an  ac-
complished bibliographer  in  finding  many  rare  works  which
it  was  essential  to  consult,  and  also  in  critically  revising
the  list  of  books  to  which  references  are  made.  The  com-
pleteness and  efficiency  of  this  important  department  are
in  great  measure  due  to  his  voluntary  services.

All  this  is  independent  of  my  great  debt  to  Major  J.
W.  Powell,  for  which  the  poor  boon  of  a  dedication  seems
a  trivial  acknowledgment;  and  also  of  my  lasting  obliga-
tion to  Professor  Edward  L.  Youmans,  who  has  been  espe-
cially helpful  to  me  in  facilitating  publication.

L.  F.  W.

STI^OPSIS  OF  THE  WOEK.

A.  Introduction — Outline  of  the  Work.

B.  Historical  Review.

a.  Positive  Philosophy  of  Augustc  Comte I

b.  Synthetic  Philosophy  of  Uerbert  Spencer II

C.  Cosmical  Principles  underlying  Social  Phenomena — Law  of  Aggrega-

tion.

a.  Primary  Aggregation.     Cosmogeny,  or  Genesis  of  Matter  and  of

Celestial  Bodies — Chemical  Relations Ill

b.  Secondary  Aggregation.

1.  Biogcny,  or  Genesis  of  Life,  and  of  Organic  Forms — Vital

Relations  ..........        IV

2.  Psychogeny,  or  Genesis  of  Mind — Psychic  Relations     .         .         V

3.  Anthropogeny,  or  Genesis  of  Man VI

c.  Tertiary  Aggregation.     Sociogeny,  or  Genesis  of  Society — Social

Relations — Statical  and  Passively  Dynamic  Sociology    .        .      VII

VOL.  II.
CHAP.

D.  Actively  Dynamic  Sociology.     Artificial  Control  of  Social  Forces.

a.  Preparation  for  the  Argument — Law  of  Adaptation — Reciprocal

Relations  of  Man  and  the  Universe — Statement  of  the  Argu-
ment      VIII

b.  The  Argument — Ultimate  and  Proximate  Ends   of  Conation —

Hierarchy  of  Means  to  Ends.

1.  Ultimate  End  of  Conation — Utility  as  measured  by  Happiness  IX

2.  First  Proximate  End  of  Conation — Progress          ...  X

3.  Second  Proximate  End  of  Conation — Action          ...  XI

4.  Third  Proximate  End  of  Conation — Opinion  ....  XII

5.  Fourth  Proximate  End  of  Conation — Knowledge  .        .        .  XIII

6.  Fifth  and  last  Proximate,  and  Initial  Means  to  the  Ultimate,

End  of  Conation — Education XIV

E.  List  of  the  principal  authorities  referred  to.

F.  Index.

COI^TENTS  OF  YOLUME  I.

INTRODUCTION.

PAOB

Historical  notice  of  the  science  of  sociology — Importance  of  the  classifica-
tion of  the  sciences — Co-ordination  of  known  facts — The  two  principal
incentives  to  intellectual  labor — Position  of  sociology  in  the  hierarchy
of  the  sciences — The  utilitarian  object  of  science  and  philosophy-^
..  Influence  of  past  moral  and  religious  systems — The  world  controlled"^
by  feeling  and  not  by  intellect — Ideal  system  of  social  pcform — Epito-
mized statement  of  the  principles  of  dynamic  sociology — Natural  and''
artificial  progress  contrasted — Laissezfaire  doctrincS— Theory  of  rights
— Legislation  analogous  to  inveoUon  —  Illusions  and  paradoxes  of
nature — The  use  of  scienee-^Active  an9  passive  social  progress — En-
croachments of  government  upon  private  enterprise  —  Antithetical
types  of  mind  and  views  of  nature — Supremacy  of  the'  feelings —
Organization  of  feeling — Effect  of  accumulated  knowledge  as  distin-
guished from  intellectual  capacity — Civilization  easehtially  artificial
and  an  improvement  upon  nature — Superiority  of  teleological  over
genetic  methods — Ways  in  which  social  progress  tends  to  defeat  itself
—Aim  of  dynamic  sociology 1

CHAPTER  I.

BRIEF  SUBTET  OF   THE   POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY   OF   AUGUSTS   COMTE.

Anomalous  character  of  Comte's  philosophy — ^Nature  of  his  errors — His
style  verbose — Comte  the  founder  of  Sociology — Sense  in  which  he
employed  the  tenn  "  positive  " — His  law  of  the  progress  of  human
thought,  through  the  theological  and  metaphysical,  to  the  positive
stage — In  what  positivism  differs  from  the  scientific  method — Comte's
hostility  to  all  causes — His  "  primordial  problems  " — His  review  of

xvi  CONTENTS.

FAeB

the  history  of  civilization — The  theological  stage — The  metaphysical
stage — The  positive  stage — Comte's  hierarchy  of  the  sciences — Three
kinds  of  observation — Tests  of  the  position  of  the  sciences  in  the  hier-
archy —  Scientific  prevision — Mathematics  —  Astronomy  —  Physics —
Chemistry — Biology  —  Transcendental  biology — Sociology — Social  or-
der  and  progress — The  human  race  a  perpetual  individual — Social  stat-
ics— Social  dynamics — Positive  education — Comte's  scientific  priest-
hood   82

CHAPTEK  II.

BRIEF    SURVEY    OF   THE    SYNTHETIC   PHILOSOPHY   OP   HERBERT   SPEXCER.

Herbert  Spencer's  rank  as  a  philosopher — Reasons  for  selecting  the  sys-
tems of  Comte  and  Spencer  as  the  special  subjects  of  these  sketches —
The  Comtean  and  Spencerian  systems  compared  and  contrasted —
Spencer's  laissez  /aire  proclivities — Laws  of  evolution  as  formulated
by  Spencer — His  two  categories,  the  unknowable  and  the  knowable
— The  unknowable — The  knowable — Co-existence  and  sequence — Mat-
ter— Persistence  of  force — Rhythm  of  motion — Redistribution  of  mat-
ter— Instability  of  the  homogeneous — Multiplication  of  effects — Segre-
gation— Equilibration — The  "  Principles  of  Biology" — Chemical  laws
underlying  biological  phenomena  —  Definition  of  life — Nature  and
effects  of  the  environment — Antagonism  between  growth  and  repro-
duction— Direct  and  indirect  equilibration — Morphological  correspond-  *
ence  of  organism  with  environment  —  Theory  of  population  —  The
*'  Principles  of  Psychology  " — Rank  of  the  work — Physiology  of  feeling
— Derivative  intellectual  processes — Proof  of  the  reality  of  an  exter-
nal world — Vivid  and  faint  series  of  psychic  phenomena — Realism —
The  "  Principles  of  Sociology  "  ;  notice  of  vol.  i — Ideas  of  savage  and
prehistoric  man — Mr.  Spencer's  ghost  theory  —  Ancestor-worship  —
Animal-worsliip — Plant-worship — Conceptions  of  deity — Society  com-
pared to  an  organism — Systems  of  government  or  headship — Forms
of  marriage— The  "  Data  of  Ethics  " 139

CHAPTER  III.
PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.

COSMOGENY — GENESIS   OF   MATTER — CHEMICAL  RELATIONS.

Scientific  categories — Matter — Motion — Force  or  energy — Laws  of  aggre-
gation—  Relation — Effect  of  narrow  ideas  of  magnitude — The  ulti-
mate atom — Time  and  space — The  true  nature  of  force — Segregation
among  aggregates — Compound  aggregation — Composite  character  of
the  nervous  system,  and  the  phenomena  of  multiple  consciousness —

CONTENTS.  xvii

Probable  composite  character  of  the  chemical  elements — Transcendent-
al chemistry — Formation  of  the  inorganic  compounds — Cosmical  his-
tory of  the  earth — Theory  of  the  development  of  celestial  systems —
Cosmic  and  organic  evolution — Radiation  a  counter-force  to  gravi-
tation— Cosmical  creation  of  the  chemical  elements — Significant  rela-
tions of  the  bodies  of  the  solar  sjstcm — Constitution  of  the  earth  and
original  formation  of  its  crust  and  interior — Elements  and  compounds
compared — Organic  compounds — The  properties  of  matter  considered
as  relations  among  their  molecular  activities — Comparison  of  the
molecules  of  different  elements — Properties  of  compounds  more  active
than  those  of  elements — Great  relative  size  of  the  molecules  of  or-
ganic compounds — Continuity  between  the  inorganic  and  organic  com-
pounds         220

CHAPTER  IV.
SECOA'DAR  Y  AG  GREG  A  TION.

BIOGENT — GENESIS    OP   ORGANIC   FORMS — TITAL   RELATIONS.

Dependence  of  the  properties  of  matter  upon  their  mode  of  molecular  ag-
gregation— Reciprocal  increase  of  mass  and  decrease  of  stability  of
molecules  during  the  processes  of  cosmic  and  organic  evolution —
Initial  step  in  the  development  of  life — Formation  of  the  organic
compounds — Isomerism — History,  origin,  and  constitution  of  proto-
plasm— Plasson  bodies — Reciprocal  relations  of  organization  and  life
—  Nutrition  and  reproduction  —  Morphological  units — Chemical  vs.
morphological  organization — Moners — The  sea  the  common  mother  of
all  life — True  vital  phenomena  confined  to  the  activities  of  protoplasm
— Organization  a  means  of  intensifying  the  effect  of  protoplasmic  ac-
tivities— Origin  of  the  cell — Orders  of  individuality — Living  distin-
guished from  non-living  bodies — Nature  of  growth — Nature  of  repro-
duction—  Theory  of  sexual  differentiation — Animals  distinguished
from  plants — Development  of  the  organic  out  of  the  inorganic —
Organic  aggregation — Simplest  form  of  tissue — The  stomach  the  first
organ  formed — Embryogeny — Ontogenesis  a  recapitulation  of  phylo-
genesis— Nature  and  functions  of  chlorophyl — Fibro-vascular  bundles
— ^First  appearance  of  leaves — Carbon  the  framing  timber  of  organic
beings — Power  of  protoplasm  to  decompose  carbonic  acid — Influence
of  light  on  plant-growth — Classification  of  organisms  with  respect  to
their  power  to  manufacture  organic  substances — Proper  meaning  of
spontaneous  generation — Respiration  common  to  plants  and  animals
— The  two  forms  of  nutrition  in  plants — Constitution  and  function  of
muscle — Constitution  and  function  of  nerves — Fundamental  nature  of
organization .  800

PAGX

xviii  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  V.

SECOND  A  RY  AG  QREGA  TION.  —  ( Continued.)

PSYCnOGEXY — GENESIS   OF   MIND— PSYCHIC   RELATIONS.

Spontaneous  motility  the  fundamental  distinguishing  property  of  proto-
plasm—Properties of  matter  in  general — ^Phenomena  of  irriubility
and  sensibility— Comprehensiveness  of  the  law  of  impact  as  embody-
ing the  principle  of  force— Planes  of  stability  in  protoplasmic  masses
— Life  vs.  mind — Primary  cause  of  the  development  of  the  psycliic
property — Where  does  feeling  begin  ? — Definition  of  sensation — Con-
sciousness implied  in  feeling — In  what  sense  mind  exists  in  nature —
Genesis  of  nerves — Multiple  individuality  of  the  nervous  system —
Physiology  of  brain-function — Phenomena  of  psychology  proper — Phe-
nomena of  the  subjective  branch  of  the  mind  traced  out — Nature  of
the  will — Phenomena  of  the  objective  branch  of  the  mind  traced  out
— Nature  of  mind 357

CHAPTER   VI.
SEC  ON  DAE  Y  AG  GREG  A  TION.—{  Continued. )

ANTHROPOGENY GENESIS    OF   MAN.

Preliminary  remarks — Homogeneity  among  organized  beings — Man's  place
in  the  animal  series — Lowest  types  of  mankind — ^Anatomical  charac-
ters indicating  the  simian  ancestry  of  man — Argument  from  micro-
cephaly— Argument  from  embryology — Popular  objections  to  the  doc-
trine of  development — Argument  from  archaeology — Causes  and  con-
ditions of  man's  pre-social  development — IIow  increased  brain-mass
was  acquired — How  the  erect  posture  was  acquired — How  articulate
speech  was  accjuired — General  considerations  on  the  origin  of  man —
Unity  of  the  human  race — Local  origin  of  man — Antiquity  of  man      .  410

CHAPTER   VII.
TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.

SOCIOGENY — GENESIS   OF  SOCIETY — SOCIAL   RELATIONS.

Logical  position  of  the  chapter  on  anthropogeny — Phenomena  of  sociog-
eny  a  continuation  of  the  process  of  aggregation — Conditions  favora-
ble to  association  in  the  simian  ancestors  of  man — Social  statics  and
passive  social  dynamics — Necessity  for  realizing  the  import  of  the
term  social  science — Analysis  of  its  forces  the  initial  step  in  estab-
lishing a  new  science — Preliminary  consideration  of  the  origin  and
nature  of  society — The  four  stages  in  the  development  of  society —

CONTENTS.  xix

PAGB

The  social  forces — Classification  of  the  social  forces — Genesis  of
society  through  the  action  of  the  social  forces — Method  adopted  of
treating  the  subject — The  essential  social  forces — The  preservative
forces — Operation  in  the  pre-social  state — Become  a  factor  with  the
recognition  of  property — Hunger  and  cold,  i,  e.,  want,  regarded  as
forces — Subsistence — Feeling,  not  function,  the  object  of  the  social
forces — Origin  of  art — Relation  of  the  mind-force  to  the  sense-force
— Origin  of  industry — Property  as  a  social  factor — Genesis  of  avarice
— The  law  of  acquisition — The  principle  of  deception — Natural  justice
— Transition  from  natural  justice  to  civil  justice — Influence  of  sym
pathy  —  Influence  of  increased  intelligence — Influence  of  diminished
power  to  acquire — Genesis  of  civil  justice — Modes  of  acquisition —
Classification  of  modes  of  acquisition — Producers — Classes  of  produc-
tion— Primary  production — Sources  of  food  — Food  distinguished  from
medicine  and  poison — Mineral  foods — Organic  foods — Nutritive  foods
— Respiratory  foods — Vegetation  the  original  producer  of  organic
foods — Sources  of  vegetable  food — Sources  of  animal  food — Produc-
tion of  foods — Production  of  mineral  foods — Production  of  vegetable
foods — ^Production  of  animal  foods— Secondary  production — ^Arts  prac-
ticed in  obtaining  animal  food — ^Arts  practiced  in  obtaining  vegetable
food  — Art  displayed  in  the  preparation  of  food — Art  required  in  pro-
viding clothing  and  shelter — Nature  and  sociologic  importance  of  in-
vention— Production  of  artificial  appliances — Appliances  for  protection
against  climate  —  Art  of  making  fire — Production  of  clothing  and
shelter — Production  of  clothing — Production  of  means  of  shelter —
General  remarks  on  production — Notions  of  value — Land — Degrees  of
production — Necessities  vs.  luxuries — Classification  of  the  objects  of
production  with  respect  to  their  degrees  of  utility — Accessories  to  pro-
duction— Distribution — Transportation — Exchange — Finance  —  Distri-
bution as  a  mode  of  acquisition — Parasites — Classification  of  non-
industrial  modes  of  acquisition  — "War  —  Government  —  Hierarchy  —
Monopoly  —  Monopoly  of  transportation  —  Monopoly  of  exchange —
Monopoly  of  finance — Monopoly  of  labor  (slavery) — Monopoly  of  manu-
facture— Remedies  for  monopoly — General  observations  on  the  para-
sitic classes — The  reproductive  forces — Comparison  of  the  operations
of  the  preservative  with  those  of  the  reproductive  forces — The  phys-
ical aspect — Feeling  vs.  function — The  direct  effects — The  sexual  appe-
tite— Anomaly  of  woman's  sexual  sentiments — Difference  in  the  sexual
instincts  of  males  and  females — Diffusion  of  the  sexual  instinct — Love
— Sociological  effects  of  the  love-sentiment — Physical  modifications —
Social  modifications — Male  sexual  selection — Marriage — Principal  forms
of  marriage — Polygyny — Polyandry — Monogamy — General  remarks  on
marriage  institutions — Genesis  of  modesty — Shame — Effect  of  clothing
— Evil  consequences  of  modesty — Condition  of  women — Biological

XX  CONTENTS.

PAOB

effects — ^Woman's  anomalous  menstruation  the  result  of  male  seznal
selection  —  Sociological  effects — Sexuo-social  inequalities — Inequality
of  dress — Inequality  of  duties — Inequality  of  education — Inequality  of
rights — Genesis  of  the  sexuo-social  inequalities — The  subjection  of
women — Male  sex  not  responsible — Attitude  of  science  toward  the
equalization  of  woman's  condition — ^Male  and  female  supremacy  in  the
lower  forms  of  life — ^Assumed  superiority  of  the  natural  over  the
artificial — Sexuo-social  dynamics — The  non-essential  social  forces —
Physical  aspects — Subdivisions — Undue  prominence  popularly  given  to
the  non-essential  forces — The  aesthetic  forces — Fine  arts  that  appeal
to  the  eye — ^Fine  arts  that  appeal  to  the  ear — The  moral  forces — The
love-forces — Parental  love — Consanguineal  love — Patriotism — Philan-
thropy— Self-love — Correlatives  of  the  love-forces — The  fear-forces —
Classification  of  the  fear-forces — Physical  fear-forces — Genesis  of  pain
— Physiological  explanation  of  fear — ^Fear  of  violence — Fear  of  man
— Fear  of  animals — Fear  of  inanimate  nature — Fear  of  spiritual  beings
— Fear  of  disease — Psychical  fear-forces — Sociological  effect  of  the
doctrine  of  immortality — The  intellectual  forces — Intellect  a  directing
force — Direct  effects  of  intellectual  activity — Concluding  remarks —
Why  the  discussion  has  been  confined  to  the  passively  dynamic  stage
of  society — Tertiary  compared  with  secondary  aggregates — Social  inte-
gration— Social  dissolution — Decline  through  migration  of  the  elite —
Decline  through  dilution — Instability  of  the  social  organization   .        .  448

INTKODUCTION.

Historical  notice  of  the  science  of  sociology — Importance  of  the  classification  of
the  sciences— Co-ordination  of  known  facts — The  two  principal  incentives
to  intellectual  labor— Position  of  sociology  in  the  hierarchy  of  the  sciences
— The  utilitarian  object  of  science  and  philosophy — Influence  of  past  moral
and  religious  systems— The  world  controlled  by  feeling  and  not  by  intellect
— Ideal  system  of  social  reform — Epitomized  statement  of  the  principles
of  dynamic  sociology — Natural  and  artificial  progress  contrasted — Laissez
/aire  doctrines — Theory  of  rights— Legislation  analogous  to  invention-
Illusions  and  paradoxes  of  nature — The  use  of  science — Active  and  passive
social  progress — Encroachments  of  government  upon  private  enterprise —
Antithetical  types  of  mind  and  views  of  nature — Supremacy  of  the  feelings
— Organization  of  feeling — Effect  of  accumulated  knowledge  as  distin-
guished from  intellectual  capacity — Civilization  essentially  artificial  and  an
improvement  upon  nature — Superiority  of  teleological  over  genetic  methods
— Ways  in  which  social  progress  tends  to  defeat  itself— Aim  of  dynamic
sociology.

The  science  of  Sociology,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  said  to
have  had  a  definite  origin,  was  founded  by  Auguste  Comte,
who  first  made  nse  of  the  term  in  his  "  Cours  de  Philoso-
phic Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  185,  third  edition,  written  in  1838.
The  conceptions  on  which  it  rests,  however,  are  much  older,
and  Comte  himself  ascribes  their  first  distinct  enunciation  to
Montesquieu  and  Condorcet.

The  essential  element  in  the  idea  of  a  social  science  is,  of
course,  the  recognition  of  the  regularity  and  uniformity  of
social  phenomena.  Statistics  had  proved  this  with  respect
to  certain  classes  of  these  phenomena,  and  there  had  been
many  before  Comte  who  had  not  shrank  from  declaring

2  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SCIENCES.

that  the  apparent  irregularity  and  arbitrary  nature  of  human
actions  and  social  movements  were  due  to  the  greater  com-
plexity of  this  class  of  facts,  and  the  consequent  inability  of
man  to  reduce  them  to  general  laws.

But  Comte  undertook  another  and  equally  important
task.  He  sought  to  fix  the  position  of  sociology  among  the
sciences,  of  which  he  drew  up  a  natural  series  or  "hie-
rarchy." This  was,  in  fact,  an  attempt  in  the  most  general
way  to  classify  the  sciences.  In  this  he  proved  himself  a
true  philosopher.

The  classification  of  the  sciences  is  and  should  properly
be  made  the  basis  of  every  comprehensive  scheme  of  philos-
ophy. Everything  that  can  be  known  belongs  to  science.
Everything  capable  of  forming  a  distinct  intellectual  con-
ception is  reducible  to  a  place  under  some  one  of  the  Scien-
tific categories.  Indeed,  science  itself,  in  so  far  as  it  is  dis-
tinguishable from  knowledge  in  a  general  sense,  consists  in
a  co-ordination  and  subordination  of  the  different  kinds  of
knowledge;  in  a  word,  the  essential  of  all  science  is  the
classification  of  knowledge.  The  classification  of  the  sci-
ences, therefore,  is  itself  strictly  a  science,  and  consists  in  a
prolongation  of  the  scientific  process,  whereby  it  is  extended
into  higher  fields  and  made  to  embrace  its  own  grand  divis-
ions, objectively  regarded  as  material  for  science.  Mere
classification,  or  "  systematization,"  *  is,  therefore,  a  less
trivial  operation  than  some  persons  have  intimated.  It  is
the  essential  process  of  organization,  and  has  for  its  real
object  to  arrive  at  the  true  order  which  exists  in  the  uni-
verse. But  order  'implies  a  relation  of  parts,  not  an  ideal
but  a  real  relation.  The  only  real  or  physical  relation  which
can  subsist  is  the  relation  of  dependence,  or  subordination,
by  which  every  thing  is  actually  connected  with  every  thing
else,  both  in  space  and  time,  by  an  unbroken  series  of  links.
Relation  of  co-existence  is  an  ideal  relation  which  can  only
be  realized  by  following  both  objects  back  through  their

*  J.  S.  Mill,  "  Auguste  Comte  and  Positivism,"  Philadelphia,  18G6,  p.  177.

CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SCIENCES.  3

chain  of  real  relations  to  tlieir  common  antecedent.  This
ideal  relation  of  co-existence,  or  independent  existence,  is
the  domain  of  fact,  and  constitutes  the  field  over  which  the
specialists,  the  mere  fact-gatherers,  delight  to  roam,  and  in
which  they  perform  their  vast  and  invaluable  labors.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  the  relation  of  sequence,  of  dependent
existence,  is  the  domain  of  law,  of  order,  and  the  fertile
field  in  which  the  great  systemizers,  theorizers,  and  organ-
izers of  the  world  find  congenial  employment.  It  is  the
former  class  with  whom  the  term  science  is,  at  the  present
day,  most  commonly  connected,  that  of  philosophy  being
generally  reserved  for  the  labors  of  the  latter  class.

Without  discussing  the  relative  merits  of  either  of  these
terms,  or  of  the  classes  of  labor  to  which  they  are  applied,
the  incorrectness,  not  to  say  injustice,  of  withholding  the
title  of  science  from  the  efforts  of  those  whose  minds  are
ever  seeking  after  the  order  of  the  world  rather  than  its
disconnected  materials,  is  too  apparent  to  need  be  more  than
pointed  out.*  It  is  clear  that  the  possession  of  materials  of
science  is  only  of  practical  value  to  mankind  in  proportion
as  they  are  co-ordinated  and  organized,  and  it  has  been
justly  remarked  that  such  an  accumulation  in  excess  of  one's
powers  to  systemize,  may  constitute  an  impediment  to  prog-
ress from  the  very  confusion  which  it  engenders.

All  classification  is  a  striving  after  unity.  To  classify
it  is  necessary  to  generalize.  The  only  exception  possible
would  be  where  all  the  terms  are  co-ordinate,  a  condition

*  It  is  an  unfortunate  circumstance  that  the  speculating  and  philosophizing
have,  to  a  great  extent,  been  done  by  persons  who  have  not  been  observers  of
facts,  while  those  who  have  extensively  observed  have  either  not  found  time  to
theorize,  or  have  shrunk  timidly  from  the  task  of  drawing  conclusions.  Alexan-
der von  numboldt,  while  he  complained  of  this  tendency,  was  himself  an  exam-
ple of  it.  The  question  now  is,  not  whether  men  shall  cease  to  philosophize,
for  this,  as  Sir  William  Uamilton  says,  can  not  be  prevented,  but  whether  phi-
losophy and  speculation  shall  be  forbidden  to  those  who  have  premises,  and,
consequently,  monopolized  by  those  who  have  none.  Shall  science  and  philos-
ophy, thought  and  things,  be  united  or  divorced  ?

4  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SCIENCES.

which  is  never  found  in  nature.  Generalization  rises  from
the  individual  and  special  to  the  general  and  universal.  AVith-
in  certain  limitations  the  universal  is  frequently  reached,  and,
in  such  cases,  unity  is  attained.  But  such  unity  is  only  rela-
tive. However  many  such  unities  there  may  be,  and  how-
ever apparently  independent  and  co-ordinate  they  may  be,
they  are  all  subordinate  to  some  higher  unity,  and  so  on  until
we  arrive  at  the  ultimate  unit  which  comprehends,  or  rather
constitutes,  the  universe  itself,  and  whose  limit  is  infinity.
This  must,  therefore,  ever  remain  incomprehensible  to  the
finite.  Every  approach  toward  it,  however,  furnishes  a  high
satisfaction  to  the  human  mind,  and  can  not  fail  to  place  the
race  not  only  upon  a  higher  intellectual  but  upon  a  higher
material  plane.  As  a  sufficient  illustration  of  this  we  need
only  point  to  the  great  barological  law  of  Newton,  which,
though  by  no  means  an  ultimate  unit,  has  raised  both  the
intellectual  and  the  material  world  to  a  new  and  higher  stage
of  existence  and  activity.

The  efforts  of  modern  philosophers  to  classify  the  sciences
have,  on  this  principle,  exerted  a  wholesome  influence  upon
human  speculation.  They  have  done  more.  They  have
added  a  new  impetus  and  given  a  certain  tone  to  science
itself.  The  pursuit  of  knowledge,  in  whatever  manner,  is
necessarily  laborious.  No  labor  can  be  performed  without  a
stimulus  or  incentive.  The  first  principle  of  political  econ-
omy is  that  every  one  must  be  expected  to  seek  the  greatest
gain.  But  gains  are  of  various  kinds.  The  mind  has  its
needs  and  its  satisfactions  as  well  as  the  body.  Intellectual
labor  usually  receives  its  remuneration  in  hind.  Where  no
immediate  material  benefit  is  to  follow,  the  mind  can  not  be
depended  upon  to  labor  except  for  a  confidently  expected
reward  in  intellectual  satisfaction.  It  is  this  anticipated
intellectual  remuneration  that  has  formed  the  incentive  to
the  greatest  mental  achievements.  It  is  to  this  that  we
owe  our  grandest  discoveries.  To  one  class  of  minds,  it
must  be  admitted,  a  seemingly  adequate  satisfaction  is  felt

ACCUMULATION  OF  FACTS.  6

in  the  mere  acquirement  of  independent  items  of  knowledge.
It  would  probably  be  more  correct  to  say  that  the  natural
satisfaction  which  the  mind  normally  derives  from  the  ac-
quisition of  knowledge  is  sufficient  in  some  persons  to  render
it  more  or  less  independent  of  the  quality  of  that  knowledge.
This  sentiment  exists  in  all  just  as  the  sense  of  causalty  exists
in  all,  only  in  some,  under  certain  conditions  of  education  or
of  inherited  experience,  the  passion  for  acquisition  predomi-
nates and,  as  it  were,  eclipses  the  satisfaction  derived  from
the  contemplation  of  causal  relation,  so  that  the  former  alone
may  become  a  sufficient  stimulus  for  a  life  of  arduous  labor.
The  case  is  analogous  if  not  parallel  to  the  trite  one  in  which
the  passion  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth  becomes  an  incen-
tive in  itself  to  the  complete  oblivion  of  the  real  purpose  or
utility  of  the  wealth  amassed.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  the
materials  of  science,  like  those  of  wealth  thus  acquired,  may
or  may  not  be  somewhat  useful  to  the  individual  accumu-
lating them,  but  are  pretty  sure  to  be  ultimately  useful  to
others ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  real  value  of  the  former
consists  in  their  employment,  by  those  competent  to  do  so,
for  the  discovery  of  the  laws  of  nature  by  a  study  of  their
natural  relationships ;  a  use  as  unlike  that  to  which  their
collector  applies  them  as  the  economic  distribution  and  cir-
culation of  money  is  unlike  its  systematic  hoarding  in  the
vaults  of  the  miser.  But  this  class  of  scientists  who  derive
an  adequate  remuneration  for  their  sustained  labors  in  the
pleasure  which  each  new  object  affords,  independently  of  its
relations  to  other  objects,  and  of  its  place  in  the  great  hie-
rarchy of  nature — this  class,  though  large  and  useful,  can  be
progressive  only  in  an  indirect  manner,  and  only  as  the
statisticians  of  that  other  class,  in  whom  the  supreme  grati-
j&cation  consists  in  tracing  the  relations  of  dependency  among
the  objects  of  nature  and  assigning  each  to  its  appropriate
group  in  a  universal  system.

The  primary  task  of  this  latter  class  was  the  estabhshment
of  science  itself,  for  which  the  other  class  now  receives  the

6  CO-ORDINATION  OF  FACTS.

chief  credit.  Science,  as  before  remarked,  is  the  co-ordina-
tion, or,  ratlier,  the  systemization  of  knowledge.  It  is  this
causal  type  of  mind  which,  not  satisfied  with  a  heterogeneous
mass  of  known  facts  and  phenomena,  each  appealing  inde-
pendently and  for  itself  to  the  intellect,  has  proceeded  to
organize  this  mass  and  determine  the  relations  of  its  indi-
vidual facts  and  phenomena  to  one  another,  thus  endeavoring
to  reduce  all  knowledge  to  a  homogeneous  system.  This
ideal  homogeneous  system  is  science.  In  the  attempt  to
reach  it  many  distinct  steps  have  been  taken,  many  compre-
hensive groups  have  been  clearly  established.  Each  of  these
groups  is  denominated  a  science.  In  the  present  infancy  of
the  co-ordinating  process  it  is  not  surprising  that  these  so-
called  sciences  should  have  themselves  the  form  of  units,  of
independent  groups  of  knowledge.  So  little  is  known  of
the  more  remote  and  involved  relations  of  phenomena,  that
when  a  phenomenon  has  been  correctly  referred  to  a  given
group  it  is  not  suspected  that  it  possesses  other  than  those
most  obvious  relations  which  induced  such  a  reference.  So
distinct  appear  the  sums  of  these  related  phenomena,  these
groups  called  sciences,  that  it  is  not  perceived  that  they  have
further  relationships,  indirectly  with  one  another,  but  di-
rectly with  a  higher  order  of  phenomena  to  which  they  have
a  common  relation  of  dependence.  Thus,  after  the  great
step  which  has  resulted  in  a  multitude  of  independent  sci-
ences, out  of  a  multitude  of  independent  facts,  the  world  is
now  preparing,  under  the  leadership  of  the  causal  type  of
mind,  to  take  another  great  step  and  bring  this  heterogeneous
multitude  of  apparently  independent  sciences  into  one  homo-
geneous system  of  universal  science.  As  no  one  will  deny
that  the  establishment  of  the  present  so-called  sciences  was
a  great  advance  upon  the  conception  of  an  infinite  multi-
tude of  independent  facts,  so  we  have  a  right  to  expect
that  the  universal  science  or  true  cosmology  will  constitute
an  equally  great  advance  upon  the  present  heterogeneous
state  of  science.

VALUE  OF  HYPOTHESES.  7

Now,  tlie  means  by  whicli  eacli  of  the  present  established
sciences  has  been  reached  is  the  hypothesis.  It  is  to  the
theorizers,  to  those  who,  not  knowing  the  relations  of  things,
suppose  them  and  proceed  upon  their  suppositions,  and,  if
false,  reject  them  and  try  other  suppositions,  until  they
arrive  at  the  true  laws  of  phenomena,  that  the  world  is
almost  exclusively  indebted  for  what  it  now  possesses  of
organized  science.  It  is  the  so-called  philosophers  who  after
all  lead  the  scientific  as  they  have  always  led  the  intellectual
and  literary  world.  It  may  not  be  too  much  to  say  that
science  will  one  day  admit  that  it  owes  more  to  Immanuel
Kant  for  publishing  his  "  Theorie  des  Himmels "  than  to
Alexander  von  Humboldt  for  publishing  his  "  Cosmos " ;
the  one  a  brief  but  profound  theory  of  the  Cosmos,  the
other  an  extended  enumeration  of  its  then  known  phe-
nomena.

There  are  two  principal  directions  in  which  this  work  of
unifying  science  is  advancing :  the  one  is  the  discovery  of
comprehensive  laws  under  which  great  groups  of  distantly
related  phenomena  can  be  systematically  placed ;  the  other
is  the  establishment  of  a  hierarchy  *  of  the  sciences.  These
two  paths  of  progress  are  somewhat  distinct,  though  ulti-
mately dependent.  In  any  given  state  of  discovery  and  of
knowledge,  the  work  of  organization  can  be  carried  on  inde-
pendently of  new  discoveries  until  its  materials  are  ex-
hausted. On  the  other  hand,  the  work  of  discovery  can  be
carried  on  to  a  great  extent  independently  of  the  organiza-
tion of  previously  known  facts.  Such  has,  in  fact,  been  the
true  history  of  science.  The  discoverers  of  great  principles
have  never  themselves  been  able  to  refer  but  a  small  num-
ber of  the  facts  properly  belonging  to  them  to  those  prin-
ciples.    They   have  generally  "builded  better  than  they

*  The  use  here  of  the  word  hierarchy  iu  the  Comtean  sense,  from  the  anal-
ogy of  the  Celestial  Hierarchy,  and  upon  which  ecclesiastical  rank  in  the  Roman
and  Anglican  churches  was  based,  is  not  for  the  sake  of  novelty,  but  because  it
seems  to  supply  a  positive  defect  In  the  language.

8  COSMIOAL  PKINOIPLES.

knew."  Strictly  speaking,  only  three  comprehensive  cos-
mical  principles  have  yet  been  enunciated,  only  one  of  which
is  yet  universally  accepted.  These  are :  1,  the  law  of  gravi-
tation ;  2,  the  nebular  hypothesis ;  and,  3,  the  development
theory.  The  attempt  of  Herbert  Spencer  to  combine  the
two  latter  in  connection  with  the  first  into  a  universal  theory
of  evolution  approaches  nearer  to  the  complete  unification
of  science  than  has  ever  before  been  done.  In  fact,  the  idea
embraced  in  the  word  evolution  *  as  employed  by  him  is  by
far  the  nearest  approach  ever  yet  made  to  the  conception  of
an  absolutely  universal  and  cosmical  law.  Among  the  next
great  steps  to  be  taken  may  be  expected  discoveries  tending
to  explain  more  fully  the  nature  of  the  matter  of  interplane-
tary space,  and  thus  perfect  our  knowledge  of  the  phenomena
of  light,  heat,  electricity,  etc.  It  is  possible  that  facts  enough
may  now  exist  from  which,  if  properly  co-ordinated,  some
grand  law  of  their  common  nature  might  be  deduced.  The
world  is  probably  now  on  the  eve  of  one  or  more  such  far-
reaching  discoveries.

In  the  direction  of  organizing  the  known  science  the
present  epoch  is  very  active.  Two  important  principles
of  classification  are  now  for  the  first  time  recognized  and
avowed.  The  one  is  that  of  a  causal  dependence  in  all  the
phenomena  of  nature  ("  monism  ").  The  other  is  that  of  the
utilitarian  object  of  science.

The  leading  scientists  and  philosophers  now  realize  and
announce  that  all  possible  observable  phenomena  have  real
antecedents,  and  that  therefore  the  work  of  investigating
them  is  no  longer  a  hopeless  task,  as  it  certainly  would  be
if  the  possibility  of  the  absolute  independence  of  any  phe-
nomenon were  admitted.

The  leading  thinkers  of  our  time  also  now  concede  and
declare  that  the  only  ultimate  object  which  can  be  success-
fully maintained  for  human  effort  is  the  improvement  of  the
human  race  upon  this  planet.
*  For  a  criticism  of  this  term  as  employed  by  Mr.  Spencer,  see  infra,  p.  248.

THE  TWO  INCENTIYES  TO  INTELLECTUAL  LABOR.     9

Under  the  healthy  stimulus  of  these  two  cardinal  princi-
ples, the  work  of  organizing  human  knowledge  is  now  pro-
gressing with  great  promise  of  soon  reaching  a  high  state  of
completeness.  Not  until  the  work  of  classifying  the  sciences
could  be  undertaken  with  the  clear  recognition  that  they
may  be  arranged  in  some  sort  of  connected  and  ascending
series,  whereby  an  acquaintance  with  subordinate  stages  be-
comes essential  to  a  complete  appreciation  of  the  higher
ones,  could  any  satisfactory  arrangement  of  the  groups  of
phenomena  be  made  or  expected.

Not  until  such  a  clew  was  discovered  and  laid  hold  of,  as
the  purpose  of  elevating  humanity  furnishes,  could  sufficient
energy  or  perseverance  be  infused  into  the  eliort  to  insure
for  it  a  successful  issue.  The  conception  of  a  universal
causal  dependence  of  phenomena  when  transformed  into  an
active  working  principle  takes  the  shape  of  a  universal
theory  of  development  or  evolution.  The  high  utilitarian
motive,  focalizing  all  considerations  in  the  good  of  man,  can
have  no  other  effect  than  to  establish  as  the  ultimate  science,
for  the  perfection  of  which  all  other  sciences  exist,  the
science  of  human  life,  which  takes  the  form  and  name  of
sociology.

Thus,  with  the  principle  of  evolution  as  a  law  and
guide,  and  with  the  doctrine  of  "  meliorism  "  (vol.  ii,  p.  468)
as  an  incentive  and  motive-power,  the  organization  of  aU
facts,  forces,  and  phenomena  into  an  orderly  and  connected
system  is  to-day  progressing  with  certain  and  rapid  steps.

The  subject  of  the  classification  of  the  sciences  and  of  the
natural  order  of  phenomena  will  come  up  for  a  more  special
consideration  in  an  early  part  of  the  work  {infra,  pp.  97,
147,  and  chaps,  iii-vii).  Its  introduction  here  is  for  the  pur-
pose of  early  calling  attention  to  the  position  and  to  the
importance  of  sociology  in  such  a  system.  Whatever  may
be  the  difficulty  in  fixing  the  position  of  any  other  science,
that  of  sociology,  as  Comte  clearly  showed,  must  occupy  the
last  place  in  the  series.     Its  highly  special  character,  its

10  SYSTEMATIC  POSITION  OF  SOCIOLOGY.

great  complexity,  and,  above  all,  the  dependence  which  a
careful  study  of  it  shows  it  to  have  upon  all  the  rest,  all
point  unniistakably  to  the  end  of  the  chain  as  its  only  natu-
ral position.  Not  only  does  it  depend  more  or  less  upon
all  other  sciences,  but  it  can  not  be  shown  that  any  other
science  is  in  the  least  dependent  upon  it.  This  last  fact
is  even  more  decisive  than  the  others  as  to  its  true  character
and  place.  Its  logical  position  at  the  end  of  the  series  is
further  shown  by  the  manner  in  which  it  comprehends  all
other  sciences.  It  is,  as  it  were,  all  sciences  combined,  em-
bracing all  that  they  embrace,  together  with  a  large  differ-
entia.

It  is  impossible,  on  the  other  hand,  to  overestimate  the
importance  of  a  well-defined  object  toward  which  human
effort  may  be  directed.

It  is  vain  to  expect  men  to  put  forth  efforts  unless  some
object  is  clearly  set  before  them.  It  is  further  necessary
that  this  object  be  a  positive  or  constructive,  and  not  a  nega-
tive or  destructive  one.  The  tendency  is  to  be  perpetually
building  up.  !N^egative  objects,  whose  nature  is  to  tear
down,  are  undertaken  with  reluctance,  and  soon  relinquished.
To  insure  successful  prosecution  they  must  possess  the  ele-
ments of  progress,  and  give  earnest  of  carrying  the  world
forward  to  a  more  advanced  position.  The  failure  of  all
religious  systems  to  accomplish  this  is  now  apparent  to  all
capable  of  observing  the  history  of  the  world  from  a  wholly
unbiased  stand-point.  The  influence  of  imaginary  advanced
states  beyond  the  present  life  has  had  no  effect  in  securing
such  a  state  in  this  life.*  The  moral  systems  that  have
been  more  or  less  mechanically  mixed  with  religious  ones
have  shown  themselves  incapable  of  progressing  beyond  a
limit  reached  in  the  time  of  Confucius  and  Hillel.f

*  Tylor,  "Primitive  Culture"  (Boston,  1874),  vol.  i,  p.  495;  vol.  ii,  pp.
104-lOY.  Auguste  Comte,  "Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  v,  pp.  123,  124,  297-
300,  etc.

f  Hillel  taught  this  precept,  "  Do  not  unto  others  as  thou  wouldst  not  have

FEELING  THE  MOTIVE  OF  ALL  ACTION.  H

The  need  of  some  inspiring  progressive  principle  for
mankind  to  lay  hold  of,  for  the  satisfaction  of  that  funda-
mental sentiment  which  aspires  to  a  better  condition,  is  as
strongly  felt  now  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Plato  or  of  Paul.

The  motive  of  all  action  is  feeling.  All  great  move-
ments in  history  are  preceded  and  accompanied  by  strong
feelings.  And  it  is  those  persons  whose  feelings  have  been
most  violent  that  have  exerted  the  greatest  influence  upon
the  tone  and  character  of  society.  Purely  intellectual  feel-
ing is  never  sufiicient  directly  to  sway  the  multitude.  The
historical  example  which  furnishes  the  nearest  approach  to
this  is  that  of  ancient  Greece.  But  even  of  this  we  have,  in
the  surviving  literature  of  that  age,  a  very  inadequate  and
superficial  criterion.  The  fact  alone  that  feeling  so  far
prevailed  over  intellect  as  to  require  the  sacrifice  of  Socrates
to  its  demands  gives  us  a  faint  glimpse  of  the  other  unre-
corded exactions  which  it  must  have  made.  Throughout  all
time  past,  the  mass  of  mankind  has  been  carried  along  by  the
power  of  sentiment.  It  has  never  been  deeply  moved,  at
least  directly,  by  that  of  intellect.  Ilence  we  see  that  the
psychical  agencies  that  have  stirred  up  mankind  have  been  \y'
chiefly  of  a  religious  nature.  Keligion  is  the  embodied  and  ,
organized  state  of  the  emotions.  It  represents  the  combined
forces  of  human  feeling.  The  immense  success  with  which
religious  reformers  have  met  has  been  due  to  the  almost
irresistible  power  of  their  emotional  nature,  and  never  to
their  intellectual  supremacy.  That  this  is  the  normal  state
of  the  public  mind  I  shall  endeavor  to  establish  in  another
place  (vol.  ii,  pp.  Ill,  113,  123),  What  I  desire  to  draw
especial  attention  to  here  is  the  remarkable  fact  that  not
only  has  the  world  been  thus  far  ruled  by  passion  and  not
by  intellect,  but  that  the  true  rulers  of  the  world  have  had
to  be,  in  order  to  win  that  distinction,  not  merely  enthusi-
asts and  fanatics,  but,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  insane  per-

others  do  unto  thee;  that  is  all  the  law,  the  rest  is  mere  comment." — ("Babyl.
Talm.  Shabb.,"  31  a.)

12  FEELING  THE  MOTIVE  OF  ALL  ACTION.

sons,  in  a  certain  legitimate  acceptation  of  that  term.  It
is  no  longer  a  question  among  modem  medical  men  that
the  remarkable  actions  of  those  men  who  have  laid  claims
to  divine  inspiration  and  founded  religious  systems  must  be
referred  not  only  to  a  pathological  but  to  an  actually  de-
ranged condition  of  their  minds.*

The  strange  truth  thus  comes  up  for  our  contemplation
that,  instead  of  having  been  guided  and  impelled  by  intellect
and  reason  throughout  all  the  years  of  history,  we  have  been
ruled  and  swayed  by  the  magnetic  passions  of  epileptics  and
monomaniacs.

But  this  startling  fact  only  shows  us  the  more  forcibly
that  it  is  feeling  and  not  intellect  which  is  required  to  influ-
ence human  action.  Indeed,  this  proposition  is  capable  not
only  of  a  logical  and  a  pyschological,  but  of  a  truly  physical,
demonstration.  Still,  as  it  is  somewhat  obscure,  it  needs
the  aid  of  such  an  illustration  as  the  above  to  bring  it  home
to  the  mind.  Those  persons  (and  there  are  some  very  en-
lightened ones)  who  hope  one  day  to  see  this  state  of  society
reversed,  and  who  are  looking  forward  to  the  time  when
intellect  and  reason  shall  assume  control  of  society,  dethron-
ing passion  and  emotion,  are  doomed  to  disappointment,  not
only  in  their  own  time  but  for  ever.  Intellect  is  not  an  im-
pelling but  a  directing  force.  Feeling  alone  can  drive  on
the  social  train,  whether  for  weal  or  woe.

This  is  one  of  the  great  facts  which  the  sociologist,  laying
aside  all  personal  bias  and  seeking  only  the  real  and  the  true,
must  clearly  realize  and  frankly  acknowledge,  and  which,
having  realized  and  acknowledged,  he  must  respect  by  shap-
ing his  philosophical  system  to  correspond  with  fact.  Re-
nouncing the  hope  of   an  intellectual  rule,  admitting  the

*  Du  Boi8-Re3THond'a  address  before  the  Scientific  Lectures  Association  of
Cologne,  translated  into  "The  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiii,  p.  388.
Henry  Maudsley,  in  "Fortnightly  Review"  for  September,  1878,  p.  882.  See
also  Dr.  Howden's  paper  before  the  Edinburgh  Medico-Psychological  Associa-
tion, 1873,  "On  the  Mental  Condition  of  Epileptics  in  Relation  to  Religions
Sentiment."    Also,  William  B.  Carpenter,  F.  R.  S.,  "  Mental  Physiology,"  p.  812.

REFORMATORY  SYSTEMS.  13

right  of  feeling,  or,  if  he  please,  of  passion,  to  control  the
world,  it  becomes  his  duty  to  address  himself  to  the  only
task  remaining,  and  to  inquire  candidly  how,  taking  facts  as
they  are,  the  existing  condition  of  society  is  to  be  amelio-
rated.

All  reform  which  it  is  hoped  to  bring  about  by  argu-
ment, persuasion,  or  any  of  the  means  available  to  the  phi-
losopher, must  hold  forth  moral  rather  than  intellectual
inducements.  To  succeed,  it  must  follow  in  the  path  of  all
previous  efforts  of  the  kind,  of  the  religious  systems  and  the
moral  schemes  of  Menu,  Zoroaster,  Confucius,  Jesus,  and
Mohammed.  But  like  these  great  and  successful  systems  it
must  be  in  accord  with  the  state  of  society  upon  which  it  is
expected  to  exert  an  influence.  Any  one  of  those  systems,
if  attempted  to  be  put  into  effect  in  Europe  or  America  to-
day, would  fail  at  its  inception.  Every  such  scheme  must
bear  upon  it  the  stamp  of  reasonableness  proportioned  to
the  reasoning  capacities  of  the  people.  Thus  far  does  intel-
lect come  in  as  an  element  of  reform.  Until  credence  can
be  secured,  the  necessary  degree  of  sentiment  can  not  be
aroused.  But  the  same  was  necessary  for  the  systems  enu-
merated. The  condition  of  society  is  at  all  times  so  bad,
the  degree  of  suffering  every-where  witnessed  is  so  great,
and  the  amount  of  sympathy  thereby  excited  and  con-
stantly experienced  in  society  is  so  intense,  that  there  has
never  been  an  age  when  there  did  not  exist  a  deep-seated
demand  for  some  improvement  of  the  existing  state  of
things.  The  great  moral  systems  of  the  remote  past  which
have  sought  to  accomplish  this,  owing  no  doubt  to  their
failure  to  do  so,  were  gradually  transformed  in  more  mod-
ern times  into  religious  systems  which  made  no  promises
for  this  life,  which  they  perceived  could  not  be  fulfilled,
but  only  held  out  the  highest  hopes  for  another  life,  by
which  the  failure  of  fulfillment  could  never  be  proved.
Both  classes  of  systems  succeeded  because  they  were  adapted
each  to  the  degree  of  credulity  of  the  people  to  whom  they

14  IN  WHAT  REFORM  CONSISTS.

were  addressed.  As  the  failure  of  the  first  began  to  be  felt,
the  second  were  brought  forward.  Now  that  in  our  age
the  fulfillment  of  the  promises  held  out  by  the  latter  is
coming  more  and  more  in  question,  there  has  been  a  rapid
and  increasing  amount  of  dissatisfaction,  until  the  present
prevailing  systems  now  fail  to  respond  to  the  still  undimin-
ished demand  for  better  things.  But  the  failure  of  all
previous  systems,  both  moral  and  religious,  to  fulfill  their
promises,  makes  some  despair  that  any  will  ever  be  offered
which  shall  succeed.  Others  think  differently,  and  still  hope
that  some  fundamental  movement  may  yet  be  set  on  foot
which  shall  lead  to  the  real  improvement  of  society.  The
demand  is  for — 1,  an  increase  of  enjoyment ;  and,  2,  a
diminution  of  suffering.  It  is,  moreover,  of  a  twofold
character — subjective  and  objective.  The  motive  principle
of  the  former  is  egoism ;  that  of  the  Latter,  altruism.

Egoism  is  the  feeling  which  demands  for  self  an  increase
of  enjoyment  and  diminution  of  discomfort.  Altruism  is
that  which  demands  these  results  for  others.  Of  course  it
can,  and  at  the  proper  time  will,  be  shown  (vol.  ii,  pp.  14:6,
368)  that,  in  the  last  analysis,  egoism  and  altruism  are  one,
that  altruism  is  only  an  indirect  or  mediate  form  of  egoism
in  which  the  motive  is  sympathy,  i.  e.,  a  kind  of  feeling  which
results  from  the  contemplation  of  suffering  in  others,  and
which  is  strong  in  proportion  as  the  organization  is  delicate
and  refined.  For  this  reason,  and  not  because  it  is  of  a  dis-
tinct nature,  is  altruism  a  far  higher  and  nobler,  though  thus
far  a  much  less  powerful,  sentiment  than  egoism.

The  great  moral  and  religious  systems  referred  to  present
us  with  a  somewhat  remarkable  paradox.  They  have  been
grand  successes  in  so  far  as  exerting  an  extraordinary  influ-
ence and  absolute  control  over  the  wills  and  acts  of  men  is
concerned.  They  have  been  signal  and  complete  failures  in
so  far  as  the  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  society  is  con-
cerned. While  it  is  impossible  to  discern  what  would  have
existed  in  the  world  if  they  had  not,  it  is  possible,  on  the

CAUSE  OF  THE  REAL  SOCIAL  PROGRESS.  15

other  hand,  to  trace  to  their  direct  influence  an  enormous
amount  of  unquestionable  evil,  and  that  mixed  with  but  a
small  quantity  of  demonstrable  good.*  The  fact  that  every
system  imputes  as  much  to  every  other  is  one  very  strong
proof  of  this  truth.

When  I  speak  of  the  influence  of  these  systems  in
controlling  the  destiny  of  mankind,  I  wish  to  disconnect
this  idea  wholly  from  that  of  the  true  progress  which  I
admit  has  taken  place  in  society  (vol.  ii,  pp.  168,  178,  385,
507).  And  when  I  assert  that  all  the  control  that  can
ever  be  exerted  over  mankind  must,  in  the  future  as  in
the  past,  emanate  from  the  side  of  feeling  and  not  of  in-
tellect, and  promise  a  mitigation  of  the  hardships  of  exist-
ence, at  the  same  time  I  unqualifiedly  maintain  that  all  the
true  progress  which  has  in  fact  taken  place  in  the  world
has  come  from  the  side  of  intellect  and  not  of  feeling.  And
herein  lies  a  second  paradox.  This  finds  its  explanation  in
the  fact  that  all  the  real  progress  that  has  been  made  in  the
world  has  been  the  result  of  accident,  or,  at  least,  of  the
operation  of  the  uncontrolled  and  unknown  laws  of  nature.
There  has  been  progress  in  civilization  just  as  there  has  been
progress  in  organic  life,  because  the  highest  and  best  has
been  selected  and  preserved,  and  the  lowest  and  poorest  has
perished.  It  is  simply  that  man,  as  a  progressive  animal
before  the  human  period,  and  before  the  historic  period,  did
not  cease  to  be  a  progressive  animal  after  reaching  these
periods.  His  progress  has  been  the  progress  of  nature,  a
secular  and  cosmical  movement,  not  the  progress  of  art,  the
result  of  foresight  and  intelHgent  direction.  In  short,  man
has  not  yet  ceased  to  be  an  animal,  and  is  still  under  the
control  of  external  nature  and  not  under  the  control  of  his
own  mind.  It  is  natural  selection  that  has  created  intellect ;
it  is  natural  selection  that  has  developed  it  to  its  present
condition,  and  it  is  intellect  as  a  product  of  natural  selection
that  has  guided  man  up  to  his  present  position.  The  prin-
*  President  Andrew  D.  White,  "  The  Warfare  of  Science."

16  NEED  OF  A  PROGRESSIVE  SYSTEM.

ciple  of  artificial  selection  whicli  he  has  been  taught  by
nature,  and  has  applied  to  other  creatures,  more  as  an  art
than  as  a  science,  to  his  immense  advantage,  he  has  not  yet
thought  of  applying  to  himself.  Not  until  he  does  this  can
he  claim  any  true  distinction  from  the  other  animals.

Notwithstanding  the  failure  of  all  systematic  attempts
thus  far  made  to  secure  artificially  the  improvement  of  so-
ciety, still,  cheerless  as  the  prospect  may  seem,  the  only
hope  of  success  in  this  direction  is  in  other  systematic  at-
tempts made  in  the  same  mauner,  and  according  to  the
same  methods  as  those  by  which  these  have  been  established
and  carried  on ;  that  is,  placed  in  the  power  of  the  feelings
which  alone  are  capable  of  propelling  any  social  operations.
If  this  is  hopeless,  then  must  the  race  be  left  to  drift  on
under  purely  natural  influences,  and  reach  any  stage  to
which  the  conditions  found  on  the  planet  may  be  capable
of  carrying  it.  Let  no  one,  however,  be  deluded  by  the
thought  that  this  cosmical  progress,  even  in  its  own  slow
way,  can  continue  for  ever.  It  will  hereafter  be  shown
(vol.  i,  pp.  704,  Y06 ;  ii,  pp.  15,  210,  272)  that  this  swarm-
ing planet  will  soon  see  the  conditions  of  human  advance-
ment exhausted,  and  the  night  of  reaction  and  degeneracy
ushered  in,  never  to  be  again  succeeded  by  the  daylight  of
progress,  unless  something  swifter  and  more  certain  than
natural  selection  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  devel-
opment of  the  psychic  faculty,  by  which  alone  man  is  distin-
guished from  the  rest  of  the  fauna  of  the  earth  and  enabled
to  people  all  parts  of  its  surface.  The  resources  of  the  globe
are  not  inexhaustible  unless  zealously  husbanded  by  the  de-
liberative foresight  of  enlightened  intellect.

But  as  the  non-progressive  systems  of  the  past  have,  in
fact,  differed  immensely  in  all  their  minor  details,  so  there
is  no  limit  to  the  variation  to  which  we  may  conceive  some
future  and,  possibly,  progressive  system  subjected.

There  can  be  no  question  of  the  mere  power  that  resides
in  such  movements.     When  we  consider  the  enormous  extent

POWER  OF  PAST  AND  PRESENT  SYSTEMS.  17

to  whioli  ihej  have,  as  a  matter  of  fact  and  of  history,  con-
trolled the  actions  of  men,  we  can  only  deplore  the  vast
waste  of  energy  which  their  failure  to  accomplish  their  end
shows  them  to  have  made.  Under  the  direction  of  religious
organization  empires  have  been  established ;  wars  of  conquest
and  of  propagandism  have  been  waged ;  churches,  mosques,
cathedrals,  and  temples  have  been  erected ;  and  the  whole
surface  of  the  globe  has  been  transformed  at  the  command
of  organized  priesthoods.

To  the  candid  and  dispassionate  judgment  these  histor-
ical facts  combine  with  irresistible  force  to  demonstrate  the
extraordinary  power  of  vast  moral  and  religious  systems  to
influence  the  condition  of  society.  But,  if  they  can  influence
it  thus  to  no  purpose,  or  for  evil,  the  question  can  not  be
suppressed.  Why  can  they  not  as  well  influence  it  for  good  ?
Is  there  anything  in  the  inherent  nature  of  these  systems
which  requires  that  they  should  necessarily  be  non-progres-
sive or  retrogressive  ?  May  they  not  as  well  be  progressive  ?
The  fact  alone  that  they  do  sometimes  work  for  good  would
be  suflScient  to  decide  this  question,  if,  indeed,  it  could  be
seriously  raised.  But,  if  it  be  possible  to  convert  all  this
vast  force  into  progressive  channels,  why  is  it  thus  allowed
to  run  to  waste,  and  why  is  it  turned  loose  like  a  wHd  beast
to  rend  society  and  neutralize  the  progressive  tendencies  of
unimpeded  nature?  The  answer  to  this  question  is  to  be
found  in  the  causes  which  have  produced  these  institutions
in  the  past.  They  have  been  the  product,  as  before  re-
marked, of  the  ever-pressing  demand  of  suffering  humanity
for  a  better  state  of  things ;  they  have  promised  to  supply
this  demand,  and  mankind  have  lent  their  undivided  ener-
gies to  their  establishment  and  dissemination,  in  the  firm
conviction  that  they  were  competent  to  fulfill  their  promises.
This  unqualified  belief,  this  unswerving  faith  on  the  part  of
the  mass  of  mankind,  is  the  true  secret  of  their  power.  The
only  essential  element  of  such  a  system,  therefore,  is  a  firm
and  unshakable  conviction  in  the  minds  of  the  great  mass

18  IDEAL  SYSTEM  OF  SOCIAL  REFORM.

of  society  that  its  success  will  have  the  effect  of  increasing
human  happiness  and  diminishing  evil.

l!iow,  at  first  glance  it  would  seem  that  it  would  be  as
easy  to  secure  this  popular  faith  in  a  progressive  as  in  a
non-progressive  or  retrogressive  system.  It  is,  however,  the
misfortune  of  man's  mental  constitution,  and  of  the  consti-
tution of  nature  in  which  he  is  placed,  that  the  reverse  of
this  is  true.  He  is  ever  prone  to  seize  upon  the  apparent
and  overlook  the  real,  to  pin  his  faith  to  the  superficial  and
reject  the  fundamental,  to  follow  after  the  fanciful  and  the
imaginary  and  pass  by  the  actual  and  the  tangible.  Such  is
the  feebleness  of  the  average  intellect,  and  such  the  com-
plexity of  the  truths  of  nature,  that  it  would  have  been  im-
possible in  any  past  age,  if  it  be  not  so  still,  sufficiently  to
commend  the  latter  to  the  former  to  secure  any  firm  and
abiding  conviction  that  the  reform  demanded  must  come
through  knowledge.  The  best  example  of  this  that  could
be  adduced  is  the  very  truth  which  it  would  otherwise  be
necessary  to  state  in  this  place,  which  is  this:  The  only
means  hy  which  the  condition  of  manlcind  ever  has  heen  or
ever  can  he  improved,,  is  the  utilization  of  the  materials  and
the  forces  that  exist  in  nature.

Imagine,  now,  the  difficulty  which  would  attend  the  thor-
ough and  radical  inoculation  of  this  truth  into  the  universal
popular  creed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  induce  anything  analo-
gous to  the  great  emotional  interest  which  past  systems  have
exhibited  among  men !  Yet  the  dogmas  which  have  under-
lain these  systems  have  promised  nothing  which  this  prin-
ciple would  not,  if  rigidly  carried  out,  secure.

The  difficulty  is  still  further  complicated  by  the  neces-
sity of  adopting  an  entirely  different  method  in  carrying  out
this  principle  from  that  which  has  been  employed  in  advanc-
ing the  doctrines  of  past  moral  and  religious  systems.  No
amount  of  exhorting,  of  proselyting,  of  missionary  work,  of
war,  or  of  persecution,  would  in  the  least  avail  for  this  pur-
pose.   Most  of  these  methods  would  tend  to  retard,  and  some

THE  INTELLECTUAL  OR  DIRECTIVE  ELEMENT.       19

to  crush  out,  tlie  movement  in  its  infancy.  An  entirely  new-
element  would  have  to  be  added  to  the  emotional  force  in
order  to  secure  success.  This  element  is  the  guidance  of
the  intellect.  Not  that  the  intellect  is  at  all  a  propelling
force.  It  is,  and  can  only  be,  a  directive  force  (vol.  i,  pp.
400,  476,  486,  599  ;  ii,  100).  But  it  is  this  directive  force
that  would  be  absolutely  required  to  secure  the  successful
spread  of  this  new  gospel  of  progress.  The  intellectual
directive  force  must  further  be  exactly  proportional  to  the
emotional  impulsive  force ;  at  least,  it  must  never  fall  be-
low it.  In  the  other  movements  referred  to,  there  has  been
no  proportion  between  these  two  forces.  True,  the  priest-
hood has  generally  exercised  an  intellectual  control  over  the
masses,  but  their  directive  efforts  have  too  often  been  toward
securing  personal  power,  honors,  and  emoluments  out  of  the
seething  passions  of  their  credulous  adherents.  Instead  of
restraining  these  passions,  it  has  generally  been  their  policy
to  increase  them  to  the  utmost,  recognizing  that  the  inten-
sity of  popular  feeling  is  the  measure  of  their  own  power.

The  character  of  these  priesthoods  suggests  another
serious  difficulty,  viz.,  that  of  preventing  a  scientific  or
industrial  priesthood  from  re-enacting  these  evils.  The
only  solution  of  this  problem  is  to  suppose  it  possible  to
diffuse  the  intellectual  or  directive  force  uniformly  along
with  the  emotional  or  propelling  force.  But  this  difficulty
may  be  deemed  wholly  insuperable.  If  so,  then  the  pro-
posed system  must  be  given  up.  For  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  carry  it  on,  and  insure  the  object  which  it  has  in
view,  in  a  state  of  society  where  the  directive  force  was  con-
fined to  an  oligarchy  who  simply  managed  the  operations
of  an  impelling  force  residing  in  the  passions  of  the  masses.
Not  that  wisdom,  if  properly  applied  to  emotion,  no  matter
where  either  should  reside,  might  not  secure  the  benefits
sought;  but  because,  from  the  constitution  of  man,  it  can
never  be  properly  applied  where  the  two  are  vested  in  dif-
ferent individuals.

^

20  NATURAL  PROGRESS.

y  The  fundamental  law  of  human  nature,  and  therefore
of  political  economy,  is  that  all  men  will,  under  all  circum-
stances, seek  their  greatest  gain.  All  the  alleged  exceptions
to  this  rule  are  apparent  only,  and  experience  has  a  thousand
times  over  established  their  entire  unreliability  as  grounds
of  public  policy.  But,  where  the  intellectual  and  the  moral
forces  of  a  great  social  movement  are  separated,  the  tempta-
tions to  self-aggrandizement  on  the  part  of  those  wielding
the  former  are  wholly  irresistible.  They  never  have  been
resisted,  and  it  would  be  folly  to  expect  that  they  ever  would
be.  In  such  a  movement,  therefore,  every  individual  must
be  both  a  force  and  a  rein  for  himself.  But  it  must  be  appar-
ent to  all  that  intellectual  activity,  coupled  with  enthusiasm,
could  never  alone  accomplish  the  great  object  of  utilizing
the  materials  and  the  forces  of  nature.  Of  course,  originally,
this  is  all  that  could  have  initiated  this  movement.  But
every  one  can  not  origiuate  such  work  for  himself.  The
originators  must  always  remain  a  mere  handful  as  compared
with  those  who  follow  and  elaborate.  Whatever  has  been
thus  far  done  in  this  direction  has  been  the  work  of  nature.
Kecessity  has  led  man  to  adopt  a  thousand  ingenious  means
of  supplying  his  needs.  The  inventions  and  discoveries
that  have  thus  far  been  made  are,  in  one  sense,  the  products
of  natural  selection  as  much  as  are  the  improved  nests  of
certain  birds,  or  the  dams  of  beavers.  True,  they  have  all
been  due  to  the  guiding  force  of  the  intellect  applied  in  aid
of  the  propelling  forces  of  hunger  and  want.  And  if  the
world  is  left  wholly  to  nature,  these  agencies  will  continue
for  a  great  while  to  produce  progress.  The  case  is  compa-
rable to  that  which  exists  in  plants  and  animals.  Many  of
them  are  still  in  a  progressive  state.  As  the  vegetable
kingdom  has  for  millions  of  years  been  slowly  rising  from
sea-weed  to  moss,  from  moss  to  fern,  from  fern  to  cycad,
from  that  to  pine,  and  so  on  to  the  oak  and  the  apple,  and
as  the  animal  kingdom  has,  in  like  manner,  continued  to
exhibit  forms  of  a  higher  and  higher  organization  from  the

ELEMENT  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  21

monad  to  the  man,  so  it  may  be  expected  that  both  these
kingdoms  will,  for  perhaps  an  indefinite  period  of  time,  con-
tinue this  progressive  differentiation.  Yet  how  long,  under
nature  alone,  would  it  require  to  develop  the  wheat,  the
maize,  and  the  apple,  that  human  agency  has  brought  forth  ?
how  long  to  produce  the  Ayreshire,  the  Devon,  the  Che-
viot breeds  of  animals  ?  And  while  the  cases  are  not  strictly
parallel,  since  nature  would  never  select  just  the  qualities
that  man  selects,  still  it  gives  us  a  faint  idea  of  the  enor-
mous acceleration  which  we  may  imagine  human  progress
to  acquire  if  it  could  be  made  the  subject  of  artificial  instead
of  natural  selection.  I  do  not  speak  here  either  of  genera-
tive selection,  as  it  is  practiced  on  animals  and  plants,  with  a
view  to  improve  the  physical  quality  of  humanity,  although
I  recognize  this  as  one  of  the  great  considerations  that  can
not  much  longer  escape  the  serious  attention  of  those  who
lead  the  thought  of  the  world.  I  desire  to  confine  the  com-
parison now  wholly  to  society  as  an  organism.  The  problem
is  to  apply  the  vast  emotional  forces  which  are  ever  striving
to  improve  society,  but  failing  for  want  of  the  proper  intel-
lectual guidance,  to  some  truly  progressive  system  of  ma-
chinery that  shall  succeed  in  accomplishing  the  desired  end.
As  above  remarked,  the  intellect  alone  can  not  do  this.  It
must  be  joined  to  facts.  In  short,  what  is  really  required  is
knowledge.  Knowledge  is  simply  truth  apprehended  by  the
intellect.  Intelligent  mind,  fortified  with  knowledge,  is  the
only  reliable  form  of  the  directive  force.  The  only  proper
knowledge  for  this  purpose  is  that  which  can  be  acquired  of
the  materials  and  the  forces  of  nature.  As  it  is  the  utilizing
of  these  which  alone  can  secure  the  end  sought,  so  the
knowledge  of  these  is  the  prime  necessity  in  the  exercise  of
a  directive  control  over  human  zeal  for  the  improvement  of
mankind.  Hence  the  diffusion  of  this  kind  of  knowledge
among  the  masses  of  mankind  is  the  only  hope  we  have  of
securing  any  greater  social  progress  than  that  which  nature
itself  vouchsafes  through  its  own  process  of  selection.     But

22  HOW  KNOWLEDGE  IS  TO  BE  OBTAINED.

the  knowledge  referred  to  is  just  that  which  is  embraced  in
the  word  science,  and  the  diffusion  of  it  is  the  process  which
goes  by  the  name  of  education.  Therefore,  the  first  element
of  a  truly  progressive  system  is  popular  scientific  education.

It  is  thus  clear  how  wholly  different  must  be  both  the
nature  and  the  plan  of  operation  of  a  tnily  progressive  sys-
tem from  those  of  any  of  the  non-progressive  systems  which
have  divided  up  the  energies  of  the  world  in  the  past.

It  may  be  asked :  "  Where  can  this  knowledge  be  ob-
tained ?  Must  we  go  to  nature  for  it  and  dig  it  out  of  the
bowels  of  the  earth  before  we  can  scatter  it  among  men  % "
This  is  now  happily  unnecessary.  Unaided  nature,  operating
upon  man  as  upon  animals  and  plants,  has  impelled  him  to
seek  this  knowledge  for  himself,  and,  obeying  this  strictly
biological  law,  he  has  brought  to  light  a  vast  mass  of  truth,
sufficient,  if  properly  distributed,  to  place  society  on  the
highway  to  permanent  prosperity.  But,  as  the  movement,
being  a  purely  natural  one,  has  been  strictly  egoistic,  this
mass  of  knowledge  has  remained  locked  up  in  the  minds  of
a  few  persons,  and  has  only  been  allowed  to  exert  an  indi-
rect influence  on  the  state  of  society,  and  scarcely  any  on  the
great  majority  of  its  individual  members.  Further,  society
at  large,  which  has  come  into  the  possession  of  the  greater
part  of  this  knowledge,  has  taken  no  pains  to  secure  its  dif-
fusion among  its  members.  The  only  means  of  obtaining
this  knowledge  is  for  each  individual  to  seek  it  out  for  him-
self— an  effort  which  not  one  in  a  thousand  could  afford  to
make,  even  should  he  chance  to  have  a  desire.  The  great
majority  never  even  learn  the  fact  that  any  such  fund  of
knowledge  exists  in  the  world.  Comparatively  few  have  any
idea  of  its  value.

It  is  customary  in  our  day  to  recommend  in  the  strongest
terms  the  extension  to  all  our  higher  institutions  of  the  facili-
ties for  increasing  knowledge,  for  independent  original  re-
search (vol.  ii,  p.  565).  This  is  well,  but  the  fact  is  that  not
one-hundredth  part  of  the  facts  which  original  research  has

EXCESSIVE  ACCUMULATION  OF  KNOWLEDGE.        23

already  brought  forth  are  to-day  obtainable  by  the  one-hun-
dredth part  of  the  members  of  society,  so  that  not  one  truth  in
ten  thousand  is  fully  utilized.  Why  go  on  bringing  forth  -
new  truth,  when  in  the  existing  state  of  society  it  is  impossible
to  make  a  proper  use  of  what  we  already  have  ?  It  would  not
be  difficult  to  demonstrate  that  this  constant  accumulation  of
materials  for  progress  so  far  beyond  the  capacity  of  society
to  utilize  them,  or  even  to  become  conscious  of  their  exist-
ence, exerts  along  with  some  direct  benefits  a  large  amount
of  indirect  evil  to  society  itself.  *  It  is  like  gorging  the
stomach  to  repletion  in  the  hope  that  thereby  nutrition  may
be  increased.  And,  just  as  this  may  with  some  safety  be
done  by  lowly  organized  creatures,  while  its  practice  by
highly  organized  ones  is  certain  to  end  in  reaction  and
disease,  so  the  early  and  lowly  organized  societies  of  the
world  may  without  danger  have  accumulated  great  masses
of  facts  for  the  later  and  more  delicately  constituted  ones  to
apply,  while  the  same  policy  pursued  by  the  latter  makes  a
dangerous  chasm  between  the  intelligent  few  and  the  igno-
rant many  which  can  not  fail  to  accomplish  the  aggrandize-
ment of  the  former  at  the  expense  of  the  latter.  To  this
influence,  if  I  mistake  not,  is  to  be  ascribed  the  greater  part
of  the  evils  of  which  modern  society  complains.  Every  cul-
tivated man  has  often  wondered  at  the  extraordinary  degree
of  refinement  to  which  many  branches  of  knowledge  have
been  carried.  Considered  independently  of  each  other,
nearly  every  so-called  science,  not  to  speak  of  the  arts  both
useful  and  aesthetic,  has  been  pursued  to  the  most  astonish-
ing heights  of  specialization,  and  carried  out  through  the
most  delicate  and  multiplied  ramifications.  I  need  but  refer
to  the  great  and  useful  sciences  of  mathematics,  of  astronomy,

*  Professor  E.  L.  Youmans'a  address  before  the  Liberal  Club  of  New  York,
June  6,  1874,  in  "Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  vi,  p.  44;  Professor  F.  W.
Clarke,  he.  cit.,  p.  276.  Dr.  Jeffries  Wyman  has  truly  said :  "  The  isolated
study  of  anything  in  natural  history  is  a  fruitful  source  of  error.  No  single
experiment  in  physiology  is  worth  anything."

24  CHAOTIC  CONDITION  OF  KNOWLEDGE.

of  physics,  and  of  chemistry.  Still  better  illustrations,  how-
ever, are  found  in  the  less  practical  sciences  of  zoology  and
botany.  The  incentive  in  these  latter  seems  to  have  chiefly
been  mere  fondness  for  the  acquisition  of  facts.  There  is
scarcely  an  animal  or  a  plant  in  Europe,  in  America,  or
even  in  Australia,  that  has  not  been  collected,  studied,  de-
scribed, named,  and  classified.  Volumes  have  been  written
and  profusely  illustrated  with  elegant  plates  to  describe  the
species  of  certain  plants  and  animals  whose  practical  use  to
mankind  is  not  appreciable,  and  is  not  in  the  slightest  degree
increased  by  such  accurate  knowledge  on  the  part  of  a  few
specialists.  Considering  the  number  of  important  and  fun-
damental problems  which  every  science  always  presents,  and
the  manner  in  which  these  are  neglected,  while  such  ab-
struse and  useless  niceties  are  spun  out  by  specialists,  I  have
been  led  to  believe  that,  except  as  goaded  on  by  personal
want,  the  human  intellect  prefers  trifles  and  hair-breadth
subtilties  to  the  serious  investigation  of  truth.  This  ten-
dency, so  manifest  in  science,  has,  as  all  know,  been  still
more  pronounced  in  philosophy,  and  every  human  effort  is
constantly  in  danger  of  degenerating  into  a  gymnastic*

But  not  only  is  all  the  knowledge  in  the  world  confined
to  a  few,  but  each  different  kind  of  knowledge  is  in  the  ex-
clusive possession  of  a  small  class  of  these  few ;  not  only  is
the  mass  of  mankind  excluded  from  knowledge,  but  those
who  have  any  possess  only  a  minute  fraction  of  the  useful
knowledge  extant.  It  is  all  chance-work ;  there  is  no  system,
no  general  scheme  for  the  dissemination  of  truth.  This  is
of  course  the  worst  feature,  but  second  only  to  it  stands  the
unorganized  state  of  knowledge  itself.  If  knowledge  could
be  diffused,  there  is  probably  causality  enough  in  the  world
to  co-ordinate  and  arrange  it.  But,  unfortunately,  those  who
possess  it  have  obtained  it  through  the  mere  love  of  facts,
and  belong  to  the  class  who  see  only  relations  of  co-existence

*  Comte,  "Phil.  Pos.,"  vol.  i,  p.  26  ;  Bacon,  "Not.  Oi^.,"  lib.  ii,  Aph.  27,
p.  ill]  Haeckel,  "Schopf.,"  S.  334,  639.

PRINCIPLES  OF  DYNAMIC  SOCIOLOGY.  25

and  not  of  dependence,  and  hence,  as  they  hold  on  to  their
facts  and  are  incompetent  to  classify  them,  they  are  never
generalized  and  therefore  never  utilized ;  or  else  they  come
at  their  knowledge  through  the  force  of  necessity,  like  the
breeders  and  gardeners,  and  have  no  time  or  desire  to  in-
quire after  principles.  In  either  case,  their  knowledge
remains  useless,  or  exerts  its  beneficial  effects  only  within
a  very  limited  circle.  Unorganized  knowledge  can  not  be
utilized.

The  two  prime  elements,  therefore,  of  any  system  that
aspires  really  to  benefit  the  race  must  be,  first,  the  diffusion
of  existing  knowledge  universally  throughout  society ;  and,
secondly,  its  organization,  or  synthesis^  with  a  view  to  the
establishment  of  the  true  relations  of  dependence  which
exist  among  all  known  truths.  The  first  of  these  processes
is  education^  the  second  is  philosophy ;  but,  as  the  former
could  not  but  result  in  the  latter,  this  may  for  present  pur-
poses be  neglected.

The  whole  philosophy  of  human  progress,  or  dynamic
sociology^  may,  therefore,  be  briefly  epitomized  in  a  few
words  :  The  desire  to  be  happy  is  the  fundamental  stimulus
which  underlies  all  social  movements,  and  has  carried  on  all
past  moral  and  religious  systems.  These  have  been  estab-
lished in  obedience  to  the  deepest  conviction  and  belief  that
they  were  able  to  accomplish  the  amelioration  of  the  condi-
tion of  mankind.  They  failed  because  misdirected,  owing  to
the  ignorance  of  man  respecting  nature,  upon  which  alone  all
successful  effort  must  be  expended.  The  only  real  progress
has  resulted  from  such  effort.  Some  progress  has  been  made
in  spite  of  these  badly  directed  and  superficial  systems,  but  it
has  been  the  result  of  the  secular  forces  which  have  evolved
man  out  of  the  animal  state.  The  problem  is,  to  guide  these
vast  and  acknowledged  forces  in  a  progressive  instead  of  a
non-progressive  direction.  To  do  this,  something  analogous
to  these  past  non-progressive  systems  must  be  established.
There  must  be  a  set  of  principles,  doctrines,  or  articles,  to

26  DEFINITION  OF  EDUCATION.

which,  as  a  creed,  the  world  shall  give  in  its  adhesion.  These
principles  must  be  true,  and  be  founded  on  the  natural,  and
not  false,  as  in  previous  systems,  and  founded  on  the  super-
natural (vol.  ii,  p.  266).  The  fundamental  principle  or  tirst
article  of  this  new  creed  is,  that  all  progress  is  the  result  of
the  utilization  of  the  materials  and  the  forces  which  exist
in  nature.  The  second  is,  that  the  true  and  only  way  of  car-
rying out  the  first  lies  in  the  universal  diffusion  and  thorough
co-ordination  of  the  knowledge  now  existing  in  the  world
respecting  the  materials  and  forces  of  nature — in  short,  the
sdentific  education  of  all  the  members  of  society.  But,  as  the
second  tenet  is  but  the  means  of  realizing,  through  the  first
and  deeper  truth,  the  immediate  object  of  human  desire,  it
would  be  sufficient  if  the  latter  alone  could  be  made  the
direct  and  special  object  of  popular  faith.  Before  progress
can  be  achieved,  a  public  sentiment  must  exist  in  favor  of
scientific  education  as  strong  as  it  has  ever  existed  in  favor
of  religious  education.  If,  by  the  term  education,  there  can
be  constantly  implied  the  two  adjuncts,  scientific  and  popu-
lar /  if  the  word  can  be  made  to  embrace  the  notion  of  im-
parting a  knowledge  of  the  materials  and  forces  of  nature
to  all  the  members  of  society,  there  can  be  no  objection  to
the  employment  of  this  word  education  as  the  embodiment
of  all  that  is  progressive.

Education  thus  defined  is  the  available  means  of  setting
the  progressive  wheels  of  society  in  motion  ;  it  is,  as  it  were,
the  lever  to  which  the  power  must  be  applied.  Give  society
education,  strictly  held  within  the  assigned  limits,  and  all
things  else  will  be  added.  Even  the  philosophy  required  to
co-ordinate  existing  knowledge  would  be  certain  to  come  in
time.  Continuing,  for  the  sake  of  comparison  alone,  the
analogy  of  the  supposed  system  with  the  systems  of  the  past
and  present,  we  may  imagine  the  creeds  of  the  world  sup-
planted by  a  similar  faith  in  the  progressive  principle  here
formulated.  The  energies  heretofore  so  powerfully  directed
to  ecclesiastical  work  would  then  be  directed  to  educational

ARTIFICIAL  VS.   NATURAL  PROGRESS.  27

work.  The  school  would  fill  the  place  now  occupied  by  the
church.  The  scientific  lecture  would  supersede  the  sermon,
and  the  study  of  natural  objects  and  of  standard  scientific
works  would  form  a  substitute  for  the  study  of  sacred  writ-
ings.

This,  I  must  repeat,  is  a  purely  ideal  scheme,  and  one
which  may  never  be  actually  realized,  but  it  will  help  us  to
conceive  of  something  more  practical.  For  its  realization
would  certainly  accelerate  the  rate  of  social  advancement  in
some  such  way  as  the  artificial  development  of  domesticated
animals  and  cultivated  vegetables,  through  human  foresight
and  intelligence,  has  accelerated  their  natural  development
due  to  the  blind  struggle  for  existence.  For  it  is  just  this
blind  struggle  for  existence  that  society,  as  a  great  organ-
ism, has  been  thus  far  making  and  is  still  making,  while  the
proposed  system  is  nothing  more  than  the  application  to  so-
ciety of  that  foresight  and  intelligence  which  artificial  selec-
tion applies  to  organic  nature.

But,  admitting,  as  we  must,  the  impossibility  of  the  adop-
tion of  any  such  system  in  any  such  abrupt  manner  as  that
pointed  out,  the  question  still  remains,  whether,  with  such  a
system  as  an  ideal,  there  is  not  room  to  hope  that  something
may  be  done  which  shall  amount  to  an  approximation  to  it,
and  this  with  a  prospect  of  constant  approach  to  its  ulti-
mate realization.  This  question  I  can  now  only  answer  dog-
matically in  the  affirmative,  leaving  the  reader,  who  shall
desire  to  follow  me  through,  to  judge  for  himself  whether
satisfactory  grounds  exist  for  this  conviction.  But,  even
should  his  faith  in  the  feasibility  of  the  undertaking  be
weak,  I  shall  expect  him  at  least  to  agree  with  me  that
the  organization  of  social  progress  and  its  artificial  accel-
eration, if  accomplished  at  all,  must  be  accomplished  sub-
stantially on  the  basis  above  set  forth.

This  broad  distinction  between  natural  development  and
artificial  development,  which  receives  so  many  striking  illus-
trations from  a  comparison  of  the  results  of  "  natural  selec-

28       ANTHROPO-TELEOLOGY  VS.  TIIEO-TELEOLOGY.

tion  "  with  tliose  of  artificial,  or  liuman  selection  in  the  ani-
mal and  vegetable  kingdoms,  deserves  an  appropriate  term
for  its  distinct  expression.  Rather  than  search  for  a  new
term  for  this  purpose,  let  us  content  ourselves  with  the  adop-
tion of  one  which  has  been  for  some  time  in  use  where  it  was
once  much  needed,  but  where,  although  employed  in  the
same  sense,  it  has  so  distinct  an  application  that  at  first  sight
the  new  application  may  not  appear  to  be  justified,  although
a  closer  view  can  not  fail  to  show  that  it  is  the  application
only,  and  not  the  meaning,  which  has  been  changed.  To
this  especial  conception,  therefore,  of  man,  in  his  social
capacity,  seeking  to  improve  society  by  the  exercise  of  an
intelligent  foresight,  in  seizing  upon  the  laws  of  nature  and
directing  them  to  the  ends  which  his  reason,  combined  with
his  acquaintance  with  those  laws,  teaches  him  to  be  those
certain  to  secure  the  advantage  of  society — to  this  notion  let
us  apply  the  term  teleology^  which  we  may  qualify,  for  the
sake  of  distinction,  as  anihrapo-teleology^  and  let  us  call  this
action  on  the  part  of  man  and  of  society  teleological  action,
and  the  plans  and  measures  thus  adopted  the  teleological
plans  and  measures  of  man  and  of  society.  Let  us  further
designate  whatever  progress  may  be  effected  through  this
means  teleological  progress,  and  thereby  distinguish  it  from
the  natural  or  genetic  progress  which  has  been  thus  far,  and
is  still,  going  on.

From  a  purely  etymological  point  of  view,  there  is  cer-
tainly as  much  propriety  in  this  use  of  the  word  teleology
as  in  that  which  applies  it  to  the  supposed  purposes  of  deity.
While  its  usefulness  in  this  latter  application,  as  a  means  of
designating  the  fundamental  idea  that  pervades  a  great  school
of  philosophy,  must  be  admitted,  the  real  title  to  this  use,  re-
garded as  an  expression  of  any  actual  truth,  is  being  latterly
called  rigorously  in  question.  The  most  enlightened  and
advanced  thinkers  of  this  age  reject  this  conception  of  a
theo-teleology  in  nature,  and  science  is  steadily  moving  in  the
direction  of  explaining  all  phenomena  on  strictly  genetic  or

MAN  THE  PROPER  TELEOLOGICAL  AGENT.  29

mechanical  principles.  Should  this  school  triumph,  the  term
teleology,  if  restricted  to  that  application,  would  be  robbed  of
its  meaning,  and  exist  as  a  mere  relic  of  an  obsolete  cosmol-
ogy. But,  just  as  its  usefulness  is  vanishing  in  this  field,
another  field  is  opened  in  which  it  is  greatly  needed,  and  can
not  fail  to  do  good  service.  For,  when  we  reflect  upon  the
matter,  we  perceive  that  man  is  Kar'  i^o^n^  the  proper  tele-
ological  agent.  Viewed  in  the  widest  sense,  man  is  of  course
but  a  product  of  nature,  and  his  acts  are  the  effects  of  com-
plicated antecedent  causes.  In  this  sense  there  is,  and  can
be,  no  teleological  action.  But  it  is  neither  convenient  nor
customary  to  speak  in  common  parlance  from  any  such  pro-
foundly philosophical  stand-point.  For  all  practical  purposes
the  acts  of  men  are  regarded  as  emanating  from  motives
which  lie  within  each  individual.  They  are  performed  in
obedience  to  plans,  designs,  and  purposes,  which  exist  in  the
minds  of  individuals.  This  is  just  as  true  as  though  these^
subjective  motives  were  as  wholly  without  antecedent  cause
as  the  majority  of  men  believe,  and  as  our  "  moral-science  "
teachers  tell  us  that  they  are.  But  design  or  purpose  is  the
essential  basis  of  teleological  action.  Human  acts  are  as
truly  causes  Jmales  as  if  they  emanated  from  a  First  Cause.

Not  only  is  this  true,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it
was  his  own  teleological  action  that  caused  man  to  ascribe
such  action  to  deity.  Historically  viewed,  the  theo-teleolog-
ical  conception  grew  out  of  the  anthropo-teleological  fact.
Teleology,  as  popularly  understood,  is  simply  one  of  those
anthropomorphic  conceptions  of  which  the  history  of  human
beliefs  furnishes  so  many  examples.  In  indicating  a  new
and  useful  application,  therefore,  of  this  term,  we  do  but  re-
store it  to  the  original  object  from  which  the  conception  first
emanated,  and  assign  to  it  a  meaning  which  we  know  to  rep-
resent a  reality.

!Now,  the  kind  of  social  progress  which  is  needed  is  tele-
ological progress..  The  slow  and  imperceptible  genetic  prog-
ress which  society  has  thus  far  made  is  barely  suflBcient  to

30  EVILS  OF  SOCIETY.

keep  pace  with  the  increase  of  population.  Its  entire  incre-
ment toward  improving  the  condition  of  society  is  neutralized
by  the  rapid  multiplication  of  individuals  which  it  itself  en-
ables the  race  to  carry  on  (vol.  i,  p.  "703 ;  ii,  p.  209).  There
is  very  little  perceptible  amelioration  of  the  condition  of
society  at  large.  The  world  does,  indeed,  enjoy  thousands
of  material  blessings  which  this  unorganized  progress  has
scattered  over  it ;  but  when  we  consider  the  proletariat,  when
we  look  into  great  cities  or  out  on  large  plantations,  or  visit
those  immense  centers  of  production,  the  factories,  we  real-
ize that,  while  the  intellectual  and  material  condition  of  so-
ciety has  reached  almost  giddy  heights,  the  moral  or  emo-
tional condition  of  man  has  scarcely  advanced  at  all.  There
still  remain  the  overworked  millions  on  the  one  hand,  and
the  unemployed  millions  on  the  other.  There  are  still  all
the  depths  of  ignorance,  poverty,  drudgery,  and  nameless
misery  that  have  ever  been  the  baneful  concomitants  of  hu-
man civilization.  I  am  aware  that  it  will  be  said  that  all
this  is  a  necessary  evil,  that  it  arises  out  of  the  inherent
depravity,  the  idleness,  or  the  perversity  of  human  nature  in
some  of  its  phases,  and  that  it  is  incurable.  This,  however,
is  precisely  the  issue.  There  are  some  who  think  it  quite  un-
necessary and  the  result  of  the  wholly  unorganized  state  of
society  itself — that  these  wretched  ones  are  simply  the  unfor-
tunates who,  in  the  great  soulless  struggle  for  existence  and
scramble  for  gain,  are  crowded  to  the  wall.  There  are  those
who  believe  that  the  organization  of  society  on  such  a  basis
as  shall  put  these  evils  in  the  way  of  immediate  mitigation
and  ultimate  removal  is  not  a  chimera.  In  fact,  almost
every  one,  without  admitting  it,  entertains  notions  more  or
less  definite  of  this  kind.  Such  conceptions  were  far  more
prevalent  in  past  ages  than  they  are  in  our  own.  The  fail-
ure of  all  the  attempts  in  this  airection  has  led  to  much
skepticism  in  these  later  times.  All  the  moral  and  religious
systems  of  which  mention  has  been  made  have  been  noth-
ing more  or  less  than  so  many  attempts  to  realize  a  teleo-

GOVEKNMENT.— LAISSEZ  FAIRE.  31

logical  progress.  Even  if  tlie  liope  of  securing  any  im-
provement in  this  world  were  renounced,  and  all  efforts
concentrated  on  obtaining  the  same  results  in  a  future  life,
the  labors  of  missionaries  and  propagandists  would  still  be
simply  teleological  attempts  to  secure  artificially  this  great
good  for  man.

But  not  moral  and  religious  systems  alone  belong  to  this
class ;  government,  too,  with  all  its  usurpations  and  oppres-
sions, has  always  avowed,  and  still  avows,  as  one  of  its  pri-
mary functions,  the  temporal  advancement  of  citizens  and
subjects.  It  has  thus  expressly  declared  for  the  feasibility
of  this  teleological  improvement.  That  it  has  almost  with-
out exception  failed  to  realize  the  results  claimed  has  not  pre-
vented nearly  all  mankind,  not  in  the  past  only  but  in  the
present,  from  giving  in  their  adhesion  to  this  doctrine,  so
that  even  those  who  repudiate  it  in  the  case  of  religious  in-
stitutions generally  accept  it  in  the  case  of  political  ones.

We  shall  come  back  to  the  question  of  the  legitimate  func-
tions of  government  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  nature  of  religion
as  a  social  factor  (vol.  ii,  pp.  212,  252).  Let  us  content  our-
selves here  with  the  most  general  survey  of  the  doctrine  which
has  in  modem  times  been  indicated  by  the  term  laissez  faire.
Indeed,  let  us  expand  this  notion  beyond  the  limits  usually
assigned  to  it,  and  embrace  not  only  the  question  whether
human  government  can  rightfully  or  successfully  undertake
to  initiate  and  conduct  reformatory  and  progressive  meas-
ures, but  with  this  the  wider  one,  whether  society,  no  matter
by  what  means,  whether  through  political,  moral,  religious,
or  any  other  system  of  institutions,  regulations,  or  measures,
can,  either  rightfully  or  successfully,  prosecute  any  plans
having  the  improvement  of  its  own  condition  for  their  ob-
ject. The  question  of  right  can  be  disposed  of  with  a  word.
We  do  not  care  to  discuss  the  question  as  to  whether  society
or  any  other  organism  has  a  right  to  manage  itself.  Through-
out nature  the  rights  of  individuals  to  carry  out  their  desires
are  limited  only  by  their  power  to  do  so.    Man  otAj  pretends

32  THEORY  OF  EIGHTS.

to  do  differently.  A  bird's-eye  view  of  human  history  shows
liim  to  have  acted  on  the  same  principle  as  the  rest  of  nature,
the  principle  that  "  might  maTces  right."  *

Not  until  we  have  succeeded  in  banishing  the  metaphys-
ical conception  of  abstract  right,  and  taken  down  the  unreal-
izable standards  of  an  imaginary  disinterestedness  in  action,
shall  we  be  prepared  to  discuss  intelligently  the  conditions  of
man's  progress  conceived  as  capable  of  accomplishment  by
his  own  efforts.  The  first  step  in  this  movement  is  the  rec-
ognition of  the  primary  law  that  in  the  last  analysis  all  re-
sults are  accomplished  by  force.  Although  this  proposition
may  shock  the  minds  of  many  when  brought  forward  as  a
law  of  society,  it  is  really  no  more  than  saying  in  other  words
that  all  effects  are  produced  by  causes,  which  is  a  truism.
But  its  effect  as  a  law  of  sociology  is  to  establish  the  neces-
sity for  a  paramount  source  of  power  in  human  society.

It  is  here  that  the  new  science  is  destined  to  be  strong-
ly  antagonized  by  the  growth  of  erroneous  ideas  respect-
ing liberty.  The  so-called  "abstract  rights"  of  mankind
must  be  denied  if  society  is  ever  to  become  the  arbiter  of  its
own  destiny — in  theory,  that  is,  for  it  is  impossible  that  the
real  enjoyment  of  liberty  should  be  thereby  in  the  least  di-
minished, while  the  sum  of  human  happiness  must  be  greatly
increased,  and  this  is  the  only  conceivable  object  of  any
right.  All  the  prevailing  theories  of  human  rights  are  but
ideal  conceptions  which  not  only  have  never  yet  been  real-
ized, but  in  the  nature  of  things  never  can  be.  In  point  of
fact,  all  things  are  now  and  always  have  been  governed  by
force,  and  all  the  attempts  to  disguise  it  under  the  color  of
abstract  right  have  only  served  to  make  it  easier  for  the
unscrupulous  to  accomplish  their  personal  aggrandizement.
Government  has  always  wielded  an  iron  scepter,  which  the
forms  of  law  have  only  rendered  the  more  inexorable.  The
most  complete  recognition  of  the  right  of  force  in  human

*  "  Ne  poHvant  pas  faire  que  ce  qui  est  juste  fAt  fort,  on  a  fait  que  ce  qui
est  fort  fat  juste  "  (Pascal).     See  Cousin,  "  Du  Vrai,  du  Beau  et  du  Bicn,"  p.  396.

TELEOLOGICAL  AOTIOX  OF  Ii^"DIVIDUALS.  33

society — the  only  rule  known  to  the  rest  of  the  sentient
world,  and  the  only  one  ever  acted  upon  by  mankind — could
by  no  possibility  render  matters  worse  than  they  are.  But
this  recognition  would  put  it  in  the  power  of  the  controlling
authorities  in  society  to  introduce  progressive  elements  into
government,  and  make  the  coercion  which  is  now  so  fruitless
a  positive  and  increasing  future  benefit.  Under  the  nega-
tive system  of  government  which  has  prevailed  thus  far,  the
world  naturally  looks  round  and  asks  what  return  it  has
received  in  exchange  for  all  this  sacrifice,  and  it  is  no  won-
der that  many  insist  that  the  account  is  against  government,
and  would  gladly  dissolve  the  partnership  and  annul  the
"  social  compact,"

The  remainder  of  the  problem  can  only  be  profitably  dis-
cussed in  the  abstract.  For  there  is,  on  the  one  hand,  noth-
ing in  the  experience  of  the  past  to  teach  us  the  possibility
of  the  ultimate  success  of  teleological  measures,  while,  on
the  other  hand,  the  short-sighted  and  profoundly  mistaken
character  of  nearly  all  such  measures  as  have  thus  far  been
tried  renders  them  wholly  useless  as  signals  either  to  follow
or  to  shun.

If  we  rise  a  step  higher  and  expand  our  term  teleology
one  circle  wider,  so  as  to  make  it  embrace  the  acts  of  the
individual  members  of  society  performed  solely  for  their
own  benefit,  and  without  conscious  application  to  the  good
of  society,  we  find  that  all  the  increment  which  mere  "  natu-
ral selection "  has  produced  in  the  direction  of  human  ad-
vancement has  come  from  this  source,  which  on  analysis
proves  to  be  simply  a  higher  form  of  natural  or  genetic  de-
velopment ;  for,  given  a  being  with  the  degree  of  organiza-
tion possessed  by  man  at  the  time  he  began  this  new  sort  of
development,  including  the  cerebral,  such  a  result  must  take
place  as  a  purely  natural  process.  Now,  this  real  progress
thus  secured,  and  for  which  society  as  an  organization  de-
serves no  credit,  has  been  the  result,  as  before  remarked,  of
the  discovery  and  application  to  human  needs,  each  Individ-

34        CONTROL  OF  NATURAL  FORCES.

ual  for  himself,  of  certain  valuable  materials  and  laws  which
existed  in  nature.  Nothing  more  than  this  can  be  said  of
the  last  and  greatest  of  discoveries  and  inventions.  A  ma-
chine is  nothing  but  a  collection  of  material  substances  so
formed  and  adjusted  by  human  foresight  (teleologically)  as
to  perform  valuable  service  for  the  inventor.  Every  inven-
tion is  simply  an  anthropo-teleological  direction  of  some  of
nature's  forces  into  channels  which  carry  benefit  to  man.
These  natural  forces  always  exist.  They  operate  according
to  fixed  and  invariable  laws.  They  can  neither  be  created
nor  destroyed,  but  they  can  be  controlled.  All  the  material
civilization  man  has  achieved  has  resulted  from  his  success-
ful teleological  control  of  these  forces  of  nature.  This  is  not
alone  true  of  machinery,  that  is,  of  what  are  called  mechan-
ical or  physical  forces,  although  of  these  he  controls  some  of
the  most  subtile  and  inscrutable,  such  as  light,  heat,  electric-
ity, etc.  As  we  have  already  seen,  he  also  takes  advantage
of  what  are  generally  distinguished  as  vital  laws,  of  the  laws
which  regulate  the  phenomena  that  living  beings  manifest.
It  is  probable  that  he  began  to  control  the  complicated  ani-
mal forces  before  he  undertook  to  extend  his  dominion  over
the  perhaps  less  complicated  vegetal  ones.  The  pastoral
period  is  usually  placed  before  the  agricultural.  The  domes-
tication of  a  wild  animal,  not  less  than  the  cultivation  of  an
indigenous  cereal  or  fruit-tree,  is  a  simple  application  of  the
teleological  agency.  The  high  degree  of  refinement  to
which  this  control  of  the  vital  forces  has  been  finally  brought
is  strikingly  attested  by  the  skill  attained  by  both  breeders
and  horticulturists  in  artificially  improving  animals  and
plants.  Man  even  controls  emotional  and  intellectual  forces.
In  the  training  of  animals  he  does  this  to  a  limited  extent.
He  does  the  same  in  governing  those  of  his  own  race.  He
does  nothing  else  when  he  governs  himself.  And  this  is  all
of  self-control.

We  see  that  by  the  aid  of  a  more  or  less  powerful  intel-
lect put  in  possession  of  a  greater  or  less  number  of  natural

CONTROL  OF  SOCIAL  FORCES.  35

truths  man  has  succeeded  in  so  directing  his  own  vital  or
muscular  movements  as  to  regulate,  in  a  greater  or  less
degree,  the  external  physical  or  mechanical  movements  of
the  material  objects  around  him,  and  by  obstructing  their
advance  here,  intensifying  their  velocity  there,  and  forcing
them  into  harmless  or  useful  channels  in  other  places,  he
causes  nature  first  to  leave  him  unmolested,  and  then  actu-
ally to  serve  him  in  the  most  advantageous  ways.  It  is  in
this  alone  that  civilization  consists.  It  is  by  extending  this
dominion  over  other  higher  and  yet  unsubdued  forces  that
all  progress  in  the  future  must  be  secured.

At  first  this  may  seem  a  digression.  But  our  problem
was,  whether  it  is  possible  for  society  to  improve  itself.
Society  is  simply  a  compound  organism  whose  acts  exhibit
the  resultant  of  all  the  individual  forces  which  its  members
exert.  These  acts,  whether  individual  or  collective,  obey
fixed  laws.  Objectively  viewed,  society  is  a  natural  object,
presenting  a  variety  of  complicated  movements  produced  by
a  particular  class  of  natural  forces.  The  question,  therefore,
simply  is.  Can  man  ever  control  these  forces  to  his  advantage
as  he  controls  other,  and  some  very  complicated,  natural
forces  ?  Is  it  true  that  man  shall  ultimately  obtain  the  do-
minion of  the  whole  world  except  himself  1  I  regard  society
and  the  social  forces  as  constituting  just  as  much  a  legiti-
mate field  for  the  exercise  of  human  ingenuity  as  do  the
various  material  substances  and  physical  forces.  The  former
have  been  investigated  and  subjugated.  The  latter  are  still
pursuing  their  wild,  unbridled  course.  The  former  still
exist,  still  exhibit  their  indestructible  dynamic  tendencies,
still  obey  the.  Newtonian  laws  of  motion,  still  operate  along
lines  of  least  resistance.  But  man,  by  teleological  foresight,
has  succeeded  in  harmonizing  these  lines  of  least  resistance
with  tJiose  of  greatest  advantage  to  himself.  He  has  made
the  winds,  the  waters,  fire,  steam,  and  electricity,  do  his  bid-
ding. All  nature,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  has  been
reduced  to  his  service.    One  field  alone  remains  unsubdued.

36  LEGISLATION  AS  INVENTION.

One  class  of  natural  forces  still  remains  the  play  of  chance,
and  from  it,  instead  of  aid,  he  is  constantly  receiving  the
most  serious  checks.  This  field  is  that  of  society  itself,  these
unreclaimed  forces  are  the  social  forces,  of  whose  nature  man
seems  to  possess  no  knowledge,  whose  very  existence  he  per-
sistently ignores,  and  which  he  consequently  is  powerless  to
control.

But  we  have  said  that  the  very  systems,  moral,  religious,
political,  of  which  mention  has  been  made,  are  hut  so  niany
direct  attempts  to  control  society  and  improve  its  condition.
True  ;  and  they  failed  to  accomplish  their  object  because
they  did  not  recognize  the  very  laws  and  forces  which  they
sought  to  control.  The  extraordinary  influence  which  they
have,  in  fact,  exerted  shows  how  great  would  have  been  the
result  had  they  really  been  directed  in  channels  of  human
advantage.  They  recall  the  misdirected  efforts  and  hope-
less dreams  of  the  crazy  inventors  of  "  perpetual  motion,"
and,  as  attempted  inventions,  they  have  failed  for  the  same
reason ;  these  complicated  machines  have  not  worked,  be-
cause they  were  contrived  in  ignorance  of  the  forces  they
were  expected  to  control.

Again,  the  defenders  of  laissez  faire  will  object  that
society  has  always  done  better  when  let  alone ;  that  all  efforts
to  improve  the  moral  or  material  condition  of  society  by
legislation  and  kindred  means  have  not  only  been  inoper-
ative, but  have  in  the  majority  of  cases  done  positive  harm,
often  to  the  very  cause  they  were  intended  to  subserve.

If  it  could  be  proved  that  they  had  always  been  abso-
lutely inoperative,  the  case  would,  perhaps,  be  somewhat  dis-
couraging ;  but,  if  they  can  be  shown  to  have  had  an  evil
effect,  this  is  all  we  can  hope  or  desire.  For,  if  they  can  do
harm,,  they  can  do  something,  and  nothing  is  left  but  to
make  them  do  good.  Legislation  (I  use  the  terra  in  its  most
general  sense)  is  nothing  else  but  invention.  It  is  an  effort
80  to  control  the  forces  of  a  state  as  to  secure  the  greatest
benefits  to  its  people.     But  these  forces  are  social  forces,  and

LEGISLATION  AS  INVENTION".  37

the  people  are  the  members  of  society.  As  matters  now  are
and  have  thus  far  been,  government,  in  so  far  as  the  improve-
ment of  society  is  concerned,  has  been  to  a  great  extent  a
failure.  It  has  done  good  service  in  protecting  the  operation
of  the  natural  dynamic  forces,  and  for  this  it  should  receive
due  credit.  But  it  has  also  to  be  charged  with  a  long  account
of  opposition  to  science  and  oppression  of  aspiring  humanity.
But  why  has  it  failed  as  a  promoter  of  the  social  welfare  to
which  it  has  laid  such  special  claims  ?  Because  legislators,  as
inventors,  have  proved  mere  bunglers ;  because  they  have
known  nothing  of  the  laws  of  society;  because  they  have
been  ignorant  of  the  forces  over  which  they  have  sought  to
exercise  control.  Success  in  invention  must  be  limited  by
the  acquaintance  of  the  inventor  with  the  forces  that  are  to
propel  his  machine.  Man  rarely  stumbles  by  mere  chance
upon  any  great  invention.  Art  is  measured  by  science,  and
a  comparison  of  its  progress  since  the  scientific  epoch  began
with  that  of  the  ages  that  preceded  that  epoch  proves  incon-
trovertibly  that  all  progress  in  practical  art  must  be  preceded
by  progress  in  science  (vol.  ii,  p.  193).  Before  science  taught
man  the  nature  of  physical  laws,  all  attempts  at  invention,
except  of  the  simplest  kind,  were  just  such  wi-etched  mis-
carriages as  attempts  at  progressive  legislation  are  to-day,
and  for  the  same  reason,  viz.,  that  the  inventors  possessed
no  science  of  the  field  of  natural  forces  over  which  they
sought  to  exert  an  influence.  Before  progressive  legisla-
tion can  become  a  success,  every  legislature  must  become,
as  it  were,  a  polytechnic  school  (vol.  ii,  p.  252),  a  laboratory
of  philosophical  research  into  the  laws  of  society  and  of
human  nature  (vol.  ii,  p.  249).  !No  legislator  is  qualified  to
propose  or  vote  on  measures  designed  to  affect  the  destinies
of  millions  of  social  units  until  he  masters  all  that  is  known
of  the  science  of  society.  Every  true  legislator  must  be  a
sociologist,  and  have  his  knowledge  of  that  most  intricate
of  all  sciences  founded  upon  organic  and  inorganic  science.
For  the  organic  world  is  a  product  of  the  inorganic,  and  in

38  LEGISLATION  AS  INVENTION.

its  most  general  aspects  is  governed  by  the  same  laws,  and
man  is  at  best  but  a  highly  organized  animal,  and  is  as  fully
under  the  dominion  of  biological  laws  as  is  the  humblest
worm.  Society  is  ruled  by  the  simple  resultant  of  aU  the
physical  and  physiological  forces  which  control  its  mem-
bers. How  profound,  then,  and  comprehensive,  must  be  the
science  of  sociology !  How  utterly  incompetent,  from  this
ideal  stand-point,  are  the  men  who  have  always  held  and
still  hold  the  reins  of  power  in  society !  And  what  wonder
that  all  their  short-sighted  efforts  to  promote  its  material
welfare  have  proved  abortive,  and  that  their  schemes  so  often
react  upon  themselves  and  "  return  to  plague  the  inventor  "  I
Attempts  of  legislators  to  control  society  have  proved  inop-
erative for  what  they  were  designed  to  accomplish,  because
the  true  springs  were  not  touched  or  known.  They  have
more  frequently  done  harm  than  good,  because,  while  there
may  be  many  wrong  ways,  there  can  be  but  one  right  way
in  which  to  harmonize  the  social  impulses  with  the  social
interests.

This  comparison  of  legislation  to  invention  is  not  a  mere
accidental  or  convenient  analogy.  So  soon  as  the  mind  rises
to  grasp  the  conception  of  social  forces  possessing  all  the
essential  attributes  of  the  physical  forces,  and  differing  from
them  only  as  these  differ  from  one  another,  the  actual  iden-
tity of  legislation,  as  it  should  be  conducted,  with  mechan-
ical invention,  as  it  is  alone  successfully  conducted,  becomes
at  once  obvious.  The  successful  inventor,  knowing  as  he
first  must  the  nature  of  the  forces  and  the  objects  with  which
he  has  to  deal,  so  adjusts  the  latter  that  the  former,  though
in  no  way  increased  or  diminished  or  changed  in  their  essen-
tial nature,  will,  by  their  natural  operation,  produce  results
beneficial  to  human  interest.  The  true  legislator  must  do  pre-
cisely this  and  nothing  else.  The  only  difference  is,  that  he  is
dealing  with  social  forces  and  objects  instead  of  physical  ones.

Considering  the  physical  forces  from  the  stand-point  of
their  manifestations,  we  may  conveniently  divide  them  into

COMPULSOKY  A^D  ATTRACTIVE  LEGISLATION.      39

two  classes:  1,  impelling  forces;  and,  2,  attracting  forces.
The  consideration  of  the  essential  nature  of  force  in  the  ab-
stract maj  be  left  for  a  future  place  {irifra,  pp.  228,  291) ;  the
classification  here  given  does  not  pretend  to  be  fundamental,
but  only  auxiliary  to  the  present  discussion.

Perhaps  the  greater  part  of  the  mechanical  devices  which
are  made  have  to  deal  with  attractive  forces;  at  least,  a
large  amount  of  the  mechanical  invention  accomplished  rests
on  the  general  principle  of  removing  obstacles  to  the  flow
of  these  forces  in  certain  desired  channels.  True,  there  are
cases  in  which  heavy  bodies,  such  as  water,  must  be  forced
upward  against  the  direction  of  gravitation,  and  where  light
bodies,  as  gases  and  smoke,  by  special  contrivances  are  made
to  descend  against  the  force  represented  by  their  buoyancy,
but  wherever  this  is  necessary  the  inventor  always  knows
that  it  must  be  done  at  a  large  expense  of  energy  drawn
from  some  other  source.  Now,  to  this  there  seems  to  be  a
complete  analogy  in  human  attempts  to  direct  the  social
forces.  In  this  field,  as  in  the  other,  the  coercive  method
is  necessarily  attended  with  great  loss,  and  wherever  it  can
be  avoided  it  certainly  should  be.  Contemplated  from  this
stand-point  we  may  regard  all  legislation  as  belonging  to  one
or  the  other  of  the  two  general  classes :  1,  compulsory  leg-
islation ;  and,  2,  attractive  legislation.  The  analogy  with
physical  experimentation  thus  becomes  complete.  In  which-
soever department  we  look,  the  same  truth  is  manifest  that,
wherever  this  is  possible,  the  attractive  method  is  superior
to  the  compulsory  one,  a  superiority  which  is  due  to  the
actual  loss  which  must  necessarily  be  sustained  by  the  latter
method.

The  history  of  mechanical  invention,  from  the  earliest
and  lowest  forms  of  it  to  the  latest  and  highest,  shows  a
gradual  advance  in  the  substitution  of  the  attractive  for  the
coercive  method.

The  primary  attempts  of  rude  peoples  to  intensify  the
forces  of  nature  consisted  in  the  slightest  possible  advance

40  PROGRESS  m  CONTROLLING  NATURE.

upon  the  purely  coercive  method  which  is  called  "brute
force."  In  brute  force  pure  and  simple,  there  is  no  device,
no  attempt  to  employ  physical  forces  or  laws.  The  entire
action  is  performed  at  the  expense  of  the  muscular  powers
of  the  agent.  But  the  use  of  a  club  constitutes  such  an
advance,  and  the  momentum  which  it  acquires  in  swinging
through  the  air  serves  in  a  strictly  artificial  way  to  intensify
the  muscular  power.  From  this  to  the  bow  and  arrow,  and
from  that  to  the  gain-twist  rifle  or  the  shell-mortar,  there  is
a  gradual  advance  in  this  one  direction  of  substituting  the
attractive  for  the  coercive  method ;  of  adjusting  the  forces
so  as  to  render  them  self-acting,  instead  of  having  to  assist
them  by  personal  strength  or  other  forces.  ~

We  should  find  the  same  to  be  equally  true  of  any  other
branch  of  human  invention.  The  implements  and  machinery
required  in  every  industry  have  grown  up  under  similar  con-
ditions, and  their  completeness  and  success  depend  upon  the
progressive  recognition  and  application  of  the  same  principle,
while  failures  in  efforts  to  perfect  them  (and  there  have  been
many)  have  resulted  in  thousands  of  instances  from  attempts
to  coerce  the  physical  forces  into  channels  which  were  con-
trary to  their  special  nature  and  tendencies.  Wherever  this
has  actually  been  done  (and  there  are  cases  in  which  it  is
necessary),  it  has  been  at  an  actual  loss  of  force  supplied  from
some  other  source.

In  the  department  of  social  forces  most  of  the  attempts
to  control  them  have  thus  far  been  made  according  to  the
coercive  method ;  and  this  illustrates,  in  a  remarkable  manner,
the  infantile  state  of  the  science  of  sociology.  We  are  living
in  the  "stone  age"  of  the  art  of  government.  We  shall  not
emerge  from  it  until  the  principle  of  "attractive  legislation"
is  thoroughly  understood  and  applied.  This  is  by  no  means
a  new  method,  because  it  is  the  same  that  is  principally  em-
ployed in  all  other  forms  of  invention — that  is,  in  all  other
attempts  to  direct  natural  forces  into  channels  advantageous
to  man.     The  existing  laws  on  nearly  all  subjects  are  pro-

LOSS  INVGLYED  IN  COERCION.  41

hibitoiy,  compulsory,  penal.  They  appeal  to  the  fear  of
punishment  as  the  sole  deterrent.  Very  rarely  do  they
promise  reward.  They  are  based  on  the  assumption  that
men  are  constantly  prompted  by  their  desires  to  perform
acts  injurious  to  the  interests  of  society  at  large.  They
forbid  such  acts,  and  affix  the  penalties.  The  citizen  is  still
at  liberty  to  perform  the  act  and  pay  the  penalty ;  but  it
is  usually  more  to  his  interest  to  refrain  from  the  act  and
escape  the  penalty.  But,  whichever  course  he  prefers,  he
necessarily  loses  something.  A  portion  of  his  liberty  (vol.
ii,  p.  232)  is  abridged.  Some  of  his  desires  must  fail  of
gratification.  This  is  a  loss,  however  viewed.  It  is  com-
monly regarded  as  the  necessary  sacrifice  which  each  mem-
ber of  society  is  assumed  willingly  to  make  for  the  general
good.  But,  when  the  principle  of  attractive  legislation  is
fully  understood  and  put  in  operation  by  competent  legis-
lators, it  will  be  seen  that  this  supposed  "  necessary  evil "
will  be  in  a  great  measure  removed.  Instead  of  contin-
ually damming  the  stream  of  human  desire,  as  has  been
60  often  done  in  the  past,  until  it  finally  bursts  over  all
its  barriers  and  whelms  everything  in  the  ruin  of  political
revolution,  men  will  learn  to  direct  it  into  channels  not  only
innocent  but  useful.  It  will  be  found  that  the  degree  of
liberty  necessary  to  be  surrendered  for  the  good  of  society  is
far  less  than  has  been  supposed.  The  very  complexity  of
social  phenomena  will  serve  only  to  multiply  the  resources
of  the  thoroughly  competent  explorer  in  this  field  of  natural
law.  Diligent  search  will  be  made  for  principles  which
will  render  human  legislation  self-executing.  Springs  of
human  action  will  be  sought  out  which,  when  the  proper
artificial  adjustments  are  made,  will  spontaneously  work  out
results  beneficial  to  all.  Many  of  the  propensities  now  re-
garded as  wholly  bad  will  be  found  to  be  capable,  by  the
proper  adaptations  in  the  circumstances,  of  producing  great
good.  Such  discoveries  have  been  common  in  the  history
of  all  the  physical  sciences.

42  REGULATION  VS.  LAW.

A  so-called  human  "  law  "  is  simply  an  adjustment  of  the
circumstances  which  human  action  influences,  and  which  in-
fluence human  action.  It  is  at  best  only  a  regulation  ;  it  is
merely  an  attempt  to  control  and  modify  the  results  of  the
real  laws  which  exist  in  society.  These  laws  are  the  expres-
sions of  actual  forces  as  real  and  natural*  as  the  mechanical
forces  of  matter.  These  forces,  which  can  neither  be  in-
creased nor  diminished,  may,  like  all  other  natural  forces,  be
antagonized  and  brought  into  the  state  of  equilibrium.  The
forces  remaining  undiminished,  their  manifestation  may  be
wholly  or  partially  suspended  by  the  presence  of  counter-
forces.  The  normal  condition  is  the  dynamic  one.  The
forces,  so  long  as  unimpeded,  produce  motion.  Motion  pro-
duced by  the  social  forces  is  action.  So  long  as  it  is  free,
society  will  act.  This  is  the  sole  condition  of  all  social  prog-
ress. Interpose  obstacles  to  the  movement  of  these  forces,
and  it  is  slackened  or  arrested  entirely.  A  statical  condition
is  brought  about.  Action  is  sluggish  and  labored  or  ceases
altogether.  Social  stagnation  results.  Such  is  the  condition
of  those  societies  which  are  under  an  absolute  despotism.
Progress  is  impossible.  In  eveiy  case  the  degree  of  activity,
and  therefore  of  progress,  is  proportioned  to  the  degree  of
liberty,  i.  e.,  to  the  degree  to  which  the  natural  play  of  the
social  forces  is  unimpeded  and  unrestricted.  The  normal
tendency  of  all  compulsory  legislation  is  to  restrict  human
liberty.  It  interposes  a  counter-force  to  the  natural  social
force,  and,  in  so  far  as  it  produces  any  efEect,  diminishes  the
outward  manifestation  of  that  force  without  diminishing  the
force  itself.  It  brings  about  a  partial  or  total  condition  of
equilibrium,  and  converts  the  nonnal  dynamical  into  an  ab-
normal statical  condition.  This  is  so  much  clear  loss  to  social
activity  and  social  progress.  If  it  be  said  that  the  activities
thus  arrested  were  injurious  ones,  and  were  better  suppressed
than  exercised,  the  reply  is,  that  so  much  force  has  been  lost
by  equilibration,  and  this  should  have  been  saved  and  con-
ducted into  useful  channels.     And  if  it  be  further  insisted

UTILIZATION  OF  THE  SOCIAL  FOKOES.  43

tliat  it  could  not  have  been  so  conducted,  the  answer  is,  that
this  is  precisely  the  issue.  The  sociologist  who  really  be-
lieves there  is  such  a  science  has  a  right  to  claim  that  all  the
social  forces  may  be  utilized  as  the  physical  ones  have  been.
He  classes  those  who  maintain  the  contrary  along  with  those
who  once  believed  that  the  thunders  were  only  engines  of
destruction,  the  winds  powers  of  evil,  and  the  gases  demoni-
acal spirits.  Evil  is  only  relative.  Whatever  produces  injury
is  evil.  But  in  the  physical  world  we  find  nearly  all  the
forces  producing  both  good  and  evil,  according  to  the  degree
to  which  man  has  placed  them  under  control  and  subjected
them  to  his  service.  The  vast  benefits  and  injuries  wrought
by  fire  form  a  striking  illustration  of  this.  But  the  elements
— the  waters,  steam,  electricity,  and  even  light — are  also  exam-
ples. If  any  one  imagines  that  any  social  forces  exist  which
are  wholly  bad,  it  is  because  he  has  not  considered  these  facts
in  the  light  of  the  history  of  science.

The  social  forces  only  need  to  be  investigated  as  the  rest
have  been,  in  order  to  discover  ways  in  which  their  utility
can  be  demonstrated.  Here  is  a  vast  field  of  true  scientific
exploitation  as  yet  untracked,  and  which  to  the  legislators  of
this  age  is  not  known  to  exist.  To  just  what  extent  the  pres-
ent evil  tendencies  of  society  may  be  turned  to  good,  under
the  management  of  truly  enlightened  legislation,  it  is  impos-
sible to  predict.  If  the  domain  of  social  phenomena  is  as
completely  one  of  law  as  that  of  physical  phenomena — and
between  this  and  total  absence  of  law  there  can  be  no  inter-
mediate condition — then  may  we  logically  expect  the  same
measure  of  success,  in  proportion  as  these  laws  are  known,
which  marks  the  progress  of  human  supremacy  in  the  mate-
rial world.

Such  a  degree  of  social  progress  simply  bewilders  the
mind,  but  not  more  so  than  our  material  civilization  bewilders
the  mind  of  the  savage ;  and  in  the  art  of  politics  we  are  still
savages.

Illustrations  of  the  nature  and  operation  of  attractive  leg-

44  ATTRACTIVE  LEGISLATION.

islation  are  as  yet  difficult  to  produce,  because  bo  few  at-
tempts of  the  kind  Lave  ever  been  made.  Many  approaches
toward  such  a  mode  of  legislation  might,  it  is  true,  be  re-
ferred to.*  A  single  example,  itself  somewhat  imperfect,
will  be  here  submitted.

Prohibitory  temperance  legislation,  with  its  unsatisfao-
tory  results,  is  familiar  to  all.  A  substitute  for  it  has  been
adopted  in  certain  localities,  by  which  the  person  suffering
damage  to  property  or. injury  to  person  committed  by  an
inebriate,  has  his  or  her  remedy  against  the  vender  of  the
intoxicating  agent.  This  law  is  said  to  work  admirably,  by
placing  the  venders  of  liquors  on  their  guard  against  selling
any  one  customer  too  much.  It  executes  itself,  because
where  injury  is  done  it  is  the  party  injured,  and  not  the
police,  who  demands  indemnity.  It  calls  in  the  force  of
avarice  to  neutralize  that  of  appetite,  and  thus  the  good  of
society  is  subserved  at  all  points.  This  example  belongs  to
the  negative  class  of  those  measures  which  may  be  embraced
under  the  term  attractive  legislation.  Two  forces,  both  use-
ful when  moderate  but  injurious  when  in  excess,  so  far  spon-
taneously antagonize  each  other  as  to  reduce  both  to  the
point  of  safety  and  advantage.

But  social  science,  when  it  shall  have  once  fairly  passed  to
its  stage  of  application,  will  not  stop  here.  It  will  proceed  to
devise  measures  and  perfect  adjustments,  which  will  not  only
convert  the  strongest  and  thus  far  most  dangerous  tendencies
of  society  into  beneficial  ones  of  the  same  strength,  but  it
will  also  intensify  existing  good  impulses,  and  create  new
ones  by  judiciously  holding  out  great  and  certain  rewards.
There  are  many  ways  in  which  the  progressive  forces  of  so-
ciety may  be  augmented  and  their  beneficial  effects  multi-
plied. This  does  not  involve  the  impossible  task  of  increas-
ing their  general  sum.  The  effects  are  increased  on  precisely
the  same  principle  as  the  effects  of  a  battery  are  increased  by
a  wire  coil,  or  those  of  the  solar  heat  by  a  lens.     This  can

*  For  further  examples,  see  vol.  i,  pp.  618,  580;  ii,  249,  392.

FALSE  INTERPRETATION  OF  PHENOMENA.  45

be  done  by  the  proper  adjustments  of  the  objects  experi-
mented upon,  by  the  adoption  of  ingenious  devices  whose
success  can  be  predicted  from  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the
forces  to  be  dealt  with.  This  is  the  essence  of  all  invention,
and  will  be  as  applicable  to  society  as  it  has  been  to  electric-
ity or  to  light.

In  order  more  fully  to  comprehend  the  futility  of  at-
tempting the  progressive  control  of  society  without  the  most
fundamental  knowledge  of  the  principles  by  which  it  is  gov-
erned, we  should  consider  the  fact  that  nearly  all  the  phe-
nomena of  nature  have  at  first  appeared  not  merely  inscru-
table but  paradoxical.  To  the  primeval  mind  the  "  book  of
nature "  is  but  a  collection  of  Sibylline  leaves  which  have
been  first  stirred  by  the  wind.

Science  may  be  defined  as  an  explanation  of  the  phe-
nomena of  the  universe  as  presented  to  the  senses.  This  im-
plies that  these  phenomena  need  explanation,  which  is  true.
It  is  often  said  that  the  first  presentation  of  a  natural  phe-
nomenon is  as  likely  to  elicit  a  false  as  a  true  interpretation
from  the  untaught  intellect.  This  is  much  less  than  the  truth.
So  far  from  the  chances  being  equal,  they  are  almost  infinity
to  one  against  the  true  interpretation  of  any  natural  phenom-
enon on  first  observation  by  the  untutored  mind  of  man.  1
do  not  say  there  may  not  be  cases  in  which  the  first  impres-
sion from  the  senses  may  be  in  correspondence  with  reality.
It  is,  of  course,  true  that  new  facts  appealing  for  the  first
time  to  the  cultivated  and  experienced  minds  of  civilized
men  often  receive  an  immediate  interpretation  in  harmony
with  reality,  but  for  this  they  have  the  advantage  of  a  wide
experience  with  related  phenomena  and  acquired  knowledge
of  the  true  meaning  of  other  facts  upon  which  these  depend.
And  even  here  error  is  constantly  occurring  wherever  the
new  phenomena  are  somewhat  remotely  or  obscurely  related
to  the  acquired  knowledge.  It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  rule
that  the  normal  deductions  of  the  intellect  from  the  crude

46  RELATION  OF  PHENOMENA  TO  NOUMENA.

impressions  of  sense,  received  from  objects  not  obviously  re-
lated to  others  already  acquired  by  experience  or  education,
will  be  uniformly  incorrect.  Not  only  bo,  but  in  a  great
number  of  cases  they  will  be  the  exact  reverse  of  the  reality.
In  other  words,  the  apparent,  where  no  acquired  data  exist
for  directing  the  judgment,  will  generally  differ  widely  from,
and  often  be  the  opposite  of,  the  real.  This  seems  to  result
from  the  nature  of  things,  from  the  necessary  fact  of  finite
intellect  and  the  actual  laws  of  physics  and  mechanics.*

We  are  speaking  now  only  of  phenomena,  but,  to  show
how  universal  is  the  law,  we  might  demonstrate  that  it  ex-
tends even  into  the  domain  of  metaphysics.  "What  is  the
relation  of  phenomena  to  noumena  f  Not  a  philosopher  of
any  note  can  be  named  who  has  ever  held  that  the  former
bear  any  direct  resemblance  to  the  latter.  Most  metaphysi-
cians insist  that  they  are  different  in  all  respects,  many  that

*  The  rationality  of  action  depends  not  upon  the  power  of  a  being  to  reason,
but  upon  the  correspondence  of  mental  deductions  with  objective  reality.  The
effect  of  an  intoxicating  stimulus  or  of  delirium  or  insanity  on  the  individual's
action  is  analogous  to  that  which  would  result  if  a  perfectly  rational  person
were  conceived  to  be  placed  under  surroundings  so  wholly  unlike  those  to  which
he  had  been  accustomed  that  no  single  object  should  possess  a  resemblance
to  any  that  he  had  ever  perceived  with  his  senses.  Under  such  conditions  his
reason,  however  vigorous,  would  be  wholly  useless ;  all  his  conclusions  would  be
utterly  false,  and  his  actions  correspondingly  wild  and  maniacal.  lie  could  not
be  distinguished  by  those  to  whom  the  surroundings  were  familiar  from  a  real
lunatic,  and  to  all  intents  and  purposes  he  would  be  one,  with  the  sole  difference
that  his  condition  would  be  the  result  of  objective  or  external  instead  of  subject-
ive or  internal  derangement.  For  what  we  call  "  returning  to  ourselves  "  is
simply  a  return  to  surroundings  so  familiar  that  we  are  able  to  draw  correct  con-
clusions from  them.  A  diseased  state  of  the  brain  brings  strange  objects  before
consciousness,  which  are  wholly  out  of  harmony  with  objective  reality,  and  the
deductions  made  from  them,  and  accompanying  actions  performed,  are  necessa-
rily wild  and  incoherent.  It  must,  moreover,  be  true  that  this  aberrant  state  of
mind  and  action  admits  of  all  degrees,  and  irrespective  of  whether  due  to  sub-
jective or  objective  causes.  Therefore,  just  as  we  find  all  shades  of  insanity
due  to  cerebral  derangement,  so  we  have  all  degrees  of  irrationality  due  to  igno-
rance of  the  environment.  It  may  have  been  some  such  train  of  reflection  as  this
that  moved  Socrates  to  ask  the  question  which  I  have  adopted  as  the  motto  of
this  work  (see  title-page).

PARADOXES  OF  NATURE.  47

there  can  be  no  possible  relation  of  any  kind  between  tliem,
while  Herbert  Spencer's  ingenious  theory  of  "  transfigured
realism  "  *  makes  the  one  but  a  view  in  perspective  of  the
other.

But,  excluding  all  metaphysical  comparisons,  the  phenom-
enon of  sense-impression  itself  is  a  paradox.  Physiologists
now  tell  us  that,  instead  of  feeling  with  our  extremities,  as
we  seem  to  do,  we  feel  with  the  brain,  or  at  least  with  cer-
tain interior  nerve-centers.  But,  passing  to  the  objective,  all
the  deliverances  of  the  most  imj)ortant  of  our  senses,  that  of
sight,  would  be  inverted  but  for  the  aid  of  experience  which
corrects  the  error  too  early  in  the  life  of  each  of  us  to  be
remembered.  These  and  other  similiar  instances,  however,
are  such  as  the  necessary  experience  of  the  organism  will
correct  without  the  aid  of  instruction  from  without  or  effort
from  within.  They  are  valuable  only  as  showing  the  great
generality  of  the  law  of  paradoxes.

As  we  emerge  into  the  domain  of  general  experience  we
find  the  law  the  same,  but  the  consequences  become  more
and  more  serious  the  more  remote  and  obscure  the  relations
of  known  to  unknown  phenomena,  for  in  the  same  propor-
tion does  the  mind  require  more  and  more  experience  and
instruction  for  their  true  interpretation.

There  is,  first,  the  great  astronomical  paradox  of  the
earth's  diurnal  revolution.  The  sun,  moon,  and  stars  appear
to  revolve  around  the  earth,  and  no  one  would  ever  think  of
accounting  for  the  phenomena  on  any  other  principle  were
he  not  taught  the  true  explanation.  All  antiquity  believed,
and  the  majority  of  mankind  still  believe,  the  exact  opposite
of  the  truth  in  this  respect.  It  is  only  within  the  last  three
hundred  years  that  the  geocentric  theory  has  been  fairly
superseded  by  the  heliocentric,  even  among  the  elite  of  hu-
manity.

Then  there  is  the  paradox  of  the  earth's  support.  To
the  primitive  mind  the  conception  of  a  world,  of  whatever

*  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  496.

48  PAKADOXES  OF  NATURE.

shape,  suspended  in  space  by  means  of  equilibrating  forces,
was  impossible,  and  all  mankind  believed  tbat  it  rested  on
some  other  object  or  support,  the  intellect  not  yet  being
strong  enough  to  extend  the  series  and  realize  the  difficulty
of  the  explanation.

Next  comes  the  paradox  of  the  earth's  shape.  To  the
eye  of  sense  it  seems  flat.  It  has  been  demonstrated  to  be
spherical,  or  nearly  so.  What  an  immense  delusion  !  And
yet  in  the  nature  of  things  it  was  necessary.  And  how  much
longer  has  error  prevailed  than  truth !

Again,  take  the  age  of  the  earth.  Although  not  so  ob-
trusive a  paradox,  this  has  perhaps  led  man  further  into  error
and  delusion  than  some  of  those  already  mentioned.  All
the  old  cosmologies  prove  that  the  evidences  furnished  to
priitiitive  man  by  the  face  of  nature  led  him  to  assume  for
the  age  of  the  earth  a  period  far  too  short — nay,  thousands,
perhaps  millions  of  times  too  short.  The  truth  of  its  hoary
antiquity  now  just  begins  to  dawn  upon  us  after  the  most
thorough  investigation  of  the  materials  of  which  its  crust  is
composed.

The  great  antiquity  of  the  human  race  is  another  para-
dox, and  one  allied  to  the  last.  It  resisted  all  efforts  at  ex-
planation for  a  century  longer,  and  the  truth  has  reached  a
much  less  number  of  persons  than  that  of  the  antiquity  of
the  globe.  Yet,  who  shall  measure  the  evil  that  this  long-
obscured  truth  has  worked  in  society?  "Who  shall  predict
the  good  its  revelation  is  to  accomplish  ?

To  primitive  man  the  wind  is  a  paradox.  An  invisible
power,  it  could  only  be  likened  to  mind  or  spirit,  and  was
usually  endowed  with  intelligence  and  will.

As  observation  began  to  be  made  of  the  substances  found
on  the  globe,  many  other  equally  mysterious  and  invisible
gases  were  set  free,  and  these  were  all  regarded  as  demons.

Gravitation  was  another  profound  paradox,  and  one  which
has  scarcely  yet  been  redeemed  from  this  category.  Things
seemed  to  gravitate  toward  the  earth  because  it  was  their

PARADOXES  OF  NATURE.  49

nature,  a  mere  "  vicious  circle."  Scarcely  a  better  argument
can  be  adduced  to-day,  but  immense  progress  has  been  made
in  bringing  the  whole  solar  system  at  least  under  this  one
law.

The  real  variability  of  the  condition  of  the  earth's  crust
is  a  stubborn  paradox  which  has  required  a  Hutton  and  a
Lyell  to  explain.  Under  the  deluding  error  of  its  present
stability,  the  great  Cuvier  invented  his  cataclysms,  which
ouly  lost  their  last  defender  with  the  death  of  Louis  Agassiz.

The  indefinite  variability  of  the  forms  of  life  on  the
earth  is  a  still  more  subtile  paradox,  and  some  who  are  thor-
oughly acquainted  with  these  forms  still  cling  to  the  testi-
mony of  appearances.

The  natural  evolution  of  the  solar  system,  first  system-
atically formulated  by  Immanuel  Kant,  is  now  pretty  gener-
ally accepted  among  advanced  thinkers  as  a  substitute  for
the  explanation  of  special  creation  which  in  the  nature  of
the  human  mind  was  the  first  and  apparent  one.  With
greater  or  less  modifications,  this  truth  will  doubtless  one
day  be  recognized  as  one  of  nature's  many  paradoxes.

The  genetic  or  monistic  origin  and  development  of  life
on  the  globe  is  fast  passing  through  the  same  phases,  and  is
now  on  its  high  way  to  recognition  and  admission  to  the
class  of  truths  whose  opposite  is  first  long  behoved  because
wearing  the  outward  garb  of  reaUty.

But  this  truth  must  soon  carry  with  it  the  deeper  and
still  more  paradoxical  one  that  organic  and  inorganic  nature
are  one.  Evolution  itself  is  a  paradox,  no  matter  into  what
department  of  it  we  may  inquire.

Man's  animal  nature  is  a  paradox.  Evident  as  it  really
is  that  a  man,  viewed  from  a  physical  stand-point,  is  an  ani-
mal, still  a  variety  of  causes,  some  of  them  purely  conven-
tional but  none  the  less  natural,  have  conspired  to  prevent
the  recognition  of  so  obvious  a  truth.

As  we  ascend  the  scale,  we  find  that  mind  itself  is  not
a  mystery  only,   but  a  true  paradox.     Beginning  with  the

50  PARADOXES  OF  NATURE.

senses,  every  perception  is  paradoxical.  We  think  we  feel
and  see  definite  objects.  No  doubt  we  do,  but  they  are  not
what  they  seem  to  be.  All  that  afiects  us  is  the  medium.
We  hear  only  vibrations  of  air ;  sight  is  but  the  contact  of  a
paradoxical  ether.  Color  is  an  illusion,  residing  in  the  eye,
or  rather  in  the  ether  that  penetrates  it,  and  not  in  the
object.  Consciousness  itself  is  in  a  certain  sense  a  paradox.
It  appears  to  be  wholly  under  our  control  and  independent
of  external  influences.  Yet  there  are  many  substances  which,
taken  into  the  system  in  various  ways,  instantly  rob  us  of  all
control  of  the  mind.  It  relaxes  into  coma,  or  flies  into  de-
lirium, according  to  the  objective  nature  of  such  substances.

Finally,  the  will,  that  highest  power  of  mind  of  which  we
boast  so  much,  is,  if  not  a  chimera,  at  least  a  far  different
thing  from  what  it  appears  to  be.  The  real  paradox  here  is
the  truth  that  it  is  an  effect  as  well  as  a  cause.  Like  the
universe,  like  life,  like  man  himself,  like  the  other  faculties
of  mind,  the  will  is  a  genetic  product  of  cosmical  law.  The
illusion  consists  in  supposing  that  our  will  is  subject  to  our
orders,  that  it  is  in  any  sense  free.  Yet  here  in  the  depen-
dence of  the  will  we  have  a  paradox  which  clings  with  the
utmost  tenacity,  even  to  the  most  enlightened  of  mankind.
They  have  been  compelled  to  admit  the  monistic  principle
in  the  celestial  bodies,  in  the  inorganic  world,  perhaps  in  the
organic  world.  They  may  be  even  willing  to  agree  that  man
is  himself  a  genetic  product,  that  brain  has  been  mechanic-
ally evolved,  that  sensation  and  even  thought  are  the  effects
of  antecedent  causes,  but,  when  the  great  demi-god  vyill  is
sought  to  be  rolled  in,  they  take  fright  and  resist  this  last
encroachment.  These  several  classes  of  mind  only  show  the
degrees  of  causal  power  with  which  they  are  endowed.  A
full  complement  of  causality  never  allows  itself  to  be  arrest-
ed by  the  consideration  of  consequences.  If  the  universe  is
the  theatre  of  law,  freedom  is  a  delusion.

Last  of  all  must  we  add  the  paradox  that  society  itself  is
the  domain  of  law,  and  that  its  movements,  so  far  from  being

PARADOXES  OF  NATURE.  51

sporadic,  irregular,  and  incapable  of  classification  or  predic-
tion, are  tlie  strict  determinable  products  of  antecedent  causes,
which  can  be  studied  and  known  by  man  in  the  same  way  that
the  causes  of  physical  phenomena  have  been  studied  and
learned  by  him — by  the  scientific  method.  Although,  when
we  consider  particular  acts  of  individuals  or  of  communities,
they  seem  to  have  emanated  from  their  own  arbitrary  free-
will, and  therefore,  so  far  as  science  is  concerned,  to  be  purely
fortuitous  and  incalculable,  yet,  when  vast  nmnbers  of  such
acts  are  collected,  co-ordinated,  and  tabulated,  they  are  found
to  fall  readily  under  a  few  general  laws  more  or  less  modified
by  numerous  special  laws ;  proving  that  even  this  great  field
of  nature  belongs  to  Science  the  moment  she  sees  fit  to  re-
claim it.

We  perceive,  then,  that  not  only  is  nature  wholly  unknown
to  primitive  man,  not  only  is  it  full  of  mysteries  and  deep-
hidden  secrets,  but  it  is  full  of  actual  illusions,  deceptions,
and  paradoxes.  It  matters  not  in  what  field  of  that  knowl-
edge which  long  study  of  it  has  brought  forth  we  may  look,
we  find  that  the  true  condition  of  things  was  not  merely
unknown,  but  that  the  actual  manifestations  of  natural
phenomena  have,  from  their  very  nature  and  that  of  the
human  mind,  led  man  to  believe  things  were  other  than  they
are,  often  precisely  the  reverse.  It  may  almost  be  stated  as
a  rule  that  appearances  are  the  opposite  of  realities.  Not
ignorance  alone,  but  error^  is  the  necessary  result  of  strict
obedience  to  the  dictates  of  sense,  before  it  is  accompanied
by  the  most  thorough  and  prolonged  process  of  scientific
verification  (vol.  ii,  p.  41 T).  Things  are  not  what  they  appear
to  be.  They  are  usually  wholly  different,  very  frequently
just  what  they  seem  not  to  be.  Nature  is  one  great  paradox,
embracing  many  minor  ones.

Briefly  to  recapitulate  :  there  is  the  astronomical  paradox
of  the  earth's  true  motions ;  the  terrestrial  paradoxes  of  the
earth's  figure,  support,  and  antiquity ;  the  geological  para-
dox of  the  changes  going  on  in  the  earth's  crust ;  the  mete-

52  PARADOXES  OF  NATURE.

orological  paradox  of  the  winds;  tlie  chemical  paradox  of
invisible  gases ;  the  physical  paradox  of  gravitation ;  the
cosmological  paradox  of  the  evolution  of  the  solar  system ;
the  biological  paradox  of  the  variability  of  species  and  the
evolution  of  living  forms;  the  anthropological  paradox  of
the  animal  origin  and  nature  of  man  ;  the  psychological
paradox  of  the  mechanical  development  of  the  mind,  and
its  absolute  dependence  upon  the  brain  and  nervous  sys-
tem ;  the  moral  paradox  of  the  dependence  of  the  will ;  and,
finally,  the  sociological  paradox  of  the  reign  of  fixed  laws  in
society.

Such  is  a  hasty  survey  of  man's  true  relations  to  the
world  in  which  he  is  placed — a  crude  enumeration  of  the
most  general  illusions,  deceptions,  and  paradoxes  of  nature.
But  within  each  of  these  great  groups  there  is  a  multitude
of  minor  phenomena  which  all  partake  of  the  same  general
character.*  Only  so  fast  as  appearances  have  been  made  to
give  way  to  realities,  whether  in  the  domain  of  physical,
vital,  or  psychic  laws,  have  mankind  been  able  to  make  any
material  progress.  Only  when  the  same  shall  have  been
done  in  the  domain  of  social  laws,  will  social  progress,  ex-
cept of  the  secular  kind,  be  possible.  Physical  realities
have,  one  by  one,  been  stripped  of  their  masks,  and  dragged
before  the  light.  Once  caught,  they  have  been  tamed,
trained,  and  put  to  man's  service.  To  this  alone  is  due  all
our  brilliant  material  civilization.  Yital  laws  have  been  gin-
gerly invaded,  but  with  proportionate  results.  Psychic  laws
have  long  received  attention,  but  from  so  false  a  stand-point
that  little  more  than  the  natural  results  have  been  achieved.
Morals  have  stood  absolutely  still,  if  they  have  not  gone
backwardjf  as  the  "moral  science"  writers  admit,  because
the  appearance  of  a  free  will  has  not  yet  given  way  to  the
reality  of   a   dependent  will.     Social  laws   have   received

*  For  other  examples,  see  vol.  ii,  pp.  25,  473.

f  The  only  sense  in  which  this  statement  is  not  true  is  set  forth  in  vol.  ii,
p.  507.

USE  OF  SCIENCE.  53

scarcely  any  attention,  and,  as  a  consequence,  society  as  a
whole  lias  undergone  no  improvement,  although  the  vastly
disproportionate  extent  to  which  physical  progress,  due  to
the  discovery  of  physical  truth,  has  overlapped  and  over-
grown it,  makes  the  social  stagnation  another  paradox  to
thousands  who  mistake  material  progress  for  social  progress.
Now,  every  one  admits  that  the  practical  use  of  science
is  its  application  to  art.  The  application  of  science  to  art  is
only  another  way  of  expressing  the  utilization  of  the  mate-
rials and  forces  of  nature.  By  a  knowledge  of  natural  laws
man  is  enabled  to  harmonize  natural  forces  with  human  ad-
vantage. This  truth,  of  course,  must  be  general.  It  would
be  illogical  to  pretend  that  it  applies  to  some  kinds  of  natural
laws  and  forces  and  not  to  others.  What  becomes,  then,  of
laissez  fai/re  f  Yet  some  who  would  be  the  first  to  grant
the  above  premises,  who  are  strongest  in  the  conviction  that
society  is  the  domain  of  regular  laws,  who  are  most  earnest
in  their  search  for  these  laws,  nevertheless,  strangely  enough,
deprecate  all  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  agents  of  society
to  control  the  social  forces  and  harmonize  them  with  the
social  welfare.  This  is  perhaps  well  enough,  in  so  far  as  it
may  tend  to  check  these  attempts  at  this  time,  although  such
attempts  are  rather  to  be  smiled  at,  as  we  smile  at  the  plans
of  the  would-be  inventoi*s  of  self-acting  motors,  were  they
not  often  so  serious.  But  why  lay  so  much  stress  on  these
crude  failures  at  invention,  due  to  the  absence  of  science  ?
Why  point  to  them  as  permanent  warnings  against  all  future
attempts  to  regulate  society  ?  Why  cry  ^^  Laissez /aire .' "  as
if  society  would  ever  work  out  its  own  progress  ?  As  well
say  to  all  inventors :  Cease  trying  to  control  nature,  let  it
alone  and  it  will  control  itself ;  it  will,  if  left  undisturbed,
work  out,  in  its  own  good  time,  all  the  cotton-gins,  reaping-
machines,  printing-presses,  and  sand-blasts  that  are  needed.
Why  not,  because  the  first  telegraph  line  and  the  first  ocean
cable  failed,  cry  down  the  Wheatstones  and  the  Fields,  and
say,  Let  these  matters  alone,  they  will  regulate  themselves  ?
4

64  USE  OF  SCIENCE."

In  point  of  fact,  there  were  many  wlio  did  so  exclaim,  as  my
personal  recollection  of  the  last-named  event  attests;  and,
although  they  did  not  claim  that  nature  would  ever  do  these
things  itself,  they  insisted  that  they  could  never  be  done.
But  even  this  last  is  not  an  uncommon  position  on  the  socio-
logical question.  In  the  domain  of  physics  and  mechanics,
of  industry  and  commerce,  we  are  accustomed  to  call  such
people  "  croakers  "  and  "  retardatairesP  "What  shall  we  say
of  them  in  the  field  of  social  science  ?  If  society  is  to  be
benefited  by  the  establishment  of  a  social  science,  pray,  how
is  it  to  be  done,  except  by  the  same  means  that  have  ren-
dered other  sciences  so  useful  ?  What  would  be  thought  of
a  successful  experimenter  in  physics,  should  he  constantly
maintain  that,  while  all  the  phenomena  with  which  he  dealt
were  uniform  and  governed  by  fixed  laws,  it  was  neverthe-
less useless  to  hope  that  they  could  ever  be  made  more  bene-
ficial to  man  than  nature,  unaided,  renders  them,  and  should
perpetually  characterize  all  who  attempted  this  as  mere  med-
dlers with  the  unchangeable  laws  of  nature  ?  Such  a  posi-
tion would  be  pronounced  highly  inconsistent,  in  view  of  the
actual  benefits  which  man  has  derived  from  just  such  artifi-
cial and  meddlesome  control  of  physical  forces,  and  of  the
fact  that  every  successful  experiment,  whether  useful  to  man
or  not,  implies  and  involves  such  extra-natural  modification.

The  only  way  in  which  any  science  has  ever  done  any
practical  service  has  been  in  enabling  man,  by  the  aid  of  the
insight  and  foresight  it  has  furnished  him,  to  control  the
laws  and  forces  which  that  science  explains,  and  to  bring
them  into  harmony  with  his  own  wants.  The  social  science
can  form  no  exception  to  this  rule;  it  must  come  strictly
within  its  scope  and  purview.  But  how  shall  the  social
forces  be  controlled  but  by  society  itself,  and  through  its
own  chosen  agents  ?

Let  us  admit,  however,  as  candor  dictates,  that  almost
everything  that  has  been  said  byvthe  advocates  of  laisses
faire  about  the  evils  of  governmental  interference  is  true,

SOCIAL  DYNAMICS.  55

and  that  there  is  much  more  that  has  not  been  said  which
should  be  said  on  the  same  subject.  Let  us  only  take  care
not  to  admit  the  principle  in  its  abstract  essence,  which  is  the
only  hope  there  is  for  the  ultimate  establishment  of  a  teleo-
logical  progress  in  society.

It  is  true  that  the  laws  of  society  are  so  deep  and  so
occult  that  the  present  political  rulers  have  only  the  vaguest
conception  of  them ;  that  sociological  paradoxes  are  so  com-
mon, nay,  almost  universal,  that  as  a  rule  their  supposed
ingenious  devices  fail  entirely  or  produce  effects  the  reverse
of  those  intended,  and  expose  them  to  the  merited  rebukes
of  scarcely  less  deluded  critics  who  unfairly  judge  them  from
these  effects  after  they  have  taken  place ;  yet,  amid  all  this,
the  principle  remains  unshaken.

While  there  is  a  social  statics,  there  is  no  statical  condition
of  society.  Just  as  the  mechanical  laws  of  equilibrium  do
not  prevent  the  incessant  motion  and  change  of  all  things  in
the  universe,  so  the  establishment  of  the  laws  which  tend  to
preserve  society  as  it  is  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  society  is
in  a  state  of  incessant  change.  It  is  social  dynamics,  there-
fore, which,  whatever  may  be  its  real  importance  compared
with  social  statics,  must  always  possess  the  chief  interest  in
the  science  of  sociology,  as  the  end  for  which  all  other  laws
are  studied  and  principles  laid  down.

The  movements  of  society  are  various,  and  may  be  va-
riously classified.  There  are  changes  in  quantity  and  in
quality,  in  position  and  in  location.  Population  undergoes
a  thousand  modifications.  Customs,  laws,  governments,
religions,  industries,  all  change,  disappear,  and  re-appear.
Character  and  physical  constitution  also  vary  almost  beyond
limitation.  On  each  of  these  peculiarities  different  classifi-
cations may  be  and  have  been  based.  But  the  fundamental
classification,  and  that  which,  though  not  independent  of
these,  lies  below  them  and  supports  them  all,  is  the  distinc-
tion of  progressive  and  non-progressive  changes.     In  the

56         PASSIVE  OR  NEGATIVE  SOCIAL  PROGRESS.

course  of  this  work  rigid  and  unambiguous  definitions  of
these  terms  will  be  introduced  (vol.  ii,  pp.  108,  161),  and  this
may  therefore  be  here  dispensed  with.  For  the  present  we
need  only  maintain  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  definite
standard  of  human  progressiveness,  leaving  the  substantia-
tion of  that  proposition  for  a  future  place.

Of  retrogressive  modifications  little  need  be  said.  That
they  occur  can  not  be  denied,  but  whenever  they  do  so  it  is
always  in  strict  accordance  with  the  established  laws  of  nat-
ure. The  main  drift,  however,  of  social,  and  indeed  of
anthropological  changes,  has  ever  been  and  is  still  progres-
sive, and  it  is  with  these  that  we  have  now  chiefly  to  deal.
These  constitute  the  true  field  of  social  dynamics,  and  the
legitimate  aim  of  this  science  is  to  ascertain  the  laws  of  these
changes.  But  knowledge  would  be  useless  if  confined  to
the  mere  contemplation  of  truth.  As  M.  Comte  so  justly
remarks,  all  that  distinguishes  science  from  mere  erudition
is  the  power  it  affords  of  rendering  knowledge  useful  by
enabling  us  to  predict,  and  thereby  to  prepare  for  and  modify
events  and  results.*  If  social  dynamics  is  a  true  science,  this
is  its  chief  aim.  It  should  investigate  the  laws  of  human
progress  with  a  view  to  influence  that  progress  for  the
good  of  society.  But,  according  to  our  definition,  hereafter
to  be  more  fully  stated,  to  do  this  is  simply  to  increase  the
rate  of  that  progress.

Social  progress  as  thus  defined  is  capable  of  a  still  further
subdivision  vnio  passive^ov  negative,2Lnd  active,or positive.

Passive,  or  negative,  progress  contemplates  the  forces  of
society  as  operating  in  their  natural  freedom,  subject  only  to
the  laws  of  evolution  in  general.  Here  society  is  regaj-ded
as  passive  in  the  sense  of  being  simply  acted  upon  by  the
forces  that  surround  it  and  operate  within  it.  It  is  conceived
as  negative  from  the  absence  of  any  force  extraneous  to  these
regular  natural  forces  operating  in  the  direction  of  their
limitation  or  modification.  Such,  it  is  believed,  has  been  the
*  "Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  ii,  p.  20;  vol.  iii,  pp.  8,  212.

ACTIVE  OR  POSITIVE  SOCIAL  PROGRESS.  57

nature  of  most  of  the  progress  thus  far  attained  by  society,
as  it  is  of  all  that  which  has  taken  place  in  the  animal,  vege-
table, and  inorganic  kingdoms  of  nature.

Active,  or  positive,  progress  takes  place  through  the  appli-
cation to  the  natural  forces  acting  in  and  upon  society  of  a
force  external  to  and  distinct  from  them.  To  the  regular
course  of  the  social  phenomena  as  determined  by  the  laws  of
evolution,  we  must  conceive  added  a  new  force  limiting  and
directing  these  into  special  channels  and  for  special  ends.
Its  chief  quality  as  distinguished  from  other  forces  is  'pur-
pose. In  short,  it  is  the  teleological  force,  the  abstract  con-
ception of  which  is  familiar  to  all,  having  formed  the  basis  of
theological  philosophy.  Indeed,  this  element  is  by  no  means
new  as  a  factor  in  social  dynamics.  The  pure  processes  of
nature,  conceived  as  unintelligent,  have  never  been  deemed
sufficient  to  account  for  social  phenomena.  A  teleological
force  has  always  been  believed  to  preside  over,  control,  limit,
and  direct  the  affairs  of  men  to  special  progressive  ends.  No
time  need  therefore  be  spent  in  endeavoring  to  define  the
nature  of  this  force,  it  having  already  been  closely  woven
into  all  our  conceptions  of  social  progress  by  theological
teachings  famihar  to  all.  The  only  thing  new  about  the
idea  under  consideration  is  the  source  of  this  influence.  The
progress  of  our  knowledge  of  nature  has  tended  steadily  in
the  direction  of  narrowing  down  the  field  of  alleged  teleo-
logical power,  banishing  it  from  each  of  the  great  provinces
of  nature — first,  from  the  celestial  realms,  which  are  now
presided  over  by  the  strictest  mathematical  laws,  and  then
from  the  other  fields  of  increasingly  complex  phenomena.
And  so  great  has  been  the  success  thus  far,  and  so  complete
the  proof  of  the  possibility  of  genetic  explanation  where
teleological  explanation  has  so  long  been  regarded  necessary,
that  consistent  minds,  having  no  natural  or  hereditary  bias,
are  ready  to  concede  the  probability  that  teleological  influ-
ences must  eventually  be  excluded  from  the  whole  domain
of  natural  phenomena.

68  ACTIVE  OR  POSITIVE  SOCIAL  PROGRESS,

Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  the  very  idea  of  a  teleolog-
ical  force  is  an  anthropomorphic  conception.  But  for  the
known  power  of  man  to  modify  nature  to  his  own  ends,  no
such  power  would  have  ever  been  ascribed  to  his  divinities.
And,  although  the  reality  of  such  an  ascribed  power  be  dis-
proved by  the  light  of  scientific  truth,  the  source  of  such  a
conception  will  still  remain  as  an  objective  reality.  It  is
this  reality  that  it  is  sought  here  to  recognize  and  rehabili-
tate, and  to  bring  forward  as  the  true  active  or  positive  force
in  social  dynamics.  No  one  can  fail  to  perceive  its  identity
with  what  has  been  already  designated  as  anthropo-teleol-
ogy  {supra,  p.  28),  the  power  of  man  to  modify  and  direct
the  forces  of  nature  for  his  own  purposes.*  While  this
force  was  there  applied  generally  to  all  the  processes  of  na-
ture and  shown  to  constitute  the  chief  element  of  the  indi-
vidual progress  of  mankind,  its  application  is  here  limited  to
the  natural  laws  of  society,  and  it  is  proposed  to  show  that
to  its  general  recognition  will  be  due  a  renewed  and  greatly
accelerated  progressive  movement  in  society.

This  force  is  regarded  as  active  by  reason  of  its  direct
action  upon  the  remaining  forces  controlling  society,  while
progress  thus  produced  may  be  fitly  coWeii  j)ositive,  from  the
purely  arbitrary  character  of  its  processes  and  the  recogni-
tion of  man  himseK  as  the  disposer  of  social  events.  As,  in
individual  action  and  enterprise,  this  force  is  the  real  cause
of  all  invention,  through  which  nearly  all  the  material  prog-
ress of  the  world  has  been  effected,  so  it  is  claimed  that,  if
society  is  admitted  to  be  the  theatre  of  natural  forces  in  the

*  The  modifications  of  nature  which  follow  science  and  which  constitute  art
are  twofold — objective  or  positive,  and  subjective. or  negative.  In  the  first  of
these  cases  man  adapts  nature  to  his  wants,  in  the  second  he  adapts  himself  to
nature's  requirements.  Thus,  wherever  it  is  possible,  objective  phenomena  are
modified  and  forced  into  channels  advantageous  to  man.  But  where  he  has  no
direct  control  over  phenomena,  as,  e.  g.,  the  weather,  he  accomplishes  the  same
purpose  by  modifying  his  own  immediate  surroundings,  and  adapting  himself  to
conditions  which  he  is  unable  to  change,  as  by  the  invention  of  clothing,  the  con-
Btruction  of  houses,  etc.

SCIENCE  MUST  PKECEDE  AET.  69

same  sense  as  the  remaining  departments  of  nature,  there  is
no  escaping  the  conclusion  that  the  extension  of  the  same
force  or  influence  to  social  phenomena  may  yield  correspond-
ing results.  To  deny  this  is  to  deny  the  parallelism  of  social
and  physical  phenomena — i.  e.^  to  deny  the  existence  of  a
social  science.

Let  us  insist  once  more,  however,  that  science  must  pre-
cede ar^/  that  discovery  must  antedate  invention.  For,  as
already  said,  the  cause  of  the  failure  of  all  attempts  at  inven-
tion in  politics  thus  far  has  been  ignorance  of  the  laws  of
nature  controlling  human  events.  It  must,  therefore,  be
frankly  admitted  that,  at  the  present  stage  of  human  knowl-
edge, the  great  work  to  be  done  is  the  investigation  of  these
laws.  This  is  the  province  of  sociology  at  the  present  infan-
tile stage  of  the  science,  and  too  much  praise  can  not  be  ac-
corded those  pioneers  of  this  science  who  insist  that  we
must  not  advance  too  rapidly,  but  must  first  assiduously
apply  ourselves  to  the  task  of  collecting  materials  and  sup-
plying data  for  the  future  prosecution  of  the  study  of  sociol-
ogy. But  it  will  not  do  to  go  so  far  as  to  assert  that  this  pas-
sive or  negative  department  constitutes  the  whole  of  that
science.  Were  such  the  case,  then  would  it  be  a  plaything,
and  deserve  to  be  classed  along  with  the  metaphysics  of
the  middle  ages,  as  a  mere  grindstone  for  the  sharpening  of
human  wits.

Social  phenomena  have  been  shown  to  be  capable  of  vari-
ous kinds  of  independent  classification.  The  most  important
of  these  was  stated  to  be  that  into  progressive  and  non-pro-
gressive. Of  progressive  phenomena  two  general  divisions
were  made — the  one  passive  or  negative,  the  other  active  or
positive.  The  laws  governing  all  these  classes  of  social  phe-
nomena are  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  constitute  the
legitimate  province  of  sociological  study.  But  in  all  except
the  last-named  subdivision  pure  science  is  involved,  with  no
direct  allusion  to  art.  In  the  last-named  subdivision,  it  is
joined  to  the  art  of  regulating  society.

60  SOCIOOKAOY.

The  science  whicli  concerns  itself  with  the  laws  of  the  so-
cial order  is  social  statics.  That  which  considers  the  condi-
tions of  social  jyrogress  is  social  dynamics.  One  branch  of
social  dynamics  confines  itself  to  the  normal  changes  going
on  in  society  under  the  sole  influence  of  natural  laws,  and  is
strictly  analogous  to  the  dynamics  of  astronomy  or  physics.
The  study  of  this  class  of  laws  has  no  other  object  than  that
of  mere  discovery.  It  admits  of  no  attempts  to  connect  dis-
covery with  invention.  But  the  other  branch  of  social
dynamics,  that  which  embraces  the  influence  of  those  active
or  positive  forces  heretofore  described,  necessarily  connects
the  study  of  these  forces  with  the  art  of  applying  them,
which  is  a  distinctly  human  process,  and  depends  wholly  on
the  action  of  man  himself.  This  art  may  be  very  appropri-
ately named  Sociocracij^  although  it  is  the  same  that  has  been
sometimes  called  ^politics,  giving  to  that  term  a  much  wider
range  than  that  now  usually  assigned  to  it.  We  have,  there-
fore, besides  social  statics,  negative  and  positive  social  dy-
namics, all  of  which  classes  are  necessary  to  constitute  sociol-
ogy a  true  science.

It  would  be  easy  to  show  that  any  science  possesses  just
these  stages  of  development,  and  that,  before  it  can  become
useful  to  man,  the  last  or  positive  stage  must  be  reached.
By  means  of  this  alone  can  the  principles  of  a  science  be  ap-
plied to  human  uses — i.  e.,  to  art.  A  science  which  can  not
be  so  applied  is  useless,  and  an  acquaintance  with  its  laws,
constitutes  what  Comte  distinguishes  as  mere  "  erudition."

This  should  not,  however,  discourage  the  investigation
of  any  department  of  nature  whose  immediate  application  to
human  needs  can  not  be  perceived.  The  history  of  discov-
ery is  too  full  of  examples  of  the  unexpected  practical  fruits
of  abstruse  and  apparently  valueless  researches,  to  warrant
the  prediction  that  any  thing  must  necessarily  be  useless.

Again,  there  are  many  sciences,  and  sociology  may  be  one,
the  precise  manner  of  whose  returns  in  direct  benefit  to  the

*  Sec  "Penn  Monthly,"  May,  1881,  p.  336.

LIMITS  OF  STATE  EEGULATION.  61

race  is  as  yet  very  obscure,  and  in  whose  study  the  greatest
efforts  should  be  made  to  refrain  from  undue  attempts  to
apply  its  principles  before  they  have  been  established  upon
the  most  certain  foundations.  In  such  cases  it  is  better  to
linger  long  and  patiently  at  the  statical  and  passively  dy-
namical stages,  and  to  understand  thoroughly  its  positive-
ly dynamical  principles,  before  venturing  to  point  out  the
proper  mode  of  their  active  application  to  art.  But  this  is
quite  another  thing  from  maintaining  that  these  sciences
admit  of  no  such  application,  which  is  the  absurd  position  of
the  laissez  faire  school  of  sociologists  —  absurd,  since  it
involves  a  direct  contradiction,  and  clearly  concedes  that  no
such  science  exists.

The  problem,  therefore,  is  one  of  method.  The  immediate
question  is.  What  measures  are  safe,  what  means  certain  to  re-
sult in  increasing  the  harmony  and  diminishing  the  discord
between  the  phenomena  of  nature  and  the  welfare  of  man  ?

In  the  discussion  of  all  questions  respecting  the  legiti-
mate sphere  of  positive  law,  it  must  finally  become  recognized,
as  it  has  been  in  so  many  other  questions  in  which  abstract
principles  have  once  been  defended,  that  no  such  principles
exist,  and  that  each  special  issue  must  be  considered  upon  its
own  merits.  Its  advisability  will  depend  upon  its  own  spe-
cial nature  and  upon  the  circumstances  under  which  it  must
operate.  Whether  it  will  in  reality  prove  more  beneficial
than  injurious  becomes  in  all  cases  a  simple  question  of  fact,
and  its  adoption  or  rejection  must  always,  as  now,  be  due  to
the  opinion  of  the  legislator  as  to  what  are  to  be  its  effects.
But  this  very  admission  only  shows  the  immense  importance
of  reducing  legislation  to  a  science  as  exact  as  possible.  Ex-
perience must  be  organized  and  judicially  weighed.  History
must  be  thoroughly  understood,  not  only  in  its  superficial
bearings,  but  in  its  fundamental  principles,  as  an  index  to
human  nature  in  general.  But,  above  all,  the  laws  mani-
fested by  the  social  forces  {infra,  p.  468),  the  first  principles
of  social  mechanics,  must  be  drawn  from  the  great  "  hie-

62  LIMITS  OF  STATE  REGULATION.

rarcliy"  of  simpler  sciences  upon  which  the  social  science
rests,  and  theoretically  mastered  by  the  law-maker  and  the
statesman.

There  are  already  many  minor  questions  of  positive  law,
national  control,  and  public  intervention  in  social  intercourse
and  private  business  affairs,  which  almost  unconsciously  have
passed  through  the  stage  of  discussion,  been  conceded  by  the
laissez  faire  school,  and  adopted  by  society  in  many  coun-
tries.* The  advantages  of  the  municipal  control  of  the  fire
department  in  cities  is  so  obvious  that  scarcely  any  one  can
be  found  to  favor  private  companies.  Postal  affairs  in  some
countries  occupy  nearly  the  same  position.  In  a  few  coun-
tries the  management  of  telegraph  lines  has  with  a  feeble
struggle  passed  out  of  private  hands.  Lines  of  passenger
travel  and  freight  transportation  might  be,  no  doubt,  in
many  if  not  all  cases,  and  have  in  some  cases  already  been,
advantageously  transferred  to  the  public  charge.  In  Ger-
many and  the  United  States  public  instruction  has  been
made  in  a  great  measure  to  suiDersede  private  instruction.
In  the  former  country  it  is  compulsory,  and  is  extended  to
a  large  percentage  of  the  population.  Few  doubt  that  the
general  intelligence  of  the  German  people  is  vastly  gi'eater
than  it  would  be  had  education  been  left  entirely  to  private
enterprise.  Even  in  the  United  States,  where  it  is  wholly
optional  with  parents  and  students,  though  taxation  for  the
purpose  is  obligatory  on  all,  it  will  not  be  disputed  that  the
people  are  more  enlightened  than  they  would  be  with  none
but  private  institutions  of  learning.  Of  the  real  benefits  of
public  education,  as  of  education  itself,  there  are  varying
estimates.  Of  its  efficiency  and  feasibility  there  can  be  no
longer  any  doubt.  And  there  are  some  who  regard  these
effects  as  of  the  highest  importance,  and  who  believe  that
an  extension  of  the  amount  of  such  instruction  would  be
attended  by  proportionate  results.

It  may  surprise  some  of  the  advocates  of  the  let-alone

*  See  "Pcnn  Monthly,"  May,  1881,  p.  883.

LIMITS  OF  STATE  REGULATION.  63

policy  to  be  informed  tliat  there  are  certain  operations  which
have  always  been  under  state  control.  But  such  is  the  fact.
For  what  is  government  but  a  system  of  control  ?  It  con-
trols the  finances,  the  public  domain,  the  administration  of
justice  (vol.  ii,  pp.  364,  391),  defense  of  its  boundaries,  the
intercourse  with  foreign  countries,  and  a  multitude  of  other
matters.  The  fact  that  these  have  never  been  left  to  private
enterprise  does  not  prove  that  such  might  not  be  the  case.
A  nation  might  leave  its  financial  affairs  to  private  individ-
uals as  well  as  its  postal  a£fairs.*  The  private  banking  sys-
tem, which  the  state  controls  more  or  less  as  it  sees  fit,  might
be  so  far  left  to  itself  that  the  collection  and  disbursement
of  the  public  revenues  would  be  performed  by  private  banks,
and  the  entire  financial  system  placed  in  the  hands  of  inde-
pendent financiers.  Suicidal  as  such  a  policy  would  ob-
viously be,  it  can  not  be  qualitatively  distinguished  from  the
like  policy  applied  to  the  business  of  transporting  crops,
minerals,  and  manufactured  goods  from  place  to  place  for
the  purposes  of  distribution.  The  revenues  of  a  nation  do
not  belong  to  it  any  more  than  the  products  from  which
they  are  raised,  and  the  state  has  as  much  right  to  control
the  management  of  the  one  as  of  the  other.  The  only  dif-
ference is  that,  from  the  specific  nature  of  the  two  opera-
tions, one  has  always  been  regarded  as  legitimately  under  the
control  of  the  state,  while  the  other  has  been  thought  to  be
most  advantageously  left  to  private  enterprise.  All  the  func-
tions which  the  state  habitually  performs,  even  to  those  of
war,  might  be  similarly  compared,  and  it  would  appear  that
government  itself  is  simply  a  collection  of  cases  in  which
society  in  its  corporate  capacity  has  assumed  to  control  cer-
tain operations,  and  interfere  with  the  unrestrained  liberty
of  private  enterprise.

In  all  those  affairs  which  the  state  can  manage  more  ad-
vantageously than  the  individual  it  has  in  fact  managed  well,
and  such  as  have  passed  from  private  to  public  control  are
*  Farming  of  revenues  has,  in  fact,  been  extensively  practiced.

G4:  ANTITHETICAL  TYPES  OF  MIND.

better  administered  by  the  state  than  they  were  by  the  indi-
vidual, while  such  as  are  in  part  administered  by  the  stata
and  in  part  by  private  parties  are  as  a  rule  far  better  admin-
istered by  the  former.  To  this  latter  class  pre-eminently  be-
longs the  work  of  popular  instruction.  This  is  not  the  place
to  introduce  a  full  discussion  of  the  superiority  of  public
over  private  education,  and  for  this  the  reader  is  referred  to
Chapter  XIV.  We  may,  however,  anticipate  the  decision
there  reached  that,  whatever  doubt  may  exist  with  reference
to  the  propriety  of  state  control  of  any  other  social  process,
there  can  be  none  with  regard  to  education.  But,  if  this
be  the  case  with  what  has  heretofore  gone  by  the  name  of
education,  it  will  be  far  more  true  still  of  that  which  we
have  sought  to  embody  in  that  term.  If  there  has  been  ap-
parent failure  or  partial  real  failure,  it  has  been  due  to  the
manifold  imperfections  of  the  systems  denominated  educa-
tional. When  education  shall  imply  a  knowledge  of  nature,
its  universal  extension  must  result  in  progress.

It  is  important,  before  fairly  entering  upon  the  subject-
matter  of  this  work,  to  indicate  the  stand-point  from  which
whatever  shall  be  stated  will  proceed.  I  have  already  brief-
ly alluded  to  the  two  prevalent  antagonistic  types  of  mind,
by  which  all  questions  concerning  the  universe,  mankind,  and
society  are  always  discussed.  The  chief  difference  in  them
is  the  point  of  view  from  which  they  respectively  regard
phenomena.  One  class  sees  everything  as  being  done,  the
other  as  doing.  One  type  of  mind  may  be  regarded  as  put-
ting nature  in  a  passive,  the  other  in  an  active,  attitude.  A
variety  of  antithetical  terms  have  been  invented  for  the  pur-
pose of  clearly  setting  off  these  two  great  types  of  mind
against  each  other.  Few  of  these  are  wholly  unobjection-
able ;  none  of  them  are  suflSciently  comprehensive  to  embrace
all  the  points  of  distinction.  The  word  teleology  approaches
more  nearly  to  a  complete  expression  of  the  conceptions  of
the  one  school  than  any  other,  but  no  equally  satisfactory

TERMS  EMPLOYED.  65

term  lias  yet  been  found  to  convey  the  opposite  idea.  The
word  getiesis  wonld  probably  be  the  best  yet  discovered  for
this  purpose,  were  it  not  preoccupied  in  a  variety  of  other
and  special  senses.  The  adjective  genetic  is  less  objection-
able in  this  respect,  and,  where  adjectives  are  required,  teleo-
logical  and  genetic  are  probably  on  the  whole  the  best.  But,
as  even  these  fail  to  take  in  the  whole  scope  of  the  concep-
tions, another  pair,  very  useful  in  certain  cases,  has  been  pro-
posed.* These  are,  dualistic  and  monistic.  The  idea  here
is,  in  the  first,  the  separation  of  the  motive  power  in  nature
from  the  phenomena,  and,  in  the  second,  their  union.

The  term  positive,  used  by  Comte  as  the  opposite  of  both
theological  and  metaphysical,  is  both  vague  and  ambiguous
{infra,  p.  85).  The  term  mechanical  is  too  apt  to  be  con-
founded with  what  Herbert  Spencer  calls  the  "carpenter
theory,"  and  thus  suits  both  the  conceptions.  Other  expres-
sions, many  of  them  useful  in  certain  applications,  but  all  of
them  insufficient  as  general  terms,  need  not  be  considered
here,  although  they  will  be  freely  used  when  required  in
seeking  to  elucidate  this  deepest  of  conceptions  for  which
there  is  an  acknowledged  dearth  of  words.  In  ordinary
cases,  however,  the  four  terms  teleological,  dualistic,  genetic,
and  monistic,  will  have  to  suffice,  and  their  meaning  may  be
extended  by  the  reader  beyond  the  limits  prescribed  by
their  etymology,  and  made  to  embrace  all  the  accessory  no-
tions demanded  by  the  context.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  the  stand-point  from
which  the  present  work  is  written  is  the  strictly  monistic  or
genetic  one,  from  which  I^ature  and  all  her  phenomena  are
conceived  as  the  parts  of  one  whole  or  unit,  and  bound  to-
gether by  an  absolutely  unbroken  chain.  For  it  is  clear  that
only  from  such  a  stand-point,  and  only  in  harmony  with  such
a  conception,  would  it  be  of  the  least  use  to  hope  for  the  ac-
complishment of  any  results.     I^Teither  man  individually  nor

*  Ernst   Haeckel,    "  Schopfungsgeschichte,"  S.  31,  67 ;   "  Anthropogenie,"
S.  12.

66  FINAL  AND  EFFICIENT  CAUSES.

society  collectively  could  ever  take  one  certain  step  except
actuated  by  this  idea.  However  it  may  be  in  the  domain  of
faith,  in  all  real  action  this  conception  is  and  always  has
been  the  fundamental  postulate.  The  invariability  of  na-
ture's laws,  the  absolute  dependence  of  all  phenomena  :  these
are  the  initial  premises,  the  sine  qua  non,  not  only  of  all
science  and  of  all  art,  but  of  all  action  of  whatever  kind.
And  herein  is  the  most  complicated  of  paradoxes — that,
while  the  intellect  has  been  wedded  to  appearances  and  er-
ror, truth  and  reality  have  overruled  the  vagaries  of  the
reason,  and  prevented  it  from  leading  the  race  to  its  own
destruction  (vol.  ii,  p.  28Y).

Instead  of  considering  phenomena  as  the  effects  only  of
independent  and  arbitrary  causes,  as  the  teleologists  do,  or
merely  as  phenomena  wholly  disconnected  from  the  idea  of
cause  or  effect,  as  the  positivists  do,  they  will  be  regarded  as
both  effects  and  causes,  as  terms  in  an  infinite  series  of  cau-
sation, deriving  their  own  character  from  the  immediate  an-
tecedents out  of  which  they  are  evolved,  and  impressing  that
character  upon  the  immediate  consequents  upon  which  their
activities  are  expended.  Dispensing  with  the  agency  of  a
Jirst  cause  and  oi  final  causes,  and  calling  in  that  of  eJBScient
causes  only,  all  manifestations  in  nature  must  be  regarded  as
the  effects,  on  the  one  hand,  of  true  causes  {causce  efficientes),
and  as  themselves  such  true  causes,  on  the  other.  This  con-
ception is  the  only  one  by  means  of  which  any  anthropo-
teleological  results  can  be  supposed  capable  of  accomplish-
ment, and  without  such  results  the  limit  of  man's  evolution,
both  individually  and  socially,  must  soon  be  reached.  The
law  of  population  as  set  forth  by  Malthus,*  which  is  at  least
true  in  the  abstract,  that  whereas  the  means  of  subsistence
increase  in  an  arithmetical,  population  increases  in  a  geo-
metrical ratio,  would  be  sufficient  to  teach  us  this,  were  there
not  a  variety  of  other  circumstances  that  with  equal  certainty

"Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population,"  fifth  edition,  London,  1817,  vol.  i,
pp.  9,  14.

DEFINITION  OF  PROGRESS.  67

point  to  the  same  result.  The  only  hope  of  establishing,  or
for  any  great  length  of  time  maintaining,  a  condition  of  so-
cial dynamics  is  in  the  invention,  by  human  foresight,  and
direct  application  to  society  itself,  of  such  an  anthropo-teleo-
logical  plan  or  scheme  as  shall  successfully  neutralize  these
equilibrating  forces,  and  give  to  the  social  organism,  as  it
were,  a  new  lease  of  life.  But  social  progress  means  more
than  the  mere  maintenance  of  the  social  organism,  just  as
individual  life  means  more  than  the  bare  conservation  of  the
bodily  existence.  No  progress  is  real  that  does  not  con-
stantly show  a  reduction  of  the  aggregate  suffering  or  an
increase  of  the  aggregate  enjoyment  throughout  society
(vol.  ii,  pp.  161,  174).  This,  no  means  thus  far  adopted
have  ever  yet  accomplished.  Before  concluding  this  intro-
ductory survey,  therefore,  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  a
moment's  attention  to  this,  the  really  most  important  and
practical  of  all  the  considerations  to  be  discussed.  A  sys-
tematic analysis  of  this  subject  will  be  found  in  Chapters  IX
and  X,  but,  as  it  is  one  that  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the
whole  work  and  modifies  all  its  details,  it  should  be  con-
stantly before  the  mind  of  the  reader  as  he  passes  through
the  various  chapters  of  the  present  volume,  to  certain  por-
tions of  which  its  recollection  will  supply  an  explanation
where,  without  it,  the  mere  text  might  appear  obscure.

The  root-idea  to  which  I  will  here  confine  myself  is  the
true  supremacy  which  must  be  accorded  in  any  just  system
of  philosophy  to  the  feelings  as  the  real  end  toward  which
all  efforts  designed  to  secure  the  advancement  of  society
must  be  directed.  Although  it  is  upon  the  intellect  that  we
can  alone  rely  to  secure  such  a  control  of  the  social  forces  as
shall  successfully  harmonize  them  with  human  advantage,  it
is  feeling  that  must  be  alone  consulted  in  determining  what
constitutes  such  advantage.  Every  true  system  must  regard
intellect  as  the  means  and  feeling  as  the  end  of  all  its  opera-
tions. Intellect  itself  can  only  constitute  an  end  in  so  far
as  it  is  itself  a  seat  of  feeling ;  and,  while  intellectual  enjoy-

68  ORGANIZATION  OF  FEELING.

ment  is  sure  to  constitute  a  progressively  larger  proportion
of  the  sum  of  all  enjoyment  as  it  itself  develops,  it  is  in
point  of  fact  at  the  present  time,  even  among  the  most
advanced  races,  a  very  minute  fraction  of  it,  stnd  must  con-
tinue to  remain  so  for  a  great  while.  This  fact  must  be  rec-
ognized and  appreciated,  or  there  will  be  great  danger  of
mistaking  the  means  for  the  end.  It  is  nevertheless  true
that,  before  any  direct  measures  bearing  upon  this  end  can  be
entered  upon,  a  large  amount  of  preliminary  work  must  bo
first  laid  out  in  the  perfection  of  the  means,  just  as,  before
any  great  direct  results  can  be  attained  in  any  other  field  of
science,  as  for  example  in  astronomy,  the  means  of  prosecut-
ing the  necessary  undertakings — ^that  is,  the  instruments  by
which  natural  forces  are  to  be  controlled,  directed,  and  in-
tensified— must  first  have  been  brought  to  a  certain  high  state
of  delicacy  and  perfection.  ]S'ow,  the  intellect  is  the  general
means  of  exploitation  in  the  great  field  of  sociology,  and  it,
together  with  the  more  special  means  or  instruments  by
which  it  must  operate,  such  as  education,  schools,  labora-
tories, museums,  etc.,  must  first  reach  a  certain  degree  of
perfection,  before  the  practical  labor  of  engineering  the  so-
cial forces  can  be  fairly  entered  upon.  The  present  humble
effort,  therefore,  so  far  from  claiming  to  attack  the  problems
of  sociology  itself,  is  simply  an  appeal  to  mankind  to  sharp-
en up  their  tools  for  the  work,  to  set  about  the  task  of  pro-
curing the  primary  means  for  entering  upon  the  campaign.

The  practical  work  which  sociology  demands  is,  when  re-
duced to  its  lowest  terms,  the  organization  of  feeling.  The
human  body  is  a  reservoir  of  feeling  which,  when  wholly
unobstructed,  is  all  pleasurable.  There  are  wide  degrees  of
difference  both  in  the  quantity  and  the  quality  of  this  feel-
ing. It  has  its  volume,  pitch,  and  timhre.  The  height  to
which  enjoyment  might  be  carried  is  very  great,  and  can  not
yet  be  reduced  to  any  standard  of  measurement.  Like
everything  else  in  nature,  feeling  is  the  constant  play  of
external  forces  which  are  perpetually  buffeting  against  it.

INTELLECT  AND  KNOWLEDGE.  69

Checked  in  its  natural  flow  it  becomes  pain,  and  this  negative
class  of  feeling,  too,  has  att  the  degrees  which  belong  to  the
positive  or  pleasurable  class.  The  special  problem  of  soci-
ology is  to  control  these  forces,  to  remove  throughout  its
vast  domain  all  those  which  obstruct  the  natural  course  of
the  feelings,  to  increase  and  intensify  those  which  are  favor-
able to  that  course,  and  to  guard  against  any  form  of  stimu-
lation whose  reaction  will  count  more  strongly  against  the
general  sum  of  human  happiness  than  the  stimulus  itself
counts  in  its  favor.

Such  is  the  barest  outline  of  the  real  problem  with  which
the  social  science  must  expect  to  grapple,  so  soon  as  it  shall
have  secured  the  means  by  which  alone  it  can  successfully
commence  operations.

One  other  point  may  be  briefly  touched  upon  here,  to  be
fully  drawn  out  hereafter  (vol.  ii,  pp.472,  487),  the  reasons
for  doing  so  being  substantially  the  same  as  those  given  in
the  case  of  the  point  just  disposed  of.  This  is  the  important
distinction  which  it  is  necessary  to  make  between  intellect
and  knowledge.  Intellect  alone  is  wholly  untrustworthy.  It
matters  not  how  vigorous,  brilliant,  or  profound  it  may  be,
it  is  unsafe  when  left  to  itself.  The  various  metaphysical
and  scholastic  systems  of  philosophy,  so  totally  barren  of
practical  results,  are  the  sufficient  proofs  of  this  truth.  To
be  of  the  least  value,  intellectual  activity  must  be  coupled
with  knowledge.  Knowledge  is  simply  objective  truth  com-
prehended by  the  intellect.  Truth  is  the  natural  nourish-
ment of  the  mind,  and,  when  not  fed  by  it,  the  mind  becomes
superficial  and  impotent.  "When  nourished  by  unnatural
food,  such  as  pure  theory,  internal  reflection,  imagination,
or  fancy,  the  mind  is  not  only  impoverished,  but  it  becomes
deranged  and  delirious.  It  flies  off  into  the  empty  realms
of  speculation,  fanaticism,  and  mysticism,  and  builds  up  airy
systems  which  hold  out  large  promise  to  the  plodding  masses
who  have  neither  time  nor  power  to  think,  and  who  follow
on  to  their  ultimate  ruin.     The  world,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  has

70  IFTELLIGENOE.

at  last  fairly  learned  the  lesson  that  nothing  short  of  stern
objective  realities  can  constitute  a  safe  foundation  for  any
future  moral  or  social  system.

Tangible  facts ;  material  objects ;  truths,  laws,  and  prin-
ciples, demonstrable  either  directly  by  the  senses  or  deduci-
ble  from  such  as  are  demonstrable,  in  such  a  manner  that
their  negation  is  absolutely  excluded — such  are  the  materials
for  the  intellect  to  deal  with,  such  the  proper  objects  of
knowledge.  The  only  safe  knowledge  is  knowledge  of
things.  Knowledge  of  thoughts  is  unreliable,  because
thoughts  themselves  as  often  consist  in  errors  as  in  truths.
The  only  real  knowledge  is  knowledge  of  nature.  The
only  important  knowledge  is  science.  Not  to  limit  the
range  of  man's  attainments,  for  knowledge  of  anything  may
be  acquired  as  science,  and  no  knowledge  which  is  not  capa-
ble of  reduction  to  a  place  in  the  category  of  science  can  be
considered  as  knowledge  at  all.

But,  again,  there  are  degrees  of  importance  in  the  mani-
fold forms  of  true  knowledge,  a  fact  which  will  require  the
most  thorough  consideration  at  the  proper  time  (vol.  ii,  pp.
495,  619),  but  which  can  only  be  mentioned  here,  to  avoid
any  possible  misunderstanding  upon  that  point.

The  particular  end  here  aimed  at  is  the  distinction  be-
tween intellect,  the  bare  capacity  for  knowledge,  and  intel-
ligence, which  implies  that  the  intellect  has  been  provided
with  the  proper  materials  for  its  successful  operation  as  an
agent  of  civilization.

This  knowledge  can  only  be  imparted  to  great  masses  of
men  by  means  of  the  systematic  education  of  the  young.
It  is,  however,  easy  to  adopt  what  seems  to  be  such  a  sys-
tem, but  which  utterly  fails  to  accomplish  the  object  which
civilization  demands,  viz.,  the  improvement  of  society.
Education  should  be  valued  in  proportion  as  it  gives  its  pos-
sessor correct  views  of  life,  of  his  relations  to  society  and  to
nature — i.  e.,  as  it  improves  the  moral  tone  of  mankind.  The
speculations  of  the  intellect,  unsupplied  with  facts,  have  no

ARTIFICIAL  PROGRESS.  71

influence  in  tliis  direction.  Kcither  do  those  forms  of  edu-
cation which  go  by  the  name  of  erudition  or  culture  do  this
to  any  marked  extent.  I  would  not  discourage  the  disci-
pline and  refinement  of  the  intellect  or  the  cultivation  of  the
aesthetic  faculty.  "  These  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to
leave  the  other  undone."  Mere  culture,  while  it  is  in  itself
an  element  of  human  happiness,  is  at  the  same  time  wholly
non-progressive.  It  is  not  a  form  of  knowledge.  It  has  no
effect  on  action,  and  exerts  no  influence  on  character.  It
should  be  made  secondary,  and  enter  into  education  only
after,  or  as  additional  to,  the  inculcation  of  truth.  The  sys-
tem of  education  which  makes  art  take  precedence  over  sci-
ence, and  culture  over  knowledge,  is  a  perverted  system
which,  at  best,  only  leaves  the  world  where  it  finds  it.

The  progress  to  which  dynamic  sociology  points  is  an
artificial  progress.  To  some  this  may  sound  strange.  As-
sociated with  the  word  artificial  are  certain  vague  and  con-
fused ideas.  Whatever  is  artificial  is  assumed  to  be  in
some  way  inferior  to  that  which  is  natural.  Such  ideas
need  to  be  corrected.  It  is  generally  true  that  in  the  fine
arts  the  aim  is  to  imitate  nature,  but  it  is  also  true  that  even
here  art  often  surpasses  nature.  In  the  domain  of  practical
art,  however,  the  case  is  quite  different.  Here  all  progress
in  art  is  directly  away  from  nature.  The  successful  in  this
field  is  not  that  which  most  closely  imitates  nature,  but  that
which  most  completely  alters  it  and  bends  it  to  the  advan-
tage of  man.  Useful  art  is  a  departure  from,  and  improve-
ment upon,  nature.  It  is  therefore  important  to  gain  a  clear
conception  of  the  distinction  between  natural  and  artificial
progress.*

*  It  is  proper  to  remark  respecting  the  discussion  which  follows,  and  the
important  principles  therein  set  forth,  which  are  frequently  applied  through-
out the  entire  work,  that  up  to  the  date  of  its  completion,  in  July,  1880,  I  had
neglected  to  acquaint  myself  with  the  Duke  of  Argyll's  (in  many  respects)  re-
markable book,  "The  Keign  of  Law."  Supposing  him  to  be  a  follower  of
Adam  Smith,  and,  as  the  title  of  the  work  would  naturally  lead  one  to  expect,  a
theoretical  political  economist  and  advocate  of  the  competitive  system,  laissez

72  PASSIVE  AND  ACTIVE  ADAPTATION.

All  progress  is  brought  about  by  adaptation.  Whatever
view  we  may  take  of  the  cause  of  progress,  it  must  be  the
result  of  a  correspondence  between  the  organism  and  the
changed  environment.  This,  in  its  widest  sense,  is  adapta-
tion. But  adaptation  is  of  two  kinds :  One  form  of  adap-
tation is  passive  or  consensual^  the  other  form  is  active  or
previsional.  The  former  represents  natural  progress,  the
latter  artificial  progress.  The  former  results  in  a  growth^
the  latter  in  a  manufacture.  The  one  is  the  genetic  process,
the  other  the  teleological  process.  In  passive  adaptation  the
means  and  the  end  are  in  immediate  proximity,  the  variation
takes  place  by  infinitesimal  differences ;  it  is  a  process  of  dif-
ferentiation. In  active  adaptation,  on  the  contrary,  the  end
is  remote  from  the  means ;  the  latter  are  adjusted  to  secure
the  former  by  the  exercise  of  foresight.  It  is  a  process  of
calculation.

faire  doctrine,  and  naturistic  policy,  I  had  not  hoped  to  find  anything  new  to
repay  its  perusal.  A  friend  having  pointed  out  to  me  the  coincidence  between
certain  of  my  views  and  those  maintained  in  that  work,  I  have  hastened  to  re-
pair this  omission,  and  correct  my  mistake.  The  enlightened  and  all-sided  tone
which  pervades  the  greater  part  of  this  treatise  is  highly  refreshing,  and,  would
space  permit,  I  would  gladly  introduce  a  more  extended  exposition  of  the  Duke
of  Argyll's  views.  As  it  is,  I  can  only  point  out  that,  in  a  way  of  his  own,  the
analogy  between  legislation  and  invention,  and  the  law  of  attractive  legislation,
are  quite  distinctly  enunciated,  while,  under  the  terms  "Natural  Law"  and
"Positive  Institution,"  he  has  foreshadowed  the  distinction  between  genetic
and  teleological  methods  in  the  domain  of  politics.  With  regard  to  this  latter
principle,  however,  so  feeble  is  his  grasp  of  it,  that,  after  having  formulated  it
with  some  clearness,  he  immediately  loses  it  in  the  following  paragraph :  "  They
[men]  were  right  when  they  regarded  their  own  faculty  of  contrivance  as  the
nearest  and  truest  analogy  by  which  the  constitution  of  the  universe  can  be
conceived  and  its  order  understood  "  (p.  890).  This  is  not  surprising,  when  it  is
remembered  that  throughout  the  first  six  chapters  his  chief  aim  seems  to  be  to
show  design  in  nature,  and  to  prove  the  existence  of  "  contrivance  "  in  natural
phenomena  identical  with  that  exhibited  by  human  agency.  In  a  word,  "  The
Reign  of  Law "  seeks  to  establish  the  co-existence  of  theo-teleology  with  an-
thropo-teleology.  It  is  through  the  rejection  of  the  former  rather  than  through
the  recognition  of  the  latter  that  philosophy  can  reach  solid  ground,  since  the  only
alternative  to  theo-teleology  is  the  genetic  method.  In  failing  to  grasp  this  truth,
the  Duke  of  Argyll  seems  to  have  studied  the  "  Origin  of  Species  "  quite  in  vain.

SUPERIORITY  OF  THE  TELEOLOGIOAL  METHOD.      73

In  order  properly  to  estimate  the  superiority  of  active
over  passive  adaptation,  and  the  advantage  of  teleological  or
artificial  over  genetic  or  natural  progress,  we  need  first  to
consider  the  nature  of  the  latter  and  the  obstacles  with  which
it  perpetually  meets.  In  the  first  place,  it  necessarily  in-
volves enormous  waste.  The  proximity  of  the  means  to  the
end  forbids  the  taking  advantage  of  the  forces  in  operation,
destroys  the  leverage  by  which  effects  are  rendered  dispro-
portionate to  causes.  The  higher  we  rise  in  the  scale  of
being,  the  greater  is  the  disproportion  between  causes  and
their  effects  in  producing  further  progress.  This  may  be
seen  in  the  increased  length  of  the  strides  that  animals  and
plants  have  made  as  they  have  risen  in  the  scale  of  organiza-
tion, until  at  last  we  find  the  slightest  differences  in  the
brain-structure  producing  the  enormous  differences  which
distinguish  men  from  animals  and  sages  from  cretins.  This
becomes  still  more  apparent  in  the  progress  of  human  civ-
ilization, where  apparently  simple  mechanical  devices  have
exerted  such  immense  influence  on  the  condition  of  mankind
and  on  the  physical  state  of  the  earth's  surface.

The  principle  which  underlies  these  truths  is  that,  as
organization  'progresses,  the  genetic  gradually  gives  way  to
the  teleological  method,  the  means  separate  more  and  more
widely  from  the  end,  and  the  amount  oi purchase  or  l&verage
is  correspondingly  increased.  The  secret  of  the  success  of
the  mind-force  in  nature  is  not  its  greater  mechanical
strength,  but  its  peculiar  faculty  of  applying  itself  to  the
long  end  of  the  lever,  and  thus  gaining  an  immense  ad-
vantage over  all  the  counter-forces  of  inertia,  resistance,
etc.,  to  be  overcome.  The  same  principle,  on  the  other
hand,  equally  accounts  for  the  enormous  waste  which  not
progress  alone  but  existence  itself  entails  in  the  case  of  all
organisms  as  products  of  natural  development.  The  terms
natural  selection  and  survival  of  the  fittest^  tersely  as  they
express  the  great  law  of  passive  adaptation,  both  contain  the
significant  implication  that  the  great  bulk  of  things  are  not

74:      WASTE  INVOLVED  IN  THE  GENETIC  METHOD.

selected,  that  only  the  select  few,  who  happen  to  prove  Jit,
survive.  All  else  perishes.  I  need  not  refer  to  the  still
more  shocking  waste  of  germs  which  throughout  all  organic
life  accompanies  the  process  of  perpetuating  the  species.
Society  itself  offers  unlimited  examples  of  this  truth.  It
is  still  in  the  main  a  prey  to  this  wasteful,  passive  adapta-
tion. Cities  grow  up  without  the  least  premonition  of  their
future  greatness,  and  require  numerous  expensive  re-adjust-
ments to  meet  what  a  little  foresight  might  have  provided
for  at  the  outset.  The  first  pioneers  of  a  new  country  de-
stroy the  forests,  and  leave  to  the  dense  population  which  is
to  rise  an  uninhabitable  desert.  The  soil  of  the  richest  re-
gions of  the  globe  is  exhausted  in  the  first  few  years  of
occupancy,  in  consequence  of  the  same  improvident  policy.
Enormous  losses  are  incurred  by  redundant  transportation.
Free  trade  is  the  impersonation  of  the  genetic  or  develop-
mental process  in  nature.  Heavy  metals  are  mined  on  one
side  of  the  globe,  transported  in  a  raw  condition  to  the  oppo-
site side,  manufactured  there,  and  then  re-transported  as  man-
ufactured articles  to  the  place  where  they  were  taken  from
the  earth,  to  be  consumed,  perhaps,  by  the  very  people  who
mined  them.  And  all  this  when  there  was  no  lack  of  nat-
ural facilities,  skilled  artisans,  or  thrifty  capitalists  in  the
immediate  vicinity  of  the  original  resources.  Some  claim
that  this  involves  no  loss,  that  it  must  be  an  advantage,  else
the  laws  of  trade  would  not  require  it.  As  well  maintain
that  the  bringing  forth  by  the  oyster  of  its  two  million  em-
bryos, only  a  few  hundred  of  which  can  survive  under  the
most  favorable  circumstances,  must  be  economical  because
they  are  produced  under  the  operation  of  strictly  natural  laws.
The  prodigality  of  nature  is  now  a  well-understood  truth
in  biology,  and  one  that  every  sociologist  and  every  states-
man should  not  only  imderstand  but  be  able  to  apply  to
society,  which  is  still  under  the  complete  dominion  of  these
same  wasteful  laws.  No  true  economy  is  ever  attained  until
intellectual  foresight  is  brought  to  bear  upon  social  phe-

WAYS  IN  WHICH  PROGRESS  DEFEATS  ITSELF.      Y5

nomena.  Teleological  adaptation  is  the  only  economical
adaptation.

One  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  slow  and  secular  character
of  social  progress  is  the  fact  that,  in  a  variety  of  ways,  under
the  operation  of  genetic  laws,  it  tends  to  defeat  itself.  A  few
of  these  ways  may  be  mentioned  here,  merely  as  illustrations.*

All  genetic  progress  is  accomplished  by  rhythmical  ebbs
and  flows.  '  This  involves  incalculable  waste.  Only  a  small
part  of  what  is  gained  by  the  flood-tide  is  retained  after  the
ebb-tide  is  over.  The  perpetual  strife  between  the  party  of
progress  and  the  party  of  order  carries  both  to  ruinous  ex-
tremes. The  former  becomes  the  party  of  excessive  con-
struction, building  more  than  can  be  occupied;  the  latter
becomes  the  party  of  destruction,  demolishing  the  useful  and
the  useless  alike.  Thus  the  cost  of  a  little  real  progress  is
rendered  enormous.

This  same  rhythm  takes  place  in  physical  phenomena,
making  rivers  crooked,  the  surface  of  the  earth  irregular,  and
the  distribution  of  climate  and  other  habitable  conditions  un-
equal. The  efforts  of  man  artificially  to  influence  such  phys-
ical phenomena  to  his  advantage  are  always  in  the  direction
of  diminishing  the  intensity  of  this  rhythm.  He  aims  to
regulate  the  natural  forces.  "Whatever  success  he  has  achieved
has  been  of  this  kind,  and  but  for  such  success  he  could  not
inhabit  this  planet  as  he  does.  Social  phenomena,  however,
are  still  allowed  to  continue  their  wide  fluctuations,  and  dev-
astate the  accumulations  of  ages.  And  some  imagine  that
this  is  the  true  way  to  progress,  and  laud  the  advantages  of
extreme  parties  as  calculated  to  "  hold  each  other  in  check,"
when  in  reality  their  normal  effect  is  to  aggravate  the  asperi-
ties of  the  situation  and  increase  the  force,  both  of  the  for-
ward and  of  the  backward  movement.f

*  For  additional  instances,  see  vol.  ii,  pp.  Vl-YS.

f  Professor  C.  S.  Peirce,  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiii,  p.  476 ;
Professor  Joseph  Le  Conte,  "  Address  before  the  Chitchat  Club  of  San  Fran-
cisco, 1878,"  loc.  cit.,  p.  100.

76      WAYS  IN  WHICH  PROGRESS  DEFEATS  ITSELF.

Another  of  the  misfortunes  of  human  progress  is  that,  in
all  dejjartments  of  knowledge,  the  human  mind  and  the  con-
ditions surrounding  it  require  that  the  study  of  phenomena
be  commenced  from  the  top,  and  that  the  superficial  view  be
taken  before  the  fundamental  view  can  be  gained.  Thus
not  only  do  we  find  men  first  occupied  with  the  problems  of
sociology,  the  highest  and  most  complex  of  the  sciences,  but
in  each  more  simple  science,  as  in  biology,  the  superficial  and
obvious  are  first  studied  and  innumerable  errors  formed  be-
fore the  more  profound  and  recondite  problems  are  under-
taken by  whose  solution  alone  true  conceptions  are  attainable.
How  great,  for  example,  have  been  the  error  and  confusion  to
which  the  study  of  the  most  highly  organized  living  beings
has  led  before  that  of  the  simpler  beginnings  of  life  was
commenced,  which  alone  can  yield  the  primary  principles  of
organic  existence !

Again,  moral  and  social  science  labor  under  difficulties
from  which  all  other  sciences  are  exempt.  "While  in  the
physical  sciences  every  attempt  to  go  back  to  fundamental
principles  is  deemed  highly  proper  and  praiseworthy,  the
original  truths  upon  which  society  and  morality  rest  can  not
be  laid  bare  and  plainly  stated  for  fear  of  shocking  the  mor-
bid sense  of  the  civilized  world.  To  do  so  would  be  to  call
down  a  storm  of  indignation  from  the  majority  of  mankind.
This  denunciation  is  no  less  effective  because  irrational.
Those  who  use  it  thereby  show  that  they  have  no  grounded
conception  of  the  origin  of  society  or  the  bases  of  human
action.  The  foremost  thinkers  are,  therefore,  obliged  to  re-
frain from  promulgating  the  real  truths  that  underlie  society
and  conduct,  through  fear  of  actually  obstructing  the  prog-
ress of  the  world.  A  wise  man  has  declared  that  "the
greatest  intellectual  benefactors  of  mankind  have  never
dared,  and  dare  not  now,  to  utter  the  whole  of  their
thought."  *  But  this  timidity  is  usually  due  to  a  truly  phil-
osophical fear  of  jeopardizing  the  very  cause  which  they

*  C.  S.  Peirce,  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xii,  p.  13.

WAYS  IN  WHICH  PROGRESS  DEFEATS  ITSELF.       77

Kold  most  dear.  The  impolitic  class  of  theoretical  reform-
ers who  have  the  habit  of  charging  such  people  with  moral
cowardice,  are  themselves  only  lit  to  lead  a  forlorn  hope,  and
frequently  thereby  engender  a  deplorable  reaction.

There  is  scarcely  an  important  principle  of  sociology
which  has  not  shocked  the  sense  of  the  age  and  been  met
witb  condemnation  as  calculated  to  upturn  the  established
order.  The  primary  laws  of  human  action,  upon  which  both
social  and  moral  science  rest,  can  not  be  stated  in  the  simple
language  of  science.  The  objection  that  the  explanation  is
too  simple  to  be  true,  which  is  often  made  in  the  less  in-
volved sciences,*  is  particularly  apt  to  be  made  in  these  most
involved  sciences.  Men  do  not  want  to  know  that  their  life
is  capable  of  analysis  into  simple  physical  principles.  They
prefer  to  contemplate  themselves  as  something  entirely
preternatural.  The  science  of  human  conduct  is  particu-
larly objectionable.  Every  rational  analysis  of  human  action
tends  to  ground  it  in  egoism  and  assimilate  it  to  animal  ac-
tion. Yery  few  want  to  know  such  truths.  That  the  most
disinterested  action  should  result  from  the  effort  of  the  actor
to  experience  pleasure  is  a  truth  repugnant  to  the  cultured
mind.  It  belongs  to  the  list  of  unwelcome  truths,  like  that
of  the  genetic  development  of  the  race  from  a  less  highly
organized  state.f

And  thus  is  social  progress  thwarted  at  every  step.  The
various  institutions  established  in  society  are  hedged  about
witb  a  sanctity  which  it  would  be  sacrilege  to  invade.  To
show  how  they  originated,  or  even  to  assert  that  they  have
had  an  origin  in  the  nature  of  things,  is  a  task  which  only
brave  minds  will  undertake,  and  that  with  little  hope  of  con-
vincing any  body.

These,  we  say,  are  among  the  obstacles  which  the  science
of  sociology  has  to  encounter  beyond  all  that  lies  in  the  path

*  Haeckel,  "  Anthropogenie,"  S.  109.

f  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  "  Principles  of  Geology,"  vol.  ii,  p.  501 ;  Professor  C.
S.  Peirce,  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xiii,  p.  477.
5

78       WAYS  m  WHICH  PROGRESS  DEFEATS  ITSELF.

of  the  other  sciences.  And,  if  other  sciences  have  sometimes
been  similarly  hampered  to  a  limited  degree,  it  has  only  been
in  proportion  as  it  was  vaguely  apprehended  that  similar  ex-
planations might  thereby  be  made  easier  of  the  more  com-
plex phenomena  of  life,  mind,  and  action.

Among  other  means  by  which  progress  defeats  itself  is
the  circumstance  that  all  the  labor  performed  in  the  interest
of  progress  is  unremunerative.  Most  of  the  labor  incident
to  scientific  discovery  has  to  be  done  gratuitously,  as  it  com-
mands no  price.  In  fact,  much  of  it  has  to  encounter  strong
opposition,  so  that  there  have  even  been  martyrs  to  science.
The  utterance  of  progi'essive  ideas  is  not  welcomed,  much
less  paid  for.  The  lucrative  employments  are  all  non-pro-
gressive. Those  receive  most  who  labor  solely  for  the  main-
tenance of  the  existing  status,  such  as  lawyers,  judges,  officers
of  government ;  and,  in  civil  life,  merchants  and  various  non-
producing  professions.  In  the  literary  world  the  only  writers
that  are  paid  are  those  who  describe  things  as  they  are,  and
the  more  superficial  and  trivial  the  subject  written  upon  the
greater  the  compensation.  Those  who  are  able  to  tell  us
how  things  were  in  the  remote  past,  how  they  are  to  be  in
the  remote  future,  or  how  they  should  be  in  the  present —
these  must  work  for  nothing,  and  meet  with  perpetual  oppo-
sition besides.

The  three  classes  who  have  made  all  the  contributions  to
the  world's  advancement  have  thus  performed  only  a  "  labor
of  love."  These  are  the  mechanical  inventor,  the  scientific
discoverer,  and  the  philosophic  thinker.  With  regard  to  in-
ventors, all  know  how  unfortunate  their  personal  history  has
usually  been.  To  die  in  poverty,  though  often  living  to  see
the  fruits  of  their  brain  enrich  others  having  more  practical
shrewdness,  is  too  often  the  lot  of  this  most  useful  class  of
men.  The  same  is  often  aIso  true  of  the  scientific  discov-
erer, but  the  greatest  results  that  have  been  achieved  by  this
class  have  come  from  men  of  leisure  and  of  means,  who  were
wholly  free  from  embarrassment  by  the  res  augustoe  domi,  a

WAYS  IN   WHICH  PROGRESS  DEFEATS  ITSELF.       Y9

fact  which  militates  powerfully  against  the  oft-made  claim
that  great  success  is  most  likely  to  come  from  hardship  and
opposition.  The  great  thinkers  of  the  w^orld  have  shared
about  equally  the  two  conditions  just  described,  which  are
respectively  well  represented  by  Francis  Bacon  and  Auguste
Comte.  But  in  all  these  cases,  and  almost  without  exception,
the  grand  progressive  achievements  of  human  history  have
been  wholly  without  pecuniary  reward  to  the  persons  who
have  accomplished  them.  And  there  seems  no  help  for  this
state  of  things.

The  reformer  necessarily  labors  in  an  untried  field.  His
principles  are  in  fact  often  unsound,  and,  however  sound,
they  are  always  mistrusted.  Success  is  the  only  commodity
that  commands  a  price.  But  the  inventor,  the  discoverer,
and  the  thinker  work  not  for  the  present,  but  for  the  future.
They  rarely  hope  that  their  efforts  will  be  crowned  with
practical  success  during  their  own  lives.  How,  then,  can  they
look  for  material  reward  ?  They  do  not,  and  it  can  not  be
seriously  complained  that  it  is  not  conferred.  It  is  not  to
complain  that  these  facts  are  here  brought  forward,  but
rather  to  show  that  in  the  very  nature  of  things  all  human
progress,  so  long  as  spontaneous  or  genetic,  i.  e.,  so  long  as
not  teleological,  must  operate  to  its  own  greatest  disadvan-
tage, and  perpetually  defeat  itself.

Modern  society  is  in  such  a  state  that  not  only  is  it  the
worthless  that  commands  the  pay,  but  the  truly  valuable  is
systematically  kept  out  of  view.  Those  having  the  least
merits  have  the  most  love  of  applause.  It  is  sufficient  to
make  one  believe  in  the  alleged  degeneracy  of  the  times  to  see
the  zeal  for  "  cheap  notoriety  "  evinced  by  persons  having  no
merits,  and  the  willingness  of  society  at  large,  through  the  press
and  in  other  ways,  to  co-operate  in  the  work.  The  really  meri-
torious person  shrinks  from  notoriety,  and  scorns  applause
not  rendered  to  merit  alone.  Yet  merit  is  rarely  sufficiently
appreciated  to  secure  its  own  public  mention.  It  has,  there-
fore, come  to  be  a  tolerably  safe  inference,  whenever  such

80      WAYS  m  WHICH  PROGRESS  DEFEATS  ITSELF.

public  mention  is  made,  to  assume  that  it  has  been  directly
or  indirectly  procured  by  the  party  complimented.  Such  a
state  of  things  makes  merit  take  precautions  against  being
put  forward  by  appreciative  friends,  lest  the  manner  of  the
commendation  be  misunderstood,  and  the  belief  be  enter-
tained that  it  had  stooped  to  advertise  itself.  In  this  way
the  true  condition  of  society  is  not  only  never  known,  but
what  is  precisely  the  reverse  of  its  true  condition  is  publicly
believed  to  exist.  The  light  portion,  representing  medioc-
rity, is  bolstered  up  and  kept  prominently  conspicuous,  while
the  serious  and  solid  portion  willingly  aids  the  former  in
keeping  itseK  constantly  out  of  view.

Human  progress  is  further  defeated  by  man's  ignorance  of
his  own  interests.  Those  who  most  strenuously  oppose  meas-
ures of  reform  are  usually  the  ones  who  would  be  most  bene-
fited by  their  adoption.  Just  as  the  slave  often  declares  his
preference  for  slavery  and  helps  his  master  to  rivet  his  chains,
so  the  ignorant  generally  denounce  intelligence,  and  do  all
in  their  power  to  prevent  the  light  from  reaching  them.  It
is  a  paradox  in  matters  of  education  that  those  who  vote
against  it  thus  really  prove  their  need  of  it.  The  unlettered
man  of  large  family  whose  children  might,  by  the  laws  of
many  localities,  be  educated  at  the  expense  of  the  rich  man
of  small  family,  is  usually  found  joining  with  the  latter  to
destroy  this  precious  advantage.  The  laboring  masses  follow
after  designing  demagogues,  who  promise  impossibilities,  to
secure  personal  gain.  They  reject  the  wiser  counsel  of  their
real  friends,  who  place  less  stress  upon  them  from  fear  of
being  suspected  of  self-seeking.  And  so  it  is  throughout ;  so
that  the  philosopher  often  finds  himself  wondering  how  any
progress  can  take  place  at  all  when  every  thing  seems  to  con-
spire to  make  bad  worse.  And,  in  fact,  whatever  advance  is
made  is  due  to  "  natural  selection,"  and  is  in  one  sense  the
result  of  chance.  Only  progressive  or  at  most  stationary
societies  can  survive.  All  others  (and  they  may  have  been
many)  have  disappeared.     The  most  that  can  be  said  is  that

AIM  OF  DYNAMIC  SOCIOLOGY.  81

Bociety  exists  because  it  is  not  retrogressive.  And  this  ex-
plains in  the  only  scientific  way  why  it  is  progressive.

But  it  is  only  of  genetic  or  passive  progress  that  we  have
spoken,  for,  unfortunately,  this  is  about  all  that  has  thus  far
taken  place.  The  era  of  teleological  or  artificial  progress
has  not  yet  begun.  It  may  never  begin,  but,  until  it  does  so,
society  is  as  liable  to  succumb  to  an  adverse  wave  of  reac-
tion, and  suffer  extinction,  as  is  any  race  or  species  of  animals
or  plants ;  and  we  know  that  this  is  constantly  occurring.

To  overcome  these  manifold  hindrances  to  human  prog-
ress, to  check  this  enormous  waste  of  resources,  to  calm  these
rhythmic  billows  of  hyper-action  and  reaction,  to  secure  the
rational  adaptation  of  means  to  remote  ends,  to  prevent  the
natural  forces  from  clashing  with  the  human  feelings,  to
make  the  current  of  physical  phenomena  flow  in  the  chan-
nels of  human  advantage — these  are  some  of  the  tasks  which
belong  to  the  great  art  which  forms  the  final  or  active  de-
partment of  the  science  of  society — this,  in  brief,  is  Dynamic
Sociology.  "  Voir  pour  jprevoir  "  ;  *  ^' prevoyance,  d^ou  ao-
tion,^^  f  i.  e.f  predict  in  order  to  control,  such  is  the  logical
history  and  process  of  all  science ;  and,  if  sociology  is  a
science,  such  must  be  its  destiny  and  its  legitimate  function.

*  Comte,  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  618.

f  Loc.  ci(.,  vol.  i,  p.  51.  The  passage  from  which  this  last  citation  is  made
ought  to  be  quoted  entire,  and  deserves  a  place  in  the  anthology  of  science.  It
is :  "  Science,  d'oH,  prevoyance  ;  prevot/ance,  d^oit  action :  telle  est  la  formule
tres-siraple  qui  exprime,  d'une  maniere  exactc,  la  relation  gen6rale  de  la  science
et  de  Vart,  en  prenant  ces  deux  expressions  dans  leur  acception  totale."

CHAPTEK  I.

BRIEF   SURVEY  OF   THE    POSITIVE   PHILOSOPHY   OF    AUGUSTE

COMTE.

Anomalous  character  of  Comte's  philosophy — Xature  of  his  errors — His  style
verbose — Comte  the  founder  of  Sociology — Sense  in  which  he  employed  the
term  "  positive  " — His  law  of  the  progress  of  human  thought,  through  the
theological  and  metaphysical,  to  the  positive  stage — In  what  positivism
differs  from  the  scientific  method — Comte's  hostility  to  all  causes — His
"  primordial  problems  " — His  review  of  the  history  of  civilization — The
theological  stage — The  metaphysical  stage — The  positive  stage — Comte'a
hierarchy  of  the  sciences — Three  kinds  of  observation — Tests  of  the  posi-
tion of  the  sciences  in  the  hierarchy — Scientific  prevision — Mathematics-
Astronomy — Physics — Chemistry — Biology  —  Transcendental  biology — So-
ciology— Social  order  and  progress — The  human  race  a  perpetual  individual
— Social  statics — Social  dynamics — Positive  education — Comte's  scientific
priesthood.

The  works  of  Auguste  Comte  occupy  an  anomalous  posi-
tion in  the  history  of  philosophy.  They  may  be  briefly  de-
scribed in  their  ensemble  as  embodying,  in  the  exposition  of  a
fundamental  truth,  the  greatest  possible  number  of  only  less
fundamental  errors.  The  essential  groundwork  of  all  his
reasoning  is  not  only  sound  and  progressive,  but  it  is  also,  in
the  main,  at  least  as  far  as  concerns  terminology  and  mode  of
presentation,  new.  However  many  previous  writers  may
have  caught  glimpses  of  his  philosophy,  and  however  often  his
fundamental  tenets  may  have  found  utterance  under  different
circumstances  and  at  different  times  and  places  before  him,  it
still  remains  true  that  no  one,  prior  to  his  time,  had  appropri-
ated his  method,  and  history  will  probably  bear  out  his  own

NATUEE  OF  COMTE'S  EREORS.         83

assertion  *  that,  in  point  of  fact,  no  one  before  him  can  be
justly  said  to  have  conceived  the  Positive  Philosophy.  True,
as  he  himself  admits,  this  philosophy,  as  a  fact  in  human  his-
tory, had  long  existed  in  the  world,  and  had  ever  been  the  rival
of  the  two  great  opposing  philosophies,  the  theological  and
the  metaphysical ;  and  the  period  is  assigned  by  him  when  it
may  be  said  to  have  fairly  assumed  the  supremacy  f  as  a  princi-
ple of  human  action ;  but,  objectively  considered,  it  is  none  the
less  true  that,  not  until  long  after  it  had  openly  asserted  itself
as  the  mainspring  of  scientific  progress  in  the  world,  did  there
rise  up  a  philosopher  to  comprehend  its  true  nature  and  rela-
tions, and  to  give  it  a  name.  As  the  claimant  of  this  great
honor,  Auguste  Comte  has  never  had,  and  never  can  have,
a  contestant.

But  it  is  the  misfortune  of  all  truly  great  minds  to  be
wedded  to  errors  as  well  as  to  truths.  In  most  cases  the
latter  so  far  prevail  over  the  former  as  wholly  to  eclipse  them
as  soon  as  the  sun  of  historical  criticism  fairly  rises  upon
their  lives.  Usually,  too,  their  errors  are  of  minor  moment,
and  are,  therefore,  soon  forgotten.  Generally,  they  are  few
in  number  and  unobtrusive,  and  not  unfrequently  is  the
attachment  shown  to  them  of  a  more  or  less  equivocal  char-
acter. Kot  so  with  those  of  Auguste  Comte.  His  are  both
numerous  and  obtrusive ;  they  are  of  the  gravest  character,
and  are  adhered  to  in  his  writings  with  all  the  pertinacity,
emphasis,  and  iteration  to  which  the  French  language  is  capa-
ble of  giving  vigorous  expression.  For  this  reason  the  writ-
ings of  Comte  have  been  slow  in  making  an  impression  upon
human  thought.  They  are  voluminous,  verbose,  and  unat-
tractive in  their  style  ;  and  nothing  short  of  a  persistent  fol-
lowing out  of  the  argument  to  the  end  can  give  the  reader
the  ability  to  appreciate  fully  the  magnitude  of  the  theme

*  "  Philosophie  Positive  "  (third  edition,  Paris,  1869),  vol.  ii,  p.  436  ;  vol.  vi,
p.  468.

f  About  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  centurj;  ("  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  i,
pp.  19,  20 ;  vol.  vi,  p.  429).

84  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

or  the  "  solidarity  "  of  the  great  body  of  truths  which  the
author  actually  marshals  with  the  most  rigorous  logic.  The
result  is,  that  the  general  reader  has  either  not  read  them  at
all,  and  has  derived  his  ideas  of  them  from  those  who  have
only  glanced  at  them,  or  else  he  has  himself  only  casually
looked  them  through,  dwelling  longest  where  the  language
is  most  emphatic,  which  is  usually  where  some  favorite  un-
truth is  being  defended.

The  general  result  is,  that  the  works  of  Comte,  where
known  at  all,  are  for  the  most  part  unfavorably  known,  only
a  few  having  followed  him  through  with  their  attention  con-
stantly directed  to  the  general  argument,  and  disregarding
the  erratic  course  of  the  author  in  adducing  untenable  aux-
iliaries, which  are  for  the  most  part  unnecessary,  in  support
of  it.  That  the  popular  verdict  upon  the  case  is  unjust,  may
be  safely  assumed  from  the  array  of  eminent  names  that  have
been  permitted  to  be  used  as  more  or  less  unequivocally
favoring  Comte's  general  scheme.  Among  these  may  be
mentioned  those  of  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  Baron  Fou-
rier, De  Blainville,  Poinsot,  Navier,  Broussais,  Esquirol,
Binet,*  and  others,  at  the  time  when  he  was  delivering  his
course  in  public ;  while  in  recent  times  a  no  less  eminent
man  than  the  late  M.  Littre  has  not  only  given  in  his  adhe-
sion to  the  Positive  Philosophy,  but  has  edited  the  new
edition  of  Comte's  works,  and  written  an  extended  indorse-
ment of  them  in  the  form  of  what  he  boldly  styles  the  "  Pre-
face d'un  Disciple."

The  general  influence  of  Comte's  writings  is,  moreover,
beginning  to  make  itself  strongly  felt  in  France,  not  only  by
the  spread  of  his  moral  and  religious  doctrines  as  set  forth
in  his  later  speculations,  but  more  especially  in  scientific
circles,  where  the  eminently  practical  character  of  the  Posi-
tive Philosophy  is  commending  itself  to  many  well-known
men  of  science,  and  may  be  seen  as  a  silent  power  in  national
scientific  assemblies.

*  "Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  i,  p.  3.

MEANING  OF  THE  TERM  "POSITIVE."  85

It  is  as  the  unquestioned  founder  of  the  modern  and  as
yet  scarcely  fledged  science  of  sociology,  the  name  itself  of
which  was  first  employed  *  by  M.  Comte,  that  a  brief  ex-
position of  his  system  and  of  the  Positive  Philosophy  itself,
also  founded  by  him,  requires  a  place  in  this  work.

Notwithstanding  the  attempts  that  are  constantly  being
made,  wherever  it  becomes  appropriate  to  refer  to  the  Posi-
tive Philosophy,  to  define  the  term  positive  in  that  con-
nection, and  notwithstanding  the  acknowledged  ability  of
many  of  those  making  these  attempts,  and  the  fact  that
they  are  not  generally  open  to  the  charge  of  incorrectness,
it  is  nevertheless  true  that  very  few  persons,  who  have
not  carefully  followed  Comte  in  his  own  works  and  paid
special  attention  to  this  chief  characteristic  of  them,  have
acquired  an  adequate  comprehension  of  the  true  meaning
and  scope  of  this  term  as  he  himself  has  employed  it.
While  it  is  not  untrue  that  the  leading  notion  of  the  word
in  the  Comtean  sense  is  contained  in,  and  conveyed  by,
the  word  phenomena,  and  that  the  general  idea  of  the  Posi-
tive Philosophy  is  the  study  of  phenomena,  wholly  apart
from  both  essence  and  cause,  still  this  bald  and  technical
form  of  definition  falls  far  short  of  conveying  to  the  ordi-
nary intellect  the  intensely  active  and  living  idea  which
these  terms  excited  in  the  author's  mind,  and  which  ani-
mate every  page  of  that  Koran  of  positivism,  the  "  Philo-
sophic Positive."  Comte  nowhere  undertakes  a  formal  defi-
nition of  the  term  positive,  and  indeed  the  sense  in  which
he  applies  it  seems  to  agree  so  nearly  with  the  popular  ac-
ceptation that  he  perhaps  thought  it  required  none.  This
meaning,  too,  singularly  enough,  is  in  substantial  harmony
with  the  etymological  one.  Derived  from  the  passive  root
of  the  Latin  word  put  or  place  {ponere),  whatever  may  be
called  positive  must  have  been  placed  in  a  definite  position.
The  intensive  notion  that  this  position  is  absolute  or  immov-
able is  no  more  than  frequently  attaches  to  words  seeking

*  "Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  185.

86  OOMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

definite  signification  in  derivative  languages.  In  popular
language  this  notion  is  conveyed  by  emphasis,  and,  as  it  al-
ways accompanies  this  word,  it  becomes  of  itself  an  emphatic
word.  It  is  never  used  by  common  people  except  in  an  em-
phatic sense  and  with  a  special  stress  of  voice.  The  philo-
sophical application  of  the  term  simply  continues  the  inten-
sive idea,  without  requiring  any  emphasis  in  its  utterance.
The  exact  idea,  then,  of  "positive,"  in  the  true  Comtean
sense,  is  merely  that  which  is  fixed  or  established  as  certain
truth.  It  is  the  real^  the  known,  the  tangible  or  sensible  in
nature.  The  positive  may  be  briefly  defined  as  that  which
really  exists,  that  which  is  positively  true — what  is.  It  will
be  seen,  therefore,  that  it  does  not  differ  from  the  scientific
idea  as  commonly  understood.  Indeed,  Comte  employs  the
term  scientific  as  a  synonym  of  positive.  Starting  from  the
Cartesian  idea  of  self  as  the  only  judge  of  truth,  it  assumes
that  there  is  something  present  when  the  senses  so  report ;
and,  not  stopping  to  discuss  the  correspondence  of  that  some-
thing with  the  report  thus  made  of  it,  the  positive  philoso-
phy confines  its  investigations  to  these  sense-reports  which
alone  can  be  known.  The  sum  total  of  these  reports  to
the  senses  constitutes  what  are  called  phenomena,  and  with
these  and  these  only  the  positive  philosophy  deals.  This,
again,  is  simply  the  method  of  science.

The  two  great  antagonistic  and  rival  philosophies  with
which  the  positive  philosophy  has  always  had  to  contend
are  theology  and  metaphysics.  The  former  is  chiefly  distin-
guished by  the  introduction  of  causes,  the  latter  by  that  of
entities,  into  all  forms  of  speculation.  The  essential  vice  of
both,  according  to  Comte,  is  that  of  attempting  to  account
for  things.  Unwilling  to  regard  the  phenomena  of  the  uni-
verse as  the  true  matter,  in  and  of  itself,  for  mankind  to
study,  these  earlier  and  less  experienced  philosophies  have
perpetually  wasted  their  energies  in  the  vain  search  after  the
causes  of  phenomena  on  the  one  hand  and  their  substance
or  substratum  on  the  other.     The  investigations  of  the  thco-

THE  THREE  RIVAL  PHILOSOPHIES.  87

logical  school  have  been  teleological,  those  of  the  metaphys-
ical school,  ontological.  But,  as  the  individual  is  cut  off  bj
his  very  constitution  from  all  access  to  either  of  these  fields
of  thought,  it  follows  that  all  the  efforts  expended  in  these
directions  have  been  absolutely  wasted.  The  only  field  re-
maining, the  field  of  phenomena,  on  the  contrary,  is  found
to  yield  rich  and  valuable  results  wherever  human  research
has  been  directed  to  it.  All  that  has  been  gained  toward
the  elevation  of  society  and  toward  securing  the  comforts
and  enjoyments  of  life  has  come  from  this  source,  not  one
item  having  ever  been  contributed  to  the  material  prosper-
ity of  the  world  from  either  teleological  or  ontological  re-
searches.

The  essential  accuracy  of  all  this,  in  both  its  historical
and  its  dogmatical  character,  can  not  now  be  doubted,  and,
both  for  the  fact  and  for  the  form  of  its  presentation,  the
world  owes  to  Auguste  Comte  a  debt  of  gratitude  which  its
long  neglect  and  tardy  acknowledgment  of  his  writings  have
poorly  repaid.

Thus  far  the  positive  philosophy  has  been  shown  to  be
little  more  than  a  formal  expression  of  the  scientific  method
as  recognized  by  the  ablest  men  of  our  day,  and  it  is  hoped
that  the  term  may  be  preserved  as  a  synonym  for  that
method,  and  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  terminology
of  those  ideas  which  are  so  rapidly  advancing  as  almost  to
render  all  language  obsolete  or  inexact.  But  any  account
of  the  positive  philosophy  as  founded  by  M.  Comte,  and
as  still  adhered  to  by  his  faithful  disciples,  would  be  quite
incomplete  if  nothing  were  said  of  an  important  peculiar-
ity which  has  not  thus  far  been  mentioned,  and  which  may
be  regarded  as  all  that  really  distinguishes  it  from  the  sim-
ple method  which  all  science  must  adopt.  It  has  already
been  remarked  that,  as  against  the  theological  school,  M.
Comte  repudiates  all  attempts  to  determine  the  causes  of
phenomena.  But  theology  busies  itself  solely  about  arbi-
trary  causes,   each  of   which  is  original  and   independent.

88  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

while  all  are  supposed  to  proceed  from  the  divine  agent,  and
to  aim  at  the  accomplishment  of  preconceived  ideal  results.
Each  may  therefore  be  regarded  both  as  a  first  cause  and
as  a  final  cause.  One  might  suppose  that  it  would  have
been  sufficient,  for  the  purpose  of  antagonizing  the  theo-
logical philosophy,  to  repudiate  and  disclaim  such  causes  as
alone  concern  theology.  The  readers  of  Comte  had  at  least
the  right  to  expect  that  he  would  distinguish  between  causoB
finales  and  causce  efficienteSy  and  that,  in  case  there  were
valid  reasons  for  rejecting  the  latter,  he  would  state  those
reasons.  They  are,  however,  doomed  to  the  remarkable
disappointment  of  nowhere  finding  any  such  distinction
mentioned,  while  both  classes  of  causes  are  perpetually  as-
sailed in  one  common  strain  of  denunciation,  and  consigned
to  the,  with  Comte,  exceedingly  long  list  of  "  profoundly
vicious  hypotheses."

While,  to  the  mind  of  all  other  philosophers,  the  arbi-
trary, original,  and  the  final  cause  stand  in  the  plainest  con-
trast with  the  necessary,  efficient,  or  mechanical  cause,  the
former  being,  as  Comte  justly  asserts,  the  basis  of  all  theo-
logical reasoning,  while  the  latter  seems  the  almost  indis-
pensable postulate  of  science  itself,  he  fails  utterly  to  per-
ceive any  difEerence  between  them,  and  is  found  attacking
with  equal  vehemence  conclusions  flowing  from  the  one  and
from  the  other  class.  Now,  even  were  these  attacks,  where
necessary  causes  are  involved,  ever  so  much  deserved,  it  is  at
least  a  manifest  injustice  to  lay  these  latter  to  the  charge  of
theology,  and  against  this  theologians  have  a  just  right  to
remonstrate,  while  all  attempts  to  explain  the  Comtean  phi-
losophy should  contain  an  honorable  vindication  of  the  the-
ological school  from  so  unjust  an  imputation.

This  remarkable  fallacy  which  pervades  the  entire  phi-
losophy of  Comte,  this  confusion  of  two  things  so  wholly
different  and  even  antagonistic,  can  only  be  accounted  for
as  intentional,  and  it  seems  pi\  (lable  that,  as  he  could  find  no
valid  argument  comporting  with  his  system  by  which  he

COMTE'S  HOSTILITY  TO  EXPLANATIONS.  89

could  assail  efficient  causes,  although  odious  to  his  eminently
practical  mind,  he  found  it  convenient  to  embrace  all  causes
under  one  general  head,  declare  them  theological  fictions,
and  dispatch  them  all  together.  The  narrow  straits  into
which  this  plan  so  frequently  led  him  are  familiar  even  to
casual  readers,  and  yet  only  in  a  very  few  cases  can  he  be
charged  with  inconsistency  in  endeavoring  to  escape  the
meshes  of  his  own  net.  He  seems  to  prefer  to  battle  on  that
questionable  ground  with  the  prevailing  current  of  the
thought  of  his  own  day,  at  the  risk  of  making  himself  ridicu-
lous in  the  next  generation.

Among  the  necessary  consequences  of  so  singular  a
course  may  be  mentioned  his  repeated  discouragement  of
all  attempts  at  explanation.  What  the  phenomena  them-
selves, subjected  to  the  proper  scientific  tests,  do  not  yield,
may  be  taken  as  beyond  the  reach  of  human  inquiry.  It  is
only  those  who  are  affected  either  with  the  theological  or
the  metaphysical  bias  or  spirit  that  will  waste  their  time  and
energy  in  the  vain  effort  to  fathom  the  mysteries  that  lie
behind  phenomena.  He  seems  to  have  scarcely  the  remotest
conception  of  the  great  principle,  which  even  Bacon  recog-
nized,* that  the  most  important  phenomena  of  iNature  lie
deep-hidden  within  her  and  are  not  seen  by  the  average  ob-
server (vol.  i,  pp.  45-52),  but  that  it  is  only  as  guided  by
apparent  phenomena,  as  effects,  that  the  true  investigator  is
led  back  into  the  region  of  those  deeper  ones  which  stand
to  the  superficial  ones  in  the  relation  of  efficient  causes.

As  a  further  and  necessary  consequence  of  this  obstinate
blindness,  we  find  Comte  multiplying  the  number  of  what
he  calls  "  primordial  "  problems  beyond  the  limits  of  finite
powers,  impossible  for  man  ever  to  solve,  and  fit  subjects
only  for  the  labors   of    theologians    and    metaphysicians.

*  "  ^dificium  autem  hujus  universi  structura  sua,  intellectui  bumano  con-
templanti,  instar  labyrinthi  est ;  ubi  tot  ambigua  viarum,  tam  fallaces  rerum
et  signorum  similitudines,  tam  obliquas  et  implexte  naturarum  spirae  et  nodi,  un-
dequaque  se  ostendunt." — ("  Instauratio  Magna,"  Prsefatio.)

90  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

Among  these  it  is  amusing  to  notice  quite  a  number  which
were  actually  solved  during  Comte's  own  life-time.  For
example,  he  repeatedly  asserts  that  the  chemical  constitu-
tions of  the  heavenly  bodies  belong  to  this  class  of  insolu-
ble problems ;  yet,  even  while  he  wrote,  Kirchoff  and
Frauuhofer  were  collecting  from  the  sun  and  the  stars  the
evidence  of  their  composition.

Among  the  most  lamentable  of  Comte's  vagaries,  arising
out  of  the  confusion  above  referred  to,  is  his  uncompromising
hostility  to  all  the  modern  hypotheses  respecting  the  nature
of  light,  heat,  electricity,  etc.  He  classed  all  these  along
with  gravitation,  and  declared  that  all  the  efforts  expended
in  the  vain  search  after  their  origin,  nature,  or  cause,  were
simply  squandered.  These  agencies,  according  to  him,  were
merely  phenomena,  and  were  to  be  studied  only  as  such.
The  imaginary  interstellar  ether  was  an  ontological  concep-
tion, a  metaphysical  entity,  to  be  classed  along  with  phlogis-
ton, and  all  the  spirits  of  the  laboratory,  and  the  imaginary
occupants  of  the  bodies  of  men,  animals,  and  inanimate  ob-
jects. The  undulatory  theory  of  light  was  no  better  than
the  emission  theory,  and  both  equally  vain  attempts  to  know
what,  from  the  nature  of  things,  can  not  be  known.  In  fact,
the  domain  of  the  Unknowable  in  Comte's  philosophy
was  enormous  in  its  extent,  and,  when  we  contemplate  the
little  that  was  left  for  man  to  do,  we  almost  wonder  how  he
should  have  regarded  it  worth  the  labor  of  writing  so  large  a
work.

The  amount  of  mischief  which  this  one  glaring  fallacy
accomplished  for  Comte's  system  of  positivism,  insinuating
itself  into  every  chapter,  and  more  or  less  vitiating  the  real
truths  contained  in  the  work,  was  so  great  as  to  give  consid-
erable color  to  the  claim  that  pure  Comtism,  if  it  could  be
made  to  prevail  and  exert  its  legitimate  influence  upon
human  inquiry  in  the  future,  would  so  far  cripple  every  de-
partment of  science  as  to  throw  it  back  into  mediaeval  stag-
nation.    For  it  would  strike  a  fatal  blow  at  all  true  progress

THE  FUNDAMENTAL  SCHISM.  91

in  human  knowledge  by  crushing  out  the  very  spirit  of  in-
quiry, and  would  quench  all  interest  in  phenomena  them-
selves by  prohibiting  the  search  after  the  springs  and  sources
— the  causes — of  phenomena  which  furnish  the  true  life  and
soul  of  scientific  research.

Having  thus  dwelt  sufficiently  upon  the  elements  of
Comte's  philosophy,  which  have  tended  to  render  his  works
both  unpopular  and  unknown,  and  which  in  themselves
would  be  sufficient  to  condemn  their  unconditional  accept-
ance, let  us  now  return  to  the  primary  truths  of  positivism,
and  rapidly  follow  the  author  through  the  six  volumes  of  his
"  Philosophic  Positive."

Next  after  the  establishment  of  an  adequate  definition  of
the  term  positive,  the  most  important  consideration  embraced
in  the  Comtean  philosophy,  and  one  which,  whether  true  or
not,  is  certainly  new,  is  the  manner  in  which  the  human  race
has  reached  the  condition  required  for  the  practical  applica-
tion of  the  principles  of  positivism.

That  there  exists,  and,  so  far  as  literature  gives  us  any
account,  has  always  existed,  a  fundamental  schism  in  the
human  mind,  perpetually  presenting  two  opposing  modes  of
explanation  for  the  current  phenomena  of  life  and  the  uni-
verse, has  long  been  understood,  and  in  recent  times  a  few
attempts  have  been  made  to  subject  it  to  a  partial  analysis,
and  to  introduce  terms  designed  to  bring  out  into  clearer  an-
tithesis this  deep-seated  intellectual  antagonism  (vol.  i,  p.
64 ;  ii,  24).  This  movement  has  finally  resulted  in  arraying
the  theological  world  on  one  side  of  an  imaginary  line  and
the  scientific  world  on  the  other,  although  it  is  every-where
conceded  that  there  are  many  truly  great  scientific  men  who
see  the  universe  in  much  the  same  way  that  theologians  in
general  see  it,  while  a  few  theological  minds  are  not  wholly
satisfied  with  the  prevailing  theological  method.

A  closer  inspection  reveals  the  fact  that  the  difference
lies  deeper,  and,  though  usually  determined  by  the  boundaries

92  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

named,  is  not  necessarily  so  determined.  The  essential  ques-
tion is  whether  the  antecedents  of  the  phenomena  of  the  uni-
verse are  arbitrary  and  independent  of  the  phenomena,  or
whether  they  are  constant  and  connected  necessarily  with
them.  The  scientific  school  and  science  as  a  whole  are  per-
petually tending  to  demonstrate,  by  an  immense  and  increas-
ing induction,  the  absolute  dependence  of  all  phenomena
upon  their  antecedents,  as  against  the  theological  view,  which
makes  them  rest  upon  the  arbitrary  free-will  of  deity  or  of
man.  That  the  scientific  method  is  gaining  ground  while  the
theological  is  losing,  is  proved  by  the  concessions  of  theolo-
gians themselves,  who  nearly  or  quite  all  have  latterly  adopted
a  species  of  "  duaKsm,"  *  in  which  they  admit  the  constancy
of  natural  law  within  certain  limits  which  vary  with  almost
every  individual,  and  always  cease  at  the  point  where,  accord-
ing to  the  complexity  of  the  operation  and  the  analytical
power  of  each  mind,  no  mechanical  principle  can  be  further
followed  out.  It  is,  however,  asserted  on  the  one  side,  and
admitted  on  the  other,  that  this  does  not  necessarily  touch
the  foundations  of  theology ;  for,  even  could  all  the  phenom-
ena of  nature  be  shown  to  result  from  unchangeable  laws,  it
is  no  more  difficult  to  conceive  a  universe  impressed  by  its
creator  with  all  its  laws  than  with  a  few  of  them,  or  none  at
all.  As  a  philosophical  principle,  therefore,  the  theological
question  is  not  involved,  but  as  an  historical  fact,  the  only
point  of  view  from  which  Comte  considers  it,  it  is,  of  course,
of  the  first  importance.

He  takes  a  different  and,  as  I  have  said,  a  novel  view  of
this  important  fact  in  the  intellectual  history  of  the  race,  the
difference  consisting  in  the  introduction  of  an  intermediate
phase  between  the  theological  and  the  scientific,  or,  as  he  calls
it,  the  "  positive,"  and  also  in  the  extreme  position  which  he
makes  this  latter  phase  assume  by  ignoring  all  efficient  or
necessary  mechanical  causes.     This  intermediate  stage  in  the

*  Uaeckel,  "  Schopfungsgescbichte,"  S.  31,  &1,  90;  "Anthropogenie,"  S.  12,
64.

THE  THREE  PHILOSOPHICAL  PERIODS.  93

progress  of  the  human  mind  from  the  theological  to  the  posi-
tive state  is  the  metaphysical,  in  which  entiiies  are  created
as  connecting  links  between  the  antecedents  and  consequents,
and  called  explanations.  This  metaphysical  or  ontological
field  is  so  enlarged  as  to  embrace  the  true  scientific  material-
ist who  would  account  for  gravitation,  electricity,  light,  heat,
etc.,  by  introducing  material  atoms,  fluids,  ether,  etc.

The  theological  conception  assumes  the  direct  interven-
tion of  an  intelligent  agent  presiding  over  the  universe,  to
whom  is  attributed  the  arbitrary  disposition  of  each  modifi-
cation undergone  by  nature.  The  metaphysical  conception
searches  for  some  entity  to  whose  intervention  the  phenom-
enon in  question  is  to  be  ascribed.  The  positive  conception
disregards  all  causes,  and  addresses  itself  solely  to  the  study
of  phenomena  as  they  present  themselves  to  the  senses.

These  three  distinct  states  of  mind,  all  of  which,  in  point
of  fact,  are  admitted  to  exist  together  at  the  present  time,
and  perhaps  to  have  always  done  so  to  a  greater  or  less  ex-
tent, Comte  declares  to  have  undergone  a  regular  progressive
movement  in  the  history  of  society.  There  have  been  three
successive  epochs,  during  which  these  three  philosophic  prin-
ciples have,  each  in  its  turn,  predominated  over  both  the
others  and  controlled  the  current  of  human  events.  Western
Europe  (America  is  scarcely  recognized)  is  the  only  region  of
the  world  in  which  this  progressive  march  has  been  com-
pleted, and  the  full  ascendency  of  the  last  or  positive  stage
reached.  Indeed,  in  all  other  parts  of  the  world  the  first,  or
theological,  stage  still  prevails ;  the  second,  or  metaphysical,
although  a  necessary  condition  through  which  all  must  pass
if  they  ever  complete  their  progress,  being  only  a  brief  tran-
sition state  required  to  usher  in  the  final  era  of  positive
thought.  For  this  and  other  reasons,  Comte,  in  his  "rapid"
historical  sketch  of  the  history  of  civilization,  confined  him-
self to  that  of  the  white  race,  or  at  least  to  the  strict  line  on
which  the  highest  civilization  of  his  day  has  advanced,  and
deprecated  the  tendency  of  certain  writers  on  the  origin  and

94  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PDILOSOPHY.

progress  of  civilization  to  wander  off  among  the  many  scat-
tered peoples  of  the  globe,  whose  condition  and  history  sus-
tain no  immediate  relation  to  ours,  in  search  of  evidences
bearing  upon  the  civilization  of  the  ^' elite  of  humanity."

The  theological  supremacy  was  maintained,  according  to
him,  down  to  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century,  when  it  was
compelled  to  give  way  to  the  metaphysical  conception  which
prevailed  in  Western  Europe  for  the  next  five  centuries,  or
down  to  the  beginning  of  the  present.  The  true  ascendant
of  positive  ideas  has,  therefore,  but  just  commenced.  Each
of  the  two  preceding  stages,  however,  has  had  its  period  of
highest  glory  followed  by  a  period  of  decline,  the  latter
being  overlapped  by  the  power  which  was  destined  to  sup-
plant it.

The  theological  period  is  distinctly  marked  by  three
successive  stages :  fetichism,  polytheism,  and  monotheism.
The  first,  recognizing  the  existence  at  all  times  and  places
of  unseen  supernatural  forces,  constitutes  the  stage  of  most
intense  theological  activity  and  most  complete  theological
supremacy.  The  second,  by  originating  a  priesthood,  or-
ganizing government,  and  subjecting  the  masses  to  slavery,
proved  favorable  to  progress,  both  intellectual  and  material.
During  its  reign,  not  only  were  the  seeds  of  monothe-
ism, which  was  destined  to  overthrow  it,  sown  in  Egypt
and  Syria,  but  the  metaphysical  conception  took  deep  root
among  the  Greek  philosophers,  and  even  the  positive  method
found  a  remarkable  expression  in  the  works  of  Aristotle,
Arcliimedes,  and  Hipparchus.  The  true  theological  spirit
had  declined,  and,  when  at  length  the  Semitic  doctrine  of  the
unity  of  God  spread  into  Greece  and  Italy  and  deposed  the
pagan  deities,  a  new  priesthood  arose  and  a  complete  reor-
ganization was  effected.  Polytheism  had  given  way  to  mono-
theism. The  two  great  branches  which  broke  away  from  the
grand  trunk,  and  formed  the  Greek  Church  in  Eastern  Eu-
rope and  the  Mohammedan  religion  in  Asia  and  Africa,  were
both  monotheistic,  never  to  revert  to  polytheism,  but  Intel-

THE  THREE  PHILOSOPHICAL  PERIODS.      95

lectuallj  incapable  of  coping  with  the  highest  mental  powers
of  mankind  embodied  in  Catholicism.  This  last  was  left  to
complete  the  theological  stage  of  human  progress,  and  in
turn  to  yield  to  the  irresistible  power  of  events  in  the  inau-
guration of  the  metaphysical  stage,  or  age  of  independent
criticism.

The  intellectual  reformation  of  France  and  Italy  was
scarcely  less  thorough  than  that  of  Germany  and  England.
The  vast  and  wonderful  power  of  Catholic  organization  dur-
ing the  middle  ages,  for  which  Comte  evinces  the  most  ex-
travagant admiration,  was  broken,  never  to  be  re-installed,
and  a  stage  of  complete  intellectual  license  and  anarchy
began.  During  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  the
critical  movement  was  spontaneous,  without  possessing  any
systematic  doctrine,  while  during  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,
and  eighteenth,  the  disorganization  became  complete,  and
culminated  in  the  establishment  of  a  philosophy  which  was
formally  negative,  and  which,  for  a  long  time,  prevailed  over
the  social,  political,  and  religious  interests  of  the  world.
The  true  father  of  this  negative  philosophy  is  declared  to  be
Hobbes,  who  was  seconded  in  England  by  Locke  and  others,
and  the  doctrine  was  carried  to  its  extreme  length  in  France
by  the  writings  of  Yoltaire,  Rousseau,  Helvetius,  and  Diderot.
In  religion.  Protestantism,  with  its  wholly  anti-theological  and
"  bastard"  principle  of  the  right  of  inquiry,  spread  over  I^orth-
western  Europe,  and  so  poisoned  the  atmosphere  of  France
and  Italy  that  the  papal  supremacy  was  wholly  destroyed.  In
politics,  the  reins  of  government  were  seized  by  lawyers  and
litterateurs,  and  a  system  was  inaugurated  which  Mr.  John
Stuart  Mill,  in  his  correspondence  with  M.  Comte,  aptly
styled  '''■  ijedantocracy^''  *  a  name  which  the  latter  gratefully
adopts.  In  industry,  socialistic  schemes  of  the  most  vision-
ary character  were  prevalent,  rendering  the  general  anarchy
complete.

The  positive  or   final   stage  of  progress,  whose  actual

*  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  448.

96  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

ascendency  dates  onlj  from  tlie  beginning  of  the  nineteenth
century,  but  which  primarily  took  root  in  polytheistic  an-
tiquity, received  its  grand  impetus,  and  placed  itself  beyond
the  power  of  further  repulse,  in  the  age  and  through  the
agency  of  Bacon,  Galileo,  and  Descartes.  Lord  Bacon  laid
the  foundation  of  the  future  system  of  positive  philosophy
by  the  establishment  of  the  canons  of  observation  and  experi-
mentation. Galileo,  born  only  three  years  later,  confirmed
the  reliability  of  these  canons,  by  making  extensive  practical
application  of  them  to  the  great  problems  of  astronomy  and
physics,  though  without  any  acquaintance  with  the  works  of
his  illustrious  English  contemporary.  Descartes,  laboring
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  later,  in  the  full  knowledge
of  the  works  of  Bacon  and  Galileo,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of
the  ripest  scholarship,  crystallized  the  results  achieved  by
all  his  predecessors  and  contemporaries  into  a  grand  sys-
tem of  genuine  philosophy,  which,  more  than  any  other  hu-
man production,  bore  the  stamp  of  the  true  positive  method.
Ripened  by  the  genius  of  these  great  minds,  the  harvest  of
science  at  once  began,  and,  during  the  three  centuries  that
followed,  a  complete  revolution  was  wrought  in  the  world.
The  idle  dialectics  of  the  school-men  was  superseded  by  the
search  for  truth ;  the  destructive  tendencies  of  the  negative
philosophy  were  counteracted  by  the  constructive  tendencies
of  the  positive ;  and,  although  as  a  system  of  philosophy  the
scientific  method  had  as  yet  neither  name  nor  recognition,
the  commencement  of  the  present  century  found  it  master  of
the  whole  field,  and,  by  means  of  its  irresistible  weapons  of
knowledge  and  material  prosperity,  pursuing  its  victorious
march  over  the  crumbling  ruins  of  theological  systems  and
amid  the  vanishing  shadows  of  metaphysical  eons.  It  re-
mained only  for  Comte  to  trace  the  path  of  these  mighty
events  in  the  history  of  thought,  to  assign  to  each  its  appro-
priate limits,  and  apply  to  the  whole  a  terminology  adapted
to  so  profound  a  theme.  Whatever  may  have  been  his  errors
of  detail  or  his  exaggerations  of  particular  parts  of  his  sub-

COMTE'S   HIERARCHY  OF  THE  SCIENCES.  97

ject,  his  knowledge  of  the  general  trend  of  society  and  hu-
man thought  is  certainly  wonderful,  and  his  mode  of  presen-
tation is  of  the  highest  originality  and  the  deepest  interest,

Next  after  its  definition  and  its  history,  by  far  the  most
important  characteristic  of  the  positive  philosophy  is  the
manner  in  which  it  classifies  the  sciences.  Instead  of  re-
garding the  various  branches  of  man's  knowledge  of  nature
as  so  many  distinct,  independent,  and  co-ordinate  sciences,  as
much  of  the  philosophy  of  modern  times  tends  to  do,  Comte
conceived  them  as  not  only  related  and  mutually  dependent,
but  also  as  definitely  subordinated  to  one  another,  so  as  to
form  a  regular  scale  or  "  hierarchy.''^  This  classification  was,
with  him,  a  strictly  natural  one,  and  based  upon  the  same
essential  principles  that  govern  the  classification  of  scientific
objects,  such  as  plants  or  animals.  In  his  treatment  of  the
sciences  he  proceeds  from  the  more  general  to  the  more
special.  Each  new  science,  as  we  descend  the  scale,  is  less
general,  and  therefore  is  embraced  within  the  limits  of  the
preceding,  to  which  it  stands  in  the  true  logical  relation
of  species  to  genus,  while  at  the  same  time  possessing  spe-
cial characteristics  of  its  own  which  distinguish  it  from  all
above  it.  But  this  "hierarchy"  differs  from  most  sys-
tems of  scientific  classification  adopted  for  the  subordinate
sciences  by  being  free  from  all  arbitrary  or  artificial  taint,
and  based,  as  M.  Comte  fully  believed,  upon  the  true  order
of  nature  as  revealed  in  the  history  of  the  evolution  of  the
human  mind  and  of  the  universe.  An  absolute  derivation
of  each  science  from  those  higher  in  the  scale  ("  filiation  "),
and  a  complete  chain  of  dependence  ("  solidarity ")  of  the
whole,  constitute  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the
system.  The  descent  was,  therefore,  by  a  continuous  and
unbroken  line  through  the  entire  range  of  human  knowl-
edge, always  passing  from  the  more  general,  which  is  also
necessarily  the  more  simple,  to  the  more  special,  which  is
the  more  complex.

98  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

In  order  that  tlie  merits  of  this  scheme  may  be  better
understood,  let  us  first  state  its  exact  terras,  and  enumerate
in  their  natural  order  the  several  sciences  recognized  by
Comte.  They  are  six  in  number,  as  follows :  1,  Mathemat-
ics ;  2,  Astronomy ;  3,  Physics ;  4,  Chemistry ;  5,  Biology ;
and,  6,  Sociology.  These  are,  according  to  Comte,  the  six
natural  divisions  or  "categories"  under  which  all  human
knowledge  falls,  and  the  above  arrangement  of  them  is  the
order  which  they  must  necessarily  assume  in  the  scientific
hierarchy.  Each  of  these,  after  the  first,  is  embraced  in
the  definition  of  the  one  above  it,  and  at  the  same  time  pos-
sesses special  qualities  not  possessed  by  any  higher  in  the
scale.  Each  one,  as  we  descend,  is  more  ample  in  its  scope
but  less  numerous  in  its  details  than  the  one  below  it.
From  first  to  last  there  is  a  diminishing  generality  and  an
increasing  complexity.  At  the  same  time  there  is  neither
break  of  continuity  nor  lack  of  lineal  dependence — there  is
both  "  solidarity  "  and  "  filiation  "  throughout.

There  is  one  important  law  which  Comte  says  had  never
been  perceived  before  him,  and  upon  which  he  frequently
insists,  which  is  well  worth  a  careful  consideration  even  in
this  brief  sketch,  and  which  it  also  seems  necessary  to  un-
derstand before  we  can  justly  appreciate  the  true  nature  of
the  scientific  hierarchy.  This  law  concerns  the  observation
of  phenomena,  and  explains  the  variation  in  kind  which  this
observation  undergoes  in  its  application  to  sciences  occupy-
ing different  places  in  the  positive  scale.  In  proportion  as
the  phenomena  to  be  investigated  become  more  complicated,
they  are  at  the  same  time  susceptible  of  more  and  more  ex-
tensive and  varied  means  of  exploration,  although  this  in-
crease of  facility  is  not  proportionate  to  the  increase  of  dif-
ficulty. There  are  thus  three  general  classes  or  methods  of
observation  applicable  to  more  and  more  complex  phenomena,
the  first  of  which  is  chiefly  applied  to  the  liigher  and  simpler,
and  the  last  to  the  lower  and  more  complex  sciences.

Those  three  methods  are,  first,  observation  ^projyer,  i.  e.,

TESTS  OF  POSITIVITY.  99

the  direct  examination  of  the  phenomena  as  they  naturally
present  themselves ;  secondly,  experimentation,  the  contem-
plation of  the  phenomena  after  they  have  been  more  or  less
modified  by  artificial  circumstances  ;  and,  thirdly,  comjparison^
which  is  the  connected  consideration  of  a  succession  of  anal-
ogous cases  in  which  the  phenomena  grow  more  and  more
simple.

The  first  of  these  methods  is  the  one  exclusively  em-
ployed in  astronomy ;  the  first  and  second  are  used  in
physics,  but  the  second  more  than  the  first ;  in  chemistry,
the  second  is  almost  exclusively  employed ;  while  the  third
is  the  chief  method  applicable  to  all  biological  and  sociolog-
ical investigations.

The  correctness  of  this  exposition  will  scarcely  be  ques-
tioned, and  its  utility  must  be  recognized  by  all  who  have  per-
ceived that  it  is  the  clear  analysis  of  all  our  mental  operations
which  constitutes  the  chief  distinction  between  the  labors
of  the  true  man  of  science  and  those  of  the  mere  empiricist
or  the  vulgar  practicalist  who  accidentally  blunders  upon  the
truth,  but  loses  it  before  it  has  an  opportunity  to  bear  fruit.

There  are  certain  special  tests  or  canons  by  which  the
true  place  of  any  science  in  the  hierarchy  may  be  deter-
mined independently  of  the  general  principles  of  its  rela-
tive generality  or  complexity.

It  will  always  be  found  that  the  degree  of  generality
will  also  correspond  with  the  degree  of  positivity,  while  the
degree  of  complexity  is  an  index  of  the  extent  to  which  it  is
still  subject  to  theological  and  metaphysical  influences,  for,
in  proportion  as  each  science  is  lower  in  the  hierarchical
scale,  it  becomes  in  that  proportion  the  more  subject  to  the
influences  of  metaphysical  and  theological  conceptions.

This  principle,  which  is  clear  enough  when  we  come
to  biology,  and  especially  to  sociology,  where  these  concep-
tions still  have  full  sway,  becomes  a  paradox  when  applied
to  astronomy,  the  grand  science  which  is  supposed  to  con-
stitute in  itself  a  certain  cure  for  skepticism,  and  to  inspire

100  OOMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

the  loftiest  ideas  of  the  divine  power  and  majesty.  That
this  law  does  hold  good  of  astronomy,  however,  must  be
admitted  when  we  examine  more  closely  the  real  merits  of
the  question.  The  proper  test  of  the  supremacy  of  positive
over  theological  and  metaphysical  ideas  is  the  degree  of  faith
reposed  in  the  constancy  and  regularity  of  the  laws  of  nat-
ure ;  and,  while  in  the  laws  of  society  and  those  governing
the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms,  and  even  to  some  ex-
tent in  those  of  chemistry  and  physics,  there  may  prevail
a  belief  that  the  natural  and  regular  laws  are  superseded  by
arbitrary  fiats  of  divine  power,  no  educated  ecclesiast  even
of  Comte's  day  would  have  maintained  that  aught  but
absolute  and  unvarying  law  and  order  prevail  among  the
celestial  bodies.  About  the  last  instance  of  this  kind  was
that  of  [Newton,  who  brought  in  divine  agency  to  account
for  so  much  of  observation  as  his  theory  failed  to  explain,
and  this  is  now  set  down  as  one  of  the  unfortunate  weak
points  in  his  biography,  to  be  forgotten  as  fast  as  possible.
Those,  therefore,  who  imagine  that  theology  influences  their
views  of  astronomy  are  mistaken  ;  though  they  may  not  be
aware  of  it,  they  are  really  emancipated  from  those  influ-
ences, in  so  far  as  that  science  is  concerned.  They  only  lack
the  power  to  analyze  the  inconsistency  they  are  living,  and
perceive  the  incompatibility  of  their  theological  with  their
astronomical  education.  It  is,  moreover,  doubtless  true,  as
Comte  says,  that  the  apparent  reverence  inspired  by  astro-
nomical phenomena  is  due  rather  to  ignorance  than  to
knowledge  of  them.  The  phenomena  appeal  to  those  who
are  ignorant  of  their  laws  the  same  as  to  such  as  are  ac-
quainted with  them.  The  former  class  still  predominates
largely,  even  in  the  most  enlightened  countries,  and  it  is
jfrom  such  that  the  greater  part  of  the  religious  awe  for  the
mysteries  of  the  universe  proceeds.  Those  who  Icnow  the
mechanical  regularity  of  the  celestial  orbs,  while  they  may
admire  the  positive  order  of  nature,  and  as  they  labor  glow
with  a  lofty  sentiment  of  love  for  truth  which  some  con-

TEST   OF  PEEVISIOIT.  101

found  with  religion,  but  which  is  a  far  nobler  impulse,  are
little  inclined  to  see  in  this  order,  which  they  can  calculate
with  precision  and  predict  for  centuries,  any  evidence  of
a  divine  interference  or  supervision.  Moreover,  it  could
scarcely  be  expected  that  the  emancipation  of  a  single  sci-
ence should  be  sufficient  to  purify  all  the  rest  from  teleo-
logical  tendencies,  since  there  have  been  so  many  of  the
greatest  philosojihic  minds  of  the  world  sharing  the  senti-
ment of  Kant,  the  founder  of  the  uniformitarian  school  of
astronomers,  who  did  not  deem  it  illogical  or  absurd  to  in-
troduce an  arbitrary  free-will  into  biology  and  ethics,  of
which  he  knew  less,  while  claiming  regularity  and  invaria-
bility in  the  domain  of  astronomy,  which  he  thoroughly
understood.*

Astronomy  was  thus  regarded  by  Comte  as  the  only  sci-
ence completely  emancipated  from  theological  and  metaphys-
ical conceptions,  and  as  being  already  firmly  established  in
the  true  positive  stage  of  man's  intellectual  development.

The  principle  of  scientific  prevision  or  prediction  is  an-
other of  the  fundamental  tests  of  the  time  position  in  the
hierarchy.  Indeed,  it  constitutes  the  essential  quality  which
distinguishes  all  that  is  entitled  to  the  name  of  science.
The  entire  utility  of  all  science  and  of  all  knowledge  con-
sists in  our  ability,  by  the  aid  of  it,  to  foretell  future  phe-
nomena. This  ability  will  be  possessed  exactly  in  the  degree
to  which  observed  phenomena  are  co-ordinated  into  laws.
This  is  also  the  test  of  the  degree  of  positivity  of  each
science.  In  point  of  fact  all  j)henomena  are  absolutely  uni-
form, and  may  be  co-ordinated  into  fixed  and  invariable
laws.  Our  greater  ability  to  accomplish  this  with  respect  to
some  sciences  than  to  others  is  due  to  the  greater  imperfec-
tion of  our  knowledge  of  the  phenomena  of  the  latter  than
of  the  former,  and  not  to  the  increased  regularity  of  certain

*  "  Kritik  der  Urtlicilskraf t,"  §  79  ;  "  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,"  S.  260,

288;  "Allgemeiue  Naturgeschichte  und  Theorie  des  Himmcls,"  S.   294,  313,

814.

6

102  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

phenomena  over  certain  others.  Where  all  the  phenomena
of  a  branch  of  science  are  positively  known,  being  absolutely
invariable,  it  is  of  course  possible  to  establish  the  precise
laws  of  their  operation,  and,  by  the  aid  of  these,  to  predict
with  certainty  all  future  results.  By  applying  this  test,  the
undeniable  logic  of  Comte's  classification  is  better  shown
than  in  any  other  way.

Astronomy  is  certainly  the  science  whose  future  events
can  be  most  accurately  predicted.  The  phenomena  of  eclipses,
occultations,  transits,  etc.,  are  forecast  in  the  computing-
room  for  as  many  years  in  advance  as  may  be  required,
from  the  observed  facts  previously  recorded ;  and  the  navi-
gator, setting  out  for  a  voyage  of  several  years,  takes  with
him  his  almanac  containing  all  the  celestial  phenomena  that
can  be  of  service  to  him  for  the  whole  period  of  his  absence.
This  science  must,  then,  have  reached  an  almost  perfect  state
of  positivity.

Applying  the  same  test  to  physics,  we  perceive  that,  while
many  results  can  be  predicted,  they  are  fewer  in  number,
the  predictions  are  less  certain,  and  the  period  of  time  over
which  they  may  be  extended  is  not  so  great  as  in  astronomy.
Yet  it  is  upon  the  certainty  of  these  predictions  that  all
mechanical  appliances  rest.  The  greater  part  of  all  material
civilization  is  due  to  the  high  and  constantly  increasing  de-
gree of  positivity  attained  in  the  department  of  physics.

The  place  of  chemistry,  viewed  by  this  standard  as  by
the  others,  is  next  below  physics,  of  which  it  is  defined  aa
simply  the  molecular  department.  It  is  not  only  natural
that  molecular  phenomena  should  be  less  clearly  understood
than  molar  phenomena,  but  this  is  in  point  of  fact  the  case,
and  many  and  great  difliculties  which  beset  the  chemist,  in
his  efforts  to  decompose  and  to  recompose  the  different  com-
pound substances,  all  arise  from  his  inability,  from  observed
facts,  to  predict  more  or  less  remote  consequences.  And
when  he  enters  into  the  department  of  organic  chemistry,
which  lies  over  against  biology,  he  finds  no  end  of  problems

PKEVISION  IN  BIOLOGY  AND  SOCIOLOGY.         103

which  have  thus  far,  at  least,  remained  irresolvable.  But
whatever  progress  has  been  made — and  it  must  be  admitted
to  have  been  very  considerable — has  been  due  to  this  same
condition  of  positivity,  this  quantitative  exactness  of  man's
knowledge  of  observed  phenomena,  and  his  consequent  abil-
ity to  foresee  future  results  by  the  light  of  invariable  laws.

In  biology  this  scientific  foresight  is  still  less  clear ;  and,
when  we  remember  that  it  is  under  this  category  that  all
questions  of  physiology,  hygiene,  and  pathology  fall,  the
immense  importance  of  strengthening  this  faculty  will  be  at
once  apparent.  Yet  here  the  only  success  whatever,  thus  far
achieved,  in  raising  the  physical  standard  of  man,  has  come
from  this  same  power  of  predicting  future  results  from  past
experiences.

Lastly,  in  sociology,  the  most  complex  of  all  the  sciences,
which,  with  Comte,  embraces  all  the  phenomena  of  human
action,  we  find  the  power  of  prevision  in  a  very  imperfect
and  undeveloped  state.  As  far  as  individual  action  is  con-
cerned, this  power  is  wholly  abnegated  by  the  majority  of
mankind,  and  its  place  supplied  by  a  general  belief  in  the
doctrine  of  an  arbitrary  free  agency  in  each  individual — a
purely  theological  state.  As  regards  social  action,  it  is  for  the
most  part  given  over  also  to  the  theological  belief  in  an  ex-
ternal divine  agency  as  arbitrarily  determining  all  the  events
of  society,  of  history,  and  of  progress.  With  such  beliefs
prevailing,  there  is,  of  course,  no  room  for  any  form  of  pre-
vision or  prediction.  In  politics,  however,  there  has  always
prevailed  an  ill-defined  notion  of  the  power  to  modify  fu-
ture events  by  means  of  legislation,  but  so  imperfect  has
been  the  knowledge  upon  which  this  action  has  be'en  based,
and  so  untrue  the  conclusions  which  have  been  drawn  from
it,  that  either  all  such  attempts  have  miscarried  entirely,  or
else,  as  has  more  commonly  occurred,  results  wholly  differ-
ent from,  and  not  unfrequently  the  direct  reverse  of,  those
sought,  have  been  produced.  This  fact  has  given  encourage-
ment to  the  negative  school,  and  chiefly  contributed  to  the

104  COMTE'8  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

establishment  and  support  of  wliat  is  known  as  the  doctrine
of  laisses  faire.  This  doctrine  Comte,  with  his  accustomed
consistency,  repudiates,  and  insists  that  the  time  will  yet
arrive  when  all  the  branches  of  sociology  will  be  founded  on
the  known  and  positive  laws  of  its  accurately  observed  and
systematically  co-ordinated  phenomena,  by  the  aid  of  which
all  the  events  of  the  future  can  be  predicted  with  certainty,
and  the  true  avenues  of  human  progress  laid  out  in  advance.

There  is  no  portion  of  Ck)mte's  entire  system  which  is
better  founded,  or  more  absolutely  sound,  than  this  impor-
tant principle  of  scientific  foresight.  "  Yoir  pour  prevoir  "  *
is  Comte's  maxim,  and  it  deserves  to  find  its  way,  not  only
into  the  current  philosophy  and  science  of  the  age,  but  also
into  the  vocabulary  of  popular  sayings  of  the  people  of  every
tongue.

It  would  be  unjust  to  M.  Comte  to  pass  from  this  impor-
tant consideration  without  noticing  the  further  fact  that  in
elaborating  it  he  has  not  failed  to  add,  as  an  essential  concom-
itant of  prevision,  the  necessity  of  what  he  calls  the  volun-
tary modification  of  phenomena.  In  most  sciences  this  is  the
main  desideratum^  which,  though  impossible  without  the
power  of  prediction,  becomes,  in  the  light  of  that  faculty,
the  chief  dynamical  quality  of  man's  supremacy  over  nature.
My  own  appreciation  of  both  branches  of  this  argument  will
be  found  in  other  parts  of  this  work  (vol.  i,  p.  54 ;  vol.  ii,
p.  376).

Let  us  now  follow  the  author  a  little  way  into  the  exam-
ination of  each  of  his  six  fundamental  categories  of  science.
The  greater  part  of  the  first  volume  of  the  "  Philosophie
Positive  "  is  devoted  to  a  rapid,  general  survey  of  the  science
of  mathematics,  a  treatise  respecting  the  intrinsic  ability  of
which  we  are  not  here  directly  concerned.  This  much  may,
however,  be  said  by  any  reader,  even  though  he  may  ac-
knowledge his  lack  of  the  necessary  qualifications  to  pass
judgment  upon  a  purely  mathematical  treatise,  that  not  only

*  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  618.

THE  CATEGORIES.— MATHEMATICS.  105

here,  but  in  treating  of  all  the  other  sciences,  M.  Comte  has
applied  a  principle  the  almost  total  disregard  of  which  in
all  text-books  has  done,  and  is  continually  doing,  more  to
secure  for  them  the  reputation  of  being  dry  and  repugnant
than  all  the  rest  of  their  too  obvious  defects.  The  essence
of  this  principle  is  contained  in  this  pregnant  remark,  made
almost  at  the  outset  of  his  great  work  :  "  We  are  certainly
convinced  that  the  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  sciences
is  of  the  highest  importance.  I  even  think  that  no  one
completely  knows  a  science  so  long  as  he  does  not  know  its
history."  Surely  there  is  no  science  to  which  this  canon
needs  more  to  be  applied  than  to  mathematics.  In  conse-
quence, therefore,  of  this  historical  method,  no  one  can  read
Comte's  treatise  on  mathematics  without  great  interest.

Mathematics  is  regarded  by  Comte,  not  as  a  separate
science,  holding  the  highest  rank  in  the  positive  hierarchy,
but  as  the  true  basis  of  all  the  sciences,  and  of  the  posi-
tive philosophy  itself.  lie  lays  great  weight  upon  the
important  princi23le  laid  down  by  Descartes  that  all  ques-
tions of  quality  are  reducible  to  those  of  quantity,  and  that,
therefore,  the  theoretical  perfection  of  every  science,  even
the  complex  ones,  such  as  biology  and  sociology,  is  the  re-
duction of  all  its  laws  to  mathematical  precision.  Every
truth  in  nature  is  not  only  capable  of  being  stated  in  one
simple  proposition,  but  it  is  also  capable  of  expression  by
means  of  an  equation.  The  position  of  any  given  science  in
the  scale  of  theoretical  perfection  may  be  judged  by  the
completeness  with  which  it  is  capable  of  fulfilling  this  con-
dition, and  this  becomes,  at  the  same  time,  the  criterion  by
which  its  true  relative  place  in  the  hierarchy  is  determined.
Every  true  science,  in  the  positive  sense  of  the  term,  em-
braces some  general  class  of  phenomena,  and  has  reference
entirely  to  the  operations  of  nature,  objectively  and  con-
cretely considered.  The  totality  of  all  the  sciences  em-
braces the  knowledge  of  the  active,  changing,  and  real  uni-
verse.    In  proportion  as  these  different  classes  of  phenomena

106  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

become  more  complex  and  obscure,  the  less  capable  will
beings  of  a  given  degree  of  intelligence  be  of  reducing
their  laws  to  mathematical  rules,  the  more  will  they  be  com-
pelled to  confine  their  understanding  of  them  to  approxi-
mate, qualitative  laws,  and  forego  the  benefits  of  exact,
quantitative  knowledge.  Having  arranged  all  the  sciences
in  a  true  ideal  hierarchy  based  on  this  distinction,  we  may,
in  theory,  imagine  them  to  become  successively  more  and
more  perfectly  known,  and  one  by  one  to  reach  this  high-
est and  most  perfect  positive  or  quantitative  stage.  But,
after  the  last  one  has  reached  it,  and  all  the  phenomena  of
the  universe  have  become  subjected  to  absolute  mathematical
formulas  and  equations,  it  is  clear  that  the  so-called  science
of  mathematics  will  have  no  distinct  and  independent  place
of  its  own  in  the  hierarchy.  Each  of  the  true  sciences  will
employ  its  principles  in  explaining  the  objective  truths  of
the  substantial  universe,  but  mathematics,  possessing  in  itself
no  such  substantial  truths,  and  no  objective  phenomena,  will
have  been  wholly  absorbed,  and  occupy  no  separate  rank  or
position  in  the  scientific  hierarchy.  The  so-called  pure  or
abstract  mathematics  has  no  real  existence  in  itself.  To
claim  this  for  it  is  to  remand  it  to  the  age  of  metaphysical
entities.  It  is  simply  the  ultimate  principle  of  the  relations
which  concrete  things  sustain  to  one  another.  Mathematics
is,  therefore,  the  condition  of  science,  rather  than  a  science
in  itself,  the  instrument  with  which  the  mind  works  for  the
perfection  of  our  knowledge  of  ultimate  truth.

^Notwithstanding  this  well-marked  distinction  of  abstract
from  concrete^  as  most  adequately  expressing  the  relation  of
mathematics  to  science  properly  so  called,  Comte  sees  fit
to  employ  these  terms  in  the  subdivision  of  mathematics
itself.  In  doing  so,  however,  he  uses  the  term  concrete  in
a  somewhat  different  sense  from  that  in  which  it  has  been
here  employed,  and  from  its  ordinary  acceptation.  "With
him  abstract  mathematics  is  simply  the  operation  of  solv-
ing problems  already  stated,  "^  calcul^''  the  calculus,  or

ABSTKACT  MATHEMATICS.  107

process  of  calculation  or  solution.  Concrete  mathematics,
on  the  contrary,  is  its  application  to  the  solution  of  prob-
lems, whether  actually  existing  in  nature  or  ideally  conceived
in  the  mind.

The  "  calcul,"  or  calculus,  that  branch  of  mathematics
which  is  alone  concerned  with  the  working  of  solutions  for
problems  supposed  to  have  been  previously  stated,  he  divides
into  two  general  classes,  (1)  algebra,  and  (2)  transcendental
analysis  or  calculus  proper.  The  first  is  also  called  the  calcu-
lus of  direct  functions,  and  the  second  the  calculus  of  indirect
functions.  The  former  is,  of  course,  the  basis  of  all  purely
mechanical  operations  looking  to  the  solution  of  mathemat-
ical problems,  and  is  treated  in  a  brief  but  broadly  general
way,  which  might  tend  to  enlarge  the  views  of  even  a  pro-
fessional mathematician.  The  latter  embraces  the  great  field
of  the  diiferential  and  integral  calculus,  of  the  calculus  of
variations  and  of  finite  differences,  in  the  effort  to  attain  to
which  the  highest  flights  of  the  human  intellect  have  been
taken.  Comte's  historical  and  analytical  presentation  of  this
part  of  his  subject  will  probably  be  set  down  among  the
most  able  and  telling  efforts  of  his  life.  It  is  scarcely  saying
too  much  to  assert  that  a  good  translation  of  the  seventh,
eighth,  and  ninth  lectures  of  the  "Philosophic  Positive,"
inserted  as  an  introduction,  or  even  as  an  appendix,  to  any
modem  text-book  on  the  calculus,  would  go  far  to  exoner-
ate this  useful  branch  of  mathematics  from  the  charge  of
abstruseness  and  of  "mental  gymnastic"  which  is  now  so
frequently  made.  The  student  wants,  above  all,  to  know
when,  where,  how,  and  by  whom.  He  needs  to  be  told  the
entire  rationale  and  genesis  of  this  (to  him)  so  singular  a
branch  of  human  knowledge ;  how,  prior  to  its  introduction,
the  sages  of  the  world,  with  a  full  knowledge  of  all  that
had  been  done  by  those  who  had  labored  in  the  same  field
before  them,  were  exerting  every  faculty  to  discover  the
means  of  solving  the  great  problems  which  observational
science  was  thrusting  upon  them ;  how,  notwithstanding  the

108  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

vast  advantage  which  mathematics  had  seemed  to  possess
from  the  days  of  Archimedes  and  Euclid,  the  invention  of
the  telescope  and  other  great  facts  had  opened  up  new  and
undreamed-of  realms  for  its  application  to  concrete  phenom-
ena, until  at  last  the  machinery  of  calculation  was  strained
to  its  utmost,  and  still  found  inadequate  to  keep  pace  with
inductive  discovery;  and  how  not  only  JSTewton  and  Leib-
nitz, but  hundreds  of  others,  were  working,  under  the  resist-
less spur  of  certain  immortality  and  apotheosis  in  case  of
success,  to  find  the  golden  key  that  should  unlock  these  gates
of  the  universe,  and  that  it  was  under  this  enormous  press-
ure and  in  the  strife  for  such  inestimable  prizes  that  two
men  simultaneously  and  independently  achieved  the  fame
they  strove  for  by  making  these  grand  discoveries  and  found-
ing the  new  science  which,  without  these  explanations,  ap-
pears so  abstruse  and  unpractical.  "With  these  facts  before
them,  the  blank  astonishment  so  generally  manifested  by  stu-
dents at  the  fact  of  the  simultaneous  and  independent  elabora-
tion of  substantially  the  same  profound  truth,  a  state  of  mind
which  most  text-books  only  seek  to  intensify,  would  cease,
and  the  natural  deduction  of  these  consequences  from  the
ripened  condition  of  the  world  would  lead  them  rather  to
marvel  that  no  more  than  two  intellects  should  have  proved
themselves  equal  to  the  emergency.  At  the  same  time  it
would  greatly  strengthen  their  faith  in  the  operation  of  law
in  the  domain  of  mind,  and  confirm  the  conviction  that,  even
in  the  history  of  the  evolution  of  the  human  intellect,  no
phenomenon  ever  takes  place  without  its  necessary  antece-
dents and  its  suflBcient  cause.

The  rival  claims  of  Newton,  Leibnitz,  and  Lagrange  to
the  honors  of  this  great  discovery  are  ably  considered  by  M.
Comte.  Dismissing  all  fruitless  discussion  of  the  emjpty
question  of  priority  of  discovery  by  the  first  two,  he  addresses
himself  to  a  philosophical  analysis  of  the  methods  by  which
they,  as  well  as  also  a  little  later  Lagrange,  arrived  at  and
elaborated  the  principle  of  transcendental  analysis.     He  per-

OONCKETE  MATHEMATICS.  109

ceives  that  these  three  men  all  approached  the  subject  from
different  directions  and  considered  it  from  different  points  of
view,  whereby  an  immensely  more  enlarged  conception  of  it
has  been  gained  than  would  have  been  possible  had'the  dis-
covery been  confined  to  a  single  mind,  or  had  there  been  a
concert  of  action.  Although  the  temptation  to  enter  into
details  must  be  resisted  in  a  general  sketch  of  this  kind,  I
can  not  refrain  from  strongly  commending  this  portion  of
the  "  Philosophic  Positive  "  to  all  who  are  interested  in  trac-
ing the  grand  triumphs  of  the  human  mind  and  the  progress
of  the  investigation  of  natural  truth.

"Concrete  mathematics,"  in  Comte's  view,  may  be  re-
duced to  two  general  branches — geometry  and  mechanics.
Every  problem  that  can  possibly  present  itself  for  statement
may,  according  to  him,  be  classified  under  one  or  the  other
of  these  heads.  These  two  terms  may  be  regarded  as  synony-
mous with  statics  and  dynamics^  although  this  is  the  ordinary
subdivision  of  the  latter  branch  of  mathematics  only.  But  a
glance  at  the  fundamental  principles  of  Comte's  classification
is  sufiicient  to  show  its  profound  philosophy  and  general  ac-
curacy.

The  problems  of  geometry  are  clearly  all  of  a  statical  char-
acter, and  constitute  the  science  of  extension,  or  space-rela-
tions. Those  of  mechanics,  on  the  other  hand,  all  arise  from
the  actions  of  forces,  a  fact  which  is  not  altered  because  those
forces  are  frequently  considered  as  equal  and  opposite,  that
is,  in  a  state  of  equilibrium.  Mechanics  may,  therefore,  be
regarded  as  the  science  of  change,  or  motion,  since  all  forces
produce  actual  or  potential  change  or  motion ;  and,  inasmuch
as  all  motion  requires  time,  it  may  be  further  defined  as  the
science  of  time-relations,  just  as  geometry  is  the  science  of
space-relations.  And  here  we  may  now  see  what  M.  Comte
has  not  failed,  though  under  another  head,*  to  point  out,
viz.,  the  great  philosophic  value  of  this  conception  as  applied
to  true  concrete  science  even  of  the  most  complex  character,

*  *'  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  612.

110  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

where  the  ideas  of  co-existence  and  sequence  become  the  two
fundamental  categories  to  which  all  phenomena  are  assigned.
Some  of  the  readers  of  Herbert  Spencer,  who  brings  this
conception  forward  so  prominently  in  his  philosophy,  may
imagine  that  these  categories  were  original  with  him,  and
may  therefore  be  interested  to  know  that  they  had  been  pre-
viously recognized  by  Comte.

The  hybrid  character  of  the  term  concrete  as  applied  by
Comte  to  statical  and  dynamical  mathematics  would  now  be
clear  if  no  further  explanation  were  added.  All  problems
must  arise  from  phenomena,  real  or  imaginary.  But  nothing
can  be  imagined  the  elements  of  which  at  least  have  not
been  perceived.  Concrete  mathematics  is  the  poetry  of  sci-
ence. Drawing  its  elements  from  the  real  fields  of  obser-
vation and  experience,  it  applies  the  calculus  to  imaginary
spaces  and  imaginary  forces,  in  which  great  field  of  fiction,
like  romance  and  epic,  it  enjoys  the  immense  advantage  of
utter  freedom  from  the  incumbrances  of  unyielding  facts,  and
has  been  able  to  build  up  a  vast  ideal  fabric  for  the  crude
sciences  of  phenomena  to  take  possession  of  as  fast  as  they
become  sufficiently  purified  to  enter  the  list  of  quantitative
or  positive  sciences.  This  field  of  imaginary  phenomena  is
Comte's  conception  of  concrete  mathematics.  ^

Astronomy  is  regarded  by  Comte  as  occupying  the  first
place  in  the  scientific  hierarchy,  because  on  applying  the  test
of  true  positivity  it  is  found  to  present  not  only  the  simplest
but  also  the  most  general  class  of  phenomena.  Notwith-
standing the  many  complicated  problems  presented  by  it  re-
specting the  influences  of  the  different  heavenly  bodies  upon
one  another,  it  is  clear  that  these  difficulties  are  far  less  than
those  presented  by  any  of  the  other  sciences ;  and  although
some  of  them,  as  for  example  the  problem  of  three  bodies,
are,  in  the  present  state  of  the  calculus,  beyond  solution,  still
the  number  of  such  questions  is  comparatively  small,  and
they  frequently  depend  upon  the  imperfect  state  of  abstract
mathematics  rather  than  upon  that  of  direct  observation —

ASTRONOMY.  HI

i.  e.,  upon  ignorance  of  methods  of  solution  rather  than  upon
ignorance  of  observed  facts.

This  condition  of  simplicity  and  generality,  which  is  char-
acteristic of  astronomical  phenomena,  leads  to  a  simple  defi-
nition of  the  nature  and  object  of  the  science.  Astronomy
is  accordingly  defined  as  "  the  science  which  has  for  its  ob-
ject the  discovery  of  the  laws  that  are  presented  to  us  by
the  geometrical  and  the  mechanical  phenomena  of  the  celes-
tial bodies."  He  discountenances  all  attempts  on  the  part  of
astronomers  to  go  beyond  this  purely  mathematical  limita-
tion of  the  science,  ignores  all  the  concrete  discoveries  as  to
the  geography  of  the  moon  and  of  Mars,  and  all  the  efforts
yet  made  to  ascertain  the  constitution  of  the  sun  and  plan-
ets. He  goes  further,  and  declares  the  utter  impossibility  of
ever  learning  anything  of  the  chemical  composition  of  the
heavenly  bodies.  The  foundations  for  the  actual  discovery
of  what  he  thus  dogmatically  declares  to  be  for  ever  out  of
the  reach  of  human  effort  had  already  been  laid  by  Wollas-
ton  and  Fraunhofer  a  quarter  of  a  century  before  this  decla-
ration was  made,  and  a  quarter  of  a  century  later,  as  already
remarked,  the  true  chemical  constitution  of  the  sun  and  many
fixed  stars  had  been,  to  a  great  degree,  determined.

It  seems  scarcely  necessary  to  add,  from  what  the  reader
already  knows  of  his  practical  severity  in  repressing  all  spec-
ulations not  based  upon  observed  phenomena,  that  Comte
allows  little  weight  to  be  placed  upon  the  doctrine  pre-
viously alluded  to,  as  founded  by  Kant  and  expounded  by
Laplace,  of  the  genetic  evolution  of  the  solar  system  from
some  primordial  diffused  state  of  the  cosmical  matter  compos-
ing it.  He  regards  this  theory,  which  he  calls  the  "  cosmog-
ony of  Laplace,"  as  purely  conjectural,  but  finally  conde-
scends to  give  a  somewhat  extended  review  of  it,  and,  as  to
everything  else  that  he  treats  of,  he  contributes  to  it  impor-
tant additions  of  his  own.

His  treatment  of  sidereal  astronomy  is  very  brief,  since  he
does  not  consider  the  fixed  stars  as  coming  fairly  within  his

112         •         COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

definition  of  astronomy,  because  the  geometrical  and  mechan-
ical laws  of  their  phenomena  are  mostly  beyond  the  power
of  human  observation.  He,  therefore,  distinguishes  sharply
between  the  solar  system  (Je  monde)  and  the  universe  {runi-
vers\  embracing  all  the  celestial  bodies,  and  deprecates  all
premature  flights  of  fancy  in  attempting  to  speculate  upon
phenomena  which  can  probably  never  be  understood  with
the  requisite  degree  of  positivity  to  be  justly  classed  in  the
great  hierarchy  of  the  sciences.

The  second  scientific  category  is  physics,  which  according
to  Comte  consists  in  the  "study  of  the  laws  which  govern
the  general  properties  of  bodies  ordinarily  regarded  en  mcLsse,
and  constantly  placed  under  circumstances  susceptible  of
maintaining  intact  the  composition  of  their  molecules,  and
even  most  frequently  their  state  of  aggregation."  We  per-
ceive by  this  definition  that  the  chief  distinction  between
physics  and  chemistry  is  that  the  former  deals  with  molar,
the  latter  with  moleGular  forces ;  Comte  has,  therefore,  pro-
posed, as  another  name  for  chemistry,  that  of  molecular  phys-
ics. As  in  astronomy  the  first  method  of  investigation,  viz.,
observation  proper  of  the  phenomena  in  their  natural  state,
was  the  one  necessary  to  be  chiefly  employed,  so  in  physics
the  second  method,  or  that  of  experimentation,  is  the  one
which  is  demanded  by  the  nature  of  the  phenomena.  For
here  not  only  has  the  investigator  the  power,  from  his  prox-
imity to  the  phenomena,  to  alter  the  circumstances  to  suit  the
particular  case,  but  from  the  variety  of  the  phenomena  and
his  ability  to  examine  them  from  all  sides  he  is  able  to  make
selections  from  among  them,  and  to  institute  comparisons  be-
tween such  only  as  he  deems  applicable  to  his  particular  line
of  investigation.

Physics,  too,  comes  next  after  astronomy  in  the  degree
of  thoroughness  with  which  it  has  been  purged  of  theological
and  metaphysical  conceptions,  and  the  extent  to  which  true
positive  principles  have  been  made  to  preside  over  its  phe-
nomena.   Indeed,  theological  notions  may  be  said  to  have

PHYSICS.  •        113

disappeared  from  this  science  almost  as  completely  as  from
that  of  astronomy,  but  its  true  position,  next  in  the  scale
below  astronomy,  is  shown  by  the  presence  of  a  large  and
troublesome  class  of  metaphysical  conceptions  lingering
about  it  and  vitiating  the  results  of  human  labor  in  this  field.
These  consist  of  numerous  imaginary  entities  still  brought  in
to  explain  physical  phenomena,  and  which  go  by  the  names
of  fluids,  ether,  and  atoms.  The  uncompromising  bitterness
with  which  Comte  attacks  and  denounces  these  ontological
conceptions,  as  then  commonly  employed  to  explain  the  phe-
nomena of  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  gravitation,  can  only
be  realized  by  a  perusal  of  this  part  of  his  work.  The
atomic  theory,  then  but  just  revived  by  scientific  men  from
the  philosophy  of  Leucippus,  Democritus,  and  Epicurus,  is
assailed  as  a  vain  and  profitless  hypothesis,  seeking  to  ex-
plain the  TTiode  of  production  of  phenomena.  The  doctrine
of  an  interstellar  medium,  or  ether,  is  equally  proscribed,  as
being  a  line  of  research  absolutely  and  for  ever  forbidden
by  the  nature  of  things.  The  undulatory  theory  of  light
and  heat  of  course  suffers  the  same  fate  as  that  of  the  en-
tity upon  which  it  is  founded,  and  is  classed  on  the  same
footing  of  respectability  with  the  Newtonian  doctrine  of
emission,  then  generally  being  abandoned.  Gravitation,
which  is  perhaps  identical  with  magnetism,  and  electricity,
which  is  apparently  a  form  of  the  same  force,  all  are,  accord-
ing to  Comte,  and  must  ever  remain,  absolutely  inexplicable,
being  primordial  phenomena  or  processes  of  nature.  Espe-
cially severe  is  he  in  his  condemnation  of  the  theories  of
electrical  fluids,  then  generally  in  vogue.  All  these  pro-
cesses are  to  man  simply  phenomena.  They  admit  of  no
explanation,  being  the  primary  qualities  of  the  original
constitution  of  nature,  and  all  time  expended  in  vain
efforts  to  determine  their  antecedents  and  mode  of  pro-
duction is  declared  futile  and  for  ever  lost.  All  of  which
simply  goes  to  show  the  power  of  a  system,  especially  in
the  mind  of  a  Frenchman,  to  override  and  bear  down  all

114  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

recalcitrant  bits  of  evidence  which  threaten  to  weaken  or
modify  it.

The  science  of  physics  is  treated  under  the  different  heads
of  barology,  thermology,  acoustics,  optics,  and  electrology,
each  of  which  is  presented  both  historically  and  dogmatic-
ally, and,  notwithstanding  grave  inconsistencies  in  the  above
order  as  viewed  with  modern  ideas,  the  discussion  is  made
both  interesting  and  instructive  to  all  intelligent  readers.

Barology,  or  the  science  which  embraces  all  the  phenom-
ena of  terrestrial  gravitation,  is  regarded  as  the  purest  of  all
the  branches  of  physics,  and  therefore  stands  at  the  head  of
the  category  after  astronomy.

'Next  to  barology,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  he  regards
thermology,  or  the  science  of  the  phenomena  of  heat,  as
possessing  the  highest  degree  of  positivity.  This  opinion
was  occasioned  solely  by  the  great  influence  which  the  im-
portant treatise  of  his  friend  and  patron,  Fourier,  on  this
subject  exerted  on  his  mind,  and  which  he  never  allows  an
opportunity  to  escape  of  commending  in  the  most  extrava-
gant terms,  as  a  perfect  model  of  genuine  positive  investiga-
tion. In  this  treatise  the  phenomena  of  heat  are  studied
simply  as  such,  co-ordinated  into  pure  empirical  laws,  and
subjected  to  strict  mathematical  formulas  and  equations.

The  position  to  which  he  assigns  acoustics,  between  ther-
mology and  optics — the  science  of  the  phenomena  of  at-
mospheric vibrations  between  two  closely  allied  branches  of
tlie  science  of  the  phenomena  of  ethereal  vibrations — viewed
from  the  present  stand-point  of  these  sciences,  seems  irrational
enough ;  but  to  Comte,  who  repudiated  ethereal  vibrations
and  ether  itself,  it  was  quite  logical.  All  he  looked  for  was
to  determine  which  was  jnost  completely  emancipated  from
theological  and  metaphysical  influences.  Fourier  had  ele-
vated thermology  to  a  place  only  inferior  in  this  respect  to
that  of  gravitation  itself.  The  science  of  light  was  still
weighed  down  by  vicious  undulatory  and  emission  theories.

Acoustics,  from  the  more  tangible  nature  of  the  atmos-

ACOUSTICS.— OPTICS.  — ELECTROLOGY.  11 5

phere,  then  an  admitted  phenomenon  of  itself,  had  made  the
greatest  progress,  and  already  occupied  a  high  plane  of  posi-
tivitj.  In  this  discussion  he  adduces  very  little  that  is  new,
but,  notwithstanding  his  hostility  to  all  theories  tending  to  es-
tablish a  medium  for  the  phenomena  of  heat  and  light,  he  inci-
dentally offers  one  of  the  most  convincing  arguments  for  the
undulatory  theory  that  can  even  now  be  urged  in  its  support.
Referring  to  certain  investigations  made  by  Laplace,  in  con-
sequence of  the  results  of  which  that  great  mathematician
urged  the  necessity  of  combining  thermological  considera-
tions with  the  purely  dynamic  theory  of  vibratory  motions,
he  points  out  the  significant  fact  that,  in  the  rigidly  posi-
tive discussion  of  that  science  by  Fourier  for  which  he  ex-
presses such  unbounded  admiration,  the  principal  equations
offer  so  great  an  analogy  with  those  of  the  vibratory  move-
ments of  the  air  in  producing  sound  as  sometimes  to  differ
from  them  by  the  sign  of  one  co-efficient  only !  How  strange
that  a  love  of  system  should  be  able  to  divert  so  great  a  mind
from  the  proper  appreciation  of  such  a  manifest  index  of
nature  !

After  acoustics,  optics  is  the  branch  of  physics  which  has
attained  the  highest  state  of  positivity,  and  aside  from  its
historical  presentation,  Comte's  treatment  of  it  is  remarkable
only  for  the  unsparing  manner  in  which  he  seeks  to  drive
out  all  the  ontological  beings  which  he  imagined  to  infest  it.
He  may,  however,  be  admitted  to  have  done  good  service  in
pointing  out  the  essentially  twofold  character  of  the  science,
the  one  physical,  the  other  physiological,  and  the  necessity
of  preserving  these  distinct,  the  former  belonging  here,  while
the  latter  properly  comes  under  biology,  and  thus  falls  two
grades  lower  in  the  hierarchy,  so  that  it  can  not  be  intelli-
gently studied  until  that  grade  is  reached.

Finally,  electrology,  whose  identity  with  magnetism  is
admitted,  while  its  relation  to  gravitation  (barology)  is  ig-
nored, is  placed  at  the  foot  of  the  list  of  physical  sciences,
as  being  least  understood  in  its  phenomena,  and  most  heavily

116  OOMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

burdened  with  vain  ontological  hypotheses  of  fluids,  atoms,
etc.  His  historical  review  of  the  progress  made  down  to
his  time  is,  however,  interesting  reading.

As  regards  the  different  branches  of  physics,  Comte  evi-
dently regarded  them  as,  to  a  great  degree,  independent  and
their  natural  order  as  quite  arbitrary,  and  he  distinctly  states
that  it  is  rather  an  ensemble  of  various  sciences  almost
isolated,  than  one  truly  uniform  science — an  opinion  which
grew  out  of  his  persistent  rejection  of  every  unifying  prin-
ciple, and  his  willful  ignoring  of  all  causal  forces,  which  pre-
cluded his  catching  the  faintest  glimpse  of  the  law  of  the
correlation  and  conservation,  i.  e.,  the  unity,  of  force.

One  degree  lower  in  point  of  generality  and  positivity,
and  higher  in  point  of  complexity,  stands  the  science  of
chemistry,  which  is  defined  as  having  for  its  object  "the
study  of  the  laws  of  the  phenomena  of  composition  and  de-
composition which  result  from  the  molecular  and  specifilc
action  of  the  various  natural  or  artificial  substances  upon  one
another."  All  the  tests  above  described  combine  in  assign-
ing this  place  to  this  science.  No  one  will  question  the  supe-
rior complexity  and  obscurity  of  chemical  over  physical  phe-
nomena taken  as  a  whole.  The  method  of  pure  experimen-
tation becomes  here  less  universally  applicable,  and  that  of
comparison  has  to  be  frequently  called  to  its  aid.  The  abil-
ity to  predict  results  is  much  less,  and  the  degree  of  quanti-
tative knowledge  of  its  phenomena  and  laws  is  unquestion-
ably lower.  He  further  asserts  that  the  doctrine  of  chemical
afiSnities  is  even  more  purely  metaphysical  and  ontological
than  that  of  the  alleged  fluids  and  media  which  are  intro-
duced to  account  for  physical  phenomena.

The  division  of  the  science  into  inorganic  and  organic  is
pronounced  irrational,  inasmuch  as  the  two  are  only  distin-
guished by  the  different  degrees  of  complexity  of  the  sub-
stances usually  assigned  to  each,  and,  as  this  varies  through
all  degrees,  there  is  no  fixed  line  of  demarkation.  Still,  much
that  has  heretofore  been  classed  under  the  head  of  organic

CHEMISTRY.— BIOLOGY.  117

chemistry  should  be  assigned  to  physiology,  such  as  an  ex-
amination of  the  composition  of  sap,  blood,  etc.,  and  the
analysis  of  the  products  of  respiration,  secretion,  etc.

Comte's  acceptance  of  the  Berzelian  principle  of  "  dual-
ism "  should  perhaps  be  mentioned,  since  upon  it  he  founds
some  claims  to  an  original  discovery  which  he  believed  to
constitute  an  important  contribution  to  the  science.  It  con-
sists primarily  in  assuming  that,  as  a  result  of  the  differ-
ent electrical  states  of  different  substances,  all  compounds
above  the  binary  ones  are  composed  of  constituents  which
are  themselves  compounds  rather  than  of  the  several  inde-
pendent elements  separately.  The  object  of  this  hypothesis
is  to  simplify  the  analysis  of  compound  substances  by  first
resolving  them  into  groups  and  then  treating  these  groups
separately.  This  principle  had  already  been  extensively  ap-
plied to  inorganic  compounds,  and  he  believed  that  it  would
prove  still  more  serviceable  when  applied  to  the  more  com-
plex ones  derived  from  organic  sources.  However  far  this
suggestion  has  influenced  the  chemists  since  Comte's  time,
it  is  at  least  certain  that  something  approaching  it  is  now
extensively  recognized  {infra,  p.  236).

The  science  of  biology  stands  very  low  down  in  the  hie-
rarchy. Founded  by  Bichat  in  the  very  beginning  of  this
century,  and  first  named  by  De  Blainville,  the  illustrious
contemporary  and  co-laborer  of  Comte  in  I  ^J^oole  polytech-
niqice,  the  treatise  of  the  latter  possesses  an  especial  interest
as  constituting  the  first  attempt  to  generalize  its  principles.
He  found  it  almost  wholly  given  over  to  the  domination  of
theological  influences,  the  only  attempts  thus  far  made  to
emancipate  any  part  of  it  having  been  those  of  Jean  La-
marck and  of  Etienne  Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire.  In  anatomy
alone,  some  degree  of  positivity  had  been  reached,  and  an
immense  mass  of  mostly  barren  facts  and  materials  of  nat-
ural history  had  already  been  accumulated.

The  chief  object  of  the  study  of  biology  is  declared  to  be
the  relations  of  organization  and  lifoy  which  are  said  to  be

118  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

mutually  dependent — all  idea  of  the  subordination  of  the  one
to  the  other  being  excluded.  The  important  consideration
in  the  discussion  of  this  subject  is  the  mutual  influence  of
the  organism  and  its  medium  ("  milieu  ").  There  is  no  dis-
tinction whatever  between  the  notion  conveyed  by  this  term
milieu  and  that  of  "  environment "  employed  by  Herbert
Spencer.  The  latter  may  be  regarded  as  a  simple  transla-
tion of  the  former.  If  any  have  supposed,  therefore,  that
the  doctrine  of  the  reciprocal  influence  of  organism  and  en-
vironment so  ably  developed  in  Herbert  Spencer's  "Biol-
ogy" was  first  proposed  by  him,  they  have  been  mistaken.
It  is  not  even  original  with  Comte,  as  it  is  introduced  and
discussed  at  length  by  Lamarck  in  his  "  Philosophic  Zoolo-
gique."  *

Between  the  organism  and  its  medium  there  is  a  nec-
essary harmony  and  correspondence,  which  constitute  the
fundamental  condition  of  life.  Both  tend  toward  modi-
fication, the  rise  and  decline  of  life  being  as  frequently
determined  by  necessary  and  spontaneous  modifications  in
the  organism  as  by  the  influence  of  surrounding  circum-
stances.

The  word  milieu,  so  constantly  employed  by  Comte,  is
expressly  defined  as  designating  not  only  the  fluid  in  which
the  organism  is  plunged,  but  the  entire  ensemble  of  the
external  circumstances,  of  whatever  nature,  necessary  to  its
existence.  Although  he  alludes  several  times  to  the  great
treatise  of  Lamarck  above  mentioned,  he  seems  to  have  been
only  imperfectly  acquainted  with  it,  since  he  imagines  the
terra  to  be  new  in  this  sense,  and  even  proceeds  to  offer
an  apology  for  the  neologism.  Upon  a  careful  comparison
I  am  unable  to  perceive  any  distinction  between  the  appli-
cation he  makes  of  the  term  and  that  made  by  Lamairck,
while,  as  already  stated,  Herbert  Spencer's  "  environment "
can  only  be  regarded  as  a  simple  translation  of  this  word
into  expressive  Enghsh.     Of  this  Mr.  Spencer  was  doubtless

*  Vol.  i,  p.  145 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  6.

INFLUENCE  OF  THE  ENVIRONMENT.      119

aware,  as  he  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  familiar  with  M.
Comte's  works,  but,  if  not,  it  would  only  prove  that  in  this
case,  as  occurs  in  so  many  others,  when  the  knowledge  and
insight  of  mankind  are  rapidly  advancing,  an  important
truth  had  become  apparent  to  three  great  minds  investigat-
ing the  laws  of  life,  and  found  expression  with  each  in  the
most  fitting  term  his  language  afforded.

An  important  extension  of  this  principle,  for  which
Comte  deserves  credit,  consists  in  his  application  of  it  to  the
several  organs  of  an  organism,  as  well  as  to  the  whole  organ-
ism. The  correlation  is,  therefore,  in  this  case  between  the
organ  and  its  medium,  which  leads  to  a  clearer  understand-
ing of  the  relation  between  the  organ  and  its  function.  To
determine  this  relation  is  one  of  the  most  important  prob-
lems in  biology,  and  affords  a  reliable  measure  of  its  true
scientific  condition  when  submitted  to  the  test  of  the  ability
to  predict.  Given  the  organ  or  any  organic  modification,
the  question  is  to  find  the  function  or  mode  of  action,  and
vice  versa.

Notwithstanding  the  general  breadth  and  liberality  of
Comte's  views  of  the  vital  processes,  he  was  not,  as  a  mathe-
matician, sufficiently  conversant  with  the  phenomena  of  bi-
ology to  appreciate  the  advanced  speculations  of  Lamarck
and  Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire  respecting  what  may  be  called
the  dynamic  phase  of  this  same  law  of  the  correlation  of
organism  and  environment.  It  was  probably  owing  to  a  cer-
tain timidity,  as  not  being  himself  a  master  in  any  depart-
ment of  biological  science,  and  these  views  having  the  weight
of  the  then  greatest  authorities  against  them,  that  he  thought
best  to  discountenance  them,  and  plant  himself  safely  down
upon  the  doctrine  of  discontinuity  in  the  biological  series  and
the  fixity  of  existing  forms.  That  logic  would  have  impelled
him  to  adopt  the  contrary  course  can  scarcely  be  doubted
when  we  carefully  consider  the  following  remarkable  pas-
sage :  "  If  we  conceive  all  possible  organisms  to  be  succes-
sively placed,  during  a  suitable  time,  in  all  imaginable  medi-

120  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

Tims,  the  greater  part  of  these  organisms  would  of  necessity
finally  disappear  and  leave  only  those  surviving  which  could
satisfy  the  general  laws  of  this  fundamental  equilibrium  ;  it
is  probable,  after  a  succession  of  analogous  eliminations,  that
the  biological  harmony  must  have  established  itself  little  by
little  upon  our  planet,  where  we  still  see  it  continually  modi-
fying itself  in  a  similar  manner."  *

With  regard  to  the  general  classification  of  biological
science,  M.  de  Blainville  had  already  proposed  the  term
zootomy,  as  limiting  the  study  of  the  parts  of  living  objects
to  animals  alone,  thus  leaving  the  word  anatomy  to  apply
equally  well  to  animals  and  plants.  He  had  also  proposed
the  term  zootaxy  to  denote  the  classification  of  animal  forms.
Corresponding  to  this  last  as  a  generic  term  Comte  suggests
that  of  hiotaxy,  which  seems  quite  appropriate  and  needful.
He  also  employs  the  term  hionomy  as  embracing  the  general
science  of  the  laws  of  living  functions,  or  dynamic  biology.
This  differs  very  little  from  pure  physiology  as  applied  to
both  animals  and  plants.  His  hiotomy  is  both  bad  in  its
etymology  and  wholly  needless,  being  neither  more  nor  less
than  anatomy,  animal  and  vegetable.  By  adding  three  more
terms,  viz.,  phytonomy,  phytotomy,  and  phytotaxy,  the  last
but  one  of  which  is  not  very  euphonious,  a  terminology  would
exist  as  complete  and  symmetrical  as  the  science  of  biology
would  be  likely  ever  to  require.

With  Lamarck,  Comte  inclined  to  accept  the  lineal  series
of  living  forms,  and  in  one  place  f  declares  that  this  extends
from  the  lowest  vegetable  forms  up  to  the  apes  and  to  man.
At  the  same  time  he  also  asserts  that  there  exists  no  estab-
lished hierarchy  in  this  series,  and,  for  the  present  at  least,
the  position  of  the  intermediate  terms  must  be,  to  a  great
extent,  arbitrary.  Yet,  holding  to  the  fixity  of  species,  he  is
not  concerned  with  any  theory  of  descent  or  genealogical
filiation,  much  less  with  the  idea  of  a  genealogical  tree,

*  "Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iii,  p.  392.
f  Ibid.,  vol.  iv,  p.  443.

DIVISIONS  OF  BIOLOGY.  121

althongh.  he  intimates  that  the  doctrine  of  an  order  of  two
or  three  dimensions  analogous  to  that  of  geographical  charts,
as  a  substitute  for  the  lineal  series,  though  an  unrealizable
hypothesis,  is  an  evident  symptom  of  a  growing  but  as  yet
confused  sentiment  of  the  true  natural  method.

The  entire  science  of  biology,  according  to  Comte,  may
be  arranged  into  three  natural  divisions — not,  indeed,  wholly
independent  and  distinct,  yet  sufficiently  so  in  their  general
character  to  constitute  a  convenient  classification  in  substan-
tial harmony  with  the  hierarchy  of  the  sciences.

The  first  of  these  divisions  concerns  the  laws  of  what  is
understood  as  vegetative  life ;  the  second,  those  of  animal
life,  properly  so  called ;  and  the  third,  those  of  the  intel-
lectual and  moral  capacities  of  living  beings.  It  is  of  course
unnecessary  to  say  that  the  distinction  of  vegetative  and  ani-
mal life  is  not  at  all  the  same  with  that  of  plants  and  animals,
botany  and  zoology.  Yegetative  functions  belong  equally
to  animals,  even  the  highest,  as  man.  Indeed,  this  subject,
discussed  by  Aristotle,  Buifon,  Bichat,  and  all  modern  biol-
ogists and  physiologists,  is  too  familiar  to  require  further
notice  here,  as  M.  Comte  adds  little  to  its  already  established
character  and  scope,  and  has  been  greatly  distanced  by  more
recent  investigators.  We  will  pause  a  moment,  therefore,
upon  the  last  of  his  divisions,  and  consider  what  he  has  so
appropriately  styled  "  transcendental  biology."

The  absence  oi  psychology  from  the  list  of  Comtean  cate-
gories and  from  the  scientific  hierarchy  has,  no  doubt,  al^
ready  been  noticed  with  surprise.  This  surprise  may  not  be
lessened  when  the  reader  learns  that  this  science  is  there
made  a  branch  of  biology.  It  will  certainly  be  immensely
heightened  on  finding  it  based  solely  on  phrenology.  Yet
such  is  the  case.  There  is  no  part  of  the  "  positive  philoso-
phy "  which  has  been  more  severely  criticised  than  this  re-
markable new  departure,  in  making  phrenology,  as  expound-
ed by  its  founder.  Dr.  Gall,  the  basis  of  all  the  phenomena
and  laws  of  the  mind.     Nevertheless,  it  should  be  remem-

122  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

bered  that  phrenology  in  Comte's  time  had  not  yet  so  totally
disgraced  itself  by  systematic  jugglery  and  itinerant  charla-
tanism as  it  succeeded  in  doing  during  the  decade  which  fol-
lowed his  death,  and  yet  it  had  gone  so  far  even  then  that
he  was  obliged  carefully  to  define  his  understanding  of  the
term,  and  to  denounce  its  tendency  to  quit  the  high  plane  of
true  science  upon  which  Gall  had  erected  it.  It  is  not  a  little
surprising,  therefore,  to  see  critics  of  the  acknowledged  can-
dor of  John  Stuart  Mill  *  alluding  to  Comte's  indorsement
of  phrenology  without  doing  him  the  justice  of  making  this
explanation.  For,  notwithstanding  the  admirable  etymology
of  this  word  as  the  name  of  a  great  science  as  yet  scarcely
founded,  Comte  rejects  its  unqualified  use  in  consequence  of
the  bad  company  into  which  it  had  already  fallen,  and  pre-
fers to  substitute  for  it  the  qualified  form,  "  phrenological
physiology."  He  has  not  accepted  all  the  views  of  Gall,  and
notably  the  important  one  respecting  the  localization  of  the
faculties,  which  was  the  real  bane  of  the  entire  system,  and
accomplished  its  overthrow.  This  he  declares  to  be  "  evi-
dently venturesome  and  notoriously  erroneous,"  and  the
"fundamental  vice"  of  the  system.  The  ntmost  that  he
is  willing  to  allow  in  this  direction  is  the  division  of  the  fac-
ulties of  the  mind  into  two  general  classes,  the  "affective"
and  the  "  intellectual "  faculties,  the  former  of  which  belong
to  the  whole  posterior  and  middle  portion  of  the  cerebral
apparatus,  while  the  latter  are  confined  to  the  anterior  por-
tion ;  and  the  further  subdivision  of  each  of  these,  the  "  affec-
tive "  faculties  into  inclinations  and  sentiments,  the  former  of
which  reside  in  the  posterior  and  lower  part,  and  the  latter  in
the  middle  part  of  the  posterior  region  of  the  brain,  and  the
"  intellectual "  faculties  into  perceptive  and  reflective,  the
latter  occupying  the  antero-superior  frontal  region  as  their
true  seat,  and  constituting  the  highest  cerebral  functions.
Much  of  this  the  progress  of  science  has  substantiated,  while
it  is  also  actually  building  up  a  new  phrenology  and  estab-

4  ♦  "  Auguste  Comte  and  Positivism,"  p.  65.

TRANSCENDENTAL  BIOLOGY.  123

lishing  a  system  of  distinct  localizations,  which,  though  not
those  of  the  old  school,  are  equally  arbitrary  and  far  more
remarkable.

What  Comte  aims  to  demonstrate  is  simply  the  physio-
logical basis  of  psychic  phenomena,  and,  as  the  brain  is
the  seat  of  the  greater  part  or  all  of  these  phenomena,  the
term  phrenology  is  not  in  itself  objectionable.  That  the
actions  of  the  mind  are  as  much  the  visible  outcome  of  phys-
iological processes  in  the  appropriate  organs  as  are  the  actions
of  the  limbs,  Comte  did  not  for  a  moment  doubt,  and  thus  he
was  perfectly  justified  in  the  assumption  that, mental  phe-
nomena can  be  studied  like  other  phenomena,  their  laws
established,  and  the  science  of  the  mind  founded  on  strict
scientific  methods  of  observation.  The  mere  observation  of
the  secondary  results  of  these  phenomena,  that  is,  of  the  so-
called  mental  states  of  individuals,  did  not  seem  to  him  suf-
ficient. These  mental  states  are  the  results  of  real  physiolog-
ical processes  taking  place  in  the  tissues  of  the  brain  and  nerv-
ous system,  and  it  is  these  that  should  be  studied.  For  the
current  psychology  of  the  schools,  he,  of  course,  entertained
the  most  haughty  disdain.  The  method  of  "  interior  obser-
vation" he  condemned  in  the  most  unmeasured  terms,  and
declared  it  to  be  an  impossibility  and  a  delusion  based  on  an
attempt  to  reason  in  a  circle.  The  minds  of  animals  differ
only  in  degree  from  those  of  men :  ideology,  as  Tracy  had
remarked,  is  a  part  of  zoology ;  De  Blainville's  dictum  tliat
"  instinct  is  fixed  reason — reason  is  movable  instinct,"  is  in-
dorsed. Morality,  in  so  far  as  it  concerns  the  individual,  is
founded  on  sympathy,  and  becomes  the  basis  of  his  famous
doctrine  of  egoism^  for  which  he  invented  the  exceedingly
appropriate  and  much-needed  correlative,  altruism,  the  basis
of  all  objective  morality.

In  most  of  his  views  on  the  physiological  nature  of  men-
tal phenomena  he  had  been  anticipated,  and  in  many  far
transcended,  by  his  illustrious  countryman  Lamarck,  whose
remarkable  chapters  upon  this  subject,  with  a  little  reason-

124  OOMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

able  allowance  for  the  age  in  which  he  wrote,  form  quite
interesting  reading  even  in  our  own  times.

Whatever  may  be  said  of  Comte's  qualified  adoption  of
the  term  jphrenology,  his  unqualified  rejection  of  the  term
psycJiology  is  at  least  justifiable  in  view  of  the  whole  tenor
of  his  philosophy.  The  former  not  only  possesses  the  merit
of  an  unexceptionable  etymology,  but,  what  is  more  impor-
tant, it  expresses  in  itself  the  complete  notion  of  the  physio-
logical basis  of  all  psychical  phenomena.  Cutting  loose  from
the  vague  and  ethereal  conceptions  to  which  the  terms  soul,
mind,  spirit,  etc.,  give  rise,  as  possessing  nothing  sufiiciently
tangible  and  positive  for  science  to  lay  hold  of,  it  brings  im-
mediately forward  the  visible  object  and  tangible  substance
of  the  physical  brain  as  the  true  source  and  fountain  of  the
most  complex  and  wonderful  manifestations  in  the  whole
domain  of  nature.  Psychology,  on  the  other  hand,  besides
being  identified  in  its  composition  with  all  that  is  vague  and
unreal  in  human  thought,  is  scarcely  as  yet  emancipated  from
the  fogs  of  mysticism,  scholasticism,  and  metaphysical  specu-
lation. It  is  difiicult  to  say  which  is  more  to  be  regretted,
the  loss  to  science  of  so  admirable  a  word  as  "  phrenology,"
through  the  unfortunate  associations  into  which  its  too  hasty
introduction  condemned  it,  or  the  probable  revival,  as  the
name  of  a  positive  science,  of  so  objectionable  a  word  as
"  psychology."

Lowest  in  the  scale  of  positivity,  most  thoroughly  given
over  to  the  control  of  theology  and  metaphysics,  presenting
phenomena  most  diflScult  to  foresee,  and  capable  of  being
studied  only  by  the  method  of  comparison,  yet  constituting
the  most  practical  and  important  of  all  the  sciences,  stands
sociology,  the  science  of  the  collective  action  of  mankind.

The  eminent  founder  of  this  great  science,  in  the  chef
d'cGuvre  which  we  are  considering,  has  assigned  to  it  a  place
and  space  commensurate  with  its  importance.  Three  of  the
six  volumes  of  the  "Philosophic  Positive"  are  devoted  to
this  science  alone,  and  it  is  in  these  three  volumes  that  he

ORDER  AND  PROGRESS.  125

has  taken  the  occasion  to  deliver  to  the  world  the  most  im-
portant of  his  views  on  all  the  questions  which  the  history
of  man  has  presented  to  the  philosophic  mind.  The  general
outline  of  this  discussion  has  already  been  stated,  and  needs
here  only  to  be  recalled  in  the  special  order  adopted  by  M.
Comte.

Agreeably  to  his  fundamental  principle  respecting  the
method  of  presentation  of  all  the  sciences,  that  it  be  both
dogmaiio  and  historical,  he  has  so  presented  this  science  of
sociology,  or,  as  he  still  modestly  calls  it,  "  Social  Pliysics."  *
He  begins  with  the  "  dogmatic  method,"  and  considers  all  the
phenomena  from  the  two  general  pomts  of  view  of  the  order
and  progress  of  society.

On  this  distinction  of  order  and  progress,  Comte's  ideas
are  not  only  exceedingly  luminous  and  interesting,  but  also
pre-eminently  sound  and  philosophical.  With  the  eye  of  a
true  philosopher  and  co-ordinator  of  truth,  he  here  clearly
perceives  and  points  out  the  direct  derivation  of  these  two
sociological  factors  from  the  two  corresponding  biological
ones,  to  which  he  had  paid  such  special  attention,  viz.,  those
of  organization  and  life.  He  sees  that  this  is  no  mere  acci-
dental analogy,  but  one  and  the  same  principle  manifesting
itself  in  identical  relations  under  slightly  changed  names  in
the  two  intimately  related  sciences.  Order  is  organization,
the  systematic  adjustment  of  parts  to  a  whole.  The  uni-
verse, in  its  sublime  order,  is  simply  a  vast  organization,
held  together  by  laws  that  bind  its  parts  together.  A  living
organism  is  nothing  more  ;  the  social  order  is  nothing  less.
Life,  on  the  other  hand,  is  growth ;  when  growth,  both  in
quantity  and  quality,  ceases,  death  begins.  "With  an  entire
organism  this  may  appear  obscure ;  with  the  ultimate  ele-
ments of  organization  it  is  clear.  So  clearly  did  Comte  see
this  principle  that,  although  he  resisted  the  newly  proposed
cell-theory  of  the  tissues,  he  yet  made  bold  to  assert  that  the

*  The  term  "  sociologie  "  first  appears  on  page  185  of  vol.  \y,  but,  in  the  head-
ings of  the  chapter  and  head-lines  of  the  pages,  it  is  called  "  physique  sociale."

7

126  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

decline  of  life  of  every  organism  is  a  gradual  death.  But,  if
life  means  simply  growth,  growth  is  clearly  nothing  else  than
progress  in  organization,  either  in  extent,  variety,  or  refine-
ment. This  fundamental  fact  of  biological  science  crops  out
into  full  view  as  one  of  the  prime  factors  of  social  physics.
As  in  the  organism,  without  organization  there  can  be  no
life,  so  in  society,  without  order  there  can  be  no  progress
The  two  are  indissolubly  connected.  Just  as  surely  as  the
destruction  of  its  organization  destroys  the  life  of  a  plant  or
an  animal,  so  surely  will  the  overthrow  of  order  in  the  human
race  be  the  extinction  of  its  progress.  This  comparison  con-
stitutes one  of  the  best  illustrations  of  the  value  of  a  full  com-
prehension of  the  dependence  of  the  more  complex  and  spe-
cial sciences  upon  the  more  simple  and  general.  By  the
ordinary  intelligence,  viewing,  as  it  does,  the  complex  phe-
nomena of  society  because  they  more  directly  appeal  to  it,
but  ignorant  of  biology  becausd  deemed  of  no  practical  im-
portance, this  fundamental  truth  is  wholly  ignored,  and  in  its
place  is  generally  found  the  highly  pernicious  error,  the  pre-
cise opposite  of  the  truth,  that  order  and  progress  are  directly
antagonistic.  Although  incapable  of  clearly  comprehending
the  philosophical  discussion  relative  to  the  relations  of  order
and  progress  in  society,  the  average  man,  even  in  the  less
civilized  countries,  practically  acts  upon  just  this  question,
but  in  so  crude  and  imperfect  a  manner  as  wholly  to  mistake
the  relation  of  the  terms  while  definitely  understanding  the
terms  themselves.  For  to  what  does  the  great  problem  of  hu-
man advancement  amount  but  to  this  same  question  of  order
and  progress  ?  What  retards  human  advancement  ?  Undue
respect  for  the  established  order.  In  every  age  and  nation
of  the  world  there  have  always  been  a  party  of  progress  and
a  party  of  order.  Let  no  one  be  misled  by  the  names  that
have  been  applied  to  these  two  parties.  All  stronger  terms
than  these  have  been  invented  by  one  party  in  the  heat  of
passion  to  stigmatize  its  opponent.  The  party  of  progress
calls  the  party  of  order  conservative,  retrogressive,  Bourbon.

ORDER  AND  PROGRESS.  127

The  party  of  order  calls  the  party  of  progress  radical,  revolu-
tionary, Jacobin.  And,  although  Corate  is  not  wholly  free
from  the  use  of  hyperbole  of  this  nature,  he  nevertheless
gives  mankind  the  credit  for  generally  meaning  well.  The
difference  simply  is  that,  while  one  class  possess  a  high  re-
gard for  the  beneiits  of  the  established  order  and  view  with
dread  and  horror  all  attempts  to  disturb  it,  the  other  class,
perceiving  its  defects  and  thinking  they  see  means  by  which
it  can  be  improved,  are  anxious,  not  generally  to  overthrow
all  order,  but  to  sacrifice  existing  order  for  the  sake  of  estab-
lishins:  a  higher  and  a  better  order.

Yet,  without  a  clear  conception  of  the  true  relation  of
order  to  progress,  both  parties  usually  go  to  extremes.  The
party  of  order,  in  their  love  of  order,  come  to  hate  progress,
and  regard  it  as  the  enemy  of  order.  The  party  of  progres?,
in  their  zeal  for  progress,  come  to  detest  order,  and  to  regard
it  as  the  great  obstacle  to  progress.  Illustrations  of  both
these  phases,  were  they  not  abundant  in  every  one's  range  of
observation,  might  be  found  on  a  large  scale  in  the  civiliza-
tion of  China  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  the  French  revolu-
tionary element  on  the  other.  In  the  former,  nearly  all
signs  of  progress  have  been  crushed  out  by  the  overweening
reverence  for  order.  In  the  latter,  all  thought  of  order  was
banished,  and  progress  was  vainly  sought  through  the  mere
negative  process  of  destroying  the  established  order.  In
fact,  the  history  of  the  world  is  the  history  of  this  alternate
rhythmical  struggle  between  the  elements  of  order  and  prog-
ress, recording  the  protracted  persistence  of  the  former,  fol-
lowed at  length  by  their  complete  surrender  to  the  unbridled
power  of  the  latter,  which,  carried  to  great  excesses  on  the
waves  of  victory,  are  in  turn  overtaken  and  engulfed  in  an-
other long  wave  of  reaction,  and  so  onward  through  all
time.  How  changed  would  all  this  become  could  mankind
be  brought  to  realize  that  the  true  object  of  order  is  progress,
wliile  the  true  condition  of  progress  is  order  !

The  positive  principle  which  underlies  all  considerations

128  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

of  order  and  progress  is  tlie  mathematical  distinction  of
statics  and  dynamics,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  fonned  the
primary  subdivision  of  what  Comte  denominated  "  concrete
mathematics  " — geometry  and  mechanics.  This  only  serves
to  illustrate  the  iundainental  and  comprehensive  character  of
his  generalizations.  Whenever  biology  and  sociology  shall
have  passed  through  their  imperfect  stages  of  theological  and
m.etaphysical  supremacy  and  emerged  into  the  pure  light  of
positive  science,  then  will  organization  in  the  one  case  and
order  in  the  other  be  capable  of  and  receive  their  true  quan-
titative laws  under  the  domain  of  statical  mathematics,  while
the  life  of  the  organism  and  the  jprogress  of  society  will  be-
come subject  to  the  exact  canons  of  rational  mechanics.
Such  is  the  future  of  these  great  sciences,  which  in  his  time
were  in  the  act  of  being  born,  and  which  are  still  in  the
swaddling-clothes  of  infancy  !  In  the  present  state  of  sociol-
ogy all  mathematical  notation  is  of  course  wholly  inapplica-
ble. Nevertheless,  it  can  not  be  denied  that  the  primary
classiUcation  of  the  laws  of  this  science  into  statical  and
dynamical,  while  it  avoids  all  vain  pretensions  to  mathemati-
cal exactness,  preserves  better  than  any  other  the  notion  of
its  true  positive  character,  and  gives  to  the  fundamental  dis-
tinction of  order  and  progress  a  scientific  synonymy  of  great
propriety  and  value.  It  will  be  further  observed  that  this
distinction  is  none  other  than  that  already  alluded  to  of  co-
existence and  sequence.

We  have,  therefore,  the  primary  division  of  the  laws  of
social  physics  into  the  two  great  sub-sciences,  social  statics
and  social  dynamics,  the  former  of  which  studies  the  laws  of
co-existence — the  status  of  society — while  the  latter  studies
those  of  succession — its  movement.

In  comparing  biology  with  sociology,  Comte  seems  to
have  been  struck  with  an  idea  which  the  further  progress  of
science  has  demonstrated  to  be  illusive.  He  frequently  in-
sists that,  while  both  these  sciences  have  their  statical  and
their  dynamical  laws,  the  former  are  of  chief  importance

STATICAL  AND  DYNAMICAL  SOCIOLOGY.  129

in  biology,  and  the  latter  in  sociology.  In  other  words,  he
conceives  biology  principally  to  consist  in  the  study  of  or-
ganisms in  their  relations  of  co-existence,  while  he  regards
the  study  of  what  he  denominates  the  development  or  evo-
lution of  society  as  the  main  object  of  sociology.  This  er-
ror, for  such  it  unquestionably  is,  is  partly  to  be  accounted
for  by  his  failure,  as  above  explained,  to  accept  the  devel-
opment theory  in  biology  'as  propounded  by  Lamarck  and
Geoffrey  Saint-Hilaire,  and  partly  by  a  tendency  to  underrate,
if  not  wholly  misconceive,  the  value  and  nature  of  the  co-
existent factors  of  social  physics,  due  without  doubt  to  an
extravagant  attachment  for  his  celebrated  theory  of  the  des-
tiny of  the  human  race  regarded  as  a  perpetual  progressive
individual.  This  theory,  which  he  elaborated  in  his  later
writings  into  a  vast  humanitarian  system  of  religion,  led  him
to  give  undue  weight  to  all  considerations  of  social  progress.
The  advance  of  science  has  not,  perhaps,  reversed  this  doc-
trine of  the  supremacy  of  statical  biology  and  dynamical
sociology,  but  it  has  shown  that,  while  the  knowledge  of  the
dynamical  laws  of  both  sciences  is  the  chief  end  of  their
study,  an  acquaintance  with  the  statical  laws  in  the  one,  as
in  the  other,  is  the  necessary  means  to  the  sure  attainment
of  that  end.  Tlie  study  of  anatomy  and  morphology  con-
stitutes only  a  basis  from  which  the  great  practical  laws  of
physiology  and  biological  development  can  be  investigated ;
while  political  economy,  comparative  social  ethics,  mythol-
ogy, and  religion,  together  with  the  general  laws  of  human
nature,  are  the  elements  and  the  data  from  which  alone  the
phenomena  of  social  development  can  be  understood  or  intel-
ligently influenced.

So  far  as  M.  Comte's  views  on  social  statics  are  concerned,
they  must  be  classed  as  generally  unsound  ;  but  with  him  this
is  nothing  new.  He  seems  to  possess  the  rare  power,  every-
where manifest  tliroughout  his  works,  of  weaving  upon  a
warp  of  truth  a  woof  of  error.  The  iron  consistency  of  his
general  logic  is  in  strange  contrast  with  the  flimsy  fallacies

130  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

that  fill  out  its  frame-work,  and  stare  at  the  astonished  reader
from  every  page.  He  is  a  great  general  in  the  army  of
thinkers,  but,  when  he  descends,  as  he  continually  does,  to
meddle  with  the  brigades,  regiments,  and  platoons,  he  throws
them  into  confusion  by  the  undue  severity  and  amazing  stu-
pidity of  his  commands.

He  sets  out  by  declaring  the  natural  sociability  of  man,
a  statement  which  he  would  have  'long  hesitated  to  make  had
he  better  understood  man's  true  biological  history  and  origin.
In  this  connection,  he  very  naturally  condemns  the  "  neces-
sary irrationality  of  the  strange  doctrine  which  derives  the
social  state  solely  from  the  fundamental  utility  which  man
received  from  it  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  various  individual
needs,"  and  dogmatically  asserts  that  "  the  essential  spon-
taneous sociability  of  the  human  species,  in  virtue  of  an  in-
stinctive penchant  for  a  life  in  common,  can  in  no  way  be
henceforth  contested."

On  the  subject  of  man's  moral  nature  as  a  fact  favorable
to  tlie  possibility  of  a  social  state,  he  expresses  views  which
remind  one  more  of  a  modern  theologian  than  of  the  founder
of  the  great  doctrine  of  altruism.  Man  is  naturally  a  moral
being.  His  sympathies  with  the  sufferings  of  others  prompt
him  at  all  times  to  act  for  the  good  of  society.  These  views,
and  all  others  to  which  he  commits  himself,  are  only  calcu-
lated to  show  how  little  he  knew  of  the  history  of  savage
races,  and  how  thoroughly  he  was  capable  of  perverting  that
history,  since,  if  its  facts  prove  any  thing,  it  is  that  in  the
lowest  grades  of  human  society  no  true  ethical  princij)les  are
recognized.

He  considers  the  family  as  the  true  social  unit,  the  nucleus
of  which  is  the  simple  pair,  a  man  and  a  woman.  In  the
family  he  recognizes  two  kinds  of  subordination,  the  subor-
dination of  age  and  the  subordination  of  sex.  The  child  is
subordinate  to  the  parents,  and  the  woman  to  the  man.

Comte's  views  of  the  relations  of  women  to  society  are
simply  execrable.      Marriage  should  be  perpetual.      Every

SOCIAL  STATICS.  131

effort  to  loosen  its  bonds  is  regarded  as  a  step  in  the  direc-
tion of  anarchy.  "Woman  is  the  complete  and  absolute  slave
of  man,  and  placed  by  marriage  under  his  perpetual  tutelage.
She  is  considered  as  in  a  state  of  continual  childhood  {en-
fcmce  continue).  To  support  this  view,  he  attempts  to  appeal
to  biology !  This  was  ludicrous  enough  in  his  day,  but  what
would  be  thought  of  it  now  after  the  law  of  sexual  selec-
tion has  become  known,  showing  that  superiority  of  the  male
in  any  respect,  where  it  exists,  is  due  to  the  very  preferences
of  females  themselves  ?  *  Not  here  alone,  but  every- where,
he  seems  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that,  in  society  as  well  as
in  biology,  whatever  we  actually  see  existing  must  be  taken
as  the  final  result  of  aifimmense  concouree~of  circumstances,
and  grand  conflict  ofjorces,  of  which,  so  tar  as  it  canbestat-
ically  considered,  this  existing  state  of  things  exhibits  sim-
ply the  condition  of  equilibrium.  Not  less  the  apparently
inferior  condition  of  women,  than  the  different  size  and  color
of  the  sexes  of  many  birds,  has  resulted  from  a  long  train  of
circumstances,  which,  could  they  be  justly  assigned  a  moral
significance,  would  be  little  flattering  to  the  male  element.
It  is  forgetfulness  of  this  same  truth,  too,  which  inspires  in
Comte  that  undue  admiration  which  he  evinces  for  what  he
regards  as  the  marvel  of  the  social  order  itself.  The  variety
and  multiplicity  of  conflicting  elements,  whose  failure  con-
stantly to  destroy  and  annihilate  one  another  seems  to  him  so
miraculous,  have  been  the  result  of  a  prolonged  process  of
adaptive  inter-operation,  which  has  worn  away  more  and  more
the  rough  angles  of  friction  until  we  have  society  as  we  see
it,  and  which,  after  all,  need  inspire  us  with  no  inordinate
sense  of  respect  or  astonishment.  Not  only  is  it  still  a  prey
to  perpetual  collisions,  but  its  whole  theory  is  interwoven
with  a  thread  of  falsehood.

Passing  now  to  social  dynamics  we  find  Comte  once  more

*  This  idea  has  been  considerably  dwelt  upon  by  modern  biologists,  from
how  false  a  stand-point  will  be  shown  in  other  parts  of  this  work  (vol.  i,  pp.
657,  et  seq. ;  vol.  ii,  p.  616).

133  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

on  the  high  plane  of  consistent  logic.  He  has  even  caught  a
glimpse  of  the  great  law  of  the  social  forces  of  which  Ilobbes  *
gave  out  an  adumbration.  "  In  our  social  infancy,"  says  he,
"  the  instincts  relative  to  material  preservation  are  so  pre-
ponderant that  the  sexual  instinct  itself,  in  spite  of  its  coarse
primitive  energy,  is  at  first  essentially  dominated  by  it."

Another  condition  which  tends  to  produce  social  progress
is  the  perpetual  struggle  between  the  essential  attributes  of
humanity  and  those  of  mere  animality,  the  gradual  encroach-
ment of  the  intellectual  powers  upon  the  domain  of  the  pas-
sions in  influencing  human  conduct.  These  are  the  primary
elements.  There  are,  however,  secondary  ones,  one  of  the  most
important  of  which  is  the  phenomenon  of  ennui.  "When-
ever a  being  possessing  highly  developed  organs  is  for  any
cause  restricted  in  their  use,  this  mental  state  arises,  and,  un-
less relief  is  afforded,  becomes  one  of  the  most  intolerable  of
sensations.  In  its  struggles  to  free  itself  from  this  oppres-
sion the  organism  will  develop  enormous  energy  and  accom-
plish results  otherwise  unattainable.  The  susceptibility  to
this  feeling  is  proportionate  to  the  degree  of  development  of
the  organism,  and  especially  to  its  intellectual  development.
Man  is,  therefore,  chiefly  subject  to  it,  and  in  his  efforts  to
escape  from  it  achieves  many  important  results.

It  is  to  such  impulses  as  the  above  that  Comte  seems  to
attribute  whatever  advancement  man  has  thus  far  made.
He  rightly  says  that  the  two  stages  (theological  and  meta-
physical) through  which  he  has  thus  far  been  passing  were
little  conducive  to  progress,  and  only  looks  for  any  further
great  advance  to  the  third  or  positive  stage  upon  which  he
has  just  entered.

The  theological  stage  was  the  period  of  order  without
progress ;  the  metaphysical  stage,  at  least  in  its  later  devel-
opments, tended  to  destroy  the  social  order  without  setting
up  any  new  condition  of  progress.  The  positive  stage  is  des-
tined to  establish  a  new  order,  which,  unlike  the  theological

♦  "  Iluman  Nature,"  English  works,  Tol.  iv,  London,  1840,  pp.  67,  68.

SOCIAL  DYNAMICS.  133

one,  shall  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  greatest  degree  of
advancement.  In  the  theological  regime  a  mostly  statical
condition  was  preserved  by  reason  of  the  enormous  friction
of  the  machinery  for  maintaining  order.  The  positive  regime
is  to  avoid  this  friction.

Among  the  most  eminently  sound  of  all  the  doctrines
'contained  in  the  works  of  Comte  must  be  classed  those  upon
the  subject  of  education.  Separated  from  their  connection
with  government,  it  would  seem  that  every  honest  mind
would  be  forced  to  give  its  assent  to  teachings  so  obviously
just  and  undeniable.  Although  he  has  left  these  considera-
tions out  of  their  natural  place  in  the  chapter  on  social  dy-
namics, and  preferred  to  introduce  them  in  his  general  dis-
cussion of  the  method  of  positivism,  they  are  none  the  less
the  viral  part  of  his  whole  theory  of  human  progress.  First
of  all,  after  insisting  that  all  education  be  positive  in  its
nature,  he  demands  that  it  be  extended  to  all  mankind,  and
no  longer  restricted  to  an  imaginary  aristocracy.  "  It  will
be  important  never  to  forget  that  this  system  of  positive  edu-
cation is  necessarily  destined  for  the  direct  and  continuous
use,  not  of  any  exclusive  class,  however  large  it  may  be  sup-
posed, but  of  the  entire  universality  of  the  people  throughout
the  whole  extent  of  the  European  republic.  .  .  .  Nothing  is
better  adapted  profoundly  to  characterize  the  present  anarchy
than  the  shameful  indifference  {incurie)  with  which  the
upper  classes  to-day  habitually  consider  this  total  absence  of
popular  education.  .  .  .  Thus  the  first  essential  condition  of
positive  education,  at  once  intellectual  and  moral,  considered
as  a  necessary  basis  of  a  true  social  reorganization,  must  cer-
tainly consist  in  its  rigorous  universality."  He  declares  for
the  invariable  homogeneity  of  the  human  mind,  and  says
truly  that  the  lower  classes  have  far  greater  need  of  a
public  education  which  their  private  means  can  not  sup-
ply, while  they  are  at  the  same  time  much  more  exposed
to  those  injuries  which  can  be  avoided  only  by  increased
intelligence.

134  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

Another  point  in  Comte's  system  of  education  upon  which
he  insists  with  great  justice  is,  that  the  acquisition  of  knowl-
edge shall  proceed  in  the  order  of  the  scientific  hierarchy.
If  we  admit  that  his  six  categories  as  arranged  by  him  repre-
sent the  true  order  of  the  phenomena  of  nature,  we  can  scarce-
ly deny  that  this  also  indicates  the  proper  order  of  their
study.  If  we  change  the  order,  the  principle  is  not  changed.
But,  whatever  latitude  might  have  to  be  allowed  in  the  cur-
riculum of  a  system  of  education  as  growing  out  of  practical
consideration,  this  much  should  at  least  be  strictly  observed,
and  it  is  this  upon  which  Comte  lays  the  chief  emphasis —
namely,  that  no  teacher  should  be  allowed  to  attempt  to  ex-
pound the  laws  of  a  science  more  complex  than  his  specialty,
and  that  no  one  should  be  held  competent  to  teach  any  sci-
ence who  has  not  lirst  made  himself  familiar  with  all  those
which  come  before  it  in  the  system.

The  astronomer  must  be  a  mathematician,  but  he  must
not  pretend  to  teach  physics ;  the  biologist  must  be  acquainted
with  mathematics,  astronomy,  physics,  and  chemistry,  before
he  is  qualified  to  expound  the  laws  of  the  great  complex  sci-
ence which  rests  upon  all  these  ;  while  the  sociologist  must  be
all  this  and  a  sociologist  besides,  otherwise  he  can  not  under-
stand the  full  nature  and  scope  of  social  phenomena.  Of
course,  it  is  not  insisted  that  he  should  know  all  these  sciences
equally  well  or  in  all  their  details,  for  this  would  be  a  super-
human achievement,  but  the  general  principles  of  all  the
antecedent  sciences  he  considered  necessary  to  be  thoroughly
comprehended  in  order  to  qualify  one  to  instruct  in  any  one
of  them.  This  may  seem  a  very  severe  standard,  but,  unless
we  deny  the  subordination  of  the  sciences,  there  seems  no
escape  from  its  logic.  And  if  we  consider  the  vast  advantage
which  the  erection  and  enforcement  of  such  a  standard  would
secure  to  education,  we  may  well  believe  that  it  would  more
than  repay  the  costs.  At  least  as  an  ideal  system  it  holds  up
something  for  our  contemplation,  against  which  the  only  cry
we  can  raise  is  that  of  impracticable.

POSITIVE  EDUCATION.  135

"With  regard  to  the  first  prohibition,  as  a  mathematician
himself,  Comte  saw  the  utter  folly  and  silly  pedantry  of  at-
tempting, as  many  were  in  the  habit  of  doing,  to  apply
mathematical  formulas  to  problems  belonging  to  the  complex
sciences  whose  phenomena  were  not  yet  sufficiently  known
to  render  any  such  application  at  all  warrantable  or  even
rationally  possible,  and  he  very  justly  and  very  severely
rebukes  all  such  vain  charlatanism.  But,  in  his  own  attempt
to  lay  down  the  principles  of  sociology,  he  laid  himself  open
to  the  same  class  of  criticism  through  his  ignorance  of  bi-
ology. Still,  every  fair  critic  would  generously  overlook
these  slips,  considering  the  infancy  of  the  one  and  the  ex-
treme youth  of  the  other  of  these  sciences.  As  regards  the
latter  prohibition,  the  utter  incompetency  of  so  many  scien-
tific men  and  so-called  specialists  to  deal  with  the  legitimate
problems  of  their  own  branch  of  science,  in  consequence  of
their  total  ignorance  of  all  those  branches  upon  which  it  rests,
is  a  fact  of  common  observation  to-day  as  it  was  half  a  cen-
tury ago.  It  is  by  this  means  that  science  is  robbed  of  its
choicest  results.  The  power  of  co-ordinating  facts  can  only
be  acquired  by  their  study  in  relation  to  more  general  tnitlis.
These  general  truths  are  to  be  found,  not  in  the  science  to
which  the  facts  belong,  but  in  the  more  general  sciences  to
which  this  is  subordinate.  In  a  word,  the  details  of  each  sci-
ence can  only  be  generalized  by  referring  them  to  the  laws
of  the  science  next  above  it  in  the  hierarchy.

This,  then,  is  the  cause  of  the  greater  part  of  that  sterile
specialism,  that  empty  zeal  for  the  multiplication  of  independ-
ent facts,  of  species,  of  mere  names,  which,  even  in  our  own
day,  passes  current  for  true  technical  science.  It  is  because
specialists  know  nothing  of  the  more  general  sciences  upon
which  their  special  branch  depends,  because  it  is  vainly  sup-
posed that  a  great  complex  science  can  be  studied  alone,  and
that  the  pupil  just  out  of  the  village  school  is  qualified  to
select  at  his  own  pleasure  any  one  of  the  great  fields  of  in-
vestigation that  lie  before  him.

136  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

Comte  does  not,  as  he  might  have  done,  enumerate  under
this  head  that  most  patent  and  glaring  of  all  violations  of
this  priuciple,  the  notorious  ignorance  of  legislators  in  all
branches  of  science.  His  profound  contempt  for  pedantoc-
racij  was  coupled  with  a  firm  conviction  that  philosophers,
however  sound,  are  necessarily  unfit  for  legislators.  But  he
evades  the  real  issue,  which  is,  whether  a  sound  education  in
all  the  successive  sciences,  and  including  all  that  is  really
known  of  social  science,  can  do  any  harm  to  the  man  whose
whole  life  is  to  be  practical  work  in  this  highest  field.
Learned  men  as  well  as  unlearned  are  of  all  shades  and  casts
of  mind.  In  the  one  class  as  in  the  other  we  have  the  theo-
rizer  and  the  practical  matter-of-fact  man  of  business.  Which
is  better,  an  ignorant  theorizer  or  an  instructed  politician  ?  or
if,  as  is  always  the  case,  we  must  have  both  classes  among
law-makers,  to  have  them  all  well  informed  or  all  unin-
formed ?

Comte's  celebrated  theory  of  a  scientific  priesthood  in
imitation  of  the  Roman  pontificate,  a  spiritual  power  to  rule
over  all  questions  of  an  intellectual  character,  including  that
of  education,  to  be  supreme  in  its  own  sphere  but  not  allowed
to  meddle  with  the  temporal  powers  below  it,  which  were  to
be  controlled  by  practical  diplomatists  and  trained  represent-
atives of  the  various  commercial  and  industrial  interests  of
society — this  great  system  of  his  to  which  he  devoted  his
later  life  has  bean  almost  unanimously  voted  a  chimera.  The
intellectual  and  material  concerns  of  society  will  commingle.
Education  and  labor  can  not  be  divorced.  But  with  this  sys-
tem falls  the  last  argument  against  the  high  expediency  of  a
thoroughly  learned  legislature.

The  legislature  is  the  voice  of  society.  To  speak  for  it,
it  must  represent  it ;  to  represent  it,  it  must  understand  it.
To  understand  society  is  to  be  acquainted  with  the  science  of
sociology.  Politics,  now  a  mere  trade,  which,  as  Blackstone
Bays,*  seems  not  to  be  supposed  even  to  require  any  appren-
*  "  Commentaries,"  Introduction,  pp.  9,  27.

HIS  SCIENTIFIC  PRIESTHOOD.  137

ticeship,  is,  when  properly  appreciated,  the  highest  and  most
reiined  of  all  the  scientilic  professions,  to  which  no  aspirant
should  be  admitted  who  is  not  master  of  the  whole  field
of  recognized  science.  On  that  high  plane  let  the  theoret-
ical and  the  practical  mind  meet,  and  no  one  need  fear  the
result.

Comte  is  no  advocate  of  laissez  faire.  Indeed,  his  whole
work  may  be  characterized  as  an  argument  against  that  doc-
trine. His  eminently  just  and  philosophical  definition  of
the  true  criterion  of  all  real  science  as  its  ability  to  foretell
future  unknown  results  from  the  co-ordination  of  present
known  phenomena,  becomes,  when  applied  to  the  last  and
greatest  of  the  sciences,  identical  with  the  doctrine  so  con-
stantly advocated  in  this  work,  that  the  future  of  human  so-
ciety is  in  its  own  hands,  and  that- a  great  and  rapid  progress
can  be  artificially  attained  through  clear  and  accurate  scien-
tific foresight  of  the  necessary  effect  of  present  human  modi-
fications. If  sociology  is  a  science,  there  can  be  no  escaping
this  conclusion.  We  know  that  by  precisely  these  means
man  has  artificially  modified  the  results  of  the  operation  of
law  in  all  other  sciences,  even  down  to  biology,  and  there
can  be  no  longer  a  doubt  of  the  same  power  over  sociologi-
cal phenoiriena.  This  is  the  department  of  active  social
dynamics,  or  sociocracy  (vol.  i,  p.  60),  which  Comte  dimly
saw,  but  which  his  successors  have  thus  far  failed  to  recog-
nize.

As  the  historical  part  of  the  work  has  been  already  briefly
sketched,  this  need  not  be  here  repeated  or  enlarged  upon,
and  we  are  prepared  to  dismiss  the  formal  consideration  of
Comte's  system  of  philosophy.  As  the  founder  of  the  sci-
ence of  sociology,  as  the  first  to  establish  the  true  principle
of  the  natural  dependence  of  all  the  sciences,  as  the  man
who  has  thus  far  alone  undertaken  to  classify  the  history  of
human  thought  according  to  the  fundamental  conditions  of
the  mind,  and  to  assign  a  generic  name  to  all  those  intel-

138  COMTE'S  POSITIVE  PHILOSOPHY.

lectual  processes  which  converge  to  develop  the  scientific
method,  and,  finally,  as  the  great  pioneer  champion  of  uni-
versal education,*  the  one  form  of  modification  of  social
phenomena  certain  to  result  in  benefits  which  can  be  scien-
tifically predicted,  the  world  is  surely  under  heavy  and  lasting
obligations  to  this  somewhat  erratic  philosopher.

*  "  Philosopliie  Positive,"  vol.  vi,  p.  504.

I

CHAPTEE  11.

BRIEF     BUEVET     OF    THE     SYNTHETIC   PHILOSOPHY    OF    HEKBERT

8PENCEK.

Herbert  Spencer's  rank  as  a  philosopher — ^Reasons  for  selecting  the  systems  of
Comte  and  Spencer  as  the  special  subjects  of  these  sketches — The  Comtean
and  Spencerian  systems  compared  and  contrasted — Spencer's  laissez  /aire
proclivities — Laws  of  evolution  as  formulated  by  Spencer — His  two  cate-
gories, the  unknowable  and  the  knowable — The  unknowable — The  know-
able — Co-existence  and  sequence — Matter — Persistence  of  force — Rhythm  of
motion — Redistribution  of  matter — Instability  of  the  homogeneous — Multi-
plication of  effects — Segregation — Equilibration — The  "  Principles  of  Biol-
ogy " — Chemical  laws  underlying  biological  phenomena — Definition  of  life —
Nature  and  effects  of  the  environment — Antagonism  between  growth  and
reproduction — Direct  and  indirect  equilibration — Morphological  correspond-
ence of  organism  with  environment — Theory  of  population — The  "  Princi-
ples of  Psychology  " — Rank  of  the  work — Physiology  of  feeling — Derivative
intellectual  processes — Proof  of  the  reality  of  an  external  world — Vivid
and  faint  series  of  psychic  phenomena — Realism — The  "  Principles  of  Soci-
ology "  ;  notice  of  vol.  i — Ideas  of  savage  and  prehistoric  man— Mr.  Spen-
cer's ghost  theory — Ancestor- worship — Animal-worship — Plant-worship—
Conceptions  of  deity — Society  compared  to  an  organism — Systems  of  gov-
ernment or  headship — Forms  of  marriage — The  "  Data  of  Ethics."

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  has  received,  and  probably  de-
serves, the  title  of  England's  greatest  philosopher ;  and  when
we  reach  England's  greatest  in  any  achievement  of  mind,
we  have  usually  also  reached  the  world's  greatest.

The  work  of  the  true  philosopher  is  pre-eminently  the
synthesis  of  human  knowledge.  To  accomplish  this  work
he  must  possess,  on  the  one  hand,  the  greater  part  of  the
general  knowledge  of  his  age,  and,  on  the  other,  the  special
faculty  required  to  co-ordinate  it.    Earely,  indeed,  are  these

140  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

qualifications  combined  in  a  single  mind.  It  has  been  the
misfortune  of  philosophy  that  the  most  of  the  truly  logical
minds  have  been  deplorably  lacking  in  the  necessary  data
upon  which  to  exercise  their  reasoning  powers,  while  many
of  the  minds  that  have  taken  pains  to  acquire  extensive
information  have  proved  wholly  incapable  of  making  any
rational  use  of  it.  We  have,  therefore,  had  logicians  and
speculators  on  the  one  hand,  and  erudites  and  specialists  on
the  other.

Among  the  few  who  have  sought  to  base  philosophy
upon  known  facts  may  be  mentioned  first  of  all  Aristotle.
He  certainly  had  a  disposition  to  acquire  real  knowledge  and
to  make  it  the  foundation  of  his  general  speculations,  and,
considering  the  state  of  the  world  in  his  time,  and  all  the
circumstances  of  the  case,  he  must  be  credited  with  having
done  remarkably  well.  From  the  time  of  Aristotle  to  that
of  Bacon  and  Descartes,  who  singularly  enough  were  con-
temporaries, nothing  was  produced  that  answers  to  this  cri-
terion of  philosophy.  The  efforts  of  these  men  were,  how-
ever, decidedly  of  this  character,  and,  though  neither  of  them
possessed  all  the  real  knowledge  of  his  time,  still  both
sought  to  make  what  they  had  available,  and  advocated  the
extension  of  phenomenal  truth  as  the  groundwork  of  intel-
lectual exercise  and  the  test  of  certainty  in  opinions.  Bacon's
ignorance  of  mathematics  Sind  j)enchant  for  physics  were  well
supplemented  by  Descartes's  truly  profound  talent  for  the
former,  which  atones  for  many  of  his  speculative  vagaries.
Although  neither  of  these  two  men  ever  made  any  great
discoveries  in  physical  science,  the  healthy  tone  which  their
works  exerted  upoT\  human  thought  must  be  credited  with
producing  a  large  share  of  the  impetus  which  civilization
received  from  about  that  date,  and  which  has  been  accelerated
with  each  new  application  of  the  scientific  method  more  or
less  distinctly  formulated  by  them.*

*  It  has  become  quite  customary  for  scientific  writers  of  late  to  cast  asper-
sions  upon  Lord  Bacon  and  his  works,  and  to  intimate  that  what  has  been  called

\  HIS  RANK  AS  A  PHILOSOPHER.  141

From  the  epoch  of  Bacon  and  Descartes  no  further  con-
tributions to  the  philosophy  which  rests  exclusively  on  the
known  were  made  until  the  appearance  of  the  "  Philosophie
Positive  "  of  Auguste  Comte.  This  statement  does  not,  of
course,  ignore  the  great  epoch-making  labors  of  Galileo,
Newton,  Humboldt,  and  Lamarck.  These  were  but  the
fruits^  as  it  were,  of  the  "  Instauratio  Magna  "  and  the  "  Prin-
eipia  Philosophioe."  These  men  were  scientiste  rather  than
philosophers,  and  although  the  important  results  reached  by
them  were  due  to  their  power  of  co-ordinating  the  facts
within  their  respective  spheres  of  research,  still  none  of  the
works  produced  by  them  can  be  properly  described  as  em-
bodying a  philosophy  of  the  universe.  Newton  no  more
attempted  to  connect  astronomy  with  biology  than  did  La-
marck biology  with  astronomy,  while  Humboldt's  "  Kosmos"
is  scarcely  more  than  a  compilation  of  the  data  existing  at  his
time.  Though  he  constantly  talks  of  connecting  the  sciences
into  one  vast  whole,  the  Cosmos,  still  he  utterly  fails  to  point
out  the  fundamental  laws  of  their  relations.

Comte's  system,  on  the  contrary,  is  truly  a  system.  It
really  seeks  to  co-ordinate  the  sciences.  It  makes  a  bold  and
gigantic  stride  across  the  whole  field,  and,  allowing  for  certain
defects,  which  have  for  the  most  part  been  pointed  out  in
the  previous  chapter,  it  realizes  more  nearly  than  anything
that  had  preceded  it  the  ideal  of  a  true  philosophy.

But  with  Comte  the  data  were  still  very  deficient.     His

his  system  is  wholly  impracticable  and  useless.  This  results  from  confounding
what  has  heretofore  been  commonly  and  not  improperly  known  as  the  Baconian
method  with  the  system  which  he  has  drawn  up  in  his  "  Novum  Organum  "  for
arriving  at  certainty  in  physical  experimentation  (B6ok  II,  Aph.  xi).  That
this  last  is  of  no  practical  value  all  admit,  but  this  does  not  invalidate  any  of
Bacon's  claims  as  the  founder  of  the  true  scientific  method.  He  may  not  have
perceived  it  as  clearly  as  scientific  men  now  do,  but  that  its  chief  principles
formed  a  fundamental  basis  for  his  entire  philosophy  may  be  cfearly  gathered
from  numerous  passages  (sec  "Distributio  Operis,"  pp.  214,  221,  of  American
edition;  also,  Praefatio  to  'Novum  Organum,"  pp.  234,  237;  also, Book  I,  Aph.
ix,  xiv,  xix,  cxxiv;  Book  II,  Aph.  xxxvii,  etc.).

142  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

laborious  life  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  acquaint  him-
self with  the  known  facts  of  his  time.  The  details  of  his
system  are,  consequently,  very  imperfect — often,  as  already
shown,  erroneous.  His  great  service,  therefore,  was  to  lay
out  the  general  scheme,  and  sketch  the  most  comprehensive
and  fundamental  laws.  The  best-founded  charge  that  has
been  or  can  be  made  against  it  is  that  it  was  crude.  A  uni-
versal philosophy  had  been  founded.  It  remained  to  be  im-
proved and  perfected.

This  duty  has  seemed  to  devolve  upon  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer,  and  no  one  can  challenge  his  qualifications  for  its
performance.  His  mastery  of  all  branches  of  human  knowl-
edge has  been  justly  styled  "  encyclopedic."  His  causality
has  never  been  equaled.  To  him  were  thus  secured  the  two
essential  conditions  for  accomplishing  the  permanent  object
of  philosophy — the  synthesis  of  science.  Without  the  com-
prehensive survey  which  his  laborious  investigations  have
secured  for  him,  his  great  combining  powers  would  have  been
profitless ;  without  those  powers,  no  museum  of  facts,  how-
ever well  learned,  would  have  yielded  the  broad  principles
of  a  cosmical  philosophy.  Of  the  former  of  these  state-
ments, not  only  all  the  great  minds  of  antiquity,  but  such
modern  names  as  those  of  Kant,  of  Comte,  and  of  Hamilton,
are  obvious  examples  ;  while  of  the  latter,  the  life  of  Hum-
boldt is,  perhaps,  the  most  conspicuous  proof ;  although,
within  more  restricted  limits,  the  scientific  world  offers  a
multitude  of  instances  in  which  the  capacity  for  observation
vastly  transcends  the  power  of  co-ordination.

From  the  array  of  great  names  which  philosophy  and
science  have  given.to  the  world,  I  have  singled  out  those  of
Auguste  Comte  and  Herbert  Spencer  as  the  subjects  of  these
brief  sketches,  not  so  much  in  consequence  of  any  assumed
pre-eminence  in  these  two  men  above  others,  as  because  they
alone,  of  all  the  thinkers  of  the  world,  have  the  merit  of
having  carried  their  generalizations  from  the  phenomena  of
inorganic  nature  up  to  those  of  human  action  and  social  life.

REASONS  FOR  REVIEWING  COMTE  AND  SPENCER.  143

Of  all  tlie  philosophers  that  humanity  has  brought  forth,
these  two  alone  have  conceived  and  built  upon  the  broad
principle  of  the  absolute  unity  of  Nature  and  her  laws  through-
out all  their  manifestations,  from  the  revolutions  of  celestial
orbs  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires  and  the  vicissitudes  of
social  customs  and  laws.  This  grand  monistic  conception  is
the  final  crown  of  human  thought,  and  was  required  to  round
out  philosophy  into  a  form  of  symmetry,  whose  outlines,  at
least,  admit  of  no  further  improvement.

While  disclaiming  all  invidious  comparison  of  the  relative
merits  of  these  two  great  philosophers,  it  will  be  in  strict
furtherance  of  our  avowed  object  of  tracing  the  history  of
the  ideas  and  methods  which  have  led  to  the  present  state
of  sociological  science,  to  inquire  in  how  far  the  two  greatest
champions  of  the  new  science  have  been  able  to  follow  the
same  lines  of  investigation  and  the  same  canons  of  logic ;
and  also  to  point  out  in  what  respect  these  lines  have  diverged.
Thus  only  shall  we  be  able  to  weigh  intelligently  the  reason-
ing of  each,  and  build  up  a  consistent  structure  for  ourselves.

Mr.  Spencer  has  been  at  great  pains  to  explain  to  the
public,  from  time  to  time,  that  all  attempts  to  identify  his
system  with  that  of  Comte,  or  to  make  him  out  as  in  any
sense  a  disciple  or  follower  of  the  French  philosopher,  are
wholly  unjust  and  erroneous,  and  founded  on  a  complete
misunderstanding  of  one  or  both  systems.*  This  is  entire-
ly proper,  though,  it  may  be  added,  wholly  unnecessary  for
those  at  all  acquainted  with  both  these  philosophers.  But
when  he  goes  further,  and  expressly  repudiates  the  chief
characteristic  parts  of  Comte's  system,  and  says,  "from  every
thing  which  distinguishes  Comteism  as  a  system,  I  dissent
entirely,"  the  readers  of  the  works  of  both  must  be  allowed
to  place  such  an  interpretation  upon  his  words  as  seems  in
all  respects  to  comport  with  the  facts.  Indeed,  from  a  note
appended  to  page   Y4,  Yolume  I,  of   the  "  Principles  of

*  See  his  letter  published  in  the  January  number  of  "  The  New-Englander,"
1864  •  also,  note  to  page  74,  vol.  i,  of  his  "  Principles  of  Biology."

144  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

Biology,"  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  he  was  justly  en-
titled to  make  such  a  sweeping  disclaimer,  for  he  there  admits
that  his  direct  acquaintance  with  the  works  of  Comte  ig  lim-
ited to  the  first  half  of  his  "  Positive  Philosophy."  *  It  is
thus  wholly  possible  that  a  great  part  of  Comte's  system
might  coincide  entirely  with  his  own  views  arrived  at  quite
independently.  It  certainly  would  not  be  strange  that  the
only  two  minds  that  have  ever  risen  to  the  grasp  of  the  uni-
tary principle  of  nature  should  build  upon  the  same  foun-
dation a  somewhat  similar  superstructure.  Independently  of
this,  however,  let  us  endeavor  to  see  what  relation  the  most
general  principles  of  the  two  systems  sustain  to  each  other.

We  have  already  seen  that,  upon  the  most  general  of  all
philosophical  conceptions,  the  ultimate  unity  of  all  the  proc-
esses of  nature,  Comte  and  Spencer  are  at  one.  It  is  not
enough  to  say  that  others  have  held  to  the  same  truth.  No
one  before  Comte  had  made  it  the  basis  of  a  system  of  phi-
losophy. Judged  by  any  other  standard,  all  claims  to  origi-
nality in  any  thing  would  be  invalidated.  To  do  this  would
be  like  awarding  to  the  American  savage  the  merit  of  dis-
covering the  New  World.  But  let  us  see  what  is  the  full
meaning  of  this  fundamental  principle.  From  the  physical
laws  that  govern  the  inorganic  world  to  those  that  preside
over  the  movements  of  enlightened  social  centers,  there  is  a
chasm  hitherto  regarded  as  absolutely  impassable.  Contem-
plate, then,  the  hardihood  of  the  great  positivist  in  deliber-
ately expounding  the  laws  of  "  social  physics  " !  Think  of
the  rigorous  monistic  consistency  that  led  him  to  reject
psychology  as  distinct  from  biology  !  Every  reader  of  the
"  Philosophic  Positive  "  well  knows  that  its  author  regarded
the  process  by  which  this  chasm  was  closed  by  nature  as  a
process  of  evolution.  For,  although  he  did  not  undertake  to
formulate  the  laws  of  the  redistribution  of  matter,  the  dif-

*  Trcvious  to  writing  his  "  Study  of  Sociology,"  Mr.  Spencer  seems  to  have
acquainted  himself  better  with  the  Comtcan  system,  and,  as  a  consequence,  he
speaks  of  certain  parts  of  it  in  a  much  more  respectful  wme  (chap.  xiv).

THE  TWO  SYSTEMS  COMPARED.  145

ferentiation  of  living  forms,  and  the  development  of  nervous
systems,  he  none  the  less  distinctly  maintained  the  claims  of
law  and  progressive  evolution  through  all  these  manifesta-
tions of  nature's  operations.

Nor  are  these  two  philosophers  very  widely  at  variance  in
the  order  in  which  they  conceived  this  progressive  movement
to  have  proceeded.  Both  saw  that  evolution  begins  with  in-
oro-anic  matter  and  ends  with  human  societv.  If  Comte  has
omitted  to  introduce  a  separate  treatise  on  psychology,  it  was
in  consequence  of  the  severity  of  his  logic,  which  refused  to
separate  the  brain  from  the  nervous  system,  the  man  from
the  animal.  He  declares  man  and  his  achievements  to  be  the
simple  prolongation  of  the  animal  series  of  forms  and  activ-
ities, and  with  almost  theatrical  effect  disposes  of  psychology
as  "transcendental  biology."  A  far  less  valid  excuse  has
Spencer  offered  for  his  omission  of  any  systematic  treatment
of  the  plienomena  of  inorganic  evolution,  viz.,  insufficient
time  for  its  elaboration.  Had  he  written  such  a  work,  it  can
scarcely  be  doubted  that  he  would  have  found  himself  com-
pelled to  adopt  substantially  the  order  of  development  set
down  by  Comte.  We  can  only  say  that,  so  far  as  the  two
philosophers  have  made  known  their  views  on  the  order  of
development  in  nature,  they  are,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,
in  harmony.  The  degree  of  importance  which  each  has  re-
spectively assigned  to  the  different  stages  of  evolution  has
indeed  been  different,  if  we  are  to  judge  by  the  length  to
which  they  have  been  treated,  but  there  is  reason  to  sup-
pose that  this  was  due,  in  great  part,  to  particular  circum-
stances. The  plan  of  Comte  was  made  from  the  beginning,
and  strictly  adhered  to  throughout.  The  course  of  evolution
was,  for  convenience,  marked  by  stages  corresponding  respect-
ively to  the  five  fundamental  sciences — astronomy,  physics,
chemistry,  biology,  and  sociology.  These  sciences,  it  will  be
observed,  are  more  nearly  distinct  than  any  others.  If  they
have  any  vice,  it  is  that  of  overlapping,  and  that  is  only  the
natural  result  of  an  attempt  to  fix  limits  to  nature's  opera-

146  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

tions,  which  are  never  separated  by  definite  boundaries.
These  five  stages  he  styled  the  "  categories,"  to  some  one  of
which  every  phenomenon  of  nature  may  be  referred.  The
order  of  these  stages,  it  will  be  further  seen,  is  the  natural
one.  Mt.  Spencer  does  not  deny  this.*  On  the  contrary,
he  virtually  adopts  it.  In  his  "  First  Principles  "  he  repeat-
edly illustrates  his  laws  of  the  redistribution  of  matter  from
the  various  known  sciences,  and,  in  doing  so,  he  usually
adopts  substantially  the  order  of  Comte.

This  work  must  be  taken  as  embracing  his  views  on  the
evolution  of  inorganic  matter.  When  he  comes  to  take  up
a  department  more  specifically,  he  begins  with  biology,
apologizing,  however,  for  having  been  compelled  to  omit
two  volumes  of  his  philosophy  treating  of  the  evolution  of
inorganic  matter.  Between  his  two  volumes  on  biology
and  his  treatise  on  sociology,  he  interpolates  two  volumes
on  psychology.  These  occupy  precisely  the  place  of  Comte's
"  Transcendental  Biology,"  and  would  not  have  suffered  in
their  intrinsic  merits,  which  are  very  great,  had  they  been
designated  by  that  name.  For  Comte  by  no  means  intends
by  the  term  transcendental,  as  thus  employed,  to  deny  the
legitimacy  of  this  study  as  true  scientific  ground.  He  meant
only  for  the  time  being  to  label  them  ignoramus,  not  ignora-
Mmus.  And  here,  again,  the  harmony  between  the  two  phi-
losophers is  quite  remarkable.  Both  recognize  the  absolute
dependence  of  mind  upon  body,  and  both  perceive  that  the
nervous  organization,  of  which  the  brain  is  recognized  as
only  a  part,  is  the  one  biological  fact  to  which  all  psycho-
logical phenomena  must  be  referred  as  their  immediate  ante-
cedent. And,  when  we  consider  the  immense  progress  which
the  students  of  nerve  phenomena  had  made  between  the  pe-

*  ITc  only  denies  that  man  has  cultivated  and  perfected  these  sciences  in
precisely  this  order,  which  is  quite  another  thing  from  their  natural  dependence.
Historically,  science  has  been  a  growth,  and  is  affected  with  all  the  irrcgularitiea
which  characterize  every  thing  that  has  been  developed.  (See  Introduction,  pp.
T2-Tr..)

I

THE   TWO   SYSTEMS  COMPAEED.  147

riods  at  which  the  two  works  under  discussion  were  written,
we  may  almost  assert  that  Corate  said  proportionally  as  much
in  his  one  chapter  as  Spencer  in  his  two  volumes.  Both  sys-
tems close  with  sociology ;  for,  should  Mr.  Spencer  live  to
complete  his  last  two  volumes  on  the  "  Principles  of  Moral-
ity," this  could  present  nothing  more  than  the  ethical  side  of
the  great  social  science.*

Thus  we  see  that  the  two  philosophers  are  wholly  agreed
respecting  the  natural  order  of  development  in  the  universe,
and  this,  from  Mr.  Spencer's  own  point  of  view,  must  be  the
primary  problem  for  the  classification  of  the  sciences.  For
it  is  to  him  that  is  due  the  credit  of  having  demonstrated
more  fully  than  any  other  writer  the  universality  of  the
laws  of  evolution  and  the  importance  of  making  the  general
doctrine  of  evolution  the  basis  of  all  inquiry  into  the  con-
nected phenomena  of  the  universe.  The  problem  to  be
solved,  first  of  all,  in  this  view  of  the  case,  was  the  order
in  which  the  laws  of  evolution  regularly  effect  the  phe-
nomena of  nature.  "What  classes  of  phenomena  must  be
regarded  as  forming  the  first  and  what  the  last  objects  of
the  evolutionary  forces  ?  Which  ones  must  be  considered  as
antecedents  with  respect  to  others,  and  which  consequents  ?
These  are  the  fundamental  problems  whose  solution  must
underlie  all  satisfactory  attempts  to  classify  the  sciences.
Sciences,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  grouped  at  all,  simply
represent  the  natural  groups  of  phenomena,  and  to  determine
the  natural  order  in  which  phenomena  are  related  to  one
another  as  indicated  by  their  respective  antecedence  and  se-
quence in  the  march  of  evolving  forces,  is  to  determine  the
natural  order  in  which  the  sciences  stand  to  one  another,  and
that  in  which  alone  they  can  be  successfully  studied.  Now
in  the  classification  of  the  sciences,  in  so  far  as  this  funda-
mental canon  is  concerned,  we  have  seen  that  the  Comtean
and  the  Spencerian  philosophies  differ  in  no  respect.     It  is

*  The  greater  part  of  this  chapter  was  written  in  the  spring  of  1S77,  or  more
than  two  years  before  the  appearance  of  the  "  Data  of  Ethics."

148  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PniLOSOPHY.

true  that  Mr.  Spencer  has  ■written  a  separate  treatise  on
the  "  Classification  of  the  Sciences,"  *  in  which  he  criticises
Comte's  system  and  elaborates  one  of  his  own,  the  apparent
object  of  which  work  was  to  disclaim  that  part  of  Coratism
and  disseminate  the  impression  that  there  was  something
wholly  incompatible  in  the  two  systems.  The  truth  is  that,
with  the  exception  of  some  minor  points  of  difference,  tlie
two  methods  of  classification  are  not  only  not  incompatible,
but  are  quite  independent  of  each  other.  It  may  be  truly
said  that,  so  far  from  there  being  any  disagreement  between
them,  they  are  both  essentially  true.  They  are  capable
neither  of  agreement  nor  of  disagreement,  not  proceeding
from  the  same  standard  of  comparison.  The  classification
of  Comte  is  a  'phenomenal^  that  of  Spencer  is  a  logical  one.
The  former  represents  the  actual  course  of  natural  phenom-
ena in  the  ascending  grades  of  development  and  the  increas-
ing stages  of  complexity.  The  latter  refers  to  the  ideal  rela-
tions among  phenomena  as  necessarily  contemplated  by  the
human  intelligence.  There  is  no  more  conflict  between  them
than  there  would  be  between  two  modes  of  classifying  men,
one  of  which  should  be  based  on  the  color  of  the  skin  and
the  other  upon  the  differences  of  language.  So  clear  is  this
that  it  need  be  no  further  insisted  upon.  This  much,  how-
ever, we  may  say,  that  while  the  Comtean  principle  is  com-
mon to  both  systems,  and  varies  in  no  respect  as  to  its  pre-
cise order,  but  only  in  the  degree  of  importance  attached  to
some  of  its  stages,  the  classification  of  Herbert  Spencer  is  in

*  At  the  time  of  writing  the  above,  this  work  had  not  yet  come  into  my
hands,  and  my  efforts  to  secure  it  had  only  resulted  in  the  discovery  that  it  was
out  of  print.  My  knowledge  of  it  was  therefore  chiefly  drawn  from  his  other
works  and  from  Mr.  Fiske's  "  Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy."  Recently,  how-
ever (18S0),  the  work  itself  has  come  under  my  notice,  together  with  his  "Rea-
sons for  dissenting  from  the  Philosophy  of  M.  Auguste  Comte."  After  a  care-
ful perusal  of  this  most  interesting  work,  I  sec  little  reason  to  change  any  thing
which  has  been  said,  and  am  gratified  to  find  that  several  of  the  real  points  of
divergence  to  which  I  had  drawn  attention  are  very  clearly  set  forth  by  Mr
Spencer  himself.

THE  TWO  SYSTEMS  CONTRASTED.  149

the  main  his  own,  and  constitutes  a  valuable  contribution  both
to  philosophy  and  to  science.  But,  whether  he  was  pleased  or
chagrined,  Mr.  Spencer  was  compelled  to  adopt  the  Comtean
series,  simply  because  it  was  the  order  of  nature,  and  he  was
too  great  a  philosopher  to  misrepresent  nature  one  jot  or
tittle  for  the  paltry  credit  of  originality.  Still,  many  doubt-
less think  that  he  could  have  well  afforded  to  rest  his  repu-
tation upon  those  vast  original  achievements  which  none  can
dispute,  while  frankly  referring  to  their  proper  source  what-
ever great  truths  it  was  found  necessary  to  recognize  as  hav-
ing been  already  offered  to  the  needy  world  by  the  noble
thinkers  who  had  preceded  him.

Having  thus  shown  that,  in  some  of  the  most  important
principles  on  which  Comte  and  Spencer  are  popularly  sup-
posed to  differ  widely,  they  are  in  reality  in  substantial  har-
mony, it  may  be  well  in  the  next  place  to  point  out  a  few
particulars  in  which  the  reverse  is  true,  the  prevailing  opin-
ion attributing  harmony  to  their  ideas  where  in  point  of  fact
they  are  broadly  at  variance.

As  an  avowed  systematist,  it  is  but  natural  and  necessary
that  Comte  should  have  had  great  faith  in  the  power  of  the
corporate  wisdom  of  mankind  to  modify  tihe  condition  of
society  by  those  measures  which  must,  for  want  of  a  better
term,  be  called  political.  Indeed,  it  becomes  a  leading  factor
of  the  positive  philosophy  to  recognize  the  efficacy  of  posi-
tive law.  That  art  is  the  end  to  which  science  is  the  means
is  a  conception  that  permeates  the  positivism  of  Comte,  and
which  finds  its  accurate  analysis  in  that  important  principle
upon  which  he  so  frequently  insists,  that  the  power  of  pre-
vision is  the  only  safe  test  by  which  true  science  can  be
determined.  Nor  has  he  failed  to  add  to  this  that  the  chief
object  or  utility  of  science  thus  defined  is  the  power  thereby
acquired  of  modifying  phenomena.  He  does  not  fail  to  sup-
plement his  maxim  "  See  to  foresee  "  by  the  equally  forcible
injunction  :  predict  in  order  to  control.

160  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

In  short,  Comte  was  a  consistent  opponent  of  the  laissez
fairs  school,  which  he  styled  a  mere  negative  school,  placing
it  in  the  metaphysical  stage  of  the  history  of  intellectual
progress.  lie  recognized,  in  its  entire  length  and  breadth,
the  science  of  sociology,  to  which  he  gave  its  name.  "Without
entering  upon  the  analysis  which  was  made  in  the  Intkoduc-
TiON  (vol.  i,  p.  56),  he  has  overlooked  neither  the  statical,  the
passive  dynamical,  nor  the  active  dynamical  class  of  social
phenomena,  and  upon  this  last-named  class,  which  carries
every  science  into  its  stage  of  application — that  of  art — ^he
has  expressed  himself  in  an  unmistakable  manner.  Indeed,
in  his  later  utterances,  made  after  the  decline  of  his  intellect-
ual powers  had  begun,  he  carries  his  doctrine  of  the  control  of
social  phenomena  to  a  wholly  untenable  length.  But,  while
his  system  with  its  cumbersome  details  deserved,  and  has  re-
ceived, the  fate  of  all  of  its  class,  the  principle  still  remains,
and  must  re-appear  again  and  again  until  the  increase  of
knowledge  shall  crown  it  with  success.  Meantime  let  us  not
forget  that  Auguste  Comte  has  raised  the  only  voice  that  has
yet  been  heard  for  universal  education  as  the  primary  politi-
cal measure  of  the  sociological  art.

If,  as  has  been  stated  by  Mr.  Spencer  himself,  and  as
most  of  the  criticisms  that  have  been  made  of  him  and  his
philosophy  seem  to  imply,  the  impression  prevails  that  he  is
a  positivist  in  the  sense  of  being  an  adherent  of  the  French
school  as  founded  by  Comte,  then  is  public  opinion  egre-
giously  wrong,  and  Mr.  Spencer  amply  justified  in  making
every  reasonable  effort  to  set  himself  right.

The  Spencerian  philosophy,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to
detect  from  a  careful  study  of  it,  never  recognizes  what  I
have  denominated  anthropo-teleological  progress  in  society.
It  treats  sociology  purely  as  a  science,  never  touching  upon
its  active  or  positive  dynamical  phase,  and  confining  itself
almost  exclusively  to  its  statical  laws.  Human  progress  Mr.
Spencer  contemplates  from  exactly  the  same  stand-point  as
that  from  which  he  con  tempi"  ^;e8  the  progress  of  biological

LAISSEZ  FAIRE  PROCLIVITIES.  151

differentiation.  This  is  the  passive  stage  of  social  dynamics,
and  with  this  he  stops.  He  only  deems  it  his  business  to
investigate  the  phenomena  of  society,  the  laws  which  tend
to  preserve  it  from  destruction,  and  those  which  operate  upon
it  to  modify  it.  With  this  view  he  institutes  a  comparison
of  the  social  organism  with  that  of  the  animal  or  tlie  vege-
table, and  to  this  analogy  he  steadfastly  adheres.  'Nor  is  his
avoidance  of  the  positive  ideas  the  result  of  his  failure  to
conceive  of  them.  He  finds  them  perpetually  intruding
themselves  into  the  field  of  his  reasoning,  and  he  taxes  his
ingenuity  in  dexterously  baffling  them  and  chasing  them
from  the  forbidden  ground.

In  an  early  work  which  can  not  be  justly  classed  as  a  part
of  his  philosophy  proper — ^his  "  Social  Statics  " — he  has  taken
strong  ground  against  all  attempts  on  the  part  of  government
to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  society,  and  may  be  said  to  have
fairly  identified  himself  with  the  school  of  laissez  faire  phi-
losophers. But  in  his  more  recent  works  he  has  greatly  mod-
ified the  views  there  expressed,  while  nevertheless  steadily
declining  to  recognize  strictly  positive  doctrines.  A  remark-
able fact  in  this  connection  is  the  open  and  somewhat  bitter
hostility  to  state  education  which  he  manifests  in  the  "  Social
Statics,"  and  which  he  has  not,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  either
withdrawn  or  qualified  in  any  later  work.

Thoroughly  disgusted  by  the  ridiculous  failures  he  was
compelled  to  witness  in  the  short-sighted  attempts  of  a  sport-
ing gentry  and  superficially  educated  nobility  to  legislate  for
the  removal  of  evils  and  the  attainment  of  benefits  in  so-
ciety, he  naturally  enough  drew  the  hasty  conclusion  that
these  were  not  the  legitimate  functions  of  government,  and
labored  successfully  to  show  how  much  better  society  regu-
lates itself  than  Parliament  can  regulate  it.  And,  having
settled  that  question  to  his  own  satisfaction  in  his  early  lit-
erary career,  it  was  naturally  difficult  for  him  to  re-open  it,
not  to  say  to  reverse  his  conclusion  in  later  years  after  a  more
comprehensive  survey  of  the  field  before  him.

152  SPENCER'S  SY]!n:HETIO  PHILOSOPHY.

Mr.  Spencer  has  not,  however,  been  guiltless  of  the
charge  of  having  proved  too  much.  The  evil  effects  which
he  has  ascribed  to  this  legislative  meddling  are  sufficient,
coming  from  so  high  a  source,  to  demonstrate  the  general
principle  that  there  is  power  in  positive  law,  and  this  is  the
sole  admission  the  positivist  requires  {supra,  p.  36).  In  his
later  writings,  particularly  in  his  "  Study  of  Sociology,"  Mr.
Spencer,  as  already  stated,  has  modified,  without  retracting,
these  views  as  put  forth  in  his  "  Social  Statics."  lie  justly
complains  that  governments  are  continually  regulating  just
those  things  which  will  regulate  themselves  much  better,  and
neglecting  those  measures  which  are  necessary  to  secure  the
due  preservation  of  the  social  order.  StiU,  in  all  the  whole-
some lectures  which  he  reads  the  modern  legislator,  there  is
an  unmistakable  trace  of  the  spirit  of  hostility  to  the  doc-
trine itself  of  progressive  reform  through  legislation.  He
nowhere  goes  back  to  principle,  and  openly  admits  that,  as-
suming the  wisdom  and  good  intention  of  the  legislator  to
be  all  that  is  desired,  the  natural,  or  passive,  progress  of  a
people  could  be  hastened  by  active  legislative  measures.  If
he  mentally  recognizes  such  a  possibility,  there  are  no  such
measures  of  which  he  feels  qualified,  in  the  present  condi-
tion of  social  science,  to  predict  the  success.  He  has  in  his
own  mind  openly  decided  adversely  to  the  claims  of  state
education  as  such  a  measure,  and  this  is  the  principal  one
in  which  unqualified  confidence  is  expressed  in  this  work.
Could  I  be  convinced,  as  he  doubtless  is,  that  this  too  would
fail,  I  should  occupy  a  position  but  slightly  different  from
what  I  conceive  his  to  be.  I  should  not  in  the  least  yield
the  a  priori  principle  that  legislation  is  to  sociology  what
invention  is  to  physics,  and  that,  if  progress  is  ever  to  be-
come anything  more  than  passive  and  secular,  as  we  see  it  in
the  evolution  of  worlds,  of  plants,  and  of  animals,  the  qual-
ity of  positivity  and  extra-natural  speed  must  come  through
what  I  have  called  political  action.  And  I  should  enjoin  all
who  desire  to  see  humanity  improved  to  labor  for  that  end

LAISSEZ  FAIRE  PROCLIVITIES.  153

in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  they  labor  in  all  the  remain-
ing fields  of  science,  to  investigate  the  laws  of  social  order
and  social  progress,  in  the  hope  that  light  would  eventually
dawn,  and  that  a  clear  course  would  ultimately  be  revealed,
in  which  such  measures  of  artificial  progress  might  be  adopt-
ed with  safety  and  carried  through  with  success.  These
views  I  should  be  compelled  to  hold  because  there  is  no  alter-
native but  to  renounce  all  effort  and  trust  to  the  slow  laws  of
cosmical  evolution,  and  also  because  experience  in  all  the
other  fields  of  science  shows  that  this  is  the  normal  condition
of  things,  and  that,  if  sociology  is  really  a  science,  the  same
attitude  should  be  assumed  toward  it  as  has  always  been  as-
sumed toward  other  sciences,  if  anything  like  analogous  re-
sults are  to  be  expected.  But,  if  there  were  presented  no
single  step  by  which  to  initiate  a  course  of  procedure,  it  may
be  doubted  whether  it  would  be  deemed  worth  while  to
elaborate  a  treatise  whose  only  object  could  be  to  urge  on  a
work,  the  ultimate  success  of  which  could  only  be  foreseen
by  the  eye  of  reason,  as  a  dim,  shapeless  something,  whose
very  distance  could  not  be  known.  Mr.  Spencer  seems  to
me  to  have  labored  under  mental  conditions  similar  to  what
1  have  described.  Rejecting  as  chimerical  all  the  positive
systems  thus  far  set  up,  yet  firmly  believing  in  the  reign  of
undeviating  law  throughout  the  whole  domain  of  human  ac-
tivity, he  recognizes  the  paramount  necessity  of  entering  at
once,  and  in  earnest,  upon  the  work  of  exploring  this  realm
and  of  investigating  the  phenomena  and  laws  of  social  exist-
ence, subject  to  the  same  canons  and  by  the  same  methods
that  have  been  successfully  applied  to  other  phenomena  and
other  laws.

The  more  we  examine  the  situation  the  more  clearly  we
shall  see  that  this  was  precisely  the  attitude  that  the  condi-
tion of  the  science  at  the  time  demanded.  Theological  posi-
tivism had  been  a  success  only  in  maintaining  its  hold  on
mankind  during  a  long  and  dark  period.  As  a  means  of  in-
creasing the  natural  progress  of  the  race  it  had  proved  a

154  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

failure.  The  metapLysical  negativism  that  succeeded  it  had
demonstrated,  by  its  tendency  to  anarchy,  both  intellectual
and  political,  that  some  positive  system  was  demanded,  and
threatened  a  return  of  the  odious  theological  regime.  The
Comtean  system  was  too  chimerical  and  preserved  too  many
relics  of  theological  tyranny  to  permit  it  ever  to  receive  a
trial.  Government,  both  on  the  Continent  and  in  England,
was  reverting  to  the  policy  of  aggressive  legislation,  but  the
quality  of  the  legislators  everywhere  was  such  as  could  re-
sult in  nothing  but  failure  in  all  attempts  to  improve  the
condition  of  society.  Science  had  achieved  a  complete  tri-
umph over  all  the  fields  of  inorganic  nature,  and  the  reign
of  law  had  been  demonstrated  throughout  the  domain  of
mechanical  and  physical  forces.  The  undulatory  theory  of
light,  heat,  etc.,  had  been  followed  by  the  discovery  of  the
law  of  the  correlation  of  all  forces  known  to  exact  science.
Lamarck,  Geoffroy  Saint-IIilaire,  and  Dr.  Erasmus  Darwin
had  striven  to  bridge  over  the  chasm  that  separated  the  in-
organic from  the  organic  world,  and  introduce  law  into  the
world  of  life.  The  great  truth  that  all  phenomena  were
mutually  dependent,  and  that  every  fact  was  but  the  last
link  of  a  chain  reaching  back  into  the  unfathomable  past,
had  dawned  fully  upon  the  age.  The  questions  whetlier  life
was  also  a  part  of  nature,  whether  man  was  the  product  of
ages  of  slow  development,  whether  language,  custom,  civil-
ization, society,  were  not  also  subject  to  law  and  fruits  of
cosmic  evolution,  were  before  the  bar  of  human  judgment
for  decision.

It  was  under  these  circumstances  that  Herbert  Spencer
came  upon  the  stage.  lie  looked  over  the  field.  His  eye
caught  the  salient  points.  He  saw  that  the  first  requisite
was  knowledge.  He  obtained  it.  He  then  proceeded  to
compare  it.  Under  every  point  of  view  one  fundamental
law  of  nature  stood  boldly  out.  That  law  was  change.  Re-
stricting his  view,  a  second  law  presents  itself,  subordinate
only  to  the  law  of  change.     This  law  is  progress.     The  ele-

LAWS  OF  EVOLUTION".  155

ments  of  all  phenoinena  are  perpetually  changing  tlieir  posi-
tion. This  change  is  in  a  iixed  direction,  and  not  arbitrary.
That  direction  is  from  the  confused  and  homogeneous  toward
the  definite  and  heterogeneous.  This  is  the  test  of  progress.
It  is  the  process  of  evolution.  The  opposite  tendency  is  dis-
solution,, and  must  be  assumed  to  be  going  on  in  some  parts
of  the  universe  in  such  a  manner  and  degree  as  exactly  to
balance  the  changes  of  evolution.  In  our  system,  and  cer-
tainly on  our  planet,  however,  the  law  of  progress  has  long
prevailed,  and  seems  still  to  prevail.  All  change  is  due  to
the  motion  of  matter.  The  process  of  evolution  consists  in
the  integration  of  matter  and  the  dissipation  of  motion.
That  of  dissolution  consists  in  the  integration  of  motion  and
the  disintegration  of  matter.  The  living  forms  found  on
the  globe  when  compared  with  those  found  fossil  in  the
rocks  prove  that  the  law  of  evolution  has  prevailed,  and
must  be  called  in  to  account  for  the  great  progress  attained.
Man  himself  is  a  product  of  this  all-pervading  and  long-con-
tinued progress.  Human  languages,  when  systematically
compared,  show  that  the  same  law  has  prevailed  also  in  that
department.  History  and  archseology  combine  to  demon-
strate that  civilization  has  formed  no  exception.  Society,
therefore,  is  itself  a  product  of  evolution.  But,  as  all  forms
of  evolution  are  subject  to  uniform  laws.  Science  becomes
mistress  of  all  fields  of  phenomena.  Biology  has  a  legiti-
mate existence,  and  sociology  takes  rank  as  a  true  science.
Such  is  the  primary  conception  of  the  Spencerian  philosophy.

We  will  now  rapidly  review  the  principal  outlines  of  this
system.  Most  readers  are,  no  doubt,  familiar  with  his  works ;
but,  partly  to  complete  the  symmetry  of  our  plan,  and  partly
because  such  a  casual  survey  may  contribute  somewhat  to  its
elucidation,  let  us  more  specifically  consider  the  philosophy
of  Herbert  Spencer.

Mr.  Spencer  acknowledges  but  two  categories,  the  JJn-
JcnowoMe  and  the  Knowahle.

156  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

^

The  Unknowable  is  the  Absolute,  or  Unconditioned ;  the
Knowable  is  the  Finite,  or  Conditioned.  The  former  is  the
legitimate  domain  of  Religion  ;  the  latter,  of  Science.  For
all  time  there  has  existed  a  conflict  between  Religion  and
Science.  The  cause  of  this  conflict,  like  that  of  conflicts
between  adjoining  states,  has  been  disputed  loundaries.
The  only  possible  reconciliation,  therefore,  must  consist  in  a
settlement  of  this  question  of  boundaries.  Such  a  settlement
he  conceives  to  be  the  final  recognition  of  these  two  catego-
ries, and  the  assignment  to  Religion  of  the  region  of  the
Unknowable,  and  to  Science  of  that  of  the  Knowable.

Perhaps  no  more  equitable  award  can  be  made,  and  both
parties  will  probably  be  ultimately  compelled  to  accept  it  and
be  satisfied ;  still,  on  first  view,  it  vividly  recalls  the  manner
in  which  the  man  is  credited  in  the  story  with  dividing  his
house  with  his  wife,  taking  the  inside  for  his  portion  and
allotting  the  outside  to  her.

Throughout  the  varied  and  conflicting  forms  of  religious
belief,  there  is  one  truth,  and  but  one,  that  underlies  them
all.  This  truth  is,  that  there  exists  a  something  which  the
finite  intelligence  does  not  and  can  not  comprehend.  That
something  is  the  Absolute,  the  Unconditioned,  the  Unknow-
able. This  is  the  foundation  of  all  religion,  and,  as  it  is  for
ever  safe  from  all  the  encroachments  of  Science,  it  insures  to
Religion  a  reign  of  perpetuity.

To  establish  this  truth,  Mr.  Spencer  goes  over  the  field  of
metaphysical  speculation,  reviewing  the  scholastic  doctrine
of  mediaeval  times,  the  "  Antinomies  "  of  Kant,  and  the  con-
tradictory propositions  of  Sir  "William  Hamilton  and  of  Man-
sel.  He  arrives  at  the  relativity  of  all  knowledge  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  actuality  of  the  non-relative  on  the  other.
The  Absolute  and  Unconditioned  is  not  a  vague  conception
that  we  may  put  equal  to  zero.  It  is  a  reality  of  the  highest
certainty,  and  forms  the  basis  and  the  substratum  of  all  com-
prehensible truths.  As  such,  it  is  worthy  of  all  worship,  and
a  fitting  object  of  religious  reverence.    This  basis  of  recon-

THE  SPENCERIAN  CATEGOEIES.  157

ciliation,  therefore,  for  tlie  conflicting  interests  of  religion
and  science,  is  not  as  unequal  as  it  might  at  first  appear,  and
must  certainly  be  recognized  as  the  most  satisfactory  plan  of
settlement  yet  proposed.

Leaving  the  domain  of  the  Unknowable  to  religion,  to
which  it  belongs,  Mr.  Spencer  enters  the  realms  of  the  Know-
able  as  the  domain  of  science  and  also  of  philosophy.  lie
closes  the  chasm  supposed  to  exist  between  science  and  phi-
losophy by  defining  the  latter  as  "  knowledge  of  the  highest
generality."  And  as  science  is  only  another  word  for  knowl-
edge, so  philosophy  is  only  a  certain  kind  of  knowledge.  The
particular  kind  of  knowledge  constituting  philosophy  he  rec-
ognizes as  the  knowledge  of  the  relations  which  phenomena
sustain  to  one  another.  Science,  therefore,  properly  under-
stood, is  the  generic  term,  and  includes  both  a  knowledge
of  phenomena  and  of  their  relations.

Predicating  the  reality  of  the  Unknowable,  the  Knowable
must  be  regarded  as  simply  the  varied  manifestations  of  the
Unknowable.  The  distinctions  among  these  manifestations
constitute  the  data  of  philosophy.  The  most  profound  of
these  distinctions  is  that  between  the  self  and  the  not-self.
Throughout  all  the  forms  of  contemplation  of  that  which  ap-
peals to  consciousness  and  to  sense,  there  is  this  ever-present
duality  which  separates  the  subject  from  the  object,  the
thinking  from  the  thought.  As  on  the  one  hand  the  confu-
sion of  object  with  subject  is  the  great  cause  of  error  in  the
world,  so  on  the  other  hand  false  conceptions  of  their  rela-
tions have  led  to  the  denial  of  one  and  even  of  both.  Phi-
losophy is  impossible  without  the  unquestioned  postulate  of
the  reality  of  both  ego  and  non-ego.  Eeality  is  defined  as
persistence  in  consciousness,  and  with  this  test  not  only  can
things  known  to  sense  be  established  as  realities,  but  the  Ab-
solute and  Unconditioned,  that  which  makes  these  real,  is  ac-
corded a  still  higher  degree  of  certainty.

Thought  is  a  comparison  of  relations.  The  two  funda-
mental standards  of  this  comparison  are  those  of  co-existence

158  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PniLOSOPHY.

and  of  sequence.  Relations  of  co-existence  take  place  in
space,  those  of  sequence  in  time.  All  phenomena  that  cor-
relate the  subject  with  the  object  do  so  under  one  or  the
other  of  these  relations.  Matter  is  simply  the  resistance
of  co-existent  points  of  space.  All  the  properties  of  mat-
ter are  reducible  to  this  one  of  resistance,  and  the  concep-
tion of  matter  itself  proves  to  be  nothing  else  than  the  ex-
perience of  this  resistance.  Motion  is  the  change  of  position
of  these  co-existent  resisting  points,  which  change  takes  place
successively  and  not  simultaneously.  Hence  motion  involves
space,  time,  and  matter.  Force,  which  is  the  product  of  the
matter  into  its  motion,  is  regarded  by  Mr.  Spencer  as  the
ultimate  conception.  It  is  the  relation  which  involves  all
the  other  conceptions.  "All  other  modes  of  consciousness
are  derivable  from  experiences  of  force,  but  experiences  of
force  are  not  derivable  from  anything  else."  We  may  reduce
time,  space,  matter,  and  motion  to  terms  of  force,  but  can
never  eliminate  that  term ;  it  is  the  final  unknown  quantity
in  the  problem  of  the  universe,  the  unknowable  reality  which
transcends  all  experience  and  all  representation.  Force,  with
Mr.  Spencer,  is  the  true  first  cause  of  all  phenomena,  and  his
adhesion  to  it  as  the  fundamental  reality  of  the  universe  is
worthy  of  a  religious  enthusiast,  while  the  thorough  and  able
manner  in  which  its  claims  are  brought  forward  and  estab-
lished entitles  him  to  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of  a  new
school  in  philosophy,  which  may  be  appropriately  styled  the
school  of  dyncmiists.

It  should  be  stated  that  this  view  is  by  no  means  accepted
by  all  the  scientific  minds  of  the  age,  and  is  rejected  by
many  who  subscribe  to  the  greater  part  of  the  Spencerian
philosophy.  My  own  strictures  upon  it  must  be  postponed
to  a  more  appropriate  place  {infra^  p.  221),  where  I  shall
undertake  to  show  that,  if  not  demonstrably  unsound,  it  is  at
least  the  less  plausible  of  two  hypotheses  which  every  one  is
wholly  free  to  choose  between,  and  olie  of  which,  it  would
seem,  must  be  true.

MATTER  AND  FORCE.  159

The  indestructibility  of  matter  and  the  continuity  of  mo-
tion lead  to  the  persistence  of  force,  which  is  the  funda-
mental dictum  and  universal  criterion  of  Mr.  Spencer's  sys-
tem. "With  him  the  reductio  ad  absurdum  is  to  demonstrate
that,  on  a  given  assumption,  the  persistence  of  force  would
be  denied — a  law  as  universal  as  the  law  of  contradiction,  or,
as  Sir  William  Hamilton  called  it,  non-contradiction,*  was
held  to  be  by  the  older  metaphysicians.

However  questionable  or  faulty  Spencer's  doctrine  of  the
supremacy  of  force  may  be,  it  is  certainly  a  great  improve-
ment upon  the  Comtean  denial  of  the  existence  of  force  as
a  necessary  relation  of  nature  and  conception  of  mind.  By
means  of  it  the  law  of  efficient  causes  can  be  as  conveniently
formulated  as  it  can  under  the  law  of  the  impact  of  'bodies.
We  thus  have  a  dependence  in  nature,  and  are  shown  the
possibility  of  the  rational  explanation,  proximate  at  least,  of
any  given  phenomenon.  As  I  have  shown  when  treating  of
Comte's  ideas,  the  strict  adherence  to  the  positivist  concep-
tion in  its  Comtean  purity,  instead  of  being,  as  he  thought,
the  only  legitimate  scientific  method,  would  be  in  reality  the
abnegation  of  the  scientific  method  by  substituting  mere  in-
dependent succession^  assumed  to  be  uniform,  for  actual  caKr-
sation  among  dependent  terms  of  a  series.  In  the  former
case,  even  if  induction  should  suffice  to  establish  uniformity,
all  power  of  explanation  is  removed  as  well  as  all  hope  of
tracing  phenomena  back  along  the  series  in  search  of  more
and  more  fundamental  conditions  of  their  existence.  Add
to  this  the  demoralization  (which  the  history  of  teleological
conceptions  ought  to  have  taught  us  not  to  underestimate)
due  to  the  acceptance  of  any  thing  less  than  a  demonstrated
necessity  that  certain  effects  shall  follow  given  causes,  and
the  immense  superiority,  from  the  point  of  view  of  practical
value,  of  any  system,  however  defective  in  other  respects,
which  recognizes  such  a  necessary  relation,  over  one  that
does  not,  may  be  better  realized  and  appreciated.

*  "Metaphysics,"  lecture  xxxviii.

160  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

Still,  it  ia  difficult  to  perceive  wherein  the  Spencerian
conception  of  force  differs  fundamentally  from  Boscovich's
theory  of  matter,  which  rejects  the  ultimate  atom,  and  de-
fines matter  as  the  resistance  of  a  mathematical  point.  It
must  be  conceded  that  to  the  unsophisticated  mind  this  bears
the  usual  marks  of  all  sophistry ;  and  it  may  be  questioned
whether  this  fundamental  dictum  of  Herbert  Spencer's  phi-
losophy is  not  itself  a  good  example  of  those  very  "  pseud-
ideas"  whose  nature  and  frequency  in  human  reasoning  he
has  so  clearly  described.

A  return  to  the  realistic  doctrine  of  Democritus  and  Epi-
curus is  about  as  certain  to  follow  this  new  wild  flight  o'
reason  as  did  the  return  to  "  Common  Sense,"  the  erratic
rovings  of  the  idealists  and  the  nihilists.  That  kind  of  rea-
soning which  puts  every  thing  equal  to  zero  which  it  can  not
directly  perceive,  belongs  to  a  past  age  of  philosophy.  Mr.
Spencer  has  successfully  rebuked  it  in  declaring  for  the  real-
ity of  the  noumenon.  But  why  should  he  make  force  the
basis,  which  is  clearly  a  relation^  while  denying  this  dignity
to  matter,  which  all  experience  declares  to  be  a  thing  f

The  law  of  the  "transformation  and  equivalence  of
forces  "  is  squarely  met  and  recognized  by  Mr.  Spencer,  who
does  not  limit  its  range  to  what  are  known  as  physical  and
chemical  forces,  but  extends  it  into  the  domain  of  vital  and
even  of  psychical  energies.

The  doctrines  of  "  least  resistance  "  and  the  "  rhythm  of
motion  "  are  fully  elaborated,  and  the  treatment  of  the  latter
subject  offers  one  of  the  most  brilliant  examples  of  strict
philosophic  thinking  which  the  world  has  yet  produced.
We  are  here  vividly  shown  that,  from  the  rhythmic  move-
ment of  the  pennant  as  it  flutters  in  the  gentle  breeze  to  the
"  tidal  waves  "  of  public  opinion  so  certain  to  ebb  into  reac-
tion, there  is  always  going  on  this  universal  undulation
throughout  the  entire  domain  of  nature.

?^e  are  thus  prepared  to  contemplate  the  laws  of  the
red^^stribution  of  matter .

REDISTRIBUTION  OF  MATTER.  161

The  knowable  universe  consists  of  material  aggregates.
These  aggregates  are  in  a  condition  of  incessant  change.
They  disappear,  and  new  ones  appear  in  their  places.  Each
aggregate  has  a  history.  The  complete  history  of  every  ag-
gregate covers  the  entire  period  of  its  perceptibility.  This
history  has  two  stages.  The  one  stage  is  from  the  moment
of  its  appearance  out  of  the  imperceptible  to  the  moment  of
greatest  concentration  and  definiteness.  The  other  stage  is
the  remainder  of  its  perceptible  existence  until  it  again
passes  into  the  imperceptible.  The  first  of  these  stages
covers  a  gradual  transition  from  a  diffused  to  a  concentrated
state,  the  second  a  transition  from  a  concentrated  to  a  dif-
fused state.  The  progress  from  a  diffused  to  a  concentrated
state  is  called  evolution,  and  consists  in  the  integration  of
matter  and  the  dissipation  of  motion.  The  progress  from
the  concentrated  to  the  diffused  state  is  called  dissolution,
and  consists  in  the  disintegration  of  matter  and  the  integra-
tion of  motion.

This  is  the  fundamental  law  of  the  redistribution  of  mat-
ter, and  applies  alike  to  every  department  of  science.

Evolution  is  simple  when  this  process  of  the  concentra-
tion of  matter  is  unaffected  or  only  slightly  affected  by  ex-
ternal perturbing  influences,  that  is,  when  the  progress  of  one
aggregate  is  undisturbed  or  little  disturbed  by  the  proximity
and  influence  of  other  aggregates  in  different  stages  of  their
progress.  It  is  compound  when  the  proximity  and  influence
of  such  other  aggregates  so  disturbs  the  normal  process  as
materially  to  change  the  rate  and  the  course  of  its  progress.

These  laws  of  the  redistribution  of  matter  are  universal.
They  are  traceable  from  the  development  of  a  system  out
of  a  nebulous  mass  to  that  of  human  language  and  institu-
tions.

The  next  great  principle  which  is  required  to  complete  the
conception  of  the  law  of  evolution  is  that  of  the  "  instability
of  the  homogeneous."  The  instability  of  all  matter  is  implie  i
in  the  law  of  perpetual  change.    But  there  is  special  instabit-

162  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPOY.

ity  inhering  in  diffused  homogeneous  masses.  The  universal
tendency  of  all  matter  is  from  a  condition  of  unstable  to  a
condition  of  stable  equilibrium.  A  pendulum  illustrates  this
law.  Inverted  and  ever  so  nicely  balanced,  any  change,  how-
ever slight,  in  the  conditions  which  surround  it,  destroys  its
equilibrium,  and  it  continues  to  oscillate  to  both  sides  of  the
center  of  gravity  until  its  momentum  is  overcome  by  gravi-
tation and  the  condition  of  stable  equilibrium  is  attained.
The  homogeneous  state  is  a  condition  of  unstable  equilibrium.
The  least  initial  impulse  applied  to  an  aggregate  in  this  state,
conceived  to  be  so  equipoised  by  the  mutual  attractions  of
its  own  particles  and  uninfluenced  by  forces  from  without,
is  sufficient  to  set  up  the  changes  required  to  destroy  this
equilibrium,  and  overthow  its  state  of  perfect  homogeneity.
It  thus  passes  through  states  of  successively  greater  and
greater  heterogeneity  in  its  progress  toward  a  state  of  com-
pletely stable  equilibrium.  The  history  of  our  earth  affords
a  good  example  of  this  process.  From  the  diffused  gaseous
condition  in  which  it  is  supposed  to  have  once  been,  its
motion  has  gradually  been  dissipated  while  its  matter  was
being  integrated,  until  now  only  a  comparatively  thin  outer
envelope  of  gas  exists,  while  the  remainder  has  assumed
either  the  liquid  or  the  solid  form,  the  last  of  which  presents
the  greatest  stability.  And  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that
this  process  is  still  going  on,  and  that  ultimately  this  omni-
present eremaeaitsis  will  reduce  the  waters  and  the  atmos-
phere to  the  state  of  stable  equilibrium — a  stage  of  plan-
etary existence  which  our  satellite  seems  to  have  already
reached.  And  may  not  this  same  law  be  called  in  to  explain
the  heterogeneity  of  elementary  matter  as  known  to  modem
chemistry  ?  If  all  matter  is  primordially  identical,  is  it  not
philosophical  to  assume  that  the  sixty-five  *  known  elements

*  The  number  of  chemical  elements  recognized  differs  with  different  authors.
Sixty.five  was  the  number  long  set  down  by  teachers  of  chemistry,  but,  not-
withstanding the  alleged  recent  discovery  of  quite  a  number  of  new  ones.  Pro-
fessor Cooke  only  enumerates  sixty-three  la  his  "  New  Chemistry,"  pubhshed  in

INSTABILITY  OF  THE  HOMOGENEOUS.  163

represent  so  many  states  of  heterogeneity  which  it  has  thus
far  assumed  in  its  cosmical  course  from  unstable  homogeneity
toward  the  Tiltimate  condition  of  stable  equilibrium  ?

It  is  proper  to  remark  that,  so  far  as  regards  purely  cos-
mical processes,  the  ascending  series  is  the  only  one  observ-
able to  us.  We  look  in  vain  for  any  sign  of  the  incipient
dissolution  of  the  universe.  Whatever  theory  may  require,
the  fact  ever  remains  that  the  process  we  see  going  on  in  our
portion  of  space  is  that  of  evolution  only.  We  see  only  the
integration  of  matter  and  the  dissipation  of  motion.  We
see  only  the  tendency  toward  the  condition  of  stable  equilib-
rium. We  see  only  the  absorption  of  the  gaseous  and  the
establishment  of  the  solid  form  of  matter.  All  theories  by
which  it  has  been  sought  to  compensate  for  the  radiations  of
luminous  bodies  have  proved  mere  speculations.  We  Tinow
that  the  sun  is  radiating  its  heat  into  space.  We  do  not  know
that  space  is  returning  this  dissipated  motion  either  to  the
sun  or  to  any  other  center.  We  see  planets  in  various  stages
of  their  progress  toward  the  stable  state.  We  have  no  rea-
son to  suppose  that  any  are  in  a  state  of  transition  from  the
stable  to  the  unstable  state.  Our  satellite  is  supposed  to  have
passed  through  all  its  stages  from  the  gaseous  to  the  solid
condition.  Its  gases  have  been  absorbed,  its  waters  have  re-
treated into  its  interior,  and  aU  its  visible  activities  have  ap-
parently ceased.*  The  moon  appears  to  be  a  dead  star.  It
has  run  its  long  cosmical  course,  and  has  at  last  arrived  at  the
final  state  of  complete  stable  equilibrium.  This  state  is  the
goal  of  the  whole  process  of  evolution.  If,  in  fact,  the  moon
has  not  yet  reached  this  point,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time
when  it  shall  reach  it.  Other  planets  or  satellites,  no  doubt,
have  already  done  so,  and  all  must  eventually  share  their  fate.

1876.  In  the  second  revised  edition  of  Dr.  George  G.  Groff  s  elaborate  "  Chart
of  the  Chemical  Elements"  (Lewisburg,  Pennsylvania,  1881),  sixty-seven  are
enumerated.

*  According  to  Neisan,  Klein,  and  ether  selenographers,  there  is  ample  evi-
dence that  volcanic  activitv  is  still  going  on  in  the  moon.

164  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

But  where  is  the  evidence  that  any  have  commenced  to  re-
verse this  universal  process  ?  What  star  is  suspected  of  being
in  a  state  of  dissolution  ?  "Where,  in  all  the  universe,  do  we
see  solids  turning  into  liquids,  and  liquids  into  gases  ?  Where
and  how  are  the  radiations  emitted  by  concentrating  bodies
being  harvested  for  the  purpose  of  disintegrating  matter
which  has  reached  its  ultimate  stage  of  complete  equilibra-
tion ?  We  seem  bound  to  confess  that  we  are  justified  in
such  an  assumption  only  by  the  arbitrary  extension  of  the
law  of  the  "  conservation  of  energy  "  (which  is  only  another
way  of  expressing  the  indestructibility  of  motion)  as  estab-
lished in  the  domain  of  physics.  So  far  as  the  observation  of
terrestrial  phenomena  is  possible,  motion  is  indestructible,  and
escapes  from  every  attempt  to  diminish  it,  under  other  forms
whose  reduction  to  the  terms  of  the  first  has  been  quantita-
tively formulated.  But  are  we  thus  justified  in  projecting
this  law  into  the  remote  regions  of  space  where  we  see  mo-
tion daily  being  dissipated  but  never  recomposed,  and  have
we  a  right  to  say  that  this  motion,  lost  to  our  system,  is  not
lost  to  the  universe  ?  True  science  well  knows  how  here  to
suspend  its  judgment,  and  hand  this  question  over  to  him  to
whom  it  legitimately  belongs — the  philosopher.  But  it  also
knows  how  to  refrain  from  the  hopeless  cry  of  ignorabimus.'^

The  passage  from  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous
is  attended  by  a  further  result  which  Mr.  Spencer  designates
as  the  "  multiplication  of  effects."  Increasing  heterogeneity
necessitates  greater  or  less  interference  of  the  discrete  masses.
A  single  aggregate  has  become  a  multitude  of  aggregates  in
such  proximity  as  constantly  to  impinge  upon  one  another.
Simple  evolution  has  thus  been  greatly  compounded  by  the
actions  of  its  own  forces,  and  the  consequent  effects  have
been  greatly  multiplied.

The  heterogeneity  evolved  by  the  laws  of  the  redistribu-
tion of  matter  is  not  wholly  fortuitous  and  irregular.     It

*  These  views   were   somewhat  enlarged  upon  in   "  The   Popular  Science
Monthly."  vol.  xl  pp.  672,  et  seq.

SEGREGATION.— EQUILIBRATION.  1G5

takes  place  in  conformity  with  a  fundamental  law  of  selec-
tion. This  law  is  called  by  Mr.  Spencer  "  Segregation."
The  heterogeneous  products  of  evolution  possess  all  degrees
of  dissimilarity.  The  law  of  segregation  unites  those  which
most  resemble  one  another,  and  separates  those  differing
most.  This  gives  a  definiteness  to  the  process.  The  union
of  the  similar  every-where  into  distinct  groups  tends  to  in-
crease stability.  It  thus  increases  the  power  of  the  new  ag-
gregates to  resist  the  forces  of  disintegration.  This  is  the
principle  that  underlies  all  organization.

Segregation,  ending  with  organization,  completes  the  as-
cending series.  Each  aggregate,  after  leaving  the  homoge-
neous mass,  may  still  be  considered  homogeneous  in  itself.
Segregation  has  made  it  so  by  selecting  like  elements  of
which  it  is  composed.  But  there  must  be  a  limit  to  the  proc-
ess ;  it  can  not  go  on  forever.  The  quantity  of  matter  as
well  as  of  motion  in  the  universe  is  always  the  same.  No
more  matter  can  be  integrated  than  exists  for  the  purpose.
All  motion  can  not  be  dispelled  from  the  universe.  This  is
practically  true  of  limited  portions  of  space.  Organization
is  a  positive  process,  and  can  only  take  place  under  the  influ-
ence of  some  prevailing  force.  That  force,  in  our  system,
is  the  heat  of  the  sun.  Even  this  is  approaching  its  stage
of  greatest  concentration.  On  a  smaller  scale  the  process  of
evolution  is  being  perpetually  antagonized  and  overcome.
The  forces  of  evolution  are  ever  struggling  with  the  forces
of  dissolution,  and  the  state  of  equilibrium  between  them  is
invariably,  sooner  or  later,  reached.  This  last  process,  or
rather  conclusion  of  the  process,  is  termed  "  equilibration."
Homogeneous  aggregates  are  differentiated  into  heteroge-
neous collections  of  minor  aggregates.  These  minor  aggre-
gates are  further  differentiated  by  the  accumulation  of  all  the
like  units  into  the  same  combinations.  The  diffused  state  is
converted  into  the  concentrated  state.  The  greatest  density
and  least  volume  are  attained.  Complete  equilibrium  is
reached.    Each  aggregate  has  parted  with  all  its  excess  of

166  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

motion.  Henceforth  it  is  completely  a  prey  to  its  environ-
ment. It  possesses  no  positive  force  within  itself.  IIow
long  it  will  remain  in  this  condition  must,  therefore,  depend
npon  the  external  conditions  by  which  it  is  surrounded.  But,
as  these  can  integrate  it  no  further,  if  they  are  able  to  affect
it  at  all,  they  can  only  disintegrate  it.  This  they,  in  fact,  in-
vaiiably  sooner  or  later  do.

The  process  of  "  Dissolution  "  begins  by  an  increase  in
the  movements  of  parts  and  a  decrease  in  the  movements  of
wholes.  Molar  motion  having  ceased  and  molecular  motion
commenced,  the  process  of  the  disintegration  of  the  matter
of  an  aggregate  continues  until  it  has  absorbed  all  the  mo-
tion of  which  it  is  capable,  and  its  matter  has  been  complete-
ly separated  and  dispersed.  As  we  have  already  seen,  this
process,  conceived  as  purely  cosmical,  is,  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  wholly  inferential.  We  see  it  going  on
under  certain  limitations  in  the  visible  world  around  us,  but
we  see  as  yet  no  evidence  of  it  in  the  great  expanse  of  the
heavens.  Still,  as  our  sphere  of  observation  is  so  limited
both  in  time  and  in  space,  we  are  left  the  alternative  of  mak-
ing this  logical  deduction  or  of  suspending  our  judgment.

It  should  be  remarked  of  the  law  of  dissolution  that  it
must  be  conceived  of  as  a  constantly  active  principle.  How-
ever much  the  opposite  law  of  evolution  may  in  fact  pre-
dominate, dissolution  is,  nevertheless,  perpetually  antagoniz-
ing it.  And,  in  the  progress  of  almost  any  aggregate,  there
are  constantly  recurring  periods  when  the  quantity  of  mo-
tion absorbed  is  greater  than  the  quantity  dissipated.  These
are  moments  of  reaction,  the  temporary  triumphs  of  the
forces  of  dissolution.

"We  must  divest  our  minds  of  the  current  notion  that
evolution  necessarily  implies  higher  and  higher  organization.
Evolution  is  progress  toward  the  condition  of  stable  equilib-
rium, not  necessarily  progress  toward  higher  organic  perfec-
tion. The  stage  of  greatest  organization  is  that  in  which  the
struggle  between  the  antagonistic  forces  is  greatest,  in  which

DISSOLUTION.  167

the  success  of  tlie  one  or  tlie  other  is  least  constant.  The
prime  of  life  of  a  planet,  like  that  of  a  person,  is  when  the
forces  of  growth  and  decay  are  nearly  balanced,  but  slightly
in  favor  of  the  former.  The  period  of  greatest  perfection  of
any  aggregate  is  the  period  immediately  antecedent  to  that
of  greatest  concentration.  The  organizing  vitality  of  the
earth  is  due  to  the  heat  received  by  it  from  the  sun.  This  is
in  the  nature  of  the  absorption  of  motion.  It  is  this  action
that  converts  the  liquids  on  its  surface  into  gases.  The  ex-
istence of  an  atmosphere  is  due  to  the  quantity  of  motion
constantly  being  absorbed  by  the  earth.  But  without  an
atmosphere  no  life  could  exist.  It  is,  therefore,  this  agency
of  dissolution  which  renders  organic  progress  possible  on  the
earth.  The  agencies  of  evolution  seize  upon  the  liberated
atoms  and  reintegrate  them  into  new  and  plastic  forms,  and
endow  them  with  the  subtile  principles  of  life  and  activity,
of  sensation  and  intelligence.  But  when  evolution  shall  have
so  far  progressed  that  the  further  absorption  of  motion  is
impossible,  when  the  solar  radiations  shall  at  length  fall  pow-
erless upon  the  earth,  and  all  nature  shall  be  locked  in  the
icy  embrace  of  solid  matter,  then  will  all  organization,  all
life,  all  mind,  and  all  intelligence  have  departed  for  ever.
Yet  then  only  will  the  normal  process  of  evolution,  the  in-
tegration of  matter  and  the  dissipation  of  motion,  have  run
its  course,  and  the  state  of  complete  equilibration  be  reached.

The  above  important  considerations,  although  Mr.  Spen-
cer has  failed  to  present  them,  flow  as  simple  corollaries  from
his  own  analysis.

Dissolution  forms  the  last  act  in  the  great  cosmical  drama,
and  completes  the  cycle  of  change.  Societies  are  disinte-
grated, and  the  races  of  man  scattered  and  extinguished.*
The  animal  and  vegetable  forms  are  deprived  of  life,  of
organization,  and  their  substance  decomposes  and  passes  into

*  There  is  much  truth  in  the  saying  of  St,  Simon,  that  nations  and  societies,
as  certainly  as  individuals,  must  reach  their  age  of  decrepitude  and  ultimate
dissolution.

168  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

the  gaseous  form.  The  rocks  and  minerals  of  which  the
earth  is  composed  are  disintegrated  bj  internal  activities,
and  join  the  nebulous  mass.  All  the  planets,  and  along  with
them  the  sun,  will  have  their  materials  broken  up,  and  the
infinitesimal  particles  to  which  they  are  reduced  diffused  over
a  vast  expanse  of  space.  Star  systems  shall  be  changed  into
nebulae,  eventually  to  begin  anew  the  same  grand  cycle
through  which  they  have  already  passed.

Such  is  a  brief  and  imperfect  sketch  of  the  "  First  Prin-
ciples "  of  Herbert  Spencer's  philosophy.  No  one  has  yet
been  found  to  deny  that  they  give  their  author  a  better
title  to  the  name  of  philosopher  than  belongs  to  any  other
to  whom  it  has  thus  far  been  applied.

The  '''■Principles  of  Biology P — The  two  volumes  on  the
"Principles  of  Biology"  follow  immediately  upon  "First
Principles."  It  has  been  said  that  Mr.  Spencer's  work  on
the  "  Principles  of  Psychology  "  would  probably  be  the  one
on  "which  his  reputation  would  finally  rest.  This  may  be  the
popular  view,  since  the  reading  public  is  more  competent  to
pass  judgment  upon  a  psychological  than  upon  a  biological
treatise.  But  to  those  considerably  acquainted  with  the
forms  of  life,  and  who  regard  a  philosophical  co-ordination
of  the  laws  and  phenomena  of  the  vital  and  sentient  universe
as  of  greater  value  at  this  time  than  the  analysis  of  mental
operations — to  such  the  "Principles  of  Biology"  can  but  be
regarded  as  a  masterpiece  of  the  highest  merit,  and  as  the
precursor  of  a  new  era  in  the  study  of  both  animals  and
plants.

While  our  space  forbids  any  extended  examination  of
this  truly  great  work,  a  cursory  glance  at  some  of  the  most
important  truths  brought  out  in  it  seems  to  be  demanded.

Of  exceedingly  great  interest  are  Mr.  Spencer's  remarks
upon  the  constitution  of  organic  matter.  The  peculiar  and
important  office  which  the  clement  nitrogen  performs  in
the  organic  world  is  coupled  in  the  most  significant  and
instructive  manner  with  evidence  that  all  nitrogen  compounds

THE   "PRINCIPLES  OF  BIOLOGY."  169

present  the  highest  states  of  instability.  As  all  vital  exist-
ence depends  on  the  power  of  the  organized  substance  rapid-
ly to  decompose  and  recompose,  the  secret  of  the  importance
of  nitroo-enized  compounds  in  all  living  tissues  is  apparent.

The  qualities  of  colloid  matter,  of  which  all  organic  com-
pounds consist,  are'  compared  with  those  of  crystalloid  sub-
stances, constituting  the  greater  part  of  the  inorganic  world.
The  former  is  shown  to  be  far  more  susceptible  to  change  of
internal  constitution  and  external  form  than  the  latter— so
much  so  as  to  warrant  calling  the  colloid  the  dynamical  state
of  all  matter,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  crystalloid,
which  is  its  statical  condition.  The  nitrogenous  colloids,  of
which  all  organized  beings  are  composed,  admit  of  a  greater
number  of  isomeric  forms  than  any  other  known  substances,
proteine  having  as  many  as  a  thousand.  The  theory  of  iso-
merism is  that  of  re-arrangement  of  molecules.  The  greater
the  number  of  isomeric  forms  the  more  numerous  the  possi-
ble re-arrangements  of  the  same  particles.  A  re-arrangement
of  particles  is  as  much  a  change  of  molecular  constitution  as
is  an  exchange  of  molecules.  It  implies  the  same  quantity
of  motion.  By  this  means  alone  can  motion  be  generated
without  the  renewal  of  matter.  The  mysteries  of  nerve-
currents  and  of  muscular  contraction  are  thus  put  in  the
way  of  solution,  in  complete  harmony  with  the  doctrine  of
evolution.

Passing  over  this  interesting  question,  let  us  notice  Mr.
Spencer's  definition  of  life.  When  fully  elaborated,  it  is
this :  "  The  definite  combination  of  heterogeneous  changes,
both  simultaneous  and  successive,  in  correspondence  with
external  co-existences  and  sequences."  In  this  definition  he
claims  to  have  established  a  formula,  under  whose  terms
nothing  else  than  a  living  organism  can  be  placed — i.  e.,  a
formula  which,  if  anything  can  be  shown  to  agree  with  each
of  its  terms,  will  at  once  determine  it  to  be  a  living  organism.
Any  aggregate,  therefore,  which  is  undergoing  changes  of
different  kinds  (heterogeneous)  in  many  parts  of  its  mass  at

170  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PIIILOSOPHY.

tlie  same  time  (simultaneous),  and  different  for  the  same  part
at  different  times  (successive),  and  which  combines  these
changes  in  a  systematic  (dehnite)  manner  into  a  subordi-
nate whole,  and  which  is  caused  to  do  this  by  the  influence
of  contiguous  external  aggregates,  which  are  reciprocally
modified  by  it  into  a  state  of  greater 'or  less  adaptation
(correspondence) — such  an  aggregate,  without  looking  for
any  farther  characteristics,  may  be  at  once  classed  as  either
an  animal  or  a  plant.

Whether  or  not  any  number  of  such  definitions,  however
logically  drawn  up,  could  ever  aid  the  naturalist  to  decide
whether  a  given  object  properly  belonged  to  his  field  of
research,  attempts  to  reduce  the  phenomena  of  life  to  one
general  law,  however  complicated  that  law  may  be,  should
not  be  despised  or  discouraged  on  any  false  plea  of  utility.
It  is  to  know,  that  we  study ;  and  the  highest  form  of  knowl-
edge is  the  generalization  of  nature's  laws.  It  is  a  grand
thing  to  know  that  there  seems  to  be  a  possibility  of  bring-
ing all  the  complicated  phenomena  that  constitute  life  under
a  single  definition.  To  those  who  complain  that  the  defini-
tion is  long  and  involved,  it  should  be  replied  that  the  thing
defined  is  vast  and  manifold.  And,  although  it  may  still  be
well  doubted  whether  this  definition  is  adequate,  or  will  be
found  broad  enough  to  admit  all  the  future  discoveries  in  the
science,  it  is  yet  conceded  that  it  is  an  improvement  on  all
attempts  previously  made,  and  constitutes  the  truest  defini-
tion of  life  that  we  now  possess.*

The  great  importance  of  the  last  part  of  this  definition
seems  to  have  been  fully  appreciated  by  Mr.  Spencer.  He
refers  to  M.  Comte's  theory  of  the  necessary  harmony  between
the  organism  and  the  medium  {milieu)  in  which  it  lives,  and
proceeds  to  develop  his  own  now  celebrated  doctrine  of  the
complete  dependence  of  the  organism  upon  its  "  environ-
ment," a  doctrine  of  the  first  importance,  and  whose  ulterior

*  The  definition  given  in  chapter  iv  {infra,  pp.  318,  320,  356)  belongs  to
quite  another  class.

LIFE.— ENVIRONMENT.  ITl

consequences  he  has  brought  out  with  unequaled  clearness
and  power  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  chapters  of  Yolume  I.
In  no  spirit  of  underrating  the  services  of  Herbert  Spen-
cer, or  indeed  of  any  one,  but  simply  that  the  true  history  of
human  thought  on  this  subject  may  be  correctly  stated,  it  is
proper  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  conception  of  the  cor-
relation of  organism  with  environment  was  not  only  enter-
tained by  Lamarck,  but  that  it  received  at  his  hands  a  some-
what extended  treatment,  and  may  be  said  to  form  one  of
tiie  cardinal  princijjles  of  his  "Philosophie  Zoologique."  lie
adopts  a  slightly  different  terminology,  and,  in  fact,  does
not  confine  himself  very  strictly  to  any  one  set  of  terms  em-
ployed in  the  technical  scientific  sense.  He  makes  free  use
of  the  popular  term  drcumstanees  to  imply  very  much  the
same  as  Mr.  Spencer's  word  environment.  He  also  fre-
quently speaks  of  the  medium  {milieu)  in  which  a  creature
lives,  and  gives  to  this  word  all  the  latitude  which  Comte
subsequently  assigned  to  it.  He  even  seems  to  have  occa-
sionally foreshadowed  both  the  Comtean  and  the  Spencerian
expression,  when,  wishing  to  convey  his  meaning  with  special
clearness,  he  combines  the  two  allied  terms,  and  says,  "  mi-
lieux environnants.^''  *  The  most  important  chapter  (vol.  i,
chap,  vii)  of  this  entire  work  bears  this  somewhat  prolix  but
very  significant  title :  "  De  I'influence  des  circonstances  sur
les  actions  et  les  habitudes  des  animaux  et  de  celle  des  ac-
tions et  des  habitudes  de  ces  corps  vivants,  comme  cause  qui
modifient  leur  organisation  et  leurs  parties.^^  By  this  ex-
pression, he  meant  to  imply  that  the  influence  of  circum-
stances, in  modifying  the  organization  of  animals,  was  the
remote  rather  than  the  immediate  cause ;  that,  while  circum-
stances influence  the  actions  and  habits  of  animals,  these
latter  effect  the  observed  moi-phological  modifications.  The
entire  chapter  is  in  complete  conformity  with  its  caption,
and,  considering  the  period  when  it  was  written,  it  assumes,
in  the  light  of  modern  discovery,  an  extraordinary  interest.
*  "Philosophic  Zoologique,"  vol.  ii,  pp.  5,  304.

172  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY,

The  entire  subject  is  briefly  summed  up  in  two  general  laws,
which  contain  the  essential  elements  of  the  "Descent  The-
ory." The  first  is  the  law  of  adaptation  ;  the  second,  that  of
heredity.  But  Mr.  Spencer's  criticism  of  the  presentation  of
Comte  applies  equally  to  that  of  Lamarck,  that,  while  the
correspondence  between  organism  and  environment  was  rec-
ognized as  a  condition  essential  to  life,  it  was  not  perceived
that  it  is  in  this  correlation,  understood  in  its  whole  scope,
that  life  itself  consists.

Fully  comprehending  this  fact,  Mr.  Spencer  has  proposed
a  second  definition  of  life,  which,  while  less  analytic,  he  re-
gards as  equally  true,  viz.,  "  the  continuous  adjustment  of
internal  relations  to  external  relationsP

In  his  chapter  on  "  Genesis,"  Mr.  Spencer  has  brought  into
special  prominence  the  important  law,  which  had  generally
been  overlooked,  and  the  reverse  of  which  is  popularly  held,
respecting  the  species  of  antagonism  which  exists  between
growth  and  reproduction.  Farmers  and  horticulturists,  de-
siring abundant  fruit,  and  gardeners  hoping  to  secure  fine
flowers,  are  frequently  disappointed  after  the  greatest  care
in  enriching  their  soil.  A  luxuriant  crop  of  leaves,  with
sparing  or  no  flowers  or  fruit,  is  too  often  the  result.  Again,
all  botanists,  and,  indeed,  most  observing  persons,  have  re-
marked how  plants  and  trees  that  have  become  injured  by
some  accident  usually  bear  a  profuse  abundance  of  flowers
and  fruit.  Trample  a  stalk  of  com  under  your  feet,  and,  if
not  killed  outright,  its  struggling  energies  will  develop  its
seed  far  in  advance  of  its  uninjured  comrades.  Even  a  slight
touch  of  early  frost  seems  to  admonish  a  plant  to  hasten  on
with  its  mission  of  reproduction.  In  the  lower  forms  of
animal  life,  too,  many  facts  analogous  to  those  observed
among  plants  have  been  brought  out.

One  principle  alone  is  suSicient  satisfactorily  to  account
for  them  all.  So  long  as  the  forces  of  growth  are  largely  in
excess  of  the  forces  of  decay,  no  reproductive  processes  arc
possible.      Growth  is  the  normal  process.      Reproduction

GROWTH  AND  EEPRODUOTION  ANTAGONISTIC.    173

marks  a  falling  o£E  of  tliis  power.  It  indicates  a  degeneracy
of  certain  parts  of  tke  system.  In  plants,  it  is  noteworthy
that  it  takes  place  first  at  points  most  remote  from  the  base,
and  hence  most  difficult  of  access  to  the  sap.  The  repro-
ductive functions,  notwithstanding  the  mystery  that  sur-
rounds them,  are  of  the  lowest  biological  order.  The  sexual
products  are  found  to  consist  of  the  simplest  elements  of
combination — of  simple  cells.  They  become  differentiated
into  organs  of  independent  function,  and  serve  to  secure  the
perpetuation  of  the  species  when  the  dissolution  of  the  indi-
vidual has  commenced.

Paradoxical  as  this  doctrine  at  first  appears,  the  number
of  facts  that  come  forward  to  support  it,  when  once  pre-
sented, is  almost  without  limit.  It  is  one  of  the  most  im-
portant laws  of  biology,  and  its  elucidation  in  Mr.  Spencer's
work  shows  tolerably  well  the  advanced  character  and  high
scientific  merit  of  this  treatise,  which  is  the  chief  reason  for
selecting  it  from  among  so  much  other  valuable  matter  as  a
special  subject  of  comment.  Mr,  Spencer  has,  however,  in
other  works  drawn  from  this  law  some  very  questionable
deductions  respecting  the  application  of  this  principle  to  the
human  race,  which  will  be  touched  upon  at  the  proper  time
(vol.  i,  p.  657,  et  seq. ;  vol.  ii,  p.  616).  There  is  not,  however,
any  doubt  that  in  man,  as  in  the  rest  of  nature,  a  natural
antagonism  exists  between  growth  and  reproduction.

In  the  chapter  on  "  Distribution,"  a  very  important  law
is  announced,  which,  like  the  one  just  examined,  had  not
merely  been  overlooked  by  previous  vsriters,  but  was  then
and  still  is  to  a  great  extent  the  reverse  of  the  received  ideas
on  the  subject.  This  law  refers  to  the  degree  of  correspond-
ence generally  existing  between  the  organism  and  its  par-
ticular habitat.  The  popular  teleological  opinion  of  course
is  that  plants  and  animals  possess  a  perfect  adaptation  to  the
places  for  which  they  were  intended,  and  in  which  we  find
them.  Dysteleologists,  without  admitting  a  purpose,  had  not
felt  called  upon  to  deny  the  fact.     But  no  truth  is  better

174  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPnY.

proved  by  modem  science  than  that  this  adaptation  is  very
imperfect,  and  no  fact  is  more  fully  attested  than  that  organ-
isms thrive  equally  well,  and  frequently  far  better,  under
wholly  different  conditions  from  those  in  which  they  are
found  in  a  state  of  nature.  On  closer  scrutiny,  this  fact  is
found  to  form  the  real  basis  upon  which  all  artificial  improve-
ment of  wild  stocks,  both  of  animals  and  plants,  rests.  The
great  law  of  competition,  of  which  natural  selection  is  the
most  important  subordinate  law,  finds  here  another  exten-
sive application,  which  Mr.  Darwin  had  overlooked,  but  which
did  not  escape  the  vigorous  generalizing  powers  of  Mr.
Spencer.  This  he  characterizes  as  "  the  truth  that  each  species
of  organism  tends  ever  to  expand  its  sphere  of  existence — to
intrude  on  other  areas,  other  modes  of  life,  other  media ;
and,  through  these  perpetually  recurring  attempts  to  thrust
itself  into  every  accessible  habitat,  spreads  until  it  reaches
limits  that  are,  for  the  time,  insurmountable."

Mr.  Spencer  here  catches  a  glimpse  of  the  universal  law
which  I  have  called  "  'biological  staticsP  *

In  the  last  part  of  the  first  volume  Mr.  Spencer  enters
squarely  upon  the  task  of  harmonizing  the  facts  of  biology
with  the  hypothesis  of  evolution.  He  disposes  of  the  Special
Creation  hypothesis  in  a  somewhat  summary  but  very  au-
thoritative manner,  and  shows,  on  the  other  hand,  how  com-
pletely the  hypothesis  of  evolution  accounts  for  all  the  facts
that  are  satisfactorily  understood.  In  doing  so  he  considers
the  arguments  from  classification,  from  embryology,  from
morphology,  and  from  distribution.  He  further  shows  that
evolution,  as  seen  to  go  on  in  the  living  world,  is  none  other
than  the  general  cosmical  process  described  in  "  First  Prin-
ciples." Organic  evolution  commences  with  homogeneous
organic  matter.     The  instability  of  the  organic  colloids  favors

*  Sec  "  The  Local  Distribution  of  Plants  "  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"
vol.  ix,  p.  6*76.  I  there  discussed  this  question  from  the  facts  of  the  vegetable
kingdom,  and  carried  the  Spencerian  doctrine  even  further  than  Mr.  Spencer  has
done,  being,  at  the  time,  unacquainted  with  his  "Biology."

EVOLUTION"  IN  BIOLOGY.  175

change  in  the  direction  of  the  heterogeneous.  This  passage
from  the  homogeneous  toward  the  heterogeneous  in  living
forms  is  the  process  known  as  differentiation.  The  result  of
this  differentiation  is  the  multiplication  of  special  organs  hav-
ing special  functions.  From  the  amoeba,  whose  entire  body
may  be  said  to  consist  of  a  single  organ,  its  stomach,  to  the
human  being,  with  numerous  distinct  vessels,  nerves,  and
muscles,  well-deiined  limbs,  and  specialized  senses,  this  dif-
ferentiation is  immense.  Segregation  here  appears  as  the
"  physiological  division  of  labor,"  by  which  all  the  elements
of  each  organ  are  assimilated  and  the  distinctness  of  the  or-
gan secured.  Along  with  this  differentiation  there  perpet-
ually goes  a  corresponding  integration.  These  terms  are  not
opposites  in  the  Spencerian  sense,  but  correlatives.  Differ-
entiation must  not  be  confounded  with  disintegration  or  dis-
sipation. It  is  the  formation  of  definite  and  distinct  parts
and  organs,  while  integration  is  the  union  of  all  these  differ-
entiated parts  into  one  dependent  system — an  organism.
The  more  complete  the  differentiation,  i.  e.,  the  more  defi-
nite, distinct,  and  numerous  the  special  organs,  the  more  firm
will  become  their  dependence  upon  the  organism,  considered
as  a  whole  or  unit.  Thus  the  degree  of  integration  increases
pari  passu  with  that  of  differentiation.

Finally,  the  organism,  like  all  other  aggregates,  reaches
a  limit  to  its  capacity  for  differentiation  and  integration,  and
becomes  equilibrated  with  the  forces  of  dissolution.  Its  de-
cline then  sets  in,  and  dissolution  eventually  becomes  com-
plete ;  the  tissues  and  organs  become  disintegrated,  death
ensues,  and  decomposition  dissipates  the  matter  of  which  the
organism  was  composed  into  the  elementary  gases  of  the
earth's  atmosphere.

Let  us  here  again  note  the  important  fact,  overlooked  by
Mr.  Spencer,  that  the  original  office  of  the  sun's  heat,  instead
of  being  that  of  the  evolution  of  life,  is  the  dissolution  of
organic  forms.  It  is  by  the  absorption  of  a  portion  of  the
sun's  molecular  motion  in  the  form  of  heat  that  a  correspond-

176  SPENCER'S  SYNTUETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

ing  portion  of  the  earth's  matter  is  disintegrated  and  dissi-
pated in  the  form  of  gas,  such  as  that  of  which  our  atmos-
phere is  composed.  It  is  the  master j  of  this  same  force
over  the  organized  aggregate  that  finally  deprives  it  of  its
life,  and  eventually  returns  the  greater  part  of  it  to  the  at-
mosphere. Evolution,  therefore,  is  in  as  true  a  sense  the
destroyer  of  life  as  is  dissolution,  and  it  is  only  by  a  certain
happy  combination  of  the  two  antagonistic  forces  that  cer-
tain aggregates  are  enabled  to  maintain,  during  a  very  brief
period,  that  highly  active,  unstable  state  from  which  the
phenomena  of  life  result.  The  accident  of  a  gaseous  envel-
ope, consisting  in  great  part  of  nitrogen,  combined  with  a
temperature  not  above  nor  below  the  capacities  of  such  ag-
gregates, is  the  combination  of  cosmical  circumstances  to
which  all  life  owes  its  possibility,  although  it  is  equally  true
that,  given  precisely  such  conditions,  the  evolution  of  living
organisms  is  as  much  a  necessity  as  their  destruction  would
be  were  those  conditions  removed.  But  we  learn  from  the
contemplation  of  such  facts  how  exceedingly  slender  is  the
tenure  by  which  the  vital  and  sentient  creation  is  bound  to
earth,  and  how  brief  the  period  of  its  possible  existence
must  be  in  the  history  of  any  planet  compared,  on  the  one
hand,  with  the  vast  antecedent  period  during  which  the  dis-
integration of  matter  is  too  great,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
with  the  equally  enormous  subsequent  period  during  which
its  integration  will  have  proceeded  too  far  for  the  support  of
life.  Between  these  antagonistic  forces  of  evolution  and  dis-
solution, as  between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  the  frail  bark  of
vital  existence  must  pass,  while  behind  lies  the  illimitable
ocean  of  blank  non-existence  from  which  it  has  been  evolved,
and  before  it  the  certainty  of  destruction  through  the  slow
withdrawal  of  all  the  conditions  which  make  life  possible
{swpra,  p.  164,  note).

Unquestionably  the  most  able  portion  of  Herbert  Spencer's
treatise  on  biology  is  his  discussion  and  analysis  of  the  prin-

DIREOT  AND  INDIRECT  EQUILIBRATION.  177

ciplesof  "  Equilibration "  in  Chapters  XI  and  XII  of  Yol-
ume  I.  It  is  here  that  he  deals  directly  with  the  great  prob-
lem whose  partial  solution  at  the  hands  of  Charles  Darwin
has  thrown  the  whole  scientific  world  into  the  very  throes
of  revolution.  But,  keen  as  was  the  insight  of  this  world-
renowned  naturalist,  Mr.  Spencer  clearly  shows  that  he  by
no  means  probed  this  question  to  the  bottom.  The  principle
which  Darwin  designated  by  the  term  IsTatural  Selection  is
only  one  of  the  chief  divisions  of  the  far  wider  law  of  Equili-
bration.

Equilibration  is  the  constant  tendency  of  the  organism  to
adapt  itself,  by  means  of  morphological  and  physiological
modifications,  to  the  changes  going  on  in  the  environment.
Although  the  organism  must  be  regarded  as  a  product  of  the
environment,  and  might  hence  be  supposed  to  be  perfectly
correlated  with  it,  still,  since  there  is  nothing  absolutely  fixed
in  nature,  since  the  environment,  even  while  evolving  the
organism,  is  itself  changing,  and  since  the  process  of  evolu-
tion is  always  slow  and  secular,  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  cor-
relation is  never  absolutely  complete,  and  that  the  forces
themselves  of  evolution  are  ever  tending  to  modify  what
they  have  but  just  evolved,  and  demanding  that  things  shaU
be  other  than  they  are  in  the  same  name  in  which  they  re-
quired them  to  be  what  they  are  (vol.  i,  p.  72;  ii,  p.  83).
Thus  arises  and  ever  continues  that  rhythmic  movement
throughout  the  organic  world,  which  can  only  be  adequately
designated  by  the  term  equilibration.

Equilibration  is  either  direct  or  indirect.

Direct  equilibration  is  the  immediate  response  of  the
organism  to  the  demands  of  the  changed  environment.  The
muscle  enlarges  in  response  to  an  increased  exercise,  the
plant  bends  toward  the  window  from  which  it  receives  its
light.  This,  therefore,  constitutes  the  law  of  modification
through  use  and  disuse  upon  which  Lamarck  placed  so  great
weight,  and  which  may  still  be  regarded  as  the  primary  prin-
ciple of  the  doctrine  of  development.

178  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

Indirect  equilibration,  on  the  other  hand,  consists  in  the
transmission  to  new  generations  of  those  yariations  which
are  in  the  direction  of  the  more  complete  correlation  of  the
organism  with  the  environment.  It  assumes,  to  begin  with,
that  every  organism  possesses  at  all  times  a  constant  tendency
to  vary  in  all  directions.  But  for  such  a  susceptibility  there
could  be  no  equilibration.  "Were  the  organism  confined  to
one  special  direction,  in  which  it  could  experience  modifica-
tion, it  would  soon  reach  a  limit  of  correlation  through  modi-
fications in  the  environment  to  which  it  could  not  respond.
It  is  further  assumed  (or,  rather,  this  is  now  a  fact  established
by  the  widest  induction)  that  all  organisms  are  perpetually
undergoing  slight  variations  of  every  conceivable  nature,  and
in  every  organ,  tissue,  and  part  of  their  organized  structure.
It  is  further  assumed  (and  this,  too,  rests  on  strong  proof
a  posteriori)  that  every  modification  of  a  parent  organ-
ism is  capable  of  transmission  to  the  progeny  of  that  organ-
ism. The  same  universal  law  of  heredity  which  makes  the
child  resemble  the  normal  parent  is  that  which  also  makes
it  resemble  the  abnormal  parent.  Now,  the  law  of  natural
selection,  or,  as  Mr.  Spencer  more  clearly  terms  it,  "  sur-
vival of  the  fittest,"  consists  in  this  :  that,  of  all  these  minute
variations  which  are  constantly  taking  place  in  all  organisms,
only  those  which  tend  to  increase  the  correspondence  between
organism  and  environment,  can  be  successively  transmitted
to  a  sufficient  number  of  generations  to  cause  any  consider-
able alteration  in  the  original  stock.  Darwin,  looking  at  this
process  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  saw  it  in  the  light  of
a  selection  by  nature  of  those  modifications  which  proved  of
economic  advantage  to  the  organism.  He,  therefore,  called
it  "  Natural  Selection."  Herbert  Spencer,  regarding  it  from
the  stand-point  of  the  physicist,  saw  it  to  be  only  another
manifestation  of  the  universal  tendency  of  all  the  forces  of
the  universe  to  approach  the  statical  condition.  He,  there-
fore, dropped  it  into  its  appropriate  niche  in  his  cosmical
system,  and  named   it  "  Indirect  Equilibration."     That  it

i

INDIRECT  EQUILIBRATION.  179

constitutes  a  mode  of  equilibration  between  organism  and
environment,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Tlirough  it,  precisely
the  same  end  is  accomplished  which  is  reached  by  direct
equilibration,  yet  the  process  is  very  different.  The  tend-
ency of  any  part  of  the  organism  to  respond  directly  to  the
immediate  demands  of  a  change  in  the  environment  is  no
longer  called  into  account.  Only  those  ever-recurring  varia-
tions which  are  proved  to  be  constantly  taking  place  in  every
part  of  the  individual  simultaneously  are  relied  upon  for  the
initial  step  in  the  process.  But  upon  all  these  the  forces  of
its  surrounding  medium  are  perpetually  reacting  in  such  a
manner  that  only  such  as  prove  in  entire  harmony  with  it
can  secure  sufficient  permanence  to  admit  of  being  brought
under  the  law  of  heredity  and  transmitted  to  posterity ;  for,
should  a  variation  not  in  accord  with  existing  conditions
succeed  in  reappearing  in  the  offspring,  it  would  be  met  on
the  very  threshold  of  its  existence  by  hostile  conditions,  and
crushed  out  at  its  incei^tion.  And,  in  general,  all  such  in-
adaptive  variations  are,  as  it  were,  "  nipped  in  the  bud,"  and
are  never  allowed  to  make  themselves  manifest  in  the  new
generation.  But  the  adaptive  variations,  meeting  no  resist-
ance, continue,  and  re-appear  in  the  offspring  according  to
the  law  of  heredity.  Being  attuned  to  the  new  conditions,
they  serve  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  organism,  to  lengthen
its  life,  to  increase  the  probabilities  of  its  living  to  reach
the  age  of  fertility  and  transmitting  its  improved  characters
to  future  generations.  So  long  as  this  modification  contin-
ues to  accord  with  its  surroundings,  so  long  will  this  process
of  re-transmission  continue  cumulatively  to  increase,  until  a
new  species,  or  perhaps  a  new  genus,  may  be  at  length  de-
veloped. The  amount  of  modification  possible  under  this
law  is,  therefore,  practically  unlimited.

Such  is  indirect  equilibration,  survival  of  the  fittest,  or,
as  Mr.  Darwin  prefers,  natural  selection.  It  is  a  mode  of
equilibration  which  only  finds  an  appreciable  manifestation
after  a  long  series  of  hereditary  transmissions,  and  which

180  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

operates  with  secular  slowness,  yet  with  unerring  precision.
The  only  margin  for  its  operation  is  in  the  small  advantage
which  an  individual,  possessing  a  shght  variation  from  the
general  characters  of  its  race,  has  over  its  fellows  in  the
struggle  for  existence,  in  the  slightly  increased  probability
that  such  an  individual,  in  consequence  of  this  advantage,
will  live  to  the  age  of  fertility,  and  be  able  to  transmit  this
peculiarity  to  its  offspring.  If  we  contemplate  the  minute-
ness of  this  variation,  and  take  only  a  single  individual  into
consideration,  this  increased  probability  will  appear  so  trivial
as  to  make  us  doubt  whether  it  could  ever  be  made  appre-
ciable ;  but,  if  we  consider  that  the  liability  thus  to  vary  is
common  to  every  one  of  the  millions  of  creatures  that  usually
make  up  a  race,  and  couple  this  with  the  fact  that  there  is  no
necessary  limit  to  the  number  of  such  repeated  transmissions,
we  may  readily  perceive  that  any  increment,  however  slight,
if  multiplied  a  sufficient  number  of  times,  will  eventually
amount  to  a  marked  modification,  while  the  merest  tend-
ency to  vary,  though  it  fail  a  hundred  times  in  order  to
succeed  once,  will,  when  belonging  to  an  entire  race,  result
in  an  immense  number  of  successes,  and  thus  amply  account
for  all  the  modification  which  is  attributed  to  indirect  equili-
bration. Those  most  perfectly  equilibrated  with  their  sur-
roundings will,  on  the  whole,  and  in  the  long  run,  live  long-
est, and  those  which  live  longest  will,  on  an  average,  produce
the  greatest  number  of  offspring.  These  offspring  will,  most
of  them,  inherit  the  peculiarities  which  gave  their  parents
their  advantage ;  and  thus,  after  a  sufficient  lapse  of  time,
the  number  of  individuals  possessing  these  peculiarities  will
become  equal  to,  and  at  length  greater  than,  the  number  of
those  not  possessing  them.

Moreover,  so  long  as  variation  in  the  same  direction  con-
tinues to  perfect  the  correspondeno§  between  the  organism
and  the  environment,  so  long  the  modification  in  this  direc-
tion will  continue  to  increase  and  reduplicate  itself,  its  ratio
of  increase  itself  increasing:  with  the  increased  ratio  of  tlie

IN^DIRECT  EQUILIBEATION.  181

modified  to  the  unmodified  individuals,  until  any  observed
differentiation  maj  be  accounted  for  with  entire  satisfac-
tion.

Thus  viewed  and  understood,  this  fertile  law  of  indirect
equilibration  becomes  extremely  reasonable,  and  its  results
comparatively  simple.  Indeed,  to  those  who  have  made
themselves  familiar  with  Darwin's  arguments  from  facts,
and  Spencer's  arguments  from  logic,  the  conviction  of  the
real  truth  of  this  principle  usually  becomes  complete.

Mr.  Spencer  admits  that  the  influence  of  natural  selec-
tion is  very  great,  but  thinks  that  Darwin  gives  it  a  some-
what undue  importance.  Lamarck  failed  to  grasp  this  prin-
ciple,* and  attributed  all  organic  modification  to  the  inher-
ited results  of  use  and  disuse — i.  e.,  to  direct  equilibration.
i|  Darwin  almost  wholly  neglects  this,  and  relies  chiefly  upon
■  the  new  and  brilliant  conception  of  natural  selection.  Spen-
cer gives  to  each  its  proper  weight,  and,  what  is  chiefly  to
his  credit,  assigns  to  both  their  exact  place  in  the  system  of
laws  pertaining  to  vital  phenomena.

Of  the  second  volume  of  the  "  Principles  of  Biology "
we  can  here  say  very  little,  since  any  attempt  to  review  this
part  of  the  work  would  necessarily  carry  us  far  beyond  the
limits  prescribed  for  its  consideration.  It  may,  however,  be
remarked  in  general  terms  that  it  consists  of  a  systematic
effort  to  establish,  a  posteriori,  from  a  multitude  of  appro-
priate illustrations,  both  in  the  department  of  morphology
and  in  that  of  physiology,  the  several  general  principles  ar-

I  rived  at  deductively  in  the  first  volume.
The  primary  truth  which  it  is  here  sought  to  establish
inductively  is  the  universality  of  the  operation  of  the  law  of
evolution  throughout  the  domain  of  organic  life.  Of  this
law,  the  most  obvious  manifestation  is  the  evidence  avail-
*  Quite  distinct  adumbrations  of  the  law  of  natural  selection  may,  however,
be  found  in  the  first  volume  of  the  "Philosophic  Zoologique,"  pp.  112-114,
259,  265.

182  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

able  to  demonstrate  that  organic  forms  are  the  outcome  of
the  forces  in  operation  in  the  environment  in  which  each
organism  exists.  The  amount  and  cogency  of  this  species
of  evidence,  as  marshaled  here  in  this  work,  are  not  only  sur-
prising but  convincing,  while  the  manner  in  which  it  is  pre-
sented by  Mr.  Spencer  is  that  best  calculated  to  make  its
force  felt  and  its  relation  to  the  general  argument  appre-
ciated.

It  would,  perhaps,  be  almost  an  injustice  to  Mr.  Spen-
cer, notwithstanding  our  necessary  inability  to  enter  into  de-
tails, not  to  call  somewhat  more  special  attention  to  a  single
instance  in  which  he,  through  the  logical  pursuit  of  a  great
principle,  has  developed  a  minor  but  important  truth,  whose
enunciation  and  proof  have  won  for  him  the  highest  enco-
miums from  the  leading  specialists  of  the  world.  I  refer
to  his  celebrated  and  now  generally  accepted  theory  of  the
mode  of  development  of  the  Annulosa.  All  animals  above
the  simple  cell  are  composed  of  some  combination  of  sev-
eral cells.  Taking  the  cell  as  the  unit  of  individuality,  the
greater  number  of  creatures  may  be  regarded  as  individuals
of  the  second  order.  But  an  examination  of  the  annelids
shows  a  remarkable  peculiarity  in  this  group  of  animals.
They  are  all  composed  of  numerous  rings  or  annular  seg-
ments, known  as  "somites,"  which  are  attached  to  one
another,  forming  a  longitudinal  series,  and  upon  the  num-
ber of  which  depends  the  length  of  the  animal.  A  close
inspection  of  these  somites  reveals  the  fact  that  each  is  pro-
vided with  numerous  distinct  and  independent  organs,  some
of  which  are  in  full  operation,  while  others  are  more  or  less
rudimentary.  Each  has  its  independent  locomotive  append-
ages, where  the  creature  possesses  any,  and  these  are  in  con-
stant use  at  the  command  of  the  general  system.  But,  be-
sides these,  there  are  sometimes  eyes  in  each  segment.  The
repetition  of  internal  organs  is  still  more  apparent.  "  Each
has  its  enlargement  of  the  alimentary  canal;  each  its  con-
tractile dilatation  of  the  great  blood-vessel;   each  its  por-

MORPHOLOGICAL  CORRESPONDENCE.  183

tion  of  the  double  nervous  cord,  with  ganglia,  when  these
exist;  each  its  branches  from  the  nervous  and  vascular
trunks,  answering  to  those  of  its  neighbors ;  each  its  simi-
larly answering  set  of  muscles ;  each  its  pair  of  openings
through  the  body-wall ;  and  so  on  throughout,  even  to  the
organs  of  reproduction."  Not  only  is  this  true,  but  a  study
of  the  life-histories  {ontogenesis)  of  this  group  shows  that
this  segmentation  takes  place  successively  by  the  addition  of
new  segments  to  a  primordial  germ  of  the  first  order.  This
occurs  chiefly  within  the  egg,  but  in  two  entire  orders,  the
Dorsibranchiata  and  the  Tuhicolce,  the  embryo  leaves  the
Qgg  in  this  simple  condition.  Moreover,  there  are  some  of
these  creatures,  as  the  common  tape-worm,  in  which  each
seo-ment  is  so  far  distinct  from  the  rest  that  it  will  live
when  separated  and  will  put  forth  new  segments.  It  is
thus  clear  that  the  annelids  are  simply  compound  animals —
i.  e.,  animals  of  the  third  order — and  that  each  somite  must
be  regarded  as  a  complete  animal  of  the  second  order.

But  Mr,  Spencer  does  not  stop  here.  lie  proceeds  to
point  out  in  the  most  convincing  manner  that  this  state  of
things  grew  out  of  the  actual  relations  which  these  creatures
sustain  to  their  environment,  that  the  forces  of  adaptation
and  natural  selection  have  operated  to  bring  it  about,  and
that  these  forms  are  but  the  final  product  of  equilibration
according  to  the  general  laws  of  evolution.  Indeed,  this
particular  and,  from  this  point  of  view,  exceedingly  interest-
ing group  of  animals  is  only  one  of  the  many  illustrations
which  he  presents  of  the  general  truth  which  should  be
ascribed  to  him,  that  throughout  the  organic  world,  both
among  animals  and  among  plants,  and  iii  the  vertebrate
sub-kingdom  as  well  as  in  the  invertebrate  series,  there  is
every-where  a  striking  conformity  in  the  shape  of  the  organ-
ism to  the  conditions  under  which  it  exists  and  the  circum-
stances out  of  which  it  has  been  evolved.  All  the  facts  of
phylogeny  and  of  ontogeny,  of  geographical  distribution  and
of  anatomical  symmetry,  of  morphology  and  of  physiology.

184  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

conspire  to  confirm  this  universal  law,  whose  first  system-
atic presentation  is  to  be  found  in  the  "  Principles  of  Biol-
ogy-"

The  work  closes  with  an  interesting  treatise  on  the  laws
of  multiplication,  in  which  the  general  theory  of  human
population  is  appropriately  discussed.  He  here  extends  the
law  of  the  antagonism  between  nutrition  and  reproduction
to  the  human  race,  and  maintains  the  general  truth  that,  with
certain  limitations,  fertility  and  development  are  inversely
proportional.  As  man,  therefore,  continues  to  develop,  his
degree  of  fertility  will  correspondingly  decline,  until  multi-
plication will  eventually  cease,  and  a  stationary  population
of  the  world  will  be  reached.

With  this  brief  and  very  unsatisfactory  survey  we  must
here  close  the  consideration  of  Mr.  Spencer's  truly  great
work  on  the  "Principles  of  Biology,"  a  work  which  will  be
still  replete  with  fresh  truths  and  profound  suggestions
after  the  science  of  biology  shall  have  become  as  firmly  es-
tablished as  many  of  its  sister  sciences  are  now.  Different
critics,  viewing  Mr.  Spencer's  works  from  different  points  of
view,  will  naturally  differ  in  their  verdict  upon  their  relative
merits.  But,  considering  the  state  of  the  science  when  this
treatise  was  written,  and  the  fact  that  Mr.  Spencer  does  not
profess  to  be  a  naturalist,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the
"Principles  of  Biology"  is  a  true  masterpiece.  Precisely
what  this  science  needed,  ridden  as  it  had  so  long  been  by
narrow  specialists  and  inflexible  systematists,  was  a  broad
and  enlightened  survey  of  its  field,  and  a  philosophic  syn-
thesis of  its  principles.  This  is  pre-eminently  the  service
performed  in  this  work,  and  for  this  the  "  Principles  of  Biol-
ogy "  is  deserving  of  the  highest  commendation.

The  "  Principles  of  Psychology  "  has  been  by  many  re-
garded as  Mr.  Spencer's  greatest  work,  and  that  upon  which
his  reputation  as  a  philosopher  will  finally  rest.  It  cre-
ates an  entirely  new  departure  from  all  that  had  previously

THE  "PRmCIPLES  OF  PSYCHOLOGY."  185

been  thought  to  constitute  the  philosophy  of  the  mind.
Without  going  to  the  extreme  lengths  of  Gall  and  Spurz-
heim  in  seeking  to  establish  a  purely  physiological  science
of  mind  before  the  nature  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system
were  at  all  understood  in  their  relation  to  function,  Mr.
Spencer  has,  nevertheless,  sought  to  demonstrate  that  all  the
phenomena  of  the  mind  have  this  physiological  basis.

Mind  consists  essentially  of  two  elements,  feelings  and  the
relations  between  feelings.  Feelings  are  the  result  of  the
passage  of  nerve-currents  through  the  various  parts  of  the
system.  These  may  originate  either  externally  or  internally.
Those  originating  externally  are  in  the  nature  of  sensations ;
those  originating  internally  are  known  as  emotions.  A  nerve-
cuiTcnt  is  set  up  by  the  contact  of  any  part  with  an  external
object.  This  current  is  carried  from  the  part  affected  to  the
nearest  nerve-center  or  ganglion.  From  this  it  may  be  com-
municated to  higher  and  more  remote  nerve-centers,  or  it
may  go  no  farther,  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  organism
and  on  that  of  the  contact.  The  nerves  that  convey  impres-
sions from  external  surfaces  to  internal  nerve-centers  are
called  afferent  or  sensor  nerves.  Corresponding  to  these
there  proceed  other  nerves,  so  co-ordinated  as  to  convey  back
to  the  point  of  contact  an  impulse  to  perform  whatever
action  may  be  required  by  the  nature  of  the  impression.
These  are  known  as  efferent  or  motor  nerves.  The  state  of
mind  produced  by  the  contact  of  a  foreign  body  is  called  a
sensation.  In  a  highly  organized  being  like  man  every  new
sensation  is  carried  up  to  the  highest  co-ordinating  nerve-
center,  the  brain.  If  consciousness  is  to  be  distinguished  at
all  from  sensation,  it  consists  in  the  cognizance  which  this  high-
est nerve-center  takes  of  the  impression.  In  one  sense  every
nerve-center  may  be  considered  as  a  distinct  individual,  hav-
ing a  consciousness  of  its  own.  In  the  lowest  organisms,  in
which  there  exists  but  one  nerve-center,  the  distinction  be-
tween sensation  and  consciousness  disappears.  Here  every
action  is  what  is   called   a  rejiex  action.     The   impression

186  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

passes  to  the  ganglion  on  tlie  afferent  nerve,  and  is  returned
in  the  form  of  motion  along  the  motor  nerve.  The  whole  is
strictly  consensual — automatic.  Between  this  and  complete
consciousness  there  are  all  stages,  according  to  the  degree
of  generality  of  the  highest  ganglion  to  which  the  sensation
attains.  Unconscious  and  habitual  actions  arise  from  the
gradual  reduction  of  the  number  of  nerve-centers  to  which
the  muscular  impressions  are  conveyed.  By  long  habituation
they  become  purely  reflex.

Perception  is  the  act  of  arriving  at  the  nature  of  the  ob-
ject by  means  of  its  impression  on  the  subject.  It  is  the  cor-
relate of  sensation.  Yet  it  is  by  no  means  simple,  but  con-
sists in  a  comparison  of  sensations.  If  a  first  sensation  could
be  conceived  of,  it  could  have  no  corresponding  perception.
The  subject  could  form  no  idea  of  the  object.  It  is,  there-
fore, a  comparison  of  a  given  sensation  with  previous  and
simultaneous  sensations  by  which  a  judgment  can  be  formed
of  the  nature  of  the  object.  In  short,  perception  is  a  rela-
tion between  feelings.  It  is,  therefore,  the  initial  process  of
mental  operation.  All  higher  acts  of  the  intellect  are  fur-
ther compoundings  of  this  vrith  other  relations  between  sen-
sations.

The  fundamental  distinction  between  intellect  and  sensi-
bility, between  the  rational  and  the  sensual  departments  of
mind,  is  resolved  into  the  distinction  between  sensation  and
perception,  between  feeling  itself  and  the  relation  between
feelings.  As  every  nerve  consists,  not  of  a  single  fiber,  but
of  a  bundle  of  fibers,  it  becomes  possible  for  a  single  sensa-
tion to  give  rise  to  a  perception  consisting  in  a  comparison
of  the  different  feelings  produced  by  the  different  fibers  of
a  single  nerve.  By  this  means,  and  by  multiplied  repeti-
tions of  kindred  sensations,  such  comparisons  lead  to  a  proxi-
mate determination  of  the  nature  of  the  external  objects  pro-
ducing these  sensations.  It  is  thus  that  the  greater  part  of
our  knowledge  is  made  up,  and  it  is  this  process  which  is
known  as  experience.     Not  that  our  conceptions  of  objects,

PSYCHIC  PROCESSES.  187

derived  from  a  co-ordination  of  repeated  perceptions,  enable
us  to  know  what  external  objects  really  are,  or  how  they  act-
ually resemble  and  differ  from  one  another.  They  only  teach
us  what  qualities  they  possess,  and  in  what  manner  they  are
capable  of  manifesting  themselves  to  the  senses.  The  true
proof  of  their  real  existence  lies  not  in  the  sensations  they
produce  nor  in  the  perceptions  derived  from  those  sensations.
This  proof  lies  in  the  jpersistence  of  these  sensations  and  per-
ceptions. Whatever  persists  exists,  is  Mr.  Spencer's  dictum.
The  same  object  often  persists  during  the  entire  life  of  an
individual,  and  even  of  many  generations  of  individuals,  and
produces  every  day  the  same  sensation  from  which  the  same
perceptions  follow,  and  the  same  conceptions  are  necessarily
formed.  All  the  objects  which  constitute  the  surroundings
of  every  individual  persist  in  a  nearly  unchanged  relation
and  mutual  configuration.  Were  they  unreal  or  purely  sub-
jective, the  chances  are  infinity  to  one  that  this  could  not  be
the  case.  If  the  reality  of  the  non-ego  is  susceptible  of  proof,
that  proof  is  to  be  found  in  its  persistence  in  consciousness.
All  our  feelings  present  themselves  in  two  series — a  vivid
series  and  a  faint  series.  The  vivid  series  is  produced  by  the
actual  impression  made  by  an  external  object  upon  a  given
nerve  or  set  of  nerves.  In  conveying  its  vibrations  along  the
nerves  to  the  nerve-centers,  an  actual  change  is  effected  in
the  structure  of  the  nerve-tissues,  l^ot  only  does  a  current
of  vibratory  waves  traverse  the  nerve,  excite  the  ganglia,  and
produce  a  real  movement  among  the  molecules  of  the  brain,
but,  after  this  immediate  effect  has  ceased,  the  nervous  system
is  left  in  an  altered  condition,  which  may  continue  for  days
or  years  or  through  life.  A  new  consciousness  of  this  pre-
cise condition  may  be  induced  an  indefinite  number  of  times
by  the  recurrence  of  such  circumstances  as  are  required  to
recall  it.  These  renewals  of  past  states  of  consciousness  are
less  vivid  than  the  original  states  were.  They  constitute  the
faint  series,  and  the  faculty  by  which  they  are  produced  is
equivalent  to  what  is  known  as  memory.

188  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

The  lowest  mental  state  is  that  which  results  in  reflex
action.  This  is  not  confined  to  the  lowest  animals,  but  is
found  to  occur  in  the  young  of  all  animals,  including  man,
and  there  are  some  actions  that  adults  perform  which  can
with  difficulty  be  classed  under  any  other  head.  These  ac-
tions approach  most  closely  to  those  observed  in  purely  phys-
ical phenomena.  A  change  in  the  environment  brings  an
external  object  into  direct  contact  with  a  bundle  of  nerve-
fibers.  A  current  is  at  once  set  up  in  the  nerve,  which  passes
directly  to  the  ganglion,  and  is  there  discharged  through  a
motor  nerve,  resulting  in  the  motion  corresponding  to  the  im-
pression. The  resultant  action  in  the  lower  animals  always
concerns  the  preservation  of  life.  It  is  the  necessary  action
either  for  escaping  danger  or  for  securing  nourishment.
As  low  forms  gradually  become  more  highly  organized,
the  movements  necessary  to  secure  these  ends  become  more
complicated  and  different  in  character,  but  this  change  never
occurs  too  rapidly  for  corresponding  changes  in  the  nervous
system  to  keep  exact  pace  with  them,  until  at  length  we  see
quite  highly  organized  creatures  performing  very  complicated
actions  with  all  the  apparent  precision  of  reflex  actions.
Such  actions  are  called  instinctive.  Instinct  is,  therefore,
simply  "compound  reflex  action."  But,  as  reflex  action  is
only  the  result  of  an  exact  correspondence  brought  about  by
a  long  period  of  development  between  the  organism  and  the
environment,  between  the  objects  that  surround  an  animal
and  the  nerve-tissues  within  its  system,  so  this  same  result
may  be  produced  by  the  repetition  of  a  somewhat  comph-
cated  action  in  the  most  highly  developed  organisms.  By
such  frequent  repetitions,  habits  are  formed  by  men  which
often  approach  very  closely,  and  even  reach,  the  strictly  auto-
matic. After  each  repetition  of  the  same  action,  conscious-
ness begins  more  and  more  obviously  to  lose  its  hold  upon
the  lower  nerve-centers,  the  nerves  immediately  employed
in  performing  the  action,  and  the  muscles  brought  into  play
by  its  performance,  until  it  finally  ceases  any  longer  to  co-

PSYCHIC  PROCESSES.  189

ordinate  this  particular  class  of  action,  which  becomes  purely
habitual  or  automatic.  The  actions  of  the  various  so-called
involuntary  and  semi-involuntary  muscles,  such  as  produce
the  heart's  pulsations  and  the  respiratory  movements,  must,
undoubtedly,  be  explained  on  this  principle.  The  distinc-
tion between  instinct  and  habit,  therefore,  is  very  slight.  It
consists  more  in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  respectively
evolved  than  in  any  true  qualitative  difference.  Instinct
may  be  called  o.  jphylogenetic^  habit  an  ontogenetic  process.

Just  as  certain  actions  become  reflex,  automatic,  instinct-
ive, and  habitual,  so  certain  states  of  mind  come  at  length
to  follow  one  another  with  ease  and  regularity.  Indeed,  the
greater  part  of  our  daily  thoughts  are  such  as  perpetually
cohere  in  consciousness,  and  can  only  be  separated  with
greater  or  less  degrees  of  difficulty.  And  as  among  animals
the  lower  they  stand  in  the  scale  of  development  the  more
regular  their  actions  become,  so  states  of  mind  are  found  to
cohere  more  completely  in  less  developed  than  in  more  de-
veloped creatures ;  and  of  men  the  lowest  races  and  the
most  imperfectly  organized  individuals  present  a  greater
uniformity  and  fixity  of  ideas  than  the  highest  races  and
the  most  perfectly  organized  individuals.  The  highest  types
of  mind  are  perpetually  making  excursions  into  new  fields ;
old  fields  are  traversed  at  different  angles  and  in  different
ways  from  those  in  which  ordinary  minds  traverse  them ;
original  thought  takes  the  place  of  traditional  belief;  old
truths  are  placed  in  new  lights,  and  compared  with  other
truths  with  which  ordinary  minds  do  not  compare  them ;
and  thus  the  path  of  consciousness  is  almost  always  new  and
the  coherence  of  its  states  is  very  slight.  As  the  automatic
becomes  thus  insensibly  transformed  into  the  original,  the
coherent  into  the  disjunctive,  the  frequent  into  the  unfre-
quent,  the  mental  process  passes  from  the  instinctive  into
the  rational.

Reason  consists  in  the  intellectual  establishment  of  new
and  original  relations.     The  ability  to  do  this  is  the  test  of

190  SPENCEE'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

intellectual  power.  It  is  the  originality  of  a  mental  adjust-
ment, and  not  its  adaptation  to  a  particular  purpose,  which
indicates  intellectual  development.  The  purpose  may  be
subserved  through  countless  generations  of  adaptive  modi-
fication in  very  lowly  organized  beings,  as  insects,  or  it  may
be  reached  by  a  single  original  effort  of  a  highly  developed
brain,  as  in  man.     The  one  is  instinct,  the  other  reason.

Such  is,  in  its  barest  outlines,  Mr.  Spencer's  synthesis  of
mind,  from  which  it  is  clear  that  he  regards  the  psychical
faculty  as  one  fact,  presenting  many  degrees  from  the  lowest
creatures  to  the  most  enlightened  human  beings,  and  that
psychological  phenomena  are  as  dependent  upon  the  environ-
ment as  are  those  of  life.

Turning  to  the  analysis  of  mental  phenomena  and  laws,
as  Mr.  Spencer  has  set  it  forth  in  the  second  volume  of
the  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  we  need  not  be  surprised
to  find  that  he  differs  from  most  logicians  in  his  ideas  of
the  nature  of  the  reasoning  process.  If  reason  is  simply
the  power  to  combine  relations  which  neither  experience
nor  heredity  has  made  coherent  in  consciousness,  then  clearly
the  mode  of  performing  this  operation  is  not  likely  to  re-
semble closely  any  of  the  intellectual  operations  which  logi-
cians have  described  as  constituting  the  reasoning  process.
Every  essential  step  in  the  operation  he  calls  an  "  intui-
tion." The  reasoning  power  is  a  power  of  direct  compari-
son of  relations  not  before  compared,  or  not  compared  often
enough  to  produce  cohesion  in  consciousness.  This  act  of
original  comparison  is  a  pure  intuition.  All  relations  capa-
ble of  comparison  are  either  of  degree  or  of  kind.  The  fac-
ulty of  comparing  them  is,  therefore,  either  quantitative  or
qualitative.  Quantitative  reasoning  compares  relations  which
differ,  if  at  all,  only  in  degree,  and  its  greatest  completeness
exists  when  this  difference  disappears  entirely  and  equality
is  reached.  Quantitative  relations  are  either  equal  or  un-
equal. Qualitative  reasoning  compares  relations  which  dif-
fer, if  at  all,  in  kind.     In  order  to  be  comparable,  they  must

ANALYSIS  OF  PSYCHIC  PHE]!TOMEN"A.  191

have  a  certain  degree  of  resemblance.  They  must  be  in
some  measure  alike.  As  quantitative  reasoning  is  founded
on  the  notion  of  equality,  so  qualitative  reasoning  is  founded
on  the  notion  of  similarity.  Mr.  Spencer,  however,  fails  to
perceive,  or  at  least  to  state,  that  these  two  may  be  reduced
to  one ;  that  qualitative  relations  may  be  referred  to  quanti-
tative ones  by  taking  them  in  part  only ;  and  that,  to  say
that  two  relations  are  similar,  is  equivalent  to  saying  that
parts  of  them  are  equal.

In  the  reasoning  from  generals  to  particulars,  which  is
very  common  in  every-day  life,  the  process  is  usually  what
is  called  reasoning  by  analogy.  The  accuracy  of  conclusions
reached  by  this  kind  of  imperfect  qualitative  reasoning  de-
pends in  great  part  upon  the  ratio  between  the  number  of
known  to  the  number  of  unknown  relations  or  attributes.
Where  the  number  of  known  attributes  is  very  small,  and
the  number  of  unknown  very  large,  we  have  that  fallacious
species  of  analogical  reasoning  that  underlies  all  sophistry,
and  much  past  and  current  superstition.  When  a  respect-
able number  of  attributes  becomes  known,  the  reasoning  be-
comes inductive.  A  particular  attribute  is  inferred  from  a
large  number  of  known  like  attributes,  although  the  number
still  unknown  may  greatly  exceed  the  number  known.  As
the  ratio  of  the  known  to  the  unknown  diminishes,  the  force
of  the  induction  increases  until  the  point  of  equality  is
passed,  after  which,  according  to  Spencer,  the  reasoning
becomes  deductive ;  or,  to  use  his  own  words :  "  If  the
known  relations,  grouped  together  as  of  the  same  kind,
outnumber  the  unknown  relations  conceived  to  be  like
them,  the  reasoning  is  deductive ;  if  the  reverse,  it  is  in-
ductive."

While  this  may  be  accepted  as  the  best  definition  of  de-
ductive reasoning,  it  is  not  the  current  acceptation  of  the
term.

Keasoning  is  distinguished  from  logic  in  being  a  subject-
ive process  rather  than  an  objective  science.     An  account

192  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

of  the  former  would  describe  the  mental  operations  gone
through  with  in  the  act  of  forming  intuitions  from  a  com-
parison of  relations.  Logic,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  science
of  those  relations  in  themselves,  objectively  considered.
The  syllogism  Mr.  Spencer  regards  as  an  aid  to  the  science
of  logic  rather  than  to  the  act  of  reasoning.

Psychical  phenomena  being,  like  vital  phenomena,  the
result  of  prolonged  and  continuous  intercourse  between  the
subject  and  the  object,  which  are  always  in  correspondence,
it  follows  that  the  fundamental  relation  is  the  relation  of  sub-
ject to  object.  But  the  manifold  character  of  the  external
world  gives  rise  to  various  manifestations  of  this  relation,  all
of  which  may  be  reduced  to  that  of  resistance  as  the  generic
form  of  all  relations  perceptible  to  the  mind.  The  reality
of  the  object  is  proved  by  the  persistence  of  the  different
relations.*  While  its  nature  is  unknown,  and  can  have  no
resemblance  to  the  conceptions  produced  by  it  in  the  mind,
its  reality  is  none  the  less  demonstrated  as  positively  as  that
of  the  relations  themselves.  "With  regard  to  the  nature  of
the  object,  however,  Mr.  Spencer  has  put  forward  a  most
ingenious  theory  under  the  name  of  "  transfigured  realism,"
which  is  worthy  of  the  palmiest  days  of  transcendental  specu-
lation. The  mind  is  represented  as  a  receptive  surface  of
peculiar  shape,  e.  g.,  a  cylinder.  External  objects  are  assumed
to  cast  their  impressions  upon  this  receptive  surface  as
shadows  are  cast  upon  a  wall.  The  images  thus  produced
are,  as  it  were,  in  perspective.  As  the  shadow  of  a  cube
upon  a  cylinder  would  have  a  shape  entirely  different  from  a
cube,  so  the  images  of  things  projected  upon  the  mind  can
have  no  necessary  resemblance  to  the  things  themselves.  Yet
as  certainly  as  a  shadow  proves  the  existence  of  an  opaque
object  between  the  surface  on  which  it  falls  and  the  source
of  light,  so  certainly  do  the  conceptions  of  the  mind  demon-

*  This  principle  consitutea  the  basis  of  the  rule  in  science  which  requires
all  truth  to  be  verified,  and  accepts  only  what  has  been  verified.  Verification  is
simply  the  process  of  testing  persistence.    (See  vol.  ii,  p.  417.)

THE  "PEINCIPLES  OF  SOCIOLOGY."  193

strate  the  reality  of  that  transcendental  substance  without
which  no  conceptions  could  be  formed.

In  summing  up  our  general  estimate  of  the  "  Principles
of  Psychology,"  we  are  obliged  to  admit  that,  if  it  were  Mr.
Spencer's  only  production,  it  would  go  far  toward  making  an
epoch.  At  the  same  time  we  fail  to  discover  any  evidence,
either  internal  or  external,  which  is  sufficient,  from  our  own
point  of  view,  to  assign  to  this  work  a  rank  superior  to  that
of  the  "  Principles  of  Biology."

The  "  Principles  of  Sociology"  have  now  (1882)  advanced
to  near  the  conclusion  of  the  second  volume.  Volume  I  has
regularly  appeared,  and  the  first  division  of  Yolume  II  has
been  published  separately.  The  magazines  contain  the  later
chapters.     We  will  glance  at  Yolume  I.

Doubtless  many  were  disappointed  in  this  work.  It  is
certainly  a  very  different  book  from  what  its  title  would  lead
any  one  unacquainted  with  Mr.  Spencer's  other  works  to  ex-
pect. The  term  society  and  the  notion  of  social  phenomena
rarely  give  rise  in  the  ordinary  mind  to  any  other  ideas  than
such  as  are  associated  with  advanced  societies.  The  thought
of  going  back  to  primitive  man  seldom  occurs.  A  work  on
social  philosophy  is  supposed  to  treat  of  the  laws  which  gov-
ern industry,  domestic  relations,  religious  observances,  social
customs,  the  way  in  which  men  co-operate  in  business,  carry
on  their  commercial  and  manufacturing  interests,  dress,  build
houses — in  short,  the  way  men  live.  And  if  an  historical
view  is  taken,  it  is  expected  to  compare  the  life  of  the  Greeks
and  Komans,  of  the  Chinese,  Turks,  etc.,  with  that  of  mod-
ern civilized  peoples.  To  go  back  of  recorded  history  is
deemed  speculative  and  Utopian,  and  the  thought  seems
scarcely  to  have  struck  any  body  that  existing  non-historic
races  may  be  regarded  as  living  representatives  of  the  pre-
historic ancestors  of  existing  civilized  races.  The  study  of
society  from  the  standpoint  of  evolution,  admitting  the  evo-
lution of  society  as  well  as  of  the  rest  of  nature,  is  therefore

194  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

a  new  departure,  and  the  starting-point  from  primitive  man
in  Lis  pre-social  state  seems  to  many  a  strange  waj  of  look-
ing at  social  questions.

Another  thing  which  seems  somewhat  singular  is  that
he  should  regard  ideas  as  the  principal  data  of  sociology.
We  are  here  reminded  of  the  method  which  he  adopted  in
writing  his  "  First  Principles."  The  object  aimed  at  in  his
"Unknowable"  was  to  assign  to  faith  and  religion  their
proper  share  of  thought  and  of  things.  This  he  deemed  ne-
cessary in  order  to  lay  out  the  held  of  his  future  labors.
The  conclusion  which  he  reached  was  that  to  religion  belongs
all  that  can  not  be  known.  In  the  great  struggle  of  human
ideas  to  solve  all  the  problems  presented  by  nature  and  by
mind,  many  had  been  proposed  that  are  in  the  nature  of
things  insolvable.  These  are  the  materials  and  the  objects
of  faith.  The  progress  of  human  ideas  has  ever  been  in
the  direction  of  drawing  the  line  between  the  Unknowable
and  the  Knowable,  and  the  conflict  between  religion  and  sci-
ence has  been  due  to  the  perpetual  encroachments  of  each
upon  the  domain  of  the  other.  Human  thought  has  been  a
constant  effort  to  know,  and  irresolvable  questions  have  as
frequently  forced  themselves  upon  it  as  those  of  the  opposite
class.  In  the  beginnings  of  thought,  therefore,  the  Know-
able  and  the  Unknowable  were  completely  confounded.  Re-
ligion and  science  were  not  as  yet  differentiated.  In  the
prevalence  of  ignorance  all  ideas  partook  of  the  nature  of  re-
ligious ideas.  Every  conception  rested  on  faith,  i.  e.,  on  some
form  of  belief.  The  scientific  ideas  of  causation,  of  rational
explanation,  etc.,  were  wholly  wanting.  The  primitive  man
judges  everything  after  himself.  His  narrow  range  of  ex-
perience only  teaches  him  that  he  can  produce  mechanical
effects,  and  any  manifestation  of  such  effects  in  objects  out-
side of  himself  is  naturally  attributed  to  a  like  power  in  such
objects.  Mr.  Spencer  had  before  shown  that  social  phe-
nomena rest  fundamentally  on  psychic  phenomena.  Society
is  not  alone  an  aggregate  of  individuals.     It  is  an  aggregate

IDEAS  OF  PKIMITIVE  MAN.  195

of  individuals  possessing  ideas.  Ideas  are,  therefore,  the
fundamental  facts  of  sociology.  But,  if  the  genesis  of  society
is  to  be  worked  out,  the  progress  of  ideas  must  be  studied,
beginning  as  low  down  as  the  knowledge  of  the  age  will  per-
mit. And,  if  primordial  ideas  are  to  be  studied  at  all,  they
must  be  studied  as  they  are,  and  as  all  the  evidences  show
they  must  have  always  been.  The  attempt  to  ascertain  what
primitive  man  thought  about  political  economy,  social  order,
domestic  relations,  moral  law,  or  religious  truth,  would  be
simply  absurd,  since  primitive  man  never  thought  any  thing
about  any  of  these  things.  These  are  advanced  ideas,  de-
rivative conceptions,  modern  forms  of  thought.  And  yet,
the  primitive  man  thinks.  He  thinks  vigorously  within  the
narrow  range  of  his  experience.  Those  who  have  carefully
followed  Mr.  Spencer  through  Part  I  can  but  be  convinced
of  this  truth  when  they  consider  the  great  system  of  ideas
which  savages  have  built  up,  consistent  in  all  its  parts,  and
strictly  logical  in  all  its  conclusions,  if  only  the  premises  had
been  sound.  And,  if  they  have  gone  far  astray,  if  the  entire
edifice  is  after  all  only  a  "  monstrous  farrago,"  *  they  have
not  done  so  much  worse  than  certain  metaphysicians  who
have  flourished  in  the  most  enlightened  countries  and  ages
of  the  world.

Although  the  expression  "■  data  of  sociology  "  may  not  be
the  proper  one  to  comprehend  an  enumeration  of  the  prin-
cipal ideas  of  primitive  man,  still  it  can  not  be  denied  that
such  an  enumeration  constitutes  an  important  "internal  fac-
tor" in  the  soliition  of  all  the  chief  problems  which  sociology
presents.

From  what  has  already  been  said,  it  appears  clear  that
the  study  of  the  ideas  of  primitive  man  is  nearly  the  same
thing  as  the  study  of  the  genesis  and  history  of  religion
among  men.  It  was  only  at  a  later  and  historic  period  that
philosophic  speculation  became  differentiated  from  religious
speculation,  and  only  in  comparatively  recent  times  have

*  E.  B,  Tylor,  "Primitive  Culture,"  London,  IS^l,  p.  120.

196  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIO  PHILOSOPHY.

scientific  ideas  liad  any  part  in  the  general  current  of  hu-
man thought.  This  differentiation  is,  moreover,  far  from
completed  in  the  most  advanced  nations,  and  the  strict  con-
finement of  religious  ideas  to  the  absolutely  unknowable  can
never  be  realized  so  long  as  there  remains  the  least  room  for
dispute  about  the  boundaries  of  this  realm.  Comte's  gen-
eralization, therefore,  that  the  lowest  forms  of  religion  are
most  intensely  religious,  is  true  in  the  sense  that  the  lowest
ideas  are  nearly  unmixed  religious  ideas.

One  of  the  greatest  demands  of  the  age  has  long  been  a
genesis  of  religion.  We  have  had  ecclesiastical  histories,  la-
bored attempts  to  show  the  workings  of  religious  systems  in
different  ages,  nations,  and  races,  and  lastly  some  praisewor-
thy efforts  to  subject  existing  systems  to  rational  analysis  and
unbiased  historical  criticism.  But  these  have,  after  all,  added
little  to  our  real  knowledge  of  what  religion  is,  and  why  it
is  so  universal.  The  philosopher  has  long  observed  that  in
proportion  as  knowledge,  science,  and  intelligence  spread
among  men,  the  strong  religious  spirit  disappears.  Some
have  argued  that  this  tendency  must  eventually  eradicate
the  religious  sentiment  from  mankind,  since  already  many  of
the  truly  greatest  and  best  men  have  nearly  or  quite  wholly
renounced  all  attachment  for,  or  belief  in,  any  religious  sys-
tem. This  idea  was  fast  gaining  acceptance  until  Mr.  Spen-
cer came  forward  with  his  famous  "reconciliation,"  which
showed  that  there  is  a  limit  at  which  this  differentiation
must  stop,  while  the  apparently  innate  sentiment  of  worship
will  ever  possess  an  object  in  the  Absolute,  the  Uncondi-
tioned, the  Unknowable.

But  this  service,  great  as  many  think  it  to  be,  is  small
compared  with  that  which  he  has  rendered  in  the  first  part
of  his  "  Sociology."  "We  have  here  at  last  a  key  to  the  funda-
mental problem,  How  has  religion  been  introduced  into  the
world  ?  We  now  have  a  rational  explanation  of  religion,  its
origin  and  cause  as  a  cosmical  phenomenon  (vol.  ii,  pp.  252
et  seq.).    If  man  has  reaUy  descended  from  a  condition  psy-

GENESIS  OF  EELIGION.  197

cMcally  on  a  level  with  the  lower  animals,  as  many  anatomi-
cal as  well  as  ethnological  facts  indicate,  then  there  must
have  been  a  beginning  to  religion.  No  animal  race  gives
evidence  of  the  possession  of  a  religious  sentiment,  and,
if  man  has  once  been  an  animal,  this  sentiment  must  have
originated  somewhere  in  the  course  of  his  development
from  animalitj  to  humanity.  But  even  for  those  who  reject
this  view  there  are  facts  showing  that  religion,  like  many
other  highly  developed  sentiments  and  institutions,  has  been
a  growth.  There  are  a  few  races  that  can  scarcely  be  said  to
possess  any  such  sentiment,  and  that  have  none  of  the  sym-
bols or  rites  which  universally  attend  it.  The  existence  of
a  religious  sentiment  presupposes  ideas,  and  there  are  races
that  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  any  ideas.  Religion  is  the
product  of  thought.  It  develops  after  a  long  course  of  rea-
soning about  the  facts  of  experience.  It  is  the  outcome  of
a  real  philosophy.  It  results  from  the  natural  struggle  of
the  mind  to  know.  In  any  age  or  race  the  materials  of  re-
ligious belief  are  unexplained  pheDomena.  The  true  do-
main of  religion  is  the  unknown.  It  will  continue  to  be  so
even  after  that  domain  is  narrowed  down  to  synonymy
with  the  unknowable.  And,  as  already  said,  during  this  entire
period  in  which  the  boundaries  of  the  unknown  are  being
contracted,  there  will  necessarily  be  conflict.

Reduced  to  its  lowest  terms,  belief  is  the  presumed  ex-
planation of  phenomena.  The  sum  of  all  the  beliefs  of  any
people  constitutes  their  theory  of  the  universe.  This  is  true,
however  narrow  or  wide  their  view  may  be.  The  theories  of
modern  scientists  only  differ  from  those  of  savages  in  the
higher  credibility  of  the  experiences  on  which  they  rest.
They  are  simply  greater  approximations  to  the  truth  uni-
versally sought  to  be  reached.  Science  itself  only  differs
from  religion  in  the  degrees  of  certainty  attainable  in  human
knowledge.  We  believe  in  the  heliocentric  rather  than  in
the  geocentric  theory,  because  we  regard  the  evidence  as
possessing  superior  credibility.  We  believe  in  evolution
10

198  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

rather  than  in  special  creation,  for  the  same  reason.  And
thus  it  is  throughout.  All  depends  upon  the  degree  of  veri-
fication, and  upon  the  susceptibility  of  the  mind  to  the  influ-
ence of  rational  proof.

The  religion  and  the  philosophy  of  the  savage  are  one.
All  his  ideas  are  religious  ideas.  Before  he  has  religious
ideas  he  has  no  ideas,  and  is  in  the  condition  of  an  animal.
Animals,  it  is  true,  think,  but  it  is  always  about  some  im-
mediate object  to  be  attained.  Their  ideas,  if  they  are  en-
titled to  be  called  such,  are  of  the  conative  class,  never  ab-
stract. They  never  seek  the  explanation  of  phenomena  for
its  own  sake.  This  is,  perhaps,  as  good  a  line  as  can  be  drawn
between  the  human  and  the  animal  mind.  !Nor  should  we
forget  that  such  a  line  would  consign  a  large  part  of  mankind
to  the  animal  class.  For  it  is,  after  all,  only  the  few  who
really  think.  ISTot  every  savage  could  build  up  a  cosmology
or  a  religion.  A  few  elaborate  the  principal  beliefs  and  the
mass  accept  them  at  second  hand.  This  is  as  true  of  the
lowest  as  of  the  highest  races.  Mr.  Spencer,  no  doubt,  would
admit  this,  but  he  has  unfortunately  failed  to  fonnulate  it,
and  thus  left  some  parts  of  his  admirable  scheme  open  to
criticism.

Abundance  of  facts  conspire  to  prove  that  primitive  ideas
have  all  emanated  from  the  individual's  experience  of  his
own  powers.  The  most  fundamental  of  all  such  experiences
are  those  connected  with  personal  locomotion.  The  savage's
idea  of  life  is  ability  to  move.  Whatever  moves  is  supposed
to  do  as  he  does  when  he  moves.  It  therefore  must  be  con-
stituted, in  that  one  respect  at  least,  as  he  is  constituted.
Hence,  one  of  the  first  results  of  human  reasoning  is  the
attributing  of  life  to  inanimate  objects.  This  process  re-
sulted in  some  of  the  forms  of  fetichism.  But  it  also  led  to
other  consequences,  which  we  shall  presently  consider.

Akin  to  this  conception  was  that  of  the  presumed  power
of  metamorphosis  which  a  certain  class  of  phenomena  early
led  primitive  man  to  ascribe  to  almost  every  object  in  nat-

HIS  GHOST-THEORY.  199

ure.  Among  these  Mr,  Spencer  enumerates  the  formation
and  dissipation  of  clouds,  the  succession  of  daylight  and
darkness,  the  appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  sun,
moon,  and  stars,  the  phenomena  presented  hy  comets,  me-
teors, lightning,  the  aurora,  the  rainbow,  etc.  One  of  the
most  remarkable  facts  which  nature  ever  presses  upon  the
attention  of  the  primitive  man  is  that  of  wind.  It  is  the
very  embodiment  of  power  without  visible  cause.  The  sav-
asre  never  thinks  of  the  air  as  a  material  substance.  There
are  doubtless  people  in  the  most  civilized  countries  who
never  so  conceive  it.  And  yet  consider  the  wonderful  effects
daily  produced  by  this  mysterious  invisible  agent !

The  general  sum  of  all  these  phenomena  must  have  pro
duced  some  impression  upon  the  minds  of  primitive  men,
and  the  study  of  the  ideas  prevailing  among  existing  savage
races  shows  how  profound  this  influence  has  been.

Amid  the  many  collateral  ideas  to  which  these  phenom-
ena give  rise,  there  is  one  central  one  which  takes  more  and
more  definite  shape  as  the  mind  strengthens  and  the  power
of  drawing  conclusions  increases.  This  idea  is  that  of  the
transmutability  of  all  things,  and  particularly  the  power  of
every  object  in  nature  to  assume  at  wiU  a  visible  or  an  in-
visible form.  This  belief  in  unlimited  metamorphosis  is
strengthened  by  a  thousand  minor  details  which  everywhere
present  themselves  whenever  the  savage  attempts  to  study  or
observe  the  most  familiar  facts  of  his  experience.

The  growth  and  decay  of  vegetation ;  the  transitions
from  eggs  to  yoimg  birds,  and  from  these  to  fuU-plumaged
ones ;  the  true  metamorphoses  of  insects  (which  must  have
escaped  the  observation  of  all  but  a  very  few) ;  the  resem-
blance of  fossil  shells  to  living  mollusks  (a  still  more  obscure
fact) ;  the  resemblance  of  certain  beetles,  butterflies,  etc.,
to  the  twigs,  leaves,  and  bark,  which  natural  selection  has
caused  them  to  imitate — all  these  and  endless  other  phenom-
ena are  ever  recurring  to  strengthen  and  confirm  the  no-
tion once  conceived  that  every  object  in  the  world  possesses

200  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

the  power  to  transform  itself  into  any  shape,  color,  or  condi-
tion that  may  satisfy  its  caprice.

These  phenomena  are  external  or  objective,  but  there  is
a  corresponding  class  of  internal  or  subjective  phenomena.
There  are  all  these  evidences  that  external  objects  possess
numerous  distinct  forms,  which  they  assume  at  different
times,  and  there  is  an  allied  body  of  evidence  that  man  him-
self has  also  a  number  of  forms  into  which  he  often  passes.
Such  evidence  is  afforded  by  dreams,  by  various  pathological
states,  such  as  swoons,  catalepsy,  delirium,  insanity,  apoplexy,
and  even  by  death.  It  is  also  based  on  at  least  three  forms
of  external  proof  Mdiich  carry  with  them  the  additional  idea
that  difference  of  time  is  not  requisite  for  these  transforma-
tions :  these  are  the  phenomena  of  echoes,  of  shadows,  and  of
reflected  images.  The  savage  never  doubts  that  an  echo  is
a  real  voice,  never  conceives  it  possible  that  the  shadow  of
himself  which  he  sees  on  the  ground  in  sunshine  has  no
material  reality.  lie  thinks  them  the  voice  and  the  figure,
respectively,  of  his  other  self.  Still  more  conclusive  is  the
image  he  perceives  in  the  water.  His  friends  inform  him
that  this  image  exactly  resembles  him  to  the  minutest  feature
of  his  countenance,  and  he  is  able  to  verify  this  by  compar-
ing the  reflections  of  others  with  the  originals.  Surely  these
images  are  real  persons,  and  every  person  and  every  thing
can  thus  be  proved  to  have  at  least  two  doubles,  the  shadow
and  the  reflected  image.  The  primitive  man  reasons  in  the
same  way  about  dreams.  He  never  doubts  for  a  moment
that  he  has  actually  experienced  what  he  has  dreamed.  And
yet,  on  awaking,  all  the  evidences,  including  the  testimony
of  others  whom  he  can  trust,  prove  that  his  body  has  not  been
absent.  This  difficulty,  however,  does  not  trouble  him.  He
believes  that  it  is  his  double  that  has  experienced  the  things
dreamed.  The  case  of  swooning,  in  which  the  person  may
live  for  days  in  a  state  of  lethargy,  and  finally  come  to  him-
self and  recount  a  long  series  of  strange  events  experienced
while  in  that  state,  only  shows  that  the  double  has  the  power

HIS  GHOST-THEORY.  201

of  remaining  away  from  tlie  body  for  an  indefinite  period.
The  phenomena  of  catalepsy  and  apoplexy  still  further  confirm
this  belief,  and  finally  death  itself  comes  to  be  interpreted
as  an  unwillingness  or  inability  on  the  part  of  the  double  to
return  at  all.  The  question  then  naturally  comes  up,  "  Where
has  the  double  gone  ? "  It  has  left  the  body  of  a  man  and
has  doubtless  gone  somewhere.  In  sleep  it  had  been  in  the
habit  of  wandering  about,  hunting  in  strange  lands,  or  fight-
ing hostile  tribes.  JN^ow  it  has  gone  for  good,  but  where  ?
Upon  the  varying  answers  given  to  this  question  will  depend
the  multitudinous  customs  of  different  races  respecting  the
disposal  of  the  body,  and  the  character  of  their  beliefs  in  a
future  existence  and  a  future  world.  But  among  all  these
varied  beliefs  there  is  one  common  to  all  races  which  have
acquired  any  degree  of  reasoning  power ;  that  is,  the  belief  in
some  kind  of  a  future  life  and  in  some  place  of  future  abode.
Here  we  have  a  complete  genesis  of  this  universal  belief,  and
a  satisfactory  explanation  of  its  universality.  It  ends  the
war  between  the  religionists  and  the  anti-religionists,  the
former  of  whom  claimed  that  the  belief  in  a  future  life  was
universal,  and  must,  therefore,  be  an  innate  sentiment,  and
the  latter  of  whom  replied  that  its  universality  had  not  been
proved.  The  premises  of  the  first  are  practically  sustained,
but  in  such  a  way  as  to  disprove  their  conclusion,  wbile  the
claim  of  the  latter  is  opposed  to  the  facts.  The  simple
truth  comes  forth  that  the  universal  belief  in  another  life
after  death  is  a  necessary  conclusion  which  must  be  drawn
by  the  primitive  man,  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  reason,  from
the  phenomena  which  nature  always  presents.  The  univer-
sality of  the  belief  in  an  after  life  is  due  to  the  simple  fact
that  from  identical  phenomena  reason,  which  is  not  a  thing
of  race,  will  uniformly  deduce  an  identical  conclusion.
There  is  immense  variety  in  the  minor  accompaniments  of
this  general  belief,  but  the  central  idea  itself  is  found  almost
every-where.

.  The  savage's  philosophy  does  not,  however,  stop  with  the

202  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

conception  of  a  future  existence  and  a  separable  double — a
persistent  self,  independent  of  the  body.  It  proceeds  still
further  to  elaborate  the  system  of  primitive  ideas.  The
spirit,  or  persistent  self,  is  usually  supposed  to  remain  near
the  place  where  the  dead  man  lived.  It  is  commonly  be-
lieved to  haunt  the  locality  where  the  body  was  finally
placed.  It  lingers  round  the  corpse  as  long  as  it  remains
preserved,  and  follows  it  into  the  cave  or  mountain  or  stream
or  tomb.  An  endless  variety  of  ceremonies  is  found  to  ex-
ist, which  have  grown  out  of  these  beliefs,  and  which  con-
trol the  funeral  rites  of  different  tribes.  Among  the  most
important  and  instructive  of  these  are  the  various  modes  of
preserving  the  dead  body,  some  of  which  reached  so  high  a
perfection  of  art  that  the  mummies  of  Egypt  and  Peru  have
survived  during  a  period  of  two  thousand  years.

The  idea  of  the  survival  of  individuals  that  die  could
not  help  exerting  a  profound  influence  upon  the  hving.  In
the  first  place,  conceiving,  as  savages  usually  do,  that  the
persistent  ghost  remains  near  the  scene  of  its  career  during
life,  or  at  least  frequently  returns  to  visit  it,  the  effect  is  to
people  every  spot  with  innumerable  spirits.  These  spirits
are  very  generally  regarded  as  evil-disposed,  and  to  them  are
attributed  all  the  misfortunes  that  befall  the  living.  This,
too,  furnishes  an  explanation,  satisfactory  to  the  savage's
mind,  of  all  the  mysterious  phenomena  of  nature.  Incapa-
ble of  conceiving  the  operation  of  natural  forces,  he  had
from  the  first  accounted  for  all  movements  in  the  inanimate
world  on  the  principle  of  indwelling  spirits,  and  now  with
the  vast  accumulating  host  of  liberated  human  doubles  there
is  no  lack  of  materials  for  animating  every  object  in  nature.
And  this,  Mr.  Spencer  thinks,  is  the  true  theory  of  fetichism.
The  beings  that  animate  the  sticks  and  stones  are  the  ghosts
of  deceased  men  and  women.

A  still  more  important  consequence  of  this  belief  is  that
which  follows  on  the  death  of  any  great  chieftain  or  mighty
ruler.     The  souls  of  such  men,  too,  persist.     They,  too,  linger

ANCESTOR-WOESHIP.  203

round  the  places  of  their  glorious  achievements,  and  are  the
invisible  spectators  of  every  act  performed  by  their  subjects
and  their  descendants.  What  must  be  the  effect  of  such  a
belief  ?  For  a  while,  elaborate  ceremonies  are  performed  over
the  tomb  of  the  dead  hero.  His  weapons  are  usually  buried
by  his  side,  to  fight  with  in  the  next  life.  Vast  treasures,  too,
are  frequently  placed  in  his  grave,  to  be  used  hereafter.  Too
often  slaves  and  attendants  and  even  wives  are  sacrificed,  to
accompany  him  and  minister  to  his  wants.  As  time  goes  by,
his  earthly  exploits  are  more  and  more  exaggerated.  ISTone
but  the  most  wonderful  accounts  are  remembered,  and  these
receive  fresh  accretions  of  marvelousness  at  each  repetition.
Complete  apotheosis  is  the  ultimate  result.  At  first  he  was
the  son  of  a  god,  and  finally  he  never  was  other  than  a  god.
And,  having  been  a  god  and  still  existing,  he  is  still  a  god.
But  apotheosis  is  a  gradual  process.  There  is  no  line  be-
tween a  hero  and  a  god.  Worship  began  long  before  divin-
ity was  reached.  The  first  form  of  worship  was  this  ances-
tor-worship. The  first  gods  were  ancestral  heroes.  Gods,
one  and  all,  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  transformed  men.
The  idea  of  independent  deities  is  shown  to  be  a  compara-
tively advanced  and  recent  development.  Ancestor-worship
is  not  only  almost  or  quite  universal  among  savage  and  bar-
barous tribes,  but  it  is  traced  to  both  the  early  Semitic  and
the  early  Aryan  civilizations.  In  ancestor-worship  we  have
the  nucleus  of  all  subsequent  forms  of  religious  belief.  In
the  belief  in  a  persistent  ghost  we  have  the  groundwork  of
all  religious  superstitions.  Fetichism  is  the  peopling  of  par-
ticular objects  with  these  ghosts.  Idolatry  is  the  artificial
manufacture  of  an  object  for  them  to  occupy.  Metempsycho-
sis is  the  transmigration  of  these  souls  into  inferior  animals.

Animal-worship  grows  out  of  the  respect  shown  to  those
animals  into  which  ancestral  heroes  are  supposed  to  have
passed.  Another  explanation  of  animal-worship  is,  however,
proposed,  which  makes  it  a  direct  consequence  of  ances-
tor-worship.    It  is  well  known  that  very  many  tribes  name

204  SPENCER'S  SYNTnETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

their  children  from  some  accidental  circumstance  occurring
at  or  near  the  time  of  their  birth.  Most  commonly  they
receive  the  name  of  some  object  that  may  strike  their  par-
ents in  a  special  manner.  Such  objects  are  frequently  ani-
mals, as  it  is  with  these  that  savages  more  especially  deal.
Hence  their  children  bear  the  names  dog,  bear,  wolf,  horse,
bull,  lion,  tiger,  eagle,  etc.  Not  unfrequently  powerful  chiefs
are  thus  named,  and  after  their  death  are  raised  to  heroes
and  then  to  gods.  They  are  thus  worshiped  under  their
animal  names,  and  are  made  the  founders  of  new  tribes.
These  tribes,  at  iirst  recognizing  their  descent  from  a  great
ancestor  called  the  Bear,  the  Stork,  or  the  Serpent,  finally
lose  sight  of  his  ancestral,  and  indeed  of  his  human,  char-
acter, and,  remembering  his  na^ie  only,  confound  it  with  the
real  animal  with  which  they  are  familiar.  They  thus  come
firmly  to  believe  that  they  are  the  real  descendants  of  these
animals,  and  they  prove  the  sincerity  of  this  belief  by  hold-
ing their  supposed  ancestors  sacred  and  even  worshiping
them  with  great  ceremony.

Plant-worship  no  less  than  animal-worship  is  explained
on  the  ghost-theory,  and  is  hence  a  derivative  form  of  ances-
tor-worship. First,  plants  furnishing  artificial  stimulants,
such  as  the  "  soma,"  the  vine,  etc.,  become  objects  of  wor-
ship in  consequence  of  the  physical  exaltation  which  they
furnish.  But  this  effect  is  attributed  to  an  indwelling  spirit
which  animates  the  plant,  and  through  it  exerts  this  peculiar
influence  over  men.  This  spirit  is  the  double  of  some  great
ancestor,  whose  powers  during  life  are  only  exceeded  by  his
powers  after  death.

Again,  tribes  that  have  migrated  from  a  forest  retain  an
ever-fading  tradition  of  such  an  emergence.  The  imperfec-
tion of  their  languages  and  the  laxity  of  all  their  conceptions
lead  eventually  to  the  confusion  of  the  idea  of  having  come
out  of  a  wood  with  that  of  having  descended  from  a  wood.
The  idea  once  started  that  they  v:ere  the  descendants  of  a
certain  grove,  or  tree,  or  kind  of  reed,  would  be  readily  be-

DERIVATIVE  FORMS  OF  WORSHIP.  205

lieved  on  account  of  its  strangeness,  and  the  whole  tribe
would  soon  come  to  regard  these  objects  as  their  true  ances-
tors, and  would  worship  them  accordingly.

Lastly,  the  naming  of  children  after  plants  leads  to  the
same  result  precisely  as  does  the  naming  of  children  after
animals.

The  worship  of  other  kinds  of  natural  objects  is  ac-
counted for  on  similar  grounds,  and  facts  are  not  wanting
in  support  of  such  explanation.  Even  star-worship  and  sun-
worship,  which  have  formed  the  highest  types  of  worship
below  that  of  ideal  deities,  admit  of  similar  derivation  from
ancestor-worship.  In  the  words  of  Mr.  Spencer,  "  partly  by
confounding  the  parentage  of  the  race  with  a  conspicuous
object  marking  the  natal  region  of  the  race,  partly  by  literal
interpretation  of  birth-names,  and  partly  by  literal  interpre-
tation of  names  given  in  eulogy,  there  have  been  produced
beliefs  in  descent  from  Mountains,  from  the  Sea,  from  the
Dawn,  from  animals  which  have  become  constellations,  and
from  persons  once  on  Earth  who  now  appear  as  Moon  and
Sun."

The  origin  of  deities  is  thus  made  clear.  The  apotheo-
sized ancestor  soon  loses  his  connection  with  earth  and  be-
comes a  god.  Grecian  and  Roman  mythology  furnish  us
with  all  the  degrees  of  this  progress  from  the  simple  man  to
the  hero,  and  from  the  hero  to  the  deity.  The  mythologies
of  other  advanced  nations  show  the  same.  Polytheism  comes
first,  as  various  mighty  names  become  successively  raised
to  the  divine  state.  Integration  early  sets  in,  and  a  subordi-
nated hierarchy  results.  Little  by  little  the  highest  deity
acquires  supremacy,  until  at  length  the  rest  of  the  pantheon
is  swallowed  up  in  him.  The  principal  forms  of  so-called
monotheism  have  retained  innumerable  lesser  gods  in  the
persons  of  angels  who  are  deified  saints,  while  most  of  them
have  recognized  a  distinct  dualism,  in  which  the  powers  of
the  malevolent  deity  have  compared  so  favorably  with  those
of  the  benevolent  one  that  the  term  monotheism  becomes

206  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

quite  inapplicable.  Hebrew  monotheism  is  nearly  pure,*
and  has  been  best  preserved  by  the  Mohammedan  sect.  Mr.
Spencer,  however,  cites  passages  from  the  Hebrew  Bible
in  w^hich  the  ancestral  origin  of  Jehovah  is  sufficiently
clear.  Thus  is  every  form  of  human  worship  and  human
religion  referable  to  the  universal  custom  of  venerating  the
dead.

The  theory  here  sketched,  and  which  is  elaborated  with
great  care  and  skill  by  Mr.  Spencer,  is  remarkable  in  a
number  of  respects.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  the  first  attempt
ever  made  to  trace  the  real  history  of  religion  to  its  original
source  in  the  phenomena  of  nature  and  the  laws  of  thought.
If  true,  it  constitutes  the  genesis  of  religion,  and  explains  all
the  most  difficult  facts  connected  with  its  existence  and  dif-
fusion among  men.  In  the  second  place,  this  effort  is  re-
markable from  the  manner  of  its  presentation.  It  is  no
mere  theory  elaborated  out  of  the  web  of  logic  in  the  author's
brain.  In  every  particular  he  has  allowed  himself  to  drift
wath  the  current  of  accumulating  facts.  The  great  bulk  of
the  volume  is  made  up  of  citations  of  simple  facts  as  gath-
ered together  from  every  available  source.

The  time  seemed  ripe  for  this  great  undertaking.  For
twenty  years  the  materials  for  it  have  been  accumulating,  and
the  world  had  already  been  treated  to  several  able  presenta-
tions of  the  general  subject.  Those  who  were  familiar  with
the  recent  great  works  of  Sir  John  Lubbock  and  Mr.  E.  B.
Tylor  felt  that  we  were  on  the  eve  of  some  grand  revelation
respecting  the  origin  of  our  civilization  and  of  our  race.
Not  only  has  Mr.  Spencer  drawm  freely  from  these  and  other
rich  sources,  but  to  them  he  has  by  his  own  efforts,  in  his
"  Descriptive  Sociology,"  added  a  new  and  bounteous  supply,

*  Recent  critical  studies  of  the  text  of  the  Pentateuch  have  made  it  tolerably
certain  that  in  Moses'  time  at  least  a  form  of  polytheism  prevailed,  of  which
the  plural  form  Blohim,  which  monotheistic  translators  have  taken  the  lib-
erty to  make  singular,  affords  the  strongest  ^rima /aeie  proof.

CONCEPTIONS  OF  DEITY.  207

from  the  combined  currents  of  all  of  which  streams  he  has
poured  a  vast  flood  of  light  and  truth  upon  the  world.

Finally,  the  manner  in  which  the  facts  have  been  mar-
shaled by  Mr.  Spencer  would  in  itself  constitute  a  new  de-
parture. For  the  first  time  the  bearing  of  this  class  of  facts
upon  the  law  of  evolution  has  been  recognized  and  distinctly
pointed  out.  iNot  only  worlds,  and  plants,  and  animals,  and
society,  but  ideas  themselves  have  been  evolved  according  to
the  same  universal  laws.  The  phenomena  of  society  rest  on
those  of  mind.  It  is,  therefore,  fitting  that  the  first  chapter  in
the  evolution  of  society  should  be  a  treatise  on  the  evolution
of  thought.  As  we  have  seen,  primitive  ideas  are  necessarily
religious  ideas.  We  might  almost  as  well  have  said  that
primitive  ideas  are  scientific  ideas.  They  partake  of  the
nature  of  both.  On  the  one  hand,  they  are  filled  with  awe
for  the  mysteries  of  the  unknown,  fear  of  the  invisible,  faith
in  the  incomprehensible.  In  so  far  they  are  religious.  On
the  other  hand,  they  are  the  products  of  an  effort  to  explain
the  unknown,  they  are  gropings  after  truth,  theories  of  the
Cosmos.  As  such  they  are  identical  with  those  ideas  now
regarded  as  possessing  the  highest  scientific  purity.  The
truth  is,  that  primitive  ideas  are  simply  the  chaotic  stage  of
thought.  They  are  the  nehulce  of  future  systems,  both  of
religion  and  of  science — the  confused,  undifferentiated,  pri-
mordial aggregate  out  of  which  in  due  process  of  evolution
will  come  at  last  both  the  proper  reverence  for  the  Unknow-
able and  the  fullest  acquaintance  with  the  Knowable.

A  complete  history  of  the  origin,  relationships,  growth,
and  development  of  primitive  ideas  gives  us  the  genesis  of
both  religion  and  science.  While  we  may  imagine  that  in
studying  them  we  are  tracing  the  genesis  of  religion  only,
with  its  ideas  of  spirits,  worship,  gods,  etc.,  yet  we  must  not
forget  that,  inseparably  connected  with  every  religion,  there
is  a  cosmology  which  tends  to  develop  into  a  true  system  of
the  universe — the  highest  aim  of  science.  It  cannot,  how-
ever, be  denied  that  in  its  external  character  the  thought

208  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

of  the  savage  more  closely  resembles  that  of  the  modem
theologian  than  that  of  the  modern  scientist.  It  sets  out,
like  that  of  the  former,  with  the  teleological  conception,  and
never  forsakes  it,  as  the  theologian  now  frequently  does,
to  employ  the  theory  of  mechanical  causation  in  its  stead.
The  savage  knows  nothing  of  natural  causes,  except  such  as
he  is  himself  able  to  exemplify  in  his  own  muscular  actions.
With  this  narrow  induction  he  can  only  reason  that  all  effects
are  produced  by  such  causes.  Not  a  leaf  trembles  in  the
breeze,  not  a  wave  washes  the  shore,  but  that  in  his  mind  it
is  the  result  of  will.  Eolus  and  Neptune  are  but  the  more
refined  embodiments  in  a  highly  civilized  people  of  these
crude  conceptions  of  the  savage.  All  the  imaginary  beings
conceived  as  exerting  this  will-power  are  highly  anthropo-
morphic in  their  character.  No  doubt,  as  Mr.  Spencer  main-
tains, they  generally  are  originally  the  ghosts  of  dead  men
and  women.  They  lose  nothing  of  their  anthropomorphic
character  by  being  gradually  expanded  into  great  and  pow-
erful deities,  not  even  when  integrated  into  a  single  supreme
ruler  of  the  universe.

Mr.  Tylor's  "  Animism,"  which  he  has.  elaborated  with
great  ability  in  his  "  Primitive  Culture,"  was  a  very  distinct
adumbration  of  the  general  truth  underlying  the  whole  sub-
ject, and  really  amounts  to  a  history  of  the  development  of
the  conception  of  Deity.  It  lacks  only  the  initial  idea  that
all  worship  is  the  worship  of  the  ghosts  of  dead  men,  perhaps
not  universally  true,  to  make  it  cover  in  a  manner  the  whole
ground  of  Mr.  Spencer's  argument.  The  general  student  of
ethnography  is  surprised  at  not  finding  here  a  more  definite
recognition  of  Mr.  Tylor's  services  in  this  respect.  Mr.
Spencer's  treatise  certainly  contains  enough  that  is  original.

The  second  part  of  the  volume  is  devoted  to  what  the
author  calls  the  "  Inductions  of  Sociology."  In  this  place  he
considers  systematically  the  principle,  many  times  enunciated
in  the  course  of  his  works,  of  the  fundamental  analogy  be-

SOCIETY  AS  AN  ORGANISM.  209

tween  society  and  an  organism.*  In  support  of  this  prin-
ciple he  brings  forward  an  immense  array  of  illustrations  and
comparisons  from  biology  and  physiology,  and  enters  into  a
systematic  classification  of  all  the  principal  types  of  society
found  upon  the  globe.  He  admits  that  between  a  society
and  an  organism  there  exist,  along  with  the  very  many  analo-
gies so  fully  brought  forward  by  him,  a  number  of  impor-
tant points  of  divergence.  The  social  organism  is  discrete,
i.  e.,  while  it  consists  of  many  individual  units,  these  units
are  not  intimately  bound  together  like  the  cells  of  an  animal
or  a  plant,  but  are  wholly  independent  of  one  another.  In
a  word,  the  mode  of  integration  is  wholly  different.  A  so-
ciety is  asymmetrical  while  an  organism  is  symmetrical,  i.  e.,
there  is  no  definite  and  fixed  shape  to  the  former.  Each  of
the  units  of  a  social  organism  possesses  independent  sensa-
tion, and  is  not  subordinate  in  this  respect  to  higher  centers
of  sensation.  It  has  no  sensorium.  A  common  mode  of
growth  as  well  as  of  decay,  in  societies,  is  by  migration,
which  has  no  analogy  in  biology.  Finally,  Mr.  Spencer  ad-
mits that  the  analogies  between  society  and  organic  beings
possess  no  further  significance  than  that  of  showing  the
mutual  dependence  of  parts  displayed  by  both.  There  is  no
causal  relation  connecting  the  one  with  the  other,  but  it  is
still  instructive  to  compare  the  two  aggregates  through  the
several  phases  of  their  development.

It  might,  indeed,  be  said  that  all  evolving  aggregates  ex-
hibit the  same  analogies  that  are  exhibited  by  organisms  and
societies.  The  chief  service  that  has  been  done  in  pointing
out  these  analogies  so  minutely  has  been  that  of  demonstrat-
ing by  means  of  them  that  society  is  an  evolving  aggregate.
This  was  the  truth  that  most  needed  demonstration,  being
the  one' commonly  called  in  question.  The  denial  of  this
proposition  is  fatal  to  all  attempts  to  study  sociology  as  a
branch  of  science.  Ko  one  doubts  now  that  organisms  may
be  legitimately  so  studied.  When,  therefore,  it  is  shown
*  Cf,  Ernst  Haeckel,  "Das  Protistenreich,"  S.  16-18.

210  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

that  nearly  all  the  phenomena  which  a  living  creature  pre-
sents are  directly  conaparable  to  exactly  corresponding  phe-
nomena in  society,  the  strongest  proof  that  can  be  presented
of  the  scientific  character  of  social  processes  has  been  fur-
nished. And  when  it  is  shown  that  society  has  passed
through  all  the  stages  of  evolution  that  living  creatures
have,  and  has  been  subject  to  all  the  laws,  principles,  and
processes  of  evolution  in  general,  the  case  seems  to  be  pretty
thoroughly  made  out.  From  a  confused,  chaotic,  homoge-
neous state,  still  represented  by  many  low  tribes,  there  have
gone  on  both  differentiation  and  integration.  From  the
several  degrees  of  social  differentiation  shown  by  different
races,  a  classification  of  societies  is  made  possible.

Mr.  Spencer  establishes  four  general  classes  or  principal
grades  of  social  development — the  simple,  the  compound,
the  doubly  compound,  and  the  trebly  compound.  Roughly
stated,  simple  societies  embrace  the  true  savages ;  compound
societies,  barbarians ;  doubly  compound  societies,  semi-civil-
ized races ;  and  trebly  compound  societies,  civilized  and  en-
lightened nations.  Each  of  these  great  groups  is  further
subdivided  with  reference  to  the  degree  to  which  headship
prevails,  and  these  lesser  groups  in  turn  are  classified  accord-
ing as  the  races  embraced  under  them  are  nomadic,  partially
settled,  or  completely  settled.

This  classification  of  societies  constitutes  an  important
contribution  to  ethnography,  as  we  have  only  to  glance  over
the  tables  to  determine  the  true  social  position  of  any  given
tribe  or  race.

In  all  these  stages  of  social  progress,  there  are  differentia-
tion, integration,  and  segregation,  progress  toward  the  heter-
ogeneous, toward  the  definite,  accompanied  by  the  rhythmic
movements  characteristic  of  approaching  equilibration.  In
short,  the  progress  of  society  has  been  brought  about  by  the
uniform  laws  of  evolution,  and  certain  smaller  social  aggre-
gates have  completed  their  entire  course,  reached  the  condi-
tion of  equilibrium,  and  disappeared  under  the  laws  of  final

HEADSHIP.— MARRIAGE.  211

dissolution  {supra,  p.  167,  note).  At  tlie  same  time  the  gen-
eral process  of  integration,  bj  which  all  the  different  races,
nations,  and  societies  on  the  globe  become  more  and  more
dependent  upon  one  another,  has  been  constantly  going  on  ;
and  the  time  may  be  foreseen  when  all  the  societies  on  the
earth  will  be  bound  together  bj  a  system  of  commercial,  in-
dustrial, and  perhaps  political  nerves  and  sinews.

In  the  remainder  of  the  volume  the  author  treats  of  the
domestic  relations,  but  confines  himself  almost  exclusively
to  the  subject  of  marriage.  In  no  part  of  the  entire  work
does  his  mastery  of  the  facts  tell  more  powerfully  than  in
this.  We  have  here  a  true  basis  in  observed  fact,  in  re-
corded observation,  derived  from  real  men  and  compiled
from  all  quarters  of  the  globe,  which  enables  us  to  speak
confidently  as  to  the  true  nature  of  man.

The  relations  of  the  sexes,  which  are  alone  considered  in
Volume  I,  are  shown  to  be  exceedingly  varied.  Every  one
a  little  informed  knows  already  that,  taking  the  mass  of
mankind,  even  now,  the  preponderant  form  of  marriage  is
what  is  popularly  known  as  polygamy,  i.  e.,  plurality  of
wives.  Not,  of  course,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  men  have
more  than  one  wife,  for  this  would  require  a  great  disparity
of  numbers  in  the  sexes,  which  is  nowhere  found.  But,  tak-
ing the  population  of  the  globe  by  nations  and  races,  by  far
the  greater  part  sanction  polygamy,  and  practice  it  as  far  as
the  circumstances  will  permit.  Whatever,  therefore,  monog-
amous peoples  may  believe,  and  however  sound  their  opin-
ions may  be  respecting  the  benefits  and  the  social  and  moral
superiority  of  their  custom,  it  is  clearly  absurd  to  declaim
against  the  prevailing  custom  of  the  world  and  brand  it  as  a
"sister  superstition."  It  is  monogamy  rather  than  polyg-
amy that  is  on  trial,  and,  as  Mr.  Spencer  shows,  there  is  a
strong  prejudice  among  polygamists  against  the  monoga-
mous innovation.  But,  besides  these  two  principal  forms  of
marriage,  there  is  also  a  third,  not  uncommon  among  certain

212  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

tribes,  viz.,  polyandry,  or  a  plurality  of  husbands.  Neither
is  this  purely  exceptional  and  anomalous.  More  than  a
dozen  tribes  in  the  Old  and  New  World  are  known  to  prac-
tice it,  and  in  some  peculiar  districts  it  would  seem  to  have
grown  up  in  harmony  with  the  economic  and  industrial  de-
mands of  the  surroundings.  In  some  cases  its  origin  can  be
readily  traced  to  the  custom  that  the  deceased  husband's
brother  must  marry  the  widow,  and  to  that  of  regarding  a
man's  wife  as  also  the  wife  of  all  his  brothers.  In  a  num-
ber of  cases,  polyandiy  and  polygyny  are  shown  to  co-exist,
which  would  at  first  sight  seem  to  be  a  very  natural  re-
sult. Indeed,  in  one  form  they  no  doubt  always  do  co-
exist, though  polyandry  then  usually  verges  on  prostitution,
but  as  much  must  also  be  said  for  monogamous  countries.
In  addition  to  these  three  settled  forms  of  marriage,  there
also  prevail  numerous  peculiar,  anomalous,  and  unsettled
customs  among  certain  low  races  governing  the  relations  of
the  sexes.  These  can  scarcely  be  called  marriage,  and  form
the  transition  from  simple  promiscuity  to  the  settled  forms
of  marriage.

Many  animals  seem  to  have  risen  above  complete  promis-
cuity, as  where  the  birds  choose  their  mates,  and  even  snakes
and  fishes  often  remain  faithful  to  their  first  attachments.
But,  among  the  very  lowest  tribes  of  men,  there  is  found  a
condition  of  absolute  promiscuity,  such  as  is  exemplified  by
domestic  animals.

Nothing  is  better  adapted  to  confirm  the  conviction  of
man's  animal  origin  than  this  study  of  the  relations  of  the
sexes.  We  here  see  that  society  has  come  into  existence  only
through  the  adoption  of  some  more  or  less  settled  form  of
marriage.  Originally,  without  any  guide  whatever,  the
human  race  has  been  groping  about  after  some  plan  by  which
its  posterity  could  be  protected.  The  various  forms  of  mar-
riage are  the  result  of  this  prolonged  effort.  Tribes  in
which  no  marriage  exists  are  always  sparse,  and  can  not  be-
come populous.    They  have  no  successful  mode  of  protecting

FORMS  OF  MARRIAGE.  213

their  offspring,  and  these  consequently  perish  in  a  thousand
ways  before  reaching  maturity.  In  this  respect  they  are  like
other  animals.  Temporary  marriage,  such  as  exists  in  some
places,  is  better  than  none.  Polyandry  arises  where  a  portion
of  the  male  members  must  spend  a  large  part  of  their  time
away  from  their  children.  In  such  cases  one  of  the  hus-
bands remains  behind  and  protects  them.  Such  is  the  case  in
Thibet  and  other  mountainous  pastoral  regions.  It  becomes
a  substitute  for  pure  nomadism.  Among  warlike  tribes  po-
lygyny is  the  first  and  principal  settled  form  of  marriage.
There  is  a  peculiar  adaptation  of  this  form  to  militant  com-
munities, where  the  men  are  all  w^arriors,  and  therefore  the
natural  protectors  of  children  and  non-combatants.  And
with  them  the  number  of  wives  and  of  children  is  compara-
tively unimportant.  Finally,  in  countries  where  war  has
ceased  to  form  the  leading  occupation  of  the  male  popula-
tion, and  where  agriculture  and  other  peaceful  industries
have  taken  its  place,  the  large  degree  of  male  celibacy  en-
forced by  polygyny  not  only  becomes  a  positive  hardship,  but
is  opposed  to  the  economic  interests  of  the  people.  Few  can
support  more  than  one  wife,  while  each  man  can  generally
do  better  with  one  wife  than  with  none.  Hence  monogamy
comes  to  be  the  prevailing  form  of  marriage  among  such
peoples.  Not  only  is  this  true  of  different  nations  having
different  characteristics,  but  it  is  true  of  individuals,  groups,
and  classes  within  the  same  nation.  Thus  among  the  great
polygamous  peoples  of  Asia  this  form  of  marriage  is  chiefly
confined  to  the  influential  families  who  are  essentially  mili-
tant in  their  modes  of  living,  while  among  the  lower  indus-
trial population  monogamy  is  nearly  universal.  And  as  the
industrial  type  of  society  is  the  only  one  that  can  be  per-
manently maintained,  and  the  only  truly  healthy  condition
of  the  race,  so  monogamy,  which  is  best  adapted  to  that  type,
is  the  form  of  marriage  which  most  completely  fulfills  the
requirements  of  society,  and  the  one  which,  no  doubt,  will
eventually  become  almost  universal.    I  say  almost,  for  there

214  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPHY.

is  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  a  great  many  radical  reformers
to  hasten  the  completion  of  nature's  great  cycle  in  this  respect,
and  inaugurate  a  return  to  a  civilized  form  of  promiscuity.
These  claim,  of  course,  that  it  shall  possess  none  of  the  coarse
and  repugnant  features  of  the  savage  custom,  shall  be
founded  on  the  absolute  freedom  and  choice  of  the  parties,
and  that  offspring  under  their  system  shall  receive  even
greater  protection  at  the  hands  of  the  community  and  the  par-
ents than  they  receive  under  the  monogamous  system.  Such
idealists  can  not  be  suppressed ;  they  can  only  be  told  that
the  age  is  not  yet  ripe  for  this  mode  of  artificially  advancing
the  social  state,  and  that  to  most  minds  their  ideas  are  repug-
nant. It  is,  nevertheless,  true  that  there  is  much  room  for
improving  the  system  of  monogamy,  and  undoubtedly  the
progress  of  liberal  and  enlightened  sentiment  in  monogamous
countries  will  eventually  remove  the  present  strait-jacket  in
which  society  now  so  awkwardly  labors.

The  remaining  parts  of  the  "  Sociology,"  so  far  as  pub-
lished, furnish  a  fair  indication  of  what  the  whole  will  be,
but  they  are  necessarily  so  laden  with  illustrative  facts  as  to
render  them  less  attractive  than  Mr.  Spencer's  previous  works,
and  afford  him  less  opportunity  to  display  his  accustomed
powers  of  logical  analysis  and  his  wonted  originality.  It  is
probably  for  this  reason  that  some  have  supposed  that  Mr.
Spencer's  mental  vigor  was  declining,  but  those  who  enter-
tained this  view  were  generally  convinced  of  their  mistake
after  the  appearance  of  the  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  which  he
paused  from  his  regular  work  to  prepare.

It  would  scarcely  be  fair  to  pass  judgment  upon  the  work
at  its  present  stage,  and  we  shall,  therefore,  forbear  to  discuss
it,  and  be  content  to  await  its  completion.  It  may  not,  how-
ever, be  improper  to  remark  that  there  are  some  competent
ethnographers  who  are  somewhat  disappointed  with  his  mode
of  treating  the  subjects  handled  in  the  work,  and  who  regard
some  of  his  reasoning  as  unsound.  The  belief  is  growing  in
the  minds  of  careful  students  of  savage  life  that  the  ultimate

THE  "DATA  OF  ETHICS."  215

basis  of  regulative  institutions  must  be  sought  in  the  facts
which  cluster  round  the  conception  of  marriage  and  kinship,
and  that  the  course  of  the  evolution  of  government  and  of
other  institutions  has  been  fundamentally  different  from  that
marked  out  by  Mr,  Spencer.

The  "  Data  of  Etldcsr — Mr.  Spencer's  justification  for
this  work,  written  and  published  in  advance  of  its  natural
place  in  his  general  system  in  view  of  the  possibility,  if
deferred,  of  its  failing  to  be  reached,  may  be  gathered  from
the  following  passage  of  the  preface :  "  Few  things  can  hap-
pen more  disastrous  than  the  decay  and  death  of  a  regulative
system  no  longer  fit,  before  another  and  fitter  regulative  sys-
tem has  grown  up  to  replace  it."

Readers  of  his  works  had  been  led  to  suspect  his  loyalty
to  the  established  code  of  morals  by  frequent  previous  utter-
ances.* Such  intimations  were  found  in  his  earlier  works
which  preceded  his  "  Synthetic  Philosophy,"  and  throughout
the  latter  this  respect  was  occasionally  manifested.  It  ap-
peared strange  that  a  writer  whose  works  had  cleaved  so
thoroughly  the  superstitions  and  traditions  of  his  time,  and
acquired  the  reputation  of  being  so  radical  and  profound  on
most  subjects,  should  evince  so  high  a  regard  for  the  prevail-
ing code  of  morals,  and  the  world  was  prepared  to  expect  in
the  "Data  of  Ethics"  to  find  the  elements,  at  least,  of  a
new  system  of  morality — a  substitute  for  the  existing  sys-
tem. In  this  it  was  destined  to  be  disappointed.  It  is  true
that  he  would  do  away  with  the  coarse  incentives  of  fear
and  hope,  and  make  conduct  to  spring  from  a  higher  regard
for  the  interests  of  others,  but  this  is  the  direction  in  which
the  prevailing  system  is  obviously  tending.  His  scheme  of
morals  rests,  like  the  old  one,  wholly  upon  the  feelings,  and
his  ideas  of  the  manner  in  which  conduct  is  to  be  controlled

♦See  "First  Principles,"  pp.  U7,  118;  also,  frequently  in  his  "Study  of
Sociology,"  The  passages  in  the  "  Data  of  Ethics  "  in  which  he  most  clearly
intimates  the  necessity  of  an  authoritatiye  code  may  be  found  on  pages  156,
162,  IVl,  1V2.

216  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIC  PHILOSOPnY.

agree  with  those  of  the  most  ancient  moralists  in  seeking  to
make  human  actions  conform  to  certain  standards  erected
by  the  wisdom  and  experience  of  the  past.  He  nowhere
recognizes  the  important  facts,  pointed  out  in  the  Introduc-
tion to  the  present  work  {supra,  p.  10),  that  there  has  been
no  progress  in  the  character  of  these  rules  of  conduct  since
the  days  of  Confucius  and  Hillel ;  that  real  moral  advance-
ment does  not  depend  upon  such  rules,  but  upon  the  charac-
ter of  the  people ;  that  it  is  character,  created  by  other  cir-
cumstances, which  determines  the  codes  of  ethics,  and  not
the  codes  of  ethics  that  determine  the  character  of  any
people.

Failing  to  recognize  these  truths,  he  of  course  fails  to  rec-
gnize  the  deeper  truth  that,  if  any  moral  progress  is  ever  too
be  made  other  tlian  that  which  would  naturally  be  brought
about  by  the  secular  influence  of  cosmical  laws,  it  must  be
the  result  of  an  intellectual  direction  of  the  forces  of  human
nature  into  channels  of  human  advantage,  since  appeals  to
the  emotions,  though  often  productive  of  great  excitement,
are  in  the  nature  of  things  non-progressive.  He  does,  in-
deed, say  that  "  the  entire  field  of  ethics  includes  the  two
great  divisions,  personal  and  social"  (p.  281),  but  he  does
not  seem  to  think  that  society  as  a  body  has  anything  to  do
with  either.

Mr.  Spencer  regards  the  moral  phenomena  from  the  ob-
jective and  not  from  the  subjective  point  of  view.  Life,
its  duration,  maintenance,  and  perfectionment,  he  holds  to
be  the  supreme  end.*  This  is  what  we  have  denominated
the  object  of  nature  as  contradistinguished  from  happiness,
the  sum  of  pleasures,  which  is  the  object  of  sentient  beings
(vol.  i,  pp.  461,  469 ;  ii,  120,  132).  The  former  considera-
tions belong  to  the  department  of  natural  history.  They  are
natural  phenomena,  beyond  all  control  of  the  will.  Hence
they  are  not  in  any  sense  objects  of  conation  (vol.  ii,  p.  93),

*  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  14.

TPIE  "DATA  OF  ETHICS."  217

and  have  no  connection  witli  morals.  The  latter  rest  upon
the  feelings,  the  emotional  and  volitional  parts  of  mental
phenomena,  and  form  the  basis  of  all  voluntary  action.
They  are,  therefore,  the  foundations  of  a  scientific  morality.
This  distinction  has  escaped  Mr.  Spencer  throughout  all  his
works.

This  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  he  plants  himself  squarely
upon  utilitarian  principles.  Indeed,  this  book  contains  de-
cidedly the  best  defense  of  utilitarianism  that  has  yet  been
made.  Its  chief  merit  consists  in  the  thorough  and  able
manner  in  which  the  doctrine  is  pruned  of  its  crudities,  con-
fined within  its  proper  boundaries,  and  presented  as  a  reason-
able and  respectable  truth  for  acceptance.

Mr.  Spencer's  distinction  of  "  absolute  and  relative  eth-
ics "  is  something  of  an  elaboration  of  Kant's  "  pure  morals,"  *
and  may  form  the  basis  for  important  advances  in  the  com-
prehension of  the  true  character  and  limits  of  this  as  yet
crude  science.

Finally,  we  may  remark  that  the  position  to  which  Mr.
Spencer  assigns  this  science  is  difficult  to  defend.  He  else-
where strenuously  maintains  that  the  character  of  society  is
determined  by  the  character  of  its  constituent  members.f
The  phenomena  of  society  as  a  body  he  also  holds  to  be  in
the  nature  of  a  resultant  of  the  activities  of  its  individual  com-
ponents. And  yet  he  places  the  science  of  sociology  below
that  of  morality,  i.  e.,  considers  the  phenomena  of  the  com-
posite body  prior  to  those  of  its  components  whose  resultant
it  is.

Of  the  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  as  of  all  the  rest  of  Mr.  Spen-
cer's works,  it  must  be  said  that  it  persistently  cHngs  to  the
pure  and  better  established  statical  aspects  of  the  subject
treated,  rarely  rising  into  the  passively  dynamic,  and  never
into  the  actively  dynamic  {supra,  p.  56),  or  applied,  de-
partment.    Notwithstanding  the  claims  of  his  "Synthetic

*  "  Kritik  der  reinen  Vernunft,"  S.  840.

f  "  First  Principles,"  p.  133 ;  "  Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  chap.  ii.

218  SPENCER'S  SYNTHETIO  PHILOSOPHY.

Philosophy  "  to  rank  as  a  system,  it  is  not  itself  in  strictness
such,  though  a  somewhat  systematic,  and  certainly  very  able,
co-ordination  of  the  greater  part  of  all  known  truth.  But  it
is  expository,  not  constructive.  This  gives  it  a  cliaracter  of
great  solidity  and  respectability.  All  systems  necessarily
involve  much  that  the  world  calls  chimerical.  It  is  impos-
sible to  construct  a  logical  and  symmetrical  edifice  of  thought
without  going  both  below  and  above  the  familiar  range  of
common  experience,  and  enunciating  propositions,  whether
true  or  false,  which  the  popular  mind,  or  even  the  general
sentiment  of  the  most  enlightened  portion  of  the  commu-
nity, will  refuse  to  accept,  and  will  pronounce  Utopian.
This  fact  might  have  been  enumerated  among  the  many
modes  in  which  human  progress  tends  to  defeat  itself  (vol.  i,
p.75;ii,  71).

Mr.  Spencer  has  steadfastly  declined  to  be  drawn  by  his
logic  into  anything  that  even  the  most  incredulous  could  call
a  vagary.  Ko  man  probably  ever  wrote  as  much  as  he  has
written  without  saying  more  that  the  average  judgment  of
mankind  could  not  indorse  as  soon  as  presented.  This  is
due  to  the  firm  manner  in  which  his  reason  is  enthroned,
and  the  all-sided  and  practical  wisdom  with  which  his  ex-
tensive information  enables  him  to  survey  every  problem.
But  it  is  just  these  qualities  that  render  him  unsystematic,
non-constructive,  and  non-progressive.  Paradoxical  as  it
may  sound,  and  whether  it  be  construed  as  complimentary
or  otherwise,  Mr.  Spencer  has  too  much  good  sense  and
too  much  real  knowledge  to  build  a  perfect  system  of  phi-
losophy. Should  he  be  tempted  to  undertake  it,  the  objec-
tions to  certain  parts  essential  to  its  symmetry  would  present
themselves  so  vividly  that  he  could  not  resist  the  feeling  that
the  whole  system  was  vitiated  and  untenable,  and  would
renounce  his  design.  Much  less  could  he  go  back  to  the
initial  steps  in  the  aggregation  of  ultimate  atoms,  or  on,  to
revel  in  dreams  of  future  social  perfection  in  a  millennial
age.

THE   "DATA  OF  ETHICS."  219

What  lie  has  given  us  is  something  wholly  different  from
this.  He  has  taken  the  materials  which  the  world  already
possessed  and  made  the  most  of  them.  He  has  accepted  the
estate  which  human  thought  and  labor  have  bequeathed,  and
fitted  it  up  for  the  occupancy  of  a  higher  and  nobler  race  of
beings.

I

CHAPTER  III.

PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.

COSMOGENY* — GENESIS   OF   MATTER CHEMICAL   RELATIONS.

Scientific  categories — Matter — Motion — Force  or  energy — ^Laws  of  aggregation
— Relation — Effect  of  narrow  ideas  of  magnitude — The  ultimate  atom —
Time  and  space — The  true  nature  of  force — Segregation  among  aggregates
— Compound  aggregation — Composite  character  of  the  nervous  system,  and
the  phenomena  of  multiple  consciousness — Probable  composite  character  of
the  chemical  elements — Transcendental  chemistry — Formation  of  the  inor-
ganic compounds — Cosmical  history  of  the  earth — Theory  of  the  develop-
ment of  celestial  systems — Cosmic  and  organic  evolution — Radiation  a
counter-force  to  gravitation — Cosmical  creation  of  the  chemical  elements —
Significant  relations  of  the  bodies  of  the  solar  system — Constitution  of  the
earth  and  original  formation  of  its  crust  and  interior — Elements  and  com-
pounds compared — Organic  compounds — The  properties  of  matter  consid-
ered as  relations  among  their  molecular  activities — Comparison  of  the
molecules  of  different  elements — Properties  of  compounds  more  active  than
those  of  elements — Great  relative  size  of  the  molecules  of  organic  com-
pounds— Continuity  between  the  inorganic  and  organic  compounds.

True  scientific  progress  tends  constantly  to  increase  the
number  of  known  facts  and  to  reduce  the  number  of  funda-
mental concepts.  As  the  phenomena  are  multiplied  and
specialized,  the  laws  are  unified  and  generalized.  As,  under
the  law  of  parsimony,  it  is  bad  logic  to  appeal  to  the  preter-
natural where  the  natural  will  suffice,  so  it  should  be  re-
garded as  bad   logic  to   invoke  two  principles  where  one

*  I  have  preferred  this  to  the  common  form  cosmogony  chiefly  for  the  sake
of  making  it  conform  more  strictly  with  the  corresponding  heads  of  the  four
following  chapters.  Though  not  in  use,  I  believe,  it  is  certainly  immaterial,  from
an  etymological  point  of  view,  which  of  these  roots  is  employed.

SCIENTIFIC  CATEGORIES.  221

priuciple  is  adequate.*  It  is  in  obedience  to  the  first  of
these  postulates  that  theology  has  been  eliminated  from  sci-
ence, and  it  is  by  a  recognition  of  the  second  of  these  postu-
lates that  most  of  the  once  so  numerous  ontological  concep-
tions have  one  by  one  been  banished  from  the  same  field.
The  classification  of  the  sciences  has  for  one  of  its  chief  ends
so  to  generalize  their  fundamental  laws  as  to  arrive  as  nearly
at  a  single  universal  law  as  the  human  mind  is  capable  of
doing,  and  in  this  attempt  the  effort  has  also  to  be  made  to
penetrate  to  the  absolute  foundation  or  suhstratum  of  the
universe,  and  limit  the  number  of  categories  until  further
reduction  is  impossible.

In  pursuance  of  this  purpose,  the  scientific  thought  of
this  age  has  successfully  pruned  away  the  complicated  sys-
tem of  former  ages  until  it  may  be  said  to  have  narrowed  the
bases  of  the  universe  down  to  three  fundamental  elements
which  may  be  respectively  designated  as  matter,  motion,  and
energy.  In  the  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  reduce
them  still  further,  it  has  been  sought  to  eliminate  matter  and
also  to  eliminate  energy.  That  one  or  the  other  of  these  at-
tempts will  prove  successful,  there  is  much  cause  to  hope.
The  chief  contest  going  on  at  the  present  time  among  scien-
tific thinkers  is  between  these  two  views.  Those  who  would
resolve  matter  into  centers  of  force  may  be  said  to  constitute
the  school  of  dynamists  (vol.  i,  p.  158),  while  those  who
would  reduce  all  forms  of  energy  to  modes  of  motion  in
matter  should  be  satisfied  with  the  designation  materialists,
notwithstanding  a  certain  groundless  stigma  which  popular
abuse  and  confusion  of  the  term  have  contrived  to  fasten
upon  it.  Both  theories  are  perfectly  legitimate  scientific
attempts  to  enlarge  the  conceptions  of  the  universe  by  seek-
ing in  each  case  to  abolish  a  supposed  redundant  factor  in  its
fundamental  elements.

Whatever  may  be  the  charm  of  superior  purity  and  free-
dom from  reproach  which  attaches  to  the  dynamistic  theory,

*  Entia  non  sunt  creanda  praeter  necessitatem.
11

222  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

and  however  well  it  may  seem  to  satisfy  many  of  the  facta
which  nature  presents,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  tlie  prog-
ress of  physical  science  from  the  first  has  steadily  pointed
in  the  direction  of  the  recognition  of  the  ideality  of  matter^
and  it  has  been  invariably  found  necessary  to  assume  such
reality  as  an  hypothesis,  if  for  no  other  purpose,  in  order  to
obtain  a  basis  for  the  interpretation  of  the  facts  of  every  sci-
ence. I  need  but  refer,  in  illustration  of  this  remark,  to  the
extraordinary  development  whicii  the  science  of  chemistry
has  recently  undergone  under  the  stimulus  of  the  atomic
theory,  which  is  nothing  less  than  a  recognition  of  the  real-
ity and  material  constitution  of  the  minute  objects  with
which  that  science  has  to  deal.

The  object  of  all  science  is  truth,  and  that  of  philosophy
should  be  the  same.  The  acceptance  of  the  materialistic
hypothesis,  therefore,  rather  than  the  dynamistic  one,  needs
no  further  apology  than  to  say  that  it  appears  to  bear  the
strongest  marks  of  inherent  verity.

Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  energy  as  an  entity ^
however,  do  not  by  any  means  deny  it  as  a  relation.  And
this  is  all  they  are  willing  to  admit  for  motion.  They  will
concede  but  one  entity,  matter,*  but  this  may  have  numerous
relations  which  will  increase  in  number  and  variety  as  the
process  of  material  aggregation  advances.  Of  matter  re-
garded as  multiple  there  can  exist  two,  and  but  two,  primary
relations,  those  of  co-existence  and  sequence.

Besides  matter  itself,  only  the  relations  of  matter  can  be
conceived  to  exist.  The  most  important  relation  of  matter
is  motion — i.  <?,,  change  of  position  of  its  parts  in  space.  This
always  occupies  time.  Changes  of  position  of  matter  in  space,
conceived  either  as  taking  place  (dynamically),  or  as  having
taken  place  (statically),  come  under  the  logical  category  of  co-
existence. Considered  with  reference  to  the  time  occupied,
they  belong  to  the  logical  category  of  sequence.  These  two
categories  embrace  all  conceivable  or  possible  phenomena.
*  "  Tangere  enim  et  tangi  nisi  corpus  nulla  potest  res." — Ldcrktius.

SCIENTIFIC  CATEGORIES.  223

Therefore  motion,  conceived  both  as  taking  place  (actual)
and  as  having  taken  place  or  capable  of  taking  place  (poten-
tial), is  the  one  relation  which  involves  all  relations.  Re-
solve it  into  its  two  elements,  and  we  have  on  the  one  liand
change,  and  on  the  other  difference.  All  relations  are  re-
ducible to  these  two.

The  two  questions  at  the  bottom  of  all  philosophy  are
— 3 .  "What  should  be  understood  by  the  term  matter  ?  and,
2.  What  should  be  understood  by  the  term  relation  ?

In  seeking  to  answer  the  first  of  these  questions  we  only
state  the  results  of  all  scientific  investigation  when  we  say
that  matter  is  what  it  seems  to  be.  It  is  not  the  study  of
matter  that  has  taught  the  world  a  contrary  lesson.  It  is
only  the  deductions  of  the  intellect,  divorced  from  the  thing
it  would  instruct  us  about,  that  have  created  the  wide  spread
impression  that  we  know  nothing  of  matter,  that  the  senses
are  false  guides,  and  even  that  no  such  thing  as  matter  exists.

Ho^^ever  true  it  may  be  that  early  vulgar  impressions
are  usually  erroneous  (vol.  i,  pp.  45-52),  it  is  not  thus  in
the  case  of  man's  intuitive  ideas  of  the  nature  of  matter.
And,  stranger  still,  this,  which  was  supposed  to  be  nature's
greatest  deception,  proves  to  be  no  deception  at  all,  and
every  truly  scientific  effort  brought  to  bear  upon  the  problem
serves  to  vindicate  more  and  more  completely  the  primary
deliverances  of  sense.  The  metaphysicians  tell  us  that  it  is
impossible  for  mind  to  come  in  contact  with  matter;  that  the
existence  of  an  external  world  is  revealed  to  us,  if  revealed
at  all,  by  means  of  images  which  have  no  relation  or  resem-
blance to  the  objects  which  we  imagine  we  perceive.  This,
physical  science  denies,  and  asserts  that  not  only  does  the
real  matter  of  external  objects  come  into  actual  contact  with
the  real  matter  of  the  physical  organism,  but  that  the  com-
munications which  this  contact  makes  with  the  sensorium
are  made  by  means  of  actual  changes  in  the  matter  of  the
nerves  and  the  brain.  The  objects  are  not  even  "trans-
figured," but  the  qualities  perceived  are  directly  cognized,

224:  PRIMARY  AGGREGATIOK— COSMOGENY.

the  form  of  the  object  depending  upon  the  number  and  nat-
ure of  the  qualities  brought  into  contact  with  sense.

But  still  the  question  will  be  asked,  What  is  matter?  A
definition  of  matter  is  impossible.  Matter  is  the  final  limit
in  the  definition  of  every  thing  else.  Any  definition  would
involve  the  use  of  terms  requiring  the  notion  of  matter  to
define  them.  When  we  have  said  that  matter  is  what  it  ap-
pears to  be,  we  have  defined  it  as  far  as  it  admits  of  defini-
tion. But,  while  the  term  matter  can  not  be  defined,  some-
thing may,  perhaps,  be  said  with  regard  to  the  ultimate
constitution  of  matter.  Although  the  vulgar  impression
respecting  it  is  substantially  correct,  and  the  speculations  of
the  metaphysicians  are  incorrect,  it  must  still  be  admitted
that  the  former  are  as  crude  as  the  latter  are  false.  The  vul-
gar intellect,  while  its  practical  intuitions  concerning  ma-
terial objects  are  in  the  main  just,  practical,  and  reliable,
nevertheless  has  no  adequate  conception  of  the  subtilty  of
matter.  It  has  no  idea  of  the  minuteness  of  its  ultimate
divisions.  It  looks  upon  matter  wholly  from  a  molar  point
of  view,  and  knows  nothing  of  molecular  phenomena.  If
molecular  phenomena  are  presented  to  such  an  intellect,  they
are  not  referred  to  the  material  category  at  all.  The  phe-
nomena of  light,  heat,  electricity,  and  even  of  gases,  as  in
the  atmosphere,  are  not  considered  as  material  agencies.
But  this  only  proves  that  the  manifestations  of  matter  are
governed  by  uniform  laws,  whatever  the  magnitude  of  the
aggregates  which  operate  to  produce  those  manifestations.
I  do  not  mean  that  there  is  any  thing  in  molar  phenomena
which  precisely  corresponds  with  some  of  the  manifestations
of  molecular  phenomena,  but  simply  that  there  is  nothing  in
molecular  phenomena  which  indicates  that  matter  in  the
molecular  state  is  controlled  by  any  different  laws  from  those
which  control  it  in  the  mass.  The  most  successful  experi-
ments in  molecular  physics  have  been  those  that  have  pro-
ceeded on  the  assumption  that  tho  so-called  molecular  forces
were  simply  the  manifestations  of  ordinary  matter  in  ex-

RELATIVITY  OF  MAGNITUDE.  225

tremelj  minute  particles  acting  relatively  to  each  other  and
to  other  objects  precisely  as  larger  particles  would  act  under
analogous  conditions.

But  is  there  any  limit  to  the  divisibility  of  material  mole-
cules ?  Here  the  confines  of  the  unknown  are  reached.  Sci-
ence simply  confesses  its  ignorance.  Science  has  no  opin-
ions. It  either  knows  or  it  does  not  know.  But  philosophy
claims  this  field,  and,  without  being  dogmatic,  exercises  the
right  of  discussion.  It  is  a  common  fallacy  in  human  rea-
soning to  judge  all  things  by  the  standards  which  the  human
faculties  set  up.  It  is  only  another  form  of  this  universal
anthropomorphism  which  looks  upon  matter  itself  from  this
same  stand-point.  Man's  ideas  of  great  and  small  relate  to
his  own  bodily  dimensions,  to  the  magnitude  of  the  common
objects  that  immediately  surround  him,  and  to  the  power  of
his  senses  to  perceive  objects.  There  is,  therefore,  a  certain
range  of  magnitude  which  men  set  up  as  the  standard  by
which  to  compare  and  judge  each  new  object ;  and  so  abso-
lute is  this  standard  that  even  wise  and  great  men  have  fre-
quently followed  the  example  of  the  unthinking  mass,  and
substituted  this  range  of  the  human  faculties  for  the  range
of  nature's  powers.  We  sometimes  plainly  gather,  from  the
general  tone  of  a  treatise,  that  its  author  supposes  it  impos-
sible that  anything  should  be  so  great  or  so  small  as  the  hy-
pothesis he  may  be  combating  would  require.  And,  while
few  occasions  arise  for  making  an  express  avowal  of  this
kind  of  doctrinCjUhere  is  no  doubt  that  a  vague  notion  of
the  kind  pervades  all  speculation  concerning  the  nature  of
matter,  and  serves  to  render  a  clear  conception  of  that  nature
impossible.  I  do  not  know  where  it  has  ever  been  positively
declared  and  laid  down  as  a  distinct  postulate  of  philosophy,
that  there  is  no  limit  to  the  conceivable  range  of  magnitude
among  the  atoms  and  aggregates  of  matter.  If  we  adopt  the
hypothesis  of  an  ultimate,  finite,  indivisible  atom  as  the  unit
of  the  universe,  there  is  really  no  more  difficulty  in  conceiv-
ing that  atom  as  much  smaller  than  the  smallest  object  now

226  PRIMARY  AGGREGATIOK— COSMOGENY.

recognizable  under  the  highest  microscopic  power  yet  in-
vented as  that  object  is  smaller  than  the  sun  or  Sirius,  than
there  is  in  conceiving  that  atom  large  enough  to  be  seen  by
such  a  high-power  microscope.  And  it  would  be  as  irra-
tional to  argue  that,  because  we  are  unable,  with  all  our  ap-
pliances for  intensifying  the  power  of  the  senses,  to  perceive
the  ultimate  atom,  it  therefore  can  possess  no  material  ex-
istence, as  it  would  have  been  before  these  artificial  appli-
ances were  invented  to  have  argued  that  no  object  could
exist  too  small  to  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye.  Yet  it  is,
perhaps,  not  too  much  to  say  that  all  the  refined  specula-
tions of  the  idealistic  school,  to  which  even  scientific  men
have  too  often  lent  countenance,  have  'been  due  to  the  sim-
ple fact  that  human  ingenuity  has  proved  unable  so  far  to
divide  matter  that  it  has  not  remained  capable  of  still  fur-
ther division  !

But,  while  we  make  bold  to  affirm  that  the  known  facts
and  laws  of  science  are  entirely  satisfied  with  the  hypothesis
of  an  ultimate,  indivisible  unit  of  matter,  of  which  all  ob-
jects which  appeal  in  any  manner  to  the  senses  or  the  in-
tellect are  but  aggregations,  at  the  same  time  they  do  not,
as  it  seems  to  me,  conflict  with  such  a  modification  of  that
hypothesis  as  assumes  the  actual  magnitude  of  the  material
unit  so  far  reduced  as  to  be  practically  infinitesimal.  They
only  declare,  and  they  do  this  in  the  most  emphatic  manner,
that  this  reduction  must  not  be  so  far  continued  as  to  make
the  ultimate  atom  equal  to  zero.*

There  are  certain  generalizations  which  can  not  be  longer
postponed.  It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  primary  law  of  the
human  mind  that,  whether  it  contemplates  matter  or  relation,
whether  it  considers  the  magnitude  or  the  multitude  of  the
ultimate  divisions  of  matter,  or  the  time  dunng  which  they

*  The  practice  by  mathematicians  of  confounding  infinitesimal  quantities
with  zero  can  not  fail  to  be  demoralizing  to  the  causality  of  all  students  of
mathematics.    (See,  for  example,  Loomis's  "  Algebra,"  Articles  129,  130.)

TIME  AND  SPACE.  227

have  existed  or  will  continue  to  exist,  or  the  space  through
which  they  extend — in  none  of  these  relations  is  anj  positive
limit  conceivable  or  thinkable.  Whatever  the  concrete  fact
may  be,  an  ultimate  atom  is  by  the  laws  of  thought  inconceiv-
able, since,  such  a  finite  body  once  reached,  the  mind  can  not
help  declaring  its  further  divisibility  possible.  Similarly  no
time  can  be  fixed  for  the  commencement  of  the  existence  of
matter,  but  that  its  existence  prior  to  that  time  is  a  necessary
product  of  thought.  The  only  escape  from  this  necessity  is
in  ceasing  to  think  about  it.  Again,  no  limit  can  be  set  in
space,  either  in  all  directions  or  in  any  direction,  beyond
which  other  space  must  not  be  necessarily  thought,  although
the  filling  of  that  space  with  matter  is  not  a  necessary  ad-
junct of  this  conception.  And  here  the  notions  of  time  and
space  seem  to  differ,  although  the  difference  is  not  real.
There  is  no  absolute  difficulty  in  conceiving  time  without
matter,  any  more  than  there  is  in  conceiving  space  without
matter.  The  difficulty  in  the  former  case  arises  only  from
the  fact  that  matter  now  exists,  and  therefore  no  point  of
time  can  be  conceived  at  which  it  did  not  equally  exist,  or
at  which  from  non-existence  it  could  have  commenced  to
exist.  But  these  have  become  truisms.  What  it  interests
us  to  remark  is  the  necessary  recognition  of  infinity  as  the
only  limit,  if  such  it  can  be  called,  which  the  mind  will
admit  of  when  it  really  thinks  about  these  things.  In  all
things  we  find  ourselves  within  a  limited  field  beholding
limited  parts  of  a  whole  which  we  are  obliged  to  conceive
as  infinite.  The  finite  is  nothing  else  than  one  of  these
parts  cut  out,  as  it  were,  of  this  infinite  whole.

Whatever  is  true  of  matter  is  also  true  of  its  relations.
For,  while  relations  are  nothing  in  themselves,  it  is  only  by
means  of  them  that  matter  is  recognizable.  Perfectly  inert
matter,  could  this  be  conceived  to  exist,  could  produce  no
effect  on  the  sentient  world.  The  relations  of  matter  are  its
properties.  Matter  without  relations  would  be  matter  with-
out properties.     This  is  said  to  be  inconceivable,  but  is  so

228  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

only  in  a  certain  sense.  The  primary  relation  or  property
of  matter  is  the  change  of  place  of  its  particles.  This  im-
plies much  absolute  void  space  and  distinctly  negatives  the
plenuTn.  All  the  properties  of  matter  are  the  results  of  this
primary  property  variously  compounded  and  complicated  in
the  process  of  aggregation.  This  primary  relation  is  simply
motion,  and  the  progress  of  experimental  science  is  daily
referring  new  properties,  manifestations,  and  phenomena  of
the  material  world  to  this  simple  principle.  Already  heat
and  light  are  defined  as  "  modes  of  motion  "  ;  electricity  and
magnetism  are  also  recognized  as  such ;  and  the  law  of  the
commutation  of  the  diiferent  molecular  forces  into  one  an-
other and  into  mechanical  force,  only  goes  to  prove  experi-
mentally what  philosophy  claims  a  jpHori^  that  motion
among  the  particles  of  matter  is  the  original  cause  of  all
phenomena.

But  what  is  force  ?  Surely  here  is  something  which  is
neither  matter  nor  motion.  Not  so.  This  mysterious  enti-
ty, the  latest  survivor  of  all  ontological  conceptions  of  meta-
physical speculation,  is,  when  properly  viewed,  one  of  the
readiest  to  take  its  place  as  a  derivative  relation  of  moving
matter.  It  has  been  well  said  that  the  only  rational  con-
ception of  force  is  jpressure."^  Omnis  alteratio  jit  jper  con-
tactum.  Perhaps  a  still  clearer  conception  is  expressed  by
the  term  impact.  Everybody  understands  the  effect  of  the
impact  of  bodies.  It  is  a  branch  of  pure  mechanics  whose
laws  have  been  long  formulated  into  mathematical  equations.
These  laws  are  generally  applied  to,  and  illustrated  by,  large
aggregates  of  matter  or  masses.  But  they  are  just  as  true
of  atoms  as  of  such  masses.  What  is  called  the  momentum
or  quantity  of  motion  of  a  body  represents  the  force  with
which  that  body  will  impinge  upon  another  body  with  which
it  meets.  This  force  is  equal  to  the  product  of  its  velocity
into  its  mass,  i.  e.,  of  the  amount  of  matter  into  the  amount
of  space  it  will  pass  through  in  a  giypm  time.  And  this  is
•  Challis,  "Principles  of  Mat'  ,matical  Physics."

NATURE  OF  FORCE.  229

of  course  true,  whatever  mass  we  may  assign  to  the  body,
even  though  it  be  indefinitely  small.

That  matter  in  a  primary  or  unaggregated  state,  or  at
least  in  an  extremely  low  state  of  aggregation,  pervades  all
space  seems  highly  probable  from  the  phenomena  of  light,
heat,  etc.  That  these  phenomena  take  place  without  the
intervention  of  matter  is  not  only  contrary  to  the  laws  oi-
thought,  but  contradicts  the  testimony  of  sense,  and  is  fun-
damentally irrational.  The  units  of  this  cosmical  matter
are  so  far  below  the  range  of  our  faculties  that  it  remains,
and  will  perhaps  for  ever  remain,  impossible  to  determine
more  of  their  nature  than  is  revealed  by  these  general  phe-
nomena. Already,  however,  we  have  learned  much  about
them,  and  this  field  of  discovery  is  comparatively  a  new  one.
It  is  only  for  a  few  years  that  the  existence  of  such  an  all-
pervading  medium  has  been  admitted,  but  its  admission  has
given  us  a  comparatively  clear  idea  of  the  true  nature  of  all
the  radiant  forces.

That  the  force  of  gravitation  is  another  mode  of  mani-
festation of  some  universal  material  substance  can  scarcely
be  doubted,  although  no  clear  line  of  investigation  has  yet
been  discovered  which  promises  to  demonstrate  this  truth.
In  what  manner  this  universal  force  operates  to  produce  the
effects  which  we  constantly  perceive  is  not  yet,  and  may
never  be,  known,  but  all  analogy  points  to  the  laws  of  me-
chanical impact  as  the  true  principles  upon  which  gravitation
is  to  be  finally  explained  if  it  ever  is  explained.  The  theory
of  Le  Sage  is  doubtless  crude,  because  no  experimental  proof
has  been  brought  to  its  support ;  but  perhaps  such  a  theory
is  not  more  objectionable  than  was  the  undulatory  theory  of
light  a  century  ago.  So  far  at  least  as  we  know  the  laws
of  gravitation,  they  an»  in  harmony  with  those  of  perpetually
renewed  impact,  and  sUeh  is  the  nature  of  all  continuous
force;  bodies  under  its  influence  have  their  velocities  in-
creased at  an  accelerated  rate,  which,  for  short  distances,  is
usually  assumed  to  be  ajft,  arithmetrical  progression  with  a

230  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.-COSMOGENY.

common  difference  of  two.  But,  as  the  force  of  gravitation
acts  according  to  the  law  of  the  inverse  square  of  the  dis-
tance, this  progression  is  not  true  for  great  distances,  and
the  velocity  of  the  falling  body  is  considerably  more  ac-
celerated than  it  would  be  were  this  not  the  case.  Upon
the  hypothesis  that  gravitation  is  the  result  of  the  constant
impact  of  material  atoms  whose  velocities  toward  the  at-
tracting body  are  greater  than  in  the  opposite  direction,  it
must  be  further  assumed  that  either  their  number  or  their
velocity  is  increased  with  increased  proximity  to  that  body
in  inverse  proportion  to  the  square  of  the  distance.  The
former  assumption  is  the  more  satisfactory,  although  it
would  seem  to  require  that  there  should  be  a  greater  amount
of  cosmical  matter  near  to,  than  remote  from,  attracting
bodies.

There  also  seems  to  be  a  fundamental  antithesis  between
the  force  of  gravitation  and  that  of  radiation.  The  one  ap-
pears to  be  the  precise  opposite  of  the  other. .  The  first  is  a
force  of  concentration  by  which  all  matter  is  aggregated  into
masses,  and  each  mass  is  increased  by  all  minor  aggregates
that  come  within  its  sphere  of  attraction.  The  other  tends
constantly  to  unbind  the  material  aggregates  from  their  at-
tracting masses  and  dissipate  them  into  space  {supra,  p.  167).
But  to  this  important  principle  we  shall  presently  recur.  In
so  far  as  they  constitute  forces  their  laws  are  the  same,  and
are  one  with  those  of  the  so-called  mechanical  forces.  This
is  equally  true  of  magnetism,  chemical  attraction,  and  all
other  forces.

Force  may,  therefore,  be  defined  as  molecular  im/pact.  It
is  simply  the  effect  which  matter  in  its  motion  through  spaxie
exerts  upon  other  matter  with  which  it  coTnes  in  contact.

The  so-called  mechanical  forces  are  all  merely  results  of
the  two  cosmical  forces  referred  to.  They  are  simply  the
effects  of  these  upon  forme  of  matter  with  which  we  are
familiar.  It  is  often  remarked  that  "  every  thing  that  is  done
under  the  sun  is  done  by  it."    But  while  instances  of  the

NATURE  OF  FORCE.  231

direct  or  indirect  influence  of  the  radiant  forces  are  most
frequent  in  human  economic  devices,  instances  of  the  utiliza-
tion of  gravitation  for  human  ends  are  not  wanting,  and  are
well  exemplified  by  the  various  applications  of  water-power,
as  well  as  by  those  of  weights  in  machinery.  But  a  "  vicious
circle  "  lurks  in  all  such  questions.*

We  thus  see  that  every  thing  which  is  not  matter  is  some
relation  between  discrete  parts  of  matter.  The  only  reality
is  matter.  It  alone  has  an  independent  possible  existence.
Such  an  independent  existence,  however,  could  only  be  on
the  condition  that  there  existed  but  a  single  ultimate  unit  of
matter.  Such  a  single  unit  could  have  no  relation,  since  a
relation  implies  two  things  at  least.  Even  the  motion  of
such  an  atom  could  not  be  termed  a  relation ;  but  the  discus-
sion of  such  a  question  would  be  pure  dialecticism.  But
increase  the  number  of  such  atoms,  and  relations  necessarily
arise.  For,  even  if  no  motion  were  supposed,  there  would
exist  relations  of  co-existence.  It  is,  however,  a  concrete
fact,  and  as  such  requires  nothing  but  simple  recognition
that  the  atoms  of  matter  are  in  motion,  at  least  relatively
to  each  other,  which  is  the  only  motion  recognizable.  Once
in  motion,  their  cessation  is  inconceivable.  No  such  coinci-
dence of  impacts  is  possible  as  shall  bring  them  all  into
equilibrium.  The  motions  of  material  particles  are  as  eter-
nal as  are  the  particles  themselves.  The  destruction  of  mo-
tion is  as  impossible  as  that  of  matter.  The  creation  of
matter  is  inconceivable;  it  must  have  existed  always,  and
hence  the  alleged  endowment  of  it  with  properties,  i.  e.,  with
motion,  is  impossible.  Such  a  supposed  endowment  implies
a  time  when  matter  had  no  properties — no  relations — which
must  have  been  a  time  when  it  had  no  existence.  The  en-
dowment of  matter  with  its  properties  is  equivalent  to  its
creation.

*  For,  if  it  be  said  that  it  is  the  sun's  influence  that  first  raises  the  water  and
the  weights,  it  is  also  claimed  that  the  sun's  heat  is  in  turn  due  to  its  contrac-
tion under  the  influence  of  the  opposite  agency  of  concentration  or  gravitation.

232  PRIMARY  AGGREGATIOIT.— 00SM0GE2TY.

The  basis  of  all  philosophy,  as  we  have  remarked,  is  the
conception  of  matter  and  its  relations,  and  it  amounts  sub-
stantially to  the  same  thing  to  say,  matter  and  its  motions,
since  all  its  relations  are  the  result  of  its  motions.

All  the  motions  of  matter  fall  under  two  general  classes :
those  which  tend  to  unite  and  those  which  tend  to  separate
the  particles  or  atoms.  It  is  these  two  opposite  classes  of
motion  among  the  particles  of  matter  which  in  their  higher
manifestations  constitute  the  gravitant  and  the  radiant  forces
of  the  universe.  We  see  them  most  obviously  in  the  force
of  gravity  as  displayed  upon  the  earth  and  among  the  bodies
of  the  solar  system,  and  in  the  phenomena  of  light  and  heat.
But  the  fundamental  effect  of  these  forces  escapes  the  ordi-
nary observation,  and  is  indeed  produced  upon  a  scale  either
far  too  minute  or  far  too  vast  to  fall  within  the  possible
direct  contemplation  of  man.

Setting  out  with  matter  assumed  to  exist  in  a  wholly  un-
aggregated  and  homogeneous  state,  but  endowed  with  inde-
structible motions  operating  in  obedience  to  these  two  laws,
the  necessary  result  must  be  that  in  certain  parts  of  space
certain  kinds  and  degrees  of  aggregation  of  matter  will  take
place.  For,  without  assuming  any  supremacy  of  one  class  of
motion  over  the  other  but  their  substantial  equality,  there
will  be  portions  of  space  in  which  the  one  class  will  prepon-
derate over  the  other,  although  this  will  be  balanced  by
other  parts  in  which  the  opposite  will  be  the  case.  If,  there-
fore, we  were  to  suppose  a  time  when  no  such  preponder-
ance existed,  it  could  not  be  long  before  this  condition  of
homogeneity  would  be  broken  up  and  one  of  heterogeneity
would  result.  And  if  at  the  imaginary  epoch  of  homo-
geneity we  assume  all  matter  to  exist  in  a  wholly  non-aggre-
gated state,  then,  as,  in  those  portions  in  which  the  force  of
disintegration  predominated,  no  change  could  take  place  be-
cause no  aggregates  would  exist  there  to  be  disintegrated,
so,  in  those  portions  in  which  the  force  of  aggregation  ex-

SEGREGATION-  AMONG  AGGREGATES.  233

isted,  change  could  take  place,  and  the  aggregation  of  matter
would  be  the  result.  On  this  principle  there  is  no  difficulty
in  accounting  for  any  degree  of  aggregation  without  assum-
ing an  excess  of  concentrative  over  dissipative  motion  in  the
universe.  For  there  must  be  supposed  to  exist  the  same
rhythmic  ebb  and  flow  in  these  fundamental  conditions  of
matter  as  are  observable  throughout  all  the  higher  mani-
festations of  these  conditions  which  we  are  able  to  study,
from  the  action  of  volcanoes  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  em-
pires, from  the  roll  of  billows  upon  the  beach  to  the  prog-
ress of  moral  principles  in  society.  And  while  it  may  be
certain  that  the  time  must  come  when  the  aggregates  now
formed  will  all  be  swept  away  by  the  great  ebb-tide  of  dis-
solution, compensated  by  a  corresponding  flood-tide  of  evolu-
tion in  another  region  of  the  universe,  still  there  is  no
necessary  limit  short  of  the  infinite,  either  to  the  duration
or  to  the  degree  of  cosmical  progress  in  those  parts  in  which
it  has  begun.  But  on  the  same  principle  it  can  be  shown  that
in  no  part  of  the  universe  can  the  unaggregated  state  exist
for  an  appreciable  period  of  time.  Such  a  state  is  one  of
absolute  homogeneity,  whose  inherent  instability  is  constantly
able  to  overthrow  it  and  bring  about  the  only  possible  state
of  heterogeneity — a  state  of  greater  or  less  aggregation.  The
cosmical  fluctuations  are  not  therefore  between  the  aggre-
gated and  the  unaggregated  state,  but  between  states  of
greater  aggregation  and  states  of  less  aggregation.

The  special  study  of  material  philosophy  is  therefore  the
aggregates  of  matter.  From  what  is  known  of  the  constitu-
tion of  matter,  it  must  be  supposed  that  there  can  exist  no
practical  limit  to  the  possible  variety  and  multiplicity  of  form,
size,  and  other  conditions,  in  material  aggregates.  But,  as
the  aggregating  force  is  perpetually  counteracted  by  the  segre-
gating force,  it  can  not  be  doubted  that  the  successful  aggre-
gates are  determined  by  a  sort  of  selection,  those  only  resist-
ing immediate  disintegration  which  possess  something  special
in  their  essential  nature  that  tits  them  to  resist  it.     In  fact,

/

234  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

tlie  law  of  the  "  survival  of  the  fittest,"  now  so  potent  in
explaining  the  formation  and  self-dependence  of  secondary
aggregates — organic  forms — must  undoubtedly  be  called  in
equally  to  explain  the  possibility  of  the  formation  of  primary
aggregates — molecules.  And  as  there  are  myriads  of  organic
forms  that  have  a  relatively  ephemeral  existence,  and  are
speedily  extinguished  in  consequence  of  their  constitutional
unfitness  to  compete  with  other  forms,  and  a  still  greater
number  of  conceivable  ones  which  succumb  to  these  influ-
ences before  they  have  fairly  taken  shape,  so  we  may  sup-
pose it  to  be  in  this  transcendental  world  of  molecular  exist-
ence, only  a  comparatively  few  of  the  conceivable  combina-
tions ever  gaining  a  foot-hold,  and  many  others  clinging  to
a  very  feeble,  precarious,  and  short-lived  existence.

We  may  further  with  great  safety  assume  that  the  proc-
ess of  aggregation  has  been  from  the  first  a  system  of  com-
jpoundi/ng  of  aggregates  previously  formed.  When  in  the
process  of  selection  already  described  certain  states  have
been  reached  which  possess  sufficient  stability  to  resist  the
disintegrating  forces  surrounding  them,  these  must  in  turn
become  units  of  aggregation  for  the  continuation  of  the
process.  There  may  thus  arise  an  indefinite  number  of
orders  of  aggregation,  in  which  the  units  are  removed  in  all
degrees  from  the  primordial  unit  of  wholly  unaggregated
matter.  To  this  law  we  see  the  clear  analogy,  at  least,  if
not  the  actual  continued  operation  in  all  the  departments  of
nature  which  have  risen  high  enough  above  the  mysterious
realm  of  molecular  existence  to  be  appreciable  by  our  senses.

In  biology  we  have  the  individuals  of  various  orders,
both  animal  and  vegetable,  in  which  the  lower  forms  are
taken  up  bodily  and  made  to  enter  as  integral  units  into  the
higher  forms.  Not  only  are  all  animals  and  plants  com-
pounded of  innumerable  cells  as  ultimate  biological  units,
but  the  earlier  forms,  which  are  aggregations  of  cells,  are
repeated  as  units  in  the  production  of  higher  forms.

The  tape-worm  is  an  animal  of  the  third  order,  the  cell

COMPOUND  AGGREGATION.  235

being  taken  as  the  first,  but  its  segments  are  so  feebly  inte-
grated that  they  possess  all  the  essential  characteristics  of  a
perfect  animal,  and  will  not  only  survive  when  separated  and
perform  all  the  functions  of  complete  life,  but  will  also  mul-
tiply themselves  and  reproduce  the  compound  organism
(vol.  i,  pp.  183,  337,  376).  In  the  higher  Annulosa  the  in-
tegration is  more  complete,  but  the  compound  character  is
still  evident.  In  the  Vertebrata  the  embryological  study  of
the  origin  and  formation  of  the  different  parts  shows  plainly
their  composite  character,  every  vertebral  segment  repre-
senting a  unit  of  organization,  while  the  number  and  variety
of  the  ganglionic  centers  in  their  nervous  systems  are  very
great,  and  the  degree  of  co-ordination  is  so  incomplete  that
many  entire  classes  of  actions  are  performed,  even  by  man,
solely  under  the  direction  of  special  nerve-centers  without
the  aid  or  even  the  knowledge  of  the  brain.  Thus  the
greater  part  of  the  difficulties  and  supposed  mysteries  of  psy-
chic phenomena  have  grown  out  of  our  ignorance  of  the
physiological  fact  that  man  and  all  other  vertebrates  are
compound  organisms,  and,  instead  of  possessing  each  a  sin-
gle mind  or  ego,  each  possesses  many  minds,  which  are  only
more  or  less  co-ordinated  and  wholly  co-ordinated  for  longer
or  shorter  periods,  and  with  respect  to  a  wider  or  narrower
range  of  functions,  depending  on  the  degree  of  organization.
In  the  vegetable  kingdom  we  have  a  still  clearer  illustra-
tion of  the  manner  in  which  the  aggregates  are  compounded.
The  cellular  plant,  as  in  Caulerpa,*  consists  of  a  simple  ag-
gregation of  cells,  although  the  form  would  indicate  a  con-
siderable degree  of  organization.  In  higher  plants  the  leaf
forms  a  new  order  of  organization,  and  this  is  usually  taken
to  represent  the  true  individual,  although  it  consists  of  cells
which  undergo  more  or  less  modification  in  the  formation  of
fibers,  vessels,  etc.  In  trees  the  process  of  compounding
has  gone  so   far  that,  considered  as  individuals,  they  may

*  Caulerpa  is  said  to  consist  of  simple  plastid  units  or  cells  without  nuclei.
— (Haeckel,  "  Schopfungsgeschichte,"  S.  409.)

236  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

reacli  their  hundredtli  degree.  And  in  each  degree  we  see
nothing  but  a  repetition  of  the  one  process  by  which  stable
aggregates  have  been  made  the  units  for  further  aggregation,
and  so  on.

If  we  contemplate  the  mineral  kingdomj  we  are  shown
the  results  of  the  same  law.  The  different  minerals  are  not
found  to  be  so  many  different  compounds  of  the  elementary
substances,  so  called,  but  consist  of  compounds  of  different
orders  in  which  simpler  compounds  enter  as  units  of  compo-
sition. Thus  feldspar  contains  silica,  alumina,  peroxide  of
iron,  lime,  soda,  potash,  magnesia,  water,  etc.,  as  units  of  its
composition,  none  of  which  is  assumed  to  exist  in  the  min-
eral in  any  simpler  state,  and  all  of  which  are  already  more
or  less  complex  chemical  compounds.

When  we  consider  the  facts  which  chemistry  furnishes
we  see  the  same  principle  or  law  in  great  simplicity.  In
many  of  the  binary,  ternary,  and  higher  compounds,  theory
requires  us  to  assume  that  the  aggregates  entering  into  them
do  so  in  their  integral  state,  and  are  not  first  decomposed  into
their  primary  elements  and  then  reorganized  into  the  new
compound.  Sulphuric  acid  (H,SOJ,  for  example,  is  com-
posed of  two  equivalents  of  hydroxyl  (HO),  and  of  theionyl
(SOj),  both  of  which  constituents  are  regarded  as  remaining
intact  in  their  composite  state  and  entering  bodily  into  the
new  compound.  The  entire  series  of  "  compound  radicals  "
requires  the  same  supposition,  and  furnishes  illustrations  of
the  same  law.

So  far,  then,  as  induction  can  be  depended  upon,  we  find
that  it  is  a  universal  law  of  the  aggregation  of  matter  that
each  new  aggregate  may  become  a  unit  for  the  formation  of
aggregates  of  higher  orders.  That  such  is  the  law  of  aggrega-
tion below  the  plane  of  human  investigation  seems,  therefore,
to  be  a  necessary  inference.

It  is  essential  to  form  a  clear  conception  of  the  nature
and  physical  constitution  of  a  molecular  aggregate.     If  the

MOLECULAR  AGGREGATES.         237

ultimate  atom  be  conceived  to  be  a  real  thing— a  quantity  of
matter  physically  indivisible,  no  matter  how  minute,  and
thus  essentially  impermeable  and,  as  we  may  say,  infinitely
dense,  nevertheless  the  facts  of  science,  so  far  as  they  go,
as  well  as  the  laws  of  thought,  will  not  conntenance  a  simi-
lar conception  of  a  molecular' aggregate.  Whatever  modifi-
cations this  opinion  may  yet  undergo,  the  present  concep-
tion of  the  molecule,  by  those  physicists  and  chemists  whose
opinions  on  this  subject  are  most  valuable,  negatives  the  idea
of  permanent  contact  among  the  atoms,  and  regards  the  mole-
cules rather  as  systems  of  atoms.  The  term  "  atom  "  as  used
by  chemists  refers,  of  course,  to  the  supposed  elementary
units  of  chemistry.  But  the  same  general  principle  must  be
applied,  no  matter  how  low  in  the  scale  we  may  conceive  ag-
gregates to  stand.  If,  therefore,  the  chemical  atoms  are,  in
fact,  as  we  assume,  aggregates  of  a  comparatively  high  or-
der, they  must  be  supposed  to  stand  in  the  same  relation  to
the  lower  aggregates  of  which  they  are  composed  as  the
molecules  of  chemistry  stand  to  them,  and  so  on  down  to
the  primary  atoms  themselves.  An  interesting  confirmation
of  this  theory  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  exact
mathematical  determinations  of  the  laws  governing  gases,
no  distinction  can  be  found  between  those  which  are  re-
garded as  elementary,  such  as  hydrogen,f  and  those  known
to  be  compound,  such  as  carbonic  acid.  However  much
they  may  differ  in  atomic  weight,  specific  gravity,  and  other
properties  characteristic  of  the  different  gases,  they  are  all
found  to  obey  the  same  general  laws — the  laws  of  gaseous
action.  This  fact  rightly  viewed  should,  moreover,  I  think,
afford  a  strong  evidence  of  the  composite  nature  of  the  ele-
ments.    But  this  is  an  anticipation.

f  All  the  permanent  and  easily  obtainable  elementary  gases,  as  hydrogen,
oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  chlorine,  are  now  believed  to  have  as  their  units,  not  sin-
gle chemical  atoms,  but  molecules  consisting  of  two  such  atoms  combined.  It
can  scarcely  be  doubted,  however,  that  the  vapor  of  mercury  or  of  iron,  in  which
the  atoms  are  supposed  to  be  single,  would  obey  the  law  of  Mariotte  or  of
Charles  as  absolutely  as  do  the  permanent  gase^

238  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

The  nature  of  a  molecule,  tlien,  is  not  different  from
that  of  a  chemical  atom,  and  this  is  again  only  that  of  any
aggregate  whatever.

In  our  present  profound  ignorance,  experimentally,  of
the  nature  of  the  attractive  force,  we  might  find  in  the  phe-
nomena of  gravitation,  viewed  simply  as  such,  a  plausible
approximate  explanation  of  the  current  conception  of  the
molecular  aggregate  as  a  system  of  atoms  or  lesser  compo-
nent aggregates  revolving  around  their  common  center  of
gravity,  and  separated  from  one  another  by  distances,  and
moving  with  velocities,  analogous  to  those  of  the  solar  and
other  celestial  systerns,  according  to  laws  which  enable  them
to  maintain  their  equilibrium  and  preserve  the  stable  condi-
tion. But  this  theory  is  wholly  unsatisfactory,  and,  while
the  analogy  may  be  one  well  calculated  to  fascinate  the  rea-
son, it  must  be  regarded  as  worthless  when  the  attempt  is
made  to  explain,  by  the  original  motions  of  the  ultimate
units  of  matter  alone,  not  only  the  formation  of  aggregates
of  all  orders,  but  the  law  of  gravitation  itself.  That  this  is
done  here  is  not  pretended ;  that  it  can  be  done  is  not  as-
serted ;  but  it  is  simply  maintained  that,  so  far  as  any  one
knows,  gravitation  is  as  likely  to  be  capable  of  explanation
as  radiation,  and  the  former  does  not  now  seem  more  im-
possible than  did  the  latter  two  centuries  ago.

The  facts  which  we  have  with  regard  to  molecules,  and
the  evidences  which  these  furnish  as  negativing  the  idea  of
the  actual  contact  of  the  component  aggregates,  are  valuable,
and  in  so  far  seem  to  favor  the  theory  of  molecular  systems.
The  systems  of  worlds  in  space  may,  in  fact,  constitute  a
legitimate  analogy  to  strengthen  this  view ;  but,  after  all,  it
must  be  admitted  that,  further  than  the  great  probability
that  all  aggregates  consist  of  collections  of  lesser  aggregates
or  of  ultimate  units  of  matter  in  a  state  of  great  activity,  i.  e.,
motion,  of  which  the  properties  of  each  must  be  taken  as  the
index,  we  are  as  yet  wholly  without  any  satisfactory  theory,
not  to  say  explanation,  of  the  real  nature  of  aggregates,  and

TRANSCENDENTAL  CHEMISTRY.— ELEMENTS.        239

must  remain  so  for  the  present.  Yet  this  much  is  suflBcient
to  justify  us  in  attempting  the  further  explanation  of  those
higher  phenomena  which  are  capable  of  appealing  to  our
senses  and  our  intellects.

What  the  properties  of  those  molecular  aggregates  may
be  whose  activities  can  not  be  revealed  to  sense  is  of  course
unknown.  Conjecture,  even,  as  to  the  probable  number  of
degrees  of  such  aggregation,  from  the  ultimate  atom  to  the
supposed  atom  of  hydrogen,  would  of  course  be  idle.  But
that  such  aggregates  exist  far  down  upon  this  inaccessible
plane,  having  definite  shapes,  sizes,  degrees  of  stability,  and
individual  activities  and  properties,  we  are  permitted,  if  not
compelled,  to  assume ;  but  as  to  how  they  may  be  related  to
the  phenomena  of  light,  heat,  electricity,  and  gravitation,
science  has  as  yet  vouchsafed  no  theory.

Passing  over  these  lower  stages,  therefore,  whose  study
belongs  to  the  future  of  human  science  or  to  possible  beings
endowed  with  finer  faculties,  and  which  may  be  regarded  as
the  domain  of  transcendental  chemistry^  we  finally  arrive  at  a
class  of  aggregates  of  great  stability,  but  which,  though  still
so  minute  that  they  can  only  be  perceived  when  accumulated
into  masses,  have,  nevertheless,  been  studied  in  their  free
state  by  means  of  the  various  phenomena  to  which  they  give
rise,  either  in  the  natural  condition,  or,  as  is  usually  the  case,
under  certain  artificial  conditions  to  which  the  ingenuity  of
man  has  learned  to  subject  them.  As  these  aggregates  are
the  lowest  which  can  be  perceived,  they  have  been  denomi-
rated  elements^  and  are  by  some  supposed  to  constitute  the
ultimate  units  of  matter.  That  this  is  not  the  case  seems
almost  certain,  and  it  is  far  more  consistent  with  what  is
known  of  matter  and  with  the  laws  of  thought  to  regard
them  as  the  first  or  lowest  stages  of  aggregation  whose  activi-
ties are  capable  of  appealing  to  our  senses  either  directly  or
indirectly.  It  is  really  no  more  probable  that  the  so-called
elements  are  the  lowest  subdivisions  of  matter  than  it  is  that

240  PPwlMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

the  remotest  stars  visible  are  those  actually  at  the  confines  of
the  universe.

That  these  so-called  elements  possess  the  power  of  ap-
pealing, directly  or  indirectly,  to  our  senses  is  the.  sole  rea-
son of  our  recognizing  their  existence ;  and  the  history  of
their  discovery,  by  vehich  their  number  has  been  so  greatly
increased,  shows  that  their  modes  of  thus  appealing  are  often
so  subtile  as  to  escape  all  but  the  most  thorough  methods  of
detection.  Many  of  these  elements,  now  universally  recog-
nized, remained  for  a  long  time  wholly  unsuspected,  and
these  then  belonged  to  the  great  class  of  unknown  aggre-
gates. This  interesting  chapter  in  the  history  of  science
should  be  sufficient  to  teach  us  that  below  the  known  of  to-
day there  still  lies  a  wide  belt  of  the  knowable  unknown,
and  that  other  and  still  lower  orders  of  aggregates  will  doubt-
less yet  be  induced  to  reveal  their  existence.

Another  reason  for  regarding  these  elementary  substances
as  ultimate  units  has  been  supposed  to  be  found  in  their
great  stability,  which  causes  them  to  behave  as  if  they  were
such.  While  there  is  one  possible  exception  to  this  in  the
case  of  oxygen,  and  the  peculiar  phenomena  of  ozone  and
antozone,  it  is  indeed  true,  so  far  as  known,  in  all  the  re-
maining elements,  that  they  have  thus  far  resisted  all  at-
tempts to  decompose  them.  This,  however,  aside  from  the
possibility  of  doing  so  still,  is  really  no  evidence  of  their  ab-
solutely elementary  character,  but  only  indicates  what  the
whole  theory  of  aggregation  would  admit  if  not  require,  that
all  aggregates  which  could  possess  the  properties  requisite
for  the  composition  of  such  masses  as  are  capable  of  affect-
ing the  senses,  or  of  so  affecting  other  masses  as  to  make
themselves  known  to  the  human  intellect  by  the  effects  pro-
duced, must  possess  a  degree  of  inherent  stability  sufficient
to  resist  all  human  efforts  to  disintegrate  them.  "While,
therefore,  it  is  very  probable  that,  just  as  the  alkalies  and
alkaline  earths,  w^hich  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  cen-
tury were  regarded  as  elementary,  have  yielded  to  the  gal-

THE  CHEMICAL  ELEMENTS.  241

vanic  battery  and  prove  to  be  composite,  bo  a  few  more  of
those  now  classed  as  elements  will  at  no  distant  day  be
similarly  decomposed  by  the  higher  appliances  yet  to  be  de-
vised, it  is  nevertheless  entirely  consonant  with  the  theory
of  the  constitution  of  matter  here  maintained  that  there
shall  remain  upon  the  plane  of  human  investigation  a  greater
or  less  number  of  wholly  undecomposable  aggregates  serving
as  the  primary  basis  of  all  tangible  substances,  and  I  see  no
impropriety  in  retaining  for  such  aggregates  the  present
practically  correct  designation  of  "  elements."  It  must  be
expected,  however,  that  these  elements  will  possess  all  de-
grees of  capacity  for  manifesting  their  presence,  and  that
while  some  will  stand  out  boldly,  cohere  in  vast  masses,  and
in  various  ways  render  themselves  obvious  and  obtrusive,
there  are  others  which  will  be  ever  hugging  the  confines
of  the  imperceptible,  escaping  in  mysterious  ways,  and  evad-
ing the  most  subtile  human  devices,  and  that  only  occasion-
ally, perhaps  when  least  expected,  and  for  periods  and  under
conditions  such  as  to  render  their  exact  study  difiicult  or
impossible,  will  they  reveal  the  evidence  of  their  existence.
The  action  of  ozone  and  antozone  represents  in  many  re-
spects this  last  condition,  and  may  indicate  the  existence  of
substances  but  just  within  the  range  of  man's  present  pow-
ers of  apprehension.*

The  green  ray  of  the  solar  spectrum  is  another  most
interesting  example,  and  has  led  eminent  chemists  to  the
conjecture  at  least  that  it  may  indicate  an  elementary  sub-
stance of  simpler  constitution  than  any  recognized  element,
if  not  the  primary  form  of  matter,  f

Starting  anew  with  the  elements,  regarded  as  aggregates
of  a  comparatively  high  order  and  stable  organization,  but

*  Inasmuch  as  the  oxygen-molecules  are  assumed  to  be  double,  it  is  at  least
a  legitimate  hypothesis  that  ozone  is  the  substance  that  results  from  the  separa-
tion of  the  chemical  atoms  constituting  these  molecules.

f  See  Professor  T.  Sterry  Hunt's  address  at  the  grave  of  Priestley,  in  ISH.

242  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

differing  from  one  another  in  form,  size,  and  atomic  activi-
ties as  widely  as  the  masses  they  form  differ  in  properties,
the  problem  of  the  formation  of  the  higher  orders  of  aggre-
gates becomes  comparatively  simple.  We  find  ourselves
already  in  the  domain  of  experimental  science  where  the
more  or  less  completely  demonstrated  laws  of  chemistry  and
molecular  physics  lead  us  up  to  the  formation  of  the  various
inorganic  and  organic  aggregates.

The  composition  of  the  various  substances  found  upon
the  earth  is  readily  determined  by  the  process  of  decom-
posing these  and  weighing  their  elements.  The  precise
conditions,  however,  which  have  resulted  in  their  formation,
and  in  the  existing  state  of  things  in  the  universe,  are  not  so
easily  determined,  and  for  this  purpose  a  further  extension
of  the  general  law  of  material  aggregation  is  required.

The  study  of  the  earth's  crust  clearly  indicates  that  very
different  conditions  have  existed  upon  it  in  the  remote  past
from  those  we  now  find.  The  facts,  as  a  whole,  prove  be-
yond a  doubt  that  our  globe  has  once  been  in  a  state  both  of
greater  or  less  liquidity  and  also  of  great  heat,  and  that,  as  its
surface  has  cooled  down,  the  solid  parts  to  which  alone  we
have  access  have  been  formed,  though  to.  what  depth  they
extend  we  are  still  ignorant.  But,  notwithstanding  certain
doubts  w-hich  have  from  time  to  time  been  cast  upon  it,  the
theory  which  was  very  early  advanced  as  most  in  harmony
with  the  probable  history  of  the  planet,  and  according  to
which  the  cooling  process  has  not  yet  reached  the  great  in-
terior, which  is  therefore  still  in  a  heated  and  molten  condi-
tion, still  furnishes,  perhaps,  the  most  rational  explanation
yet  made  of  the  phenomena  which  the  earth  presents,  and
also  best  satisfies  the  a  priori  requirements.  The  simulta-
neous study  of  the  other  planets,  the  sun,  and  the  earth's  sat-
ellite, leads  to  the  assumption  that  all  these  bodies  constitute
a  single  system  which  is  not  only  made  up  of  interdepend-
ent parts,  the  forces  of  attraction  maintaining  it  in  its  in-
tegrity and  existing  configuration,  but  which  is  really  homo-

COSMICAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  EARTH.  243

geneous  in  its  nature,  and  bears  the  marks  of  an  original
unity  of  composition.

The  facts  which  have  abeady  been  brought  to  light,
chiefly  through  the  telescope  and  the  spectroscope,  respect-
ing the  other  visible  bodies  in  space,  are  sufficient  to  indicate
in  a  very  satisfactory  manner  that  the  solar  system  is  not
exceptional  to  any  great  degree,  and  that  in  fact  all  the  fixed
stars,  so  called,  are  simply  the  self-luminous  bodies  of  other
systems  fundamentally  analogous  to  ours.  It  is  to  be  ex-
pected by  any  one  who  has  a  clear  idea  of  the  processes  of
nature  in  general  that  there  will  be  found  among  so  many
different  systems  a  great  variety  in  many  minor  respects,
and  so  in  fact  we  find  it.  The  essential  part  of  a  fully  de-
veloped system  is  that  a  number  of  bodies  shall  be  found
revolving  about  their  common  center  of  gravity.  The  abso-
lute as  well  as  the  relative  size  of  those  bodies  is  immaterial,
and  accordingly  we  not  only  find  that  the  systems  seem  to
differ  greatly  from  each  other  in  the  amount  of  matter  com-
posing them^  but  that  the  bodies  within  the  same  system
differ  in  their  relative  proportions  in  all  degrees.  We  have,
for  example,  some  systems  in  which  there  appear  to  be  two
or  more  bodies  of  nearly  equal  size,  whose  common  center  of
gravity  must  therefore  fall  outside  of  any  of  them,  and  not,
as  in  ours,  within  the  volume  of  the  primary.  Such  are
most  of  the  double  and  triple  stars.  The  number  of  lumi-
nous bodies  in  any  system  is  also  independent  of  the  hy-
pothesis, as  these  same  stars  as  well  as  other  systems  with
numerous  luminous  bodies  illustrate.  And  while  we  can
say  with  certainty  that  there  are  systems  in  which  several
of  the  bodies  are  in  the  incandescent  state  like  our  sun,
we  may  infer  with  at  least  great  probability  that  there  are
many  in  which  none  of  the  bodies  are  in  that  state — dark
systems — concerning  which  there  seems  at  the  present  time
no  hope  of  our  ever  obtaining  the  least  intelligence.  The
further  inference  that  in  the  systems  possessing  luminous
bodies  there  exist  other  non-luminous  bodies,  such  as  our

244  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

earth  and  the  other  planets,  is  even  more  natural,  and  has
been  drawn  by  several  eminent  astronomers.

It  is  further  quite  immaterial  to  the  theory  of  a  homo-
geneous universe  how  dense  the  several  bodies  of  any  system
may  be.  In  the  solar  system  we  find  the  densest  planet
(Mercury)  sixteen  times  denser  than  the  least  dense  one
(Saturn),  while  the  Earth  is  four  and  Mercury  eight  times
as  dense  as  the  Sun.

Diminution  of  density  requires  a  proportional  increase
of  volume,  and  we  may  conceive  a  body  attenuated  into  a
mere  gas,  and  occupying  a  vast  amount  of  space.  An  entire
system  may  thus  be  imagined  to  consist  of  a  single  body  in
this  rarefied  state.  Such,  in  fact,  are  the  true  nehulcE,  and
those  already  discovered  and  tested  by  the  spectroscope  pre-
sent numerous  gradations  from  this  ideal  initial  form  to  states
which  exhibit  marked  traces  of  organization  and  internal
differentiation.  We  have  the  spiral  nebula  in  Canes  Vena~
iid,  with  evidence  of  the  development  of  new  centers  near
its  outer  limit.  We  have  also  the  annular  nebula  in  Z^/ra
with  a  very  definite  organization,  and  we  have  many  other
remarkable  forms  which  indicate  that  these  nebulae  are
in  reality  nascent  systems.  Moreover,  certain  star-systems
show  marks  of  more  or  .less  imperfection  in  their  develop-
ment, and  some  of  the  fixed  stars  themselves  afford  an  uncer-
tain and  partially  nebular  spectrum.

Assuming  the  molecular  aggregation  of  matter  to  have
been  such  as  we  have  described,  we  are  justified  in  advanc-
ing a  general  theory  for  the  process  of  molar  aggregation
throughout  the  universe.  Molecular  aggregation  having
gone  on  in  certain  parts  of  space  according  to  the  laws  al-
ready mentioned,  until  in  any  one  of  these  parts  or  regions
a  vast  volume  of  matter  has  been  accumulated  in  a  form
analogous  to  that  which  we  denominate  a  gas,  and  which  is
still  and  constantly  affected  by  its  normal  activities,  and
still  in  process  of  developing  new  and  higher  orders  of  ag-

DEVELOPMENT  OF  CELESTIAL  SYSTEMS.  245

gregates,  a  point  is  at  length  reached  in  which  the  degree
of  molecular  aggregation  is  sufficient  to  render  the  independ-
ent and  discrete  condition  of  all  the  molecules  no  longer  main-
tainable, and  a  general  influence  begins  to  be  felt  by  the
entire  mass,  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium,  as  it  were,  en-
tirely pervading  it.  There  thus  arises  a  greater  and  more
pronounced  consensus^  or  mutual  influence,  among  all  the
particles,  and,  from  the  condition  in  which  each  molecule  or
lesser  group  of  molecules  manifested  its  activities  in  and
upon  itself  or  only  upon  its  immediate  associates,  thus  only
slightly  or  not  at  all  affecting  the  whole,  a  condition  at
length  comes  to  exist  in  which  large  groups  of  molecules
manifest  decided  activities  and  considerably  influence  other
like  groups  at  greater  and  greater  distances,  exciting  here
vortices  and  there  currents  and  waves  which  agitate  the  en-
tire area  occupied  by  the  molecularly  aggregated  matter,  or
nebula.  It  could  be  shown  that  the  ultimate  result  of  this
process  would  be  finally  to  bring  the  entire  nebula  into  some
definite  form  of  motion  in  a  common  direction.  Larger
masses  would  absorb  smaller  ones,  stronger  currents  would
neutralize  and  overcome  weaker  ones,  and  in  due  time  the
entire  mass  would  assume  a  uniform  motion  as  a  mass,  its
molecular  activities  continuing  as  before.  It  could  further
be  experimentally  demonstrated  that  this  general  molar  mo-
tion would  eventually  become  vortical,  and  the  nebula  would
sooner  or  later  assume  a  more  or  less  spherical  form  and
commence  a  process  of  molar  aggregation  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  same  general  laws  that  govern  molecular  aggre-
gation. The  organization  of  systems  would  be  the  result.
In  this  there  may  be  an  infinite  variety  of  conditions  which
determine  the  manner  in  which  the  entire  mass  shall  be
finally  aggregated,  whether  it  shall  remain  in  one  vast  mass,
as  it  no  doubt  often  does,  or  whether  it  shall  divide  up,  as
seems  to  be  the  more  usual  case,  into  two  or  more  final  ag-
gregates, and  what  shall  be  the  size  and  general  relations  of

each  of  these  to  the  rest  of  the  system.     These  conditions,
12

246  PKIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

we  63.7,  are  determined  by  the  infinitely  varied  and  wholly
fortuitous  circumstances  existing  in  the  case  of  each  nebula,
and  of  the  different  parts  of  its  mass  at  different  periods  of
its  history.

From  the  analogy  of  the  solar  system,  and  from  what  the
telescope  teaches  us  respecting  the  other  systems  of  space,  it
would  seem  to  be  the  usual  course  for  the  nebular  mass  to
acquire  a  considerable  velocity  of  rotation  about  an  axis
before  its  parts  become  to  a  very  great  extent  coherent,  and
in  the  process  of  contraction  to  throw  off  numerous  rings  of
matter  from  its  exterior,  which  by  accident  have  acquired  a
greater  cohesion  for  the  parts  of  themselves  than  for  the
matter  of  the  general  mass,  and  which  in  turn  become  ag-
gregated into  spherical  masses  while  still  revolving  about  the
main  body,  and  often  themselves  throwing  off  in  their  turn
similar  rings  which  also  assume  the  spherical  form.

In  this  manner  the  various  systems  of  space  are  supposed
to  have  been  formed,  and  the  solar  system  affords  so  many
facts  pointing  to  such  an  origin  and  development  that  most
astronomers  now  accept  the  general  outlines  of  what  is
known  as  the  Nebular  Hypothesis,  while  the  controversy  has
chiefly  narrowed  down  to  the  details  and  minor  questions
involved.  Space  forbids,  even  were  it  deemed  essential,
that  an  extended  account  should  be  here  introduced  of  the
origin,  progress,  and  principles  of  that  celebrated  hypothesis,
which,  like  all  other  great  thoughts,  was  a  growth  of  the
human  mind,  and  not  at  all  the  brilliant  conception  of  any
single  brain.  Initiated  by  Giordano  Bruno  in  the  sixteenth
century,  it  grew  with  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler,  was  restated
by  Sir  William  Ilerschel,  formally  elaborated  by  Immanuel
Kant,  and  after  much  discussion  was,  at  length,  propounded
anew  by  Laplace  with  far  weightier  arguments  than  ever
before,  and  in  a  great  measure  subjected  to  the  tests  of  celes-
tial mechanics.  In  its  most  general  aspects  it  is  in  entire  har-
mony with  the  law  of  development  here  formulated ;  and,  as
to  the  detailed  questions  of  fact,  it  has  l^een  shown  that,  in

DEVELOPMENT  OF  CELESTIAL  SYSTEMS.  247

the  normal  operation  of  tliat  law,  wide  differences  are  not
only  presumable  but  even  necessary  in  different  systems  and
different  nebulae.  It  is  not  even  necessary  that  all  nebulae
should  ever  become  differentiated  into  definite  systems  with
discrete  bodies.  Conditions  can  readily  be  conceived  in
which  no  further  jjrogress  shall  ever  take  place  than  the
formation  of  a  gaseous  volume,  which  may  remain  in  that
state  for  an  indefinite  period  or  be  early  dissipated.

It  must,  however,  be  steadily  borne  in  mind  that  this
gaseous  or  nebulous  condition  is  one  of  a  high  degree  of  ag-
gregation. Before  the  operations  which  may  be  designated
as  molar  can  commence,  a  degree  of  aggregation  must  be
reached  far  exceeding  that  which  exists  in  those  molecules
which  are  the  vehicles  of  luminous  radiations.  The  particles
constituting  the  ethereal  matter  of  interstellar  space  must  be
supposed  to  be  so  minute  and  relatively  far-separated  as  not
to  exert  upon  one  another  any  appreciable  influence  tending
to  produce  molar  aggregation  or  organization ;  just  as  one
system  in  space  exerts  no  appreciable  influence  upon  another
system.  From  this  condition  to  that  of  a  true  gas  the  inter-
val is  analogous  to  that  which  separates  star-systems  from
one  another,  as  compared  with  that  which  separates  the  bodies
of  the  same  system.

The  laws  of  molar  aggregation,  as  the  term  is  here  em-
ployed, have  been  subjected  to  a  profound  analysis  by  Mr.
Herbert  Spencer  in  his  "First  Principles,"  with  the  chief
results  of  which  I  so  fully  agree  that  I  take  pleasure  in
referring  the  reader  to  that  work  for  the  completion  of  the
scheme  which  is  here  only  begun,  and  which  space  would
have  forbidden  me  to  enter  upon  even  had  there  existed  no
such  work.  But  in  doing  this  I  also  call  the  reader's  atten-
tion to  certain  considerations  which  may  seem  to  him  to
detract  from  the  force  of  Mr.  Spencer's  argument.  For  a
discussion  of  these  points,  and  an  attempt  to  reconcile  cer-
tain apparent  inconsistencies  in  Mr.  Spencer's  system,  I  refer
the  reader  to  the  paper  on  "  Cosmic  and  Organic  Evolu-

248  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

tion,"  already  cited  in  the  last  chapter  {supra,  p.  164).  I
have  there  pointed  out  the  fact  that  more  than  one  cos-
mical  process  is  called  by  the  name  of  Evolution,  and  this
not  only  by  the  public  in  general  but  by  Mr.  Spencer  him-
self;  and  moreover  that,  singularly  enough,  the  effects  of
the  two  directly  opposite  processes  go  by  the  same  name.
That  this  is  due  to  a  defective  terminology  is  also  there
shown,  and  an  attempt  is  made  to  apply  the  true  prin-
ciples and  proper  appellations.  I  will  only  further  say
here  that  the  general  result  of  this  analysis  is  to  inval-
idate the  claims  of  the  term  evolution  to  the  fundamental
place  assigned  to  it  by  Mr.  Spencer.  The  two  great  op-
posing laws  or  principles,  which  underlie  the  phenomena
of  the  entire  universe,  indeed  exist,  and  are  accurately  for-
mulated by  him.  The  one  consists  in  the  integration  of
matter  and  the  dissipation  of  motion,  and  the  other  in  the
integration  of  motion  and  the  disintegration  of  matter.  But
the  evolution  of  a  solar  system  is  brought  about  by  the
predominance  of  the  first  of  these  principles,  while  the  evo-
lution of  an  organism  is  due  to  the  at  least  apparent  local
prevalence  of  the  second.

The  conclusion  to  which  this  points  is,  that  some  other
term  besides  "evolution"  should  be  employed  to  express
these  processes,  and,  after  due  consideration,  the  word  "  ag-
gregation," also  extensively  employed  by  Mr.  Spencer,  has
been  selected  as  most  faithfully  designating  the  first  of  these
processes,  while  the  opposite  process  may  still  be  called  dis-
sipation or  disintegration.  "Dissolution"  may  also  some-
times be  appropriate.  Yet  there  are  cases  in  which  none
of  these  terms  will  apply,  and  the  antithesis  to  aggregation
may  sometimes  be  expressed  by  the  term  segregation.  This
word  embodies  two  somewhat  distinct  notions,  a  primary  one
denoting  the  separation  of  groups  and  a  secondary  one  de-
noting the  selection  of  similar  units.  Mr.  Spencer,  as  already
shown  {sujpra,  p.  165),  has  made  it  fill  an  important  place  in
his  system.     The  phenomena  of  segregation  do  not  arise

COSMIC  AND  ORGANIC  EVOLUTION.  249

until  the  process  of  molar  aggregation  comes  to  be  strongly-
counteracted  by  the  opposite  process,  and  under  the  joint
action  of  the  two  processes  groups  of  like  units  are  formed.
Such  groups  of  like  units  constitute  the  homogeneous  ag-
gregates, i.  e.,  the  various  substances,  of  which  matter  is  com-
posed. The  great  law  of  progress  in  the  universe,  therefore,
is  the  law  of  aggregation,  and  evolution  is  due  to  the  resist-
ance which  this  law  meets  with  from  the  opposite  law  of  dis-
persion, out  of  which  conflict  not  only  substances  and  worlds
but  organic  forms  are  evolved.

I  can  not  refrain  from  expressing  my  regrets  that  Mr.
Spencer  should  have  left  unwritten  the  two  volumes  on  "  In-
organic Evolution  "  which  he  admits  were  necessary  to  com-
plete his  scheme  of  philosophy.*  I  should  have  expected  to
find  in  that  treatise  a  complete  exposition  of  the  chief  prin-
ciples which  have  governed  the  activities  of  the  material
elements  throughout  the  entire  process  of  world-making,
from  the  gaseous  nebula  to  the  "  burned-out  star,"  But,  in
the  absence  of  any  systematic  treatment  of  this  subject,  let  us
endeavor  briefly  and  rapidly  to  follow  the  process  of  aggre-
gation from  the  point  at  which  a  gaseous  nebula  has  been
fairly  formed  to  its  complete  organization  into  a  system.

Before  commencing,  however,  we  must  gain  a  somewhat
clearer  idea  of  what  constitutes  a  nebula.  If  we  define  this
primary  condition  as  gaseous,  we  should  not  by  any  means
imply  that  it  consists  of  a  single  homogeneous  gas,  such  as
would  be  represented  by  any  of  the  gases  known  to  chemis-
try. If  the  so-called  chemical  elements  are  simply  so  many
stable  molecular  aggregates  whose  differences  are  due  to  dif-
ferent modes  and  degrees  of  aggregation,  then  the  gases  of
our  earth  are  simply  the  most  diffused  state  in  which  masses
of  these  aggregates  can  be  obtained.  A  gas  is  a  diffused
mass  of  homogeneous  aggregates,  and  this  definition  is  as
true  of  the  compound  gases,  steam,  carbonic  acid,  or  vapor

*  See  his  letter  to  the  "  North  American  Review,"  published  in  Appendix  to
•'  Biology  "  vol.  1,  p.  479 ;  also,  "  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  3.

250  PRIMARY   AGGREGATION".— COSMOGEXY,

of  alcohol,  as  of  the  simple  ones,  such  as  vapor  of  mer-
cury, hydrogen,  nitrogen,  or  chlorine,  the  last  named  of
which  is  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  It  might,  then,  be  natu-
rally supposed  that  the  matter  of  a  nebula  would  contain  a
number  of  such  gases ;  and,  as  it  is  scarcely  to  be  presumed
that  all  the  modes  of  forming  aggregates  suflBciently  stable
to  resist  decomposition  are  represented  on  our  planet,  so,  in
addition  to  some  of  those  found  here,  it  is  reasonable  to  ex-
pect that  a  nebula  will  contain  some  not  known  to  us.

In  so  far  as  the  spectroscope,  to  which  indeed  we  owe
our  positive  evidence  of  the  existence  of  true  nebulae,  is  able
to  inform  us,  this  view  is  confirmed.  Two  of  our  common-
est gases,  hydrogen  and  nitrogen,  have  been  identified  in
nebulae,  and  at  least  one  which  has  not  yet  been  identified
with  any  element  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  When  we
consider  what  kind  of  things  these  nebulae  are  as  objects
of  sQientific  observation,  it  seems  wonderful  that  even  this
much  should  have  been  positively  learned  of  their  nature.

Every  modification  of  the  nebular  hypothesis  yet  put
forth  has  been  compelled  to  assume  that  the  original  nebu-
lous mass  is  in  an  incandescent  state  at  the  period  when  its
condensation  begins.  This  requirement  has  been  the  chief
objection  to  the  hypothesis,  and  many  have  declared  that  no
reason  could  be  given  for  supposing  diffused  gaseous  matter
to  be  thus  affected.  Whence  comes  this  heat  ?  The  only
probable  source  is  the  friction  of  the  gaseous  molecules
among  themselves.  But  can  this  be  violent  enough  in  so
rare  a  medium  ?

To  get  rid  of  this  difficulty  it  may  be  supposed  that  the
heated  condition  may  have  been  a  secondary  one,  and  dne,  in
fact,  to  the  aggregation  of  matter.  'No  reason  exists  why
cold  particles  may  not  become  collected  into  a  diffused  mass.
The  inherent  motions  of  these  particles  are  not  diminished,
neither  are  they  increased,  by  such  a  grouping.  But,  these
motions  remaining  the  same,  their  circuits  are  diminished
by  association  with  other  particles,  and  an  effect  may  be

GRAVITATION  AND  RADIATION.  251

conceived  to  take  place,  even  among  molecules,  analogous  to
that  whicli  we  daily  observe  to  convert  mechanical  motion
into  heat.  Or,  to  speak  more  definitely,  this  massing  of  the
molecules  and  the  consequent  shortening  and  multiplying  of
their  circuits  of  motion  eventually  extend  to  the  lesser  aggre-
gates constituting  the  omnipresent  interstellar  ether  in  such
a  manner  as  to  transmit  some  of  the  longer  vibrations,  at
least,  to  our  eyes  and  produce  the  sensation  of  light.  Such
an  effect  must,  however,  be  accompanied  by  heat,  and  when
we  consider  by  what  violent  motions  such  a  mass  must  be
agitated  in  order  finally  to  set  itself  revolving  upon  a  general
axis,  it  may  not  be  too  much  to  expect  that  from  this  agita-
tion heat  will  be  evolved.  Certain  it  is  that  all  visible  neb-
ulae are  in  a  self-luminous  state.  It  can  not  be  known,  how-
ever, how  many  there  may  be  which  have  not  yet  reached
the  self-luminous  state,  and  are  therefore  invisible  to  us.

It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  subsequent
contraction  of  a  nebulous  mass  either  is  due  to  this  high
temperature  or  requires  it.  The  tendency  of  all  matter  under
the  law  of  gravitation,  considered  as  an  unexplained  fact,  is
toward  concentration.  The  evolution  of  heat  is  rather  the
check  put  upon  this  tendency,  and,  in  so  far  as  it  exerts  an
influence,  exerts  it  in  a  direction  the  reverse  of  gravitation.
It  is  an  illustration  of  the  perpetual  rhythm  between  the
forces  of  concentration  and  diffusion.  "When,  for  any  rea-
son, the  former  acquires  an  impetus  which  carries  it  to  great
lengths,  it  is  resisted  with  greater  and  greater  violence  by
the  antithetical  forces  evolving  great  heat  and  eventually
restoring  the  normal  equilibrium,  or  at  least  the  true  ratio
existing  between  the  two,  in  the  portion  of  space  in  which
the  phenomena  occur.  It  seems  altogether  probable,  there-
fore, that  in  the  process  of  contraction  of  a  nebulous  mass,
and  its  formation  into  a  true  system  of  worlds,  the  amount
of  heat  radiated  is  in  the  end  equal  to  the  amount  produced
by  condensation,  which  disposes  entirely  of  the  supposition
that  there  must  exist  an  incandescent  nebula  at  the  outset.

252  PEIMAEY  AGGREGATIOIsr.— COSMOGENY.

The  so-called  "  cooling  off  "  is  only  apparent,  and,  while  at
times  the  amount  of  heat  may  be  diminished,  at  other  times  it
will  be  correspondingly  increased.  If  the  radiation  of  heat
from  the  surface  of  a  body  into  space  tends  to  cool  it  off,  bo
does  the  constant  diminution  of  its  volume  without  loss  of
mass  tend  to  heat  it,  and  throughout  its  career  these  two
influences  must  antagonize  each  other.  It  is  only  after  the
limit  to  possible  contraction,  due  to  the  nature  of  matter
itself,  begins  to  be  reached,  that  the  amount  of  radiation  of
heat  comes  greatly  to  exceed  the  amount  of  its  generation,
and  that  the  body  actually  begins  to  cool  off.

This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  nature  of  this
form  of  material,  or  molar,  aggregation  which  results  in  the
formation  of  world-systems.  From  our  terrestrial  point  of
view,  dealing  chiefly  with  solids,  it  seems  to  us  at  first  sight
as  if  the  solid  form  of  matter  was  the  normal  or  primary
form.  Chemistry,  it  is  true,  disabuses  us  of  this  idea,  but  it
is  not  until  we  contemplate  the  entire  history  of  our  globe
and  system  that  we  fairly  realize  how  modem  and,  as  it
were,  exceptional  the  solid  form  of  matter  is.  Most  of  the
gases  known  to  us  are  simply  the  most  diffused  state  obtain-
able of  the  elementary  substances  of  the  globe.  Few  now
need  be  told  that  all  matter  can,  actually  or  theoretically,  be
made  to  assume  either  the  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous  condi-
tion. Only  a  few  substances,  such  as  carbon,  have  failed  to
yield  to  the  attempts  that  have  been  made  to  volatilize  them,
while  quite  recently  the  most  obstinate  of  the  gases  have
been  liquefied  and  solidified.  The  liquid  state  is  interme-
diate between  the  solid  and  the  gaseous,  and,  though  often
appearing  very  distinct  from  either,  has  been  repeatedly
shown  to  be  capable  of  exhibiting  all  the  intermediate
stages.  StiU,  each  substance  has,  it  would  seem,  a  definite
plane  for  each  of  these  states  or  forms,  and  when  it  is  com-
pelled to  surrender  one  it  passes  over  all  intermediate  ones
and  assumes  the  next  state,  and  so  on.  Now,  the  physical
fact  which  renders  these  forms  distinct  is,  so  far  as  experi-

STATES  OF  MATTEK.  253

ment  has  been  able  to  indicate,  difference  in  the  length  of
the  path  or  orbit  in  which  the  molecules  move.  In  a  gas
the  molecules  describe  long  paths  and  move  freely  about
among  one  another  in  definite  ways  and  with  fixed  velocities.
In  liquids  they  describe  much  shorter  orbits,  and  come  much
more  frequently  into  contact  with  one  another.  In  solids  the
distances  traveled  are  still  less,  the  orbits  fixed,  and  the  num-
ber of  contacts  much  more  frequent.  In  gases  there  is  ready
diffusion  of  molecules  according  to  a  fixed  law.  In  liquids
tlie  molecules  intermingle  much  less  rapidly,  but  motions  may
be  communicated  with  some  ease.  In  solids  the  molecules
no  longer  diffuse,  though  motions  are  readily  propagated.
But,  besides  these  so-called  perfect  gases,  liquids,  and  solids,
there  are  all  shades  of  intermediate  forms  connecting  them.

It  is  essential  to  distinguish  clearly  what  are  here  de-
nominated moleGular  aggregates  from  molar  aggregates.

Molecular  aggregates,  as  already  defined,  consist  of  atoms
of  primary  matter,  or  of  compounds  of  such  atoms  in  differ-
ent degrees  of  aggregation.  Every  such  aggregate  consti-
tutes, therefore,  a  true  molecule,  and  is  not  different,  except
in  the  many  degrees  of  aggregation  to  which  the  present
theory  assumes  all  matter  to  be  subject,  from  the  chemist's
conception  of  a  molecule.

.  A  molar  aggregate  consists  of  a  volume  of  matter,  all
the  molecules  of  which  are  alike.  It  is  a  homogeneous  mass
of  matter — a  quantity  of  like  molecules  aggregated  together.
Any  gas  is  a  molar  aggregate,  while  each  of  its  molecules
is  a  molecular  aggregate  of  the  same  sjpectes.  The  same  is
of  course  true  of  any  liquid  or  any  solid,  since  these  are
only  different  forms  which  all  molar  aggregates  may  assume
under  proper  conditions  without  altering  their  identity.  For
brevity's  sake,  molecular  aggregates,  thus  defined,  may  be
designated  simply  as  molecules,  while  molar  aggregates  may
with  entire  propriety  be  called  masses.

The  different  chemical  elements  are,  therefore,  so  many
distinct  species  of  molecular  aggregates,  or  molecules,  while

254  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

the  different  molar  aggregates,  or  masses,  which  the  aggrega-
tion of  many  such  molecules  results  in,  may  be  understood
as  60  many  distinct  substances.

It  may  be  further  remarked,  as  a  fact  of  great  importance
in  the  organization  of  masses  of  matter,  that  the  process  of
integration  is  attended  by  a  constant  tendency  to  segregation,
which,  as  Mr.  Spencer  shows,  affects  masses  and  becomes  the
true  element  of  organization  throughout  the  entire  process
of  evolution.  It  only  requires  to  be  added  here  that  this  seg-
regative tendency  extends  to  molecules  also,  and  it  is  really
this  which  renders  the  distinct  existence  of  molar  aggregates
possible.  But  for  this  law  of  segregation,  by  which  like
molecules  gravitate  toward  one  another,  there  could  exist  no
distinct  suhstances,  such  as  iron,  carbon,  or  nitrogen,  and
the  molecules  of  all  these  substances  would  be  promiscu-
ously commingled,  resulting  in  a  typical  chaos.  But  under
the  law  that  "  like  seeks  like,"  which  may,  indeed,  be  capable
of  a  physical  explanation,  the  molecules  of  the  same  species
cohere  more  strongly  with  one  another  than  with  those  of
different  species,  and  form  masses  of  more  or  less  definite
extent  and  regularity  of  outline.  It  need  not  be  repeated
that  the  theory  of  the  constitution  of  matter  now  quite
firmly  established  upon  an  experimental  basis,  does  not  per-
mit any  constant  contact  of  these  molecules  in  the  mass,
either  in  the  gaseous,  liquid,  or  solid  condition,  but  only  occa-
sional or  oft-repeated  contacts  due  to  unceasing  activities  in
more  or  less  definite  paths,  orbits,  or  circuits  of  greater  or  less
extent  and  in  longer  or  shorter  periods.

As  there  is  no  necessary  limit  to  the  possible  minuteness
of  molecules,  so  there  need  be  none  to  their  possible  mag-
nitude. A  molecule,  large  enough  to  be  seen  and  handled,
might  be  conceived,  as  well  as  one  y.Trinr.Tinr.inyu"  ^^  ^^  i^^^  i°
diameter,  which  corresponds  to  some  of  the  measurements.
But  it  seems  to  be  a  concrete  fact  that  the  only  molecules
which  actually  do  form  masses  are  such  as  lie  within  certain
limits,  the  largest  of  which  are  vastly  below  the  capacity  of

ORIGIN  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.  255

the  highest  microscopic  power  to  detect  them,  while  the
least  are  far  less  minute  than  the  units  of  the  ethereal  me-
dium.

Every  nebula  must  consist  of  molar  matter,  i.  e.,  of  mo-
lecular aggregates  which  fall  within  the  range  necessary  to
render  them  capable  of  molar  aggregation,  and  in  point  of
fact  each  does  consist  of  several  or  many  species  of  such  mole-
cules and  of  the  corresponding  substances  produced  by  their
molar  aggregation.  Beyond  the  few  valuable  facts  which  the
spectroscope  has  revealed  to  us  respecting  the  score  of  true
nebulae  determinable  in  the  heavens,  we  know  absolutely  noth-
ing of  what  nebulae  are.  The  nebular  hypothesis,  however,  is
far  older  than  the  spectroscope,  and  in  that  instrument  it  has
certainly  found  a  faithful  defender,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  and
this  at  the  precise  point  where  defense  was  most  needed.  It
was  from  the  strong  array  of  cumulative  evidence  which  the
solar  system  affords  that  the  nebular  hypothesis  (not  so  called
by  Kant,  or  until  recently)  was  formulated.  This  -  evidence
points,  with  scarcely  an  adverse  fact,  to  the  development  of
the  splar  system  out  of  an  original  mass  of  matter,  in  which
all  the  planets  and  satellites  were  embraced,  and  existed  in
a  diffused  state.  The  incandescent  condition  of  this  matter
is  required  by  chemistry  as  well  as  by  physics,  since  there
are  in  our  globe  many  substances  whose  existence  in  the
gaseous  state  presupposes  great  heat.  The  heat  required  to
volatilize  the  metals  is  enormous,  and  there  are  certain  other
substances,  such  as  silicon,  for  which  still  greater  tempera-
tures are  demanded.  It  may,  however,  be  a  question
whether  these  substances  can  not  exist  in  nebulae  at  low
temperatures  in  a  condition  not  strictly  gaseous,  but  really
solid,  only  in  exceedingly  minute  molar  aggregates,  as  a  sort
of  "  cosmical  dust "  or  mist.

It  is  much  more  probable,  however,  that  these  substances,
requiring  so  great  heat  to  liquefy  and  volatilize  them,  have
been  created,  i.  e.,  developed,  during  the  progress  of  the  for-
mation of  the  system,  out  of  materials  already  existing  in

256  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENT.

other  forms  and  states  of  aggregation.  On  tlie  assumption
that,  during  the  earlier  part,  and  perhaps  during  all  but  the
very  latest  period,  of  this  process,  the  temperature  of  the
nascent  system  is  increasing,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that
the  intense  heat  would  cause  the  breaking  up  of  some  of  the
molecular  aggregates  which  were  capable  of  maintaining  the
gaseous  form  at  low  temperatures,  and  would  at  the  same
time  cause  the  formation  of  new  aggregates  only  capable  of
maintaining  that  form  under  the  high  temperatures  to  which
they  were  subjected  at  the  time  of  their  formation,  many  of
which,  nevertheless,  would  prove  sufficiently  stable  to  pre-
serve their  own  new  form  of  aggregation  after  the  tempera-
ture should  go  down,  and,  instead  of  reverting  to  their  former
condition  on  the  cooling  of  the  system,  would  assume  succes-
sively the  liquid  and  the  solid  conditions,  and  become  con-
stituent parts  of,  and  distinct  substances  in,  the  cooled-off
planets.

This  theory  of  the  origin  of  all  those  terrestrial  sub-
stances which  require  great  heat  to  liquefy  or  separate  them
into  gas  is  supported  by  some  facts.  In  the  first  place,  none
of  the  gases  of  these  substances  have  been  discovered  to  exist
in  any  of  the  nebulae.  The  only  two  terrestrial  substances
thus  far  determined  with  any  certainty  are  hydrogen  and
nitrogen.  The  latter  of  these  exists  in  a  free  state  in  the
earth's  atmosphere,  forming  about  four  fifths  of  its  volume
and  over  three  fourths  of  its  weight.  The  former  does  not
exist  in  a  free  state  in  the  atmosphere,  in  consequence  of  its
strong  afiinity  for  oxygen,  which  is  present  there  in  excess,
and  whose  union  with  it  forms  the  waters  of  our  globe.
Both  of  these  substances  are  gases  at  all  temperatures  pro-
ducible by  artificial  means,  and  have  only  very  recently  been
made  to  assume  the  liquid  and  solid  states  by  the  nse  of  ex-
traordinary devices  involving  immense  pressure  accompanied
by  intense  cold.

The  other  definite  line  which  the  spectrum  of  certain
nebulae  presents  is  near  to  that  of  barium,  but  is  conceded

OEIGm  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.  257

not  to  be  the  barium-line.  It  is,  therefore,  an  unknown  sub-
stance, and  nothing  can  be  said  of  its  properties.  Its  prox-
imity to  the  barium-Hne  in  the  spectrum  can  not  certainly  be
taken  to  indicate  any  special  resemblance  to  that  metal,  and
it  is  probably  a  gas  at  low  temperatures  like  hydrogen  and
nitrogen.

In  the  second  place,  as  to  these  last  two  substances,  one
of  them  (hydrogen)  is  present  in  nearly  or  quite  all  the  self-
luminous  bodies  whose  spectra  have  been  observed,  where  it
seems  to  occupy  a  position  far  out  in  the  upper  atmosphere.
As  to  nitrogen,  its  presence  in  such  bodies  is  doubtful  so  far
as  the  spectroscope  is  able  to  inform  us,  but,  as  it  exists  in
such  quantities  in  the  earth  and  our  atmosphere,  the  belief  is
strong,  especially  among  those  who  accept  the  nebular  hy-
pothesis, that  the  failure  to  discover  it  there  is  due  to  our  im-
perfect methods,  or  to  our  ignorance  of  the  manner  in  which
the  phenomena  of  the  spectroscope  are  to  be  interpreted.

The  recent  triumph  of  science,  in  the  discovery  of  oxy-
gen in  the  sun  by  Dr.  Henry  Draper,  only  serves  to  show
how  easy  it  is  to  overlook  facts  all  the  while  perceptible,  and
gives  great  hope  that  not  only  nitrogen  but  many  other  sub-
stances will  yet  be  found  there,  which  some  have  thought
could  not  be  there  because  not  yet  discovered.  The  fact
that  an  element  exists  in  the  earth  may  not  be  proof  that  it
must  exist  in  the  sun,  even  on  the  assumption  that  the  sun
is  the  parent  of  all  the  planets,  but  it  is  strong  presumptive
evidence  that  it  is  also  there.  It  is,  however,  much  stronger
proof  that  it  existed  in  the  general  mass  as  late  at  least  as
when  the  earth  was  formed  out  of  it,  and  therefore  in  the
original  nebula,  as  shown  by  observation  on  other  nebulse.
It  is  an  interesting  fact,  however,  that  there  should  be  found
in  the  spectra  of  nebulae  a  line  easily  identifiable  as  that  of
our  abundant  gas  nitrogen,  which  the  spectrum  of  the  sun
does  not  yield.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  spectrum
of  a  nebula  belongs  to  a  different  class  from  that  of  the  sun,
consisting  of  bright  lines  on  a  dark  ground,  which  indicates

258  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

a  luminous  gas,  the  latter  consisting  of  dark  lines  on  a  bright
ground,  indicating  an  incandescent  solid  or  liquid  interior,
the  rays  of  which  pass  through  a  cooler  gaseous  atmosphere.
Now  this  antithesis  in  the  constitution  of  the  two  bodies
may  explain  why  certain  elements  existing  in  both  may  be
capable  of  spectroscopic  determination  only  in  one,  owing  to
peculiar  conditions  supplied  by  the  special  nature  of  the  sub-
stances themselves  ;  for  it  is  by  no  means  probable  that  the
spectroscope  gives  us  an  account  of  all  the  substances  exist-
ing in  the  bodies  examined  by  it.

While,  therefore,  there  is  nothing  in  the  facts  thus  far
discovered  which  is  opposed  to  the  theory  that  the  terrestrial
substances  having  high  melting  and  volatilizing  points  have
been  developed  out  of  aggregates  which  are  gaseous  at  lower
temperatures  in  the  process  of  evolution  of  planetary  sys-
tems, these  facts,  so  far  as  they  apply,  appear  to  favor  such
an  hypothesis.  We  certainly  find  such  substances  in  our
earth  and  in  the  intensely  heated  bodies  of  space,  as  well  as
in  such  meteoric  aggregates  as  from  time  to  time  reach  our
planet,  and  we  have  not  yet  found  any  such  in  any  nebula.
If  the  latter  be  conceived  as  gaseous,  and  the  solar  system
be  conceived  as  only  a  developed  state  of  one  of  them,  either
some  such  hypothesis  must  be  brought  forward  to  explain
the  existence  of  such  substances  in  the  earth,  or  the  original
mass  must  be  supposed  to  possess  a  sufficient  degree  of  heat
to  maintain  them  in  the  gaseous  form,  which  would  be  enor-
mous. And  on  the  theory  here  advanced  of  the  origin  of
nebulae  themselves,  the  assumption  of  so  great  an  initial
temperature  is  wholly  inadmissible.  Prior  to  the  state  in
which  the  degree  of  molar  aggregation  is  sufficient  to  occa-
sion a  great  amount  of  friction,  the  temperature  of  the  pri-
mary molecular  aggregates  must  be  nearly  that  of  space,  and
it  can  rise  only  as  increase  of  aggregation  and  molar  motion
increases  that  friction  and  converts  material  motion  into
ethereal  vibration.  Nebulte  must,  therefore,  possess  a  long
history,  of  which  neither  the  telescope  nor  the  spectroscope

ORIGIN  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.  259

can  give  any  record — the  pre-luminous  period — in  which,  of
course,  no  gases  can  exist  except  those,  like  hydrogen  and
nitrogen,  which  maintain  their  gaseous  form  under  extremely
low  temperatures.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  dur-
ing this  period  other  gases  may  exist  associated  with  these,
which,  however,  unlike  them,  are  unable  to  sustain  the  suc-
cessively higher  and  higher  temperatures  which  the  nebula
acquires  in  its  process  of  concentration  and  organization  into
a  system,  and  at  certain  stages  of  this  process  are  dissociated
and  resolved  into  aggregates  of  a  different  constitution  suited
to  these  temperatures.  It  is  further  reasonable  that  some  of
these  latter  new  aggregates  should  assume  the  liquid  and
solid  forms  at  temperatures  still  high  as  compared  with
those  to  which  we  are  accustomed,  and  should  constitute  in
the  cooled  crust  of  planets  the  metals  calcium,  aluminium,
etc.,  as  well  as  silicon.  Indeed,  it  would  not  be  at  all  diffi-
cult, on  this  assumption,  to  account  for  the  existence  of  all
the  elements  found  on  the  earth,  were  it  known  for  a  cer-
tainty that  none  existed  in  the  parent  nebula  except  the
three  of  which  the  spectroscope  furnishes  the  proof.

"We  will  leave  it  to  the  nebular  hypothesis  to  explain
the  progress  of  the  nebulous  mass  from  the  early  luminous
state  to  which  we  have  traced  it  down  to  that  in  which  the
several  planetary  bodies  have  been  disengaged  and  formed,
assuming  the  reader  to  be  already  familiar  with  both  the
evidence  in  its  favor  and  the  somewhat  inharmonious  infer-
ences which  have  been  drawn  from  it,  all  converging,  never-
theless, toward  the  development  of  one  of  the  grandest  of
Imman  conceptions — the  evolution  of  the  solar  system.

Leaving  all  other  systems  out  of  view  for  the  time  being,
and  contemplating  our  own,  we  have  next  to  consider  the
closing,  as  we  have  just  considered  the  opening,  scenes  in
the  great  drama  of  cosmical  organization.

At  the  epoch  in  the  history  of  our  system  in  which  we
live,  we  observe  that  from  the  central  mass  eight  planets,

260  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

varying  greatly  in  size,  volume,  density,  and  other  character-
istics, and  agreeing  in  many  respects,  have  been  disengaged
and  not  only  formed  into  spheroidal  bodies,  but  so  far  cooled
down  as  to  be  no  longer  self-luminous  after  the  manner  of
the  nucleus  or  sun  and  of  other  fixed  stars.  In  addition  to
these  a  great  number  of  smaller  bodies  are  found  to  occupy
the  space  intermediate  between  Mars  and  Jupiter,  while  the
existence  of  a  ninth  planet  within  the  orbit  of  Mercury  has
been  suspected.  Innumerable  other  bodies,  under  the  names
of  comets,  aerolites,  and  meteorites,  are  also  observed  to  be
constantly  flying  through  the  interplanetary  spaces,  many  of
which  are  known  to  move  in  orbits  around  the  sun.  It  is,
moreover,  now  believed  that  all  the  space  of  the  solar  system
is  occupied  by  minute  cosmical  particles  or  dust,  the  chem-
ical constitution  of  which  is  identical  with  that  of  comets  and
aerolites ;  and  the  zodiacal  light,  if  not  a  terrestrial  phenome-
non, may  indicate  that  this  matter  increases  in  density  with
its  proximity  to  the  sun.

The  sun  itself  is  the  only  one  of  the  bodies  in  the  system
which  is  still  so  greatly  heated  as  to  be  incandescent  at  its
surface.  This  may  be  accounted  for  by  its  great  size  and
low  density.  Its  diameter  is  about  111  times  that  of  the
earth,  its  volume  therefore  over  1,400,000  times  that  of  the
earth,  and,  although  its  density  is  only  one  fourth  of  the
earth's  density,  its  mass  or  quantity *of  matter  still  remains
more  than  350,000  times  the  earth's  mass.  How  near  the
sun  com6s  to  containing  all  the  matter  of  the  system,  may
be  appreciated  when  we  consider  that  all  the  rest  of  the
matter  contained  in  it  constitutes  only  ^^  of  the  volume,
or  -y^j-  of  the  mass,  of  the  sun  and  planets  combined.  The
sun  contains,  therefore,  -ff^*  of  the  matter  of  the  solar
system,  a  fraction  so  near  to  unity  that  for  all  rough  esti-

*  Calling  the  mass  of  the  sun  alone  1,000,000,000,  that  of  all  the  planets
will  be  1,341,687,  and  of  the  sun  and  planets,  1,001,341, 687.  The  mass  of  the
sun  is  therefore  99-866  per  cent  of  the  entire  system.  (See  Newcomb's  "  Popu-
lar Astronomy,"  New  York,  1878,  p.  238.)

THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.  261

mates  tlie  matter  of  the  solar  system  not  embraced  in  tlie
sun's  volume  may  be  disregarded.  The  great  nebula,  there-
fore, out  of  which  the  solar  system  has  been  evolved  has,  in
its  course  of  contraction,  concentration,  and  integration,  only
lost  a  few  comparatively  minute  films  of  matter,  while  the
chief  bulk  of  it  still  clings  to  the  primary  mass.  This  mass,
as  we  may  infer  from  its  rarity,  is  still  contracting  and  in-
tegrating at  so  rapid  a  rate  that  the  amount  of  heat  thereby
generated  is  less  than  overbalanced  by  the  amount  radiated
from  its  surface ;  in  other  words,  it  has  not  probably  yet
commenced  to  cool  off.  For,  as  has  already  been  remarked,
this  stage  can  not  be  reached  until  the  process  of  molar  ag-
gregation has  proceeded  so  far  that  but  little  further  con-
traction can  take  place  under  the  laws  of  the  constitution  of
matter;  since  it  is  concentration  of  matter,  or  integration,
which  evolves  heat  by  the  con  version  of  material  into  ethe-
real motion,  and  this  is  really  nothing  more  than  simple
friction  among  the  molecules.  As  long  as  this  can  actively
take  place,  heat  will  result,  but  as  soon  as  a  state  is  reached  at
which  these  activities  are  checked  and  as  it  were  clogged,
then  they  actually  cease  in  a  measure,  the  friction  is  dimin-
ished, and  with  it  the  evolution  of  heat.

A  further  evidence  that  such  is  the  true  present  condition
of  the  sun  is  found  in  what  is  known  of  its  physical  consti-
tution. Its  low  density  is  due  to  this  constitution  more  than
to  the  specific  gravity  of  the  materials  of  which  it  is  com-
posed. Besides  the  lighter  bodies,  such  as  hydrogen,  sodium,
magnesium,  etc.,  the  sun  is  also  known  to  contain  vast  quan-
tities of  the  heavier  metals,  such  as  iron,  nickel,  zinc,  cop-
per, and  probably  also  gold.  The  low  density  of  the  sun  is
therefore  chiefly  due  to  the  fact  that  a  large  part  of  its  vol-
ume consists  of  these  materials  in  a  gaseous  form ;  and  we
know,  from  observation  upon  the  corona  and  from  the  phe-
nomena of  sun-spots,  that  this  is  the  case.  To  so  great  an
extent  is  the  sun  a  gaseous  body,  that  its  outline  and  volume
have  been  observed  to  undergo  variations,  the  matter  of  its

262  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGEXY.

substance  surging  first  to  one  side  and  tlien  to  the  other  to
a  degree  snfiicient  to  render  observations  based  on  the  con-
tact of  a  planet  in  transit  unreliable.  Kot  only  has  it  a  very
thick  atmosphere  (chromosphere),  composed  chiefly  of  hydro-
gen gas,  but  beneath  this  lies  the  photosphere  of  unknown
depth,  which  is  believed  also  to  be  wholly  gaseous,  and  in
which  profound  chasms  frequently  open,  whose  relatively
darker  color  at  the  bottom  produces  the  so-called  spots  on
the  sun.  As  to  what  lies  beneath  this,  we  can  only  specu-
late ;  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  it  may  consist  of  the
heavier  materials  which  are  supposed  to  make  up  the  interior
mass  of  our  globe,  but  which  are  there  in  a  semi-gaseous
condition  due  to  increased  temperature.

The  stray  little  cloudlets  which  have  chanced  to  become
disengaged  from  the  contracting  mass  and  have  formed  the
various  planets,  although  in  a  highly  heated  state  at  that
time,  have  all  passed  the  point  at  which  the  generation  of
heat  balanced  its  radiation,  and,  left  far  out  in  space  by  the
receding  nucleus  whose  radiant  influence  has  been  constantly
diminishing,  tliey  have,  in  consequence  of  the  small  amount
of  matter  composing  them,  for  the  most  part  ceased  rapidly
to  contract  and  diminish  in  volume,  and  have  become  crusted
over  with  a  layer  of  solid  matter.  That  this  is  the  case  with
all  the  planets  can  not  be  aflfirmed,  and  indeed  with  regard
to  Jupiter,  and  perhaps  Saturn  also,  it  is  now  generally  be-
lieved that  the  matter  composing  them  is  still  in  an  incan-
descent state  at  the  surface,  and  is  only  obscured  by  the  im-
mense atmosphere  of  dense  vapors  that  constantly  hang  over
the  seething  caldron  below.  This  condition  of  things,
which  is  inferred  almost  wholly  from  telescopic  observation
of  Jupiter,  can  be  deduced  with  great  fidelity  from  the  anal-
ogy of  the  earth  on  the  assumption  of  complete  homogeneity
in  the  two  planets.  Suppose  the  present  crust  of  the  earth
raised  to  a  temperature  sufllcient  to  melt  all  the  rocks  of
which  it  consists.  The  waters  of  the  ocean  would  be  con-
verted into  steam  at  the  surface  and  driven  far  upward  into

THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.  263

tte  upper  regions  of  the  atmosphere.  There,  meeting  with
colder  strata,  they  would  be  condensed  into  vapor  and  hang
heavily  over  the  entire  earth,  wholly  obscuring  the  view  of
the  surface  of  the  planet  from  observers  on  other  planets.
Whenever,  by  the  interaction  of  currents  of  difEerent  tem-
peratures, further  condensation  should  be  caused  and  torrents
of  water  be  poured  back  upon  the  planet's  surface,  the  in-
tense heat  of  the  latter  would  again  convert  this  water  into
steam  long  before  it  could  reach  it,  and  send  it  back  to  the
upper  regions,  to  be  again  condensed  and  poured  down,  and
again  hurled  back  in  an  unceasing  storm.  "When  we  im-
agine all  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  lakes,  rivers,  etc.,  on  the
surface  of  the  globe  converted  into  steam  and  aqueous  vapor,
we  can  readily  conceive  what  an  enormous  atmosphere  of
this  gas  would  surround  the  heavier  portions  of  the  earth's
substance.  In  fact,  it  requires  no  profound  exercise  of  mathe-
matics to  calculate  with  considerable  accuracy  the  dimensions
of  this  envelope.  The  average  depth  of  the  ocean  is  esti-
mated at  12,000  feet,  while  the  area  of  the  earth's  surface
occupied  by  it  is  not  far  from  140,000,000  square  miles.  The
product  of  these  dimensions  gives  approximately  the  quan-
tity of  water  on  the  globe.  By  reducing  the  depth,  say  to
8,000  feet,  so  as  to  equalize  it  over  the  entire  surface,  we
have  an  easy  method  of  computing  the  effect  of  its  expan-
sion into  gas.  Water  on  being  converted  into  steam  in-
creases in  volume  1,800  times.  If,  on  any  given  area,  this
increase  of  volume  be  supposed  to  take  place  in  vertical
thickness  only,  we  should  have  for  the  depth  of  the  aqueous
atmosphere  2,Y27  miles.  This  will,  of  course,  be  diminished
by  the  fact  that  the  superficial  area  of  a  sphere  increases
with  the  diameter,  but  this  reduction  is  easily  made.  The
fact  that  a  large  part  of  this  steam  would  necessarily  exist
at  all  times  in  a  state  of  cloud  or  vapor,  would  also  greatly
affect  the  computation ;  and  the  correction  for  this  source
would  be  difficult  to  make  with  any  great  degree  of  accu-
racy.    But,  with  all  the  difficulties  of  the  problem,  it  is  quite

264  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

easy  to  form  a  general  mental  conception  of  the  degree  to
which  the  volume  of  the  earth  would  be  extended.  And
in  the  same  degree  would  its  density  be  diminished.  Its
surface  would  also  present  a  constant  state  of  agitation,
variation,  and  disturbance,  analogous  to  that  presented  by
the  surface  of  Jupiter,  meteorological  phenomena  going
on  on  a  scale  proportional  to  the  depth  of  the  atmos-
phere, and  the  degree  of  heat  at  the  surface  of  the  planet
proper.

These  considerations  may  serve  to  account  for  the  great
rarity  of  the  matter  of  the  outer  planets,  although  it  must  be
confessed  that  it  is  not  suiRcient  of  itself  fully  to  explain
this,  especially  in  the  case  of  Saturn,  which,  though  a  smaller
planet  than  Jupiter,  is  Kttle  more  than  half  as  dense,  and  is
nearly  eight  times  as  rare  as  the  earth.

The  constitution  of  the  outer  planets — Jupiter,  Saturn,
Uranus,  and  Neptune — must  be  in  some  manner  different
from  that  of  the  inner.  The  habit  of  speaking  of  the  two
groups  as  though  they  were  substantially  similar  has  been
justly  criticised,  for  not  only  is  there  no  comparison  in  the
amount  of  matter  contained  by  them,  but  there  is  a  great
and  radical  difference  in  the  mode  of  aggregation  of  that
matter.  Of  all  the  matter  of  the  solar  system  exclusive  of
the  sun,  Jupiter  alone  furnishes  over  70  per  cent,  while  all
the  inner  planets  together  only  furnish  '0044,  or  less  than
one  half  of  one  per  cent.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the
great  bulk  of  the  matter  which  was  thrown  off  by  the  con-
tracting nebula  was  lost  near  the  periphery  of  what  we  now
regard  as  the  limits  of  the  solar  system :  first,  in  two  large
masses ;  then  a  third,  several  times  larger  than  both  the  pre-
ceding ;  and  finally  a  fourth,  more  than  three  times  as  large
as  the  third ;  and  that  after  this  no  losses  of  any  comparative
magnitude  took  place.

Now,  while  it  might  be  reasonable  to  expect  that,  accord-
ing to  the  theory  of  aggregation  here  set  forth,  the  nature  of
the  matter  which  was  separated  from  the  vast  gaseous  nebula

THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.  265

at  the  period  when  it  extended  continuously  to  the  orbit  of
Jupiter,  Saturn,  or  Neptune,  would  differ  in  many  respects
from  that  which  disengaged  itself  from  this  denser  ball  of
fire  at  the  time  when  its  outer  border  coincided  with  the
orbit  of  Mars  or  of  the  earth ;  and,  while  in  this  circum-
stance doubtless  must  lie  in  part  the  explanation  of  the  im-
mense differences  in  the  densities  of  the  outer  and  inner
series  of  planets,  there  are  nevertheless  other  valid  grounds
on  which  to  account  for  the  greater  part  of  this  difference,
even  were  it  established  that,  in  its  essential  nature,  the
matter  of  all  the  planets  is  strictly  homogeneous.  These
grounds  are  furnished  chiefly  by  the  enormous  disproportion
between  the  masses  of  the  two  classes  of  bodies,  as  affecting
the  history  of  their  cosmical  development.

For  example,  while  the  mass  of  Jupiter  is  338  times  that
of  the  earth,  its  distance  from  the  sun  is  only  5*2  times  the
distance  of  the  earth.  Although  the  rate  of  contraction  of
the  sun's  mass  was  doubtless  less  rapid  as  it  progressed,  still
the  difference  in  the  ages  of  Jupiter  and  the  earth  could
bear  no  proportion  to  the  difference  of  their  masses. "  Ju-
piter is  of  course  many  times  older  than  the  earth,  but  it  is
several  hundred  times  greater.  The  same  is  also  true  to  a
greatly  diminished  extent  of  Saturn,  the  amount  of  matter
in  that  planet  being  ten  times  as  much  greater  than  that  in
the  earth  as  its  distance  from  the  sun  is  greater  than  the
earth's  distance.  When,  however,  we  consider  Uranus,  and
especially  Neptune,  these  differences  disappear,  and  the
masses  become  relatively  less  than  their  distances  from  the
sun.

In  the  case  of  Jupiter  it  is  clear  that,  judging  solely  from
the  analogy  of  the  earth,  sufficient  time  has  not  yet  elapsed
in  which  to  expect  that  this  comparatively  vast  mass  of  mat-
ter would  have  so  far  contracted  as  to  cease  to  generate  heat,
or  to  have  radiated  enough  of  its  original  heat  to  form  a
crust  like  that  of  the  earth.  It  accordingly  appears  to  be  in
something  the  same  condition  in  which  the  earth  was  before

266  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

its  crust  was  formed,  and  while  the  rocks  composing  it  were
in  a  molten  state,  and  the  waters  of  its  present  seas  were
floating  above  it  in  the  form  of  steam  and  aqueous  vapor.
Observations  upon  Jupiter  indicate  with  great  certainty  that
its  vast  cloud-atmosphere  consists  chiefly  of  the  same  matter
as  our  terrestrial  clouds,  and  it  is  a  reasonable  inference  that
these  are  mingled  with  an  invisible  gaseous  atmosphere  anal-
ogous to  our  own.  This,  however,  must  be  much  more
dense,  due  to  increased  gravitation ;  though  the  latter  would
be  in  great  part  counteracted  by  the  effect  of  heat  at  the  sur-
face.

Saturn,  too,  is  known  to  possess  a  great  cloud-envelope,
and  has  been  thought  by  some  to  be  nearly  altogether  gase-
ous. Its  astonishing  rarity  seems  almost  to  require  this  as-
sumption, while  certain  remarkable  phenomena  which  it  has
been  known  to  present,  whereby  it  seems  actually  to  undergo
a  change  of  shape,  strongly  confirm  this  view.  This  planet,
therefore,  is  probably  also  in  an  intensely  heated  state,  and
is  still  contracting  its  mass.  In  short,  Jupiter  and  Saturn  are
simply  lesser  suns,  and,  notwithstanding  the  immense  differ-
ence between  their  dimensions  and  those  of  the  sun,  the  solar
system  may  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of  triple  star.

Of  the  two  outer  planets,  Uranus  and  Neptune,  little
more  can  be  said  than  that  they  are  very  large  bodies ;  the
smaller  of  them  containing  nearly  seven  times  as  much  mat-
ter as  all  the  inner  planets  combined,  and  that  they  rank
in  density  along  with  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  the  sun,  and  must
therefore  be  classed  with  these  as,  to  a  great  extent,  gaseous
bodies.

In  all  these  oiiter  planets,  as  in  the  sun,  we  therefore  per-
ceive that  the  process  of  integration  and  concentration  of
matter  has  not  reached  a  stage  comparable  with  that  which
the  interior  planets  present.  While  the  latter  are  abso-
lutely much  younger,  they  arc  relatively  far  older  than
the  former ;  the  great  difference  in  the  cosmical  progress  of
the  two  classes  of  bodies  being  doubtless  due  in  large  part

THE  SOLAR  SYSTEM.  267

to  the  difference  of  size.  The  case  of  our  moon,  which  is
nearly  as  much  smaller  (in  quantity  of  matter)  than  the  earth
as  the  earth  is  smaller  than  Saturn,  and  M'hich  has  advanced
so  much  farther  than  the  earth  as  to  have  absorbed  into  its
solid  matter  both  its  waters  and  its  atmosphere,  still  further
illustrates  this  general  tendency  of  bodies  to  condense  in  vol-
ume and  radiate  their  heat  in  proportion  to  their  mass.

But  still  it  must  be  confessed  that  much  remains  unex-
plained. "Why  should  Saturn  be  so  much  lighter  than  Jupi-
ter, and  Neptune  so  much  heavier  than  Uranus  or  Saturn  ?

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  distances  of  these  outer
planets  from  one  another  bear  some  relation  to  their  dimen-
sions as  compared  with  the  distances  and  dimensions  of  the
inner  group.  While  Saturn  is  nearly  as  far  from  Jupiter  as
Jupiter  is  from  the  sun,  Uranus  is  nearly  twice,  and  Neptune
over  three  times,  as  far  from  the  sun  as  Saturn.  These  two
latter  must  therefore  be  vastly  older  than  the  two  former,
and  on  the  theory,  being  much  smaller,  should  be  far  more
dense.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  Neptune,  the  outer,  agrees  sub-
stantially with  Jupiter,  while  Uranus  agrees  quite  closely
with  Saturn.

These  facts  and  certain  others  lead  us  to  make  the  fur-
ther assumption  that  there  may  be  fundamental  differences  in
the  constitution  of  the  matter  composing  the  different  bodies
of  the  solar  system.  In  other  words,  it  seems  necessary  to
suppose  that  the  substances  composing  different  planets  are
more  or  less  different,  or  rather  that,  of  the  many  distinct
substances  or  molar  aggregates  which  have  been  evolved  in
the  course  of  development  of  the  system  from  its  nebulous
condition,  some  of  them  will  prevail  in  some  of  the  disen-
gaged masses  and  others  in  others,  and  that  on  this  circum-
stance, which  may  be  partly  accidental,  will  depend  the  chief
characteristics  of  these  bodies.  Of  the  actual  chemical  con-
stitution of  these  outer  planets  we  have  no  direct  {i.  e.,  spec-
troscopic) information.  The  masses  of  condensed  vapor  that
surround  them  can  do  nothing  but  reflect  the  light  of  the

268  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

sun.  It  is  quite  evident  that  no  very  large  proportion  of  the
mass  of  these  bodies  can  consist  of  the  materials  which  form
the  original  crust  of  the  earth,  unless  they  exist  in  the  gase-
ous state.  The  assumption  of  a  core  of  molten  matter  of
this  class  would  require  that  core  to  be  very  small  in  propor-
tion to  the  gaseous  envelope  surrounding  it.  Such  may,  it
is  true,  be  the  case,  and  this  would  fully  harmonize  with
theory.     But  another  explanation  may  be  proposed.

Assuming,  as  we  have  done,  that  the  nebula  out  of  which
the  solar  system  has  been  evolved  was  originally  at  a  low
temperature  which  constantly  increased,  and  that  it  origi-
nally consisted  of  a  few  substances  which  are  gaseous  at
very  low  temperatures,  out  of  which,  under  the  influence
of  increasing  heat,  all  the  other  chemical  substances  were
formed  by  the  breaking  up  of  portions  of  the  original  ones,
we  may  well  doubt  whether,  at  the  time  when  the  extreme
outer  planets  were  liberated,  all  the  heavier  substances  had
yet  been  formed.  Iron,  gold,  zinc,  copper,  platinum,  etc.,
might  not  as  yet  have  been  born,  as  it  were,  and  this  would
explain  the  far  greater  rarity  of  the  outer  than  the  inner
planets.  Or  it  may  be  that  these  heavier  substances,  though
present  in  the  contracting  mass,  did  not  find  their  way  out
to  the  extreme  periphery  from  which  the  materials  for  these
planets  were  taken.  We  know  from  the  specific  gravity  of
the  whole  earth,  which  is  nearly  five  and  a  half  times  that  of
water  and  about  double  the  average  density  of  the  matter
composing  its  crust  (exclusive  of  the  waters),  that  the  matter
of  its  interior  must  be  nearly  three  times  as  dense  as  that  of
its  exterior  (not  counting  the  gaseous  envelope).  The  moon,
too,  which  is  supposed  to  have  once  formed  a  part  of  the
earth,  and  been  thrown  off  from  its  extreme  outer  portion  in
the  same  manner  in  which  the  earth  and  other  planets  were
thrown  off  from  the  sun,  proves  to  have  a  density  but  little
more  than  half  that  of  the  earth,  or  about  that  of  the  earth's
present  solid  crust,  notwithstanding  that  it  has  progressed
so  much  further  in  the  process  of  integration  of  its  matter.

THE  SOLAE  SYSTEM.  269

This  fact  would  seem  to  indicate  that,  as  a  rule,  planets  will
diminish  in  density  in  proportion  to  their  distances  from  the
sun,  of  which  law  Mercury  furnishes  still  another  confirma-
tion, with  its  density  of  more  than  double  that  of  the  other
three  planets  in  the  same  group.  This  law,  however,  is  only
general,  and  can  not  be  traced  in  all  the  individual  cases,  as
the  densities  of  the  outer,  as  well  as  of  these  three  of  the
inner  group,  when  compared  with  each  other,  attest.  Still  it
is,  perhaps,  as  uniform  as  ought  to  be  expected.

The  differences  in  density  between  the  four  inner  planets
are  small  as  compared  with  the  difference  between  the  den-
sity of  the  inner  planets,  taken  as  a  group,  and  that  of  the
outer,  taken  as  a  group.  The  average  density  of  the  former
is  nearly  six  times  the  average  density  of  the  latter,  while
the  density  of  Mercury,  the  heaviest  of  the  inner  planets,
is  considerably  less  than  three  times  that  of  Mars,  the  light-
est. It  will  be  further  observed  that,  in  harmony  with  our
theory,  the  most  external  of  this  group  (Mars)  is  also  the
least  dense,  while  the  most  internal  (Mercury)  is  the  most
dense ;  only  Yenus  and  the  Ear.th  should  be  transposed  to
render  the  scheme  true  for  all.  But  the  difference  of  den-
sity of  tliese  two  last-mentioned  bodies  is  comparatively
small.

These  relations  of  density  are  thus  specially  dwelt  upon
because  it  is  this  characteristic  which  indicates  the  degree
of  integration  and  the  mode  of  aggregation  in  the  body,
and  hence  alone  enables  us  to  form  a  conception  of  its  nat-
ure and  constitution.  This  and  the  information  furnished
by  the  telescope  enable  us  to  say  with  reasonable  certainty
that  these  four  interior  planets  of  the  solar  system  are  sub-
stantially homogeneous,  and  that  a  tolerably  correct  idea  of
them  all  may  be  formed  from  the  character  of  the  earth.

This  statement,  however,  is  wholly  exclusive  of  all  but
their  mineral  condition.  Organic  life  is  influenced  by  such
exceedingly  delicate  conditions  that  no  inferences  with  re-
gard to  its  existence  on  other  planets  can  be  deduced  from
13

270  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

any  of  the  facts  above  set  forth,  but  must  be  drawn  from
another  and  far  more  difficult  class  of  considerations,  if
they  are  ever  drawn  at  all.

Leaving,  then,  all  others  for  the  time  being  out  of  view,
let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the  matter  of  our  globe.  "We
iind  it  to  consist  of  a  large  number  of  distinct  substances,
of  which  some  sixty-five  *  have  thus  far  resisted  all  human
efforts  further  to  simplify  them,  and  have  hence  been  de-
nominated elements.  Of  the  great  mass  of  very  dense  mat-
ter which  lies  far  down  in  the  interior  we  are  wholly  igno-
rant.

So  far  as  we  have  been  peiTuitted  to  observe  it,  the  mat-
ter composing  the  earth  consists  of  three  general  forms  or
stages — the  solid,  the  liquid,  and  the  gaseous.  The  solid
crust  of  unknown  thickness  is  surrounded  by  a  liquid  envel-
ope of  about  eight  thousand  feet  in  depth.  Owing  to  irregu-
larities in  the  surface  produced  since  the  solid  crust  has
formed,  and  due  to  the  contraction  of  the  earth's  volume
which  is  still  taking  place,  a  considerable  amount  of  the  solid
matter  has  been  made  to  rise  up  out  of  the  water,  and  this  is
compensated  for  by  corresponding  depressions  in  the  ocean-
bed  at  other  places.  This  condition  would  naturally  occur
under  the  circumstances,  and  something  analogous  to  it  is
visible  in  Mars,  and  doubtless  formerly  existed  in  the  moon,
but  it  is  not  an  essential  condition  of  a  planet  that  any  dry
land  shall  project  above  the  waters.  This  is,  as  it  were,  ac-
cidental, and  theoretically  the  entire  surface  of  the  globe  is
enveloped  by  a  relatively  thin  film  of  water  some  two  miles
in  depth.  Surrounding  this  aqueous  envelope  is  one  of  gas
of  unknown  depth.  Though  often  put  down  at  fifty  or
sixty  miles,  it  is  certainly  much  deeper,  and  meteorites,
ignited  by  contact  with  it,  have  been  seen  at  the  height  of

*  A  much  larger  number  is  now  known  to  exist,  but  many  of  the  more  re-
cently discovered  ones  are  exceedingly  rare,  and  only  obtainable  by  special  and
delicate  processes,  while  some  are  still  problematical.     (See  supra,  p.  162,  note.)

\

THE  EARTH.  271

nearly  one  hundred  miles.  It  is  known  to  diminish  in  den-
sity with  the  distance  from  the  earth  at  the  rate  of  one  centi-
meter of  barometric  pressure  per  hundred  meters.  Some
have  supposed  that  this  rate  of  diminution  continued  until
the  atmosphere  vanished  from  its  own  rarity,  but  Wollaston  *
maintained  that  it  possessed  a  definite  surface  upon  which  he
conceived  the  waves  to  roll  much  as  they  do  upon  the  sur-
face of  the  sea.  This  view  must  be  sustained  unless  it  can
be  shown  experimentally  that  there  is  no  limit  to  the  ex-
pansibility of  a  gas.  In  fact,  since  the  substances  of  which
the  atmosphere  is  composed,  though  gases,  are  still  as  strict-
ly ponderable  as  water,  they  must  be  every-where  acted  on
by  the  earth's  attraction ;  and,  as  the  air  grows  more  rare
in  the  upper  regions  and  the  repulsive  force  of  the  mole-
cules diminishes,  they  must  come  more  and  more  relatively
under  the  influence  of  gravitation,  and  the  point  must  be
finally  reached  at  which  the  latter  force  will  overbalance
the  former,  and  render  farther  removal  of  the  molecules
from  the  earth's  surface  impossible.  Thus  would  exist  a
definite  limit  to  the  atmosphere,  f

Some  have  thought,  perhaps  from  the  analogy  of  the
sun,  that  the  upper  strata  of  the  atmosphere  may  consist  of
pure  hydrogen,  extending  far  beyond  the  limit  of  the  atmos-
phere proper.  The  law  of  the  diffusion  of  gases  would  seem
to  negative  this  hypothesis,  and  the  fact  that  the  most  vio-
lent meteorological  disturbances  never  bring  us  any  traces
of  pure  hydrogen  is  equally  unfavorable  to  it.  Moreover,
the  analogy  is  not  good,  since  in  the  sun  the  heat  is  too
great  certainly  for  the  union  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  into
water  or  vapor,  and  doubtless  even  steam  would  be  decom-

*  Wollaston,  in  the  "  Philosophical  Transactions  "  for  1822,  p.  89.

f  The  views  recently  advanced  by  Professor  T.  Sterry  Hunt,  according  to
which  our  atmosphere  is  of  cosmical  origin,  are  highly  interesting,  although
they  would  be  regarded  as  somewhat  visionary  had  they  not  emanated  from  so
high  an  authority.  (Sec  "Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,"  May  31,  1867,
and  "  Chemical  and  Geological  Essays,"  second  edition,  Salem,  ISTB,  p.  xii.)

272  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGE NY.

posed  there  if  formed.*  The  indications  are  that,  as  the
earth  cooled  down  to  the  point  at  which  the  formation  of
Bteam  was  possible,  all  the  free  hydrogen  in  the  atmosphere
was  seized  by  the  superabundant  oxygen  and  converted  into
steam,  and,  as  the  process  of  cooling  still  further  progressed,
this  was  condensed  to  vapor  and  finally  to  water,  establish-
ing the  condition  of  things  which  we  find  to  exist.

The  atmosphere  consists  chiefly  of  four  gases,  oxygen,  ni-
trogen, carbonic  acid,  and  steam,  or  gaseous  water.  Roughly
speaking,  the  relative  amount  of  each  of  these  gases  may  be
stated  as  follows :  nitrogen,  42,000  ;  oxygen,  10,000  ;  car-
bonic acid,  26  ;  steam,  1.  The  amount  of  aqueous  vapor,
however,  is  variable,  since  it  is  constantly  being  generated
by  the  sun's  rays  and  again  condensed.  Still,  the  average
amount  existing  in  the  whole  atmosphere  must  remain  sub-
stantially the  same,  since  the  sun  always  shines  on  one  half
the  globe  and  no  more.  It  is  probably  somewhat  greater
while  the  sun  is  south  of  the  equator  than  while  it  is  north
of  it,  in  consequence  of  the  increased  ocean-surface  in  the
southern  hemisphere,  as  well  as  because  at  the  present  time
the  earth  is  then  nearer  to  the  sun.

The  amount  of  carbonic  acid  is  also  somewhat  variable
in  consequence  of  the  facility  with  w'hich  vegetation  decom-
poses, and  animal  respiration,  as  well  as  all  forms  of  combus-
tion, produces  it.  Still,  these  agencies  are  supposed  to  be
every- where  somewhat  equally  balanced.  There  are  certain
localities  on  the  globe  at  which  large  quantities  of  this  gas  are
being  constantly  liberated  from  beneath  the  surface  where
it  must  have  been  generated  by  certain  processes  not  well
understood.  It  is  also  generally  supposed  that  the  vast  de-
posits of  coal  in  the  earth  are  evidence  that  this  gas  formerly
existed  in  the  atmosphere  in  far  greater  proportions  than  at
present,  and  that  it  has  been  extracted  from  it,  and  its  oxy-
gen liberated,  by  ages  of  luxuriant  vegetation  before  the  ap-

*  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  address  before  Section  A,  at  the  Bristol  meet-
ing of  the  British  Association.    Report.    London,  1876.

THE  EAETH.  273

pearance  of  land  animals,  Notwithstanding  tlie  attempt  of
Sir  Charles  Lyell  and  other  nniformitarians  to  qualify  this
view,*  it  has  not  been  successfully  disproved.  Indeed,  it
would  seem  to  be  a  necessary  deduction  from  the  data,  the
only  question  being  as  to  its  suflSciency  to  produce  the  "pu-
rification "  claimed.

It  is  even  more  certain  that  the  proportion  of  oxygen  in
the  atmosphere  is  gradually  diminishing.  Its  strong  affinities
for  nearly  all  the  other  substances  have  given  it  a  constant
career  of  conquest  over  them  ever  since  the  earth  cooled
down  sufficiently  to  admit  of  the  formation  of  solid  matter
on  its  surface.  It  appears  to  have  seized  and  converted  into
water  all  the  free  hydrogen  existing  in  the  former  atmos-
phere. It  has  combined  with  all  the  silicon,  aluminum,  and
calcium  lying  near  the  periphery  of  the  forming  planet,  and
thus  combined,  forms  at  present  about  one  half  of  the  matter
of  the  crust  of  the  globe.  There  is  reason,  however,  to  believe
that  this  proportion  is  much  less  at  great  depths,  and  it  does
not  seem  probable  that  a  large  amount  of  oxygen  is  mingled
with  the  molten  mass  of  the  interior.  This  alone  would  ac-
count for  the  increased  specific  gravity  of  the  deeper-lying
materials.  Oxygen  also  enters  largely  into  all  organic  com-
pounds, forming  more  than  three  fourths  of  the  entire  vegeta-
ble and  animal  kingdoms.  There  still  exist  many  substances
to  which  it  has  not  yet  had  access,  or  which  there  has  not
yet  been  time  enough  to  consume,  but  which  are  constantly
withdrawing  the  free  oxygen  from  the  air  and  locking  it  up
for  ever.  Many  of  the  rocks  of  the  earth's  surface  are  con-
stantly adding  to  their  proportions  of  oxygen.  All  the  car-
bon existing  on  or  in  the  earth  seems  destined  to  be  yet  laid
under  contribution  to  this  tyrant  gas.  The  same  is  true  of
the  hydrocarbons  wherever  found,  and  a  heated  and  lighted
city  is  an  example  of  how  man  allies  himself  on  the  side  of
oxygen  to  compass  the  destruction  of  every  thing  which  nat-

*  Lyell's  "  Travels  in  North  America,"  vol.  i,  chap,  vii,  p.  119  ;  also,  "Prin-
ciples of  Geology,"  eleventh  edition,  vol  i,  p.  226.

274  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— OOSMOGENY.

ure  had  seemed  to  seek  to  protect  from  its  rapacious  grasp.
But  these  breathing  human  millions  still  further  aid  in  the
devastation,  as  in  their  blind  ignorance  they  sacrifice  the
forests  which  can  alone  redeem  their  losses.  It  has,  there-
fore, been  remarked  that  long  before  the  heat  of  the  sun
shall  have  so  far  diminished  as  to  render  our  globe  uninhabit-
able, the  withdrawal  of  the  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere  will
have  gradually  asphyxiated  all  living  things.

Great  as  has  been  the  interest  which  the  world  has  mani-
fested in  oxygen  since  its  discovery  by  Priestley,  and  wonder-
ful as  its  properties  indeed  are,  it  can,  nevertheless,  scarcely
be  said  to  exceed  nitrogen  either  in  the  results  which  flow
from  its  activities  or  in  the  marvel  of  its  manifestations.  In
many  respects  these  two  gases  seem  to  be  antithetical  in  their
nature  and  properties.  "While  oxygen  is  the  embodiment  of
activity,  nitrogen  is  the  embodiment  of  inertia.  Composing
four  fifths  (upward  of  three  fourths  by  weight)  of  the  atmos-
phere, it  has  thus  far  steadily  refused  to  be  incorporated
into  the  solid  or  liquid  parts  of  the  earth.  'No  rock,  no  min-
eral, no  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous  substance  (with  the  excep-
tion of  ammonia  and  nitric  acid),  belonging  to  the  earth,  is
a  natural  compound  of  nitrogen  with  any  other  substance.
The  nitrogenous  beds  of  Peru  are  generally  supposed  to  be
of  organic  origin,  although  the  exact  nature  of  the  deposits
is  imperfectly  understood.  Guano  is  known  to  consist  of
bird-excrement,  while  the  saltpeter  of  the  East  Indies  is,
doubtless,  a  product  of  long-lixiviated  organic  heaps.  Am-
monia and  nitric  acid,  therefore,  are  the  only  compounds  of
nitrogen  known  to  be  formed  by  inorganic  agency.  All
other  nitrogenous  products  must  have  first  passed  through
one  of  these  stages ;  since  it  is  not  even  given  to  organized
life  to  form  nitrogenous  compounds  out  of  free  nitrogen.
It,  too,  is  compelled  to  go  to  ammonia  as  the  only  available
source  of  a  substance  so  absolutely  indispensable  to  its  exist-
ence, and  so  lavishly  diffused  throughout  the  atmosphere.

It  may  be  idle  to  speculate  as  to  what  would  have  been

THE  EARTH.  275

the  result  had  nitrogen  also  disdained  to  form  this  feeble
association  with  hydrogen,  as  it  does  all  other  associations ;
and  yet  to  imagine  life  without  ammonia  is,  in  the  present
state  of  science,  impossible.  This  persistent  refusal  to  com-
bine with  other  substances  is  the  special  property  wliich
gives  to  nitrogen  its  great  interest  to  chemistry  and  impor-
tance to  biology.  Upon  this  latter  point  more  will  be  said
in  its  proper  place.

As  we  are  now  considering  the  formation  of  the  globe,
it  becomes  an  important  question  what  is  to  be  the  final
destiny  of  this  vast  volume  of  free  gas  which  now  so  ob-
stinately declines  all  union  with  the  rest  of  the  earth's  mat-
ter. "We  have  seen  that,  as  the  temjjerature  of  the  earth
declines,  the  aqueous  vapor  of  the  atmosphere  will  become
solid  and  fojm  part  of  its  crust.  The  carbonic-acid  gas  of
the  atmosphere  may  be  all  locked  up  in  peat-bogs  and  coal-
deposits  long  before  that  period  shall  arrive.  The  oxygen
of  the  air  is  known  to  be  still  grasping  at  innumerable
unappropriated  substances,  and  bearing  them  down  to  the
earthj  and  will  doubtless  be  one  day  wholly  reduced  to  the
solid  form  in  permanent  combination.  But  what  is  to  be-
come of  this  stubborn  and  inert  gas  nitrogen,  which  is  gaseous
at  both  high  and  low  temperatures,  and  shows  no  disposition
to  form  any  combinations  with  heavier  matter  ?  The  exist-
ence of  certain  nitrogenous  salts  in  the  earth  from  which
nitric  acid  is  derived,  especially  niter,  and  the  fact  that  nitric
acid  is  sometimes  found  in  rain-water  after  a  thunder-shower,
have  been  taken  to  prove  that,  either  by  the  effect  of  light-
ning or  in  some  other  manner,  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere
sometimes  seizes  a  limited  quantity  of  its  nitrogen  and  brings
it  down  to  the  earth.  Will  the  conditions  ever  arise  under
which  this  power  of  combination  will  be  increased  ?  "Will
any  appreciable  part  of  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere  be-
come oxidized?  Such  a  result  seems  highly  improbable.  In
nitric  acid  there  are  three  times  as  many  molecules  of  oxy-
gen as  of  nitrogen,  while  in  the  atmosphere  there  is  over

276     PEIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGEFT.

three  times  as  mucli  nitrogen  as  oxygen ;  so  that,  even  if  all
the  oxygen  should  be  consumed  in  the  formation  of  this
compound,  a  vast  quantity  of  nitrogen  would  remain  free,  to
constitute  all  that  would  be  left  of  the  atmosphere.  Bat,
whatever  becomes  of  the  oxygen,  there  is  reason  to  believe
that  a  long  period  of  the  earth's  history  will  be  passed  dur-
ing which  its  atmosphere  will  consist  of  nitrogen  alone.

There  remains  but  one  other  mode  in  which,  in  our  pres-
ent knowledge,  we  are  able  to  account  for  the  absorption  of
any  considerable  portion  of  the  nitrogen  of  the  air.  Just  as
a  large  part  of  the  carbon  which  plant-life  derives  from  the
carbonic-acid  gas  of  the  air  is  stored  away  in  a  pure  state
beyond  the  reach  of  oxygen  to  seize  it,  and  is  thus  with-
drawn from  the  gaseous  and  added  to  the  solid  portion  of
the  earth,  so  a  large  part  of  the  nitrogen  which  is  appropri-
ated by  the  tissues  of  living  organisms  is  stored  away  in  the
earth  in  a  similar  manner.  Not  only  do  the  extensive  niter-
beds,  guano  islands,  etc.,  of  the  earth  testify  to  this  fact,  but
all  "  soil "  contains  this  solid  nitrogenous  matter,  and  every
manure-heap  adds  to  the  quantity  of  nitrogen  permanently
withdrawn  from  the  air.  Still,  it  would  require  aeons  of  time
to  exhaust  in  all  these  ways  the  enormous  quantity  of  nitro-
gen existing ;  and  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that,  long  before
any  such  result  could  be  accomplished,  the  organic  era  of  the
earth's  history  will  close,  and  the  last-named  process  cease
altogether.

One  concrete  fact  is  of  special  interest  as  bearing  upon
this  question.  The  earth's  satellite  appears  to  be  wholly
destitute  of  an  atmosphere.  I^ow,  an  atmosphere  of  pure
nitrogen  would  manifest  the  phenomena  of  twilight  as  well
as  one  composed  of  two  or  more  gases  like  our  own.  If  the
moon  was  originally  homogeneous  with  the  earth  and  once
formed  a  part  of  it,  it  could  scarcely  fail  to  have  possessed  a
similar  atmosphere  at  one  period.  If  so,  and  that  atmos-
phere has  disappeared,  it  seems  probable  that  ours  will  dis-
appear in  like  manner  when  the  earth  shall  reach  the  stage

THE  EARTH.  277

corresponding  to  that  at  which  such  disappearance  took  place
in  the  moon.  But  we  are  certain  that  no  temperature  has
ever  yet  existed  on  the  moon  low  enough  to  cause  the  solidi-
fication of  nitrogen,  and  we  must  therefore  conclude  that  in
the  grand  processes  of  cosmical  evolution  the  conditions  will
be  duly  developed  under  which  the  final  aggregation  of  all
kinds  of  substances  can  take  place.  It  is  the  law  of  evolu-
tion which  creates  the  conditions,  and  not  the  conditions
which  permit  that  law  to  operate.

The  substances  forming  the  fluid  and  liquid  envelopes  of
the  globe  are,  of  course,  gaseous  and  liquid,  respectively,  at
such  temperatures  as  we  are  most  accustomed  to.  Water  or
steam  becomes  a  solid  at  the  zero  of  the  Centigrade  ther-
mometer, and  remains  so  at  all  lower  temperatures.  About
the  poles  of  the  earth,  therefore,  it  must  form  a  permanent
part  of  the  earth's  crust,  as  much  so  as  the  rocks  do  in  other
regions.  It  is  proved,  however,  that  ice,  even  at  very  low
temperatures,  is  constantly  undergoing  slight  evaporation,
by  which  this  substance  passes  directly  from  the  sohd  to  the
gaseous  state.  But  all  exposed  rocks  undergo  some  slight
modifications  in  secular  periods,  and  therefore  aqueous  rock
can  not  be  regarded  as  any  exception.

The  carbonic-acid  gas  of  the  atmosphere  is  produced  by
the  action  of  oxygen  in  seizing  the  carbon  contained  in  the
earth.  This  it  doubtless  effected  long  before  the  earth  had
a  crust,  and  at  that  early  period  it  is  supposed  that  all  carbon
existed  in  this  combined  state.  The  various  allotropic  forms
of  carbon,  such  as  the  diamond,  graphite,  charcoal,  etc.,  now
found  in  the  crust  of  the  earth  in  the  solid  state,  are  prob-
ably all  of  organic  origin,  the  carbon  having  been  appropri-
ated by  vegetation  from  the  carbonic  acid  of  the  air,  and
subsequently  deposited  in  the  soil  and  preserved  from  the
contact  of  oxygen.  The  cosmical  history  of  carbon  is  of
great  interest,  and  presents  many  difficulties.  Although  by
no  means  an  abundant  substance,  it  stands  next  to  oxygen
and  nitrogen  in  the  importance  of  its  results,  especially  as

278  PEIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

forming  the  warp,  as  it  were,  of  all  organic  matter.  The
fact  that  no  degree  of  heat  attainable  by  man  is  sufficient  to
fuse  or  volatilize  it,  shows  that  it  must  have  had  its  origin  at
a  period  when  the  degree  of  heat  was  much  greater  than  any
now  producible.  It  was  thus  safe  at  its  creation  from  the
attacks  of  oxygen,  since  the  degree  of  heat  would  have  been
sufficient  to  dissociate  all  the  present  compounds  formed  by
that  element.  It  was  only  as  the  mass  cooled  down  that
carbonic  acid  was  formed,  just  as  was  also  aqueous  vapor ;
the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  of  this  latter  being  dissociated,  or
rather  not  yet  able  to  associate,  at  those  elevated  tempera-
tures. This  latter  fact  is  now  positively  confirmed  by  the
known  condition  of  the  sun,  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  being
there  uncombined.

The  most  abundant  substance  in  the  crust  of  the  earth  is
silica.  It  is  a  compound  of  oxygen  with  silicon,  or  silicium,
an  element  never  found  in  an  uncombined  state.  All  the
sand,  sandstone  rocks,  quartz,  and  fiint  of  the  earth  consist
chiefly  of  silica.

Next  to  silica  stands  alumina  as  an  abundant  constituent
of  the  known  parts  of  the  solid  earth.  It,  too,  is  a  compound
of  oxygen  with  an  element,  aluminium,  never  found  in  a  free
state.  It  is  the  base  of  all  the  clays.  Notwithstanding  its
vast  abundance  as  clay,  certain  allotropic,  crystalline  forms
of  alumina  constitute  the  most  brilliant  gems  of  the  mineral
kingdom.  The  element,  too,  which  js  a  true  metal,  possesses
some  of  the  most  valuable  properties,  and  is  expensive  to
obtain.

The  substance  which  ranks  third  in  abundance  is  lime,
the  oxide  of  calcium,  which,  however,  usually  occurs  in  the
form  of  a  carbonate,  that  is,  combined  again  with  an  equiva-
lent of  carbonic  acid.  Of  this  substance  all  limestone  and
marble  are  composed.

These  three  substances — silica,  alumina,  and  lime — form
the  great  bulk  of  the  earth's  crust,  so  far  as  known  to  us.
The  two  former  are  of  undoubted  cosmical  origin,  but  the

THE  EARTH.  2Y9

last  is  now  supposed  to  be  cliieflj,  if  not  wholly,  of  organic
origin.  It  is  confined  to  the  sedimentary  rocks,  and  scarcely
belongs  to  our  present  discussion.

The  specific  gravity  of  all  these  substances  is  not  great ;
that  of  the  metal  aluminium  is  about  2*6  as  compared  with
water,  or  nearly  the  average  density  of  the  earth's  crust  in
general.  Silicon  and  calcium  are  no  doubt  lighter,  although
quartz  and  limestone  are  heavier  than  clay.  The  fact  that  the
earth's  crust  has  this  specific  gravity  is,  of  course,  due  to  the
vast  preponderance  of  these  substances  in  it,  and  our  only
means  of  explaining  the  far  greater  specific  gravity  of  the
earth  taken  as  a  whole  is  to  assume  that  its  interior  is  com-
posed of  entirely  different  materials  having  greater  density.
Deducting  the  water  and  a  stratum  of  a  few,  say  twenty,
miles  for  the  crust  of  the  globe,  the  remainder  would  require
to  possess  about  the  density  of  iron  (7*5)  to  fulfill  the  condi-
tions existing ;  so  that,  if  there  were  a  very  large  amount
of  iron  in  the  earth's  interior,  there  might  exist  many  other
substances — some  lighter,  as  magnesium  (i'7),  sulphur  (2),
carbon  (2  to  3),  phosphorus  (1*76) ;  and  some  heavier,  as
cobalt  (8-54),  copper  (8-80),  lead  (11-45),  silver  (10-5),  mer-
cury (13*5),  gold  (19'26),  and  platinum  (21),  in  such  propor-
tions as  not  materially  to  alter  the  general  density  of  the
mass.  It  is,  in  fact,  altogether  probable  that  the  greater
part  of  the  earth's  mass  consists  of  these  different  metals  and
substances,  of  which  we  find  only  occasional  samples  near  the
surface,  imbedded  in  the  stratum  of  ashes  which  constitutes
the  crust.  It  is  also  perfectly  consonant  to  all  the  laws  of
matter  under  the  influence  of  gravitation,  that,  so  long  as
either  the  gaseous  or  the  liquid  state  prevailed,  the  heavier
materials  should  penetrate  to  points  nearer  the  center  of  at-
traction.

If  we  go  back  to  the  period  when  the  degree  of  heat  was
sufficient  to  create  and  maintain  as  gases  carbon,  platinum,
etc.,  we  may  imagine  all  the  gaseous  aggregates  of  which
alone  the  globe  consisted  mingled  in  a  promiscuous  manner

280  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— OOSMOGEiTY.

and  wholly  unable  to  combine.  But  even  then  the  lightest
gases  would  doubtless  occupy  the  extreme  outer  strata,  as
hydrogen  and  the  gas  that  gives  the  green  line  {supra,  p.
241)  of  the  spectrum  now  do  in  the  sun.  The  degree  of
expansibility  of  a  substance  in  passing  into  the  gaseous  state
is  no  measure  of  its  density  as  a  solid.  In  other  words,  a
heavy  solid  may  become  a  light  gas,  and  vice  versa  ;  but  in
a  wholly  gaseous  body  the  heaviest  substances  will  be  near-
est the  center  and  the  lightest  nearest  the  periphery,  and  so
it  will  be  in  a  wholly  liquid  body.  If  the  interior  of  the
earth  be  not  now  of  a  liquid  or  semi-liquid  consistency,  not
only  the  interior,  but  the  crust  as  well,  has  undoubtedly
been  so  in  former  times,  as  the  spheroidal  form  clearly
proves.  From  the  wholly  gaseous  form  it  has  passed  by
gradual  transitions  into  this  wholly  liquid  form,  and  in  doing
so,  in  consequence  of  gradual  loss  of  heat,  the  substances  of
which  it  was  composed,  being  of  many  different  kinds  and
having  each  a  different  condensing  point,  must  have  passed,
one  by  one,  from  the  gaseous  into  the  liquid  state,  and  as
they  did  so  each  sought  and  eventually  found  its  true  posi-
tion in  the  liquid  mass  according  to  its  specific  gravity,  and
irrespective  of  its  former  position  as  a  gas  and  of  the  time,
relatively  to  other  substances,  at  which  the  change  took
place.  It  follows  that  those  substances  having  the  highest
condensing-points  would  condense  first,  and  it  so  happens
that  at  least  one  of  these,  platinum,  has  a  very  great  density,
though  in  the  case  of  carbon  the  condensing-point  is  prob-
ably still  higher,  while  its  specific  gravity  is  very  small.  We
may  imagine  a  time  when  the  nucleus  of  the  liquid  globe
consisted  of  nothing  but  platinum  and  carbon.  Their  mode
of  association  must  have  resembled  that  of  oil  and  water,
though  a  much  more  extreme  case.

Thus,  gradually,  all  the  elements  condensed  in  a  chrono-
logical order  corresponding  to  the  thermometrical  order  of
their  condensing-points,  and  took  up  their  positions  in  the
liquid  mass  in  the  order  of  their  specific  gravities.     To  do

THE  EARTH.  281

this  the  heavier  ones  having  lower  condensing-points  must
have  passed  through  all  the  lighter  superficial  strata.  Thus
mercury  must  have  sunk  through  numerous  strata  of  iron,
copper,  lead,  zinc,  tin,  etc.,  before  finding  its  appropriate
level.  When  all  the  gases  vrhose  condensing-points  are  high
enough  to  necessitate  their  liquefaction  before  the  crust
of  the  globe  could  be  formed,  had  been  thus  withdrawn
from  the  atmosphere  and  added  to  the  globe  proper,  there
were  left  three  gases — oxygen,  hydrogen,  and  nitrogen — to
form  the  gaseous  envelope.  But  no  sooner  had  the  point
been  reached,  in  the  general  process  of  refrigeration,  at
which  it  became  possible  for  oxygen  and  hydrogen  to  com-
bine, than  all  the  latter  gas  immediately  entered  into  combi-
nation with  the  former,  constituting  a  compound  gas,  which
was  none  other  than  pure  steam,  to  which  we  might  apply
the  more  general  and  cosmical  term  aqueous  gas.  This  re-
mained in  the  purely  gaseous  condition  until  the  process  of
refrigeration  had  gone  much  further,  when  at  length  its  con-
densing-point  (100  °  Cent.)  was  reached  and  it  became  water,
and  formed  the  ocean.  This  did  not  take  place,  however,
until  after  the  solid  crust  of  the  earth  had  been  formed.

Meanwhile  the  carbon  which  had  long  before  been  pre-
cipitated, and  which,  in  consequence  of  its  small  specific
gravity,  was  near  the  surface,  was  also  seized  by  the  super-
abundant oxygen  and  converted  into  carbonic-acid  gas.*
Thus  the  atmosphere  and  the  sea  assumed  the  conditions
under  which  we  find  them.

The  vast  volume  of  oxygen  still  left  in  the  atmosphere
also  laid  hold  of  every  other  substance  within  its  reach.
Many  of  tlie  metals  had  passed  into  the  liquid  state  and
sunk  beneath  the  molten  billows  before  the  conditions  for
combination  existed.     Many  of  these  heavier  ones,  such  as

*  The  fact  that  all  forms  of  carbon  resist  oxidation  proves  that  the  original
formation  of  carbonic  acid  must  have' taken  place  under  wholly  different  condi-
tions from  any  now  known,  perhaps  just  at  the  condensing-point  of  carbon,  a
temperature  too  enormously  high  to  be  ever  artificially  produced.

282  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

platinum,  gold,  silver,  nickel,  lead,  etc.,  oxidize  slowly,  even
under  the  most  favorable  conditions,  or  not  at  aU.  These
escaped,  but  all  the  lighter  substances  that  would  combine
fell  a  prey  to  oxygen.  There  was  a  vast  quantity  of  silicium,
and  this  was  converted  into  silex,  and  now  forms  half  of  the
earth's  crust.  The  aluminum  and  calcium,  of  which  im-
mense quantities  must  also  have  existed,  shared  the  same
fate,  and  the  argillaceous  and  calcareous  rocks  were  the
abundant  product.  The  magnesia,  potash,  and  soda,  so  ex-
tensively distributed  over  the  earth,  were  the  result  of  the
appropriation  by  oxygen  of  all  that  existed  of  those  light
metals,  magnesium,  potassium,  and  sodium.  In  its  pursuit
of  the  last  of  these  metals,  however,  oxygen  found  a  for-
midable rival  in  chlorine,  which  succeeded  in  obtaining
enough  of  it  to  form  all  the  salt  of  the  sea  and  of  the  rocks.
But  not  only  the  bases  of  the  earths  and  lighter  substances,
but  also  some  of  the  heavier  metals,  have  undergone  exten-
sive oxidation.  The  oxides  of  iron,  copper,  lead,  manganese,
etc.,  form  a  large  per  cent  of  the  crust  of  the  earth.  Their
occurrence  so  near  the  surface,  notwithstanding  the  greater
specific  gravity  of  these  metals,  is  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  fact
that  throughout  the  liquid  mass  of  the  condensed  portion  of
the  globe  strong  currents  constantly  existed,  and  a  state  of
great  and  violent  activity  prevailed  by  means  of  which  sub-
stances of  less  specific  gravity  were  often  forced  inward  and
those  of  greater  specific  gravity  were  driven  outward ;  and,
while  each  constituent  remained  for  the  most  part  at  or  near
the  position  to  which  its  density  would  naturally  assign  it,
all  the  substances,  regardless  of  their  densities,  were  liable  to
be  carried  away  from  this  position  and  mingled  promiscu-
ously together ;  so  that  even  gold  and  platinum,  which  may
form  a  vast  nucleus  at  the  center  of  the  earth,  have  found
their  way  in  small  quantities  to  its  surface,  and,  in  a  sparing
manner,  have  enabled  man  to  profit  by  their  valuable  prop-
erties. And  yet  there  may  exist  other  substances,  of  far
greater  density  than  these,  of  which  no  trace  has  ever  strug-

THE  EARTH.  283

gled  up  tlirougli  the  overlying  strata  to  mingle  witli  the
surface  materials.

Such  is  the  condition  in  which  we  find  our  planet  at  the
present  stage  of  its  development.  It  consists  of  a  mass  of
distinct  substances  or  molar  aggregates  variously  combined
and  related  to  one  another.  Of  these  no  less  than  sixty-five
{sup'a,  p.  124,  note)  have  thus  far  resisted  all  human  efforts
to  simplify  them,  and  are  hence  called  elements.  Many  oth-
ers exist  as  known  compounds  of  these  elements,  behaving
in  substantially  the  same  general  manner  as  their  simples ;  so
that,  unless  they  had  been  decomposed  and  their  component
parts  thoroughly  tested,  we  should  have  no  hesitation  in  pro-
nouncing them  elementary  also,  and  several  of  them  were
for  a  long  time  so  regarded.  These  known  compounds,
moreover,  exhibit  properties  of  their  own  not  possessed  by
any  of  their  constituents.

The  condition,  therefore,  of  the  matter  of  the  earth  is
one  of  great  heterogeneity.  The  assumed  elements  range
through  an  enormous  scale  with  respect  to  their  condensing
and  solidifying  points,  as  do  also  the  compounds  with  refer-
ence to  their  combining  points.  In  other  respects  they  pre-
sent an  equal  variety  and  diversity.  All  this  is  in  strict  con-
formity with  the  laws  of  evolution  in  general,  and  is  really
nothing  more  than  the  manifestation  of  these  laws  in  molecu-
lar as  they  are  manifested  in  molar  matter.  For  there  is  no
more  reason  to  doubt  that,  from  the  primordial  nebulous  con-
dition to  that  which  the  earth  is  now  in,  there  should  be
an  advance  from  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous  in
the  molecular  aggregates  composing  it,  than  there  is  to  doubt
that  the  present  solar  system,  with  its  clearly  defined  sun,
planets,  and  planetary  satellites,  is  an  advance  in  the  same
direction  in  the  formation  of  worlds.

It  is  an  interesting  fact  deserving  to  be  noticed  here,  in
anticipation  of  more  special  notice  in  the  next  chapter,  that
the  evolution  of  new  and  varied  aggregates  out  of  few  and
simple  ones  requires  the  assumption  of  intense  heat.     The

281  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

differentiation  of  such  substances  as  iron,  gold,  platinum,
etc.,  from  simpler  states  of  matter,  can  not  be  conceived  of
in  their  present  solid  state,  or  even  in  a  liquid  state.  They
must  be  regarded  as  the  products  of  intensely  heated  gases,
their  present  state  being  due  to  enormous  refrigeration.
But  to  say  this  is  simply  to  say  that,  in  order  to  produce
variety  from  simplicity,  and  evolve  heterogeneity  out  of
homogeneity,  the  aggregating  tendencies  must  be  powerfully
counteracted  by  the  disintegrating  tendencies,  and  progress
is  the  product  of  the  struggle  between  the  two  great  antag-
onistic principles  in  nature.  We  shall  see  this  law  repeated
•on  a  higher  plane  in  the  production  of  organic  forms.

The  history  thus  far  traced  is  that  of  inorganic  matter.
The  period  during  which  the  existing  state  of  matter  has
been  acquired  may  be  denominated  the  inorganic  period.
The  conflict  has  been  between  gases  usually  at  temperatures
which  the  mind  would  fail  to  grasp  if  they  could  be  stated.
This  period  still  continues  in  the  sun  and  in  all  the  self-
luminous  stars.  It  is  drawing  to  its  close  in  Jupiter  and
Saturn.  In  the  earth,  and  perhaps  in  Mars  and  Venus,  it
has  passed  by,  or  nearly  so,  and  been  succeeded  by  what
may  be  called  the  organic  period.  Cosmical  processes,  it  is
true,  are  still  going  on  on  these  planets.  A  few  new  com-
pounds are  being  formed ;  possibly  some  old  ones  may  be
undergoing  dissolution  ;  but  the  great  theater  of  activity  at
the  present  time,  upon  the  earth  at  least,  is  that  of  organic
evolution.

The  earth's  satellite,  and  doubtless  many  other  bodies  of
the  solar  system,  could  they  be  known,  exhibit  a  third  and
perhaps  final  stage  of  cosmical  development,  in  which,  so  far
as  we  can  judge,  organic  existence  has  wholly  ceased,  and
inorganic  activity  is  brought  nearly  to  rest.  It  is  a  cold
picture,  but  there  seems  no  escape  from  the  conviction  that
all  the  planets  and  finally  the  sun  itself  must  reach  that
stage.  What  is  to  be  the  next,  remains  wholly  unknown.
Whether  these  cold,  dense,  inactive  spheres  of  solid  matter

THE  EARTH.— RELATIONS.  285

are  destined  to  roll  on  for  ever,  or  whether  they  shall  be
finally  brought  back  by  the  resistant  matter  of  space  to  the
central  body  from  which  they  were  disengaged,  and  all  event-
ually redistributed,  there  is  no  science  as  yet  capable  of
affording  the  slightest  indication.

Having  thus  attempted  a  general  answier  to  the  first  of
the  primary  questions  of  philosophy,  "  What  is  matter  ? "
we  "may  now  proceed  still  more  briefly  to  seek  an  answer  to
the  second  fundamental  question,  "  What  are  relations  ? "

All  properties  of  matter  are  due  to  the  mode  of  its  ag-
gregation. The  differences  in  these  properties  in  different
substances  are  the  result  of  the  differences  of  molecular  ag-
gregation of  each  distinct  substance.  This  is  very  clear  in
what  we  know  to  be  compound  substances.  An  example
commonly  given  is  that  of  calomel  and  corrosive  sublimate,
two  substances  possessing  very  different  properties,  but
known  to  be  formed  of  the  same  elements  in  different  pro-
portions. If  the  substance  contain  the  same  number  of
molecules  of  chlorine  as  of  mercury,  it  is  an  insipid  drug ;
if  it  contain  two  of  chlorine  to  one  of  mercury,  it  is  a  virulent
poison.  But  the  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  afford
equally  good  illustrations,  and  others  might  be  enumerated
almost  indefinitely.  Ternary  and  higher  compounds  are  not
less  interesting.  The  different  salts  differ  entirely  both  from
their  acids  and  their  bases,  and,  whatever  may  be  the  mode
of  re-combination,  the  properties  become  entirely  changed.
Every  fact  which  chemistry  furnishes  on  this  point  is  addi-
tional evidence  that  the  properties  of  compound  substances
result  simply  from  the  differences  of  combination.  Every
thing,  therefore,  points  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  in  con-
sequence of  changes  in  the  mode  of  molecular  aggregation
that  different  substances  manifest  different  properties.  Every
aggregate  has  its  own  kind  of  activities,  due  to  its  molecular
constitution.  When  two  are  chemically  combined,  the  ac-
tivities peculiar  to  the  molecular  systems  of  each  component,

286  PRIMARY   AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

respectively,  are  broken  up  and  re-compounded,  resulting  in
entirely  new  activities  of  the  new  molecular  system  of  aggre-
gation. We  can  hardly  realize  that  there  is  mercury  in  red
precipitate  or  lead  in  litharge,  so  entirely  different  are  their
properties.  And  it  is  so  throughout,  wherever  there  is  true
chemical  combination,  i.  e.,  re-formation  of  molecular  aggre-
gates into  new  systems  having  new  activities.

Our  ideas  of  color  have  undergone  a  great  change  since
the  undulatory  theory  of  light  has  taught  us  to  refer  differ-
ent colors  to  the  different  powers  of  substances  to  absorb
waves  of  different  lengths ;  and  we  find  this  so  determined
by  conditions  that  we  are  beginning  to  cease  to  regard  color
as  a  permanent  property  of  matter.  But  chemistry  is  unset-
tling in  a  similar  manner  our  faith  in  the  permanence  of  all
other  properties  of  matter.  Modify  the  circumstances  so
that  the  substance  in  question  may  form  new  associations,  and
all  its  properties  (except  weight)  disappear,  and  new  ones  are
manifested,  wholly  unlike  the  original  ones.

While  these  facts  may  overthrow  our  time-honored  con-
ceptions of  matter,  they  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  the
theory  of  molecular  aggregation  here  advanced.  It  is  not  at
all  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  systems  of  molecules  having
different  orbits  and  velocities,  and  different  forces  of  impact,
should  manifest  to  our  senses  entirely  different  properties,
notwithstanding  that  we  may  know  that  the  same  molecules
are  present.  Indeed,  upon  this  theory,  the  properties  of
matter  can  not  be  expected  to  remain  the  same  except  so  long
as  the  mode  of  aggregation  remains  the  same.  So  far  as
these  properties  are  concerned,  it  is  the  mode  of  aggregation,
and  not  the  identity  of  substance,  which  constitutes  their
essence.  Without  activities  there  could  be  no  manifestation
of  properties,  i.  e.,  no  properties ;  and  with  each  change  of
aggregation  must  come  change  of  activities,  *'.  e.,  change  of
properties.

The  facts  of  isomerism  are  also  in  perfect  harmony  with
this  theory.     In  binary  and  ternary  compounds  we  may  con-

PEOPERTIES  OF  MATTER.  287

ceive  of  a  variety  of  entirely  diiferent  substances  being  formed
out  of  the  same  elements  by  changing  the  proportions  of
each  component.  Every  time  these  proportions  are  changed
an  entirely  different  substance  is  formed,  and  aggregates  of
different  substances  will  of  course  be  different.  The  same
may  be  true  of  all  polymeric  isomerides,  for  no  one  can
know  what  the  mode  of  aggregation  of  the  components  may
really  be.  There  are,  however,  many  cases  in  which  chem-
ists believe,  and  some  in  which  they  may  be  said  to  know,
that  they  have  found  the  different  compound  units  upon
which  the  differences  in  the  isomerides  depend.  Butyric
acid,  for  example,  is  a  well-known  isomer  of  acetic  ether,
whose  common  symbol  is  C^HgO,.  But,  if  these  two  isomeric
compounds  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  by  the  same  re-
agent (potash),  different  results  follow,  which  show  conclu-
sively that,  while  acetic  ether  contains  as  its  component
units  the  two  radicals,  ethyl,  C,H„  and  acetyl,  C,II,0,  bu-
tyric acid  is  foi-med  of  the  more  complex  radical  C^II,0
in  combination  with  free  hydrogen,  to  which  it  is  united  by
an  oxygen-atom  in  the  same  manner  as  are  the  radicals  of
acetic  ether.*

Many  such  illustrations  might  be  added,  all  of  which
would  help  to  show  how  perfectly  explicable  isomerism  is
when  we  regard  the  properties  of  matter  as  wholly  due  to
the  mode  of  its  aggregation.  In  fact,  such  substances  do  not
consist  of  equal  parts  of  like  components.  The  components
themselves,  having  formed  new  associations,  are  no  longer
the  same  substances.  The  resultant  molecule  is  a  different
system,  having  a  different  velocity,  path,  force  of  impact,
and  frequency  of  contact.

From  known  compounds  we  may  pass  to  substances
whose  composite  character  has  not  been  demonstrated  by
actual  dismemberment  and  recombination.  These  are  the
so-called  "  elements."  The  very  fact  that  more  than  one
such  substance  is  known  should  be  sufficient  to  raise  a  sus-

*  Josiah  r.  Cooke,  Jr.,  "  The  New  Chemistrj,"  p.  301.

288  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

picion  of  their  composite  nature.  All  that  enables  us  to
predicate  plurality  of  them  is  difference  of  property.  When
we  say  that  there  are  sixty-five  known  elementary  substances,
we  mean  that  our  senses  are  affected  differently  by  that  num-
ber of  objects  whose  manifestations  persist,  i.  e.,  remain  the
same  every  time  they  are  pi-esented,  no  matter  how  often
the  experiment  is  repeated.  If  any  two  manifested  precisely
the  same  effects,  they  would  no  longer  be  two  but  one,  "  for,"
as  Bacon  said,  "  if  a  man  can  make  a  metal  that  hath  all  the
properties  of  gold,  let  men  dispute  whether  it  be  gold  or
no."  *  But,  judging  the  unknown  from  the  known,  apply-
ing to  substances  not  known  to  be  compound  the  law  which
we  have  found  it  possible  to  formulate  in  the  case  of  sub-
stances known  to  be  compound,  viz.,  that  their  properties
depend  altogether  upon  their  mode  of  combination  or  aggre-
gation, we  find  ourselves  compelled  to  assume  some  mode
of  aggregation  for  the  former  class  of  substances  in  order  to
account  for  their  differences  of  property.  I  do  not  say  that
we  can  not  conceive  of  sixty-five  distinct  qualities  of  primal
matter,  but  such  an  assumption  certainly  belongs  to  the
"  violent "  class,  which  are  coming  to  have  less  and  less
place  in  the  sciences.

The  differences  of  property  manifested  by  these  ele-
mentary or  irresolvable  substances  are  of  precisely  the  same
nature  as  those  manifested  by  known  and  resolvable  com-
pounds. A  piece  of  copper  differs  from  a  piece  of  zinc  in
very  much  the  same  way  that  a  lump  of  salt  does  from
a  lump  of  soda.  There  is  nothing  distinctive  about  the
differences  of  elementary  bodies  by  which  they  may  be  in
themselves  known  from  non-elementary  ones.  The  child,
the  savage,  and  the  uneducated  man  never  classify  on  this
line,  as  they  certainly  would  do  if  there  were  any  such  line.
All  analogy  points  to  the  general  homogeneity  in  this  re-
spect of  all  substances.  It  is  true  that  many  of  the  elements
are  metals,  while  no  metal  has  been  formed  by  chemical

*  "Silva  Silvarum";  also,  "Novum  Oi^anum,"  lib.  2,  aph.  v.

PROPERTIES  OF  MATTER.  289

union.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  non-metallic
elements,  and  there  are  also  many  at  least  hypothetical  me-
tallic compounds,  of  which.' ammonium  may  be  named  as  the
type.

Upon  the  whole,  then,  the  facts  themselves,  independ-
ently of  any  more  comprehensive  application  of  them,  pre-
ponderate in  favor  of  the  composite  nature  of  all  material
substances,  and  this  is  an  immense  gain  for  any  rational  cos-
mology.*

It  might  at  first  be  supposed  that  we  have,  in  the  phe-
nomena of  allotropism,  some  direct  evidence  of  the  com-
posite character  of  many  of  the  elements,  and  I  confess  that
I  was  at  one  time  of  that  opinion,  but  upon  more  mature
consideration  I  am  convinced  that  such  is  not  the  case,  and
that  all  cases  of  allotropism  must  be  explained  by  the  as-
sumption of  modifications  in  the  molar,  and  not  in  the  mo-
lecular aggregates.  All  matter  is  susceptible  of  assuming  at
least  three  distinct  quasi-allotropic  forms,  the  gaseous,  liquid,
and  solid,  and  there  have  been  observed  many  intermediate
stages.  The  allotropic  forms  of  phosphorus  and  sulphur,
although  differing  widely  in  certain  properties,  may  be  pro-
duced by  simple  changes  of  temperature.  Once  obtained,
however,  they  persist,  notwithstanding  such  changes.  The
same  is  true  of  carbon.  Subject  the  diamond  to  intense
heat  without  contact  with  oxygen,  and  it  is  converted  into
charcoal  or  a  similar  coke-like  substance.  In  this  latter  case
we  may  suppose  that  the  molecules  of  the  diamond  are  con-
fined within  narrower  limits  than  in  charcoal,  that  they  have
shorter  paths  and  more  frequent  contacts,  and  that,  moreover,
their  actions  are  reduced  to  greater  regularity  and  defined
with  greater  precision.  Such,  in  fact,  is  the  theory  of  all
crystals  as  contrasted  with  amorphous  forms  of  matter.  The
molar  aggregate  itself  tends  to  establish  a  system  out  of
its  homogeneous  molecules,  and  this  constitutes  a  crystal.

*  Compare  the  views  of  Lockyer.  Dumas,  and  Pettenkofer  in  the  "  Comptes
Kendus"  of  November  3,  1873.

290  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

In  amorphous  matter  this  is  not  the  case.  But  the  allo-
tropic  forms  of  sulphur,  of  silicon,  and  other  elements,  al-
though amorphous,  must  be  explained  on  some  such  prin-
ciples. The  molecules  are  differently  related  in  the  mass
under  the  different  conditions,  and  this  is  as  well  able  to
produce  distinct  substances  as  if  the  molecules  themselves
were  differently  aggregated.  It  is  the  effects  which  thej
produce  upon  sensitive  parts  which  constitute  differences  of
property,  and  the  same  molecules  moving  at  different  rates
and  with  different  forces  of  impact  must  produce  the  effect
of  variety  as  distinctly  as  if  the  molecules  theinselves  were
of  different  degrees  of  aggregation.  The  facts  of  allotro-
pism,  therefore,  while  they  afford  no  evidence  that  the  recog-
nized elements  are  ever  further  decomposed,  constitute,
nevertheless,  a  new  argument  for  the  theory  of  the  proper-
ties of  matter  here  advanced,  supplementing  in  an  interest-
ing way  the  arguments  from  isomerism  and  from  chemicjJ
combination  in  general.  But  the  molecules  of  the  recog-
nized elements  are  stable  aggregates  that  have  resisted  the
disintegrating  influences  of  the  entire  cosmical  history  of  our
system ;  they  are  therefore  too  firmly  fixed  for  us  ever  to
expect  to  witness  their  dismemberment.  Of  their  composite
nature,  however,  we  must  rest  satisfied  from  the  analogy  of
their  properties  with  those  of  known  compounds,  and  from
those  large  views  of  the  universe  which  reach  out  amid
diversity  and  grasp  at  unity.

From  analysis  let  us  pass  to  synthesis.

A  theory  of  the  origin  of  matter  in  the  forms  under
which  we  know  it  has  already  been  rudely  outlined.  We
have  now  only  to  look  at  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  its
properties.  Since  these  are  only  the  sensible  effects  which
matter  is  able  to  produce  upon  living  creatures,  they  are  to
be  explained  on  the  simple  principle  of  impact,  which  is
the  essence  of  the  idea  of  force.  "When  a  cannon-ball
strikes  and  shatters  a  tree,  we  rea'dily  comprehend  the
cause,  but,  when  a  "thunder-bolt"  accomplishes  the  same

FORCE.  291

result,  we  shake  our  heads,  and  say,  "  Mysterious  force ! "
When  strong  suction  is  produced  by  the  creation  of  a
vacuum,  we  have  learned  to  refer  the  effect,  though  the
force  is  wholly  invisible,  to  the  air  which  seeks  to  fill  the
vacuum,  and  "  rushes  in "  for  this  purpose ;  but,  when  we
see  a  body  fall  to  the  earth,  we  say  it  does  so  in  obedience  to
the  law  of  gravitation,  but  humbly  and  properly  avow  our-
selves ignorant  of  the  nature  of  that  law.  Now,  the  effect
produced  by  the  cannon-ball  is  a  case  of  molar  impact^  and,
without  going  back  to  the  origin  of  the  motion  of  the  ball,  is
readily  understood.  The  effect  produced  by  the  "  thunder-
bolt "  is  a  case  of  molecular  impact,  and  we  need  not  any
more  go  back  to  the  origin  of  the  motion  of  liie  molecules
to  give  it  an  immediate  explanation.  ]^o  matter  how  they
came  to  acquire  it,  the  fact  is  that  all  the  molecules  of
matter  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tree  on  the  side  struck  were
in  rapid  and  violent  motion  toward  the  tree,  and  actually
struck  it  with  such  force  as  to  shiver  it  to  pieces.  There  is
no  difference  in  the  two  phenomena,  except  as  to  the  number
and  size  of  the  bodies  producing  the  effect.*

In  the  case  of  the  vacuum,  the  hand  interposed  in  the  cur-
rent simply  experiences  the  impact  of  millions  of  molecules
of  oxygen,  nitrogen,  etc.  The  effects  of  a  strong  wind  are
identical  with  this  in  all  respects,  and  wind  is  always  actually
caused  by  air  rushing  into  a  partial  vacuum.

Now,  when  a  body  falls  to  the  earth,  shall  we  say  that  it
is  due  to  any  other  cause  than  that  which  would,  were  the
wind  sufficiently  strong,  carry  the  same  body  in  a  direction
perpendicular  to  that  in  which  gravitation  acts  ?  Is  its  fall
not  also  due  to  impact  of  molecules  or  atoms  which  are  pelt-
ing it  with  greater  force  on  the  upper  than  on  the  under
side  ?  If  all  matter,  in  whatever  state  of  aggregation,  has
always  been  in  motion,  which  motion,  therefore,  need  not

*  Cooke,  "  The  New  Chemistry,"  p.  44 ;  also.  Professor  Clerk  Maxwell's
"Address  before  the  British  Association  at  Bradford,"  in  "Popular  Science
Monthly,"  vol.  It,  p.  279.

292  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENT.

be  explained,  then  all  that  remains  to  be  explained  in  gravi-
tation is  why  it  operates  in  the  particular  directions  in
which  we  observe  it  to  operate.  Of  this  we  are  still  igno-
rant, just  as  man  was  ignorant  of  the  reasons  why  the  mole-
cules of  the  atmosphere  took  the  directions  which  they  were
observed  to  take  when  it  was  said  that  "  the  wind  bloweth
where  it  listeth."  The  laws  of  meteorology  were  as  abso-
lutely unknown  then  as  are  those  of  barology  now.  As  all
force  must  be  referred  to  molecular  impact,  so  must  all
other  so-called  properties  of  matter,  force,  or  molecular  im-
pact, being  simply  the  generic  property  under  which  all
effects  of  whatever  kind  are  embraced.  A  substance,  could
such  a  one  be  conceived,  which  should  consist  solely  of
ultimate  atoms  of  matter,  could  possess  very  few  properties.
Feeble  resistance  is  about  all  that  could  be  expected  of  such
a  substance.  The  first  degrees  of  aggregation  from  that
consisting  of  the  simple  cohesion  of  two  atoms  and  their
revolution  about  their  common  center  of  gravity,  or  whatever
might  be  the  mode  of  their  aggregation  and  activities,  to
those  in  which  the  units  of  aggregation  should  consist  of
aggregates  of  the  third,  fourth,  or  even  tenth  order,  would
perhaps  still  remain  imperceptible  to  any  being  endowed
with  feeling.  The  molecules  of  such  aggregates  would  be  too
minute,  their  momentum  too  slight,  their  impact  too  faint,
to  produce  any  effect  on  the  large  multiply-compound  units
that  compose  the  sensitive  nerve-tissues  of  animals.  The
ethereal  medium  that  conveys  light  through  space  is  un-
doubtedly the  lowest  aggregate  of  whose  presence  sentient
beings  are  rendered  cognizant.  Its  molecules  are  so  much
more  minute  than  those  of  any  of  the  so-called  "  ponderable  "
substances  that  they  appear  to  be  independent  of  the  law
of  gravitation.  They  penetrate  bodily  and  with  pei-fect  ease
the  humors  of  the  eye,  and  are  felt  by  the  exceedingly  deli-
cate nerve-tissue  that  is  spread  out  over  its  interior  surface.
This  mechanism  is  a  comparatively  recent  development  of
organic  nature,  and,  notwithstanding  all  that  science  has  said

PROPERTIES  OF  MATTER.  293

about  it,  its  extreme  delicacy  is  not  yet  fully  appreciated,  and
will  not  be  until  it  is  generally  realized  to  the  influence  of
•what  a  remarkable  medium  it  alone,  of  all  the  nerve-tissues,
is  susceptible  and  sensible.  It  is  only  since  the  invention  of
photography  that  it  has  been  generally  known  that  light
exerts  any  other  influence  upon  terrestrial  things.

Delicate  as  is  the  mechanism  of  the  ear,  it  is  sensible  only
to  the  impact  of  the  comparatively  heavy  and  normally  ma-
terial molecules  of  the  air ;  and  the  odorous  particles  that
emanate  from  bodies,  and  manifest  their  presence  on  con-
tact with  the  olfactory  nerves,  belong  to  the  more  complex,
chiefly  organic  matters,  and  produce  their  effects  principally
by  the  inherent  activities  of  the  molecules  themselves.

Besides  the  ethereal  medium,  no  other  aggregates  are  ap-
preciable by  the  nerves  of  sense  except  such  as  are  known  to
obey  the  laws  of  gravitation.  These  are  the  elements  of
chemistry  and  their  compounds.  Most  of  these,  too,  would
be  imperceptible  in  the  gaseous  state,  i.  e.,  if  we  depended
upon  the  activities  of  the  molecules  separately  to  furnish  us
our  knowledge  of  their  presence  and  existence.  It  is  usually
only  as  molar  aggregates,  in  which  many  molecules  cohere
into  a  mass,  that  we  are  able  to  detect  them,  though  many
such,  when  once  detected  in  the  solid  or  liquid  state,  may  be
made  perceptible  in  the  gaseous  state.  Besides  the  sixty-five
recognized  elements,  there  exist,  as  combinations  of  these  in
different  ways,  thousands  of  distinct  substances,  manifesting
an  almost  infinite  variety  of  properties.

To  explain  in  a  purely  theoretical  manner  the  conditions
necessary  to  produce  so  many  distinct  elementary  substances,
we  must  suppose  that  they  are  all  highly  compound,  and
consist  of  molecules  of  different  degrees  of  aggregation.
Their  atomic  weights,  as  proved  by  their  modes  of  combi-
nation, indicate  that  they  are  of  different  sizes,  weights,  etc.
A  great  variety  in  the  mode  of  aggregation  is  possible.
Suppose  the  units  in  the  hydrogen  molecule  to  consist  of

aggregates  of  the  fifth  or  sixth  order  or  of  both,  a  definite
14

294  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION^COSMOGENY.

number  of  each  kind  of  unit  in  each  molecule,  and  these
to  move  in  regular,  definite  orbits,  or  paths,  in  a  molecular
system.  Then  we  may  suppose  that  the  oxygen  molecule,
which  has  sixteen  times  the  mass  of  the  hydrogen  mole-
cule, consists  of  aggregates  of  the  tenth  or  twelfth  order,
or  of  these  and  others  of  still  higher  orders,  or  of  several
kinds  of  orders,  both  higher  and  lower,  aggregated  into  a
large  system,  each  of  the  units  having  its  own  definite  mo-
tions, and  each  molecule  having  the  same  fixed  number
of  each  kind  of  units,  whose  combined  activities  should  be
Buflficient  to  give  to  oxygen  all  those  properties  with  which
we  find  it  endowed.  Thus  may  be  hypothetically  explained
the  constitution  and  properties  of  all  the  elementary  sub-
stances. Of  course,  the  molar  aggregates  of  each,  formed  by
the  cohesion  into  a  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous  mass  of  many
such  like  molecules,  would  possess  properties  derived  from
those  of  their  constituent  molecules,  though  differing  greatly
in  different  states.  These  properties,  though  the  necessary
consequence  of  the  mode  of  aggregation  of  the  different
molecules  composing  the  compound,  would  not  on  this  ac-
count resemble  those  of  any  one  of  their  components.  Prop-
erties, being  simply  the  subjective  manifestation  of  the  ob-
jective fact  of  a  certain  mode  of  impact,  might  bear  no  sort
of  resemblance  to  one  another,  although  the  mode  of  impact
were  the  exact  mechanical  resultant  of  the  combined  im-
pacts of  constituents  having  such  different  properties.  Take
any  known  compound,  as  carbonic  oxide.  This  has  proper-
ties very  different  from  those  of  either  oxygen  or  carbon ;
and  yet  the  activities  which  are  the  objective  cause  of  its
manifestations  must  be  the  exact  mechanical  resultant  of  the
combined  activities  of  these  two  substances.  In  other  words,
there  is  no  fixed  relation  between  the  differences  in  the  ob-
jective activities  and  the  subjective  manifestations.  Slight
differences  of  the  former  kind  may  produce  great  differences
of  the  latter.  The  addition  of  a  small  unit  to  a  large  system
may  entirely  alter  its  mode,/)f  manifestation  to  sense,  and

COMPARISON  OF  MOLECULES.  295

even  a  slight  change  in  the  grouping  of  identical  units  may
produce  a  new  substance,  as  the  phenomena  of  isomerism
render  quite  certain.  This  point,  however,  need  not  be  dwelt
upon,  since  it  is  really  none  other  than  the  scientific  version
of  the  old  question  of  the  relation  of  the  external  world
to  the  mind,  with  regard  to  which,  in  whatever  respects
philosophers  may  have  differed,  all  have  at  least  agreed  that
it  is  not  a  fixed  proportion,  and  that,  if  the  one  is  a  true
function  of  the  other,  it  is  a  function  for  the  determination
of  which  we  have  as  yet  no  formula.

The  recognized  elementary  substances,  presenting  so
many  different  qualities,  vary  greatly  in  their  so-called
"atomic  weights."  This  means  simply  that  their  mole-
cules vary  greatly  in  mass.  The  hydrogen  molecule  is  the
smallest  known,  and  is  hence  taken  as  the  standard.  Com-
pared with  this  as  unity,  we  find  that  the  molecule  of  oxy-
gen contains  16  times  as  much  matter.  Its  chemical  equiva-
lent is  therefore  said  to  be  16.  That  of  carbon  is  12,  that
of  nitrogen  14,  while  that  of  chlorine  is  36^.  But  these,
instead  of  representing  large  equivalents,  are,  when  com-
pared with  those  of  most  of  the  metals,  very  small.  One
molecule  of  mercury  contains  200  times  as  much  matter  as
one  of  hydrogen,  and  one  of  gold  197  times  as  much.  The
combining  number  for  platinum  is  given  at  197*4,  that  for
silver  at  108,  for  antimony  at  120-3,  for  bismuth,  208,  and
that  for  lead  at  207,  while  the  thorium  equivalent  has  lat-
terly been  quadrupled  and  put  at  231-4,  being  the  largest  of
all  the  elementary  units.  The  equivalents  of  sodium  (23)
and  potassium  (39-1)  are  smaller,  as  also  are  those  of  the
non-metallic  elements  in  general,  as  phosphorus  (31),  sulphur
(32),  and  silicon  (28).

Whether  hydrogen,  carbon,  nitrogen,  oxygen,  or  any  of
the  other  abundant  elements  having  small  molecules,  ever
enter  into  the  composition  of  the  elements  having^  large
molecules,  is  a  legitimate  question  for  those  chemists  to  dis-
cuss who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  idea  that  such  substances

296  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

are  absolutely  elementary.  Although  not  at  all  necessary  to
the  theory  of  matter  under  discussion,  it  would  at  least
seem  probable  that  such  was  the  case.  The  fact  that  these
molecules  are  stable,  whether  combined  or  uncombined,  is
favorable  to  this  view,  although  there  may  exist  as  com-
ponent aggregates  of  metallic  molecules  many  equally  stable
aggregates  which  no  human  power  can  dissociate  from  their
present  combinations.  But,  if  known  elements  were  em-
ployed as  components  of  other  known  elements  having
larger  molecules,  the  very  fact  that  they  are  elements,  i.  ^.,
that  we  are  unable  to  decompose  them,  would  render  it
impossible  to  know  that  they  had  other  elements  for  their
components.  Think  how  many  hydrogen,  oxygen,  or  nitro-
gen molecules  might  enter  into  the  system  that  constitutes
the  molecule  of  bismuth  or  of  gold !

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  those  elements  which  have
very  high  condensing  points,  i.  e.,  which  assume  the  liquid
(or  solid)  form  at  very  high  temperatures,  have  large  com-
bining numbers,  i.  e.,  large  molecules,  while  those  having
low  condensing-points,  and  which  are  gaseous  at  ordinary
temperatures,  as  a  rule  have  small  combining  numbers,  or
small  molecules.  To  this,  carbon  and  mercury  form  notable
exceptions,  it  is  true,  and  prove  that  it  is  according  to  no
uniform  law ;  but,  nevertheless,  the  bulk  of  the  facts  support
this  statement,  and  indicate  that  the  genesis  of  those  ele-
ments which  we  know  only  as  solids  or  liquids,  which  we
have  supposed  to  have  taken  place  during  the  fiery  ordeal
through  which  the  solar  system  has  had  to  pass,  is  rather
a  process  of  integration  than  of  disintegration,-  since  they
have  miioh  larger  molecules  than  the  gases  that  exist  in  the
nebulse.*

*  The  recent  investigations  of  Professor  J.  Norman  Lockycr,  which  have  led
him  to  conclusions  not  widely  differing  from  those  here  expressed,  were  not  pub-
lished until  after  this  chapter  was  written.  While  it  would  be  improper  to  pass
unnoticed  such  important  researches  into  the  essential  conditions  of  the  uui-
verse,  yet,  from  the  substantial  harmony  of  the  theory  proposed  in  this  chapter

GENESIS  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.  297

The  power  of  the  elements  to  affect  the  senses  is  small
compared  with  that  of  many  compound  substances.  Few  of
the  gases  are  perceptible  to  any  of  the  senses,  and  affect  the

with  the  facts  and  results  brought  out  by  them,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  recast
the  former.  There  is,  however,  one  important  point  respecting  which  opinions
might  at  first  sight  differ,  but  which,  when  properly  viewed,  really  constitutes
a  striking  confirmation  of  the  theory  by  the  facts.  One  of  Professor  Lockyer's
most  important  generalizations  is  that  "  the  running  down  of  temperature  in  a
mass  of  matter  which  is  eventually  to  form  a  star  is  accompanied  by  a  gradually
increasing  complexity  of  chemical  forms."

Certain  of  the  facts  by  which  he  illustrates  this  law  he  condenses  into  the
following  tabular  tonn  :

Hottest  stars  ^  T  H  +  Ca  4-  Mg.

Sun  >  show  lines  of  <  H  +  Ca+Mg  +  Na  +  Fe.

Cooler  stars    )  ( —    —    Mg+Na  +  Fe  +  Bi  +  Hg,

(  Fluted  spectra  of
Coolest  stars,  fluted  bands  of       —    —     —    —     —    —  i      metals  and  met-

(      alloids.
Without  at  all  changing  the  character  of  this  exhibit,  it  may  be  put  in  a
clightly  different  form,  as  follows  :

Cooler  stars.

Sun.

Hottest  stars.

, — — ' ,

1      24     40     23     56     200   208

H  +  Mg  +  Ca  +  Na  +  Fe  +  Hg  +  Bi
1      12     20     23     28     100   208

In  this  diagram  calcium  and  magnesium  are  transposed,  but,  as  both  are  re-
vealed by  the  spectra  of  the  hottest  stars,  this  change  does  not  affect  the  order
of  the  groups.  The  same  is  the  case  with  bismuth  and  mercury,  both  belong-
ing only  to  the  cooler  stars.  The  figures  placed  above  the  symbols  are  those
representing  their  atomic  weights  according  to  the  new  system,  and  those  placed
below  them  their  equivalents  according  to  the  old  system.  It  will  be  seen  that,
with  the  exceptions  of  calcium  and  sodium,  the  new  equivalents  form  a  con-
tinuous ascending  series,  while,  with  the  old  equivalents,  not  even  this  break
occurs  in  the  series,  the  equivalent  of  calcium  having  been  doubled,  while  that
of  sodium  has  remained  unchanged.

On  the  theory  advanced  in  this  chapter,  of  the  successive  evolution  of  the
various  elements  and  their  formation  out  of  the  simpler  aggregates  existing  at
the  period  of  their  creation,  it  would  certainly  be  in  the  cooler  because  younger
Btars  that  the  fewest  and  simplest  elements  would  be  expected,  growing  fewer

298  PRIMARY  AGGREGATION.— COSMOGENY.

animal  system  only  when  inhaled.  Liquids  and  solids  have
more  decided  properties,  but  with  the  exception  of  arsenic
and  a  few  others  all  the  elements  are  rather  inert.  This  may
be  due  to  the  smallness  of  their  molecules,  or,  more  properly
speaking,  to  the  simplicity  of  the  systems  forming  such  mole-
cules. The  larger  and  more  complex  such  systems,  the  more
varied  and  active  will  be  the  properties  manifested.

Passing  from  substances  whose  composition  is  unknown
(elements)  to  those  whose  composition  is  known,  we  find  that,
of  inorganic  compounds,  those  possessing  the  most  decided
properties  are  the  acids,  alkalies,  and  salts.  Looking  at  their
combining  numbers  we  find  them  large.  Carbonic  acid,
which  is  among  the  lowest  and  most  inert,  and  is  not  an  acid
at  all  in  the  modern  sense  of  the  term,  but  a  binary  com-
pound, has  molecules  44  times  those  of  hydrogen.  The  com-
mon-salt molecule  is  equal  to  59  hydrogen  molecules,  that  of
the  carbonate  of  soda  to  106,  and  that  of  Rochelle  salt  to
438,  while  that  of  alum  foots  up  517.

The  organic  compounds  are  all  of  high  degrees  of  organi-
zation, and  have  large  complex  molecules.  The  equiyalent
of  morphine  (C„H,gNOj)  would  be  285,  that  of  strychnine
(C,,H„N,0,)  is  334,  and  that  of  quinine  (C,„H,,]Sr,0,),  324.  -
A  molecule  of  sugar  weighs  342  microcriths,  and  one  of
starch  324.  And  thus  it  is  throughout  the  organic  com-
pounds.

In  the  albuminous  group  the  size  and  complexity  of  the
molecules  are  still  greater,  so  much  so  that  no  reliable  formu-
las of  any  of  them  have  yet  been  obtained.  From  such  ap-
proximations as  have  been  made,  however,  it  would  seem  that
a  molecule  of  albumen  weighs  nearly  5,000  times  as  much  as

and  simpler  until  the  nebulae  themselves  are  reached,  while  the  hotter  stars
should  yield  the  richest  abundance  of  elements  as  well  as  those  having  the  most
complicated  structure,  i.  c,  the  largest  molecules.  The  assumption,  apparently
favored  by  Professor  Lockyer  and  freely  Bcade  by  others,  that  the  cooler  stars
and  the  sun  have  lost  a  portion  of  their  heat  formerly  possessed,  is  wholly
gratuitous,  and  has  already  been  sufficiently  combated.  (See  also  "Popular
Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xviii,  p.  638.)

ORGANIC  MOLECULES.  299

one  of  hydrogen,  while  one  of  blood-fibrin  or  of  casein  would
weigh  5,000  or  6,000  times  as  much.

These  examples  are  sufficient  to  show  that  in  order  to
come  up  to  working  proportions  the  degree  of  aggregation
must  be  high,  and  the  molecules  of  substances  capable  of  ap-
pealing to  sense  and  generating  organic  beings  must  be  large
as  compared  with  those  of  the  elements  which  combine  to
produce  them.  In  other  words,  while  out  of  substances  pos-
sessing very  small  molecular  aggregates  vast  molar  aggregates
may  be  formed  by  simple  multiplication  and  accumulation,
and  the  whole  inorganic  world,  the  rocks,  the  mountains,  nay,
the  very  orbs  of  space,  may  be  created,  yet,  for  the  develop-
ment of  organized  beings,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  a
different  class  of  substances  is  required,  substances  contrast-
ing with  the  former  by  the  larger  size  and  greater  complexity
of  their  molecular  aggregates,  by  greater  instability  and  Tnore
active  proj)erties.

These  preliminary  considerations  respecting  the  origin
and  nature  of  matter  in  general  will  better  prepare  us  to
enter  upon  the  discussion  of  the  questions  to  which  the  pres-
ence of  life  on  our  globe  gives  rise,  and  which  the  reader  is
asked  to  regard  rather  as  a  continuation  of  the  present  inquiry
into  the  nature  and  properties  of  matter  than  as  in  any  sense
a  distinct  subject.  There  are  no  breaks  in  the  processes  of
nature,  and  the  aim  of  all  true  philosophy  is  to  establish  the
continuity  which  the  philosopher  is  confident  must  exist
throughout  all  its  departments.

CHAPTER  lY.

SECONDART  AQGEEQATION.

BIOGENY  ^ GENESIS    OF   ORGANIC   FORMS  — VITAL   RELATIONS.

Dependence  of  the  properties  of  matter  upon  their  mode  of  molecular  aggrega-
tion— Reciprocal  increase  of  mass  and  decrease  of  stability  of  molecules
during  the  processes  of  cosmic  and  organic  evolution — Initial  step  in  the
development  of  life — ^Formation  of  the  organic  compounds — Isomerism —
History,  origin,  and  constitution  of  protoplasm — Plasson  bodies — Recipro-
cal relations  of  organization  and  life — Nutrition  and  reproduction — Mor-
phological units — Chemical  vs.  morphological  organization — Moners — The
eea  the  common  mother  of  all  life — True  vital  phenomena  confined  to  the
activities  of  protoplasm — Organization  a  means  of  intensifying  the  effect  of
protoplasmic  activities — Origin  of  the  cell — Orders  of  individuality — Liv-
ing distinguished  from  non-living  bodies — Nature  of  growth — Nature  of
reproduction — Theory  of  sexual  differentiation — Animals  distinguished
from  plants — Development  of  the  organic  out  of  the  inorganic — Organic
aggregation — Simplest  form  of  tissue — The  stomach  the  fifst  organ  formed
— Embryogeny — Ontogenesis  a  recapitulation  of  phylogenesis — Nature  and
functions  of  chlorophyl — Fibro-vascular  bundles — ^First  appearance  of
leaves — Carbon  the  framing  timber  of  organic  beings — Power  of  protoplasm
to  decompose  carbonic  acid — Influence  of  light  on  plant-growth — Classifi-
cation of  organisms  with  respect  to  their  power  to  manufacture  organic
substances — Proper  meaning  of  spontaneous  generation — Respiration  com-
mon to  plants  and  animals — The  two  forms  of  nutrition  in  plants — Consti-
tution and  function  of  muscle — Constitution  and  function  of  nerves — Fun-
damental nature  of  organization.

We  have  seen  that  matter,  in  its  cosmical  history  as
enacted  in  the  development  of  a  planetary  system,  assimies
a  great  variety  of  forms,  and  resolves  itself  into  numerous

*  "  Biogenia  (Gricchisch)=  Entwickelungsgeschichte  der  Organismen  oder  der
Icbendigen  Naturkorper  im  weitesten  Sinne !  (  GeneO,  tv,  hiu)P — (Haeckel,  "  An-
thropogenic," S.  TIO,  note  to  S.  6.)

PROPERTIES  DEPEND  UPON  MODE  OF  AGGREGATION".   301

specifically  distinct  aggregates.  The  different  substances
which  we  know  on  our  planet  are  the  result  of  the  cohesion
into  homogeneous  masses  of  these  different  aggregates,  all
the  constituent  units  of  any  one  of  these  masses  consisting
of  the  same  species  of  molecular  aggregate.  The  properties
of  the  masses,  therefore,  depend  absolutely  upon  the  nature,
i.  e.,  the  mode  of  composition,  of  their  molecular  units,
although  our  knowledge  of  these  is  wholly  insufficient  to
enable  us  to  predict  the  properties  of  any  compound  to  be
formed  out  of  known  substances.

We  saw  reason  to  suppose  that  at  an  early  period  in  the
development  of  the  solar  system  (and  we  may  infer  the  same
for  all  systems)  the  number  of  distinct  substances  was  small,
and  that  these  substances  were  gaseous  at  very  low  tempera-
tures. The  two  abundant  gases,  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,
exist  in  the  irresolvable  gaseous  nebulae,  and  doubtless  went
far  to  constitute  the  original  substance  of  our  infant  system.
These  substances,  though  differing  greatly  from  one  another
in  that  respect,  have  nevertheless  small  molecular  aggregates
as  compared  with  those  of  most  substances  now  found  in  the
earth,  and  which  are  mostly  solid  or  liquid  at  life-supporting
temperatures.  There  has,  therefore,  been  upon  the  whole
increase  of  mass  among  the  molecules  of  substances  later  de-
veloped.

When  we  rise  to  the  point  of  view  which  removes  all
distinction  between  "elements"  and  "compounds,"  except
the  subjective  one  that  in  the  former  we  do  not  know
and  can  not  prove  empirically  their  state  of  composition,
while  in  the  latter  we  can  do  this  in  so  far  as  to  resolve  them
into  the  former,  we  can  make  the  further  general  state-
ment that  not  only  do  these  known  compounds  sustain  the
above-mentioned  law  of  the  progressive  increase  of  mass  of
the  molecules  of  matter,  but  that  there  is  also  progressive
decrease  of  stahility  in  such  molecules.  We  are,  of  course,
unable  to  predicate  this  of  such  substances  as  we  are  unable
to  decompose,  although  they  doubtless  vary  greatly  in  their

302  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

relative  stability,  and,  as  before  remarked,  some  substances
which  had  been  supposed  to  be  elementary  have  already
yielded  to  human  efforts  to  separate  them,  and  others  may
still  do  so.  Moreover,  those  that  have  thus  yielded  possess
large  molecules,  and  this  should  serve  as  an  index  for  future
attempts  of  a  like  nature.  There  is,  for  example,  little  hope
of  artificially  resolving  hydrogen  or  carbon  into  simpler  ele-
ments, but  the  reverse  of  the  alchemists'  dream  may  yet  be
realized,  and  gold  be  reduced,  if  not  to  baser  at  least  to  sim-
pler molecular  elements.

All  known  chemical  compounds  must  be  supposed  to
have  been  developed  within  relatively  quite  recent  periods.
The  intense  heat  that  has  prevailed  throughout  the  greater
part  of  the  history  of  the  solar  system,  and  which  indeed  still
prevails  in  its  nucleus,  the  sun,  which  is  99f  (vol.  i,  p.  260
and  note)  per  cent  of  the  entire  mass  of  the  system,  or  nearly
the  whole  of  it,  has  prevented  the  formation  of  any  of  the
substances  which  we  know  to  be  composite.  It  is  only  in  the
comparatively  small  masses  which  have  been  accidentally
separated  from  the  rest,  and  which  in  consequence  of  their
diminutive  size  have  sooner  reached  the  stage  at  which  the
radiation  exceeds  the  generation  of  heat,  that  conditions  have
been  produced  under  which  such  comparatively  unstable
substances  as  water,  carbonic  acid,  and  the  oxides  composing
the  earth's  crust,  could  exist.  The  formation  of  such  sub-
stances may,  perhaps,  be  regarded  as  the  first  step  toward
the  development  of  life  on  the  globe.

In  proportion  as  the  degree  of  heat  diminished,  the  ca-
pacity for  more  and  more  unstable  substances  increased.  The
earliest  compounds  were  those  in  which  silicon,  potassium,
sodium,  magnesium,  etc.,  combine  with  oxygen,  several  of
which  were,  from  their  great  stability,  long  regarded  as  ele-
mentary. Then  came  a  variety  of  acids,  alkalies,  and  salts,
together  with  compounds  of  the  metals.  These  the  early
alchemists  succeeded  in  resolving,  and  the  ores  of  the  metals
were  many  of  them  successfully  worked  by  the  ancients.

PREPARATIONS  FOR  LIFE.  303

Later,  as  the  temperature  still  further  lowered,  the  oxygen
was  enabled  to  seize  the  hydrogen  and  form  the  gaseous  pro-
toxide steam,  or  aqueous  gas,  which,  at  a  still  later  period,
when  the  temperature  of  the  earth's  surface  fell  below  100°
Cent.,  condensed  into  water.  Long  prior  to  this,  carbonic  acid
had  been  formed,  and  doubtless  constituted  at  that  time  fully
one  half  the  gaseous  atmosphere  of  the  earth.  The  vast
amount  of  free  carbon  now  existing  in  the  earth,  and  still
more  that  which  is  fixed  in  the  chalk  and  limestone  forma-
tions, all  of  which  must  have  formerly  existed  in  the  atmos-
phere in  the  form  of  carbonic-acid  gas,  indicates  that  the
above  estimate  is  probably  far  too  low.

All  the  compounds  thus  far  referred  to  and  all  others  hav-
ing a  certain  degree  of  stability  must  have  been  first  formed
at  a  period  of  considerable  heat,  the  dissociation-point  of  all
compounds  having  been  estimated  at  6,000°  Cent.,  although
this  doubtless  varies  for  different  compounds  as  greatly  as  do
the  condensing-points  of  different  gases.

But  there  are  many  compounds  which  are  continually
forming  at  such  temperatures  as  now  prevail  at  the  surface
of  the  earth,  and  most  of  these  are  very  much  more  unstable
than  those  last  mentioned.  The  elements  which  chiefly  en-
ter into  these  compounds  are  oxygen,  nitrogen,  hydrogen,
and  carbon,  all  but  the  last  named  of  which  are  gaseous  at
ordinary  temperatures.  The  substances  of  this  nature  with
which  we  are  familiar  are  known  as  "  organic  compounds,"
and  such  as  we  commonly  see  are  in  fact  the  products  of
organized  beings  from  the  different  parts  of  which  they  are
obtained.  That  such  substances,  however,  are  formed  by
nature  directly  out  of  the  inorganic  world  can  not  be  doubted,
although  so  unstable  are  they  that,  unless  held  together  by
some  special  force,  they  must  succumb  almost  as  soon  as
formed,  and  therefore  never  leave  any  evidence  of  their  ex-
istence.

Quantitative  chemistry  has  not  only  succeeded  in  the
complete  analysis  of  all  the  substances  of  this  nature  ob-

304  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

tained  from  organized  beings,  but  it  has  also  effected  the
synthesis,  or  reproduction  out  of  the  inorganic  elements,  of
a  large  number  of  them.  All  these  substances  have  their
peculiar  properties  depending  on  their  molecular  constitution,
and  the  glycerine  which  is  manufactured  in  the  laboratory
possesses  the  same  sweet  taste  as  when  obtained  from  organic
sources.  Some  of  these  substances  are  exceedingly  complex,
and  consist  of  molecules  of  a  very  high  order.  We  have  al-
ready {supra,  p.  298)  referred  to  some  of  these,  and  shown
that  their  molecules  often  contain  several  thousand  times  as
much  matter  as  a  molecule  of  hydrogen.  Their  instability,
moreover,  bears  some  proportion  to  their  complexity.

Most  of  these  compounds  are  colloidal  and  refuse  to  crys-
tallize. Some  of  the  simpler  ones,  however,  in  which  the
proportion  of  oxygen  is  large,  as  sugar,  for  example,  become
crystalline  under  certain  conditions.  The  only  element
which  is  never  absent  from  any  of  these  compounds  is  car-
bon. Oxygen  is  almost  universally  present,  and  the  "hydro-
carbon "  group  in  which  it  is  wanting  is  quite  distinct  from  all
others.  Hydrogen  comes  next  in  point  of  regularity,  and
these  three  elements  make  up  the  great  bulk  of  all  organic
matter,  and  a  large  number  of  them  consist  of  these  three
alone,  which,  by  altering  the  proportions,  are  capable  of  pro-
ducing an  almost  unlimited  variety  of  bodies  all  possessing
different  properties.  When  nitrogen  is  added,  a  marked
change  is  made  in  the  nature  of  the  compounds.  The  nitro-
genous group  is  distinguished  especially  by  its  great  insta-
bility, and  also  by  the  number  of  isomeric  forms  which  these
compounds  are  capable  of  assuming.  The  only  other  ele-
ments that  enter  to  any  great  extent  into  organic  compounds
are  sulphur  and  phosphorus.  These  occur  in  limited  but
definite  proportions  in- many  of  the  most  complex  substances.

The  remarkable  contrasts  which  the  elements  constitut-
ing the  organic  compounds  present  when  compared  with  one
another  have  been  frequently  pointed  out  by  different
writers,  and  they  are  certainly  adequate  to  explain  most  of

FORMATION  OF  ORGANIC  COMPOUNDS.  305

the  properties  possessed  by  these  bodies.  The  chief  charac-
teristic of  oxygen  is  its  great  chemical  activity,  or  tendency
to  combine  with  other  substances,  while  that  of  nitrogen  is
its  inertia,  or  inability  so  to  combine.  Carbon  is  a  solid  at
all  temperatures  producible  on  the  globe,  while  all  the  other
three  chief  constituents  of  organic  matter  are  practically  in-
capable of  solidification.  This  fact  is  a  measure  of  the  de-
gree of  cohesion  of  the  homogeneous  molecules  composing
the  respective  molar  aggregates ;  that  of  carbon  is  intense,
while  that  of  hydrogen  is  exceedingly  slight.  While  this  in
each  case  depends  on  the  degree  of  heat,  it  will  be  relatively
the  same  among  them  all  at  any  given  temperature.

It  seems  probable  that  all  attempts,  so  to  speak,  on  the  part
of  nature  to  form  compounds  of  the  gaseous  elements  alone
have  resulted,  if  successful,  in  substances  which  are  at  once
pronounced  inorganic,  such  as  water  (H^O),  ammonia  (NHj),
nitric  acid  (HNO,),  etc.  It  is  remarkable  that,  while  the  chief
compound  of  the  two  persistent  gases,  hydrogen  and  oxygen,
is  liquid  or  solid  at  our  temperatures,  that  formed  of  the
persistent  solid,  carbon,  and  oxygen  (CO,),  is  a  gas  at  ordi-
nary temperatures  and  pressures.  ISTotwithstanding  this,  it
can  not  be  doubted  that  carbon  is  the  agent  which,  by  its
gi-eat  molecular  cohesion,  prevents  the  dissolution  of  the
higher  compounds,  and  renders  organic  substances  possible.

The  transition  from  the  inorganic  to  the  organic  is  purely
nominal,  and  the  existence  of  any  definite  line  marking  off
one  of  these  fields  from  the  other  has  long  been  denied.  If
there  were  any  advantage  to  be  derived  from  such  a  line,  per-
haps it  could  not  be  drawn  in  a  better  place  than  where  car-
bon unites  with  hydrogen  or  nitrogen,  either  with  or  without
oxygen.  This  would  place  all  the  hydrocarbons  in  the  or-
ganic series,  as  also  cyanogen,  which  can  only  be  obtained  by
the  use  of  organic  matter.

The  inorganic  compound,  therefore,  nearest  related  to
the  organic  series  would  be  carbonic  acid,  of  whose  inor-
ganic origin  there  can  be  no  doubt.     The  simplest  organic

306  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

compounds  consist  chiefly  in  the  addition  of  different  pro-
portions of  hydrogen  to  this  basis  and  the  reduction  of  the
proportion  of  oxygen.  In  the  various  hydrides  (methylic
CH^,  ethylic  C,IIg,  amylic  CJI,,,  etc.)  the  oxygen  disappears
altogether.  In  the  alcohols  it  reappears  only  in  the  addition
of  one  oxygen  molecule  to  the  respective  hydrides.  The
acids  result  from  an  additional  increase  in  the  proportion  of
oxygen.  Formic  acid  is  written  CII,Oj,  acetic  acid  C,H^O„
etc.  The  actual  development  of  organic  compounds,  as  it
may  be  supposed  to  take  place  in  nature,  would  seem  to  be
in  the  reverse  order  to  that  above  given,  the  acids  being  first
formed,  then  the  alcohols,  and  lastly  the  hydrides,  thus :

Carbonic  dioxide.  Formic  acid.  Methylic  alcohoL

CO,+H,=CHA;  CHA  +  II,-0=CH,0;

Methyl.

CH,0-0=CH„  etc.

This  example  involves  the  simplest  known  organic  com-
pounds, and  sufficiently  illustrates  how  the  formation  of
them  all  may  be  conceived  to  take  place  in  nature.

In  the  formation  of  sugar  (C„H„0„),  starch  (C„H,oO,o),
gum  (C„H,,0„),  etc.,  the  proportion  of  oxygen  is  quite  large,
and  the  phenomenon  of  crystallization  occurs  under  certain
conditions.  The  oils  are  a  more  complex  group,  being
formed  by  the  union  of  very  feeble  acids  with  the  common
base  glycerine  (CjIIgO,).  They  are  colloid  under  all  condi-
tions, and  decompose  much  more  easily  than  the  amyloids.

The  most  important  organic  compounds,  however,  espe-
cially from  the  biological  point  of  view,  are  those  containing
nitrogen.  These  fall  under  two  general  classes,  and  con-
stitute the  so-called  organic  hases  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
aWwminoids  on  the  other.  The  former  of  these  groups  have
been  for  the  most  part  extracted  from  vegetables,  of  which
they  constitute  the  "  active  principles,"  or  characteristic
properties.  As  illustrations  of  the  nature  and  composition
of  these  substances,  we  may  mention  morphine  (Ci,H„NO,),
narcotine    (C„H„NO,),    quinine    (C„H„]Sr,0,),    strychnine

FORMATION  OF  ORGANIC  COMPOUNDS.  307

(CjjHjjNjOj).  It  will  be  seen  tliat  the  principal  particulars
in  which  these  fundamentally  differ  from  the  organic  com-
pounds already  considered  consist  in  the  addition  of  a  small
percentage  of  nitrogen  and  the  reduction  of  the  proportion
of  oxygen,  yet  the  properties  which  they  possess  are  a  hun-
dred-fold more  active.

The  composition  of  the  organic  bases,  however,  though
somewhat  complex,  is  simple  compared  with  that  of  the
albuminous  compounds.  These  contain,  in  addition  to  the
elements  of  the  former,  small  but  rather  definite  proportions
of  both  sulphur  and  phosphorus.  The  number  of  mole-
cules of  each  of  the  components  indicates  a  large  complex
molecule.  That  of  albumen,  could  the  formula  of  Liebig
(CjijHjjgN^SjOgg)  be  relied  upon,  contains  679  equivalents,  and
is  4,870  times  as  large  as  one  of  hydrogen,  while  that  of  fibrin
is  said  to  be  still  larger.  The  substances  thus  composed,  as
we  should  naturally  expect,  are  very  unstable,  and  possess
remarkable  properties.  They  constitute  the  substance  of  the
muscles  and  nerves  of  the  animal  system  and  the  fibrin  of
blood.  They  are  also  found  in  a  peculiar  form  in  all  cells,
whether  animal  or  vegetable.-  The  base  of  the  entire  group
is  known  as  protein,  so  named  from  its  remarkable  power  of
assuming  different  isomeric  forms,  of  which  it  presents  some
thousand  or  more.  Protein  contains  no  sulphur  or  phos-
phorus, and  its  formula,  as  given  by  its  illustrious  discov-
erer, Mulder,  is  CigHj^lSr^Og.  Each  of  its  units,  therefore,  is
composed  of  65  elementary  molecules,  the  combined  mass  of
which  is  equal  to  395  molecules  of  hydrogen.

This  substance,  it  is  proper  to  state,  is  to  some  extent
theoretical,  and  is  not  believed  in  as  a  reality  by  many  chem-
ists, while  all  the  albuminoids  are  often  indiscriminately  de-
nominated protein  bodies.  All  the  actual  known  substances
of  this  group  have,  as  we  have  seen,  much  more  complex
molecules  still.

The  high  order  of  composition  of  these  bodies  is  the  suf-
ficient explanation  of  the  facility  with  which  they  assume

308  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

isomeric  forms.  Among  many  of  tlie  subordinate  aggregates
entering  into  an  albuminoid  molecule,  the  elective  affinities
are  bo  nearly  balanced  that  any  slight  disturbance  is  suffi-
cient to  break  up  some  of  the  combinations  and  produce
new  ones.  For  example,  under  one  form  there  may  be  sup-
posed to  exist  carbonic-acid  molecules  and  ammonia  mole-
cules, together  with  free  molecules  of  all  the  elements  form-
ing these  units,  but  by  some  shock,  change  of  temperature
or  condition,  or  from  any  other  cause,  part  or  all  of  these
compound  units  may  be  decomposed,  and  the  elements  com-
posing them  be  set  free.  These  will  either  remain  free  and
cohere  with  like  molecules  or  they  will  re-combinc  metathet-
ically  with  one  another  into  different  forms.  In  either  case
a  new  substance  with  distinct  properties  is  the  result.  The
number  of  water-molecules  may  thus  vary  to  any  extent,
changing  the  character  of  the  compound  with  each  new
variation.

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  has  very  ingeniously  explained  the
nature  not  only  of  muscular  contractility,  but  also  of  nervous
discharge  on  this  principle,  and  maintains  that  the  substance
of  the  muscle  and  nerve  takes  on  a  new  isomeric  form,  with
only  slight  loss  of  matter  at  each  contraction,  sensation,  or
motor  impulse.*

Apart  from  the  living  organism,  all  the  substances  thus
far  mentioned  possess  sufficient  stability  to  be  retained,  han-
dled, and  examined,  and  to  the  ordinary  observer  they  pre-
sent very  much  the  general  appearance  of  other  matter.  Al-
though possessing  many  special  qualities  distinguishing  them
from  other  bodies,  the  albuminoids,  as  well  as  all  the  other
organic  compounds,  appear  to  be  and  are  incapable  of  any
visible  automatic  movement.  Like  other  solids,  however,
even  the  densest  crystals  or  metals,  we  are  obliged  to  suppose
that  these  also  possess  at  all  times  molecular  activities.  It  is
these,  as  we  believe,  that  determine  the  respective  properties
of  all  substances,  and  constitute  the  multiple  and  varied  in

*  "Biology,"  vol.  ii,  §  302  ;   " Tsycliology,"  vol.  i,  §  9.

ISOMERISM.  309

nature.  In  protein  bodies  we  must  suppose  that  these  molec-
ular activities  are  much  more  extensive  and  varied  than  are
those  of  ordinary  inorganic  bodies.  The  molecular  units  are
so  much  larger  that  their  motions  must  be,  as  it  were,  molar
in  comparison,  while  within  these  larger  primary  units  there
are  lesser  units  of  many  different  orders  of  aggregation,  eacli
of  which  manifests  its  own  appropriate  activities,  and  thus
modifies  the  general  properties  of  the  whole.  The  reason
we  are  unable  to  see  these  motions  is  simply  that  tliey
are  on  too  small  a  scale,  and  vast  as  is  a  protein  mole-
cule compared  with  inorganic  molecules  in  general,  it  is  still
far  too  minute  to  permit  the  human  eye  to  perceive  any
molecular  changes  that  are  going  on  within  a  mass  of  this
substance.

There  is  much  evidence  that  living  organisms  are  not
made  up  simply  of  organic  matter  specially  arranged.  The
various  organic  compounds,  as  before  remarked,  must  per-
haps be  wholly  accounted  for  as  derived  originally  from
organisms,  from  whose  bodies,  living  or  dead,  they  were
taken,  either  ready  formed  or  in  such  form  as  was  able  to
yield  them  by  the  application  of  certain  processes.  After-
ward, when  chemists  had  learned  of  what  inorganic  elements
they  wore  composed,  they  succeeded  in  producing  many  of
them  directly  by  compelling  the  proper  combination  of  these
elements.  But  all  the  substances  within  the  living  body
which  properly  belong  to  this  class  are  obviously  no  longer
of  active  service  to  the  organism.  They  are  either  effete,
reserve,  or  skeleton  matters,  whose  functions  have  either
wholly  ceased  or  are  of  a  mechanical  character.  Of  this
nature  are  urea,  fat,  woody  tissue,  etc.  The  same  is  true  of
the  whites  of  eggs  and  the  so-called  "  albumen  "  of  seeds.
"Where  they  are  products  of  the  tissues  they  are  formed  by
breaking  up  the  normal  composition  of  these  and  extracting
the  organic  compounds  from  them.  In  either  case  the  or-
ganic compound  represents  a  simplification  of  the  organized
tissue.     The  effete  matters,  fatty  deposits,  and  other  organic

310  SECONDARY   AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

products  of  living  organisms  appear  to  be  degraded  bodies
possessing  something  less,  botb  of  vital  and  chemical  organ-
ization, than  the  true  living  tissues  themselves.  And  this
is  doubtless  the  literal  fact.

The  development  of  the  albuminoids,  highly  complex  as
thej  are,  is  not  alone  suflBcient  for  the  immediate  genesis  of
life.  A  form  of  matter  still  more  complex  must  be  reached
before  this  result  is  possible.  But  there  is  no  evidence  that
this  form  of  matter  is  produced  by  any  different  process  from
that  by  which  all  other  forms  of  matter  are  produced.  From
the  hypothetical  molecule  of  the  first  order  produced  by  the
union  of  ultimate  atoms  to  the  molecule  of  hydrogen  or
other  recognized  element,  and  from  this  to  the  molecule  of
albumen  or  fibrin,  the  process  has  been  uniformly  the  same,
that  of  successive  compounding,  re-compounding,  doubly  and
multiply  compounding.  In  short,  it  has  been  the  process  of
molecular  aggregation.  It  would  be  contrary  to  the  law  of
uniformity  known  to  prevail  every-where  in  nature  where
experience  has  been  able  to  reveal  it,  should  there  be  found
an  abrupt  change  of  process  at  this  point.  Upon  those  who
assert  such  a  saltus  must  rest  the  burden  of  proof,  and  no
proof  has  yet  been  adduced.  We  are  all  the  way  dealing
with  molecules,  and  are  able  to  judge  only  by  the  effects.
But  we  observe  that,  without  changing  the  elementary  sub-
stances which  analysis  can  demonstrate  to  be  present  at  any
stage  of  the  process,  with  each  new  step  in  the  progress  of
aggregation  new  and  higher  properties  are  created.  From
the  inert  properties  of  carbon  and  nitrogen  in  the  free  state,
of  water  and  carbonic  acid,  the  simplest  compounds,  we
have,  by  further  successive  compounding,  the  more  active
ones  of  ammonia  and  nitric  acid,  the  sweet  taste  of  sugar  and
glycerine,  the  powerful  narcotic  properties  of  narcotine  and
morphine,  the  deadly  toxic  properties  of  strychnine,  and,
manifesting  themselves  in  a  wholly  different  manner,  the
still  higher  order  of  properties,  including  those  of  isomerism,
exhibited  by  the  protein  bodies ;  all  of  which  we  seem  bound

FORMATION  OF  PEOTOPLASM.  311

to  ascribe  to  the  respective  orders  of  combination  and  com-
plication tinder  which  these  substances,  possessing  the  same
elementary  constituents,  exist,  when  they  display  these  quali-
ties which  are  the  effects  of  their  molecular  constitution.
With  still  higher  states  of  aggregation  we  would,  therefore,
expect  still  higher  forms  of  activity,  still  more  marked  prop-
erties.

"We  have  also  learned  that,  while  we  may  safely  predict
higher  properties  from  higher  degrees  of  aggregation,  we
have  no  basis  whatever  upon  which  to  predict  the  nature  of
this  change.  Not  even  in  the  simplest  inorganic  re-agencies
can  we  foretell  the  result  of  the  union  of  any  two  elements.
We  can  not  even  tell  which  of  the  three  states,  gaseous,
liquid,  or  solid,  our  new  compound  will  exhibit  at  our
temperatures.  The  invincible  solid,  carbon,  when  joined
with  oxygen  becomes  a  gas ;  the  type  of  all  gases,  hydrogen,
when  combined  with  another  gas  (oxygen),  results  in  a  solid
at  32°  Fahr.  Much  less  can  we  predict  the  other  more  spe-
cial properties  even  of  these  primary  compounds.  A  fortiori
is  human  prevision  wholly  inadequate  to  presage  the  result
of  organic  combinations.  That  the  re-compounding  of  the
protein  bodies  should  result  in  a  new  form,  possessing  the
quality  of  spontaneous  movement,  is  a  priori  just  as  probable
(and  no  more  so)  as  that  the  addition  of  a  molecule  of  oxygen
should  convert  the  hydrides  into  alcohols.

This  complex  stage  of  aggregation  is  no  longer  an  hy-
pothetical one.  The  molar  aggregate  resulting  from  such
a  re-compounding  of  the  albuminoids  has  been  discovered.
It  exists  under  diverse  conditions,  and  manifests  properties
fully  in  keeping  with  its  exalted  molecular  character.  This
substance,  discovered  by  Oken  in  1809  and  denominated
Urschleim,  recognized  by  Dujardin  in  1835  and  called  sar-
code,  and  thoroughly  studied  by  Mohl  in  1846,  who  named  it
protoplasm,  has  now  passed  unchallenged  into  the  nomen-
clature of  modern  organic  chemistry  under  the  last-men-
tioned title.

312  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

Protoplasm  is  a  real  substance,  found  in  considerable
abundance  in  nature,  not  only  within  the  tissues  of  organized
beings,  but,  as  we  might  almost  say,  in  a  mineral  state,
wholly  disconnected  from  such  beings.  There  is  no  more
doubt  that  it  is  elaborated  out  of  the  inorganic  elements  than
there  is  that  ammonia  or  common  salt  is  thus  elaborated.  It
is  a  true  chemical  compound,  in  which  the  proportions  of
each  element  are  known.  It  contains  approximately  64  parts
of  carbon,  21  parts  of  oxygen,  16  parts  of  nitrogen,  7  parts
of  hydrogen,  and  2  parts  of  sulphur,  in  100  parts.*

These  proportions  doubtless  vary  somewhat,  but  suffice
to  represent  this  body  from  this  point  of  view.  To  write  its
chemical  formula  is  impossible  in  the  present  state  of  sci-
ence. The  formulas  given  for  the  albuminoids  are  merely
theoretical  and  conjectural.  Their  numerous  isomeric  forms
show  us  that  the  grouping  of  the  molecules  is  subject  to  con-
stant changes.  This  is  doubtless  true  to  a  far  greater  extent
of  protoplasm.  It  is  a  substance  whose  molecular  units  are
probably  compounds  of  the  units  of  the  albuminoids.  These
enter  bodily  into  them  in  the  same  manner  that  oxygen  and
hydrogen  enter  into  water,  or.  as  we  suppose  ammonia,  car-
bonic acid,  and  the  compound  radicals  to  enter  into  the  more
complex  organic  compounds.

The  final  molecular  units  of  protoplasm  seem  to  be  iden-
tical with  Herbert  Spencer's  "physiological  units."  He
says  ("  Biology,"  I,  §  66) :  "  There  seems  no  alternative  but
to  suppose  that  the  chemical  units  combine  into  units  im-
mensely more  complex  than  themselves,  complex  as  they
are ;  and  that  in  each  organism  the  physiological  units,  pro-
duced by  this  further  compounding  of  highly  compound
atoms,  have  a  more  or  less  distinctive  character."  And
again  (letter  to  the  editor  of  the  "North  American  Re-
view ") :  "  Organic  evolution  takes  place  only  on  condition
that  the  masses  of  protoplasm,  formed  of  the  physiological

*  Professor  Ernst  Ilaeckel,  ia  "  American  Cyclopedia,"  article  "  Proto-
plasm."

PROTOPLASM.  313

units^  and  of  tlio  assimilable  materials  out  of  which  others
like  themselves  are  to  be  multiplied,  are  subject  to  heat  of  a
given  degree."

Nor  is  it  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  present  theory  to
carry  the  notion  of  these  physiological  units  to  the  extent  of
supposing  that  they  are  so  varied  in  kind  as  to  require  a  dis-
tinct species  of  unit  to  secure  the  development  of  each  spe-
cies of  organism,  although  this  doctrine  is  not  without  seri-
ous objections,  and  the  discussion  of  the  theory  of  pangenesis
is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  work.  It  should,  however,  at  least
be  remarked  that,  as  there  are  various  kinds  of  albuminoid
substances  having  somewhat  different  compositions,  so  there
doubtless  are  many  forms  of  protoplasm  differing  in  as  many
respects  from  one  another,  and  that  these  are  all  capable  of
differentiation  to  adapt  themselves  to  special  functions  in  the
organism.

The  mode  of  development  of  this  highly  complex  sub-
stance, protoplasm,  in  the  laboratory  of  nature  is  involved  in
great  obscurity.  It  would  seem  incredible  that  it  should
have  been  formed  directly  out  of  the  inorganic  elements,  and
yet  we  find  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  series  of  less
complex  organic  compounds  leading  gradually  up  to  it  ex-
cept as  products  of  living  organisms  which  presuppose  the
prior  existence  of  protoplasm.  "We  seem,  however,  com-
pelled to  suppose  that  such  less  highly  compound  bodies  pre-
ceded this  most  highly  compound  one,  and  can  only  confess
that  we  are  as  yet  ignorant  of  the  circumstances  of  their  for-
mation. Most  of  the  protoplasm  within  the  reach  of  obser-
vation exists  within  the  bodies  or  tissues  of  living  organisms
whose  origin  is  exceedingly  ancient,  and  which  are  simply
the  modified  products  of  millions  of  generations  of  genea-
logical descent  from  actual  parents.  In  all  this  the  forma-
tive power  of  nature  in  the  initial  production  of  protoplasm
is  excluded.  The  initial  formation  of  the  protoplasmic  units
is  the  real  question  involved  in  the  controversy  about  "  spon-
taneous generation,"  and  it  is  precisely  analogous  to  the  ques-

314  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

tion  of  the  formation  of  ammonia  or  any  other  chemical
compound.

It  should  be  remembered  that  the  lowest  forms  of  life
are  found  in  the  water.  Water  in  its  purest  form  consists
of  hydrogen  and  oxygen.  It  absorbs  cai'bonic  acid  and  am-
monia with  great  avidity,  and  is  never  found  in  a  natural
state  entirely  free  from  these  substances.  In  the  sea,  as  also
in  all  bodies  of  fresh  water,  it  is  always  permeated  by  a  vast
number  of  salts  and  solids  of  all  kinds,  and  contains  a  small
percentage  of  sulphur.  The  waters  of  the  globe,  therefore,
contain  all  the  elements  that  ever  enter  into  any  living  or-
ganism, and  especially  the  constituents  of  protoplasm.  The
liquid  state  must  also  be  regarded  as  by  far  the  most  favor-
able of  all  for  the  transformation  and  re-formation  of  com-
pounds of  all  orders  and  degrees.  In  the  gaseous  state  the
molecules  are  ever  tending  to  fly  away  from  one  another  and
remain  uncombined,  while  in  the  solid  they  can  not  over-
come their  own  inertia  sufficiently  to  unite.  In  the  liquid
state  they  mingle  freely,  and  full  play  is  allowed  to  their
elective  affinities.  That  amid  this  constant  intermingling  of
all  the  elements,  and  many  of  the  lower  compounds  that
enter  into  the  more  complex  organic  bodies,  there  should  be
frequent  formation  of  many  of  them,  would  seem  a  most  rea-
sonable conclusion.  Such  formations  would  be  likely  to
escape  detection,  from  a  variety  of  causes.  It  is  not  probable
that  compounds  thus  formed  under  special  circumstances,  and
then  left  to  the  play  of  constantly  changing  circumstances,
would  possess  any  great  degree  of  permanence,  or  ever  exist
in  any  great  abundance.  Like  the  clouds  of  the  sky,  these
"  creatures  of  circumstance  "  would  constantly  form  and  van-
ish, and  again  re-form,  again  to  disappear.

In  this  manner  there  may  be  constantly  forming  and
disappearing  organic  compounds  of  many  kinds  and  degrees.
Organic  radicals  (ethyl,  methyl,  amyl,  etc.),  organic  acids,
alcohols,  ethers,  amyloid  and  saccharine  bodies,  protein  and
albuminoids,  may  all  be  thus  spontaneously  formed  in  such

BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE.  315

limited  quantities  and  in  this  transient  manner  in  the  waters
of  the  sea,  at  certain  points  where  all  the  circumstances  con-
spire to  such  a  result,  and  several  of  these  may  frequently
commingle  and  generate  new  compounds  of  still  higher  or-
ders. That  this  is  actually  the  case  we,  of  course,  do  not
know,  but  if  it  were  we  certainly  should  never  detect  the
presence  of  these  diffused  substances.

Although,  in  the  solid  and  dry  state  in  which  the  various
organic  compounds  are  usually  presented  to  our  inspection,
the  lower  or  less  complex  ones  appear  to  be  and  are  the
most  stable,  it  is  probable  that  this  may  be,  in  a  sense,  re-
versed in  the  case  of  their  formation  in  water  by  the  natural
cohesion  of  commingled  molecules.  Many  of  these  sub-
stances are  soluble  in  water,  and  this  property  would  be
increased  by  the  presence  of  alkalies  that  abound  in  the  sea.
The  albuminoids  would  perhaps  be  no  more  stable,  but,  amid
all  the  multitudinous  combinations  which  it  is  possible  to
conceive  of  as  thus  being  brought  into  existence,  some  com-
paratively permanent  ones  would  be  likely  to  result.  For
there  may  be  supposed  to  be  going  on  among  the  many
forms  of  matter  that  freely  commingle  in  the  ocean  a  con-
tinuation of  that  same  selective  process  which  was  described
{supra,  p.  233)  as  possible  among  the  original  molecules  of
imponderable  matter,  which  resulted  in  the  production  of
a  few  stable  elements,  and  again  among  the  elements  that
composed  the  incandescent  nebula  when  the  metals,  etc.,
were  created,  and  which  we  shall  see  again  still  more  clearly
going  on  among  morphological  units  and  developed  organ-
isms. It  is  a  "  struggle  for  existence,"  a  selection  by  which
the  feeble  aggregates  are  disintegrated  and  the  strong  ones
preserved ;  another  illustration  of  the  law  of  the  "  survival
of  the  fittest,"  the  final  outcome  of  which  is  the  production
of  stable  organic  aggregates.  The  lower  compounds  have
scarcely  more  than  a  nominal  existence.  Out  of  correspond-
ence with  their  environment  they  quickly  return  to  their
original  inorganic  state  unless,  perchance,  they  be  developed

316  SECONDARY  AGGREGAriON,— BIOGENY.

in  the  midst  of  others  whose  combined  influence  tends  to
the  production  of  more  complex  ones,  and  eventually  of  the
truly  stable  fonn.  All  the  intermediate  stages  may  be
regarded  as  merely  "  transition  forms,"  whose  well-known
ephemeral  character  they  fully  share,  or  as  those  countless
failures  of  nature  which  are  always  necessary  to  the  consum-
mation of  one  success.  In  this  case  the  grand  success  is
protoplasm.     Until  this  is  reached,  all  is  failure.

It  is  a  matter  of  fact  that  protoplasm  is  found  in  the  sea
and  in  water  under  circumstances  which  fully  accord  with
this  theory  of  its  formation.  Ilaeckel's  Protogenes  and
Huxley's  Bathyhius  are  examples.  These  are  cTiemical  sub-
stances of  the  composition  stated  above,  and  possessing  prop-
erties due  to  such  composition.  The  latter  is  found  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea,  where  it  exists  in  large  masses  as  a  true
chemical  product  of  the  varied  contents  of  the  ocean.  To
distinguish  these  wholly  amorphous  and  spontaneously  de-
veloped forms  of  protoplasm  from  that  which  is  found  in
the  tissues  of  true  organisms.  Professor  Haeckel  proposes  to
apply  to  them  the  term  plasson,  or  jplasson  bodies,  which,
while  it  should  not  lead  to  the  notion  that  there  is  any  essen-
tial difference  in  the  matter  itself,  is  convenient  to  keep
fresh  the  idea  that  it  is  a  true  chemical  substance.

It  is  difficult  to  describe  the  properties  of  the  plasson
bodies  without  giving  rise  to  the  idea  of  life,  for  the  leading
property  is  that  of  spontaneous  mobility.  Anything  that
moves  is  naturally  supposed  to  be  alive,  and,  if  this  is  a  test
of  life,  all  forms  of  protoplasm  are  living  things.  And  there
is  really  no  objection  to  this  view,  provided  the  idea  of  life
be  confined  to  this  and  a  few  other  simple  phenomena.  But
the  tendency  always  is,  to  couple  with  the  idea  of  life  that
of  organization.  We  are  apt  to  think  of  nerves,  muscles,
joints,  and  sinews,  if  not  of  mouth,  stomach,  limbs,  and
sense-organs.  From  plasson  bodies  all  these  are  as  com-
pletely wanting  as  from  a  lump  of  gypsum.  The  spon-
taneous movements  and   all   the  transformations  through

I

PLASSON  BODIES.  31Y

which  these  substances  pass  are  simply  the  result  of  their
peculiar  chemical  composition  and  constitution.  These  ac-
tivities belong  to  them  in  the  same  sense  tliat  sweetness
belongs  to  sugar  or  bitterness  to  quinine.  In  fact,  the  pri-
mary distinction  between  these  most  complex  of  all  known
bodies  and  the  less  complex  ones  is  that,  while  in  the  latter
all  the  activities  are  molecular,  in  the  former  they  are  partly
molar.  The  units  of  these  substances,  compared  to  those
of  any  of  the  less  complex  ones,  amount  almost  to  masses,
although  still  far  too  small  to  be  distinguishable  by  the
highest  microscopic  powers.  But  the  peculiar  distinction  is
found  in  the  power  of  these  large  complex  molecules  to
combine  into  masses  and  manifest  activities  in  unison,  con-
sisting in  the  movement  of  these  masses  or  of  special  por-
tions of  them  under  the  influence  of  appropriate  stimuli.
The  secret  of  their  stability  seems  to  be  their  power  to  per-
petuate or  continue  their  existence  by  the  attraction  and
absorption  of  additional  assimilable  materials.  This  may,
at  tirst  sight,  seem  to  be  a  truly  vital  process,  but,  whether  it
be  or  not,  it  is,  after  all,  only  an  extension  of  the  powers
■which  originated  it.  All  bodies  must  possess,  or  must  have
once  possessed,  the  power  of  increasing  their  mass.  The
inorganic  bodies  which  we  know  as  solids  are  stable  as  we
see  them,  because  the  conditions  of  great  heat,  etc.,  which
existed  at  the  time  of  their  formation,  no  lonsrer  exist.  To
compare  them  to  the  organic  bodies  under  consideration
here,  we  should  be  obliged  to  refer  them  to  that  period,  and
to  suppose  the  existence  of  such  conditions.  These  condi-
tions are  necessary  to  their  formation,  but  they  are  at  the
same  time  fatal  to  their  continuance.  The  plasson  bodies,
in  order  to  survive  the  destructive  tendencies  of  their  sur-
roundings, acquire,  instead  of  a  firm  armor  of  resistance  to
such  tendencies,  a  means  of  self-renewal  by  which  their  ex-
istence can  be  maintained  and  perpetuated.  They  possess  the
power  of  assimilating  to  themselves  all  substances  whose
chemical  composition  is  identical  with  or  very  similar  to
15

818  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY,

their  own.  Two  bits  of  protoplasm  brought  into  contact
blend  into  one.  If  one  be  much  the  larger,  it  appears  to
devour  the  smaller.  Masses  of  protoplasm  assimilate  protein
substances  .and  by  re-compounding  them  convert  them  into
protoplasm  also.  Living  organisms  containing,  as  thej  always
do,  protoplasm  in  their  tissues,  are,  if  of  proper  size,  absorbed,
and,  as  it  were,  devoured  by  plasson  bodies,  and  the  assimilable
parts  dissolved  out  and  appropriated.  In  order  to  accomplish
this,  mechanical  means  are  frequently  employed.  Certain
portions  of  a  plasson  body  are  temporarily  protruded  from
the  mass  in  the  form  of  pseudojpodia,  or  false  limbs,  and,  by
means  of  these,  infusoria  and  other  minute  organisms  are
seized  and  drawn  into  the  mass.  This  might  be  regarded
as  at  least  a  sort  of  false  organization.  That  it  does  not
deserve  to  be  called  true  organization  is  clear  when  we  re-
member that  before  this  can  take  place  a  still  higher  degree
of  composition  must  be  reached.  The  unit  of  protoplasm  is
only  chemical,  or  at  most  physiological.  All  organization  is
produced  by  the  multiplication  and  special  disposition  of
morphological  units,  No  plasson  body  is  strictly  such  a
unit,  of  however  few  chemical  units  it  may  be  composed.

These  plasson  bodies  have  recently  been  made  to  con-
stitute a  special  field  of  scientific  research,  and,  as  much  by
accident  as  otherwise,  it  has  been  occupied  by  the  biologists
instead  of  the  chemists.  These,  like  judges  on  the  bench,
have  constantly  ruled  in  favor  of  their  own  jurisdiction,  and
in  this  way  these  substances  have  come  to  be  regarded  as
forms  of  life,  although  their  biographers  have,  from  the  first,
insisted  that  they  are  not  organized  beings.  Perhaps  this
bit  of  history  is  not  unfortunate,  since  it  teaches  us  to  dis-
connect the  ideas  of  life  and  organization,  and  thereby  di-
rects our  thoughts  toward  the  most  profound  truth,  both  of
biology  and  of  chemistry,  which  is,  that  life  is  the  result  of
the  aggregation  of  matter-

A  plasson  body  performs  all  th5  essential  functions  of  h
living  organism.      It  is  capable  of  motion,  nutrition,  and

LIFE  DEFINED.  319

propagation.  To  these  Professor  Haeckel  adds  sensation,
for  how  can  the  other  functions  be  conceived  of  without  the
aid  of  this  one  ?  But  we  might  almost  as  well  ask,  How  can
a  crystal  grow  without  sensation  ?  Nor  has  the  great  natu-
ralist failed  to  perceive  these  extreme  consequences  of  this
extension  of  the  biological  jurisdiction,  for  he  seeks  to  escape
them  only  by  pushing  it  still  further,  and  proclaiming  the
doctrine  of  the  animation  of  material  atoms  of  the  lowest
order,  die  Atom-SeeleJ*

It  should  be  stated  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  organiza-
tion which  ought  never  to  be  confounded.  There  is  chem-
ical organization  and  there  is  morphological  organization.
The  first  is  the  organization  of  matter  proper,  the  second
is  the  organization  of  special  forms  of  matter.  From  the
broadest  cosmical  point  of  view,  it  is  true,  these  may  be  said
to  differ  only  in  the  mass  of  the  units  involved,  but  from  the
more  practical  point  of  view,  which  seeks  to  comprehend  the
phenomena  of  life  as  distinguished  from  that  which  is  not
life,  the  separation  of  the  two  classes  of  organization  is  of
great  value.  For  example,  if  an  answer  is  demanded  to  the
question,  long  ago  asked,  whether  life  is  the  cause  or  the
product  of  organization,  this  answer  will  depend  entirely
upon  which  of  the  two  kinds  of  organization  is  meant.  If
chemical  organization  is  referred  to,  then  life,  as  the  term  is
popularly  understood,  is  a  product  of  it.  If  only  morpho-
logical organization  is  to  be  considered,  then,  in  a  certain
sense,  life  may  be  regarded  as  a  cause.  It  is  at  least  certain
that,  before  anything  more  nearly  allied  to  life  than  molecu-
lar activities  is  observed,  there  must  be  a  long  series  of  com-
poundings  and  re-compoundings  of  the  elements  of  matter,
which  is  what  we  mean  by  chemical  organization ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  certain  that,  before  anything  that
biologists  will  recognize  is  reached,  the  matter  which  per-
forms the  vital  functions  in  all  organized  beings  has  an  inde-
pendent existence,  and  possesses  all  the  properties  manifested

*  "  Die  hcutige  Entwickclungslehrc,"  S.  14,  23.

320  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION. -BIOGENY.

later.  Whether  there  be  or  not  a  causal  dependence  between
the  phenomena  of  life  and  those  of  these  two  classes  of  organi-
zation, there  is,  at  least,  an  order  of  sequence  such  as  has
been  pointed  out.

Tims  far  we  have  confined  our  discussion  exclusively  to
the  organization  of  matter — to  chemical  or  molecular  organi-
zation. And,  without  stepping  over  this  line,  we  have  now
brought  ourselves  face  to  face  with  the  phenomena  of  life.
While  still  dwelling  upon  the  composition  and  physical
properties  of  chemical  substances,  we  have  encountered  the
problem  of  vitality.  Looking  at  this  problem  thus  as  it  were
from  below  upward,  we  are  able  to  observe  its  very  roots,  and
thus  to  gain  a  far  more  fundamental  idea  of  life  in  the  ab-
stract than  could  have  been  gained  by  a  direct  consideration
of  organized  beings  themselves.

The  great  truth  that  now  comes  squarely  home  to  us  is
that  life  is  a  projperty  of  matter.  It  is  simply  the  result  of
the  movements  going  on  among  the  molecules  composing  a
mass  of  protoplasm.  It  is  a  phenomenon  presented  by  this
most  highly  complex  form  of  matter,  and  which  is  never
absent  from  it.  To  kill  protoplasm  is  to  destroy  its  compo-
sition, to  degrade  it  into  a  lower  order  of  substance.  The
activities,  powers,  functions,  and  susceptibilities  possessed  by
this  substance,  whose  combined  effect  we  denominate  life,  are
but  the  relations  which  the  substance  sustains  by  virtue  of
its  constitution  to  the  forms  of  matter  around  it.  They  are
its  properties  just  as  astringency,  transparency,  etc.,  are  the
properties  of  alum.

All  the  known  plasson  bodies  have  been  denominated  by
Professor  Haeckel  moneres^^  or  inoners^  although  in  some
cases,  as  in  Huxley's  Bathyhius  Ilaechelii,  the  protoplasm  is
scarcely  individualized,  and  exists  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea
at  the  depth  of  from  ten  to  twenty  thousand  feet  in  immense

*  I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  satisfactory  etymological  grounds  for  the
plural  monera  used  by  Professor  IlaeckeL

MONEKS.  321

quantities  and  amorphous  masses,  mingled  with  coccoliths
and  GlohigerincB.  When  taken  out,  this  substance  was  ob-
served by  Sir  Wyville  Thomson  and  Professor  William  B.
Carpenter  to  undergo  spontaneous  movements.  On  careful
analysis  it  was  found  to  consist  of  protein  matter,  and  to
contain  carbon  and  nitrogen.  With  regard  to  this  substance
there  has,  it  is  true,  been  some  question,  but  the  effort  to
overthrow  the  theory  of  its  protoplasmic  character  seems  to
have  been  made  by  persons  who  feared  the  consequences  of
that  theory  more  than  they  loved  truth,  and,  unless  better
proofs  can  be  adduced  against  it  than  have  thus  far  appeared,
Bathybius  will  have  to  stand.*  The  facts  of  its  protein  con-
stitution and  spontaneous  movements  are  sufficient  alone  to
make  it  a  plasson  body.  That  it  is  in  the  biological  sense
organized  no  one  claims.  It  is  also  an  interesting  fact  in  its
history  that,  before  its  chemical  constitution  was  known,  its
amoeboid  motions  were  observed  by  two  eminent  scientific
observers,  neither  of  whom  has  ever  been  accused  of  undue
leanings  toward  the  advanced  theories  of  modern  biology.
These  men  stated  that  it  was  "  capable  of  a  certain  amount
of  movement,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  manifests
the  phenomena  of  a  very  simple  fonn  of  life."  They  fur-
ther say :  "  This  ooze  was  actually  living ;  it  collected  in
lumps,  as  though  albumen  had  been  mixed  with  it,  and  under
the  microscope  the  sticky  mass  was  seen  to  be  living  sarcode."
A  similar  substance,  or,  as  Ilaeckel  thinks,  the  same  sub-
stance, was  discovered  in  Smith  Sound,  at  the  depth  of  552
feet,  by  Dr.  Emil  Bessels,  of  the  ill-fated  Polaris.  The  writer
of  this  work  had  the  good  fortune  to  hear  Dr.  Bessels  de-
scribe this  discovery,  soon  after  his  return,  in  a  paper  read
before  the  Potomac-Side  ISTaturalists'  Club  of  Washington,
D.  C.  He  found  it  in  even  more  pristine  simplicity  than
Bathybius,  and  unaccompanied  by  either  coccoliths  or  Globi-

*  See  Haeckel's  defense  of  Bathybius  in  "Kosmos,"  1877,  and  Huxley's  re-
marks at  the  close  of  Professor  Allman's  address  before  the  Sheffield  meeting
of  the  British  Association,  August  20,  1879.

322  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENT.

gerincBy  from  which  circumstance  he  named  it  Protobaihyhius.
It  is  described  and  figured  in  the  report  of  the  expedition.*
Of  it  Dr.  Bessels  says :  "  These  masses  consisted  of  pure  pro-
toplasm, in  which  calcareous  particles  occurred  only  by  acci-
dent. They  appeared  to  be  very  sticky,  mesh-like  structures,
with  perfect  amceboid  movements ;  they  took  up  particles  of
carmine  and  other  foreign  substances,  and  there  was  active
motion  of  the  nuclei."

The  existence  of  such  substances  as  these  is  an  astonish-
ing fact,  and  can  not  be  robbed  of  its  interest  by  any  attempt
to  show  that  they  are  simply  chemical  products  of  the  sea.
No  biologist  should  claim  more.  The  peculiar  force  of  the
lesson  they  teach  is  derived  from  just  this  circumstance.
While  it  seems  to  point  to  the  sea  as  the  common  mother
of  all  life,  it  also  shows  that  a  simply  chemical  substance  can
manifest  the  phenomena  of  life.  To  paraphrase  Bacon's
aphorism  with  the  proper  modifications,  it  may  be  said  that,
if  a  substance  displays  all  the  phenomena  of  life,  let  wise
men  dispute  whether  it  be  living  or  no  (vol.  i,  p.  288).

In  addition  to  these  examples  of  perfectly  amorphous
protoplasm,  all  parts  of  which  present  these  truly  vital  prop-
erties, which  are  no  more  affected  by  division  at  any  point
than  are  those  of  a  mass  of  dough,  there  are  other  true
moners  whose  individual  character  is  well  defined.     In  these
each  individual    consists  of    a   small    (usually  microscopic)
mass  of  wholly  undifferentiated  protoplasm  which,  like  drops
of  water  or  any  other  fluid  or  semi-fluid,  has  the  spherical  for  I
its  normal  form,  but  possesses  the  power  of  improvising!
pseudopodia  and  protruding  them  in  any  direction  for  the
capture  of  nutritious  objects  that  chance  to  pass  within  its  ^
reach.     Moners  of  this  class  differ  somewhat  in  size  and  in
certain  characteristics  upon  which  a  classification  into  genera
and  species  has  been  based.     The  principal  differences  are
displayed  in  the  mode  of  protruding  the  pseudopodia  and  of

*  "  Die  Amerikanische  Nordpol  Expedition,"  Leipzig,  Wilhelm  Engelmano,  J
1379,  S.  320,  321.

MONERS.  323

multiplying  individuals.  With  regard  to  the  latter  function,
Professor  Haeckel  gives  three  distinct  modes  in  which  it  is
accomplished  by  different  kinds  of  moners.  One  of  these
modes  is  that  of  simple  division,  which  takes  place  as  soon
as  the  individual,  through  the  absorption  of  nutritious  ele-
ments, has  attained  a  given  size,  each  half  again  increasing
and  again  dividing.  Another  mode  is  that  of  gemmation,
the  individual,  on  reaching  the  maximum  dimensions,  put-
ting forth  a  little  bud  into  which  the  matter  henceforth
assimilated  seems  to  go,  until  it  reaches  a  size  approaching
that  of  the  parent,  when  it  separates  and  becomes  a  new  in-
dependent individual.  The  third  mode  is  much  more  re-
markable. The  entire  individual,  after  it  has  reached  com-
plete maturity,  suddenly  resolves  itself  into  a  great  number
of  minute  germs,  each  of  which  becomes  a  new  individual,
increases  in  size,  and  again  breaks  up  as  before.  The  first
two  of  these  processes  remind  us  strongly  of  the  modes  of
propagation  of  many  well-defined  animal  organisms,  as,  for
example,  of  Yorticella,  Hydra,  etc.

The  "actual  existence  of  moners  was  first  made  known  by
Professor  Ernst  Ilaeckel,*  to  whose  researches  the  world  is
indebted  for  the  greater  part  of  its  information  respecting
these  wonderful  objects.  It  was  in  1864  that  he  discovered
in  the  Mediterranean  his  famous  Protogenes  primordialis,
since  which  time  some  fifteen  more  have  been  identified  and
described.  For  thorough  descriptions  of  most  of  these  the
reader  is  referred  to  his  "  Monographic  der  Moneren,"  pub-
lished in  1868,  and  the  supplement  thereto,  published  in
ISTT.f  Other  naturalists,  particularly  Cienkowski,  have  also
made  these  forms  a  special  study,  and  added  largely  to  our
knowledge  of  their  nature.

*  For  evidence  that  Lamarck  had  seen  and  described  actual  moners,  see  the
"Philosophic  Zoologique,"  vol.  i,  pp.  208,  281.

f  In  his  "  Protistenreich,"  kindly  sent  me  by  Professor  Haeckel  since  the
above  was  written,  this  whole  field  is  greatly  enlarged  and  made  to  embrace  the
Bacteria^  Vibrioncs,  etc.

324  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

These  forms,  as  already  stated,  differ  as  they  may  in  other
characteristics,  are  simple,  homogeneous,  chemical  substances,
and  consist  of  pure,  undifferentiated  protoplasm,  whose  prop-
erties alone  they  manifest.  These  properties  are  essentially
those  of  life,  and  the  further  we  explore  the  secrets  of  that
wonderful  phenomenon,  the  more  probable  does  it  become
that  all  the  higher  forms  of  vital  activity  exhibited  by  the
most  highly  organized  animals  are  nothing  more  than  special
manifestations  of  these  same  properties  residing  in  this  same
substance,  variously  enlarged  in  area  of  influence  and  in-
tensified in  degree  of  power  by  the  complicated  mechanism
of  organization.  In  reaching  the  substance  protoplasm,  we
have  not  only  reached  the  fact  of  life  itself,  but  in  its  prop-
erties we  behold  all  there  is  essential  to  life.  The  rest  is
but  the  mechanical  husbanding  of  the  essential  principle,  and
its  general  application  to  high  and  complicated  machinery.
The  mone  is  Hero's  engine,  the  vertebrate  is  the  modern
locomotive;  the  power  that  propels  is  the  same  in  both.
The  observed  advance  is  not  in  the  force  but  in  the
organization.

From  this  point,  therefore,  the  progress  of  life  is  that  of
the  morphological  organization  of  matter.  "We  have  reached
the  end  of  the  process  of  chemical  organization.  The  high-
est of  all  chemical  substances  is  protoplasm.  Its  chief  prop-
erty is  life.  Its  chemical  unit  or  molecular  aggregate  is  a
compound  of  protein  or  albuminoid  molecules,  and  possesses
a  complexity  and  variability  which  place  it  wholly  beyond
the  power  of  our  imperfect  chemistry  to  formulate  it.  But,
although  this  purely  chemical  and  molecular  re-compound-
ing of  matter  is  thus  able  to  evolve  life,  it  can  only  of  itself
evolve  the  most  rudimentary  form  of  life.  To  carry  this
wonderful  property  up  into  more  exalted  forms  requires  still
further  combinations  of  material  elements,  still  higher  de-
grees of  aggregation.

In  Nature's  processes,,  as  in  those  of  man,  there  are  limits

MORPHOLOGIOAL  ORGANIZATION.  325

to  the  application  of  means.  The  molecular  aggregate  or
molecule,  as  defined  above,  seems  to  have  reached,  in  the
composition  of  protoplasm,  the  limit  of  its  possible  applica-
tion in  the  further  aggregation  of  matter.  The  great  size,
complexity,  and  instability  of  these  ultimate  chemical  units
render  them  incapable  of  any  further  aggregation  of  the
same  kind.  To  secure  the  further  organization  of  matter
other  means  must  be  employed,  a  new  process  must  be  intro-
duced. Had  no  such  new  process  developed  itself  among
the  infinite  number  of  trials  which,  under  the  law  of  evolu-
tion. Nature  still  continued  to  make,  the  formation  of  the
chemical  substance,  protoplasm,  would  have  marked  the
highest  form  of  material  progress  on  the  globe.  But  amid
thousands  of  failures  one  process  proved  a  success.  This
process  consisted  in  the  development  of  morphological
units.

This  development  began  by  the  differentiation  of  the
plasson  bodies.  An  individualized  moner  may  be  regarded
as  some  advance  upon  the  undifferentiated  mass  of  sarcode
which  constitutes  Protohathyhiics.  The  first  step  may
therefore  be  said  to  be  the  individualization  of  protoplasmic
masses.  This  is  a  mechanical  process,  and,  though  itself  not
organization,  is  a  preparation  for  organization.  The  first  true
differentiation  consists  in  the  formation  of  a  central  portion
of  different  constitution  from  the  outer  portion  of  the  spher-
ical plasson  body.  Such  a  differentiation  actually  takes  place,
and  has  been  repeatedly  observed  in  the  embryological  study
of  the  lower  animals.  Of  its  occurrence  in  nature  among
the  true  moners,  we  know  as  little  as  we  know  of  the  original
creation  of  these  forms,  but  of  the  existence  of  forms  thus
differentiated  there  are  abundant  examples.  Of  these  the
amceboB  are  the  most  familiar,  but  there  are  many  more.
This  differentiated  central  portion  may  be  supposed  to  vary
in  its  degree  of  difference  from  the  surrounding  protoplasm
in  all  possible  shades,  and  thus  there  may  exist  a  complete
series  of  gradations  from  the  wholly  undifferentiated  proto-

326  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

plasmic  spherule,  or  cytod^  to  the  form  having  a  well-defined
central  nucleus  and  surrounding  protoplasm.

This  latter  structure,  in  the  now  accepted  terminology  of
histology,  is  called  a  ceU.  The  cell,  therefore,  is  the  primary
morphological  unit,  or  unit  of  organization,  and  the  basis  of
all  higher  organic  development.

In  biological  language,  the  cell  is  the  individual  of  the
first  order,  and  all  individuals  whose  structure  consists  of  a
simple  multiplication  of  ceUs  or  cohesion  in  any  form  of
more  than  one  cell,  also  belong  to  the  first  order.  Individ-
uals of  the  second  order  are  compounded  of  two  or  more  of
the  first  which  enter  into  them  as  units,  and  so  of  higher
orders.  In  this  the  process  of  physiological  aggregation  is
identical  with  that  of  chemical  or  molecular  aggregation.
The  fundamental  distinction  consists  in  this:  that  a  mole-
cule, or  chemical  unit,  is  a  compound  of  heterogeneous  mole-
cules, or  molecules  of  different  species,  as  carbon,  oxygen,
hydrogen,  nitrogen,  etc. ;  while  a  cell,  or  morphological  unit,
is  a  true  molar  aggregate  consisting  of  a  mass  of  homogeneous
molecules  of  protoplasm.  Herein  consists  the  essential  dis-
tinction between  chemical  or  molecular  and  morphological  or
mechanical  organization,  between  the  organization  of  matter
itself  and  the  organization  of  the  forms  of  matter,  the  former
of  which  is  the  cause  and  the  latter  the  product  of  the  vital
properties  of  matter  or  life  in  the  abstract.

The  cell  is  the  lowest  form  that  can  properly  be  termed
an  organism.  A  moner  is  only  a  plasson  body,  a  spherule  or
minute  lump  of  protoplasm.  Bathybius  and  Protobathybius
are  but  masses  of  this  chemical  substance.  But  the  cell  has
a  trace  of  true  organization.  The  protoplasm  of  its  exterior,
though  identical  in  chemical  composition,  is  different  in  me-
chanical constitution  from  that  of  its  interior.  This  is  a  step
in  the  direction  of  physiological  organization.  Ilaeckel  styles
this  differentiated  nucleus  of  the  cell  a  germ,  and  believes
it  to  constitute  simply  an  organ  of  propagation.  This  con-
ception he  bases  upon  the  fact  that,  in  the  reproduction  of

I

I

THE  CELL.  327

cells,  it  is  the  germ  whicli  first  divides,  and  the  surrounding
protoplasm  then  arranges  itself  about  each  division.

The  fundamental  distinction  between  living  and  non-liv-
ing bodies  consists  in  the  fact  that  in  the  former  the  exist-
ence of  each  individual  aggregate,  of  whatever  order,  de-
pends upon  the  perpetual  renewal  of  its  substance,  which  is
subject  to  perpetual  waste,  while  in  the  latter  the  same
molecules  persist ;  or,  if  we  admit,  as  we  undoubtedly  must,
that  all  forms  of  matter  are  subject  to  ceaseless  change,
whereby  every  aggregate  must  in  its  own  good  time  be
transformed  and  redistributed,  then  the  distinction  may  be
reduced  to  this :  that  in  non-living  aggregates,  as  a  rule,  this
change  is  secular,  and  the  same  form  is  not  generally  renewed,
while  in  living  aggregates  the  change  goes  on  rapidly,  and
pari  passu  with  it  the  process  of  renewal  takes  place,  thus
maintaining,  during  the  period  which  is  to  constitute  the  life
of  an  individual,  an  identity  of  form  without  identity  of
matter.  The  petrifaction  of  wood  might  be  instanced
as  an  analogous  process  in  non-living  matter,  but,  besides
being  much  less  rapid,  it  exhibits  this  fundamental  differ-
ence: that  the  new  form,  though  identical  in  shape,  is
composed  of  wholly  different  elements ;  it  is  a  different
substance.

In  the  living  aggregate,  composed  as  it  is  of  protoplasm
alone,  or  of  this  combined  with  such  other  matters  as  proto-
plasm is  capable  of  appropriating  and  weaving  into  tissues,
so  large,  complex,  and  unstable  are  the  chemical  units  that
they  are  perpetually  falling  back  into  simpler  and  more
stable  states.  It  seems  that,  in  the  very  process  of  assimila-
tion by  which  aggregates  of  lower  orders  are  re-compounded
into  protoplasm  aggregates,  portions  of  the  substance  em-
ployed in  performing  this  function  "  lose  their  balance,"  as
it  were,  and  relapse  into  the  lower  state.  The  same  occurs
with  every  movement  of  the  protoplasmic  mass,  whether
made  for  the  purpose  of  assimilation  or  for  any  other,  and
thus  the   chemical  units  of  the  aggregate  are  continually

328  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENT.

breaking  np  into  the  lower  organic  compounds  and  being
rejected  as  waste  material.  The  individual,  therefore,  can
only  exist  so  long  as  it  is  able  to  appropriate  new  material
from  the  surrounding  medium.  This  process  of  appropria-
tion is  denominated  nutrition.  Where  nutrition  is  in  excess
of  waste,  as  is  normally  always  the  case,  growth,  or  increase
of  bulk,  takes  place.  But  to  this  also  there  must  be  a  limit.
This  limit  varies  with  the  species,  but  probably  depends
chiefly  on  the  important  principle,  insisted  on  by  Herbert
Spencer,  that  while  masses  vary  as  the  cubes  of  their  dimen-
sions, the  power  to  resist  disintegrating  influences  varies  as
their  squares.  Many  organisms  seem  to  remain  stationary
at  a  certain  maximum  size,  but  this  is  only  apparent.  Dur-
ing all  this  period,  whether  long  or  short,  there  is  a  constant
struggle  between  the  forces  of  nutrition  and  dissolution,
which  is  usually  rhythmical,  but  always  terminates  eventu-
ally in  the  triumph  of  the  latter.  In  this  respect  living  ag-
gregates difier  from  non-living  ones  only  in  degree,  but  the
degree  is  in  most  instances  immense,  yet  perhaps  not  far  out
of  proportion  to  the  contrast  between  the  mass  of  their  re-
spective molecular  units.

There  are,  however,  many  ways  in  which  the  speedy  ter-
mination of  the  existence  of  living  aggregates  is  arrested,  and
their  existence  in  a  modified  form  is  continued  during  rela-
tively immense  periods.

In  certain  of  the  moners,  as  we  have  already  seen,  when
the  maximum  bulk  is  attained,  instead  of  dissolution  ensu-
ing, fission  takes  place,  the  spherical  individual  resolving  it-
self into  two  similar  spherical  individuals  of  only  half  the
size.  These  new  individuals  then  continue  the  process  of
assimilation  exactly  as  was  done  by  the  parent  whole,  until,
arriving  in  turn  at  the  limit  of  growth,  division  again  takes
place,  and  so  on  indefinitely.  This  same  process,  as  was
pointed  out  above,  has  been  observed  in  a  large  number  of
true  organisms  of  higher  orders.  It  is  called  reproduction,
but  is  in  reality  only  a  new  form  of  nutrition,  or  rather  a

NUTEITION  AND  EEPRODUCTIOK  329

process  preparatory  to  continuing  that  of  nutrition,  which  was
the  direct  cause  of  its  occurrence.  And,  rightly  viewed,  all
reproduction  admits  of  this  explanation.  In  the  case  of  bud-
ding, which  is  so  common  also  among  more  highly  organized
forms,  this  principle  is  only  less  obvious  than  in  that  of  di-
vision. The  nutritive  matter  which  continues  to  be  absorbed
after  the  limit  of  growth  is  reached,  no  longer  able  to  dis-
tribute itself  through  the  organism  as  before,  now  finds  a
new  channel  at  some  point  at  its  periphery,  and  begins  to  de-
posit itself  there  in  the  form  of  a  bud  which  is  in  the  nature
of  a  new  individual,  and  eventually  becomes  one  by  com-
plete separation  from  the  parent.  The  third  mode  of  propa-
gation described  by  Ilaeckel  as  taking  place  in  certain  moners,
as  in  Protomyxa  aurantiaca  and  others,  in  which  the  entire
individual  suddenly  resolves  itself  into  a  great  number  of
minute  individuals,  is  partially  paralleled  by  certain  higher
organisms  in  which  the  parent  ultimately  assumes  the  form
of  a  sac  filled  with  the  new  germs,  which,  after  absorbing  all
the  nutritious  matters  the  sac  contains,  finally  burst  its  mem-
branous walls  and  come  forth  as  young  individuals.  Here
the  parent,  or,  as  it  is  called,  "  nurse,"  is  completely  sacrificed
to  the  offspring.  Judging  from  the  plates  of  Professor
Haeckel  representing  the  reproductive  process  of  Protomyxa,
it  would  appear  that  in  this  case  also  a  thin  film  or  mem-
brane remains  after  the  change  occurs,  which  is  clearly  the
homologue  of  the  "  nurse's  "  sac.

This  process  may,  perhaps,  be  regarded  as  the  rudiment-
ary form,  from  which  has  been  gradually  developed  the  or-
dinary process  of  reproduction  observed  in  higher  organisms.
A  gradual  reduction  takes  place  in  the  completeness  with
which  the  parent  organism  is  sacrificed  to  the  offspring,  ac-
companied by  a  corresponding  reduction  in  the  number  of
the  latter,  until  at  length  the  condition  is  reached  in  which
a  few  germs  are  differentiated  from  a  certain  special-
ized part  of  the  body  of  the  parent  and  expelled  there-
from without  injury  to  the  parent,  which  process  may  be

330  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

repeated  many  times  during  its  life.  Many  animals  and
plants*  are  known  to  reproduce  in  this  manner,  at  least
during  many  generations.  The  process  is  known  as  parthe-
nogenesis.

Sexual  differentiation,  which  has  taken  place  in  most  ad-
vanced forms,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  is  quite  inde-
pendent of  the  primary  principle  of  reproduction.  It  is
not,  however,  incapable  of  rational  explanation.

The  power  of  plasson  bodies  to  absorb  and  assimilate
protein  substances  would  seem  to  carry  with  it  the  power  to
absorb  other  plasson  bodies  also,  provided  in  both  cases  the
bodies  to  be  absorbed  be  of  proper  size  and  character.  In
fact,  in  the  appropriation  of  organisms  of  far  higher  struct-
ure by  such  bodies,  we  must  suppose  that  the  protoplasm
found  in  the  tissues  of  the  former  is  not  first  degraded  to  the
nature  of  protein  bodies  and  then  re-manufactured  into  pro-
toplasm, but  that  it  is  directly  incorporated  as  protoplasm
into  the  plasson  body  to  be  nourished.  It  is  therefore  natu-
ral to  suppose  that,  where  such  bodies  exist  together,  occa-
sionally coming  in  contact,  the  tendency  of  each  to  nourish
itself  by  appropriating  the  other  will  manifest  itself,  and
there  will  be  occasional  absorption  of  smaller  by  larger  in-
dividuals. This  is  a  perfectly  normal  form  of  nutrition.
Where  the  two  individuals  coming  in  contact  are  very  simi-
lar and  of  €qual  size,  the  tendency  of  each  to  appropriate  the
other  may  most  frequently  prevent  any  result,  the  morsel  in
each  case  proving  too  large.  But  it  may  also  frequently
cause  a  complete  coalescence  of  the  two  individuals.  The
resultant  individual  would  then  contain  twice  as  much  mat-
ter as  either  of  the  component  individuals,  and  yet  it  would
continue  to  exist  as  a  plasson  body.  But  it  must  now  be
regarded  as  another  species.  Although  this  phenomenon
has  not  as  yet  been  observed  to  occur  among  recognized

*  Sachs,  "  Lehrbuch  der  Botanik,"  S.  278,  876 ;  Adrien  de  Jussicu,  "  Cours
^lementairc  de  Botaniquc,"  1840,  p.  463,

SEXUAL  DIFFERENTIATION.  331

moners,*  there  are  certain  unicellular  organisms  in  which  it
is  known  to  take  place.  This  occurs  with  the  lowest  zygo-
spores, as  with  the  VolvocinecB,  Desmidem^  and  Mesocarpem.
Although  clearly  a  mode  of  nutrition,  it  is  here  denominated
reproduction  or  propagation.  It  is  in  fact  both,  and  the  two
are  one.

Now,  without  delaying  to  trace  out  the  progress  of  devel-
opment of  this  principle,  we  may  consider  those  animals  very
much  higher  in  the  scale  in  which  two  germ-cells,  indistin-
guishable in  form  and  size,  are  secreted  from  a  special  part
of  the  interior  of  the  body,  either  of  the  same  or  of  different
individuals,  by  means  of  whose  union  and  complete  coales-
cence the  germ  of  a  new  individual  is  generated.  This  germ
so  produced  grows  in  the  normal  mechanical  way  into  an
animal  resembling  the  parent,  but  this  depends  upon  another
law.  The  germ-cells  must  be  regarded  as  obeying  the  same
laws  as  other  cells,  and  the  process  is  here,  so  far  as  these  are
concerned,  identical  with  that  which  a  couple  of  desmids
present.  And  just  as  in  the  zygospores  the  mode  of  conju-
gation is  gradually  differentiated,  until  in  the  MyxomycetcB
the  coalescing  cells  are  more  or  less  active  and  dissimilar,
and  until  in  higher  thallophytes,  as  in  ColeochoBte,  etc.,  the
comparatively  large  and  passive  oogonium  is  truly  impreg-
nated by  the  comparatively  minute  and  active  spermatozoid,
BO  in  the  higher  organisms  there  occurs  a  parallel  differentia-
tion of  the  cells  specially  secreted  for  purposes  of  reproduc-
tion, until  we  have  the  strongly  contrasted  germ-cell  and
sperm-cell,  the  ovum  and  the  spermatozoon.

In  the  case  of  higher  organisms,  in  which  the  cells  per-
forming the  reproductive  function  are  simply  recommence-
ments of  a  new  life  for  the  organism,  which,  by  the  laws  of
growth,  they  eventually  produce,  we  must  suppose  that  it  is

*  It  seems  that  a  true  conjugation  takes  place  in  certain  monads,  or  Hetero-
mitce,  some  of  which  possess  a  nucleus  and  contractile  vacuole  and  others  do
not.  These  creatures,  therefore,  probably  belong  to  Professor  Haeckel's  "  Pro-
tistenreich."

832  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.-BIOGENY.

some  advantage  in  the  accomplishment  of  this  latter  object
that  the  coalescing  cells  be  dissimilar.  The  existence  of  a
simple  cell  separate  from  any  tissues  must  at  best  be  very
precarious.  Consisting  as  it  does  of  the  complex  and  totter-
ing protoplasm,  it  requires  all  the  aid  attainable  to  prevent
it  from  succumbing  to  the  adverse  influences  surrounding
it,  and  anything  that  can  afford  this  aid  must  be  a  great
advantage  to  its  life  and  to  the  future  of  the  species.  But
no  two  cells  are  ever  precisely  alike,  and  the  result  of  the
coalescence  of  two  cells,  however  nearly  they  may  resemble
each  other,  is  certain  to  add  something  to  the  resultant  cell
or  body  which  neither  of  the  components  possessed.  This
addition  may  perhaps  be  as  likely  to  be  injurious  to  its  exist-
ence as  beneficial,  but,  if  so,  the  resultant  products  thus  dete-
riorated would  disappear  under  the  law  of  survival  of  the
fittest,  and  only  those  in  which  it  was  not  disadvantageous  to
have  thus  combined  would  survive.  Between  those  in  which
the  blending,  though  not  a  positive  disadvantage,  was  no
positive  advantage,  and  those  in  which  it  was  such  an  advan-
tage, the  race  would,  in  the  long  run,  be  in  favor  of  the  lat-
ter, and  the  former  would  gradually  disappear  from  the  con-
test. The  same  process  would  continue  among  those  pos-
sessing different  degrees  of  this  advantageous  property,  until
by  the  simple  law  of  natural  selection  such  a  degree  of  differ-
entiation would  be  eventually  reached  as  would  be  most
advantageous  to  the  well-being  of  the  species.  In  this  way
all  the  phenomena  of  sexual  polarity,  as  well  physiological
as  morphological,  have  in  all  probability  been  brought  about.
"Not  only  has  one  germ-cell  in  nearly  all  cases  been  made  to
differ  from  the  other  in  size  and  form,  but  they  have  been
endowed  with  very  different  activities  and  properties.  In
the  vast  majority  of  cases  the  distinctive  male  and  female
characters  have  been  made  to  appear.

The  female  cell  is  usually  very  much  larger,  and  spheri-
cal in  form,  and  is  surrounded  by  a  membrane  or  coat  (the
chorion).     It  exhibits  no  movements  of  its  own,  and  remains

SEXUAL  DIFFERENTIATION.  333

Btationary,  performing  a  perfectly  passive  role.  Tlie  male
cell  is  comparatively  minute,  often  not  a  thousandth  part
the  size  of  the  female  cell.  It  is  usually  spindle-shaped,  and
possesses  distinct  fore-and-aft  portions.  The  head  is  much
larger,  the  body  part  tapers  gradually  backward,  and  is  con-
tinued into  a  more  or  less  attenuated  caudal  extremity.  In
the  proportions  of  these  parts,  as  in  many  other  respects,  it
varies  greatly  with  different  species,  but  these  are  its  general
characters.  It  possesses  no  membranous  coat,  and  is  endowed
with  very  active  powers  of  automatic  movement.  The  coa-
lescence takes  place  by  the  male  or  sperm-cell  penetrating
through  pores  in  the  membrane  of  the  female  or  germ-cell
and  becoming  absorbed  by  the  latter.  Those  who  have  most
attentively  watched  the  entire  process  now  positively  assert
that  immediately  after  the  coalescence  the  contents  of  the
new  cell  become  entirely  homogeneous  by  the  total  disap-
pearance of  both  the  sperm-cell  and  the  nucleus  of  the  germ-
cell,  and  are  reduced  for  a  brief  period  to  the  condition  of  a
cytod,  like  Protamozba.  A  new  nucleus  is,  however,  soon
formed  out  of  the  contained  protoplasm,  and  the  germ  again
becomes  a  cell.  This  new  cell,  endowed  with  the  properties
of  the  two  widely  dissimilar  cells,  is  now  capable  of  develop-
ing into  an  organism  like  the  parent.

The  important  lesson  which  these  facts  teach  will  be
considered  later.  "VYe  may  now  recur  to  the  processes  of
sexual  differentiation  and  the  different  modes  of  propagation,
and  note  the  truth,  which  comes  clearly  out  of  these  details,
that  sexual  propagation  is  the  result  of  successive  modifica-
tions of  the  third  mode  observed  in  moners,  in  which  the
protoplasm,  as  soon  as  its  limit  in  size  has  been  reached,
breaks  up  into  many  small  but  otherwise  similar  bodies,
which  each  repeat  the  same  process.  It  also  clearly  exem-
plifies the  truth  that  reproduction  is  nothing  more,  even  in
its  most  extreme  phases,  than  a  modified  form  of  nutrition.

Of  the  two  asexual  forms  of  reproduction,  viz.,  division
and  budding,  the  former  obtains  only  in  a  few  of  the  lowest

334  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

organisms,  proving  its  unfitness  for  higher  stages  of  organ-
ization, while  the  latter  is  not  found  in  higher  animals,  but
goes  hand  in  hand  with  sexual  propagation  throughout  the
entire  vegetal  series.  It  may  in  fact  be  here  regarded  as  the
common  and  normal  form,  and  is  only  supplemented  by  the
sexual  form  as  a  sort  of  safeguard  against  adverse  circum-
stances. In  climates  where  cold  and  warm  seasons  alternate,
many  plants  revert  to  complete  renewal  from  the  seed  each
year,  and  but  for  sexual  propagation  would  speedily  perish
(annuals).  Others  would  survive  but  a  few  years  from  bud-
ding alone  (perennial  herbs).  But  in  warm  climates  there  are
many  plants  whose  roots  put  forth  new  buds  at  intervals,  and
which  thus  reproduce  their  kind  without  the  aid  of  sexual
propagation ;  so  that,  were  this  wanting  entirely,  the  vegeta-
tion might  continue  for  an  immense  period.  It  appears,
however,  that  there  is  no  plant  above  the  thallophytes
in  which  the  organs  of  sexual  reproduction  are  entirely
wanting,  or  in  which  they  are  not  at  times  observed  to
perform  their  functions  and  renew  the  species.*  The  ex-
clusive resort  to  sexual  propagation  by  all  higher  animals  is
one  of  the  fundamental  facts  that  distinguish  the  two  great
biological  series.

The  particular  manner  in  which  the  higher  living  organ-
isms have  been  developed  from  the  plasson  bodies  or  undif-
ferentiated protoplasm  has  not  been  observed,  and  can  not
be  empirically  known.  Processes  of  this  kind  are  secular,
and  do  not  occur  in  such  a  way  that  their  dynamic  stages  can
be  observed.  From  this  circumstance  some  have  found  rea-
son to  charge  those  biologists  with  theorizing  who  assert  that
development  must  have  taken  place.  But  the  biologist  no
more  theorizes  in  maintaining  development  in  his  department

*  The  seedless  plantain,  banana,  bamboo,  etc.,  which  have  been  introduced
into  the  warmer  parts  of  America  from  those  of  Asia  and  Africa,  and  which
propagate  solely  by  buds,  can  scarcely  be  called  exceptions,  since  by  long  culti-
vation  in  their  original  home  their  habits  had  probably  been  fixed  before  they
reached  American  soil.

SEXUAL  DIFFERENTIATION.  335

than  does  the  geologist  in  maintaining  it  in  his.  Neither  can
observe  the  process  of  change,  except  under  very  peculiar  and
limited  circumstances.  Both  must  judge  from  the  existence
of  transition  forms,  and  where  gaps  occur  both  must  fill  them
bj  rational  deduction  from  known  facts.  The  gaps  in  the
geological  record  are  known  to  every  body,  but  they  are  nev-
ertheless not  sufficient  to  prevent  cultivated  persons  of  all
classes  from  yielding  complete  acquiescence  to  the  leading
truths  of  geological  development.

The  biologist  has  the  following  facts  as  the  data  from  which
to  infer  the  development  of  living  organisms  from  inorganic
matter :  He  has,  first,  the  protein,  or  albuminoid  substances,
which  contain  all  the  elementary  matters  that  are  found  in  the
tissues  of  organized  beings.  He  has,  secondly,  large  amor-
phous masses  of  undifferentiated  protoplasm  existing  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea,  and  presenting  all  the  phenomena  of  life
without  organization.  This  substance  is  identical  with  the  mat-
ter found  in  nerve-cells,  blood-cells,  and  muscle-cells,  as  also  in
the  cells  of  plants,  and  which,  wherever  identified,  possesses
this  same  property  of  spontaneous  activity.  He  has,  thirdly,
individual  plasson  bodies  composed  of  this  same  substance  and
endowed  with  the  same  activities,  but  possessing  specific  di-
mensions, so  as  to  constitute  them  distinct  individuals.  These
vary  in  some  respects  sufficiently  to  be  classified  into  genera,
and  even  families,  and  possess  the  powers  of  locomotion,  nu-
trition, and  reproduction ;  they  are  living  things,  though  as
yet  wholly  unorganized.  He  has,  fourthly,  simple  living
cells,  differing  from  these  plasson  bodies  in  nothing  but  the
possession  of  a  nucleus  at  the  center  of  the  mass  of  proto-
plasm of  which  they  are  composed.  This  nucleus  consists
itself  of  protoplasm,  and  differs  only  in  its  consistency,  color,
etc, .  AmcebcB  and  other  unicellular  creatures  of  this  class
swarm  in  all  waters,  both  salt  and  fresh,  and  have  long  been
known,  named,  and  classified  by  systematists.  Finally,  the
biologist  has  the  further  fact  that  all  organized  beings  what-
ever, whether  animal  or  vegetable,  are  made  up  of  combina-

336  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

tions  of  these  cells,  which  constitute  the  morphological  units
of  biology.

With  this  series  of  connected  facts  leading  from  tlie  in-
organic to  the  organic  world,  the  biologist  may  well  inquire
what  he  is  expected  to  prove,  if  these  are  not  siiflficient.  And
he  justly  maintains  that  the  positive  demonstration  of  the
truth  of  development  follows  from  the  establishment  of  these
facts.  If  it  be  denied  that  these  facts  are  estabhshed,  he  may
admit  that  further  evidence  on  many  points  is  desirable,  but
it  must  come  from  chemists  and  histologists,  who  are  earnestly
invited  to  review  all  the  knowledge  thus  far  gained,  and,  if
defective,  to  correct  and  amplify  it.  Attempts  to  overthrow
the  doctrine  of  development  from  other  points  of  view  than
those  of  actual  observation  and  experiment,  which  can  be
repeated  and  verified  at  any  time,  must  prove  futile,  as  they
can  not  be  entertained  by  science.

The  cell,  or  morphological  unit,  once  reached,  the  course
of  evolution  is  continued  by  substantially  the  same  general
law  as  that  which  we  have  observed  to  govern  it  during  its
antecedent  stages.  This  law  requires  the  aggregates  of  a
higher  order  to  be  compounded  with  those  of  a  lower,  while
at  the  same  time  masses  are  formed  by  the  cohesion  of  many
homogeneous  units.  The  cell,  though  it  must  be  regarded
as  a  molar  aggregate,  since  it  is  composed  of  homogeneous
molecules  of  protoplasm,  is  nevertheless  the  unit  of  organi-
zation and  of  biology.  This,  as  before  remarked,  is  the  only
departure  from  the  universal  law  of  aggregation  in  the  world
below  it.  But,  waiving  this  anomaly,  the  process  of  evolution
is  again  resumed,  with  this  anomalous  aggregate  as  its  unit,
and  continued  in  harmony  with  the  general  law.  While  a
developed  organism,  composed  as  it  is  of  cells  as  units,  bears
something  the  relation  to  its  units  that  a  chemical  substance
or  molar  aggregate  of  any  kind  bears  to  its  molecular  units
or  molecules,  it  must  be  further  observed  that  such  developed
organism,  besides  being  composed  of  cells  as  its  ultimate

ORGANIC  AGGREGATION.  337

units,  is  also  composed  of  numerous  proximate  units,  which,
now  greatly  modified,  once  represented  organisms  of  lower
orders,  and  are  now  united  by  the  law  of  integration  in  an
organism  of  a  higher  order.

If  we  take  a  plant — a  tree,  for  example — every  leaf  (giv-
ing to  that  term  its  widest  theoretical  application)  and  every
bud  represents  an  individual  of  the  second  order,  itself  com-
posed of  cells,  or  individuals  of  the  first  order.  The  whole
tree,  therefore,  represents  an  individual  of  the  thousandth  or
ten-thousandth  order,  according  to  its  degree  of  ramifica-
tion, and  each  branch  exhibits  the  same  fact  on  a  reduced
scale.  The  tree  is,  therefore,  a  compound  organism,  into
whose  ensemble  there  enter  a  vast  number  of  individuals
of  different  orders  in  a  regular  ascending  hierarchy.  This
may,  perhaps,  be  best  illustrated  by  the  inflorescence  of
plants.  If  the  solitary  and  terminal  flower  be  taken  as  the
individual  of  the  first  (or  any  given)  order,  the  raceme,
spike,  simple  umbel,  simple  corymb,  etc.,  would  represent
individuals  of  the  second  (or  next  higher)  order,  while
the  panicle,  thyrse,  compound  umbel,  etc.,  would  repre-
sent individuals  of  the  third,  fourth,  and  higher  orders,
according  to  the  degree  to  which  the  inflorescence  was  com-
pounded.

In  the  animal  series  the  Annulosa  furnish  good  exam-
ples of  the  law  of  biological  aggregation.  Each  ring  of  the
body  represents  a  distinct  individual  of  the  second  order,  and
possesses  in  some  species,  as  in  Tcenia,  all  the  organs  of  a
complete  organism  (vol.  i,  p.  182).  Every  worm  (except
some  of  the  lowest,  which  are  simple),  every  crustacean,  every
insect,  therefore,  is  an  organism  of  the  third  order,  and  con-
tains as  integral  parts  of  its  body,  in  more  or  less  perfect
condition,  individuals  of  the  second  order.  In  most  of  these
cases  there  are  several  of  these  secondary  organisms  united
into  the  ternary  individual,  in  which  respect  animals  gener-
ally differ  from  plants.  Even  in  the  vertebrate  type  of  ani-
mals this  system  of  compounding  is  observable,  although  less

338  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

distinctly  so,  each  vertebra  being  regarded  as  a  distinct  in-
dividual of  a  lower  order.*

With  these  general  remarks  we  are  now  prepared  to  con-
sider the  mode  of  development  of  organized  beings  from  the
simple  morphological  or  biological  unit,  the  cell.  True  to
the  general  law  of  aggregation,  the  first  tendency  of  these
morphological  units  is  to  cohere  into  masses  or  societies,  and
form  collective  individuals  which  are  only  slightly  inte-
grated, and  whose  units  are  still  to  a  great  extent  independent.'
We  find  the  Rhizopods  living  in  colonies,  of  which  one  genus
{Cystophrys)  forms  compound  spherical  masses,  closely  ag-
gregated, yet  BO  far  independent  as  to  be  capable  of  changing
their  positions  in  the  collective  mass.  The  LdbyrinthulecB
furnish  another  example  of  this  kind  in  which  the  masses
of  simple  cells  are,  as  it  were,  woven  loosely  together  by  a
maze  of  thread-like  filaments.

In  the  next  higher  class  of  organisms  the  cells  are  firmly
coherent  into  a  thin  membrane,  only  one  cell  in  thickness,
and  this  is  rolled  up  into  a  perfect,  hollow  sphere.  The  cav-
ity of  the  interior  is  filled  with  fluids,  perhaps  containing
free  protoplasm,  while  nutrient  matters  are  absorbed  by  all
the  cells  forming  the  external  coat.  These  so-called  Blasto-
sjoheres  occur  with  great  frequency  as  a  larval  stage  of  higher
creatures,  but  have  their  representatives  among  permanent
forms,  as  in  the  VolvocinecB  and  Flagellata.  Volvox  globator
is  itself  an  example.  This  cellular  coating,  which  forms  the
exterior  of  these  hollow  spherules,  may  perhaps  be  regarded
as  the  lowest  form  of  proper  tissue.

All  tissue  is  composed  of  cells  which  form  layers  and
serve  as  membranes,  coatings,  etc.,  for  the  various  vessels  and
organs  of  the  higher  forms  of  life.

In  the  larval  stages  of  certain  animals,  as  the  Ascidians,

and  even  of  AnvpTiioxus^  there  occurs  a  form  which  differs

from  the  last  described  in  having  two  layers  of  cells  instead

of  a  single  layer,  and  also  in  the  possession  of  an  opening  at

*  Haeckel,  "  Anthropogenie,"  S.  678.

HISTOLOGICAL  DEVELOPMENT.  339

one  spot  on  the  surface  through  which  nutrient  matters  are
chiefly  conveyed  and  waste  materials  expelled.  The  interior
cavity  in  this  case  obviously  performs  the  functions  of  a
stomach,  and  we  here  see  the  first  appearance  of  an  organ  in
the  animal  kingdom.

Embryologists  have  long  and  faithfully  studied  the  devel-
opment of  the  organs  and  tissues  of  animals  from  the  earliest
embryonic  stages,  and  they  find  that,  in  the  progress  from  the
simple  cell  which  results  from  the  coalescence  of  the  two
sexually  differentiated  cells  of  the  male  and  female  parent,
there  is  in  all  cases,  first,  a  process  of  division  which  soon  re-
sults in  a  mass  of  homogeneous  cells ;  that,  next,  these  form
a  hollow  sphere  whose  wall  is  composed  of  a  single  layer  of
cells ;  and  that,  later,  this  single-celled  wall  is  converted  into
a  double-celled  wall.  From  this  point  the  formation  of  the
tissues,  especially  of  higher  animals,  becomes  complicated,
but  after  one  more  doubling  of  the  cells  forming  the  ger-
minative  layers  this  process  ceases,  and  all  the  tissues  of
even  the  most  highly  organized  animals  are  developed  out  of
these  four  primary  layers  of  cells.

The  stage  of  embryonic  development  in  which  the  cellu-
lar wall  consists  of  two  layers  of  cells  is  called  by  Haeckel  the
"  Gastrula  stage,"  and  all  animals  whose  structure  is  more
simple  than  this  are  by  him  classed  as  Protozoa^  the  appear-
ance of  the  double  layer  being  regarded  as  the  true  dividing
line  between  the  Protozoa  and  the  Metazoa  (or  all  animals
higher  than  the  Protozoa).  These  two  primary  layers  are
called  respectively  exoderm  and  entoderm.  Each  of  these
subsequently  doubles,  making  the  four  germinative  layers
that  constitute  all  the  tissues  of  higher  animals,  and  to  these
four  layers  there  have  been  applied  the  following  terms,
commencing  with  the  most  exterior  and  passing  through  to
the  most  interior :  1,  the  dermal  layer;  2,  the  muscular  layer ;
3,  the  vascular  layer ;  and,  4,  the  mucous  layer.

The  tissues  which  each  of  these  layers  ultimately  forms
are  rudely  foreshadowed  by  these  names,  but  the  task  of  fol-

340  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

lowing  them  out  in  tlie  higher  organisms,  though  a  very  deli-
cate one,  has  been  already  most  successfully  performed,  until
the  true  genetic  history  of  nearly  every  organ  of  the  body  is
now  quite  satisfactorily  understood.

The  most  remarkable  fact  which  this  class  of  studies  has
brought  to  light  is  that  the  embryological  progress  of  every
developing  germ  recapitulates,  in  the  brief  period  of  its
course,  the  progress  of  all  the  forms  below  it.  In  other
words,  there  is  a  period  in  the  life-history  of  every  higher
organism  in  which  the  embryo  bears  a  striking  resemblance
to  the  adult  forms  of  each  of  the  creatures  below  it  in  the
scale  of  biological  development.  The  obvious  deduction
has  been  drawn  and  is  insisted  upon,  that  those  lower  forms
which  the  embryos  of  these  higher  forms  so  closely  resemble
stand  in  the  line  of  the  genealogical  descent  of  the  latter,
and  the  corresponding  stages  represent  in  the  brief  embry-
onic history  of  the  creatures  the  permanent  stages  of  that
long  secular  progress  which  the  organic  world  has  been  mak-
ing in  past  ages.  This  truth  is  so  strongly  substantiated  by
all  the  known  facts  that  it  has  become  the  fundamental  law
of  biogeny  as  taught  by  the  advanced  school  of  biologists.

The  development  of  vegetal  forms,  though  more  simple,
is  analogous  to  that  of  animal  forms.  The  lowest  plants,  or
Protophytes,  are  strictly  unicellular  organisms,  and  therefore
always  of  the  first  order.  In  short,  they  are  living  vegetable
cells  which  never  attain  any  higher  development.  In  most
cases  they  have  proper  motions  of  their  own,  and  are  there-
fore not  to  be  distinguished  from  animals  of  the  same  stage
of  development,  except  by  certain  delicate  and  often  ques-
tionable chemical  tests.  The  presence  of  chlorophyl,  as  in
the  OscillatorioB,  Chroococci,  etc.,  is  distinctive  wherever  it
occurs,*  but  this  is  wanting  in  large  groups,  as  in  the  Schi-
zomycetcB  {Bacteria,  Vfjriones,  etc.)  and  in  the  yeast-fungus

*  The  existence  of  chlorophyl  in  some  unquestioned  animals,  as  in  hydra,
etc.,  is  now  believed  by  some  investigators  to  be  due  to  hypodermal  parasitic
plant-forms  visible  through  the  transparent  cells  of  the  epidermis.

ONTOGENY  AND  PHYLOGENY.-PLANTS.  341

{Torula  eerevism,  or  SoGcharomyces).  The  surrender  of  the
former  of  these  to  the  botanists,  after  a  long  struggle,  has
been  made  in  consequence  of  the  fact  that  they  have  been
proved  to  be  capable  of  appropriating  and  assimilating  purely
inorganic  matters.

We  next  find  among  plants  the  same  collective  or  associ-
ated structure  observed  in  the  lowest  compound  animals.  In
Pandorina  and  StejphanosphcBra  such  collective  masses  or
balls  are  formed  from  the  subsequent  cohesion  at  the  bottom
of  the  water  of  cells  which  were  at  first  free.  Later  we
have  the  blastosphere  type  represented  by  Volvox  glohator,
which  has  also  been  remanded  to  the  botanists,  although  a
very  active  creature.  From  this  stage  of  structure  an  almost
endless  variety  follows,  dependent,  as  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer
has  so  ably  demonstrated,  on  the  nature  of  their  surround-
ings and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  affected  by  incident
forces  (vol.  i,  p.  181).  But  the  modes  of  compounding  sim-
ple cells  are  far  more  varied  and  multiform  in  plants  than  in
animals.  In  fact,  no  vascular  tissue  appears  until  the  ferns
or  club-mosses  are  reached,  although  long  before  this  true
leaves  have  been  differentiated  from  the  primordial  thallom.
In  Caulerpa  denticulata,  in  addition  to  a  creeping  stem  and
fibrous  tufted  roots,  which  are  wholly  cellular,  there  are
formed  broad,  leaf -like  expansions,  also  purely  cellular ;  but
there  is  this  remarkable  peculiarity,  that  none  of  the  cellular
units  contain  any  nucleus,  but  all  remain  in  the  cytod  stage.
This  fact  shows  that  even  the  cell,  as  usually  defined,  is  not
necessarily  the  unit  of  organic  existence,  but  that  still  sim-
pler forms  of  protoplasm  may  develop  organisms  of  consid-
erable complexity  of  structure.

The  mycelium  of  the  fungi  consists  of  fine  threads  com-
posed of  cylindrical  cells  placed  end  to  end,  while  the  larger
fruiting  portion  of  these  plants  is  made  up  of  cells,  also
loosely  woven  together,  and  often  widely  separated  by  inter-
cellular cavities.     When  ripe,  certain  of  these  cells  are  set

apart  and  inclosed  in  appropriate  sacs  or  cavities  as  spores,
16

342  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

and  these  contain  the  germs  of  future  plants.  Although  no
true  sexual  organs  have  been  found  in  the  commoner  fungi,
many  botanists  believe  that  the  spores  are  the  product  of  a
sexual  process  that  takes  place  in  some  way  within  the  my-
celium. Throughout  the  thallophytes  this  simple  cellular
structure  prevails  in  all  the  organs  and  parts,  scarcely  ever
becoming  differentiated  into  anything  like  fibers  or  vessels.
-In  the  MuscineoB  such  a  differentiation  takes  place  sparingly.
We  here  find  the  exterior  layer  of  cells  much  more  compact,
and  sometimes  inteiTupted  by  pores  forming  a  rudimentary
epidermis.  Through  the  stems  and  often  through  the  cen-
ter of  the  leaves  there  runs  a  line  of  elongated  cells  forming
a  rudimentary  axis  or  fibro-vascular  bundle.  The  forma-
tion of  true  foliar  appendages  also  first  appears  here.  From
these  the  vascular  cryptogams  (ferns,  LycopodiacecB^  etc.)  are
distinguished  by  the  existence  of  distinct  fibro-vascular  bun-
dles, whose  function  is  to  lend  support  to  the  plant.  They
consist  of  bundles  of  fibers  which  are  formed  by  a  high  de-
gree of  differentiation  of  the  primitive  cells,  and  ^vllich  ex-
tend through  nearly  all  parts  of  the  fronds  of  these  plants,
and  are  very  numerous  within  the  stem.  The  fibro-vascular
bundles  are  to  plants  what  the  skeleton  is  to  an  animal,  and
by  their  aid  the  higher  plants  are  enabled  to  produce  a  great
variety  of  complicated  organs,  and  often  to  attain  a  large
size.

In  propagation  by  means  of  buds,  which  is  the  ordinary
mode  with  most  plants,  very  little  of  the  degree  of  organiza-
tion attained  is  lost;  only  the  buds  and  young  shoots  are
more  juicy,  have  looser  tissues,  and  less  distinct  axial  organs
and  vessels.  But  whenever  sexual  propagation  takes  place
there  is  a  complete  return  to  the  primordial  unit  of  vegeta-
tion, the  cell.  The  ultimate  product  of  sexual  differentiation
is  the  female  ovum,  or  germ-cell,  and  the  male  spermatozoid,
or  sperm-cell.  The  former  is  usually,  but  not  always,  pas-
sive and  devoid  of  spontaneous  movement.  The  latter  is
usually  very  active,  and  possesses  the  same  form  as  that

VEGETAL  DEVELOPMEJ^T.  343

found  in  tlie  spermatozoa  of  animals,  viz.,  that  of  the  "  lash-
cell."  In  many  cases  it  is  very  slender,  and  the  caudal  por-
tion is  much  attenuated.  It  never  has  a  membrane  inclosing
it,  and  consists  entirely  of  protoplasm  with  a  minute  nucleus
in  the  center  of  the  anterior  portion.  The  spermatozoid
penetrates  the  oogonium,  and  mingles  its  substance  with  that
of  the  female  germ-cell.  The  process  throughout  is  the
same  as  that  which  takes  place  in  animals.  In  the  highest
orders  of  plants  the  spermatozoid  becomes  inactive,  and  is
brought  by  other  agencies  into  contact  with  the  female  ova-
ries. The  pollen-grains  of  phenogamous  plants  are  carried
by  the  wind  or  by  insects  to  the  stigmas  of  the  female
flowers,  and  there  send  forth  a  long  tubular  cell  (the  pollen-
tube),  which  penetrates  to  the  ovules,  however  great  the  dis-
tance may  be,  and  fertilizes  them.  There  is,  however,  here
as  before,  a  blending  of  the  contents  of  the  two  cells,  and
a  subsequent  development  of  the  new  organism.  Could  a
thorough  study  of  the  embryology  of  plants  be  carried  on,
it  would  probably  confirm  in  the  vegetal  kingdom  the  law
above  enunciated,  so  well  established  in  the  animal  king-
dom, of  the  embryological  recapitulation  in  each  germ  of
the  course  of  development  which  the  parent  plant  has  passed
through  in  order  to  reach  its  present  stage  of  organization.
But  obstacles  thus  far  insurmountable  have  prevented  the
prosecution  of  this  study.

"We  have  seen  that  life  in  its  essence  results  from  the  or-
ganization of  matter — from  chemical  or  molecular  organiza-
tion. That  kind  of  organization  of  which  biologists  take  cog-
nizance is  due  to  the  mechanical  adaptations  which  are  effected
by  the  action  of  this  life-principle  or  vital  energy  upon  the
other  materials  with  which  it  comes  in  contact.  The  pure
life-substance,  protoplasm,  can  make  no  great  progress  in
organization  so  long  as  it  is  left  to  itself.  In  order  that  it
build,  it  must  possess  materials  suitable  for  the  purpose.
Protoplasm  is  far  too  unstable  and  changeable  in  its  consti-

344  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

tution  to  form  a  structure  of  any  strength  or  durability.
But  other  more  suitable  materials  are  always  at  hand  and  in
constant  contact  with  it,  and  these  it  has  the  power  to  utilize
as  building  material.  The  atmosphere  as  well  as  the  waters
is  filled  with  carbonic  acid,  and  protoplasm  possesses  the
power  under  certain  conditions  to  decompose  this  and  to  ap-
propriate its  carbon  as  the  chief  timber  for  the  frame-work
of  organic  tissues.  This  it  doubtless  does  at  an  expense  to
itself  whereby  a  portion  of  the  matter  of  protoplasm  allows
itself  to  be  seized  by  the  oxygen  of  the  carbonic  acid  for
which  its  affinity  is,  under  the  given  circumstances  at  least,
less  strong,  and  in  this  way  the  carbon  is  liberated.  It  has
also  the  power  to  appropriate  the  ammonia  from  the  air,  the
hydrogen  from  the  water,  and  even  various  salts  essential  to
organic  structure  from  their  respective  solutions.  ]N^ot  only
can  it  manufacture  other  organic  compounds,  but  it  can-
multiply  its  own  mass  by  its  immediate  reactions  upon  en-
vironing ingredients.

It  was  undoubtedly  in  the  sea,  that  great  receptacle  for
all  forms  of  matter,  that  the  first  beginnings  of  life  took
place.  In  the  sea  there  now  exist  millions  of  beings  of
lowly  organization  whose  bodies  consist  almost  exclusively
of  protoplasm,  either  in  its  undifferentiated  state,  or  but
slightly  modified  into  cells  and  simple  aggregates  of  cells.
And  l^ature,  like  the  inhabitants  of  a  new  country,  always
uses  for  building  purposes  the  class  of  materials  most  abun-
dant and  convenient  to  the  region  occupied.  So  we  find
that  the  chief  timbers  employed  in  the  construction  of  ma-
rine creatures  are  lime  and  silica,  which  are  extracted  from
the  circumambient  fluid.  Thus  the  minute  creatures  that
swarm  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  are  composed  almost  ex-
clusively of  a  sarcode  body  incased  in  calcareous  or  siliceous
shells,  while  the  coral  reefs  are  formed  by  the  deposits  of
carbonate  of  lime  from  the  bodies  of  gelatinous  polyps.  The
extensive  use  of  carbon  as  the  framing  timber  of  living  or-
ganisms was  not  adopted  until  land  forms,  or  at  least  par-

MODES  AND  MATERIALS  OF  ORGANIZATION.        345

tially  aerial  organisms,  began  to  appear.  The  largest  sea-
weeds, such  as  Macrocystis  pyrifera  which  sometimes  at-
tains the  immense  length  of  four  hundred  feet,  are  plants  of
a  low  order,  being  composed  entirely  of  cellular  tissue,  and
propagating  by  a  process  little  higher  than  mere  conjuga-
tion.

Since  protoplasm  has  so  little  power  of  organizing  its
own  substance,  the  great  desideratum  was  to  find  materials
capable  of  sustaining  it  in  its  work  of  development.  We
have  seen  that  the  Khizopods,  sponges,  and  other  low  marine
organisms,  depend  for  the  advance  which  they  make  beyond
the  condition  of  JBathyhius,  Protogenes,  or  Am(El)a,  upon
mineral  constituents,  such  as  lime,  silica,  etc.  We  have  also
had  occasion  to  remark  that  Bacteria  have  been  shown  to  be
capable  of  assimilating  purely  inorganic  matter,  and  out  of
this  alone  of  multiplying  their  numbers  at  a  prodigious  rate.
The  substances  out  of  which  these  latter  thus  manufactured
protoplasm  were  the  various  salts  of  ammonia.  That  any
strengthening  matter  was  utilized  in  this  case  to  sustain  the
protoplasm  of  which  these  simple  organisms  consist  is  not
proved.  But  amid  all  the  trials  of  nature,  which  are  as
varied  and  multiform  as  the  forms  themselves  of  matter,  the
most  eminently  successful  one  has  been  that  of  employing
carbon  as  the  frame-work  of  organization.  All  ends  in  nat-
ure as  in  art  are  attained  by  the  use  of  appropriate  means.
The  means  in  this  case  was  chlorophyl.  Chlorophyl  is  a
substance  existing  in  all  true  (not  parasitic)  plants,  and  by
the  influence  of  whose  presence  the  decomposition  of  the
carbonic  acid  of  the  air  and  waters  of  the  globe  can  alone  be
effected.  It  is  a  product  of  protoplasmic  activity  combined
with  a  certain  degree  of  radiant  energy,  and  these  must  co-
operate under  otherwise  favorable  conditions  in  order  to  in-
sure its  production.  Chlorophyl  never  exists  except  under
the  influence  of  sunlight.*     It  consists  of  exceedingly  mi-

*  In  Siemens's  recent  experiments,  the  electric  light  is  claimed  to  have  the
power  of  generating  chlorophyL

346  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

nute  grains  of  a  green  color  and  resinous  consistency,  which
diffuse  themselves  through  the  substance  of  vegetable  cells,
and  by  their  presence,  aided  by  sunlight,  the  decomposition
of  carbonic-acid  gas  is  effected  and  the  manufacture  of  the
carbonized  secondary  tissues  of  plants  takes  place.  Chloro-
phyl  may,  perhaps,  be  regarded  as  the  intermediate  stage  in
the  process  of  tissue-manufacture,  which  is  always  represented
by  a  minute  quantity  in  the  transition  state  after  the  contact
of  the  pure  carbon  with  the  cell-protoplasm  has  taken  place.
In  that  case  it  would  be  rather  an  effect  than  a  cause,  and
the  real  labor  of  tissue-formation  would  then  have  to  be
attributed  to  protoplasm  under  the  influence  of  sunlight.*
The  quantity  of  chlorophyl  has  been  proved  to  be  amazingly
minute  in  proportion  to  the  effect  which  it  produces  in  im-
parting a  green  color  to  vegetation.  The  fact  that  it  is  itself
uniformly  generated  by  the  application  of  sunlight  to  etio-
lated plants,  while  carbonic  acid  is  decomposed  under  the
same  conditions,  may  sustain  the  assumption  that  the  two
effects  are  due  to  the  same  cause,  without  standing  in  any
order  of  sequence  to  each  other.  To  the  optimist  it  may  be
regarded  as  a  happy  accident  that  the  effect  of  the  solar
beam  on  protoplasm  in  contact  with  carbonic  acid  is  to  de-
compose this  gas  and  deposit  the  carbon  as  strengthening
material  to  the  vegetal  organism,  whereby  the  vital  energies
of  protoplasm  are  enabled  both  to  undergo  differentiation
into  numerous  vessels  and  special  organs  and  also  to  admit
of  integration  into  one  compound  and  complex  organization.
But  this  is  only  one  of  the  examples,  of  which  organic  nat-
ure is  full,  of  the  truth  that  organic  evolution  is  the  out-
come of  a  struggle  between  the  cosmic  forces  of  concentra-
tion and  dissolution,  in  which  the  former  maintains  itself  by
a  resort  to  such  artifices,  whose  overthrow  the  latter  can
only  slowly  accomplish.     This  seemingly  remarkable  coinci-

*  This  view,  which  ascribes  to  protoplasm  the  work  usually  assigned  to  chlo-
rophyl, has  recently  met,  in  Pringshcim's  resear^^-^s,  with  a  quite  unexpected  con-
firmation.

INFLUENCE  OF  LIGHT  ON  PLANT-GROWTIL       347

dence  is,  however,  heightened  still  further  when  we  remem-
ber within  what  narrow  limits  the  phenomenon  is  confined.

JSTot  all  ethereal  vibrations  acting  upon  the  protoplasm
of  vegetable  cells  are  capable  of  decomposing  carbonic  acid.
These  vibrations,  in  order  to  accomplish  this  result,  must
have  a  certain  wave-length,  which  represents  but  a  small
portion  of  the  spectrum.  The  liberation  of  oxygen  can  not
take  place  unless  the  ether-waves  are  as  much  as  0-0003968
millimetre  in  length,  and  the  phenomenon  again  ceases  when
these  waves  become  more  than  0*0006866  millimetre  in
length.  The  wave-length  representing  the  maximum  effect
has  been  observed  to  be  0*0005889  millimetre,  which  very
nearly  corresponds  with  the  center  of  the  yellow  band.  It
also  closely,  but  not  absolutely,  coincides  with  the  point  of
greatest  luminosity,  falling  the  merest  trifle  below  (toward
the  red  end  of)  that  point.

All  true  plants  contain  chlorophyl,  or  have  once  contained
it ;  but  botanists  unite  in  referring  to  the  vegetable  kingdom
many  organisms,  such  as  fungi,  which  do  not  come  within
this  definition.  The  terms  animal  and  vegetable  have  proved
wholly  inadequate  to  express  the  distinctions  which,  in  the
evolution  of  life,  are  found  to  exist.  Belonging  to  popular
language,  and  growing  out  of  vulgar  observation,  these  terms
naturally  serve  only  to  distinguish  the  largest  and  most  obvi-
ous classes  of  living  organisms,  and  can  not  be  expected  to
answer  the  needs  of  science.  They  should  be  superseded  in
science  by  others  better  adapted  to  express  the  real  phenom-
ena of  nature.  As  popular  terms  they  are  useful,  but  as
scientific  terms  they  have  alread}''  led  to  a  vast  amount  of
fruitless  discussion  in  the  vain  attempt  to  refer  all  organisms
to  the  one  or  the  other  kingdom,  and  to  determine  to  which
certain  ones  belong.

The  fundamental  distinction  in  biology  should  be  drawn
between  those  organisms  which  are  capable  of  assimilating
chemical  or  inorganic  matter  as  the  frame-work  of  their  tis-
sues and  those  which  depend  entirely  upon  the  appropriation

348  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

of  matter  already  so  manufactured.  Organisms  of  the  first
class  may  be  called  assimilators,  tissue-manufacturers,  or  au-
togens ;  those  of  the  second  are  parasites.

The  first  class  is  further  subdivided  into  three  groups:
1.  Those  which  manufacture  protoplasm  only,  and  consist
entirely  of  that  substance.  This  group  includes,  not  only  all
purely  plasson  bodies,  but  all  strictly  unicellular  organisms,
Buch  as  Amoebce,  Flagellata^  LahijrinthuleoB,  etc.,  which  con-
tain no  additional  strengthening  material.  2.  Those  organ-
isms which  possess  the  power  to  manufacture  not  only  proto-
plasm, but  also  some  form  of  shield,  integument,  shell,  or
other  protecting  armament  or  frame-work.  To  this  group
belong  the  Diatoms,  whose  protoplasmic  cells  are  surrounded
by  delicate  incasements  of  silica,  and  also  the  Ehizopods,
whose  shells  are  usually  calcareous.  3.  All  organisms  which
possess  the  power  of  decomposing  carbonic  acid  and  em-
ploying the  carbon  (which  is  usually  combined  with  oxygen
and  hydrogen  to  form  cellulose,  or  lignine,  CjgHjoO,^)  as  the
strengthening  material  or  frame-work  of  their  tissues.  Or-
ganisms of  this  group  are  always  true  plants  in  the  popular
sense,  and  contain  chlorophyl.

The  second  class,  or  those  organisms  which  have  not  the
power  of  assimilating  mineral  matters,  may  likewise  be  sub-
divided into  three  groups :  1.  Fungi,  lichens,  etc.,  which  ap-
propriate matters  already  manufactured  by  organisms  of  the
fii*st  class  (or,  as  in  case  of  lichens,  take  them  at  third-hand
from  organisms  of  the  same  class),  but  which  are  not  only
fixed  like  plants,  but  are  of  low  cryptogamic  organization,
and  simple  cellular  structure.  2.  True  parasitic  plants,
whose  organization  plainly  indicates  that  they  have  de-
scended from  chlorophyl-bearing  plants,  of  which  they  are
usually  degraded  types.  In  most  cases  these  organisms  have
not  differentiated  so  greatly  from  the  ancestral  form  but
that  the  family  may  be  easily  determined  to  which  they  be-
long, while  they  generally  retain  various  foliar  and  bracteal
appendages  in  the  form  of  white,  tawny,  red,  or  brown

CLASSIFICATION  OF  ORGANISMS.  349

scales,  vestiges  of  tlie  former  leaves  {Orobanche^  Monotropay
etc.).  As  might  be  expected  of  this  group,  many  interme-
diate links  exist  between  the  chlorophyl-bearing  and  the
wholly  parasitic  state.  VisGum  and  Phoradendron  (mistle-
toe) have  dull-green  foliage,  and  contain  chlorophyl,  while
they  also  appropriate  the  sap  of  the  foster-tree  ready  manu-
factured. Cuacuta  (dodder)  begins  life  as  a  true  plant,  and
climbs  upon  the  contiguous  vegetation  until  it  finds  an  ap-
propriate subject  to  which  it  adheres,  and  into  which  it  in-
trudes its  rootlets.  From  this  time  the  portion  below  decays,
while  the  upper  portion  continues  to  grow  as  a  true  parasite.
3.  Animals  proper,  which  live  on  the  substance  manufactured
by  the  first  class  of  organisms,  either  by  taking  it  directly
from  plants,  or  by  preying  on  other  creatures  of  their  own
group  which  have  derived  their  sustenance  from  plants.

It  will  be  seen  that  only  the  third  group  of  each  of  the
two  great  classes  attains  to  any  high  degree  of  organization,
and  that  of  these  groups  the  great  bulk  of  living  things  is
made  up.  To  these  two  groups  of  organisms  the  terms
jplants  and  animals  have  been  applied  by  popular  language,
and  their  proper  use  is  nearly  confined  within  these  limits.
It  is  true  that  parasitic  plants  by  degradation,  and  also  fungi,
are  properly  and  correctly  regarded  as  plants,  but  neither  of
the  terms  seems  properly  applicable  to  the  two  lower  groups
of  the  first  series.  The  term  Protista,  employed  by  Pro-
fessor Haeckel,  embraces  a  field  nearly  commensurate  with
this  definition,  and,  having  been  adopted  by  so  high  an
authority,  it  ought  to  stand,  unless  superseded  by  a  better
one.

It  is  not  claimed  that  any  of  these  groups  are  so  absolute-
ly distinct  that  no  transition  stages  can  be  detected.  Such
transition  stages  have  already  been  pointed  out  between  true
chlorophyl-bearing  plants  and  parasites  by  degradation.
There  are  also  a  few  cases  in  which  chlorophyl  was  supposed
to  have  been  detected  in  what  are  properly  animals,  as  in
Hydra  viridis,  Convoluta  Sohultzii,  etc.,  though  a  different

350  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

explanation  of  the  plienomena  has  recently  been  offered  («w-
j^a^  p.  340,  note),  while  the  mantles  of  certain  Ascidians  con-
tain cellulose.  But  in  so  far  as  these  facts  exist,  the  creatures
to  which  they  belong  are  to  that  extent  vegetable.  In  fact,
there  are  some  creatures  which  undergo  metamorphoses  such
that  they  may  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  one  group  at  one
period  of  their  existence  and  to  another  at  another ;  and  even
true  plants  cease  to  assimilate  the  moment  they  are  removed
from  the  sunlight,  though  they  continue  to  grow  by  the  ex-
change and  distribution  of  materials  already  assimilated  bo
long  as  any  reserve  of  these  remains.

Again,  all  animals,  even  the  highest,  certainly  do  assimi-
late certain  mineral  salts  and  other  strengthening  materials,
which  are  utilized  in  their  skeletons  and  frame-work,  and
which  they  derive  directly  from  the  inorganic  world.  Cer-
tain animals  also  manufacture  cellulose  out  of  the  materials
existing  in  the  cells  of  their  tissues,  while  amyloid  and  sac-
charine matters  in  animals  are  no  uncommon  occurrence.

But  there  are  two  things  which  no  animal,  no  fungus,  no
true  parasite  can  effect,  viz.,  the  manufacture  of  protoplasm,
and  the  decomposition  of  carbonic  acid.  The  former  is  a
common  function  of  the  Protista  and  of  plants,  the  latter  of
plants  alone.  These  two  (which  I  have  extended  into  three)
groups,  therefore,  constituting  the  first  great  class  or  grand
division  of  organic  life,  embrace  the  only  true  producers ;
all  the  rest  are  simply  parasites  of  unequal  rank  and  dignity.
It  is,  however,  well  worth  observing  that  even  in  the  fact
that  the  higher  forms  of  life  are  dependent  upon  the  lower
for  the  production  of  their  assimilable  matter,  the  universal
law  of  aggregation,  which  we  have  steadily  kept  in  view  from
the  beginning,  is  again  reiterated.  The  production  of  these
assimilable  materials  is  a  form  of  aggregation,  and  in  the
development  of  organisms  of  a  higher  degree  they  enter
again  without  decomposition  as  integral  units.  The  process
consists  of  a  sort  of  chemical  aggregation  going  on  simultane-
ously with,  and  subordinate  to,  the  higher  physiological  and

ORIGIN  OF  ORGANIZATION.  351

morphological  aggregation  which  determines  the  forms  of
the  organisms  themselves.

All  investigation  has  thus  far  failed  to  reveal  the  absolute
beginning  of  life  on  the  globe.  In  fact,  since  life  is  simply
the  result  of  molecular  aggregation,  it  is  impossible  to  estab-
lish any  exact  line  of  demarkation  for  its  absolute  introduc-
tion. Any  general  theory  of  life  must,  if  logically  pursued,
lead  to  the  animation  of  all  forms  of  matter.  The  most  defi-
nite and  convenient  limitation  is  to  predicate  life  only  of
those  objects  which  contain  protoplasm,  and  of  that  sub-
stance itself.  What  is  really  sought,  therefore,  by  the  em-
pirical defenders  of  so-called  "spontaneous  generation"  is,
the  origin  of  organization.  Upon  this  question  all  that  is  as
yet  known  is,  that  the  spontaneous  activities  constantly  going
on  in  protoplasm  tend  to  organization  :  first,  through  the  in-
dividualization of  definite  portions  of  the  substance ;  next,  in
the  differentiation  of  a  nucleus  to  these  plastid  individuals,
transforming  them  into  true  cells ;  then,  in  the  aggregation  of
a  number  of  cells  into  a  cluster  or  association,  and  the  gradual
more  and  more  complete  integration  of  this  collective  mass
into  a  new  unit  or  individual  of  the  second  order ;  and,  after
this,  in  various  physiological  and  morphological  differentia-
tions of  the  lower  units  into  various  organs,  vessels,  strength-
ening timbers,  etc.,  in  which  general  process  higher  and  higher
orders  of  organization  result.  As  the  size  and  complexity  of
the  organisms  increase,  means  must  be  developed  for  carrying
on  the  more  and  more  complicated  functions  necessary  to  their
existence.  The  process  of  assimilation  must  be  seconded  by
the  means  of  distribution,  which  is  accomplished  by  the  flow
of  sap,  i.  e.,  of  a  liquid  charged  with  assimilated  matter.  This
is  at  first  nothing  more  than  a  general  diffusion  of  such  liquids
through  the  cellular  mass,  but  in  the  highest  plants  it  grows
into  an  elaborate  system  of  appropriate  vessels.  In  all  plants,
and  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  vital  energy,  a  portion  of
the  carbon  entering  into  the  tissues  is  rendered  effete,  or  in

352  SECONDARY    AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

some  way  dropped  from  the  combinations  in  course  of  forma-
tion, and,  seized  by  the  ever-present  oxygen,  is  returned  to
the  atmosphere  as  carbonic  acid  gas.  This  function,  which  is
that  of  true  respiration,  is  now  known  to  be  as  universal  in
the  vegetable  as  in  the  animal  kingdom.  The  chief  nutrition
of  plants  consists  in  the  assimilation  of  carbon  and  the  forma-
tion of  celluline  or  wood  by  its  combination  with  oxygen
and  hydrogen,  or  perhaps  directly  with  water,  as  the  formula
would  suggest.  But  this  form  of  nutrition  is,  after  all,  only
the  supply  of  strengthening  material.  Another  form  of  nu-
trition is  likewise  going  on  at  the  roots,  in  which  the  quantity
of  protoplasm  is  increased  by  the  contact  of  the  ultimate  cells
of  the  roots  with  the  matters  contained  in  the  soil,  which
must  possess  a  certain  proportion  of  nitrogen  in  some  form,
or  the  plant  will  perish.  This  may  be  regarded  as  the  true
process  of  nutrition.  The  other  process  is  to  the  tree  what
the  absorption  of  carbonate  of  lime  is  to  the  coral,  and  the
trunk  of  the  tree,  as  well  as  all  its  true  woody  fiber,  may
represent  the  polypidbm  upon  which  the  animals  live,  and
which  they  secrete  from  their  gelatinous  bodies.

In  animals,  too,  there  are  constantly  going  on  the  two
corresponding  processes  of  nutrition,  with  this  fundamental
distinction  (which  applies,  however,  as  well  to  all  other  para-
sites), that  neither  the  strengthening  material  nor  the  proto-
plasm are  manufactured  by  the  organism  which  appropriates
them.  In  all  animal  tissues  there  exists,  in  addition  to  pro-
toplasm, a  large  amount  of  other  matter  whose  function  is  to
sustain  the  protoplasm  and  enable  it  to  co-operate  in  all  parts
of  the  system.  But  for  such  materials  no  complicated  organ-
ization could  exist.  Even  the  cells  (and  this  is  as  true  of
plants  as  of  animals)  are  many  of  them  composed  in  large
proportion  of  matters  of  a  wholly  different  constitution  from
that  of  protoplasm,  and  contain  only  a  minute  portion  of
that  substance  in  the  free  and  active  state.  This  serves  as
the  vehicle  by  means  of  which  the  various  alimentary  solu-
tions are  transported  through  the  tissues.     But  in  large  and

ORGANIZATIOK  358

complex  animal  organisms  elaborate  systems  of  vessels  have
been  developed,  without  which  the  varied  and  here  greatly
complicated  functions  of  circulation,  absorption,  secretion,
and  excretion  would  be  impossible.  In  animals  the  propor-
tion of  protoplasm,  or  vital  substance,  to  other  matters  is  far
greater  than  in  plants,  and  all  the  vital  functions  are  carried
on  with  a  correspondingly  increased  activity.  The  quantity
of  carbon  set  free  from  the  tissues  and  seized  by  oxygen  is
therefore  greater,  and  the  respiratory  function  hence  becomes
a  prominent  one,  requiring  a  complicated  mechanism  for  its
fulfillment.  In  animals,  too,  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  in
plants,  is  the  automatic  activity  which  always  resides  in  pro-
toplasm itself  transmitted  by  the  mechanism  of  the  organi-
zation to  different  parts  of  the  organism  or  to  the  whole  of
it.  This  is  accomplished  by  the  massing  together  of  cells
containing  a  large  proportion  of  protoplasm,  and  by  the
direct  connection  of  these  masses,  by  means  of  a  differenti-
ated tissue  called  tendons,  with  limbs  or  organs  to  be  moved,
the  term  muscle  being  applied  to  the  masses  of  protoplasmic
cells.  Any  change  in  all  the  cells  of  such  a  collection  is
capable  of  producing  an  effect  upon  the  whole  mass  equal
to  the  amount  of  change  undergone  by  one  of  the  cells  mul-
tiplied by  the  number  of  cells.

One  of  the  special  automatic  properties  of  all  protoplasm,
as  seen  in  the  manufacture  of  temporary  pseudopodia  by  the
moners,  amoebae,  and  rhizopods,  is  the  power  of  contraction
and  extension.  It  is  the  former  of  these  processes  which
exclusively  characterizes  the  phenomena  of  muscular  move-
ment.

A  further  differentiation  of  the  most  delicate  nature  is
found  wherever  a  muscular  apparatus  exists,  by  means  of
which  impulses  or  motives  to  the  exercise  of  the  former  are
communicated  to  them  both  from  without  and  from  within
the  system.  This  consists  in  all  the  higher  animals  of  a
complicated  system  of  well-protected  cellular  threads,  called
nerves,  highly  charged  with  protoplasm,  or  consisting  almost

354:     SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENY.

wholly  of  that  substance,  and  connecting  the  muscular  cell-
masses  with  the  surface  of  the  animal's  body,  and  also  with
all  the  internal  organs.  The  slightest  mechanical  impact
against  the  extremities  of  these  protoplasmic  threads  commu-
nicates a  shock  to  the  cell-mass,  or  muscle,  to  which  they
lead,  and  causes  its  instant  contraction.  In  nearly  all  cases
this  apparatus  is  compound,  the  thread  of  protoplasm  leading
first  to  a  central  mass  or  ganglion  of  the  same  substance,  and
then  from  this  to  the  muscle  to  be  affected.  The  simple
movement  of  a  limb  caused  by  the  communication  of  the
shock  of  an  external  contact  to  the  muscle  connected  with
it  is  denominated  a  reflex  action,  and  all  muscular  move-
ments whatever  are  simply  modifications  and  extensions  of
this  same  principle.

Organization,  therefore,  is  simply  an  enlargement  of  the
sphere  of  vital  activity  manifested  by  the  vital  substance  pro-
toplasm. Just  as  an  organized  army  can  accomplish  vastly
greater  results  than  the  same  individuals  that  compose  it
could  accomplish  working  independently,  so  the  particles  of
protoplasm  organized  into  an  animal  can  produce  far  greater
results  than  they  could  in  the  form  of  independent  moners.

While  the  organisms  of  the  first  great  class  above  desig-
nated are  absolutely  essential  to  the  existence  of  those  of  the
second,  which  subsist  upon  the  products  of  their  manufact-
ure, and  while  the  third  group  of  this  primary  division  fur-
nishes the  great  bulk  of  the  vegetation  of  the  earth,  without
which  it  would  be  a  dreary  place  indeed,  and  in  which  are
combined  so  much  that  is  useful,  grand,  and  sublime,  with
so  much  that  is  beautiful,  picturesque,  and  lovely,  it  is  never-
theless out  of  the  secondary  or  parasitic  class,  and  out  of  the
third  group  of  that  class,  that  the  highest  degrees  of  organi-
zation have  been  attained,  and  the  true  masterpieces  of
organic  life  have  been  carved.  The  former  may  be  regarded
as  the  primary  or  original  products  of  organization,  the  lat-
ter as  the  secondary  or  derivative  ones,  but  in  the  sense  that
whatever  degree  of  organization  has  been  effected  in  the

ORGANIZATION.  355

production  of  the  first  is  utilized  directly  in  the  production
of  the  second  class  of  organisms.  The  vegetable  kingdom
represents  the  first  platform  in  an  ascending  scale  of  organi-
zation, starting  from  which,  as  a  basis,  the  animal  kingdom
rises  by  additional  progressive  steps  to  the  highest  forms  of
life.

The  extreme  meagemess  of  this  survey  of  the  vast  field
thus  passed  over  will  perhaps  be  excused  when  the  limited
space  available  for  such  a  discussion  in  this  more  general
treatise  is  considered,  but  especially  when  it  is  clearly  under-
stood by  the  reader  that  the  object  is  not  to  put  forth  a  trea-
tise on  biology,  but  simply  to  find  the  proper  place  in  a  uni-
versal cosmology  for  the  phenomena  of  life.  Our  object  has
been  to  connect  this  class  of  phenomena  with  those  consid-
ered in  the  previous  chapter,  with  a  view  to  showing  that  all
phenomena,  however  subtile  or  obscure,  are  the  result  of  one
universal  process  which  may  be  called  the  process  of  material
affocregation  or  evolution.

The  central  fact  which  it  has  been  sought  to  impress  is,
that  life  is  the  result  of  chemical  or  molecular  aggregation,
which  has  for  its  product  a  substance  whose  properties  are
in  fact  the  phenomena  of  life — in  short,  that  life  is  a  prop-
erty of  a  particular  substance  called  protoplasm,  which  is  as
truly  chemical  as  is  water  or  lime,  and  whose  properties  are
as  inseparable  from  it ;  that  just  as  water  may  form  into
spherules  or  crystals  under  appropriate  conditions,  so  may
this  substance  by  virtue  of  its  properties  develop  living  or-
ganisms.

Next  in  importance  to  this  truth  it  has  been  sought  to
establish  that  above  and  beyond  this  chemical  substance,  en-
dowed with  all  the  essential  properties  of  life,  no  other  vital
principle  has  yet  been  found  to  exist  in  any  organism,  how-
ever high  in  the  scale,  and  that  organization  is  nothing  more
or  less  than  a  device  of  nature,  so  to  speak,  for  the  extension
of  the  powers  of  this  vital  plasma,  by  employing  other  mate-

356  SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— BIOGENT.

rials,  such  as  carbonate  of  lime,  silicaj  carbon,  and  water,  as
the  means  of  carrying  this  power  into  effect ;  that  in  this  re-
spect animals  and  plants  are  identical,  and  the  only  part  of
any  organism  that  possesses  automatic  activity  is  the  proto-
plasm contained  in  the  tissues ;  that  the  protoplasm  of  plants
is  just  as  active  as  that  of  animals,  and  the  appearance  of
fixity  in  the  former  is  due  to  the  stationary  character  of  the
supporting  timbers  and  frame-work  of  the  organism  only,
since  in  this  way  a  higher  degree  of  organization  is  attainable
by  this  class  of  organisms.  Not  only  is  the  protoplasm  in
plant-cells  very  active  at  all  times,  but  in  the  functions  of
reproduction  in  all  cryptogamic  plants  a  portion  of  it  be-
comes free  and  carries  on  independent  operations  in  no  re-
spect different  from  those  of  an  amoeba  or  an  infusorium.
At  this  stage  of  their  existence  all  distinction  between  ani-
mals and  plants  is  effaced.  The  features  which  eventually
distinguish  them  arise  later  and  concern  the  mode  of  organ-
ization only,  and  not  at  all  the  vital  principle.  All  life  is
one  fact,  which  only  clothes  itself  with  different  apparel,  aud
manifests  itself  under  varied  forms.

CHAPTER  Y.

SECOND  AH  Y  AG  GREG  A  TIOK—{  Con  tinned.)

PSTCHOGENY* GENESIS    OF    MIND — PSYCHIC   KELATIONS.

Spontaneous  motility  the  fundamental  distinguishing  property  of  protoplasm —
Properties  of  matter  in  general — Phenomena  of  irritability  and  sensibility
— Comprehensiveness  of  the  law  of  impact  as  embodying  the  principle  of
force — Planes  of  stability  in  protoplasmic  masses — Life  vs.  mind — Pri-
mary cause  of  the  development  of  the  psychic  property — Where  does  feel-
ing begin  ? — Definition  of  sensation — Consciousness  implied  in  feeling — In
what  sense  mind  exists  in  nature — Genesis  of  nerves — Multiple  individu-
ality of  the  nervous  system — Physiology  of  brain-function — Phenomena  of
psychology  proper — Phenomena  of  the  subjective  branch  of  the  mind  traced
out — Nature  of  the  will — Phenomena  of  the  objective  branch  of  the  mind
traced  out — Nature  of  mind.

In  enumerating  the  different  properties  of  protoplasm  in
the  previous  chapter,  those  of  contractility  and  extensibility
were  specified.  These  properties  are  clearly  reducible  to  one
which  may  be  defined  as  the  power  of  any  specific  mass  of
j>rotoplasm  to  change  its  form.  This  is  the  fundamental
characteristic  which  distinguishes  protoplasm  phenomenally
from  all  other  substances.  It  belongs  to  all  the  plasson
bodies  from  Bathybius  upward,  and   also  manifests  itself

*  John  Fiske,  "Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,"  vol.  i,  p.  221.  The  remarks
on  the  use  of  the  word  cosmogeny  at  the  head  of  chapter  iii  are  in  the  main  ap-
plicable here.  The  genesis  of  mind  is  as  much  a  fact  as  that  of  life,  and  as
such  should  have  a  definite  term  to  express  the  conception.  (Since  this  note
was  penned,  an  article,  by  Professor  Preyer,  entitled  "  Psychogenesis,"  has  ap-
peared in  the  "  Deutsche  Rundschau  "  for  May,  1880,  but  the  writer  confines  it  to
what  I  may  call  the  ontogenesis  of  mind  instead  of,  as  here,  to  \i%  phylogenesis.)

358        SECONDARY   AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

throughout  all  organized  beings,  whether  protists,  plants,  or
animals,  wherever  protoplasm  exists  in  them  in  a  free  state.
Many  cells  are  endowed  with  these  automatic  properties.
Those  found  in  the  blood,  in  the  nerves,  and  in  the  brain,
and  which  consist  of  protoplasm  in  a  nearly  pure  state,  often
so  closely  resemble  certain  independent  moners  as  to  have
first  excited  the  suspicion  of  being  parasitic  organisms.  The
germ-cells  or  unfecundated  eggs  of  Medusa,  Hydra,  and
other  marine  zoophytes,  which  were  found  leading  an  appar-
ently independent  existence  within  the  cavities  of  these  ani-
mals, where  they  carry  on  the  various  functions  of  independ-
ent organisms,  had  long  been  observed  and  classified  as  in-
ternal parasites  before  their  true  nature  was  made  known.
The  lowest  plants  consist  of  such  cells,  which  become  simply
collected  together  in  those  a  little  more  advanced,  and,  as  the
process  of  organization  proceeds  and  definite  structures  are
acquired,  the  condition  of  existence  exhibited  by  the  lowest
is  continued  with  every  reproductive  act — the  primordial
cells,  now  polarized  into  male  and  female,  initiating  each
new  organism  by  simple  union,  the  same  as  when  this  was
the  final  stage.  Throughout  the  Cryptogamia  the  sexual
differentiation  is  carried  so  far  that,  while  the  female  or
germ-cell  {ovum)  is  outwardly  passive,  the  male  or  sperm-cell
(spermatozoid)  is  intensely  active,  and  possesses  a  specialized
form,  frequently  with  several  appendages.  In  the  PhcBno-
gamia,  the  spermatozoids  are  represented  by  the  so-called
pollen-tube,  which,  under  favorable  circumstances,  extends
itself  down  into  the  ovary  with  such  rapidity  {e.  g.,  through
the  silk  of  maize)  as  to  suggest  the  process  by  which  pseudo-
podia  are  formed  by  the  Amaibos.

In  animals,  of  whatever  grade  of  organization,  the  male
reproductive  cell  is  an  active  animalcule,  consisting  of  pure
protoplasm,  and  endowed  with  all  its  life-like  characteristics,
while  the  female  ova,  both  before  and  after  fecundation,
possess  a  greater  or  less  amount  of  amoeboid  properties.
All  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  these  bodies  consist  chiefly

PROPEKTIES  m  GENERAL.  359

or  wholly  of  protoplasm  in  which  this  automatic  property
resides,  just  as  saccharine  properties  reside  in  sugar,  or  saline
properties  in  salt.  And  just  as  the  properties  of  all  sub-
stances are  due  to  the  particular  molecular  activities  which
the  substances  possess  by  virtue  of  their  molecular  constitu-
tion, so  protoplasm  presents  to  us  its  peculiar  phenomena
because  its  molecular  aggregates  are  composed  as  they  are.
The  reason  why  these  activities  are  so  striking  to  our  senses
is,  because  they  act  upon  masses  of  the  substance  so  as  to
produce  molar  motion  visible  to  our  eyes.  We  are  not  sur-
prised when  a  piece  of  alum  produces  a  lively  sensation
upon  the  tongue  and  palate,  although  this  is  exactly  as
much  the  result  of  activities,  i.  «.,  of  the  movements  of
molecules,  as  is  the  contraction  of  a  muscle.  But,  as  all
other  forms  of  matter  except  protoplasm  affect  our  senses
in  this  molecular  way,  producing  only  invisible  motions,  we
do  not  realize  that  these  effects  are  due  to  motions  at  all,
and  employ  the  term  properties  in  a  sort  of  ontological
sense,  scarcely  distinguishable  from  that  in  which  the  al-
chemists expressed  the  phenomena  of  gases,  which  they  re-
garded as  immaterial  spirits.  The  true  rationale  of  the
difference  between  the  manifestations  of  protoplasmic  ac-
tivities and  those  of  other  substances  is  found  in  the  higher
degree  of  aggregation  to  which  the  molecules  of  protoplasm
have  attained.  This  was  sufficiently  dwelt  upon  in  the  last
chapter.

"We  have  now  to  consider  to  what  this  peculiar  property
of  protoplasm  naturally  leads  when  organization  affords  it
an  opportunity  to  act  upon  large  masses.  So  far  as  this
affects  the  movement  of  organic  bodies,  this,  too,  has  been
considered  in  the  previous  chapter.  What  especially  con-
cerns us  here  is,  not  the  power  of  protoplasm  directly  over
other  matter  introduced  as  skeleton  -  work  or  stiffening-
material  for  the  production  of  molar  effects,  but  the  effect
of  the  organization  of  protoplasm  upon  its  own  substance
when  suitably  massed  and  organized  for  this  purpose.    Al-

360   SECONDARY  AGGREGATION".— PSYCHOGENY.

though  we  must  suppose  that  the  molecular  activities  of  })ro-
toplasm  are  constantly  going  on,  as  are  those  of  all  other  sub-
stances, independently  of  all  external  influences,  still,  as  in  the
latter  molar  effects  may  be  produced,  a  marked  influence  is
felt  in  these  by  the  contact  of  external  objects.  It  is  indeed
doubtful,  could  such  a  supposition  be  made,  whether  any
molar  effects  would  manifest  themselves  but  for  the  presence
of  such  external  agencies,  and  it  is  evident  that  the  nature
of  the  former  is  wholly  determined  by  that  of  the  latter.
The  tendency  residing  in  a  protoplasmic  body  to  change  its
form,  i.  e.,  to  expand  or  contract  any  part  of  itself,  and
which  is  a  property  of  the  substance,  due,  like  all  properties
of  substances,  to  the  molecular  constitution  of  the  substance
itseK — this  tendency,  M^hich,  for  brevity's  sake,  we  will  call
contractility,  is  always  exerted  in  the  degree  and  direction
induced  in  the  substance  by  the  influence  of  its  contiguous
environment.  The  substance,  as  it  seems,  responds  to  all
outside  influences  by  corresponding  changes  of  form.  This
phenomenon  thus  contemplated  has  been  denominated  irri-
tdbility.

The  phenomenon  of  irritability,  as  thus  defined,  and  as
observed  to  occur  in  living  organisms,  has  been  much  dis-
cussed by  eminent  writers  on  biology,  whose  opinions  need
not  be  here  reproduced  in  detail.  They  all  agree,  of  course,
that  nothing  corresponding  to  it  occurs  in  the  inorganic
world,  but  it  is  needless  to  say  that  none  of  them  have  ever
contemplated  it  from  the  point  of  view  here  adopted.  It  is
not,  in  fact,  true  that  no  property  is  ever  modified  by  the
influence  of  external  agencies.  Every  aUotropic  or  isomeric
form  represents  a  modification  of  the  properties  of  the  bodies
undergoing  them,  produced  by  certain  external  influences,
and  is  therefore  analogous  to  the  changes  of  form  undergone
by  protoplasmic  bodies  under  like  changed  conditions.  And
the  higher  we  ascend  in  the  scale  of  chemical  complexity
of  molecule  the  greater  is  the  number  of  isomeric  changes
producible,  and  the  more  easily  are  they  produced,  until  in

IRRITABILITY  AND  SENSIBILITY.  361

protein  we  have  thousands  of  such  changes  which  appear  to
take  place  almost  spontaneously.  But  we  have  seen  that
protoplasm  bears,  in  this  respect,  something  the  relation  to
protein  that  this  does  to  ordinary  mineral  compounds.  The
eiFects  should  be  correspondingly  higher  in  this  same  direc-
tion, and  so  we  find  them  to  be.  This  alone  would  be  a
sufiicient  natural  explanation  of  irritability.  It  is  as  satis-
factory as  is  that  of  allotropisra  or  isomerism,  and  surely
the  biologist,  in  view  of  the  more  complex  character  of  the
phenomena  of  his  department,  should  not  be  expected  to
furnish  more  exact  explanations  than  the  chemist.

But  does  irritability  imply  sensibility  ?  Most  writers,  I
believe,  maintain  that  it  does,  and,  as  I  think,  logically.
Lamarck,  however,  denied  this,  and  assigned  to  this  latter
plienomenon  an  origin  much  later  in  the  progress  of  organ-
ization. He  regarded  sensibility  as  a  quality  peculiar  to
those  animals  possessing  a  nervous  system,  and  failed  to  state
his  belief  in  the  genetic  character  of  the  nervous  system.
lie  argues  as  if  all  animals  could  be  divided  into  two  great
classes,  one  of  which  possessed  and  the  other  did  not  possess
a  nervous  system.  If  this  were  the  fact,  his  argument  would
at  least  merit  serious  attention ;  but  no  one  now  believes  that
any  such  natural  division  exists,  and  those  who  would  main-
tain that  the  particular  attribute  called  sensibility  belongs  to
higher  and  not  to  lower  creatures,  must  show  at  what  point
it  commenced  to  appear.  Every  thing  now  points  to  a
strictly  differential  genesis  of  the  nervous  system.  In  fact,
the  nervous  system  is  simply  the  organization  of  protoplasm,
with  which  substance  all  vital  phenomena  originate,  and  to
the  organized  and  intensified  properties  of  which  they  must
all  be  ascribed.  The  nucleus  of  the  highest  nervous  system
is  contained  in  the  lump  of  protoplasm  which  moves  about
by  the  apparently  spontaneous  transformation  of  its  gelati-
nous mass.  Lamarck  knew  nothing  of  protoplasm.  The  cell
theory  of  Schleiden  and  Schwann  had  but  just  been  pro-
posed, and,  though  quick  to  accept  it,  neither  he  nor  any  of

362        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

his  contemporaries  had  yet  grasped  its  full  import.  He
knew  nothing  of  nerve-cells,  or  blood-cells,  or  brain-cells,
nothing  of  spermatozoa  or  spermatozoids.  He  rejected  the
then  infant  doctrine  of  sexnal  organs  in  cryptogamic  plants,
and  hence  excluded  the  entire  vegetable  kingdom  from  the
attributes  of  both  sensibility  and  irritability.  Such  an  au-
thority, therefore,  though  a  recognized  pioneer  in  his  depart-
ment of  science,  is  clearly  without  weight  on  the  new  and
rising  questions  of  life  and  of  mind.

A  close  consideration  of  the  phenomenon  of  irritability,
or  the  modification  of  form  which  a  protoplasmic  body  un-
dergoes on  contact  with  an  extraneous  substance,  gives  rise
to  the  fundamental  question  as  to  why  it  does  so,  the  true
cause  or  rationale  of  the  observed  fact.  This  is  to  be  found
in  the  general  law  of  impact,  which,  as  has  been  maintained,
underlies  the  conception  of  force.  But,  owing  to  the  pecul-
iar molecular  constitution  of  the  substance  impinged  and
its  great  internal  instability,  a  greater  effect  is  produced  than
would  be  by  the  same  impact  against  a  chemically  stable
body.  The  molecules  at  the  surface  being  disturbed,  the
equilibrium  of  the  whole  mass  is  overthrown,  as  when
bricks  are  set  up  at  short  distances  from  one  another,  so
that  the  fall  of  the  first  one  will  occasion  the  fall  of  the
entire  row.  The  fall  in  the  case  of  the  protoplasmic  mass
is,  however,  arrested  on  another  ji?Zane  of  stability,  and  a  dif-
ferent molecular  state  is  the  result ;  or,  the  molecules  may
be  in  such  a  state  of  tension  in  one  state  that  a  slight  disturb-
ance will  carry  the  whole  mass  upward  to  a  higher  plane  of
stability.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  case  in  contraction,
the  result  being  greater  concentration  ;  while,  in  expansion,
the  reverse  is  the  case,  and  the  molecular  state  suffers  a  spe-
cies of  degradation.  By  increased  molecular  organization
these  results  may  be  rendered  regular  and  definite,  and  such
a  condition  would  necessarily  arise  under  the  law  of  natural
selection,  where  the  regularity  of  the  phenomena  is  required
to  secure  the  permanence  of  the  individual  aggregate.     And

lERITABILITY  AND  SENSIBILITY.  363

on  tlie  same  principle  various  modifications  of  this  general
character  might  be  expected  to  take  place,  in  the  latter  of
which  other  more  stable  materials  would  be  woven  into  the
mass,  and  larger  mechanical  effects  produced  by  means  of
tliem.  That  such  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  origin  of  all
tissues,  of  all  the  lower  forms  of  organic  life,  and,  extended
to  a  far  higher  scale,  of  all  animal  movements  whatever,  has
been  already  intimated.  The  most  familiar  illustration  of
this  secondary  form  of  irritability  is  to  be  found  in  the  phe-
nomena of  muscular  contraction.

Eeturning  to  the  simple  form,  or  irritability  proper,  as
manifested  in  protoplasm  itself  and  also  in  all  organisms
whatever,  we  must  contemplate  it  from  a  new  point  of  view.
The  simple  motion  of  the  molecules,  which  produces  the
change  of  form  constituting  irritability,  is  a  purely  vital  phe-
nomenon, and  constitutes  in  the  last  analysis  the  sole  fact  in
the  idea  of  life.  But  this  is  also  the  point  at  which  the  phe-
nomena of  mind  take  their  origin,  and  from  which  the  de-
partments of  biology  and  psychology  diverge.  It  is,  indeed,
also  true  that  in  the  most  abstract  sense  life  and  mind  are
but  two  sides  or  phases  of  one  common  truth.  This  truth  is
neither  irritability  nor  sensibility,  but  the  molecular  change
which  underlies  and  occasions  both.  That  we  should  not  go
further  back  and  predicate  life  and  mind  of  less  complex
aggregates  than  protoplasm,  and  indeed  of  all  matter,  I  will
not  assert  in  opposition  to  the  views  of  the  greatest  think-
ers of  the  age.  Indeed,  I  recognize  the  logical  necessity  we
are  under  of  doing  this.  The  impossibility  of  finding  any
line  of  demarkation  forces  this  admission  upon  us,  and  the
phenomena  of  chemical  affinities  and  molecular  physics  af-
ford numerous  justifications  for  the  inductive  establishment
of  the  same  conclusion.

While  the  phenomena  of  irritability  are  sufficiently  mani-
fest in  the  reactions  of  protoplasm  as  a  chemical  substance
to  be  observed  by  ordinary  scientific  methods,  the  same  can

364        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYOHOGENY.

not  be  said  of  those  of  sensibility.  As  all  psychic  phenom-
ena are  removed  one  degree  further  from  the  access  of  our
senses  than  are  the  vital  ones,  so  we  find  the  manifestations
of  sensibility  in  the  fundamental  organic  substance  one  grade
more  subtile  than  those  of  irritability  in  this  substance,  and
that  there,  as  in  the  higher  stages  of  organic  development,
the  former  must  frequently  be  pursued  by  the  aid  of  reason
where  the  latter  may  be  made  accessible  to  the  organs  of
sense.

Do  the  lowest  organisms  feel  ?  This  is  the  fundamental
problem  of  psychology.  That  the  substance  of  their  bodies
reacts  to  the  influence  of  certain  stimuli  no  one  doubts,  but
is  this  anything  more  than  is  embraced  in  the  notion  of  irri-
tability ?  It  seems  to  me  that  this  term  has  been  very  hap-
pily chosen  to  express  this  phenomenon,  and  that  in  choosing
it  Lamarck  has  "  builded  better  than  he  knew."  lie  has  de-
fined it  as  "  la  faculte  que  possedent  les  parties  irritables  des
animaux  de  produire  subitement  un  phenomene  local."
Although  not  the  first  to  use  the  term,  he  was,  perhaps,  the
first  to  define  it,  and  in  his  definition  all  idea  of  conscious-
ness on  the  part  of  the  organism  of  this  "  phenomene  local "
is  carefully  excluded.  He  further  alludes  to  the  remark  of
Cabanis,*  "  that  sensibility  and  irritability  are  phenomena  of
the  same  nature  and  have  a  common  source,"  for  the  purpose
of  combating  it.  Nevertheless,  the  term  irritability,  in  its
common  acceptation,  as  well  as  in  its  proper  etymology,  im-
plies feeKng,  and  it  is  hard  to  define  away  this  implication.
It  is  fortunate  that  such  is  the  case,  since  every  attempt  to
separate  the  mere  mechanical  operations  of  the  least  organ-
ized beings  from  the  notion  of  a  conscious  sense  of  the  ob-
jects they  are  to  attain  is  in  the  direction  of  Descartes's  ex-
ploded theory  that  all  animals  are  automatons.

What,  then,  is  sensation  ?

It  may  be  defined  as  the  conscious  susceptihility  of  a  sub-
stance to  the  impressions  made  upon  it  by  other  substances

*  "  Rapports  du  physique  et  du  moral,"  vol.  i,  p.  90.

SENSATION.  365

hrought  into  contact  loith  itself.  The  only  qualification  which
this  definition  requires  is  that,  when  the  feeling  is  wholly  in-
ternal, portions  of  its  own  mass  producing  them  must  be  ob-
jectively conceived,  as  if  external.  It  may  then  be  asserted,
without  qualification,  that  every  manifestation  of  the  phe-
nomena of  irritability  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  the
phenomena  of  sensibility.

The  great  mystery  of  the  universe  is  not  life,  but  mind ;
for,  while  the  progress  of  science  has  dispelled  all  the  onto-
logical  conceptions  of  life,  and  furnished  a  rational  and  intel-
ligible theory  of  all  its  phenomena,  it  has  not  yet  offered  a
solution  of  the  question  of  the  essential  nature  of  psychic
effects.  Nothing  is  explained  until  it  can  be  reduced  to  the
movement  of  matter  in  some  form.  Yital  phenomena  can
be  so  reduced,  and  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  explained.
But  how  can  feeling  be  brought  under  this  canon  ?  It  is
easy  enough  to  understand  how  material  contact  can  produce
the  phenomena  of  sensation  in  a  being  presupposed  to  be  en-
dowed with  that  attribute,  but  how  is  the  attribute  itself  to
be  explained  ?  and  what  is  the  essential  nature  of  feeling
itself  ?  If  it  is  the  result  of  a  mechanical  change,  what  is
the  nature  of  such  change,  and  how  does  it  differ  from  all
other  changes  ?  To  those  who  believe  in  force  and  energy
as  entities  distinct  from  matter,  these  questions  are  easily
answered.  Mind  is  a  form  of  force.  But  the  ease  with
which  such  answers  are  given  only  serve  to  remind  us  of  the
equal  ease  with  which  our  ancestors  answered,  and  all  sav-
age races  still  answer,  all  the  questions  about  which  science
is  most  sorely  puzzled.  Force  itself  and  energy  must  be  ex-
plained. This  has  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  done ;  and  why  ?
Because  they  have  not  yet  been  reduced  to  terms  of  matter
and  motion.  The  school  of  dynamists  can  not  be  allowed  to
introduce  these  entities,  and  ingraft  them  permanently  upon
philosophy.  The  causality  of  the  age  and  of  future  ages
will  seek  to  go  below  them.  All  phenomena  must  ulti-
mately be  brought  under  two  categories,  matter  and  relation ;
17

366        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

and  every  attempt  to  arrest  the  course  of  philosophy  before
it  reaches  this  basis  will  be  eventually  overcome.  It  is  as
logical  to  make  mind  a  category  in  itself  as  to  refer  it  to  any
other  category.     But  it  is  not  logical  to  do  either.

We  have  seen  that  life  is  a  property  of  matter,  strictly
analogous  to  all  other  properties  of  matter,  and  that  all  prop-
erties of  matter  may  be  explained  on  strictly  mechanical
principles  in  terms  of  matter  and  motion — that  they  are  the
mechanical  effects  of  the  motions  of  the  molecules  of  the  sub-
stances manifesting  them,  and  differ  as  the  degree  and  mode
of  aggregation  of  those  molecules  differ.  That  we  do  not
know  more  about  them  is  because  the  molecules  are  so  small
as  to  be  far  beyond  the  limits  of  our  organs  of  sense,  which,
being  composed  of  matter  of  much  larger  molecules  than
those  of  most  other  substances,  can  not  be  expected  to  be
capable  of  directly  perceiving  such  inconceivably  minute  ob-
jects. What  we  know  about  them  we  have  inferred  by  the
exercise  of  reason  from  some  of  the  grosser  manifestations,
which  either  come  or  may  be  artificially  brought  within  the
range  of  our  faculties.

If  we  declare,  as  we  logically  must,  that  the  phenomena
of  mind — all  of  which,  like  those  of  life,  are,  as  we  shall  see,
derived  from  the  simplest  form  of  feehng  or  sensibility — are
the  result  of  molecular  activity,  although  we  thus  place  them
upon  the  same  general  footing  we  are  nevertheless  com-
pelled to  confess  that  the  attempt  rationally  to  grasp  the  con-
ception is  accompanied  by  far  greater  difficulties.

Underlying  the  idea  of  feeling,  and  embracing  it,  is  the
more  comprehensive  idea  of  consciousness.  Without  attempt-
ing to  follow  or  dissent  from  the  opinions  of  the  purely  meta-
physical school,  it  may  be  asserted  with  safety  that  no  sen-
sation can  exist  without  a  consciousness  of  it.  Taking  the
common  acceptation  of  those  terms,  such  a  proposition  would
involve  a  contradiction.  The  essence  of  sensation  is  con-
sciousness. The  real  problem  is,  therefore,  how  matter  is
rendered  conscious.    If  we  were  endowed  with  faculties  with

CONSCIOUSNESS.  3G7

wliicli  we  could  penetrate  a  molecule  of  protoplasm,  and  note
the  manner  in  which  it  is  compounded  and  the  motions  de-
scribed by  its  components,  and  by  the  components  of  these
components,  we  might  then  have  hopes  of  one  day  discover-
ing the  exact  configuration  and  composition  required  to
awaken  in  such  molecule  a  consciousness  of  the  presence  and
impact  of  another  molecule ;  or,  if  we  failed  to  detect  such
a  property  in  a  single  molecule,  we  might  learn  what  amount
of  association  of  such  molecules  into  a  mass  was  sufficient  to
make  this  property  perceptible.  For  the  mere  massing  to-
gether of  homogeneous  molecules  is  a  form  of  organization,
and  the  primary  form  of  all  organization.  And  any  prop-
erty which  becomes  manifest  after  any  given  degree  of
organization  may  be  safely  inferred  to  have  existed  in  the
molecules  prior  to  such  organization,  but  in  so  feeble  a  form
as  to  escape  observation.  The  gulf  which  separates  the  mani-
festation of  vital  force  in  Bathybius  and  in  an  eagle  is  as  wide
as  that  which  separates  the  manifestation  of  psychic  force  in
an  amoeba  and  a  Cicero.  But  this  difference  must  be  ac-
counted for  in  both  cases  by  the  degree  of  organization,  by
which  low  and  feeble  activities  are  immensely  magnified  and
intensified  through  purely  mechanical  devices.

The  property  of  consciousness  must  therefore  be  assumed
to  inhere  in  eveiy  molecule,  of  protoplasm  to  a  certain  limited
degree,  which  in  certain  definitely  shaped  masses  becomes  so
far  increased  in  intensity  as  to  be  inferable  from  the  actions
of  such  individualized  portions  of  the  substance.  From  this
simple  state  increment  is  added  to  increment  throughout  the
whole  course  of  organic  development,  until  the  highest  mani-
festations are  reached.  Conversely,  we  are  compelled  to
predicate  of  each  component  of  a  protoplasmic  molecule
some  trace  of  the  same  property,  which  is  the  proper  basis
for  the  theory  of  a  universal  soul  in  inanimate  nature.  It
exists,  but  for  want  of  organization  it  is  too  feeble  to  be  per-
ceptible to  the  human  faculties,  or  to  work  any  appreciable
effects.     It  is  thus  that  science  at  length  agrees  with  vulgar

368        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGE  NY.

opinion  as  to  the  existence  of  Mind  in  Nature;  but  there
remains  this  fatal  difference,  that  instead  of  magnifying  it
into  omniscience,  it  reduces  it  to  practical  nescience,  and  de-
clares that  increase  in  mind-force  can  only  take  place  in  pro-
portion to  increase  in  organization.  And  while  molecular  or
chemical  organization  may  so  far  intensify  it  as  to  render  it
perceptible  to  the  human  faculties,  molar  or  morphological
organization  may  carry  it  up  to  the  exalted  height  to  which  it
attains  in  the  elite  of  mankind.  The  only  intelligence  in  the
universe  worthy  of  the  name  is  the  intelligence  of  the  organ-
ized beings  which  have  been  evolved,  and  the  highest  mani-
festation of  the  psychic  power  known  to  the  occupants  of
this  planet  is  that  which  emanates  from  the  human  brain.
Thus  does  science  invert  the  pantheistic  pyramid.

The  consciousness  of  effects  is  the  quality  which  consti-
tutes the  essence  of  sensibility  and  of  mind,  and  to  define  it
further  would  require  a  knowledge  of  the  molecular  changes
adequate  to  produce  it.  It  is  a  dij05cult  conception,  because
mind  can  not  readily  conceive  the  mechanical  causes  of  its
own  operations.  It  is  rather  the  awkward  attitude  in  which
we  stand  to  the  phenomenon  than  any  inherent  difficulty  in
the  phenomenon  itself  that  renders  it  impossible  to  convey
to  the  mind  a  clear  conception  of  what  it  is  in  its  most  sim-
plified condition.  It  is  not  different  in  other  respects  from
all  other  properties  of  matter.  We  can  easily  conceive  how
the  particular  activities  of  the  molecules  of  a  given  quality
of  wine  should  be  the  cause  of  the  effects  produced  by  it
upon  the  tongue,  palate,  and  lining  of  the  stomach,  but  no
adequate  conception  can  be  formed  of  what  those  molecular
activities  actually  are.  It  is  not  otherwise,  in  the  last  re-
spect, with  the  conception  of  a  piece  of  conscious  matter,  but
neither  can  we  well  conceive,  as  we  can  in  the  other  case,
that  any  such  activities  should  result  in  such  a  property.  In
the  one  case  the  property  itself  can  be  tested  by  sense,  in  the
other  no  such  test  is  applicable.  We  can  not  conceive  of  our
minds  as  the  result  of  organized  matter.     Yet,  if  candid,  we

MIND  IN  NATURE.  369

must  admit  tliat  they  are  just  tliis ;  for,  if  our  brain  were  re-
duced to  sixty-five  cubic  inches,  or  deprived  of  the  delicately
organized  tissues  of  vessels  and  nerve-matter  of  which  it  is
composed,  we  should  be  idiots  instead  of  rational  beings.

The  phenomena  of  life  and  those  of  mind  may  be  prop-
erly regarded  as  the  obverse  and  reverse  of  one  and  the  same
truth.  Irritability,  according  to  Lamarck's  definition,  is  sim-
ply the  motor  effect.  Sensibility,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the
corresponding  sensor  effect.  The  former  we  perceive,  the
latter  we  only  infer.  This  is  why  the  term  irritability  has
acquired  both  senses,  which  cling  to  it  so  persistently  that  it
becomes  difiicult  to  conceive  of  irritation  without  sensation.
On  the  other  hand,  so  natural  is  it  to  infer  feeling  and  even
thought  from  any  form  of  action  or  motion  whose  immedi-
ate mechanical  cause  is  not  apparent,  that  we  are  apt  to  style
an  object  sensitive  because  it  is  observed  to  have  such  move-
ments, although  there  may  be  a  presumption  against  its  pos-
sessing any  proper  feeling.  This  is  the  case  with  "  sensitive-
plants,"  very  few  persons  believing  that  they  act  from  real
sensation.

Yital  and  psychic  phenomena  are  certainly  too  intimately
connected  and  interwoven  to  be  separated  in  discussing
either,  and  it  has  therefore  been  customary  to  embrace  both
under  the  last-named  term,  so  far  as  their  abstract  consider-
ation is  concerned,  and  to  confine  the  term  "  biology  "  to  the
treatment  of  the  facts  of  morphological  and  physiological
organization.  In  the  preceding  chapter,  however,  the  phe-
nomena of  life  have  been  isolated  as  far  as  possible,  the  chief
object  being  to  furnish  a  rational  or  mechanical  explanation
of  them.  The  present  discussion  is,  therefore,  simply  a  con-
tinuation of  that  just  closed,  with  a  view  to  carrying  it  up  a
step  higher  in  the  ascending  series  of  co-ordinated  relations.

We  have  already  seen  that  all  psychic  phenomena  are
either  motor  or  sensor,  the  former  of  which  are  perceived,
the  latter  inferred,  from  our  own  constitution.  "Wlien  we
see  other  creatures  perform  those  actions  which  we  believe

370   SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PS YCHOGENY.

to  be  due  to  sensory  experiences,  we  make  this  inference
solely  by  virtue  of  this  faculty  in  ourselves,  and  leave  it
to  reason  alone  to  determine  how  far  it  shall  be  carried.
While  some  carry  it  to  sensitive-plants,  to  the  least  organ-
ized animalcules,  to  nerve-cells  and  sperm-cells,  and  even  to
chemical  molecules  of  inorganic  substances,  others,  like  Des-
cartes, deny  it  even  of  the  highest  animals.  It  is  at  best  a
species  of  anthropomorphism,  by  which  we  conclude  that
other  things  are  like  ourselves  in  proportion  as  they  behave
as  we  do.  Since  it  is  from  motor  effects  that  we  can  alone
judge  of  sensor  effects,  it  is  by  the  study  of  the  former  that
all  our  knowledge  of  the  rudimentary  manifestations  of  mind
in  the  universe  can  be  acquired.  This  is  a  strictly  scientific
line  of  inquiry,  and  has  already  been  successfully  prosecuted
until  a  flood  of  light  has  been  shed  upon  this  most  important
of  all  human  problems.  Since  science  has  attacked  this  prob-
lem from  this  its  only  legitimate  side,  the  metaphysician's
"occupation's  gone,"  and  the  world  now  looks  to  science
alone  for  its  ultimate  solution.

Serves  are  mechanisms  for  the  organization  of  the  prop-
erties of  protoplasm.  A  nervous  system  is  a  mechanical
arrangement  through  which  the  motor  effects  of  this  vital-
ized substance  are,  as  it  were,  "geared  up,"  and  thus  in-
tensified to  the  required  degree  for  conducting  the  functions
of  the  organism  endowed  with  it.  A  brain  is  to  a  lump  of
protoplasm  what  a  high-pressure  steam-engine  is  to  a  cloud
of  vapor,  or  a  Ruhmkorff  coil  to  a  pith-ball.  These  are  not
mere  analogies,  they  are  practical  illustrations  of  the  me-
chanical way  in  which  these  forces  are  intensified  by  the
process  of  organization.  Chemical  or  molecular  organization
produces  a  substance  possessing  vital  properties  strong
enough  to  be  detected  by  the  human  faculties.  Morphologi-
cal organization  continues  these  effects  to  the  highest  point
reached  in  the  organic  world.  Psychic  phenomena  go  hand
in  hand  with  vital  phenomena,  and  are  inseparable  from
them.     Protoplasm  is  the  "  physical  basis  of  Kfe."     It  is  also

GENESIS  OF  NERVES.  371

the  physical  basis  of  mind.  It  constitutes  the  nerves.
Everything  else  connected  with  them  is  apparatus.  A
nerve  consists  of  a  chain  of  cells  inclosed  in  a  sheath  and
extending  from  one  part  of  the  organism  to  another.  In
the  lowest  and  least  differentiated  organisms  there  are  no
nerves.  The  creatures  are  all  nerve.  The  impulses  pass
through  the  substance  of  their  sarcode  bodies  and  com  muni-
cate  the  impressions  received  with  sufficient  force  and  pre-
cision for  their  simple  habits  of  life.  As  the  process  of
morphological  aggregation  advances,  protection  is  required
for  so  large  a  group  of  units,  and  this  is  supplied  by  natural
selection  in  the  form  of  a  frame-work  or  skeleton  of  a  differ-
entiated material  of  one  kind  or  another.  This  is  incipient
organization.  Still  later  the  economic  effects  of  natural
selection  tend  to  increase  the  quantity  of  the  strengthening
materials  until  it  far  exceeds  the  quantity  of  vital  substance.
This  becomes  distributed  to  different  parts  of  the  system  and
co-ordinated  by  means  of  special  channels.  Thus  the  same
quantity  of  vital  force  is  capable  of  producing  vastly  increased
effects.  This  diluting  process  begins  in  the  cell,  which  event-
ually comes  to  contain  no  more  free  active  protoplasm  than
is  found  in  Mohl's  "primordial  utricle,"  which  is  usually
found  in  active  operation  within  the  inner  lining  of  the  cell-
coat  of  plant  cells.  In  animal  cells  the  proportion  of  pure  and
active  protoplasm  is  usually  greater  than  in  plants,  but  differs
widely  in  different  tissues.  In  the  nerve-substance  itself,  and
that  of  ganglia  and  of  the  cineritious  brain-substance,  the
entire  cells  consist  chiefly  of  pure,  living  protoplasm.  In
the  muscles  the  amount  is  greatly  diminished,  but  sufficient  is
retained  to  perform  the  functions  of  muscular  contraction
which  constitute  the  principal  lever  of  power  employed  by
the  animal  economy.  All  parts  of  the  organism  are  inte-
grated by  means  of  channels  or  tracks  of  protoplasm  in  the
form  of  nerves,  along  which  constant  communication  may  be
kept  up  among  them.  In  the  very  lowest  animals,  as  in  the
Protozoa,  Zoophytes,  etc.,  these  channels  are  rudimentary,

372        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION".— PSYCOOGENY.

and  not  anatomically  distinguishable  from  the  surrounding
parts.  Motor  and  sensor  impulses  are  set  up  in  the  general
tissues,  which  pass  along  through  certain  parts  more  fre-
quently than  through  others.  Such  tracks  soon  become
lines  of  least  resistance,  and  every  additional  repetition  di-
minishes the  resistance  and  specializes  these  parts  of  the  tis-
sue as  the  channels  of  communication.  The  manifest  advan-
tage of  this  change  tends  to  continue  the  differentiation,
under  the  laws  of  direct  and  indirect  equilibration,  until  the
degree  of  specialization  assumes  the  nature  of  a  true  nervous
apparatus.

In  all  the  more  highly  organized  forms  of  life  the  process
is  twofold.  The  impression  made  at  the  exterior  is  commu-
nicated through  a  more  or  less  completely  developed  nerve,
by  the  actual  successive  alteration  of  the  state  of  its  mole-
cules, to  a  less  differentiated  protoplasmic  mass  in  the  inte-
rior, which  receives  the  impulse  by  a  similar  alteration  of  all
its  molecules,  throwing  it  into  an  unstable  condition,  from
which  it  immediately  returns  to  its  normal  state  by  means  of
a  discharge  along  a  second  line  leading  to  some  organ  of  lo-
comotion, and  terminates  in  a  more  or  less  completely  de-
veloped muscle.  The  molecular  change  communicated  to
the  second  nerve  is  transferred  to  the  cells  of  the  muscular
substance,  which  contract  in  response  to  the  nerve-vibrations,
drawing  with  them,  by  means  of  a  firmer  tissue  attached  to
them,  the  limb  or  organ  to  be  moved.  From  the  act  of  put-
ting forth  pseudopodia,  improvising  mouth,  stomach,  and
other  organs,  and  performing  general  amoeboid  movements,
to  that  of  regularly  transmitting  a  motor  impulse  by  means
of  true  nerves,  the  animal  world  presents  every  conceivable
shade  of  transitional  gradation.  The  nerves  leading  from  the
periphery  to  the  interior  mass  of  protoplasmic  matter  are  de-
nominated afferent  nerves ;  those  leading  from  this  interior
mass  to  the  muscle  to  be  contracted  are  called  efferent  nerves.
The  interior  mass  is  itself  styled  a  ganglion,  and  the  entire
process  resulting  in  the  required  movement  is  what  is  known

MULTIPLE  INDIVIDUALITY.  373

as  a  reflex  action.  Reflex  action  may  take  place  in  indi-
viduals of  the  second  order,  but  not  in  those  of  the  first.
But  in  individuals  of  the  second  order  the  individuality  of
the  cells  is  only  so  far  lost  as  to  be  co-ordinated  into  a  com-
pound aggregate.  Each  cell  still  acts  and  feels  for  itself,  and
maintains  its  individuality  within  the  higher  individuality.

The  next  step  in  the  development  of  a  nervous  system  is
to  co-ordinate  two  or  more  of  the  simple  systems  described,
which  are  capable  of  reflex  action,  into  a  system  of  a  higher
order.  The  several  nerve-centers  or  ganglia  of  the  simple
systems  are  connected  by  a  third  kind  of  nerve  called  a
trunks  and  all  acquire  a  certain  degree  of  dependence  upon
one  another  and  upon  the  whole,  acting  as  a  unit.  This  stage
is  beautifully  illustrated  by  the  Annulosa,  within  which  group
all  grades  of  the  development  may  be  found,  from  that  in
which  there  is  simply  co-ordination  of  a  very  feeble  degree,
all  the  ganglia  being  apparently  equal,  to  that  in  which  this
co-ordination  is  accompanied  by  a  more  or  less  complete  sub-
ordination of  all  the  rest  to  one  of  larger  size  and  greater
power.  This  one  which  thus  assumes  control  over  the  entire
series  may  be  called  the  brain,  although  that  term  is  gener-
ally confined  to  the  Vertebrata  in  which  it  is  incased  in  an
osseous  frame-work  and  protected  from  injury.  Although
between  the  Invertebrata  and  the  Vertebrata  there  are  mor-
phological differences,  which  it  would  be  important  to  note
if  we  were  contemplating  the  subject  from  that  point  of
view,  nevertheless  there  are  no  strictly  qualitative  physiolog-
ical differences,  and  this  is  our  present  point  of  view.  In
the  vertebrate,  as  in  the  worm  or  the  insect,  we  find  a  com-
pound nervous  system  such  as  above  described,  only  in  the
latter  the  co-ordination  becomes  more  complete,  while  the
degree  of  preponderance  of  the  principal  ganglion  is  far
greater.  But  in  both  these  respects,  and  particularly  in  the
latter,  there  is  great  progress  among  vertebrates,  from  the
acranial  lancelet  to  man.  And  yet  neither  the  degree  of  co-
ordination nor  of  subordination  is  ever  so  complete  but  that

374        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PS YOnO GEN Y.

parts  of  the  system  may,  under  the  proper  circumstances,  be
found  acting  independently,  as  if  belonging  to  a  lower  stage
of  the  development.

The  actions  of  the  highest  vertebrate  may  be  classed  un-
der two  general  heads :  1,  those  which  are  performed  by  the
exercise  of  the  nervous  system  in  its  integral  capacity ;  and,
2,  those  which  call  into  exercise  only  one  or  more  of  the  sub-
ordinate simple  systems  composing  it.  This  second  class  of
actions  is  the  physiological  explanation  of  all  involuntary
and  habitual  actions,  and  opens  up  a  subject  of  the  utmost
importance,  which  has  already  been  referred  to  in  our  consid-
eration of  Herbert  Spencer's  "  Principles  of  Psychology,"  in
which  work  it  is  also  treated.  "What  it  especially  concerns
us  to  note  here  is,  that  each  simple  system  within  the  most
complex  one  maintains  a  certain  degree  of  its  original  indi-
viduality, and  in  so  far  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  integer.  When
this  fact  is  fully  comprehended,  most  of  the  diflBculties  which
now  perplex  the  students  of  mind,  arising  out  of  the  nu-
merous so-called  "  unconscious  "  actions,  will  disappear.  We
must  not  only  iterate  the  truth  which  biology  has  now  so
plainly  taught  us,  that  we  are  made  up  of  many  distinct  in-
dividuals integrated  into  an  organic  unit,  but  we  must  actu-
ally believe  and  realize  this  truth.  The  compound  unit  thus
formed  by  the  integration  of  simpler  ones  may  properly
enough  be  called  the  ego^  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that
each  of  the  simpler  units  is  also  in  itself  an  ego,  and  per-
forms its  own  psychic  and  vital  functions  independently  of
the  general  ego  in  all  cases  where  it  is  not  necessary  to  ap-
peal them  to  that  tribunal.  Over  all  the  so-called  "vegeta-
tive "  functions  the  brain  sits  in  serene  unconsciousness.  It
can  not  allow  itself  to  be  drawn  upon  for  the  incessant  sup-
ply of  the  physical  force  required  to  carry  on  these  opera-
tions. Every  new  duty  is  attended  to  by  the  whole  or  su-
preme ego  until  its  repeated  performance  renders  this  waste
of  nerve-tissue  unnecessary,  and  these  impulses  are  remanded
to  the  subordinate  ganglia.     But  these  subordinate  egos  are

MULTIPLE  INDIVIDUALITY.  375

not  the  senseless,  unconscious  things  which  they  are  supposed
to  be.  They  are  conscious  individualities,  whose  feelings  we
do  not  appreciate  because  they  are  not  our  own.  The  only
ego  we  know  any  thing  about  is  the  supreme  one.  This  is
the  person  thinking  and  feeling.  But,  if  the  subordinate
simpler  egos  could  also  express  their  feelings,  they  would  tell
us  of  pains  and  pleasures  of  which  we  are  ourselves  ignorant.
And  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  these  sensations,  emotions,
and  thoughts  are  so  feeble  in  their  intensity  as  to  be  un-
worthy of  serious  consideration.  J^umerous  cases  are  on
record  in  which  pains  and  emotions  of  the  profoundest
character  must  have  been  experienced  by  the  lower  centers
of  which  the  supreme  ego  was  wholly  unconscious.  It  is
probable  that  this  is  the  true  explanation  of  those  struggles
which  patients  make  who  are  undergoing  painful  operations
under  the  influence  of  chloroform.  The  drug  paralyzes  only
the  highest  center,  and  leaves  the  lower  ones  to  suffer  as  if  it
had  not  been  administered.  And  these  sufferings  are  as  real
as  if  they  had  been  undergone  by  another  person,  or  an  ani-
mal whose  feelings  the  patient  could  not  share.  It  is,  there-
fore, the  practice  with  competent  surgeons  to  continue  the
administration  of  the  anaesthetic  until  all  the  subordinate
centers  except  those  presiding  over  the  essential  functions  of
circulation  and  respiration  are  fully  under  its  influence,
when  operations  may  be  performed  without  danger.

But  this  is  not  all.  The  brain  itself  is  a  compound  organ,
and  it  is  a  daily  occurrence  that  prolonged  and  rational  trains
of  thought  are  carried  on  wholly  without  the  knowledge  of
the  integral  organism.  The  cerebral  lobes  themselves,  from
whose  molecular  changes  have  emanated  the  most  profound
results  which  the  materials  of  this  planet  have  evolved,  con-
stitute subordinate  egos  or  individual  identities,  and  their
operation  is  often  clearer  and  deeper  when  untrammeled  by
the  multitudinous  side-issues  which  accompany  their  co-ordi-
nation with  the  sensorial  center.  Herein  is  the  complete
explanation  of  the  much-discussed  phenomena  of  "uncon-

376        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSTCHOGENY.

scious  cerebration."  The  same  principle  also  satisfactorily
accounts  for  the  strange  feats  of  somnambulism  and  hyp-
notism so  numerously  recorded,  as  well  as  for  all  cases  of
so-called  "  double-consciousness  "  resulting  from  epilepsy  and
undue  excitement.  In  fact,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  greater
part  of  the  mysteries  and  marvels  of  mind  become  greatly
simplified,  if  not  completely  reduced  to  the  strict  rules  of
science,  by  the  simple  recognition  of  the  multiple  character
of  organic  individuality,  as  is  shown  by  the  process  of  evolu-
tion itself.

The  class  of  actions  in  which  the  sensor  impulse  which
gives  rise  to  them  is  not  carried  to  the  highest  center  and  not
co-ordinated  with  the  whole  nervous  system  is  still  further
subdivided  into  a  series  of  classes,  according  to  the  number
of  subordinate  centers  to  which  it  is  carried,  and  the  nature
of  the  resultant  action  is  proportionally  removed  from  sim-
ple reflex  action.  All  afferent  nerves  do  not  arise  at  the
periphery,  but  many  take  their  origin  along  the  alimentary
canal  and  at  other  points  in  the  interior.  It  is  by  means  of
such  comparatively  independent  internal  systems  that  all  the
vital  functions  of  circulation,  digestion,  secretion,  excretion,
etc.,  are  carried  on,  and  of  these  the  integral  system  is  rarely,
or  never  at  all,  apprised.  What  has  been  called  by  metaphy-
sicians "  the  consciousness  "  is,  the  consciousness  of  the  high-
est center.  As  all  other  centers  of  the  compound  system  are
subordinated  to  this  one,  when  it  becomes  itself  conscious  of
a  change  at  any  point  in  the  body,  the  whole  organism  is  said
to  be  conscious.  This  consciousness,  par  excellence,  is  not,
however,  the  only  consciousness.  In  the  highest  verte-
brates, owing  to  the  vastly  greater  size  and  complexity  of
the  supreme  center  as  compared  with  any  of  the  subordinate
ones,  the  consciousness  of  this  center  is  regarded  as  that  of
the  organism,  and  no  account  is  taken  of  the  consciousness
of  the  lower  ones.  But  in  animals  of  far  lower  organization,
as  in  the  tape-worm,  the  consciousness  of  the  lower  centers
is  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  highest ;  and,  if  by  chance  a

PHYSIOLOGY  OF  BRAIN-FUNCTION.  377

pliysical  disunion  of  any  of  the  somites  is  made,  each  be-
comes supreme  and  soon  produces  others.  Many  animals
may  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  each  piece  will  survive  and  ulti-
mately reproduce  its  kind.  The  law  is  well  established  that
the  degree  of  dependence  of  the  parts  upon  the  whole  is
proportionate  to  the  distinctness  with  which  the  systems  are
constructed,  and  subordinated  to  the  highest  system.  In
other  words,  the  degree  of  integration  is  proportional  to  the
degree  of  differentiation.  In  the  highest  mammalian  forms,
and  especially  in  man,  the  gulf  between  the  highest  center
and  the  lower  ones  becomes  so  wide  that  it  is  no  wonder
that  the  individuality  of  the  latter  should  have  been  wholly
ignored,  but  this  has  led  to  many  errors  in  the  study  of  the
mind  which  its  recognition  removes.

The  supreme  consciousness  of  the  entire  organism  con-
sists, as  already  remarked,  in  the  continuation  of  the  molecu-
lar change,  set  up  at  any  point  in  the  body,  along  the  general
nerve-trunk,  from  ganglion  to  ganglion,  until  it  reaches  the
supreme  center  and  produces  a  corresponding  change  in  the
molecules  composing  it.  This  renders  this  center  conscious
of  the  same  impression  of  which  the  subordinate  ones  had
been  made  conscious,  and  this  unison  of  consciousness  along
the  entire  line  constitutes  the  state  which  is  termed,  kot
€^oxvv,  consciotisness.  But  many  of  our  highest  physical  op-
erations are  carried  on  without  such  complete  co-ordination,
of  which  those  of  standing  erect  and  of  walking  are  among
the  most  important,  and  must  require  the  necessary  impres-
sions to  be  referred  to  the  highest  ganglionic  centers  of  the
spinal  cord  and  medulla  oblongata,  and,  as  some  believe,  to
the  cerebellum.

The  organ  of  supreme  consciousness,  as  all  now  admit,
is  not  the  cerebral  lobe,  but  that  tract  at  the  base  of  the
brain  which  constitutes  the  true  termination  of  the  spinal
cord,  and  which  has  received  the  name  of  sensorium.  The
brain  itself  is  simply  a  modification  and  specialization  of  the
principal  nerve-trunk  of  vertebrated  animals.     This  is  lo-

378        SECOKDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

cated  along  the  dorsal  region  of  all  animals  of  that  type,  and,
after  reaching  such  as  possess  a  true  osseous  spine,  it  is  found
inclosed  by  processes  of  this,  which  are  adapted  for  the  pur-
pose. Just  as  the  brain-substance  is  a  continuation  of  the
spinal  cord  enlarged  and  remarkably  modified,  so  is  the
skull,  within  which  it  is  securely  incased,  a  like  modification
of  the  spinal  axis  correspondingly  enlarged  and  specialized  to
accommodate  it.  The  various  steps  of  this  development
may  be  traced  with  considerable  clearness,  not  only  in  the
lowest  vertebrate  forms  from  amphioxus  to  the  fishes,  but
also  in  the  embryonic  changes  which  the  highest  forms  pass
through  according  to  the  remarkable  law  already  stated  {sur
^ra,  p.  340).

In  the  study  of  these  transitions,  whether  phylogenetically
or  ontogenetically,  it  is  found  that  the  cerebral  lobes,  whether
anterior,  lateral,  or  posterior,  must  be  regarded  as  compara-
tively new  and  superadded  structures,  having  no  necessary
existence  so  far  as  maintaining  the  life  of  the  animal  is  con-
cerned, but  designed  to  increase  the  power  of  co-ordiuating
the  impressions  or  states  of  consciousness  of  the  highest,  or
sensorial,  center,  so  as  to  produce  what  is  understood  by  the
terra  thought.  These  cerebral  lobes  are  not  centers  in  any
proper  sense  of  the  term,  although  they  may  contain  partial
systems  within  themselves.  They  are  rather  in  the  nature
of  receiving  and  transmitting  surfaces  for  a  special  class  of
impressions.  They  are  analogous  to  the  nerves  of  the  special
senses,  such  as  the  eye.  The  retina,  spread  over  a  large  sur-
face for  the  purpose  of  receiving  a  special  class  of  impres-
sions, may  be  compared  to  the  cortical  layer  of  the  brain,  in
which  the  chief  power  seems  to  reside.  This  becomes  the
reservoir  of  a  greater  and  greater  amount  of  force  in  pro-
portion as  its  superficial  area  is  increased,  and  to  effect  this
the  "  convolutions  "  are  developed  which  in  the  human  brain
largely  contribute  to  this  object.  The  cortical  layer  is  con-
nected with  the  sensorium  by  means  of  special  nerve-fibers
which  traverse  the  substance  of  the  brain-mass  and  terminate

PHYSIOLOGY  OF  BRAIN-FUNCTION.  379

in  the  two  pairs  of  bodies  belonging  to  the  sensorium,  which
are  called  respectively  the  thalami  optici  and  the  corpora  stri-
ata. Those  connecting  with  the  former,  which  lie  a  little
behind  the  others,  are  believed  to  be  chiefly  ascending  fibers,
and  those  connected  with  the  latter,  chiefly  descending  fibers.
The  ascending  fibers  are  supposed  to  convey  the  molecular
changes  undergone  by  the  sensorium  in  response  to  various
impressions,  and  which  constitute  states  of  consciousness,  to
the  cortical  layer,  in  which  a  corresponding  molecular  change
takes  place,  constituting  a  more  or  less  permanent  impression.
The  descending  fibers  are  calculated  to  convey  to  the  sen-
sorium impressions  experienced  by  the  cerebrum,  and  are
therefore  strictly  analogous  to  all  other  afferent  nerves.

The  rapid  circulation  of  the  blood  through  the  brain-mass,
and  particularly  within  the  cortical  layer,  has  the  effect  con-
stantly to  excite  its  delicate  tissues  into  action  the  same  as  the
contacts  of  external  objects  excite  the  sensitive  peripheral
nerves  of  the  body.  This  perpetual  excitement  of  the  im-
pressible substance  of  the  cortical  layer,  with  its  complicated
folds,  tends  to  keep  alive  the  impressions  made  in  it  by  the
action  of  the  sensorium  as  conveyed  by  the  ascending  fibers.
The  substance  of  this  portion  of  the  brain  is  so  specialized
by  the  action  of  natural  selection  that  the  slightest  impulse
received  from  the  sensorial  center  is  not  only  distinctly  felt,
but  so  deeply  imprinted  upon  the  brain-tissue  that  it  re-
mains for  a  great  length  of  time,  or  during  life.  The  proc-
ess of  nutrition,  which  is  constantly  going  on  from  materials
copiously  supplied  by  the  blood,  does  not  obliterate  these
impressions,  but  acts  after  the  manner  of  the  calcareous  or
siliceous  particles  in  the  process  of  petrifaction,  and,  while
rapidly  renewing  the  actual  matter  of  the  tissues,  preserves  the
form  with  the  utmost  fidelity.  As  the  general  experience
of  the  whole  body  is  constantly  producing  new  states  of  con-
sciousness, which  are  each  in  turn  transmitted  to  the  cerebral
hemispheres  and  stamped  upon  the  cortical  layer,  the  inces-
sant flow  of  the  blood  arouses  the  older  of  these  into  action

380        SECONDARY  AGGREGATIOK-PSYCHOGENY.

along  with  the  newer,  and  bo  commingles  them  into  simul-
taneous activity  that  they  are  necessarily  compared  and  con-
trasted. The  several  harmonies  and  discords  thus  produced
are  the  fundamental  elements  of  thought,  and,  whenever  they
become  sufficiently  vigorous,  they  discharge  themselves  along
the  descending  fibers  to  the  sensorium,  which  sends  them  out
in  the  form  of  motor  impulses  to  the  muscles  whose  contrac-
tion will  produce  the  action  demanded  by  the  thought,  or
to  emotional  centers  in  the  form  of  painful  or  pleasurable
states  of  mind.  The  transmission  of  a  state  of  consciousness
from  the  sensorium  to  the  cerebrum  and  the  impression
which  it  directly  makes  upon  the  latter  organ  constitute  an
experience.  The  revival  of  such  an  experience  by  the  action
of  the  blood,  in  rapidly  circulating  through  the  particular
tissue  upon  which  the  impression  was  made,  constitutes  a
remeinbrance.  Thought  may  be  defined  as  the  com/parison
of  experiences  and  rememhrances.  But  as  remembrances  are
nothing  more  than  revived  experiences,  which  do  not  on  this
account  at  all  cease  to  be  experiences,  it  would  seem  equally
proper  to  define  thought  more  generally  as  the  comparison
of  experiences.  Reflection  is  that  form  of  thought  in  which
all  the  experiences  compared  are  revived  or  remembered  ex-
periences, and  most  of  the  serious  thinking  which  is  done  by
mankind  is  of  this  character.  Although  there  is  reason  to
believe  that  portions  of  the  surface  are  specialized  for  the
reception  of  particular  classes  of  impressions,  still  there
doubtless  exists  a  more  or  less  complete  system  of  fibers
whose  office  is  to  connect  all  such  localized  parts  with  one
another,  and  perhaps  to  refer  them  to  subordinate  centers  be-
fore their  final  transmission  to  the  sensorial  center.  The  ex-
istence of  some  such  fibers  has  long  been  known,  such  as  the
commissural  and  inter-cerebral  fibers,  the  former  of  which
constitute  the  fornix,  while  the  latter  connect  the  cortical
layers  of  the  two  hemispheres  by  means  of  the  corpus  callo-
sum  /  other  subordinate  ones  also  exist.

The  above  constitutes  the  purely  physical  explanation  of

PSYCHOLOGICAL  PHENOMENA.  381

the  fundamental  phenomena  of  the  mind,  from  which  all
the  psychic  manifestations,  whether  of  animals  or  of  man,
are  directly  derived,  and  to  which  they  may  all  with  greater
or  less  distinctness  be  traced.

Just  as  we  have  seen  that  vital  and  psychic  phenomena
are  but  the  two  sides  of  a  single  truth,  so  we  shall  now  see
that  the  phenomena  of  sense  and  those  of  intellect  are  like-
wise but  the  obverse  and  reverse  of  one  and  the  same  coin.

The  common  origin  of  sense  {Sinnlichkeit)  and  intellect
( Verstand)  was  taught  by  Immanuel  Kant,  than  whom  no
philosopher  has  penetrated  deeper  into  the  purely  phenome-
nal or  psychological  problems  of  mind.

This  fundamental  distinction  here  foreshadowed  rises  im-
mediately out  of  that  which  subsists  between  subject  and
object.  Sense  may  be  defined  as  the  subjective,  intellect  as
the  objective,  side  of  mind.  Neither  is,  however,  in  any  de-
gree independent,  but  together  they  constitute  simply  the
two  points  of  view  from  which  the  same  phenomena  are
contemplated.  Sense,  indeed,  "gives  us  the  object";  but
this  object  is  the  initial  unit  of  intellectual  operations.  The
true  antithesis  to  the  object  is  the  immediate  consciousness
of  the  subject.  The  process  is  made  clearer  when,  instead
of  the  things,  we  consider  the  actions.  The  act  of  becoming
conscious  of  the  contact  of  an  object  is  properly  denominated
sensation  /  the  act  of  recognizing  the  object  is  called  jpercep-
tion.

Sensation  is  the  consciousness  of  the  change  which  the
contact  of  the  object  effects  in  the  state  of  the  molecules  at
the  point  of  contact.  This  bears  no  direct  proportion  to  the
amount  of  disturbance  produced,  but  depends  far  more  upon
the  degree  of  sensitiveness  of  the  part  affected.  This  sensi-
tiveness is  due  to  the  specialization  of  the  tissues  for  this
express  purpose,  which  results  from  the  operation  of  natu-
ral selection  or  adaptation.  The  physiological  meaning  of
these  degrees  of  sensitiveness  in  different  tissues  is,  that  the

382        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCIIOGENY.

nerve-fibers  are  so  arranged  at  points  where  it  is  advanta-
geous to  the  organism  to  have  them  so,  that  slight  disturb-
ances at  their  termini  convey  comparatively  powerful  dis-
charges to  the  interior  centers,  and  the  greater  the  dispro-
portion between  the  amount  of  disturbance  and  the  amount
of  the  discharge  the  more  sensitive  the  part  is  said  to  be.
The  contrast  between  the  degree  of  sensitiveness  of  the  ends
of  the  fingers  and  the  back  of  the  hand  is  the  most  familiar
illustration.

Perception  is  the  quality  of  that  state  of  consciousness
of  the  tissue  affected,  which  arises  from  the  character  of
the  object ;  it  is  the  result  of  differences  of  sensations  pro-
duced by  differences  of  objects ;  or,  still  more  clearly,  of
different  sensations  caused  by  different  objects.  It  will  be
seen  that  perception  involves  plurality.  It  also  involves
comparison  of  differences  in  the  effects  produced  by  differ-
ences in  the  causes.  But,  when  we  speak  of  objects  as
causes  of  sensations,  we  mean,  of  course,  the  properties  of
these  objects.  I^^ot  only  do  all  different  objects  have  different
properties  (else  they  would  be  the  same),  but  every  object
has  many  different  properties.  It  is  the  different  states  of
consciousness  induced  by  the  simultaneous  effect  of  several
different  properties  in  the  same  object  which  determine  the
identity  of  that  object,  and  give  us  a  clear  perception  of  it.
The  action  of  a  single  property,  could  such  a  thing  be  con-
ceived of,  would  produce  a  sensation,  but  it  would  result  in
no  perception.  There  would  be  no  data  furnished  for  arriv-
ing at  any  of  the  properties  of  the  object,  unless  it  be  that  of
resistance,  and  no  other  idea  of  the  object  could  be  formed.
But  not  only  do  we  always  receive  a  multiple  impression
from  the  plurality  of  properties  of  all  bodies,  but  this  multi-
plicity is  still  further  multiplied  by  a  similar  plurality  in  the
sensitive  mechanism.  In  every  part  which  has  been  at  all
adapted  (specialized)  for  receiving  impressions,  the  number
and  proximity  of  the  nerve-fibers  leading  to  it — or,  rather,
from  it — are  so  great  that  no  object  large  enough  to  produce

PSYCHOLOGICAL  PHENOMENA.  383

a  molecular  change  at  all  could  escape  coming  into  contact
with  several  such  fibers.  The  several  distinct  sensations  thus
produced  are  instantly  referred  to  the  higher  centers,  where
they  are  co-ordinated  and  compared  in  something  like  the
manner  in  which  it  has  been  described  as  taking  place  in
the  brain.  This  comparison  of  a  multiple  impression  trans-
mitted through  a  multiple  channel  furnishes  the  data  for  a
perception  of  the  object.  This  perception  is  in  the  nature  of
a  judgment  as  to  the  character  of  the  object  itself.  All  the
lower  nerve-centers,  and  the  afferent  fibers  themselves,  also
co-ordinate  actual  impressions  with  previous  ones  still  remain-
ing, as  in  the  case  of  the  brain ;  and  from  this  source  still
more  extensive  data  are  derived  for  the  formation  of  a  dis-
tinct perception  of  the  nature  of  the  object.

Perception  of  the  lowest  form  consists  in  the  impression
thus  made  by  the  object  upon  the  afferent  nerve  and  the
ganglion,  to  which  it  immediately  leads.  That  animals,
which  have  no  other  nervous  system  than  this,  perceive  in
some  sort  of  rude  manner  the  nature  of  the  bodies  with
which  they  come  in  contact,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  Per-
ception alone  has  no  reference  to  motor  action.  It  is  strictly
passive  in  its  character,  and,  although  the  molecular  change
set  up  by  the  contact  may  cause  a  motor  impulse  along  the
efferent  nerve  and  an  action  on  the  part  of  the  organism,
the  perception,  itself,  abstractly  considered,  is  a  passive  phe-
nomenon. It  is  simply  the  recognition  by  the  sensitive  nerve-
matter  affected  that  it  has  been  thus  affected,  the  manner  in
which  it  is  affected  denoting  the  properties  of  the  object.
This  is  the  root  of  the  idea  of  knowledge.  In  thus  recogniz-
ing the  properties  of  an  object,  the  nervous  system,  however
simple,  in  so  far  Tcnows  the  object.  The  term  cognition  is
preferable  to  recognition,  since  it  does  not  presuppose  an
antecedent  acquaintance  with  the  same  properties.  In  this
sense  we  shall  use  this  term  with  the  corresponding  verb
cognize,  the  meaning  being  substantially  the  same  as  that  as-
signed to  it  by  the  later  metaphysicians.

384        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION,— PSTCHOGENY.

The  power  of  cognition,  or  the  capacity  to  acquire  knowl-
edge of  objects,  is  the  essential  quality  of  intellect.  This
term  is  not  generally  applied  to  any  but  advanced  organ-
isms, and  has  probably  been  thus  far  confined  to  man.  But
the  human  intellect,  whether  we  take  that  of  the  Bush-
man or  of  the  Teutonic  sage,  is  only  an  amplification  of
this  power  or  capacity  which  resides  in  the  lowest  organ-
ized beings.  "When  additional  centers  are  developed  and
the  rudiments  of  a  brain  appear,  the  impressions  are  carried
up  along  the  nerve-trunks,  stamped  upon  the  intermediate
ganglia,  and  finally  referred  to  the  sensorium.  If  there  are
as  yet  no  cerebral  lobes,  this  is  the  terminus,  and  the  entire
system  is  thrown  into  a  state  corresponding  to  the  qualities
of  the  object  with  which  it  has  been  brought  in  contact.
The  entire  organism  having  been  built  up  by  infinitesimal
modifications  which  have  been  made  to  adapt  it  to  its  environ-
ment, i.  e.j  to  similar  contacts,  it  has  already  registered  all
such  influences  previously  experienced,  and  can  instantly  re-
fer the  latest  one  to  some  category  already  well  established,
as  being  similar  to  such  and  such  influences  previously  re-
ceived.

]^ot  only  immediate  actions  but  gradual  modifications  of
structure  are  determined  by  the  advantage  or  disadvantage  of
the  existing  conditions  as  regards  new  impressions.  The
manifest  advantage  of  an  increase  in  the  power  of  distinctly
cognizing  the  properties  of  bodies  brought  into  contact  with
the  organism,  both  with  a  view  to  appropriating  and  to  escap-
ing such  objects,  tended  to  the  introduction  of  means  for
increasing  this  power,  and  the  chief  modification  of  struct-
ure undergone  for  this  purpose  was  the  development  of  the
cerebral  lobes.  The  power  of  cognition  depends  upon  the
degree  of  co-ordination  of  data  rendered  possible  by  the
structure  of  the  organism.  This  co-ordinating  power  in  turn
depends  upon  the  quantity  of  organized  nerve-tissue,  and
more  especially  upon  the  amount  of  surface  of  this  tissue
suitably  adapted  for  the    reception    of    impressions.     The

PSYCHOLOGICAL  PHENOMENA.  385

development  of  the  cerebral  lobes  admirably  fulfilled  this
office  and  increased  the  power  of  cognition.  A  theory  of
the  manner  in  which  perceptions  and  all  kinds  of  impres-
sions are  referred  to,  and  compared  by,  the  cerebrum,  has
already  been  given  in  the  present  chapter  {supra,  p.  373).
Where  such  operations  are  confined  solely  to  the  impressions
made  by  external  objects,  they  may  be  regarded  as  strictly
intellectual,  and  the  same  is  true  no  matter  to  how  great  an
extent  the  process  of  comparison,  abstraction,  generalization,
or  classification  may  be  carried.  Any  object  whose  qualities
have  ever  impressed  themselves  upon  the  mind  in  the  course
of  its  experience  may  be  legitimately  recalled  and  brought
into  juxtaposition  with  an  actual  or  present  impression,  or
may  be  compared  with  any  other  old  one  at  any  time  or  to
any  extent.  The  process  thus  described  is  thinking,  and  the
object  of  all  thought  is  truth.  Should  this  theory  be  re-
proached with  ignoring  the  part  which  is  performed  by  rela-
tions in  the  operations  of  the  thinking  faculty,  it  must  be
replied  that  tlie  properties  of  the  bodies  from  which  are
derived  the  data  of  all  thought  are  only  relations,  that  sensa-
tion which  renders  the  perception  of  these  properties  possible
is  itself  a  relation,  and  that  all  the  operations  of  the  brain  are
performed  in  adjusting  relations  thus  communicated  to  it.
The  objects  are  certainly  not  there,  only  the  impressions
which  their  activities  have  made  upon  the  plastic  tissues  of
the  organ  of  the  mind  are  immediately  concerned,  and
although  these  impressions  are  real,  material  facts,  as  are
also  the  objects  which  have  directly  or  indirectly  produced
them,  still  the  entire  process  has  for  its  result  the  determina-
tion of  the  relations  which  these  impressions  sustain  to  one
another.  In  short,  the  thinking  process  is  one  of  representa-
tion. It  is  this  fact,  wholly  unavoidable  as  it  is,  which  ren-
ders error  possible.  In  sensation  we  have  the  origin  of  feel-
ing, in  perception  that  of  thouglit.  Let  us  follow  out  these
two  primary  branches  of  psychic  phenomena  in  a  somewhat
more  careful  manner.

386        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

Sensation,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  state  of  consciousness
of  an  impression.  The  essence  of  the  notion  of  sensation
is  that  of  consciousness.  An  unconscious  sensation  would
be  the  same  as  an  unconscious  consciousness.  No  form  of
psjchic  phenomena  can  exist  without  this  consciousness,  not
even  that  seen  in  the  spasmodic  movements  of  a  headless
frog's  leg.  The  unconsciousness  is  onlj  apparent  and  is  in-
ferred from  certain  conditions,  but  in  all  such  cases  the  truth
of  the  independent  individuality  of  lower  nerve-centers,
without  which  none  of  the  phenomena  ever  take  place,  is
ignored.

Sensation  and  feeling  are  really  one  and  the  same  thing,
but  the  former  term  is  used  to  denote  all  forms  of  feeling  in
the  abstract,  and  to  disconnect  entirely  the  idea  from  that  of
agreeableness  or  disagreeableness  which  so  naturally  associates
itself  with  the  latter.  That  there  exist  feelings  which  are
entirely  indifferent  admits  of  no  doubt,  and  the  chief  sensa-
tions which  enable  us  to  perceive  the  properties  of  bodies  are
of  this  nature.  If  an  object  is  taken  in  the  hand,  and  the
process  of  "  feeling  of  it "  is  gone  through  with  in  order  to
learn  what  it  is,  i.  e.,  what  properties  it  possesses,  no  such
sentiment  as  pleasure  or  pain  is  experienced,  and  yet  the
sensation  produced  by  the  object  is  plainly  recognizable  as  a
definite  state.  If  the  same  object  is  placed  on  the  back  of
the  hand,  or  on  other  parts  of  the  body,  the  sensation,  though
neither  pleasurable  nor  painful,  is  still  more  distinct  than
when  held  in  the  fingers.  But,  if  the  attention  is  directed  to
the  perception  instead  of  to  the  sensation,  it  will  be  seen  that
a  much  clearer  idea  of  the  properties  of  the  object  is  obtained
when  it  is  held  in  the  fingers  than  when  applied  to  the  back
of  the  hand.  This  illustrates  the  well-known  law  that  the
powers  of  perception  and  of  sensation  are  inversely  propor-
tional.* The  extreme  instances  of  this  are  found  in  the
action  of  the  nerves  of  the  eye  and  the  ear.  Here  the  sen-
sation escapes  us  entirely,  so  that  by  the  closest  attention  we

*  Sir  William  Hamilton,  "  Metaphysics,"  lecture  xxiv.

I

SUBJECTIVE  DEPARTMENT  OF  MIND.  3S7

are  wholly  unable  to  recognize  any  form  of  feeling  as  pro-
duced by  the  acts  of  hearing  or  of  vision,  and  yet  the  percep-
tion is  in  these  cases  very  distinct,  seeing  being  regarded  as
the  most  complete  mode  in  which  the  nature  of  an  object
can  be  brought  before  the  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  tissues
which  whether  from  inflammation  or  otherwise  are  "ten-
der," i.  e.,  in  which  painful  impressions  are  easily  produced,
are  poorly  adapted  for  the  determination  of  the  qualities  of
the  objects  brought  into  contact  with  them ;  and  the  same  is
true  of  such  tissues  as  yield  pleasurable  sensations  on  moder-
ate contact  of  external  objects.  This  long-understood  law
teaches  the  new  truth  that  in  the  process  of  organization
and  the  development  of  the  tissues  different  kinds  of  nerve-
tissue  are  produced,  adapting  it  to  different  ends  in  the  econ-
omy of  the  organism,  and  that,  while  at  most  points  on  the
body  the  sensitiveness  is  not  greater  than  is  required  to  give
proper  warning  of  danger,  and  is  capable  of  yielding  the
impression  of  pain  in  case  the  contacts  become  sufficiently
violent  to  endanger  the  well-being  of  the  creature,  there  are
certain  special  points,  more  exposed  from  their  location  to
moderate  contacts,  at  which  the  differentiation  has  been  in  the
direction  of  increasing  the  faculty  of  perception,  or  the  clear-
ness with  which  the  qualities  of  the  objects  are  made  known.
These  nerve-tissues  may  be  said  to  have  become  accustomed
to  pay  attention  only  to  this  one  side  of  the  two-sided  phe-
nomenon, and  in  proportion  as  attention  is  so  concentrated  it
is  withdrawn  from  the  other  side.  This  affords  another  in-
stance of  the  essential  homogeneity  of  all  nerve-tissues,  includ-
ing the  brain.  The  power  of  the  brain  to  become  accustomed
to  give  its  whole  attention  to  one  thing,  with  a  correspond-
ing disregard  for  others,  is  a  favorite  theme  for  writers  on
the  mind.  Yet  here  are  tiny  nerves  at  the  extremities  exliib-
iting  these  wonderfully  mind-like  characteristics.  That  the
whole  distinction  is,  after  all,  a  product  of  the  brain,  and  due
to  different  modes  of  sensorial  co-ordination,  no  physiologist
would  maintain.     The  differentiation  has  tiiken  place  in  the

388        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

nerves  at  the  extremities,  which,  when  accurately  dissected,
exhibit  corresponding  differences  of  structure.

As  regards  the  other  class  of  sensations,  or  those  which
give  rise  to  pain  or  pleasure,  they  are  the  original  source  of
the  emotions.  An  indifferent  sensation  can  have  no  eco-
nomic value  except  as  a  means  of  perfecting  perception.
The  less  obtrusive  the  sensation  the  greater  the  advantage.
Such  sensations  are  therefore  as  completely  eliminated  as
possible  from  the  supreme  consciousness.  That  a  sensation
must  be  produced  upon  the  retina  in  every  act  of  vision  fol-
lows as  a  necessity  from  the  perception  itself.  The  two  are
not  independent,  but  are  a  common  phenomenon.  If  pre-
cedence, in  time,  is  to  be  given,  it  must  be  to  sensation;
but,  as  already  shown,  they  bear  no  necessary  relation  to
each  other  as  regards  the  degree  with  which  they  are  man-
ifested, and,  in  point  of  fact,  they  appear  within  certain
necessary  limits  to  vary  in  an  inverse  proportion.  The  in-
ability to  recognize  the  sensation  produced  by  the  act  of
vision  is  due  in  part  to  the  subtile  character  of  the  medium
which  alone  produces  the  contact,  and  in  part  to  the  fact
that  the  sensation  actually  required  to  yield  the  perception  is
not  carried  to  the  sensorium  at  all,  and  is  confined  to  the
retina  and  the  optic  lobes.  This  is  nothing  more  than  is
true  of  thousands  of  very  vivid  sensations  and  those  result-
ing in  necessary  pain,  the  sensorium  being  so  completely  en-
grossed in  other  matters  as  actually  to  refuse  admission  to
the  molecular  vibrations  conveying  them.

But  the  opposite  class  of  sensations  have  a  special  duty  to
perform,  and  their  efficiency  is  kept  up  for  this  purpose.
The  normal  operations  of  the  organism  must  be  maintained  ;
life  must  be  preserved ;  the  species  must  be  perpetuated.
Natural  selection  has  therefore  made  those  acts  which  secure
these  ends  pleasurable,  and  those  that  threaten  to  defeat
them  painful.  Any  species  in  which  these  sensations  are  not
sufficiently  lively  to  secure  the  performance  of  the  acts  nec-
essary to  maintain  and  perpetuate  its  life,  and  to  defend  it

THE  EMOTIOis'S.  389

from  external  dangers,  must  rapidly  become  extinct,  and  only
those  species  have  survived  in  which  the  sensations  were  suf-
ficiently developed  for  these  purposes.

The  seat  of  these  sensations  is  not  altogether  peripheral.
The  functions  of  the  internal  organs  are  also  regulated  by
them,  and  it  is  the  internal  pleasures  and  pains,  far  more  than
the  external  ones,  which  influence  the  affairs  of  human  life.
The  collective  effect  of  all  the  internal  sensations  of  the  posi-
tive (non-indifferent)  class  constitutes  what  are  termed  the
emotions.  The  vagueness  of  this  class  of  feelings  has  gen-
erally been  taken  to  indicate  their  higher  and  less  sensual
character ;  but  in  truth  they  are  equally  dependent  on  the
actual  presence  and  contact  of  material  objects.  The  want
of  food  produces  hunger,  and  of  water  thirst.  The  tissues
actually  require  the  supply  of  these  materials,  and  suffer  pain
until  they  are  introduced  into  them  through  the  appointed
channels.  But  when  a  mother  mourns  for  her  lost  child  the
exact  modifications  of  structure  undergone  in  producing  this
emotion  are  far  more  obscure.  And  yet  we  can  not  doubt
that  the  violent  waves  of  anguish  that  course  through  her
body,  many  of  which  she  can  easily  locate,  are  produced  by
actual  changes  going  on  in  the  interior  nerves,  caused  by  the
lack  of  an  accustomed  activity,  which  the  presence  of  her
child  supplied.  And  this  satisfaction,  now  suddenly  with-
drawn, is  the  result  of  that  economic  law  which  required
the  development  of  the  maternal  instinct  as  a  necessary  pro-
tection against  the  possible  extinction  of  the  race  through  the
destruction  of  the  young  and  helpless.  One  of  the  necessary
conditions  to  the  maintenance  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  nerv-
ous organization  of  that  mother  as  derived  from  the  inherit-
ance of  all  the  economic  tendencies  of  her  ancestors  had  been
removed  in  the  death  of  her  child,  and  painful  sensation  was
the  result.  And  even  in  the  case  of  two  friends  suddenly
deprived  of  each  other's  society,  where  no  parental  or  sexual
instinct  can  be  called  in  to  explain  it,  there  remains  the
social  instinct,  derivative  though  it  be,  yet  in  certain  cases

J

390        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCUOGENY.

deeply  graven  upon  the  whole  nervous  constitution  of
man.

It  can  not  of  course  be  claimed  that  any  thing  like  a  me-
chanical theory  of  the  modus  operandi  of  the  emotions  can
be  given ;  but  this  much  can  be  asserted  with  certainty,  that
in  all  such  phenomena  molecular  changes  take  place  in  the
tissues  of  the  nervous  system,  which  must  be  regarded  as
the  immediate  mechanical  cause  of  the  emotions  themselves.
Moreover,  most  of  the  emotions  can  be  localized,  and  the  par-
ticular system  of  nerves  whose  derangement  occasions  them
can  with  considerable  certainty  be  announced.

The  brain  has  little  to  do  with  these  bodily  states,  ex-
cept as  they  are  co-ordinated  by  the  sensorium,  and  brought
under  the  general  consciousness.  But  the  cerebrum  is  itself
the  seat  of  important  emotions  of  its  own  wholly  analogous
to  all  the  others  described.  The  exalted  states  attendant
upon  the  discovery  of  truth  and  the  acquisition  of  knowledge
belong  to  the  class  of  purely  cerebral  emotions,  and  tbey  are
capable  of  affording  the  highest  form  of  satisfaction.

The  most  important  product  of  the  economic  laws  of
adaptation,  which  have  been  perpetually  operating  upon  the
human  race  all  through  its  long  course  of  development  from
the  animal  stage  and  creating  those  emotions  which  tend  to
preserve  life  and  perpetuate  the  race,  is  what  may  with  en-
tire propriety  be  called  the  social  instinct.  For  those  who
recognize  the  law  of  adaptation  the  fact  that  a  given  condi-
tion could  not  have  been  attained  without  a  certain  attribute
is  a  suflScient  raison  d'etre  for  that  attribute.  The  social  in-
stinct is  an  attribute  of  the  human  race  wherever  it  exists
as  a  society.  This  sufficiently  accounts  for  such  an  instinct.
Among  incipient  societies  the  law  of  the  survival  of  the
fittest  prevailed,  atid,  as  we  can  easily  see,  no  society  was  fit
to  survive  which  possessed  no  social  bond,  whether  due  to  a
blind  feeling  of  attachment  among  its  members  or,  as  was
doubtless  largely  the  case,  to  an  intellectual  conception  of
the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  co-operation.   And,  as  Mr.

SOCIAL  AND  MORAL  SENTIMENTS.  391

Spencer  argues,  and  Mr.  Fiske  still  more  clearly  points  out,
the  earliest  moral  conceptions  were  exclusively  utilitarian ;  di-
rect advantage  to  self  was  the  sole  standard  of  action ;  but  so
unerringly  did  the  general  economic  laws  operate,  that  just
these  egoistic  sentiments  were  what  was  necessary  to  preserve
the  race  and  its  social  communities.  And  those  instincts  which
tended  to  preserve  both  the  individual  and  the  community
were  gradually  associated  more  and  more  with  the  latter  ob-
ject, until  at  length  the  former  was  lost  sight  of  to  such  an
extent  that  most  of  the  attempts  to  understand  the  laws  of
moral  science  have  not  only  ignored  the  egoistic  or  utilitarian
principle,  but  have  denied  it,  and  maintained  that  this  science
deals  with  an  abstract  moral  sense.  The  great  philosopher
of  Konigsberg  stumbled  on  this  rock,  and  sought  to  found
a  science  of  "  pure  morals  "  co-ordinate  with  that  of  pure
mathematics.*  But  these  truths  of  ethics  are  coming  to  light
along  with  the  truths  of  anatomy,  and  it  is  now  perceived
that  the  utilitarian  principle  has  been  obscured  by  ages  of
hereditary  modification,  and  only  appears  under  certain  pe-
culiar conditions,  very  much  as  the  anatomy  of  the  human
body  has  been  gradually  modified,  until  its  relationship  with
the  lower  forms  from  which  it  sprung  is  only  revealed  by
"  rudimentary  organs  "  and  cases  of  "  reversion."  But  I  can
not  agree  with  Mr.  Fiske  that  there  is  anything  real  in  this
principle  of  abstract  morality.  There  may  be  many  cases
in  which  the  egoistic  influence  can  not  be  reached  by  any
analysis  we  can  make  of  the  motives  to  action,  but,  upon
the  whole,  and  with  the  great  mass  of  mankind,  the  law  of
"greatest  gain"  bears  universal  sway,  controlling  all  the
business  transactions  of  life  as  regularly  as  the  laws  of
physics.  And  the  suspicion  is  irrepressible  that,  in  every  case
in  which  apparently  abstract  moral  principles  seem  to  over-
ride this  law,  it  is  because  we  are  not  qualified  to  understand
the  motives  or  the  mental  constitution  of  the  persons  whose
conduct  we  are  observing.     Altruism  itself  is  based  on  ego-

*  "  Kritik  der  reinen  Vcraunft,"  Leipzig,  1868,  S.  340.

392        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOG EN Y.

ism,  and  it  is  according  to  those  economic  laws  of  nature  to
which  we  have  referred  that  it  should  be  so.  To  say  that
the  utilitarian  principle  of  action  is  low  and  unworthy  of
mankind  is  to  reproach  nature,  which  has  made  that  princi-
ple universal  throughout  the  domain  of  organic  life,  and  the
great  means  by  which  individuals,  species,  nay,  and  societies
too,  are  enabled  to  maintain  and  continue  their  existence.
The  effect  of  denying  this  truth  is  to  erect  a  standard  which
is  too  high  to  be  realized ;  to  attempt  to  realize  such  a
standard  is  to  demorahze  society.  All  claims  to  this  effect
are  only  pretensions,  and  between  the  hypocrisy  of  the  self-
styled  paragons  of  morality  and  the  despair  of  the  honest
masses  the  worst  forms  of  selfishness  are  certain  to  be  devel-
oped. It  should  therefore  be  constantly  insisted  upon  by  the
advanced  school  of  philosophers  and  scientists  that  one  of  the
chief  merits  of  the  recent  theory  of  man's  development  is  its
moral  effect  in  lowering  an  artificial  standard,  which  the  laws
of  social  science,  of  political  economy,  and  of  business  ignore
'or  contradict,  and  whose  maintenance  as  a  code  of  ethics  is
destructive  of  all  true  morality.

The  fulfillment  of  organic  function  is  always  pleasurable,
but  the  pleasure  is  usually  moderate.  Only  in  the  two  most
important  functions,  those  of  alimentation  and  propagation,
does  the  pleasure  become  extreme,  and  in  these  cases  the
supreme  necessity  for  their  performance  is  an  ample  reason
for  their  intensity.  The  emotions  arise  from  failure  in  some
way  to  fulfill  the  normal  functions.  They  are  therefore
essentially  painful  in  their  nature,  but  this  term  frequently
fails  to  describe  the  state  produced.  They  may  be  divided
into  two  classes :  1,  those  occasioned  by  the  deprivation  of
functional  activity  previously  enjoyed ;  and,  2,  those  occa-
sioned by  the  prospect  or  anticipation  of  such  an  exercise  in
the  future.  The  former  are  emotions  proper ^  the  latter  are
desires.  There  is,  however,  no  radical  distinction  between
these  states,  and  a  gratification  lost  creates  a  desire  to  regain
it,  while  both  are  equally  emotions.     The  former  class  are

DESIRES.  393

the  more  painful  as  the  change  is  more  sudden ;  the  latter
when  they  take  the  form  of  hope,  and  when  the  representa-
tive powers  are  vivid,  often  constitute  a  sort  of  pleasure
which  to  some  natures  seems  to  be  even  sweeter  than  the
actual  gratification  anticipated  (voL  i,  p.  676  ;  ii,  pp.  150,
284).  There  is,  too,  the  sentiment  which  has  been  called
the  "  luxury  of  grief."  But  these  are  highly  artificial  forms,
due  to  the  great  development  of  the  imagination,  which  need
only  to  be  referred  to  in  passing.  Among  the  lower  ani-
mals all  these  states  are  undoubtedly  painful.

Actual  gratification  is  itself  sometimes  called  an  emotion,
as  when  one  reaches  the  top  of  a  mountain  and  first  looks
down  upon  a  picturesque  valley.  But  even  these  vague  but
intense  feelings  are  probably  the  result  of  a  series  of  rapid
representations  of  imaginary  gratifications  assumed  to  be  in
store  for  those  that  should  occupy  the  paradise  which  dis-
tance and  position  have  created.  It  is  the  vague  sense  of
possible  happiness  connected  with  beauty.  Animals  experi-
ence little  or  nothing  of  these  thrills,  neither  do  the  lower
types  of  mankind.  They  are  sentiments  which  have  grown
up  with  the  growth  of  the  higher  faculties  and  been  devel-
oped to  a  great  extent  artificially  by  the  pursuit  of  the  fine
arts.*

The  one  thing  common  to  all  proper  emotions  is  the  sen-
timent of  desire.  The  gratification  of  desire  is  the  satisfac-
tion of  the  demands  of  the  nervous  system,  and  this  is  only
accomplished  by  the  complete  and  natural  exercise  of  the

*  That  development  of  the  aesthetic  faculty  which  has  resulted  in  the  keen
appreciation  and  admiration  of  the  picturesque,  is  a  comparatively  recent  proc-
ess. The  total  disregard  for  the  finest  natural  scenery  of  Europe  which  must
have  been  frequently  seen  by  the  most  cultivated  men  of  the  Augustan  age  has
been  remarked  by  Humboldt  and  other  writers  ("Kosmos,"  vol.  ii,  S.  16).  Land-
scape-painting was  unknown  to  the  ancients,  and  landscape-gardening  is  a  very
modern  art  (see  Carpenter's  "Mental  Physiology,"  pp.  513,  514).  That  this
was  natural  in  the  then  condition  of  the  human  mind  is  sufficiently  obvious
from  numerous  utterances  that  were  made  by  the  cultivated  men  of  ancient  and
media;val  times  (see  Hugh  Miller's  "Testimony  of  the  Rocks,"  p.  411).

\/'

394       SECONDARY  AGGEEGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

functional  activities  of  that  system  and  of  the  organism  in
general.  To  secure  such  satisfaction  and  gratify  desire,  cer-
tain appropriate  mechanical  actions  are  performed  by  the
individual  experiencing  these  mental  states,  which  are  alto-
gether determined  by  the  circumstances  of  each  case.

Frequently  more  than  one  desire  may  exist  at  once,  and
in  such  cases  it  may  happen  that  the  action  which  would
gratify  one  would  render  the  gratification  of  the  other  im-
possible. With  animals  such  cases  rarely  receive  sufficient
consideration  to  exert  any  influence  upon  the  action  per-
formed. The  strongest  impulse  is  obeyed,  and  the  conse-
quences are  ignored.  But  with  man,  as  soon  as  he  began  to
form  societies,  such  conflicts  of  desires  became  frequent.
The  social  instinct  must  have  had  to  battle  long  and  hard
against  the  momentary  selfish  desires  of  individuals,  and  its
/  triumph  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  desire  of  each  to  pro-
tect himself  by  sustaining  the  community  gradually  came  to
exceed  the  desire  to  gratify  immediate  personal  wants  which
were  incompatible  with  the  existence  of  society.  And  this
is  exactly  what  the  "  social  compact "  amounts  to,  of  which
BO  much  has  been  said.  .  The  maintenance  of  the  social  state,
which  was  at  its  origin,  and  still  is,  opposed  to  the  gratifica-
tion of  many  strong  personal  desires  (vol.  ii,  p.  232),  depends
upon  the  degree  to  which  its  benefits  are  realized,  whereby
the  counter-desire  of  a  higher  order  antagonizes  the  anti-
social tendencies  and  finally  subordinates  them.  But  society
must  have  begun  with  a  very  small  circle  or  with  many  such
circles,  each  starting  with  single  families  so  as  to  receive  the
aid  of  a  certain  growing  amount  of  natural  parental,  filial,
and  fraternal  affection.  Family  pride,  too,  so  powerfully
manifested  in  certain  "clans,"  must  have  been  a  factor  of
some  value  in  nearly  all  cases.  These  infiuences  coupled
with  the  advantages,  which  an  ape  ought  to  perceive  as
clearly  as  a  wolf,  gradually  gained  for  the  social  tendency  an
ascendant  which  secured  its  ultimate  triumph.  These  con-
siderations belong  to  the  two  following  chapters,  as  well  as

NATUEE  OF  THE  WILL.  395

the  very  important  one  of  the  influence  of  government  in
conserving  society,  and  have  only  been  touched  upon  in  this
place  to  illustrate  the  legitimate  influence  of  the  emotions.

Just  as  the  social  instinct,  and  therefore  society  itself,
has  been  the  result  of  a  conflict  of  desires,  so  can  it  also  be
shown  that  all  that  we  denominate  proper  conduct,  and  the
very  sentiment  of  right  and  wrong,  have  risen  and  assumed
definite  shape  in  precisely  the  same  manner.  Indeed,  the
social  instinct  and  the  moral  instinct  are  so  closely  allied,  or
rather,  are  to  so  great  an  extent  identical,  that  it  scarcely
seems  necessary  to  follow  out  the  genesis  of  each  separately,
and  the  only  object  in  introducing  the  latter  at  this  time  is
to  endeavor  to  convey  a  clear  conception  of  what  is  involved
in  the  term  will,  which  is  claimed  to  lie  at  the  foundation  of
moral  science,  and  is  also  set  down  among  the  normal  attri-
butes of  mind.  The  consideration  of  -the  nature  of  this  at-
tribute, therefore,  naturally  belongs  here.

We  have  seen  that  the  social  instinct  and  the  moral  in-
stinct are  the  products  of  the  development  of  social  and
moral  desires,  having  at  the  outset  at  least  a  strictly  utilita-
rian or  egoistic  motive,  and  the  gradual  elevation  of  such  de-
sires to  the  point  at  which  they  prevailed  over  what  we  may,
by  way  of  antithesis,  call  the  animal  instincts ;  though  by  no
means  are  all  animal  instincts  anti-social  or  anti-moral,  and
the  social  and  moral  instincts  are  as  strictly  animal  as  any
other.

Social  and  moral  desires  are  founded  upon  three  pri-
mary elements :  1,  affection,  arising  out  of  family  instincts,
parental,  filial,  and  fraternal ;  2,  reason,  the  rational  belief
that  it  is  more  advantageous  to  co-operate  and  forbear  than
to  pursue  the  opposite  course ;  and,  3,  sympathy,  the  painful
sensation  which  results  to  high  nervous  organizations  at  the
sight  of  suffering  in  others.

These  three  bases  of  emotions,  it  will  be  perceived,  stand
in  an  ascending  series  in  the  scale  of  progressive  development
of  mental  attributes,  and  yet  each  is  clearly  egoistic.     Affec-

396        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

tion,  or  the  family  instinct,  is  an  attribute  of  all  animals  at
all  developed,  and  it  therefore  operated  with  full  force  at
the  origin  of  society.  The  rational  motive  was  later  devel-
oped, and  marks  an  era  of  gi-eat  progress.  It  must  have  been
preceded  by  a  considerable  cerebral  enlargement,  though  not
necessarily  enough  to  be  classed  as  essentially  human.  Sym-
pathy  was  of  much  later  origin,  and  could  not  have  arisen
until  vivid  mental  representations  could  be  made  of  the  state
of  suffering  in  others  based  on  the  experience  of  each  indi-
vidual of  like  sufferings  in  himself.  Tliis  is  the  psychologi-
cal analysis  of  the  so-called  "  golden  rule  "  of  the  moral  teach-
ers of  antiquity,  Confucius,  Hillel,  and  Jesus  {supra,  p.  10).
It  can  not  be  realized  until  the  organ  of  reason  and  intellect
has  been  sufficiently  developed  to  enable  the  person  witness-
ing pain  in  another  to  conclude,  first,  from  the  similarity  of
the  form  and  character  of  the  other  individual  to  his  own
form  and  character,  that  causes  which  have  produced,  or
would  produce,  pain  in  himself  must  produce  pain  in  the
other  individual  so  like  himself ;  and,  secondly,  to  realize  or
recall  in  a  vivid  manner,  from  the  belief  that  the  other  ob-
ject is  suffering,  the  feelings  formerly  experienced  by  him-
self under  similar  circumstances.  Not  only  are  the  organiza-
tions of  animals  not  capable  of  such  refined  operations  to  any
great  extent,  but  neither  are  those  of  the  lower  races  of  men
or  even  of  the  more  degraded  of  the  populations  of  the  civ-
ilized world.

The  three  classes  of  motives  above  enumerated  constitute
what  are  called  the  higher  sentiments  or  impulses,  and  are
contrasted  with  the  lower  impulses  chiefly  actuating  animals,
the  carnal  appetites,  etc.  These  latter,  it  must  be  borne  in
mind,  have  been  developed  by  natural  selection  to  secure  the
fulfillment  of  the  primary  organic  functions,  and  they  exist
still  in  the  highest  types  for  this  purpose.  Of  the  two
classes,  therefore,  these  must  be  regarded  as  by  far  the  more
important,  if  we  look  upon  the  preservation  of  existence  as  a
thins:  to  be  desired.     But  with  the  animal  ancestors  of  man

NATURE  OF  THE  WILL.  397

these  motives  alone  had  indeed  preserved  their  existence  and
enabled  nature  to  work  a  great  advancement  in  physical  and
mental  organization,  though  in  so  doing  they  had  been  re-
stricted to  a  circumscribed  habitat,  and  had  been  unable  to
multiply  beyond  a  certain  limited  number,  all  excess  over  that
number  succumbing  to  adverse  conditions,  as  in  the  case  of
the  other  animals  that  make  up  the  faunas  of  the  various
regions  of  the  globe.  The  effect  of  the  supremacy  of  the
higher  sentiments  above  enumerated  and  described  would
naturally  be  to  change  all  this.  Where,  in  the  comparatively
solitary  life  before  led,  they  would  one  after  another  come  to
a  premature  death  by  the  violence  of  the  great  carnivora,  or
by  lack  of  food,  or  in  some  other  way,  the  co-operative  habit
produced  by  the  social  instinct  would  enable  them  to  attain
a  greater  age  and  leave  a  more  numerous  progeny.  And
where  obedience  to  fierce  passion  before  made  them  to  a
large  extent  the  destroyers  of  one  another,  the  moral  in-
stincts, if  heeded,  would  accomplish  their  mutual  protection.
In  the  transition  state  between  the  periods  of  supremacy  of
these  two  classes  of  motives,  a  constant  struggle  was  kept  up
for  the  mastery,  and  in  civilized  life  a  strong  current  of  that
same  turbid  torrent  still  sweeps  through  society.  Now,  as
then,  is  a  battle  at  all  times  being  fought  between  the  lower
and  the  higher  impulses  of  man's  nature.

The  mental  phenomenon  which  is  called  will  is  always
manifested  when  two  antagonistic  motives  are  struggling  for
the  mastery  in  the  same  individual  at  the  same  time,  i.  e.,
when  of  two  actions  only  one  can  be  performed,  and  there
exists  a  desire  to  perform  them  both.  In  most  cases  the
exercise  of  the  will  is  on  the  side  of  the  higher  as  against
the  lower  impulse  or  desire.  But  this  is  not  necessarily  the
case ;  neither  is  it  necessary  that  the  two  desires  should
belong  to  opposite  classes.  There  is  really  nothing  in  the
will  except  the  simple  fact  that  one  of  the  desires  prevails
over  the  other,  and  the  action  is  performed  at  tlie  behest  of
the  prevailing  impulse  or  desire.     Yet  from  the  peculiar  con-

398        SECONDARY  AGGEEGATION.— PSYCUOGEXY.

stitution  of  the  mind  there  is  an  apparent  nexus  or  tertiimi
quid,  which  is  called  an  "  act  of  volition,"  and  which  aeema
to  come  forward  as  the  true  cause  of  the  mental  decision
rendered ;  but  science  and  philosophy  have  so  long  searched
for  this  mysterious  factor  without  finding  it  that  its  existence
is  now  denied  by  all  except  those  who  are  prepared  to  credit
the  human  mind  with  the  power  of  originating  that  which
has  no  other  antecedent,  and  who  consequently  can  conceive
of  an  effect  without  a  cause.  This  school  of  philosophers
can  really  have  nothing  to  do  with  true  science,  and  science
can  have  no  real  meaning  for  them.

The  phenomena  of  mind  are  subtile  and  perplexing  at
best,  and  belong  to  the  highest  and  most  complex  of  all
the  classes  of  truth  with  which  science  has  to  deal.  It
was  shown  in  the  Introduction  (pp.  47,  50)  that  even  the
simpler  truths  of  physics,  chemistry,  etc.,  have  been  found
to  present  difficulties,  puzzles,  and  paradoxes,  at  every  step
in  their  investigation.  It  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that
the  far  more  subtile  phenomena  of  mind  should  present
enigmas  and  paradoxes  even  more  remarkable,  and  thus  baffle
the  common  intellect  and  that  of  the  philosopher  as  well.
That  the  phantom  of  the  will  is  such  a  paradox  there  is  no
doubt.  Already  far  more  deeply  cherished  beliefs  in  vari-
ous departments  have  been  remanded  by  science  to  the  limbo
of  paradoxical  myths,  and  I  see  no  reason  for  clinging  with
such  pertinacity  to  the  will  after  it  is  shown  to  be  only  a
wiU-d' -the-wisp.  Human  actions  will  not  be  affected  by
the  possession  of  one  term  more  or  less  in  the  nomencla-
ture of  psychology,  and  in  all  sciences  the  reduction  of  the
number  of  elements,  where  this  can  be  done  without  com-
promising the  phenomena  themselves,  is  always  a  gain.  Sim-
plification is  the  great  desideratum,  and,  where  this  can  be
done,  it  is  better  to  lop  off  a  clearly  redundant  branch  than
to  accomplish  this  object  by  a  higher  generalization.

Briefly  to  sum  up  the  conclusions  to  which  we  are  led  by
our  review  of  that  branch  of  psychic  phenomena  which  starts

SUBJECTIVE  DEPARTMENT  OF  MIND.  399

with  sensation — and  wMcli  may  therefore  be  called  the  sub-
jective department  of  mind  —  we  note  first  the  primary
subdivision  of  sensations  into  indifferent,  or  negative,  and
tliose  positive  sensations  which  assume  the  character  of
pleasure  and  pain.  "We  saw  that  the  sole  object  of  the  first
was  to  afford  a  basis  for  the  determination  of  the  quali-
ties of  the  objects  producing  them,  and  that,  from  the  habit
of  withdrawing  the  attention  from  the  sensation  and  concen-
trating it  upon  the  qualities  producing  it,  the  increase  of  this
latter  power  carried  with  it  a  proportional  diminution  of  the
degree  with  which  these  sensations  are  carried  to  the  sen-
sorium,  so  that  the  two  appear  to  exist  in  an  inverse  pro-
portion.

Positive  sensations,  on  the  other  hand,  were  seen  to  have
an  important  office  to  fill,  and  it  was  shown  that  upon  them
depends  the  very  performance  of  all  the  higher  vital  func-
tions. They  must,  in  fact,  have  arisen  through  the  law  of
natural  selection,  as  the  only  incentives  to  the  preservation
or  continuation  of  life.  This  solves  the  whole  problem  of
the  origin  of  pleasure  and  pain.  Pleasure  leads  to  the  per-
formance of  those  acts  which  are  essential  to  the  preservation
of  life  and  to  the  continuation  of  the  species.  Pain  leads
to  the  performance  of  those  acts  which  avert  danger  and
prevent  the  destruction  of  life.  Sensations  are  further  sub-
divided into  those  which  are  external  or  peripheral  and  those
which  are  internal  or  visceral.  The  former  class,  besides  fur-
nishing nearly  all  the  objective  sensations,  furnish  those  sub-
jective ones  which  are  caused  by  the  most  direct  influence
of  the  environment.  They  thus  chiefly  determine  the  shajpe
of  the  organism.  The  internal  or  visceral  sensations,  besides
contributing  principally  to  the  determination  of  the  structure
of  the  organism,  by  adapting  it  to  the  character  of  the  food,
air,  etc.,  by  which  the  tissues  are  supplied,  also  constitute  the
basis  of  that  class  of  feelings  known  as  the  emotions.  The
emotions  are  the  condition  of  instincts  and  the  result  of  de-
sires.    They  generally  have  each  its  definite  local  seat  in  the

400        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION— PSYCHOGENY.

body,  and  depend  upon  molecular  changes  taking  place  in
certain  systems  of  nerves.  They  are  of  two  kinds,  according
to  whether  an  habitual  function  has  been  suddenly  terminated
or  a  pleasurable  experience  is  withheld.  In  either  case  they
are  in  the  nature  of  desires.  They  are  of  various  kinds,  both
original  and  derivative.  The  most  important  groups  of  pri-
mary emotions  are  those  connected  with  alimentation  and.
reproduction,  upon  which  the  whole  organic  economy  abso-
lutely depends.  From  these  arise  numerous  accessory  and
derivative  emotions  which  will  be  enumerated  in  a  future
chapter  {infra,  p.  QQQ).  The  most  important  derivative  emo-
tions are  those  having  their  local  seat  in  the  cerebrum.
These  will  be  better  understood  after  we  have  followed  out
the  objective  branch  of  psychic  phenomena,  but  we  may  say
here  that  desires,  however  generated,  become  emotions  when
prolonged  with  the  requisite  intensity.

The  exercise  of  reason  gives  rise  to  desires  which,  though
of  a  high  order  and  less  violent  than  those  of  passion,  fre-
quently take  the  form  of  true  emotions  and  largely  influence
conduct.  The  progress  of  the  development  of  the  brain  has
been  attended  with  a  constantly  increasing  proportion  of
these  rational  emotions,  and  these  have  necessarily  found
themselves,  in  a  large  measure,  in  conflict  with  the  non-
rational  emotions.  The  social  state  rests  on  the  moral  state,
and,  with  man,  both  are  incompatible  with  the  unchecked
play  of  the  non-cerebral  impulses.  Society  itself  depends
upon  the  greater  or  less  ascendency  of  the  rational,  and
subordination  of  the  sensual,  emotions.  However  much
ideas  may  serve  to  guide  mankind,  they  have  no  power  to
propel.  It  is  only  when  they  are  crystallized  into  desires  and
emotions  rising  out  of  beliefs  that  intellectual  activities  be-
come indirectly  forces  of  civilization.  The  conative  faculties
of  mind  embrace  all  those  which  relate  to  the  strusfffle  be-
tween  the  rational  and  the  sensual  emotions.  This  struggle
had  well  begun  when  the  historical  period  was  ushered  in.
Man,  therefore,  knows  no  time  when  there  were  no  moral

OBJECTIVE  DEPARTMENT  OF  MIND.  401

questions  to  perplex  him.  Yet  certain  savages  distinctly
remind  us  of  such  a  time  in  the  career  of  our  race.  But
perpetual  familiarity  with  such  questions  has  naturally  led  to
the  introduction  of  anthropomorphic  solutions,  as  in  the  case
of  all  other  questions  of  pre-scientific  times.  The  doctrine  of
the  will  as  a  distinct  faculty  of  the  mind  independent  of  and
distinct  from  all  others,  and  capable  of  originating  action
without  itself  having  been  originated,  is  one  of  those  anthro-
pomorphisms which  the  deceptive  order  of  things  naturally
brought  forward  as  the  easiest  explanation  of  all  the  facts.
Its  place  is  among  the  historical  archives  of  philosophy  by
the  side  of  the  Archcms  of  the  biologists  and  the  Spiritus  of
the  chemists.  Like  these  and  the  whole  train  of  daimons
and  gods  that  preceded  them,  it  is  not  only  not  needed,  but
is  decidedly  in  the  way,  so  soon  as  the  natural  or  causal  ex-
planation is  brought  forward.

It  remains  to  follow  out  in  something  more  of  detail  the
objective  branch  of  the  psychic  phenomena  which  give  rise
to  the  intellectual  states.

As  we  have  already  seen,  in  addition  to  the  sensation
itself,  or  primary  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  the  object,
there  is,  when  the  contact  is  not  too  violent,  a  secondary  con-
sciousness of  the  manner  in  which  the  object  appeals  to  the
nerves.  This  secondary  consciousness  determines  the  prop-
erties of  the  object  in  so  far  as  they  are  revealed  by  the  con-
tact, and  is  called  perception.  The  immediate  relation  in
which  every  organism  stands  to  the  multitude  of  objects  con-
stituting its  environment  necessitates  the  production  of  an
incessant  train  of  perceptions  of  every  conceivable  kind,  and
thus  informs  the  creature  of  the  nature  or  properties  of  all
these  varied  objects.  These  perceptions  are  registered  with
greater  or  less  permanence  in  the  plastic  tissue  of  the  nerves
and  ganglionic  centers,  and  particularly  in  the  supreme  cen-
ter, or  brain.  Whenever,  therefore,  an  impression  is  received
which  has  been  previously  made,  the  identity  is  recognized,

402       SECONDAEY  AGGREGATION,— PSYCHOGENY.

and  the  impression  strengtliened.     The  properties  of  bodies
thus  become  more  thoroughly  known  in  proportion  to  the
number  of  times  their  perception  is  repeated.    Perceptions
also  differ  in  distinctness  according  as  they  are  more  or
less  forcibly  produced  and  more  or  less  isolated,  so  as  to
allow  the  mind  to  attend  to  them  separately.     In  this  man-
ner the  organism  gradually  becomes  acquainted  with  its  en-
vironment and  learns  to  conform  its  actions  to  it.    It  is  evi-
dent that,  as  the  organs  of  special  sense  increase  in  number
and  power,  the   environment  correspondingly  widens  and
increases  in  complexity  and  multiplicity.    The  number  and
quality  of  the  perceptions  expand  and  the  range  of  data  fur-
nished to  the  mind  by  the  environment  enlarges.     The  fre-
quency of  identical  perceptions  is  diminished  and  that  of  dis-
tinct ones  increased.    The  number  of  categories  to  which
the  mind  must  refer  them  is  thus  multiplied,  and  it  is  clear
that  this  would  wholly  bewilder  the  strongest  intellect  if  no
means  of  simplification  existed.    But,  while  innumerable  per-
ceptions produce  innumerable  impressions  sufficiently  dis-    m
tinct  not  to  be  identical,  these  are  nevertheless  not  so  dis-    I
tinct  but  that  thousands  of  them  are  similar  to  other  thou-  '■
sands,  and  thus  the  mind  is  called  upon  to  perform  a  new
duty  quite  distinct  from  the  mere  registration  of  impres-
sions.    This  is  to  compare  and  classify  them.    In  addition  to
dealing  with  the  direct  changes  produced  in  the  nerve-tissue
by  the  various  impacts  made  from  without,  it  has  now  to
deal  with  the  relations  which  subsist  among  the  impres-
sions thus  registered.     It  has  to  arrange  them  into  groups
having  characters  in  common,  but  still  not  identical  through-
out.     It  must  now  determine  to  what  extent  there  is  identity
and  to  what  extent  variation.     This  is  an  interior  and  prop-
erly intellectual  process,  which,  though  begun  in  a  very
early  stage  of  organic  development,  is  only  extensively  car-  ■
ried  on  by  those  beings  which  have  a  highly  organized  nerv-
ous system  with  a  predominant  ganglion  and  complete  sub-
ordinate system  of  ganglia  and  nerves.

I

INTELLECTUAL  STATES.  403

The  act  by  wliich  a  new  impression  is  compared  with  old
ones  and  declared  to  have  a  certain  resemblance  to  them,  or
to  belong  to  an  already  established  group  of  such  similar  im-
pressions, may  be  called  a  conception,  and  constitutes  the  first
strictly  relational  psychic  phenomenon.  We  thus  have  the
following  series  of  effects :  1.  The  object  is  brought  into
contact  with  the  subject,  and  by  its  properties  makes  the  lat-
ter conscious  of  its  presence  by  means  of  a  sensation.  2.
Through  this  sensation  the  nature  of  the  properties  of  the
object  are  cognized  or  made  known  to  the  subject  in  what
we  call  a  jperception.  3.  The  physiological  equivalent  of  a
perception  is  a  molecular  change  in  the  nerve-substance  of
the  subject  which  is  called  an  impression.  4.  The  psychic
action  by  which  impressions,  similar  but  not  identical,  are
recognized  as  such,  and  thus  logically  grouped,  is  called  con-
ception.

All  the  higher  intellectual  operations  are  but  the  extension
of  the  process  involved  in  conception  to  psychological  units
of  higher  orders.  This  primary  act  deals  directly  with  the
first  of  relations,  that  of  likeness,  or,  what  amounts  to  the
same  thing  viewed  from  the  opposite  side,  that  of  difference.
With  this  relation,  or  some  derivative  of  it,  all  intellectual
operations  must  necessarily  deal.  The  conceptions  first  formed
become  the  psychological  units  of  a  process  of  classification
of  an  order  one  stage  higher,  and  these  again  become  new
psychological  units  for  generalizations  of  still  higher  degrees.
The  products  of  these  several  acts  of  the  mind  are  variously
denominated  ideas,  judgments,  rational  conclusions,  etc.  In
the  entire  series  we  find  a  perfect  homogeneity  and  uniform-
ity in  the  process,  and  are  vividly  reminded  of  the  universal
law  of  aggregation,  which  we  have  sought  to  trace  from  the
ultimate  atom  to  the  organic  unit,  and  which  we  shall  follow
out  to  its  culmination  in  the  social  aggregate.

Memory,  as  has  already  doubtless  been  inferred,  is  noth-
ing but  the  fact  that  impressions  once  registered  possess  a
greater  or  less  degree  of  permanence.     And  this  is  true  of

404        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

all  mental  states.  An  impression  is  a  mental  state.  It  re-
sides in  the  subject,  and  is  locallj  separated  from  the  object
which  produced  it.  But  every  molecular  change  is  no  less
a  mental  state,  and  leaves  its  appropriate  impression;  so
that  not  only  are  perceptions  registered  and  capable  of  being
called  up  by  the  proper  stimulus,  but  so  are  also  conceptions,
ideas,  and  thoughts  of  whatever  kind.     This  is  memory.

Consciousness,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  not  only  all
that  Sir  William  Hamilton  claimed  for  it,  but  it  is  more.  It
underlies  sensation  itself.     To  be  sentient  is  to  be  conscious.

Reason,  as  a  faculty  (  Yemunfi)^  is  the  intellectual  j96>z<>(3r
which  exerts  itself,  as  already  described,  in  the  co-ordination
of  perceptions,  conceptions,  ideas,  and  all  the  psychological
units.  Heasoning  is  the  intellectual  jprocess^  and  may  be
either  simple,  direct,  and  intuitive,  when  it  sometimes  takes
the  name  oi  judgment,,  or  compound  and  indirect,  when  it  is
called  ratiocination.  The  charge  of  x>etitio  principii  which
has  been,  not  groundlessly,  made  against  this  last  process,  lies
equally  against  every  other  intellectual  process  except  that  of
original  perception  ;  for  beyond  this  nothing  is  original,  and
all  the  higher  psychic  operations  have  for  their  sole  object  to
determine  all  the  implications  in  experience,  and  to  exhaust
the  possible  relations  subsisting  among  received  impressions.
Impressions  frequently  belong  to  the  same  class,  although
their  direct  comparison  does  not  reveal  this  fact,  and  it  does
not  appear  until  they  have  been  separately  referred  to  the
same  class ;  and  this  is  the  essential  characteristic  of  syllogis-
tic reasoning.  It  is,  however,  true  that,  in  practice,  the  full
syllogism  is  rarely  used  to  determine  the  relations  of  ideas ;
but  its  chief  and  important  service  is  in  the  verification  of
suspected  relationships  among  ideas.  The  syllogism  is  a  test
of  truth  rather  than  a  means  of  reaching  it.

The  intellect  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  unit  and  not  a  congeiies
of  independent  faculties.  The  term  "  faculty  "  may  prove
convenient  in  aiding  us  to  mark  off  the  various  manifesta-
tions of  the  one  connected  process,  but  warning  should  be

INTELLECT  AND  INTELLIGENCE.  405

t.iken  from  the  past  history  of  intellectual  philosophy  not  to
assign  to  any  faculty  too  great  a  degree  of  independence  in
the  scheme  of  psychic  plienomena.

Quantitatively  considered,  intellect  has  been  aptly  styled
the  "  co-efficient  of  intelligence."  The  degree  of  intellectual
power  is  the  measure  of  capacity  for  acquiring  knowledge ;
and  intellect,  with  acquired  knowledge,  constitutes  intelli-
gence. This  intellectual  power  is  of  two  sorts,  which  are
very  correctly  distinguished  in  popular  language  by  the  ex-
pressions perceptive  and  reflective  faculties.  All  knowledge
comes  through  the  senses,  and  the  keenness  of  the  senses
in  correctly  registering  perceptions  is  the  original  meas-
ure of  the  materials  of  the  intellect.  But,  as  we  have  seen,
registered  perceptions,  regarded  as  independent,  serve  only
to  confuse  and  bewilder  the  mind.  Hence  the  paramount
importance  of  that  high  cerebral  capacity  for  co-ordinating,
classifying,  and  generalizing  these  impressions,  by  which
process  the  perceptions  are,  as  it  were,  pennutated,  and  all
their  most  involved  relations  are  brought  out.

Intelligence  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  intel-
lect. The  latter  expresses  the  degree  of  psychic  force  of
the  objective  class.  It  represents  the  mere  mental  capacity.
Intelligence,  on  the  other  hand,  embraces  all  that  is  implied
by  the  term  intellect,  together  with  all  its  registered  expe-
rience. There  is  some  such  a  difference  between  the  two
notions  as  there  is  between  a  blank  book  and  one  full  of
printed  pages.  In  a  word,  intelligence  equals  intellect  plus
knowledge.  It  must  not,  however,  be  inferred  that,  where
intellect  is  equal,  intelligence  will  necessarily  be  equal  also.
It  is  true  that  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  perfectly  blank
intellect,  or  intellect  entirely  without  knowledge.  Xo  cir-
cumstances in  life  can  be  conceived  in  which  there  is  not  a
constant  accumulation  of  experiences  which,  where  the  in-
tellect is  vigorous,  will  be  duly  registered,  and  produce  a  cor-
responding degree  of  intelligence.  But  the  important  fact
to  be  noted  is  the  immense  difEerence  in  the  value  of  differ-

406        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYCHOGENY.

ent  kinds  of  experience.  In  the  first  place,  the  nature  of
things  is  such,  as  has  been  previously  pointed  out  {supra,
p.  46,  note),  that  while  objects  are  correctly  perceived  and
their  properties  are  accurately  noted  so  far  as  they  manifest
themselves,  yet  a  very  large  part  of  the  comparisons  made
and  conceptions  and  ideas  formed  from  the  data  thus  at  hand
is  false,  so  that  the  mind  is  filled  with  error  instead  of  truth.
And  the  higher  the  order  of  intellectual  operation  performed,
the  greater  the  liability  to  error.  It  is  needless  to  add  that
actions  growing  out  of  these  erroneous  opinions  tend  to
arrest  all  social  and  moral  progress.  Most  error  is  due  to
the  incompleteness  of  the  data  of  experience,  by  which  only
one  side  of  a  many-sided  fact  exists  in  the  mind ;  the  rest,
which  may  form  the  more  important  part,  being  disregard-
ed, because  never  brought  within  the  range  of  experience.
Erroneous  ideas  can  not  be  said  to  contribute  anything  to
intelligence.  But,  aside  from  the  great  prevalence  of  errone-
ous impressions  in  the  mind  of  early  man  and  of  existing
savages,  the  quality  of  the  actual  knowledge  possessed  is  such
as  to  contribute  comparatively  little  to  their  intelligence.  It
consists  of  such  impressions  as  are  made  upon  them  by  the
limited  range  of  objects  with  which  they  come  in  contact,
and  the  ideas  and  opinions  which  they  are  able  to  derive  from
these  by  the  normal  intellectual  processes.  A  very  little  is
handed  down  in  a  distorted  and  exaggerated  form  by  tradi-
tion. Limited  intercourse  with  near  surrounding  tribes  may
slightly  widen  their  own  narrow  circle  of  experience.  Death
destroys  all  that  any  one  individual  may  have  acquired,  and
each  one  must  learn  it  all  in  the  brief  span  of  a  life-time.
Now,  if  we  could  imagine  such  a  race  endowed  with  as  vig-
orous intellects  as  are  the  most  enlightened  nations,  the  de-
gree of  intelligence  must  still  be  exceedingly  low.  There  is
no  fixed  proportion  between  intellect  and  intelligence.  The
latter  depends  altogether  upon  the  correctness  of  the  ideas,
the  amount  and  value  of  the  information,  and  in  general
upon  the  quantity  and  quality  of  knowledge  possessed.     But

INTELLIGENCE.— EDUCATION.  407

it  is  as  easy  to  learn  a  truth  as  an  error,  a  valuable  as  a  value-
less truth.  The  mind  will  be  busy  with  the  materials  it
happens  to  possess,  and  the  results  will  be  trivial  and  worth-
less or  important  and  useful,  according  as  these  materials  are
poor  or  rich.  While,  therefore,  the  progress  of  intellect  is  a
physiological  fact,  and  belongs  to  the  department  of  biology,
that  of  intelligence  is  to  a  great  extent  the  result  of  favoring
circumstances,  and  must  be  referred  to  the  department  of
sociology.  Two  races  with  the  same  intellectual  capacity  may
differ  to  almost  any  extent  in  the  degree  of  intelligence,  and
the  same  race  at  different  periods  of  its  existence,  without
undergoing  any  perceptible  change  in  native  mental  powers,
may  represent  two  distinct  planes  of  intelligence,  and  conse-
quently of  civilization.  Such  has,  in  fact,  been  the  history
of  the  Indo-European  race,  and  it  is  still  disputed  whether
the  degree  of  intellectual  power  has  at  all  advanced  since  the
age  of  Aristotle,  or  of  the  far  more  ancient  Brahmans.  The
reason  why  the  intelligence  of  Europe  and  America  to-day  is
so  much  greater  than  that  of  Greece  and  Kome  two  thousand
years  ago  is  not  to  any  great  extent  because  the  power  of  in-
tellect, or  co-efficient  of  intelligence,  has  increased,  but  be-
cause the  acquired  knowledge  is  so  much  greater  both  in
quantity  and  quality.  And  this,  when  sifted  to  the  bottom,
may  be  attributed  to  the  more  universal  practice  of  record-
ing, preserving,  and  inculcating  on  succeeding  generations
the  truths  learned  by  preceding  ones  and  found  by  experi-
ence to  be  most  valuable.  Science  itself  is  capable  of  being
reduced  to  this  formula.  The  general  deduction  which  fol-
lows of  itseK  from  these  facts  obviously  is  that,  where  intel-
lect is  equal,  intelligence  will  vary  with  the  amount  of  educa-
tion.  This  theorem  will  be  fully  discussed  in  the  second
volume  of  this  work,  and  its  important  and  far-reaching  con-
sequences pointed  out  (pp.  471,  4:Y5).  The  corollary  from
this  proposition,  that  whatever  most  rapidly  increases  intel-
ligence will  also  most  rapidly  develop  intellect  (vol.  ii,  pp.
484,  549,  564),  will  be  readily  drawn  by  all  who  have  learned

408        SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— PSYOHOGENY.

that  in  physiology  an  organ  is  always  strengthened  by  use,
and  that  acquired  modifications  are  inherited.  Thus  does
science  at  every  turn  point  to  education  as  the  great  lever  of
human  advancement

This  rapid  survey  of  the  psychic  phenomena  should  not
be  closed  without  a  general  remark  respecting  the  true  nat-
ure of  mind  itself.  The  question  of  questions  has  always
been,  Is  the  mind  material  or  immaterial  ?  So  long  as  it  was
regarded  by  metaphysicians  as  an  entity,  both  these  alterna-
tives were  legitimate.  In  fact,  where  both  parties  are  agreed
upon  this  point,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  materialists
had  the  advantage.  For  they  could  justly  say,  If  mind  is  a
thing,  it  must  be  made  of  matter.  But  science  cuts  off  the
debate  on  this  line  of  argument,  on  whichever  side  of  the
question,  for  it  declares  that,  of  the  only  two  possible  catego-
ries, matter  and  relation,  the  phenomena  ascribed  to  mind
clearly  belong  to  the  latter.  But  these  categories,  unlike
those  of  the  old  philosophies,  are  not  independent.  Bela-
tious  subsist  between  material  things,  and  in  no  other  way.
In  and  of  themselves  they  are  nothing.

Psychic  phenomena  are  the  relations  which  subsist  among
the  material  molecules  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system
and  between  these  and  the  material  objects  of  the  outside
world  which  appeal  to  them  by  means  of  actual  mechanical
contact.  All  that  we  know  of  mind,  except  by  our  own
consciousness  of  what  is  going  on  within  ourselves,  is  in-
ferred from  the  mechanical  effects  which  it  produces.  We
may  stand  close  by  the  side  of  the  greatest  genius  of  the  age
at  the  moment  when  his  mind  is  developing  the  greatest
truth  that  has  ever  been  brought  to  light,  and  be  wholly  un-
conscious of  the  mighty  work.  But,  if  he  speaks,  and  unfolds
to  our  auditory  faculties  through  the  medium  of  articulate
language  the  thoughts  that  occupy  his  brain,  we  are,  by  this
purely  mechanical  effect,  impressed  upon  us  through  a  series
of  tangible,  material  appliances,  put  in  possession  of  the  truth

I

NATURE  OF  MIND.  409

which,  through  a  less  obvious  mechanism,  has  been  evolved
within  him.  Or  the  same  result  may  be  brought  about  by
the  still  more  obviously  mechanical  process  of  writing  and
reading.  These  silent  and  imperceptible  relations  are  the
result  of  interior  processes,  and  are  made  manifest  by  exterior
actions.  Mind  is  immaterial  because  relational,  but  like  all
relations  it  has  matter  for  its  basis — the  organized  matter  of
the  living  body,  actuated  by  the  co-ordinated  mechanism  of
a  brain  and  nervous  system.  But,  as  we  saw,  relations  con-
stitute the  properties  of  matter,  and  hence  mind,  as  well  as
life,  is  such  a  property.

CHAPTEK  YI.

SECONDARY  A  0  GREG  ATI  OK— {Continued.)

ANTHKOPOGENY — GENESIS    OF   MAK.

Preliminary  remarks — Homogeneity  among  organized  beings — Man's  place  in
the  animal  series — Lowest  types  of  mankind — Anatomical  characters  indi-
cating the  simian  ancestry  of  man — Argument  from  microcephaly — Argu-
ment from  embryology — Popular  objections  to  the  doctrine  of  development
— Argument  from  archa3ology — Causes  and  conditions  of  man's  pre-social
development — IIow  increased  brain-mass  was  acquired — How  the  erect
posture  was  acquired — How  articulate  speech  was  acquired — General  con-
siderations on  the  origin  of  man — Unity  of  the  human  race — Local  origin
of  man — Antiquity  of  man.

"We  are  wholly  ignorant  to  what  degree  the  law  of  or-
ganic aggregation  may  have  advanced  in  other  portions  of
the  universe  than  onr  own  planet ;  we  are  not  even  certain
that  cosmieal  phenomena  have  followed  the  same  path  else-
where as  here  and  accomplished  the  creation  of  the  vital
substance,  protoplasm ;  though,  for  aught  we  know,  a  still
more  wonderful  product  may  have  been  somewhere  evolved
whose  further  aggregation  may  wholly  eclipse  the  highest
organic  achievements  with  which  we  are  acquainted.*  Such
speculations  must,  for  the  present  at  least,  be  dismissed,  and
we  must  content  ourselves  to  contemplate  the  organized
beings  found  on  the  earth.

*  The  recent  alleged  discovery  of  organic  remains  in  certain  meteoric  rocks
is  as  yet  quite  too  problematical  to  furnish  a  valid  ground  for  speculation  as  to
life  in  other  worlds.

PRELIMINARY  REMARKS.  411

Looting  around  us,  we  may  well  be  amazed  at  the  amount
of  organization  to  be  seen  on  every  hand,  as  well  as  at  the
wonderful  degree  to  which  it  so  frequently  attains.  Employ-
ing the  popular  terms,  we  behold  in  the  vegetable  and  in  the
animal  world  a  truly  astonishing  picture.  The  attempt  to
conceive  of  all  this  as  the  product  of  a  vast  monistic  process
which  has  been  going  on  for  ages  in  nature  appalls  the  intel-
lect, and  we  no  longer  wonder  that  a  different  explanation,
in  accord  with  the  modes  of  human  achievement,  has  been
offered  and  generally  accepted  by  the  unscientific.  But
so  many  of  these  teleological  and  anthropomorphic  explana-
tions have  already  been  compelled  to  give  way  before  the
march  of  science  in  its  irresistible  pursuit  of  true  causes  that
it  has  ceased  to  be  thought  the  part  of  true  wisdom  to  de-
fend, as  exceptions  to  the  law  already  admitted  to  be  general,
any,  even  the  most  cherished,  theories  of  a  supernatural  cre-
ation. Kising  thinkers,  who  would  gladly  conserve  much  of
the  belief  of  the  past,  are  now  hesitating  in  the  midst  of  the
swift  current  of  progressive  thought,  lest  a  few  more  years
may  leave  them  the  unwelcome  alternative  of  defending
theories  which  science  has  completely  overthrown  or  of  reced-
ing, with  whatever  grace  may  be  left  them,  from  positions
which  they  have  wasted  a  life-time  to  sustain.  The  risk  is
certainly  small  as  between  the  natural  and  the  supernatural
explanation  of  a  fact  in  espousing  the  former  even  in  ad-
vance of  that  positive  proof  which  science  alone  seems  to  be
required  to  furnish.  Consistency  has  been  called  a  jewel,
but  never  is  it  more  precious  than  in  philosophy.  The  phi-
losopher who  accepts  so  much  only  of  a  great  principle  as
seems  to  accord  with  his  practical  interests  or  his  education
is  not  respected  even  by  those  who  for  the  same  reasons  de-
sire to  agree  with  him.  On  the  other  hand,  the  brave  mind
which  withdraws  its  personality  and  lets  the  unfettered  sword
of  logic  cleave  through  the  warp  of  tradition,  education,
public  opinion,  and  self-interest,  is  always  honored,  even  by
those  whose   fondly  cherished   errors  have  been   thereby

412    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

assailed  and  destroyed.  That  species  of  "  dualism  "  which
assigns  to  certain  phenomena,  whose  causes  are  simple  and
easily  understood,  a  natural  or  genetic  explanation,  while  for
those  which  are  more  complex,  and  as  yet  beyond  the  reach
of  true  scientific  methods,  it  claims  a  teleological  or  super-
natural explanation,  should  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a  form
of  wise  conservatism,  useful  in  preventing  extremes  of  hu-
man opinion,  but  as  an  example  of  intellectual  deficiency,
by  which  the  grasp  of  truth  is  enfeebled  by  the  fear  of  con-
sequences and  the  voice  of  reason  muffled  by  conventional-
ism. The  fact  alone  that  the  progress  of  thought,  as  directed
by  that  of  science  and  increased  knowledge,  has  always  been
in  the  one  direction  of  substituting  the  natural  for  the  super-
natural, in  proportion  as  it  has  been  brought  within  the  reach
of  scientific  investigation,  and  never  in  the  reverse  direction,
should  be  sufficient  to  deter  any  devotee  of  science  from  up-
holding the  non-scientific  dogmas  which  precede  exact  knowl-
edge. While  the  complete  suspension  of  the  judgment  on
questions  not  yet  fairly  within  the  reach  of  scientific  methods
is  certainly  a  most  healthy  state  of  mind,  the  defense  of  a
truly  scientific  hypothesis  as  against  a  wholly  unscientific  one
is  often  a  greater  service  to  science  and  to  truth  than  an
actual  investigation  of  facts.

Among  all  the  forms  of  organic  life  there  is  not  one
which  differs  so  widely  from  the  rest  as  to  raise  a  suspicion
of  having  originated  in  a  different  way.  The  broadest  dis-
tinction that  can  be  named  is  that  which  separates  the  manu-
facturing from  the  non-manufacturing  organism,  the  autogen
from  the  parasite  {supra^  p.  350).  But  even  these  qualities
are  sometimes  united  in  the  same  individual,  and  the  closest
scrutiny  fails  to  find  a  definite  boundary-line  between  them.

Organization  in  its  widest  sense  is  a  means  by  which  pro-
toplasm can  produce  effects  upon  larger  masses  of  matter  and
upon  matter  of  a  different  kind  from  itself.  The  plant  and
the  animal,  widely  as  they  seem  to  differ,  agree  in  both  {

HOMOGENEITY   AMONG  ORGANIZED  BEINGS.        413

being  embodiments  of  tins  truth.  The  different  forms  of
plant-life  all  bear  marks  of  resemblance  close  enough  for
science  to  fix  their  relationships,  and  even  to  trace  to  some
extent  their  line  of  probable  descent.  Animals,  though
presenting  a  higher  kind  of  organization,  being  no  longer
required  to  perform  tlie  drudgery  of  production,  still  have
strong  relationships  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest.  The
widest  distinctions  found  among  them  are  those  which  separ
rate  the  so-called  "  types  "  of  structure.  And  yet  the  asser-
tion of  a  different  ongin  for  any  of  these  types  is  now  vigor-
ously repelled  by  biologists  of  all  schools.  Still  closer  is  the
bond  between  the  different  classes  within  each  type.  The
relationship  of  the  amphibians  and  reptiles  to  the  fishes,  and
of  the  birds  to  the  reptiles,  is  now  universally  acknowledged.
A  close  affinity  is  also  pointed  out  between  the  lowest  mam-
mals (the  Monotremes)  and  both  birds  and  reptiles,  while
the  mammalian  class  consists  of  several  diverging  series  of
closely  connected  steps,  from  the  Ornithorhynchus  to  the
horse,  the  dog,  the  elephant,  and  the  chimpanzee.  Whoso-
ever should  attempt  to  break  this  chain  of  relationship  and
maintain  a  different  nature  or  mode  of  origin  for  any  of
these  forms,  would  be  speedily  read  out  of  the  synagogue  of
science  as  a  charlatan  and  an  impostor.  However  widely
men  may  differ  as  to  the  origin  of  animal  life  and  of  species,
the  fact  of  their  relationships  and  homogeneity  can  not  be
gainsaid,  and  whatever  has  been  the  history  of  one  has  been
that  of  all.

1^0 w,  we  find  within  the  mammalian  class,  I  will  not  say
at  the  head  of  it,  a  genus,  or,  as  some  claim,  a  species,  sys-
tematically named  Homo,  which,  had  it  simply  been  found
fossil,  would  have  been  immediately  referred  to  its  proper
place  in  the  series,  with  scarcely  a  remark,  except  as  to  the
unusual  capacity  of  the  cranium.  This  genus  belongs  to  the
type  or  department  of  the  Yertehrata,  to  the  class  Mamma-
lia, and  to  the  sub-class  Placentalia.  It  further  belongs  to
the  division  of  that  sub-class  which  has  the  deciduous  pla-
19

414    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

centa,  and  to  the  still  more  restricted  group  in  which  the
placenta  is  attached  by  means  of  a  disk.  In  other  words,  this
genus  agrees  with  millions  of  organisms  in  possessing  a  ver-
tebral column,  with  hundreds  of  thousands  in  suckling  its
young,  with  tens  of  thousands  in  nourishing  the  foetus  by
means  of  a  placenta,  with  thousands  in  having  that  placenta
deciduous,  and  with  thousands  more  in  the  manner  in  which
it  is  attached  to  the  inner  walls  of  the  uterus ;  these  several
characters  being  the  most  reliable  ones  which  naturalists  have
been  able  to  fix  upon  to  determine  the  relationships  of  ani-
mals. And  not  in  these  only,  but  in  all  the  correlative  char-
acters which,  with  something  less  of  regularity,  go  hand  in
hand  with  these,  is  man  found  to  hold  his  place  right  man-
fully in  the  animal  kingdom.  Yet  this  is  the  being  which
it  has  been  sought  to  separate  from  that  kingdom,  and  estab-
lish by  itself  in  another  "  corner "  of  the  universe  !  If  a
man  differed  as  widely  from  an  anthropoid  ape  as  a  seal  dif-
fers from  an  Octopus,  or  a  humming-bird  from  a  sphinx-moth,
there  might  be  more  ground  for  assigning  to  him  a  separate
place  in  creation.  If  he  even  belonged  to  a  different  class,
or  sub-class,  or  division  of  the  sub-class,  or  group  of  this
division,  there  might  be  a  faint  excuse  for  such  a  course.
But  such  is  not  the  case,  and  according  to  all  the  accepted
principles  of  classification  the  man  and  the  ape  belong  to  the
same  order  or  family  of  animals.  When  as  great  an  anato-
mist as  Professor  Huxley  declares  that  "  the  structural  dif-
ferences which  separate  man  from  the  gorilla  and  the  chim-
panzee, are  not  so  great  as  those  which  separate  the  gorilla
from  the  lower  apes,"  *  and  when  Haeckel  emphasizes  the
remark  that  "in  his  entire  organization  and  his  origin  man
is  a  genuine  catarrhine  ape,"  and  assigns  to  him  "  his  nat-
ural position  within  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  order  of
the  apes,"  how  shall  we'  reconcile  these  assertions  with  that
of  M.  A.  de  Quatrefages  that  "  we  are  not  animals  "  ?  f     The

*  "  Man's  Place  ia  Nature,"  p.  124.

f  See  "Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  v,  p.  527.

MAN'S  PLACE  IN  THE  ANIMAL  SERIES.  415

last-named  writer  is  a  professed  anthropologist,  and  is  not  igno-
rant of  the  anatomical  facts  here  stated.  He  professes  to  rise
above  anatomy  and  to  see  in  the  human  intellect  a  distinction
sufficiently  wide  to  warrant  such  a  classification.  But  such
a  procedure  can  not  be  recognized  by  science.  The  character
relied  upon  is  not  only  not  one  which  the  laws  of  classifica-
tion will  sanction  as  sufficient,  but  when  properly  studied  it
proves  to  be  quantitative  only,  and  even  bears  those  marks
of  continuity,  and  exhibits  those  intermediate  transition-
stages,  which  clearly  show  the  connections  which  bind  man
to  the  rest  of  the  animal  world.  That  physically,  at  least,
man  is  an  animal,  no  one  can  deny  who  possesses  any  ade-
quate conception  of  what  constitutes  an  animal,  and  this
much  M.  de  Quatrefages  frankly  admits.  His  body  is  made
up  of  the  same  kind  of  tissues  as  those  of  all  other  highly
organized  animals — the  same  skeleton,  muscles,  nervous  sys-
tem, digestive  apparatus,  blood-vessels,  secretive  and  excre-
tive organs  ;  the  same  number  of  limbs  and  digits,  of  eyes
and  ears,  constructed  with  the  same  mechanism ;  the  whole
co-ordinated  and  operated  in  the  same  way,  performing  the
same  functions,  if  any  of  which  are  suspended  the  same  evil
results  ensue.  Moreover,  the  sensibilities  of  man  are  mani-
fest in  other  animals,  and  Descartes's  doctrine  that  they  are
mere  automatons  is  not  only  an  insult  to  the  simplest  com-
mon sense,  but  the  ridicule  of  both  philosophy  and  science.
"We  also  see  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  existence  through-
out the  entire  animal  kingdom  of  a  degree  of  self-guiding
power  which  is  strictly  identical  with  the  common  concep-
tion of  mind,  to  a  certain  extent  proportioned  to  the  mode
of  existence  and  the  wants  of  the  creature.

These  facts  alone  would  be  amply  sufficient  to  assimilate
man  completely  to  the  animal  life  of  the  globe.  But  these
are  only  the  most  general  relations.  In  addition  to  them  we
find  that  the  particular  type  or  plan  on  which  the  human
body  is  built  is  identical  with  that  on  which  all  the  most
highly  organized  animals  are  constructed.     As  we  have  al-

416    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

ready  briefly  set  forth,  the  human  skeleton  is  made  in  com-
plete conformity  with  the  vertebrate  type,  the  reproductive
system  is  strictly  mammalian,  and  belongs  furthermore  to  the
more  restricted  groups  in  which  the  placenta  is  both  decidu-
ous and  discoidal.  This  latter  character  is  shared  only  by  a
small  group  of  animals  composed  of  the  rodents,  the  Insec-
tivora,  and  the  bats,  in  addition  to  the  group  of  lemurs  and
the  apes.  Within:  this  narrow  sphere  man  is  immovably
fixed  by  these  anatomical  characteristics,  which  he  can  no
more  alter  than  a  leopard  can  change  his  spots.

Of  all  the  families  belonging  to  this  group,  man  undoubt-
edly most  resembles  that  of  the  apes.  Aside  from  that  general
appearance  familiar  to  every  one,  but  not  formeriy  believed
to  possess  any  scientific  significance,  the  anatomical  study
of  the  apes  has  revealed  the  most  astonishing  coincidence
among  the  leading  characters  and  those  of  the  human  body.
This  is  especially  true  of  the  Old  World  monkeys,  or  catar-
rhine  apes,  in  which  the  dentition  is  identical  with  that  of
man.  Among  these  there  are  species  in  which  the  head
and  face  are  remarkably  conformed  to  the  human  type,  the
nose  being  reduced  in  Semnopithecus  nasicus  to  proper
human  proportions,  and  the  face  being  nearly  destitute  of
hair  except  a  surrounding  circle  of  whiskers.  In  the  true
anthropoid  apes  the  resemblance  to  man  is  still  greater.  The
tail  here  disappears  as  completely  as  in  man,*  a  semi-erect
posture  is  attained,  and  a  stature  not  greatly  differing  from
that  of  the  average  human  being  is  acquired.  If  before  the
appearance  of  man  on  the  earth  an  imaginary  painter  had
visited  it,  and  drawn  a  portrait  embodying  the  thorax  of  the
gibbon,  the  hands  and  feet  of  the  gorilla,  the  form  of  skull
of  the  chimpanzee,  the  brain-development  of  the  orang,  and
the  countenance  of  Semnojnthecus,  giving  to  the  whole  the

*  The  coccyx  of  the  gibbon  contains  one  less  vertebra  than  that  of  man
(Hacckel,  "  Anthropogenic,"  p.  575),  and  this  is  also  true  of  the  Barbary  ape
Inuw  (Mivart,  "  Lessons  in  Elementary  Anatomy,"  p.  68),  which,  however,  la
not  an  anthropoid.

LOWEST  TYPES  OF  MANKIND.  417

average  stature  of  all  of  tliese  apes,  the  result  would  have
been  a  being  not  far  removed  from  our  conception  of  the
primitive  man,  and  not  widely  different  from  the  actual  con-
dition of  certain  low  tribes  of  savages.  The  brain-develop-
ment would  perhaps  be  too  low  for  the  average  of  any  exist-
ing tribe,  and  would  correspond  better  with  that  of  certain
microcephalous  idiots  and  cretins,  of  which  the  human  race
furnishes  many  examples.

But  not  only  do  the  highest  apes  thus  approach  the  human
race ;  the  human  race,  when  all  its  varieties  are  understood,
also  approaches  the  apes  in  a  scarcely  less  striking  manner.
In  the  interior  of  the  Island  of  Borneo,  according  to  reliable
authority,  there  is  a  race  which  is  not  distinguished  from  the
apes  by  the  more  advanced  coast-dwellers  of  the  island.
They  live,  says  Mr.  Dalton,  "absolutely  in  a  state  of  nat-
ure, who  neither  cultivate  the  ground  nor  live  in  huts,  who
neither  eat  rice  nor  salt,  and  who  do  not  associate  with  each
other,  but  rove  about  some  [the]  woods  like  wild  beasts ;
the  sexes  meet  in  the  jungle,  or  the  man  carries  away  a
woman  from  some  campong.  When  the  children  are  old
enough  to  shift  for  themselves  they  usually  separate,  neither
one  afterward  thinking  of  the  other.  The  poor  creatures  are
looked  on  and  treated  by  the  other  Dyaks  as  wild  beasts."  *

The  Yeddas  of  Ceylon  are  scarcely  superior.  They  live
in  the  vast  forests  without  any  habitation,  and  possess  no
flint  or  stone  implements.  They  can  not  count  or  discrimi-
nate colors,  and  are  said  never  to  laugh.  In  the  jungles  of
India  there  lives  a  race  of  low  stature,  round  head,  coarse
black  woolly  hair,  dark-brown  skin,  low,  retreating  forehead,
the  lower  part  of  the  face  projecting  like  that  of  a  monkey,
thick  lips,  protruding  an  inch  beyond  the  nose,  a  long  body
for  the  size,  with  short  bandy  legs,  and  arms  extending  almost
to  the  knees.  They  live  chiefly  on  roots  and  honey,  have  no
fixed  dwelling-places,  but  sleep  between  rocks  or  in  caves

*  Sir  John  Lubbock,  "  Origin  of   Civilization,"   p.  5 ;   quoted  from  Moor'a
"  Notices  of  the  Indian  Army,"  p.  49.

418    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

near  which  they  may  happen  to  be  when  night  conies  on.*
Dii  Chaillu  describes  a  similar  pygmy  race  in  Africa,  the
Obongos,  as  does  Schweinfurth  still  a  third,  the  Akkas,
while  the  Dokos  of  Dr.  Krapf  are  scarcely  superior.  The
Juangs  of  India,  if  they  be  not  identical  with  the  race  de-
scribed by  Mr.  Bond,  are  not  much  above  their  level.  Tliey
are  said  to  have  "  no  word  for  a  supernatural  being,  no  idea
of  another  life,  no  ancestor-worship,  and  no  fetichism."  f
Among  other  very  low  savage  races  may  be  mentioned  the
Fuegians,  who,  though  of  rather  large  stature,  are  mentally
little  superior  to  animals ;  the  aboriginal  Australians  of  the
interior,  who,  along  with  other  simian  characteristics,  are
nearly  destitute  of  the  fleshy  muscles  constituting  the  calf  of
the  leg  {gastrocnemius  and  soUus) ;  the  Papuans,  Hotten-
tots, Bushmen,  Andaman-Islanders,  Cayaguas  or  Wood  In-
dians of  South  America,  the  aboriginal  Califomians  and
root-diggers  of  the  Eocky  Mountains,  and  the  Esquimaux.
Many  of  these  tribes  and  races  live  almost  entirely  after  the
manner  of  wild  beasts,  having  nothing  that  can  be  called
government,  religion,  or  society.  In  the  north  of  Ashantee
is  a  race  remarkable  for  an  extraordinary  growth  of  the
cheek-bones  under  the  eyes.  "  It  is  in  the  form  of  horns  on
each  side  of  the  nose,  and  so  long  that  in  some  instances  the
man  had  to  squint  violently  to  see  at  all."  X

Not  only  do  many  human  races  approach  the  animals  in.
mental  and  physical  qualities,  but  there  are  many  convincing
facts  which  indicate  the  descent  of  man  from  the  ape  family.
In  Hottentots,  at  least  in  some,  the  nasal  bones  are  com-
pletely ossified,  so  as  to  leave  no  trace  of  a  suture ;  this  fact
is  not  found  in  ordinary  men,  but  is  the  normal  condition  of
monkeys  and  apes,  even  the  young  ones.     The   arras  of

*  See  annual  address  of  Judge  Charles  P.  Daly,  before  the  American  Geo-
graphical Society,  18V6,  quoting  Mr.  Bond,  of  the  Indian  Trigonometrical
Survey.

t  Spencer,  "Principles  of  Sociology,"  p.  341.

X  Daly,  loc,  cit.

I

SIMIAN  ANATOMICAL  CHARACTERS.  419

negroes,  as  demonstrated  by  exhaustive  observations  made  by
Gould,  Broca,  Pruner  Bey,  Lawrence,  and  others,  are  rela-
tively longer  than  those  of  Europeans.  The  difference  is
much  greater  in  all  the  families  of  apes.

The  perforation  of  the  humerus,  which  is  the  normal  con-
dition in  the  apes,  rarely  occurs  in  Europeans,  while  it  is
found  in  nearly  one  third  of  the  humeri  of  the  American  In-
dians. In  most  men,  even  Europeans,  there  exists  a  muscle,
the  extensor  coccygis^  which  is  a  vestige  of  that  which  raises
the  tail  of  all  animals  that  have  one.  In  the  tailless  apes  it
is  less  rudimentary,  and  is  more  rarely  wanting.

Human  paleontology  furnishes  us  still  more  conclusive
proofs  of  man's  simian  origin.  The  platycnemic  tibia,  rarely
found  in  advanced  living  races,  but  more  frequent  in  certain
low  savage  tribes,  is  of  so  common  occurrence  in  the  fossil
remains  of  great  antiquity,  that  its  prevalence  among  the
men  of  those  ages  is  no  longer  questionable.  Broca  shows
that  such  tibiag  are  direct  approaches  to  the  ape,  and  that,  in
addition  to  the  flattening,  "  the  bone  is  sometimes  bent,  and
is  strongly  convex  forward,  and  its  angles  so  rounded  as  to
present  the  nearly  oval  section  seen  in  the  apes."  This
peculiarity  has  not  only  been  found  in  the  fossil  remains  of
•Europe,  but  also  in  America,  where  Mr.  Henry  GiUman  has
found  the  flattest  tibia  ever  recorded.

A  still  stronger  evidence  of  man's  descent  from  the  lower
animals,  and  particularly  from  the  apes,  is  furnished  by  the
phenomenon  of  microcephalous  idiots.  Such  monstrosities,
though  rare  in  civilized  nations,  sometimes  occur,  and  they
are  now  believed  to  be  cases  of  reversion  to  the  ancestral
type.  This  opinion  is  founded  on  extensive  and  systematic
study  of  large  classes  of  facts.  Professor  Carl  Yogt,  who  has
given  this  subject  years  of  close  study,  and  has  published  the
results  of  his  observations  in  his  celebrated  "  M^moire  sur  les
Microcephales,"  comes  to  this  conclusion.  Among  the  pecu-
liarities generally  accompanying  microcephaly  and  pointing
in  this  direction  are,  that  "  the  convolutions  of  the  brain  are

420    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

less  complex  than  in  normal  men,  tlie  frontal  sinus  or  pro-
jection over  the  eyebrows  is  largely  developed,  and  the  jaws
are  prognathous  to  an  effrayant  degree,  so  that  these  idiots
somewhat  resemble  the  lower  types  of  mankind.  .  .  .  They
can  not  acquire  the  power  of  speech,  and  are  wholly  incapa-
ble of  prolonged  attention,  but  are  much  given  to  imitation.
They,  are  strong,  and  remarkably  active,  continually  gam-
boling and  jumping  about  and  making  grimaces.  They
often  ascend  stairs  on  all-fours,  and  are  curiously  fond  of
climbing  up  furniture  or  trees."  *  Microcephalous  skulls  are
of  quite  frequent  occurrence  among  the  fossil  remains  of  pre-
historic man  found  in  difEerent  parts  of  the  world.  Consid-
ering the  paucity  of  such  remains  thus  far  discovered,  the
number  of  microcephalous  crania  found  among  them  indicates
with  positive  certainty  that  these  monstrosities  were  many
times  more  numerous  in  proportion  to  the  general  population
than  at  present,  which  harmonizes  perfectly  with  the  general
law  that  reversion  diminishes  in  frequency  in  proportion  to
the  degree  of  removal  from  the  ancestral  type.  Micro-
cephaly is  furthermore  closely  correlated  with  the  flatten-
ing of  the  shin-bone,  and  the  extreme  case  of  the  latter  from
the  mounds  of  Michigan,  above  referred  to,  was  also  micro-
cephalous. A  microcephalous  idiot  is  simply  an  animal  with
the  human  form.  Such  creatures  fall  under  the  dominion  of
man,  the  same  as  domesticated  animals.  They  can  be  taught
to  play  tricks,  obey  commands,  "  know  their  names,"  and  do
certain  kinds  of  service,  the  same  as  a  dog  or  a  horse.  If
they  are  cases  of  reversion,  the  animal  to  which  they  revert
must  have  resembled  them  in  many  respects,  although  not
necessarily  so  closely  in  other  respects  as  in  the  brain  and
skull.

Embryology  further  corroborates  the  theory  of  the  de-
scent of  man  in  direct  line  from  the  apes,  and  through  these
from  the  lowest  forms  of  life.  The  coccygeal  bones  in  the
adult  human  being  are  closely  grown  together  and  immov-(

*  Darwin,  "  Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  p.  lit.

MICROCEPHALY  AND  EMBRYOLOGY.  421

able,  but  in  the  embryo  at  a  late  period  tliey  are  free,  and
constitute  a  true  caudal  appendage.  The  relative  proportion
in  the  length  of  the  arms  and  body  is  not  the  same  in  fully
developed  persons  as  in  the  foetal  stages,  the  arms  being  then
much  longer,  which  is  the  special  peculiarity  of  all  the  tribes
of  monkeys.  The  human  foetus  from  the  fifth  to  the  sev-
enth month  is  covered  with  hair.  In  new-born  infants  there
is  little  difference  in  the  facility  with  which  the  hands  and
feet  can  be  used,  and  the  efficiency  of  the  great  toe  as  an
aid  to  grasping  is  not  greatly  inferior  to  that  of  the  thumb.
It  has,  in  fact,  been  shown  by  dissection  that  all  the  muscles
by  which  the  apes  move  the  thumbs  of  their  feet  for  grasp-
ing, etc.,  are  actually  present  in  the  human  subject,  though
atrophied  and  nearly  obliterated  by  long  disuse.

But  embryology  does  not  stop  with  demonstrating  man's
simian  origin.  The  course  of  development  of  the  race  is  re-
peated in  that  of  every  individual.  This  wonderful  recapit-
ulation by  the  growing  embryo  of  the  steps  through  which
the  race  has  passed  in  its  development  from  the  lowest  forms
of  life  is  so  vivid  that  many  of  these  stages  can  be  distinctly
recognized.  This  is  unquestionably  the  most  important
truth  in  biology.  Not  only  is  the  ape-stage  of  man's  devel-
opment clearly  recognizable,  but  also  many  lower  ones.
Below  the  marsupial  and  monotreme  stages,  during  which
.  important  physiological  changes  take  place  corresponding  to
the  peculiar  characteristics  of  the  animals  of  these  families,
there  is  a  reptilian  stage,  and  a  piscine  stage.  In  these,  not
only  does  the  embryo  greatly  resemble  these  creatures,  but
its  internal  organs  have  the  form  which  the  latter  preserve
through  life.  In  the  fish-stage  the  human  being  possesses
the  undoubted  homologues  of  gills  and  swimming-bladders,
which  are  subsequently  transformed  into  lungs  and  other
organs.

Facts  like  these,  equally  with  those  of  geology  or  astron-
omy, are  calculated  to  carry  conviction  in  spite  of  all  efforts
to  escape  it.     They  are  their  ovra  arguments,  and  only  re-

422    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

quire  to  be  accepted  as  facts.  It  is  ignorance  of  sucli  facts,
or  doubt  as  to  whether  they  are  really  established,  which
most  strongly  stands  in  the  way  of  the  popular  acceptance  of
man's  animal  origin.

The  effect  of  science  upon  philosophy  is  to  simplify  it,
to  bring  it  down  from  the  clouds  to  the  earth,  to  incarnate
it,  to  dispel  the  mysticism  that  enshrouds  it,  and  establish  it
upon  a  basis  of  reality — in  a  word,  to  materialize  it.  The
facts  of  science  are  multitudinous  and  hard  to  find  out,  but
when  obtained  they  are  always  simple,  rational,  intelligible.
So  plain  and  homely  are  they  that,  when  acquired  by  long
and  diligent  labor,  the  world  is  not  satisfied  with  them.
They  do  not  come  up  to  its  ideal  standard  reached  by  pure
intellectual  contemplation.  The  ideas  of  things  before  the
facts  have  been  worked  out  are  always  tinged  with  many-
colored  hues  and  trimmed  with  a  golden  border.  This  comes
of  poetic  imagery  common  to  mind  itself.  It  is  this  that
makes  all  truth  so  unwelcome  when  it  is  first  announced.
Truth  comes  unadorned.  It  is  straightforward,  plain,  and
reasonable.     Therefore  it  does  not  satisfy.

Now,  nothing  could  certainly  be  more  reasonable,  in  the
light  of  the  facts  within  the  range  even  of  ordinary  observa-
tion, than  that  the  human  race  has  descended  by  a  very  long
course  of  very  gradual  modifications  from  the  family  of  apes
which  resemble  it  in  so  many  respects.  But  this  is  an  un-
welcome truth.  It  is  too  coarse  an  idea.  Men  want  to  be
descended  from  gods.  Animal  ancestry  is  too  simple.*  They
can  see  how  this  might  be.  Some  families  trace  their
pedigree  back  through  many  generations.  The  conception
is  perfectly  intelligible.  The  world  demands  an  origin  that
can  not  be  comprehended.  Then,  again,  and  there  is  no  use
in  qualifying  it,  man  is  ashamed  to  admit  that  he  has  de-
scended from  apes.     Every  educated  person  knows  that  he

*  The  very  resemblance  of  the  apes  !->  men,  instead  of  being  an  aid,  is  a  hin-
derance  to  the  truth.   Simla  quam  similis  turpissima  bestia  nobis. — Ennius,  lib.  xL

POPULAR  OBJECTIONS.  423

has  descended  from  the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  or  Asia,  or
Africa,  when  nothing  analogous  to  what  we  call  civilization
existed  there.  No  one  claims  that  his  ancestors  have  been
created  since  the  historic  period.  In  fact,  every  body  knows
that,  if  he  could  trace  his  pedigree  far  enough  back,  he
would  find  his  ancestors  to  have  been  barbarians,  even  sav-
ages. But  what  is  the  pedigree  of  the  savage  ?  Anatom-
ically, as  Huxley  has  shown,  the  ape  tribes  are  more  widely
separated  from  one  another  than  man  is  from  the  nearest  of
them.  And,  although  the  lowest  men  do  not  differ  from
the  highest  physically  as  widely  as  they  do  mentally,  still,
the  different  races  are  sujfficiently  distinct  to  be  classed  as  so
many  species,  and  some  very  eminent  anatomists,  among
whom  was  Professor  Louis  Agassiz,  maintain  that  their  dif-
ferences are  so  great  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  their
having  had  a  common  origin.  This  opinion  may,  however,
be  now  regarded  as  overthrown,  and  the  monogenetic  origin
of  all  human  races  established,  and  this  to  a  great  extent
independently  of  anatomy  and  on  philological  and  choro-
logical  evidence.  But,  if  all  races  have  had  one  origin,  then
the  origin  of  the  European  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Hot-
tentot or  the  Papuan.  Archaeology  emphatically  denies  the
existence,  in  any  known  part  of  the  earth,  of  any  such  race
as  the  European  prior  to  our  historic  period.  If  such  had
been  the  case,  we  should,  as  Sir  Charles  Lyell  almost  face-
tiously says,  constantly  find  evidences  of  his  existence  in  the
shape  of  railroad-iron,  steam-boilers,  anvils,  anchors,  cog-
wheels and  other  machinery,  and  all  the  materials  of  mod-
em civilization.*  And  we  might  suppose  that,  if  the  lowest
savages  were  degenerate  descendants  of  such  a  race,  they
would  at  least  preserve  some  traditions  of  their  former  great-
ness.    But  no  such  exist.

That  there  are  low  races  of  men  whose  present  condition
is  due  to  a  long  course  of  degeneration  from  a  once  far  higher
state  is  not  only  possible  but  even  probable ;  but,  if  this  is
*  "  Antiquity  of  Man,"  p.  379.

424    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

ever  proved,  it  will  be  by  the  discovery,  among  sucli  tribes,  of
traditions  of  that  higher  state  so  definite  as  to  render  escape
from  this  conclusion  impossible.  Intermediate  or  transition
states,  too,  will  be  likely  to  appear  in  such  cases.  But  the
greater  part  of  the  savage  races  found  inhabiting  different
parts  of  the  world  do  not  bear  any  adequate  evidences  of  such
degeneration.  They  appear  to  be  true  children  of  Nature,
products  of  the  cosmic  forces  at  work  in  the  organic  world.
Whether  they  are  now  stationary  or  are  still  continuing  the
work  of  development  which  has  brought  them  where  they
are,  it  is  difficult  to  determine,  owing  to  the  secular  character
of  all  changes  in  the  organic  world.  At  any  rate,  they  seem
to  represent  the  highest  development  yet  attained  by  the
men  of  their  line.  Their  past  is  not  higher,  but  lower  and
more  nearly  assimilated  to  the  animals  over  which  many  of
them  have  as  yet  scarcely  acquired  dominion.

It  may  be  safely  given  as  the  opinion  of  those  naturalists
who  accept  the  animal  origin  of  the  human  race,  that  at  some
time  and  in  some  part  of  the  world  some  one  group — it  may
have  been  a  very  limited  one — of  the  ape  family  acquired
certain  of  the  characters  which  now  distinguish  the  human
from  the  simian  anatomy.  These  characters  are  few,  and
may  be  thus  summed  up :  Increased  capacity  of  the  cranium
and  increased  size  of  the  encephalon  (a  quantitative  distinc-
tion only,  and  therefore  anatomically  of  very  little  weight) ;
greater  complication  in  the  mechanism  of  the  larynx ;  the
erect  posture  of  the  body ;  the  plantigrade  character  of  the
feet ;  non-opposability  of  the  great  toe ;  diminished  length  of
the  arms  in  proportion  to  the  trunk ;  greater  or  less  absence
of  hair  from  most  of  the  body  and  limbs ;  double  curvature
of  the  spine.

These  and  a  few  other  minor  distinctions  constitute  all
that  separate  the  man  from  the  ape,  bo  long  as  we  confine
ourselves  to  the  physical  aspects.  An  examination  of  these
points  reveals  a  certain  dependence  among  them  all,  so  that,

CHARACTEES  DISTINGUISHING  MEN  FROM  APES.  425

on  tlie  principle  of  direct  adaptation,  they  would  all  flow
from  some  one  or  two  of  the  chief  ones.  In  fact,  from  the
first-named  distinction  it  can  be  shown  that  all  the  others,  as
well  as  all  the  secondary  qualities  which  so  much  more
widely  distinguish  man  from  the  animals,  may  have  re-
sulted.

The  fundamental  postulate,  in  attempting  to  account  for
any  form  of  organic  development,  is  the  tendency  of  all
organs  at  all  times  to  vary  in  all  directions.  This  tendency
is  constantly  held  in  check  by  the  counter-law  of  heredity,
by  which  the  offspring  tend  to  resemble  the  parents  in  all
respects.  The  very  facts  which  have  made  any  particular
form  a  success,  i.  e.,  have  enabled  it  to  exist,  are  constantly
co-operating  with  the  law  of  heredity  to  check  the  tendency
to  variation.  The  possibility  of  the  existence  of  an  organism
of  a  given  form  is  a  partial  negation  of  the  possibility  of  an
organism  of  a  slightly  difierent  form.  Such  forms  are  pre-
sumed to  have  been  tried  and  to  have  failed  because  not
advantageous.  But,  while  organic  forms  are  constantly  kept
within  this  narrow  groove  by  the  double  action  of  these  forces
of  heredity  and  selection,  it  is  also  true  that  variations  are
occasionally  occurring  which,  either  because  they  never  have
been  before  tried  or  because  tried  under  conditions  which  have
since  changed,  prove  clearly  advantageous  to  the  organism.
Yariations  of  this  nature,  instead  of  being  pruned  away,  are
preserved  and  perpetuated,  and,  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of
advantage  gained  by  the  variation,  not  only  that  degree  of
variation,  but  also  the  number  of  individuals  bearing  it,  will
be  increased.  It  is  believed  that  nearly  all  organic  progress
can  be  explained  on  this  law.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
such  progress  is  continuous  and  uninterrupted.  It  resembles
more  the  mode  in  which  an  array  moves  upon  an  intrenched
enemy.  After  reaching  one  secure  position,  it  rests  for  a
time,  to  prepare  for  the  next  advance.  This  may  not  be  a
directly  forward  movement.  It  may  be  by  the  flank,  with  a
change  of  base  and  of  front,  so  that  the  enemy  will  appear

426    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

to  be  encountering  an  entirely  different  force.  But  each
move  is  in  the  direction  of  advantage.  So  the  organic  life
of  the  globe  has  advanced  by  irregular,  successive  stages,  with
irregular  intervals  of  stagnation  and  frequent  partial  retreats,
many  changes  of  base  and  of  front,  and  all  in  accordance  with
the  nature  of  the  conditions  which  have  existed  in  the  case  of
each  organism  at  any  given  time.

Applying  this  general  law  to  the  transformation  of  the
anthropoids  to  men,  we  may,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  must,
assume  that  the  particular  form  of  variation  which  escaped
the  pruning  process  in  the  first  instance  was  that  which  af-
fected the  mass  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres.  In  the  an-
thropoids the  arboreal  habits  of  the  majority  of  monkeys
have  in  great  part  disappeared,*  the  size  of  the  animals  alone
being  sufficient  to  render  it  precarious  and  disadvantageous.
Already,  with  the  more  or  less  complete  adoption  of  terres-
trial habits,  a  long  step  had  been  taken  in  the  direction  of  at-
taining the  erect  posture.  If  we  suppose  the  true  Anthro-
poides,  or  simian  primogenitor  of  the  human  race,  to  have
combined  in  his  physical  form  the  several  characters  in  which
the  anthropoids  and  other  apes  most  resemble  man — viz.,  the
full  chest  of  Hyldbates^  the  gibbon;  the  skull  of  JEngeco^
the  chimpanzee;  the  short  arms  and  man-like  hands  and
feet  of  the  gorilla ;  the  size  of  brain  of  Satyrus,  the  orang-
outang ;  and,  perhaps,  the  facial  features  of  Semnqpithecvs,
Cercqpithecus,  or  Mormon,  together  with  other  less  prominent
characters  approaching  the  human  anatomy — we  shall  per-
ceive that  the  step  to  be  taken  will  be  considerably  abridged
from  that  which  now  actually  separates  man  from  any  one  of
these  forms.  And  there  can  be  no  valid  objection  raised  to
such  an  assumption.     That  such  a  form  once  existed  is  as

*  The  orang  still  inhabits  trees,  but  its  movements  among  their  branches  are
described  as  very  slow  and  labored.  (Paper  by  Mr.  Hornaday  before  the  Ameri-
can Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  Saratoga,  1879.  "  Pro-
ceedings," p.  4-17.)  The  gorilla,  on  the  contrary,  has  already  nearly  or  quite
forsaken  the  trees,  and  lives  in  jungles,  using  its  fore-limbs  to  hold  on  to  the
smaller  growths.

PRE-SOCIAL  DEYELOPMEITT.  427

probable  as  that  the  gorilla  or  orang  should  exist.  True,
we  have  no  living  representatives  of  just  this  form,  but
neither  have  we  probably  any  living  representatives  of  the
form  then  contemporary  with  this  supposed  Anthropoides,
and  from  which  the  orang,  for  example,  may  be  supposed  to
have  developed.  As  there  existed  then  no  true  men,  so
there  existed  then  no  true  gorilla.  iN'one  of  the  forms  now
in  existence  correspond  with  any  then  living.  All  have
changed,  and  we  have  the  anthropoids  on  the  one  hand  and
man  on  the  other.  These  have  all  doubtless  had  a  common
progenitor,  if  we  go  far  enough  back;  but  this  may  have
been,  and  doubtless  was,  long  anterior  to  the  development  of
Anthrojpoides.

It  may  be  urged  that  we  have  no  fossil  remains  of  this
assumed  progenitor,  which  is  true ;  but  neither  have  we  any
fossil  remains  of  the  progenitors  of  the  living  anthropoids.
All  the  higher  simian  forms  are  of  late  tertiary  time,  and
this  formation  is  very  poor  in  fossil  remains.  Besides,  the
regions  of  the  world  in  which  all  facts  show  that  they  can
only  have  existed  have  never  been  studied  by  paleontolo-
gists, and  we  are  as  ignorant  of  what  treasures  may  remain
in  store  for  this  branch  of  science  in  Central  Africa,  South-
ern, Eastern,  and  Central  Asia,  as  we  were  of  those  of  the
Great  Plains  of  Montana  and  "Wyoming  a  century  ago.
There  is,  therefore,  no  reason  to  despair  of  finding  the
"  missing  link,"  so  long  as  the  pliocene  and  post-pliocene  of
those  regions  remain  unexplored  by  competent  paleontolo-
gists.

Setting  out,  then,  with  our  Anthrojpoides,  a  true  ape,  as
above  described,  living  mostly  on  the  ground,  walking  par-
tially erect  by  holding  on  to  the  small  undergrowth  of  the
forests  and  jungles,  even  as  the  gorilla  is  known  to  do,  we
have  but  to  assume  a  tendency  to  vary  in  a  single  direction,  to
see  worked  out  before  the  eye  of  the  mind  all  the  remaining
changes  necessary  to  complete  the  transition  to  full  manhood

y

428    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

as  we  find  it  among  the  lowest  human  races.  This  variation
must  have  been  in  the  direction  of  increase  of  brain.  Pari
jpassu  with  the  increasing  organization  of  the  Vertebrata  has
gone  on  increasing  mass  of  brain.  From  the  Amphioxus^  in
which  no  enlargement  of  the  spinal  cord  takes  place  at  the
anterior  extremity  and  no  cranium  exists,  to  the  fishes,  the
reptilia,  the  mammalia,  and  throughout  the  ascending  grades
of  these  latter,  this  process  of  cejphalization  has  constantly
kept  pace  with  the  general  degree  of  organic  development,
not  always  in  exact  proportion  to  the  latter,  but  in  a  sort  of
corresponding  parallel  series.  It  has  reached  its  highest  ex-
pression, at  the  extremity  of  several  lines,  in  the  hoi-se,  the
dog  (wolf),  the  elephant,  and  the  ape,  particularly  in  the
orang-outang.  We  may  suppose  that  the  mass  of  brain  in
Anthroj)oides  was  equal  to  what  we  now  find  it  in  the  orang,
whereby  the  former  would  have  the  advantage  of  the  latter
by  a  truly  immense  period  of  time ;  and,  therefore,  among  the
valid  reasons  to  be  given  for  man's  supremacy  would  be  that
he  has  had  the  start  of  all  other  creatures,  chronologically
speaking,  and  therefore  has  held  the  field.

Under  the  law  of  Natural  Selection,  everything  is  an  ad-
vantage which  servies  to  protect  individuals  from  destruction
from  outer  enemies,  both  organic  and  inorganic,  or  which
enables  them  better  to  secure  the  means  of  subsistence.  A
race  of  large  apes  living  in  the  vast  forests  of  Central  Africa
or  tropical  Asia,  where  lions,  tigers,  leopards,  and  many  other
large  and  ferocious  camivora  abound,  would  be  the  con-
stant prey  of  these  beasts,  and  especially  liable  to  have  their
young  carried  off  and  devoured,  thus  rendering  the  exist-
ence of  the  species  precarious.  Lacking  most  of  the  means
of  defense  as  well  as  of  escape  necessary  to  prevent  destruc-
tion from  such  creatures,  the  only  substitute  possible  for  these
is  increased  sagacity  or  cunning  in  outwitting  their  enemies.
But  increased  sagacity  can  only  come  of  increased  brain-mass
in  relation  to  size  of  body.  These  creatures  must  have  con-
stantly found  themselves  "  put  to  their  wits'  end  "  to  devise

HOW  BRAIN-MASS  WAS  ACQUIRED.  429

means  of  preventing  such  attacks,  and  we  seem  fully  justified
in  supposing  that,  from  the  recurrence  of  such  efforts,  in  which
bodily  efficiency  was  not,  and  mental  efficiency  was,  solely
relied  on,  the  development  of  the  cerebral  lobes  went  on
rapidly  under  the  law  of  direct  adaptation.  But,  from  the
increased  protection  thus  rendered  both  to  adults  and  to
offspring,  the  number  of  the  latter  enabled  to  survive  was
increased,  and  these  inherited  the  increased  brain-power  of
their  parents,  and  again  transmitted  it,  with  an  additional
increment,  to  their  offspring.

In  addition  to  this  negative  influence,  which  was  perhaps
the  strongest,  there  was  also  the  positive  influence  exerted  in
the  same  direction  in  the  struggles  of  these  creatures  for  the
means  of  subsistence.  The  discontinuance  of  their  arboreal
habits  put  a  vast  amount  of  their  natural  food  beyond  their
reach.  The  rich  nuts  that  hung  from  the  branches  of  tall
trees,  the  dates  and  other  delicious  fruits  of  the  palm,  the
plantain,  and  the  banana,  must  now  be  watched  till,  ripened
by  time,  they  fall  to  the  ground,  if  happily  the  lesser  monk-
eys, the  squirrels,  and  the  bears  have  not  already  devoured
them  all.  These  losses  must  be  made  up.  This  can  only  be
done  by  increased  cunning ;  and  here,  again,  the  direct  im-
pulse to  further  brain-development  is  exerted.  From  these
two  influences  acting  in  the  same  direction,  aided  by  natural
selection,  the  entire  amount  of  cerebral  increase,  with  its  cor-
responding cranial  enlargement,  necessary  to  bridge  over  the
chasm  between  the  true  ape  and  the  true  man,  between  the
highest  animal  and  the  lowest  human  brain,  can  be  readily
accounted  for  without  exceeding  the  time-limits  within  which
geology  requires  this  differentiation  to  have  taken  place.

It  remains  to  consider  how,  from  this  one  alteration  in
the  animals'  form,  all  the  other  differences  between  apes  and
men  would  naturally,  if  not  necessarily,  follow.  Take  first
the  completion  of  the  erect  posture,  already  so  far  carried  on
in  consequence  of  the  change  from  an  arboreal  to  a  terrestrial
existence.    The  argument  that  the  increased  weight  of  brain,

>

)

430     SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

bj  placing  too  great  strain  on  the  muscles  of  the  neck,  tends
to  raise  the  head  to  a  position  more  nearly  on  a  line  with  the
axis  of  the  body,  in  which  it  is  more  easily  supported,  is  not
without  great  force.  An  increase  of  weight  in  the  brain-
substance  alone  of  from  two  to  three  pounds  is  no  small  con-
sideration in  itself,  when  we  remember  that  a  horizontal
animal  must  carry  this  mass  at  a  right  angle  to  the  vertical
axis,  and  this  extended  from  the  body  to  a  greater  or  less
distance.  But  the  weight  of  the  cerebral  substance  is  prob-
ably much  less  than  half  of  the  real  increase  of  weight  to  be
sustained.  The  bones  of  the  head  must  be  correspondingly
enlarged,  and,  being  nearer  the  circumference,  the  increase
of  mass  is  larger  in  proportion.  Then  the  whole  head  must
undergo  a  similar  enlargement,  so  that  the  contrast  is  not  at
all  exaggerated  when  we  compare  the  head  of  a  microcepha-
lous idiot  with  a  normal  human  head.  Under  this  constant
influence  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  would  be  a  gradual
adjustment  of  the  head  to  the  position  in  which  it  is  most
easily  carried — that  is,  vertically  over  the  spinal  axis.

If  it  be  asked  why  the  same  is  not  the  case  with  other
animals,  the  answer  is,  first,  that  the  weight  of  brain  is  never
so  disproportionally  increased  in  these ;  and,  secondly,  their
habits  of  life,  as  well  as  the  entire  use  of  all  four  of  their
limbs  in  the  act  of  locomotion,  forbid  any  such  transforma-
tion. In  other  arboreal  animals  whose  fore-limbs  are  still  em-
ployed as  true  legs,  as  in  the  squirrels,  a  transition  from  the
life  in  trees  to  one  on  the  ground  would  result  in  the  greater
assimilation  of  the  fore-legs  to  those  of  other  ground  animals,
which  has  perhaps  been  the  case  with  some  rodents.  In  such
cases  the  change  tends  to  make  the  animal  more  strictly  a
quadruped.  In  the  ape  family,  however,  so  different  is  their
mode  of  climbing,  and  so  dissimilar  the  nature  and  conforma-
tion of  their  anterior  extremities,  that  it  might  be  supposed
a  priori  that  the  course  of  differentiation  would  be  in
the  opposite  direction,  and  that,  on  the  discontinuance  of
arboreal  habits  and  the  adoption  of   terrestrial   ones,  the

HOW  THE  ERECT  POSTURE  WAS  ACQUIRED.        431

modifications  of  structure  necessary  to  adapt  the  animal  to
tlie  new  mode  of  existence  would  be  such  as  to  render  it  es-
sentially a  biped.  Both  the  fore-  and  liind-limbs  of  a  monkey
are  very  poorly  adapted  to  locomotion  on  the  ground,  but,  as
the  use  of  the  hind-limbs  for  this  purpose  would  be  wholly
indispensable,  the  only  question  would  be  that  of  the  modi-
fications which  the  fore-limbs  would  be  likely  to  undergo.
Already  admirably  adapted  for  prehension  and  for  the  con-
veyance of  food  to  the  mouth,  and  constantly  in  use  for  a
great  variety  of  other  acts  analogous  to  those  for  which  men
employ  their  hands,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  when  no  longer
used  for  climbing  they  would  still  further  come  into  use  in
the  performance  of  these  latter  acts.  This  would  be  all  the
more  natural  where  the  new  mode  of  life  was  to  be  led  in  the
midst  of  a  tropical  forest,  where  the  dense  growth  of  under-
brush, vines,  and  trees  would  often  be  so  great  as  to  render  it
impossible  for  a  man  to  penetrate  it.*  Here  the  fore-limbs,
previously  so  serviceable  among  the  branches  of  the  trees,
would  be  no  less  serviceable  in  holding  on  to  the  smaller
growths,  and  thus  supplementing  the  awkward  movements
of  the  hind-limbs.  Even  without  increased  brain-develop-
ment, the  natural  tendency  under  such  circumstances  would
be  toward  the  development  of  true  hands  as  well  as  true  feet.
But,  when  the  protection  of  the  animal's  life  from  stronger
enemies,  as  well  as  the  supply  of  food  to  maintain  its  subsist-
ence, came  to  depend  upon  strategy,  craft,  cunning,  and
all  the  forms  of  mental  superiority,  then  it  would  be  that  \
free  and  dexterous  hands  would  be  of  the  greatest  service,  f
We  rarely  reflect  what  an  immense  advantage  man  has  over
the  other  animals  in  being  able  to  perform  the  acts  of  loco-
motion by  means  of  only  two  of  his  limbs,  leaving  the  other
two  free  to  be  used  for  a  thousand  other  purposes.  While
we  may  lament  that  man  has  not  been  endowed  with  wings
with  which  to  navigate  the  air  and  defy  all  obstacles  upon

*  See  Humboldt's  description  of  a  South  American  forest,  in  "  Das  nachtllche
Thierleben  im  Urwalde,"  "  Ansichten  der  Natur,"  S.  156,  IS*?.

432     SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTBROPOGENY.

the  earth,  we  may  find  some  consolation  in  the  fact  that  the
■wings  of  a  bird  are  the  homologues  of  our  hands,  and  that
they  have  no  other  substitute.  If  any  one  were  obliged  to
take  wings  at  the  expense  of  his  hands,  he  would  doubtless
prefer  to  be  wingless.  And  it  is  a  suggestive  thought,  though
doubtless  the  naked  truth,  that  man  owes  his  hands  to  the
circumstance  that  the  primordial  ancestor  of  his  line,  at  the
base  of  the  mammalian  class,  was  forced  to  inhabit  the  trees.
Hands  were  not  originally  made  to  wield  the  pen  or  the
hammer,  or  to  hold  the  plow,  but  to  grasp  the  limbs  of  the
trees  in  the  vast  wildernesses  of  the  tropics,  and  enable  their
possessors  to  live  among  their  branches.  In  this  strictly
arboreal  life  there  were  many  uses  to  which  the  hands  were
put  besides  those  of  simple  climbing;  but  when  brought
down  to  earth,  where  the  primary  function  could  no  longer
be  exercised,  the  secondary  ones  came  to  assume  the  chief
importance,  and  continued  to  increase  in  number  and  variety
until  they  reached  the  condition  now  taken  by  the  human
hands.

But  what,  it  may  be  asked,  has  all  this  to  do  with  the
erect  posture?  Every  thing.  With  all  tendency  to  "go
on  all-fours  "  removed,  and  with  the  feet  capable  of  sustain-
ing the  body  without  the  hands,  there  was  nothing  to  lose
and  every  thing  to  gain  by  the  adoption  of  a  vertical  position.
The  art  once  fairly  acquired  of  balancing  the  body  on  the
hind-limbs  alone,  and  of  progressing  thus  balanced,  with  the
hands  free  to  perform  all  other  services  required  by  the  sur-
rounding conditions,  the  habit  of  bringing  the  entire  spine  into
a  vertical  line  would  soon  be  attained  from  an  unconscious  com-
pliance with  the  mechanical  conditions  of  equilibrium.  The
effect  of  increased  brain-development  would  be  to  make  the
hands  more  and  more  serviceable  as  auxiliaries  in  defense,
in  the  procuring  of  food,  and  in  the  various  higher  forms
of  exercise,  such  as  are  characteristic  of  the  hands  of  men,
and  to  withdraw  them  more  and  more  from  duty  as  in-
struments  of  locomotion.      The  whole   of    this  influence

HOW  THE  ERECT  POSTURE  WAS  ACQUIRED.       433

would  be  exerted  in  the  direction  of  establishing  the  erect
posture.

All  that  has  been  said  of  the  differentiation  of  the  hands
and  their  specialization  for  the  high  purposes  of  existence  as
a  means  of  bringing  about  the  erect  posture  is  equally  true  of
the  specialization  of  the  feet  for  purposes  of  locomotion.  In
the  arboreal  state  both  pairs  of  limbs  were  adapted  for  grasp-
ing. Both  were  provided  with  distinct  opposable  thumbs,  and
could  be  used  indifferently  for  most  of  the  actions  which  an
arboreal  life  required.  On  the  change  to  terrestrial  life  these
qualities  in  the  forward  members  were  increased  and  inten-
sified, while  in  the  posterior  ones  they  fell  into  disuse,  and
became  gradually,  more  and  more  atrophied  until  the  opposa-
bility  of  the  great  toe  was  finally  lost,  and  the  entire  foot
underwent  so  complete  a  transformation  that  it  has  required
the  closest  anatomical  study  to  work  out  the  homologies.
That  this  has,  however,  been  done,  we  may  state  upon  the
highest  authority,  that  of  Professor  Huxley.  While  the  hands
and  feet  of  men  seem  to  differ  so  much  more  from  each  other
than  do  the  fore  and  hind  hands  of  the  apes,  it  is  now  made
clear  that  the  distinction  is  functional  or  physiological  only,
and  not  morphological.  In  point  of  fact,  the  fore  and  hind
limbs  can  not  be  homologically  compared  either  in  men  or  in
apes,  not  being  constructed  alike,  although  the  hind-limbs  of
the  apes  are  homologous  with  the  feet  of  man,  as  their  fore-
limbs  are  with  his  hands.  The  resemblance  in  the  apes  be-
tween the  fore  and  hind  hands  is  due  to  the  specialized  form
which  differently  constructed  organs  have  assumed  in  virtue
of  the  similarity  in  the  functions  which  their  mode  of  life
required  them  to  perform.  The  subsequent  differentiation
of  the  feet  of  man,  on  account  of  a  change  in  those  conditions
in  which  hands  and  feet  were  called  upon  to  perform  en-
tirely different  functions,  was  perfectly  normal,  and  repre-
sents rather  a  partial  return  to  the  original  type  than  any
wide  deviation  from  it.  Certain  it  is  that  increased  brain-
development,  by  originating  new  uses  for  the  hands  incom-

^

434     SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

patible  with  their  functions  as  aids  to  locomotion,  tended,  by
the  same  amount,  to  restrict  the  feet  to  the  sole  performance
of  that  function,  and  thus  contributed  to  the  establishment
of  the  erect  posture  which  is  alone  in  harmony  with  the  me-
chanical conditions  of  a  two-legged  animal.

The  only  other  prominent  consideration  to  be  added  is
that  which  concerns  the  vocal  organs,  and,  although  it  must
be  confessed  that  no  more  important  faculty  exists  than  that
of  speech,  and  that  while  this  is  common  in  some  form  to  aU
known  human  races,  and,  so  far  as  known,  is  absent  from  all
other  animals,  so  as  to  be  properly  regarded  as  one  of  the
leading  distinctions  which  separate  man  from  all  other  forms
of  life,  still  the  readiness  with  which  the  development  of
the  vocal  organs  follows  from  the  primary  condition  of  in-
creased brain-mass  renders  this  character,  properly  viewed,
one  of  the  easiest  to  account  for  on  strictly  natural  principles.
Nearly  all  mammals  possess  a  well-developed  larynx,  and
in  most  of  them  it  is  employed  for  precisely  the  same  pur-
1  pose  as  is  that  of  man,  viz.,  to  create  audible  sounds  which
'^  convey  a  definite  meaning  to  others.  This  may,  in  its  ulti-
mate analysis,  be  regarded  as  the  definition  of  speech.  On
this  view,  all  animals  capable  of  conveying  an  idea,  however
simple,  by  means  of  a  vocal  sound,  however  rude,  may  be
said  to  be  possessed  of  speech.  But  this  would  equally  apply
to  insects  which  produce  sounds  by  various  forms  of  stridu-
lation  not  at  all  analogous  to  vocalization.  For  these  have  a
definite  object  in  view,  and  their  calls  are  successful  in  secur-
ing this  object.  Remarkable  differentiations  in  the  larynx
are  common  in  many  vertebrate  forms.  The  amphibians
have  a  well-developed  larynx,  and  most  of  them  utter  loud
and  shrill  notes.  In  toads  there  is  a  loose  membrane  adja-
cent which  can  be  greatly  inflated,  and  which  thus  assists  in
the  production  of  the  loud  and  disagreeable  sounds  which
these  creatures  make  at  night.  The  Reptilia^  singularly
enough,  are  for  the  most  part  silent ;  but  the  birds,  which

now   SPEECH  WAS  ACQUIRED.  435

liave  undoubtedly  descended  from  tliem,  present  some  of  the
most  remarkable  laryngeal  developments  furnished  by  the
animal  kingdom.  The  musical  powers  of  birds  are  due  to
this  fact,  and  here  the  vocal  cords  are  variously  modified  to
produce  the  results.  In  the  whooping  crane  {Grus  Ameri-
canus),  and  also  to  a  less  extent  in  the  sand-hill  crane  {G.
Canadensis),  there  exists,  in  addition  to  the  regular  vocal
organs,  an  exceedingly  long  tube  connected  with  them,  and
consisting  of  the  trachea  incased  in  a  mass  of  ossified  tissue,
and  coiled  several  times  round  to  increase  its  length.  This
tube  serves  to  intensify  the  sound,  and  gives  it  a  peculiar
tone  which  can  be  heard  at  an  immense  distance,  and  long
after  the  aspiring  bird  in  its  vast  upward  cycles  has  been  lost
to  view.

In  most  mammals  the  ability  to  multiply  and  vary  sounds
is  generally  much  limited,  which  is  supposed  to  be  in  great
part  due  to  the  imperfect  nature  of  the  sonorous  cavities
adjacent  to  the  larynx  rather  than  to  the  imperfection  of
that  organ  itself.  M.  Emile  Blanchard  thinks  that,  but  for
this,  dogs  would  be  found  to  possess  a  considerable  degree  of
speech.  In  the  monkey  tribe  the  larynx  is  highly  differen-
tiated, and  does  not  seem  to  be  much  inferior  to  that  of  man
himself.  There  is  great  variety  and  doubtless  much  expres-
siveness in  the  chatter  of  these  creatures,  and  some  monkeys
are  capable  of  uttering  sounds  of  immense  volume,  as  the
BO-called  "  howling-monkeys."  But  the  anthropoid  apes  seem
to  be  for  the  most  part  silent,  and  make  little  or  no  use  of
the  highly  developed  vocal  organs  which  they  possess.  Mr.
Darwin  claims  that  this  is  not  by  any  means  a  solitary  in-
stance in  nature,  and  names  various  birds  whose  vocal  appa-
ratus seems  to  be  equally  elaborate,  some  of  which,  as  the
crow,  merely  croak,  while  others  pour  forth  rich  and  varied
melodies.

But,  although,  as  we  have  seen,  various  creatures  employ
their  vocal  apparatus  for  definite  purposes  analogous  to  those
for  which  man  employs  his,  still  it  is  beyond  question  that

436     SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

man  is  the  only  being  on  the  globe  that  has  advanced  to
the  point  of  emplojing  arbitrary  signs  to  embody  ideas  which
they  do  not  naturally  suggest,  and  of  uniting  many  such  into
connected  articulate  speech.  But,  in  viewing  this  apparently
salient  distinction,  we  must,  as  heretofore,  resist  the  tendency
which  constitutes  the  chief  fallacy  of  all  attempts  to  compare
man  with  the  lower  animals,  to  contrast  wide  extremes  while
ignoring  intermediate  facts.  Barely  referring  to  the  fact
that  the  genetic  study  of  human  language  leads  to  the  belief
that  thousands  of  words  now  wholly  arbitrary  have  grown
out  of  original  sound-words,  or  onomatopoeia,  we  may  note
that  the  languages  of  certain  living  races  scarcely  rise  above
this  level.  That  gesture-language  preceded  sound-language,
or  developed  pari  passu  with  it,  there  is  much  evidence,  and
in  many  of  the  lower  animals  it  is  far  more  expressive  than
the  scanty  sounds  which  they  can  alone  make.  There  exist
at  the  present  day  races  of  men,  as  the  Zuiii  and  Arapaho
Indians,  or  the  Bushmen,  who  depend  so  much  upon  gesture,
it  is  said,  that  they  can  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  con-
vey the  simplest  ideas  by  speech  alone,  or  in  the  dark.*

The  great  relative  imperfection  of  the  languages  of  vari-
ous savages  has  been  repeatedly  pointed  out  by  ethnographers
and  philologists.  Many  lack  the  verb  "to  be"  entirely.
There  are  no  general  or  abstract  terms,  and  all  nouns  may  be
said  to  be  proper  nouns.  While  the  Shoshone  Indians  have
long  holophrastic  words  to  express  various  kinds  of  going,
such  as  going-on-horseback,  going-on-foot,  going-over-the-
mountain,  and  still  more  compound  ideas,  they  have  no  sim-
ple word  "  to  go."  Then,  again,  as  the  vocal  organs  are  ca-
pable of  making  a  great  variety  of  sounds,  we  find  that  those
of  savages  do  not  necessarily  conform  to  the  euphonious  ones

*  Spencer's  "Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  149.  This  statement  has
been  denied  of  the  Arapahoes  by  persons  well  acquainted  with  that  tribe  (Colo-
nel Garrick  Mallery,  in  "Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,"  1879-'80,
p.  314);  it  is  also  now  known  to  be  untrue  of  the  Zunis,  who  have  a  highly
developed  language.

HOW   SPEECH  WAS  ACQUIRED.  437

embodied  in  cultivated  languages.  Words  are  often  the
merest  grunts  or  clucks,  and  in  some  languages  it  would
be  impossible  to  spell  out  the  pronunciation  of  many  of
them.*  These  crude,  undilferentiated  sounds  can  scarcely
be  called  words,  and  yet  monosyllabic  words  all  rest  on  very
similar  claims.  It  may  be  truly  said  that  tliere  are  human
languages  which  are  not  articulate,  or,  at  least,  which  are  no
more  so  than  are  the  various  sounds  expressing  ideas  which
certain  of  the  lower  animals  are  capable  of  making.  All,
therefore,  that  can  still  be  said  in  favor  of  language  as  an
exclusively  human  attribute  is,  that  even  the  crudest  human
languages  contain  a  somewhat  larger  number  of  expressive
sounds  than  can  be  marshaled  by  any  other  animal.

The  amount  of  actual  modification  which  the  larynx  of
man  has  undergone  is  very  slight  compared  with  the  progress
made  in  speaking.  It  is  probable  that,  with  their  present  or-
gans and  the  proper  incentive  to  their  exercise,  the  higher
apes  could  utter  all  the  sounds  embraced  in  some  rude  lan-
guages. Practice  alone  is  all  that  would  be  needed  to  adapt
the  organ  to  the  function,  and,  according  to  the  law  of
direct  equilibration,  or  morphological  adaptation  produced
by  use  alone,  the  highest  perfection  in  the  form  of  the
organs  themselves  might  be  reached.  The  condition  re-
quired, however,  is  the  incentive  to  practice.  This  is  the
result  of  a  variety  of  circumstances,  none  of  which  would
avail  without  a  certain  degree  of  mental  development,  or
intelligence,  as  the  primary  and  initial  condition.

The  degree  of  sagacity  amounting  to  actual  intelligence,
which  we  so  frequently  observe  in  domestic  animals,  particu-
larly in  the  dog,  is  still  far  short  of  that  required  to  initiate
articulate  speech.  The  suggestion  of  M.  Emile  Blanchard  that
certain  animals,  as  monkeys,  would  probably  have  been  able  to
communicate  orally  with  man,  but  for  a  defect  in  the  buccal
cavity  and  other  sonorous  passages,  which  differ  more  in  man
than  does  the  larynx  itself,  is  worth  considering,  but  upon

*  Tylor,  "Primitive  Culture,"  Boston,  1874,  vol.  i,  p.  1,0.
20

/

438     SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

the  whole  it  seems  that  the  true  cause  of  the  deficiency  lies
in  the  brain.

If  a  microcepLalons  idiot,  with  from  fifty  to  sixty-five
cubic  inches  of  brain,  can  not  be  taught  really  to  speak  like
other  men,  although  possessing  all  the  organs  employed  in
this  process  exactly  like  other  human  beings,  it  can  hardly  be
expected  that  the  chimpanzee,  with  nearly  the  human  stature
and  only  thirty-five  cubic  inches  of  brain,  could  be  taught  to
talk,  even  if  all  its  organs  were  precisely  the  same.  And
this  may  be  taken  as  a  fair  type  of  the  relation  between  brain
and  size  of  body  among  the  most  intelligent  of  the  lower
animals.  The  full  consideration  of  this  subject  brings  out
into  greater  and  greater  prominence  the  salient  fact  that  it
is  his  disproportionate  brain-mass,  even  among  the  lowest
savages,  that  makes  man  to  differ  from  the  rest  of  the  animal
world,  and  that  out  of  this  one  fact,  as  a  sufficient  primary
datum,  all  other  distinctions  naturally  grow.  Indeed,  when
we  give  due  weight  to  this  factor,  we  are  forced  to  concede
that  not  only  is  it  sufficient  satisfactorily  to  account  for  all
the  collateral  results,  but  that,  following  up  its  natural  genesis,
precisely  such  results  must  necessarily  be  evolved.

While  increase  of  brain  is  the  efficient  cause  of  so  many
other  prominent  qualities  which  are  regarded  as  strictly  hu-
man, this  increase  must  also  be  regarded  as  an  effect;  and
one  of  the  chief  causes,  which  along  with  others  have
conduced  to  it  in  the  primordial  animal  state  of  the  race,  has
undoubtedly  been  the  tendency  to  associate.  But,  again,  this
tendency  itself  may  not  have  arisen  as  the  most  powerful
causal  influence  until  the  long  secular  effect  of  other  less
powerful  causes  had  carried  the  process  of  brain-development
to  that  point  from  which  the  mutual  advantages  of  such  asso-
ciation to  the  maintenance  of  the  species  had  begun  to  be
perceived.  Thus  have  all  the  varied  influences  mutually
aided  one  another,  now  appearing  as  causes  and  now  as
effects,  until  the  result  which  we  find  has  been  reached.

QUALITATIVE  DEVELOPMENT.  439

I  have  spoken  of  brain-mass  without  mentioning  any
qualitative  development  as  attending  this  quantitative  one.
There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  brain  has  not  only
grown^  but  that  it  has  also  developed.  Along  with  increase  of
mass  there  has  undoubtedly  gone  increase  of  structure  in  the
brain  as  well  as  in  all  other  organs,  and  in  organisms  in  gen-
eral. This  fact,  while  it  has  many  valuable  bearings,  is  es-
pecially effective  in  explaining  one  of  the  chief  difficulties  in
the  way  of  the  theory  of  man's  descent  from  the  animal  world
below  him.

The  opponents  of  this  theory  are  fond  of  alluding  to  the
fact  that  among  savages,  and  even  among  the  remains  of  pre-
historic man,  crania  of  large  capacity  are  frequently  found,
and  also  to  the  fact  that  the  average  cranial  capacity,  even  of
the  smallest-headed  races,  is  greatly  disproportional  to  that  of
the  anthropoid  apes  which  approach  or  exceed  the  human
stature.  Mr.  A.  E..  Wallace  concludes  that  "the  average
cranial  capacity  of  the  lowest  savages  is  probably  not  less
than^'y^  sixths  of  that  of  the  highest  civilized  races,"  and  he
cites  cases  in  which  the  brain  of  an  Esquimau  measured
11 3*1  cubic  inches  and  of  an  Australian  that  measured  104*5.
To  these  cases  might  be  added  many  in  which  acknowledged
mental  powers  were  manifested  by  brains  of  small  capacity.
In  so  far  as  these  cases  are  exceptional  they  are  of  little  value,
but  there  remain  certain  results  that  are  relatively  constant
on  taking  the  average  of  numerous  observations,  which  still
show  that  the  degree  of  brain-increase  is  not  in  any  direct
proportion  to  the  degree  of  intelligence.  This  fact,  however,
admits  of  a  number  of  qualifications  in  addition  to  the  impor-
tant, and,  as  it  would  seem,  sufficient  consideration  already
named,  which  ascribes  the  disproportion  to  a  qualitative  differ-
entiation, which,  in  harmony  with  the  general  laws  of  biology,
is  the  constant  concomitant  of  this  quantitative  increase.

As  regards  other  qualifying  considerations,  it  may  be
urged  that  the  doctrine  of  the  causal  dependence  of  intelli-
gence upon  brain-mass  does  not  imply  that  any  definite  ratio

440      SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHEOPOGEXY.

subsists  between  them,  much  less  that  the  increase  of  the  one
must  be  directly  proportional  to  the  increase  of  the  other.
The  most  that  it  predicates  is,  that  the  former  is  a  function
of  the  latter,  and  the  law  of  the  relation  between  the  two
variables  must  be  determined  by  the  observation  of  facts.

The  amount  of  intelligence  to  be  manifested  by  a  given
brain  capacity  is  no  more  to  be  determined  by  direct  calcula-
tion than  is  the  "  power  "  of  a  steam-engine  by  its  size.  And
yet  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other  there  is  a  relation  between
them,  and  this  relation  is  in  the  nature  of  an  "  increasing
function."

Intelligence,  regarded  as  a  something  to  be  increased  and
diminished,  multiplied  and  divided,  certainly  can  not  be  so
dealt  with  in  connection  with  brain,  any  more  than  dollars
can  be  added  to  ounces  or  bushels  multiplied  by  yards.  It
is,  therefore,  impossible  to  say  how  much  the  intelligence
ought  to  be  increased  for  a  given  increase  of  brain.  We  can
only  point  to  the  facts,  and  assert  that  the  vast  and  incalcu-
lable difference  between  the  intelligence  of  the  average  Eu-
ropean and  the  average  Australian  has  been  due  directly  or
indirectly  to  an  increase  on  an  average  of  twelve  cubic  inches
of  brain,  or  about  seven  per  cent.  Mr.  John  Fiske  *  has  in-
geniously compared  this  accelerated  increase  of  intelligence
to  a  geometrical  progression  whose  first  doublings  for  a  long
time  produced  comparatively  small  effects,  but  which  reached
large  numbers  when  history  began,  and  made  a  grand  stride
with  the  advent  of  science.  The  increase  of  the  brain  may
thus  be  said  in  a  certain  rude  sense  to  be  a  "logarithmic
function  "  of  the  development  of  the  mind.  And  as,  in  the
case  of  small  and  large  cubes,  equal  increments  added  to  the
respective  edges  produce  very  disproportionate  amoimts  of
increase  in  their  volumes,  so  equal  increments  added  to  un-
developed and  to  developed  brain  respectively  yield  im-
mensely disproportionate  amounts  of  intelligence.

But  another  important  qualification  of  the  general  facts

*  "  Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,"  vol.  ii,  p.  296.

NATURE  OF  HUMAN  PROGRESS.       441

here  (!onsidered  should  not  be,  although  it  usually  is,  disre-
garded. Intelligence  is  not  a  simple  attribute,  but  a  com-
pound one.  It  may  be  resolved  into  two  distinct  factors,
intellect  and  knowledge  (vol.  i,  p.  405 ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  471,  474).
A  full  discussion  of  this  analysis  belongs  to  the  second  vol-
ume of  this  work  (chapters  xiii  and  xiv),  but  it  should  be
noted  here  that  an  immense  amount  of  what  is  ordinarily
accredited  to  brain  belongs  to  education.  Civilization  does
not  make  its  successively  increasing  strides  by  virtue  solely
or  principally  of  increased  brain-development,  but  rather  be-
cause the  brain-work  of  ages  has  accumulated,  and  the  effects
are  again  multiplied.  Labored  essays  have  been  written  to
prove  that  the  so-called  "  Ancients  "  were  endowed  with  in-
tellect even  superior  to  modern  men.  Certainly  as  between
ancient  Greece  and  modem  Europe  there  can  have  been  but
slight  increase  in  the  mere  co-efficient  of  intelligence.  The
rest  is  due  to  accumulated  knowledge  wielded  by  at  least
equal  intellectual  powers.  It  is  upon  this  fact  that  the
principal  claims  of  this  work  are  based,  and  the  chief  object
in  writing  it  has  really  been  to  show  that  the  influence  of
knowledge  as  compared  with  that  of  intellect,  in  securing  for
the  human  race  the  satisfaction  of  its  wants,  and  in  leading
it  to  higher  desires  and  their  equal  gratification,  has  been
vastly  underrated ;  and  also  to  show  that,  in  paying  greater
attention  to  the  former,  which  is  under  man's  control,  and
less  to  the  latter,  which  results  from  the  subtile  laws  of  selec-
tion, the  end  most  desired — viz.,  increase  of  intellect — will
itself  be  far  more  rapidly  and  certainly  attained  (vol.  ii,  pp.
483,  649).

Connected  with  the  discussion  of  the  origin  of  man  there
are  three  questions  which  usually  arise,  and  which  have  been
variously  answered  according  to  the  stand-point  of  different
individuals,  and  to  the  real  degree  of  information  possessed,
bearing  legitimately  upon  them.  Such  questions  are  :  first,
whether  the  race  originated  in  one  spot  at  one  time,  or  has

/;

442    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

had  several  distinct  places  and  times  of  origin;  second,  in
what  part  of  the  globe  these  one  or  more  beginnings  took
place ;  and  third,  how  long  ago  man  appeared  on  the  earth.

As  all  these  questions  must  be  settled,  if  ever,  by  the  log-
ical deductions  which  can  be  made  from  known  facts  of  an-
thropology, considered  as  a  department  of  biology  and  as  a
subdivision  of  zoology,  all  discussion  of  them  prior  to  the
development  of  a  body  of  such  facts  was  utterly  nugatory.

With  regard  to  the  first  one,  or  whether  there  is  more
than  one  human  race,  or  stock,  science  has  alternately  favored
one  or  the  other  view  according  as  the  materials  of  evidence
have  accumulated.  While  the  Linnaean  and  Cuvierian  doc-
trine of  the  special  creation  and  invariability  of  species  pre-
vailed, science  pointed  unmistakably  to  the  multiple  origin  of
the  human  race  ;  and,  as  the  deduction  thus  forced  by  logic
upon  the  scientific  world  was  diametrically  opposed  to  the
traditional  belief,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  warmly  sup-
ported the  doctrine  of  special  creation,  it  came  to  be  more
and  more  obviously  impossible  to  subscribe  to  both  doctrines,
nd  the  conventional  scientist  found  himself  in  a  sad  dilem-
ma. At  last  Professor  Louis  Agassiz  came  out  strongly  in
favor  of  the  doctrine  of  polygenesis,*  and  declared  that  the
differences  presented  by  the  different  races  of  men  were  too
great  to  be  explained  as  mere  variations.  They  were  specific,
and  the  negro,  the  Caucasian,  the  Papuan,  and  the  Mongolian,
were  species  of  the  genus  Homo^  and  as  such  must  have  had
as  many  distinct  origins.

This  fiat,  however,  came  too  late,  as  the  Lamarckian  doc-
trine of  descent  had  now,  in  the  hands  of  Charles  Darwin,  so
far  won  its  way  into  the  minds  of  scientific  men  that  its
complete  triumph  could  not  be  arrested.  And  even  the  the-
ological and  non-scientific  world,  whose  acceptance  or  rejec-
tion of  such  doctrines  depends  wholly  upon  their  supposed
practical  advantages,  and  not  at  all  on  the  evidence  of  their

*  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,"  vol.  iii,  p.
6.    See  also  his  New  York  lecture  on  "Men  and  Apes,"  1873.

UNITY  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE.  443

truth,  seemed  to  prefer  the  one  which  restored  to  them  a
united  humanity,  although  it  robbed  them  of  a  "golden
age."

At  the  present  time  this  theory  of  the  descent  of  all  the
human  races  from  a  single  primordial  stock  may  be  said  to
be  the  only  one  which  possesses  any  degree  of  respectability
either  inside  or  outside  of  scientific  circles.  It  can  not,  how-
ever, be  denied  that  there  are  many  valid  arguments  still  un-
answered in  favor  of  the  polyphyletic  origin  of  man ;  and,
although  these  may  one  day  be  satisfactorily  answered,  and
the  monophyletic  theory  be  fully  sustained,  it  is  at  least  evi-
dent that  the  present  harmony  on  this  point  is  in  great  part
due  to  the  general  satisfactoriness  of  a  scientific  theory  in
accord  with  received  traditions.  For  scientific  men,  who
consider  that  there  are  more  vital  questions  to  be  settled,
wisely  deem  it  imprudent  to  agitate  this  unimportant  one,
which  has  already  been  settled,  though  perhaps  only  provis-
ionally, but  so  settled  as  to  diminish  considerably  the  popular
prejudice  against  the  remainder  of  the  theory.

From  what  has  already  been  said,  it  will  appear  to  all  that
the  question  which  was  formerly  discussed,  as  to  whether
the  race  sprung  from  a  single  pair  or  from  many  such,  no
longer  exists  for  science.  It  is  simply  a  case  of  the  de-
velopment of  a  species  by  means  of  infinitesimal  differen-
tiations, so  that  no  line  of  demarkation  between  man  and
animal  could  possibly  have  ever  existed.  The  question  as  to
who  was  the  first  man  is  equivalent  to  the  question  which
was  the  first  fan-tail  pigeon  or  the  first  Durham  cow.  As
Professor  Haeckel  justly  remarks,  we  can  no  more  say  that
the  human  race  sprung  from  an  original  pair,  or  from  several
such,  than  we  can  say  that  the  English  race  or  the  French
race  so  sprung.  The  entire  conception  implies  a  saltus  of
which  Nature  is  never  guilty.

With  regard  to  the  next  question,  or  the  local  origin  of
man,  a  great  deal  has  been  said  and  written.  But  even  this
problem  requires  to  be  definitely  stated,  which  is  seldom  done,

444    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENT.

and  its  answer  will  undoubtedly  differ  according  as  the  state-
ment of  tlie  question  differs.  Here,  again,  arises  the  nice
point,  which,  as  we  have  just  seen,  admits  of  no  absolute
settlement,  as  to  what  really  constitutes  a  man.  At  what
place  in  the  long  line  of  gradual  morphological  transforma-
tion of  the  leading  organs  of  the  body  shall  we  stop  and  say,
On  this  side  is  manhood,  and  on  that  side  is  apehood  ?  Until
all  can  agree  on  some  such  point,  no  solution  of  any  of  the
questions  above  proposed  can  be  given  which  will  satisfy  all,
nor  could  there  be,  even  if  all  the  facts  were  known.  The
mass  of  linguistic  and  traditional  evidence  which  has  been
long  accumulating,  and  which  points  to  Southern  or  Central
Asia  as  the  center  from  which  a  large  number  of  races,  now
ethnologically  distinct,  have  at  a  remote  period  radiated  and
settled  remote  regions  of  the  world,  is  valuable  only  as  in-
dicating the  probable  habitat  of  one  of  the  primordial  groups
of  mankind  after  the  power  of  speech  had  been  fully  devel-
oped. But  even  the  languages  now  understood  by  philolo-
gists are  thought  to  indicate  a  multiple  origin  of  speech
among  men,  and  this,  if  true,  implies  that,  before  articulate
speech  had  fairly  arisen,  the  Pithecanthropi,  or  Alali,  had  be-
come separated  into  something  like  tribes,  occupying  separate
localities,  perhaps  thousands  of  miles  apart.  If  the  question
be,  Where  did  man  first  begin  to  speak  ?  the  answer  would
seem  to  be,  In  several  places,  one  of  which  may  have  been
in  Southern  or  even  Central  Asia.  But,  if  we  go  back  of
this,  and  ask  where  the  Alali,  or  non-speaking  men,  first  ac-
quired a  sufficient  erectness  of  posture  and  other  physical
characters  to  entitle  them  to  be  called  human  beings,  or  true
Homines,  to  this  question  no  answer  can  be  given.  The
nearest  approach  to  a  positive  declaration  that  can  perhaps
be  made  would  be  that  most  or  all  of  these  modifications
must  have  taken  place  while  the  creatures  inhabited  warm  or
tropical  regions,  in  which  nature  supplied  the  means  of  sub-
sistence without  labor  either  in  producing  or  preparing  them.
Nearly  all  apes  and  monkeys  are  inhabitants  of  the  tropics.

LOCAL  ORIGIN  OF  MAN.  445

and,  although  fossil  remains  of  them,  such  as  Dryopithecus,
an  anthropoid  ape,  have  been  found  in  more  northern  coun-
tries, still  it  is  supposed  from  other  evidence  that  a  much
warmer  climate  prevailed  there  then  than  novr.  It  is  not
to  philology  or  mythology  that  science  must  look  for  the
solution  of  the  question  of  the  local  origin  of  man,  bnt  to
paleontology,  and,  before  such  a  solution  can  be  expected,  this
science  must,  at  least,  be  prosecuted  in  the  regions  where
those  animals  which  most  closely  resemble  the  human  fonn
now  exist.

As  regards  the  third  and  only  remaining  question  which
it  is  proposed  here  to  discuss,  viz.,  that  of  the  antiquity  of
man,  so  much  has  been  said  upon  it  that  its  consideration  is
introduced  rather  to  preserve  the  symmetry  of  the  treatise,
than  because  it  is  presumed  that  anything  new  can  be  ad-
duced.

But,  notwithstanding  the  great  extent  to  which  this  prob-
lem has  engaged  the  attention  of  the  most  able  writers,  it
may  be  doubted  whether  the  point  of  view  from  which  the
discussion  here  proceeds  has  been  sufficiently  appreciated.
For  in  this  problem,  as  much  as,  if  not  more  than,  in  those
already  discussed,  is  the  solution  complicated  by  the  lack  of  a
definition  of  what  constitutes  man.  The  period  that  elapsed
between  the  time  when  he  would  have  been  separated  by
modem  naturalists  from  the  true  Simice  and  that  at  which  he
or  any  of  his  tribes  acquired  the  power  of  articulate  speech,
was  probably  vastly  greater  than  all  the  rest  of  his  subse-
quent career.  If  any  time-measures  of  this  period  are  ever
obtained,  they  will  be  deduced  from  the  comparison  of  fossil
remains  yet  to  be  discovered,  and  of  the  geologic  strata  in
which  they  shall  be  found.  Kot  having  yet  been  found,  no
paleontologist  having  yet  systematically  examined  the  re-
gions where  they  can  alone  be  expected  to  exist,  there  are,  of
course,  no  data  on  this  important  point.  All  opinions  on
this  subject  being,  therefore,  purely  deductive,  and  based  on
inductions  from  later  facts,  they  are  far  less  reliable  than

446    SECONDARY  AGGREGATION.— ANTHROPOGENY.

those  usually  avowed  respecting  the  antiquity  of  so-called
prehistoric  man,  known  to  have  inhabited  Europe  and
America  at  the  same  time  with  the  cave-bear,  woolly  rhi-
noceros, and  Irish  elk.  Of  the  enormous  period  of  time
which  must  have  elapsed  between  the  prehistoric  and  the
modern  peopling  of  Europe,  estimates  in  figures  convey  but
dim  impressions,  and  it  scarcely  matters  that  they  should
differ  by  several  hundred  thousand  years.  All  attempts  to
measure  so  great  a  period  in  years  must  prove  futile,  and
when  a  number  is  fixed  upon,  such  as  800,000  or  1,000,000
years,  the  mind  utterly  fails  to  grasp  the  period  thus  ex-
pressed. The  reader  who  has  made  himself  a  little  ac-
quainted with  geological  conceptions  will  form  a  far  more
adequate  idea  when  the  phenomenon  is  expressed  in  terms
of  geology.  It  is  now  certain  that  the  earth  has  been  the
theatre  of  a  series  of  secular  changes  of  climate  or  alterna-
tions of  cold  and  warm  periods,  either  in  both  hemispheres
at  once,  or,  more  probably,  with  the  northern  and  southern
hemispheres  always  in  opposite  states ;  but  of  the  southern
hemisphere  comparatively  little  is  known.  The  cold  periods
are  known  as  glacial  epochs,  and  already  two  such  are  satis-
factorily traced  in  European  strata.  If  caused  by  astronomic
changes  such  as  those  which  periodically  occur  in  the  eccen-
tricity of  the  earth's  orbit,  in  the  revolution  of  the  line  of
apsides  and  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  whose  rate  is
known,  the  exact  time  can  indeed  be  calculated  at  which
the  maximum  effect  would  be  reached.  This  Mr.  Croll  has
attempted  to  do,  and  places  the  period  of  last  maximum
glaciation  at  about  200,000  years  before  our  era.

It  is  pretty  well  established  upon  paleontological  evidence
that  man  not  only  existed  prior  to  the  last  glacial  epoch,  but
that  at  that  time  he  possessed  some  rude  degree  of  art.  But
this  is  not  all.  Unquestionably,  human  remains  have  beeii^j
found  in  both  the  Pliocene  and  the  Miocene  formations  of
the  Tertiary  period,  which  throw  all  numerical  calculation  .j
into  the  background,  and  establish  man  as  a  product  of  goo-i

ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.  447

logic  time.  And  this  is  developed  man,  with  the  large
brain  of  seventy  cubic  inches,  the  plantigrade  foot,  the  erect
habit,  and  doubtless  with  the  power  of  oral  intercommuni-
cation— articulate  speech.  Further  back  into  this  dim  and
hoar  J  antiquity,  through  the  millions  of  years  which  it  must
have  required  to  raise  him  from  the  speechless,  semi-erect,
half-quadrumanal  state  which  he  had  even  after  his  brain
became  large  enough  to  entitle  him  to  the  name  of  man,  it
is  both  fruitless  and  unnecessary  to  peer.

CHAPTER  VII.
TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.

80CI0GENT* — GENESIS   OF    SOCIETY — SOCIAL    EELATIONS.

Logical  position  of  the  chapter  on  anthropogeny — Phenomena  of  sociogeny  a
/  continuation  of  the  process  of  aggregation — Conditions  favorable  to  asso-
I  elation  in  the  simian  ancestors  of  man — Social  statics  and  passive  social
dynamics — Necessity  for  realizing  the  import  of  the  term  social  science —
Analysis  of  its  forces  the  initial  step  in  establishing  a  new  science — Pre-
liminary consideration  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  society — The  four  stages
in  the  development  of  society — The  social  forces — Classification  of  the
social  forces — Genesis  of  society  through  the  action  of  the  social  forces—
I  Method  adopted  of  treating  the  subject — The  essential  social  forces — The
I  preservative  forces — Operation  in  the  pre-social  state — Become  a  factor
U  with  the  recognition  of  property — Hunger  and  cold,  i.  c,  want,  regarded  as
*  forces — Subsistence — Feeling,  not  function,  the  object  of  the  social  forces
— Origin  of  art — Relation  of  the  mind-force  to  the  sense-force — Origin  of
industry — Property  as  a  social  factor — Genesis  of  avarice — The  law  of
acquisition — The  principle  of  deception — Natural  justice — Transition  from
natural  justice  to  civil  justice — Influence  of  sympathy — Influence  of  in-
creased intelligence — Influence  of  diminished  power  to  acquire — Genesis  of
civil  justice — Modes  of  acquisition — Classification  of  modes  of  acquisition
— Producers — Classes  of  production — Primary  production — Sources  of  food
— Food  distinguished  from  medicine  and  poison — Mineral  foods — Organic
foods — Nutritive  foods — Respiratory  foods — Vegetation  the  original  pro-
ducer of  organic  foods — Sources  of  vegetable  food — Sources  of  animal
food — Production  of  foods — Production  of  mineral  foods — Production  of
vegetable  foods — Production  of  animal  foods — Secondary  production — Arts  |
practiced  in  obtaining  animal  food — Arts  practiced  in  obtaining  vegetable j

*  Fiske,  "Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy,"  vol.  i,  p.  222.  This  term  may  1
defended  upon  precisely  the  same  grounds  as  was  the  term  Psychogcny.  Its]
heterogeneous  (Grseco-Latin)  character,  while  it  is  admitted  to  be  an  objection,]
is  only  the  same  objection  which  lies  against  "Sociology,"  which  has  now]
received  the  highest  sanction.

TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.  449

food — Art  displayed  in  the  preparation  of  food — Art  required  in  providing
clothing  and  shelter — Nature  and  sociologic  importance  of  invention — ^Pro-
duction of  artificial  appliances — Appliances  for  protection  against  climate
— Art  of  making  fire — Production  of  clothing  and  shelter — Production  of
clothing — Production  of  means  of  shelter — General  remarks  on  production
— ^Notions  of  value — Land — Degrees  of  production — Necessities  vs.  luxuries
— Classification  of  the  objects  of  production  with  respect  to  their  degrees
of  utility — Accessories  to  production — Distribution — Transportation — Ex-
change— Finance — Distribution  as  a  mode  of  acquisition — Parasites — Clas-
sification of  non-industrial  modes  of  acquisition — War — Government — Hi-
erarchy— Monopoly — Monopoly  of  transportation — Monopoly  of  exchange
— Monopoly  of  finance — Monopoly  of  labor  (slavery) — Monopoly  of  manu-
facture— Remedies  for  monopoly — General  observations  on  the  parasitic
classes — The  reproductive  forces — Comparison  of  the  operations  of  the
preservative  with  those  of  the  reproductive  forces — The  physical  aspect —
Feeling  vs.  function — The  direct  effects — The  sexual  appetite — Anomaly  of
woman's  sexual  sentiments — Difference  in  the  sexual  instincts  of  males  and
females — Diffusion  of  the  sexual  instinct — Love — Sociological  effects  of  the
love-sentiment — Physical  modifications — Social  modifications — Male  sexual
selection — Marriage — Principal  forms  of  marriage — Polygyny — Polyandry
— Monogamy — General  remarks  on  marriage  institutions — Genesis  of  mod-
esty— Shame — Effect  of  clothing — Evil  consequences  of  modesty — Condi-
tion of  women — Biological  effects — Woman's  anomalous  menstruation  the
result  of  male  sexual  selection — Sociological  effects— Sexuo-social  inequali-
ties— Inequality  of  dress — Inequality  of  duties — Inequality  of  education —
Inequality  of  rights — Genesis  of  the  sexuo-social  inequalities — The  subjec-
tion of  women — Male  sex  not  responsible — Attitude  of  science  toward  the
equalization  of  woman's  condition — Male  and  female  supremacy  in  the  lower
forms  of  life — ^Assumed  superiority  of  the  natural  over  the  artificial —
Sexuo-social  dynamics — The  non-essential  social  forces — Physical  aspects —
Subdivisions — Undue  prominence  popularly  given  to  the  non-essential  forces
— The  aesthetic  forces — Fine  arts  that  appeal  to  the  eye — Fine  arts  that  ap-
peal to  the  ear — The  moral  forces — The  love-forces — Parental  love — Con-
sanguineal  love — Patriotism — Philanthropy — Self-love — Correlatives  of  the
love-forces — The  fear-forces — Classification  of  the  fear-forces — Physical
fear-forces — Genesis  of  pain — Physiological  explanation  of  fear — ^Fear  of
violence — Fear  of  man — Fear  of  animals — Fear  of  inanimate  nature — Fear
of  spiritual  beings — ^Fear  of  disease — Psychical  fear-forces — Sociological
effect  of  the  doctrine  of  immortality — The  intellectual  forces — Intellect  a
directing  force — Direct  effects  of  intellectual  activity — Concluding  remarks
— ^Why  the  discussion  has  been  confined  to  the  passively  dynamic  stage  of
Bociety — Tertiary  compared  with  secondary  aggregates — Social  integration
— Social  dissolution — Decline  through  migration  of  the  elite — Decline
through  dilution — Instability  of  the  social  organization.

450  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

PRELIMINAR  7  C0N8IDERA  TIONS.

The  chapter  on  Man,  just  closed,  instead  of  logically
carrying  forward  the  series  of  aggregations  of  matter  and
presenting  a  new  phase  of  the  universal  process,  was  really
nothing  more  than  the  consideration  of  a  special  department
of  Life,  in  which,  however,  the  ideas  embraced  in  the  chapter
on  Mind  were,  of  course,  prominently  involved.  It  might
have  formed  a  conclusion  to  the  chapter  on  Lite,  as  showing
the  highest  degree  to  which  the  process  of  organization  has
been  carried,  but  its  proper  treatment  would  then  have  been
somewhat  impeded  by  a  lack  of  the  connection  between
organization  and  the  psychic  phenomena  which  chiefly  ele-
vate man  above  the  rest  of  the  animal  world.  This  alone
would  perhaps  have  been  sufficient  to  detennine  the  place
in  the  general  system  most  appropriate  for  the  treatment  of
this  particular  case  of  biological  organization ;  but  the  title
of  the  present  chapter  indicates  that,  independently  of  such
considerations,  and  whether  a  proper  sequel  to  a  discussion  of
the  phenomena  of  life  or  of  mind,  the  inquiry  into  the  true
nature  of  man  is  a  necessary  prelude  to  the  treatment  of
the  class  of  phenomena  to  which  association  gives  rise,
and  which  are  accordingly  denominated  social.  If  it  be
true,  as  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  insists,  that  social  phenomena
represent  the  resultant  of  all  the  activities  manifested  by
the  individual  social  factors,  then  is  it  doubly  essential  that
these  factors  be  analyzed,  examined,  and  understood  before
launching  out  into  the  more  complicated  problems  which
arise  from  the  repeated  compounding  and  re-compounding
of  these  factors.

SocioGENY  A  Continuation  of  the  Process  of  Aggeega-

TION.

The  phenomena  of  sociology,  unlike  those  of  anthro-
pology, but  equally  with  those  of  biology  and  psychology,
present  us  with  an  additional  instance  of  the  great  cosmic

SOCIOGENY  A  FOKM  OF  AGGREGATION.  451

process  of  aggregation  which  we  have  sought  to  trace  out.
Just  as  the  highest  chemical  aggregates  forming  the  chemical
substance  protoplasm  are  compounded  and  re-compounded
in  the  formation  of  physiological  and  then  of  morphological
■nnits,  and  just  as  these  are  further  re-compoimded  to  form
organic  aggregates  of  the  first,  second,  third,  etc.,  orders,  so  |/
are  the  highest  of  these  organic  aggregates,  or  men,  com-
pounded anew,  on  precisely  the  same  principle,  to  form
society.  And  this  is  the  last  and  highest  step  with  which
we  are  acquainted  of  this  long,  unbroken  series  of  cosmical
aggregations  leading  from  the  ultimate  material  atom  up  to
social  aggregate.

When  treating  of  man's  development,  we  purposely
neglected  to  dwell  upon  the  influence  which  this  ten-
dency to  association  exerted  upon  it.  It  must  be  declared
at  the  outset  that  human  association,  and  hence  society  it-
self, is  the  product  of  the  law  of  natural  selection,  or
adaptation,  and  was  brought  about  under  the  rigid  influence
of  natural  economy,  which  preserves  only  such  things  as
prove  to  be  advantageous.  That  there  existed  in  primordial
man  or  his  immediate  animal  ancestors  an  innate  social  senti-
ment which  naturally  drew  any  considerable  number  of  men
together,  is  not  only  improbable  a  priori,  but  is  disproved
by  the  actual  condition  of  the  apes,  from  which  family,  as  we
have  seen,  man  has  undoubtedly  descended.  "Whether  it  is  /
to  the  advantage  of  any  animal  to  congregate  and  lead  a  grega-
rious life  depends,  in  every  instance,  upon  a  variety  of  circum-
stances. For  all  creatures  of  low  psychic  development,  this
will  be  greatly  influenced  by  the  nature,  habits,  and  dispo-
sition of  the  species,  and,  as  a  rule,  only  harmless,  non-
combative  animals  are  so  found.  The  exception  in  the  case
of  wolves  is  doubtless  due  to  their  superior  sagacity,  and  the
fact  that  they  usually  occupy  cold,  inhospitable  countries,
where  the  advantages  of  association  are  great  and  manifest.
With  regard  to  the  ape-tribes,  living,  as  most  of  them  do,  in
trees  and  subsisting  chiefly  on  fruits,  it  is  manifestly  most

452  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEN"Y.

economical  to  live  solitary  or  in  pairs,  or  at  most  in  troops
of  limited  numbers.  This  latter  is  described  as  the  mode  of
life  of  some  anthropoids,  which,  having  left  ofiE  their  arboreal
habits,  probably  profit  somewhat  by  a  semi-gregarions  exist-
ence. But  to  increase  this  degree  of  sociability  would  with
them  soon  prove  disastrous.  Not  only  would  their  supply
of  food  early  become  exhausted,  but  frequent  quarrels  would
decimate  their  ranks,  and  reduce  them  to  the  state  most  in
harmony  with  their  mode  of  life.  Not  but  that  these  creat-
ures might  derive  great  benefits  from  extensive  association,
but  their  mental  development  is  not  sufficiently  advanced
to  enable  them  to  secure,  by  the  least  exercise  of  foresight,
any  of  the  advantages  thus  ofiered.

This,  then,  is  the  essential  prerequisite  to  all  true  social
union,  that  there  shall  be  sufficient  brain-development  to
enable  the  individuals  interested  to  perceive,  however  dimly,
the  advantages  of  association.  It  may  be  assumed — and
this  is  probably  the  correct  view — that  there  are  two  an-
tagonistic tendencies  at  work  both  before  and  after  social
union  has  been  perfected,  the  one  resulting  from  certain
advantages  which  such  union  offers,  and  from  the  fact  that
the  natural  multiplication  of  individuals  operates  to  increase
the  number  in  any  one  spot,  and  the  other  resulting  from
the  consumption  of  all  the  food  in  such  places,  and  from  the
fierce  contests  due  to  this  last  cause  and  various  others.  The
chances  in  favor  of  or  against  the  success  of  such  social  union
will  then  depend  upon  the  relative  strength  of  these  two
tendencies.  In  animals  which  subsist  wholly  on  vegetables,
and  which  are  provided  with  no  special  weapons  of  defense
and  none  of  offense,  the  gregarious  habit  may  soon  be  ac-
quired. In  carnivorous  animals  this  rarely  takes  place,  the
anti-social  tendencies  being  constantly  uppermost.  Up  to  a
certain  point,  the  degree  of  psychic  development  probably
exerts  itself  on  the  anti-social  side,  since  it  tends  to  heighten
the  sense  of  individual  liberty  and  of  personal  possession,
thereby  increasing  the  degree  of  combativeness,  without,  as

ASSOCIATION  IN  MAN'S  SIMIAN   ANCESTORS.      453

yet,  producing  any  realization  of  the  advantages  of  union  for
mutual  defense  or  protection.  In  the  case  of  wolves  inhab-
iting cold  climates,  and  depending  to  a  great  extent  for  their
subsistence  on  the  capture  of  large  animals,  such  as  deer,
elk,  moose,  etc.,  too  large  for  a  single  wolf  to  encounter  with
any  hope  of  success,  the  advantage  of  hunting  in  packs  is  so
obvious  that  it  has  been  adopted,  notwithstanding  their  com-
bative natures.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  wolf
is  the  stock  from  which  the  domestic  dog  has  sprung,  and
that  it  possesses  a  large  share  of  that  high  psychic  develop-
ment which  is  characteristic  of  those  intelligent  companions
of  man,  without  which  it  would  undoubtedly  be  impossible
for  it  to  adopt  gregarious  habits.

CoiiDrnoNS  favorable  to  Association  in  the  Simian
Ancestors  of  Man.

Without  adducing  further  examples  from  other  classes  of
animals,  we  may  consider  the  effects  of  these  social  and  anti-
social tendencies  upon  the  ape-family,  and  especially  upon
the  hypothetical  ancestral  type  of  the  human  race.  Judging
from  man  as  we  know  him  in  his  developed  state,  we  shall  not
greatly  err  in  presuming  that  this  ancestral  being  possessed
a  very  irascible  and  quarrelsome  disposition  which  must  have
been  increased  by  the  gradual  liberation  of  his  fore-limbs
from  duty  as  locomotive  agents,  and  their  employment  in
defensive  and  offensive  operations.  This  anti-social  influence,
joined  with  others  common  to  other  creatures,  must  have
had  the  effect  to  counterbalance  the  social  tendencies  of  his
increased  brain-development  far  beyond  the  point  where  the
latter  would  have  prevailed  in  a  creature  of  a  more  amiable
temperament.  In  fact,  these  reasons,  combined  perhaps  with
the  effect  of  inheriting  the  solitary  or  non-social  habits  of  a
long  line  of  ancestors,  seem  to  have  postponed  the  adoption
of  the  gregarious  or  social  mode  of  life  until  after  a  con-
siderable degree  of  cerebral  enlargement,  the  erect  posture,
and  the  plantigrade  gait  had  been  attained.    Even  speech

454  TERTIARY  AGGREGAHON.— SOCIOGENY.

may  have  been  rudely  acquired  while  man  still  roamed  about
in  small  troops  and  knew  no  arts,  not  even  that  of  making
fire.  Races  have  been  found  now  living  and  possessing  some
degree  of  rude  art  and  an  intelligible  language,  who  still
scarcely  possess  anything  that  can  be  called  society,  and  seem
to  live  solitary  lives  or  in  pairs,  the  children  separating  as
soon  as  able  to  subsist  alone.

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  history  of  society
has  been  every-where  the  same.  As  the  race  struggled  up
from  animality  to  humanity,  it  broke  up  into  numerous  bands
which  occupied  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  were  sur-
rounded by  different  conditions  of  existence.  This  no  doubt
gave  rise  to  great  differences  in  the  relative  periods  at  which
the  social  prevailed  over  the  anti-social  tendencies.  It  would
seem  wholly  impossible  for  a  race  leading  what  is  under-
stood as  a  "  solitary "  life,  i.  e.,  a  life  in  which  there  is  the
least  degree  of  association  consistent  with  the  continuance  of
the  species,  ever  to  acquire  the  art  of  speech.  Certain  calls,
calculated  to  bring  the  sexes  together,  might  indeed  exist  and
reach  some  degree  of  variability,  but  they  could  never  attain
the  nature  of  a  language.  But,  between  this  state,  which  is
rare  among  animals  generally,  and  that  which  amounts  to
society  proper,  there  are  all  gradations,  and  it  is  in  some  of
these  intermediate  states  that  most  apes  are  now  found,  and
that  we  must  presume  that  the  Pithecanthropi  also  lived.
The  development  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  of  speech,  and
of  society,  must  have  gone  on  simultaneously,  each  mutually
reacting  in  a  favorable  manner  upon  the  others.  All  the
other  differentiations  might  have  preceded  these  and  been
induced  by  other  causes,  chiefly  by  the  adoption  of  the
terrestrial  habit  which  was  in  turn  due  to  the  increase  of
corporeal  bulk  and  weight,  rendering  arboreal  existence  im-
possible, or,  at  least,  not  advantageous.  But,  as  even  the
existing  arboreal  monkeys  are  found  to  possess  a  larger
relative  brain-mass  than  most  other  animals,  it  is  safe  to
presume  that,  at  the  base  of  the  entire  series  of  special  adap-

ASSOCIATION  m  MAN'S  SIMIAN  ANCESTORS.      455

tations  which  raised  man  to  his  final  place  in  the  scale  of
organization,  lay  this  causa  causarum  of  an  antecedent  mental
superiority,  which  it  was  his  good  fortune  to  receive  in  the
course  of  his  organic  progress  from  a  still  lower  plane  of
existence.  From  the  condition  of  a  being  such  as  has  been
described,  walking  chiefly  erect,  with  a  brain  capacity  of
from  sixty  to  seventy  cubic  inches,  living  in  troops  or  rude
societies,  and  communicating  ideas  mostly  by  gestures,  but
constantly  accompanied  by  some  chattering  jargon  in  which
the  different  sounds  symbolized,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,
emotional  states  at  least,  if  not  true  intellectual  conceptions
— from  the  condition  of  such  a  being  to  that  of  certain
extremely  low  races  now  existing  upon  the  globe,  such  as
the  Judngs,  the  step  is  indeed  short,  much  shorter  than  that
which  spans  the  interval  between  the  present  anthropoid  and
such  a  being.  And,  if  it  be  said  that  the  difference  of  brain
in  these  cases  is  very  great,  it  may  be  replied  that  it  is  no
greater  than  that  which  separates  the  Australian  from  the
European,

Of  the  fact  that  the  different  tribes  and  races  of  men
must  have  advanced  at  very  different  rates,  no  bettei  illustra-
tion is  needed  than  is  furnished  by  a  comparison  of  the  con-
dition of  the  existing  savages  with  that  of  prehistoric  man
as  he  is  revealed  by  the  remains  of  his  achievements  in  the
paleolithic  age.  While  in  these  remains  themselves  we  find
great  differences  in  the  degree  of  social  development,  some
of  them  indicating  a  condition  scarcely  above  the  brute,  and
others  a  remarkably  high  degree  of  engineering  skill  and
intellectual  elevation,  we  also  find  among  living  races,  exclu-
sive of  the  truly  civilized  historic  ones,  extremes  of  very
nearly  the  same  range.  It  is  a  valuable  discovery  of  recent
times  that,  if  we  would  know  the  history  of  man's  develop-
ment from  the  lowest  savage  state,  we  have  but  to  study  the
series  of  gradations  which  the  various  existing  races  actually
present.  That  the  results  thus  obtained  are  in  the  main  reli-
able as  indices  of  the  true  nature  of  the  development  of  the

456  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEFY.

advanced  races,  there  now  remains  little  doubt.  It  is  upon
tills  assumption  that  are  based  the  great  works  of  Tylor,
Spencer,  and  other  recent  writers,  who  have  suddenly  thrown
such  a  flood  of  light  upon  the  whole  problem  of  society  and
civilization.

Social  Statics  and  Passive  Social  Dynamics. — ^Relying
chiefly  on  the  many  facts  brought  forward  in  these  works,
and  upon  the  meager  teachings  of  human  paleontology,  we
have  thus  far  sketched  the  supposed  path  of  tlie  progress  of
mankind  from  the  animal  to  the  human  and  the  social  state,
and  shall  next  proceed  to  develop,  in  such  brief  manner  as
comports  with  the  limits  of  this  work,  the  principal  truths  of
social  statics,  and  of  what  we  have  called  passive  social  dy-
namics {sujora,  p.  56),  or  such  of  them  as  may  be  deemed
essential  to  serve  as  the  data  of  that  higher  science  to  which
we  have  assigned  the  name  Dynamic  Sociology.

The  condition,  or  status,  oi  society  at  the  present  time  or
at  any  past  time  is  the  problem  of  social  statics  /  the  natural
progress,  or  movement,  of  society,  the  causes,  origin,  and  gen-
esis of  its  leading  institutions,  and  the  purely  spontaneous
changes  which  it  has  undergone,  are  problems  of  passive,  or
negative,  social  dynamics.

It  is  to  these  two  classes  of  social  problems  that  this  chap-
ter must  be  chiefly  confined,  as  alone  affording  the  data  for
the  consideration  of  the  problem  of  active,  or  positive,  social
dynamics,  of  which  both  the  doctrine  and  the  method  will  be
set  forth  in  the  second  volume  of  this  work.  It  is  scarcely
necessary  to  repeat  that  this  problem  differs  from  the  last-
named  in  contemplating  society  itself,  considered  as  an  intel-
ligent agency,  seeking  to  secure,  through  the  exercise  of  a
true  scientific  prevision  based  on  a  fundamental  acquaintance
with  the  laws  governing  social  phenomena,  an  artificial  or
teleological  control  of  these  phenomena,  analogous  in  all  re-
spects to  that  which  science  exerts  over  physical  phenomena,
in  the  interest  of  human  advantage  and  human  progress.

Import  of  the  Term  Social  Science. — Those  who  are  ac-

MEANING  OF  SOCIAL  SCIENCE.  457

customed  to  speak  of  a  social  science  stould  contemplate  well
the  meaning  which  is  conveyed  by  that  term.

There  is  some  small  danger  that  this  expression  may  be
shorn  of  its  legitimate  force  in  somewhat  the  same  manner
as  the  expression  moral  science  has  been  thus  shorn.  The
latter  is  now  in  common  use  by  a  class  of  persons  who  pos-
sess no  adequate  idea  of  what  science  means,  and  who  simply
employ  the  word  in  deference  to  a  growing  public  respect
for  every  thing  scientific  without  investing  their  ideas  with  a
shred  of  scientific  meaning.  In  their  "  moral  science  "  trea-
tises they  talk  of  "  free  moral  agency,"  which  is  a  direct  con-
tradiction to  the  title-page,  and  clearly  proves  that  the  authors
have  not  yet  conceived  of  the  most  fundamental  truth  of  all
science,  the  absolute  dependence  of  phenomena  upon  ante-
cedents.

So,  with  the  social  science,  there  are  even  now  those  claim-
ing to  be  its  votaries  who  imagine  that  it  consists  of  a  chaotic
mass  of  incoherent  and  independent  facts  of  a  highly  com-
plex order,  and  that  the  pursuit  and  investigation  of  this  sci-
ence consist  of  the  gathering  in  and  storing  away  in  vast
volumes  (usually  without  indexes)  of  these  bewildering  de-
tails. It  is  admitted  by  all  without  exception  that  the  prose-
cution of  the  physical  sciences  is  only  possible  on  the  assump-
tion of  fixed  and  unchangeable  laws  prevailing  within  each,
so  absolute  in  their  regularity  that  the  same  adjustments  are
regarded  as  certain  to  involve  the  same  results  under  like
conditions.  Without  this  it  is  admitted  that  no  advance
whatever  could  be  made  in  utilizing  the  physical  forces,  no
inventions  would  be  possible,  and  no  laws  could  be  established
in  the  physical  universe.  In  short,  without  this  assumption
there  could  absolutely  be  no  science.  But  science  means  the
same  in  all  departments  or  it  means  nothing.

There  can  no  more  be  a  moral  science  in  connection  with
a  free  moral  agency,  or  a  social  science  while  human  events
are  determined  by  an  arbitrary  free-will,  whether  human  or
divine,  or  both,  than  there  could  be  a  physical  science  in  a

458  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

purely  "  chance  world."  If  it  be  really  true  that  these  high-
er departments  of  phenomena  are  exempt  from  the  control
of  invariable  law,  and  subject  to  the  caprice  of  irresponsible
volition,  then  is  it  utterly  vain  to  talk  of  moral  or  social  sci-
ence, and  those  who  make  this  claim  while  at  the  same  time
employing  these  expressions  are  guilty  of  the  most  obvious
and  glaring  inconsistency.

The  true  sociologist  speaks  of  social  science  because  he
firmly  believes  that  social  phenomena  are  under  the  dominion
of  unvarying  law  in  precisely  the  same  sense  that  astronom-
ical phenomena  are,  while  he  ascribes  the  apparent  irregu-
larity and  non-conformity  to  our  ignorance  of  the  subject
due  in  turn  to  the  far  greater  complexity  in  which  these
events  are  involved.  If  he  is  mistaken,  he  is  at  least  con-
sistent.

The  primary  concept  upon  which  all  science  rests,  as  al-
ready remarked,  is  the  dependence  of  phenomena  upon  ante-
cedents. The  phenomena  are  the  effects  of  the  antecedents
as  producing,  or  eflBcient,  causes.  The  production  of  an  effect
by  a  cause  involves  the  notion  of  change — movement.  It  is  a
dynamic  phenomenon.  The  etymology  of  the  word  dynamic
(hiivafiL^,  power)  shows  how  naturally  the  hnman  mind  con-
nects the  idea  of  motion  with  that  oi  force,  and  it  is  only  in
recent  years  that  another  word  (kinetic,  kinematic)  has  been
adopted  into  mechanics  to  sever  this  connection.

The  mind  can  not,  however,  conceive  of  a  change  without
referring  it  to  some  power  adequate  to  produce  it.  In  the
word  effect  there  lurks  the  inseparable  idea  of  motion,  while
in  the  word  cause  there  equally  inheres  the  idea  of  force.
The  further  analysis  of  these  terms  has  been  presented  in  a
previous  chapter  {supra,  pp.  228,  291),  and  we  may  witli
entire  propriety  content  ourselves  here  with  the  more  popular
proximate  expressions.

Analysis  of  its  Foi^ces  the  Initial  Step  in  estahlishing  a
New  Science. — We  perceive,  therefore,  that  in  any  depart-
ment of  phenomena  the  laws,  whose  establishment  gives  it

ANALYSIS  OF  FORCES.  459

the  character  of  a  true  science,  depend  upon  the  operation  of
certain  forces  prevailing  within  that  department  which  un-
derlie, or  rather  constitute,  the  causes  of  which  the  phenom-
ena are  the  effects.  And,  although  in  modern  times  great
progress  has  been  made  in  the  direction  of  correlating  these
forces  and  demonstrating  their  dependence  and  their  common
origin,  if  not  their  ultimate  unity  and  identity,  still  this  (to
the  causal  intellect)  grand  and  wholesome  result  will  prob-
ably never  be  carried  so  far  that  the  subdivision,  classifica-
tion, and  separate  denomination  of  these  forces  will  not
always,  as  now,  prove  convenient  and  necessary  for  the
practical  teaching  and  prosecution  of  science.  In  fact,  it  is
this  analytical  treatment  of  the  forces  of  nature,  and  their
subdivision,  classification,  and  naming,  as  distinct  principles
of  material  change,  that  has  brought  the  world  out  of  the
chaos  of  the  earlier  ages,  and  enabled  it  to  proceed  with  the
work  of  perfecting  its  knowledge  of  the  material  universe.
The  universe  is  so  vast  that  it  was  necessary  to  attack  it  in
detail.  So  long  as  it  was  attacked  in  gross,  after  the  manner
of  the  older  cosmologists,  no  impression  could  be  made  upon
it.  But  no  fears  need  be  entertained  from  any  of  the  gen-
eralizations, such  as  that  of  the  unity  of  force,  which  man
has  been  able  to  make  by  a  synthesis  of  the  data  which  have
previously  been  laboriously  elicited.

Each  science,  too,  after  it  has  been  made  to  take  shape
by  a  careful  study  of  every  thing  which  it  presents  sui  gen-
eris^ must  be  further  analyzed  and  subdivided  into  still  more
limited  departments.  In  physics,  for  example,  we  find  that,
before  we  can  commence  the  practical  study  of  the  physical
forces,  we  must  further  classify  them  into  barologic,  acous-
tic, radiant  (optics,  thermology,  etc.),  magnetic,  electric,
etc.,  each  of  which  must  be  prosecuted  separately,  however
manifest  their  ultimate  correlations  or  identity  may  be.  It
is  the  same  with  the  rest.  Analysis  must  precede  practical
investigation.  Positive  work  can  only  be  done  on  the  small-
est subdivisions.     This  analysis,  therefore,  this  penetration

460  TEKTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

into  a  vast  field  of  however  obviously  connected  phenomena,
the  staking  off  and  setting  apart  for  detailed  consideration  of
all  the  departments,  groups,  and  classes  which  possess  suffi-
cient characters  of  their  own  to  admit  of  their  separate  classi-
fication— this  process  is  essentially  the  primary  one  in  the
effort  to  establish  a  new  department  of  science.

It  is  considerations  such  as  these  that  have  led  me  to
undertake  in  this  chapter  some  such  an  analysis  of  the  social
phenomena  as  experience  has  shown  to  be  necessary  in  all
the  sciences.  This  endeavor  can,  of  course,  take  no  other
form  than  that  of  a  classification  of  those  influences  which
are  seen  to  be  most  potent  in  the  production  of  social  events
— a  close  consideration  of  the  real  causes  of  the  facts  occur-
ring within  the  social  aggregate.  But,  as  in  all  other  sciences,
the  causes  of  phenomena  are  the  forces  which  are  operating
in  each  department,  and  this  must  be  as  true  of  social  as  of
physical  phenomena.  The  real  task,  then,  stripped  of  circum-
locutory explanation,  is  the  classification  of  the  social  forces,
which  expression  I  shall  now  employ  throughout  as  the  only
one  conveying  the  technical  idea  here  needed.

Before  entering  directly  upon  this  classification,  a  few
preliminary  remarks  upon  the  nature  of  society  in  general
will  be  necessary.

rKELIMTNAKY    CoNSIDEEATION    OF    THE     OEIGm   AND   NaTHRE

OF  Society.

Society,  in  its  literal  or  primary  sense,  is  simply  an  asso-
ciation of  individuals.  Animals  and  birds  which  are  usually
found  thus  associated  are  termed  gregarious.  The  fact  that
throughout  all  historic  time  man  has  been  found  associated
has  naturally  given  rise  to  the  general  opinion  that  he  is  by
nature  a  social  being.*  And  this  is  doubtless  true  for  man
as  he  is  and  has  been  ever  since  the  earliest  traditions.  But
whether  he  was  originally  social  by  nature  is  quite  another

*  Auguste  Comte,  "  Philosophic  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  S86  ;  Darwin,  "  Descent
of  Man,"  vol.  i,  p.  81 ;  Alexander  Bain,  "  Education  as  a  Science,"  p.  68.

OKIGIN  OF  SOCIETY.  461

question,  and  one  which,  as  we  have  just  seen,  most  probably
demands  a  negative  answer.

We  saw  reason  in  the  last  chapter  not  only  for  believing
that  all  the  present  advanced  races  of  men  have  descended
from  a  lower  barbaric  and  savage  state,  but  that  the  entire
human  race  may  be  traced  back  through  a  series  of  differ-
entiations to  a  state,  if  not  identical,  at  least  equally  low,
with  that  of  the  existing  animals.

Assuming  man  to  have  once  existed  in  such  a  state,  the
mode  of  life  which  he  must  at  that  time  have  led  becomes
the  question  which  first  presents  itself.  It  is  probable  that
human  nature  in  its  lowest  phases  has  always  remained  very
nearly  the  same,  while  in  its  highest  phases  it  has  evidently
undergone  great  changes.  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that
the  very  attribute  which  now  specifically  bears  his  name,  that
of  humanity,  did  not,  in  his  early  infancy,  form  any  part  of
man's  nature.  The  same  may  be  said  of  all  the  so-called
virtues — honesty,  benevolence,  justice,  etc.  These  qualities
are  the  result  of  his  civilization.  His  moral  nature  has
sprung  from  his  rational  faculties,  and  may  be  traced  back
to  its  origin  in  sympathy :  at  first  confined  to  his  immediate
companions  or  offspring ;  thence  gradually  extended  to  em-
brace his  own  clan ;  then  his  particular  tribe,  race,  or  country ;
then,  to  a  limited  degree,  the  whole  human  race ;  and,  lastly,
as  exhibiting  the  highest  type,  and  quite  rare  even  among  the
most  civilized,  made  to  comprehend  the  lower  brute  creation
in  one  beneficent  scheme  of  morals.  Such  qualities  may  very
properly  be  styled  derivative,  as  distinguished  from  those
original  ones  which  must  have  been  common  to  his  animal
and  his  human  states  of  being.

These  latter  comprehend  his  physical  appetites,  and  in
the  mother  at  least,  the  love  of  offspring ;  that  is,  they  em-
brace just  so  much  as  is  necessary  for  the  two  great  objects
of  nature  {sujpra,  p.  216) — the  maintenance  and  \h.Q  jperj>etu>a-
tion  of  life.

These  natural  appetites  when  deprived  of  gratification
21

462  TERTIARY   AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

give  rise  to  desires,  emotions,  and  passions,  and  it  is  upon  the
frequency  and  intensity  of  these,  and  the  pliysical  capacity
for  doing  injury  to  those  who  are  the  objects  of  them,  that
the  probability  or  improbability  of  man's  early  gregarious  or
social  habits  depends.  Not  to  speak  of  exceptional  facts,  it
is  the  general  law,  as  already  remarked,  that  animals  having
feeble  passions  and  few  weapons  for  fighting  (which  latter
circumstance  seems  again  to  depend  upon  the  former)  are  most
likely  to  be  gregarious,  while  those  which  are  easily  excit-
able to  rage  and  possess  formidable  weapons  of  attack  and
destruction  are  usually  found  in  a  solitary  state  or  in  pairs.*
The  mode  of  obtaining  their  food  often  seems  to  a  great
extent  to  determine  this,  beasts  of  prey,  accustomed  as  they
are  to  the  infliction  of  pain,  being  more  ferocious  than  those
which  derive  their  subsistence  from  the  vegetable  world
alone.  Another  determining  cause  is  the  relative  degree  of
sagacity  of  the  creatures,  those  which  possess  the  keenest
mental  faculties  being  more  likely  not  to  brook  the  real  or
supposed  encroachments  upon  their  means  of  enjoyment.
There  are  many  other  conditions,  such  as  the  abundance  or
scarcity  of  food,  the  nature  of  the  climate  and  of  the  surface
of  the  country  inhabited,  which  enter  as  elements  into  the
determination  of  the  social  or  solitary  habits  of  animals ;  but

*  Some  interesting  confirmations  of  this  law,  as  well  as  some  apparent  excep-
tions to  it,  are  furnished  by  the  vulture  tribes  of  South  America,  as  described  by
Mr.  Darwin,  in  his  "Journal  of  Researches"  (pp.  67-59).  He  states  that  the
carranchas  {Foli/borm  Brasilierms),  though  not  gregarious,  are  very  sagacious,
and  assist  one  another  in  the  capture  of  prey,  and  quotes  Azara  as  saying  that
"  five  or  six  together  will  unite  in  chase  of  large  birds,  even  such  as  herons"
(p.  57).  Another  species  of  Polyborus  {P.  Novce  Zelandim)  is  said  to  collect  in
small  groups,  "  wait  at  the  mouth  of  a  rabbit-hole,  and  together  seize  on  the
animal  when  it  comes  out  "  (p.  58).  He  further  says  of  this  species  :  "These
birds  are,  moreover,  very  quarrelsome  and  passionate;  tearing  up  the  grass  with
their  bills  from  rage.  They  are  not  truly  gregarious."  Of  the  gallinazo  (Ca-
(hartcs  airaius),  however,  which  seems  to  live  almost  entirely  on  carrion  and  to
be  of  a  mild  disposition,  he  says,  "  These  vultures  certainly  may  be  called  gre-
garious, for  they  seem  to  have  pleasure  in  society,"  etc.,  which  is  true  also  of
our  Northern  turkey-buzzard  ( C,  aura).

ORIGIN  OF  SOCIETY.  463

those  above  stated  are  the  principal  ones,  and  from  them  we
may  make  a  tolerably  safe  conjectm'e  as  to  man's  early  condi-
tion in  this  respect.

In  the  first  place,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  ever  been  a
pnrely  carnivorous  animal,  but  rather  an  omnivorous  one.
Yet  there  are  unmistakable  evidences  that  the  ancestors
of  man  once  possessed  tusks  or  canine  teeth  clearly  de-
signed as  weapons  of  attack.  These,  however,  are  secondary
sexual  characters,  and  were  doubtless  used  chiefly  against
those  of  his  own  kind.  Their  first  exercise  was  in  that  fierce
rivalry  for  the  possession  of  females,  so  common  with  the
lower  animals,  and  women  did  not  cease  to  constitute  the
bone  of  contention  until  civilization  had  progressed  a  long
way,  as  the  traditions  of  the  Trojan  War  over  Helen  attest.
This  and  other  causes  kept  the  race  perpetually  embroiled,
and  it  has  passed  into  a  proverb  that  man  is  the  worst  enemy
of  man :  homo  Tiominis  Vajpus.  Whenever  and  wherever  his
history  has  been  known,  he  has  always  been  found  at  war
with  his  own  kind,  and  every  page  that  has  been  recorded
testifies  to  the  continued  intensity  of  his  passions  and  the
brutality  of  his  deeds.

Although  we  now  almost  always  find  him  associated,
yet,  as  will  be  shown  in  a  future  chapter  (vol.  ii,  pp.
214,  229,  239),  this  is  for  purposes  of  protection,  and  seems
not  to  have  been  his  condition  until  after  his  intellect  had
become  strong  enough  to  appreciate  and  devise  a  scheme  of
protection.

Thus  at  a  certain  stage  the  associative  influence  of  his
superior  mental  powers  was  neutralized  by  their  anti-social
influence.  Before  the  intellectual  qualities  had  become  suf-
ficiently developed  to  comprehend  a  scheme  of  government,
their  whole  tendency  was  to  render  man  a  solitary  being.
This  effect  was  produced  in  two  ways :  first,  by  individuals
destroying  one  another  whenever  their  pursuits  conflicted ;
and,  secondly,  by  inducing  a  mutual  withdrawal,  one  from
another,  through  fear  of  receiving  injury.     In  other  words,

464  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGENY.

Buperior  sagacity  or  intelligence  was  advantageous  both  in
securing  the  destruction  of,  and  escape  from,  his  enemies ;
both  of  which  processes  tended  to  segregation,  by  decima-
tion on  the  one  hand,  and  voluntary  separation  on  the
other.

The  former  of  these  processes  was  at  first  more  effective
than  the  latter,  but,  as  man  became  more  capable  of  resisting
the  natural  obstacles  to  existence  in  more  and  more  remote
and  different  regions,  the  practice  of  migration  probably  in-
creased. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  considerations
went  far  to  diffuse  the  race  over  the  globe,  and  may  account
for  many  of  the  curious  facts  in  connection  with  its  wide  dis-
tribution.

The  I^oue  Stages  in  the  Development  of  Society.

Thus  we  can  hardly  escape  the  conclusion  that  at  one
period  man  must  have  been  as  far  removed  from  a  social
state  as  it  is  possible  for  a  species  to  be  and  continue  the
propagation  of  its  kind,  leading  a  life  to  a  great  extent  soli-
tary, or  at  least  in  small  groups.  This  may  be  regarded  as
\hQ  first  or  initial  stage  in  the  genesis  of  the  social  aggregate.
But  his  own  rapid  multiplication  was  alone  sufficient  to  make
this  state  only  temporary,  and  the  influence  of  high  mental
quahties  preserved  him  from  the  fate  of  other  solitary  ani-
mals, who  only  retain  such  a  state  by  a  constant  process  of
partial  extinction,  produced  partly  by  themselves,  partly  by
other  species  preying  upon  them,  and  partly  by  natural  influ-
ences. Human  sagacity  soon  rose  to  a  height  which  rendered
the  last  two  of  these  modes  of  decimation  practically  in-
effectual. Man  became  at  a  very  early  period  "  lord  of  the
fowl  and  the  brute,"  and  able  to  resist  climatic  and  other
destroying  forces.  The  thing  he  then  stood  most  in  need  of
was  protection  from  his  own  kind.

But  rapid  multiplication  and  comparative  safety  from
external  dangers  rendered  the  accumulation  of  individuals  in

THE  FOUK  STAGES  OF  SOCIETY.  465

certain  localities  a  physical  necessity,  notwithstanding  their
natural  inadaptation  to  a  social  condition.  This  may  be  re-
garded as  the  second  stage  of  the  development  of  society.  It
was  a  society  of  which  the  elements  were  wholly  uncon-
genial— a  forced  association.  In  this  state  the  individual  was
free,  but  he  was  utterly  insecure.  There  reigned  the  utmost
liberty  and  the  utmost  license.  The  moral  qualities  were  as
yet  unborn.  The  virtues  had  no  existence.  Intellect  was
the  servant  of  selfish  passion  alone,  and  all  forms  of  abuse
were  of  constant  occurrence.

The  paramount  necessity  for  some  form  of  regulation,
at  first  chiefly  of  the  sexual  relations,  and  then  of  such  rude
proprietary  interests  as  began  to  arise,  became  gradually  ap-
parent, and  with  the  growth  of  more  or  less  definite  forms
of  headship  were  developed  laws  relating  to  marriages,  and
to  a  few  other  acts.  This  establishment  of  the  first  rudi-
mentary elements  of  government  marked  the  third  stage,  or
epoch  of  social  progress.*

There  must,  of  course,  have  been  many  of  these  social
centers,  or  points,  to  which  individual  pairs  or  families  had
retired  when  persecuted  or  threatened,  and  from  which  they
had  expanded  by  multiplication,  forming  new,  independent
societies.  Again,  if  it  be  true,  as  many  eminent  scientific
men  have  insisted,f  that  the  human  race  has  had  several

*  See  Herbert  Spencer's  closer  classification  of  the  actual  existing  races,
"Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  pp.  5*71,  572,  574.  My  first  and  second  stages
are  chiefly  theoretical,  and  are  scarcely  represented  in  Mr.  Spencer's  tables,  which
embrace  known  tribes  only.  In  the  present  state  of  the  race,  if  we  believe  in
evolution  at  all,  we  are  compelled  to  deduce  the  assumed  simpler  states  from
the  evidence  furnished  by  existing  races.  Those  who  deny  the  legitimacy  of
this  method  forget  that  it  is  the  one  now  extensively  employed  by  scientific
men  not  only  in  the  next  less  complex  department,  that  of  biology,  but  in  the
now  well-established  science  of  geology.

f  Agassiz,  "  Diversity  of  Origin  of  the  Human  Races,"  in  the  "  Christian
Examiner,"  July,  1850  ;  also,  "  Men  and  Apes,"  a  lecture  delivered  in  New  York,
1874;  Carl  Vogt,  in  "Revue  Scientifique,"  5  mai,  1877,  p.  1060.

Arguments  for  this  view  are  also  presented  by  Humboldt  ("  Kosmos,"  vol.  i,
S.  228)  and  by  Mr,  A.  R.  Wallace  ("  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural

466  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

origins,  each  must  have  had  substantially  the  same  general
history.

After  the  lapse  of  time,  owing  to  the  power  of  man,
through  his  superior  intellect,  of  surmounting  most  of  those
natural  obstacles  which  prevent  all  other  species  from  in-
creasing beyond  a  certain  maximum,  these  various  small
scattered  communities  grew  into  tribes  and  nations,  and
began  gradually  to  encroach  upon  one  another.  War  was
the  natural  result,  and  the  strifes  between  independent  indi-
viduals in  the  previous  state  of  anarchy  seem  to  have  been
transferred  to  these  independent  communities.  The  result
was  the  union,  either  from  compulsion  or  interest,  of  many
of  the  tribes,  and  the  enlargement  of  the  spheres  of  social
organization.  This  process  is  still  going  on,  and  will  proba-
bly be  one  day  extended  to  embrace  all  mankind ;  though
diversity  of  language  and  national  prejudices  operate  pow-
erfully to  postpone  that  consummation.

Government,  so  necessary  for  the  prevention  of  internal
war,  became  the  cause  of  external  war,  yet  the  latter  was
undoubtedly  the  lesser  of  the  two  evils,  and  will  itself  dis-
appear, in  turn,  when  all  governments  shall  be  consolidated
into  one.  This  event,  if  realized,  will  form  the  fourth  stage
of  social  progress.

These  four  stages  in  the  inception,  development,  and
progress  of  social  aggregation — viz.,  1,  the  solitary,  or  au-
tarchic, stage;  2,  the  constrained  aggregate,  or  anarchic,
stage ;  3,  the  national,  or  pohtarchic,  stage ;  and  4,  the  cos-
mopolitan, or  pantarchic,  stage  —  constitute  a  great  cycle
within  which  all  the  .social  forces,  statical  and  dynamical,
progressive  and  retrogressive,  have  operated  and  must  con-
tinue to  operate.

It  will  be  perceived  that  the  practical  view  which  we  are
able  to  take  of  this  field  in  the  existing  condition  of  the  race

Selection,"  Essay  No.  9),  both  of  whom,  however,  incline  toward  the  monc-
phyletic  origin  of  man.  See  also  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  "  Principles  of  Geology,"
vol.  i,  p.  64 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  481.

THE  FOUR  STAGES  OF  SOCIETY.  467

is  confined  almost  exclusively  to  the  third  of  these  stages.
The  first  stage  lies  on  the  very  confines  of  the  sub-human
epoch  represented  by  the  genus  of  true  animals,  which
Haeckel  has  called  Pithecanthropus^  and  is  equally  hypo-
thetical with  that  now  extinct  genus.  A  few  unconfirmed
reports  of  the  discovery  of  men  in  a  condition  which  is
referable  to  that  stage  alone  serve  to  give  what  practical
proof  we  have  of  its  real  existence  {swpra^  p.  417).  But,
whether  now  actually  represented  on  the  globe  or  not,  its
reality  as  an  intermediate  condition  between  animality  and
humanity  rests  on  precisely  the  same  evidence  as  does  the
general  theory  of  the  development  of  the  race  from  a  lower
or  sub-human  type  of  existence.

The  second  stage  embodies  none  of  the  elements  of  per-
manency and  can  not  be  expected  to  be  found  extensively
prevailing  at  any  age  of  the  world.  It  is  essentially  a  tran-
sition stage,  and,  like  transition  forms  in  biology,  is  charac-
terized by  an  ephemeral  duration.  ^Nevertheless,  it  has
numerous  living  representatives  among  the  lower  existing
tribes,  particularly  among  the  Fuegians,  interior  Australians,
Wood-Yeddas,  and  Bushmen.

To  the  third  stage,  however,  as  already  remarked,  belong
not  only  all  the  savage  tribes  at  all  advanced  and  possessing
any  settled  habits  or  form  of  government,  but  also  all  bar-
barians, semi-civilized  races,  and  races  and  nations  calling
themselves  civilized  and  enlightened.

If  the  first  stage  is  a  strictly  theoretical  one,  the  fourth  is
a  purely  ideal  one.  There  is  a  philosophic  ken  that  pro-
fesses to  see  in  the  future  of  the  race  that  triumph  of
humanitarian  sentiments,  which  would  no  doubt  also  be  a
triumph  of  practical  interests,  that  shall  sweep  away  the
present  barriers  of  language,  national  pride,  and  natural
uncongeniality,  and  unite  all  nations  in  one  vast  social
aggregate  with  a  single  political  organization.

468  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

THE    SOCIAL    FORCES.

We  are  now  prepared  to  commence  the  more  special
consideration  of  tlie  nature  of  the  social  forces,  and  to  seek,
among  the  varied  phenomena  to  which  they  give  rise,  for
such  distinguishing  marks  as  shall  enable  us  to  make  a  con-
venient, at  least,  if  not  always  a  strictly  logical,  classification
of  them.

All  beings  which  can  be  said  to  perform  actions  do  so  in
obedience  to  those  mental  states  which  are  denominated  de-
sires. In  the  absence  of  desire  there  will  always  be  absence
of  what  are  called  voluntary  movements.  Analyses  of  the
psychological  and  physiological  principles  underlying  this
truth  have  already  been  given  (supra,  pp.  392,  397),  and
will  be  still  further  made  (vol.  ii,  p.  321),  so  that  they  need
not  be  entered  into  here.  We  will  therefore  rest  con-
tent to  assume  that  desire  is  the  essential  basis  of  aU  ac-
tion, and  hence  the  true  force  in  the  sentient  world ;  and
consistency  as  well  as  truth  requires  us  to  predicate  this
equally  of  man  and  of  all  things  lower  in  the  scale  of  ani-
mal life.

CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE   SOCIAL  FOECES.

The  classification  of  the  forces  operating  in  the  depart-
ment of  animated  nature  will  then  be  equivalent  to,  and,
in  fact,  the  same  thing  as,  the  classification  of  animal  de-
sires ;  and,  as  what  is  true  of  all  must  be  true  of  a  part,
this  will  likewise  constitute  a  classification  of  the  social
forces.

In  the  organic  world  nature  may  be  said  to  possess  two
primary  objects,  viz.,  the  preservation  of  the  individual  and
the  continuance  of  the  species  or  race.  These  ends  are
secured  by  means  of  desires  inhering  in  the  individuals,
leading  them  to  perform  the  necessary  acts.  The  two  funo-
tiona  absolutely  essential  to  life  are  nutrition  and  reproduc-

THE  SOCIAL  FORCES.  469

tion.  To  these  correspond  in  all  sentient  beings  two  classes
of  desires.  These  may  be  denominated  the  gustatory  and  the
sexual  appetites.  By  the  former,  the  sustenance  necessary
for  replenishing  the  tissues  is  attracted  to  its  proper  place
in  the  system ;  by  the  latter,  the  reproductive  act  is  rendered
agreeable,  without  which  it  would  not  be  performed.

Against  these  objects  of  nature  may  be  set  the  corre-
sponding objects  of  the  organism,  or,  confining  ourselves  to
the  human  race,  they  may  be  called  the  objects  of  man.  The
end  of  nature  is  the  preservation  and  perpetuation  of  life  ;
that  of  man  is  the  satisfaction  of  desire.  The  former  is
objective,  and  constitutes  a  biologic  process ;  the  latter  is
subjective,  and  is  a  moral  or  sociologic  process.  Properly
understood,  these  processes  possess  no  natural  or  necessary
relation  to  each  other.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  a  person  wholly
destitute  of  taste ;  indeed,  such  cases  are  on  record.  Th'fe
pleasure  derived  from  the  contact  of  nutritious  substances
with  the  tongue  and  palate  is  obviously  distinct  from  the
benefit  which  such  substances  confer  upon  the  system  after
digestion.  Such  a  person  as  we  have  supposed  would  none
the  less  need  food  because  he  had  no  desire  to  partake  of  it.
It  is  still  more  easy  to  conceive  a  total  absence  of  the  sexual
instinct,  and  this  is  a  much  more  common  pathological  con-
dition found  in  practice.

Some  might  be  surprised  that  these  desires  and  their
functional  results,  being  so  wholly  unrelated  in  themselves,
should  so  universally  accompany  each  other.  But,  to  those
who  comprehend  the  law  of  adaptation,  the  reason  is  not  far
to  seek.  This  apparently  "pre-established  harmony"  has
been  a  primary  condition  to  the  development  of  animal  life.
The  agreeableness  of  the  acts  of  nutrition  and  reproduction
exists  because  without  it  nutrition  and  reproduction  could
never  have  been  secured.  The  existence  of  these  pleasures,
as  of  all  other  pleasures,  and  of  all  pain  also,  is  explained  on
the  theory  of  selection.  It  is  desire  alone  that  leads  to
action.      Among  the  lower   animals  it  is  the  momentary

470  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

impulse  that  determines  it.  Hence  the  latter,  if  destitute
of  these  passions,  in  the  gratification  of  which  they  preserve
their  existence  and  continue  their  kind,  would  speedily  perish.
Those  that  possessed  them  to  a  diminished  degree  must
have  fallen  behind  in  the  race  for  life,  and  only  those  that
possessed  them  in  a  high  degree  can  have  survived  the  com-
petition. This  alone  accounts  for  their  presence  in  the  degree
in  which  we  find  them.

Even  man  is  wholly  dependent  upon  these  purely  nat-
ural forces  to  preserve  his  existence,  and,  notwithstand-
ing his  rational  powers,  combined  with  all  his  science,
he  would  quickly  succumb  if  they  were  withdrawn.  In
him  both  these  classes  of  desires  are  strong,  and  constitute
the  motive,  either  direct  or  indirect,  to  the  greater  part  of
all  his  acts.  They  are  the  great  original  and  essential
forces  of  society.

In  the  most  primitive  forms  of  society  very  little  else  can
actuate  it ;  but  in  developed  society  the  derivative  forms  of
these  original  desires  become  so  widely  differentiated  that  it
is  difiicult  to  trace  them  to  their  sources  and  inconvenient  to
insist  on  their  identity.  The  dispersion  of  the  human  race
into  cold  climates  added  other  wants  to  those  of  mere  nutri-
tion, and  rendered  clothing,  shelter,  and  fire  as  much  objects
of  desire  as  food  and  drink.  "While  the  gratification  of  all
desire  must  be  regarded  as  pleasurable,  this  need  not  always
be  absolute  ;  it  may  often  be  relative,  and  the  diminution  or
prevention  of  pain  is  as  much  a  satisfaction  of  desire  as  the
production  of  positive  pleasure  (vol.  ii,  p.  149).  These  nega-
tive desires  must  be  taken  into  account,  since  they  are  as
essential  to  life  as  positive  ones.  They  constitute  the  pro-
tective forces  of  society.

Ab  development  goes  on  in  society,  and  even  to  a  large
extent  below  the  social  stage,  there  arise  derivative  products
of  the  reproductive  forces.  These  are  of  various  kinds  and
degrees.  The  sexual  desire  itself  becomes  wonderfully  ex-
panded in  its  relations,  and  comes,  in  civilized  races,  to

CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SOCIAL  FORCES.         471

embrace  all  the  manifold  phases  of  love  and  the  romantic
sentiment,  than  which  no  more  powerful  forces  exist  in
society.  Thus  far  these  forces  may,  however,  be  regarded
as  primary,  but  there  are  secondary  ones  of  great  importance
arising  out  of  the  relations  which  these  primary  ones  entail,
most  of  which,  however,  will  be  more  properly  classed  as  non-
essential. These  are,  the  affections  which  exist  between  par-
ents and  their  offspring,  so  essential  to  the  protection  of  the
latter ;  the  love  of  offspring  for  their  parents,  also  a  strong
bond  in  most  races ;  the  sentiments  which  subsist  between  the
members  of  the  same  family,  as  brothers,  sisters,  and  other
kindred ;  and,  finally,  the  general  feeling  which  binds  related
clans,  gentes,  etc.,  together,  which  is  the  true  original  of  the
still  more  remotely  derivative  sentiment  of  patriotism,  the
sociological  position  and  nature  of  which  were  little  under-
stood until  ethnographers  commenced  the  scientific  study  of
the  lower  races.

Besides  these  essential  forces  of  society,  either  original
or  derivative,  there  are  others,  chiefly  derivative,  which,  may
be  called  non-essential,  as  having  no  direct  connection  with
the  great  functions  of  nutrition  and  reproduction,  but  certain
of  which,  in  the  developed  state  of  mankind,  have  really
become  very  important.

These  are :  first,  the  cesthetic  sentiments,  resting  physi-
ologically upon  the  remaining  four  senses,  as  the  nutritive
function  rests  upon  that  of  taste  ;  secondly,  the  emotional  or
moral  forces,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  distinguished  from
those  presiding  over  reproduction  ;  and,  thirdly,  the  iritel-
lectual  forces,  or  the  sociologic  result  of  those  yearnings  after
normal  exercise  which  the  mind  soon  begins  to  manifest
when  lifted  above  the  necessity  of  concentrating  its  energies
upon  the  mere  supply  of  bodily  wants.

The  powerful  influence  in  the  direction  of  culture  and
refinement  which  the  aesthetic  sentiments  have  exerted  need
not  be  insisted  upon  as  a  sociological  factor.

The  emotional  forces  may  perhaps  be  most  conveniently

472

TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

grouped  around  the  dominant  sentiments  of  love  (with  its
opposite,  hate)  and  fear  (with  its  opposite,  hope) ;  but  the  sys-
tematic development  of  this  scheme  of  love-forces  and  fear-
forces  must  be  deferred  until  later  in  the  chapter.

With  regard  to  the  intellectual  forces,  let  it  be  remarked,
once  for  all,  to  prevent  an  erroneous  impression  which  might
otherwise  be  quite  naturally  formed,  that  their  only  basis  is  the
pleasure  of  intellectual  activity,  in  the  effort  to  attain  which
they  produce  their  only  results,  at  present  quite  limited,  but
destined  to  increase  with  intellectual  development.  They
have  nothing  to  do  with  those  transcendent  effects  which
intellect  secures  in  its  capacity  of  guide  and  director  of  mus-
cular activity  toward  the  satisfaction  of  physical  desires.  As
such,  mind  is  no  longer  a  true  natural  force,  but  a  condition
to  the  production  of  results  by  the  true  social  forces.

The  following  table  will  exhibit  at  a  glance  the  classifica-
tion of  the  social  forces  as  already  sketched :

3

o

Ph

»

Preservative    (  ^^^i^i^^'  gustatory  (seeking  pleasure),
orces,       ^  Negative,  protective  (avoiding  pain).

Reproductive
Forces.

Direct.    The  sexual  and  amative  desires.
Indirect.    Parental  and  consanguineal  affections.

K  fjEsthetic  Forces.

a>  o    I
m   >-    I

« f§  -<  Emotional  (moral)  Forces.

o  "3  1
['i^'^  [^ Intellectual  Forces.

It  will  be  observed  that  each  of  these  groups  has  a  real
basis  in  fact,  a  physiological  existence,  and  a  local  seat  in  a
definite  portion  of  the  body  to  which  it  can  be  readily  re-
ferred.

The  tongue,  palate,  and,  to  some  extent,  the  stomach,  are
the  seats  of  the  physical  satisfaction  excited  by  the  nutritive
act,  and  this  pleasure  is  wholly  disconnected  from  the  func-
tion of  nutrition,  which  takes  place  after  these  sensations

CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  SOCIAL  FORCES.         473

have  ceased,  in  a  different  part  of  the  body,  and  constitutes
a  strictly  vegetative  process  of  which  the  nervous  system  is
wholly  unconscious.

The  local  seat  of  the  procreative  satisfaction  is  still  more
definite,  and,  as  already  remarked,  stUl  more  widely  removed,
both  in  time  and  location,  from  the  function.

The  aesthetic  enjoyments  reside  chiefly  in  the  eye  or  the
ear,  though  the  olfactory  sensations  contribute  somewhat  to
their  general  sum,  the  fragrance  of  flowers  being  even  more
highly  prized  than  their  beauty.

With  regard  to  the  emotional  forces,  which  poetry  has
erroneously  located  in  the  heart,  they  are  less  easy  to  refer
to  a  physical  seat ;  but  any  one  who  will  carefully  observe
Buch  sensations  will  find  that  they  appear  to  center  in  the
region  of  the  breast,  and,  while  different  emotions  doubtless
proceed  from  different  nerve-plexuses,  their  physiological
basis  is  no  longer  doubted  by  students  of  the  nervous
system.

Finally,  the  intellectual  forces  have  as  their  local  habita-
tion the  interior  of  the  cranium,  and  modern  experiments
point  to  the  cortical  layers  as  the  probable  region  of  all  the
higher  forms  of  brain-action.

The  sociologic  importance  of  these  facts  lies  in  their  sci-
entific bearing,  as  showing  that  the  phenomena  manifested
by  organized  beings  have  definite  and  tangible  properties,
such  as  inhere  in  other  classes  of  phenomena,  and  by  means
of  which  they  may  be  investigated,  comprehended,  and  con-
trolled by  the  appliances  of  art.  Like  other  phenomena,
social  phenomena  flow  from  definite  antecedents,  depend
upon  conditions  within  the  reach  of  science,  and  hence  may
be  affected,  as  physical  phenomena  are  affected,  by  the  intel-
ligent alteration  of  those  antecedent  conditions.

But,  aside  from  these  corollaries  which  belong  to  the
applied  stage  of  social  science,  and  will  be  duly  considered
at  the  proper  time,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  find  just

474  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

what  the  social  forces  really  consist  in,  how  they  are  consti-
tuted, and  where  they  are  physically  located,  and  to  be  able
to  distinguish  them  from  other  things  which  have  not  the
character  of  true  forces.

Following  this  simple  yet  perfectly  rational  theory  of  the
science,  let  us  consider,  first,  the  preservative ;  secondly,  the
reproductive  (these  constituting  the  essential) ;  and  thirdly,
the  various  secondary  or  non-essential  forces.  Other  deriva-
tive, or  acquired  desires  will  be  noticed  in  connection  with
the  original  or  natural  ones  from  which  they  are  the  out-
growths, developments,  or  corruptions,  and  this  although
they  may  no  longer  be  preservative,  reproductive,  or  aes-
thetic. Of  the  preservative  forces  I  shall  not  attempt  sys-
tematically to  keep  up  the  distinction  between  positive  and
negative,  but  shall  regard  the  entire  subject  as  a  whole  in  its
various  philosophical  and  historical  aspects,  as  bearing  upon
the  social  condition  of  the  race.

GENESIS   OF    SOCIETY   THROUGH   THE   ACTION   OF   THE   SOCIAL

FORCES.

The  first  desire  of  all  creatures  is  for  nourishment.  As
the  babe  seeks  its  mother's  breast  as  soon  as  it  is  bom,  so  the
human  race  spent  its  infancy  in  the  single  pursuit  of  subsist-
ence. In  a  pure  state  of  nature,  where  the  spontaneous
products  of  the  vegetable  world  supply,  unprepared,  their
only  food,  there  seems,  indeed,  little  else  for  a  being  to  pur-
sue. In  the  tropical  zone,  where  man  must  have  made  his
first  appearance,  fire  and  clothing  were  not  required,  and
shelter  was  afforded  by  the  trees  of  the  forests.  Such  was
doubtless  man's  early  state,  when  for  ages  he  roamed  over
the  regions  of  interior  Africa,  Southern  Asia,  Australia,  and
perhaps  Central  and  South  America.  But  the  efibrts  already
alluded  to,  to  break  over  the  territorial  limits  of  the  fauna
to  which  he  belonged,  made  necessary  by  his  rapid  mul-
tiplication and   his   quarrelsome  and  unsocial  disposition,

1

I

ACTION  OF  THE  SOCIAL  FORCES.  475

being  in  a  manner  successful  in  consequence  of  his  superior
sagacity,  he  soon  found  himself  carried  into  uncongenial
climes  where  nature  no  longer  furnished  all  the  necessities
of  his  existence  without  preparation  or  labor  in  procuring
them.  Multiplication  alone  might  have  brought  about  the
necessity  for  labor  by  exhausting  all  the  spontaneous  produc-
tions without  supplying  the  demands  of  so  many  individ-
uals. With  other  animals  under  the  same  circumstances,  this
excess  always  perishes  from  want,  between  which  and  the
perpetual  and  fierce  struggles  of  individuals  man  was  forced
to  resort  to  migration.  That  other  creatures  also  resort  to
migration  under  similar  circumstances  is  a  well-known  fact
of  geographical  distribution,  but  in  the  attempt  they  are
usually  unsuccessful.  They  succumb  to  inclement  weather
and  the  various  other  obstacles  with  which  they  meet.  But
man  surmounted  these  obstacles,  though,  doubtless,  only
after  many  failures,  and  ultimately  triumphed  over  climate
and  soil,  over  animate  and  inanimate  foes.  If  I  were  to
employ  a  single  word  which  could  be  made  to  convey  the
whole  notion  of  man's  supremacy  over  nature  and  his  su-
periority over  all  other  living  things,  I  should  choose  the
word  Labor.  His  labor  of  mind,  seconded  by  his  labor  of
body,  have  made  him  conqueror  of  nature  and  master  of  the
planet.

That  which  has  preserved  the  human  species  from  ex-
tinction and  from  local  circumscription  has  been  the  law  of
natural  selection,  or  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  This  latter
term  means  that  those  who  are  best  capable  of  surviving,
survive,  and  not,  as  some  seem  to  suppose,  that  those  who
are  most  deserving  of  life,  live.  It  has  a  physical  and  not
a  moral  signification.  It  is  not  because  man  was  the  most
worthy  to  maintain  an  existence  upon  this  earth,  that  he  has
lived  when  other  species  have  perished.  It  is  because  he
acquired  the  power  of  resisting  the  influences  which  swept
other  species  away.  The  secret  of  his  survival  and  suprem-
acy lies  in  his  intellectual  power.     He  has  exercised  this

476  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

power,  the  most  effective  of  all  forces,*  in  defeating  by  indi-
rection those  attacks  which  have  overcome  the  direct  efforts
of  creatures  of  far  superior  strength.

When  we  recognize  the  full  influence  exerted  by  the  nor-
mal, or  indirect,  action  of  the  intellect,  and  concede  to  man  a
considerably  higher  development  of  this  faculty  than  is  pos-
sessed by  any  other  being  on  the  globe,  there  is  no  difficulty
in  accounting  on  natural  principles  for  his  gradual  eleva-
tion and  distribution.  And  the  fact  that  one  being  has
once  gained  the  ascendency  now  held  by  man  constitutes  in
itself  a  sufficient  reason  why  no  other  can  attain  it.f  Only
one  such  being  can  exist  at  once  upon  the  same  planet.:}:
Every  other  creature  must  perish  before  his  power,  or  be
brought  into  his  personal  service.  He  must  multiply.  If
the  globe  is  to  be  inhabited,  it  must  be  by  individuals  of
his  race.  The  ferocious  beast,  the  venomous  serpent,  and
the  noisome  insect,  must  be  exterminated  as  his  enemies.
The  antelope  and  the  grouse  must  be  hunted  for  his  nourish-
ment and  his  pleasure.  The  very  fishes  of  the  sea  and  the
monsters  of  the  deep  must  fall  a  prey  to  his  universal  rapine.
If  it  be  true  that  the  wildernesses  of  interior  Asia  and  Africa
are  developing  other  lines  of  superior  beings  in  the  Primates
of  those  regions,  which,  were  there  no  human  race,  would  at
length  supply  one  to  the  world,  there  is  no  hope  that  the
present  dominant  being  will  permit  nature  to  carry  out  such
a  scheme.     The  forces  of  mind  are  a  thousand-fold  more

*  To  avoid  the  possible  charge  of  ambiguity,  it  may  be  here  stated  that
nothing  thus  far  said  or  to  be  said  hereafter,  respecting  the  intellectual  force
proper,  is  intended  to  deny  the  mighty  influence  of  normal  intellectual  action.
It  is  only  maintained  that  this  influence  is  in  no  way  analogous  to  the  remaining
social  forces,  and  is  not  a  true  natural  force  capable  of  management  as  are  the
physical  forces.  In  a  word,  the  normal,  or  indirect,  action  of  the  intellect  does
not  obey  the  universal  laws  of  motion,  and  it  is  this  which  constitutes  the  only
certain  test  of  a  truly  natural  force  (vol.  ii,  p.  95).

f  A  theory  for  man's  initial  supremacy  has  already  been  put  forward  {supra,
p.  428).

X  Lyell,  "Principles  of  Geology,"  vb?.  ii,  p.  4S7.

ACTION  OF  THE  SOCIAL  FORCES.  477

rapid  than  those  of  matter.  The  millions  of  years  that  it
would  probably  require  to  transform  apes  into  men,  perhaps
I  may  say  that  it  has  already  once  required  to  perform  the
same  or  an  equivalent  task,  would  be  sufficient  for  the  com-
paratively lightning-like  forces  of  mind  to  push  their  positive
civilization  into  the  most  impenetrable  wildernesses  and  the
most  barren  deserts,  sweep  away  or  subordinate  all  living
species,  re-enact  in  Africa  and  South  America — only  in  their
own  peculiar  way — the  scenes  which  Asia  and  Europe  have
witnessed,  and  establish  a  cosmopolitan  nationality  and  a
universal  civilization.

Nor  is  it  the  lower  animals  alone  whose  development
man  checks,  and  whose  existence  he  threatens.  The  same
process  is  going  on  between  the  superior  and  inferior  races
of  men  as  between  men  and  brutes.  The  development  of
the  lower  races  is  being  checked  by  the  higher  ones.  The
latter  find  the  former  in  their  way  as  much  as  are  the  wild
beasts.  Whether  they  know  it  or  not,  whether  they  intend
it  or  not,  the  superior  races  all  over  the  globe  are  gradu-
ally but  surely  crowding  the  inferior  ones  out  of  existence.
Where  to-day  are  the  peoples  which  the  Europeans  found
both  in  North  and  South  America  ?  *    Head  the  history  of

*  An  attempt  has  been  recently  made  to  show  that  the  number  of  Indians  in
North  America  is  nearly  or  quite  as  great  as  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  occupancy
of  the  whites.  (See  a  paper  by  Brevet  Lieutenant-Colonel  Garrick  Mallery,
U.  S.  A.,  read  before  the  Anthropological  Sub-section  of  the  American  Associ-
ation for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  its  twenty-sixth  meeting,  held  in  Nash-
ville, Tenn.,  August,  IS'rY,  "Proceedings,"  p.  340.)  This,  if  true,  should  sur-
prise no  one,  considering  the  comparatively  gentle  treatment  which  these  In-
dians have  received  at  the  hands  of  the  whites,  and  the  earnest  efforts  made  by
the  United  States  Government  to  protect,  supply,  and  civilize  them.  For,  not-
withstanding some  bad  faith  on  the  part  of  agents  under  great  temptations,  this
national  effort  has  not  only  been  sincere,  but  on  the  whole  successful,  and  it  is
very  doubtful  whether  these  Indians  could  have  held  their  own  better  than
they  have,  had  no  whites  ever  molested  them.

It  has  been  very  different  in  South  America  and  in  Mexico,  where  absorption
and  amalgamation  have  been  extensive  in  regions  originally  populous,  while  in
sparsely  settled  regions  extermination  has  been  nearly  complete.

478  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

the  early  settlements  of  all  these  countries.  The  work  of
extermination  and  absorption  is  still  going  on.  In  the
Bonthem  part  of  South  America  the  aborigine  is  hunted
by  the  descendants  of  the  Spaniards,  and  shot  down  as  coolly
as  is  the  jaguar.*  The  same  operation  has  commenced  in
Africa  at  several  points,  and  has  long  been  going  on  in  In-
dia. Unless  the  moral  forces  of  civilization  rapidly  overtake
and  arrest  this  work  of  the  natural  forces,  the  whole  globe
will  in  a  comparatively  brief  space  of  time  fall  under  the
absolute  dominion  of  a  single  race.  It  is,  therefore,  no  won-
der that  other  beings  or  other  races  fail  to  develop,  in  the
slow  course  of  nature,  and  occupy  positions  alongside  of  the
present  dominant  inhabitant  of  the  earth.  The  reason  is
clear — because  that  race  refuses  to  permit  it,  and  has  the
power  to  prevent  it.

METHOD   ADOPTED   FOE    TEEATmO   THE   SUBJECT.

In  a  future  chapter  (vol.  ii,  p.  1Y8),  devoted  to  a  review  of
the  primary  conditions  of  human  progress,  the  chief  means
and  the  principal  institutions  of  which  man  has  availed  him-
self for  the  promotion  of  his  interests  will  be  considered.  It
is  not  proposed  to  anticipate  this  discussion  here.  It  will  be
more  to  the  point  to  undertake  a  somewhat  detailed  exam-
ination of  the  direct  results  of  the  operation  of  the  social
forces  as  above  classified,  with  a  view  to  determining  the
manner  and  the  degree  in  which  each  has  respectively  con-
tributed to  the  production  of  the  existing  state  of  society.
We  shall  thus  have  to  consider  first  the  results  of  the  direct
operation  of  the  positive  forces  of  individual  preservation
which  is  secured  by  the  process  of  alimentation,  the  sole
incentive  to  the  performance  of  which  is  the  sense  of  taste,
or  the  gustatory  desire,  coupled  with  the  gnawings  of  the
stomach,  commonly  called  the  pangs  of  hunger.  These
pleasurable  and  painful  desires  are  satisfied  by  the  contact

*  Darwin,  "  Journal  of  Researches,"  p.  104.

METHOD  OF  TREATMENT.  479

and  appropriation  of  nutritious  substances  in  the  manner
suggested  by  tlie  nature  of  the  organism.  Both  the  sub-
stances and  the  process  are  appropriately  designated  by
the  term  subsistence,  which  is  employed  in  both  a  passive
and  an  active  sense.  This  field,  therefore,  of  the  positive
forces  of  preservation  is  commensurate  with  the  general
subject  of  subsistence,  which,  consequently,  forms  the  first
subject  to  be  treated.

The  second  natural  division  of  the  general  scheme  em-
braces the  direct  effects  of  the  negative  or  protective  forces
of  preservation,  whose  objects  are  twofold,  viz. :  1,  clothing ;
and,  2,  shelter.

These  two  classes  of  desires,  constituting  the  positive  and
negative  forces  of  individual  preservation,  may  be  expressed,
where  convenient,  by  the  generic  word  want,  regarded  as  a
predominant  social  force.

The  reproductive  forces,  consisting  primarily  in  the  sexual
instinct,  and  secondarily  iii  those  higher  derivative  emotions
culminating  in  the  constant  love  of  one  man  for  one  woman,
and  vice  versa,  will  next  come  up  for  consideration,  complet-
ing the  survey  of  the  essential  forces.

The  non-essential  forces  will  be  treated  in  the  order  in
which  they  are  arranged  in  the  table  on  page  472,  under  the
three  general  heads  :  1,  Esthetic  Sentiments ;  2,  Physical
Emotions  ;  and,  3,  Intellectual  Yearnings.

With  the  object  of  enabling  the  reader  to  follow  more
easily  the  logical  order  preserved  in  this  necessarily  some-
what prolonged  discussion,  the  following  synopsis  of  the
several  heads  to  be  treated  is  introduced,  in  which  the  in-
dentations employed  will  exhibit  the  relations,  co-ordinate
and  subordinate,  of  each  head  more  clearly  than  they  can  be
indicated  by  their  titles  as  they  occur :

480  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION".— SOCIOGENY.

TABLE  OF  HEADS  EMPLOYED  IN  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SOCLiL

FORCES.

THE  SOCIAL  FORCES.

A.  The  Essential  Social  Forces.
/.  jTTIc  Preservative  Forces.

Hunger  and  Cold  (i.  c,  Want)  regarded  as  F9rce8.
Subsistence.

Feeling,  not  Function,  the  Object  of  the  Social  Forces.
Origin  of  Art.

Relation  of  the  Mind-Force  to  the  Sense-Force.
Origin  of  Industry.
Property  as  a  Social  Factor.
Genesis  of  Avarice.
The  Law  of  Acquisition.
The  Principle  of  Deception.
Natural  Justice.

Transition  from  Natural  Justice  to  Ciyil  Justice.
Influence  of  Sympathy.
Influence  of  Increased  Intelligence.
Influence  of  Diminished  Power  to  acquire.
Genesis  of  Civil  Justice.
Modes  of  Acquisition.

Classification  of  Modes  of  Acquisition.
Producers.

Classes  of  Production.
Primary  Production.
Sources  of  Food.
Mineral  Foods.
Organic  Foods.
Nutritive  Foods.
Respiratory  Foods.

Vegetation  the  Original  Producer  of  Organic  Foods.
Sources  of  Vegetable  Food.
Sources  of  Animal  Food.
Production  of  Foods.

Production  of  Mineral  Foods.
Production  of  Vegetable  Foods.
Production  of  Animal  Foods.
Secondary  Production.

Appliances  for  Protection  against  Climate.
Nature  and  Sociologic  Importance  of  Invention.
Production  of  Artificial  Appliances.

I

i

METHOD  OF  TREATAtENT.  481

Art  of  making  Fire.
Production  of  Clothing  and  Shelter.
Production  of  Clothing.
Production  of  Means  of  Shelter.
Accessories  to  Production.
Distribution.
Transportation.
Exchange.
Finance.

Distribution  as  a  Mode  of  Acquisition.
Parasites.
Classification  of  the  Non-Industrial  Modes  of  Acquisition.
War.

Government,  or  Statecraft.
Hierarchy,  or  Priestcraft.
Monopoly.

Monopoly  of  Transportation.
Monopoly  of  Exchange.
Monopoly  of  Finance.
Monopoly  of  Labor — Slavery.
Monopoly  of  Manufacture.
Remedies  for  Monopoly.
//.  The  Reproductive  Forces.
The  Sexual  Appetite,
Anomaly  of  Woman's  Sexual  Sentiments.
Difference  in  the  Sexual  Instincts  of  Males  and  Females.
Diffusion  of  the  Sexual  Instinct.
Love.
Sociologic  Effects  of  the  Love-Sentiment.
Physical  Modifications.
Social  Modifications.
Male  Sexual  Selection.
Marriage.
Principal  Forms  of  Marriage.
Polygyny.
Polyandry.
Monogamy.
Genesis  of  Modesty.
Condition  of  Women.
Biological  Effects.
Sociological  Effects.
Sexuo-Social  Inequalities.
Inequality  of  Dress.
Inequality  of  Duties.
Inequality  of  Education.

482  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGENY.

Inequality  of  Rights.
Genesis  of  the  Sexuo-Social  Inequalities.
The  Subjection  of  Women.
The  Male  Sex  not  responsible.
Attitude  of  Science  toward  the  Equalization  of  Woman's  Con-
dition.
Sexuo-Social  Dynamics.
B.  The  Non-Essenhal  Social  Fobcss.
/.  The  jEstlietic  Forces.

Fine  Arts  that  appeal  to  the  Eye.
Fine  Arts  that  appeal  to  the  Ear.
JI.  The  Moral  Forces.
The  Love-Forces.
Parental  Love.
Consanguineal  Love.
Patriotism.
Philanthropy.
Sclf-Love.

Correlatives  of  the  Love-Forces.
The  Fear-Forces.

Classification  of  the  Fear-Forcea.
Physical  Fear-Forces.
Fear  of  Violence.

Fear  of  Man.  ^

Fear  of  Animals.  f

Fear  of  Inanimate  Nature.  »

Fear  of  Spiritual  Beings.  \

Fear  of  Disease.

Psychical  Fear-Forces.  tt

///.  The  Liielledual  Forces.  |.

A.    THE  ESSENTIAL  SOCIAL  FORCES.

Those  forces  upon  which  the  existence  of  society  and
of  man  himself  depends  are  properly  designated  as  essential
forces.  They  are  those  which  lead  respectively  to  the  pres-
ervation and  the  perpetuation  of  human  life,  and  are  named
accordingly  the  preservative  and  the  reproductive  forces  of
society.

From  the  purely  biological  point  of  view,  the  term  nutri-
tive would  have  been  logically  preferable  to  the  term  j>re-
servative  for  the  first  of  these  classes  of  forces,  but  the
reader  will  perceive  as  he  proceeds  that  for  the  broader

I

THE  ESSENTIAL  SOCIAL  FOKCES.  483

needs  of  the  sociologist  the  former  term  would  prove  inade-
quate.

I.  The  Peesekvative  Fokces.

The  history  of  the  preservative  forces  is  comparatively
unimportant  in  the  pre-social  state.  As  a  biological  factor,
nutrition,  of  course,  stands  first,  and  in  the  struggle  for
existence  is  the  primary  cause  of  morphological  modifica-
tion. This  phase  has  already  been  sufficiently  treated  in
the  preceding  chapter.  But,  as  a  sociologic  factor,  as  a
motive  to  action  in  the  sub-human  stage,  considered  in
relation  to  the  genesis  of  society,  the  pursuit  of  subsistence
wrought  no  profound  alteration  in  the  character  of  the  im-
mediate predecessors  of  the  human  race.

Operation  in  the  Pre-social  State. — "Whatever  may  have
been  the  mode  of  life  of  the  true  Pithecanihrojpi^  their
efforts  to  secure  the  necessary  supply  of  food  could  have
exerted  upon  their  habits  and  their  physical  development
little  more  than  those  silent  and  secular  influences-  which  are
taking  place  throughout  the  animal  world,  and  even  among
plants,  in  obedience  to  the  same  law.

Become  a  Factor  with  the  Recognition  of  Property. — But
with  the  earhest  forms  of  association  there  is  usually  devel-
oped some  vague  conception  of  proprietary  rights.  The
genesis  of  this  conception  is  pecuHar,  and  a  large  body  of
facts  combine  to  show  that  the  idea  of  property  was  a  social
before  it  became  an  individual  sentiment.  The  first  notions
of  property  seem  to  have  been  communal,  and  the  distinc-
tion between  owners  was  at  first  that  which  assigned  it  to
one  tribe  or  gens  rather  than  to  another.  Mingled  with  this
custom  of  ownership  in  common  there  is,  nevertheless,  some-
times found  among  the  lower  races  a  remarkably  definite
conception  of  individual  ownership,  extending  it  even  to
children.

The  conceptions  of  property  among  existing  uncivilized
races  vary  greatly,  and  any  attempt  to  describe  them  would

484  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

lead  U8  mucli  beyond  the  very  restricted  limits  imposed  by
the  scope  of  this  work.  The  fact  which  chiefly  concerns
ns  is,  that  in  civilized  society  we  find  a  wide-spread  system
of  proprietary  rights  and  customs  to  be  genetically  ac-
counted for,  and  this  genesis  is  the  special  task  before  us.
The  problem  is  to  show  that  the  normal  operation  of  the
preservative  forces  in  the  social  aggregate  would  naturally
evolve  a  system  similar  to  or  identical  with  the  one  we  know
to  exist.  This  problem  involves  a  somewhat  fundamental
treatment  of  the  philosophy  of  these  preservative  forces,  and
a  more  accurate  classification  of  their  subdivisions.

Hunger  and  Cold  {i.  e.,  Want)  regarded  as  Forces. — The
fact  that  all  social  forces  consist  in  bodily  desires  must  be
kept  constantly  before  the  mind.  These,  as  we  saw,  are
sometimes  relative,  and  are  divisible  into  two  general  classes,
positive  and  negative,  the  former  seeking  the  active  preser-
vation, the  latter  merely  securing  the  protection  of  life.

Classifying  again  on  the  basis  of  the  consequences  which
flow  from  the  non-satisfaction  of  these  desires,  we  perceive
that  all  those  of  the  positive  group  cluster  round  one  pain-
ful bodily  state  which  may  be  generically  denominated  hun-
ger. All  those,  on  the  other  hand,  belonging  to  the  negative
group  may,  in  like  manner,  be  conceived  as  clustering  around
another  painful  bodily  state  which  may  be  generically  de-
nominated cold.

Generalizing  yet  again,  we  may  contemplate  the  effect  of
both  these  painful  bodily  states,  and  designate  this  compound
state  by  the  term  want.

Since,  therefore,  all  desires  are  in  the  nature  of  painful
bodily  states,  whose  struggles  to  pass  over  into  the  correla-
tive pleasurable  ones  result  in  the  powerful  discharges  of
nervous  energy  which  constitute  the  forces  under  considera-
tion, there  is  nothing  misleading  in  the  proposal  to  designate
the  positive  social  forces  by  the  name  hunger,  and  the  nega-
tive ones  by  the  name  cold,  or  generally  to  embrace  the  pre-
servative social  forces  under  the  single  appellation  want.

I

THE  PRESERVATIVE  FORCES.  485

Subsistence. — The  subjective  term  want  lias  as  its  correla-
tive the  objective  term  subsistence.  To  obtain  the  latter  is  to
satisfy  the  former.  The  satisfaction  of  want  through  the  pro-
curement of  subsistence  is  not  accompKshed  without  effort  in-
volving muscular  exertion.  The  great  variety  of  wants  of  both
tlie  positive  and  the  negative  classes  demands  a  corresponding
variety  in  the  forms  of  individual  activity.  It  is  this  inces-
sant activity  in  the  supply  of  constantly  renewed  wants  and
in  the  pursuit  of  the  manifold  kinds  of  subsistence  that  ac-
complishes those  results  upon  the  surface  of  the  globe  which
constitute  civiKzation.  Spurred  on  by  hunger  and  cold,  with
their  train  of  concomitant  and  derivative  forms  of  desire,
man  has  hunted  the  wild  beast,  domesticated  the  useful  ani-
mals, cultivated  the  soil,  cleared  the  forests,  worked  the
mines,  fabricated  an  endless  variety  of  useful  articles,  and
transported  the  products  of  this  labor  over  sea  and  land,  dis-
tributing the  wealth  of  the  world.

Feeling,  not  Function,  the  Object  of  the  Social  Forces. —
The  salient  fact  which  it  behooves  us  specially  to  notice  is,
that  these  results  are  the  indirect  products  of  the  social
forces,  and  have  no  relation  to  the  real  object  sought  by  the
agents  who  accomplish  them.  This  latter  object  is  simply
the  temporary  satisfaction  of  an  immediate  physical  demand,
and  the  advancement  of  civilization  or  social  well-being  is
never  for  a  moment  contemplated.  It  is  this  which  stamps
all  human  progress,  thus  far  accomplished,  with  its  passive
character,  and  it  is  upon  this  characteristic,  as  contrasted
with  the  idea  of  a  conscious  effort  on  the  part  of  society  to
bring  about  an  improved  social  state  foreseen  and  planned
by  society,  that  is  based  the  subdivision  of  social  dynamics
into  the  two  classes,  passive  and  active,  as  set  forth  in  the
Intkoduction'  (p.  56).

OBIGIN   OF   AET.

Considering  the  existing  industrial  races  of  men,  we  are
compelled  to  assume  that  they  have  passed  into  their  present
22

486  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

from  some  pre-industrial  state.  The  precise  line  which
mai-ks  this  transition  can  not  be  accurately  drawn,  but  the
necessity  for  labor  by  one  sex  or  the  other,  or  both,  exists  in
nearly  all  savages,  even  excluding  the  chase  from  the  indus-
trial occupations,  which  in  strictness  should  not  be  done,  so
long  as  it  constitutes  a  primary  source  of  subsistence.  In
general  it  is  the  accumulation  of  many  individuals  on  a
restricted  area  which  chiefly  necessitates  the  resort  to  labor
for  subsistence.  We  have  seen  that  this  must  take  place  witli
every  living  creature,  but  that  with  the  lower  animals  in-
crease is  checked  by  competition,  and  dense  aggregation
prevented  by  attempts  at  migration,  most  of  which  are  un-
successful. The  only  possible  escape  from  these  oonsequences,
except  perhaps  temporarily  by  war  and  plunder,  is  produc-
tive labor.  Unless  the  human  species  remain  permanently
thus  restricted  or  perish  entirely,  ^Nature  must  be  compelled
to  increase  her  normal  yield  of  subsistence.  The  superior
intelligence  of  man,  after  long  and  costly  experience,  at  last
succeeded  in  thus  subjugating  nature.  The  means  emjiloyed
was  art.  Whether  it  be  in  the  manufacture  of  rude  weap-
ons wherewith  to  slay  the  antelope,  in  the  reduction  of  the
wild  sheep  and  ox  to  a  state  of  domestication  and  servitude,
in  the  fashioning  of  implements  for  the  tillage  of  the  soil,  in
the  manufacture  of  clothing  out  of  skins,  wool,  flax,  and
other  fibers,  in  the  construction  of  thatched  huts  for  protec-
tion from  the  weather,  or  in  the  use  of  flint  and  tinder  for
building  fires,  without  which  processes  the  range  and  num-
bers must  be  restricted  as  they  are  in  other  species — in  any
case  it  is  clear  that  the  true  social  forces  must  have  been
guided  and  restrained  by  the  intellectual  power  foreseeing
good  and  evil  consequences,  securing  the  one  and  avoiding
the  other.

Relation  of  the  Mind-Force  to  the  Sense-Force. — In  par-
tial anticipation  of  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  subject  in  a
future  chapter  (vol.  ii,  p.  99),  it  may  be  here  remarked  that
the  relation  which  the  mind-force  bears  to  these  sense-forces

I

ORIGIN  OF  ART.— THE  MIND-FORCE.  487

is  similar  to  that  which  the  rudder  operated  by  the  pilot
bears  to  the  sails  operated  by  the  wind.  Desire  uninfluenced
by  intelligence  is  a  true  natural  force  and  obeys  the  universal
laws  of  dynamics.  Bodies  acted  upon  by  a  normal  force
always  tend  to  move  in  straight  lines  either  from  the  impel-
ling or  toward  the  attracting  body.  If  they  move  in  curves
or  irregular  lines,  it  is  because  a  plurality  of  forces,  having
different  directions,  are  operating  upon  them.  It  is  precisely
BO  with  organisms  impelled  by  desires  only.  They  move  as
directly  toward  the  objects  of  desire  as  do  the  objects  of
magnetic  attraction  toward  the  attracting  magnets,  or  falling
bodies  toward  the  earth's  center.  This  truth  is  expressed  by
the  adage  that  "  love  is  bKnd."  Appetite  also  is  blind ;  all
desires  are  blind.  The  social  forces  are  all  blind  forces.
They  impel  to  direct  action  toward  the  objects  of  desire.*
If  obstacles  intervene,  they  are  simply  arrested,  and  never
attain  these  objects.  They  are  well  illustrated  by  the  fa-
miliar case  of  the  fly  buzzing  against  the  transparent  pane
until  exhausted,  without  sufficient  intelligence  to  go  above
the  sash  where  no  glass  intercepts.  The  American  partridge
{Ortyx  Virginiana)  is  caught  in  great  numbers  by  attaching
kernels  of  corn  to  the  end  of  strings  tied  to  a  stake.  The
bird  swallows  the  corn  as  far  as  its  crop,  and,  in  attempting
to  go  away,  invariably  turns  its  head  away  from  the  stake,
and  does  not  possess  sufficient  intelligence  to  turn  around.
The  friction  of  the  string  in  the  angle  of  its  beak  renders  it
impossible  thus  to  extract  the  kernel,  and  the  bird  is  effectu-
ally trapped.  Qucb  ipse  miserrima  vidi.  The  mistakes  which
men  make  in  attempting  to  secure  the  objects  of  their  desires
are  mostly  of  the  nature  of  those  of  the  fly  and  the  partridge.
There  is  a  disproportion  between  the  strength  of  the  desires
and  the  strength  of  the  intellect.     With  the  lower  animals

*  The  Duke  of  Argyll  seems  to  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  this  principle  in
the  following  passage :  "  The  conscious  energies  of  the  will  arc  ever  tempted
to  march  directly  upon  objects  which  can  only  be  reached  by  circuitous  methods
of  approach  "  ("  Reign  of  Law,"  p.  341).    (See  Introduction,  supra^  p.  71,  note.)

488  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SO CIOGENY.

in  their  ordinary  habitats  this  disproportion  is  removed  by
gradual  adaptation.  Their  activities  go  on  within  the  sphere
of  their  intelligence.  There  is  a  correspondence  between  the
organism  and  the  environment.  But  remove  them  from
their  natural  habitat,  and  this  correspondence  is  more  or  less
completely  destroyed.  Even  within  their  natural  range  of
activity  this  correspondence  is  never  absolutely  complete.
Moreover,  the  higher  the  degree  of  organization,  the  greater
the  lack  of  adaptation,  "With  the  human  race,  while  the
degree  of  corrrespondence  is  always  sufficient  to  enable  it  to
subsist,  there  are  constantly  felt  innumerable  jars,  discords,
and  inadaptations.

ORIGIN   OF   INDUSTRY.

For  innumerable  ages  the  chief  object  of  human  activity
must  have  been  subsistence.  Indeed,  it  is  the  chief  object
of  the  life  of  all  lower  creatures  and  of  the  majority  of  all
human  beings  to-day.  The  first  question  which  every  living
being  must  settle  is.  How  shall  I  obtain  a  subsistence  ?  this
being  identical  with  the  question.  How  shall  I  preserve  my
existence  ?  Self-preservation  is  said  to  be  the  first  law  of
nature.  This  proverb  is  as  true  of  a  being,  when  attacked
by  hunger  or  the  elements,  as  when  attacked  by  another
being.  It  is  a  law  of  nature  because  it  is  the  legitimate
effect  of  the  operation  of  the  primary  forces  of  animated
nature,  the  preservative  forces,  and  the  regular  effects  of
forces  are  laws.  It  is  a  law  of  nature  because  these  forces
are  nature's  forces,  as  much  as  are  tliose  of  gravitation,
electricity,  or  chemical  affinity.  No  power  can  destroy
them.  The  particular  results  "which  they  seek  to  accomplish
may  be  defeated  by  obstacles,  but  the  force  is  not  destroyed.
Even  intelligence  can  only  direct  these  forces,  it  can  never
increase  or  diminish  them.  They  are  perpetually  at  work,
inspiring  activity  and  impelling  muscular  movements  in  tlie
direction  of  procuring  subsistence.

This  activity,  when  directed  by  the  intellectual  forces  to

ORIGm  OF  INDUSTRY.  489

the  increase  of  natural  production,  or  in  constraining  nature
to  yield  a  larger  supply  of  subsistence  than  it  yields  spon-
taneously, assumes  the  form  and  takes  the  name  of  labor.
The  first  lesson,  therefore,  which  man  had  to  learn,  as  his
numbers  became  too  great  for  nature  to  supply  his  wants,
or  as  he  wandered  away  from  the  spot  which  originally  sup-
phed  them  without  effort,  was,  that  he  must  labor.

Ko  amount  of  sagacity  or  cunning,  no  increased  brain-
development  or  heightened  intellectual  powers,  sufficed  to
remove  this  necessity.  It  was  a  glorious  achievement  of
mind  when  it  first  taught  him  how,  even  by  means  of  labor,
to  compel  Kature  to  multiply  her  original  supply  for  his  sake.
Beyond  this  it  could  not  go.  It  could  not  by  any  act  of
sagacity  or  foresight  create  the  material  substance  neces-
sary to  nourish  the  body.  Mind  can  only  act  upon  matter
through  the  medium  of  other  matter  in  a  state  of  organiza-
tion. Only  by  means  of  hands  and  feet,  propelled  by  mus-
cles which  are  under  the  control  of  nerves  and  brain,  can  the
last  named  organ  secure  the  fruits  of  its  designs.  It  is  true
that  in  later  times  mind  has  secured  subsistence  for  many
bodies  without  labor,  but  for  every  such  idle  body  there  has
been  one  doubly  tasked.  It  is  also  true  that,  by  the  inven-
tion of  machinery,  mind  has  vastly  reduced  the  quantity  of
manual  labor  necessary  to  supply  one  body,  but  this  has  con-
sisted simply  in  the  substitution  of  mechanical  for  muscu-
lar energy.

Nearly  every  thing  that  is  capable  of  nourishing  the  ani-
mal body  must  first  be  organized  through  the  vegetable
economy.  The  soil,  therefore,  from  which,  practically  speak-
ing, all  vegetables  must  spring,  is  the  time  original  source  of
animal  subsistence.  The  consumption  of  animal  food  is  sim-
ply the  re-appropriation  by  the  system  of  organic  matter
already  once  appropriated  from  vegetables  by  the  animals
consumed  {sujpra,  p.  350).  There  is  much  evidence  that  man
in  pre-industrial  times  was  a  strict  vegetarian,  and  that  his
present  almost  omnivorous  habits  have  been  the  result  of  the

490  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION".— SOOIOGENY.

vicissitudes  and  the  necessities  incident  to  his  wholly  anoma-
lous career  as  compared  with  other  species.

Confining  ourselves  strictly  to  his  industrial  state,  whether
as  a  hunter,  a  shepherd,  or  a  tiller  of  the  soil,  we  see  that
man  must  have  constantly  and  arduously  pursued  this  one
object,  subsistence.  The  hunting  state  was  least  conducive
to  progress,  since  it  tended  to  develop  the  muscular  at  the
expense  of  the  nervous  powers,  to  render  the  body  vigorous,
blunt  the  sensibilities,  and  cause  neglect  of  the  intellect.  Still
it  must  have  increased  the  power  of  certain  mental  forces,
cunning  in  circumventing  the  animals  which  he  sought  to
destroy,  and  courage  in  battHng  for  the  possession  of  the
objects  of  his  desire.  The  pastoral  state  fostered  both  rev-
ery  and  observation.  Many  of  the  most  beautiful  products
of  the  human  imagination,  as  well  as  of  the  most  valuable
facts  of  science,  have  emanated  from  shepherds  as  they
have  idly  watched  their  flocks.  The  agricultural  state  was,
on  the  whole,  best  calculated  to  develop  the  progressive
powers  of  the  race,  since,  while  it  stimulated  energy  and
thouglit,  it  did  not  dull  the  feelings.  The  variety  of  labors
and  of  utensils  required,  and  the  practical  sagacity  demanded
for  the  profitable  economy  of  seed,  harvesting  of  crops,  and
observation  of  the  weather  and  the  seasons,  together  with
the  extensive  margin  which  always  existed  for  improvement
and  perfection  in  all  its  departments,  rendered  the  georgic
far  superior  to  both  the  bucolic  and  the  venary  modes  of
obtaining  subsistence.  Each  of  them,  however,  as  will  be
readily  seen,  is  an  advance  upon  the  spontaneous  method
pursued  by  animals.  Each  requires  an  exercise  of  genius,  a
certain  amount  of  calculation  and  invention  which  marks  it
distinctly  as  a  human  enterprise.  Each  requires  art  and
labor,  and  compels  nature  to  yield  an  artificial  product.
The  act  of  a  lion,  when  he  pursues,  seizes,  and  devours  an
antelope,  is  not  identical  with  that  of  man  when  he  performs
the  same  act.  The  former  displays  sagacity  as  well  as  the
latter,  but  it  is  instinctive,  not  rational ;  it  is  hereditary  reason,

OEIGIN  OF  IITDUSTRY.  491

if  instinct  can  be  so  defined,  and  not  snch  as  can  adapt  itself
to  each  particular  case.  So,  too,  both  have  the  necessary
weapons,  but  those  of  the  former  are  the  works  of  nature,
while  those  of  the  latter  are  the  works  of  art.  The  former
owe  their  existence  to  the  laws  of  selection,  the  latter  to
human  design ;  the  former  are  the  products  of  circumstances
without  thought  or  intelligence,  the  latter  of  a  teleological
plan.  Again,  we  must  distinguish  between  the  parasitical
method,  by  which  certain  animals  subsist  upon  the  nourish-
ment assimilated  by  others,  and  the  pastoral  life  of  man,
since,  in  the  latter,  art  and  labor,  sagacity  and  foresight,  are
exercised  in  the  domestication  and  care  of  animals  as  well  as
in  the  manufacture  of  various  articles  out  of  the  raw  prod-
ucts yielded  by  them.  Still  broader  is  the  distinction  between
the  means  which  the  agriculturist  employs  for  deriving  an
increased  product  from  the  soil  and  that  which  the  graniv-
orous  and  herbivorous  birds  and  animals  adopt  in  subsisting
upon  its  spontaneous  vegetation.  These  characteristics  are
amply  sufficient  to  differentiate  the  human  from  the  animal
mode  of  subsistence,  and  to  give  a  special  meaning  to  the
term  labor.  No  animal,  except  under  the  dominion  of  man,
not  even  the  bee  or  the  ant,  can  be  said,  in  this  proper  sense
of  the  term,  to  work  for  its  living.

In  the  absence  of  any  system  of  government,  the  product
of  art  and  Ir.bor  would,  of  course,  inure  directly  to  the  pro-
ducer. It  was  required  for  the  immediate  sustenance  of  the
individual.  As  the  eagle  devours  its  prey  as  soon  as  it  has
seized  it ;  as  the  vampire  swallows  the  blood  of  its  victim  as
fast  as  it  sucks  it  up ;  as  the  cattle  and  sheep  and  the  birds
feed  only  themselves  from  the  grass  and  berries  which  nature
provides — so  man  may  be  supposed,  theoretically  at  least,
to  have  passed  through  a  stage  of  development  identical  with
that  of  these  creatures,  except  in  the  element  of  labor,  which
rendered  subsistence  an  artificial  product  instead  of  a  spon-
taneous growth,  but  which  each  producer  appropriated  as
fast  as  he  produced  it.     This  mainly  theoretical  stage  was

492  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION".— SOCIOGENY,

succeeded  bj  another,  marking  another  progressive  era,  and
bringing  man  another  step  forward  in  his  social  career.  The
distinguishing  feature  of  this  new  stage  was  the  recognition
of  the  idea  of  permanent  ownership  or  possession,  and  hence
it  may  be  styled  the  proprietary  stage  of  civilization.

In  order  to  enjoy  an  object  it  must  be  brought  within
the  scope  of  the  perceptive  faculties,  within  reach  of  some
one  or  more  of  the  senses.  In  all  the  immediate  objects  of
alimentary  subsistence  their  enjoyment  is  their  destruction.
The  momentary  possession  of  such  objects  until  they  are
consumed  must  exist  even  in  the  lowest  forms  of  life.  It
is  not,  therefore,  this  which  is  here  meant.  The  source  and
the  means  of  these  objects  are  usually  more  or  less  durable
and  stationary,  and  it  is  these  which  have  been  the  real  ob-
jects of  possession.  It  is  clear  that  this  could  only  apply
to  a  more  or  less  artificial  condition  of  life.  It  would  be
unnecessary  in  a  purely  natural  state.  The  objects  whose
source  can  become  a  proper  subject  of  ownership  must  be
the  results  of  a  greater  or  less  amoimt  of  labor ;  they  must  be
products  of  human  skill.  The  milk,  flesh,  and  skins  of  do-
mesticated animals  come  within  this  definition  ;  the  fruits  of
the  earth  are  among  its  best  exemplifications.  In  the  former
case,  the  domestic  animal  becomes  a  proper  subject  of  pos-
session. It  has  become  so  through  human  skill  and  labor.
In  the  latter  case,  the  soil  itself  naturally  becomes  a  subject
of  permanent  ownership,  but  only  after  it  has  been  subdued
by  human  industry,  and  rendered  more  fruitful  than  it  was
by  nature.  The  least  amount  of  labor,  however,  if  it  were
no  more  than  the  mere  selection,  would  be  sufficient  to  con-
stitute a  claim.

The  recognition  of  permanent  property  gave  to  man  an
object  to.  pursue,  an  incentive  to  industry  beyond  the  mere
present  demands  of  his  nature.  It  substituted  a  future  for  a
present  enjoyment.  Instead  of  consuming  his  product  as
fast  as  produced,  he  felt  that  in  producing  much  more  he
could  enjoy  it  at  another  time.    It  also  begat  exchange.    The

PROPERTY  AS  A  SOCIAL  FACTOR.  493

surplus  of  production  over  consumption  of  any  one  article
could  be  converted  by  exchange  into  other  articles  whereby
more  desires  could  be  gratified,  more  enjoyment  obtained.
The  inducements  to  production  became  unlimited.  He
could  not  produce  too  much.  He  could  not  be  too  indus-
trious. It  stimulated  inventive  art.  For  it  was  not  the
amount  of  labor  performed  but  the  amount  of  value  pro-
duced that  w^as  desirable,  and,  if  an  implement  could  be  made
which  would  double  the  product  with  the  same  labor,  the
means  of  enjoyment  would  be  doubled.  It  gave  a  new  im-
petus to  human  progress.  Hitherto  it  had  been  external
influences  that  had  gradually  forced  upon  man  the  condi-
tions necessary  to  progression.  Thus  far  it  had  been  a  strug-
gle for  life  which  had  exercised  the  mental  and  physical
faculties,  and  aroused  them  to  activity.  Now,  a  new  force
from  within  joins  in  the  effort.  Now  commences  a  struggle
for  possession  as  a  means  to  higher  and  prospective  happi-
ness. A  thousand  new  desires  spring  up  as  the  new  and
varied  objects  of  skill  and  labor  multiply.  Taste  becomes
refined.  The  raw  and  coarse  pabulum,  which  had  so  long
sustained  life,  is  no  longer  endurable.  It  must  now  be  pre-
pared ;  labor  and  skill  must  be  laid  out  upon  it,  and  it  is
worked  up  into  a  variety  of  delicate  dishes.  Habitations  are
constructed  in  a  more  and  more  complicated  manner,  and
rendered  more  commodious.  Garments  are  improved  both
in  quality  and  variety.  In  proportion  as  these  desires  are
gratified,  the  higher  pleasures  of  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  the
brain  are  sought  and  secured.

Property  as  a  Social  Factor. — The  vast  importance  of
property  as  a  means  to  happiness  was  little  by  little  appre-
ciated, till  at  length  it  became  recognized  that,  in  so  far  as  a
proper  use  is  made  of  it,  the  one  is  a  measure  of  the  other.
Pleasure  is  derived  from  contact  with  objects.  Its  inten-
sity depends  upon  the  variety  and  adaptation  of  those  ob-
jects. Although  many  of  the  objects  of  enjoyment  are  not
themselves  the  direct  subjects  of  possession,  are  not  them-

494  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION. -SOCIOGE NY.

selves  property,  yet  even  these  are,  in  some  indirect  manner,
rendered  attainable  and  valuable  by  means  of  the  property
with  which  they  are  associated.  The  history  of  man  and  the
daily  observation  of  every  one  tell  us  experimentally  that
possession  and  enjoyment  are,  in  the  nature  of  things,  bound
up  together.  The  measure  of  value  in  objects  is  the  degree
to  which  they  can  contribute  to  human  happiness.  Property
is  value  possessed.  Wealth  is  the  term  applied  to  the  aggre-
gate of  property  possessed  by  individuals  or  nations.  "When
we  remember  the  struggles  which  men  have  been  obliged  to
make  to  preserve  their  existence,  the  ceaseless  effort,  care,
and  anxiety  required  to  supply,  from  day  to  day,  the  rapidly
wasting  tissues,  and  protect  the  frame  from  cold,  moisture,  and
winds,  supposing  them  to  consume  the  needed  objects  as  soon
as  they  obtain  them,  as  do  most  animals,  it  requires  no  special
effort  of  the  imagination  to  comprehend  the  immense  advan-
tage that  must  arise  from  the  accumulation  in  advance  of  a
sufficient  quantity  of  property  to  render,  if  not  labor,  at  least
care  and  the  fear  of  destitution  and  suffering,  unnecessary.
We  can  then  readily  understand  the  cause  of  man's  eager
and  almost  frantic  pursuit  of  wealth.  When  we  come  to
recognize  that  the  pursuit  of  wealth  is  only  the  pursuit  of
happiness,  a  great  part  of  the  wonder  which  is  apt  to  be
evinced  at  the  wide-spread  and  all-absorbing  character  of  this
pursuit  is  removed.  Wealth  means  safety,  ease,  the  fulfill-
ment of  desire.     It  means  happiness.

The  adoption  of  a  system  of  exchange  made  the  posses-
sion of  value  of  any  kind  equivalent  to  the  possession  of  the
objects  of  personal  desire.  Money,  whose  use  was  at  length
found  out,  came  to  stand  as  a  synonym  for  everything  that
any  one  could  wish.  What  wonder  that  it  should  be  sought,
and  with  an  enthusiasm  that  borders  on  fanaticism  !  Man
enjoys  only  that  which  he  comes  more  or  less  directly  in
sensible  contact  with.  Nothing  benefits  him  unless  he  can
either  feel,  see,  hear,  taste,  or  smell  it.  The  more  of  these
senses  it  can  gratify,  the  more  valuable  it  is  to  him.    But,  as

GENESIS  OF  AVARICE.  495

a  rule,  an  object  is  capable  of  thus  imparting  its  qualities  in
proportion  as  it  is  placed  under  the  control  of  tbe  individual
enjoying  it.  That  is,  a  thing  is  worth  more  to  any  one  in
proportion  as  he  is  the  more  absolute  owner  of  it.  There-
fore, every  body  wants  to  own  as  many  such  objects  as  pos-
sible, or,  what  becomes  equivalent  to  this,  as  much  money
as  possible.  Hence  the  strife  to  obtain  money,  to  amass
wealth.

GENESIS   OF    AVAEICE.

Thus  Avarice,  a  wholly  derivative  sentiment,  has  come,
and  naturally  too,  to  be  one  of  the  ruling  passions.  It  is  a
part  of  human  history,  reaching  far  back  into  that  obscure
period  when  man  began  to  emerge  from  the  animal  state,
when  he  was  casting  about  for  a  means  of  escaping  that
otherwise  inevitable  fate  which  always  has  attended  and  must
attend  all  rapidly  multiplying  species  of  living  creatures.

But  it  is  not  merely  as  a  means  of  self-preservation  that
the  idea  of  permanent  possession  has  proved  a  benefactor  to
man.  It  has  aroused  his  faculties.  It  has  not  only  given
him  life,  it  has  given  him  intelligence.  Property  could
only  be  acquired  through  industry  directed  by  intelligence.
Those  who  possessed  the  most  tact  and  showed  the  most
enterprise  acquired  the  most,  had  the  largest  number  of
desires  satisfied,  enjoyed  most.  Here  arose  a  grand  compe-
tition, the  natural  effect  of  which  could  only  be  to  shai'pen
the  wits  and  stimulate  enterprise.  Art  and  labor  rose  rap-
idly and  assumed  form  and  character.  Production  increased
in  a  still  more  rapid  ratio.  Food,  clothing,  and  shelter
were  placed  within  the  reach  of  all  who  would  work  and
could  work  skillfully.  Conveniences  and  luxuries  followed
necessities.  "Weapons  for  the  chase  and  for  war  were  in-
vented, pottery  and  various  cooking-utensils  were  wrought
for  the  preparation  of  food,  agricultural  implements  were
devised,  vehicles  for  travel  and  transportation  were  con-
structed, roads  were  opened  and  bridges  built,  boats  were

496  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

made  and  launched  upon  the  waters,  commerce  and  trade
began.  Plenty  begat  leisure,  leisure  observation,  and  ob-
servation reflection.  Philosophy,  history,  fine  art,  and  sci-
ence took  root.  New  desires  arose,  demanding  new  objects,
and  these  in  turn  were  supplied  by  the  exercise  of  still
higher  activities.

The  conception  of  permanent  possession  is  what  gave  to
civilization  its  initial  impulse.  Industry,  inventive  art,  and
skilled  labor  are  each  sustained  by  this  vitalizing  sentiment,
60  commonly  misunderstood  and  so  frequently  condemned.
Since  to  preserve  life,  to  avert  evil,  and  to  secure  happiness,
have  always  constituted  the  primary  motives  to  human
action,  whatever  had  tliese  ends  in  view  has  naturally
acquired  the  name  of  practical.  The  phrase  "means  of
subsistence,"  used  in  its  widest  sense,  may  be  taken  to  em-
body this  class  of  objects.  "When  the  idea  of  permanent
possession  became  developed,  and  the  possibility  of  accumu-
lating these  objects  for  future  consumption  was  recognized,
all  limitation  of  the  quantity  of  value,  which  it  was  desirable
or  useful  to  amass,  except  in  the  case  of  things  ina mediately
perishable,  was  removed,  and  men  were  seized  with  a  de-
sire to  reduce  as  many  of  these  valuable  objects  as  possible
to  possession,  in  order  to  provide  against  unforeseen  con-
tingencies. The  introduction  of  a  permanent  standard,  or
measure,  of  value,  at  all  times  convertible  into  the  commodi-
ties needed,  extended  this  principle  to  the  hitherto  excluded
class  of  perishables,  and  brought  everything  under  one  gen-
eral law.  The  immediate  object  was  thenceforth  money.
With  it  any  other  object,  whether  perishable  or  imperish-
able, could  be  obtained.  Since  the  greater  part  of  all  the
objects  most  indispensable  as  means  of  subsistence  come
under  the  former  class,  it  is  evident  that  the  principle  of
permanent  possession  could  only  have  had  a  very  imperfect
application  before  the  adoption  of  a  medium  of  exchange.
With  its  adoption  it  came  forward  in  full  force,  and  began,
from  that  epoch,  its  important  career.

LAW  OF  ACQUISITION.  497

The  Law  of  Acquisition.

The  development  of  the  idea  of  permanent  possession
and  the  adoption  of  a  circulating  medium,  which  were  on
the  whole  so  beneficial  to  man,  were,  nevertheless,  attended
with  some  serious  abuses.  The  key  to  their  explanation  lies
in  the  fundamental  fact  that  the  sole  object  of  human  effort
was  to  acquire.  No  such  consideration  as  justice  originally
found  place  there.  Only  one  quality  was  attached  to  the
mode  of  acquisition,  and  that  was  success.  The  grand  rivalry
was  for  the  object,  not  the  method ;  for  the  end  regardless  of
the  means.  Those  qualities  both  of  body  and  mind  best
adapted  to  acquire  wealth  were  those  most  valuable,  most
practical,  and  soon  recognized  as  most  respectable  and  most
honorable.  There  could  be  but  one  result.  Those  individuals
in  whom  these  qualities  were  most  highly  developed  acquired
most.  While  the  wants  of  each  were  the  same,  and  the  sup-
ply none  too  great,  it  must  needs  have  been  that  the  large
acquisitions  of  this  class  were  made  at  the  expense  of  those
less  fortunate  in  the  possession  of  these  acquisitive  powers.
The  chief  object  was  to  get ;  both  the  manner  and  the  source
of  the  getting  were  ignored.  The  force  of  this  may  be  in-
creased by  the  antithesis  between  getting  and  producing.
If  the  same  wild  passion  which  has  so  long  raged  for  the
acquisition  of  wealth  were  directed  toward  its  production,
the  average  production  would  doubtless  be  three  or  four
times  the  average  consumption  instead  of  a  trifle  above  it,  as
is  now  the  case.  There  might,  for  example,  probably  be
produced  an  excess  of  four  or  five  dollars  per  capita  per
diem  instead  of  about  ten  cents.*     But  the  idea  of  creating

*  According  to  the  United  States  census,  the  true  value  of  the  property,  real
and  personal,  in  the  United  States  was,  in  1870,  $30,068,518,507;  in  1860,
$16,159,616,068,  making  an  increase  in  ten  years  of  $13,908,902,439.  The
population  of  the  United  States  in  1870  was  88,558,371;  and  in  1860  it  was
81,443,321.  The  average  population  during  the  decade,  therefore,  was  85,000,-
846.  These  figures  will  show  an  average  annual  excess  of  production  over
consumption  of  $39.74  joer  capita^  or  an  average  daily  excess  of  $0.10888.     The

498  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

value  formed  onlj  an  incidental  part  of  the  general  struggle
for  getting  possession  of  it.

It  is  true,  somebody  must  create  it.  The  spontaneous
supply  of  nature  was  exhausted  long  before  the  idea  of
property,  in  the  sense  here  used,  had  occurred  to  mankind.
If  we  look  about  us  to-day,  we  find  that  nearly  all  wealth  is
artificial  or  created.  Everything  we  own  has  a  value  ac-
quired in  some  way  or  other.  All  things  worth  possessing
are  the  products,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  of  labor.  There
are  a  few  apparent  exceptions,  but  they  are  confined  to  such
things  as  are  incapable  either  of  permanent  possession  or  of
representation  by  any  medium,  of  which  the  air  is  an  ex-
ample. Water  generally  belongs  to  this  class,  though  not
always.  The  soil  has  long  since  passed  out  of  this  category,
at  least  in  populous  countries.  These  exceptions  made,  the
rule  is  universal  in  civilized  countries  that  all  wealth  is  the
result  of  production.  The  range  and  number  of  the  excep-
tions were  not  very  much  increased  at  the  period  when  men
first  adopted  a  medium  of  exchange.  Hence,  as  remarked
above,  the  wealth  which  existed  had  all  been  produced,  and
the  production  was  still  going  on  to  supply  consumption  and
also  to  enable  certain  ones  to  accumulate  large  possessions.
All  were  alike  endued  with  a  zeal  for  accumulation,  but  they
did  not  at  all  distinguish  between  the  various  modes  of  ac-
quisition (infra,  p.  524).  Those  who  acquired  by  producing
were  not  actuated  by  any  conception  of  the  superior  im-
portance of  their  method.  Could  they  have  gained  more  by
striving  after  wealth  already  produced,  no  one  would  have
hesitated  to  abandon  production  and  engage  in  traffic.

Those  engaged  in  appropriating  the  products  of  other
men's  labor  never  entertained  the  least  idea  that  their  busi-
ness was  less  honorable  or  less  useful  than  that  of  the  pro-
figures  for  the  preceding  decade  give  a  daily  excess  of  $0.09052,  making  the
daily  excess  for  the  twenty  years  $0.0997,  or  about  ten  cents.  The  as  yet  un-
tabulated  wealth  statistics  for  the  decade  ISYO-'SG  indicate  a  much  smaller  ex-
cess of  production,  or  between  six  and  seven  cents  per  capita  per  dian.

LAW  OF  ACQUISITION.  499

ducer.  Neither  class  had  any  conception  of  these  economic
laws,  and  each  individual  limited  himself  solely  to  the  one
idea  of  appropriating  to  himself.  Neither  is  there  any  thing
so  base  and  sordid  in  this  as  some  pseudo-moralists  might
claim.  Man  was  obeying  the  same  law  that  every  other  liv-
ing creature  obeys  by  the  constitution  of  its  nature — the  law
of  self -protection.  To  secure  enjoyment  and  avert  evil,  are
the  mainsprings  of  all  animate  activity,  and  these  were  the  mo-
tives which  governed  men  in  their  earliest  economic  schemes.*

It  is  true  that  this  describes  not  only  man's  early  strug-
gles for  subsistence,  but  his  present  character  and  condition.
The  unphilosopliic  observer  of  the  economic  facts  of  to-day
is  filled  with  disgust  and  indignation  at  the  false  and  perni-
cious mania  for  getting  possession  of  the  wealth  already  pro-
duced. He  has  no  patience  with  the  man  who  will  labor  as
hard,  and  scheme  as  adroitly,  and  worry  out  his  whole  life  as
anxiously,  to  draw  the  property  that  other  men  have  created
into  the  eddy  of  his  powerful  avarice,  as  would  have  been
necessary  to  produce  it.  He  finds  no  words  of  condemnation
strong  enough  to  characterize  the  millionaire  or  the  miser,
the  speculator  or  the  stock-jobber.  He  forgets  that  all  these
are  obeying  this  same  biological  law,  uninfluenced  by  rational
thought  and  unaided  by  any  knowledge  of  economic  prin-
ciples.

Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  points  out  the  fact  that  ''  the  dis-
honesty implied  in  the  adulterations  of  tradesmen  and  manu-
facturers, in  fraudulent  bankruptcies,  in  bubble  companies
in  cooking  of  railway  accounts  and  financial  prospectuses,
differs  only  in  form  and  not  in  amount  from  the  dishonesty

*  We  saw  in  Chapter  FV  that  the  true  producers  in  the  economy  of  organi-
zation are  protista  and  plants,  and  that  all  animals  are  in  this  respect  parasites.
In  the  facts  here  considered,  the  appropriation  by  certain  individuals  of  the
wealth  created  by  others  is  simply  a  repetition  in  the  tertiary  aggregate  of  tlie
process  employed  in  the  secondary  aggregate.  We  have  also  seen,  however,  in
the  Introduction,  that  it  is  the  prerogative  and  the  duty  of  man,  by  the  exercise
of  a  tcleological  direction  over  the  laws  of  nature,  to  prevent  the  normal  process,
if  possible,  wherever  it  conflicts  with  his  interest  and  advantage.

500  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY,

of  the  uneducated."  *  This  statement  is  made  with  a  view
to  proving  that  education  has  little  or  no  immediate  effect
upon  character  (vol.  ii,  pp.  597,  605).  Without  discussing
this  question  here,  the  undeniable  facts  are  far  more  potent
in  supporting  the  principle  here  stated  that  this  "  dishon-
esty," as  we  call  it,  is  only  the  natural  result  of  the  law
which  impels  all  men  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  to  the  ac-
cumulation of  the  means  of  subsistence.  It  is  only  a  higher
manifestation  of  the  law  which  directs  the  savage  to  decoy
and  ensnare  his  game.  His  object  is  to  secure  the  means  of
subsistence.  To  succeed,  he  must  deceive.  He  never  con-
ceives of  any  immorality  in  this.  But  here,  it  may  be  urged,
is  where  the  distinction  lies,  for,  we  are  told,  the  dishonest
dealer  does  conceive  of  an  immoral  quality  in  his  act.  This
objection  will  be  considered  presently.  It  need  only  be  re-
marked here  that  no  line  of  demarkation,  satisfactory  to  all
persons,  and  applicable  to  all  cases,  can  be  drawn  between
the  honorable  and  the  dishonorable.  The  manufacturer  and
the  dealer  excuse  their  deception  in  a  manner  perfectly  satis-
factory to  themselves.  If  objective  justification  is  wanting,
it  is  easily  compensated  for  by  subjective  justification.
Among  the  most  common  of  these  subjective  justifications
are  these  :  "  I  must  live,"  "  my  family  must  be  provided
for,"  "  the  world  owes  me  a  living."  Of  course,  I  will  not
be  misunderstood  as  claiming  that  these  are  valid  justifica-
tions for  dishonesty.  I  only  claim  that  they  are  satisfactory
to  the  parties  making  them.  While  even  the  noble  maxim
that  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy  "  should  be  cautiously  ac-
cepted as  universally  true  (vol.  ii,  p.  143),  every  act  which
society  calls  dishonest  is  justified  either  on  objective  or  sub-
jective grounds  by  the  one  who  performs  it  at  the  time  per-
formed. The  proper  way  to  prevent  dishonesty  is  to  show
conclusively  in  the  case  of  every  action  that  directly  or
indirectly,  immediately  or  remotely,  physically  or  mentally,

*  "  Study  of  Sociology,"  p.  121,  New  York,  1880.

PRINCIPLE  OF  DECEPTION.  501

it  will  bring  to  the  performer  more  pain  or  less  pleasure  than
its  non-performance.

DECEPTION   THE   NORMAL    FOKM   OF   INTELLECTUAL   ACTION.

The  law  of  acquisition  above  stated,  which  is  biological
as  well  as  sociological,  since  it  is  the  law  alike  of  man  and  of
the  lower  animals,  and  is  carried  out  by  the  psychic  forces
which  include  the  social  forces,  is  supplemented  in  tlie  human
race  by  another  law,  which  may  be  called  the  princijple  of
deception.

This  law  arises  with  the  development  of  the  intellectual
faculty,  and,  properly  viewed,  it  constitutes  the  essential  form
in  which  that  faculty  every-where  manifests  itself,  altliough
this  truth  is  masked  by  the  great  variety  existing  among  the
objects  toward  which  intellectual  operations  are  directed.

To  make  this  generalization  more  clear,  it  may  be  said
that  it  is  by  a  sort  of  deception  that  man  obtains  every  thing.
It  is  a  deception  to  catch  and  domesticate  an  animal.  It  is  a
deception  to  ensnare  one.  Yet  these  are  the  necessary  means
of  reaching  the  pastoral  or  the  hunting  state.  And  is  it  not
a  sort  of  deception  to  wring  a  surplus  product  from  the  soil  ?
Is  it  not  a  species  of  fraud  to  contrive  a  mechanical  appara-
tus, to  take  advantage  of  nature's  forces  and  enslave  them  ?
If  we  deny  this  use  of  the  term,  it  is  solely  because  we  do  not
conceive  of  the  vegetable  or  mineral  world  as  possessing  feel-
ing. In  this  respect  we  are  probably  principally  right.  Yet
the  caution  with  which  such  arts  have  been  employed  shows
conclusively  that  all  these  modes  of  cheating  and  defrauding
nature  have  been  regarded  as  dangerous.  This  caution  has
never  been  exemplified  better  in  the  case  of  animate  than
of  inanimate  things.  It  is  true  that  it  arose  from  fear  of  per-
sonal danger  from  offended  deities.  The  true  morality  of
sympathy  is  a  very  recent  development.  The  great  error
which  is  so  continually  made  in  considering  such  questions
is  that  of  assuming  the  same  keen  sense  of  sympathetic  jus-
tice in  those  we  are  contemplating  which  we  ourselves  feel.

502  TERTIARY   AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

Sagacity,  cunning,  genius,  all  necessarily  imply  deception,
and  constitute  a  sort  of  vulpinism.  Every  victory  over  nat-
ure, whether  in  its  sentient  or  insentient  department,  involves
the  principle  of  deception  which  is  seen  displayed  in  all
forms  of  strategy,  craft,  or  cunning — viz.,  an  indirect  method
of  procedure  (vol.  ii,  p.  99).  The  normal  operations  of  the
intellect,  as  distinguished  from  those  of  the  emotions,  and
whereby  it  accomplishes  so  much  greater  results,  are  essen-
tially of  this  character,  so  that  it  may  be  said  that  invention
is  deception.  By  it  the  forces  of  nature  are  ensnared  and  cir-
cumvented- Language  itself  enforces  this  truth.  The  meth-
ods of  art  are  artifices,  and  its  mode  of  procedure  is  a/rtjhd.
Machines  are  machinations.  Primitive  man  had  early  to
learn  that  to  live  he  must  deceive,  and,  although  this  princi-
ple has  never  found  expression  in  any  code  of  ethics,  it  has
found  unceasing  application  throughout  history.  The  soci-
ologist can  no  more  ignore  it  than  he  can  ignore  other  fun-
damental laws.  Political  economists  have  failed  to  recognize
this  principle,  or  have  not  dared  to  admit  it,  through  fear  of
seeming  to  inculcate  it.  This  has  rendered  much  of  their
reasoning  unsound.

Those  who  employ  the  vituperative  method,  and  have  the
habit  of  denouncing  the  deceptions  practiced  by  men,  should
learn  a  lesson  from  animals  to  which  they  would  probably
deny  a  moral  faculty.  They  will  there  find  not  only  the  cun-
ning of  the  serpent,  the  slyness  of  the  fox,  the  stealth  of
the  lion,  and  the  treachery  of  the  hyena,  but  they  will  find
that  there  exists  every-where  a  merciless  competition  in  these
arts  by  means  of  which  the  more  sagacious  and  powerful  are
perpetually  circumventing  and  destroying  the  more  simple
and  feeble.  It  has  been  previously  pointed  out  {supra,  p.  32)
that,  whatever  human  ideas  may  prevail,  the  law  of  nature
is  the  "right  of  might."  But  the  normal  influence  of  the
intellect,  the  schemes,  contrivances,  wiles,  and  deceptions
which  are  the  marks  of  sagacity  and  even  of  intelligence,
can  not  be  omitted  from  this  notion  of  "  might,"  since,  when

NATURAL  JUSTICE.  503

fully  understood,  they  show  themselves  as  the  mightiest  of
all  agencies.

NATURAL   JUSTICE,    OB   THE    LAW   OF   FOKCE.

The  law  of  force  thus  stated  is  an  essential  part  of  the
law  of  acquisition,  and  inheres  in  the  psychic  process.  Its
method  may  be  denominated  natural  justice,  as  distinguished
from  the  popular  conception  of  justice,  which  we  may  call
civil  justice.

Under  the  normal  operation  of  the  psychic  and  social
forces,  the  weaker  yield  to  the  stronger  as  certainly  as  that
in  physics  motion  will  take  place  in  the  direction  in  which
the  stronger  force  acts.  In  fact,  were  this  of  sufficient  con-
sequence, it  could  be  shown  that  the  acts  of  individuals  rep-
resent the  resultants  of  different  forces  according  to  the  strict
laws  of  the  composition  of  forces  (vol.  ii,  pp.  320,  335).  We
thus  possess  a  science  of  social  mechanics,  which  is  destined
to  receive  adequate  treatment  so  soon  as  sociology  shall  have
been  universally  admitted  into  the  family  of  sciences.*

These  dynamic  phenomena,  as  seen  in  the  animal  king-
dom, whereby  large  groups  exist  only  by  the  destruction  of
other  animals,  are  paralleled  in  human  operations :  first,  by  the
slaughter  of  animals  for  food ;  and,  secondly,  by  the  greater
or  less  destruction  of  the  inferior  races  by  the  superior  ones.
Again,  the  universal  competition  going  on  throughout  all  the
lower  departments  of  life,  and  which  Mr.  Darwin  so  tersely
describes  as  the  "  struggle  for  existence,"  has  its  true  coun-
terpart in  society  in  the  industrial  struggles  of  men.  The
entire  social  fabric  rests  on  the  competitive  principle,  which
is  as  soulless  there  as  it  is  in  its  earlier  manifestations.  It
might  be  styled  the  morals  of  Nature.  Every  being  finds
all  it  can  do  in  preserving  its  own  existence,  and  in  so  doing

*  Professor  "W.  Stanley  Jevona,  in  his  "  Theory  of  Political  Economy,"  has
enunciated  a  similar  truth.  He  also  there  shows  that  in  that  particular  depart-
ment the  general  thought  had  been  given  out  much  earlier  by  Walras  and  Gos-
sen,  as  it  had  as  far  back  as  1SC2  by  himself.

504  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

takes  no  other  account  of  the  means  employed  than  simply
their  elements  of  success.*

Were  there  no  additional  factors  in  the  problem,  the
course  of  human  conduct  relative  to  the  acquisition  of  desir-
able objects  would  be  very  simple.  Any  one  who  has  watched
domestic  animals,  whether  horses,  cattle,  hogs,  dogs,  or  fowls,
in  the  distribution  of  their  food,  has  observed  that,  except
in  those  cases  where  the  element  of  sex  clearly  enters,  and
in  which  a  sentiment  not  distinguishable  from  that  which
men  call  "  chivalry  "  is  apparent,  or  where  parental  instinct
comes  into  play,  no  law  is  recognized  except  that  of  power
to  obtain  each  its  portion,  or,  if  the  quantity  is  limited,  all  it
can  of  the  food  allotted,  whatever  may  be  the  consequences
to  the  weaker  members.

With  the  human  race,  the  same  exceptions  and  no  others
being  made,  the  naked  law  of  acquisition  above  formulated
and  the  principle  of  natural  justice  would  make  the  products
of  art  and  labor — i.  e.,  the  wealth  of  the  world — the  subjects
of  a  process  of  forcible  seizure  and  appropriation,  irrespect-
ive of  the  notions  of  proprietorship  or  of  injury  to  the  loser.
This  is  the  theoretical  condition  of  the  problem  of  social
mechanics,  and  may  be  compared  with  the  statement  of  other
problems  of  concrete  science,  such  as  that  of  atmospheric
currents  on  the  globe,  which  are  simple  in  theory,  but  assume
great  complication  so  soon  as  the  modifying  facts  of  any  par-
ticular case  are  taken  into  the  account.

TEANSITION   FKOM   NATURAL   JUSTICE   TO   CIVIL   JUSTICE.

The  specific  problems  of  social  mechanics  are,  of  course,
many  of  them  highly  complex ;  but  the  predominant  influ-
ences which  tend  to  modify  the  general  theory  of  natural
justice  in  all  states  of  society  at  all  advanced  may  be  referred
to  one  common  source,  and,  when  this  is  well  understood,
they  may  then  be  subdivided  into  a  few  obvious  groups.

*  Tylor,  "Primitive  Culture,"  Boston,  1874,  vol.  ii,  pp.  89,  90,  318;  Spencer,
"  Ceremonial  Institutions,"  p.  47,  §  S55.

TRANSITION  TO  CIVIL  JUSTICE.  505

The  leading  factor  wliicli  distinguishes  the  conduct  of
men  from  the  acts  of  animals  is  the  greater  predominance  of
the  intellectual  element.  This,  it  is  true,  is  only  a  difference
of  degree,  but  so  great  is  that  degree  that  the  results  may  be
said  to  possess  a  qualitative  distinctness.  The  problem  is,
therefore,  to  determine  in  what  ways  this  intellectual  element
enters  into  the  simple  theory  of  natural  justice,  and  what
are  the  character  and  degree  of  the  modifications  effected
by  it.

In  endeavoring  to  analyze  this  influence,  we  find  that  it
may  be  subdivided  into  three  quite  distinct  constituents,  each
of  which  has  done  its  part  to  make  the  conduct  of  men  what
it  is  with  respect  to  the  acquisition  of  the  objects  of  desire.
These  three  subordinate  influences  are  as  follows :

1.  Increase  in  the  susceptibility  to  sympathy.

2.  Increase  in  the  capacity  for  foretelling  effects.

3.  Decrease  of  the  power  to  perform  desired  acts.
We  will  consider  these  in  the  above  order.

Nature  and  Influence  of  Sympathy. — As  each  of  the
three  modifying  influences  was  alleged  to  have  grown  out  of
the  more  highly  developed  intellect  of  man,  it  may  not  be
clear  to  some  how  this  can  be  predicated  of  sympathy.  It  is
not  maintained  that  sympathy  is  itself  an  intellectual  state.
On  the  contrary,  as  a  form  of  feeling,  it  is  a  true  social  force,
but  one  of  those  derivative  forms  which  could  only  be  devel-
oped after  the  intellect  had  become  quite  strong.  The  reali-
zation of  the  discomfort  of  pain  in  self  is  the  only  fact  which
could  generate  sympathy  for  others  who  suffer  it.  This  sym-
pathy is  very  early  in  its  appearance.  It  requires  a  compara-
tively small  amount  of  mental  force.  Many  animals  show
unmistakable  signs  of  such  a  realization.  The  hunter's  dog,
though  never  shot,  will  cringe  if  the  piece  is  pointed  at  him.
He  evidently  reasons  that  what  will  harm  other  animals  will
also  harm  him.

The  circle  of  human  sympathy  has  gradually  widened  as
knowledge  and  experience  have  increased,  until  it  has  come

506  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

to  embrace,  in  a  few  instances,  all  mankind  and  even  the
inferior  brute  creation.  Sympathy  is  qnite  a  complex  phe-
nomenon. It  depends  upon  several  conditions :  one  is,  of
course,  a  sensitive  organism ;  but  a  more  essential  one  is  a
rational  faculty.  Its  intensity  is  measured  by  the  perfection
of  the  organism,  i.  e.,  its  capacity  for  feeling,  on  the  one
hand,  and  by  the  strength  of  the  intellect,  i.  e.,  the  power  of
representation,  on  the  other.  Its  scope  is  also  largely  depend-
ent upon  the  range  of  experience,  i.  e.,  upon  the  degree  of
intelligence.  Hence,  the  more  delicate  the  sensibilities,  the
more  vigorous  the  intellect,  and  the  higher  the  degree  of  in-
telligence, the  keener  will  be  the  sympathies.  The  psycho-
logical lavC^,  according  to  which  sympathy  is  dependent  upon
the  representative  powers  of  the  intellect,  was  fully  set  forth
in  Chapter  Y  {supra,  p.  396).  It  need  not,  therefore,  be  re-
stated here.

This  throws  light  on  the  genesis  of  the  so-called  moral
faculty,  showing  us  how  it  has  been  produced  by  the  force
of  external  circumstances  acting  upon  the  primitive  or-
ganism.

It  remains  to  be  shown  that  this  moral  character,  so  dis-
tinct from  that  of  savage  man  and  of  animals,  constitutes,
nevertheless,  no  exception  to  the  law  that  all  sentient  beings
must  act  in  obedience  to  subjective  forces — to  internal,  or
egoistic,  desires.

The  person  who  sympathizes,  as  the  etymology  of  the
word  so  literally  ixaplies,  feels  with  the  one  who  suffers,  i.  e.,
feels  pain  also.  Sympathy,  therefore,  is  really  pain.  Hence,
every  act  growing  out  of  sympathy  is  an  act  to  escape  pain
suffered  by  the  agent.  This  act  takes  the  form  of  relief
for  the  one  suffering.  It  belongs  to  the  class  of  negative
social  forces,  but  is  neither  less  normal  nor  less  potent  on
that  account.

That  the  moral  sentiments  themselves  have  grown  out  of
these  simple  principles  was  shown  in  Chapter  V,  and  will  be
fully  considered  in  Chapter  XI.    "We  have  here  only  to  ob-

TRANSITION  TO   CIVIL  JUSTICE.  50Y

serve  their  bearing  upon  the  law  of  acquisition  and  that  of
natural  justice.  The  effect  of  sympathy  must  clearly  be  to
soften  the  rigor  of  these  laws,  and  it  will  always  be  felt  when
the  sympathetic  force  exceeds  the  acquisitive  force,  and  only
in  such  cases.  This  will  be  shown  (Chapter  XI)  to  be  the
essential  of  altruistic  action.  It  is  also  one  of  the  chief  bases
of  the  conception  of  proprietary  rights.  The  dispossession
of  a  weaker  by  a  stronger  individual  by  dint  of  strength  alone
brings  vividly  to  the  mind  the  discomfort  of  the  individual
deprived,  and  tends  in  two  ways  to  deter  from  similar  acts :
lirst,  by  partially  neutralizing  the  acquisitive  tendencies  of
the  agent  himself,  and  secondly,  by  inspiring  witnesses  of
such  acts  to  defend  the  injured  ones  by  force.  It  is  in  this
way  that  has  grown  up  that  part  of  the  moral  code  relating
to  rights  which  ultimately  assumed  its  authoritative  sanction,
in  which  aspect  it  belongs  to  the  third  class  of  influences
here  being  considered.

Influence  of  Intelligence. — A  high  intellectual  develop-
ment is  not  alone  sufficient  to  secure  great  foresight.  This
requires  the  addition  to  that  faculty  of  the  requisite  registered
experience  which  constitutes  intelligence  {supra^  p.  405).
The  ability  to  foretell  the  consequences  of  action  will  there-
fore be  measured  by  the  degree  of  intelligence,  i.  e.^  the
power  of  the  intellect  coupled  with  the  amount  of  knowledge
acquired.

The  power  to  foretell  the  consequences  of  conduct  modi-
fies the  severity  of  natural  justice  by  deterring  individuals
from  attempting  to  employ  force  in  those  cases  where  if
employed  it  must  fail  or  seems  likely  to  fail.  The  mere
pausing  to  calculate  the  chances  would  prevent  a  large  per-
centage of  such  attempts,  and  the  effect  would  be  equally
good  whether  the  attempt  in  fact  succeeded  or  failed.
The  success  or  failure  of  such  attempts  is  of  no  sociologic
importance,  since  all  the  operations  of  the  social  forces  are
important  only  in  their  indirect  effects.  If  the  jars  and  dis-
cords are  prevented,  this  is  all  that  is  noted  by  the  sociologist.

508  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

The  full  force  of  this  influence  will  be  better  seen  after
considering  the  next.

Restriction  of  Acquisitive  Powers. — The  third  and  per-
haps most  important  influence  which  has  tended  to  mitigate
the  law  of  natural  justice  has  been  the  gradual  restriction  of
the  acquisitive  power.  While  sympathy  has  done  much  to-
ward this  end,  and  intelligence  has  aided  at  least  in  a  negative
way,  the  sense  of  insecurity  and  the  necessity  for  protection
have  been  the  chief  elements  in  rendering  it  successful.  This
result  is  accomplished  principally  through  the  several  codes
which  have  grown  up  in  society,  and  which  can  be  more  con-
veniently treated  a  little  later.

The  effects  of  these  three  palliating  agencies  will  now  be
considered  in  their  ensemble.

GENESIS    OF    CIVIL   JUSTICE.

We  are  now  prepared  to  consider  the  question,  How  far
has  natural  justice,  or  the  "  right  of  might,"  been  modified
by  the  transition  to  civil  justice  ?  How  much  of  what  we
term  loyalty  and  respect  for  the  rights  of  others  can  be  at-
tributed to  sentiment — to  a  subjective  force — and  how  much
must  find  its  explanation  in  circumstances,  or  an  objective
force  ?  How  law-abiding  would  men  be  of  their  own  accord  ?
Involved  in  these  questions  is  the  paradox  that,  while  society
virtually  denies  the  sufficiency  of  sentiment  and  moral  char-
acter by  refusing  to  abolish  its  prohibitory  laws,  it  at  the
same  time  vehemently  affirms  such  a  sufficiency  as  often  as  it
is  questioned.  The  greater  part  of  this  difficulty  is  sought  to
be  avoided  by  the  claim  that  society  is  divided  into  two
classes,  one  of  which  does,  and  the  other  does  not,  require  the
maintenance  of  these  laws  whether  social  or  civil.  Admitting
the  truth  of  this  statement,  the  question  is  narrowed  down  to
determining  the  line  of  demarkation  between  these  classes,
between  the  loyal  and  the  lawless,  between  those  who  recog-
nize and  accept  the  human  or  artificial  code,  and  those  who,
were  the  penalties  removed,  would  revert  to  the  natural  code.

GENESIS  OF  CIVIL  JUSTICE.  509

This  lays  bare  a  second  paradox,  for,  while  almost  any  one
would  say  that  this  boundary  lies  somewhere  between  the
higher  and  the  lower  classes,  and  while  all  laws  are  made  es-
pecially severe  against  the  low  and  ignorant,  still,  the  same
persons  who  say  this  and  the  men  who  make  these  laws
might  deny,  if  asked  the  question,  that  intelligence  or  educa-
tion exerts  any  influence  on  morals  {supra^  p.  134,  note).
An  attempt  has  already  been  made  to  solve  this  perplexity
by  showing  that,  although  intelligence,  consisting  as  it  must
of  intellectual  elevation  coupled  with  the  possession  of  real
knowledge,  does  unquestionably  strengthen  and  promote
all  the  virtues  that  make  up  a  high  moral  character,  that  it
does  so  in  proportion  to  its  degree,  and  that  this  is  the  only
possible  means  of  securing  this  object ;  yet,  as  actions  are  the
result  of  the  forces  in  operation  within  and  without,  and  as
these  forces,  which  are  the  desires,  maybe  disproportionately
and  abnormally  strengthened  under  peculiar  circumstances,
it  therefore  often  happens  that  increased  intelligence  which
really  exalts  the  character,  affords  a  keener  appreciation  of
justice,  and  intensifies  the  desire  to  see  it  done,  increases,  at
the  same  time  and  under  the  peculiar  and  unequal  circum-
stances of  those  involved,  the  desire  to  possess  what  is  only
obtainable  by  manifest  injustice,  by  furnishing  easy  means
of  thus  obtaining  it.  If  the  circumstances  be  such  that  the
latter  desire  predominates  over  the  former,  action  follows
of  necessity,  and  the  injustice  is  clearly  chargeable  to  intel-
ligence. In  other  words,  knowledge  increases  the  tempta-
tions to  act  unjustly  at  the  same  time  that  it  increases  the
desire  to  act  justly,  and  which  one  of  these  is  to  prevail  must
depend  upon  circumstances.  It  must  necessarily  follow  that,
wherever  intelligence  works  evil,  it  is  due  to  inequality  of
opportunity  to  acquire  knowledge ;  and  this  constitutes  a
powerful  argument  for  impartial  education  (vol.  ii,  pp.  535,
596,  607).  The  line  of  demarkation  which  we  are  seeking
must  therefore  lie  between  that   class   of  persons   whose

knowledge  has  elevated   them  above   the   temptations    to
23

510  TEETIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

which  they  happen  to  be  subject,  and  that  class  whose  temp-
tations are  too  strong  for  their  character.  It  must,  there-
fore, depend  upon  two  different  elements — ^intelligence  and
circumstances — and  vaiy  as  these  two  forces  vary.  But  what
I  desire  particularly  to  bring  into  view  is  the  error  of  sup-
posing that  the  condition  of  character  which  renders  a  man
incapable  of  larceny  or  robbery  takes  him  out  of  the  class
who  obey  the  natural  rather  than  the  human  code.

Not  all  of  those  who  appear  to  have  risen  above  this  nat-
ural law  have  really  done  so.  The  moral  progress  of  the
world  is  more  apparent  than  real,  especially  as  regards  re-
spect for  proprietary  rights.  This  is  evidenced  in  a  thou-
sand ways.  In  fact,  it  must  be  assumed  as  a  basis  for  all
legislation  and  a  postulate  for  every  human  transaction  that
men  will  pursue  the  course  which  secures  to  them  the  great-
est gain.  E'ot  gain  in  its  widest  sense,  as  the  greatest
amount  of  happiness,  but  pecuniary  or  possessory  gain.
Moral  considerations  can  not  be  trusted.  Moral  obligations
are  voidable  at  law.  Supreme  selfishness  is  presumed  in  all
business  transactions.  And  it  is  reasonably  presumed.  To
depend  upon  any  thing  else  is  to  build  upon  the  sand.

'No  truth  is  more  trite  with  students  of  the  human  races
than  that  morality  is  to  a  large  extent  a  relative  term,  and
right  and  wi'ong  are  reversed  by  passing  from  one  tribe  to
another.  But  there  are  certain  acts  whose  manifest  incom-
patibility with  the  continuance  of  the  social  state  has  placed
them  in  a  special  class  and  earned  for  them  the  name  of
crimes.  These,  of  course,  do  not  vary  so  greatly  as  do  minor
acts,  yet  there  is  great  diversity  in  the  conception  and  defini-
tion of  crimes  among  different  peoples.  So,  if  we  look  back,
we  shall  find  that  certain  acts  which  are  regarded  as  criminal
now  were  not  so  regarded  in  a  not  very  remote  past,  and
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  many  classes  of  conduct  now
permitted  will  at  some  future  day  be  declared  criminal.
Theft  is  a  virtue  in  some  tribes,  but  a  heinous  crime  m  all
civilized  countries.     Lottery  speculations  are  now  fluctuating

GENESIS  OF  CIVIL  JUSTICE.  511

between  the  criminal  and  the  non-criminal  classes  of  opera-
tions, while  monopoly  seems  to  be  advancing  toward  the
modern  conception  of  criminality.

The  fact  to  be  noted  is,  that,  while  these  conceptions  of
criminality  are  advancing,  the  great  primary  law  of  acquisi-
tion is  perpetually  devising  means  to  evade  their  influence.
If  public  sentiment  takes  the  form  of  prohibitory  law,  a  way
is  found  of  securing  the  same  object  without  violating  that
law.  Just  as  at  the  outset  the  method  was  subordinated  to
the  end  sought,  when  the  former  took  the  most  direct  and
obnoxious  forms,  so  now  it  is  equally  subordinated  when  it
is  compelled  to  assume  the  most  gentle  and  refined  forms.
Where  physical  force  fails,  intellectual  force  takes  its  place.
In  the  matter  of  checking  the  operations  of  the  law  of  acqui-
sition, civilization  has  produced  scarcely  any  effect.  The
effect  it  has  produced  has  consisted  in  softening  the  method
and  mitigating  the  severity  of  the  operations  of  that  law.
While  this  has  been  a  great  and  permanent  gain,  its  advan-
tages are  apt  to  be  exaggerated,  and  the  real  character  of  the
substitutes  for  the  primitive  methods  is  frequently  misunder-
stood.

As  already  remarked,  the  chief  effect  produced  by  social
regulation  in  altering  the  methods  of  acquisition  has  been
the  substitution  of  cunning  for  brute  force.  We  may  glance
at  some  of  the  illustrations  of  this  change.

Notwithstanding  the  fine  array  of  maxims  so  constantly
quoted  to  encourage  honesty  in  the  mutual  dealings  of  indi-
viduals, scarcely  a  transaction  is  ever  consummated  without
some  form  of  deception  having  been  practiced.  What  is
understood  as  the  ability  to  "  drive  a  bargain "  is  nothing
more  or  less  than  a  certain  species  of  cunning,  in  making  the
facts  appear  in  some  way  different  from  .what  they  are,
whereby  others  are  somewhat  deceived  and  beguiled  into
paying  for  an  article,  perhaps  not  more  than  it  is  worth,  but
more  than  they  otherwise  would  have  done.  It  may  not  be
too  much  to  say  tliat  very  few  dealers  who  gain  their  livcli-

512  TERTIARY   AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

liood  in  trade  can  afford  to  be  strictly  honest  in  all  things
according  to  the  received  standards  of  honesty.  It  is  a  fair
subject  for  doubt  whether  such  a  course  would  not  in  many
cases  be  ruinous  to  their  interests.  If  all  buyers  and  sellers
would  live  np  to  such  a  standard,  there  can,  of  course,  be  no
doubt  that  this  would  be  the  best  course,  but,  taking  society
as  it  actually  is,  the  strict  integrity  of  any  one  individual,
except  within  a  very  narrow  circle  of  those  who  know  him
well,  would  probably  operate  somewhat  to  his  disadvantage.
Every  one  expects  every  one  else  to  practice  a  certain  amount
of  what  is  thought  by  each  in  his  own  case  to  be  justifiable
deception,  and  one  who  should  fail  to  do  so  would  scarcely
be  adjudged  possessed  of  the  full  complement  of  intellectual
powers,  or,  as  it  is  called,  wits.  For  so  insensibly  does  open
falsehood  shade  off  into  the  mere  exercise  of  the  normal
degree  of  intelligence  that  no  absolute  line  of  demarkation
can  be  drawn.  These  small  forms  of  deception,  never  rising
to  the  violation  of  any  positive  rules,  either  of  law,  morals,
or  propriety,  are  among  the  modified  methods  by  which  the
law  of  acquisition  asserts  itself  within  the  restricting  meshes
of  the  social  net-work.  The  end  sought  is  no  longer  accom-
plished by  force  but  by  cunning.  Truth  is  pushed  to  its
extreme  limit  on  the  side  of  advantage,  and  perhaps  supple-
mented by  a  shrewd  suggestio  falsi  without  being  accom-
panied by  any  actually  false  statement.  The  suppressio  veri
is  freely  employed,  the  impression  prevailing  universally  that
nothing  wrong  is  done,  unless  a  positive  falsehood  is  resorted
to,  although  an  ideal  morality  would  rate  the  degree  of  wrong
entirely  according  to  the  effect  produced  by  the  deception
regardless  of  the  form  in  which  it  was  presented.

Take,  next,  those  classes  of  business,  in  conducting  which
certain  persons,  owing  to  the  circumstances  by  which  they
have  known  how  to  surround  themselves,  have,  almost  with-
out effort,  made  large  accretions  to  their  stock  of  wealth,  such
as  certain  speculations  in  stocks  and  securities,  and  much  that
goes  by  the  name  of  perfectly  legitimate  and  honorable  bank-

GENESIS   OF   CIVIL  JUSTICE.  513

ing  or  brokerage.  These  are  also  illustrations  of  civilized
forms  of  acquisition,  wlioUy  witliin  the  pale  of  civil  justice.
The  man  who  can  add  thousands  to  his  wealth  in  a  moment
bj  dictating  an  entry  in  a  book,  is  congratulated  by  the  com-
munity in  which  he  lives  and  by  society  at  large.  Yet  such
a  transaction  can  not  fail,  in  the  present  state  of  society,  to
take  bread  from  the  mouths  of  hundreds  perhaps  of  suf-
fering poor,  at  one  point  or  another  within  the  radius  of  this
man's  financial  influence.

Many  other  classes  of  cases  might  be  adduced,  including
those  popularly  ascribed  to  the  legal  profession,  the  tendency
of  which  in  this  direction  is  perhaps  popularly  overstated.
Such  cases  will  suggest  themselves.

But  why  can  men  no  longer  seize  property  ?  Because  of
social  organization,  of  course.  Does  not  the  fact  of  social
organization,  then,  argue  a  disinterested  morality  ?  Why
has  society  vouchsafed  protection  to  its  members  ?  Has  it
not  done  so  because  of  a  humane  and  disinterested  sentiment
which  exists  in  the  human  bosom,  and  which  has  simply  found
expression  in  a  beneficent  scheme  of  protection  ?  Does  not
the  existence  of  laws — civil,  social,  and  moral — protecting
property  and  guaranteeing  rights,  demonstrate  an  original
altruistic  sentiment  ?  Not  at  all.  All  this  has  been  a  growth.
Once  it  did  not  exist.  It  owes  its  development  to  that  of
intelligence.  Protective  regulations  are  products  of  human
sagacity,  manifestations  of  the  intellectual  force.  They  con-
stitute the  method  which  mind  was  compelled  to  adopt  in
order  to  thwart  mind.  They  were  instigated  by  and  on  be-
half of  the  victims  of  human  wiles.

Government  (and  I  use  the  word  now  in  the  broad  sense
of  protective  social  co-operation)  was  devised,  so  to  speak,  in
order  to  escape  imposition  and  abuse.  It  was  those  who  suf-
fered who  helped  establish  it.  But  it  so  happened  that  all
individuals  were  sufferers  and  wrong-doers  at  the  same  time.
All  were  liable  to  encroachment  and  all  were  disposed  to
encroach.     Thus  it  came  about  that   each,  in   agreeing  to

514  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEJTY.

rules  for  his  owu  protection,  estopped  himself  from  the
commission  of  violence.  As,  in  each  particular  case  of  seiz-
ure or  violence,  the  number  affected  by  it,  and  frightened  by
apprehension  of  being  the  next  to  suffer,  must  have  been  far
greater  than  the  number  committing  it  or  to  be  benefited  by
its  commission,  it  was  always  easy  to  secure  a  measure  calcu-
lated to  prevent  the  repetition  of  any  particular  act.  And
so  of  every  other  act.  It  thus  came  about  that  every  man
consented  to  conditions  which  limited  his  own  action.  The
great  plexus  of  rules  which  constitutes  the  civil,  the  social,
and  the  moral  codes,  has  been  woven  in  just  this  way.  Not
that  men  have  had  to  go  through  the  form  of  assembling
and  adopting  each  of  these  rules.  It  is  sufficient  if  they
have  become  binding  upon  all  the  members  of  society.  The
exact  method  of  their  adoption  or  enforcement  is  quite  im-
material. They  have  grown  up  in  society,  have  been  the
results  of  human  sagacity,  cunning,  or  intelligence,  have
been  devised  by  the  victims  of  these  same  attributes,  and
have  become  binding  upon  all  the  members  of  society.  It  is
to  these  three  codes,  as  I  denominate  them,  that  civilized  so-
ciety owes  its  protection  of  rights  and  its  immunity  from
arbitrary  violence.  Let  us  examine  these  codes  a  little  more
closely.

The  civil  code  embraces  the  whole  body  of  the  laws  which
it  is  the  province  of  government  to  establish,  sanction,  and
enforce.  There  is  an  infinite  number  of  ways  in  which  such
laws  are  created.  The  four  principal  of  these  are :  1.  Ar-
bitrary edicts  of  chiefs  and  absolute  despots.  2.  Edicts  of
emperors  and  kings,  based  upon  or  sanctioning  the  opinions
of  eminent  jurists.  3.  Statutes  of  legislative  bodies.  4.  De-
cisions of  judges  upon  actual  cases,  enforced  by  mutual  con-
sent in  all  future  similar  cases,  though  reversible  under  cer-
tain circumstances.*  The  nature  and  origin  of  each  of  these
are  clear  to  all,  and  each  has  had  for  its  object  the  real  or  pre-
tended protection  of  the  individuals  in  whose  behalf  it  has
*  Blackstone's  "  Commentaries,"  vol.  i,  Introduction,  section  iii.

THE  THREE  CODES.  515

been  called  into  existence.  (For  a  fuller  discussion  of  tliis
subject  the  reader  is  referred  to  Chapter  X,  where  the  insti-
tution of  government  is  more  especially  treated.)

"What  I  understand  by  the  social  code  is,  that  body  of
rules,  limitations,-  and  conditions  which  society  has  gradually
built  up  to  cause  its  members  to  observe  propriety  in  all
their  acts.  It  embraces  all  the  forms  and  conventionalities
of  society,  covers  the  whole  field  of  fashion  and  appearances,
and  aims  to  enforce  uniformity,  regularity,  and  consistency
between  the  acts  and  the  circumstances,  and  to  abolish  all
eccentricity  and  indecency.  Although  a  lex  non  scripta^  it
is,  if  possible,  more  inexorable  than  the  edicts  of  despots  or
the  statutes  of  states.  The  feeling  experienced  in  its  vio-
lation is  more  intolerable  than  any  corporal  punishment  or
personal  confinement.  It  prevails  in  all  countries  and  all
forms  of  society,  although  so  whimsical  and  irrational  is  it
that  often  what  is  violation  of  it  in  one  country  or  age  is
obedience  to  it  in  another.  Although  supposed  to  be  con-
fined to  indifferent  actions,  its  boundaries  often  encroach  so
far  over  upon  the  territory  of  civil  law  on  the  one  hand,  and
moral  law  on  the  other,  that  it  should  not  be  omitted  in  a
consideration  of  the  self-imposed  limitations  of  society.  Ac-
tions are  constantly  passing  backward  and  forward  from  one
to  another  of  these  three  codes,  according  to  the  age  and
degree  of  intelligence  of  the  society  in  which  they  are  per-
formed.*

The  moral  code  is  designed  to  limit  the  members  of  so-
ciety in  the  commission  of  actions  which  tend  to  cause  pain
or  deprive  of  pleasure.  All  unwritten  as  it  is,  it  has  assumed
the  most  definite  form,  and  acquired  a  powerful  binding
force.  Like  both  the  others,  it  has  been  a  growth,  and  has
arisen  out  of  the  wants  and  necessities  of  society,  and  like
the  social  code  it  is  exceedingly  capricious,  changing,  and  irra-
tional in  many  of  its  mandates.     That  it  is  not  a  natural

*  Lubbock,  "  Origin  of  Civilization,"  p.  254 ;  Carpenter,  "  Mental  Physiol-
ogy," pp.  243,  4S5.

516  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION,— SOCIOGENY.

system,  owing  its  sanction  to  an  unerring  monitor  called  con-
science, I  shall  hereafter  endeavor  to  show  (vol,  ii,  pp.  340,
349,  441,  451).

All  three  of  these  codes,  or  systems  of  law,  with  their
multiplied  general  and  special  regulations,  and  their  in-
evitable penalties,  are  but  the  restrictions  which  society  has
placed  upon  its  own  action.  Independently  of  their  reason-
ableness and  justice,  which  depend  in  the  main  upon  the
degree  of  intelligence  and  the  amount  of  knowledge  pos-
sessed by  society,  they  are  what  essentially  distinguishes
civilized  from  savage  man.  They  are  the  covenants  of  pro-
tection from  arbitrary  encroachment  which  society  has  made
with  its  members.  So  binding  has  this  so-called  "  compact "
become,  and  so  closely  woven  is  the  net-work  of  fibers,  that
however  great  may  be  the  desire  of  one  individual  to  en-
croach upon  another,  he  feels  that  the  attempt  if  made  must
be  fruitless.  In  fact,  the  rude  violence  of  barbarism  is  ren-
dered physically  impossible.

It  has  been  shown  that  the  law  of  acquisition — i.  e.,
the  desire  to  acquire  regardless  of  the  method — is  as  strong
now  as  ever,  and  that  the  progress  made  has  consisted  in
mitigating  the  harshness  of  the  method.  We  now  see  that
this  change  of  method  has  not  been  voluntary  and  due  to
altruistic  impulses,  but  is  chiefly  compulsory  and  the  result
of  an  actual  inability  to  apply  barbarous  methods.

This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  what  may  be  called
the  major  evils  which  the  love  of  gain  has  wrought.  Thus
far  we  have  considered  only  the  minor  evils.  The  thousand
petty  arts  and  deceptions  which  it  makes  men  practice  upon
one  another,  great  as  their  accumulated  effect  undoubtedly
is,  are  but  peccadilloes  compared  with  the  extensive  system  of
wrongs  which  are  quite  unconsciously  committed  by  great
organizations,  whether  governmental,  ecclesiastical,  commer-
cial, or  financial.  When  we  look  over  society  and  behold
the  condition  of  different  classes  of  the  people,  the  exceed-
ing indigence  of  the  poor  and  the  exceeding  opulence  of

THE  THREE  CODES.  517

the  rich — when  we  reflect  that  throughout  the  world  the
tendency  of  civilization  itself  is  to  "  make  the  poor  poor-
er and  the  rich  richer,"  *  and  that  all  this  is  done  accord-
ing to  law,  in  obedience  to  all  three  of  the  codes  described
and  to  the  conscience — how  can  we  longer  doubt  that  the
human  race  is  just  as  eager  for  gain  and  just  as  indifferent
as  to  the  manner  of  securing  it  as  it  ever  could  have  been
in  the  most  barbarous  ages  ?  Man  obeys  these  several  codes
because  he  must,  but,  whenever  he  can  secure  an  acquisition
outside  of  these,  or,  as  it  were,  vltra  vires,  he  always  avails
himself  of  the  opportunity  at  whatever  expense  to  his  victim
and  the  rest  of  mankind.  Indeed,  the  very  existence  of
these  restrictions  seems  to  afford  him  an  adequate  apology
for  any  thing  he  may  do  to  which  they  do  not  apply.  If  only
he  avoids  the  malum  prohibitum,  he  cares  nothing  for  the  ma-
lum in  se.  Just  as  observing  the  Sabbath  and  conforming  to
prescribed  religious  canons  furnish  an  excuse  for  ignorant
people  to  commit  all  manner  of  wrong  on  other  days  and
outside  of  those  canons,  so  do  the  civil,  social,  and  moral  laws
of  society  afford  a  justification  for  all  acts  not  expressly  for-
bidden by  these  laws.

This  can  not  be  better  illustrated  than  by  reference  to  the
principle  that  in  matters  of  government  an  unrepresented
class  is  always  deprived  of  its  rights.  If  history  and  expe-
rience ever  taught  any  thing,  they  have  taught  this  principle.

*  Under  the  natural,  or  spontaneous,  system  of  society,  the  accumulation  of
wealth  proceeds  in  a  manner  exactly  the  reverse  of  that  best  suited  to  the  true
advancement  of  social  and  individual  welfare.  Instead  of  its  equitable  distri-
bution in  proportion  to  the  amount  each  contributes  to  its  production,  it  tends
to  concentrate  in  the  hands  of  those  who  produce  least.  Equity  would  require
that  the  difficulty  in  obtaining  wealth  should  increase  in  some  direct  ratio  to  the
amount  obtained.  In  fact,  the  difficulty  rapidly  diminishes  as  the  amount  in-
creases. Equity  would  require  that  the  extra  burdens  produced  by  unforeseen
events  should  be  chiefly  borne  by  those  who  have  already  an  abundance.  They
are  ultimately  borne  by  the  laborer  who  has  little  or  nothing.  In  most  countries
even  taxation,  which  one  would  suppose  must  necessarily  be  drawn  from  capital,
is  in  great  part  drawn  directly  from  labor  in  the  form  of  duties,  or  imposts,  on
articles  of  universal  consumption.

618  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

'No  matter  how  grievous  the  wrongs  to  be  suffered,  or  how
loud  the  protestations  of  philanthropists,  it  will  all  avail  noth-
ing until  the  victim  class  is  represented  and  its  voice  is  heard.
What  is  the  meaning  of  this  fact  ?  What  is  it  to  be  repre-
sented ?  It  is  to  be  clothed  with  power.  This  shows  that
rights  can  only  be  obtained  by  force,  that  the  only  limit  to
man's  efforts  to  acquire  is  his  power  to  succeed,  that  the
only  way  to  secure  justice  is  to  enforce  it,  and  that  human
right  and  natural  right  are  essentially  one.  Simultaneously
with  the  philanthropy  and  benevolence  which  we  see  practiced
on  a  small  scale  every  day  around  us,  there  exists  on  a  vast
scale  a  great  organized  system  of  wrong  unconsciously  per-
petrated outside  of  and  above  all  the  codes,  and  innocently
participated  in  even  by  those  who  make  the  greatest  display
of  charitable  and  philanthropic  proclivities.

There  is  no  escape  from  this  principle.  It  lies  deep  in
human  nature.  All  attempts  to  soften  the  human  heart
must  fail.  The  only  wise  thing  to  do  is  to  admit  the  facts
and  calculate  the  consequences.  Without  assuming  to  dic-
tate what  human  nature  ought  to  be,  the  only  rational  course
is  to  recognize  what  it  is,  and  act  accordingly.  Instead  of
trying  to  dissuade  men  from  taking  away  the  property  of
others,  society  must  render  it  impossible  for  them  to  do  so.
The  proper  way  to  induce  men  to  desist  from  unjust  action
is  to  make  it  for  their  own  interest  so  to  do,  and  teach  them
in  an  unmistakable  manner  that  it  is  so.  This  is  the  work
of  intelligence  and  education.  Legislation  of  this  class  we
have  called  attractive  (supra,  pp.  39  et  seq.\  and  it  is  in  har-
mony with  the  deepest  principles  of  social  science.

The  appropriateness  here  of  the  argument  that  unrepre-
sented classes  are  necessarily  deprived  of  their  rights,  arises
from  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  influence  of  property.
As  has  been  already  remarked,  every  thing  valuable  in  the
world  either  consists  of  acquirable  property,  reducible  to
money,  or  else  is  so  intimately  associated  with  such  prop-
erty or  money  that,  if  the  latter  did  not  exist,  it  would

GENESIS  OF  CIVIL  JUSTICE.  519

cease  to  possess  any  value.  Hence,  to  be  deprived  of  riglits
is  the  same  thing  as  to  be  deprived  of  property.  The  great-
er part  of  the  oppression  practiced  in  the  world  has  been  of
this  kind.  The  first  step  toward  taking  away  liberty  or  life
is  to  take  away  property.  It  is  but  a  step  from  penury  to
slavery.  Who  shall  calculate  how  large  a  part  of  all  human
suffering  is  due  to  poverty  ?  And  what  is  the  cause  of  pov-
erty ?  If  the  true  share  of  indolence  in  occasioning  poverty
could  be  known,  it  would  be  found  to  be  small.  If  the  whole
subject  could  be  thoroughly  investigated,  it  would  appear  that
the  poorest  people  in  the  world  are,  if  not  the  most  enterpris-
ing and  energetic,  at  least  the  most  industrious  and  laborious.
Those  who  are  poor  because  they  are  indolent  bear  but  a
small  proportion  to  those  who  are  poor  and  yet  industrious.
Another  fact  would  be  developed,  viz.,  that  the  indolent
rich  bear  a  far  greater  proportion  to  the  industrious  rich
than  the  indolent  poor  to  the  industrious  poor.  We  should
learn,  as  has  already  been  remarked,  that  those  who  have  the
honor  of  producing  wealth  rarely  have  the  pleasure  of  enjoy-
ing it.

Let  u€  pause  and  ask  the  cause  of  this  pecuniary  in-
equality. One  says  it  is  because  some  have  more  brains  than
others,  and  know  how  to  acquire  and  take  care  of  property.
I  accept  this  as  a  partial  explanation,  and  in  bo  far  as  it  is  true
it  can  be  stated  in  this  manner :  Some  have  more  (intellectual)
power  than  others,  and  by  means  of  it  they  withdraw  prop-
erty from  the  weaker  ones  according  to  the  law  of  acquisi-
tion above  set  forth.  This  is  the  sociological  form  of  stating
the  fact,  and,  if  the  advocates  of  brain-titles  can  derive  any
consolation  from  it,  they  are  welcome  to  enjoy  it.  But,
when  they  assert  that  the  brain-power  which  qualifies  a  man
to  accumulate  the  wealth  that  others  have  created  is  the
same  brain-power  that  moves  the  wheels  of  social  progress,
they  commit  a  very  serious  mistake.  That  quality  of  mind
which  enables  a  man  to  amass  wealth,  accumulate  property,
and,  as  the  phrase  goes,  "  make  money,"  though  doubtless  one

520  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

of  the  most  useful,  is,  at  the  same  time,  one  of  the  coarsest
and  cheapest  of  all  mental  attributes.  The  pleasure  it  confers
is  a  sordid  pleasure,  and  the  results  of  its  activity  are  wholly
statical.  Nothing  progressive  is  ever  directly  either  involved
in  or  evolved  out  of  it  (vol.  ii,  pp.  477,  599).  True,  indirectly
and  unintentionally  the  accumulation  of  wealth  has  advanced
the  race  by  affording  leisure  for  a  few  to  think  out  and  de-
velop natural  principles,  and  bj  enabling  large  schemes  of
improvement  to  be  carried  out  for  which  small  fortunes
would  not  have  sufficed.  This,  however,  was  not  due  to  this
quality  of  mind,  but  to  circumstances  which  it  engendered,
always  and  necessarily  coupled  with  those  other  qualities  of
mind  which  are  intrinsically  progressive.  This  "  money-
making"  faculty  of  the  human  mind  only  represents  the
brute-force  which  was  exerted  as  long  as  it  availed  for  seiz-
ing, or,  in  any  way  whatever,  getting  possession  of  property.
Changed  in  its  method  to  suit  the  changed  circumstances,
but  unchanged  either  in  its  object  or  its  spirit,  it  still  main-
tains its  arbitrary  sway,  drawing  all  value  toward  the  strongest
centers  of  attraction  with  no  more  feeling  for  the  weaker  ones
who  lose  than  one  magnet  feels  for  another.  And  the  phe-
nomena which  it  presents  are  as  natural,  when  viewed  from  a
sociological  stand-point,  as  are  those  of  magnetism.  It  is  not
the  best  things  in  the  world  that  succeed  best.  It  is  not
always  the  most  perfectly  organized  species  of  animals  that
survive,  nor  the  least  perfect  that  are  extinguished.*     In

*  This  truth  la  clearly  illustrated  by  many  highly  developed  forms  of  plants,
as,  for  example,  the  Orchidaccce,  which  seem  to  be  effecting  their  own  extinction
by  over-development.  This,  however,  is  probably  to  a  great  extent  due  to  spe-
cializations acquired  to  correlate  them  with  certain  insects,  which  latter,  for
any  reason,  may  have  become  scarce,  or  be  restricted  to  a  narrower  geographical
range  than  the  plants  otherwise  would  be.  The  last  case  is  known  to  be  that
of  the  Yucca,  which,  when  artificially  fertilized,  flourishes  much  farther  north
than  the  northern  limit  of  its  aceouclicuse,  Pronuha  yuccasella.  The  general  law
is  also  well  exemplified  in  the  paleontological  history  of  both  the  vegetable  and
the  animal  kingdoms,  where,  as  it  seems,  each  branch  of  the  genealogical  tree
has  developed  in  size  and  structural  organization  until  it  has  surpassed  the
limits  of  possible  existence,  and  perished  from  this  cause.

I

GENESIS  OF  CIVIL  JUSTICE.  521

human  attributes,  as  in  animal  organisms,  it  is  those  that  are
best  adapted  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  their  existence
that  thrive  best  and  propagate  most  rapidly.

Nature  is  at  once  the  most  practical  and  the  most  prodi-
gal of  all  economists :  practical,  in  that  she  never  makes  an
organ  or  an  attribute  which  has  not  the  elements  of  imme-
diate and  direct  utiKty  in  accomplishing  one  or  the  other
of  her  distinctive  objects — ^preservation  and  perpetuation;
prodigal,  because  she  spares  no  expense  to  accomplish  even
the  least  results  in  these  definite  directions  (vol.  ii,  pp.  87,
494).  A  million  eggs  are  not  too  many  to  cast  upon  the
waters  if  a  single  fish  can  be  thereby  produced.  Earth,  air,
and  sea  are  full  of  vegetable  spores,  only  a  minute  fraction
of  whose  infinite  number  can  ever  germinate.  The  greater
part  of  all  created  beings  perish  by  violence  or  the  elements.
Any  one  species  would  soon  infest  the  whole  world  to  the
exclusion  of  every  other,  if  this  were  not  so.  Nature  seems
to  turn  all  her  creations  out  loose  together  to  prey  upon  and
jostle  against  one  another,  crushing  out  the  weaker,  and
thereby  preserving  and  perpetuating  the  stronger.  Strength
is  the  key  to  success  in  this  struggle.  Man  is  a  child  of
Nature,  and  mind  an  attribute  of  man ;  mental  qualities,
therefore,  obey  this  law,  and  only  those  best  fitted  in  this
sense  survive  and  thrive.

The  time  has  not  yet  fairly  come  when  the  finer  and
nobler  qualities  shall  be  those  best  fitted  to  preserve,
strengthen,  and  perpetuate  themselves.  We  are  still  in
that  part  of  the  great  circuit  of  psychological  development
where  the  coarser  and  ruder  qualities  are  those  best  adapted
to  achieve  success.  We  have  passed  through  the  stage  when
muscle  prevailed  over  brain,  but  we  have  not  yet  reached
that  in  which  reason  shall  prevail  over  passion.

The  passion  of  avarice,  whose  genesis  we  have  been
tracing,  is  a  normal  product  of  the  great  preservative  force.
It  is  the  power  which  nature  is  employing  to  preserve  the
human  species,  and  can  only  be  checked  and  made  harmless

522  TEKTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

by  the  intervention,  or  rather  the  supervention,  of  the  high-
er, more  subtile,  and  more  penetrating  intellectual  attribute
whose  deeper  calculations  shall  outwit  the  coarse  cunning
which  expends  itself  on  gain,  even  as  this  latter  has  sup-
planted the  clumsy  dynamics  of  muscle.  In  each  and  all  of
these  cases,  however,  it  must  be  force  in  one  form  or  another
that  is  to  triumph ;  but  that  force  is  destined  to  grow  more
and  more  refined  and  spiritualized,  until,  let  us  hope,  it  will
at  last  secure  the  object  of  man — ^his  happiness — as  it  always
must  that  of  nature — his  preservation.

The  pecuniary  inequality  of  mankind,  therefore,  sociolog-
ically considered,  is  likewise  the  result  of  the  natural  opera-
tion of  the  preservative  forces  under  the  peculiar  conditions
to  which  the  race  is  subjected.  It  admits  of  a  satisfactory
genetic  explanation,  and,  in  a  philosophical  sense,  is  both
necessary  and  proper.  From  the  stand-point  of  Nature  and
her  objects,  like  all  else  that  exists,  it  is  right ;  but,  when
viewed  from  the  stand-point  of  man  and  his  objects,  it  admits
of  little  justification.  Under  the  ethical  code  of  Nature
that  every  thing  is  right  which  conduces  to  the  preservation
of  life,  this  great  struggle  for  possession  is  eminently  practi-
cal and  useful,  but,  under  the  ethical  code  of  man  that  every
thing  is  wrong  which  causes  pain,  it  is  fraught  only  with  evil
and  injustice.  Yiewed  from  a  biological  stand-point,  it  has
been  man's  greatest  blessing;  viewed  from  a  moral  stand-
point, it  has  been  his  greatest  curse.

But,  when  we  say  that  the  pecuniary  inequality  of  man-
kind is  due  to  a  corresponding  inequality  of  brain-power,
even  if  we  limit  this  brain-power  to  the  "  money-making "
quality  alone,  we  have  gone  a  great  way  too  far.  We  have
left  out  one  of  the  most  important  elements  in  the  problem.
We  have  only  stated  the  subjective  side  of  the  question,  and
have  neglected  the  objective  side.  We  shall  never  be  wholly
right  until  we  remember  that  this  inequality  of  possession  is
due  to  a  corresponding  inequality  of  circumstances.  The
inequality  of  brain-power  is  only  the  subjective  part  of  these

GENESIS  OF  CIVIL  JUSTICE.  523

circumstances.  We  must  also  consider  the  objective  part,
the  external  circumstances  which  surround  each  individual,
whether  belonging  to  the  fortunate  or  the  unfortunate  class.
Men  come  into  the  world  and  find  themselves  loaded  with
wealth  or  destitute  of  all  proprietary  interests.  They  are
born  millionaires  or  beggars.  They  open  their  eyes  upon
boundless  plenty  or  upon  abject  poverty.  They  merit
neither  praise  nor  blame  for  the  conditions  under  which
they  exist.  However  commendable  intellectual  qualities
may  be  considered,  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  these  ex-
ternal circumstances  over  which  we  have  no  control.  From
the  point  of  view  of  human  morality,  far  better  grounds  of
justification  could  be  found  for  the  state  of  social  inequality
we  are  considering,  if  it  could  be  attributed  wholly  to  a  cor-
responding inequality  in  any,  however  low  and  coarse  a
faculty  of  mind.  We  should  feel  better  satisfied  to  say :  It
is  an  inherent  necessity;  those  who  have  not  intelligence
enough  to  acquire  or  retain  must  not  expect  to  possess.
Philosophers  could  then  only  look  forward  to  the  remote
period  when  the  higher  altruistic  attributes  should  gain  as-
cendency over  the  lower  egoistic  ones,  and  augment  the
power  of  sympathy  as  a  social  force.  But  when  we  find
that  a  great  part,  perhaps  the  greater  part,  of  this  painful
inequality  is  the  result  of  mere  accident,  as  devoid  of  mental
or  moral  character  as  are  the  inequalities  of  the  earth's  sur-
face ;  due  to  some  bare  fortuity,  some  physical  fatality,  some
accidental  coincidence,  some  ancient  social  convulsion,  some
act  of  remote  ancestors,  or  some  vice  or  virtue  of  parents —
when  we  look  at  this  aspect  of  the  question,  it  requires  the
broadest  charity  as  well  as  the  profoundest  philosophy  to  re-
frain from  exclaiming  with  Tully,  0  temporal  0  mores!
1^0  merit  which  may  be  supposed  to  inhere  in  superiority  of
mind,  not  even  of  the  sordid  passion  and  talent  of  money-
getting;  nay,  not  even  the  questionable  merit  of  superior
brute-force,  can  enter  here  to  palliate  the  state  of  things.
We  see  only  the  cold,  feelingless  fingers  of  natural  law  as  it

524:  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.-SOCIOGENY.

rides  in  its  icy  chariot  througli  the  universe.  We  get  a
foretaste  of  the  inexorable  character  of  Nature,  and  find
ourselves  more  ready  to  believe  her  capable  of  blotting  out
our  central  source  of  light  and  warmth  and  life,  and  quench-
ing, in  her  slow,  imperial  way,  all  the  vitality,  feeling,
thought,  and  intelligence  which  have  been  evolved.  "When
we  reflect  upon  these  immense  sociological  facts,  we  realize
more  and  more  that  there  is  a  dark  side  to  the  picture  pre-
sented by  the  operations  of  the  preservative  force,  we  see
more  and  more  clearly  that  in  its  grand  career  of  develop-
ment civilization  has  left  a  blackened  trail  and  smoking  ruins
in  the  domain  of  feeling.*

Modes  of  Acqihsition.

When  treating  of  the  law  of  acquisition,  we  noted  that
the  modus  operandi  of  the  preservative  forces  consisted  in
continual  and  repeated  efforts  on  the  part  of  individuals  to
possess  themselves  of  the  objects  of  desire,  the  essence  of
that  law  being  that  this  class  of  phenomena  are  natural,  in
the  scientific  sense  that  they  may  be  depended  upon  to  occur
at  all  times  in  the  same  manner  as  physical  phenomena  can
be  depended  upon  to  occur.

It  remains  to  show  that,  just  as  physical  phenomena  which
have  been  reduced  to  laws  may,  and  always  do,  have  various
modes  of  Tnanifestation,  varying  with  the  particular  circum-
stances and  external  influences  by  which  they  are  surrounded,
so  these  social  phenomena  of  the  preservative  class,  when
reduced  to  the  general  law  of  acquisition,  have  in  like  man-
ner their  modes  of  manifestation  depending  upon  like  causes.
These  various  modes  of  manifestation  may  be  more  definitely
named  modes  of  acquisition,  and  it  is  to  this  next  less  general
branch  of  the  subject  that  we  have  now  to  turn  our  atten-
tion.

*  For  a  fuller  exposition  of  the  necessitarian  doctrine,  as  the  only  expla-
nation science  is  able  to  offer  of  the  origin  of  evil  and  kindred  problems,  see
Vol.  II,  pp.  35,  114,

MODES  OF  ACQUISITION.  525

In  the  treatment  of  the  several  problems  involved  in  this
discussion,  it  is  proper  to  disclaim  at  the  outset  any  attempt
at  detailed  analysis  or  at  the  bringing  forward  of  ethno-
graphic proof  in  support  of  the  positions  taken.  Such  an
attempt  would  obviously  carry  us  far  beyond  the  necessarily
circumscribed  space  which  has  been  allotted  to  this  discus-
sion. It  is  believed,  however,  that,  in  so  far  as  such  facts  are
applicable  to  them,  these  positions  will  be  found  to  har-
monize entirely  with  all  that  has  been  thus  far  brought  to
light  by  the  students  of  the  existing  lower  races  and  of  the
archaBologic  remains  of  prehistoric  ones,  while  no  one  will
expect  that  just  these  deductions  will  have  been  made  in  all
cases  by  writers  upon  those  subjects.  It  will,  therefore,  be
sufficient  if  these  conclusions  do  not  conflict  with  the  estab-
lished facts  of  anthropology,  as  discovered  by  such  investi-
gators as  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor,  Sir  John  Lubbock,  Mr.  Lewis  H.
Morgan,  or  Sir  Henry  Maine.

It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  point  of  view  is  wholly
different  from  that  of  any  of  these  writers,  or  perhaps  of  any
other  writers.  It  is  not  from  an  anthropological  or  ethno-
logical stand-point  that  our  treatise  proceeds,  but  rather  from
a  strictly  sociological  or  socio-economic  one.  The  method  is
necessarily  systematic  and  synthetic,  not  discursive  or  ana-
lytic, and,  to  be  fairly  judged,  the  ultimate  truth  underlying
the  chapter,  viz.,  the  natural  evolution  of  the  social  organism,
which  is  denominated  Sociogeny,  must  be  steadily  kept  in
view.

CLASSIFICATION   OF   THE   MODES    OF   ACQUISITION.

So  soon  as  we  leave  the  theoretical  pre-social,  vegetarian
stage,  we  find  that  nearly  all  the  objects  of  desire  must  con-
sist of  articles  which  possess  value  chiefly  or  wholly  from  the
amount  of  labor  that  has  been  expended  upon  them.  These
products  of  human  labor,  taken  collectively,  as  well  as  the
process  itself,  are,  in  economic  parlance,  denominated  jpro-
dttction.    It  is,  therefore,  only  such  articles  of  production

526  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

that  become  the  legitimate  objects  of  acquisition,  and  the
classification  of  the  modes  of  acquisition  must  be  based  upon
production.  But  acquisition,  although  it  presupposes  produc-
tion, does  not  necessarily  imply  this  of  the  agent  pursuing  the
object  produced.  It  may  have  been  produced  by  another.
The  acquisition  of  objects  produced  by  others  than  the  agent
may  further  be  of  two  kinds,  according  to  whether  the  act
of  acquiring  be  one  necessary  to  the  full  utilization  of  the
article  acquired,  or  wholly  arbitrary  and  in  no  way  affect-
ing it.

It  will  be  convenient,  while  it  can  in  no  way  diminish
the  perspicuity  of  the  classification,  primarily  to  subdivide
the  agents  instead  of  the  acts,  and  to  treat  the  latter  as  sub-
classes of  the  general  social  factors.

"We  shall  thus  be  able  to  divide  mankind  into  the  three
primary  classes ;  as,  1,  producers ;  2,  accessories  to  produc-
tion ;  and,  3,  parasites — the  last  two  classes  constituting  the
non-producers.

The  different  forms  of  activity  manifested  by  each  of
these  several  groups  will  be  classified  and  treated  under  their
appropriate  heads.

Produceks.

The  silence  of  nearly  all  human  history  upon  the  indus-
trial condition  of  man  is  notorious,  yet  every  one  knows  that
long  before  a  line  of  history  had  been  written  the  needs  of
mankind  were  supplied  by  extensive  systems  of  artificial
production.  Ages  before  history  began,  the  great  work
of  producing  wealth  had  gone  so  far  that  the  parasitic
class  had  firmly  established  itself,  and  subsisted  upon  the
surplus  over  the  wants  of  the  producers.  Not  only  were
royal  families  and  priesthoods  thus  supplied,  but  great  non-
producing  and  wealth-destroying  armies  were  kept  up  in
this  way.

It  is  a  little  surprising,  therefore,  to  find  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer,  who  must  be  aware  of  these  facts,  and  who  fre-

PRODUCERS  AND  PRODUCTION.  627

quently  condemns  the  historians  for  tlieir  superficial  treat-
ment of  events,  speaking  of  "  essentially  militant "  *  types
of  society.  If  he  merely  means  that  certain  tribes  and  na-
tions are  far  more  warlike  than  others,  it  is  true  enough ;
but  he  seems  to  convey  the  idea  of  societies  in  which  war
is  the  chief  and  permanent  occupation.  The  impossibility
of  such  a  state,  considered  as  at  all  permanent,  is  manifest.
And  when  warlike  nations  plunder  industrial  ones  they  are
soon  compelled  to  restore  in  some  way  the  industrial  state.
In  fact,  all  "militant  societies"  must  rest  upon  an  indus-
trial class,  while  the  military  operations,  however  incessant,
depend  chiefly  upon  simultaneous  industrial  operations.

Production,  in  its  widest  sense,  signifies  the  bringing  of
any  enjoyable  thing  into  available  form.  It  implies  that,  by
means  of  labor,  something  not  previously  available  for  human
use  is  rendered  so,  or  that  something  less  available  has  there-
by been  rendered  more  so.  It  does  not,  however,  imply  any
necessary  proportion  or  correspondence  between  the  amount
of  labor  performed  and  the  amount  of  value  produced,  al-
though an  individual  becomes  the  producer  of  a  commodity
only  in  the  proportion  which  the  labor  he  has  expended  upon
it  bears  to  the  whole  amount  of  human  effort  put  forth  in  its
production.  Still,  no  matter  how  small  the  amount  of  labor,
or  how  great  the  value,  the  act  of  making  that  value  realiza-
ble is  production.  This  definition  properly  excludes  the  mere
transfer,  whether  forcibly  or  peaceably,  of  an  unchanged  com-
modity from  a  condition  advantageous  to  one  to  a  condition
advantageous  to  another.  Again,  although  specially  consid-
ering the  objects  of  human  subsistence,  it  is  proper  to  say  that
the  term  production  is  not  thus  confined  within  the  limits
popularly  regarded  as  practical.  It  comprehends  all  enjoya-
ble things,  whether  they  are  calculated  to  promote  the  object
of  nature — the  preservation  and  perpetuation  of  species — or
that  of  man — enhanced  enjoyment — and  whether  that  enjoy-
ment is  to  be  derived  through  the  lower  senses  or  through

*  "Principles  of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  §  268.

628  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

the  more  refined  ones,  such  as  tlie  eye,  the  ear,  the  emotional
centers,  or  the  brain.  It  embraces  the  whole  range  of  the
practical  and  the  fine  arts,  the  physical,  the  intellectual,  and
the  spiritual  susceptibilities.

CLASSES    or   PKODUCTION.

In  their  pursuit  of  subsistence,  i.  e.,  of  food,  clothing,  and
shelter,  the  first  producers  must,  in  all  probability,  have  con-
fined their  labors  to  the  three  great  industries :  hunting  (and
fishing),  tending  their  fiocks,  and  tilling  the  soil.  Each  of
these,  as  I  have  before  remarked,  presupposed  a  certain
amount  of  native  sagacity,  or  intellectual  superiority,  suffi-
cient to  raise  man  into  clear  distinction  from  the  animals  with
which  he  was  surrounded  and  over  which  he  must  exert  con-
trol. But,  notwithstanding  the  various  devices,  deceptions,
and  arts  to  which  he  must  resort  in  any  of  these  pursuits,
the  labor  required  for  his  success  in  them,  and  the  species  of
mental  effort  required  to  direct  that  labor,  should  be  distin-
guished from  those  of  art,  properly  so  called.  The  distinc-
tion, it  is  true,  is  rather  convenient  than  fundamental,  since
all  efforts  of  mind  can  be  generalized  into  this  one ;  still,  to
the  superficial  view,  the  distinction  is  obvious  enough.  The
line  of  this  distinction  seems  to  lie  partly  between  the  effort
required  to  circumvent  the  animal  species  and  that  required
to  subdue  the  physical  forces,  and  partly  between  that  spe-
cies of  thinking  which  leads  men  to  profit  by  experience  and
observation  and  that  which  enables  them  to  anticipate  adapta-
tions and  the  relations  of  circumstances  not  yet  experienced
or  observed.  But,  whatever  may  be  the  philosophical  laws
which  underlie  them,  the  two  kinds  of  industry  are  unlike
and  more  widely  distinguished  than  any  of  the  varieties  pre-
sented by  the  forms  of  either  among  themselves.  The  one
may  be  called  the  primary,  direct,  or  original ;  the  other,  the
secondary,  indirect,  or  derivative  mode  of  production.  Al-
though, chronologically,  these  two  modes  are  not  to  be  sep-
arated, since  the  first  could  have  scarcely  attained  a  distinct

CLASSES  OF  PRODUCTION.  629

form  without  some  assistance  from  the  other,  and  that  could
not  exist  at  all  alone,  still,  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  they
may  be  treated  separately.

PjRIMAEY   PKODTJCnON.

Of  the  three  great  classes  into  which  human  subsistence
naturally  divides  itself,  viz.,  food,  clothing,  and  shelter,  the
first  was  almost  exclusively  the  object  of  the  ^primary  mode
of  production.  The  other  two,  and  all  the  auxiliary  appli-
ances for  realizing  the  first,  resulted  from  the  adoption  of  the
secondary  mode.  Confining  ourselves  first  to  the  former,  we
naturally  look  back  once  more  for  a  moment  to  the  primitive
epoch  and  the  primordial  activities.  We  reflect  once  more
that  the  first  and  greatest  of  all  desires  is  the  desire  for  food.
The  incessant  waste  of  the  tissues  renders  it  a  perpetual  force,
never  to  be  reduced  to  a  statical  condition,  except  for  a  shoii;
interval.  Failure  to  supply  the  materials  for  renewing  these
wasting  tissues  intensifies,  within  certain  limits,  the  action  of
this  force,  and  spurs  the  agent  on  to  the  severest  possible
efforts.  The  unsatisfied  body  calls  all  its  faculties  into  ex-
ercise. The  senses  become  sharpened  in  order  to  discover
the  objects  of  physical  nourishment  in  places  where,  and  at
times  when,  duller  senses  would  fail  to  detect  them.  The
muscles  become  developed  and  adapted  to  securing  them  in
ways  that  would  be  impossible  for  less  agile  and  less  power-
ful physical  frames ;  and,  when  these  means  fail,  as  they  soon
do,  the  guiding  power  of  the  intellect  comes  forward  and
points  out  new  and  fertile  avenues  to  physical  supply,  safety,
and  life.  It  is  here  that  production,  in  the  proper  sense  of
the  term,  begins.  The  prior  development  of  the  physical
system  in  a  pre-industrial  state,  adaptation  of  the  body  to
surrounding  circumstances,  provision  for  means  of  effective
offense  and  defense,  sharpening  of  the  senses  for  detecting
and  securing  nutritive  substances — all  this  is  the  routine  of
natural  selection,  and  becomes  the  history  of  every  species.
But,  notwithstanding  this,  a  limit  is  soon  reached  beyond

530  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOK— SOCIOGENY.

which  no  species  can  pass.  All  aspire  to  universality,  none
are  permitted  to  reach  it.  Each,  by  its  encroachments,  be-
comes the  enemy  of  every  other,  and  each,  by  its  multipli-
cation, becomes  a  barrier  to  its  own  progress ;  for,  thus  far,
Nature  alone  is  the  producer,  and  no  perfection  of  organiza-
tion can  draw  from  her  an  increased  supply.

The  natural  resources  of  the  earth  are  soon  exhausted  by
the  teeming  myriads  of  living  organisms  subsisting  upon  it.
The  point  at  which  this  exhaustion  takes  place  is  where  pro-
duction begins.  Production  is  teleological.  It  consists  in
such  human  actions,  guided  by  intellectual  prevision,  as  are
necessary  to  direct  the  natural  forces  into  productive  chan-
nels. It  is  the  combination,  concentration,  and  focalization
of  natural  forces,  including  those  of  the  human  body  and  of
the  bodies  of  other  living  beings,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  in-
crease the  supply  of  those  objects  which  protect  and  nourish
the  body  and  satisfy  want.

SOrKCES   OF   FOOD.

So  far  as  the  supply  of  food  alone  is  concerned,  the  gen-
eral directions  which  this  activity  has  taken  are  few  and  sim-
ple. Multitudinous  as  have  become  the  kinds  and  qualities
of  food,  they  all  come  at  the  most  from  three  original  sources,
either  from  the  mineral,  the  vegetable,  or  the  animal  king-
dom. That  definition  of  nutritious  substances  which  confines
them  to  organic  matter  is  too  restrictive,  and  can  not  be  ad-
mitted under  any  rational  view  of  what  nutrition  itself  con-
sists in.  If  there  is  to  be  applied  any  one  distinctive  test,  it
is  that  of  being  necessary  to  the  life  of  the  organism.  It
must,  for  example,  be  necessary  to  supply  some  one  or  other  of
the  wastes  which  are  perpetually  taking  place  in  the  system.

Food  distinguuhed  from  Medicine  and  Poison. — The
distinction  between  food  and  medicine  is  sometimes  very
nice.  The  former  supplies  the  natural  waste,  the  latter  re-
pairs unnatural  derangements.  But,  since  many  derange-
ments of  the  body  are  occasioned  by  an  excess  of  waste  in

PRIMARY  PRODUCTION.— SOURCES  OF  FOOD.       531

some  component  part  of  the  tissues — since,  indeed,  any  lack
of  supply  for  these  wastes  must  result  in  derangement — the
line  between  food  and  physic  becomes  difficult  to  trace.  If
they  are  to  be  separated  at  all,  the  only  means  of  doing  so
is  to  confine  the  latter  to  such  drugs  only  as  operate  to  re-
move obstructions  (^.  <s.,  excess  of  any  thing  in  the  system,
whether  alimentary  or  not),  and  to  stimulate  the  nervous
system  to  the  better  performance  of  its  functions.  But  this
definition  excludes  from  the  materia  medica  all  those  sub-
stances which  aim  to  supply  a  want,  and  classes  them  under
dietetics.  I  see  nothing  improper,  however,  in  this,  and  be-
lieve that  not  only  should  this  be  done,  but  that  such  sub-
stances should,  when  recognized  as  foods,  be  administered
as  such,  i.  e.^  in  an  alimentary  form  as  far  as  possible,  and  not
as  medicines.  And  even  this  is  not  enough — the  number
and  quantity  of  substances  of  the  other  class,  the  medicines
proper,  or  remedials,  should  doubtless  be  greatly  diminished,
and  administered  with  far  greater  caution  than  is  usually
done.  Any  proposition  looking  to  the  contraction  of  the
domain  and  influence  of  medicine  should  be  received  with
favor  by  all  true  friends  of  hygiene.  It  might  perhaps  be
adopted  as  a  general  rule  that  all  substances  which  are  not
foods  are  poisons,  and  then  the  number  and  frequency  of
the  exceptions  could  be  reduced,  by  careful  scientific  study,
to  the  minimum.

All  substances,  then,  which  are  over  introduced  into  the
system,  may  be  reduced  to  three  classes — foods,  medicines,
and  poisons.  Those  which  neither  supply  natural  loss  nor
remedy  disorganization  must  produce  disorganization.  The
mechanism  of  the  body  is  too  delicate  to  warrant  us  in
assuming  that  extraneous  matters  can  be  introduced  into  any
part  of  it  and  produce  no  effect  whatever.  If  not  needed  to
supply  a  deficiency  by  digestion  and  assimilation,  or  to  re-
move an  excess  accumulated  in  some  part,  or  to  stimulate  the
nervous  system  to  a  better  performance  of  some  or  all  of  its
functions,  such  matters  must  be  a  detriment  to  all  the  crccr.ns

532  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

within  their  influence.  So,  too,  the  remedial  state  passes
into  the  toxical  as  soon  as  there  remains  nothing  to  remedy,
and  even  foods  become  poisons  the  moment  they  are  intro-
duced in  excess  of  the  demand.

Mineral  Foods. — As  already  remarked,  foods  are  of  three
kinds,  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral.  It  is  respecting  the
last-named  group  that  all  discussion  of  the  correctness  of  this
classiiication  must  occur.  But,  under  the  broad  definition
above  given  of  the  term  food,  there  no  longer  remains  any
room  for  such  discussion.  It  need  not  even  be  introduced
through  the  alimentary  canal,  and,  indeed,  the  most  impor-
tant substance  taken  into  the  body  enters  the  lungs  and  min-
gles immediately  with  the  blood.  This  same  oxygen  of  the
atmosphere  might  also  come  in  under  the  above  definition  of
a  medicine,  since,  at  the  same  time  that  it  supplies  the  vehi-
cle of  nutrition,  it  performs  the  ofiice  of  scavenger  of  the  sys-
tem in  carrying-  away  the  effete  matter  which  the  life-current
brings  to  its  gates.  So  loose  are  the  most  technical  of  terms,
when  employed  to  describe  the  complicated  machinery  of  the
organic  world !

But  there  is  no  lack  of  mineral  substances  which  are  abso-
lutely necessary  to  be  taken  into  the  body  through  the  ordi-
nary channels  of  food,  and  conveyed  by  the  circulatory  sys-
tem to  the  required  place  to  be  deposited  as  normal  and
essential  tissue.  The  very  skeleton  and  frame-work  of  the
body,  as  well  as  the  organs  of  mastication,  are  composed  of
mineral  matter,  while  the  muscles  and  all  the  organs  of  the
body,  particularly  the  brain,  are  known  to  contain  various
kinds  of  mineral  salts,  and  the  blood  itself  owes  its  nutritive
efficiency  to  the  presence  in  it  of  one  of  the  chemical  elements
— iron.  What  food  is  more  universal,  more  lavishly  partaken
of  or  more  indispensably  necessary  to  the  health  of  man  than
the  chemical  compound  chloride  of  sodium,  or  common  salt,
usually  quarried  from  the  mines  of  the  earth?  That  the
greater  part  of  the  mineral  substances  required  by  the  system
are  introduced  into  it  along  with  organic  substances,  either

I

SOURCES  OF  FOOD.  533

vegetable  or  animal,  whicli  have  previously  absorbed  and
utilized  it,  does  not  render  these  the  less  mineral  in  their
nature,  since  they  are  found  there  in  their  inorganic  state.
It  only  proves  that  not  only  man  but  all  animals  and  all
vegetables  require  both  those  chemical  elements  which  enter
into  the  organic  compounds,  and  also  pure  inorganic  mineral
matter,  for  their  proper  growth  and  nourishment.  Finally,
we  may  enroll  among  the  mineral  foods  required  for  man's
subsistence,  and  of  which  the  greater  part  of  all  his  tissues
are  composed,  that  universal  element,  water,  which  Nature
affords  with  a  lavishness  corresponding  with  the  profuseness
with  which  she  employs  it  in  the  composition  of  living
organisms.

Organic  Foods. — The  foods  derived  from  the  mineral
kingdom,  although  just  as  indispensable  to  the  system  as
others,  differ  from  the  organic  foods  in  a  variety  of  respects.
The  most  important  of  these  is  their  failure  to  supply  either
nutrition  proper  or  warmth  to  the  body.

Nutritive  Foods. — Nutrition,  in  its  broadest  sense,  in-
cludes, it  is  true,  every  element  needed  by  the  body  to  main-
tain perfect  health,  as  well  the  salts  and  iron  and  the  fluid
solvents  as  the  organic  compounds  of  foods.  But  in  the
more  ordinary  sense  the  term  is  restricted  to  those  substances
which  are  supplied  to  the  blood  by  the  digestive  process  and
deposited  by  it  in  all  parts  of  the  body  in  the  form  of  organ-
ized tissue,  whether  as  muscle,  cartilage,  tendon,  fascia,  or
aponeurosis.  Most  tissue  is  found  to  contain  nitrogen  in  the
form  of  albumen,  and  the  kinds  of  food  which  supply  it  are
classified  under  the  head  of  nitrogenous  or  albuminous  foods.
They  are  highly  organic,  having  feeble  powers  of  resisting
decomposition  and  change.  Chemically  considered,  they  pre-
sent a  variety  of  forms,  depending  chiefly  on  the  relative
proportion  of  their  principal  elementary  constituents,  which
are  always  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen,  and
usually  sulphur.     These  nitrogenous,  or  azotized,  substances,

which  are  known  to  organic  chemistry  under  the  names  of
24

534  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION^.— SOCIOGENY.

albumen,  iibrine,  caseine,  etc.,  were  denominated  by  Liebig
the  plastic  elements  of  nutrition,  and  are  wliat  we  commonly
understand  by  the  phrase  nutritious  food.  They  supply  the
body  with  its  muscle,  nerve,  sinew,  and  other  tissues.

Respiratory  Foods. — Equally  important,  yet  perhaps  not
so  obviously  so,  is  the  other  great  class  of  organic  foods
which  has  for  its  chief  function  the  supply  of  animal  heat,  or
its  equivalent  in  force,  to  the  body.  These  are  far  more
simple  in  their  composition,  and  consist  of  the  same  chemical
elements  as  the  nitrogenous  group  except  that  they  contain
no  nitrogen  or  sulphur.  The  combining  numbers  are,  how-
ever, much  smaller,  indicating  a  much  less  delicate  state  of
organization,  and  rendering  them  far  more  firmly  fixed  in
their  relative  atomic  proportions  {supra.,  p.  306).  They  are
well  known  under  the  familiar  names  sugar,  starch,  and  fat,
or  oil,  and  under  the  more  technical  names  saccharine,  amyla-
ceous, and  oleaginous  bodies.  Like  the  nutritious  substances,
they  appear  in  a  variety  of  forms,  both  as  food  and  as  tissue,
and  have  received  a  corresponding  variety  of  technical  names.
As  already  remarked,  the  chief  function  of  these  substances,
when  introduced  into  the  system,  is  to  maintain  a  suitable
temperature  within  the  body.  This  they  do  by  a  process  of
true  combustion.  The  large  quantity  of  carbon  which  they
contain  is  brought  into  perpetual  contact  with  oxygen  in  the
blood,  both  at  the  lungs  and  also  throughout  the  system,
which  decomposes  them  and  evolves  heat,  precisely  as  the
same  elements  produce  heat  in  the  combustion  of  coal  or
wood.  They  are  called  the  non-nitrogenous,  calorific,  heat-
producing,  or,  more  commonly  still,  the  respiratory  foods.
But,  when  it  is  remembered  that  all  the  nutritive  foods  con-
tain also  all  the  elements  of  respiration  and  heat-production,
the  superior  value  of  these  as  foods  is  apparent,  since  they
are  able  alone  to  supply  both  the  great  alimentary  processes.

]!^eitlier  of  these  important  ends  of  physical  existence  is
secured  by  the  introduction  of  inorganic  or  mineral  matter
into  the  body.     To  perform  the  vital  functions  it  requires

SOURCES  OF  FOOD.  535

that  tliese  highly  organized  compounds  be  constantly  sup-
plied in  quantities  sufficient  to  replace  all  the  lost  tissue,  and
maintain  the  requisite  temperature  of  the  body.

But,  as  these  substances,  no  matter  how  complicated  their
composition  may  be,  are  all  resolvable  into  their  original  in-
organic elements,  it  must  have  required  some  organizing
force  to  have  first  worked  them  up  into  these  highly  wrought
and  nicely  poised  combinations.  Moreover,  since  from  their
very  refinement  of  organization  they  must  be  of  a  delicate
and  ephemeral  nature,  it  further  requires  that  this  organizing
process  be  constantly  kept  np  and  fresh  supplies  be  continu-
ally manufactured.

Vegetation  the  Original  Producer  of  Organic  Foods. —
"VYhat,  then,  is  this  great  mill  where  all  these  fine  fabrics
are  made  ?  It  is  the  vegetable.  The  process  is  none  other
than  vegetation.  It  is  the  office,  so  to  speak,  of  the  vegeta-
ble to  organize  the  mineral  for  the  use  of  the  animal  w;orld.
The  original  food  of  all  living  things  must  be  of  a  vegetable
nature.  All  foods  which  tend  at  all  to  nourish  or  to  warm
the  body,  whatever  form  they  may  assume  at  the  time  they
are  introduced,  must  have  first  passed  through  the  vegetal
process.  The  vegetable  foods,  therefore,  though  not  more
essential  than  the  mineral  foods,  since  life  would  not  be
maintainable  without  either,  are  yet  much  more  prominent,
from  the  superior  importance  of  their  functions.  They  con-
stitute the  main-stay  of  life,  and  supply  the  hourly  demands
of  oar  ever-changing  systems.

Sources  of  Yegetdble  Foods. — The  number  and  variety  of
these  foods  are  very  great.  The  number  of  plants  which
contribute  to  man's  sustenance  is  astonishing.  Some  one
hundred  and  twenty  thousand  vegetable  species  are  known  to
botanists,  of  which  three  or  four  hundred  with  innumerable
varieties  are  now  used  for  food  by  civilized  man,  while  un-
civilized races  utilize  a  much  greater  number.  All  parts  of
the  plant  are  thus  employed,  sometimes  all  at  the  same  time,
but  more  frequently  only  one  or  two  portions  of  one  and  the

536  TERTIAKY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY,

same  plant.  la  maize,  for  instance,  both  the  fruit  and  the
stalk  are  eaten,  the  former  by  men  and  animals,  the  latter  by
animals  only.  Tlie  fruit  is  most  commonly  the  edible  por-
tion and  that  in  which  the  nutritious  elements  are  most  con-
centrated. But  there  are  plants,  as  the  potato,  for  example,
the  fruit  of  which  is  inedible  and  poisonous,  while  some  other
part  (in  this  case  a  subterranean  tuber)  is  the  receptacle  of
nutrition.  Not  unfrequently  it  is  the  envelope  by  which
the  fruit  is  surrounded  (the  pericarp),  or  the  stalk  or  axis
in  which  it  is  imbedded  (the  receptacle),  which  constitutes
the  alimentary  portion.  Again,  as  in  the  walnut,  etc.,  it  is
only  the  endocarp,  or  meat  of  the  kernel,  which  can  be  eaten,
though  this  is  inclosed  in  a  large  sarcocarp.  In  the  peach
both  the  fleshy  envelope  and  the  seed  are  eatable,  though  the
latter  scarcely  so.  Yet  it  is  but  a  step  from  the  peach  to  the
almond,  the  "  meat "  of  which  is  greatly  esteemed.  Thus  in
trees,  shrubs,  and  herbs,  in  fruit,  stem,  bark,  and  root,  and  in
all  parts  of  each  of  these,  the  human  race  has  always  suc-
ceeded in  finding  nourishment  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.
By  skill  in  cultivation  and  science  in  propagating  the  best,
man  has  made  the  soil  multiply  its  bounties,  in  proportion  as
he  has  multiplied  his  numbers.

Sources  of  Animal  Foods. — But  he  has  not  been  content
to  subsist  upon  the  materials  which  the  vegetable  world  accu-
mulates, organizes,  and  enriches.  lie  has  demanded  that  his
food  be  still  more  highly  organized  and  still  more  narrowly
concentrated.  Not  satisfied  to  have  the  vegetable  world  bring
the  inorganic  elements  into  combinations  calculated  to  nour-
ish and  warm  his  body,  he  has  called  upon  the  animal  world
still  further  to  assort  and  perfect  them  so  that  still  less  neutral
matter  might  enter  his  system.  Not  content  with  the  albu-
men of  the  seed  and  the  kernel,  he  has  required  the  albumen
of  the  muscle  and  the  egg.  Not  content  with  sugar  and
starch,  he  has  demanded  tallow  and  butter.  These  are  the  ani-
mal foods.  Derived  originally  from  the  vegetable,  by  their
passage  through  the  digestive  and  secretive  organs  of  the  ani-

SOURCES  OF  FOOD.  537

mal,  tliey  become  adapted  to  the  formation  of  tissue,  and,  in
fact,  become  tissue,  which,  when  the  animal  is  deprived  of
life,  and  before  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  for  decomposition
to  commence,  may  be  transferred  bodily  to  another  system,
and  become  a  part  of  its  tissues  with  far  less  effort  of  the
organs  of  digestion  and  assimilation  than  is  required  to  con-
vert the  original  vegetable  substance  into  the  same  form.

The  animal  is  devoted  to  the  purposes  of  food  even  more
completely  than  the  vegetable.  All  the  soft  parts,  including
the  brain  and  the  blood,  are  converted  into  food.  The  eggs,
too,  of  such  as  are  oviparous,  and  the  milk  of  all  such  as
yield  it  to  any  profitable  extent,  are  brought  into  service  and
made  to  minister  to  the  perpetual  craving  of  the  human
stomach — all  must  succumb  to  the  irresistible  demands  of
the  great  preservative  forces.

Familiar  as  all  this  may  seem,  this  rapid  review  of  the
primary  objects  of  liuman  production  and  of  the  nature  of
subsistence  may  serve  to  increase  our  interest  in,  if  not  our
understanding  of,  those  deep-flowing  industrial  currents  which
underlie  ephemeral  military  achievements,  national  vicissi-
tudes, and  political  transformations,  and,  when  properly  com-
prehended, greatly  exceed  them  in  importance.  The  latter
are  but  the  foam  which  these  powerful  under-currents  have
produced  at  the  surface.  The  cravings  of  the  human  soul
for  glory,  fame,  and  power,  are  wholly  insignificant  in  com-
parison with  the  cravings  of  the  human  stomach  for  food,
and  if  we  will  but  look  we  shall  see,  notwithstanding  the  ob-
scurity in  which  history  has  wrapped  them,  that  the  results  of
these  forces  are  as  incomparable  as  are  the  forces  themselves.

PKODUCTION    OF    FOODS.

From  the  consideration  of  the  nature  and  sources  of
human  foods,  let  us  now  revert  to  the  activities  exercised  in
securing  them — to  the  modes  of  their  production.  As  already
frequently  observed,  they  may  be  reduced  principal!}'  to  three,
hunting  and  fishing,  pasturing  of  flocks,  and  tillage  of  the

638  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

soil.  The  two  first-named  modes  are  confined  to  those  ob-
jects of  production  described  as  animal  foods ;  the  third,  in
so  far  as  it  is  purely  agricultural,  is  limited  to  the  production
of  vesretable  foods.

Production  of  Mineral  Foods. — The  production  of  min-
eral foods  constitutes  a  somewhat  heterogeneous  class.  The
chief  minerals  required  by  the  system,  except  water  and  salt,
are  derived  from  vegetable  and  animal  substances,  into  the
constitution  of  which  they  have  already  entered.  They  are,
therefore,  embraced  in  the  consideration  of  the  other  modes
of  production.  With  respect  to  water,  it  exists  in  such  spon-
taneous profusion  in  all  habitable  parts  of  the  globe  that  its
production  consists  in  little  more  than  its  possession.  Still
the  digging  of  wells  is  an  industry  which  is  not  to  be  over-
looked, and  in  some  parts  of  the  world  the  effort  required  to
obtain  water  puts  a  positive  commercial  value  upon  the  liquid
itself.  The  production  of  salt  has  always  constituted  a  spe-
cial and  important  industry.  It  is  one  of  the  most  abundant
of  the  minerals  found  on  the  globe,  and  exists  in  a  crystal-
line state,  as  rock-salt  in  vast  quantities  in  many  parts  of  the
world,  and  in  solution  in  the  sea.

Nothing  could  be  more  interesting  than  to  know  to  what
extent  and  in  what  manner  the  early  peoples  of  the  globe
employed  and  obtained  this  universal  substance.  Specula-
tions as  to  whether  its  use  may  not  be  a  later  innovation,  and
as  to  whether  it  might  not  even  now  be  altogether  dispensed
with  by  man,  if  the  change  could  take  place  gradually  enough,
though  tempting  and  fertile  in  philosophic  results,  would  be
out  of  place  here.  Data  drawni  from  the  customs  of  savages
now  existing  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  would  be  ex-
tremely interesting  and  instructive  on  thjs  point,  and  form  a
far  better  subject  for  books  of  travels  than  much  that  is
treated  of  in  such  books.  That  the  ancients  used  salt  almost
as  freely  as  we  do  is,  however,  clear  from  the  frequent  inci-
dental occurrence  of  the  word  in  classic  literature,  and  this
fact  alone  implies  that  there  must  have  been  a  salt  industry.

PRODUCTION  OF  FOODS.  639

There  is  no  doubt,  too,  that  an  extensive  commerce  was
carried  on  in  this  commodity,  perhaps  with  Ormuz  in  the
Persian  Gulf,  though  more  probably  with  Syria,  where,  in
the  region  of  the  Dead  Sea,  it  still  abounds.  There  might
also  have  been  evaporating  processes  to  obtain  it  from  the  sea.

Its  use  by  prehistoric  races  is,  of  course,  unproved,  but
there  is  little  doubt  that  no  people  were  ever  long  with-
out it.  It  is  to  be  supposed,  therefore,  that  the  mining
and  manufacture  of  salt  must  have  constituted  an  extensive
industry  from  time  immemorial,  and  that  its  transportation
to  points  remote  from  the  mines  formed  an  important  part
of  the  commerce  of  the  world.

The  pursuit  of  mineral  foods  is,  however,  a  wholly  insig-
nificant fact  when  compared  with  that  of  either  vegetable  or
animal  foods.  Although,  perhaps,  not  chronologically  cor-
rect, it  is  more  consistent  with  the  theory  of  subsistence  to
consider  these  last  two  in  the  order  named.

Production  of  Vegetahle  Foods. — If  we  suppose  man  to
have  descended  from  the  Quadrumana,  we  must  regard  him
as  originally  quite  herbivorous,  and,  from  whatever  natural
family  we  may  derive  him,  his  anatomical  structure  seems
to  indicate  a  vegetarian  life  in  the  animal  state.  Even  the
weapons,  with  which  he  seems  to  have  once  been  provided,  are
rather  those  of  defense  and  of  attack  upon  his  own  kind  than
of  a  nature  to  seize  upon  his  prey.  They  were  most  of  them
apparently  designed  to  battle  with  male  rivals,  and  hence
their  vestiges  are  much  more  marked  in  men  than  in  women.
The  only  fact  which  seems  to  negative  the  theory  that  man
was  originally  a  pure  vegetarian  is  that,  in  his  savage  state
as  we  now  find  him,  he  usually  subsists  chiefly  on  flesh.  The
phenomenon  of  change  of  habit  from  a  granivorous  to  a
carnivorous,  or  at  least  to  an  omnivorous  condition,  is,  how-
ever, no  obstacle,  as  it  is  exemplified  by  many  domestic  spe-
cies, as  the  hog,  the  hen,  etc.  Again,  there  are  many  low
tribes  of  men  who  do  not  hunt,  but  live  princij^ally  on  roots,
leaves,  and  berries.     These  are  usually  the  very  lowest  tribes

540  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

known,  and  may  form  a  sort  of  link  between  the  hunters
and  a  still  lower  state.  Indeed,  it  is  claimed  that  on  the
Island  of  Borneo,  as  well  as  in  the  interior  of  Australia,  there
actually  exist  men  who  have  no  habitations,  live  on  grass
and  nuts,  climb  trees  like  the  orang-outang,  lead  solitary
lives,  possess  no  articulate  language,  and  are  hunted  and  shot
by  the  savage  but  more  developed  natives  like  wild  animals.
Reports  of  similar  races  in  the  interior  of  Southern  Africa
have  also  been  made,  and,  though  needing  scientific  verifica-
tion, are  not  probably  wholly  without  foundation  in  fact
{supra,  p.  41T).

Passing  over  the  pre-industrial  stage,  and  confining  our-
selves to  the  era  of  production,  we  find  mankind  struggling
to  increase  the  quantity  of  food  which  the  vegetable  world
supplies.  The  first  step  in  this  direction  was  to  determine
what  plants  and  what  parts  of  these  plants  do  by  nature  afford
the  required  nourishment.  This  labor,  although  it  does  not
belong  to  agriculture,  does,  nevertheless,  belong  to  produc-
tion. "When  cattle  are  turned  into  a  pasture,  they  graze  only
upon  those  plants  which  are  wholesome,  and  leave  the  rest.
More  probably  they  eat  only  such  as  are  agreeable  to  their
palates,  and  adaptation  has  brought  it  about  that  poisonous
herbs  are  not  generally  agreeable.  This  may  have  been  the
case  with  man  also,  and  in  so  far  this  species  of  selection  con-
stitutes no  production.  But  this  sense  is  at  best  a  very  rude
and  imperfect  one.  Many  of  the  plants  which  do  not  agree
with  the  palate  may  agree  perfectly  with  the  stomach.  Many
that  present  a  noisome  exterior  may  have  concealed  internal
parts  which  are  sweet  and  nourishing.  Many  which  are  in-
edible at  one  period  of  their  growth  may  be  edible  at  an
earlier  or  a  later  period.  Many  whose  visible  portions  are
vapid  or  noxious,  possess  valuable  subterranean  portions.
The  cow  disdains  the  green  parts  of  the  potato  and  the
artichoke,  but  finds  the  tubers  excellent  after  man  has  dug
them  np  for  her.  And  so  he  must  do  for  himself,  using  a
large  amount  of  sagacity,  and  performing  considerable  labor..

PRODUCTION  OF  FOODS.  641

This  kind  of  selection  and  effort  belongs  to  the  produc-
tive class,  and  forms  man's  first  experience  in  the  production
of  vegetable  food.  From  this  he  enters  upon  agriculture
proper.  Having  found  out  what  plants  yield  nutrition  and
in  what  parts  of  them  this  nutrition  is  located,  he  proceeds
to  laj  special  stress  upon  these,  and  seeks  to  make  a  larger
amount  of  them  grow.  Here  is  called  into  play  a  still  higher
order  of  sagacity  and  a  still  greater  effort  of  body.  The
noxious  and  useless  plants  must  be  destroyed  that  the  nutri-
tious and  useful  ones  may  thrive.  The  latter  must  be  brought
nearer  together  than  they  spontaneously  grow,  to  render
them  easy  of  cultivation  and  more  certain  to  fructify.  The
soil  must  be  prepared  by  loosening  and  clearing  of  obstruc-
tions of  all  kinds.  The  seed  must  be  carefully  planted,  the
germ  tenderly  cared  for,  the  growing  plant  watered  and
weeded,  and  the  matured  fruit  harvested.  All  this  is  calcu-
lated to  call  forth  the  best  faculties  of  the  mind  and  afford
the  body  ample  exercise,  well  adapted  to  its  healthy  develop-
ment. The* certain  results  attending  these  labors  served  to
inspire  confidence  and  stimulate  industry.

The  fact  should  not  be  forgotten  that  labor  is  not  the
natural  condition  of  man.  The  true  power  of  these  social
forces  can  never  be  understood  until  we  recognize  that  work
is  unnatural  and  irksome.  The  attempts  which  have  been
made  to  induce  the  IS^orth  American  Indians  to  follow  agri-
cultural pursuits  are  suflicient  to  indicate  the  difficulty  of
the  transition  from  the  non-industrial  to  the  industrial  state.
It  must  have  required  a  powerful  motive  to  curb  and  steady
all  the  wild  and  adventurous  desires  of  the  human  heart  and
compose  them  to  the  monotony  of  toil.*  One  of  the  most
important  effects  produced  by  the  necessity  which  forced
itself  upon  the  human  race  of  endeavoring  to  increase  the

*  The  influence  of  slavery  in  disciplining  mankind  to  uninterrupted  labor
has  been  frequently  referred  to,  but  I  can  not  agree  with  Mr.  Spencer  ("  Study
of  Sociology,"  p.  196)  that  without  it  this  state  of  discipline  is  never  reached.
The  constant  spur  of  want  is  sufficient  of  itself  to  accomplish  this,  as  is  evidenced
by  non-slaveholding  industrial  societies.

542  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION^.— SOOIOGEI^Y.

natural  supply  of  vegetable  food,  was  tlie  check  which  it
placed  upon  the  roving  propensity,  to  which  both  the  preda-
tory and  the  pastoral  states  were  favorable.  The  hunter
must  follow  his  game.  To  remain  in  one  place  would  be
to  exhaust  it  of  the  very  objects  upon  which  he  subsists.
He  must  therefore  frequently  change  his  abiding-place,  and
the  tendencies  are  strong  to  render  his  whole  life  a  roving
one.

The  shepherd  must  always  find  pasturage  for  his  flocks,
and,  although  he  need  not  be  perpetually  changing  his  loca-
tion, still  we  find,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  tliet  the  pure  pastoral
shades  off  easily  into  the  nomadic  state.

It  is  quite  otherwise  with  the  agricultural  state.  This,
instead  of  favoring  migration,  does  not  admit  of  it.

The  importance  of  this  fact  in  the  industrial  history  of
the  race  is  not  to  be  overlooked.  From  a  moral  point  of
view,  it  is  immense.  From  an  economical  point  of  view,  it
is  still  greater.  Civilization  is  the  result  of  human  labor,
guided  by  thought.  All  labor  to  be  useful  must  be  contin-
uous. It  must  be  applied  to  a  given  object,  and  continued
upon  that  object  until  the  result  is  attained.  This  requires
permanence  of  location.  Change  of  place  is  inimical  to  it.
All  the  attendant  circumstances  must  go  with  it  wherever  it
goes.  Removal  is,  therefore,  necessarily  attended  with  costs
which  neutralize  production.  This  being  so  necessary  in  all
the  multiplied  forms  of  human  industry,  it  was  of  incalcu-
lable value  that  at  least  one,  and  that  the  most  important  of
the  primary  forms  of  producing  food,  should  be  calculated
to  discipline  mankind  to  steady  labor  in  one  fixed  and  per-
manent location.  Since  all  vegetable  food  must  come  from
the  soil,  and  since  it  must  occupy  a  definite  amount  of  area
upon  the  earth,  it  soon  became  apparent  that  this  area  pos-
sessed a  certain  value.  The  soil  became  an  object  of  posses-
sion. All  value  is  the  result  of  labor.  The  amount  of  labor
bestowed  upon  the  soil  became  a  rude  measure  of  its  value.
Its  bare  occupation  was  sufficient  to  assign  a  value  to  it.    The

PRODUCTION  OF  FOODS.  543

multiplication  of  individuals  rendered  the  recognition  of  that
value  an  absolute  necessity.  Thus  arose  the  great  land  inter-
est, the  most  vital  and  important  of  all  human  interests.  As
a  terrestrial  being,  the  land  is  man's  habitat,  and  from  it  must
be  drawn,  whether  directly  or  indirectly,  his  entire  supply  of
subsistence.  So  vast  and  powerful  has  been  this  interest  that
even  in  history  it  has  occasionally  forced  itself  into  view
amid  the  detailed  accounts  of  the  ephemeral  deeds  of  acci-
dental rulers.

I  need  not  here  enter  into  the  history  of  the  soil,  nor  dis-
cuss those  great  agt^rian  questions  which  have  absorbed  the
attention  of  the  world  from  a  time  long  anterior  to  the  age
of  the  Gracchi.  It  is  enough  to  glance  rapidly  over  this
field  and  note  the  progress  of  the  race  in  the  production  of
subsistence  from  that  source.  The  cultivation  of  the  cereals
and  of  vegetables  of  various  kinds  became  at  length  a  sys-
tematized industry.  The  land  was  parceled  up  into  definite
tracts,  acknowledged  as  the  property  of  each.  The  most
successful  modes  of  planting  and  sowing,  of  tilling  and  of
harvesting,  were  learned  from  experience,  and  the  entire  sys-
tem of  agriculture  was  at  length  established.

But  the  production  of  vegetable  food  does  not  consist
alone  in  the  growth  of  nutritious  plants  and  the  harvesting
of  crops.  As  man  became  more  intelligent  he  also  grew
more  fastidious,  and  required  more  and  more  preparation  of
his  food.  His  grain  must  be  thrashed,  then  it  must  be  ground,
and,  finally,  it  must  be  sifted  and  bolted.  Nearly  all  the
kinds  of  vegetables  came  to  require  some  preparation  before
they  were  deemed  suitable  for  food.  And  then  they  could
not  generally  be  eaten  raw.  Cooking,  a  further  preparation,
grew  up  with  the  rest,  and  was  gradually  reduced  to  a  special
art.  All  this  required  additional  labor,  and  rewarded  it  with
correspondingly  improved  food.  The  labor  was  more  will-
ingly bestowed,  as  it  was  learned  how  ample  was  this  reward.

We  thus  see  how  vast  must  always  have  been  the  agri-
cultural industry.    During  all  those  ages  of  which  we  read

544  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOK.— SOCIOGEN^Y.

in  history,  contemporaneous  with  the  kings,  princes,  and
heroes,  the  warriors  and  armies  which  till  up  the  foreground,
there  must  have  been  all  the  while  going  on  this  great  vital
movement  of  food  production  from  the  soil,  without  which
these  armies  must  have  perished  more  ignominiously  than
did  the  host  of  Sennacherib.  In  fact,  it  was  only  in  pro-
portion as  this  production  became  greater  than  the  consump-
tion, thus  setting  free  a  certain  number  of  men  from  the
necessity  of  labor,  that  these  superficial  movements  were  made
possible.  The  record  of  events  which  history  makes  is  little
more  than  an  account  of  those  mischief*  which  are  the  pro-
verbial product  of  idle  hands.

Production  of  Animal  Foods. — The  consideration  of  the
modes  of  production  of  animal  foods,  instead  of  taking  us  a
step  forward  in  man's  career,  carries  us  rather  a  remove  fur-
ther toward  his  origin.  For,  although,  according  to  all  the
probabilities,  he  set  out  in  his  career  as  a  pure  vegetarian,
still  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  he  departed  from  that
course  and  maintained  his  existence  by  hunting  and  fishing
before  he  entered  upon  an  agricultural  career.  This  opinion
is  verified  by  the  actual  condition  of  many  savage  races  at
the  present  time,  the  very  lowest  of  which  are  more  or  less
purely  vegetarian,  and  the  next  almost  or  quite  wholly  car-
nivorous. This  order  of  succession  in  the  states  of  the  race
is  in  harmony  with  the  theory  of  the  gradual  development
of  the  intellectual  powers.  The  pure  vegetarian  condition
is  the  simplest,  and  calls  out  the  least  exercise  of  thought.
The  stationary  character  of  vegetables  renders  them,  in  so  far
as  nature  alone  provides  them,  easy  of  possession.  It  re-
quires little  sagacity  or  labor  to  gather  berries,  leaves,  and
nuts.  The  digging  of  roots  is  equally  simple,  though  some-
what more  laborious.  But  to  hunt  and  ensnare  wild  beasts
requires  a  certain  amount  of  cunning  and  somewhat  greater
physical  activity.  Pastoral  life  taxes  the  mental  powers  still
more  severely.  The  next  attempt  at  obtaining  food  from
the  vegetable  world  is  through  cultivation,  which  raises  man

PRODUCTION  OF  FOODS.  545

a  grade  higher  still  in  the  scale  of  intelligence.  The  flesh-
period,  as  it  may  be  styled,  is  a  sort  of  transition  stage  from
one  fruit-period  to  another.

Again,  this  theory  of  succession  is  in  harmony  with  that
of  man's  struggle  for  existence.  The  first  cause  of  this  strug-
gle is  increase  of  numbers.  As  long  as  he  was  a  solitary
being  the  vegetable  world  afforded  him  an  ample  supply
without  labor  or  skill.  As  his  numbers  increased,  this  source
began  to  be  exhausted,  and  the  next  most  natural  resort
would  be  the  animal  world.  Finding  the  antelope,  the  buf
falo,  the  gronse,  becoming  scarce,  he  set  about  the  task  of
accomplishing  their  domestication,  in  order  to  be  able  to  keep
up  the  supply.  The  use  of  milk  and  eggs,  though  incidental,
became  important,  and  added  a  new  value  to  domesticated
animals.  It  is  not  until  all  these  sources  threaten  to  fail  that
recourse  is  again  had  to  the  soil,  but  this  time  accompanied
with  skill  and  labor.  Such  is  the  theory  of  man's  early  in-
dustrial progress.  In  point  of  fact,  these  periods  must  have
overlapped  one  another  and  been  perpetually  blended,  some-
what as  the  paleontologist  finds  the  forms  of  life  in  the  theo-
retical periods  of  geology.

The  hunting  stage  has  left  its  unmistakable  stamp  upon
the  whole  human  race.  Love  of  the  chase,  so  universal  in
the  most  enlightened  peoples,  is  regarded  by  many  philoso-
phers as  the  simple  survival  of  those  wild  sentiments  which
were  implanted  in  man  in  that  remote  and  savage  era  of  his
existence  before  he  learned  the  noble  arts  or  acquired  the
steady  habits  of  agricultural  and  industrial  life.  The  pro-
duction of  animal  food  by  hunting  can  not  be  called  an
industry,  although  entered  upon  with  all  the  earnestness  of
the  most  serious  business.  That  it  is  a  species  of  labor,  and
often  of  the  severest  kind,  can  not  be  denied,  but  there  is
attached  to  it  so  much  of  pleasure  and  adventure  that  it
scarcely  warrants  being  dignified  with  the  name  of  work.*

*  It  is  doubtful  whether  any  tribe  or  race  subsists  by  hunting  alone.     In
nearly  all,  the  women  perform  other  services,  and  often  till  the  soil.

646  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

Still,  it  is  a  mode  of  production,  and  has  proved  a  very  im-
portant one  for  mankind.  The  fishing  interest  has  never
been  renounced,  and  still  constitutes  a  lai-ge  and  important
industry,  furnishing  no  insignificant  part  of  the  food  of
man.  The  pastoral  life  even  when  pure  was  of  an  indus-
trial character,  and  proved  a  successful  mode  of  supplying
human  wants.  It  is  still  pursued  more  or  less  exclusively
in  many  parts  of  the  world.  The  production  of  animal  food,
however,  by  the  fattening  of  domesticated  animals,  is  the
second  food-producing  industry  of  the  world.  The  impor-
tance of  the  labor  of  supplying  the  world  with  meat  is  only
less  than  that  of  supplying  it  with  bread.*

To  obtain  bread  and  meat — that  is,  to  obtain  food,  to
supply  the  cravings  of  the  stomach,  to  satisfy  the  demands
of  the  palate — these  are  the  objects  in  whose  accomplishment
the  greatest  exertions  have  been  made,  the  most  extensive
labor  performed,  and  the  grandest  material  results  attained.
The  motive  is  none  other  than  the  preservation  of  existence.
Although  these  results  are  secured  indirectly  and  are  never
realized  by  the  individual,  they  are  always  fully  recognized
by  nature,  whose  primary  end  they  are,  and  the  great  pre-
servative force,  irresistible  and  perpetual,  is  always  adequate
to  the  task  it  has  to  perform.  I  have  endeavored  to  give  a
hasty  sketch  of  its  operations  along  the  single  line  of  supply-
ing food  to  man.     Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  other

wants.

Secodtdaky  Pkoductiion.

The  objects  of  production,  in  so  far  as  they  conduce  to
the  preservation  of  life,  are  chiefly  of  three  kinds,  roughly
described  by  the  three  terms,  food,  clothing,  and  shelter.
Of  these  the  most  important  product  is  food,  and  the  labor
required  to  obtain  it  has  been  called  'primai^j  production.

*  See  a  communication  by  the  writer  on  the  "Animal  Population  of  the
Globe,"  made  to  the  rhilosophical  Society  of  Washington,  October  23,  1880 ;
"  Bulletin,"  vol.  iv,  p.  27.  The  paper  was  published  in  extetuo  in  the  Chicago
"Times"  of  December  18,  188a

SECONDARY  PRODUCTION.  547

Having  considered  this  mode  of  production  somewliat  in  de-
tail, we  are  now  prepared  to  glance  in  a  similar  manner  at  the
other  mode,  or  secondary  production.  It  is  threefold :  1,
the  production  of  clothing ;  2,  of  the  means  of  shelter ;  and,  3,
of  implements,  utensils,  and  other  devices  necessary  to  facili-
tate and  render  all  production  possible.  It  is  convenient  to
embrace  under  this  head  the  production  of  the  means  required
to  carry  on  all  the  processes  which  are  accessory  to  produc-
tion, such  as  commerce,  exchange,  etc.,  which  industries  them-
selves will  be  touched  upon  in  another  place.  In  short,  we
may  take  the  designation  of  secondary,  or  auxiliary,  produc-
tion to  com2:)rehend  the  whole  domain  of  practical  art.

The  production  of  food,  though  a  means  of  existence,
may  be  considered  as  an  end,  the  ultimate  object  of  all  the
activities  excited  by  the  preservative  force.  The  objects
required  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  end,  the  auxiliaries
which  the  mind  of  man  has  devised  and  his  labor  created  to
assist  him  in  securing  it — these  are  the  means  which  he  has
employed,  and  must  rank  secondary  to  the  primary  end  of
human  effort.

The  production  of  clothing  and  habitations,  though  pri-
mary, in  the  sense  of  being  directly  essential  to  the  preserva-
tion of  life,  are  secondary  in  another  sense.  Food  is  a  natural
and  inherent  necessity,  which  no  circumstances  or  surround-
ing conditions  could  obviate  or  affect.  Clothing  and  shelter
are  but  contingent  necessities.  It  is  surrounding  circum-
stances, atmospheric  conditions,  and  modes  of  life  which
determine  whether  they  are  necessary  or  not.  The  theory
of  man's  origin,  which  makes  his  present  condition  a  progres-
sive development  from  a  less  perfect  form  of  existence,  is
certain  to  carry  him  back,  sooner  or  later,  to  a  state  in  which
he  could  have  possessed  neither  artificial  covering  nor  artifi-
cial dwellings.  If  it  be  true  that  the  human  species  origi-
nated within  the  tropics,  or  at  a  period  of  the  earth's  geo-
logical history  when  the  climate  where  he  first  appeared
was  tropical  in  its  character,  he  might  have  existed  there  for

548  TEETIAKY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

an  indefinite  period  without  these  commodities.  The  savage
tribes  now  inhabiting  the  tropics  are  found  to  be  more  or  less
in  a  state  of  nudity,  and  what  clothing  they  possess  is  often
chosen  without  the  least  view  to  comfort,  but  rather  with  a
view  to  ornament  or  from  the  sense  of  modesty.  Just  as
frequently  they  are  without  habitations,  or  with  little  more
in  the  place  of  them  than  some  of  the  beasts  of  the  forest
possess.

In  the  sense  of  contingency,  therefore,  clothing  and  shel-
ter may  be  safely  called  secondary  products  of  human  labor
and  human  art,  although,  in  the  condition  to  which  man  has
now  attained,  and  in  which  all  recorded  history  h^  found  him,
they  are  as  much  necessities  as  food  itself.

It  is  the  objects  of  human  art,  then,  of  which  we  have
now  to  speak.  The  personal  power  of  man  to  obtain  the
means  of  subsistence  is  exceedingly  limited.  His  physical
form  is  poorly  adapted  to  the  performance  of  those  acts  by
which  alone  the  resources  of  the  earth  are  to  be  increased.
With  neither  the  wings  of  the  eagle  nor  the  fleetness  of  the
hound,  he  finds  himself  soon  outstripped  by  the  grouse  and
the  hare.  With  neither  gills  nor  fins,  he  is  readily  evaded
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  water.  Destitute  of  appropriate
weapons  of  offense,  he  finds  himself  no  match  for  many  of
the  animals  which  he  would  gladly  kill  for  food.  Unpro-
vided with  claws  for  digging  in  the  gi'ound,  he  can  not  bur-
row for  safety  either  from  his  enemies  or  from  the  elements.
Neither  can  he  long  till  the  soil  with  his  fingers  and  toes.
Unfitted,  as  he  is,  for  periodical  migration  for  the  purpose  of
escaping  extremes  of  temperature,  and  yet  frequently  com-
pelled to  change  his  habitat  in  consequence  of  the  rapid  in-
crease in  his  numbers  which  soon  renders  food  scarce  in  any
one  locality,  he  finds  himself  in  danger  of  being  dashed
against  Scylla  whenever  he  seeks  to  avoid  Charybdis.  With
all  these  limitations  upon  his  existence  and  progress,  there
remained  but  one  hope  for  him,  and  this  lay  through  m-
vention.

SECONDARY  PRODUCTION.  549

The  devices  and  stratagems  by  whieli  lie  was  enabled  to
circumvent  the  less  sagacious  forms  of  life,  and  the  foresight
and  calculation  which  taught  him  how  to  multiply  the  growth
and  abundance  of  nutritive  vegetables,  were  of  no  avail  be-
yond a  certain  limit  unless  supplemented  and  assisted  by  a
still  higher  order  of  mental  activity,  by  a  practical  compre-
hension of  the  inert  laws  of  physics  and  mechanics,  and  the
skillful  elaboration  of  material  objects  into  forms  adapted  to
aid,  accelerate,  intensify,  and  focalize  the  natural  forces  which
were  operating  in  the  direction  of  producing  his  means  of
subsistence.  The  form  of  mental  exertion,  the  species  of
cunning,  which  he  had  manifested  in  the  primary  modes  of
production,  were  superficial  and  general.  To  make  them
permanently  successful,  they  required  to  be  seconded  by  more
profound  and  more  specific  forma  of  psychic  power  and  in-
tellectual energy.

Arts  practiced  in  obtaining  Animal  Food. — The  great-
est paradox  in  nature  is  the  fact  that  the  most  highly  organ-
ized forms  of  matter  and  the  most  complex  forms  of  truth
are  the  earliest  to  attract  the  attention  and  elicit  the  consid-
eration of  man.  As  religion,  ethics,  and  metaphysics  had
their  teachers  and  their  followers  long  before  physics,  chem-
istry, or  geology,  so  the  phenomena  presented  by  the  organic
world  enlisted  the  interest  and  absorbed  the  activities  of
man  long  before  those  presented  by  the  inorganic  world.
And  though  the  explanation  of  this  anomaly  is  to  be  sought
in  the  more  practical,  and  especially  the  more  obtrusive,
nature  of  these  complex  organized  and  seK-acting  objects,
still  in  the  former,  as  well  as  in  the  latter  case  cited,  the
superficiality  and  uncertainty  of  every  thing  done  to  afEect
those  things  concerning  which  man  knew  so  little,  rendered
such  efforts  futile,  or  at  best  transitory  in  their  results,  and
sooner  or  later  suggested  and  compelled  the  return  to  a  more
humble  plane  of  action,  and  the  effort  to  obtain  a  better
understanding  of  the  objects,  phenomena,  and  laws  with
which  he  had  to  do.     It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  the  first

550  TEETIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

objects  toward  which  he  turned  for  supplies  of  subsistence
when  he  found  the  spontaneous  products  of  nature  faihng
him  should  have  been  the  most  highly  organized  beings
which  nature  had  evolved — the  animal  kingdom.  Though
in  fact  an  illusory  resource  for  him,  it  was  the  most  obvious
one  within  his  reach.  The  locomotive  powers  of  animals
alone  more  than  doubled  the  frequency  and  prominence
with  which  these  objects  were  thrust  upon  his  attention,
while  the  agreeableness  of  the  taste  of  flesh  and  the  nourish-
ment afforded  by  it  rendered  it  at  once  a  strong  attraction.
But  its  obtrusiveness  soon  proved  deceptive.  The  very  loco-
motive powers  which  brought  the  animal  world  so  frequently
and  manifestly  into  man's  view  availed  to  keep  the  greater
part  of  it  out  of  his  reach.  The  few  animals  which  he  could
obtain  by  means  of  the  appliances  with  which  nature  had
provided  him  were  soon  exhausted,  and  the  choice  left  him
of  migrating  perpetually  or  devising  other  means  than  these
for  securing  that  portion  which  lay  beyond  his  reach.  Even
these,  of  course,  must  soon  be  exhausted  in  their  turn,  and
all  resort  to  the  animal  creation  precluded,  unless  the  princi-
ple of  domestication  could  be  successfully  applied.  But  this,
and  the  benefits  to  be  drawn  from  it,  required  still  higher
arts  and  still  more  of  that  fundamental  knowledge  of  which
we  have  spoken.  It  is  by  the  vigorous,  careful,  and  success-
ful application  of  all  these  arts  that  the  flesh  and  other  prod-
ucts of  animals  have  been  supplied  to  man.

Arts  practiced  in  obtainitig  VegetaMe  Food. — The  at-
tempt to  till  the  soil  without  tools  must  have  had  a  still
narrower  limitation.  In  order  to  effect  any  extensive  in-
crease in  the  amount  of  vegetable  food  produced  from  the
soil,  some  means  of  preparing  it  must  be  devised,  some  rude
agricultural  implements  invented.  And  success  in  agricult-
ure has  always  been  and  still  is  more  or  less  proportionate
to  the  serviceableness  of  the  implements  employed.  The
greatness  of  this  necessity  for  tools  in  agriculture  may  be
conceived  when  we  remember  that  the  greater  part  of  the

SECONDARY  PRODUOTION".  551

globe  is  originally  found  covered  with  forests.  Naked  hands
are  powerless  to  remove  these,  and  the  ax,  or  some  substitute
for  it,  is  the  first  demand.  After  this  follow  in  their  own
good  time  all  the  other  agricultural  implements,  from  the
hoe  to  the  steam-plow,  and  from  the  sickle  to  the  reaper.

Art  displayed  in  the  Preparation  of  Food. — In  addition
to  the  instruments  and  tools  required  *f or  the  mere  produc-
tion of  foods,  there  must  be  mentioned  also  those  employed
in  their  preparation.  Cooking-utensils  have  played  almost
as  important  a  part  as  the  implements  of  agriculture  and  of
the  chase,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  position  that  pottery  occu-
pies in  archaeology.

Art  required  in  providing  Clothing  and  Shelter. — Under
the  head  of  instruments — the  physical  aids  and  means  of
production — are  to  be  included,  also,  such  as  are  needed  in
the  manufacture  of  clothing  and  habitations,  which  two  re-
maining secondary  objects  of  production  we  are  about  to
consider.

Nature  and  Sociologic  Importance  of  Invention. — Look-
ing now  at  the  nature  and  uses  of  these  various  instruments,
we  see  that  their  invention  and  manufacture  must  have  re-
quired an  immense  concentration  of  thought  and  of  labor.
The  inventor  of  a  useful  instrument  is  the  best  illustration
of  a  final  cause.  With  the  end  distinctly  in  view  but  beyond
his  reach,  he  sits  down  and  evolves  from  his  knowledge  of
physical  laws  an  indirect  method  of  accomplishing  it.  Un-
able to  perform  an  act  immediately,  he  reasons  out  a  plan  of
performing  it  mediately.  By  a  train  of  logical  calculation,
from  premises  obtained  by  experience  and  observation,  he
determines  a  mode  of  taking  advantage  of  blind  mechanical
forces  and  directing  them  into  such  channels  as  will  accom-
plish the  end  in  view.  This  method  may  be  illustrated  by
the  simplest  of  the  mechanical  laws,  that  made  use  of  in  the
lever  and  fulcrum.  The  advantage  which  man  is  able  to
take  over  nature  by  an  adjustment  of  appliances  is  the  prin-
ciple or  nexus  which  connects  mind  with  matter,  and  permits

552  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

the  former  to  manifest  itself  througli  the  latter  as  a  force.
And  the  same  illustration  shows  us  what  a  mighty  force  it  is,
and  explains  the  vast  labors  which  have  resulted  from  its
exercise.  Every  instrument,  utensil,  implement,  or  appliance
is,  and  of  necessity  must  be,  constructed  on  this  general  prin-
ciple. To  be  a  means  of  accomplishing  an  end,  it  must  con-
sist in  a  device  for  directing  natural  forces.  It  is  improper
to  ascribe  to  it  the  power  of  increasing  these  forces,  since
force  is  not  capable  of  increase  or  diminution.  The  appar-
ent increase  is  only  the  concentration  of  various  forces,  pre-
viously scattered  and  useless,  upon  a  single  point  which  it  is
desired  to  move.  Every  such  instrument,  therefore,  pre-
supposes a  knowledge,  on  the  part  of  the  inventor,  of  the
mechanical  laws  which  underlie  the  phenomena  to  be  pro-
duced. This  knowledge  is  not  innate.  It  does  not  come
without  effort.  It  is  only  acquired  by  thought,  reflection,
or  abstract  reasoning.  It  is  the  result  of  hard  intellectual
labor.

The  manufacture  of  instruments,  which  in  the  infancy  of
art  must  have  been  combined  more  or  less  with  their  inven-
tion, required  a  species  of  mental  power  which  is  called  in-
genuity. Ingenuity  is  the  ability  to  perceive  the  relations  of
parts  of  a  mechanism  before  they  are  created,  and  to  adapt
them  to  the  end  proposed.  Every  part  of  the  instrument
must  be  in  harmony  with  every  other  part,  and  adapted  to
aid  in  accomplishing  the  given  object.  All  this  requires  a
degree  of  intelligence  considerably  above  what  we  have  rea-
son to  suppose  the  most  sagacious  of  animals  to  possess.
And  it  must  all  be  accomplished  by  reason,  since  the  pro-
duction of  artificial  instruments  as  means  to  ends  seems  to  be
above  the  range  of  instinct.

PRODUCTION   OF   AETIFICIAL   APPLIANCES.

When  we  reflect  how  powerless  man  must  have  been
without  some  such  artificial  means,  how  every  thing  he  pro-
duces is  done  by  their  aid  and  can  not  be  done  without  it,

ARTIFICIAL  APPLIANCES.  553

and  what  an  immense  number  and  variety  of  these  must  be
in  constant  use  in  all  the  departments  of  industry,  we  can
form  some  idea  of  the  proportion  of  human  labor  which
must  have  always  been  directed  to  the  manufacture  of  the
mere  instruments  or  auxiliaries  of  production.  The  exact
proportion  is  to  be  determined  by  the  age  and  country,  and
by  the  prevailing  forms  of  production,  but  in  all  cases  it
must  be  very  great.  If  we  take  our  present  industrial  con-
dition as  an  example,  we  find  immense  establishments  devoted
wholly  to  this  kind  of  manufacture.  The  manufacture  of
fire-arms  (not  to  be  employed  in  war),  of  fishing-tackle,  of
agricultural  implements,  of  cutlery,  of  cooking-utensils,  of
pottery,  crockery,  dairy  and  laundry  ware,  of  machinery  of
all  kinds,  and  of  tools  required  in  building,  require  in  all
probability  a  greater  amount  of  labor  than  is  bestowed  upon
all  kinds  of  direct  production  except  that  of  agriculture.
And  this  has  doubtless  always  been  true.  Always  inventing,
always  making  instruments  of  production,  and  always  em-
ploying them  in  production  itself,  the  human  race  has  ever
been  a  busy  swarm,  constantly  pursuing  the  objects  of  exist-
ence under  the  unremitting  spur  of  the  life-preserving  forces.
Appliances  for  Protection  against  Climate. — The  class
of  products  just  considered  is  auxiliary  to  direct  production.
In  that  sense  they  have  been  called  secondary.  The  class
we  are  now  to  consider,  though  itself  a  direct  product  and
immediately  essential  to  man's  existence,  is  nevertheless  sec-
ondary to  the  original  and  inevitable  necessity,  food,  inas-
much as  it  is  only  a  contingent  necessity  dependent  upon
surrounding  circumstances.  These  circumstances,  however,
though  liable  to  change  or  to  disappear  entirely,  are  such  as
are  beyond  the  sphere  of  human  control.  They  are  natural
phenomena,  viz.,  temperature  and  meteorological  processes,
i.  e.,  climate,  and,  though  at  the  present  time  regular  within
certain  limits,  they  may,  for  aught  we  know,  undergo  a  com-
plete alteration  at  some  future  time  in  all  parts  of  the  globe.
There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  earth  has  already

554  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

undergone  several  such  changes  since  the  appearance  of  life
upon  it,  one  of  which,  the  last  glacial  epoch,  is  now  believed
to  have  taken  place  entirely  within  the  age  of  man.  Still,
within  historic  times  certainly,  and  probably  within  the
greater  part  of  the  human  era,  there  has  been  no  perceptible
change  in  the  general  thermal  and  meteorological  conditions
of  the  globe.  The  necessity  for  clothing  and  shelter  origi-
nated, in  all  probability,  in  the  migrations  of  men  from  trop-
ical to  temperate  and  frigid  latitudes.  Their  rapid  increase
and  hostile  nature  made  such  migrations  necessary,  and  these
modes  of  protection  had  to  be  resorted  to  in  order  to  secure
them  from  the  fate  of  extinction,  which  usually  attends  spe-
cies of  animals  when  they  thus  overstep  their  natural  bound-
aries:

Art  of  making  Fire. — Before  entering  upon  the  sepa-
rate consideration  of  the  two  great  protective  products,  cloth-
ing and  shelter,  it  may  not  be  too  great  a  digression  to  in-
quire into  the  origin  of  an  art  which,  while  it  has  done  much
to  accomplish  the  same  general  object,  must  have  gone  hand
in  hand  with  them  chronologically,  if  it  did  not  precede
them,  viz.,  that  of  making  fire.

Ko  animal  of  which  we  have  any  knowledge  possesses
either  the  knowledge  or  the  instinct  of  making  fire,  while
all  human  races,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  a  few  of  the
lowest  savage  tribes,  possess  this  art.*  Kearly  all  living  be-
ings must  be  more  or  less  familiar  with  the  appearance  of
fire,  since,  where  man  does  not  light  it  and  permit  it  to  ravage
the  country,  there  is  always  the  possibility  of  spontaneous
ignition  produced  by  accidental  chemical  unions.

There  are  various  ways  in  which  so  intelligent  a  being  as
man  might  have  learned  the  art  of  kindling  fires.  By  watch-
ing the  processes  of  ignition  in  spontaneous  fires,  he  would

*  "L'origine  du  feu,"  par  N.  Joly,  "Revue  Scicntifique,"  22  Jan.,  1S76,  p.
73 ;  Dr.  John  W.  Draper,  in  "  Ilistory  of  the  Conflict  between  Religion  and  Sci-
ence," p.  lOY ;  Darwin,  "Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  p.  132  ;  Tylor,  "  Researches
into  the  Early  History  of  Mankind,"  chapter  ix.

ART  OF  MAKING  FIRE.  555

soon  learn  to  transfer  fire  from  one  place  to  another,  and
apply  it  to  substances  whicli  required  more  time  in  their  con-
sumption and  evolved  more  heat.  The  influence  of  the  wind
upon  embers  would  suggest  the  possibility  of  converting  a
glow  into  a  blaze.  The  difference  in  the  degree  of  facility
with  which  different  substances  thus  take  fire  would  soon  set
him  at  work  to  find  the  substance  most  easily  ignited,  and
would  result  in  the  production  of  various  kinds  of  tinder.  The
very  common  phenomenon  of  striking  fire  between  stones  or
metals  would  suggest  the  identity  of  this  spark  with  those
which  fly  from  fire,  and  lead  to  the  attempt  to  kindle  tinder
by  means  of  such  sparks  artificially  and  purposely  produced.
The  best  substances  for  emitting  sparks  would  be  carefully
sought,  and  the  discovery  of  the  superiority  of  flint  would  be
made.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  phenomenon  of  heat
produced  by  friction,  necessarily  so  often  observed,  might
have  led  to  the  discovery  of  this  method  of  securing  fire.
I  submit  this  as  at  least  a  rational  explanation  of  what  might
have  been  the  genesis  of  this  most  valuable  art.  The  steps
in  the  process  are  all  the  result  of  close  reasoning,  and  must
have  required  a  degree  of  sagacity  far  in  excess  of  any  thing
manifested  by  the  brute  creation.  It  is  said  that  monk-
eys will  warm  themselves  by  the  fires  which  travelers  leave,
but  have  not  even  the  sagacity  to  lay  on  additional  fuel
which  has  been  brought  there  for  the  purpose,  and  allow
the  fire  to  go  out.  And  yet  the  monkey  is  one  of  the  most
intelligent  of  all  animals,  and  possesses,  moreover,  a  physical
structure  adapted  to  handling  fagots.  Before  man  could
avail  himself  of  the  blessings  of  fire,  therefore,  he  must  have
reached  a  stage  of  development  intellectually  far  above  the
present  state  of  the  Primates  {supra,  p.  438).  Yet  the  spur  of
necessity  and  the  appreciation  of  the  immense  value  of  fire
must  have  screwed  up  his  inventive  powers  to  the  highest
pitch  of  tension,  and  wrenched  the  utmost  of  valuable  in-
formation upon  the  subject  from  every  object  which  pre-
sented itself  to  his  consideration.     Once  out  of  the  tropics.

556  TERTIAKY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

artificial  heat  became  a  prime  necessity,  and  must  be  obtained.
The  value  of  fire  in  the  preparation  of  food,  too,  is  not  to  be
overlooked.  We  hear  of  cooking  eggs  in  the  sands  of  the
desert,  but  we  may  assume  with  safety  that  practically  there
could  have  been  no  cooking  until  the  art  of  building  fires  had
been  invented.

Once  learned,  it  can  not  be  said  to  have  elicited  a  verj
large  proportion  of  human  labor,  although  the  improvements
which  have  been  constantly  made  in  the  methods  of  kindling
fires,  from  the  fiint  and  tinder  or  friction  of  two  pieces  of
wood  to  the  lucifer-match  and  the  scentless  parlor-match,
have  constituted  a  distinct  civilizing  agency,  and  made  their
manufacture  quite  an  industry,  while  the  various  devices  for
economizing  heat,  from  the  open  camp-fire  to  the  most  elabo-
rate furnace  or  hot  water  or  steam-heating  apparatus,  form
a  very  important  and  extensive  one.

PEODUCTION   or   CLOTHESfG   AND    SHELTER.

Having  considered  the  production  of  food  and  the  pro-
duction of  instruments  of  labor,  there  remains  to  be  consid-
ered the  production  of  clothing  and  shelter.  The  object  of
both  is  protection  from  the  weather.  The  former  is  particu-
larly adapted  to  protect  against  temperature,  the  latter  against
storms.  Each,  however,  performs  both  these  functions  be-
sides other  very  important  ones.  Clothing  affords  some  of
the  advantages  of  an  armor,  and  a  house  constitutes  a  species
of  fortress.  "  Every  man's  house  is  his  castle,"  is  a  maxim
of  law  which  has  grown  out  of  the  real  uses  to  which  houses
were  put  in  feudal  times.  Inclosed  habitations  produce
another  very  important  effect  upon  society.  They  serve  to
segregate  families,  and  conceal  from  the  general  public  the
minor  acts  of  individuals.  Few  have  ever  reflected  upon  the
extent  of  this  influence.  In  the  natural  state,  without  places
to  retire  to,  and  where  all  are  herded  together  in  such  a  man-
ner that  all  the  acts  of  each  are  exposed  to  the  gaze  of  all,
none  of  the  finer  sentiments  were  afforded  an  opportunity

.1

I

CLOTHING  AND  SHELTER.  557

for  development.  Only  the  coarsest  forms  of  existence  could
appear,  and  the  play  of  passions  must  perpetually  be  seen.
All  this  is  wholly  incompatible  with  refinement ;  but  with
this  disadvantage  it  possessed  the  advantage  of  precluding
much  of  the  deception  and  pretense  which  inclosed  habita-
tions render  possible.  Every  man  must  stand  forth  as  he  is,
and  be  judged  according  to  his  real  character.

A  still  more  important  derivative  effect  is  produced  by
clothing.  "While  it  does  not  altogether  conceal  the  indi-
vidual from  view  or  render  his  form  indistinguishable,  it
does  conceal  the  person  of  the  wearer  at  all  the  parts  where
it  is  worn,  and  this  species  of  concealment  has  exerted  an
immense  moral  influence  upon  society.  When  treating  of
the  reproductive  forces,  I  shall  attempt  the  genesis  of  what
we  call  modesty,  and  shall  take  that  occasion  to  introduce
the  subject  of  clothing  as  a  factor  in  the  discussion  (see  infra,
p.  632).  For  the  present  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the  prod-
ucts of  the  preservative  forces,  and  restrict  the  object  and
influence  of  both  clothing  and  shelter  to  their  original  func-
tions as  protectors  of  human  life.

The  art  of  making  fire  was  an  important  step,  but  it
proved  quite  insufiScient  to  protect  man  from  all  the  rigors
of  a  cold  climate.  Before  migration  to  such  climates  could
be  made  successful,  before  the  pioneer  colonists  of  cold  conn-
tries  could  survive  and  establish  a  permanent  foot-hold,  the
other  great  arts  of  protection  from  the  weather,  the  art  of
making  clothing  and  the  art  of  making  inclosed  habitations,
must  have  been  discovered  and  universally  practiced.

Clothing. — The  first  clothing  may  have  consisted  of  the
skins  of  wild  animals  wrapped  around  the  body  as  blankets.
Yarious  efforts  to  adapt  them  more  closely  to  the  form  of
the  body,  so  as  to  give  free  play  to  the  limbs,  met  with  better
and  better  success,  until  at  length  something  like  commodi-
ous garments  were  devised  and  worn.  The  discovery  of  the
adaptability  of  animal  and  vegetable  fibers  to  the  manufact-
ure of  clothing,  and  of  the  art  of  spinning  them  into  yarn
25

558  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

and  weaving  them  into  a  convenient  fabric,  mnst  have  been
made  at  a  much  later  epoch  in  the  history  of  clothing,  yet
the  progress  from  the  loose  skin  mantle  to  the  woolen  tunic
is  very  obscure.  Certain  it  is  that  the  use  of  hair  and  wool
in  the  manufacture  of  clothing  antedates  by  far  that  of  flax
or  cotton.  Still  both  these,  and  particularly  the  former,  have
had  a  very  ancient  origin.

Nearly  all  human  clothing,  not  composed  of  the  skins  of
animals,  is,  and  always  has  been,  derived  from  four  natural
sources,  two  of  which  are  vegetable  and  two  animal.  These
are  flax  and  cotton,  wool  and  silk.

These  four  great  natural  resources  seem  to  be  inexhaust-
ible, since  they  all  belong  to  the  organic  creation,  and  may  be
reproduced  ad  libitum.  But  the  discovery  of  their  adapta-
bility to  human  wants  was,  doubtless,  as  slow  as  it  was  im-
portant. The  passage  from  the  skin  of  animals  to  a  fabric
composed  of  the  wool  by  which  it  was  covered  must  have
suggested  itseK  at  an  early  day,  but  the  necessary  means  of
reducing  this  wool  to  the  proper  state  for  clothing  were  the
result  only  of  protracted  study.  This  study  must  have  been
both  analytic  and  synthetic.  The  fibers  of  the  wool  could
not  be  made  to  lie  together  and  adhere  to  form  a  useful  fab-
ric. They  must  be  thoroughly  changed  in  their  nature  to
render  them  adhesive.  An  instrument  for  carding  had  to  be
first  devised,  then  a  machine  for  spinning,  and  finally  a  de-
vice for  weaving,  before  any  thing  like  cloth  could  be  elabo-
rated from  wool.  All  this  was  not  too  much,  however,  for
the  fertile  brain  of  man,  and  at  least  one  great  source  of
clothing  was  thus  early  discovered.

The  resemblance  of  cotton  to  wool  might  easily  have  led
to  the  discovery  of  the  value  of  this  plant,  and  the  passage
from  cotton  to  flax  might  with  equal  facility  have  been  made.
The  use  of  silk,*  too,  might  have  arisen  in  a  like  manner.
Thesp  are,  however,  but  vague  fancies,  and  are  probably  mostly
if  not  entirely  unsupported  by  fact.    We  only  know  that  from

*  Cf.  Bacon,  "  Novum  Organum,"  lib.  i,  Aph.  cix.

CLOTHING.  559

the  earliest  historic  times  each  of  these  fibers  has  been  in  use
as  material  for  clothing.  None  of  them,  however,  appear  to
have  been  universal,  unless  it  be  the  use  of  wool,  Egypt
seems  to  have  enjoyed  the  principal  monopoly  of  flax,  India
of  cotton,  and  China  of  silk.  Indeed,  with  regard  to  silk,
it  is  probable  that  its  introduction  was  never  effected  in
ancient  times  in  any  country  except  the  last  named.  With
regard  to  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  we  possess  unmistak-
able evidence  that  the  art  was  known  and  extensively  prac-
ticed at  very  remote  prehistoric  periods.  The  appearance
of  the  distaflf  upon  the  most  ancient  monuments  of  Egypt
shows  that  it  must  have  constituted  an  important  indus-
try in  ancient  Egyptian  civilization,  and  it  is  supposed  that
the  textile  fabric  upon  which  it  was  employed  was  linen.
This  is  substantiated  by  the  discovery  that  the  mummies
were  wrapped  in  a  linen  shroud,  enough  of  which  has  sur-
vived to  reveal  its  character.  In  India,  Assyria,  and  Per-
sia, the  most  ancient  literary  productions  make  mention  of
the  loom  as  an  emblem  of  human  labor,  and  it  is  probable
that  in  India,  which  has  been  thought  to  be  the  "  cradle  of
the  race,"  the  art  of  spinning  and  weaving  wool,  flax,  and
cotton  had  been  known  and  applied  for  ages  anterior  to  the
"  Yedas,"  the  oldest  of  human  books.  The  Chinese  claim
that  the  cultivation,  and  of  course  the  manufacture,  of  silk
has  been  going  on  for  a  period  of  forty-five  centuries.*

The  principal  instruments  employed  in  the  manufacture
of  cloth  are  the  card,  the  distaff,  the  spinning-wheel,  the  reel,
and  the  loom.  The  early  forms  of  all  these  were  exceedingly
simple  compared  with  the  machinery  now  employed  for  the
performance  of  these  functions.     Yet  even  these  rude  ma-

*  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  copper  utensils  discovered  in  some  of  the  mounds
of  the  Mississippi  Valley  exhibit  fine  indentations  which  are  regarded  as  demon-
Btrating  with  certainty  that  when  placed  there  they  were  closely  wrapped  with
some  kind  of  woven  cloth,  which,  though  it  has  entirely  disappeared,  has  left  a
permanent  stamp  of  its  threads  upon  the  copper.  ("  Bulletin  of  the  Philosophical
Society  of  Washington,"  vol.  ii,  p.  185.)  The  mound-builder  race  are  certainly
prehistoric,  whatever  may  have  been  the  date  of  their  sojourn  in  this  country.

560  TEETIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEXY.

chines  were  no  idle  tax  upon  the  intellect  of  primitive  man.
But  necessity,  then  as  ever  the  mother  of  invention,  accom-
plished their  contrivance,  and  gave  to  the  race  another  hold
upon  existence.  It  fortified  it  against  the  destroying  power
of  low  temperatures,  and  enabled  man  to  wrap  himself  in
warm  and  thick  woven  garments,  and  to  go  forth  in  defiance
of  the  tempest  in  search  of  food.  And  thus  another  tri-
umph was  gained  in  the  stniggle  for  existence.

Shelter. — To  surmount  the  obstacles  presented  by  climate
but  one  thing  more  was  required — a  house.  The  heat  evolved
by  the  combustion  of  wood  was  wasted  upon  the  air,  and
radiated  into  space  without  affording  man  a  tithe  of  the
benefit  which  might  be  drawn  from  it.  Clothing  might  ena-
ble him  to  preserve  his  natural  animal  heat  while  actively
engaged  in  his  daily  pursuits,  but  it  must  fail  when  he  was
at  rest  or  asleep.  It  might  protect  him  from  the  cold  and
the  wind,  but  it  could  never  sufficiently  ward  off  the  rain  or
the  snow.  A  dwelling-place  became,  therefore,  a  prime
necessity.  The  inventive  powers  required  to  be  called  into
exercise  for  this  purpose  were  less  than  in  the  case  of  cloth-
ing. Thp  luaterials  for  constructing  the  means  of  shelter
from  the  storm  were  more  apparent  and  abundant,  and  the
processes  required  to  be  gone  through  to  secure  the  realiza-
tion of  the  object  were  far  less  complicated  and  obscure.
The  instruments  and  appliances,  too,  which  must  be  employed
were  of  a  far  simpler  character.  A  cave  hollowed  out  of  the
side  of  a  hill,  a  structure  of  sods  with  a  straw-thatched  roof,
a  cabin  of  logs  chinked  in  with  mud — such  are  some  of  the
primitive  forms  of  human  habitations.  But  these  admit  of
almost  infinite  improvement.  The  capacity  may  be  enlarged.
The  interior  may  be  partitioned  off  into  convenient  apart-
ments. The  material  may  be  improved,  the  clay  made  into
regular  form  and  dried  in  the  sun  (adobes),  or  baked  in  a
kiln  (bricks),  the  logs  hewn  into  square  timbers  or  sawn  into
thin  boards  and  neatly  fastened  together.  But  each  of  these
improvements  involves  a  train  of  consequences  and  prerequi-

SHELTER.  561

sites.  The  manufacture  of  bricks  is  a  special  industry.  It
requires  a  corps  of  skilled  artisans  to  lay  them  up  safely
and  compactly  into  walls.  Mortar  *  composed  of  lime  and
sand  takes  the  place  of  clay.  Lime  is  obtained  by  burning
limestone  (carbonate  of  lime)  in  a  kiln,  and  slacking  the  same
for  use.  Here  is  another  new  industry.  The  hewing  of
timbers  is  a  skilled  occupation.  If  they  are  sawn  into  boards,
the  process  is  immensely  complicated.  Saws  must  be  in-
vented. And  to  make  any  progress  with  so  large  a  work
other  powers  than  human  must  be  employed.  For  this  pur-
pose that  of  water  is  usually  first  resorted  to.  A  mill  must
be  constructed  with  all  its  machinery.  The  use  of  boards  in
building  requires  nails  to  hold  them.  This  alone  would  in-
volve the  mining  of  iron  and  its  manufacture  into  nails.
And  thus  step  by'  step  the  log-cabin  is  transformed  into  the
spacious  and  commodious  house.  But  to  architecture  there
is  no  limit,  and,  under  the  form  of  a  fine  art,  it  reaches  on
upward  into  castles,  cathedrals,  and  coliseums.

An  inclosed  structure  is  a  symbol  of  civilization.  An
artificial  dwelling-place  is  one  of  the  chief  marks  which  sepa-
rate man  from  the  brute.  The  great  distinguishing  feature
of  the  landscape  of  inhabited  regions  is  the  buildings  with
which  it  is  covered  and  adorned.  In  cities  little  else  attracts
the  eye.  Every-where  where  man  has  been  are  to  be  seen
houses.  The  whole  earth  is  dotted  and  decked  with  the  habi-
tations of  men.  How  immense,  then,  must  have  been  the
productive  industry  directed  to  the  object  of  sheltering  the
human  race !

GENERAL   KEMAEKS   ON    PKODTJCTION.

I  have  thus  hastily  passed  in  review  the  chief  objects  and
modes  of  production.     I  have  found  it  convenient  to  divide

*  It  seems  that  none  of  the  native  races  of  America  prior  to  European  dis-
covery understood  the  art  of  manufacturing  mortar  from  lime  and  sand  or  of
burning  quick-lime  in  kilns.  (See  Lewis  H.  Morgan's  "  Houses  and  House-Life
of  the  North  American  Aborigines,"  "  Contributions  to  North  American  Eth-
nology," vol.  iv,  p.  111.)

562  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SO CIOGENY.

them  into  two  general  classes,  and  to  speak  of  primary,  direct,
or  original,  and  secondary,  indirect,  or  derivative  production.
The  fonncr  embraces  food,  the  prime  object  of  the  preserva-
tive forces.  The  latter  embraces  clothing  and  shelter,  i.  e.,
protection  against  climate,  and  instruments,  or  the  media
through  which  intelligence  gains  access  to  and  advantage
over  natural  forces  and  materials.  The  production  of  tliese
objects  is  the  original  and  natural  mode  of  acquisition.
Whatever  an  individual  desires,  it  is  his  first  impulse  to
create  or  produce  it.  Objects  which  are  already  in  the  form
required  to  be  enjoyed  do  not  constitute  products,  unless
the  effort  made  to  obtain  them  renders  them  more  enjoyable.
All  products  are  the  result  of  both  thought  and  labor.  Yet,
not  all  things  which  have  cost  thought  and  labor  are  neces-
sarily products,  since  much  thought  and  labor  is  expended
in  obtaining  the  possessions  of  others.  And  thus,  as  we
shall  see,  far  too  much  mental  and  physical  energy  is  often
bestowed  upon  an  object.  All  the  true  value  which  is  ever
conferred  upon  an  object  is  conferred  by  the  labor  required
to  produce  it.  I  refer  only  to  absolute  value ;  its  relative
value  may  vary  from  many  minor  causes,  the  chief  of  which
is  distribution.  It  is  a  common  remark  of  statesmen  and
economists  that  all  value  is  ultimately  reducible  to  labor,
and  that  labor  is  the  only  true  measure  of  value.  While
this  may  be  sufficiently  true  for  political  or  commercial  pur-
poses, it  should  be  taken  with  one  qualification,  which  is
more  important  in  some  objects  than  in  others.  This  is  the
net  value  of  the  raw  material  in  its  original  position.  In
most  vegetable  products  this  is  zero,  since  the  wild  plants
are  valueless ;  but  in  manufactures  of  gold,  silver,  and  the
precious  stones  it  is  often  their  chief  value.  It  is  not  the
labor  expended  upon  the  Kohinoor,  nor  yet  that  required  to
extract  it  from  the  earth,  which  gives  it  its  value.  Its  value
is  intrinsic  in  the  strictest  sense.  Still,  it  must  be  confessed
that  in  our  day  almost  every  thing  of  value  is  artificial.  I
speak,  of  course,  of  commercial  value.     The  soil  presents

GENERAL  REMARKS   ON  PRODUCTION.  563

Bomething  of  an  anomaly  in  this  respect.  It  should  be  classed
with  those  things  which  have  no  commercial  value,  but  are
simply  conditians  rather  than  means  of  existence.  It  would
be  so  regarded  but  for  a  single  quality  which  it  possesses,
which  the  other  objects  of  that  class  do  not ;  viz.,  local  per-
manence— the  quality  of  being  immovable.  It  is  in  conse-
quence of  this  quality  that  land  is  capable  of  being  staked
off  and  appropriated,  that  it  is  capable  of  being  made  prop-
erty. The  very  staking  off  and  defending,  the  mere  act  of
taking  possession,  is,  however,  a  kind  of  labor,  and  may  be
regarded  as  the  first  act  in  producing  its  value.  But  although
the  principle  of  recognizing  the  title  of  mere  occupation
must  always  have  its  limit,  yet  all  the  fine-drawn  arts  of
securing  a  legal  and  an  artificial  title  to  the  soil  must  event-
ually and  occasionally  yield  to  the  great  title  of  nature  by
which  they  were  first  gained — that  derived  from  forcible
seizure  and  retention,  or  the  right  of  occupancy.

I  have  spoken  of  production  as  if  its  only  objects  were
those  which  are  adapted  to  the  chief  natural  object  of  pre-
serving life.  While  I  do  not  ignore  the  manifold  human
desires  which  must  be  gratified  by  the  objects  of  productive
labor  and  yet  do  not  directly  contribute  to  the  preservation
of  the  physical  existence,  I  have,  nevertheless,  sought  to
assign  to  this  function  the  widest  signification  of  which  it  is
capable.  For  it  is  not  only  necessary  to  maintain  a  bare
existence,  but  it  is  essential  to  the  preservation  of  the  race
that  its  means  of  subsistence  be  ample  and  abundant.  An
individual  may  subsist  for  a  time  on  a  scanty  regimen,  but
he  will  subsist  for  a  longer  time  on  a  better  one.  Any  thing
which  in  the  least  contributes  to  render  life  more  secure
upon  the  whole  belongs  to  this  class.*  And  when  the  full
force  of  this  truth  is  recognized  it  will  be  seen  that  we
must  transfer  to  the  list  of  necessaries  very  many  objects
which  are  now  ordinarily  regarded  as  luxuries.  The  term
"  necessaries,"  in  a  philosophical  sense,  should  be  construed

*  Herbert  Spencer,  "  Data  of  Ethics,"  p.  14.

564  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION",— SOCIOGENY.

as  liberally  as  it  is  in  a  legal  sense.  Every  thing  which
exerts  the  least  influence  in  improving  the  physical  condi-
tion of  man  is  a  necessity.  The  development  of  new  de-
sires and  the  gratification  of  old  ones  are  useful  as  making
existence  more  desirable,  and  the  effort  to  preserve  it  more
persistent  and  successful.  It  would  be  no  stretch  of  defini-
tion to  bring  the  fine  arts  into  this  class.

Every  thing  which  serves  to  increase  the  fund  of  human
knowledge  is  useful  in  the  general  direction  of  preserving
life,  since  the  mind  is  the  regulative  power  which  alone  has
brought  the  species  through  the  several  ordeals  which  first  or
last  prove  fatal  to  all  other  species.  There  is  no  estimating
the  remote  but  often  immense  influence  of  some  of  the  most
occult  and  apparently  useless  facts.  Let  hira  who  doubts
this  study  the  causes  of  the  extinction  of  species  as  taught
by  Darwin.*  The  definition  heretofore  given  of  the  terra
"  practical,"  confining  it  to  such  acts  as  conduce  to  the  accom-
plishment of  those  ends  which  have  been  designated  the
"objects  of  nature,"  the  most  important  of  which  is  the
preservation  of  existence,  receives,  therefore,  under  this
view  an  additional  expansion,  and  the  circle  of  the  practical
encroaches  more  and  more  upon  that  of  the  liberal  and
aesthetic  in  all  departments  of  human  life.  Nor  does  this
prospect  alarm  any  person  who  is  capable  of  taking  a  com-
prehensive view  of  man  and  nature,  while  those  who  rise  to
the  height  of  recognizing  in  happiness  the  ultimate  end  of
all  action  and  all  existence,  find  no  reason  to  be  shocked  at
the  proposition  to  call  every  thing  practical  which  contributes
aught  toward  the  accomplishment  of  that  end.

That  there  are  grades  of  utility,  however,  is  by  no  means
to  be  denied,  and  they  may  not  improperly  be  ranged  under
two  quite  distinct  classes,  in  one  of  which  may  be  placed
every  thing  which  is  a  sine  qua  non  of  existence,  and  in
the  other  the   auxiliary  and  indirectly  beneficial   objects.

*  "Journal  of  Researches,  etc.,"  pp.  146,  174,  176;  "Origin  of  Species,"
pp.  79,  301 ;  nacckel,  "  Schopf ungsgcachichtc,"  S.  231.

ACCESSORIES  TO  PRODUCTION".  565

Under  thi8  classification  every  object  wliicli  contributes  to
the  happiness  of  man  must  fall  into  one  of  the  three  fol-
lowing groups  :  1.  Objects  essential  to  the  maintenance  of
physical  life.  2.  Objects  conducing  to  the  general  welfare,
and  ultimately  promotive  of  the  longevity  and  perpetuity  of
the  race.  3.  Objects  whose  only  apparent  effect  is  to  in-
crease the  sum  of  human  happiness,  and  whose  influence
upon  the  maintenance  of  life,  either  presently  or  remotely,
is  of  a  moral  nature,  and  incapable  of  explanation  upon  any
obvious  principles.

All-  these  classes  of  objects  consist  chiefly  of  the  products
of  human  ingenuity  and  labor,  and  before  they  can  be  appro-
priated or  enjoyed  must  first  be  produced.  The  busy  swarm
engaged  in  this  labor  constitute  the  great  indispensable  class
of  mankind  called  producers,  a  brief  sketch  of  whom,  chiefly
through  their  products,  I  have  attempted  to  trace.

ACOESSOKIES    TO   PkODUCTION.

Let  us  next  consider,  and  with  a  degree  of  brevity  pro-
portionate to  the  inferior  importance  of  the  subject,  the  sec-
ond great  class  of  laborers  in  the  industrial  world,  viz.,  the
accessories  to  production.  That  must  have  been  a  primitive
estate  indeed,  if  it  ever  existed,  when  mankind  knew  no
means  of  exchange  of  products — when  the  producer  and  the
consumer  were  always  united  in  one  and  the  same  individ-
ual, and  each  man  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  his  own  labor  and
no  other.  Such  a  condition  could  only  be  the  concomitant
and  consequence  of  a  more  or  less  absolutely  solitary  state.
It  could  not  exist  in  any  thing  like  a  social  state,  unless  it
were  the  mere  gregarious  condition  of  animals ;  and  there  is
no  evidence  that  such  was  ever  man's  condition.

DISTKIBUTION.

Some  means  of  distribution,  however  rude,  must  have  ex-
isted at  a  period  coeval  with  the  earliest  forms  of  production.
That  the  offices  of  both  producer  and  distributor  were  often,

566  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEN"Y.

and  at  certain  early  stages  of  society  usually,  combined  in  one
person,  may  be  true,  as  they  frequently  still  are ;  but,  as  the
objects  of  production  multiplied  and  became  more  perfect,
they  continued  to  demand  more  and  more  the  special  and
exclusive  attention  of  the  producer,  and  each  producer  con-
fined himself  more  and  more  to  the  production  of  one  spe-
cial object,  or  eventually  to  some  one  part  of  one  object.
And,  while  his  product  could  only  contribute  in  one,  it  may
be  insignificant,  respect  to  the  gratification  of  one  desire,  he
was  nevertheless  endowed,  like  all  other  men,  with  all  the  de-
sires of  humanity,  and  in  need  of  all  the  objects  required  for
the  subsistence  of  man.  As  his  own  product  can  not  supply
all  these  wants,  he  must  receive  his  supplies  from  others,  and
either  directly  or  indirectly  out  of  the  products  of  others.
But,  as,  in  the  present  social  state,  all  or  nearly  all  other
producers  are  engaged  in  the  same  manner  as  liimself,  they
can  not  afford  the  time  for  distributing  their  productions,  and
must  intrust  this  task  to  a  distinct  industrial  class.  These
"  middle-men,"  standing  between  the  producer  and  the  con-
sumer, and  charged  with  the  distribution  of  the  products  of
human  industry,  constitute  a  very  large  and  influential  ele-
ment in  society,  and,  under  the  designation  of  accessories  to
production,  seem  to  deserve  a  special  consideration  in  this
review  of  the  principal  modes  of  human  acquisition.

The  term  distribution  may  be  taken  in  a  generic  sense  to
embrace  all  the  processes  which  a  product  must  undergo  in  its
passage  from  the  hands  of  the  producer  to  those  of  the  con-
sumer, and  will  thus  include  not  only  transportation  and
exchange,  but  all  those  concomitant  negotiations  which  are
involved  in  these  dispositions.  The  subject  naturally  divides
itself,  therefore,  into  three  parts  :  1,  that  which  relates  to  the
transportation  of  products ;  2,  that  which  relates  to  the  ex-
change of  products ;  and,  3,  that  which  relates  to  the  busi-
ness that  grows  out  of  these  industries.  The  first  of  these
industries  constitutes  what  is  called  commerce ;  the  second
embraces  most  mercantile  hudness  ;  and  the  third  is  little  else

DISTRIBUTION.  567

than  what  is  comprised  under  the  general  term  ^nance.  The
first  two  relate  to,  and  have  to  do  with,  the  products  them-
selves— with  merchandise ;  the  third  deals  chiefly  with  the
medium  of  exchange,  or  money.

Transportation. — As  a  mode  of  acquisition  tins  class  of
labor  has  assumed  a  prominent  place  iu  the  history  of  soci-
ety. The  transportation  of  various  commodities  from  one
place  to  another  is,  next  to  their  production,  perhaps  the  most
important  of  human  enterprises.  It  involves  the  history  of
the  various  interesting  voyages  after  articles  not  found  in
the  countries  from  which  they  w^ere  made.  The  voyages
which  were  so  successfully  conducted  by  the  Phoenicians  to
all  points  on  the  Mediterranean,  to  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,
and  even  to  remote  points  in  Africa  and  Asia,  in  search  of
various  metals,  of  spices,  and  other  vegetable  and  animal
products,  possess  an  interest  for  the  student  of  sociology  only
equaled  by  their  value  as  keys  to  the  history  and  charac-
ter of  the  human  race.  In  the  reign  of  King  Neku  II  of
Egypt,  six  centuries  before  the  Christian  era,  a  Phcenician
voyage  is  supposed  to  have  been  made  under  his  auspices
around  the  entire  continent  of  Africa ;  and,  according  to
Aristotle,  Strabo,  and  Pliny,  an  attempt  was  made  by  Ea-
meses  the  Great  to  cut  a  canal  through  the  Isthmus  of  Suez
for  the  purpose  of  transporting  the  copper,  then  so  much
more  important  comparatively  than  now,  from  certain  parts
of  Arabia,  where  it  was  found,  to  the  Egyptian  metropolis.
The  Phoenicians  also  carried  on  an  extensive  commerce  in
bringing  tin  from  the  coasts  of  India,  from  the  mountains  of
Spain,  from  the  Scilly  Islands  (formerly  called  the  Tin  Isl-
ands), and  from  the  shores  of  Denmark.  Their  means  of
transportation  were  not  confined  to  ships,  the  trade  being
also  extensively  carried  on  overland  in  caravans  which  under-
took a  general  exchange  of  commodities  among  the  nations
of  Gaul  and  Southern  Europe.  Not  less  extensive,  if  less
useful,  was  the  celebrated  amber  trade,  whose  important
source  was  the  west  Cimbrian  coasts,  but  which  was  also

568  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION— SOCIOGENY.

found  in  large  quantities  buried  under  the  soil  of  Scythia
and  far  up  along  the  Ural  Mountains.  Adventures  in  search
of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones  have  filled  history  with
romance,  and  led  to  the  most  important  geographical  discov-
eries. Although  the  precise  locality  of  the  ancient  Ophir
and  Supara  is  not  definitely  known  to  the  present  age,  it  is
certain  that  the  traffic  between  the  ancients  of  the  Medi-
terranean coasts  and  these  countries  was  on  a  grand  scale  and
long  protracted.  But  perhaps  no  trade  has  surpassed  that
which  had  for  its  object  to  supply  the  "Western  world  with
the  spices,  gums,  and  incenses  of  the  East  Indies.  During
the  Phcenician  ascendency  and  Grecian  glory,  this  extensive
trade  was  conducted  across  the  country  where  the  splendid
"  Palmyra  of  the  Desert "  formed  one  of  the  chief  stopping-
places  for  the  caravans.

It  is  thus  that  the  history  of  mankind  is  filled  with  the
most  interesting  adventures,  each  of  which  possesses  an  eco-
nomic as  well  as  an  historical  significance.  For  the  prime
motive  of  all  these  activities  has  ever  been  the  hope  of  gain
— ^the  love  of  acquisition.  Much  as  the  mere  love  of  adven-
ture may  have  spurred  certain  individuals  on  to  make  long
expeditions  into  new  and  unknown  lands,  this  motive  lacks
the  promise  of  substantial  reward  which  alone  could  render
these  expeditions  successful.  And,  therefore,  although  the
charm  of  romance  and  adventure  may  have  risen  in  the  dis-
tance, and  eclipsed,  from  tradition  and  from  story,  the  prosy
facts  of  necessity  and  the  sordid  motives  of  gain,  it  is  always
safe  to  assume  that  these  must  have  existed,  and  placed  their
seal  of  success  upon  all  such  enterprises.

The  Argonauts  were  doubtless  in  search  of  something
more  than  a  "  golden  fleece,"  and  the  "  labors  "  of  Hercules
may  be  taken  to  represent  a  far  more  practical  phase  of
human  life  than  the  slaying  of  monsters  or  the  bringing  of
apples  from  the  "Western  Garden.  All  these  legends  and
traditions  are  either  embellished  accounts  or  allegorical  rep-
resentations of  human  activities,  at  the  foundation  of  which

TRANSPORTATION.  569

has  lain  the  desire  for  acquisition — the  pleasure  of  possession.
They  are  histories  of  commercial  events,  painted  with  the
pencil  of  the  imagination.

But  all  this  commerce,  this  traffic  in  useful  commodities,
these  nautical  expeditions,  these  overland  caravans,  had  been
going  on  for  ages  before  the  beginning  of  history,  before  the
discovery  of  any  means  of  writterf  communication.  Their
universal  necessity  rendered  them  comparatively  secure
against  the  influences  of  war  and  political  vicissitude.  With
the  expansion  of  productive  industries,  and  the  multiplica-
tion of  the  products  both  of  growth  and  manufacture,  the
peopling  of  new  and  distant  continents,  and  the  general  in-
crease in  the  wealth  and  improvement  in  the  condition  of
mankind,  the  labor  of  transportation  assumed  very  much  en-
larged proportions,  and  those  things  which  at  first  formed
the  chief  objects  of  commerce  became  reduced  to  a  relatively
insignificant  proportion  of  it.

The  closer  division  of  labor,  which  is  the  necessary  result
of  more  perfect  social  organization,  rendered  the  work  of
transporting  all  products  a  special  industry,  and  gave  birth  to
that  wonderful  internal  commerce  which  we  now  behold,
while  it  raised  foreign  commerce  from  the  condition  de-
scribed, of  half-adventurous  expeditions  and  overland  cara-
vans, to  one  in  which  regular  lines  of  steam  and  sailing  ves-
sels perpetually  plow  all  the  seas,  and  exchange  on  a  grand
scale  the  natural  and  artificial  products  of  all  parts  of  the
globe,  giving  employment  to  millions  of  human  beings.

It  would  be  improper,  in  a  work  seeking  the  causes  and
conditions  of  social  progress,  to  mention  the  subject  of  com-
merce without  pointing  out  some  of  its  indirect  moral  as
well  as  its  direct  economic  effects.  The  chief  indirect  influ-
ence which  it  has  exerted  has  been  in  the  extension  of  man's
knowledge  of  the  physical  geography  of  the  earth.  It  has
been  the  most  effectual  agency  that  has  operated  in  this
direction.  While  it  is  probable  that  the  mere  increase  of
numbers  would  have  eventually  accomplished  the  peopling

570  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

of  the  whole  world  ;  while,  if  the  doctrine  of  the  common
origin  of  all  men  be  true,  it  must  long  ago,  and  before  the
age  of  either  history  or  commerce,  have  virtually  done  this  ;
still  it  is  mainly  through  commerce,  through  these  expedi-
tions, voyages,  and  wealth-seeking  adventures,  that  the  more
civilized  parts  of  the  world  have  been  made  acquainted  with
the  existence  of  other  p^s  and  their  less  civilized  inhabit-
ants. !N^othing  did  so  much  to  inform  the  ancients  of  the
physical  and  ethnological  condition  of  Europe,  Asia,  and
Africa  as  these  voyages  in  search  of  tin,  copper,  amber,  spices,
gold,  and  silver.  And,  when  the  new  era  of  oceanic  discov-
eries began,  it  was  the  same  motive,  guided  by  increased
knowledge,  which  led  Columbus  and  his  contemporaries  to
the  "Western  hemisphere.  The  immortal  Genoese,  with  his
belief  in  the  rotundity  of  the  earth,  promised  Ferdinand  and
Isabella  that  he  would  reach  the  rich  land  of  spices  by  a
westward  voyage,  and  when  the  welcome  coast  of  San  Salva-
dor rose  on  his  view  he  was  certain  that  he  was  beholding
the  eastern  shores  of  India  !  Nor  was  he  undeceived  after
landing,  nor  after  twice  more  repeating  his  voyage  across  the
Atlantic,  but  to  the  last  moment  of  his  life  maintained  that
he  had  discovered  a  route  by  the  west  to  the  South  seas.
There  is  little  doubt  that  the  prior  settlement  of  America
by  Europeans  in  the  eleventh  century  was  likewise  the  result
of  commercial  enterprise,  since  the  Northmen  were  famous
for  voyages  of  traflSc.  So,  too,  in  looking  back,  we  are  apt
to  forget  that  the  brilliant  discoveries  of  the  Cabots,  the  Cor-
tereals,  of  Hudson,  Davis,  Baffin,  and  Ross,  in  Korth  Amer-
ica, were  made  in  attempting  to  find  a  northwest  passage  to
the  East  Indies,  were  purely  commercial  in  their  character,
and  had  as  their  motive  the  universal  love  of  gain.

Besides  the  knowledge  which  the  voyages  of  these  men
and  their  co-laborers  brought  to  light  respecting  the  Arctic
regions,  still  more  important  polar  discoveries  were  the  re-
sult of  the  notorious  efforts  so  persistently  made,  throughout
a  period  of  a  century  and  a  quarter,  to  establish  a  northeast

1

TRANSPORTATION.— EXCHANGE.  671

passage  to  the  same  country  of  wealth  and  bounty.  From
the  English  expedition  of  Willoughby  and  Cbancelor,  in
1553,  to  the  Dutch  expedition  of  Wood,  no  less  than  nine
distinct  expeditions  were  fitted  out  and  sent  on  this  perilous
undertaking.  But,  although  all  these  attempts  proved  wholly
fruitless,  and  neither  a  northeast  nor  a  northwest  passage  to
the  Indies  has  ever  yet  been  effected,*  who  shall  say  that  all
the  labor  and  suffering  which  these  expeditions  occasioned
have  not  been  amply  rewarded  in  the  vast  geographical  and
other  scientific  discoveries  to  which  they  have  led  ?

Neither  ought  I  to  omit  mention  of  the  extensive  contri-
butions which  commerce  has  yielded  to  ethnology  and  anthro-
pology, not  to  speak  of  other  sciences  which  have  been  en-
abled to  extend  themselves  along  its  lines  of  march.  The
intercourse  with  foreign  peoples,  with  strange  and  peculiar
races,  has  exerted  an  influence  upon  all  thus  brought  in  con-
tact which  it  would  be  impossible  adequately  to  measure.
That  universal  blending  and  intercommunication  of  ideas,
manners,  and  customs,  which  traffic  produces  among  the
most  widely  different  peoples,  all  of  which  must  possess  the
one  common  quality  and  bond  of  unity,  the  love  of  gain,
exerts  an  influence  which  can  not  but  be  liberalizing,  civiliz-
ing, and  elevating.  The  intercourse  of  nation  with  nation,
of  man  with  man,  of  thought  with  thought,  has,  by  a  law  of
mind,  a  distinct  tendency  to  the  evolution  of  new  ideas,  the
sharpening  of  wits,  and  the  increase  of  intelligence.  Com-
merce, as  the  vehicle  of  human  experience,  is  a  great  civiliz-
ing agency.

Exchange. — The  second  class  of  accessories  to  production
embraces  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  mere  exchange  proper
of  commodities.  They  are  the  mercantile  class,  in  a  restricted
sense.  As  producers  become  too  busy  with  their  special
work  to  find  it  profitable  or  convenient  to  engage  in  the
exchange  of  their  productions,  they  naturally  intrust  this

*  I  have  allowed  this  passage  to  stand,  written,  as  was  the  whole  chapter,  in
1873  and  1874,  or  six  years  before  the  Nordenskjold  expedition.

572  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGENY.

labor  to  others.  The  consumer  is  too  far  away,  and  there-
fore there  must  be  a  transporter,  but  it  is  found  inconven-
ient to  transport  direct  from  the  producer  to  the  consumer,
and  hence  the  plan  is  adopted  of  transporting  from  various
producers  to  one  exchanger,  from  whom  the  consumer  pur-
chases. Sometimes  a  second  transportation  takes  place,  viz.,
from  the  exchanger  to  the  consumer,  which  may  be  done
bj  either  the  one  or  the  other,  or  by  a  second  transporter ;
but  usually  the  place  of  exchange  is  near  the  place  of  con-
sumption, though  it  may  be  remote  from  the  place  of  pro-
duction. Very  frequently  there  are  two  or  several  ex-
changers, the  first  of  whom  usually  exchanges  products  in
gross  or  at  wholesale.  The  existence  of  great  commercial  en-
trepots renders  this  necessary.  Toward  these,  as  the  hearts
of  the  system,  all  the  products  of  the  world  are  conveyed  by
a  sort  of  venous  circulation,  and  from  them,  by  a  corre-
sponding arterial  circulation,  they  are  distributed  to  the
smaller  centers,  and  there  retailed  out  to  individual  pur-
chasers. The  wealth  of  the  world  thus  seems  to  flow  in  a
system  which  is  provided  with  appropriate  organs,  each  of
which  performs  its  independent  function.

Exchange  is  a  mode  of  acquisition,  a  means  of  gain.  The
value,  or  rather  the  price,  of  a  commodity  is  increased  every
time  it  is  exchanged.  This  may  be  effected  in  several  ways.
The  most  natural  and  simple  method  is  by  constituting  the
exchanger  the  mere  agent  of  the  producer  and  remunerating
him  for  his  services.  The  amount  paid  the  agent  is  then
added  to  the  price  of  the  merchandise.  The  next  most
simple  method  is  to  compensate  the  agent  by  a  commission
computed  upon  the  value  of  the  goods,  which  is  by  him
added  to  it  when  sold.  But  the  most  common  way  consists
in  the  absolute  sale  of  the  product  by  the  producer  to  the
merchant,  who  adds  to  it  as  much  as  the  circumstances  of
competition,  etc.,  will  admit  of,  and  transfers  it  again  abso-
lutely to  the  second  purchaser,  and  so  on,  till  it  reaches  the
party  who  is  to  derive  direct  benefit  from  it.     The  con-

EXOHAKGE.  573

venience  of  this  method,  as  well  as  its  disadvantages,  are
apparent.  The  producer  is  relieved  from  all  the  responsi-
bility of  seeing  his  productions  disposed  of,  and  this  is  a
decided  advantage  ;  but  the  vender  is  thus  frequently  en-
abled to  add  a  much  greater  increment  to  their  price  than
is  sufficient  justly  to  compensate  him  for  his  labor.  True,
he  is  held  in  check  by  competition,  and  by  fear  lest  it  may
perish  on  his  hands,  but,  by  co-operating  with  others  situ-
ated similarly  with  himself,  a  concerted  plan  is  easily  ar-
ranged, by  which  all  are  enabled  to  demand  more  than
a  commodity  is  worth.  This  concert  of  action  is  called
monopoly,  or  at  least  it  is  of  the  nature  of  monopoly,  in
which  all  thus  leagued  together  constitute  a  sort  of  corpo-
ration. Now,  the  mere  transfer  of  products  is  a  very  low
order  of  labor.  The  mental  qualities  required  to  perform  it
are  of  the  most  ordinary  and  inferior  kind.  A  certain  de-
gree of  skill  may  be  acquired  in  this  as  in  all  other  things,
and  more  in  the  sale  and  exchange  of  some  articles  than  of
others,  yet  there  is  in  mercantile  business  no  such  merit,  no
such  useful  quality,  required  as  in  the  production  of  the
objects  sold.  In  a  perfect  social  state,  therefore,  the  lowest
compensation  would  be  allowed  for  this  species  of  labor.
On  the  contrary,  we  frequently  find  this  labor  more  highly
rewarded  than  any  of  the  most  thoroughly  trained  mechan-
ical professions.  It  is  the  mercantile  class  which  most  rap-
idly absorbs  wealth,  and  which  usually  produces  the  men
of  princely  fortunes.  It  is  a  rare  occurrence  for  the  most
thoroughly  skilled  artisan  to  amass  a  large  competency  by
the  diligent  prosecution  of  his  trade,  but  it  is  a  common
thing  to  see  mere  dealers  in  the  products  of  such  skill  be-
come millionaires  by  reason  of  large  profits  secured  by
shrewd  management.

Again,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  machinery  of  exchange
has  become,  in  all  advanced  civilizations,  far  too  complicated,
and  is  absorbing  and  diverting  from  productive  industry
much  too  large  a  proportion  of  the  population.     Productive

674  TERTIARY   AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

industry  alone  can  maintain  the  life  of  society.  All  other
industries  are  taxes  upon  this  to  the  precise  extent  to  which
they  draw  off  from  the  numbers  engaged  in  it.  They  are,
therefore,  in  the  abstract,  evils,  and  should  only  be  tolerated
as  far  as  they  are  absolutely  necessary  to  secure  the  full
enjoyment  of  the  objects  of  production.  Exchange  is  not
only  secondary  and  subordinate  to  production,  it  is  a  mere
incident  to  the  separate  local  condition  of  consumers.  And
the  same  is  true  of  commerce  and  finance.  But  I  am
now  considering  exchange  in  its  legitimate  bearings  only,
and  shall  presently  treat  of  all  forms  of  distribution,  more
especially  in  their  illegitimate  consequences  as  modes  of
acquisition.  The  necessity  of  a  system  of  exchange  is  obvi-
ous, and,  even  if  it  were  confined  within  its  legitimate  limits,
it  would  constitute  a  great  industry,  and  occupy  a  large  part
of  the  human  race.

Little  can  be  said  of  the  indirect  moral  advantages  which
grow  out  of  this  industry.  Its  influence  upon  character  is
rather  softening  than  dignifying.  It  stimulates  no  romance
or  adventure,  leads  to  no  discoveries,  arouses  no  great  pas-
sion but  that  of  avarice.  Still,  the  ambition  to  succeed  in
businese,  eo  strong  in  the  mercantile  world,  is  a  healthy  one,
and  is  sufficient  to  sustain  thousands  of  active  lives.

Finance. — We  pass  now  for  a  moment  to  what  we  may
call  the  financial  industry.  The  necessity  for  a  medium  of
exchange  and  the  genesis  of  finance  have  already  been
touched  upon  in  the  present  chapter.  The  success,  however,
of  the  financial  industry  depended  wholly  upon  its  being  a
means  of  acquisition.  Before  it  could  be  made  available  as
a  social  economic  institution,  it  must  be  placed  upon  a  foot-
ing which  should  be  profitable  to  those  engaged  in  it.  This
was  the  first  condition  of  its  existence.  The  mere  manu-
facture of  this  medium,  the  mining  of  metals,  the  stamping
of  coins,  the  manufacture  of  paper,  and  the  printing  of  paper
currency — all  these,  as  the  creation  of  useful  commodities,  be-
long to  production,  and  those  engaged  in  them  to  the  produc-

FINANCE.  575

tive  classes.  To  this,  of  course,  is  incident  the  natural  profit
which  accrues  to  productive  labor.  But,  aside  from  this,  it
was  necessary  that  a  profit  attach  to  the  mere  manipulation,*
so  to  speak,  of  the  medium  of  exchange.  The  adoption  of
such  a  medium  implies  a  demand  for  it  sufiicient  wholly
to  withdraw  the  labor  of  some  from  the  other  industries.
The  increased  recognition  of  the  advantages  of  this  insti-
tution, and  the  multiplied  complications  growing  out  of  its
general  introduction,  still  further  enlarged  the  scope  of  the
financial  industry,  until  it  at  length  reached  the  enormous
magnitude  and  importance  with  which  modem  society  has
endowed  it.  And,  although,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  this
importance  is  greater  than  it  deserves  to  be,  nevertheless  it
can  not  be  denied  that  the  legitimate  functions  of  finance,
as  a  convenient  device  for  facilitating  exchange  and  distri-
bution, are  very  essential ;  and  the  number  of  individuals
really  required  to  give  it  its  maximum  efficiency,  as  a  ser-
vant of  man,  must  be  large  and  respectable.  For,  besides
those  actually  employed  in  handling  money,  there  is  the
long  train  of  consequential  agents  required  to  perform  the
incidental  but  more  laborious  duties.

The  term  "money"  possesses  a  very  extensive  application,
and  may  be  used  to  designate  not  only  the  original  medium,
possessing  as  it  must  an  intrinsic  value  equal  to  that  which
it  is  employed  to  represent,  but  every  kind  of  current  or
negotiable  paper,  stock,  security,  or  collateral,  which  is  the
representative  of  value,  and  convertible  into  specie  or  mer-
chandise. Any  obligation  to  transfer  to  another  a  specified
amount  of  value,  whether  it  be  in  the  form  of  a  current
bank-note  or  merely  a  registered  account,  belongs  essentially
to  the  financial  department  of  human  industry ;  and  hence
there  should  be  accredited  to  that  department  all  those  en-
gaged in  the  exchange,  circulation,  negotiation,  and  registra-
tion of  such  obligations.

Beyond  its  direct  advantages,  still  less  can  be  claimed  for
the  financial  than  for  the  mercantile  industry.    Its  perpetual

676  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

tendency  is  to  magnify  the  importance  of  that  which  adds
nothing  to  the  general  wealth,  and  to  stimulate  a  hope  and
an  effort  to  secure  value  without  producing  it.  At  the  same
time,  it  is  as  barren  of  inspiring  and  ennobling  elements  as
it  is  possible  for  an  industry  to  be.

DISTRIBUTION   AS    A   MODE    OF    ACQUISITION.

It  remains  to  take  a  summary  view  of  the  three  distribu-
tive industries  as  modes  of  acquisition,  with  special  reference
to  their  general  influence  upon  society.  When  it  is  said  that
they  are  necessities  to  the  development  and  even  to  the
maintenance  of  the  race,  that  they  were  the  spontaneous
outgrowths  of  social  conditions  demanding  them,  and  that
they  have  well  and  thoroughly  performed  their  respective
functions,  none  too  high  a  eulogium  has  been  pronounced
upon  their  direct  and  legitimate  influence  on  civilization.
But  I  have  gone  further,  and  pointed  out  the  indirect  influ-
ences, both  good  and  bad,  which  are  to  be  justly  ascribed  to
these  extensive  and  important  industries.  The  meagerness
with  which,  in  so  summary  a  treatise,  I  was  compelled  to
perform  this  latter  task,  seems  to  require,  as  a  supplementary
consideration,  that  a  few  words  be  devoted  to  a  somewhat
more  minute  examination  of  the  most  important  of  these
indirect  consequences,  and  particularly  such  as  have  grown
up  in  virtue  of  the  character  which  these  industries  assumed
as  modes  of  acquisition.

I  have  heretofore  dwelt  especially  upon  the  important
principle  that  the  preservative  forces  impel  men  only  to-
ward the  single  end  of  securing  the  objects  of  desire,  that
they  possess  no  moral  or  rational  quality,  never  inquiring
into  the  justice  but  only  into  the  feasibility  of  a  scheme.
The  result  of  this  is  the  perpetual  clash  of  interests,  and  the
certain  triumph  of  the  stronger.  It  is  the  operation  of  this
principle  which  has  produced  such  important  consequences
in  the  history  of  distribution.  "We  have  already  seen  that
every  opportunity  of  securing  these  objects  has  been  seized

DISTRIBUTION  AS  A  MODE  OF  ACQUISITION.      577

upon,  and  every  available  means  to  this  end  employed.  The
forcible  wresting  of  the  desired  objects  by  the  physically
stronger  from  the  weaker  met  with  a  check  at  the  hands  of
>  government,  whicli  was  instituted  for  the  purpose,  and  the
physical  force  impelling  to  these  acts  was  commuted  into  a
more  and  more  modified  form  of  intellectual  force.  Cun-
ning took  the  place  of  muscle,  and  exhausted  every  means
of  obtaining  all  forms  of  wealth.  All  embarked  in  the  same
enterprise  of  getting,  but  in  different  ways.  Those  who
chose  the  modest  part  of  producing  wealth  were  placed
under  comparatively  little  temptation  to  grasp  more  than
the  true  value  of  their  labor ;  while  those  who  assigned  them-
selves to  the  non-producing  division  of  society  soon  found
^^themselves  in  the  enjoyment  of  greater  or  less  facilities  for
inequitably  augmenting  their  gains.  That  such  was  the  case
was  the  fault  neither  of  the  individuals  nor  of  society.  It
was  simply  due  to  the  state  of  things  in  an  unconscious
universe  (vol.  ii,  p.  5),  which  must  necessarily  be  attended
with  pain  and  inconvenience  to  those  who  chance  to  exist
under  unfavorable  conditions.  More  philosophically  consid-
ered, it  constitutes  one  of  the  inadaptations  of  things  to  cir-
cumstances, one  of  the  imperfections  of  the  social  system,
one  of  the  discords  between  force  and  feeling — a  certain  in-
crease of  wliich  would  render  social  progress  and  human
existence  impossible,  and  enough  of  which  would  annihilate
all  life,  as  it  once  prevented  its  evolution.

The  key  to  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  circumstance  that
those  engaged  in  the  distribution  of  wealth  come  in  contact
with  such  large  amounts  that  they  can  not  resist  the  inclina-
tion to  absorb  into  their  own  possession  a  proportion  greater
than  is  sufficient  to  constitute  a  just  compensation  for  their
labor.  Neither  have  the  means  been  yet  devised  to  prevent
this.  To  do  so  is  the  problem  of  social  economy.  The  com-
binations, co-operations,  and  monopolies  already  established
by  shrewd  distributors  of  wealth  have  become  so  extensive
and  complicated  that  it  may  require  a  general  social  revolu-

678  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOIT.— SOCIOGENY.       .

tion  to  overtlirow  them.  These  industries  have  absorbed  the
most  acute  miuds  of  the  world,  because  thej  were  the  levers
of  power  which  intellectual  force  could  lay  hold  of.  They
have  maintained  their  grasp  by  dint  of  every  available  form
of  deception,  misrepresentation,  and  strategy,  which  is  all
within  the  legitimate  sphere  of  natural  law.  The  most  po-
tent of  all  the  influences  wielded  by  them  is  that  of  securing
the  acquiescence  of  the  victims — for  it  is  a  thankless  task
to  labor  for  the  emancipation  of  a  willing  slave.  This  ob-
ject the  distributors  of  wealth  have  accomplished  by  the
manufacture  of  a  public  sentiment  favorable  to  their  inter-
ests. This  has  been  done  so  successfully  that,  in  this  age
of  pretended  practical  life,  any  remark  bearing  upon  the
greatest  economic  problem  of  society— viz.,  the  equitable
remuneration  of  labor  and  distribution  of  wealth — is  at  once
branded  as  "  socialistic  "  and  "  visionary,"  as  well  by  those
who  suffer  as  by  those  who  profit  by  this  state  of  things
(vol.  ii,  p.  602).

This  exercise  of  power  by  the  cunning  and  rich  has  be-
gotten a  hierarchy  as  marked  as  the  exercise  of  political  or
ecclesiastical  power  ever  occasions.  It  has  actually  resulted
in  endowing  the  non-productive  industries,  which  are  really
nothing  more  than  the  mere  incidents  of  production,  with  a
far  higher  social  rank  and  respectability  than  the  productive
industries  by  which  all  wealth  is  created.  Not  only  does
greater  gain  come  into  the  possession  of  those  whose  duties
require  no  skill,  no  apprenticeship,  and  only  a  very  low
order  of  intellect,  but  these  occupy  a  higher  social  sphere,
and  both  demand  and  secure  the  esteem  of  all  classes  as  su-
perior to  those  who,  by  acquired  skill,  create  the  wealth  of
the  world.  The  poor  mechanic  is  taught  to  look  up,  as  to
superior  beings,  to  the  wealthy  merchant  and  banker,  who
have  grown  rich  by  the  mere  handling  of  the  objects  which
he  has  produced.

And  yet  even  these  are  not  the  worst  consequences  of
this  law.    Its  tendency  is  to  depreciate  production  itself.    It

DISTRIBUTION  AS  A  MODE  OF  ACQUISITION.      5T9

draws  away  the  best  minds  from  productive  labor,  and  in-
duces them  to  waste  their  time  in  speculations — fruitless  ex-
cept for  their  own  temporary  gain — with  the  wealth  already
created.  It  prevents  the  intellectual  and  moral  elevation  of
producers,  thus  directly  deteriorating  the  quality  and  dimin-
ishing the  quantity  of  the  wealth  produced.  It  has  thus
worked  a  complete  reversal  of  the  proper  order  of  things,
honoring  and  rewarding  the  least  worthy,  and  degrading  and
deteriorating  the  truly  meritorious.

As  these  facts  are  the  natural  result  of  the  operation  of
the  social  forces,  it  is  evident  that  they  can  be  remedied  in
no  other  way  than  by  the  counteracting  influence  of  other
opposing  forces.  The  possibility  of  these  evils  which  has
been  ascribed  to  the  mental  force  can  be  precluded  by  a
counter  mental  force.  It  is  not  only  because  some  men
are  wise  that  they  are  able  to  accumulate  wealth  without
earning  it;  it  is  equally  because  others  are  unwise.  In  a
word,  the  entire  anomaly — the  evil  itself — is  due  to  the  in-
equality which  exists  in  this  power  of  acquisition,  in  this
cunning,  or  shrewdness — this  mental  force.  To  prevent  it,
the  producer  must  be  armed  as  well  as  his  enemy.  Pro-
vided with  the  requisite  knowledge,  he  will  not  be  deceived
(vol.  ii,  p.  537).  As  in  politics,  the  victims  of  power  are
so  because  they  are  ignorant  of  their  own  interests,  since
the  ultimate  power  lies  with  the  people,  so  in  the  rule  of
wealth  it  is  the  ignorance  of  the  victims  which  renders  it
possible  to  keep  them  so.  Co-operation  is  as  easy  for  the
producers  as  for  the  non-producers,  but  they  do  not  under-
stand it  as  well ;  and,  if  they  understood  it,  they  would  lack
the  intelligence  to  carry  it  into  practical  effect.  They  are,
as  a  whole,  it  must  be  confessed,  a  less  intelligent  class.
They  receive  less  education  in  youth  and  none  at  all  after-
ward. Their  apprenticeship  is  taken  from  their  school-days,
and  when  active  life  is  begun  it  requires  so  many  hours  of
labor  per  day  to  earn  a  livelihood  that  no  time  or  energy  is
left  for  intellectual  improvement.     The  life  of  the  skilled

680  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

artisan  is  one  of  unremitting  toil.  It  is  quite  otherwise  with
those  who  live  on  the  productions  of  others.  Their  incomes
are  so  much  larger  that  they  can  afford  their  children  a  lib-
eral education,  and  find  much  leisure  for  general  mental  cul-
tivation and  current  information  in  connection  with  their
business.  This  is  the  secret  of  their  success  in  maintaining
their  hold  upon  the  wealth  of  the  people.  "What  could  be
more  monstrous  to  the  mind  of  one  wholly  unacquainted
with  the  inequalities  of  society,  and  unaccustomed  to  hear  of
the  natural  superiorities  of  certain  classes  of  people  over
others  resembling  them  in  all  apparent  respects,  than  to  be
informed  that  the  venders  of  goods  were  able  to  earn  twice
as  much  in  half  the  time  as  their  producers ;  that  by  means
of  co-operation  and  monopoly  those  who  merely  carry  mer-
chandise from  one  place  to  another  are  able  to  make  immense
fortunes  in  a  few  years  at  the  expense  of  those  who  consume
it !  Such  a  person  as  we  have  supposed  would  first  ask  why
such  a  state  of  things  was  tolerated,  but  upon  a  thorough
examination  would  find  that  it  was  not  only  tolerated  but
acquiesced  in  without  a  suspicion  on  the  part  of  those  who
suffer  most  that  any  thing  was  wrong.  We  thus  have,  in  the
history  of  the  three  great  non-productive  industries  just  con-
sidered, another  illustration  of  the  general  truth  that  out  of
every  useful  and  necessary  institution  there  will  sooner  or
later  grow  indirect  consequences  of  a  disadvantageous  char-
acter which  go  far  to  neutralize  the  benefits  secured.  And
so  long  as  society  is  imperfect  (and  it  never  can  be  perfect),
this  must  continue  to  be  the  case  to  a  degree  proportionate
to  that  imperfection.  The  great  social  forces  will  go  blindly
on,  regardless  of  the  unpleasant  feelings  which  their  action
produces,  and  can  only  be  held  in  check  by  opposing  forces.
These  opposing  forces  can  only  be  of  three  kinds :  1,  the  same
force  exerted  by  other  individuals  in  a  counter-direction ;  2,
rational  forces ;  and,  3,  sympathetic  (altruistic)  forces.  The
first  of  these  is  best  secured  by  what  are  called  attractive
measures  {swpra,  p.  39  et  seq.),  whereby  every  encroachment

PARASITES.  681

upon  the  riglits  of  another  is  followed  by  certain  conse-
quences which  can  be  foreseen,  and  which  are  sufficient  to
counteract  it  in  advance ;  and  by  equalizing  measures,  which
give  each  the  power  to  erect  positive  barriers  to  such  en-
croachments. The  second  comes  through  education,  which,
by  equalizing  the  intelligence  of  all,  renders  impossible  those
infringements  of  rights  which  obtain  their  license  through
superior  cunning  and  intelligence.  The  third  is  the  result
of  high  mental  and  moral  cultivation,  quickening  the  sensi-
bilities to  a  degree  which  renders  the  pain  experienced  in
observing  the  sufferings  of  others  greater  than  that  of  fore-
going the  pleasure  afforded  by  depriving  another  of  a  right.
Such  a  force  is  not  a  myth,  neither  is  it  the  common  condi-
tion of  all  enlightened  men.

I  have  now  passed  in  review  all  the  forms  of  industry
which  are  directed  toward  the  acquisition  of  the  objects  of
human  desire,  and  considered  at  some  length  the  two  great
classes  of  society,  producers  and  accessories  to  production.
It  is  by  the  labor  of  these  classes  that  man  has  been  enabled
to  acquire  a  firm  footing  upon  the  globe,  and  by  it  that  all
the  great  results  of  civilization  have  been  accomplished.
Guided  by  intellect  and  propelled  by  want,  the  human  spe-
cies has  built  up  this  great  economic  system,  and  worked  out
its  complicated  details.

Pakastfes.

It  might  be  supposed  that  the  analysis  above  made  of  the
various  classes  of  society,  with  reference  to  the  modes  of
acquisition  adopted  by  mankind,  would  exhaust  the  subject
and  embrace  them  all.  But,  unfortunately,  this  is  not  the
case,  and  we  find  ourselves  compelled  to  speak  of  a  class
which  is  not  only  non-producing  but  non-industrial.  To  con-
nect the  two  terms,  and  speak  of  a  non-industrial  mode  of
acquisition,  may  sound  paradoxical  if  not  paralogical.  But
the  plain  fact  is,  that  there  are  many  ways  of  acquiring  wealth
26

582  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

without  industry.  It  does  not  follow  tliat  these  non-indus-
trial gainers  of  wealth  are  all  indolent,  inert,  and  inactive.
But  all  activity  is  not  industry.  The  entire  compass  of  that
term  has  been  embraced  when  we  name  the  producers  and
those  accessory  to  production.  Mere  activity,  however  great
and  however  successful,  in  amassing  wealth,  is  unworthy  of
the  name  of  industry,  unless,  in  some  way,  either  directly  or
indirectly,  it  contributes  to  the  increase  of  wealth,  i.  e.,  to
the  increase  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  objects  of  production
upon  the  whole.  Energy,  however  great,  expended  in  secur-
ing the  transfer  of  wealth  from  one  consumer  to  another,
whereby  the  sum  of  enjoyment  is  left  the  same  as  before,
and  only  diminished  in  the  one  to  be  increased  in  the  other,
is  no  industry.  The  distinction  should  be  carefully  made
between  this  class  of  cases  and  that  in  which  the  transfer  is
from  those  who  can  not  enjoy  it  to  those  who  can.  This
latter  case  is  but  the  general  one  of  transportation  from  the
producer,  who  can  not  consume  all  he  produces,  to  the  con-
sumers at  large  who  can.  Activity  exerted  in  this  direction
is  accessory  to  production,  since  value  must  ultimately  be
measured  by  enjoyment,  and  material  objects  must  be  pres-
ent to  be  enjoyed.  The  non-industrial  or  parasitic  classes
are  often  the  most  active  and  energetic.  They  are  usually
the  best-informed  classes  of  society,  and  are  wonderfully  suc-
cessful in  creating  the  belief  that  they  are  the  most  import-
ant of  all  the  social  elements.

As  soon  as  the  amount  produced  began  at  all  to  exceed
the  immediate  requirements  of  life,  a  struggle  commenced
for  the  possession  of  the  surplus.  The  methods  employed
were  as  varied  as  the  human  brain  was  fertile.  In  the  rudest
form  they  consisted  in  forcible  seizure,  variously  practiced,
and  gradually  softened  down  into  milder  and  milder  methods,
till  they  finally  assumed  the  form  presented  to-day,  whereby
thousands  of  people  live  in  luxury  and  amass  vast  wealth
without  adding  any  thing  to  the  wealth  of  the  world  or  to
human  enjoyment.

CLASSIFICATION.  583

CLASSIFICATION   OF  THE  N0N-INDU8TKIAL  MODES    OF  ACQtnSITION.

In  attempting  a  classification  of  the  non-industrial  modes
of  acquisition,  I  find  many  practical  difiiculties  in  the  way,
and  do  not  hope  as  much  to  render  it  exhaustive  as  to  give  it
a  tangible  shape  for  more  special  consideration.  With  this
object  in  view,  I  propose  to  oSer  a  few  suggestions  upon  each
of  the  following  six  modes  of  acquisition,  relying,  for  any
degree  of  completeness  which  I  may  attain,  upon  a  certain
license  to  expand  or  modify  the  scope  of  the  terms  employed.

1.  Eobbery.  2.  Theft.  3.  War.  4.  Government,  or
Statecraft.     5.  Hierarchy,  or  Priestcraft.     6.  Monopoly.

However  well  these  divisions  may  represent  the  chrono-
logical order  and  history  of  non-industrial  acquisition,  they
may  be  all  found  in  full  operation  in  the  most  enlightened
nations  of  the  earth.  With  regard  to  tlie  moral  quality
attaching  to  them,  there  is  far  less  distinction  than  the  age  is
pleased  to  make.  Between  robbery  and  monopoly  the  differ-
ence appears  very  great,  but  it  consists  in  two  things,  both  of
which  are  quantitative  only.  These  are  the  rudeness  and  the
illegality  of  the  former  as  contrasted  with  the  civility  and
the  legality  of  the  latter.

The  principle  of  a  procedure  is  not  changed  by  mollify-
ing the  method.  The  motive  is  the  same.  This  motive  is
in  all  cases  the  desire  to  possess,  irrespective  of  the  effect
produced,  and  every  individual  is  perpetually  striving  with
all  the  powers  he  can  wield,  and  all  the  forms  of  power,
to  appropriate  the  objects  of  desire.  When  the  coarser
forms  of  power  are  cut  off,  he  resorts  to  more  and  more
refined  forms.  Robbery  is  the  coarsest  and  rudest  man-
ner in  which  force  can  be  exercised.  It  consists  in  the
spoliation  of  one  by  another,  by  virtue  of  superior  physical
strength,  or  by  intimidation  and  threats  of  personal  violence.
Theft  is  a  resort  to  the  lowest  order  of  cunning,  and  takes
advantage  of  the  absence,  ignorance,  or  unconsciousness  of
him  from  whom  property  is  taken.     War,  when  waged  for

584  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION— SO CIOGENY.

conquest,  is  simply  robbery  on  so  large  a  scale  that  in  the
crude  conceptions  of  men  it  arouses  the  sentiment  of  honor.
The  progress  which  has  taken  place  in  the  modes  of  warfare
is  analogous  to  that  in  all  other  modes  of  acquisition.  The
direct  animal  methods  first  gave  way  to  deception  in  the
form  of  mere  cunning,  but  these  became  condemned  as
treachery,  and  have  in  turn  given  way  to  an  elaborate  code
which  admits  of  modified  forms  of  this  deception  known  as
strategy,  but  which  is  even  more  efiective  than  the  cruder
forms.  Between  robbery  and  war  lies  brigandage,  which  is
regarded  as  more  or  less  honorable,  according  to  the  degree
of  moral  development  of  the  party  contemplating  it.  Once
generally  sanctioned,  it  is  now  generally  rebuked,  and  war  is
passing  through  the  same  phases.

War. — Passing  over  robbery  and  theft,  which,  though
prevalent  enough  every-where,  are  not  recognized  by  society,
let  us  consider  war,  for  a  moment,  as  a  non-industrial  mode  of
acquisition.  In  modem  times,  most  wars  have  some  pretext
besides  that  of  aggrandizing  the  victorious  party  engaged  in
them,  although,  in  nearly  all  cases,  this  latter  is  the  real  casus
belli.  This  shows  that  the  world  is  so  far  advanced  as  to  be
ashamed  of  the  motives  for  its  conduct,  but  not  enough  so  to
affect  that  conduct  materially.  In  olden  times  no  secret  was
made  of  the  fact  that  the  object  of  military  expeditions  was
the  acquisition  of  the  wealth  of  the  conquered  people.  Such
was  the  nature  of  Alexander's  conquests,  of  Caesar's  wars,
and  even  of  Napoleon's  campaigns.  Indeed,  not  a  war  can
be  mentioned,  from  the  invasion  of  the  Israelites,  and  their
brutal  and  atrocious  conquest  of  the  industrial  inhabitants
of  Palestine,  to  the  achievements  of  Charles  XII  of  Swe-
den, which  did  not  have  for  its  avowed  object  the  appro-
priation of  the  possessions  of  those  against  whom  it  was
waged.  The  valuable  object  which  it  is  sought  to  secure  by
war  is  usually  territory,  and  such  wars  are  termed  wars  of
conquest.  But  land  is  as  much  property  as  other  things,  and
often  becomes  the  subject  of  other  non-industrial  modes  of

WAR.— GOVERKMENT.  585

acquisition.  And  with  territory,  such  as  is  always  the  sub-
ject of  conquest,  there  always  come  many  other  vahiable
things — not  only  the  power  over  people  and  the  title  of
sovereignty,  but  the  revenues  of  tribute  and  taxation,  all  of
which  go  to  enrich  the  ruling  classes,  who  are  the  conquerors
themselves.  Until  recently,  it  was  customary  for  the  con-
querors to  parcel  out  the  best  lands  among  the  most  valiant
of  the  military  chieftains,  and  in  all  but  the  most  enlightened
nations  this  custom  probably  still  survives.  All  Europe,
not  excepting  the  British  Isles,  has  been  so  parceled  out,  and
much  of  it  more  than  once.  Careful  study  of  the  agrarian
history  of  India  reveals  the  same  fact  there,  and  it  seems  to
have  been  general  throughout  Eastern  and  Central  Asia.
The  well-known  subdivision  of  Alexander's  Asiatic,  Euro-
pean, and  African  conquests  constitutes  a  modified  illustrar
tion  of  the  general  principle  here  referred  to.

We  may  regard  war,  then,  strictly  considered,  as  a  mode
of  acquisition,  and  as  such  it  has  played  a  most  important
role  in  human  history.

Government,  or  Statecraft. — It  may  sound  strange  to  class
government  among  the  modes  of  acquisition.  But,  as  will
be  shown  in  another  part  of  this  work  (vol.  ii,  p.  223),  gov-
ernment, like  most  other  human  institutions,  has  been  the
product  of  egoistic  attempts  on  the  part  of  crafty  individuals
to  meet  and  supply  a  popular  demand.  It  has  not,  except
in  this  sense,  been  the  product  of  a  popular  attempt  to  avert
a  prevalent  evil.  It  is  not  the  victimized  many  who  rise
en  masse  and  organize  for  their  own  protection.  It  is  the
keen-sighted  few  who  perceive  the  wants  of  the  many,  de-
vise means  to  supply  them,  and  anticipate  rich  rewards  from
the  befriended  and  grateful  community.  This  reward  is
proportioned  to  the  success  of  the  scheme,  and  hence  the
adaptation  of  government  to  public  need.

This  is  the  essential  quality  and  necessary  genesis  of  gov-
ernment, which,  like  all  other  human  institutions,  has  to  be
moved  by  the  great  natural  social  forces.     It  has  required

586  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.-SOCIOGENY.

that  it  be  made  a  means  of  subsistence — a  profitable  business
— for  those  engaged  in  it.  And,  independently  of  any  bene-
fits secured  by  it,  it  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  activities
of  human  life,  having  for  its  object  the  aggrandizement  of
self.  In  so  far  as  it  is  a  necessity,  in  so  far  as  the  niling
classes  can  be  regarded  as  the  business  agents  of  the  people,
government  may  be  considered  an  industry.  As  such,  these
agents  may  be  referred  to  one  or  another  of  the  classes  of  ac-
cessories to  production  above  described,  or  possibly,  in  a  very
fev?-  cases,  to  the  producing  class  itself.  To  this  extent  gov-
ernment is  no  more  than  an  extensive  popular  industrial  es-
tablishment (vol.  ii,  p.  245).  But  this  scarcely  at  all  applies
to  the  so-called  governing  classes.  It  applies,  to  a  greater  or
less  extent,  to  the  large  number  of  inferior  oflScers  of  govern-
ment upon  whom  the  labor  of  this  establishment  falls.  And,
in  so  far  as  this  labor  is  really  accessory  to  the  production
of  a  country,  these  should  be  assigned  to  the  industrial
classes.  A  great  part  of  this  labor,  however,  is  done  for  the
simple  gratification  of  the  caprice  of  superior  officers  and  for
their  personal  emolument,  and  such  services,  though  not  the
fault  of  those  who  perform  it,  are  outside  of  our  technical
definition  of  industry.  The  higher  officers  of  government
are  usually  more  or  less  purely  parasitic.  Their  labors,  where
they  labor  at  all,  add  nothing  either  directly  or  indirectly  to
the  wealth  of  the  country  or  of  the  world.  The  only  effect
exerted  by  their  activities  upon  wealth  is  to  cause  it  to  flow
from  various  sources  toward  themselves.  In  countries  not
republican  in  form  there  is  often  no  claim  made  by  the
greater  part  of  the  ruling  classes  to  services  rendered  the
commonwealth.  They  receive  appropriate  titles,  which  are
accompanied  with  large  revenues  from  the  public  treasury,
and  upon  these  they  live  in  ease,  elegance,  and  luxury,  with-
out pretending  to  any  kind  of  reciprocal  service.''^  Others —
as,  for  example,  the  Lords  of  the  British  realm — have,  by

*  See  the  "parable"  of  St.  Simon  in  Blanqui's  "Eistoiy  of  Political  Econ-
omy,"  p.  497.

GOYEKNMEN"!.— HIERAROHY.  68T

virtue  of  their  titles,  the  right  to  sit  in  the  Upper  House  and
assist  in  legislation.  But,  as  they  are  responsible  to  no  one,
they  often  make  this  their  opportunity  better  to  carry  out
the  law  of  self -protection,  and  antagonize,  in  their  own  inter-
ests, the  interests  of  the  people.

Only  a  small  part  of  the  duties  of  the  ruling  classes,  where
any  duties  are  performed  at  all,  can  be  called  other  than
egoistic  activities.  The  fact  is  patent,  and  the  reason  is
plain.  The  revenues  of  a  country  are  a  tempting  bait  to
designing  men,  and  these  are  perpetually  striving  to  get
possession  of  a  portion  of  them.  By  succeeding  in  install-
ing themselves  in  positions  of  power,  they  are  en  bled  to
operate  in  two  directions :  first,  in  that  of  increasing  these
revenues ;  and,  secondly,  in  that  of  obtaining  a  larger  share
of  them  for  themselves.  Governmental  positions,  thus  ex-
tending the  promise  of  large  remunerations,  and  of  power
to  increase  them,  become  great  desiderata.  The  government
soon  finds  itself  overrun  with  officials,  and  besieged  by  influ-
ential men  to  make  room  for  more.  And,  as  all  that  is  re-
quired to  accomplish  any  object  is  the  requisite  power,  these
succeed  in  forcibly  enlarging  the  circle  of  governmental  ca-
pacity and  establishing  themselves  within  it.  All  the  attrac-
tions are  in  that  direction,  and  especially  the  pecuniary
attraction.  Unlike  the  ordinary  fields  of  industry,  which
must  obey  the  laws  of  competition,  supply  and  demand,  gov-
ernment possesses  almost  inexhaustible  resources,  only  limited
by  the  production  of  the  whole  country  and  the  patience  of
a  credulous  people  in  bearing  with  taxation,  while  its  real  or
nominal  functions  may  be  indefinitely  multiplied  and  en-
larged. And  thus  it  is  that  every  government  is  always
drugged  with  sinecures  and  every  industry  burdened  with
unnecessary  taxation.

Hierarchy,  or  Priestcraft. — "We  are  next  to  consider  hier-
archy *  as  a  parasitic  mode  of  acquisition.    To  prove  it  para-

*  The  term  hierarchy  is  here  used  in  its  primary  and  most  legitimate  sense
of  sacerdotal  government,  or,   as  defined  "  dominion  or  authority  in  sacred

588  TEETIAEY  AGGEEGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

sitic,  it  needs  only  to  be  shown  that  it  adds  nothing,  and  aids
in  adding  nothing,  to  the  production  of  the  objects  of  desire.
But  this  would  be  a  wholly  superfluous  declaration.  The  ben-
efits which  it  is  believed  that  the  priesthood  confer  are  not  to
be  enjoyed  in  this  life,  and  therefore  can  not,  by  any  process,
be  connected  with  human  economy.  If  it  be  said  that  in  a
certain  sense  the  clergy  are  teachers  of  the  people,  and  should
be  classed  with  those  who  make  this  their  profession,  and
from  whom  it  is  acknowledged  there  rise  the  greatest  of
indirect  benefits  to  material  prosperity,  the  answer  is  that  in
so  far  as  they  are  diffusers  of  knowledge  they  are  not  priests.
It  is  quite  possible  to  combine  several  classes  in  one  and  the
same  person ;  and,  when  we  class  all  the  priesthood  as  para-
sitic on  productive  industry,  we  are  regarding  each  in  that
capacity  alone.  If  any  one  be  both  priest  and  teacher,  or
both  priest  and  mechanic,  it  is  as  priest  that  we  place  him
in  the  parasitic,  and  as  producer  that  we  place  him  in  the
industrial,  class.  But,  if  it  is  claimed  that  doctrinal  teach-
ing, which  alone  characterizes  the  sacerdotal  state,  adds  any
thing  to  human  knowledge,  the  position  must  be  rejected
as  one  wholly  false  and  untenable,  and  for  the  simple  rea-
son that  by  no  possibility  can  such  teaching  lead  to  better
methods  of  obtaining  or  creating  the  objects  of  desire.

If  all  the  religious  training  the  world  has  ever  received
should  be  concentrated  upon  one  community  and  thoroughly
indoctrinated  into  the  mind  of  every  member  of  it,  it  would
be  utterly  useless  as  a  means  of  carrying  it  through  an  ordeal
which  threatened  it  with  famine  or  destruction  from  climatic
influences.  Equally  futile  would  be  the  prayers  of  all  the
devout  of  the  world  in  such  an  emergency.  Not  one  of  all
the  wonderful  contrivances  invented  by  man  for  extorting
subsistence  from  nature,  for  destroying  the  enemies  to  man's
triumphant  progress,  for  multiplying  the  objects  of  desire

things."  The  word  priesterafi,  ignoring  a  certain  popular  stigma  which  it  has
acquired,  more  nicely  conveys,  through  its  second  component,  the  special  notion
involved.

HIERAROnY,  OR  PRIESTCRAFT.  689

or  for  neutralizing  the  physical  forces  operating  adversely
to  human  life,  has  ever  been  attributable  to  the  labors  of
the  priesthood  as  such,  and  none  of  these  blessings  can  ever
come,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  from  that  source.  Yet,
from  the  infancy  of  the  race,  this  class  of  persons  has  en-
joyed a  far  greater  share  of  the  fruits  of  industry  than  the
producers  of  wealth  themselves.  Sacerdotal  duties  are,  and
always  have  been,  a  special  and  exceedingly  lucrative  means
of  obtaining  a  livelihood.*  They  constitute  a  well-marked
and  extensive  mode  of  acquisition.  It  required  only  a  little
more  than  ordinary  sagacity  to  perceive  that  appeals  to  the
sentiment  of  fear  respecting  the  unknown,  in  a  state  of
society  where  so  little  was  known,  would  exert  a  power-
ful influence,  and  a  little  calculation  was  sufficient  to  deter-
mine the  best  means  of  making  this  influence  operate  in
the  direction  of  conveying  pecuniary  value  into  the  pos-
session of  any  one  who  should  successfully  devise  such  a
scheme.  The  result  has  been  that  long  before  history  began
the  earth  was  decked  with  costly  temples,  and  within  them
a  well-fed  and  comfortably  clothed  priesthood  sat  enjoying,
all  unearned,  the  luxuries  vouchsafed  by  toil  and  credulity.
The  reign  of  this  parasitic  hierarchy  still  continues  all  over
the  world ;  and  still,  to-day,  the  hard  labor  of  the  masses,
just  saving  a  subsistence,  is  paying  its  tithes  to  the  support
of  this  great  non-industrial  class,  and  for  the  erection  of
costly  edifices  which  the  state  exempts  from  taxation,  and
which  serve  no  other  purpose  than  to  be  opened  once  in  each
week  that  honors  may  be  paid  and  anthems  sung  to  imagin-
ary deities.  When  we  consider  the  universality  of  this  hier-
archic system,  it  presents  one  of  the  most  extensive  drains
which  are  made  upon  the  productive  industry  of  the  world.

*  The  clergy  of  certain  modern  Protestant  sects,  as  the  Methodists,  for  ex-
ample, form  an  exception  to  this  remark,  except  in  the  case  of  the  higher  church
dignitaries ;  a  fact  which  some  regard  as  marking  the  decline  of  the  religion,
and  pointing  to  its  fall  when  it  shall  have  ceased  to  furnish  material  support
to  its  priesthood.

590  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

There  is  no  more  successful  mode  of  acquisition  than  the
ecclesiastical.  The  priests  of  Brahma,  of  Buddha,  of  Osiris,
of  Ormuzd,  of  Jehovah,  of  Jupiter,  of  Jesus,  and  of  Ma-
homet, have  all,  in  their  respective  lands  and  ages,  been  the
recipients  of  the  richest  material  bounties  which  earth  and
human  toil  could  bestow,  often  attaining  to  supreme  polit-
ical control.  The  uncivilized  world  is  still  the  more  or  less
absolute  victim  of  this  costly  superstition,  while  in  the  most
enlightened  nations  of  Europe  the  "  First  Estate  "  is  receiv-
ing and  enjoying,  without  labor,  the  wealth  created  by  the
productive  industry  of  the  Third.  The  enormous  salaries
received  by  the  clergy  in  all  countries  having  an  established
church  is  enough  of  itself  to  substantiate  this  view.

Monopoly. — Under  the  head  of  monopoly  as  a  mode  of
acquisition  may  be  classed  all  those  schemes  by  which,
through  the  co-operation  of  those  engaged  in  the  distribution
of  products,  whether  in  their  transportation  or  exchange,  or
in  the  financial  operations  arising  out  of  these  industries,  the
prices  of  commodities  to  the  consumers  are  increased  out  of
proportion  to  the  labor  expended  upon  them,  or  the  medium
of  exchange  is  made  to  fluctuate  in  value  so  as  to  affect  its
purchasing  power,  in  order  that  the  monopolists  may  make
large  gains  based  upon  such  fluctuations.

The  great  preservative  force  manifests  itself  in  a  univer-
sal effort  to  acquire  wealth.  So  long  as  the  motive  is  a
scarcity  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  it  is  directed  wholly  to
their  production.  The  physical  faculties  are  first  exhausted,
to  find  all  that  ISTature  herself  yields ;  then  the  lower  mental
powers  are  brought  into  play  to  secure  that  which  was  before
out  of  reach  ;  after  this,  higher  orders  of  thought  become
necessary  to  devise  means  of  inducing  Nature  to  yield  more
than  her  spontaneous  supply.  Art  and  science  are  thus  ulti-
mately brought  to  the  task  of  supporting  human  life.  All
the  great  necessary  industries,  by  which  alone  the  fruits
of  labor  can  be  universally  enjoyed,  follow  in  due  course.
Transportation,  exchange,  finance,  spring  into  being.     Plenty

MONOPOLY.  591

follows  tlirlft,  and  the  earth  teems  with  abundance.  But
avarice  survives,  and  the  love  of  accumulation,  once  and  still
so  essential  to  the  preservation  and  advancement  of  the  race,
now  revels  in  the  created  wealth  amassed.  The  same  power-
ful faculties,  arts,  and  devices  are  now  employed  to  attract
this  created  value  as  were  employed  to  create  it.  Production
requires  physical  exertion,  protracted  labor.  It  becomes
irksome,  repugnant.  The  more  sagacious  shirk  it,  throwing
it  upon  the  more  simple,  and  spend  their  time  in  devis-
ing means  of  reaping  its  benefits.  That  which  is  disliked
loses  its  respectability.  The  humble  artisan  and  peasant
come  to  be  looked  down  upon  as  inferior  to  the  proud
designer,  and  the  most  unworthy  of  the  race  are  taught  to
believe  themselves  "  better  "  than  the  most  worthy.

Of  all  the  methods  employed  to  attract  created  wealth,
that  of  organized  co-operation  has  proved  most  successful.
There  is  not  a  department  of  industry  which  has  not  been
made  a  prey  to  this  powerful  influence.  The  only  one  which
has  enjoyed  a  partial  immunity  is  that  of  production  itself.
The  number  of  producers  is  so  great,  and  their  special  duties
so  varied  and  dissimilar,  that  co-operative  production  could
only  exist  in  a  state  of  liberal  and  advanced  intelligence.
This  they  have  not  enjoyed,  for  reasons  already  set  forth.
The  non-producers  have  therefore  had  full  possession  of  the
field.

These  latter  classes  have  carried  on  their  operations  along
four  different  lines,  in  which  the  forces  of  aggrandizement
have  been  represented  by  four  corresponding  great  powers.
These  powers  are  :  the  military  power,  the  political  power,
the  sacerdotal  power,  and  the  speculative  power.  The  first
three  of  these  have  already  been  brought  under  considera-
tion, and  the  fourth  therefore  only  remains.  Just  as  men
have  banded  together  into  an  army  for  the  conquest  and
plunder  of  all  from  whom  value  could  be  taken,  just  as  they
have  plotted  to  govern  the  people  that  they  might  share  the
revenues,  just  as  they  have  co-operated  in  forming  an  eccle-

592  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEinr.

siastical  oligarchy  to  obtain  offerings  from  the  credulous  mass-
es through  awe-inspiring  teachings,  so  also  have  they  con-
trolled the  distributive  industries  by  watching  the  movement
of  the  products  of  labor  through  these  channels,  and  have
been  able  to  organize  and  control  that  movement  in  their
own  interests.

Monopoly  of  Transportation. — The  monopoly  of  trans-
portation, though  late  in  its  complete  development,  has  be-
come an  enormous  drain  upon  the  production  of  the  world,
placing  vastly  exaggerated  shares  of  the  objects  transported,
or  of  the  value  they  represent,  into  the  hands  of  the  trans-
porting companies.  The  absolute  necessity  of  transportation
to  the  distribution  of  products,  and  especially  the  great  cost
of  the  means  of  transportation,  have  rendered  this  an  easy
branch  of  industry  to  monopolize.  Since  the  introduction
of  railroads,  where  these  are  built  and  controlled  by  private
corporations,  the  temptations  to,  and  practice  of,  monopoly
have  become  so  great  that  many  seem  to  have  forgotten  that
this  evil  can  exist  anywhere  else,  and  we  find  one  class  of
monopolists,  the  monopolists  of  exchange,  organizing  against
this  class,  the  monopolists  of  transportation,  as  the  only
monopolists.

Monopoly  of  Exchange. — The  monopoly  of  exchange  is
of  remote  origin,  and  is  the  most  extensive  of  all  monopolies.
The  system  adopted  by  producers  of  transferring  absolute
possession  of  their  products  to  those  who  are  to  dispose  of
them  enables  the  latter  to  make  an  almost  unlimited  profit,
provided  a  sufiiciently  extensive  co-operation  can  be  effected.
Happily  the  mercantile  industry  is  so  large  that  there  must
always  be  a  limit  to  this  co-operation,  and,  therefore,  no
ruinous  lengths  can  ever  be  run,  yet  it  is  usually  possible  to
reserve  a  much  greater  share  than  is  sufficient  justly  to  recom-
pense the  labor  expended  in  exchange.

Monopoly  of  Finance. — Not  less  formidable  is  the  finan-
cial monopoly.  A  certain  substance  made  into  a  certain
form  and  bearing  a  certain  stamp  is  made  the  representative

1

MONOPOLY.  593

of  its  own  intrinsic  value,  in  any  form  whatever.  The  exist-
ence of  this  circulating  medium  gives  rise  to  special  enter-
prises for  the  exchange  of  this  only.  As  wealth  increases
more  rapidly  than  money,  and  the  exchange  of  products  be-
comes too  great  to  be  carried  on  with  the  amount  of  the  cir-
culating medium,  resort  is  had  to  paper  money,  in  the  nature
of  obKgations  to  pay  in  the  recognized  medium.  These
obligations,  in  the  course  of  time  and  the  demands  and  vicis-
situdes of  trade,  assume  a  thousand  forms,  and  become  loaded
with  infinite  complexities,  giving  extent  and  importance  to
financial  enterprise.

It  would  be  marvelous  if  those  who  become  initiated  into
all  the  mysteries  of  financial  manipulation  did  not  learn  with
the  rest  how  to  absorb  a  large  amount  of  these  various  rep-
resentatives of  value.  No  field  of  speculation  offers  such
temptations,  and,  while  a  lack  of  tact  and  cunning  is  sure  to
be  attended  with  ruin,  the  successful  are  loaded  with  wealth.
Sucli  a  field  is  never  without  its  organized  monopolists,  who
do  nothing  but  watch  their  chances  to  sweep  down  upon  the
fruits  of  human  toil  and  with  a  stroke  of  the  pen  brush  into
their  money-drawers  the  patient  labor  of  years.  Though  a
somewhat  hazardous  one,  speculation  in  paper  obligations  is
an  extensive  business,  a  successful  mode  of  acquisition,  and  a
dangerous  monopoly.

Monopoly  of  Labor — Slavery. — It  will  be  seen  that  the
chief  forms  of  monopoly  are  immediately  connected  with
those  industries  which  are  only  accessory  to  production.
This  is  natural,  since  it  is  so  much  easier  to  attract  created
than  uncreated  wealth.  When  we  deal  with  production  we
are  dealing  with  labor,  and  monopoly  of  labor  requires  a
control  and  management  of  the  person  of  the  laborer.  This
is  more  difficult  than  the  control  of  inanimate  merchandise.
^Nevertheless,  it  has  been  extensively  done.  For  what  is  hu-
man slavery  but  a  monopoly  of  labor,  a  non-industrial  mode
of  acquisition,  a  parasitic  way  of  gaining  a  subsistence  ?  And
slavery  is  one  of  the  great  human  institutions  which  have

694  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

existed  from  the  earliest  historic  times,  an  institution  which
is  only  now  disappearing  from  the  most  advanced  nations.

Monopoly  of  Manufacture. — Besides  that  personal  form
of  monopolizing  labor  which  is  called  slavery,  there  exists
in  all  great  manufacturing  industries  a  large  amount  of  mo-
nopoly of  a  somewhat  different  kind.  It  is  the  monopoly
of  capital,  which  denies  to  the  true  producer  the  product  of
his  labor,  pays  him  meager  wages,  and  derives  large  profits
from  the  manufacture.  But  this  is  the  least  objectionable
form  of  monopoly,  since,  thus  far  at  least,  co-operative  labor
has  failed  to  establish  those  extensive  manufactories  which
capital  creates,  and  which  are  so  necessary  to  the  material
advancement  of  the  world.  And  yet  it  is  through  the  or-
ganization and  co-operation  of  labor  that  all  monopoly  is  to
be  prevented.

Remedies  for  Monopoly. — The  natural  antidotes  to  mo-
nopoly {i.  e.,  where  no  attempt  is  made  at  social  regulation)
are  counter-monopoly  and  competition.  But  these  two  are
essentially  the  same,  counter-monopoly  being  only  competi-
tion of  monopolies.

There  is  a  constant  antithesis  between  competition  and
co-operation  which  applies  as  well  to  the  non-producer  as  to
the  producer.  Co-operation  always  tends  to  reduce  competi-
tion, and  competition  denotes  want  of  co-operation.  Wheth-
er competition  can  be  trusted  to  prevent  monopoly  depends
upon  the  degree  of  co-operation,  and  no  equitable  adjustment
of  the  various  relations  of  industry  can  be  made  so  long  as
different  industries  manifest  different  powers  of  co-operation.
As  society  is  now  constituted,  it  is  the  non-producing  classes
who  co-operate  most  and  compete  least,  while  the  producing
classes  co-operate  very  little  and  compete  strongly.  Co-
operation is  an  artificial  principle,  the  result  of  superior  in-
telligence. Competition  is  a  natural  law,  and  involves  no
thought.  Hence  those  who  co-operate  thrive  at  the  expense
of  those  who  compete.  Production,  therefore,  at  whose  ex-
pense all  or  nearly  all  this  monopoly  is  carried  on,  must,  if  it

THE  PAEASITIO  CLASSES.  595

would  hope  to  escape  it,  organize  and  co-operate  for  its  own
protection.  It  has,  in  the  end,  the  power  to  control  all  other
interests,  since  it  is  the  source  of  all  about  which  there  can
be  any  interest.  Capital  is  transient.  It  can  not  continue
to  multiply  itself  after  the  source  of  its  supplies  has  been
cut  off.  Labor  must  retain  possession  of  its  products,  and
only  transfer  them  to  the  consumer,  making  the  processes  of
distribution  wholly  dependent  upon  and  subservient  to  those
of  production.  But  this  can  only  come  of  greatly  increased
general  intelligence,  particularly  on  the  part  of  the  produ-
cers themselves,  and  for  a  long  time  to  come  we  may  expect
that  the  whole  train  of  monopolies  wiU  go  on  as  they  have
gone  on  from  time  immemorial.

GENERAL    OBSERVATIONS    ON   THE    PARASITIC    CLASSES.

This  brief  sketch  of  the  parasitic  classes  of  human  soci-
ety, though  manifestly  imperfect,  is  sufficient  to  show  that
the  acquisition  of  property  and  money  can  be  and  is  con-
ducted in  many  ways  which  add  nothing  to  the  wealth  or
material  progress  of  the  world,  and  contribute  nothing  to
the  supply  of  the  natural  and  necessary  wastes  of  existence.
It  suffices  to  show  that  a  very  large  part  of  the  human  race
is  thus  wholly  parasitic,  and  that  another  part  is  partially  so.
And  all  the  while  that  these  are  securing  the  transfer  of
value  unchanged  to  their  own  possession,  they  are  consum-
ing the  objects  of  production,  and  charging  the  productive
industries  with  all  the  labor  and  loss  which  their  activities
occasion.

The  existence  of  purely  parasitic  classes  in  society  must
be  contemplated  as  a  cosmical  fact.  Thus  viewed,  it  will
not  only  be  better  understood,  but  need  be  no  longer  de-
plored. It  affords  a  striking  proof  of  the  essential  homo-
geneity of  the  process  of  cosmic  aggregation  throughout  all
departments  of  phenomena.  We  saw,  when  dealing  with
organic  evolution  {mpra,  p.  350),  that,  from  the  point  of
view  of  biological  economics,  protists  and  plants  are  the

596  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOiT.— SOCIOGENY.

producers,  while  animals  are  parasites.  Yet  the  latter  as-
suredly represent  a  higher  stage  of  development.  They  are
a  true  aristocracy  in  the  organic  world,  and  illustrate  the
methods  by  which  nature  accomplishes  the  successive  steps
in  evolution.  Not  otherwise  must  we  contemplate  the
phenomena  of  social  parasitism.  It  can  not  be  denied  that
this  class,  measured  by  nature's  criterion — its  fitness  to  sur-
vive— occupies  a  higher  social  rank  than  that  of  the  pro-
ducing class.  We  contemplate  the  animal  world  as  an  end  in
and  for  itself,  and,  as  such,  we  say  that  it  represents  a  grade
of  progress  above  the  plant.  Relieved  from  the  necessity
of  manufacturing  the  organic  materials  of  which  it  is  com-
posed, it  can  devote  its  energies  to  higher  operations,  in-
cluding those  which  have  no  other  object  than  to  secure  the
individual's  well-being  and  enjoyment.  And  thus  we  may
equally  regard  the  parasitic  class  of  society  as  an  end  to
itself.  Relieved  from  the  drudgery  of  production  and  dis-
tribution, this  class  devotes  its  energies  to  the  attainment
of  the  maximum  personal  well-being  or  happiness.  As  this
is  the  ultimate  end  of  sentient  life  (vol.  ii,  p.  Ill),  it  is  of
course  a  legitimate  form  of  activity,  being  the  same  end  at
which  the  producer  is  also  aiming.

But,  true  as  all  this  is,  the  unphilosophical  need  to  be
cautioned  against  giving  it  too  comprehensive  an  applica-
tion. Applied  science  is  essentially  humanitarian ;  applied
sociology  must  be  especially  so.  While  fully  recognizing
all  such  facts  and  homologies  as  those  just  pointed  out,  the
sociologist  must  also  teach  that,  just  as  each  member  of
society  legitimately  seeks  his  individual  welfare,  so  society
as  a  whole  must  seek  its  collective  welfare,  and  that  it  is  the
duty  of  society,  in  its  collective  capacity,  so  to  regulate  the
phenomena  of  the  social  aggregate  as  to  prevent,  as  far  as
possible,  the  advancement  of  a  small  class  at  the  expense  of
a  large  one.  Here  especially  must  the  error  be  avoided  of
imagining  that  what  we  find  in  nature  must  therefore  be
the  best,     l^ature  is  no  more  anthropocentric  in  the  higher

THE  REPEODUOTIVE  FORCES.  597

than  in  the  lower  fields  of  phenomena  (vol.  i,  p.  Yl ;  vol.  ii,
p.  50).

I  have  now  completed  the  outline,  which  I  had  proposed
to  myself,  of  the  operations  of  the  preservative  forces  of
society.  I  have  shown  how  man  in  his  perpetual  pursuit  of
subsistence  has  organized  and  carried  forward  a  grand  eco-
nomic system,  and  how  all  this  imposing  material  civiliza-
tion which  we  see  around  us  is  but  the  magazine  which  he
has  built  and  the  stores  which  he  has  placed  in  it  in  order  to
escape  the  pains  of  hunger  and  cold.  And,  while  it  must
be  admitted  that  a  vast  deal  of  this  goes  to  the  gratification
of  higher  and  more  refined  desires  than  those  of  eating  and
of  being  comfortable,  still,  these  higher  pleasures  are  all
subservient  in  an  indirect  way  to  the  same  ultimate  end,  the
preservation  and  security  of  vital  existence.  Any  thing
which  can  be  shown  to  have  any,  even  the  least,  influence
in  placing  human  life  upon  a  surer  footing,  is  a  proper  ele-
ment of  preservation  {supra,  p.  563).  Many  things  com-
monly regarded  as  luxuries  come  under  this  head.  Facili-
ties for  intellectual  culture  are  the  indirect  means  of  secur-
ing the  most  certain  guarantees  of  perpetuity.  Even  the
softer  arts  often  exert  an  influence  ultimately  beneficial  for
this  purpose.  As  a  general  principle,  it  may  be  assumed
that  whatever  tends  to  refine,  elevate,  or  perfect  the  race,
diminishes  the  chances  of  its  ever  suffering  extinction.  The
multiplicity  of  faculties  and  susceptibilities  is  what  measures
the  degrees  of  perfection,  and  this  multiplies  proportionally
the  adaptations  to  circumstances;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is
this  adaptation  to  circumstances  which  alone  determines
what  species  shall  survive,  and  insures  their  persistence.

II.  The  Kepkoductive  Forces.

Having  considered  the  Preservative  Forces  as  the  first
and  greatest  of  all  the  motives  to  human  action,  I  now  pro-
ceed to  the  investigation  of  the   other  great   co-ordinate

698  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION".— SOCIOGENY.

moving  power — the  Reproductive  Forces.  The  special  office
of  the  former  is  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  race  by
preserving  its  physical  vitality ;  the  special  office  of  the
latter  is  to  prevent  its  extinction  by  the  reproduction  of  in-
dividuals. The  one  operates  for  the  present,  the  other  for
the  future.  The  one  preserves  the  individual,  the  other
preserves  the  species.  It  is  the  function  of  the  first  to  secure
an  average  normal  duration  of  vital  existence ;  it  is  the
function  of  the  second  to  evolve  from  each  life  the  germs  of
a  new  generation.

The  biological  importance  of  these  two  processes  be-
ing equal,  no  comparison  can  be  instituted.  Both  being
absolutely  essential  to  the  continued  existence  of  the  race,
we  must  confine  all  comparison  to  the  secondary  effects  which
each  has  proc'uced  upon  society,  and  which  constitute  the
sociological  elements.  Here,  however,  we  are  afforded  an
ample  field.  The  two  classes  of  influences  which  are  exerted
by  the  two  forces  are  very  unlike,  and  constitute  them  wholly
distinct,  though  equally  important  and  interesting,  depart-
ments of  sociological  study.  It  may  be  remarked  generally
that  the  results  attending  the  operations  of  the  Preservative
Forces  are,  from  the  point  of  view  of  social  progress,  great-
er, more  obvious,  more  varied,  and  more  comprehensive  than
those  attending  the  operations  of  the  Keproductive  Forces.
The  former  underlie  all  the  great  industrial,  economic,  and
acquisitional  movements  of  society.  It  is  to  them  that  must
be  attributed  all  the  progressive  institutions,  all  the  wealth,
all  the  invention,  all  the  civilization  of  the  world.  The  lat-
ter, on  the  other  hand,  while  they  call  forth  the  most  intense
activities,  do  not  direct  them  toward  the  production  of  wealth
or  the  advancement  of  thought.  Their  influence  is  internal,
rather  than  external,  molding  rather  than  creative.  The  nor-
mal effect  of  the  former  is  to  organize  human  happiness,
and  carry  it  up  into  higher  and  higher  spheres,  furnishing
new  and  more  complex  objects  for  the  gratification  of  new
and  more  delicate  faculties ;  the  normal  effect  of  the  latter

THE  EEPEODUOTIVE  FORCES.  599

is  to  throw  over  society  a  softening  and  refining  charm,  with-
out which  all  other  forms  of  enjoyment  would  be  insipid.
The  one  deals  with  the  hard  and  practical  side  of  life,  and
its  history  is  characterized  by  bold  and  positive  inroads  upon
nature;  the  other,  though  not  without  its  asperities,  is
chiefly  characterized  by  a  conservative  shyness  before  inno-
vation and  an  indifference  to  progress.  The  story  of  the
forces  of  preservation  is  an  epic ;  that  of  the  forces  of  per-
petuation is  a  lyric.

Civilization  may  be  said  to  be  the  product  of  three  great
forces :  those  of  the  stomach,  those  of  the  loins,  and  those  of
the  head.  The  first  is  the  propelling  power,  the  second  the
refining  power,  the  third  the  directing  power.  The  first  two
are  positive,  aggressive,  initiative ;  the  last  is  merely  super-
visory.

With  regard  to  the  positive  social  forces,  it  may  be  re-
marked that  they  are  distinguished  from  the  directive  force
by  one  essential  element,  that  of  invariability.  The  quan-
tity of  intellectual  force  is  contingent  and  dependent.  It
is  a  variable  quantity.  It  has  been  steadily  on  the  increase
for  ages,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been  in  a  state  of  develop-
ment from  the  earliest  period  in  the  history  of  man.  It  is
undergoing  perpetual  change  every-where,  is  subject  to  cir-
cumstances, and  may  be  increased  by  a  thousand  conditions,
both  natural  and  artificial,  the  most  important  of  which  is
education  (vol.  ii,  p.  483).  And  there  is  no  doubt  that  it
may  be  and  is  also  subject  to  diminution.  Quite  other-
wise with  the  positive  social  forces.  They  are  permanent.
Neither  natural  nor  artificial  causes  can  ever  avail  to  increase
or  diminish  them.  No  matter  against  what  obstacles  they
contend,  no  matter  with  what  success,  they  are  ever  active,
ever  equally  intense.  If  too  great  obstructions  intervene,  the
only  effect  is  to  arrest  motion.  The  forces  are  unabated.  They
are  true  natural  forces.  Their  operation  is  direct.  They
tend  to  produce  motion  in  a  right  line.  Obstacles  in  their
course  are  only  the  objects  of  resistance,  tending  to  bring

600  TEETIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

about  equilibrium.  "When  motion  ceases,  it  is  because  the
resistance  is  equal  to  the  propelling  force,  the  reaction  equal
to  the  action.  The  latter  is  not  diminished.  It  is  uniform
wherever  life  exists,  and  only  ceases  when  life  is  extinct.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  explain  that,  by  invariahility
and  uniformity,  as  the  terms  are  here  used,  it  is  not  meant
to  assert  that  the  human  appetites  are  at  all  times  and  un-
der all  circumstances  the  same  in  any  given  individual.
On  the  contrary,  they  are  capable  of  being  wholly  appeased
by  the  possession  of  the  objects  desired.  But  it  is  the  re-
currence of  these  desires,  on  the  withholding  of  the  objects
for  a  definite  period,  which  is  so  certain.  Neither  is  the  in-
tensity of  these  desires  precisely  equal  in  all  individuals ;  still,
the  average  intensity  is  nearly  the  same  at  all  times.  Nor
do  I  assert  that  these  appetites  are  not  greatly  modified  and
affected  by  both  natural  and  artificial  surroundings.  I  mean
simply  that  they  are  incapable  of  serial  differentiation  either
upward  or  downward,  like  the  mind-force.  Within  certain
comparatively  narrow  limits  they  are  fixed,  uniform,  and
universal.

The  Physical  Aspect. — As  an  introduction  to  the  consid-
eration of  the  reproductive  forces,  I  find  it  absolutely  neces-
sary to  deal  somewhat  specially  with  the  physical  aspect  of
the  question.  Whatever  may  be  the  notions  prevalent  of
the  relation  of  the  mind  to  the  body,  few  will  insist  that
there  is  any  great  degree  of  independence  between  the  pro-
creative  instinct  and  the  physical  organs  of  procreation.
Just  as,  in  the  preservative  forces,  the  nature  of  the  desire  is
physical,  and  gratification  is  only  obtainable  through  actual
contact  with  those  parts  of  the  nervous  system  in  which  the
desire  is  seated,  so  in  the  reproductive  forces  it  is  only
through  the  appropriate  nervous  excitation  that  the  systemic
equilibrium  can  be  restored  and  the  appetite  temporarily  ap-
peased.

Before  proceeding  further  with  this  part  of  the  discus-
sion, deference  to  established  custom  constrains  me  to  offer

THE  PHYSICAL  ASPECT.  COl

to  tlie  reader  all  the  apology  in  my  power  for  its  introduction.
He  may  rest  assured  that  it  is  not  of  my  own  choosing.  It
simply  lies  before  me,  and  without  it  the  system  would  be
manifestly  incomplete.  I  am  aware  that  it  is  customary  to
hand  over  such  topics  to  the  medical  writers,  as  if  there  were
some  necessary  connection  between  them  and  disease.  But
this  can  not  be  done  here,  because  it  is  not  the  pathological
state,  but  the  strictly  normal  operations  of  the  individual
units  of  society,  that  must  be  considered.  Moreover,  the
treatise  professes  to  be  scientific  so  far  as  the  infantile  state
of  sociology  will  permit,  and  science  has  never  found  it  pos-
sible to  defer  to  the  prevalent  sentiments  of  delicacy  which
are  properly  recognized  in  all  the  departments  of  literature
proper.  The  biologist  is  confronted  with  the  fact  that  it  is
upon  the  reproductive  system  that  he  must  depend  for  the
very  foundation  of  his  classification  of  both  animals  and
plants ;  and  about  the  first  important  work  that  ever  appeared
on  the  real  science  of  man,  Mr.  Darwin's  "  Descent  of  Man,"
is  little  else  than  a  treatise  on  the  sexual  relations  of  man
and  of  those  inferior  creatures  whose  actions  throw  light
upon  the  problems  of  anthropology.  Yet  no  one  regrets
that  great  work,  or  deems  its  celebrated  author's  mode  of
treatment  in  the  least  improper.  All  truth  is  proper  and
dignified.  Quicquid  essentia  dignum  est,  id  etiam  scientia
dignum.*

And  now  sociology,  in  passing  from  the  field  of  mere
literary  speculation  into  that  of  true  science,  finds  it  impos-
sible to  advance,  so  long  as  any  great  class  of  facts  remains
closed  to  its  investigations.

Feeling  vs.  Function. — The  physical  organs  of  reproduc-
tion may  be  considered  in  a  twofold  aspect,  viz.,  1,  as  the
seat  of  a  special  class  of  desires ;  and,  2,  as  nature's  means  of
continuing  the  race ;  i.  e.,  from  the  point  of  view  of  feeling
and  from  that  of  function.  In  this  respect  they  are  in  close
analogy  with  those  of  nutrition.     These  two  qualities  are  in

*  Bacon,  "Novum  Organum,"  lib.  1,  apli.  cxx.

602  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

botli  cases  distinct  and  independent.  There  is  even  less  rela-
tion discernible  between  the  sexual  desire  and  the  procreative
function  than  between  taste  and  digestion.  The  mind  may
frequently  dwell  upon  the  latter  during  the  performance  of
the  act,  but  it  rarely  dwells  upon  the  former ;  and,  when  it
does  so,  it  is  through  the  rational  faculties  and  not  spontane-
ously. It  is  not  supposable  that  animals  ever  connect  either
of  these  acts  with  their  consequences  while  performing  them.
To  such  as  reject  all  teleological  explanation  of  the  adaptations
in  nature,  there  remains  only  one  other  explanation.  This
consists  in  the  theory  that  the  combinations  were  originally
infinite  in  variety,  and  only  such  succeeded  as  proved  har-
monious— a  sort  of  "  pre-established  harmony  "  doctrine,  with
this  important  qualification,  that  to  every  harmony  there
were  myriads  of  discords,  and  that  while  the  latter  perished
immediately  the  former  survived.  Even  as  a  theory  and  a
speculation,  I  claim  for  the  latter  of  these  explanations  a  de-
cided superiority  over  the  former.  It  relegates  all  natural
adaptations  to  causation  or  necessity,  and  takes  them  out  of
the  hands  of  arbitrary  free-will  and  foreordination  on  the
one  hand,  and  of  mere  chance,  or  fatality,  on  the  other.  But,
whatever  may  be  the  true  explanation,  the  fact  is  obvious
that,  between  the  two,  to  all  appearances,  generically  distinct
phenomena — the  excitability  and  the  fertility  of  the  repro-
ductive organs — there  exists  an  admirable  adaptation,  with-
out which  the  latter  function  must  fail  and  life  immediately
cease.  One  great  law  permeates  the  whole  sentient  world,
that  before  there  can  be  action  there  must  first  be  desire,
that  action  can  only  be  performed  in  obedience  to  desire.
And  it  is  wholly  immaterial  whether  there  be  any  rational
dependence  and  visible  connection,  any  known  relation  be-
tween the  desire  and  the  action  or  not,  so  long  as  the  action
is  performed  and  its  own  peculiar  consequences  flow  from  it.
In  fact,  both  in  nutrition  and  fecundation  the  proper  func-
tional organs  are  not  the  same  as  those  which  attract  to  the
performance  of  the  acts  necessary  for  nourishing  and  fecun-

J

FEELIXG  VS.   FUNCTION".  603

dating.  There  are  distinct  set^  of  nerves,  located  in  differ-
ent parts  of  the  body,  for  the  latter  functions.  The  tongue
and  palate  are  the  chief  attractors  of  nutriment,  though  quite
remote  from  the  seat  of  the  digestive  and  assimilative  proc-
esses. And  although  the  stomach  itself  is  a  seat  of  pleas-
urable excitement,  still  this  grows  fainter  and  fainter  in  pro-
portion as  the  real  life-preserving  benefits  of  the  food  take
effect.  All  this  has  its  exact  counterpart  in  fecundation,
even  to  the  stimulation  of  the  secretive  glands  necessary  to
each  of  these  processes.  Viewed  from  this  stand-point,  all
physical  functions  are  homogeneous.

From  the  twofold  aspect  presented  by  the  physical  or-
gans of  reproduction,  there  naturally  comes  a  correspond-
ing division  of  the  subject  of  reproduction  into  two  parts,
one  of  which  confines  itself  to  the  results  which  flow  from
the  sexual  instinct  itself,  and  the  other  to  those  dependent
upon  the  generative  function.  The  first  of  these  classes
of  effects  may  be  denominated  direct  or  causal,  the  second
indirect  or  consequential.  With  regard  to  the  first  of  these
divisions,  the  analogy  holds  strictly  with  the  preservative
forces. ,  Both  are  mere  desires — physical  excitations — propel-
ling individuals  to  such  acts  as  will  best  afford  the  gratifica-
tion craved.  Both  deal  with  voluntary  human  actions  and
their  consequences  upon  society,  independently  of  the  phys-
ical consequences  accruing  to  the  individual.  But  when  we
come  to  the  second  division  we  find  a  divergence,  which
grows  out  of  the  radical  difference  between  the  natural  con-
sequences, or  indirect  effects,  of  the  two  classes  of  acts.  The
consequence,  or  indirect  effect,  of  the  nutritive  act  is  to  sup-
ply the  body  with  the  nourishing  materials  required  to  sus-
tain life.  The  consequence,  or  indirect  effect,  of  the  repro-
ductive act  is  to  beget  offspring.  The  two  results  are  wholly
unlike.  In  the  first,  no  radical  changes  take  place  in  the
system.  Here  the  analogy  holds  good  of  the  male,  but  not
of  the  female.  But  beyond  this  alone  it  ceases.  After  hav-
ing partaken  of  food,  every  thing  remains  as  before.     No

604  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

ulterior  consequences  follow.  No  new  element  is  introduced
into  society.  Nothing  is  added  to  society.  But  in  the  case
of  reproductive  acts,  besides  the  immediate  change  wrought
in  the  female,  there  is  soon  added  to  society  a  new  being,
so  different  from  the  parents  as  to  require  special  modifica-
tions of  the  whole  social  attitude  to  adapt  itself  to  the  new
condition.  .

The  existence  of  children  in  society  is  a  very  important
molding  fact.  Upon  it  depends  the  whole  system  of  patri-
archal institutions.  Out  of  it  has  grown  that  immense  social
factor,  the  family,  and  out  of  the  family  have  grown  gentes,
tribes,  and  nations.  From  it  proceed  new  desires  and  new
classes  of  desires,  which  are  attended,  like  all  desires,  with
their  appropriate  train  of  activities.  Parental  affection,  con-
sanguineal  predilections,  and  particularly  maternal  love,  have
proved  immense  social  influences,  doing  much  to  bring  so-
ciety to  its  present  condition.

The  nature  of  this  discussion  requires  us  to  confine  our-
selves to  the  first  of  these  divisions  of  the  subject,  to  the  train
of  circumstances  which  attend  and  follow  the  mere  desire  to
perform  the  reproductive  act,  wholly  independent  and  neg-
lectful of  its  indirect  or  physical  consequences.*

The  field  of  investigation  is  less  broad,  perhaps,  but  even
more  interesting  and  remunerative,  than  that  just  passed  over.
At  the  outset  we  are  met  by  a  distinction  not  before  found,
growing  out  of  the  fact  that  this  desire  is  of  a  dual  and  recip-

*  The  second  branch  of  this  subject  is  not  omitted  because  its  importance  is
under-estimated,  but  because  it  has  no  direct  bearing  upon  the  genesis  of  society.
It  would  be  much  easier  to  treat,  because  so  frequently  treated  already.  In  fact,
the  direct  or  causal  phenomena  of  reproduction  as  well  as  of  nutrition  have  been
wholly  neglected  by  all  writers  on  social  questions,  which  is  certainly  a  very
remarkable  omission.  Thus  far,  I  believe,  no  clear  and  comprehensive  concep-
tion of  the  nature  of  the  social  forces  has  been  formulated.  I  have  for  years
watched  with  great  care  the  drift  of  all  the  thought  with  which  I  have  been  able
to  acquaint  myself,  with  the  special  view  of  observing  to  what  extent  this  idea
was  dawning  upon  the  world,  and,  although  I  have  noted  several  adumbrations
and  fleeting  glimpses  of  the  truth,  nothing  like  a  comprehensive  view  of  its
nature  and  bearings  upon  society  has  yet  been  detected.

THE  PHYSICAL  ASPECT.  605

rocal  nature.  The  objects  of  the  preservative  force  are  ex-
ternal things.  The  relation  is  between  man  and  the  outside
world  ;  and  even  among  cannibals,  where  it  makes  man  its
object,  it  regards  him  as  an  animal,  as  an  object  external  to
man.  The  objects  of  the  sexual  instinct,  on  the  contrary,
are  other  human  beings.  Each  sex  is  so  constituted  as  to
desire  and  enjoy  the  other.  "Whereas  the  organs  of  taste  are
the  same  in  all,  and  all  pursue  the  same  objects  of  gratifica-
tion, the  organs  of  reproduction  are  of  one  kind  in  one  half
and  of  another  in  the  other  half  of  the  race,  and  endowed
with  an  adaptation  and  an  attraction  the  one  for  the  other.
Thus  the  world  is  divided  into  two  great  halves  by  this  dis-
tinction which  is  called  sex.  If  we  look  down,  at  this  point;
into  the  lower  forms  of  life,  we  shall  find  that  a  similar  dis-
tinction pervades  every  department  of  biology.  Throughout
the  vertebrate  series  of  animals,  male  and  female  exist  in  sep-
arate individuals,  and,  with  a  few  exceptions,  this  is  also  the
case  throughout  the  entire  animal  kingdom,  while  the  dis-
tinction of  sex  also  prevails  generally  among  plants.

THE    SEXUAL    APPETITE.

The  sexual  desires  of  male  beings  are  quite  different
from  those  of  females.  Throughout  the  animal  kingdom
the  latter  possess  them  only  at  certain  times  and  during  a
certain  period.  At  all  other  times  they  are  indifferent  and
manifest  no  sexual  passion.  The  males,  on  the  contrary,  seem
to  possess  the  appetite  at  all  times.*  There  could  be  noth-
ing lost  and  might  be  much  gained  by  this  latter  fact.  To
secure  certain  fecundation  for  all  females  in  the  proper  sea-
son seems  to  be  the  chief  object  of  nature.  That  many
males  are  deprived  of  gratification  is  a  matter  of  no  impor-
tance. In  such  deprivation  Nature  is  as  indifferent  as  she  is
lavish  with  her  germs  of  new  life.  Still,  it  is  certain  that
the  males  of  some  species  experience  much  more  passion
during  the  breeding-season  than  during  other  periods.    This

*  Darwin,  "  Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  pp.  264,  390  ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  116,  256.
27

606  TERTIAKY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

is  well  proved  in  the  case  of  most  birds,  while  in  fishes  there
is  a  male  periodicity  corresponding  to  the  female  periodicity.

Anomaly  of  Woman's  Sexual  Sentiments. — In  man  the
same  is  true  of  the  males  as  in  animals,  except  perhaps  tliat
his  passions  are  even  more  uniform.  But  in  women  the  case
is  somewhat  different.  Although  less  bold  and  aggressive,
and  doubtless  on  the  whole  less  intense  than  those  of  men,
they  are  yet  much  less  influenced  by  physical  processes  than
those  of  the  lower  animals.  Their  chief  variation  is  a
monthly  one  dependent  upon  ovulation,  becoming  much
weaker  during  the  agenetic  period.  But  even  then  they
are  often  by  no  means  faint.  So,  too,  they  continue  in
most  cases  throughout  pregnancy,  often  manifesting  them-
selves even  more  strongly  during  its  earlier  stages  than  at
other  times.  This  is  all  doubtless  contrary  to  the  natural
state  of  things,  and  can  only  be  accounted  for  as  the  result
of  social  conditions.

The  immense  superiority  of  the  two  faculties  of  reason
and  imagination  in  man  over  what  they  ever  attain  in  ani-
mals would  suffice  to  explain  this.  In  animals,  where  every
thing  is  done  in  obedience  to  impulse  alone,  the  males  are
unable  to  excite  passion  in  the  females  at  times  when  nature
does  not  supply  it.  They  possess  no  means  of  reaching  their
imagination.  As  all  the  facts  prove,  the  pursuit  of  this
pleasure  by  the  males  is  as  open  and  free  from  restraint  as
is  the  pursuit  of  the  gustatory  pleasure.  All  that  play  of
the  imagination  which  secrecy  fosters  is  wanting  in  them.
The  females  will  therefore  no  more  gratify  the  males  when
they  do  not  themselves  experience  desire  than  they  will
eat  when  they  do  not  experience  hunger — they  are  even
less  likely  to  do  so,  for  the  local  pleasures  of  the  tongue
and  palate  sometimes  survive  though  the  stomach  be  com-
pletely satisfied,  while  the  temporary  disappearance  of  the
sexual  desire  may  be  complete.  And,  when  this  desire  is
thus  totally  absent,  the  males  have  no  power  to  arouse  it.
They  can  not  make  their  demands  understood  by  the  fe-

THE  SEXUAL  APPETITE.  607

males,  and  the  latter  would  probably  submit  to  be  destroyed
by  tlieir  mates  rather  than  afford  them  the  gratification
sought.  In  the  second  place,  the  lower  animals  lack  the
reasoning  powers  necessary  to  prevail  upon  the  females.
They  can  not  practice  upon  them  those  arts,  and  secure,  by
promises  of  future  rewards  of  other  kinds,  present  submis-
sion to  what  gives  them  no  immediate  pleasure.  They  are
too  low  in  the  scale  of  mind  to  understand  the  principle  of
a  quid  pro  quo.  They  have  no  foresight,  do  not  know
how  to  provide,  to  anticipate,  to  barter  for  future  gratifi-
cations in  exchange  for  present  ones  conferred.  They
have  no  language  capable  of  conveying  ideas  of  this  kind
and  exciting  hopes  and  fears  of  future  benefits  and  evils
as  inducements  to  the  performance  of  acts  which  are,  if  not
distasteful,  at  least  not  prompted  by  interior  impulses.  All
tliey  know  is  to  obey  natural  promptings,  and  however  much
the  males  may  feel  these  promptings  they  can  not  persuade
the  females  to  permit  their  satisfaction  unless  they  experi-
ence similar  ones.

In  man  all  this  is  different.  He  can  employ  both  these
grand  levers,  imagination  and  reason,  to  obtain  the  pleas-
ure craved.  He  has  the  power  by  appealing  to  imagination
to  arouse  in  woman  passions  which  nature  does  not  spon-
taneously supply.  He  can  excite  them  at  times  when  they
are  not  needed  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  objects  of
nature.  He  can  produce  them  during  her  agenetic  period
when  there  is  no  fertile  principle  within  her  to  be  impreg-
nated, and  during  pregnancy  when  fecundation  has  already
taken  place.  He  employs  for  these  purposes  the  powerful
aid  of  that  social  sentiment  called  modesty,  the  genesis  of
which  we  shall  endeavor  to  trace  at  the  proper  time,  and  by
operating  behind  the  veil  of  secrecy,  and  arousing  all  the
prurient  charms  of  curiosity,  seconded  by  the  material  facili-
ties which  clothing  and  houses  afford,  he  is  able  to  gain  for
woman  a  complete  mastery  over  her  own  nature.  By  ap-
peals to  imagination  he  actually  creates  the  passion  which

608  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

Nature  declares  useless  and  withholds,  but  which  he  declares
useful  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  own.  But  Nature  is  often
too  strong  for  his  appeals.  She  often  asserts  her  supremacy,
and  refuses  to  allow  the  great  end  of  perpetuating  the  race
to  be  placed  upon  a  common  level  with  the  base  end  of  ful-
filling the  desires  of  the  male  sex.  Man  often  fails  to  excite
in  woman,  in  her  unnatural  periods,  a  reciprocation  of  his
desires.  But  this  bj  no  means  daunts  him.  When  appeals
to  imagination  fail,  he  appeals  to  reason.  If  he  can  not  cre-
ate in  her  this  desire,  he  takes  advantage  of  desires  which
are  more  constant  and  less  capricious.  If  she  can  not  be
made  to  desire  his  embraces,  he  always  knows  what  there  is
that  she  does  desire,  and  this  he  offers  in  exchange.  He  em-
ploys the  art  of  persuasion,  the  power  of  oral  communication.
He  lavishes  upon  her  endearing  epithets,  gratifying  her  pride
and  her  conceit.  And  then  he  promises  her  those  material  gifts
and  advantages  which  he  knows  will  constitute  the  strongest
temptation.  And  in  this  manner  he  secures  willing  submis-
sion when  nature  persists  in  withholding  impulse.

The  constant  exercise  of  these  influences  upon  woman
from  generation  to  generation  has  at  length  resulted  in  the
radical  differences  which  I  have  pointed  out  between  the
human  species  and  the  lower  animals.  It  seems  to  be  pro-
portional to  the  degree  of  social  organization  and  material
prosperity,  and  this  is  illustrated  in  many  savage  tribes  as
compared  with  enlightened  nations.

Difference  in  the  Sexual  Instincts  of  Males  and  Females.
— The  sexual  desire  of  man  is  quite  different  from  that  of
woman.  Besides  being  uniform  and  uninterrupted,  while
hers  is  more  or  less  periodical  and  intermittent,  it  is  further
distinguished  by  boldness  and  aggressiveness  where  we  find
shyness  and  timidity  in  her.  This  species  of  natural  mod-
esty we  find  among  the  females  of  many  animals."    ISTot-

*  The  passive  character  of  female  creatures,  as  contrasted  with  the  active
character  of  males,  is  manifested  in  the  lowest  forms  of  life.  (See  Julius  Sachs,
"  Lehrbuch  der  Botanik,"  S.  870.)

THE  SEXUAL  APPETITE.  609

withstanding  the  mutuality  of  desire  in  both,  we  almost
always  find  the  females  feigning  an  effort  to  escape,  and  the
males  pursuing.  All  this  has  its  counterpart  in  the  human
race,  where  the  normal  condition  universally  is,  that  the
males  should  take  the  initiative  and  active,  and  the  females
the  defensive  and  passive  character  in  the  courtship.  The
genetic  explanation  of  this  may  be,  at  least  in  part,  that  the
male  is  always  seeking  the  female,  even  when  she  will  not
accept  him,  and  thus,  from  the  habit  of  refusing  when  un-
willing, she  has  fallen  into  that  of  pretending  to  refuse  even
when  willing.  Certain  it  is  that  this  fact  is  a  very  import-
ant one  for  sociology,  and  one  which  has  materially  affected
the  condition  of  society.

I  note  these  points  of  distinction  between  the  sexes  to
show,  as  occasion  may  require,  in  what  manner  they  have
affected  the  character  of  society  and  determined  the  direc-
tion of  the  reproductive  forces.

Diffusion  of  the  Sexual  Instinct. — Thus  far  I  have
confined  my  remarks  to  the  simple  sexual  desire  by  which
nature  provides  that  each  species  of  animals,  including  the
human  species,  shall  reproduce  its  kind.  And,  so  long  as
man  is  regarded  as  an  animal,  this  view  is  sufficient.  For
there  is  no  probability  that  the  sexual  desires  of  animals
ever  diffuse  themselves  through  the  system  far  beyond  the
local  organs  of  generation.  To  a  certain  extent,  no  doubt,
the  whole  system  of  an  animal  is  sexually  polarized,  but
the  seat  of  pleasure  in  either  sex  is  localized.  This  is
the  case  also  with  man,  and  the  degree  of  diffusion  is
strictly  commensurate  with  that  of  his  mental  and  moral
refinement.  But  the  extent  to  which  these  influences
are  capable  of  modifying  his  sexual  nature  is  very  great.
While  the  sexuality  of  a  savage  is  scarcely  less  localized
than  that  of  a  brute,  that  of  a  cultivated  and  enlightened
man  or  woman  is  widely  diffused,  and  blends  with  all  the
other  emotions  and  with  the  intellect  itself.  It  were  fool-
ish to  deny  that  the  seat  and  radiating  source  of  all  love

610  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

between  the  sexes  is  the  generative  system.  And  yet,  in  a
highly  organized  individual,  this  sexuality  is  so  thoroughly
diffused  that  perpetual  and  enduring  pleasures  flow  from  the
entire  nervous  system,  which  are  regarded  as  spiritual  emo-
tions. This  state  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  foretaste  of  venereal
gratification  when  the  latter  is  unattainable.  It  is,  however,
much  more  than  this :  it  often  exists  independent  of,  and
unaccompanied  by,  the  localized  sentiment.

Love.

In  the  same  manner  as  the  term  Want  was  employed  as
a  general  designation  of  the  preservative  forces,  we  may
employ  as  a  general  designation  of  the  reproductive  forces
the  corresponding  term  Love.

The  word  love  is  employed  for  a  variety  of  quite  differ-
ent sentiments,  since  modem  languages  do  not  possess  sepa-
rate terms  for  the  expression  of  the  several  ideas  conveyed
by  the  Greek  in  the  three  distinct  words,  epo)?,  (vyaTrr),  and
<f)i\,ia.  It  is  only  in  the  first  of  these  senses  that  I  shall  use
the  term  love  in  this  discussion,  and  that  in  its  primitive
signification  as  employed  by  the  older  poets,  viz.,  sexual
love.  But  it  is  wholly  improper  to  restrict  this  expression
to  the  localized  instinct.  The  love  of  man  for  woman  and
of  woman  for  man,  is  necessarily  sexual,  and  any  attempt
to  separate  the  diffused  from  the  localized  form,  by  an  ab-
rupt interval,  is  useless,  and  betrays  a  desire  to  escape  the
recognition  of  an  obvious  fact.  All  love  emanates  from  the
sexual  system,  of  which  the  mammary  glands  are  a  part,
particularly  in  woman,  and  the  higher  sentiment  of  love
seems  to  have  its  chief  seat  in  the  breast  of  man  as  well  as
of  woman.

Love  is  essentially  a  physical  passion,  and  no  matter  how
pure  it  may  be,  or  how  far  removed  from  the  grosser  desire
to  perform  the  reproductive  act,  it  is  out  of  this  desire  that
all  those  etherealized  emotions  originally  emanate,  and  to
this  that  they  all  must  ultimately  revert.     Nature  begets  no

LOVE.  611

useless  thing.  Every  thing  we  find  ourselves  endowed  with
is  more  or  less  closely  linked  with  one  or  the  other  of  her
great  economic  ends,  with  the  preservation  or  the  perpetua-
tion of  life.  The  passion  of  love  in  its  most  elevated  forms
is  so  indissolubly  connected  with  the  latter  of  these  ends
that  there  exist  no  breaks  in  its  chain.  Its  final  object  can
never  be  less  than  reproduction  itself.  It  is  only  when  we
thus  regard  it  that  any  just  conceptions  of  its  nature  can  be
formed.  Instead  of  charging  love  with  impurity  because  we
find  it  constantly  tending  toward  this  object,  we  should  see
in  this  fact  only  the  natural  working  of  a  great  harmonious
law.  This  truth  once  fijsed  in  the  mind,  man  will  learn
to  expect  the  consequences  from  love  which  he  now  so
frequently  deplores.  But  the  most  important  advantage
which  will  flow  from  the  recognition  of  the  unity  of  all  the
love-sentiments,  will  be  that  of  raising  the  standard  of  those
forms  which  are  now  called  base  to  the  same  dignity  with
those  which  are  regarded  as  pure.  It  will  be  seen  that  all
love  is  pure,  since  it  is  natural ;  for  nature,  not  convention,
is  the  true  standard  of  purity.

60CI0L0GIC    EFFECTS    OF   THE   LOVE-SENTIMENT.

"When  we  consider  the  universality  and  the  intensity  of
this  passion,  we  may  well  conclude  that  its  influence  upon
society  during  the  myriads  of  ages  gone  by  must  have  been
immense.  We  may  well  suppose  that  all  human  institutions
have  been  profoundly  modified  by  its  presence.  It  is  our
present  task  to  arrive  as  nearly  as  may  be  at  the  character
and  extent,  and  also  at  a  classification,  of  the  results  which
have  accrued  to  society  from  the  sentiment  of  love  alone.
These  results  have  not  only  been  social,  but  physical.

Physical  Modifications. — The  first  physical  modifications
are  those  which  the  race  has  undergone  by  reason  of  the
preferences  of  the  females.  Far  back  in  the  primordial
ages  of  man's  existence  this  principle  began  its  work.  The
extent  of  its   effects  can  not,  of  course,  ever  be  known.

612  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

Slight  variations  are  always  occurring  in  all  organisms.
They  must  have  occurred  in  man.  Woman,  being  the  con-
stant object  of  man's  unremitting  passion,  was  placed  in  a
position  to  exercise  a  wide  option  among  those  who  sought
to  possess  her.  Thus  placed,  she  naturally  chose  those  whom
her  sense  of  the  beautiful  most  approved,  rejecting  the  less
attractive.  On  almost  all  points  this  sense  was  probably  uni-
form, so  that  the  same  peculiarities  would  be  preferred  by  all
and  at  all  times.  Those  possessing  peculiarities  which  pleased
the  female  sex,  therefore,  became  the  fortunate  founders  of
new  generations.  But  the  universal  law  of  nature  is  to  trans-
mit to  posterity  the  peculiarities  of  parents.  Hence  there
resulted  the  transmission  from  generation  to  generation  of  a
certain  number  of  variations  most  pleasing  to  the  female  sex,
which  at  length  became  characteristics  of  the  entire  race.
It  is  impossible  to  determine  in  all  cases  what  the  characters
are  which  have  been  produced  by  the  operation  of  this  law ;
but  the  color  of  the  skin,  the  growth  of  hair  upon  the  body,
the  purity  of  the  complexion,  and  the  regularity  of  the  feat-
ures, are  among  those  for  which  science  has  already  adduced
evidence.  It  is  not  at  all  impossible  that  the  erect  posture
of  man,  by  which  he  is  distinguished  from  all  other  animals,
may  be  also  to  some  degree  a  consequence  of  sexual  selec-
tion. Indeed,  for  aught  we  know,  the  entire  figure  of  the
species  may  have  undergone  a  complete  revolution  from  this
cause.

The  second  physical  alteration  which  man  has  undergone,
in  consequence  of  the  action  of  the  passion  of  love,  has
grown  out  of  the  rivalry  which  existed  among  the  males  for
the  possession  of  the  females.  Physical  strength  must  have
once  been  the  only  claim  set  forth,  and  he  who  vanquished
all  his  rivals  and  secured  the  coveted  prize  was  thus  enabled
to  transmit  the  physical  qualities  by  which  he  was  able  to  do
so.  Thus  those  possessing  the  greatest  physical  strength  and
prowess,  and  the  most  available  weapons  of  combat,  were
able  to  transmit  these  qualities  to  posterity,  and  the  weaker

EFFECTS  OF  THE  LOVE-SENTIMENT.  613

ones  were  obliged  to  die  without  issue.  The  former  pos-
session by  man  of  formidable  canine  teeth  as  offensive
weapons  is  the  most  completely  established  scientific  fact  in
favor  of  this  theory.  But  the  superior  strength  of  the  male,
as  well  as  his  size  and  courage,  may,  with  equal  proba-
bility, be  referred  to  this  law.  It  may  be,  too,  that  a  very
large  amount  of  that  excess  of  intellectual  vigor,  which  men
are  acknowledged  to  possess  over  women,  should  be  attrib-
uted to  this  cause,  since  the  mental  power — the  cunning  and
sagacity — of  the  male  sex  must  have  been  far  more  successful
in  circumventing  rivals  and  securing  the  preferences  of  the
female  sex  than  any  external  weapons  of  physical  warfare.
And  all  these  peculiarities  are  proved  to  be  inherited  to  a
greater  extent  by  the  males  than  by  the  females.

It  is  to  that  unrivaled  scientific  philosopher,  Charles
Darwin,  that  the  world  owes  the  promulgation  and  substan-
tiation of  these  great  biological  laws.

Social  Modifications. — But,  besides  these  morphological
effects  which  love  has  produced  in  man,  there  is  a  long  train
of  purely  sociological  effects  which  are  ascribable  to  its  op-
eration. These  may  all  be  brought  under  three  principal
heads  :  1,  institutions  of  marriage ;  2,  the  sentiment  called
modesty ;  and,  3,  the  present  comparative  relations  and  con-
dition of  the  two  sexes,  or,  as  some  may  better  understand
it,  the  social  condition  of  woman  as  compared  with  that  of
man.  Each  of  these,  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  considered
separately,  is  the  direct  and  exclusive  result  of  the  repro-
ductive passion,  sexual  instinct,  or  love-sentiment.  To  be
convinced  of  this,  one  needs  only  to  contemplate  the  impos-
sibility of  each  respectively,  but  for  that  emotion.

MALE   SEXUAL    SELECTION.

Before  proceeding  to  consider  the  various  forms  of  mar-
riage, it  will  be  necessary  to  advert  to  a  very  important  bio-
logical fact  which  has  constituted  one  of  the  results  of  the
development  in  man  of  his  greatly  superior  psychic  faculties.

614  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

This  fact  is  what  may  be  called  male  sexual  selection,  or  the
transfer  to  the  male  sex  of  the  sexual  selective  power  exer-
cised in  the  lower  animals  and  in  primordial  man  by  the
female.

The  higher  a  being  rises  in  the  scale  of  development,  the
more  sensitive  become  all  its  faculties  and  organs.  Just  as
the  raw  pabulum  of  animals  will  not  suflace  for  man,  and
the  rude  preparation  of  food  by  the  savage  fails  to  satisfy
the  more  refined  palate  of  civilized  man,  so  the  development
and  refinement  of  all  the  faculties  of  man  in  his  gradual
emergence  out  of  animality  into  humanity,  and  his  elevation
from  barbarism  to  civilization,  lead  him  more  and  more  to
select  his  companions  as  well  as  his  food,  and  beget  prefer-
ences in  the  objects  of  sexual  as  well  as  of  gustatory  and  all
other  species  of  gratification.  Much  as  may  be,  and  doubt-
less is,  due  to  the  effects  of  the  selection  of  the  female  sex  in
effecting  morphological  changes,  it  is  still  to  the  selection  of
the  male  sex  that  must  be  ascribed  the  greater  part  of  those
sociological  phenomena  which  belong  to  the  domain  of  the
reproductive  forces.

In  fact,  it  is  here  that  is  to  be  detected  one  of  the  few
distinct  and  tangible  facts  which  serve  to  separate  man  from
the  brute  creation.  According  to  the  law  just  enunciated,
by  which  increased  intelligence  manifests  itself  in  the  direc-
tion of  the  subjection  of  woman  to  man,  her  power  of  se-
lection, so  freely  and  constantly  exercised  in  the  animal  state,
is  taken  away,  and  she  loses  that  supremacy  which  she  for-
merly held.  Then,  and  throughout  the  animal  world,  the
female  sex  controlled  the  male  in  all  matters  pertaining  to
sex,  haughtily  declining  and  successfully  rejecting  the  ad-
vances of  the  latter  when  not  reciprocated.  But  the  female
of  the  human  race  has  lost  this  scepter,  has  yielded  to  the  cun-
ning appeals  of  her  male  companion  to  her  imagination  and
her  reason,  and  little  by  little  surrendered  both  her  mind  and
body  to  his  control.  Once  she  ruled  over  him  by  reason  of
his  passion,  which  prompted  him  to  make  perpetual  demands

MALE  SEXUAL  SEL'ECTION.  615

npon  her  for  the  favor  that  she  alone  could  confer ;  now  he
rules  over  her  body  and  soul  by  reason  of  a  thousand  desires
witliin  her,  which  prompt  her  to  make  perpetual  demands
upon  him,  as  lord  of  the  universe,  for  that  protection  and
those  favors  which  he  alone  can  confer.  The  transition  from
the  animal  to  the  human  state  has  wrought  a  complete  revo-
lution in  all  the  sexual  relations,  and  transferred  the  selective
power  absolutely  from  the  female  to  the  male  sex.  In  no
other  department  has  there  been  so  great  a  reversal  of  natu-
ral law.

This  important  fact  of  the  transition,  in  man  alone  of  all
animals,  from  female  to  male  selection  may  not  only  be
plainly  seen  in  its  direct  results,  but  is  significantly  attested
in  certain  of  its  indirect  ones.  Among  others,  it  is  interest-
ing to  observe  that,  just  as  the  form  of  sexual  selection  is  the
opposite  in  man  from  what  it  is  in  the  lower  animals,  so,  aa
indeed  might  be  expected,  the  male  beauty,  due  to  female
selection  in  the  latter,  becomes  female  beauty  due  to  male
selection  in  the  former — a  fact  which  at  once  affords  a  strik-
ing proof  of  this  transition,  and  of  the  modifying  power  of
the  selective  process.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  here  again,  as  so  many  times
before,  we  see  in  the  progress  of  true  civilization  the  un-
mistakable tendency  toward  the  ultimate  restoration  of  the
primeval  state  of  nature.  Once  more  the  cyclical  charac-
ter of  our  artificial  social  system  is  clearly  revealed.  Even
in  our  own  times  we  are  beginning  to  observe  the  most  un-
mistakable signs  of  the  eventual  resumption  by  woman  of
her  lost  scepter,  and  of  her  restoration  to  that  empire  over
the  emotional  nature  of  man  which  the  females  of  nearly
all  other  animals  exercise.

Marriage.

Let  us  now  consider  the  various  institutions  of  marriage
which  have  existed  among  men,  and  the  reasons,  known  and
hypothetical,  which  have  led  to  their  adoption.     The  uni-

616  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGE!nr.

formity  and  invariability  of  the  sexual  desire  in  man,  taken
in  connection  with  its  intermittent  and  periodical  character
in  woman,  rendered  him,  as  it  has  the  males  of  all  species  of
animals,  the  active  and  aggressive  party,  even  during  the  pe-
riods when  woman's  passion  was  as  strong  as  his  own.  She
learned  to  wait  for  advances  on  his  part  in  aU  cases,  and  to
remain  passive  under  the  most  extreme  desire.  This  fact
becomes  therefore  a  prime  element  in  the  entire  philosophy
of  sex,  since  it  reduces  the  source  from  which  the  reproduc-
tive forces  emanate  to  the  male  sex  alone.  The  results  are
doubtless  profoundly  modified,  as  well  sociologically  as  bio-
logically, by  the  elections  and  preferences  of  the  passive  sex,
but  the  motive  power,  the  propelling  force,  is  in  man,  whom,
when  we  scan  the  history  of  the  race,  we  shall  find  to  have
shaped  all  the  facts  relating  to  the  sexes  pretty  much  after
his  own  mind.  The  activities  which  have  been  put  forth
in  this  department  of  life,  like  all  other  activities,  are  but  a
series  of  struggles  for  the  gratification  of  desire.  Here,  as
every-where  else,  pleasure  is  the  object  of  all  action.  But
in  this  case,  more  than  in  any  other,  the  motive  to  action
is  impulsive  rather  than  rational  desire,  and  the  pleasure
sought  an  immediate  and  physical  rather  than  a  future  or
intellectual  one.  Moreover,  the  impulse  is  of  a  nature  which
will  not  brook  defeat,  and  which  does  not  know  how  to  sub-
mit to  restraint.  Upon  its  strength  or  weakness  depends  the
perpetuation  or  extinction  of  the  species,  and  therefore  its
intensity  is  an  element  in  the  fitness  of  the  species  to  sur-
vive. The  fundamental  law  of  natural  selection  has  in-
creased that  intensity  to  a  very  high  pitch,  and  endowed
man  with  the  most  irresistible  passions.  He  must  be  re-
garded as  the  source  of  power  for  the  accomplishment  of
all  sexuo-social  phenomena.

Marriage,  in  whatever  form,  is  but  the  successful  issue
of  these  efforts.  The  courtship  of  animals  is  but  the  at-
tempt to  obtain  temporary  gratification.  This  must  have
been  man's  early  condition,  and  the  marriage  relation  was

MARRIAGE.  617

doubtless  once  limited  to  a  single  reproductive  act,  although
in  many  animals,  and  particularly  in  birds,  quite  a  perma-
nent form  of  marriage  exists,  often  consisting  in  a  mating
for  life.

The  dissatisfaction  and  uncertainty  of  this  temporary  and
ephemeral  form  of  marriage  must  have  been  felt  by  man  at
a  very  early  period,  and  he  must  soon  have  set  about  the
task  of  devising  a  more  permanent  and  satisfactory  form.
The  passivity  of  woman,  coupled  with  the  ardor  of  man,  soon
placed  her  wholly  out  of  the  account,  and  reduced  her  to  the
condition  of  a  mere  possession,  liable  to  fall  into  the  hands
of  any  admiring  rival  who  could  succeed  in  securing  and  re-
taining her — this  possession  differing  little  from  that  of  any
other  class  of  property.  This  form  of  marriage  by  seizure
and  forcible  retention  of  the  wife  by  the  husband  may  be
regarded  as  one  of  the  first  which  existed  after  the  state  of
pure  promiscuity.  But,  like  the  seizure-method  of  obtain-
ing other  kinds  of  property,  it  involved  the  race  in  per-
petual combat,  and  rendered  existence  precarious  and  social
progress  impossible.  Just  as  government  was  instituted
to  protect  society  from  such  ruthless  modes  of  acquisition,
BO  formal  marriage  was  also  instituted  to  prevent  these
incessant  strifes  among  men  for  the  possession  and  retention
of  women.

This  parallelism  between  the  progress  which  man  has
made  in  refining  and  complicating  the  modes  of  operation
of  the  preservative  and  of  the  reproductive  forces  may  be
carried  out  still  further.  Thus  the  higher  form  of  love  may
not  inappropriately  be  compared  to  the  love  of  money  for
its  own  sake,  both  of  which  are  derived  from  the  respective
B^  simple  instincts  of  reproduction  and  nutrition  ;  while  mar-
W      riage  in  its  various  more  complicated  forms  may  be  regarded

■  as  the  homologue  of  the  various  legal  forms  of  seizin,  con-

■  veyance,  and  tenure  of  property.

■  The  term  marriage  is  used  in  the  general  sense  of  the

■  union  of  the  male  and  female  for  the  purpose  of  reproduc-

k

618  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENT.

tion.  In  this  sense  it  is  as  applicable  to  any  other  animal  as
to  man.  But  the  insecurity  of  this  kind  of  union  led  man
to  the  institution  of  various  safeguards  against  the  disturb-
ances experienced  in  his  sexual  relations.  These  safeguards
took  the  form  of  customs,  or  rites,  which  society  came  to  re-
spect. Like  all  customs  originating  among  primitive  tribes,
those  concerning  sexual  unions  were  accompanied  by  cere-
monies wliich  were  supposed  to  give  them  an  especial  sanc-
tion. The  number  and  variety  of  these  marriage  ceremonies
are  endless,  and  an  attempt  to  enumerate  them  would  be  be-
yond the  scope  of  this  work.  "We  are  less  concerned  with
these  forms  than  with  the  general  facts  connected  with  the
relations  of  men  and  women.

PEINCIPAL    FORMS    OF   MAEKIAGE.

While  the  forms  of  marriage  are  multitudinous,  often
ludicrous,  and  sometimes  barbarous,  the  general  methods
in  which  the  sexes  have  united  may  be  reduced  to  live  or
six,  only  three  of  which,  if  we  distinguish  group-marriages
from  mere  promiscuity,  are  proved  to  have  ever  prevailed
to  any  great  extent.  These  three  are  respectively  polygyny,
polyandry,  and  monogamy.  Polygyny  is  the  union  of  one
man  with  several  women.  Polyandry  is  the  union  of  several
men  with  one  woman.  Monogamy  is  the  union  of  one  man
with  one  woman.  The  first  two  are  embraced  under  the
generic  term  polygamy,  though  polyandry,  as  a  recognized
form  of  marriage,  has  been  far  less  prevalent  than  either  po-
lygyny or  monogamy.  Another  form  of  polygamy  is  where
the  two  forms  just  named  are  more  or  less  combined  and
blended  together,  so  that  one  man  plays  the  part  of  husband
to  several  women,  some  or  all  of  whom  play  the  part  of  wives
to  several  other  men.  Still  another  form  of  marriage  has
been  actually  found  to  exist,  in  which  the  union  is  for  a  hm-
ited  time  fixed  by  the  common  consent  of  both  parties,  at
the  expiration  of  which  both  are  at  liberty  to  unite  with
others.    Extensive  variation  is  also  found  in  the  terms  of

POLYGYNY.  619

union  in  all  of  these  ways,  some  of  which  might  be  classed
as  separate  and  distinct  conditions  of  marriage.*

POLYGYNY.

The  intensity  and  uniformity  of  the  sexual  passion  in
man,  while  they  rendered  the  permanence  of  the  race  secure,
exerted  at  the  same  time  a  special  influence  upon  the  mode
of  union  of  the  sexes.  It  was  impossible  that  all  men  should
be  able  at  all  times  to  obtain  the  gratification  demanded  by
their  natures,  since  woman  could  not  share  with  them  that
uniformity  of  desire.  This  was  particularly  the  case  in  the
infancy  of  the  race,  before  the  persuasive  powers  of  man  had
wrought  a  change  in  her  nature  by  appeals  to  her  imagina-
tion and  her  reason.  It  was  absolutely  necessary  for  man  to
abstain,  as  do  all  male  animals,  for  the  greater  part  of  the
time.  Upon  an  average,  the  number  of  males  in  the  human
race,  as  in  most  other  species,  is  equal  to  the  number  of  fe-
males. Therefore,  even  if  all  were  mated,  the  desires  of  the
male  sex  could  be  but  meagerly  satisfied.  In  addition,  there-
fore, to  his  efforts  to  overcome,  as  above  shown,  the  periodi-
cal apathy  of  woman,  man  sought  to  secure  this  gratification
by  other  means.  This  could  not  be  better  accomplished  than
by  the  possession  of  a  plurality  of  wives.  Of  course,  all  suc-
cess in  this  attempt  must  be  at  the  expense  of  other  less  fortu-
nate men,  since,  for  every  wife,  after  the  first,  obtained  by  one
man,  there  must  be  another  man  without  any  wife  at  all.  It
became,  therefore,  a  question  of  power  who  should  possess
the  women  and  who  should  do  without  them.  How  far  po-
lygyny tends  to  increase  the  proportion  of  females  over  males,
or  whether  it  does  so  at  all,  are  questions  which  science  has
not  yet  answered.  But  it  is  certain  that  this  form  of  mar-
riage is  one  which  has  very  extensively  prevailed,  and  still
prevails  to  some  extent,  even  among  enlightened  peoples,  and

*  For  accounts  of  a  variety  of  other  forms  of  marriage,  see  Sir  John  Lub-
bock, "Origin  of  Civilization,"  chap,  iii ;  Herbert  Spencer,  "Principlca  of  So-
ciology," vol.  i,  part  iii ;  John  F.  M'Lennan,  "  Primitive  Marriage,"  etc.

620  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

is  not  without  its  defenders  upon  philosophical  grounds.  It
is  argued  that  sexual  gratification  is  not  a  necessity  to  man,
and  that  the  effect  produced  by  permitting  the  new  generar
tion  to  be  begotten  of  the  most  enterprising  is  a  healthful  one,
and  accords  with  the  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  If
the  premises  could  be  admitted,  this  argument  might  be  good
in  itself,  but  there  could  evidently  be  no  general  system  of
polygamy  without  having  for  its  result  that  the  many  who
were  deprived  should  support  the  few  in  the  luxury  of  a
plurality  of  wives.  And  a  still  worse  consequence  would
be  apt  to  be  the  reduction  of  women  themselves  to  the  con-
dition of  drudges  in  addition  to  that  of  concubines.  And
such  has  doubtless  always  been  the  effect  of  polygyny.  But
these  considerations  are  never  urged  in  the  natural  operation
of  social  laws.  The  great  reproductive  force  pushes  forward
for  the  accomplishment  of  its  object,  regardless  of  the  weal
or  woe  of  society.  The  passions  of  men,  considered  upon
the  whole  and  in  the  long  run,  are  irresistible,  and  will  be
satisfied.  Every  form  of  power  will  be  brought  into  requisi-
tion, and  no  regard  will  be  had  for  the  feelings  of  those  who
prove  unequal  in  the  strife.  Let  the  effect  upon  society  be
what  it  will,  the  most  powerful,  in  the  exercise  of  whatever
form  of  power  is  best  calculated  to  succeed,  will  monopolize
the  luxury  of  wives  as  it  does  that  of  material  goods,  and  let
the  rest  go  without.  The  overthrow  of  polygamy,  wherever
it  has  been  overthrown,  is  a  mark  of  progress  in  abolishing
this  species  of  monopoly.

POLYANDEY.

The  other  form  of  polygamy,  in  which  several  men  unite
in  the  possession  of  one  woman,  is  far  from  being  engendered
by  causes  which  are  the  reverse  of  those  which  engender  the
first  form.  Polyandry,  which  is  the  reverse  of  polygyny,
has  by  no  means  had  its  origin  in  the  successful  efforts  of
women  to  obtain  the  gratification  demanded  by  their  natures,
as  the  latter  has  in  the  case  of  men.     On  the  contrary,  the

POLYAITDEY.  621

same  cause,  operating  in  an  inverse  direction,  has  led  to  the
institution  of  both  these  forms  of  marriage.

Reverting  to  the  fact  which  we  have  recognized  as  the
power  of  male  selection,  we  perceive  that  in  polygyny  it
operates  in  the  direction  of  securing  for  the  most  influential
as  large  a  number  as  they  desire  of  such  women  as  they  re-
gard best  adapted  to  afford  them  the  satisfaction  required.
And,  as,  notwithstanding  the  de  gustihus  non,  there  does
exist  a  certain  natural  standard  of  taste,  nowhere  more  ap-
parent than  as  thus  manifested,  the  result  is  the  attraction  of
the  most  beautiful  females  into  the  seraglios  of  those  most
powerful  in  securing  them.  The  holders  of  political  and
ecclesiastical  power  have  been  the  ones  most  successful  in
this  direction.  In  all  countries  where  polygyny  has  been
sanctioned,  it  has  been  the  kings  and  pontiffs  who  have  en-
joyed the  greatest  number  of  wives.  But  in  polyandry  it  is
no  less  male  selection  than  in  polygyny  which  controls  the
union  of  the  sexes.  It  is  the  same  preference  shown  by  men
for  beautiful  women  which  attracts  many  men  to  one  woman
as  it  is  which  attracts  many  women  to  one  man.  In  the  one
case,  the  man  is  influential  enough  to  obtain  exclusive  posses-
sion of  several  women.  In  the  other  case,  none  of  those  who
unite  with  the  woman  in  question  has  sufficient  influence  to
acquire  sole  proprietorship  over  her,  and  is  obliged  to  be  sat-
isfied with  a  partial  one.

As  the  various  tribes  among  whom  typical  polyandry
was  supposed  to  prevail  are  more  carefully  studied,  it  is
found  that  this  form  of  marriage  is  less  prevalent  than  had
been  supposed,  and  that  in  its  stead  there  exist  various  forms
of  communal  marriage  and  family  marriage,  in  which,  for
example,  a  woman  must  be  the  wife  of  all  the  brothers  of
her  husband.  On  the  other  hand,  in  certain  tribes,  as  in
Thibet  and  Cashmere,  where  the  polyandrous  unions  are
quite  definite,  it  is  found  that  industrial  considerations  have
largely  influenced  their  adoption,  since  the  chief  occupation
of  the  men  of  those  countries  is  the  herding  of  flocks  at  a

622  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

great  distance  from  their  homes,  and  polyandry  enables  each
family  to  leave  one  male  member  behind  to  care  for  the  chil-
dren while  the  rest  are  absent.

But,  whatever  may  be  the  doubts  respecting  the  practice
of  polyandry  among  the  less  civilized  tribes  of  mankind,
there  is  a  form  of  it  more  or  less  typical,  which  has  always
prevailed  in  the  highest  civilizations  as  a  concomitant  of  the
prevailing  form  of  marriage,  whether  that  be  polygyny  or
monogamy.  Though  generally  condemned,  this  form  of  sex-
ual union  furnishes  important  lessons  to  the  sociologist  in
attempting  to  trace  the  natural  effects  of  the  social  forces
irrespective  of  their  moral  bearings.

It  is  probable  that  this  species  of  polyandry  has  most  ex-
tensively prevailed  in  the  same  countries  where  polygyny
has  most  prevailed,  and  as  a  complement  to  it.  The  absorp-
tion by  the  influential  of  so  great  a  disproportion  of  the  fe-
male population  left  among  the  lower  classes  a  corresponding
disproportion  of  males.  This  would  be  equivalent  to  a  scar-
city of  females,  and  would  greatly  stimulate  the  demand  for
them.  That  this  should  result  in  the  frequent  union  of  sev-
eral men  with  one  woman  would  be  the  most  natural  of  all
consequences.  That  it  should  fail  to  do  so  would  be  quite
improbable.  But  that  the  men  thus  sharing  one  woman
should  do  so  by  virtue  of  any  mutual  compact  or  understand-
ing, would  argue  a  social  state  devoid  of  the  sentiment  of
jealousy.  The  possibility  of  such  a  state  is  put  beyond  ques-
tion by  the  facts  proved  to  have  existed.  In  either  form  of
polygamy,  one  sex  must  abjure  that  sentiment,  and  I  see  no
reason  why  man  should  not  be  wanting  in  it  in  some  cases
as  woman  is  in  many.  We  know  that,  in  those  countries
where  a  plurality  of  wives  is  allowed,  they  usually  regard  it
as  an  honor  to  become  one  of  the  wives  of  a  king,  and  know
nothing  of  jealousy  toward  other  wives  of  the  same  man.
And  yet  it  is  certainly  rare  that  two  or  more  men  have  open-
ly associated  with  one  woman  as  a  recognized  mode  of  mar-
riage.    The  fact  must  be  accounted  for  by  the  greater  inde-

POLYANDRY.  623

pendence  of  the  male  sex  and  their  more  belligerent  propen-
sities. It  is  religion  and  custom  which  reconcile  woman  to
her  lot,  but  these  influences  are  less  powerful  with  the  male
sex.*  Hence  it  is  that  i^olyandry  has  gained  so  feeble  a  foot-
hold on  society  as  a  legal  and  authorized  form  of  marriage.
Still  nothing  could  avail  to  abolish  it  as  a  prominent  social
fact.  Indeed,  in  this  respect  it  has  played  almost  as  impor-
tant a  role  as  any  other  marital  relation.  Probably  no  one
of  the  forms  enumerated  could  have  so  persistently  defied
the  influences  of  society  and  so  steadily  maintained  itself  in
the  midst  of  other  forms  having  the  social  sanction,  and  in
opposition  both  to  social  and  municipal  law.  As  already
stated,  it  seems  to  have  prevailed  extensively  in  the  earlier
ages  when  polygyny  was  the  recognized  form  of  marriage,  as
a  consequence  of,  and  as  a  complement  to,  that  institution.
In  Greek  and  Eoman  antiquity,  when  the  monogamous  form
prevailed  and  was  alone  legally  acknowledged,  the  polyan-
drous  form  was  so  completely  winked  at  that  many  ladies  of
good  repute  and  some  notoriety  adopted  it  and  made  no  effort
at  concealment.f  Women  of  both  physical  and  mental  supe-
riority became  the  recipients  of  the  attentions  of  men  of  equal
standing  from  all  parts,  and  in  these  attentions  were  included
all  that  it  requires  to  constitute  marriage.  This  was  especially
true  in  Greece  of  ladies  like  Aspasia,  who  became  the  cen-
ters of  literary  circles.  Under  the  Roman  laws  the  marriage
relations  were  very  lax.     All  forms  of  polygamy  were  for-

*  Jealousy  is,  doubtless,  a  derivatire  passion,  though  one  not  difficult  to  ac-
count for  as  a  natural  result  of  the  original  sexual  instinct,  and,  but  for  the
counter-influences  of  custom  and  reason,  would  probably  be  universal  to  man  at
least,  if  not  to  certain  of  the  higher  animals.  With  regard  to  animals,  I  give  for
what  it  may  be  worth  the  following  observation  from  my  note-book  of  Novem-'
ber  10,  18V6,  without  changing  the  phraseology:  "Witnessed  a  phenomenon
which  I  interpret  as  an  evidence  that  the  sentiment  of  jealousy  exists  among
females  of  the  lower  animals.  There  were  three  hens  with  a  cock ;  between  the
cock  and  one  of  the  hens  a  successful  courtship  took  place,  immediately  after
which,  the  successful  hen  was  attacked  first  by  one  and  then  by  the  other  of  the
two  unsuccessful  ones  and  driven  away  to  some  distance."

f  Lord  Kames,  "  History  of  Man,"  vol.  ii,  p.  60.

I

624  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGEIJY.

bidden,  but  both  polygyny  and  polyandry  prevailed  without
general  reprehension,  particularly  the  latter.  And  when  the
church  assumed  control  of  marriage,  reduced  it  to  strict
regulation,  and  placed  it  under  constant  surveillance,  pro-
hibiting bigamy  and  polygamy  under  heavy  penalties,  it  suc-
ceeded in  little  more  than  driving  the  polyandrous  system
into  darker  regions  and  investing  it  with  a  baser  and  more
criminal  character.  Instead  of  its  being  the  beautiful  and
attractive  who  offered  themselves  to  any  whom  they  found
congenial,  it  became  the  poor  crushed  victims  of  this  social
rigidity,  who,  as  outcasts  of  society,  were  compelled  to  gain
a  livelihood  by  prostitution,  which  is  a  modified  form  of  po-
lyandry.

And  this  is  the  state  of  modern  society.  This  system  of
polyandrous  marriage  exists  every-where,  to  the  knowledge  of
every  body,  and  yet  it  receives  neither  legal  nor  social  sanc-
tion. As  a  consequence,  it  must  be  a  very  low  form,  and
entail  evil  upon  every  new  generation.  Any  thing  will  be-
come base  if  it  is  placed  under  the  ban,  and  to  this  monogamy
itself  would  form  no  exception.  Whatever  must  be  done
secretly  and  clandestinely  will  be  done  improperly  and  be-
come an  evil,  though  it  possess  no  intrinsically  evil  elements.
Society  declines  to  recognize  the  irrepealable  laws  of  nature,
one  of  the  most  persistent  of  which  is  that  by  which  the
sexes  demand  and  seek  each  other.  No  human  regulation
can  check  this.  The  reproductive  forces,  developed  and
adapted  to  secure  the  perpetuity  of  the  race,  are  always  in
operation.  Society  professes  to  provide  for  the  greater  part
of  the  cases  by  sanctioning  monogamous  unions.  But  there
remain,  and  there  must  always  remain,  a  vast  multitude  for
whom  this  provision  is  not  sufficient.  It  would  be  impossi-
ble for  society  to  guarantee  the  monogamous  marriage  of  all
its  members.  The  human  race  has  grown  so  fastidious,  that
it  is  not  every  man  or  woman  that  can  find  a  suitable  life-
companion.  The  sentiment  of  love  has  become  so  delicate
that  it  requires  a  certain   degree  of  correspondence  in  all

POLYANDRY.  625

kinds  of  qualities  to  make  such  unions  desirable  or  even
tolerable.  Again,  there  come  in  so  many  pecuniary  consid-
erations, which  form  barriers  to  marriage,  that  thousands
who  would  gladly  do  so,  do  not  feel  ready  to  take  so  impor-
tant a  step,  especially  as  women  are  usually  non-productive,
and  would  require  to  be  supported  by  the  labor  of  their
hands.  In  these  and  many  other  ways  it  happens  that  soci-
ety is  constantly  filled  with  men  and  women  who  have  no
legal  access  to  one  another.

Modem  society  assumes,  firstly,  that  all  can  marry  if  they
will ;  secondly,  that  where  they  do  not,  it  is  because  they
have  no  attachments  for  the  opposite  sex ;  and,  thirdly,  that
all  can  abstain.

Each  of  these  assumptions  is  either  absolutely  or,  in  some
qualified  but  legitimate  sense,  objectively  untrue.  As  to  the
first  one,  we  have  seen  that  it  is  a  physical  necessity  that
many  remain  single,  and  a  moral  necessity  that  many  more
should  do  so.  In  cultured  communities,  a  want  of  congenial-
ity deters  great  numbers  from  marriage.  The  keener  the
sensibilities,  the  greater  the  necessity  for  a  manifestation  of
the  higher  form  of  love.  In  all  countries  at  all  advanced  in
culture,  this  sentiment  has  existed  in  a  form  so  far  removed
from  the  localized  instinct  that  those  who  furnish  the  roman-
tic literature  of  every  people  scarcely  recognize  their  connec-
tion, and  there  has  come  to  exist  a  general  disposition  to
regard  them  as  quite  independent.  The  received  theory  of
the  sexual  relations  ignores  the  more  elevated  sentiment  as
not  possessing  any  tangible  reality.

Sexual  desire  is  certain  to  be  a  concomitant  of  love  in  the
higher  sense,  although  the  reverse  is  by  no  means  necessarily
true.  It  is  certainly  a  remarkable  fact  that  some  people
spend  the  greater  part  of  their  lives  without  ever  experienc-
ing the  elevated  form  of  love.  The  theory,  that  for  every
one  there  exists  somewhere  one,  and  only  one,  perfect  sexual
counterpart,  romantic  as  it  is,  is  unfortunately  refuted  by  the
common  experience  of  two  or  more  equally  true  and  genuine

626  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

attachments  in  one  life-time.  Young  people  usually  succeed
in  finding  companions  in  their  own  neighborhoods,  no  mat-
ter how  limited  these  may  be,  as  is  found  to  be  the  case
among  the  sparse  pioneer  settlements  of  new  countries.  How
much  better  they  could  have  been  mated  had  they  possessed
a  wider  field  to  select  from  can  never  be  known.  As  a  gen-
eral rule,  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  sexes  will  join  with
each  other  wherever  they  meet  under  the  proper  conditions
of  age  and  circumstances,  that  in  populous  districts  love  is
more  selective  and  fastidious,  and  that  the  more  intelligent
the  community  is  the  more  definite  will  be  the  sentiment.  It
is  therefore  among  the  most  cultivated  that  we  find  the
greatest  number  of  those  who  have  declined  to  marry,  be-
cause they  have  not  yet  found  those  of  the  opposite  sex  for
whom  they  feel  a  sufiicient  attachment.

Another  equally  great  barrier  to  marriage  is  the  failure
of  one  of  the  parties  to  reciprocate  the  feelings  of  the  other.
It  often  happens  that  a  man  wiU  form  an  inalienable  attach-
ment for  a  woman,  or  vice  versa,  without  the  other  experi-
encing any  responsive  impulse.  Persons  often  live  single  a
whole  life-time  because  they  are  unable  to  obtain  the  only
one  in  the  world  for  whom  they  can  ever  experience  a  throb
of  pure  passion.  This  may  be  occasioned  by  other  causes
than  want  of  mutuality.  Parental  opposition,  the  previous
marriage  of  one  of  the  parties,  difference  in  social  station,
and  a  variety  of  other  causes  lead  to  the  same  result,  and
prevent  marriage.

We  see  then  that  this  more  diffused  and  elevated  form  of
love  becomes  at  once  the  greatest  incentive  and  the  greatest
barrier  to  marriage.  It  differs  wholly  from  the  localized
passion  in  being  selective.  While  it  is  less  selfish,  it  must  be
called  out  by,  and  exclusively  directed  toward,  one  definite
object.  From  this  circumstance  it  may  be  called  the  ohjeo-
tive  form  of  love.  No  other  than  the  particular  person  loved
can  claim  any  share  of  it  or  awaken  any  new  expression  of
it.     At  the  same  time  it  rather  strengthens  than  diminishes

POLYAlinDEY.  627

the  physical  desire.  Such  as  have  once  had  it  called  forth
are  justified  in  declining  to  unite  for  life  with  any  other
than  those  for  whom  it  exists.  Those  who  have  never  felt  it
can  not  be  blamed  for  not  regarding  the  lower  instinct  a
siifiicient  ground  of  marriage  in  this  permanent  form.  And
thus  the  passion  which  can  alone  make  such  a  marriage  worth
its  sacrifices  is  constantly  holding  in  celibacy  thousands  who,
but  for  its  power,  would  enter  the  connubial  state.

The  second  postulate  of  the  theory  referred  to,  viz.,
that  those  who  do  not  marry  do  not  love  the  opposite  sex,
and  have  no  right  to  expect  the  gratification  of  sexual  desires,
is  defeated  as  to  its  first  term  by  the  considerations  just
urged.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  those  who  love  most  and
most  faithfully  who  find  it  most  frequently  impossible  to
marry.  With  respect  to  what  men  have  a  right  to  expect,  it
seems  evident  that  society  has  no  voice  in  these  matters.
Every  one  has  a  right  to  seek  the  gratification  of  any  and  all
of  his  desires,'  so  long  as  in  so  doing  he  does  not  prevent
others  from  exercising  the  same  right.  If  society  interferes,
it  should  be  from  a  scientific  or  sanitary,  and  not  from  an
abstract  moral,  point  of  view.

The  third  assumption,  viz.,  that  any  one  can  abstain
under  all  circumstances,  is  the  one  most  of  all  out  of  conso-
nance with  the  facts  of  experience.  But,  then,  it  is  founded
on  the  free-will  doctrine,  and  is  only  as  true  as  that  doctrine
itself.  What  do  we  mean  by  being  able  to  do  any  thing?
Certainly  a  person  can  do  under  some  circumstances  what  he
could  not  do  under  others.  But  can  he  always  control  his
impulses  under  all  circumstances?  Manifestly  not.  When
men  yield,  it  is  because  the  combination  of  influences  without
and  within  compel  them  to  yield.  But  there  is  no  limit  until
we  broadly  admit  that  every  act  is  thus  irresistibly  controlled
(see  Chapter  XI).

.  An  appeal  to  the  facts  themselves  will  be  more  interest-
ing at  this  point,  if  not  more  conclusive.  As  a  matter  of
common  notoriety,  persons  not  legally  joined  to  those  of  the

628  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

opposite  sex  do  not  all  abstain.  Whatever  the  circumstances
may  be  wbicb  impel  them,  they  do  yield.  It  is  not  enough
to  assert  that  it  is  only  the  bad  and  depraved  who  do  this,
because  it  is  not  true.  It  is  not  claimed  that  every  one  yields,
for  every  one  is  not  tempted,  every  one  can  not  find  an  object
of  union.  Yet,  let  the  inducements  and  opportunities  be
held  out,  and  all  are  liable.  We  all  know  how  the  celibate
clergy  were  in  the  habit  of  breaking  this  fast,  and  how  mer-
cifully they  were  induced  by  their  own  experience  to  deal
with  this  class  of  offenders  against  the  canonical  code.*

Sociology  has  to  deal  with  the  positive  phenomena  of  so-
ciety, and  takes  no  notice  of  what  men's  ideas  are  as  to  what
such  phenomena  ought  to  be.  It  is  from  this  stand-point
that  this  question  must  be  viewed.  It  is  the  lower  classes  of
society  that  can  be  most  easily  studied.  The  less  the  psychic
prevail  over  the  physical  influences,  the  simpler  and  more
apparently  regular  the  phenomena  become.  Legislation  will
be  scientific,  and  therefore  effective,  in  proportion  as  it  ap-
proaches the  stand-point  of  the  sociologist,  and  recognizes  the
actual  phenomena  that  occur  while  displaying  whatever  wis-
dom it  possesses  in  the  direction  of  rendering  the  facts  harm-
less or  advantageous.

Polyandry,  therefore,  while  it  is  the  form  of  sexual  union
least  recognized  by  man,  and  least  sanctioned  by  any  form  of
law,  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  form  which,  in  the  nature  of
man,  must  exist  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  whatever  may  be
the  acknowledged  and  legalized  form  of  marriage.  Men  who
have  no  legal  access  to  women  will  seek  illegal  access  to
them,  and  will  obtain  it  at  any  price  within  their  reach.
This,  in  political  economy,  would  be  called  a  demand.  And
here,  as  certainly  as  in  trade,  demand  will  create  supply.
Under  the  reign  of  polygyny  the  demand  is  at  its  gi*eatest.
Therefore  we  find,  in  Hebrew  writ,  frequent  reference  to
harlots  and  whoremongers  in  the  land  of  David  and  Solo-
mon, with  their  numerous  wives  and  concubines.  In  con-
*  Blackstone's  "  Commentaries,"  Book  iv,  p.  65.

MONOGAMY.  629

nection  with  monogamy,  polyandry  comes  in  to  supply  its
imperfections,  as  it  does  to  complement  the  one-sidedness  of
polygyny.  Exactly  to  match  the  whole  human  race  would
be  impossible,  if  all  individual  predilections  were  set  aside,
since  in  no  community  is  the  number  of  adults  of  both  sexes
the  same.  There  would  still  remain  an  excess  of  one  sex  or
the  other.  The  exigencies  of  life,  the  flow  of  population,
the  conditions  of  various  parts  of  the  world  in  favor  of  one
sex  or  the  other,  always  cause  such  an  excess  as  the  result  of
local  influences.  In  new  countries  the  males  always  exceed
the  females.  In  old  countries  the  reverse  is  the  case.  Popu-
lation is  never  exactly  divided  between  the  sexes.  Still,  this
is  as  nothing  compared  to  the  other  causes  of  celibacy  to
which  reference  has  been  made.  The  worst  feature  of  the
form  of  polyandry  which  we  have  been  describing  is  its
mercenary  character.  This  is  due  to  two  causes.  The  first
is  the  fact  that  the  demand  comes  principally  from  the  males.
The  second  is  the  dependent  condition  of  women.  These
two  facts  conspire  to  produce  the  result.  Insatiate  man
seeks  indigent  woman.  Each  has  the  means  of  supplying
the  demands  of  the  other.  What  more  natural  than  that  an
exchange  should  be  made  ?  And  this  is,  in  plain  terms,  the
true  character  of  the  so-called  "  social  evil."  'No  belief  is
more  false  than  that  woman  prostitutes  herseK  to  any  extent
to  satisfy  her  own  sexual  desires.  But,  as  we  shall  see  pres-
ently, she  is  wholly  dependent  upon  man  for  the  means  of
subsistence,  and  is  obliged  to  barter  her  virtue  for  a  liveli-
hood. For  life  is  dearer  than  virtue,  and  there  is  often  more
true  virtue  in  this  surrender  of  virtue  than  there  would  be  in
preserving  it.

MONOGAMY.

The  remaining  principal  form  of  marriage  consists  in  the
union  of  one  man  with  one  woman.  Incomplete  and  inade-
quate as  monogamy  certainly  is,  it  is  nevertheless,  as  must  be
confessed,  a  far  superior  mode  of  sexual  union  to  either  form

of  polygamy.     It  is  the  form  which  has  recommended  itself

28

630  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

to  all  the  most  progressive  and  enlightened  civilizations.
Although  the  natural  tendency  of  the  race  is  toward  polyg-
amy, as  a  result  of  the  grasping  character  of  men,  just  as  it
is  toward  monopoly  of  goods,  still,  the  jars,  discords,  and
derangements  which  it  occasions,  by  their  perpetual  oc-
currence and  intolerable  annoyance,  have  compelled  the
compromise  of  monogamy,  just  as  the  perpetual  strifes  aris-
ing from  avarice  compelled  the  adoption  of  a  fixed  code
of  proprietary  rights.  Both  these  institutions  are  marks  of
progress  in  the  development  of  individual  liberty  and  eman-
cipation from  the  rule  of  might.  The  development  of  the
more  elevated  objective  form  of  love  has  been  favorable  to
monogamous  unions.  The  affections  once  fixed  upon  a  single
object,  the  thought  of  a  plurality  becomes  repugnant.  Pure
love,  as  it  exists  now,  is  incompatible  with  polygamy ;  at
least,  it  does  not  appear  to  be  in  the  nature  of  this  passion  to
have  more  than  one  object  at  once.  The  localized  passion
may  seek  satisfaction  from  various  sources ;  but  the  spiritual-
ized passion  is  true  to  one  object.  Both  of  these  passions
may  possibly  exist  together  and  result  in  polygamous  unions ;
but  this  is  not  of  common  occurrence.  It  is  not  maintained
that  one  person  may  not  truly  love  more  than  one  of  the
opposite  sex,  or  that  this  might  not  be,  under  certain  circum-
stances, a  still  higher  and  more  disinterested  sentiment  than
the  exclusive  devotion  to  one ;  but,  if  it  is  possible,  it  is  ex-
ceedingly rare,  and  belongs  to  an  age  in  the  future  when  the
sentiments  now  current  shall  be  greatly  changed.

In  view  of  the  numerical  equality  of  the  sexes,  monogamy
can  not  but  claim  the  highest  place  among  the  forms  of  mar-
riage. It  certainly  comes  nearest  to  supplying  the  demands
of  all,  and  best  comports  with  the  conditions  of  social  life.
It  saves  the  husband  from  impoverishment  to  support  his
family,  and  prevents  the  wife  from  being  made  a  drudge.
It  obviates  jealousies  better  than  any  other  form,  and  secures
to  lovers  the  purest  and  most  perfect  fruition  of  their  higher
emotions.     If  it  curtaps  somewhat  the  amount  of  indulgence

!

i

MARRIAGE  INSTITUTIONS.  631

craved  by  man,  and  subjects  woman  to  unsolicited  embraces
at  unnatural  periods,  these  are  but  the  evils  which  must
needs  be  under  any  artificial  system  of  social  organization.
The  first  of  these  evils,  or  at  least  deprivations,  is  far  greater
among  animals,  while  the  second  does  not  exist.  Artificial
institutions  of  marriage  seek  to  avoid  the  former,  and  tend
to  increase  the  latter.  Polygamy  accomplishes,  so  far  as  it
can  be  made  to  prevail,  the  first  of  these  objects,  leaving  the
other  nearly  in  its  natural  state.  Polyandry  carries  the  latter
evil  to  its  maximum,  without  necessarily  affecting  the  former.
Monogamy  is  a  compromise  between  the  two.  The  superi-
ority of  polygyny  over  polyandry  is  due  to  the  circumstance
that  the  enforcement  of  unsolicited  union  in  the  female  is  a
greater  strain  upon  nature  than  the  deprivation  of  gratifica-
tion in  the  male.  The  first  is  the  greater  evil,  because  a
greater  violation  of  physical  law.  The  monogamic  com-
promise does  not  seem  to  carry  the  former  evil  beyond  the
power  of  the  system  to  habituate  itself.  Still,  it  opens  a
grave  question  for  the  attention  of  hygienic  students.

GENEBAL    BEMAKKS    ON   MAERIAGE    INSTITUTIONS.

I  have  thus  briefly  glanced  at  the  subject  of  marriage  as
one  of  the  primary  consequences  of  sexual  desire.  In  any
and  all  its  forms  it  stands  as  a  simple  expression  of  the  natu-
ral law  of  sexual  attraction.  It  exhibits  so  many  modes  in
which  desire  seeks  to  obtain  its  legitimate  object.  The  vari-
ety which  it  presents  in  man  is  no  greater  than  what  we  see
in  the  lower  forms  of  life,  and,  when  carefully  compared,  is
found  to  be  astonishingly  similar,  although  the  erection  of
each  of  these  forms  into  an  institution  is  a  fact  peculiar  to
the  human  race,  and  it  is  to  this  fact  that  must  be  ascribed
those  violations  of  the  natural  order  which  are  so  apparent
in  society.  In  man  we  see  every-where,  as  we  do  not  in  ani-
mals, those  unmistakable  evidences  of  the  victory  of  desire
over  utility,  of  the  subordination  of  the  grand  object  of
nature — reproduction — to  the  immediate  object  of  man —

632  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEXY.

pleasure.  These  are  what  stamp  all  human  systems  of  mar-
riage with  an  artificial  character,  and  show,  in  the  clearest
manner,  that  something  more  than  the  unintelligent  laws
of  natural  selection  has  been  at  work  ;  that  an  intelligent
power,  that  of  reason  and  imagination,  has  been  exerting  its
designing  and  creating  influence  in  the  work  of  establishing
these  institutions.  In  a  word,  it  is  in  the  human  race  alone
that  we  see  in  marriage  institutions,  as  indeed  in  all  others,
evidence  of  teleological  design  standing  out  in  bold  distinction
from  the  genetic  adaptation  and  evolutionary  development
of  the  extra-anthropological  universe,  and  always  displaying
itself  in  this  same  direction  of  supplying  a  human  instead  of
a  natural  utility,  by  subordinating  function  to  feeling.

Genesis  of  Modesty.

Before  it  is  possible  to  proceed  further  with  the  consider-
ation of  the  sociological  results  wrought  by  the  reproductive
forces,  it  is  necessary  to  obtain  a  glimpse  of  that  important
artificial  creation  which  is  denominated  modesty.  I  have
several  times  hinted  an  intention  to  offer  an  explanation  of
this  exceedingly  peculiar  and  wholly  anomalous  sentiment  so
universal,  at  least  to  a  certain  degree,  in  the  whole  human
race,  and  so  totally  wanting  throughout  the  universe  below
it.*

In  the  natural  order  of  things,  the  existence  of  a  desire  is
sufficient  to  prompt  an  open  effort  at  gratifying  it.  It  makes
no  difference  whether  it  be  the  desire  to  eat  or  drink  or  per-
form the  act  of  reproduction.  All  desires  are  alike  before
nature — equally  pure,  equally  respectable.  All  are  per-
formed with  the  same  freedom,  the  same  publicity,  the  same
disregard  for  appearances.  Nature  knows  no  shame.  She
affects  no  modesty.     The  acts  which  are  necessary  to  the

*  Sexual  modesty  is  alone  here  considered.  Among  many  animals,  especially
domesticated  ones,  the  quality  called  neatness  often  amounts  to  a  species  of
modesty,  but  the  principle  underlying  it  is  wholly  distinct  from  that  on  which
sexual  modesty  is  founded.

GENESIS  OF  MODESTY.  633

perpetuation  of  a  species  possess  no  special  quality  which
distinguishes  them  from  those  necessary  to  its  preservation.
There  is  nothing  inherent  in  the  desires  which  prompt  these
acts  that  gives  )3oldness  to  the  one  or  shyness  to  the  other.
All  are  alike,  co-ordinate,  equally  essential,  equally  proper.
There  is  no  natural  reason  for  feeling  ashamed  of  the  one
which  does  not  equally  apply  to  the  other.*  This  natural
homogeneity  finds  a  perfectly  free  expression  throughout
all  the  departments  of  nature  below  man,  and  the  departure
from  it  among  the  human  races  bears  a  certain  ratio  to  their
degrees  of  artificial  development.  We  must  therefore  look
in  this  developing,  process  for  the  origin  and  the  cause  of  the
distinction  which  civilized  man  draws  between  these  classes
of  desires  and  the  acts  which  they  call  forth.

In  order  better  to  trace  this  sentiment,  we  must  go  back
in  imagination  to  the  time  when  man  was  still  in  his  animal
state,  in  which,  as  in  all  his  contemporary  species,  no  such
sentiment  as  shame  for  any  act  prompted  by  nature  existed.
The  first  consequence  of  his  intellectual  superiority,  as  al-
ready shown,  was  to  take  from  woman  her  power  of  selec-
tion, and  to  deprive  her  of  her  right  of  refusal.  This  sur-
render on  her  part  was  made  in  response  to  his  appeals  to
her  imagination  and  to  her  reason.  All  this  tended  to  place
woman  more  and  more  absolutely  in  the  power  of  man.
Long  before  any  proper  civilization  had  begun,  the  sub-
jection of  woman  was  complete,  and  sexual  selection  was
transferred  from  the  female  to  the  male  of  the  human
species.  Marriage,  which  had  previously  consisted  in  simple
and  promiscuous  pairing  for  momentary  gratification,  came
now  to  consist  in  something  like  the  permanent  possession  of
one  or  more  wives  by  one  man.  This  possession  was  ac-
quired, like  that  of  other  goods,  by  forcible  seizure  or  some-
thing equivalent  to  this.  It  was  in  this  act  of  getting
possession  of  women  that  those  desperate  struggles  were
made  which  ultimately  resulted  in  the  development  of  canine
*  Auguste  Comte,  "Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  iv,  p.  446,  note.

634  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOif.— SOCIOGENY.

teeth  and  otlier  organs  of  secondary  sexual  selection.  The
most  beautiful  females  were  most  admired  and  sought,  and
for  these  many  rivals  would  contend.  No  history  will  ever
describe  and  no  poet  recount  the  battles  which  have  taken
place  between  these  rivals  for  the  possession  of  the  fair
daughters  of  the  forest  and  the  wilderness.  The  victor  at
length  seizes  his  bride  and  hies  away  to  his  chosen  resort,
bearing  his  well-earned  prize.  He  dares  not  remain  and
seal  his  courtship  in  the  presence  of  his  enemies.  He  must
steal  away  and  commit  in  secret  the  act,  for  the  right  of
whose  performance  he  has  so  desperately  fought.  The  case
of  one  is  the  case  of  all.  The  marriage  ceremony  becomes
an  elopement.  The  cohabitation  of  male  and  female  be-
comes a  signal  for  attack.  All  intercouree  between  the  sexes
must  be  had  in  secret.  The  state  of  society  required  it,  self-
protection  demanded  it.  The  force  was  strong  enough  to
overcome  the  hardship,  and  the  propagation  of  the  species
went  on.  But  the  practice  of  stealing  away  to  some  solitary
spot,  where  no  rival  could  disturb  the  enjoyment  of  this
pleasure,  grew  into  a  regular  and  permanent  custom,  and
like  all  customs  was  continued  after  the  cause  which  origi-
nated it  and  made  it  necessary  ceased  to  exist.  That  cause
was  fear,  and  therefore  fear  may  be  safely  regarded  as  the
sentiment  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  human  modesty.  Fear
of  being  circumvented  and  prevented  from  consummating
a  pleasurable  act  otherwise  entirely  natural  and  proper — this
was  the  originating  cause  of  modesty.  We  see  something
approaching  it  in  animals.  The  rivalries  of  wild  animals,
could  we  fully  comprehend  their  effects,  would  show  us  some
of  the  first  steps  in  the  direction  of  establishing  such  a  custom
as  that  which  grew  up  among  men.  Breeders  of  domestic
animals  doubtless  daily  observe  tendencies  in  this  direction.
Every  one  has  observed  them  among  poultry.  Where  there
are  several  cocks,  they  seek  to  separate  their  chosen  mates
from  the  rest  in  order  to  enjoy  perfect  immunity.  When
this  precaution  has  not  been  sufficiently  well  taken,  they  are

I

GENESIS  OF  MODESTY.  635

frequently  attacked  by  rival  cocks,  and  their  pleasure  inter-
cepted. It  is  due  to  the  nature  of  the  pleasure  itself  that
these  consequences  result.  It  is  in  no  manner  due  to  the
quality  of  that  pleasure  or  any  intrinsic  criminality  attaching
to  the  act  itself.  Under  the  same  conditions  the  gratification
of  any  other  desire,  the  enjoyment  of  any  other  pleasure,
would  be  ultimately  followed  by  the  same  results,  and  gradu-
ally engender  the  same  sentiments.  But  no  other  desire  par-
takes of  that  personal  character ;  no  other  desire  is  gratified  so
much  at  the  expense  of  others ;  no  other  desire  depends  so
much  upon  the  will,  choice,  or  election  of  individuals ;  no
other  desire  possesses  the  quality  of  enduring  indefinite  dis-
appointment or  almost  indefinite  indulgence,  without  result-
ing in  death  or  satiety.  Certain  predatory  animals  seize  their
food  and  carry  it  away  from  their  companions  and  eat  it  in
secret,  in  order  to  secure  immunity  from  the  attacks  of  others.
This  practice  might  have  placed  the  pleasure  of  eating  under
the  ban  had  it  existed  in  man,  although  it  could  never  have
gone  to  the  same  lengths  with  him  as  in  the  other  case,  since
in  times  of  plenty  all  would  have  been  satisfied,  and  since,
also,  the  co-operation  of  all  was  required  in  the  production  of
subsistence.  There  is  nothing  analogous  in  the  two  acts  or
the  two  desires.  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  all  the  other
desires.  The  sexual  desire  stands  alone  as  being  capable  of
genetically  evolving  the  sentiment  of  modesty,  and  this  only
in  a  being  endowed  with  a  highly  complex  and  sympathetic
organization.  The  sentiment  of  shame,  as  employed  in  this
sense,  is  a  delicate  and  refined  sentiment.  It  has  gone  so  far
beyond  its  originating  cause  as  to  have  left  it  almost  unrecog-
nizable. Who  would  suppose  all  the  secrecy  in  sexual  mat-
ters, which  society  enforces,  to  be  the  result  of  the  fear  of
being  disturbed  by  rivals  ?  *

*  I  am  aware  of  but  one  other  attempt  having  been  made  to  account  for
modesty,  and  this  is  that  of  Schopenhauer,  whose  theory  is  that,  as  life  is  a  mis-
fortune, its  perpetuation  is  necessarily  a  crime.  The  performance  of  the  repro-
ductive act  is  therefore  instinctively  felt  to  be  a  wrong  against  society :  "  Voyez

636  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

But,  if  proprietary  protection  was  the  fonndation  of  mod-
esty, it  does  not  constitute  the  whole  of  its  superstructure.
Other  elements  soon  entered  into  it  which  have  imparted  to  it
its  peculiar  character.  The  progress  of  general  physical  devel-
opment in  man  gradually  softened  and  modified  all  human
sentiments,  and  gave  rise  to  many  other  derivative  or  com-
pound ones,  all  of  which  exerted  a  mutual  influence  upon
one  another.  The  idea  of  propriety  in  general  was  growing
up  from  a  variety  of  sources.  The  essence  of  propriety  is
conformity  to  custom.  Proper  conduct  is  wholly  distinct
from  reasonable  or  just  conduct.  That  is  proper  which  is
in  conformity  with  established  usage.  But  no  fact  is  more
clearly  taught  by  history  and  ethnography  than  that  there  is
no  necessary  relation  between  custom  and  either  reason  or
justice.  The  sentiment  of  shame  in  general  had  no  exist-
enfce  until  there  had  been  estabKshed  fixed  customs.*  Shame
itself,  a  wider  term  than  modesty,  is  simply  regret  at  having
violated  a  custom.  But  regret  may  be  ultimately  defined  as
the  fear  which  is  experienced  of  the  consequences  of  an
improper  act.  Shame,  therefore,  is  only  a  form  of  regret.
It  differs  from  other  regrets  in  the  quality  of  the  penalty.
In  ordinary  regrets  the  consequences  feared  are  physical,  or
at  least  possess  only  an  intellectual  quality,  resulting  from
negligence  or  inability  to  foresee  them.  They  are  often
serious  and  extremely  detrimental  to  temporary  interests.
The  consequences  of  shameful  regrets,  on  the  contrary,  pos-
sess a  moral  quality.  They  are  the  consequences  of  having
violated  a  custom  (inos).  They  are  not  physical,  since  cus-
tom is  only  a  form,  and  can  not  wield  any  mechanical  force.
They  are  not  intellectual :  the  rational  faculty  is  not  called

ces  deux  4tres  qui  se  cherchent  reciproquement  du  regard :  pourquoi  Ic  mjstfere
dont  ils  s'enveloppent?  pourquoi  leur  air  craintif  et  embarrass^  ?  C'est  qu'ils
sont  deux  traitres  qui  se  cherchent  ainsi  du  regard  pour  continuer  la  vie,  pour
revivre  dans  un  autre  etre." — (Leon  Dumont,  in  the  "  Revue  Scicntifique,"  7
septembre,  1872,  p.  220.)

*  The  Greek  word  SIkti  in  the  course  of  its  history  passed  through  all  threo
of  the  senses,  custom  {mos),  legal  right  (ju<),  and  moral  right  (/(»).

GENESIS  OF  MODESTY.  637

into  requisition.  They  are  not  material,  or  serious,  or  detri-
mental— at  least,  not  directly — to  temporary  interests.  They
consist  of  a  purely  emotional  pain  and  disagreeable  state  of
the  feelings  for  having  violated  an  established  usage.  To
probe  the  question  still  deeper,  the  exact  interest  whose
injury  is  apprehended  is  self-esteem,  or  rather  the  esteem  of
others.  We  see  how  far  along  the  social  influences  must
have  gone  before  the  sense  of  shame  could  be  generated.
Love  of  self  must  have  become  capable  of  soliciting  the
good-will  of  others  in  society.  Customs  must  have  become
so  firmly  established  that  to  violate  them  threatened  to  de-
stroy that  good- will,  and  the  loss  of  that  esteem  from  others
must  have  come  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  terrible
punishments  which  it  was  possible  to  suffer.  We  may,
therefore,  safely  assume  that  the  pure  feeling  of  shame,  of
whatever  kind,  must  have  been  developed  after  man  had
become,  and  had  long  remained,  an  intensely  social  being.

Now,  modesty  was  one  of  the  earliest  forms  of  shame.
The  institution  of  marriage  in  some  form,  i.  e.,  the  custom
of  appropriating  the  females,  was  one  of  the  first  of  human
institutions.  It  was  a  necessary  condition  to  the  social  state.
Without  it  the  universal  warfare  among  the  males  would
have  rendered  all  efforts  at  social  protection  nugatory.  Its
establishment  secured  man's  personal  safety.  It  had  become
a  permanent  custom  to  screen  the  conjugal  act  absolutely
from  public  gaze.  To  violate  this  custom  had  grown  to  be
regarded  as  a  gross  departure  from  the  rules  of  social  con-
duct. Hence  any  accidental  breach  of  this  canon  instantly
excited  the  fear  of  being  despised  by  those  who  observed  it,
and  was  followed  by  that  kind  of  regret  at  having  committed
the  impropriety  which  took  the  special  name  of  shame.  And
the  constant  vigilance  which  men  and  women  kept  over  this
matter  was  called  modesty,  which,  to  this  day,  is  measured
by  the  degree  of  that  vigilance.

It  is  very  probable  that  the  impropriety  was  for  a  long
time  confined  to  the  open  indulgence  of  the  sexual  act  it-

638  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

self.  It  can  not  have  a  much  wider  latitude  among  those
savages  who  wear  little  or  no  clothing.  But  the  introduc-
tion of  clothing  has  given  an  entirely  new  cast,  and  an
immensely  extended  range,  to  the  sentiment  of  modesty.
Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  the  passage  from  the
custom  of  concealing  the  act  of  reproduction  to  that  of
concealing  those  parts  of  the  body  most  directly  connected
with  that  act.  Hence  it  is  found  that  the  first  clothing  is
always  applied  to  the  loins.  The  story  of  the  "fig-leaf"
has  its  realization  in  scores  of  savage  tribes  dwelling  in  the
tropics,  where  clothing  is  scarcely  a  necessity.  And  here
the  question  arises  whether  necessity  or  propriety  had  more
to  do  with  the  extension  of  clothing  to  the  other  parts  of
the  body.  I  have  already  touched  upon  this  point  {sujpra,
p.  557),  and  will  here  add  that  the  mere  consideration  of
propriety  would  not  perhaps  have  alone  suggested  and  estab-
lished the  custom  of  clothing  even  the  loins.  Still,  if  such
is  the  case,  that  custom  can  only  be  explained  by  supposing
those  races  among  which  it  prevails  to  have  once  clothed
the  entire  body,  and  afterward,  from  migration  into  warmer
climates,  gradually  discontinued  all  but  what  was  necessary
to  cover  those  parts.

The  clothing  of  the  entire  body  except  the  hands  and
face,  which  became  a  necessity  as  soon  as  any  nation  crossed
the  tropics,  soon  rendered  improper  in  various  degrees  the
exposure  of  all  parts  of  the  person  habitually  concealed.
The  hands  and  face  would  have  suffered  the  same  fate  but
for  the  obvious  disadvantage  in  keeping  them  clothed.  A
near  approach  to  this  condition  is  found  in  some  countries
where  the  women  go  perpetually  veiled.  A  Turkish  lady  is
said  to  feel  great  shame  on  being  perceived  unveiled,  and
this  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  sentiment  is  purely  con-
ventional, and  depends  altogether  upon  the  custom  prevail-
ing in  any  particular  country.  Nothing  is  so  despotic  as
fashion.  It  can  condemn  any  thing  or  it  can  sanction  any
thing.    And,  although  all  its  laws  and  decrees  must  have

.     GENESIS  OF  MODESTY.  639

once  had  a  genetic  cause,  very  few  of  them  can  now  be  sup-
ported by  any  adequate  reason.

The  degree  of  refinement  to  which  modesty  has  been
carried  in  the  most  enlightened  countries  is  amazing  when
regarded  from  a  purely  rational  stand-point.  Like  most
time-honored  institutions  it  has  outlived  much  of  its  useful-
ness, and  now  certainly  presents  a  serious  obstacle  to  the
progress  of  rational  development.  Like  all  other  such  insti-
tutions, it  is  the  refinements  and  exaggerations  of  the  original
which  do  the  chief  mischief,  and  not  the  nucleus  itself  which
was  generated  out  of  social  conditions  and  social  needs.  It
would  be  difficult  to  see  how  any  great  harm  could  well  grow
out  of  the  original  custom  of  concealing  the  act  of  repro-
duction. The  fact  that  men  and  women  are  constantly  com-
mitting a  pleasurable  act,  which  they  seek  only  to  conceal
from  the  coarse  gaze  of  others,  casts  a  charm  over  society
which  no  doubt  really  increases  the  sum  of  human  happiness.
It  doubtless  exerts  a  refining  and  elevating  influence  upon
both  sexes  and  all  classes.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  a  cus-
tom which  forbids  parents  from  instructing  their  children  in
the  most  essential  matters  connected  with  their  social  and
physical  existence?  "What  of  a  custom  which  excludes
women  from  classes  where  the  physiology  of  their  bodies  is
explained — women  who,  far  more  than  men,  are  sacrificing
their  lives  by  thousands  on  the  shrine  of  other  fashions,  be-
cause they  do  not  know  how  they  are  made  ?

We  have  thus  endeavored  to  trace  this  remarkable  senti-
ment, this  mass  of  absurdities  and  irrationalities  which  men
call  modesty,  back  to  its  origin  in  natural  social  causes,  wholly
explicable  from  the  data  which  our  knowledge  of  human
nature  and  human  history  furnishes.  To  the  superficial  ob-
server such  an  explanation  indeed  seems  impossible,  and  it
is  no  wonder  that  the  mass  of  mankind  believe  that  modesty,
with  all  its  kindred  sentiments  and  customs,  is  a  natural
attribute  which  has  always  existed  as  now.

640  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

Condition  of  "Women.

We  are  now  prepared  to  consider,  as  a  connected  whole,
the  general  result  upon  the  sexes,  under  the  operation  of  the
social  system,  of  the  reproductive  forces,  and  to  inquire  more
particularly  into  the  present  social  status  of  the  sexes,  and
the  causes  that  have  produced  it.  Confining  ourselves,  as
before,  to  those  effects  which  must  be  ascribed  to  feeling —
i.  e.y  to  the  desire  itself — and  omitting  all  social  facts  which
are  exclusively  due  to  function — i.  e.,  to  reproduction  itself
— we  are  to  inquire  which  of  the  more  prominent  features  of
the  present  sexuo-social  system  are  referable  to  this  class,  and
how  they  have  been  developed  during  the  ages  of  vicissitude
through  which  the  race  has  passed.

BIOLOGICAL   EFFECTS.

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  facts  under  this
head  which  belong  to  biology,  and  we  have  seen  how  pro-
foundly the  race  has  been  modified  in  many  physical  aspects
by  the  influence  of  what  Mr.  Darwin  very  aptly  denominates
sexual  selection.  Man  has  doubtless  undergone  as  great
modifications  of  this  kind,  both  primary  and  secondary,  as
other  animals,  and  not  only  in  his  animal  state,  when  this
selection  was  done  by  the  female  the  same  as  among  other
species,  but  since  the  dawn  of  manhood,  and  after  this  selec-
tion, under  the  operation  of  a  higher  intellectuality,  had  been
transferred  to  the  male  sex.

There  is  at  least  one  important  physical  transformation
which,  I  think,  all  will  agree  should  be  assigned  to  this  latter
comparatively  brief  period.  I  refer  to  the  menstruation  of
women.  I  do  not  mean  the  fact  of  menstruation,  but  the
peculiarity  of  it  as  compared  with  that  of  other  animals.
Few  thoughtful  physiologists  will  contend  that  the  laborious
and  debilitating  process  by  which  women,  even  of  the  lower
races,  develop  their  ova,  is  natural  to  the  human  species.
That  it  has  become  naturalized,  so  that  it  is  regularly  in-

CONDITION  OF  WOMEN.  641

herited  and  constitutes  no  actual  diseased  condition,  is  doubt-
less true,  but  it  is  diflficult  to  believe  that  the  original  ances-
tors of  the  human  race  in  their  primeval  state  could  have
formed  such  a  remarkable  exception  to  the  rest  of  creation,
and  been  compelled  to  suffer  under  such  a  "  curse."  Ordi-
nary sexual  selection  by  the  female  could  scarcely  have  had  a
tendency  to  bring  about  a  result  of  this  kind,  since,  as  long
as  the  choice  is  with  her,  no  violence  would  be  done  to  her
system.  It  is,  therefore,  most  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
present  painful  process  is  the  result  of  the  surrender  of  this
right  of  choice,  and  the  subjection  of  her  person  to  the  ex-
cessive attentions  of  the  male  sex.  This  change,  which  must
at  one  time  certainly  have  taken  place,  was  one  of  the  most
thorough  and  fundamental  to  which  the  sexual  system  could
have  possibly  been  subjected,  and,  although  no  one  could
have  predicted  precisely  such  a  consequence,  a  far  more
radical  and  sweeping  one  might  have  been  reasonably  ex-
pected. However  wide  of  the  truth  the  above  theory  may
be,  it  is,  as  an  attempt  at  rational  explanation,  certainly  su-
perior to  the  current  theological  one.

SOCIOLOGICAL    EFFECTS.

But,  aside  from  the  physical  results  which  may  have  been
brought  about  by  the  free  action  of  the  reproductive  forces
under  the  guidance  of  a  strong  rational  faculty,  the  social
results  are  sufficiently  well  marked  and  interesting,  and  it
was  to  these  that  I  had  proposed  to  confine  the  discussion.

If  we  take  a  general  view  of  our  sexuo-social  system,  we
find  men  and  women  living  together  under  special  and  pecul-
iar rules  of  conduct,  occupying  separate  spheres  of  activity,
and  subjected  to  separate  and  distinct  social  conditions.  In
a  word,  we  find  that  society  has  erected  a  high  barrier  be-
tween the  sexes,  so  that,  although  they  live  together,  meet
each  other  constantly,  and  appear  to  be  companions,  they
are  in  fact  dwelling  in  separate  elements  and  on  different
planes.

642  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

8EXUO80CIAL   INEQUALITIES.

It  is  this  general  inequality  which  exists  in  the  social
position  of  the  two  sexes  which  especially  interests  us  at
present.  It  is  too  striking  to  be  overlooked  in  an  inquiry
into  the  conditions  of  social  progress,  and,  although  a  portion
of  it  may  be  regarded  as  but  the  natural  correlate  to  their
physical  inequality,  the  greater  part  must  be  accounted  for
in  some  other  way.  The  inequalities  which  society  has  es-
tablished between  the  sexes  may  be  variously  classified.  The
principal  ones  may  be  approximately  ranged  under  the  fol-
lowing heads :  1,  inequality  of  dress ;  2,  inequality  of  duties  ;
3,  inequality  of  education  ;  and,  4,  inequality  of  rights.  Let
us  glance  at  each  of  these  inequalities  separately.

Inequality  of  Dress. — In  all  civilized  countries  the  men
dress  differently  from  the  women.  There  seems  to  be  a  tend-
ency in  society  to  separate  the  sexes  by  some  distinguishing
mark  which  enables  people  to  determine  the  sex  of  one  an-
other at  sight.  Nature  has  done  the  same  thing,  it  is  true,
through  selection.  The  plumage  of  birds  and  the  fur  of  ani-
mals are  usually  different  in  the  males  from  what  they  are  in
the  females.  Mr.  Darwin  offers  a  very  ingenious  explanation
of  all  this.  So  the  physical  appearance  of  the  sexes  in  the
human  species  differs  in  many  important  respects,  only  a  few
of  which  are  explainable  by  their  different  habits.  The  ab-
sence of  the  beard  in  woman  and  the  difference  between
the  male  and  the  female  voice  are  among  the  best  marked  of
these  physical  inequalities.  Difference  of  stature,  complexion,
physical  strength,  and  intellectual  vigor  may  all  be  more  or
lesg  satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  the  difference  in  their  re-
spective social  conditions  and  life,  either  as  imposed  by  nat-
ure or  by  custom.  And  man  has  sought  to  imitate  nature
in  this  respect  by  clothing  the  sexes  differently.

It  is  not  probable,  however,  that  the  custom  of  dressing
one  sex  differently  from  the  other  grew  out  of  any  attempt  to
copy  from  nature,  and  the  process  was  certainly  whoUy  unlike

SEXUO-SOCIAL  INEQUALITIES.  643

the  selective  processes  of  nature.  If  we  will  examine  the
matter  closely,  we  shall  discover  that  the  dress  of  women  re-
sembles in  its  general  design  that  of  uncivilized  races  far
more  than  does  that  of  men.  It  is  more  as  both  sexes  origi-
nally dressed,  before  the  art  had  been  improved  upon  and
adapted  to  practical  wants.  Modifications  and  refinements
in  the  dress  of  women  took  the  direction  of  embellishment,
while  those  of  men  tended  toward  utility.  And  thus,  while
the  demands  of  active  life  have  worked  out  for  man  a  com-
paratively convenient  and  at  the  same  time  comely  habit,
the  conditions  which  surrounded  woman,  while  they  have
made  clothing  a  means  of  loading  her  with  ornaments,  have
left  her  in  the  same  or  in  many  respects  in  a  worse  condi-
tion, as  regards  her  adaptation  to  active  usefulness,  than  in
the  beginning.  Nor  has  it  been  altogether  because  she  has
been  inactive  and  useless  to  the  industrial  world  that  her
mode  of  dress  has  not  been  improved,  for  she  is  generally
compelled  to  perform  her  full  share  of  the  labor,  especially
of  the  lowest  and  most  purely  physical  forms  of  it.  It  is
due  rather  to  her  dependent  and  subordinate  place  in  society
which  rendered  her  incapable  of  making  innovations  in  be-
half of  her  own  sex.

The  inactive  state  of  the  women  of  the  middle  and  upper
classes,  however,  is  doubtless  in  great  part  produced  by  the
inconvenient  and  unmanageable  character  of  their  dress ;  and
the  refinements  which  the  rich,  and  some  not  so  rich,  have
learned  to  load  themselves  down  with,  are  the  cause  of  an
enormous  amount  of  disease  and  suffering,  and  threaten  to
work  a  permanent  physical  deterioration  of  the  race.  The
dress  of  men  is  not  in  all  respects  what  it  should  be,  but  t^at
of  women  is  certainly  the  disgrace  of  civilization.

Inequality  of  Duties. — Next  with  regard  to  the  inequal-
ity of  duties.  Independently  of  the  duties  of  maternity,  the
sphere  of  woman's  activity  is  wholly  different  from  that  of
man's.  If  we  grant  that  there  is  a  certain  natural  connec-
tion between  the  bearing  of  offspring  and  the  care  of  the

644  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEFT.

household,  which  is  probably  true,  there  remains  a  chasm  to
be  filled  in  order  to  equalize  the  duties  of  the  two  sexes.
Among  savages  it  is  usually  the  women  who  perform  all  the
real  work  of  their  societies.  This  they  do  in  addition  to
their  maternal  and  domestic  duties.  Among  the  lower  classes
of  so-called  civilized  society,  the  case  is  almost  the  same.  In
Germany,  women  till  the  soil  and  tend  the  flocks,  as  of  yore.
Nearly  all  the  menial  service  in  Europe  is  performed  by
women.  In  our  large  cities  thousands  of  women  toil  to  sup-
port families,  including  often  their  indolent  and  inebriate
husbands.  Go  into  the  great  factories  and  see  what  propor-
tion of  the  operatives  are  women.  Consider  the  thousands
of  women  who  make  their  living,  and  a  very  scanty  one,  by
their  needle.  Yet  the  most  of  these  have  their  domestic
duties  to  perform  in  addition  to  this  labor.  We  see,  then,
how  false  is  the  assertion  that  men  perform  the  labor  of  sup-
port, while  women  confine  themselves  to  maternal  and  do-
mestic duties.  "Women  who  profess  to  confine  themselves  to
these  duties  usually  seek  in  every  way  to  escape  them,  and
render  themselves  unfit  to  perform  them  by  their  devotion
to  fashion.  This  is  because  society  has  established  two  arbi-
trary sets  of  duties,  and  insists  that  woman  can  not  perform
the  one  and  that  man  should  not  perform  the  other.  This
fact  alone  is  a  proof  of  the  inferiority  which  society  ascribes
to  woman,  since  it  assigns  her  duties  which  it  confesses  are
beneath  the  dignity  of  male  labor.  At  the  same  time  every
attempt  made  by  the  more  courageous  of  the  female  sex  to
encroach  upon  the  domain  of  man,  and  seek  to  perform  the
duties  which  he  has  assigned  to  himself,  is  met  by  the  chiv-
alric  remonstrance  that  men's  duties  are  too  severe  for  the
delicate  constitutions  of  the  mothers  of  the  race !  Now,  all
this  is  excessively  transparent  and  false,  and  indicates  that  it
is  not  nature  at  all,  but  society,  that  has  assigned  to  woman
her  duties.

If  the  delicacy  of  the  female  constitution  is  an  objection  to
the  admission  of  women  to  the  harvest-field  and  the  machine-

SEXUO-SOCIAL  INEQUALITIES.  646

shop,  it  is  equally  an  objection  to  her  admission  to  the  laun-
dry and  the  factory.  If  maternal  and  domestic  duties  are
all  that  women  can  attend  to  in  England,  why  can  they  at-
tend to  agricultural  duties  in  Germany,  pastoral  duties  in
Switzerland,  and  mercantile  duties  in  France  ?  It  will  not
be  said  that  in  these  countries  the  men  perform  all  the  house-
hold duties.

But  it  is  claimed  that  woman  should  by  nature  preside
over  the  in-door  interests  and  man  over  the  out-door  ones.
This  is  probably  the  most  fatal  dogma  to  the  health  of
woman  and  to  the  physical  condition  of  the  race  which
can  be  found  in  the  whole  social  creed.  It  is  in  effect  to
assert  that  nature  has  designed  woman  to  breathe  carbonic
acid  and  man  oxygen  ;  that  sunlight  is  poisonous  to  woman,
but  exhilarating  to  all  other  animate  beings  ;  and  that  phys-
ical exercise,  which  is  so  necessary  to  the  health  of  every
other  living  thing,  is  fatal  to  the  female  portion  of  the  hu-
man species.  It  is  to  make  woman,  in  regard  to  her  place
and  her  duties,  as  she  is  made  in  regard  to  her  dress,  an  en-
tire exception  to  all  the  rules  of  hygiene.  If  this  vicious
dogma  that  woman's  place  is  in  the  house  is  persisted  in  for
a  few  more  centuries,  there  can  be  no  escape  from  a  general
physical  and  intellectual  degeneracy  of  the  whole  human
race.

Inequality  of  Education. — The  third  and  not  less  impor-
tant inequality  between  the  sexes  is  that  of  education.  Not
content  with  shutting  woman  out  of  all  opportunities  for
gaining  knowledge  by  experience,  society  has  seen  fit  to
debar  her  also  from  the  knowledge  acquired  by  instruction.
She  has  been  pronounced  incapable  of  coping  with  man  in
intellectual  contests,  and  it  has  not,  therefore,  been  thought
worth  while  to  provide  her  mind  with  any  considerable
amount  of  information.  It  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  fit-
ting to  have  woman's  fund  of  knowledge  correspond  in  quan-
tity to  the  variety  of  her  duties  and  be  characterized  by  the
same  limitation.    Her  knowledge  from  instruction  has,  there-

64:Q  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOaEJTY.

fore,  only  kept  pace  with  her  knowledge  from  experience.
Ignoring  the  important  truth  that  all  instruction  is  profit-
able to  society,  ignoring  the  ^act  that  most  of  the  knowledge
imparted  to  men  by  educational  processes  is  wholly  within
the  capacity  of  women  to  acquire  also,  society  has  established
schools  and  school  systems  for  the  education  of  the  former,
leaving  the  latter  in  their  natural  state  of  ignorance.  De-
prived, therefore,  for  ages  of  all  facilities  either  of  expe-
rience or  instruction,  woman  presents  herself  to  the  wisdom
of  this  age  as  a  dwarfed  and  inferior  being,  destitute  of  both
intellectual  energy  and  intellectual  aspiration.  For  it  is  in
these  two  respects  that  her  inferiority  is  chiefly  manifest.  It
is  these  that  produce  originality  and  independence  in  intel-
lectual labor,  and  it  is  originality  and  independence  which
distinguish  masculine  from  feminine  thought.  Granting,  as
we  probably  must,  with  Herbert  Spencer,  that  the  gestative
process  and  that  of  supplying  nourishment  to  infants  are
at  the  expense,  to  some  extent,  of  the  intellectual  as  they
certainly  are  of  the  physical  strength  of  women,  it  is  certain
that,  in  view  of  the  social  condition  of  woman  in  the  present
and  in  the  past,  the  difference  now,  however  fairly  shown  to
exist,  between  the  intellects  of  the  sexes,  can  by  no  means
be  taken  as  a  criterion  of  their  true  relative  merits.  The
fact  that,  wherever  the  youth  of  both  sexes  are  permitted  to
vie  with  each  other  under  equal  circumstances,  no  marked
average  inferiority  is  observed  in  the  females,  is  one  of  vital
importance,  and  proves  far  more  than  the  other  fact  that  the
males  are  more  likely  to  distinguish  themselves  in  after-life,
since  in  women  the  spirit  has  been  crushed  and  the  opportu-
nity denied.

Inequality  of  JSights.—Lastlj,  we  find  an  inequality  of
rights.  And  here,  as  every-where  else,  this  inequality  exists
to  the  advantage  of  the  males  and  to  the  disadvantage  of  the
females.  In  all  civilized  countries  the  laws  have  been  framed
so  as  to  discriminate  severely  against  the  personal  and  pro-
prietary rights  of  women.     Both  in  civil  and  political  affairs

SEXUO-SOOIAL  INEQUALITIES.    .  647

tliey  are  usually  without  redress  and  without  voice,  and  in
the  legislature  they  have  always  been  without  representation
except  by  men,  while  in  countries  where  representatives  are
chosen  by  suffrage,  this  simplest  but  most  valuable  of  all
rights  has  been  persistently  withheld.  It  is  as  a  citizen  that
woman's  position  has  reached  its  lowest  and  most  dependent
state,  she  being  literally  ignored  in  all  matters  relating  to
law  or  government.

We  see  therefore,  generally,  that,  whether  it  be  in  mat-
ters of  dress,  of  labor,  of  education,  or  of  right,  it  is  the
female  sex  which  has  had  to  suffer  from  the  discrimination.
The  clothing  of  the  male  sex  is  better,  more  convenient,
more  comfortable,  more  healthful.  The  duties  of  men  are
more  agreeable,  more  dignified,  more  varied,  and  more  in-
teresting. Man's  education  is  more  general,  i^ore  thorough,
more  profound.  The  rights  of  men  are  comparatively  ample,
liberal,  and  manifold.  These  are  facts  which,  though  they
may  bring  the  blush  to  the  cheek  of  a  truly  chivalrous  man,
possess  the  highest  interest  for  the  thoughtful  and  philo-
sophic student  of  society.

Genesis  of  Sexuo-social  Inequalities. — But  it  was  not  to
deplore  them  that  we  have  brought  them  forward  in  this
place.  It  was  rather  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  into  their
causes,  and  establishing  if  possible  a  genesis  of  their  existence
in  society.  The  first  step  in  any  investigation  is  the  discov-
ery and  recognition  of  the  facts  which  bear  upon  the  subject
of  it.  In  social  matters  these  facts  often  stand  out  in  full
view  without  being  recognized.  The  power  of  custom  and
the  bias  of  conservatism  make  us  all  blind  to  their  existence.
The  tendency  to  convert  custom  into  right  often  makes  those
facts  appear  just  and  equitable  which  are  unjust  and  despica-
ble. The  fear  of  losing  what  is  good  blinds  us  to  what
is  bad,  and  men  often  cling  to  the  very  system  which  makes
them  its  victims.  It  is  thus  that  society,  which  includes  both
sexes,  remains  incapable  of  recognizing  the  patent  fact  that
one  sex  is  in  a  condition  of  inequality  with  the  other,  that

648  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOIf.— SOCIOGENY.

woman  is  dependent  upon  man,  and  that  the  female  sex  is  in
a  state  of  subjection  to  the  male  sex.  Voltaire's  Jovian  visi-
tor* would  be  sure  at  once  to  observe  with  astonishment
that  the  inhabitants  of  this  planet  were  divided  into  two
great  castes,  dependent  on  a  physical  condition  which  they
could  not  control,  and  those  who  had  the  misfortune  to  be
born  females  were  doomed  to  perpetual  tutelage  or  servi-
tude to  the  higher  caste  of  males.  And  the  inferior  position
of  woman,  maintained  through  so  many  ages,  has  actually
resulted  in  rendering  her  both  physically  and  mentally  in-
ferior to  man.

THE    SUBJECTION    OF   WOMEN.

I  have  classed  the  inequalities  between  the  sexes  under
the  first  great  division  of  the  social  results  of  the  reproduc-
tive forces,  as  being  chiefly  due  to  the  operations  of  the  love-
passion — to  feeling — and  not  to  those  of  reproductive  pro-
cesses— to  function.  The  first  step  toward  the  subjugation
of  the  female  sex  was  the  conquest  by  the  males  of  her  pre-
rogative of  selection.  This  was  the  surrender  of  her  virtue
in  the  primary  sense  of  the  term — of  her  power  over  men,
over  society,  over  her  own  interests.  But  this  crisis  was
brought  on  wholly  by  the  force  of  male  passion.  It  was  a
victory  for  male  indulgence.  "Won  by  the  aid  of  strategy
and  of  superior  mental  power,  it  not  only  secured  the  result
aimed  at,  but  it  led  to  the  dominion  of  man  over  woman.  It
is  one  of  the  few  instances  where  nature  seems  to  have  over-
shot its  mark.  The  very  excess  of  passion  with  which  man
(along  with  the  males  of  all  other  species)  is  endowed,  and
which  was  apparently  designed  to  prevent  the  possibility  of
the  failure  of  reproduction,  became,  when  coupled  with  this
increased  mind-force  incident  to  a  certain  stage  of  intellectual
development,  the  means  of  effecting  the  most  extensive  and
systematic  violations  of  natural  laws,  and  of  imposing  serious
barriers  to  reproduction  itself.    Nothing  but  its  very  gradual

*  "  Philosophie,"  vol.  i.  ("CEuvres  completes,"  tome  xxxii),  p.  16.

SUBJECTION  OF  WOMEN.  649

introduction  and  the  slow  habituation  of  woman  to  the  change
could  have  saved  the  whole  race  from  extinction  before  the
dawn  of  civilization.  Again,  the  sexual  passion  in  man  was
one  cause  of  a  more  rapid  intellectual  development  in  him
than  in  woman.  Superior  cunning,  i.  e.,  sharper  wits,  may
be  regarded  as  a  secondary  sexual  character  as  much  as  the
tusks  of  the  boar  or  the  spurs  of  the  cock.*  Whatever  was
necessary  to  insure  success  in  courtship  was  sure  to  be  devel-
oped, and,  when  cunning  became  a  safe  weapon,  it  rapidly
increased  in  the  males  until  they  outstripped  the  females  in
vigor  of  intellect.

It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  weaker  physical  condition
of  women  during  the  period  of  gestation  and  parturition  did
much  to  give  the  advantage  to  the  males.  Although  we  do
not  perceive  any  special  disposition  on  the  part  of  other  fe-
male animals  at  these  times  to  make  themselves  dependent
upon  the  males,  we  can  readily  understand  how,  with  a  higher
development  of  the  intellect,  and  especially  of  the  sensibili-
ties, they  might  learn  to  do  so.  In  so  far  as  this  has  been
the  case,  the  present  dependent  state  of  women  upon  men
is  to  be  referred  to  the  second  great  class  of  results  of  the
operations  of  the  social  forces.

But,  to  follow  out  the  first  line  of  development,  we  find
that  woman  has  already  made  her  first  great  surrender,  and
permitted  man  to  become  the  chooser  in  the  matter  of  sexual
unions  instead  of  herself.  He  could  not  stop  here.  We
have  seen  how  the  various  systems  of  marriage  grew  up  out
of  this  fundamental  fact.  Woman  at  once  becomes  prop-
erty, since  any  thing  that  affords  its  possessor  gratification  is
property.  Woman  was  capable  of  affording  man  the  high-
est of  gratifications,  and  therefore  became  property  of  the
highest  value.  Marriage,  under  the  prevailing  form,  became
the  symbol  of  transfer  of  ownership,  in  the  same  manner
as  the  formal  seizin  of  lands.  The  passage  from  sexual  ser-
vice to  manual  service  on  the  part  of  women  was  perfectly

*  Darwin,  "  Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  p.  245.

650  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.-^OCIOGENY.

natural.  If  woman  was  man's  property  for  sexual  purposes,
he  would  certainly  claim  that  she  was  so  also  for  all  other
purposes,  and  thus  we  find  that  the  women  of  most  savage
tribes  perform  the  manual  and  servile  labor  of  the  camp.

In  the  earliest  ages,  when  nations  were  devoted  to  con-
tinual warfare,  the  duties  of  men  were  defined,  and,  while
the  women  were  left  behind  to  care  for  the  children  and
perform  the  baser  services,  the  men  went  forth  to  war,  or
took  upon  them  the  affairs  of  the  state.  This  distribution  of
the  labor  of  the  sexes  has  always  been  preserved,  as  nearly
as  the  state  of  society  would  permit.  No  moral  or  intel-
lectual progress  has  been  sufficient  to  shake  it.  The  broad
recognition  of  the  social  equality  of  the  sexes  has  never  been
distinctly  and  practically  made.  All  pretensions  to  it  have
been  contradicted  by  the  treatment  of  women,  by  their  exclu-
sion from  the  most  honorable  forms  of  labor,  and  by  with-
holding from  them  social,  civil,  and  political  rights.  To
affirm  that  women  are  the  recognized  social  equals  of  men  is
to  betray  the  prevalent  incapacity  to  see  the  plainest  facts  in
a  rational  or  abstract  light,  the  inability  to  see  them  in  any
but  a  conventional  light.

If  women  were  the  recognized  social  equals  of  men,  we
should  see  a  very  different  state  of  society  from  that  which
now  exists.  We  should,  in  the  first  place,  see  men  and  women
wearing  nearly  or  quite  the  same  kind  of  dress.  The  slight
modifications  necessary  to  adapt  the  dress  of  each  sex  to  its
peculiar  physical  constitution  would  not  be  sufficient  to  make
the  difference  noticeable,  and  would  not,  as  now,  make  the
form  of  dress  a  badge  of  sex.  For  it  can  not  be  urged  that
the  present  dress  of  woman  is  rendered  necessary  by  reason
of  its  adaptation  to  her  physical  constitution.  The  least  ac-
quaintance with  the  comparative  physiology  of  the  sexes,  on
the  contrary,  is  sufficient  to  show  that  it  is  precisely  the
reverse-^that,  if  either  sex  can  afford  to  wear  heavy  skirts
hanging  from  the  hips  and  wrenching  the  loins,  it  is  the
male ;  that,  if  either  sex  needs  the  lower  extremities  and  parts

SUBJECTION  OF  WOMEN.  651

of  the  body  thoroughly  protected  from  exposure  to  currents
of  cold  air,  it  is  the  female ;  that  the  practice  of  lacing  the
waist  would  be  far  less  fatal  to  man  than  to  woman,  with  her
delicate  uterine  system  so  liable  to  displacement.  And,  even
if  nothing  but  the  mere  question  of  modesty  were  considered,
it  would  be  more  proper  for  woman  than  for  man  to  wear
clothing  to  fit  the  body.

If  the  social  equality  of  the  sexes  were  recognized,  we
should  see  men  and  women  performing  substantially  the
same  duties.  In  uncivilized  races  the  drudgery  and  the
honorable  activities  would  be  equally  distributed  between
them.  In  civilized  countries  women  would  share  all  the
varied  occupations  and  professions  with  their  husbands  and
brothers.  There  would  be  found  very  few  avenues  to  wealth
or  happiness  which  women  would  be  incapacitated  to  enter
from  purely  physical  reasons.  There  are,  indeed,  very  few
of  them  that  women  have  not  in  some  rare  cases  actually
entered  and  successfully  labored  in.  But,  if  their  true  equal-
ity were  recognized,  it  would  not  be  left  for  the  few  who
dared  to  defy  the  rules  of  propriety  to  step  forth  into  fields
of  usefulness  to  labor  by  the  side  of  man.  Not  only  would
the  duties,  labors,  and  occupations  of  men  be  shared  by
women,  but  their  pastimes,  recreations,  and  pleasures  as
well.  We  should  not  see  man  amusing  himself  alone  and  in
his  own  Way,  or  in  the  society  of  men  only,  nor  should  we
see  women  striving  to  become  happy  in  the  society  of  their
own  sex,  and  to  derive  pleasure  from  sources  peculiarly  their
own,  to  which  men  are  entire  strangers.  We  should  see  a
community  of  enjoyments,  not  differing  materially,  perhaps,
from  the  present,  but  in  which  both  sexes  would  join,  adding
to  the  animation  which  they  otherwise  afford  the  lively  relish
of  sexual  companionship.  The  present  system,  both  of  labor
and  of  recreation,  is  calculated  to  bring  out  the  worst  side  of
sexuality.  The  separate  duties  and  spheres  in  which  the  two
sexes  labor  and  move  tend  to  render  the  desire  for  associa-
tion a  prurient  one.     The  varied  restraints  of  propriety  and

652  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

modesty  have  the  effect  of  fanning  human  passions  into  a
flame,  and  a  consequence  of  this  is  that  both  sexes  are  liable
to  be  whelmed  in  a  vortex  of  crime,  and  their  character  and
usefulness  ruined.  Equality  in  all  respects  would  prove  a
certain  antidote  to  all  these  social  evils.  It  would  do  far
more.  It  would  transfer  to  the  list  of  productive  laborers
the  legion  of  women  who  now  deem  themselves  wholly  jus-
tified in  occupying  a  position  of  dependency  upon  man,  and
consuming  the  fruits  of  his  labor  without  adding  the  value
of  a  loaf  of  bread  to  the  wealth  of  the  world.  For  this  non-
producing  condition  of  civilized  women  is  an  anomaly  in  the
animal  world,  and  even  among  human  races.  Among  the
lower  animals  the  labor  of  procuring  subsistence  is  performed
for  the  most  part  by  each  individual  for  itself,  the  males  and
females  doing  an  equal  share  of  the  labor  of  life.  This,  also,
seems  to  be  substantially  the  case  among  the  very  lowest
human  beings ;  but,  very  early  in  the  progress  of  the  race,
this  becomes  changed,  so  that  most  savages  have  a  system  in
which  the  greater  part  of  the  industrial  pursuits  are  carried
on  by  the  women,  the  men  devoting  themselves  only  to  war
and  the  chase  ;  though  of  course  both  these,  and  particularly
the  latter,  furnish  the  means  of  subsistence  to  some  extent.
This  stage  extends  down  into  semi-civilized  peoples  and  war-
like races  of  all  kinds.  It  is,  however,  succeeded  by  a  stage
in  which  every  thing  is  reversed  in  these  respects,  and,  theo-
retically at  least,  all  industrial  operations,  war,  and  the  chase
devolve  upon  men  alone,  women  being  restricted  to  the  re-
productive function,  and  to  that  of  being  ornamental.  In
theory,  this  is  the  present  system  in  civilized  communities,
but  the  manifest  impossibility  of  carrying  out  the  theory
greatly  heightens  the  evils  of  woman's  condition.

The  true  progress  of  society  must  eventually  complete  the
cycle  of  changes  thus  begun,  and  again  make  both  sexes  pro-
ducers, as  in  the  animal  and  pre-social  stages.

If  the  equality  of  the  sexes  were  recognized,  we  should
see  both  sexes  educated  alike.    We  should  see  women  ad-

SUBJECTION  OF  WOMEN.  653

mitted  along  with  men,  not  merely  to  the  common  schools,
but  to  all  the  higher  institutions  of  learning,  to  the  pro-
fessions and  to  the  technical  departments.  We  should  see
the  principle  applied  that  it  is  mind  which  needs  instruc-
tion, not  male  mind.  Men  and  women  would  then  stand
on  an  equal  intellectual  footing,  and  intellectual  superior-
ity, without  regard  to  which  sex  it  appeared  in,  would  re-
ceive its  just  recognition.  Then,  if  woman  fell  below,  it
would  be  just  to  infer  a  natural  deficiency.  Had  the  same
opportunities  and  the  same  restraints  existed  for  both  sexes
from  the  beginning,  it  would  then  be  possible  to  judge  of
their  relative  merits.

If  the  equality  of  the  sexes  had  been  frankly  recognized,
both  would  have  been  accorded  the  same  rights.  Not  only
would  both  sexes  have  labored  together  in  the  great  duty,
along  with  others,  of  framing,  interpreting,  and  executing
the  laws  of  society,*  but  both  would  have  enjoyed  the
same  protection  and  advantages  under  those  laws,  and  both
would  have  been  represented  in  all  the  branches  of  govern-
ment by  the  same  mode  of  representation,  whatever  that
might  be.  Nor  is  it  alone  in  political  affairs  that  equal
rights  would  have  been  extended.  The  social  rights  with-
held from  women  are,  if  possible,  worse  than  these.  For
under  the  head  of  rights  may  be  ranged  all  the  sexual  ine-
qualities named,  and  all  that  may  be  named.  Education,
industry,  nay,  even  dress,  are  all  of  the  nature  of  rights.
To  slight  woman's  education,  to  degrade  and  circumscribe
her  sphere  of  duty,  to  dress  her  with  burdensome  and  un-
sanitary clothes — all  these  are  deprivations  of  right  of  the
most  grievous  nature.  For  every  mind  has  a  right  to  knowl-
edge, every  one  has  a  right  to  choose  his  duties,  and  certainly

*  Among  the  Wyandots  and  many  other  American  tribes,  women  perform
important  functions  in  the  council  and  government.  (See  Professor  J.  W.
Powell's  treatise  on  "Wyandot  government ;  "  Abstract  of  Transactions  of  the
Anthropological  Society  of  Washington,"  1881,  p.  80;  "Annual  Report  of  th§
Bureau  of  Ethnology,"  1880-'81,  p.  61.)
29

654  TEKTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

all  have  the  right  so  to  clothe  themselves  as  best  to  promote
their  comfort  and  successful  activity.

But  there  are  still  higher  rights,  there  is  a  still  greater
liberty  which  society  withholds  from  one  half  its  members.
It  is  the  right  to  themselves,  the  liberty  of  controlling  their
own  persons,  the  possession  of  their  own  bodies.  What  a
commentary  upon  professed  civilization  is  the  claim  that  the
inactivity  of  the  female  sex  is  necessary  to  protect  them
from  exposure  to  personal  violence ;  that  they  can  not  pursue
the  free  and  honorable  duties  of  men  because  thereby  they
would  be  exposed  to  insult !  Or,  if  this  be  not  feared,  how
shallow  is  the  other  plea  that,  if  engaged  in  other  duties  than
those  to  which  society  has  restricted  her,  woman's  modesty
might  be  shocked  by  contact  with  the  vulgar  world !  To  so
fine  a  point  has  this  artificial  sentiment  been  reduced !  And
this  would  be  the  place  to  show  that  it  is  this  sentiment,
more  than  any  thing  else,  which  has  worked  the  degradation,
the  subjection,  and  the  social  enslavement  of  woman.  To
protect  her  from  the  rude  advances  of  others,  to  preserve
her  in  all  purity  for  the  use  of  her  owner — these  are  the
prime  factors  in  the  accomplishment  of  woman's  present
dependent  condition.

I  can  not  enter  into  a  thorough  discussion  of  the  pre-
cise links  which  connect  tliis  whole  train  of  social  phe-
nomena. I  have  outlined  the  genesis  of  modesty,  and  gone
back  to  the  origin  of  all  the  sexual  inequalities.  I  leave  it
to  the  reader  to  fiU  in  the  web  of  circumstances  and  condi-
tions which  must  have  attended  the  slow  evolution  of  these
social  conditions.  I  will  only  say,  in  concluding  this  theme,
that  the  result  of  all  these  tendencies  has  been  to  separate
and  socially  alienate  the  sexes ;  that,  while  the  conditions  of
reproduction,  not  less  than  the  power  of  the  sexual  appetite,
naturally  draw  them  toward  each  other,  and  must,  under
any  and  all  circumstances,  always  keep  them  bound  together
indissolubly  by  bonds  of  sentiment,  affection,  passion,  and
interest,  still  the  vast  and  ever-widening  inequalities  which

SUBJECTION  OF  WOMEN".  655

have  grown  up  between  them  tend  to  draw  them  asunder,
and  make  their  association  and  cohabitation  more  and  more
those  of  mere  instinct  and  less  and  less  those  of  genuine
companionship.  Incapable,  on  account  of  dress,  of  modesty,
and  of  social  custom,  of  sharing  each  other's  labors  or  amuse-
ments, but  compelled  by  such  conditions  to  plod  the  path
of  life  alone,  each  grows  less  and  less  necessary  to  the  other,
until  all  congeniality  disappears,  and  marriage  itself  becomes
a  conventional  formality.  Incapable,  in  consequence  of  un-
equal education,  of  enjoying  any  intellectual  communion,
each  seems  tame  to  the  other,  and  nothing  is  left  of  the
conjugal  relation  but  the  mere  animal  gratifications.  While
the  bodies  of  the  two  sexes  will  doubtless  always  continue
to  cling  together,  their  souls  are  drifting  apart,  and  the  very
elixir  of  human  existeuce  is  being  wasted  upon  the  most
unsubstantial  frivolities  and  conventionalities.  The  great
need  of  society  is  to  be  aroused  to  these  facts,  to  be  awak-
ened to  a  new  sense  of  the  true  and  the  genuine  in  life,  and
of  the  vanity  and  worthlessness  of  aU  forms  and  fashions  not
based  on  the  severest  rationality,  and  capable  of  withstand-
ing the  most  critical  analysis.  The  one  thing  which  would
confer  a  greater  blessing  than  any  other  upon  society,  would
be  to  open  its  e3'es  to  the  exact  position  which  it  has  reached
in  its  march,  and  to  inspire  it  with  a  realizing  sense  of  the
wide  departure  it  has  made  from  the  normal  condition.

It  is  in  the  sexual  department  of  social  phenomena  that
the  most  glaring  inconsistencies  exist,  and  that  the  worst
evils  have  been  allowed  to  develop.  It  is  to  show  this,  and,
as  far  as  possible,  to  account  for  it,  that  I  have  entered  into
the  consideration  of  the  reproductive  forces  and  their  effects
upon  the  human  race.  I  realize  both  the  importance  and
the  delicacy  of  the  subject,  and  hope  I  have  not  wholly
failed  in  its  elucidation.

The  Male  Sex  not  responsible. — In  what  has  been  said
respecting  the  dependent  and  almost  servile  social  condition
of  the  female  sex,  I  should  be  sorry  to  be  misunderstood  upon

656  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGENY.

one  point  where  I  fear  I  may  have  left  room  for  an  unjust
inference.  Although  I  have  been  careful  to  avoid  all  allu-
sion to  the  question  of  who  is  responsible  for  this  condition
of  things,  I  am  aware  that  the  human  mind  is  prone  to  infer
that  where  matters  are  bad  some  one  must  be  to  blame,  and
to  assume  that,  where  a  state  of  things  is  so  organized  as  to
discriminate  against  one  class  and  in  favor  of  another,  the
class  which  derives  the  benefit  must  somehow  be  respon-
sible ;  and  I  have  feared  that  for  these  reasons  some  of  my
readers  might  class  me  in  the  list  of  those  who  see  in  the
male  sex  only  a  confederacy  of  usurpers  and  tyrants,  who  do
nothing  but  seek  for  further  means  of  humiliating  and  sub-
jugating the  female  sex  for  their  own  gratification  and
emolument.  If  any  have  been  inclined  to  accuse  me  of  this
species  of  misandry,  they  need  simply  to  be  reminded  that
I  have  been  only  seeking  to  study  the  condition  of  society,
not  to  criticise  the  conduct  of  its  members.  If  there  is  any
responsibility  in  a  sociological  phenomenon,  it  must  rest
upon  society  as  a  whole.  If  there  is  one  social  fact  which
has  received  the  sanction  and  approval  of  all  classes  of  so-
ciety, it  is  the  existing  relations  of  the  sexes.  If  there  is  an
evil  in  the  world  for  which  nobody  is  to  blame,  it  is  the  in-
equality of  the  sexes.  If  there  is  an  illustration  of  the  vic-
tims of  an  injurious  system  countenancing  and  upholding  that
system,  it  exists  in  the  case  of  women  and  the  system  which
holds  them  down.  The  mere  handful  of  enlightened  pro-
testers, who  have  become  aroused  within  the  past  few  years
to  a  vague  sense  of  their  true  condition,  is  but  the  very  em-
bryo of  the  movement  which  would  be  required  to  accom-
plish the  emancipation  of  woman.  And  it  is  not  so  much
experience  as  philosophy  which  is  agitating  the  question.
The  victims  of  the  system  are  usually  silent,  or,  if  they
speak,  it  is  but  the  bitter  language  of  discontent  unsupported
by  the  philosophic  analysis  of  the  subject  which  can  alone
give  weight  to  their  utterances.  The  greatest  champions  of
social  reform  are,  and  will  always  be,  those  who  possess  the

THE  MALE  SEX  ITOT  EESPONSIBLE.  Q5%

capacity  to  grasp  great  social  truths  and  an  insight  into
human  nature  and  the  causes  of  social  phenomena  deep
enough  to  kindle  a  genuine  sympathy,  and  a  sound,  rational
philanthropy.  This  phenomenon,  like  all  others,  is  the  re-
sult of  causes  operating  through  innumerable  ages,  and  for
which  there  is  no  more  responsibility  than  there  is  for  the
physical  transformations  which  species  undergo  from  the
operations  of  similar  causes  during  still  more  immense  pe-
riods. And,  although  the  results  may  be  bad  and  entail  evil
upon  society,  though  they  be  irrational,  absurd,  and  perni-
cious, they  are  none  the  less  due  to  causes  sufficient  in  their
time  to  produce  them,  and  their  genesis,  or  true  explana-
tion, though  perhaps  too  obscure  for  man  ever  to  unfold,
would  still  be  traceable  to  their  earliest  origin  if  all  the
circumstances  could  be  known.  A  state  of  society,  if  it  be
bad  for  one  class,  is  bad  for  all.  Woman  is  scarcely  a  greater
sufferer  from  her  condition  than  man  is,  and  there  is,  there-
fore, nothing  either  improper  or  inexplicable  in  man's  espous-
ing the  cause  of  woman's  emancipation.  The  freedom  of
woman  will  be  the  ennoblement  of  man.  The  equality  of
the  sexes  will  be  the  regeneration  of  humanity.  Civilization
demands  this  revolution.  It  stands  in  the  greatest  need  of
the  help  which  the  female  sex  alone  can  vouchsafe.  Woman
is  half  of  mankind.  Civilization  and  progress  have  hitherto
been  carried  forward  by  the  male  half  alone.  Labor  and
production  are  now  also  suffering  from  the  same  cause.  It  is
high  time  that  all  the  forces  of  society  were  brought  into
action,  and  it  is  especially  necessary  that  those  vast  comple-
mentary forces  which  woman  alone  can  wield  be  given  free
rein,  and  the  whole  machinery  of  society  be  set  into  full  and
harmonious  operation.

ATriTlIDE  OF   SCIENCE   TOWARD  THE   EQUALIZATION  OF  WOMAn's

CONDITION.

The  general  movement  recently  set  on  foot  by  the  most
advanced  societies,  for  the  elevation  and  amelioration  of  the

658  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIO  GEN  Y.

condition  of  women,  is  obviously  and  confessedly  crude.  It
is  still  in  that  stage,  common  to  all  progressive  movements,
in  which  only  in-esponsible  persons  will  venture  to  espouse
it,  through  fear  of  obloquy ;  one  of  the  necessary  results  of
which  is  that  among  its  votaries  there  are  numbered  many
fanatics  on  the  one  hand  and  charlatans  on  the  other.  It
has  as  yet  scarcely  emerged  from  the  stage  of  ridicule  into
that  of  sober  argument.  It  is  still  almost  completely  under
the  influence  of  feeling,  and  is  little  subject  to  the  control  of
reason.

In  this  condition  it  greatly  needs  aid  from  science,  and  it
should  be  the  aim  of  scientitic  men,  particularly  of  those  who
regard  the  phenomena  of  society  as  legitimate  scientific  data,
to  furnish  so  truly  progressive  a  movement  with  a  basis  of
facts  and  fundamental  principles,  thus  lending  it  a  tone  of
serious  import  and  respectability,  while  at  the  same  time
turning  it  from  its  manifest  errors  and  directing  it  into
rational  and  practical  channels.

The  few  true  philosophers  who  have  sought  to  accom-
plish tliis  object,  however,  have  been  disappointed  to  find
that  scientific  men  in  general  do  not  rise  to  their  stand-point,
while  many  true  advocates  of  social  progress  in  other  things
do  not  think  that  the  relations  of  the  sexes  can  be  rendered
more  perfect  than  they  are.

It  is  especially  unfortunate  to  find  that  the  present  status
in  this  respect  is  actually  defended  by  arguments  from  sci-
ences more  simple  than  sociology.  Certain  facts  in  biology
are  cited,  and  these  are  assumed  to  prove  that  the  existing
condition  of  things  is  a  natural  one,  and  in  all  respects  anal-
ogous to  that  which  exists  in  the  animal  world  below  man.

It  is  argued  that  in  most  mammals  the  female  is  in  many
respects  inferior  to  the  male,  and  performs  different  func-
tions; that  in  birds  and  many  other  lower  creatures  the
males  are  more  beautiful,  larger,  more  sagacious,  and  are  ex-
empt from  the  more  unpleasant  labors  incident  to  the  rearing
and  protection  of  the  offspring.    It  is  claimed  that  facts  of

ATTITUDE  OF  SCIENCE  TOWARD  WOMEN.         659

this  kind  serve  to  point  out  the  purposes  of  Nature^  and  it
is  assumed  that  whatever  can  be  shown  to  be  natural  must
be  the  best  possible  condition.

Arguments  of  this  kind,  coming  from  high  scientific
sources,  have  great  weight,  especially  as  those  to  whom  they
are  chiefly  addressed  are  incompetent,  as  a  rule,  to  judge  of
the  adequacy  of  the  premises,  and  accept  them  as  resting
upon  authority.*

If  it  were  worth  while,  it  would  be  easy  to  deduce  from
natural  history  a  large  number  of  facts  of  precisely  the  op-
posite class,  from  which  it  might  with  equal  force  be  argued
that  the  purpose  of  Nature  was  to  favor  the  females  and
slight  the  males.  Indeed,  it  is  a  fundamental  biological  truth
that,  so  far  as  the  mere  "  purposes  of  Nature  "  are  concerned,
the  fertile  sex  is  of  by  far  the  greater  importance,  and  this
increased  importance  is  abundantly  shown  throughout  all  the
lower  forms  of  life  where  these  purposes  are  predominant.
Thus  in  plants,  the  hemp  is  by  no  means  a  solitary  example
of  the  great  partiality  shown  to  the  female  plant,  and  in
which  the  male  plant  is  comparatively  a  puny  and  ephemeral
thing,  only  attaining  a  small  size,  leading  a  precarious  exist-
ence, and  early  withering  and  dying  before  the  encroach-
ments of  the  large  and  thrifty  female  plants,  which  literally
crowd  it  out  of  existence  as  soon  as  it  has  performed  its
function  of  fertilizing  the  latter.  The  same  disparity  is  ob-
served in  Thalictrum  dioicum,  Antennaria  plantaginifolia^
and  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  in  all  strictly  dioecious  plants.f

In  the  animal  world  there  are  many  equally  forcible  ex-
amples of  Nature's  favoritism  of  the  female  sex.     In  the

*  See  an  article  in  the  "Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,"  for  October,  1878,
on  "The  Woman's  Rights  Question  considered  from  a  Biological  Point  of
View  "  ;  also,  W.  K.  Brooks,  on  "  The  Condition  of  Women  from  a  Zoological
Point  of  View,"  in  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xv,  pp.  145,  347  (June  and
July,  1879).

f  Professor  Thomas  Meehan,  in  treating  of  certain  plants,  is  led  to  remark
that  the  female  sex  seems  to  denote  "  a  higher  effort  of  vital  power  "  ("  Native
Flowers  and  Ferns  of  the  United  States,"  vol.  i,  p.  47).

660  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

lower  orders,  the  rule,  above  referred  to  as  applicable  to  most
mammals  and  birds,  seems  to  be  exactly  reversed.  Here  the
females  are  usually  larger  and  stronger  and  often  more  beau-
tiful than  the  males.*  Every  entomologist  knows  how  far
this  is  the  case  with  insects.  A  queen-bee  is  in  every  way
superior  to  a  drone,  while  the  working-bees  are  all  sterile  fe-
males. In  spiders  this  differentiation  is  carried  to  the  great-
est extremeSjt  the  female  being  usually  much  larger,  often
very  many  times  as  large,  and  more  beautifully  marked.  In
at  least  one  species,  the  function  of  the  male  is  so  entirely
confined  to  the  one  duty  of  impregnating  the  female,  that  it
seems  to  be  the  regular  practice  of  the  latter  to  seize  and
devour  her  miniature  consort  as  soon  as  this  duty  has  been
performed  !  There  are,  moreover,  instances  in  which,  as  in
Sphcerula/ria  Bonibi,  the  female  is  several  thousand  times  as
large  as  the  male ;  and,  without  going  down  to  the  liotifera,
there  are  numerous  insects  (bees,  ephemerae,  etc.)  in  which
the  male  function  is  confined  exclusively  to  the  "  Minne-
diensty

But  cases  are  by  no  means  wanting  among  vertebrates  in
which  the  female  enjoys  a  decided  ascendency  both  in  struct-
ure and  function  over  the  male.  This  occurs  among  fishes
{Gasterosteus,  Silurus),  amphibians,  and  birds.  In  the  case
of  the  American  ostrich  {Struthio  rhea),  the  male,  although
the  larger,  sits  on  the  eggs  and  hatches  them,  and  takes  the
principal  charge  of  the  young.  The  same  is  true  of  the
emu,  and  is  probably  common  to  most  allied  species.  In
most  birds  of  the  hawk  family,  the  female  is  larger  if  not
more  highly  plumaged  than  the  male.  Of  the  male  and  fe-
male marsh  harriers  {Circus  cyaneus^  var.  Hudsonius)  in  my
collection,  the  latter  exceeds  the  former  in  length  by  more
than  an  inch.

There  are  many  birds  in  which  the  two  sexes  are  in  all
respects  equal,  while  such  cases  are  by  no  means  rare  among

*  Darwin's  "  Descent  of  Man,"  vol.  i,  pp.  836,  336.
f  Loc.  cU.,  pp.  327  et  seq.

ATTITUDE  OF  SCIENCE  TOWARD  WOMEN.         G61

mammals.  Differences  here,  when  they  exist,  are  due  to
sexual  selection,  which  the  writers  referred  to  perfectly
understand,  and,  so  far  from  this  indicating  the  purposes
of  Nature,  it  is  simply  the  result  of  an  excess  of  indi-
viduality and  personality  among  the  eager  males,  which,
in  their  strife  to  secure  the  gratification  of  their  physical
desires,  have  to  this  extent  thwarted  Nature's  purposes,
and  brought  about  these  comparatively  anomalous  differen-
tiations.

But  it  must  also  be  denied  that  the  condition  of  the  sexes
among  those  animals  in  which  the  male  is  superior  is  at  all
analogous  to  that  of  men  and  women  whether  in  their  savage
or  civilized  state.  Just  as  the  sexual  differences  in  the
former  are  derivative  and  anomalous,  and  due  to  the  rise  of
the  cerebral  power,  so  those  of  the  latter  are  as  much  more
unnatural  as  that  power  is  more  pronounced  in  man  than  in
animals.  Especially  is  this  true  with  regard  to  the  respective
duties  of  the  sexes.  In  no  animal  do  we  find  any  such  dif-
ferences of  function  between  the  sexes  as  is  presented  by
men,  either  savage  or  civilized.  The  males  and  females  of
all  animals  equally  pursue  the  natural  impulses  which  prompt
them  to  activity,  and  in  no  case  is  it  left  for  the  females  to
perform  all  the  labor  necessary  to  maintain  the  physical  life
of  both  sexes,  as  is  often  the  case  with  savages ;  nor  does  it
ever  occur  that  the  female  devotes  her  whole  time  to  the
rearing  of  offspring,  while  the  male  procures  the  subsistence
for  himself  and  her  and  brings  her  portion  to  her,  which
is  the  theory  of  the  most  civilized  societies.

While,  therefore,  there  is  really  no  parallel  and  no  anal-
ogy— and  while,  if  there  were,  it  would  not  indicate  in  the
least  what  the  purposes  of  Nature  are  in  this  respect  (even  if
Nature  had  any  purposes),  but  rather,  so  far  as  the  paramount
object  of  reproduction  is  concerned,  would  prove  that,  in
proportion  as  female  superiority  is  diminished,  this  object  is
defeated — I  have  nevertheless  thought  best,  before  consider-
ing the  assumptions  of  this  specious  argument,  so  called,

662  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

from  science,  to  show  that  the  facts  themselves  are  wholly
at  fault.

Independently,  however,  of  its  false  facts  and  false  prem-
ises, this  pretended  scientific  defense  of  the  undue  inequality
of  the  sexes  in  man  is  fundamentally  unsound  in  resting
upon  a  thoroughly  false  assumption,  which  is  only  the  more
pernicious  because  widely  prevalent.  It  assumes  that  what-
ever exists  in  nature  must  be  the  best  possible  state.

This  sort  of  scientific  optimism  is,  if  possible,  worse  than
theological  optimism  (vol.  ii,  p.  45).  There  may  be  a  cer-
tain sense  in  which  "  whatever  is  is  right,"  but  there  is  no
ground  whatever  for  asserting  that  whatever  is  natural  is
best  {supra,  p.  71).  All  true  social  progress  is  artifi^al,
and  this  is  just  as  true  of  laws  and  institutions  as  it  is  of  ma-
chinery. All  social  as  well  as  material  progress  must  aim  to
alter  and  improve  the  old  status,  or  it  is  no  progress  at  all.
Those  nations  which  always  point  to  their  ancestors  as  types
of  all  that  is  perfect  are  proverbially  stagnant  and  effete.
But  what  shall  we  say  of  scientific  men — men  who  believe
in  a  humble  animal  origin  for  the  human  race — when  they
point  back  to  that  animal  world  from  which  they  sprang,
for  examples  by  which  to  justify  some  of  the  worst  features
of  our  still  imperfect  social  relations !

.  The  truth  is,  that,  if  they  could  find  a  parallel  in  biology
or  any  other  science  for  such  a  state  of  inequality,  this  would
be  no  bar  whatever  to  the  attempt  to  ameliorate  that  state.
The  only  practical  use  to  which  we  put  science  is  to  improve
upon  nature,  to  control  all  classes  of  forces,  social  forces  in-
cluded, to  the  end  of  bettering  the  conditions  under  which
we  inhabit  the  earth.  This  is  true  civilization,  and  all  of  it.
It  is  rather  a  disgrace  to  civilization — which  has  thus  re-
deemed almost  every  thing  else  from  the  rude,  wasteful,  and
heartless  dominion  of  Nature — that  it  has  left  the  relations
of  the  sexes  untouched,  or  has  even  aggravated  in  the  human
race  those  existing  in  the  brute.  But  it  is  positively  shame-
ful, in  such  a  state  of  things,  for  scientific  men,  Bourbon-

i

SEXUO-SOCIAL  DYNAMICS.  663

like,  to  go  back  to  the  brute  creation  for  standards  of  human
excellence  and  models  of  social  institutions.

We  should  congratulate  ourselves  that  we  are  neither
lions  nor  spiders  nor  yet  cave-dwellers,  but  civilized  men,
and  should  seek  so  to  shape  the  social  policy  that  honor,  jus-
tice, and  equity  should  prevail,  rather  than  the  instincts  of
brutes  or  the  caprices  of  savages.

SEXUO-SOCIAL   DYNAMICS.

In  considering  the  sociological  effects  of  the  reproduc-
tive forces,  I  have  confined  myself  to  the  direct  or  imme-
diate results  of  the  action  of  the  sexual  passion.  The  natu-
ral consequence  of  these  forces  is  reproduction  itself.  "While
this  effect  is,  doubtless,  the  prime  consideration  from  the
statical  point  of  view,  and  possesses  a  vast  importance  to
the  student  of  society  and  of  man,  it  nevertheless  does  not
belong  to  the  discussion  in  which  we  are  now  engaged ;  and
this  for  obvious  reasons.  The  social  forces,  in  the  sense  in
which  they  have  been  here  spoken  of,  are  those  influences
which  impel  man  to  action.  They  are  qualities  residing  in
men  which  determine  and  control  their  physical  activities.
They  have  their  seat  in  the  nervous  system,  and  are  what
inclines  the  body  and  limbs  to  move  in  any  particular  man-
ner. We  call  them  desires.  They  are  the  monitors  which
prompt  us  as  to  the  demands  of  the  system,  and  propel  us
toward  the  object  demanded.  Now  it  is  human  activity
which  has  exerted  the  great  influence  upon  society  that  has
resulted  in  making  it  what  it  is.  It  is  action  (vol.  ii,  p.  376)
which  has  worked  out  human  civilization.  All  this  activity
has  been  put  forth  in  the  effort  to  secure  the  objects  of  desire.
It  is  not  the  mere  securing  and  appropriating  of  these  ob-
jects that  are  attended  with  all  these  vast  and  far-reaching
consequences.  It  is  the  acts  committed  in  the  effort  to  secure
and  appropriate  them.  True,  the  securing  and  appropriating
of  the  objects  of  desire  are  necessary  to  the  existence  and  per-
petuity of  society  and  of  the  race,  and  are,  in  this  respect,  of

ee4:  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGENY.

first  importance ;  but  they  represent  no  change,  no  progress,
no  improvement  in  society.  They  are  simply  the  co-efficients
of  the  social  forces.  They  represent  persistence,  continuance,
quantitative  increase.  The  activities,  on  the  contrary,  con-
sequent upon  the  desires,  are  ever  modifying  the  very  char-
acter of  society.  They  act  upon  the  quality  of  the  social
condition — change,  elevate,  refine,  and  advance  it.  Nay,  as
we  have  so  often  seen,  they  frequently  complicate  and  dis-
tort it  into  a  far  worse  condition  than  that  in  which  they
found  it.  It  is  these  desires,  therefore,  and  the  activities
which  they  create,  that  should  form  the  theme  of  an  inquiry
into  the  conditions  of  human  progress  and  social  metamor-
phosis. The  indirect  or  consequential  results  of  this  success-
ful activity  belong  to  another  field  of  investigation.

JS.    THE  NON-ESSENTIAL  SOCIAL  FORCES.

Thus  far  we  have  been  considering  those  great  social
forces  which,  through  the  gratification  of  the  desires  and
passions  that  constitute  them,  are  essential  to  the  existence
and  continuance  of  the  race.  These  two  objects — the  preser-
vation of  the  life  already  in  being,  as  long  as  the  form  of
organization  is  capable  of  sustaining  it,  and  the  reproduction
of  other  similar  organisms  through  those  already  existing —
are  what  I  have  denominated  the  objects  of  nature.  If  we
can  conceive  of  an  intelligence  as  manifesting  itself  in  the
operations  of  nature,  the  most  obvious  mode  of  this  mani-
festation is  certainly  the  apparent  solicitude  displayed  in
securing  these  two  objects.  And  even  to  those  who  are
capable  of  comprehending  the  genetic  explanation  of  all
the  phenomena  presented  by  nature,  or  of  conceiving  how
such  an  explanation  might  be  made  if  the  means  of  discov-
ery were  within  the  reach  of  man's  limited  field  of  inves-
tigation, the  phrase  objects  of  nature  must  convey  a  notion
sufficiently  distinct  to  enable  them  to  contrast  these  natural
operations  with  others,  in  connection  with  which  there  are
no  consequences  beyond  those  which  follow  immediately

NON-ESSENTIAL  SOCIAL  FORCES.  665

from  the  acts  performed.  The  essential  part  of  those  acts,
which  are  impelled  by  the  two  great  forces  just  considered,
does  not  consist  in  the  direct  or  regular  effects  of  those  ac-
tions, but  in  other  indirect  and  ulterior  effects  which  have
no  apparent  connection  with  the  acts  themselves,  and  which
form,  especially  in  animals,  no  part  of  the  incentive  to  their
pe^'formance.  If  these  effects  help  to  strengthen  the  incen-
tive in  man,  it  is  because  his  reason  has  enabled  him  to  learn
by  experience  that  such  effects  will  follow  such  causes.  He
would  never  discover  this  by  any  course  of  reasoning  a
priori,  but,  by  reasoning  from  the  data  of  long  unvaried  ex-
perience, he  now  knows  as  positively  as  he  knows  any  phys-
ical fact  that  it  is  eating  which  preserves  life,  and  sexual  union
that  perpetuates  it.  But  I  venture  to  say  that  there  is  not
an  animal  below  man  that  ever  excogitated  this  truth.  They
do  not  do  these  things  for  the  sake  of  preserving  life  or  their
species.  They  do  them  in  obedience  to  internal  physical  de-
sires, to  inherent  physiological  forces.  And  man  is  not  far
in  advance  of  them,  for,  though  he  may  know  the  essential
effects  of  his  acts,  this  knowledge  forms  but  the  minutest
fraction  of  the  motive  which  really  prompts  their  commis-
sion. He,  too,  acts  from  impulse,  from  inherent  promptings,
from  physical  desires.  He,  too,  obeys  the  same  physiological
forces  which,  under  the  guidance  of  reason,  have  had  for
some  of  their  direct  effects  the  important  and  astonishing
social  modifications  which  have  been  cursorily  and  imper-
fectly sketched  in  the  present  chapter.

But,  as  was  stated  in  the  beginning  of  the  inquiry,  in  ad-
dition to  these  great  essential  forces,  there  are  others  which
may  for  the  same  reason  be  called  non-essential,  since  they
are  not  indispensable  to  the  life  of  either  the  individual
or  the  species,  which,  nevertheless,  are  attended  with  direct
results,  scarcely,  if  at  all,  less  wonderful  or  less  important
than  those  which  have  flowed  from  the  essential  forces  them-
selves.

The  Physical  Aspect. — The  forces  of  society  are  all

(jQ6  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

ultimately  reducible  to  a  physical  basis.  They  have  their
origin  in  the  human  body,  and,  no  matter  how  much  they
may  become  etherealized  and  spiritualized  by  psychological
and  intellectual  influences,  they  may  always  be  traced  back  to
the  body,  the  source  of  them  all,  even  of  the  mind  itself.
Moreover,  every  one  of  them  has  a  more  or  less  definite
local  seat.  No  task  is  easier  than  to  localize  the  two  most
important  of  all  human  desires,  those  which  make  up  the
preservative  and  reproductive  forces.  The  preservation  of
life  and  the  vast  train  of  industrial  and  economic  conse-
quences which  flow  from  the  operation  of  the  preservative
forces  of  society  all  have  their  seat  and  local  origin  in  the
tongue,  the  palate,  and  the  stomach,  all  center  and  focalize
in  the  sense  of  taste.  The  seat  of  the  reproductive  forces
is  still  more  definite.

The  non-essential  forces,  though  not  all  of  them  so  defi-
nitely localized,  have  still  their  appropriate  physical  origin.
The  two  senses  sight  and  hearing  form  each  the  basis  of  an
important  class  of  social  forces.  The  emotions,  embracing
all  that  class  of  feelings  which  modern  languages  metaphor-
ically call  the  "  heart,"  though  they  can  not  claim  that  organ
as  their  home,  nevertheless  reside  in  some  part  or  other  of
the  nervous  system,  and  have  as  purely  physical  an  origin  as
any  of  the  rest.  And,  finally,  the  intellectual  forces,  which
guide  and  control  all  the  others,  and  thereby  impart  to  them
their  progressive  character,  are  snugly  locked  away  within
the  cavity  of  the  cranium.

These  constitute  the  non-essential  forces.  Whatever  mo-
tive power  has  been  exerted  in  society  which  can  not  be
referred  to  the  groups  already  considered  can  find  a  place  in
this  one.

The  non-essential  forces  are  divided  into  three  classes,
those  of  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing,  those  of  the  emo-
tions, and  those  of  the  intellect.  Those  of  the  first  class
underlie  and  procure  all  the  advance  which  society  makes  in
the  fine  arts,  and  may  be  called  the  CBsthetic  forces  or  facul-

NON-ESSENTIAL  SOCIAL  FORCES.  667

ties.  Those  of  the  second  class  control  and  determine  the
changes  which  society  undergoes  in  its  customs,  sentiments,
and  desires.  They  may  be  called  the  moral  forces.  Those
of  the  third  class  regulate  the  thought,  judgment,  and  in-
telligence of  society,  and  need  no  better  name  than  the  intel-
lectual forces.

Some  of  these  are  derivative,  and  have  grown  out  of  the
two  primary  social  forces,  and  much  that  might  be  consid-
ered here  has  already  been  brought  under  those  general
heads.

Undue  Prominence  jpopularly  given  to  the  Non-essential
Forces. — It  may  be  remarked  that,  while  these  non-essential
forces  are  really  of  far  less  importance  than  the  essential
ones  in  the  history  of  social  progress,  yet  it  is  these  which
have  most  attracted  the  attention  of  mankind  and  received
the  first  place  in  all  systems  of  social  philosophy.

It  is  under  this  head  that  are  to  be  classed  all  those  social
phenomena  which  have  appealed  to  man's  perceptions  and
forced  themselves  upon  his  observation.  The  obtrusive  but
superficial  events  of  human  history,  as  well  as  the  more  ir-
regular, eccentric,  or  violent  acts  of  private  life,  are  the  re-
sults of  the  action  in  some  direction  of  some  of  these  non-
essential forces,  and,  while  they  bring  themselves  forcibly  to
the  notice  of  all  within  the  reacb  of  their  influence  or  obser-
vation, their  aggregate  effect  is  small  as  compared  with  that
which  is  produced  by  the  quiet  but  powerful  and  incessant
operation  of  the  original  forces  of  nature.  The  former  are
superficial,  irregular,  capricious,  and  sporadic,  the  latter  deep-
seated,  regular,  reliable,  and  perpetual.  The  first  are  merely
the  product  of  the  latter,  the  necessary  outbursts  of  their
intense  and  protracted  activity.  Just  as  the  vast  internal
heat  of  the  sun  makes  its  surface  seethe  with  fiery  bil-
lows, so  the  deep  social  activities  throw  perpetually  to  the
surface  billows  of  passion  and  fierce  storms  of  emotion.
But  the  real  weight  of  the  latter  bears  no  greater  propor-
tion to  that  of  the  former  than  the  solar  flames  of  incan-

668  TEETIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

descent  hydrogen  bear  to  the  substance  of  the  sun  below
them.

It  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  social  forces  of  which
we  are  speaking  are,  and  must  necessarily  all  be,  of  the  nat-
ure of  desires.  Whichever  one  of  them  we  are  discussing,
therefore,  we  must  regard  constantly  from  this  point  of
view.  We  must  come  back,  in  each  case,  to  the  fundament-
al conception  of  pleasure  and  pain,  of  agreeable  and  dis-
agreeable sensation.  It  is  always  the  inclination  to  secure
pleasure  or  escape  pain  that  prompts  action,  and  it  is  action
which  effects  the  change  in  the  character  or  constitution  of
society.

1.  The  -Esthetic  Fokces.

If  now  we  consider  the  msihetic  forces^  we  find  that  cer-
tain forms  of  manifestation  to  the  eye  and  ear  produce  upon
those  organs  pleasurable  effects.  The  growth  and  develo]>
ment  of  the  fine  arts  has  consisted  in  nothing  else  than  the
systematic  intensification  of  these  pleasures.  Like  all  other
forms  of  progress,  this  was  accomplished  simultaneously  in
two  ways — a  subjective  and  an  objective  ;  by  increasing  the
capacity  for  enjoyment  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  means  of
eujoyment  on  the  other.  And,  in  all  this,  the  development
of  the  intellect  has  performed  the  same  curbing  and  direct-
ing part,  as  in  the  case  of  all  other  social  forces.

The  love  of  the  beautiful,  both  in  sight  and  sound,  has
always  existed  in  man,  and  doubtless  exists  in  some  form  in
all  animals.  It  bears  a  certain  ratio  to  the  degree  of  general
development  and  refinement  of  organization.  In  man  we
find  it  cropping  out  in  various  ways,  from  the  earliest  periods
to  which  any  account  of  him  can  be  traced.  No  stage  of
civilization  has  ever  been  discovered  which  has  not  left  evi-
dences of  progress  in  the  fine  arts.  Some  of  these  are  en-
during and  still  exist  to  mark  the  era  of  their  constniction  ;
some  have  come  down  only  through  tradition ;  so  that,
while  we  have  an  Apollo  Belvedere,  a  Laocoon,  and  a  Dy-
ing Gladiator,  we  have  only  mythical  traditions  of  the  great

THE  JESTHETIO  FORCES.  669

musicians  Apollo  and  Orpheus.*  Enough,  however,  is
known  to  show  that,  as  fast  as  the  condition  of  the  race  rose
to  a  point  where  any  portion  of  its  energies  could  be  spared
from  the  labor  of  sustaining  life,  they  were  always  directed
into  aesthetic  channels.  There  was  always  a  latent  aesthetic
force,  ready  to  manifest  itself  whenever  the  demands  of  the
preservative  forces  were  fairly  satisfied.

FINE  ARTS    THAT   APPEAL   TO   THE    EYE.

There  are  four  great  departments  of  fine  art  ajipealing
to  the  eye,  viz.,  sculpture,  painting,  landscape-gardening,
and  architecture.  The  first  three  of  the  arts  which  please
the  eye  are  attempts  to  imitate  nature.  Sculpture  gives
form ;  painting,  color,  and  a  representation  of  form ;  while
landscape-gardening  is  nature  itself,  adorned  to  please  the
particular  taste  of  the  artist.  Architecture  is  the  connecting
link  between  the  fine  and  the  practical  arts.  It  does  not
seek  to  imitate  nature,  since  a  building  is  a  direct  improve-
ment upon  nature  for  man's  comfort,  convenience,  or  admira-
tion. It  is  therefore  an  expression  of  a  desire  to  combine
with  this  comfort  and  convenience  a  degree  of  symmetry
and  beauty  sufficient  to  gratify  the  eye,  at  the  same  time  that
it  ministers  to  the  other  demands  of  the  body.  It  is  there-
fore an  art  in  the  highest  degree,  just  as  landscape-gardening
is  an  art  in  the  lowest  degree.  The  latter  is  the  nearest  ap-
proach to  nature  itself,  the  former  tlie  farthest  remove  from
it.     The  one  pleases  by  its  regularity,  the  other  by  its  ir-

*  Although  the  mathematical  laws  of  accord  were  discovered  by  Pythagoras,
or  perhaps  by  the  Brahmans  of  India,  from  whom  he  may  have  taken  them,  and
were  known  to  Aristotle,  it  is  not  probable  that  any  progress  was  made  by  the
ancients  in  the  art  of  producing  harmony.  Their  music,  whatever  it  was,  must
have  been  chiefly  confined  to  melody,  and  this  remained  true  down  to  the  time
when  the  gamut  was  invented  by  Guido  Aretino,  in  the  eleventh  century,  and  a
system  of  musical  notation  was  adopted.  Musical  notation  has  had  an  effect
upon  the  art  quite  analogous  to  that  which  the  art  of  writing  words  has  had
upon  language  and  ideas.  (See  Carpenter's  "Mental  Physiology,"  p.  235;
Samson's  "  Art  Criticism,"  chap,  iii.)

C70  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION".— SOCIOGEFY.

regularity.  Architecture  delights  in  straight  lines,  regular
curves,  and  other  symmetrical  figures ;  landscape-gardening,
in  crooked  and  uneven  lines  and  amorphous  objects.

It  may  be  said  that  natural  objects  present  perfect  and
symmetrical  forms  such  as  please  the  eye  in  architecture,  as
in  crystals,  flowers,  etc.  This  is  true,  but  it  is  confined  to
those  natural  phenomena  which  are  produced  by  the  action
of  molecular  forces,  and  is  usually  on  too  minute  a  scale  to
be  recognized  by  the  eye  of  the  casual  observer.  The  natu-
ral objects  which  call  forth  the  truest  aesthetic  sentiments  of
men  are  large  aggregations  and  combinations  of  regular
molecules,  so  unequally  thrown  together  that  all  traces  of
their  molecular  symmetry  is  lost  sight  of.  They  are  the  prod-
ucts of  the  molar  forces,  which  may  be  called  the  forces  of
variety  and  irregularity,  while  the  molecular  forces  are  those
of  unity  and  regularity.  The  boundless  variety  presented
by  these  amorphous  objects  lends  them  a  charm  which  calls
forth  the  liveliest  cesthetic  emotions.  And  yet  the  eye  loves
symmetry,  and  delights  in  perfect  lines,  angles,  circles,  and
other  curves,  and  tliis  preference  finds  expression  with  all
true  artists  in  the  artificial  grouping  of  objects  in  pictures,  so
as  to  place  each  group  in  the  center  of  an  imaginary  circle.
The  same  tendency  displays  itself  in  landscape-gardening,
and  is  usually  carried  so  far  beyond  nature  in  the  laying  out
of  circles,  curves,  and  rows,  that  it  ceases  to  be  an  imitation
of  nature  and  becomes  an  ideal  creation.  There  are  very
few  objects  large  enough  to  appeal  to  the  aesthetic  faculties
which  are  not  so  far  removed  from  the  play  of  the  molecular
forces  as  to  leave  no  traces  of  the  regularity  of  their  work-
ings. The  flower  comes  as  near  to  this  unity  as  any  object
in  nature,  unless  it  be  the  outline  of  the  nearest  celestial
bodies.  A  close  observation  of  the  vegetable  and  animal
kingdoms  reveals  great  regularity  and  persistency  of  typical
forms  in  the  same  species,  but  very  few  of  these  forms  can
be  called  geometrically  perfect.  And,  while  all  will  unite  in
pronouncing  the  greater  part  of  them  graceful  and  beautiful.

FINE  ARTS  THAT  APPEAL  TO  THE  EYE.  671

any  one  can  readily  distingnisli  this  species  of  beauty  and
regularity  from  that  which  results  from  exact  geometrical
measurement.  A  tree  is  an  object  of  beauty,  and  may  be
pronounced  perfect,  and  yet  there  may  not  be  a  single  per-
fect line  in  its  entire  configuration.  The  serpentine  stream,
that  winds  in  exquisite  loveliness  through  the  meadow,  does
not  present  a  perfect  curve  in  any  part  of  its  extent  or  a
similar  curve  at  any  two  points.  The  molar  objects  of  nature
are  the  very  embodiment  of  irregularity  and  chaos,  but  com-
bine with  this  sentiment  a  certain  soul  of  unity  concealed
within  them.  The  forms  of  mountain-ranges,  the  shape  of
continents  and  islands,  the  indentations  of  shores,  the  wind-
ings of  rivers,  the  location  of  trees  in  forests,  the  undulations
of  the  earth's  surface,  and  the  fantastic  shapes  of  clouds — all
these  are  but  so  many  emblems  of  disorder  and  confusion  ;
and  yet,  as  the  mind  contemplates  them,  it  gets  a  glimpse  of
the  reign  of  law  which  it  feels  must  exist  within  them,  and
of  the  wider  cosmical  rule  which  presides  over  them  all,  and
the  blending  and  co-existence  of  these  sentiments  produce
a  pleasure  of  the  purest  and  most  exalted  kind.  This  senti-
ment bursts  out  on  every  occasion  in  the  lofty  ambition  to
imitate  the  objects  which  have  called  it  forth.  Nay,  it  rises
higher,  and  aspires  to  combine  in  some  grand  synthetic
scheme  all  the  beautiful  and  sublime  ideas  which  have  been
inspired  by  many  objects.  This  is  imagination^  improperly
called  creative,  since  nothing  can  be  woven  into  the  piece
which  has  not,  either  in  detail  or  in  gross,  been  impressed
upon  the  sense-perception.

The  passion  which  the  mind  possesses  for  geometrical
figures  teaches  us  unmistakably  that  even  nature  would  be
more  charming  if  more  of  its  exact  constitution  could  be
constantly  revealed.  It  is  this  yearning  to  obtain  a  deeper
insight  into  the  internal  structure  and  constitution  of  these
aggregated  masses  which  forms  one  of  the  chief  incentives
to  scientific  study.  So  near  do  art  and  science  approach  each
other !     So  narrow  is  the  line  which  separates  the  sesthetic

672  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

from  the  intellectual  emotions !  And  it  is  the  province  of
science,  of  minute  observation  and  repeated  experiment,
aided  by  the  wonderful  artificial  appliances  which  have  been
and  remain  to  be  invented  for  supplementing  the  eye,  to
build  up  a  new  school  of  art  which  shall  be  inspired  by  both
classes  of  natural  objects,  and  shall  combine  in  their  produc-
tions the  vague  and  dreamy  beauty  and  sublimity  of  molar
aggregates  with  the  exact  and  definite  perfection  of  molecu-
lar forms.*  It  is  the  province  of  science  to  open  up  to
the  workl  of  sentiment  and  imagination  all  the  beauty,  sym-
metry, and  order  that  reign  in  the  microcosm  of  molecular
activity.  Such  a  school,  though  somewhat  restrained  in  its
flights  of  imagination,  would  afford  the  lovers  of  the  true
and  the  beautiful  not  only  representations  unequaled  by  any
of  the  productions  of  the  old,  in  all  that  commend  them  to
the  aesthetic  faculties,  but  along  with  them  lessons  of  valua-
ble instruction  in  the  very  primary  methods  by  which  Na-
ture embellishes  the  universe.

FINE   AETS   THAT   APPEAL   TO   THE   EAR.

The  pleasures  of  sound,  when  properly  estimated,  form
no  small  part  of  the  history  of  the  aesthetic  faculty.  The  laws
of  harmony  have  been  much  longer  and  better  understood
than  those  of  vision.  The  way  to  render  sounds  pleasing
and  the  reason  why  they  are  so  have  long  been  reduced  to  a
degree  of  certainty  which  has  not  yet  been  reached  in  the
domain  of  optics.  This  is  because  the  medium  of  sound  has
been  recognized  from  very  early  times,  while  that  of  light  is
as  yet  imperfectly  understood.

*  Historically,  the  faculty  which  delights  in  regular  forms  and  objects  pre-
ceded that  which  delights  in  irregular  forms  and  objects.  This  is  proved  by  the
passion  of  savages  for  beads,  trinkets,  etc.,  as  well  as  by  their  indifference  to
the  beauty  of  the  landscape,  and  to  most  of  those  objects  which  cultured  races
call  grand  or  sublime.  The  failure  of  mankind  to  discover  any  of  the  natural
beauties,  now  so  classical  in  Europe,  until  since  the  sixteenth  or  seventeenth  cen-
tury, shows  that  this  is  as  true  of  the  Indo-Germanic  race  as  of  other  barbarians.
(See  Humboldt's  "  Kosmos,"  Bd.  ii,  S.  16,  23 ;  Burnet,  "  The  Sacred  Theory  of  the
Earth,"  vol.  i,  pp.  194-196  ;  Carpenter,  "Mental  Physiology,"  p.  514,  etc.)'

FINE  ARTS  THAT  APPEAL  TO  THE  EAR.  673

One  of  the  most  interesting  questions  connected  with  the
history  of  music  is  the  variety  which  is  found  to  exist  in  the
capacity  of  different  races  of  men  for  recognizing,  enjoying,
and  producing  harmonious  sounds.  "Why  is  it  that  the  abo-
rigines of  America  are  almost  destitute  of  this  faculty,  while
those  of  Africa  possess  it  in  an  exceedingly  high  degree  ?  *
All  nations  and  races  are,  doubtless,  susceptible  of  deriving  a
certain  amount  of  pleasure  from  sounds,  and  the  power  of
recognizing  harmony  bears  some  proportion  to  the  general
degree  of  development.  Yet  there  are  found  the  widest
differences  in  this  respect,  not  only  between  equally  enlight-
ened peoples,  but  between  inividuals  of  the  same  race  and
nationality.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  culture
is  capable  of  producing  the  greatest  changes,  and  there  is
probably  no  people  who  could  not  in  the  course  of  many  gen-
erations be  made,  by  the  proper  culture,  a  musical  people.  I
do  not  think  the  Caucasian  race  the  one  most  highly  favored
by  nature  in  this  respect ;  and  yet  see  the  wonderful  talent
for  music  which  it  has  shown,  culminating  in  Mozart  and
Beethoven !

At  first  glance,  it  would  appear  that  the  department  of
art  which  appeals  to  the  eye  is  that  which  must  have  made
itself  most  powerfully  felt  upon  human  society.  The  vast
range  of  its  objects,  the  varied  modes  of  its  expression,  and
the  boundless  scope  afforded  by  it  to  the  imagination,  would
seem  to  place  it  far  above  the  limited  domain  and  influence
of  the  department  which  appeals  only  to  the  ear.  But,  when
we  remember  that  the  cultivation  of  music  has  been  rendered
far  more  popular,  and  the  acquirement  of  the  art  has  been
placed  within  the  reach  of  the  masses  by  the  invention  of
popular  musical  instruments,  while  both  painting  and  sculpt-
ure are  still  monopolized  by  the  highest  genius,  and  their
choicest  productions  appropriated  by  the  few  who  combine

*  See  a  paper  by  Herbert  Spencer  on  "  The  Comparative  Psychology  of
Man,"  read  before  the  London  Anthropological  Institute,  June  22,  18T5. —
("Journal,"  vol.  V,  p.  312.)

674  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

wealtli  with  taste,  we  can  not  longer  doubt  that  the  influ-
ence of  music  in  the  aggregate  is  greater,  at  least  in  mod-
ern times,  than  is  that  of  all  the  remaining  fine  arts  com-
bined.

The  ancillary  arts  of  engraving  and  lithographing,  and
especially  that  of  chromo-lithography,  are,  it  is  true,  coming
in  to  supply  one  of  the  greatest  demands  of  man's  higher
nature,  and  may  eventually  result  in  raising  the  real  socio-
logical influence  of  representative  art  to  its  proper  degree.
There  is  little  hope  of  sculpture  ever  becoming  a  popular  art,
while  landscape-gardening  on  any  popular  scale  is  as  yet,  and
must  for  a  long  time  remain,  quite  incompatible  with  the
social  economics  of  the  world.  But  music,  engraving,  lithog-
raphy, and  photography  will  continue  to  exert  more  and
more  their  refining  and  elevating  influence,  in  heightening
and  perfecting  the  aesthetic  faculties  of  mankind.

The  love  of  the  beautiful,  both  in  sight  and  sound,  has
ever  been  and  ever  must  be  a  reliable  'social  force,  ready  to
manifest  its  power  on  every  occasion,  whenever  the  great
vital  demands  of  existence  cease  to  absorb  the  energies  of
society.  In  proportion  as  man's  physical  wants  are  supplied,
and  his  social  and  sexual  relations  placed  upon  a  natural
and  satisfactory  footing,  the  practical  arts,-  the  industrial
character,  and  the  cold  business  features  of  human  life  will
be  relieved,  subdued,  and  embellished  by  the  softening  and
cheering  presence  of  works  of  art,  and  by  the  perpetual
charm  of  music  and  poetry.  The  total  effect  of  the  opera-
tion of  the  aesthetic  forces  has  not  been  inconsiderable,  and
could  not  consistently  be  omitted  from  a  consideration  of  the
conditions  of  social  progress.

II.  The  Moral  Forces.

Under  the  head  of  moral  social  forces  are  to  be  classed  all
the  emotions  which  are  metaphorically  and  not  altogether
inappropriately  said  to  reside  in  the  human  breast,  except  in

THE  MORAL  FORCES.  675

80  far  as  the  sexual  emotion,  in  its  fullest  scope,  may  be  said
to  do  so.

The  moral  forces,  or  human  emotions,  are  susceptible  of
various  kinds  of  classification.  I  shall,  for  my  present  pur-
pose, divide  them  into  two  classes,  which,  while  they  may  not
embrace  all  possible  forms  of  sentiment,  possess  the  advan-
tage of  being  quite  distinct  and  not  overlapping  each  other
so  as  to  confuse  the  mind  in  their  consideration.  These  may
be  respectively  called  the  love-forces  and  ihe,  fear-forces,  i.  e.,
the  sentiments  and  emotions  which  have  love  (other  than
sexual)  and  its  opposite,  hate,  for  their  basis,  and  those  which
have  fear  and  its  opposite,  hope,  for  their  basis.

The  primary  foundation  of  all  emotions  is,  of  course,  sen-
sation, or  feeling.  Sensations  are  frequently  called  senti-
ments, a  word  of  kindred  etymology,  and  very  commonly
feelings,  which  they  unquestionably  are.

With  sensation  there  is  connected  either  a  pleasure  or  a
pain.  The  pleasure  which  love  affords  is  due  to  a  certain
harmony  between  the  constitutions  of  the  one  loving  and
the  one  loved.  Vice  versa,  a  want  of  harmony,  or  discord,
in  two  natures  produces  dislike,  or  hate.  This  harmony  or
inharmony  of  constitution,  however,  stands  in  no  fixed  rela-
tion to  the  character  of  the  constitutions  themselves,  or,  at
least,  is  not  due  to  any  similarity  or  dissimilarity  between
them,  for  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find  the  warmest
attachments  between  diametrically  opposite  dispositions.  It
is  not  resemblance  or  similitude,  but  a  certain  congruity  or
congeniality,  which  begets  that  intensity  of  interest  in  others,
amounting  to  affection  and  love.  The  incongruity  of  temper
wliich  engenders  dislike,  or  hate,  is  an  equally  subtile  and
unintelligible  quality.

The  second  class  of  emotions  having  fear  as  their  basis
is  as  clearly  traceable  to  the  same  common  origin  as  is  the
one  just  considered.  The  true  basis  of  fear  and  hope  is
always,  in  its  last  analysis,  pain  and  pleasure.  It  differs
from  the  love  sentiments  in  this  respect  only  in  time.     Fear

G76  TERTIAKY  AGGREGATION.— SOOIOGENY.

and  hope,  from  their  very  nature,  have  reference  to  the
future.  The  pain  feared  and  the  pleasure  hoped  for  are
things  to  come.  And  yet  in  this  very  anticipation  there  is
a  real  pain  and  a  real  pleasure,  sometimes  even  more  intense
than  the  actual  participation  (vol.  ii,  pp.  150,  284).

The  love  and  hate  sentiments  are  direct  and  immediate,
while  the  fear  and  hope  sentiments  are  indirect  and  remote,
as  regards  their  object.  The  former  have  for  their  objects
others  than  those  who  experience  them.  The  latter  have
self  alone  for  their  object.  The  case  of  self-love  may  be
deemed  an  exception  to  this,  but  it  is  only  an  apparent  one,
since,  even  where  self  is  the  object  of  love,  it  is  as  an  exter-
nal object  that  it  is  regarded.  In  other  words,  the  love-
sentiment  is  always  objective,  while  the  fear-sentiment  is
always  subjective.

Let  us  now  very  briefly  consider  the  emotions  from  these
two  points  of  view.

THE  LOVE-FOKCES.

If  we  were  to  begin  with  the  most  direct  and  physically
objective  of  all  human  sentiments,  we  should  first  glance  at
the  sexual  passion  itself,  or  the  mutual  attraction  which  na-
ture establishes  between  the  sexes  in  the  interest  of  repro-
duction and  the  perpetuation  of  the  race.  But,  inasmuch  as
this  subject  has  already  been  treated  at  length,  we  are  en-
abled to  pass  on  to  other  and  less  important  emotions.

Parental  Love. — The  feeling  most  nearly  related  to  the
sexual,  and  which  doubtless  has  some  obscure  connection
with  it,  is  that  of  philoprogenitiveness ;  this  is  especially
distinct  and  apparent  in  the  female  sex,  where  it  comes  very
near  being  an  essential  force,  since  in  man  and  most  animals
the  life  of  the  new  being  is  dependent  upon  its  existence.
This  sentiment  may,  by  attending  to  that  part,  be  clearly  per-
ceived to  reside  in  the  breast.  It  would  be  wholly  unneces-
sary to  dwell  upon  the  importance  and  extensive  influence  of
the  sentiment  of  parental  love  upon  society.     Next  to  the

TOE  LOVE-FOROES.  677

Bexual  sentiment,  it  is  the  great  bond  of  the  family,  and  the
family  is  the  most  important  social  institution  of  mankind.

Consanguineal  Love. — After  the  love  of  offspring  there
comes  consanguineal  love — the  love  of  one's  own  kindred.
Every  one  is  supposed  to  entertain  a  feeling  for  his  own
relatives  quite  different  from  that  which  he  feels  toward  the
rest  of  mankind.  This  sentiment  is  artificial,  as  is  proved
by  the  fact  that  the  lower  animals  do  not  appear  to  share  it
with  man.  It  is  distinct  from  philanthropy,  and  is  some-
thinor  more  than  the  result  of  mere  association.  Almost
any  one  will  uphold  and  defend  a  relative  where  he  would
not  at  all  excuse  one  who  was  not  related,  and  this  senti-
ment is  stronger  in  the  lower  grades  of  society.  With  a
high  degree  of  enlightenment,  reason  places  all  men  in  more
nearly  the  same  light,  and  we  learn  that  our  relatives  are
as  imperfect  and  fallible  as  the  rest  of  mankind.

The  great  strength  of  kindred  ties,  especially  among  the
less  civilized  races,  must  be  accounted  for  as  the  result  of
those  influences  which  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  social  system
itself.  Society  could  not  exist  until  the  form  of  marriage
became  sufficiently  stable  to  determine  relationship,  at  least
with  one  of  the  parents.  The  primitive  idea  of  the  family,
though  variable,  was  not  the  modem  conception,  as  the  im-
mediate children  of  two  parents,  but  as  the  kindred  of  a
stock ;  and  accordingly  we  find,  among  most  of  the  uncivil-
ized tribes  of  the  world,  a  sort  of  communal  life  to  exist,
based  on  kinship,  and  expanding  into  larger  organizations
called  clans  or  gentes,  phratries,  tribes,  and  nations.

Patriotism. — From  the  circle  of  the  family  and  the  con-
sanguineal nucleus  the  affection  gradually  expands  with  ad-
vancing civilization.  Patriotism  is  the  next  sentiment,  but
it  begins  very  humbly.  At  first  it  only  embraces  the  clan
or  tribe,  then  extends  its  limits  to  take  in  the  state.  But,  as
the  state  itself  increases,  the  patriotic  impulse  keeps  pace,  or
should  keep  pace,  so  as  always  to  be  commensurate  with  one's

country.     "Whenever  it  does  not  do  this,  there  is  danger  that
30

678  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

the  country  may  fall.  One  of  the  best  tests  of  a  nation's  fit-
ness for  territorial  expansion  and  of  its  perpetuity  may  be
found  in  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  popular  sentiment  of
patriotism.  As  soon  as  this  is  found  to  come  short  of  em-
bracing the  whole  country — as  soon  as  the  smaller  sections
or  political  divisions  become  paramount  to  the  whole  coun-
try— it  is  evidence  that  it  is  becoming  too  extensive  for  its
people,  and  a  check  should  be  at  once  put  upon  its  growth.
It  was  this  disproportion,  or  overgrowth,  which  came  so  near
whelming  this  country  in  ruin  in  1861,  and  it  would  un-
doubtedly have  succeeded  had  the  same  degree  of  sectional-
ism prevailed  in  the  Northern  as  in  the  Southern  portion  of
the  Union.  When  I  heard  Georgian  soldiei-s  speak  of  their
State  as  of  a  great  independent  country,  the  whole  philoso-
phy of  the  "rebellion"  was  laid  bare.  If  the  day  ever  comes
when  the  whole  world  shall  be  embraced  under  one  grand
politico-social  commonwealth,  the  only  condition  which  can
keep  it  there  will  be  the  existence  every-where  of  a  prevail-
ing sentiment  of  cosmopolitan  patriotism.  This  sentiment
will  be  akin  to  humanitarianism.

Philanthropy. — The  next  step  after  patriotism  is  philan-
thropy, the  sentiment  which  goes  out  for  all  mankind,  and
desires  the  happiness  of  the  most  remote  in  kindred  or
nation,  as  well  as  that  of  immediate  relations  and  country-
men.

These  are  the  positive  impulses  which  control  the  moral
world.  Their  influence  upon  society  is  immense  in  preserv-
ing the  most  important  of  human  institutions.  Parental  love
is  what  shields  and  protects  helpless  infancy  and  imprudent
youth.  Filial  and  fraternal  love  is  what  cements  the  family
and  the  consanguineal  circle.  Patriotism  is  essential  to  the
life  of  the  state,  and  thereby  secures  the  protection  of  all
those  economic  and  industrial  institutions  which  are  fostered
by  the  state.  Philanthropy  exerts  a  benign  and  pacific  influ-
ence upon  all  mankind,  although  it  has  as  yet  only  begun

THE  LOVE-FORCES.  679

to  extend  beyond  the  very  select  few  who  possess  an  insight
into  social  phenomena.

Self-Love. — Last  of  all,  and  perhaps  greatest  among  this
class  of  sentiments,  comes  the  love  of  self.  In  its  worst  mani-
festations, where  it  is  in  excess,  it  takes  the  forms  of  egotism,
pride,  and  conceit,  and  crops  out  every-where  in  imperfect
human  nature,  forming  one  of  the  chief  evils  of  social  exist-
ence. It  is  probably  a  product  of  selection,  since  there  is  no
doubt  that  an  inadequate  supply  of  self-love  would  be  fatal
to  success  in  maintaining  a  subsistence,  but  we  could  wish
that,  in  this,  nature  might  have  been  more  exact,  and  not
lavished  a  commodity  upon  society,  any  excess  of  which  be-
yond the  necessary  amount  is  so  detrimental  to  its  happiness.
When  evenly  balanced,  self-love  takes  the  form  and  name  of
self-esteem,  a  very  salutary  sentiment,  as  we  readily  perceive
as  soon  as  any  one  is  found  deficient  in  it.  When  self-love
looks  to  the  future,  it  takes  the  form  of  ambition,  or,  per-
haps more  correctly,  it  produces  that  sentiment.  Ambition,
whether  to  do  or  to  be  any  thing,  is  always  prompted  and
nourished  by  self-love.  For  the  most  universal  concomitant
of  self-love  or  self-esteem  is  the  desire  to  be  loved  and
esteemed  by  others.  And  the  one  who  is  ambitious  to  ac-
complish some  cherished  object,  not  less  than  he  who  is  am-
bitious to  attain  a  certain  standard  of  personal  excellence,  is
aiming,  as  his  chief  end,  at  securing  for  himself  a  greater
amount  of  esteem  and  regard  from  his  fellows.

Ambition,  considered  in  reference  to  all  its  many  objects,
is  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  non-essential  or  super-
ficial forces,  and  has  wrought  great  changes  in  the  condition
of  society.

COKEELATTVES    OF   THE   L0VE-F()KCE8.

But  love,  in  all  its  forms,  has  its  correlative.  For  every
love  there  is  a  hate.  If  there  is  an  exception  to  this  rule,  it
is  in  the  case  of  philanthropy,  and  even  here  few  have  failed
to  observe  that  those  whose  hearts  glow  most  warmly  for

680  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.-SOCIOGENY.

their  fellows  are  usually  most  severe  and  embittered  against
the  authors  of  misery  and  suffering  in  society.*

The  correlative  of  sexual  love  is  as  much  more  fierce  and
terrible  than  other  hates  as  that  passion  is  more  intense  and
sublime  than  other  loves.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  influ-
ence of  jealousy,  the  origin  of  which  has  already  been  touched
upon  {sujpra,  pp.  622,  623).

The  correlative  of  parental,  and  particularly  of  maternal,
love  is  a  powerful  and  almost  irresistible  passion.  When
once  the  fruit  of  her  own  body  is  put  in  jeopardy,  there  is
no  hardship  too  great  for  a  mother  to  undergo,  no  act  too
bold  for  her  to  undertake.  It  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  poetry
and  the  drama  to  illustrate,  in  innumerable  ways,  the  power
and  grandeur  of  this  sentiment.  Indeed,  but  for  it,  the  help-
lessness of  infantile  humanity  would  jeopardize  the  existence
of  the  race.

Passing  over  those  family  feuds  and  miniature  battles
which  are  the  frequent  and  inevitable  correlates  of  consan-
guineal  affection,  let  us  just  notice  the  extensive  nature  of
the  reactions  which  patriotism  engenders.  It  may  almost  be
said  that  love  of  country  is  the  true  cause  of  all  the  warfare
that  is  waged  among  nations.  Out  of  it  grow  pride,  arro-
gance, an  excessive  sensitiveness  to  disrespect,  and  an  over-
weening confidence  in  the  military  power  of  one's  country,
all  of  which  combine  in  a  thousand  ways  to  plunge  nations
into  difliculties  and  sanguinary  wars.

THE   FEAR-rOECES.

From  this  hasty  enumeration  of  the  emotions,  having
love  and  its  opposite,  hate,  for  their  basis,  we  will  pass  to
the  other  class,  having  for  their  basis  fear  and  its  opposite,
hope.  The  nature  of  the  physical  body  as  a  reservoir  of
emotions  gives  rise  to  innumerable  acts  having  for  their  ob-

*  It  has  been  frequently  remarked  that  great  philanthropists  are  often  tyrants
in  their  own  families.  This  has  been  said,  how  truly  I  know  not,  of  the  great
John  Howard,  and  in  my  own  experience  I  have  seen  the  principle  verified  in
one  quite  remarkable  instance.

THE  FEAR-rOROES.  681

ject  the  regulation  of  the  quality  of  these  emotions.  As
desire,  from  which  all  activity  flows,  is  simply  a  name  for
the  tendency  of  sentient  matter  to  escape  unpleasant  and
seek  pleasant  sensation,  so  the  activities  of  sentient  beings
are  perpetually  directed  to  averting  pain  and  attracting
pleasure.  From  this  point  of  view  it  would  be  correct  to
say  that  every  act  is  prompted  by  fear  or  hope.  But  this
sense  is  too  technical  for  our  present  purpose,  and  we  shall
place  the  popular  interpretation  upon  all  the  natural  acts  of
life — that  they  are  prompted  by  a  sort  of  instinct  or  inherent
impulse,  in  which  the  relation  between  the  subject  and  the
object  is  too  close  in  point  of  time  to  require  the  degree  of
forecast,  and  call  out  the  notion  of  future  effect,  which  are
involved  in  the  idea  conveyed  by  the  terms  fear  and  hope.
That  there  is,  however,  no  clear  line  of  demarkation,  may
be  seen  when  we  apply  the  principle  to  the  animals  below
man.  We  thus  perceive  that  the  terms  fear  and  hope  are
not  exactly  equal  in  their  scope.  We  frequently  ascribe  the
acts  of  even  the  lowest  animals  to  the  effect  of  fear,  but
rarely  to  that  of  hope,  the  latter  term  being  more  restricted
in  its  meaning.  And  yet  animals  are  not  wholly  destitute  of
the  sentiment  of  hope.  The  horse,  when  he  quickens  his
pace  as  soon  as  his  head  is  turned  homeward,  is  as  much  in-
spired by  hope  as  he  is  by  fear  when  he  does  the  same  thing
at  sight  of  the  uplifted  lash.  The  difference  in  the  force  of
the  two  terms  is  one  of  degree.  Either  may  be  strained  to
embrace  all  forms  of  action  ;  but,  when  left  to  their  normal
sense,  fear  is  more  comprehensive  than  hope,  and  does  not
require  the  same  distance  of  time  between  the  act  and  the
sentiment.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  placed  it  first,
as  though  it  were  the  positive  term,  though  it  would  naturally
appear  to  be  the  negative  term.  And  it  is  this  same  quality
of  superior  comprehensiveness  which  has  caused  fear  to  play
a  so  much  greater  role  in  the  history  of  human  society  than
hope  has  done,  and  which  has  justified  me  in  denominating
this  class  of  forces  the  fear-forces.

683  TERTIAKY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

CLASSIFICATION"   OF   THE   FEAB-FORCES.

The  fears  and  hopes  of  mankind  are  capable  of  as  many
modes  of  classification  as  are  the  varied  human  susceptibili-
ties to  suffering  and  enjoyment.  They  may  be  divided  into
physical  and  mental,  into  temporal  and  spiritual,  into  ap-
proximate and  remote,  into  real  and  imaginary,  into  secular
and  religious,  and  into  many  other  equally  distinct  divisions,
for  the  purpose  of  minute  analysis.  I  shall  endeavor  to  pre-
sent a  general  view  of  them  under  the  two  heads  oi  jplnjsical^
or  such  as  anticipate  pain  or  pleasure  to  the  body,  and  jpsy-
chical,  or  such  as  anticipate  pain  or  pleasure  to  the  mind,  or
soul.  The  former  are  always  temporal  and  secular,  but  may
be  either  approximate  or  remote,  real  or  imaginary.  The
latter  are  spiritual,  and  form  the  warp  and  woof  of  the  relig-
ious sentiment.

THYSICAL   FEAE-FOECES.

The  external  nerves  of  sensation  in  the  body  are  a  means
of  protection  to  life.  Their  existence  is  otherwise  unneces-
sary, since  it  is  pain  and  rarely  pleasure  which  they  afford.
The  nerves  which  are  the  seat  of  bodily  pleasure  are  chiefly
internal,  and  never  come  into  contact  with  external  objects,
at  least  except  when  purposely  introduced,  as  food  to  the  pal-
ate, etc.  The  ether-waves  which  strike  the  retina  and  the  air-
waves which  reach  the  tympanum  produce  no  sensation  of
which  the  mind  is  conscious.  If  they  ever  chance  to  do  so,
it  is  a  painful  one.  The  tongue  and  palate  are  indifferent  to
the  resisting  qualities  of  food,  or  certainly  derive  no  pleasure
from  them.  The  sensation  produced  upon  them  is  a  molecii-
lar  one,  caused  by  chemical  action,  and  is  never  experienced
when  insoluble  substances  are  applied.  The  pleasure  of  sex-
ual contact  is  of  a  wholly  different  nature  from  simple  sen-
sation. The  emotional  pleasures  are  seated  deep  in  the
body,  and  know  no  objective  contact,  while  the  brain  can
only  communicate  to  the  external  world  by  means  of  its
system  of  nerves.     Neither  is  it,  in  the  nature  of  things,

PHYSICAL  FEAE-FOROES.  683

necessary  that  nerves  of  pleasure  should  possess  sensitiveness
to  contact,  as  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  even  the  nerves  of
sense  may  be  severed  at  their  origin  without  producing  pain.
It  would  seem  certain,  therefore,  that  the  true  function  of
the  external  nerves  of  sensation  is  that  of  sentinels  to  avert
danger  and  protect  the  body  from  harm  and  destruction.*
It  requires  no  assumption  of  an  intelligent  design  for  those
who  object  to  such  an  interpretation  to  account  for  their
existence.  The  law  of  natural  selection  is  sufficient,  since
any  species  destitute  of  this  power  of  premonition  would
soon  be  extinguished.

The  pleasure  afforded  by  any  form  of  external  contact  is
utterly  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  pain  which  is
being  perpetually  experienced  from  the  same  cause,  and  it  is
this  immediate  pain,  more  than  the  subsequent  enfeeblement,
death,  or  extinction,  that  forms  the  object  of  fear.  Just  as
in  all  the  great  necessary  vital  acts,  it  is  not  the  preservation
or  perpetuation  of  existence,  but  the  temporary  pleasure
afforded  by  the  act  of  which  these  are  the  necessary  conse-
quences, which  is  sought,  and  which  is  alone  sufficient  to
move  the  action,  so,  in  the  case  before  us,  it  is  not  the  ul-
timate consequences '  of  external  injury,  but  the  immediate
pain  incident  to  violent  contact,  which  is  sufficient  to  arouse
the  body  to  the  action  necessary  to  escape  it.  This  senti-
ment is  fear,  and  in  this  form  it  reaches  down  to  embrace  the
greater  part  of  all  sentient  beings.  In  man  it  is  nourished
and  sharpened  by  experience,  by  reason,  and  by  precept,  un-
til it  embraces  dangers  far  beyond  the  scope  of  the  senses.
As  results  of  the  fear  of  want,  might  have  been  treated  all
the  great  social  and  economic  labors  which  man  has  per-
formed in  his  career,  and  which  were  considered  under  the
preservative  forces.  There  remain  two  other  sources  of  fear,
viz.,  fear  of  violence  and  fear  of  disease,  which  it  is  proper
■to  consider  here.

*  The  important  general  bearings  of  this  fact,  which  were  touched  upon  in
tlie  Introduction,  will  be  fully  drawn  out  in  Chapter  IX.

684  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGEFT.

Fear  of  Violence. — There  are  two  forms  of  violence
which  have  been  feared  by  man,  and  his  efforts  to  escape
which  have  produced  important  social  and  moral  results.
He  may  be  regarded  as  having  always  had  two  classes  of
enemies  against  which  he  must  perpetually  contend,  and  of
which  he  has  always  stood  in  awe.  Both  animate  and  inani-
mate nature  have  appeared  to  assume  a  hostile  attitude  toward
man.*

Fear  of  Man. — The  animate  being  which  has  most  seri-
ously obstructed  man's  progress  has  been  man  himself  {supra,
p.  463),  and  the  precautions  taken  and  acts  performed  to  pro-
tect himself  from  his  own  kind  are  among  the  most  exten-
sive of  human  operations.  Fears  from  this  source  have  usual-
ly been  well  founded,  and  the  precautions  taken  necessary.
For,  while  war  must  be  admitted  to  be  a  terrible  blight  upon
civilization,  it  is  vain  to  talk  of  abolishing  it  so  long  as  its
spirit  rankles  in  the  human  breast.  The  principle  of  non-
combativeness,  which  may  succeed  in  small  wandering  sects,
would  be  the  degradation  and  extinction  of  nationalities.  In
other  words,  non-resistance  would  be  fatal.  The  reform  must
be  on  the  side  of  the  offensive,  and  not  on  that  of  the  defen-
sive. If  war  is  ever  done  away,  it  will  be  when  the  spirit  of
aggression,  not  of  protection,  shall  have  been  quenched.  This
is  one  of  the  radical  errors  of  peace-reformers :  that  of  sup-
posing that  peace  can  be  maintained  except  by  the  very
threat  of  war,  so  long  as  the  war-spirit  prevails  in  any  con-
siderable portion  of  mankind.f

Fear  of  Animals. — ^Man's  dread  of  violence  from  the
animals  below  him  has  formed  a  great  part  of  his  solicitude,
and  occupied  a  large  share  of  his  attention.  He  came  upon
the  globe  as  one  of  them,  possessing  no  divine  charter  of  mas-
tery or  supremacy.     He  entered  the  lists  in  the  struggle  for

*  "  Es  liegt  tief  in  dcr  triiben  Natur  dcs  Menschen,  in  eincr  ernsterfiillten
Ansicht  der  Dinge,  dass  daa  Unerwartete,  Ausserordentliche  nur  Furcht,  nie
Freude  oder  Hoffnung,  erregt." — (Humboldt's  "  Kosmos,"  Bd.  i,  S.  T5.)

I  F^n^lon,  "  T^l^maque,"  liv.  xiv.

FEAR  OF  VIOLENCE.  685

existence  and  survival  as  an  equal  competitor.  Looking  out
from  the  advanced  position  "which  he  now  occupies,  the  odds
seem  vastly  in  his  favor.  But  it  was  not  always  so.  It  is
In  the  prehistoric  epoch  that  the  greatest  struggles  must  have
taken  place.

The  fear  of  wild  animals,  serpents,  and  dangerous  insects
is  still  rerj  great  in  all  sparsely-peopled  regions,  whether  the
inhabitants  be  native  savages,  or  colonists  from  civilized
countries,  and  many  are  the  hardships  from  this  source  to
the  pioneer  settlers  of  every  new  country.*

But  the  danger  is  apt  to  be  imaginary,  and  the  fears
that  were  once  justly  entertained  are  perpetuated  long  after
the  cause  has  disappeared.  Ignorant  of  the  distinctions  which
should  be  made,  it  is  common  for  even  the  most  cultivated
people  to  experience  a  dread  of  nearly  every  living  thing.
The  most  barmless  animals  are  feared,  and  dangerous  habits
and  qualities  attributed  to  creatures  which  may  really  be  the
best  friends  of  man.  There  exists  an  especial  terror  of  rep-
tiles, insects,  and  vermin.  All  snakes  are  supposed  to  pos-
sess deadly  fangs,  all  insects  poisonous  stings,  and  all  worms,
including  innocent  larvae  which  are  supposed  to  be  worms,  a
venomous  bite.f  Children  are  imbued  in  their  infancy  withi
a  thousand  vague,  fanciful  fears  of  danger  from  beasts  which
no  longer  exist,  except  in  remote  wildernesses,  where  they
justly  fear  and  fly  before  man.  An  immense  amount  of  ar-
tificial, groundless,  and  imaginary  fear  is  thus  manufactured
and  thrown  in  upon  society  to  consume  its  nerve-force,  and

*  According  to  oflScial  returns,  the  number  of  persons  who  died  from  snake-
bite in  the  Northwest  Provinces  and  Oudh  (India)  during  1879  was  3,168.  Be-
sides this,  1,051  persons  were  reported  to  have  been  killed  by  wolves  and  leopards
during  the  same  period.  A  partial  explanation  of  this  state  of  things,  however,
may  be  found  in  the  facts  set  forth  in  Chapter  X  (vol.  ii,  p.  2*71).

f  Most  wild  plants  are  assumed  to  be  poisonous  unless  well  known.  A  party
engaged  on  one  of  our  geographical  surveys  of  the  Territories  once  found  a  very
pleasant-flavored  wild-cherry,  which  they  observed  was  never  touched  by  the
Indians.  On  inquiry,  they  learned  that  these  regarded  it  as  poisonous,  and  no
one  had  ever  been  known  to  taste  it !  The  coarse  names  which  most  plants  re-
ceived from  the  early  herbalists  also  proves  the  dread  in  which  they  were  held.

686  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOK— SOCIOGENY.

render  the  race  cowardly  and  effeminate.  It  is  one  of  the
most  active  agencies  of  social  degeneracy,  and  a  powerful
element  of  that  system  of  false  conceptions  which  in  time
completely  permeate  a  civilization  and  render  it  effete.

The  remedy  for  these  pernicious  imaginary  fears  can,  of
course,  only  be  a  correct  education.  A  positive  knowledge
of  what  things  are  dangerous  and  what  innocent,  and  the
disabuse,  in  children,  of  all  absurd  notions  productive  of
fright,  are  all  that  would  be  required  to  rid  society  of  this
one  of  its  most  useless  nightmares.

Fear  of  Inanimate  Nature. — Fear  of  inanimate  nature
is  scarcely  less  profound  and  universal  than  fear  of  animate
nature.  Every  visible  phenomenon  or  effect  in  the  world  of
matter  has,  at  one  time  or  another,  been  regarded  with  awe
and  dread.  The  winds,  the  storms,  the  waves,  the  floods,  the
earthquakes,  the  thunder-bolts,  the  fires,  etc.,  that  ever  and
anon  sweep  over  the  earth — all  these  and  many  more  of  the
physical  phenomena  have,  in  varying  degrees  at  divers  times,
inspired  the  human  soul  with  the  most  profound  awe  and
terror.  The  vague  and  baseless  fears  which  all  ignorant
races  entertain  for  these  things  have  had  their  origin  in  real
danger.  But  the  hidden  character  of  such  dangers,  and
especially  the  unseen  source  of  power  manifested  in  the  in-
animate world,  has  had  the  effect  to  arouse  in  their  crude
minds  a  train  of  imaginary  terrors  far  more  extensive  than
the  real  danger.  Himself  an  animal,  man  has  animated  the
whole  universe  and  endowed  every  movement  in  nature  with
vitality,  purpose,  and  will.  This  f  etichism,  which  is  the  first
form  of  religion,  is  the  first  step  toward  the  conception  of  a
deity.  Primos  in  orbe  deos  fecit  timor.  How  can  motion
exist  without  a  mover  ?  is  the  first  problem  in  theology ;  and
every  savage  tribe  of  men  that  has  ever  emerged  from  the
condition  of  brutes  has  propounded  to  itself  this  problem
and  given  to  it  the  same  answer,  has  based  upon  it  the  pri-
mary thesis  of  theology — the  existence  of  deity  (vol.  ii,  pp.
262,  268).

FEAR  OF  VIOLENCE.  687

Man  has  often  souglit  to  bridge  over  the  chasm  between
the  animate  and  the  inanimate  world  bj  endowing  physical
objects  with  life,  and,  throughout  every  system  of  mythology,
religion,  or  philosophy,  that  has  come  down  from  pre-scien-
tiiic  ages,  the  mysteries  of  physical  agency  have  been  blended
and  interwoven  with  those  of  vital  agency  on  the  one  hand
and  with  divine  agency  on  the  other.

Fear  of  inanimate  nature  is  the  foundation  of  superstition,
and  the  heroic  efforts  of  a  few  to  overthrow  it  have  led  the
world  into  the  path  of  science.  I  need  only  allude  to  the
vast  social  results  toward  which  these  two  great  tendencies
point.  The  wretched  demoralization  of  superstitious  fear
can  only  be  offset  by  the  light  and  freedom  of  scientific  hope.

Fear  of  Spiritual  Beings. — The  fear  of  spiritual  beings
is  simply  a  last  consequence  of  the  tendency  to  impersonate
natural  objects.  Not  content  with  making  fetiches,  idols,
and  gods  of  objects  which  have  a  real  existence,  men  have
conjured  out  of  fancy  and  peopled  all  space  with  myriads  of
spiritual  beings,  which  they  have  feared,  worshiped,  im-
plored, and  propitiated  under  a  variety  of  names.  Harpies
and  griffins,  sylphs,  satyrs,  and  undines,  ghosts  and  hobgob-
lins, have  each  haunted  its  appropriate  spot,  and  inspired  the
superstitious  world  with  a  thousand  terrors  throughout  all
ages.  These  imaginary  fears  have  exerted  their  legitimate
influence  upon  human  society,  and  put  their  indelible  stamp
upon  the  civilization  of  each  age.

Fear  of  Disease. — Along  with  these  fears  of  personal
violence,  whether  real  or  imaginary,  and  whether  proceeding
from  animate,  inanimate,  or  supernatural  sources,  there  has
existed  a  deep-seated  dread  of  bodily  disease^  which,  while  it
has  been  less  apparent  in  its  outward  character,  has,  never-
theless, affected  the  constitution  of  society  in  a  no  less  pro-
found degree.  Totally  ignorant  of  the  mechanism  of  the
physical  body,  and  particularly  of  its  internal  organs,  and
wholly  unconscious  of  the  nature  of  the  vital  functions  and
the  external  elements  of  supply ;  finding  themselves  a  con-

688  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION^.— SOCIOGENY.

stant  prey  to  innumerable  disorders,  and  beholding  their
kindred  swept  away  daily  by  the  mysterious  hand  of  disease,
it  was  natural  for  the  imagination  of  primitive  men  to  run
to  the  wildest  extremes,  and  the  fancy  to  indulge  in  the
most  absurd  speculations  as  to  the  cause  of  so  terrible  and
insidious  a  scourge.  Just  as  the  tendency  was  to  imperson-
ate all  inanimate  sources  of  violence,  and  bring  them  under
one  explanation,  so  the  tendency  was  further  to  impersonate
the  sources  of  disease,  attribute  it  to  some  form  of  violence
and  to  some  voluntary  agency,  and  thus  to  reduce  it  to  the
same  explanation.  This  accounts  for  the  fact,  at  first  view
80  singular,  that  so  many  of  the  savage  races  of  men  believe
that  no  one  ever  dies,  but  is  kiUed,  and  ascribe  every  death
which  we  call  "  natural "  to  the  successful  malice  of  some
personal  enemy,  either  dead  or  living.*  The  delusion  known
as  witchcraft,  recognized  in  the  Hebrew  statutes,!  and  by  the
Twelve  Tables  of  Roman  law,:}:  but  reaching  its  most  alarm-
ing state  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  where,  for  three
centuries,  it  raged  over  Europe,  and  even  took  root  on  Amer-
ican soil,  and  which  counts  its  victims  by  millions,  was  noth-
ing less  than  the  legitimate  operation  of  this  same  belief,  the
greater  part  of  the  alleged  bewitching  being  cases  of  attacks
by  disease.

Like  every  great  source  of  fear  and  dread  demanding
relief  and  protection,  the  universal  fear  of  disease  brought
to  the  foreground  a  large  corps  of  individuals  who  pretended
to  be  able  to  supply  the  needed  remedies.  These  were  pri-
marily pure  superstitions,  and  consisted  in  mere  ceremonies,
either  with  or  without  the  application  of  some  assumed  re-
medial substance.*  As  the  world  grew  more  rational,  the
ceremonial  part  gave  way  to  the  remedial,  and  the  investiga-

*  Sir  John  Lubbock,  "  Origin  of  Civilization,"  pp.  132,  133  ;  Spencer,  "  Prin-
ciples of  Sociology,"  vol.  i,  p.  250.

f  Exodus,  xxii,  18;  Deuteronomy,  xviii,  10;  1  Samuel,  xv,  23.
X  Tabula  viii,  Fragment  25.

*  The  pure  form  of  exorcism,  without  remedial  application,  prevails  at  the
present  day  among  most  savage  tribes.

I

FEAR  OF  DISEASE.  689

tion  of  nature  for  the  purpose  of  finding  remedial  agents  for
diseases  became  an  occupation  for  many.  Tlie  study  of
plants  and  mineral  substances  for  this  purpose,  while  it  re-
sulted in  the  discovery  of  many  useful  medicinal  and  dietetic
properties,  performed  the  greater  service  of  paving  the  way
to  a  systematic  acquaintance  with  these  two  great  kingdoms
of  nature.*  To  realize  how  extensive  must  have  been  this
research  before  the  science  of  botany  was  known,  one  has
only  to  run  over  the  popular  names  of  plants,  and  note  how
large  a  proportion  of  them  are  derived  from  some  imaginary
healing  power  possessed  by  them.  From  this  same  source,
too,  has  sprung  the  whole  science  of  medicine,  with  its  vast
materia  medica  and  extensive  acquaintance  with  diseases.
The  sciences  of  anatomy,  of  physiology,  of  hygiene,  and
even  of  chemistry  and  physics,  owe  their  impetus  and  the
greater  part  of  the  fundamental  facts  upon  which  they  rest
to  the  indefatigable  labors  of  Hippocrates,  Dioscorides,  and
their  successors.

But,  although  the  great  laws  of  animal  economy  have
been  so  thoroughly  probed,  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of
the  body  made  known,  and  the  chemistry  and  physics  of  the
vital  functions  explained,  the  mysteries  of  disease  and  the
remedies  for  physical  disorders  are  not  yet  by  any  means  all
reduced  to  practical  recognition.  The  fear  of  sickness  still
exists,  and  bears  its  heavy  weight  upon  society.  N^o  longer,
it  is  true,  do  we  see  the  spectacle  of  the  dead-cart  collecting
the  bodies  of  the  victims  of  the  "  Black-death  "  from  door
to  door,  while  the  belfries  of  the  churches  are  ringing  pro-
pitiatory chimes  in  invocation  of  divine  relief,  which  could
have  been  secured  by  men  had  they  taken  the  precaution  to
cleanse  their  streets  and  remove  the  deadly  gases  which  were
doing  the  horrid  work,  but  which  because  invisible  were  un-
known.    Priestley  and  Lavoisier  have  banished  such  scenes

*  There  can  be  no  doubt  either  that  the  science  of  anatomy  received  a
strong  impetus  from  the  ancient  rite  of  haruspicj.  (See  Auguste  Comte,  "  Phi-
losophie  Positive,"  vol.  v,  p.  96.)

690  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

for  ever  from  the  civilized  world.  And  yet  these  subtile
agencies  are  every-where  at  work,  and  it  is  rare  that  a  life  is
capable  of  running  their  gantlet  and  succumbing  only  to
the  natural  laws  of  dissolution.  Science  has  here  its  greatest
work  yet  to  do,  its  greatest  victory  to  achieve.  The  masses
are  unpardonably  ignorant  of  the  truths  which  are  known  to
the  few.  Society's  first  great  duty  is  to  universalize  and
popularize  all  the  knowledge  in  existence  which  bears  upon
the  problem  of  health.

Subjection  to  a  faculty  of  medical  experts  is  dangerous
in  a  variety  of  ways.  There  is  danger  of  co-operative  mo-
nopoly for  gain,  of  charlatanism,  of  narrow  dogmatism,  and
of  reckless  experimentation.  In  the  present  state  of  society,
the  dread  of  disease  is  only  equaled  by  the  credulity  and
servility  of  the  masses,  and  of  the  abject  dependence  of  even
the  best  informed  people  in  other  respects  upon  the  so-called
"  guardians  of  the  public  health."  Many,  who  ought  to
know,  never  stop  to  reflect  that  the  functions  of  the  animal
economy  never  should  be  entirely  intrusted  to  any  guardian
but  themselves,  that  life  consists  of  certain  processes  requir-
ing certain  nourishment  and  certain  measures  of  protection,
without  which  its  functions  can  not  go  on  regularly,  and  which
all  that  the  highest  medical  art  can  do  is  to  supply.  They
seem  to  believe  that  these  processes  can  be  arrested  and  these
supplies  denied  for  an  indefinite  time  if  only  the  magic  wand
of  the  physician  is  stretched  out  at  stated  intervals  to  admin-
ister relief.  This  superstition  is  only  equaled  by  that  of  the
laity  who  ascribe  to  their  priests  the  power  of  pardoning  all
their  short-comings  at  stated  intervals  and  for  fixed  sums  of
money ;  and  the  influence  of  the  former  upon  the  health  of
the  victims  is  exactly  comparable  to  that  of  the  latter  upon
their  morals.  It  is  to  the  interest  of  the  sanitary  priesthood
to  perpetuate  this  fear,  this  belief,  and  this  ignorance,  just  as
much  as  it  is  of  the  religious  priesthood  to  perpetuate  the
other.  Society  is  suffering  from  these  practices,  and  its  duty
to  itself  is  to  educate  all  its  members  in  a  sound  and  rational

I

PSYCHICAL  FEAR-FORCES.  691

knowledge  of  themselves,  so  that  each  may  be  the  guardian
of  his  own  health.  There  will  still  remain  an  ample  field,
as  already  shown,  for  the  true  votaries  of  sanitary  science,
for  medical  and  surgical  experts.

PSYCHICAL    FEAK-FOECES.

There  only  remain  to  be  considered  the  psychical  fear-
forces,  or  those  fears  and  hopes  which  men  experience  of
harm  or  of  good  to  their  supposed  immaterial  part,  the  soul.

As  already  remarked,  these  are  all  of  a  religious  nature,
and  it  may  be  added  that,  while  the  most  extensive  of  the
religions  of  the  world  seem  to  give  play  to  them,  the  doctrine
of  some  form  of  future  existence,  capable  of  experiencing
pain  and  pleasure,  is  by  no  means  common  to  all  religions
(vol.  ii,  pp.  253,  261,  280).  The  Hebrew  religion  is  a  notable
exception,  while  in  Buddhism  the  only  trace  of  it  is  in  the
doctrine  of  metempsychosis.  It  is  a  distinct  element  of  the
Egyptian,  Persian,  and  Grecian  mythologies,  and  has  been
crystallized  into  a  cardinal  principle  of  Mohammedanism
and  Christianity.  The  importance  of  this  class  of  forces  as
modifiers  of  social  conditions  consists  in  the  powerful  hold
which  such  a  doctrine  takes  upon  the  receiver  of  it.  There
is  something  absorbing  in  the  idea  of  a  future  state  of  ex-
istence, and  especially  when  that  state  is  believed  to  be  an
endless  one.  It  would  seem  as  though  the  great  natural
objects  of  preservation  and  perpetuation  of  existence  were
cemented  into  one,  and  brought  into  the  full  recognition  of
the  intellect.  Even  this  is  heightened  by  the  additional  con-
ception that  personal  identity,  consciousness,  and  memory  of
former  states  are  to  be  embraced  in  the  future  life.  For,
without  these,  what  better  is  a  future  existence  than  the  ex-
istence of  other  beings  at  a  future  time  ?  Without  the  per-
sistence of  memory,  it  is  no  longer  a  perpetuity ;  it  is  only
another  and  distinct  existence,  another  and  separate  being.
This  is  accomplished  by  reproduction,  and  nature  strains  every
nerve  to  secure  it.    But  it  is  not  enouo:h.    The  rational  mind

692  TERTIAEY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

soon  rises  to  the  conception  of  continued  existence,  soon  sighs
for  a  persistence  of  itself,  an  uninterrupted  and  unlimited
existence.  Even  the  Hebrew  asked  the  vital  question,  which
went  ringing  down  through  the  corridors  of  Judaic  ages,  "  If
a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ? "  *  till  at  length  the  answer
burst  from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  was  caught  up  by  those  of
Mohammed  and  carried  like  wild-fire  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.
So  talismanic  was  the  word  immortality  that  it  took  the
whole  world  captive,  and  to-day  claims  as  its  adherents  all
but  the  most  barbarous  races  and  the  inhabitants  of  Eastern
Asia,  who  have  themselves  been  considerably  modified  by  it.

Much  of  the  success  of  the  doctrine  of  immortality  has
been  due  to  its  dualistic  character.  With  true  anthropo-
morphic conceptions,  its  teachers  have  employed  it  as  a  means
of  government,  and  have  made  it  the  sanction  to  their  code
of  action.  In  other  words,  this  future  existence  has  always
been  represented  as  a  means  both  of  reward  and  punishment.
Those  who  were  not  charmed  into  its  adoption  by  hopes  of
eternal  happiness  were  frightened  into  it  by  fears  of  eternal
misery.  And  thus,  like  a  two-edged  sword,  it  mowed  its
way  to  almost  universal  acceptance.

But  the  task  before  us  now  is  simply  to  point  out  the
effects  wliich  have  been  produced  upon  society  by  hopes  and
fears  entertained  of  benefits  and  injuries  to  the  soul  in  a
future  state.  The  true  method  of  determining  these,  even
approximately,  would  seem  to  be  to  figure  to  ourselves  what
would  have  been  the  probable  condition  of  society  in  coun-
tries where  this  belief  prevails  if  it  had  never  been  introduced.
This  is  by  no  means  an  impossible  supposition,  and  the  only
good  objection  to  this  method  of  inquiry  is  the  difficulty  in
answering  this  question.  But,  if  we  confine  ourselves  to
Christianity  and  Mohammedanism,  we  find  that  they  have,
been  grafted  upon  other  forms,  which  they  have  ultimately
completely  supplanted.  And,  since  it  is  an  historical  fact  that
the  moral  conceptions  of  a  religion  must  correspond  with  the

*  Job,  xiv,  14.

PSYCHICAL  FEAR-FORCES.  693

people  who  embrace  it,  or  at  least  that  the  two  will  be  sure
to  find  a  sort  of  common  level,  reached  bj  reciprocal  modifi-
cation of  tenets  on  the  one  hand  and  customs  on  the  other,
there  is  no  impossibility  involved  in  the  assumption  that  the
religion  supplanted  might  have  continued  to  the  present  day,
had  it  not  been  suppressed  by  a  stronger  rival  faith.  As-
suming this  much,  we  can  form  some  idea  of  what  Europe
and  Eastern  Asia  might  have  been  but  for  the  intervention
of  Christianity  and  Mohammedanism.  Two  great  religions
were  crushed  out  by  the  advent  of  these  new  rivals,  viz.,
Grecian  polytheism  and  Persian  Parseeism.  Both  these  em-
bodied the  doctrine  of  immortality ;  but  it  existed  in  so  feeble
a  state  as  to  take  little  hold  upon  the  masses.  Grecian  poly-
theism had  made  great  progress  in  Asia,  and  was  almost  as
powerful  even  in  Persia  as  was  the  dualism  of  Zoroaster.
Without  speculating  upon  the  influence  of  Christianity,  and
later,  of  Mohammedanism,  in  Asia,  where  the  people  were
less  enlightened,  and  where  the  form  of  religion,  probably,
did  little  either  to  elevate  or  degrade  them,  we  will  turn  our
attention  to  Europe,  where,  especially  in  Greece  and  Italy,
literature  and  the  arts  were  in  a  high  state  of  cultivation.
The  question  then  is,  In  what  respect  would  the  civilization
of  Europe  be  different  from  what  it  is  to-day  had  the  Grecian
polytheism  remained  unmolested  by  Christianity  and  all  other
forms  of  faith  ?

Greece  and  Rome  maintained  toward  the  national  religion
an  attitude  quite  analogous  to  that  which  Germany,  France,
Great  Britain,  and  America  present  now  toward  Christianity.
The  masses  believed  and  went  through  the  ceremonies,  while
the  philosophers  and  school-men  stood  aloof  and  remained
indifferent  to  religion,  appearing  to  consider  it  beneath  their
notice,  just  as  now  the  rank  and  file  observe  the  forms  of  the
Church,  while  the  most  cultivated,  and  notably  those  engaged
in  scientific  investigation,  are  for  the  most  part  indifferent  to
religion,  and  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  devote  any  time  from
their  pursuits  to  its  consideration.

691  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

There  were  indications,  then,  that  the  bonds  of  religious
restraint  were  about  to  fall  from  the  people,  and  the  light  of
knowledge  be  admitted  to  all,  just  as  now  we  see  the  forms
of  religion  more  and  more  ignored,  and  education  further
and  further  extended.  But  Christianity  rekindled  the  re-
ligious zeal,  proscribed  philosophy,  abolished  the  schools,  and
plunged  the  world  into  an  abyss  of  darkness  from  which  it
only  emerged  after  twelve  hundred  years.  Ignorant  of  what
would  have  happened  if  this  had  not  happened,  nothing  is
left  but  to  regard  the  advent  of  Christianity  as  a  calamity.*
And,  if  we  look  at  the  history  of  Christianity,  we  find  that
its  activities  have  been  so  intense  and  its  deeds  so  violent
that  it  has  been  almost  impossible  for  thought  to  obtain  a
foot-hold.  Mohammedanism  was  no  better,  but  its  field  of
operations  has  been  less  unfortunate.

The  intensity  of  these  religions  must  be  attributed  to  that
doctrine  which  is  their  cardinal  principle  and  their  source
of  vitality — the  doctrine  of  immortality.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  this  doctrine  has  exerted  an  exceedingly  pernicious
influence  upon  the  progress  of  thought,  of  knowledge,  of  ma-
terial civilization.  And,  if  we  look  at  it  from  a  moral  point
of  view,  we  see  little  to  recommend  it  there.  It  makes  light
of  the  present,  contemns  the  real  and  the  material,  and
feeds  the  mind  on  vague  imaginings.  The  hope  of  personal
pleasure  and  fear  of  personal  pain  are  sentiments  which  are
not  less  mean  and  sordid  because  that  pleasure  and  pain  are

*  It  is  fashionable  in  Protestant  countries  to  ascribe  these  acts  of  yiolence,
now  so  universally  understood,  to  the  "  Roman  Church  "  (see  Draper's  "  Con-
flict," p.  x),  or  to  charge  their  commission  upon  the  "  Catholics."  This  course
seems  very  improper  where  reference  is  made  to  the  period  anterior  to  the
Protestant  Reformation,  since  the  terms  "  Roman"  and  "  Catholic"  are  chiefly
employed  to  distinguish  that  sect  from  the  Protestant  sect.  The  history  of  the
Roman  Church  prior  to  that  epoch  is  essentially  the  history  of  Christianity,  and
its  acts  must  be  regarded  as  the  normal  operations  of  the  Christian  religion.  To
attribute  them  to  Catholicism,  in  this  special  sense,  besides  being  misleading  and
historically  inaccurate,  is  otherwise  objectionable  in  suggesting  a  desire  to  pan-
der to  the  locally  prevalent  sectarian  feeling  or  to  avoid  offending  it  by  such  a
use  of  the  word  "  Christianity."

PSYCHICAL  FEAR-FOKOES.  695

to  be  experienced  in  a  future  existence,  and  upon  tlie  imma-
terial part.  Upon  a  thorough  consideration  of  the  subject,
we  must  conclude  with  Mr.  E.  B.  Tylor  *  that  belief  in  a
future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments  exerts  a  powerful
demoralizing  influence.

But,  although  the  influence  of  the  psychical  fear-forces
has  been  generally  bad,  we  can  not  shut  our  eyes  to  its  im-
portance. The  doctrine  of  immortality  has  modified  the
character  of  society,  of  human  institutions,  and  of  civilization,
to  an  extent  which  can  never  be  exactly  calculated,  and  it  is
not  liable  to  be  overrated.  It  has  intensified  religious  feel-
ing, and  enormously  magnified  the  results  which  flow  from
it.  The  moral  elements  which  accompany  religion  can  not
justly  be  embraced  in  the  consequences  of  religion  itself.
They  exist  independently  of  religion,  and  their  connection
with  it  is  only  apparent.  Religion  never  fails  to  appeal  to
the.  moral  sentiments  which  it  finds  prevalent,  and  to  claim
credit  for  them  as  its  own,  but  the  history  of  morals  shows
that  this  claim  is  wholly  unfounded  (vol.  ii,  pp.  279,  280,
283).

The  true  influence  of  religion  must  be  based  upon  the
legitimate  effects  of  its  doctrinary  teachings,  upon  the  influ-
ence which  its  beliefs  exert  upon  human  conduct,  upon  the
difference  between  the  general  state  of  society,  as  entertain-
ing such  beliefs,  and  what  it  would  be  did  it  not  entertain
them.  And  the  comparative  merits  of  different  religions
must  rest  npon  the  same  principle.  Thus  considered,  tlie
comparison  of  those  faiths  which  embody  as  their  central
doctrine  the  belief  in  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punish-
ments with  those  which  embody  no  such  doctrine,  or  which
do  not  make  this  their  leading  doctrine,  becomes  less  diffi-
cult, and  we  find,  as  already  shown,  that  the  former  have
been  far  more  active,  far  more  intense,  and  have,  conse-
quently, exerted  the  legitimate  influence  of  all  religion  to
a  far  higher  degree.

*  "Primitive  Culture,"  Boston,  1874,  vol.  i,  p.  495  ;  vol.  ii,  pp.  104,  106,

696  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOK— SOCIOGENY.

It  may  no  doubt  be  truly  said  that  the  influence  of  this
faith  has  not  been  an  unmixed  evil  in  society.  It  is  true
that  the  history  of  the  Christian  and  Moslem  faiths,  agree-
ing in  this  one  vital  character,  has  been  one  of  dark  and
bloody  deeds,  of  persistent  hostility  to  all  forms  of  true  en-
lightenment, and  to  that  extent  of  general  injury  to  human
interests ;  but  it  may  be  frankly  confessed  that  the  hope  and
anticipations  of  so  many  individuals,  which  are  certainly
pleasurable  emotions,  constitute  no  mean  item  which  must
be  legitimately  placed  to  the  credit  of  the  belief  in  immor-
tality. Although  a  purely  egotistic  sentiment  of  a  very  low
order,  still,  as  a  real  pleasure,  it  should  not  be  overlooked.
True,  there  may  be  question  whether  the  amount  of  unhap-
piness  caused  by  the  fear  of  endless  suffering  may  not  equal
the  amount  of  happiness  resulting  from  the  hope  of  endless
bliss.  Still,  there  remains  the  fact  that  a  positive  gratifica-
tion and  a  form  of  happiness  have  always  attended  the  be-
lief in  a  future  existence.  Whether,  upon  the  whole,  the
aggregate  amount  of  human  happiness  would  be  greater,
ceteris  jparibus,  with  than  without  this  belief,  it  is  impos-
sible to  judge.  I  incline  to  agree  with  M.  Auguste  Comte
and  Mr.  Tylor,*  that  its  legitimate  moral  influence  on  man-
kind has  been  greatly  exaggerated.  But,  however  this  may
be,  it  is  at  least  certainly  true  that  this  effect,  whatever  its
extent,  has  been  altogether  of  a  statical  character,  never  of
a  dynamical  one  (vol.  ii,  p.  265).  If  it  makes  men  happier,
it  does  not  make  them  wiser  or  more  energetic  ;  in  fact,  ex-
cept in  the  work  of  repressing  the  progress  already  attained,
its  influence  has  constantly  been  to  dampen  man's  ardor  for
the  conquest  of  physical  nature,  by  which  alone  all  true  prog-
ress has  been  accomplished.  It  has  tended  to  belittle  the
importance  of  the  present  state,  and  deny  the  dignity  of  ma-
terial things,  while  the  energies  and  activities,  both  of  mind
and  body,  have  been  thus  withdrawn  from  progressive  and

*  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  vol.  v,  pp.  123,  124,297,299,800;  "Primitive
Culture,"  Boston,  1874,  vol.  ii,  pp.  104,  107.

THE  miELLEOTUAL  FORCES.         697

productive  labor,  and  wasted  in  beatific  contemplations  and
bodily  mortifications.  Thus,  in  a  twofold  manner,  has  this
belief  operated  against  the  true  advancement  of  the  race.

Social  progress  results  almost  exclusively  from  calm,  ra-
tional action.  Fear  and  hope,  not  being  essential  forces,
must  be  very  moderate  not  to  disturb  the  proper  conditions
of  advancement.  Any  wide-spread  belief  which  calls  out
these  sentiments  to  an  extreme  degree  is  therefore  highly
prejudicial  to  social  interests.  The  psychical  fear-forces  op-
erate in  this  direction,  and  are  therefore,  upon  the  whole,
injurious.  Applied  sociology  will  seek  the  means  of  subdu-
ing them,  by  allaying  all  groundless  fears  and  encouraging
only  the  most  rational  forms  of  hope.

III.    The   iNTELLECTrAL   FoKCES.

Properly  to  treat  the  intellectual  forces  as  a  separate  sub-
ject of  inquiry  would  require  another  distinct  chapter,  and
might  easily  be  extended  into  a  volume.  The  operations  of
the  human  mind,  however,  form  the  chief  subject  of  this
work,  and  not  only  the  results  of  these  operations,  but  the
conditions,  laws,  and  constitution  of  the  mind  itself,  have
been  treated  of  under  their  appropriate  heads  {supra,  Chap.
Y).  ISTothing  remains,  therefore,  but  to  embody  all  this
under  a  general  view  of  the  social  forces,  and  assign  to  the
intellectual  forces  their  proper  place  in  the  enumeration.

It  scarcely  need  be  repeated  that  it  is  to  the  activity  and
intensity  of  the  intellectual  forces  that  the  human  race  owes
all  its  superiority  over  other  species  of  animals,  and  deserves,
more  than  they,  to  be  made  the  subject  of  historical  and
scientific  investigation.  Mental  superiority  is  the  condition
upon  which  all  the  results  arrived  at  depend.  Given  a  cer-
tain degree  of  intellectual  force,  and  the  dynamic  laws  of
animal  life  will  evolve  definite  results.  Mind  is  the  variable,
the  other  forces  the  constants.  Put  the  former  equal  to  zero,
and  we  have  stagnation.  Give  it  a  series  of  increments,  and
we  have  a  series  of  results  corresponding  to  these  increments.

698  TERTIARY  AGGREGATIOK-SOCIOGENY.

In  animals,  the  mind-force  is  low,  and  progress  is  correspond-
ingly slow.  In  man,  it  presents  a  series,  and  we  find  degrees
of  social  development  and  elevation  proportionate  to  the  in-
crement as  we  rise  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  of  the
human  races.  The  ratio  of  increase  is  an  accelerated  one,
owing  to  the  mutual  effect  of  subjective  and  objective  devel-
opment.

There  is  only  one  phase  of  this  subject  which  can  be  re-
garded as  in  any  sense  belonging  to  this  discussion.  It  is
only  the  direct  effects  which  flow  from  the  activities  engen-
dered by  intellectual  desires  and  enjoyments,  the  same  as  it
was  shown  to  be  only  those  which  flow  from  the  activities
engendered  by  aesthetic  and  emotional  desires  and  enjoy-
ments, which  can  properly  be  regarded  as  dynamic  forces  of
society.  The  mind-force,  as  popularly  understood,  is  no
force,  but  only  a  condition.  It  does  not  propel,  it  only
directs.  It  is  not  mind,  except  within  the  narrow  limits  of
this  definition,  that  achieves  the  vast  results  which  civiliza-
tion presents,  and  which,  it  must  be  admitted,  could  not  be
achieved  without  it.  It  is  the  great  social  forces  which  we
have  been  passing  in  review  that  have  accomplished  all  this.
Mind  simply  guides  them  in  their  course.  The  office  of
mind  is  to  direct  society  into  unobstructed  channels,  to  en-
able these  forces  to  continue  in  free  play,  to  prevent  them
from  being  neutralized  by  collision  with  obstacles  in  their
path.  In  a  word,  mind  has  for  its  function  in  civilization  to
preserve  the  dynamic  and  prevent  the  statical  condition  of
the  social  forces,  to  prevent  the  restoration  of  equilibrium
between  the  social  forces  and  the  natural  forces  operating
outside  of  them.  Just  as  it  is  not  psychological  force  which
propels  the  water-wheel  or  the  piston — which  could  not,
nevertheless,  be  made  to  operate  without  it — but  merely  the
forces  of  gravity  and  gaseous  expansion  compelled  by  me-
chanical power  under  the  guidance  of  intelligence  to  operate
for  the  benefit  of  man,  so  it  is  not  mind  which  moves  the
civilization  of  the  world,  but  only  the  great  and  never-ceas-

THE  INTELLECTUAL  FORCES.  699

ing  forces  of  society,  which  but  for  the  guidance  of  mind
would  rush  blindly  on  into  a  thousand  entanglements  with
rival  forces,  and  assume  that  position  of  statical  equilibrium
which  represents  social  stagnation.  The  only  proper  intel-
lectual propelling  force  in  society  is  the  desire  which  the
mental  organ  experiences  in  common  with  all  the  rest  to  act,
and  the  immediate  results  which  flow  from  its  activity.

The  love  of  acquiring  knowledge,  however,  and  the  pleas-
ure derived  from  intellectual  activity,  and  particularly  from
that  form  of  activity  which  follows  the  recognition  of  truth,
have  been  important  elements  in  the  development  of  human
institutions.  They  have  been  strong  enough  to  overcome
the  tendency  to  inertia  after  all  the  physical  wants  were  sup-
plied, and  to  impel  men  on  to  the  discovery  of  truth  from
the  mere  enjoyment  which  its  investigation  yields.  While
it  is  true  that  most  of  man's  triumphs  over  nature  have  been
achieved  in  obedience  to  the  grosser  forces,  either  of  neces-
sity or  of  passion,  the  fact  must  not  be  overlooked  that  the
most  profound  and  long-protracted  researches  that  have  been
conducted,  and  the  most  important  and  practical  discoveries
that  have  been  made,  have  emanated  from  those  who  could
have  been  moved  to  perform  this  great  service  for  humanity
neither  by  want  nor  avarice,  and  to  whom  the  charge  of
ambition  would  be  scarcely  applicable.  I  need  only  mention
two  of  the  many  immortal  exem.plifications  of  this  truth,
Newton  and  Humboldt.  With  them  as  with  so  many  others,
the  chief  and  ruling  motive  to  their  useful  activities  could
have  been  little  else  than  the  ennobling  pleasure  which  never
fails  to  attend  the  highest  and  purest  exercise  of  the  intel-
lectual functions.  The  world  has  nothing  to  fear  from  the
relief  of  cultivated  brain  from  the  cares  and  wants  of  vege-
tative existence.

Concluding  Kemaeks.

In  the  foregoing  consideration  of  the  phenomena  and
laws  of  tertiary  aggregation,  those  of  the  dynamic  group  have

700  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.-SOCIOGENY.

been  chiefly  reviewed.  This  course  has  been  adopted  for  a
variety  of  reasons,  the  principal  of  which  is  that  what  is  here
said  is  designed  rather  as  an  introduction  to  the  argumenta-
tive part  of  this  work,  to  be  embraced  in  the  second  volume,
where  the  term  Dynamic  Sociology  will  be  more  fully  ex-
plained, and  the  conditions  of  its  reahzation  considered.  The
notion  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  that  expression  is  not
complete  until  the  active  stage  is  reached,  which,  as  explained
in  the  Intkoduction,  is  simply  the  "  applied "  stage  of  the
science  of  Sociology.

Among  the  other  reasons  for  omitting  the  statical  depart-
ment may  be  mentioned  the  somewhat  hackneyed  character
which  it  has  already  assumed.  For,  although  the  dynamic
laws  of  society  can  only  be  expounded  from  empirical  data
of  a  statical  nature,  and  although  I  deprecate  as  deeply  as
any  one  the  attempt  to  speculate  upon  this  most  complex  of
all  sciences  without  a  basis  of  facts,  still  I  do  not  hesitate  to
pronounce  as  mere  superficial  patchwork  the  greater  part  of
all  that  now  goes  by  the  sounding  name  of  "  social  science."

There  is,  indeed,  ample  room  for  true  scientific  work  in
the  field  of  social  statics,  but  most  of  the  would-be  laborers
in  this  field  have  greatly  mistaken  the  nature  of  the  science
itself.  They  are  apt  to  imagine  that  a  large  and  unorganized
mass  of  facts  skimmed  from  the  very  surface  of  social  phe-
nomena, belonging,  some  of  them  to  government,  some  to
political  economics,  some  to  the  industrial,  commercial,  and
financial  departments  of  the  most  forward  and  derivative
civilizations,  promiscuously  mingled  together  in  a  common
melange,  and  labeled  "  social  science,"  is  really  science,  when
it  is  not  deserving  of  that  dignity.

I  have  no  ambition  to  identify  myself  with  this  class,
while  I  humbly  confess  myself  unqualified,  through  lack  of
opportunity,  if  not  otherwise,  to  undertake  any  substantial
contributions  to  the  much-needed  data  of  Sociology.  That
truly  heroic  productiim  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  and  his
able  assistants,  his  "  Descriptive  Sociology,"  is  undoubtedly  a

CONCLUDING  REMARKS.  701

genuine  example  of  the  nature  of  the  work  required  in  this
department;  while  the  many  sterling  contributions  made
by  Tylor,  Lubbock,  Maine,  Morgan,  Powell,  Bancroft,  and
other  ethnographers  and  historians  of  the  anthropological
school,  demonstrate  that  in  sociology,  as  in  every  other  sci-
ence, the  accumulation  of  details  is  in  advance  of  their  co-
ordination into  laws  and  principles.  The  present  demand  is,
therefore,  for  synthetic  treatment,  by  which  alone  the  mate-
rials of  any  science  can  be  utilized.  In  these  pages  it  has
been  strenuously  sought  to  lay  down  no  principle  which  is
not  warranted  by  the  facts  already  accumulated.  Any  thing
further  than  this  has  simply  been  thrown  out  by  way  of  sug-
gestion, as  a  clew  to  further  methods  of  investigation,  to  stand
or  fall  with  the  evidence  to  be  adduced.

It  has  therefore  been  the  movement  rather  than  the  status
of  society,  wliich  it  has  been  sought  to  explain,  the  causes  of
social  phenomena  and  social  progress  rather  than  the  condi-
tion of  society  itself.

The  status,  or  condition,  of  society  is  to  be  learned  by  the
consideration  of  the  indirect,  or  functional,  effects  of  what
have  been  denominated  the  social  forces.  The  study  of  the
indirect  effect  of  the  preservative  forces  of  society  would
lead  to  an  acquaintance  with  the  nature  of  the  objects  which
have  been  employed  by  man  as  means  of  subsistence — a  sub-
ject only  touched  upon  in  this  chapter  because,  if  legitimate,
manifestly  too  large  for  the  limits  of  the  work.

The  consideration  of  the  indirect,  or  functional,  results
of  the  reproductive  forces  would  lead  to  a  discussion  of  the
most  important  of  all  social  institutions,  the  family — a  sub-
ject which  has  already  been  ably  treated  by  many  writers.

Still  less  could  we  afford  to  attempt  a  survey  of  the  wide

field  of  aesthetic  art,  the  deep  currents  of  human  morals,  or

the  intellectual  condition  of  mankind  in  past  ages,  as  would

be  required  by  a  consideration  of  the  indirect  effects  of  the

non-essential  forces.     These  indirect,  or  consequential,  results

constitute  what  I  have  called  the  objects  of  nature,  for  secur-
31

702  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

ing  which  the  desires  and  passions  of  men  have  been  devel-
oped by  the  law  of  natural  selection.  As  already  remarked,
they  have  no  necessary  or  real  connection  with  the  object  of
Tnan,  which  is  to  enjay^  and  the  harmony  between  the  two
can  only  be  accounted  for,  as  stated,  by  adaptation  and  sur-
vival of  the  fit,  or  by  divine  guidance  and  final  causes.  That
it  is  explicable  by  the  former  renders  resort  to  the  latter  a
violation  of  a  now  well-established  canon  of  science.

Although  these  objects  of  nature  are  the  true  cause  and
only  valid  raison  d'etre  of  the  social  forces,  it  is  nevertheless
true  that  these  indirect  statical  effects  exert  no  influence  in
changing  the  condition  of  society,  or  in  effecting  its  advance-
ment to  higher  states.  They  only  preserve  and  continue  it.
The  social  forces,  in  thus  indirectly  producing  these  func-
tional results,  do  not  operate  in  the  normal  way  in  which  all
true  forces  operate.  Although  the  true  ends  of  biological
not  less  than  of  sociological  organization,  these  results  are
really  only  the  incidental  workings  of  these  forces  accom-
plished by  virtue  of  a  higher  law  which  has  slowly  adapted
all  living  beings  to  this  end.  Quite  independently  of  these
incidental  consequences,  and  not  in  tbe  least  diminished  or
increased  by  reason  of  tbem,  these  social  forces  are  constant-
ly producing  at  the  same  time  their  normal  and  legitimate
influence  upon  the  environment,  their  natural  direct  effects
as  true  forces  of  nature.  It  is  these  to  which  we  have  con-
fined our  inquiries,  because  it  is  these  alone  whicb  tend  to
accomplish  the  objects  of  man  and  of  society,  and  these  alone
wbich  tend  to  produce  change,  and  hence  progress,  in  the
world.

In  many  respects  tertiary  aggregates  resemble  secondary
aggregrates.  A  large  proportion  of  the  laws  of  biology  ai>
ply  equally  to  sociology.  An  aggregation  of  these  highest
biological  units  bears,  in  many  general  ways,  a  striking  re-
semblance to  an  aggregation  of  the  highest  morphological
units.  But,  besides  the  necessarily  discrete  character  of  the
former,  and  besides  many  other  of  the  distinctions  which  Mr.

CONCLUDING  REMAEKS.  Y03

Spencer  admits,  there  is  one  which  he  seems  to  have  over-
looked, but  which  appears  to  be  wider  than  any  of  the  rest.

By  no  possibility  can  any  higher  order  of  integration
mechanically  take  place  in  the  biological  units.  We  may
classify  the  various  organisms  into  numerous  more  and  more
general  groups  until  we  reach  a  logical  unit  embracing  all
life.  But  this  has  no  mechanical  influence  on  the  forms
themselves ;  the  individuals  maintain  their  integrity  and  their
natural  independence,  unaffected  by  man's  intellectual  gen-
eralizations.

The  various  social  organisms,  on  the  contrary,  by  virtue
of  the  very  fact  that  the  sociological  units  are  discrete,  may
coalesce,  re-form,  expand  their  allegiance,  and  enlarge  in-
definitely their  own  dimensions.  This  process  of  expansion
and  re-integration  has  actually  gone  very  far,  and  there  is
already  a  feeble  union  existing  among  all  the  societies  on
the  globe,  and  quite  a  strong  one  among  all  the  civilized
societies.  The  eventual  complete  integration  of  all  the  in-
habitants on  the  globe  into  one  dependent  whole,  commer-
cially at  least,  if  not  politically,  is  no  idle  chimera.  This
union  is  not  a  mere  logical  classification,  but  a  true  mechan-
ical solidarity,  already  far  advanced  and  still  advancing.

Still  another  important  distinction  between  tertiary  and
secondary  aggregates,  also  growing  out  of  the  discrete  nature
of  the  units  of  the  former,  is  found  in  their  mode  of  dissolu-
tion. Societies  do  not  properly  die.  They  disappear,  it  is
true,  but  this  disappearance  is  not  a  true  demise.  In  the
great  majority  of  cases  they  become  transformed  through
migration.  The  elite  of  societies  one  by  one  abandon  the
seat  of  their  former  activities  and  continue  them  in  new
centers.  Old  centers  thus  appear  to  decay,  and  new  ones  to
spring  into  life.  [N'ot  to  speak  of  the  Pergama  recidiva
through  the  fabled  migration  of  the  reliquicB  Dariaum,  we
have  reliable  history  for  many  such  transmigrations.  Italy
has  seen  a  near  approach  to  it  again,  and  Greece  has  been
the  unhappy  victim  of  it.     Central  and  Northern  Europe

704  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

has  been  the  recipient  of  the  sinew  of  more  southern  and
eastern  societies,  and  America  is  rising  to  the  first  rank  by
virtue  of  the  same  process.  And  what  is  the  Teutonic  civili-
zation of  to-day  but  the  Brahmanic  civilization  of  the  age
of  Menu  transplanted  to  European  soil  ?  It  is  simply  this
godlike  Brahmanic  caste,  the  Aryan  or  Indo-Germanic  race,
now  occupying  the  coasts  of  the  Atlantic  instead  of  those  of
the  Indian  Ocean,  which  still  dictates  knowledge  to  the  world.

But  societies  often  appear  to  relapse  from  other  causes
than  the  actual  withdrawal  and  migration  of  the  elite  of  their
members.  There  is  a  process  which  may  be  called  dilution^
that  frequently  takes  place.  This  happens  in  two  distinct
ways :  1,  by  influx  of  less  advanced  populations  in  great
numbers ;  and,  2,  by  the  natural  operation  of  the  Malthusian
law  {sv/pra,  p.  (SQ).  The  barbarian  invasion  of  Home  and
the  Ottoman  occupancy  of  Western  Asia  and  Southeastern
Europe  are  historical  examples  of  the  first  of  these  modes  of
social  dilution  ;  while  a  possible  Mongolian  influx  into  "West-
em  America  may  one  day  constitute  a  stiU  more  fatal  case  of
the  same  kind  in  the  ^N'ew  "World.

"With  regard  to  the  second  mode  of  social  dilution,  viz.,
by  the  natural  operation  of  the  Malthusian  law  of  population,
it  may  be  remarked  that  all  societies  are  at  all  times  liable  to
it.  So  long  as  the  population  within  a  given  territory  is  in-
creasing, waves  of  social  reaction  may  occur  at  any  time.
Every  one  has  observed  the  profound  influence  exerted  by
what  are  called  periods  of  "hard  times."  And  tliese  are
frequently  caused  in  great  part  by  these  economic  social
laws.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  amount  of  production  shall
fall  short,  and  that  the  means  of  subsistence  shall  fail  to  keep
pace  with  the  increase  of  population.  The  Malthusian  prin-
ciple is  far  broader  than  its  able  expounder  supposed.  Just
as  Mr.  Darwin  has  been  able  to  apply  it  to  the  whole  animal
world  below  man,  so  it  is  also  capable  of  being  applied  to
Bupra-economic  questions  in  society.  Modem  society,  in  the
most  civilized  countries,  is  so  highly  derivative,  and  rests  to  so

CONCLUDING  REMARKS.  705

great  an  extent  upon  ideal  conceptions,  that  an  exceedingly
liigh  state  of  popular  intelligence  must  be  constantly  kept  up
to  prevent  rude  tampering  with  the  delicate  machinery  by
which  its  operations  are  conducted.  Each  new  individual
that  is  added  to  its  membership  must  be  schooled  from  the
beginning  in  the  principles  upon  which  the  social  fabric  is
constructed.  He  enters  it  wholly  ignorant  of  them  all.  The
civilized  infant  is  as  blank  intellectually  as  the  savage  infant,
and  has  no  longer  to  live,  and  immensely  more  to  learn.
Each  one  must  be  instructed  in  all  this  complicated  curricu-
lum db  initio,  before  he  can  conceive  of  his  true  relations  to
society.  We  may  therefore  say  in  this  connection,  as  truly
as  Malthus  could  say  of  his  economic  formula,  that,  while  in
the  progress  of  civilization  the  capacity  to  acquire  knowledge
increases  only  in  an  arithmetical  or  some  lower  ratio,  the
amount  of  knowledge  necessary  to  be  acquired  increases  in  a
geometrical  or  some  higher  ratio.

It  is  in  view  of  this  law  that  there  constantly  exists  so
great  danger  in  highly  advanced  societies  of  a  relapse,  or  at
best  a  temporary  reaction,  seriously  prejudicial  to  their  in-
terests and  painful  to  their  highly  sensitive  condition.  A
financial  blunder,  under  such  circumstances,  may  paralyze
industry  and  profoundly  influence  the  entire  social  fabric
at  a  time  when  there  is  an  abundant  supply  of  food  and  all
other  commodities.  A  vicious  system  of  dispensing  the
public  domain  may  render  millions  penniless,  and  jeopardize
the  stability  of  a  nation.  Bad  legislation  of  all  kinds  is
sorely  felt  by  the  masses,  irrespective  of  the  power  of  the
people  to  increase  the  aggregate  wealth.  Large  monopolies,
tolerated  by  the  central  governing  authority,  are  capable  of
doing  unlimited  mischief.  And,  finally,  we  have  seen,  in
the  latest  period  of  depression,  an  example  of  how  evil  can
accrue  on  a  vast  scale  by  a  long  period  of  abundant  but  ill-
adjusted  production.

All  this  proves  that  the  great  necessity  is  the  mainte-
nance of  a  standard  of  intelligence  corresponding  to  the  de-

70G  TERTIARY  AGGREGATION.— SOCIOGENY.

gree  of  civilization,  and  that,  to  secure  such  a  correspondence,
intelligence  must  increase  at  a  much  more  rapid  rate  than
does  material  and  social  organization.  And  this  is  why  I
insist  that  the  time  must  soon  come  when  the  control  of
blind  natural  forces  in  society  must  give  way  to  that  of
human  foresight,  or  the  highest  civilizations  of  the  earth
must  reach  their  culminating  point  and  commence  their
decline.  Nothing  can  prevent  the  occasional  recurrence  of
states  of  social  depression,  under  such  conditions,  but  prog-
ress in  intelligence,  and  practical  science  corresponding  to
the  increase  of  numbers  and  social  refinements.  And  a  time
must  certainly  come  when  the  maintenance  of  the  healthy
and  progressive  tone  of  society  will  be  far  more  difficult  than
at  present,  or  at  any  period  of  the  past.  Thus  far,  social
progress  has  in  a  certain  awkward  manner  taken  care  of  it-
self, but  in  the  near  future  it  will  have  to  be  cared  for.  To
do  this  and  maintain  the  dynamic  condition  against  all  the
hostile  forces  which  thicken  with  every  new  advance,  is  the
real  problem  of  Sociology  considered  as  an  applied  science.

THE  END   OF   VOLUME  I.

A  LIBRARY

OF     THE     MOST     IMPORTANT

STANDARD  WORKS  ON  EVOLUTION.

Origin  of  Species  by  Means  of  Natural  Selection,  or  the  Preser-
vation of  Favored  Races  in  the  Struggle  for  Life.     By  Charles  Dak-
win,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.      New  and   revised   edition,  with  Additions.
I'imo.     Cloth,  $2.00.
"Personally  and  practically  exercised  in  zoology,  in  minute  anatomy,  in

gathering  and  sifting  materials  for  his  present  work^  flie  store  of  accurately-
registered  facta  upon  which  the  author  of  the  '  Origin  of  Species '  is  able  to
draw  at  will  is  prodigious."— i>o/'«ssor  T.  E.  Huxley.

II.
Variation  of  Animals  and  Plants  under  Domestication.    By
Charles  Darwin,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.     With  Illustrations.     Revised  edi-
tion.    2  vols.,  12mo.     Cloth,  $5.00.

"  We  shall  learn  something  of  the  laws  of  inheritance,  of  the  effects  of
crossing  different  breeds,  and  on  that  sterility  which  often  supervenes  when
organic  beings  are  removed  from  their  natural  conditions  ot  life,  and  like-
wise when  they  are  too  closely  interbred." — From  the  Introduction.

III.
Descent  of  Man,  and  Selection  in  Relation  to  Sex,    By  Charles
Darwin,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.     With  many  Illustrations.     A  new  edition.
12mo.     Cloth,  $3.00.

"  In  these  volumes  Mr.  Darwin  has  brought  forward  all  the  facts  and
arguments  which  science  has  to  offer  in  favor  of  the  doctrine  that  man  has
arisen  by  gradual  development  from  the  lowest  point  of  animal  life.  Aside
from  the  logical  purpose  which  Mr.  Darwin  had  in  view,  his  work  is  an
original  and  fascinating  contribution  to  the  most  interesting  portion  of  nat-
ural history."

IV.

On  the  Origin  of  Species  ;  or.  The  Causes  of  the  Phenomena  of  Or-
ganic Nature.  By  Professor  T.  H.  Huxley,  F.  R.  S.  12mo.  Cloth,  $1.00.
"  Those  who  disencumber  Darwinism  of  its  difficulties,  simplify  its  state-
ments, relieve  it  of  technicalities,  and  bring  it  so  distinctly  within  the  hori-
zon of  ordinary  apprehension  that  persons  of  common  sense  may  judge  for
themselves,  perform  an  invaluable  service.  Such  is  the  character  of  the
present  volume." — From  the  Preface  to  the  American  edition.

V.

Darwiniana.     Essays  and  Reviews  pertaining  to  Darwinism.     By  Asa
Gray,  Fisher  Professor  of  Natural  History  (Botany)  in  Harvard  Uni-
versity.    12mo.     Cloth,  $2.00.
"  Although  Professor  Gray  is  widely  known  in  the  world  of  science  for

his  botanical  researches,  but  lew  are  aware  that  he  is  a  pronounced  and  un-

A  STANDARD  EVOLUTION  LIBRARY.

flinching  Darwinian.  His  contributions  to  the  discussion  are  varied  and
valuable,  and  as  collected  in  the  present  volume  they  will  be  seen  to  estab-
lish a  claim  upon  the  thinking  world,  which  will  be  extensively  felt  and
cordially  acknowledged.  These  papers  not  only  illustrate  the  "history  of
the  controversy,  and  the  progress  of  the  discussion^  but  they  form  perhaps
the  fullest  and  most  trustworthy  exposition  of  what  is  to  be  properly  under-
stood by  '  Darwinism '  that  is  to  be  found  in  our  language.  To  all  tliose
timid  souls  who  are  worried  about  the  progress  of  science,  and  the  danger
that  it  will  subvert  the  foundations  of  their  faith,  we  recommend  the  dis-
passionate perusal  of  this  volume." — The  Popular  Science  Monthly.

VI.

Heredity :  A  Psychological  Study  of  its  Phenomena,  Laws,  Causes,  and
Consequences.  From  the  French  of  Th.  Rieot.  12mo.  Cloth,  $2.00.
*'  Heredity  is  that  biological  law  by  which  all  beings  endowed  with  life
tend  to  repeat  themselves  in  their  descendants :  it  is  for  the  species  what
personal  identity  is  for  the  individual.  The  physiological  side  ofthis  subject
has  been  diligently  studied,  but  not  so  its  psychological  side.  We  propose
to  supply  this  deficiency  in   the  present  work." — From  the  Introduction.

VII.
Hereditary   Genius:    An  Inquiry  into  its  Laws  and  Consequences.
By  Francis  Galton,  F.  R.  S.,  etc.     New  and  revised  edition,  with  an
American  Preface.      12mo.     Cloth,  $2.00.

"  The  following  pages  embody  the  result  of  the  first  vigorous  and  me-
thodical eflfort  to  treat  the  question  in  the  true  scientific  spirit,  and  place
it  upon  the  proper  inductive  basis.  Mr.  Galton  proves,  by  overwhelming
evidence,  that  genius,  talent,  or  whatever  we  tei-m  great  mental  capacity,
follows  the  law  of  organic  transmii^sion — runs  in  iamilies,  and  is  an  aifair  of
blood  and  breed  ;  and  that  a  sphere  of  phenomena  hitherto  deemed  capri-
cious and  defiant  of  rule  is,  nevertheless,  within  the  operation  of  ascertain-
able law." — From  the  American  Preface.

VIII.

The  ETOlntion  of  Man.     A  Popular  Exposition  of  the  Principal

Points  of  Human  Ontogeny  and  Phylogeny.  From  the  German  of
Ernst  Haeckfx,  Professor  in  the  University  of  Jena.  With  numer-
ous Hlustrations.  2  vols.,  12mo.  Cloth,  $5.00.
"  In  this  excellent  translation  of  Professor  Haeckel's  work,  the  English
reader  has  access  to  the  latest  doctrines  of  the  Continental  school  of  evolu-
tion, in  its  application  to  the  history  of  man."

IX.

The  History  of  Creation ;  or,  the  Development  of  the  Earth  and  its
Inhabitants  by  the  Action  of  Natural  Causes.  A  Popular  Exposition
of  the  Doctrine  of  Evolution  in  General,  and  of  that  of  Darwin,  Groe-
the,  and  Lamarck  in  Particular.  By  Ernst  Haeckel,  Professor  in
the  University  of  Jena.  The  translation  revised  by  Professor  E.  Ray
Lankester.  Illustrated  with  Lithographic  Plates.  2  vols.,  12mo.
Cloth,  $5.00.

"  The  book  has  been  translated  into  several  languasres.  I  Iiope  that  it
may  also  find  sympathy  in  the  fatherland  of  Danvin,  the  more  so  since  it
contains  special  morphological  evidence  in  favor  of  many  of  the  most  impor-
tant doctrines  with  which  this  greatest  naturalist  of  our  century  has  enriched
science," — From  the  Pre/ace.

A  STANDARD  EVOLUTION  LIBRARY.

X.

Religion  and  Science.     A  Series  of  Sunday  Lectures  on  the  Rlatione
of  Natural  and  Revealed  Religion,  or  the  Truths  revealed  in  Nature
and  Scripture.     By  Joseph  Le  Conte,  LL.  D.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.50.
XI.

Prehistoric  Times,  as  illustrated  by  Ancient  Remains  and
the  Manners  and  Customs  of  Modern  Savages.  By  Sir  John
Lubbock,  Bart.  Illustrated.  Entirely  new  revised  edition.  8vo.
Cloth,  $5.00,

The  book  ranks  among  the  noblest  works  of  the  interesting  and  impor-
tant class  to  which  it  belongs.  As  a  resrnne  of  our  present  knowledge  of
prehistoric  man,  it  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.  It  is  not  only  a  good  book
of  reference,  but  the  best  on  the  subject.

XII,
Winners  in  Life's  Race  ;  or,  The  Great  Backboned  Family.    By  Ara-
bella B.  Buckley,  author  of   "  The  Fairy-Land  of   Science "  and
"  Life  and  her  Children."      With  numerous   Illustrations,      12mo.
Cloth,  gilt  side  and  back,  $1.50.

XIII.
Physics  and  Politics ;  or,  Thoughts  on  the  Application  of  the  Prin-
ciples of  "Natural  Selection"  and  "  Inheritance  "  to  Political  Society.
By  Walter  Bagehot.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.50,

XIV.
The  Theory  of  Descent  and  Darwinism.    By  Professor  Oscar

Schmidt.     With  26  Woodcuts.     12mo.     $1.50.

"  The  facts  upon  which  the  Darwinian  theory  is  based  are  presented  iu
an  effective  manner,  conclusions  are  ably  defended,  and  the  question  is
treated  in  more  compact  and  available  style  than  in  any  other  work  on  the
same  topic  that  has  yet  appeared.  It  is  a  valuable  addition  to  the  '  interna-
tional Scientific  Series.'  " — Boston,  Post.

XV.

Outline  of  the  Evolution  Philosophy.    By  Dr.  M.  E.  Gazelles.

Translated  from  the  French,  by  the  Rev.  0.  B.  Frothingham  ;  with  an

Appendix,  by  E.  L.  Youmans,  M.  D.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.00.

"  This  unpretentious  little  work  wilL  no  doubt,  be  used  by  thousands  to

whom  the  publications  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  are  inaccessible  and  those  of

Auguste  Comte  repellent,  by  reason  of  their  prolixity  and  vagueness.    In  a

short  space  Dr.  Gazelles  has  managed  to  compress  the  whole  outline  and

scone  of  Mr.  Spencer's  system,  with  his  views  of  the  doctrine  of  progress

and  law  of  evolution,  and  a  clear  view  of  the  principles  of  positivism." —

nature  {London).

XVI.

Principles  of  Geolopry ;  or.  The  Modem  Changes  of  the  Earth  and
its  Inhabitants,  considered  as  illustrative  of  Geology.  By  Sir  Charles
Lyell,  Bart.  Illustrated  with  Maps,  Plates,  and  Woodcuts.  A  new
and  entirely  revised  edition.  2  vols.  Royal  8vo.  Cloth,  $8.00.
The  "  Principles  of  Geology"  may  be  looked  upon  with  pride,  not  only
as  a  representative  of  English  .science,  but  as  without  a  rival  of  its  kind
anywhere.     Growing  in  fullness  and  accuracy  with  the  growth  of  experi-

A  STANDARD  EVOLUTION  LIBRARY.

ence  and  observation  in  eveiy  region  of  the  world,  the  work  has  incorporated
■with  itself  each  established  discovery,  and  has  been  modified  by  every  hy-

Eothesis  of  value  which  has  been  brought  to  bear  upon,  or  been  evolved
■om,  the  most  recent  body  of  facts.

XVII.

Elements  of  Geology.    A  Text-Book  for  Colleges  and  for  the  General

Reader.     By  Joseph  Ljs  Conte,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of   Geology  and

Natural  History  in  the  University  of  California.     Revised  and  en-

larged  edition.  12rao.  With  upward  of  900  Illustrations.  Cloth,  $4.00.

xvin.
Animal  Life,  as  affected  by  the  Natural  Conditions  of  Exist-
ence.    By  Karl  Semper,  Professor  of  the  University  of  Wiirzburg.
With  Maps  and  100  Woodcuts.     12mo.     Cloth,  $2.00.

XIX.
Crayflsh :  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Zoology.  By  Professor  T.  H.
HuxLET,  F.  R.  S.     With  82  Illustrations.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.75,

XX.
Anthropology :  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Man  and  Civilization.
By  Edward  B.  Tylok,  F.  R.  S.    With  78  Illustrations.    12mo.    Cloth,

$2.00.
"  The  students  who  read  Mr.  Tylor's  book  may  congratulate  themselves
upon  liaving  obtained  so  easy,  pleasant,  and  M-orkman-like  an  introduction
to  a  fascinating  and  delightful  science." — London  AtTienaum.

XXI.
First  Principles.    By  Herbert  Spencer.    Part  I.  The  Unknowable.
Part  II.  The  Knowable.     1  vol.,  12mo.     $2.00.

xxri.

The  Principles  of  Biology.     By  Herbert  Spencer.     2  vols.,  12mo.

$4.00.

XXIII.

The  Principles  of  Psychology.     By  Herbert  Spencer.    2  vols.,
12mo.     $4.00.

XXIV.

The  Principles   of  Sociology.      By    Herbert   Spencer.       12mo.
2  vols.     $4.00.

XXV.

The  Data  of  Ethics.     By  Herbert  Spencer.     Being  Part  I,  Vol.  I,
of  "  The  Principles  of  Morality."     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.25.
XXVI.

Illustrations    of  Universal    Progress.      By  Herbert   Spencer.
12mo.     Cloth,  $2.00.

For  sale  hy  all  booksellers  ;  or,  sent  hy  mail,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price.
New  York:  D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  1,  3,  »&  5  Bond  Street.

SCIENTIFIC  LECTURES  AND  ESSAYS.

Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects.    By  H.

Helmholtz,  Professor  of  Physics  in  the  University  of  Berlin.  First
Series.  Translated  by  E.  Atkinson,  Ph.  D.,  F.  C.  S.  With  an  Intro-
duction by  Professor  Tyndall.  With  51  Illustrations.  12mo.
Cloth,  $2.00.

CONTENTS.— On  the  Relation  of  Natural  Science  to  Science  in  General.—
On  Goethe's  Scientific  Researches.— On  the  Physiological  Cauees  of  Harmony  in
Music. — Ice  and  Glaciers.— Interaction  of  the  Natural  Forces. — The  Recent  Prog-
ress of  the  Theory  of  Vieion.— The  Conservation  of  Force.— Aim  and  Progress
of  Physical  Science.

Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects.    By  H.

Helmholtz.     Second  Series.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.50.

CONTENTS.— Gusi&v  Magnus.— In  Memoriam.— The  Origin  and  Significance
of  Geometrical  Axioms.- Relation  of  Optics  to  Painting.— Origin  of  the  Planetary
System.— On  Thought  in  Medicine.— Academic  Freedom  in  German  Universities.

"  Professor  Helmholtz'e  second  series  of 'Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Sub-
jects' forms  a  volume  of  singular  interest  and  value.  He  who  anticipates  a  dry
record  of  facts  or  a  sequence  of  immature  generalization  will  find  himself  happily
mistaiien.  In  style  and  method  these  discourses  are  models  of  excellence,  and,
since  they  come  from  a  man  whose  learning  and  authority  are  beyond  dispute,
they  may  be  accepted  as  presenting  the  conclusions  of  the  best  thought  of  the
times  in  scientific  fields."— £o«ton  Traveler.

Science  and  Culture,  and  other  Essays.  By  Pro-
fessor T.  H.  Huxley,  F.  R.  S.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.50.

"Of  the  essays  that  have  been  collected  by  Professor  Huxley  in  this  volume,
tlifi  first  tour  deal  with  some  aspect  of  education.  Most  of  the  remainder  are  ex-
positions of  the  results  of  biological  research,  and,  at  the  same  time,  illustrations
of  the  history  of  scientific  ideas.  Some  of  these  are  among  the  most  interesting
of  Professor  Huxley's  contributions  to  the  literature  of  science." — London  Acad-
emy.

"It  is  refreshing  to  be  brought  into  converse  with  one  of  the  most  vigorous
and  acute  thinkers  of  our  time,  who  has  the  power  of  putting  his  thoughts  into
language  so  clear  and  forcible."— Zowt/ow  Spectator.

Scientific  Culture,  and  other  Essays.    By  Josiah

Parsons  Cooke,  Professor  of  Chemistry  and  Mineralogy  in  Harvard
College.     12mo.     Cloth,  $1.00.

These  essays  are  an  outcome  of  a  somewhat  large  experience  in  teaching
physical  science  to  college  students.  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  early  set  the
example  of  makin!;  the  student's  own  observations  in  the  laboratory  or  cabinet
Jhe  basis  of  all  teaching,  either  in  experimental  or  natural  history  science  ;  and
jhis  example  has  been  generally  followed.  "But  in  most  centers  of  education,"
writes  Professor  Cooke,  "the  old  traditions  so  far  survive  that  the  great  end  of
scientific  culture  is  lost  in  attempting  to  conform  even  laboratory  instruction  to
the  old  academic  methods  of  recitations  and  examinations.  To  point  out  this
error,  and  to  claim  for  science -teaching  its  appropriate  methods,  was  one  object
of  writing  these  essays."

For  sale  by  all  booksellers  ;  or  sent  by  mail,  post-paid,  on  receipt  of  price.
New  York:  D.  APPLETON  &  CO.,  1,  3,  &  5  Bond  Street.

THE

POPULAR    SCIENCE    MONTHLY.

This  magazine  draws  from  the  intellectual  resources  of  all  nations,
and  is  now  recognized  as  the  most  successful  scientific  periodical  in  the
world.

Appealing  to  no  one  class,  it  is  patronized  by  intelligent  readers  of
every  class  all  over  the  country.  It  is  widely  taken  by  the  cultivators  of
science  in  all  branches,  and  by  physicians,  engineers,  scientific  farmers,
and  those  pursuing  the  mechanical  and  manufacturing  arts.  Thoughtful
clergymen  find  it  indispensable,  and  are  extensively  enumerated  among
its  subscribers.  Teachers,  finding  its  discussions  of  the  scientific  prin-
ciples of  education  invaluable,  are  among  its  most  liberal  supporters.  It
has  a  large  clientage  among  the  lawyers,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  find  an  hon-
est and  independent  student  of  politics  that  does  not  read  it.

The  reason  of  this  is,  that  our  best  minds  are  getting  tired  of  the
shallow  frivolities  of  sensational  literature,  and  demand  a  magazine  that
elevates  the  standard  of  popular  reading  in  this  country.  Science  is  the
great  agency  of  improvement  in  this  age,  private  and  public,  individual,
social,  professional,  and  industrial.  In  its  irresistible  progress  it  touches
everywhere,  and  affects  everybody.  It  gives  law  to  the  material  inter-
ests of  the  community,  and  modifies  its  ideas,  opinions,  and  beliefs,  so
that  all  have  an  interest  in  being  informed  of  its  advancement.  Those,
therefore,  who  desire  to  know  what  is  going  on  in  the  world  of  thought
in  these  stirring  times,  when  new  knowledge  is  rapidly  extending,  and
old  errors  are  giving  way,  will  find  that  they  can  only  keep  informed  by
subscribing  for  The  Popular  Science  Monthly.

Terms:  $5.00  per  annum,  or  50  cents  a  number;  cloth  covers  for  the
volumes,  50  cents  each.

The  velumes  begin  with  May  and  November  of  each  year,  and  sub-
scriptions may  begin  at  any  time.

A  club  of  five  will  be  supplied  for  $20.00  per  annum.

New  York:  D.  APPLETON  &  CO..  1,  S.  &  5  Bond  Street

.^

♦  ^J'*^**">*'^^

1  :,Ve^  -f

-^    '    ^».       4^  9^  ^*    -r%*f     *  ^•

***-••  ^4   *'*    1/4  "-

"^^  :  •'•^.*

y-^f*    -k

;^-

HM
51
W37
v.l

Ward,  Lester  Frank
Dynamic  sociology

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
